
1. Cancer Res. 2013 Jan 1;73(1):97-107. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-1993. Epub
2012 Oct 22.

Preventing postoperative metastatic disease by inhibiting surgery-induced
dysfunction in natural killer cells.

Tai LH(1), de Souza CT, BÃ©langer S, Ly L, Alkayyal AA, Zhang J, Rintoul JL,
Ananth AA, Lam T, Breitbach CJ, Falls TJ, Kirn DH, Bell JC, Makrigiannis AP, Auer
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Innovative Cancer Research, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Natural killer (NK) cell clearance of tumor cell emboli following surgery is
thought to be vital in preventing postoperative metastases. Using a mouse model
of surgical stress, we transferred surgically stressed NK cells into NK-deficient
mice and observed enhanced lung metastases in tumor-bearing mice as compared with
mice that received untreated NK cells. These results establish that NK cells play
a crucial role in mediating tumor clearance following surgery. Surgery markedly
reduced NK cell total numbers in the spleen and affected NK cell migration. Ex
vivo and in vivo tumor cell killing by NK cells were significantly reduced in
surgically stressed mice. Furthermore, secreted tissue signals and
myeloid-derived suppressor cell populations were altered in surgically stressed
mice. Significantly, perioperative administration of oncolytic parapoxvirus ovis 
(ORFV) and vaccinia virus can reverse NK cell suppression, which correlates with 
a reduction in the postoperative formation of metastases. In human studies,
postoperative cancer surgery patients had reduced NK cell cytotoxicity, and we
show for the first time that oncolytic vaccinia virus markedly increases NK cell 
activity in patients with cancer. These data provide direct in vivo evidence that
surgical stress impairs global NK cell function. Perioperative therapies aimed at
enhancing NK cell function will reduce metastatic recurrence and improve survival
in surgical cancer patients.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-1993 
PMID: 23090117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

