
1. Proc Biol Sci. 2013 Jan 22;280(1751):20122437. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2012.2437.

Specificity of resistance to dengue virus isolates is associated with genotypes
of the mosquito antiviral gene Dicer-2.

Lambrechts L(1), Quillery E, NoÃ«l V, Richardson JH, Jarman RG, Scott TW,
Chevillon C.

Author information: 
(1)Insects and Infectious Diseases, Institut Pasteur, CNRS URA 3012, 25 rue du
Docteur Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France. louis.lambrechts@pasteur.fr

In contrast to the prevailing view that invertebrate immunity relies on
broad-spectrum recognition and effector mechanisms, intrinsic genetic
compatibility between invertebrate hosts and their pathogens is often highly
specific in nature. Solving this puzzle requires a better understanding of the
molecular basis underlying observed patterns of invertebrate host-pathogen
genetic specificity, broadly referred to as genotype-by-genotype interactions.
Here, we identify an invertebrate immune gene in which natural polymorphism is
associated with isolate-specific resistance to an RNA virus. Dicer-2 (dcr2)
encodes a key protein upstream of the RNA interference (RNAi) pathway, a major
antiviral component of innate immunity in invertebrates. We surveyed allelic
polymorphism at the dcr2 locus in a wild-type outbred population and in three
derived isofemale families of the mosquito Aedes aegypti that were experimentally
exposed to several, genetically distinct isolates of dengue virus. We found that 
dcr2 genotype was associated with resistance to dengue virus in a virus
isolate-specific manner. By contrast, no such association was found for genotypes
at two control loci flanking dcr2, making it likely that dcr2 contains the
yet-unidentified causal polymorphism(s). This result supports the idea that
host-pathogen compatibility in this system depends, in part, on a
genotype-by-genotype interaction between dcr2 and the viral genome, and points to
the RNAi pathway as a potentially important determinant of intrinsic insect-virus
genetic specificity.

DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2012.2437 
PMCID: PMC3574411
PMID: 23193131  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

