
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Jan 7;19(1):49-56. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i1.49.

Performance of liver stiffness measurements by transient elastography in chronic 
hepatitis.

Ferraioli G(1), Tinelli C, Dal Bello B, Zicchetti M, Lissandrin R, Filice G,
Filice C, Above E, Barbarini G, Brunetti E, Calderon W, Di Gregorio M, Gulminetti
R, Lanzarini P, Ludovisi S, Maiocchi L, Malfitano A, Michelone G, Minoli L,
Mondelli M, Novati S, Patruno SF, Perretti A, Poma G, Sacchi P, Zanaboni D,
Zaramella M.

Author information: 
(1)Ultrasound Unit, Department of Infectious Diseases, Fondazione IRCCS
Policlinico San Matteo, Medical School University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy.
giovanna.ferraioli@unipv.it

AIM: To compare results of liver stiffness measurements by transient elastography
(TE) obtained in our patients population with that used in a recently published
meta-analysis.
METHODS: This was a single center cross-sectional study. Consecutive patients
with chronic viral hepatitis scheduled for liver biopsy at the outpatient ward of
our Infectious Diseases Department were enrolled. TE was carried out by using
FibroScan™ (Echosens, Paris, France). Liver biopsy was performed on the same day 
as TE, as day case procedure. Fibrosis was staged according to the Metavir
scoring system. The diagnostic performance of TE was assessed by using receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curves and the area under the ROC curve analysis.
RESULTS: Two hundred and fifty-two patients met the inclusion criteria. Six (2%) 
patients were excluded due to unreliable TE measurements. Thus, 246 (171 men and 
75 women) patients were analyzed. One hundred and ninety-five (79.3%) patients
had chronic hepatitis C, 41 (16.7%) had chronic hepatitis B, and 10 (4.0%) were
coinfected with human immunodeficiency virus. ROC curve analysis identified
optimal cut-off value of TE as high as 6.9 kPa for F ≥ 2; 7.9 kPa for F ≥ 3; 9.6 
kPa for F = 4 in all patients (n = 246), and as high as 6.9 kPa for F ≥ 2; 7.3
kPa for F ≥ 3; 9.3 kPa for F = 4 in patients with hepatitis C (n = 195). Cut-off 
values of TE obtained by maximizing only the specificity were as high as 6.9 kPa 
for F ≥ 2; 9.6 kPa for F ≥ 3; 12.2 kPa for F = 4 in all patients (n = 246), and
as high as 7.0 kPa for F ≥ 2; 9.3 kPa for F ≥ 3; 12.3 kPa for F = 4 in patients
with hepatitis C (n = 195).
CONCLUSION: The cut-off values of TE obtained in this single center study are
comparable to that obtained in a recently published meta-analysis that included
up to 40 studies.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i1.49 
PMCID: PMC3542745
PMID: 23326162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

