
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 5;110(6):E498-506. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1222497110. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

HSV carrying WT REST establishes latency but reactivates only if the synthesis of
REST is suppressed.

Zhou G(1), Du T, Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

HSVs transit from vigorous replication at the portal of entry into the body to a 
latent state in sensory neurons in which only noncoding (e.g., latency-associated
transcript) and micro-RNAs are expressed. In productive infection, viral genes
must be sequentially derepressed at two checkpoints. A leading role in the
repression of viral genes is carried out by histone deacetylase
(HDAC)/corepressor element-1 silencing transcription factor
(CoREST)/lysinespecific demethylase1(LSD1)/RE1-silencing transcription factor
(REST) repressor complex (HCLR). Previously, we reported that to define the role 
of the components of the HCLR complex in the establishment of latency, we
constructed recombinant virus (R112) carrying a dominant-negative REST that bound
response elements in DNA but could not recruit repressive proteins. This
recombinant virus was unable to establish latency. In the current studies, we
constructed a virus (R111) carrying WT REST with a WT genome. We report the
following findings: (a) R111 readily established latent infection in trigeminal
ganglia; however, although the amounts of viral DNAs in latently infected neurons
were similar to those of WT virus, the levels of latency-associated transcript
and micro-RNAs were 50- to 100-fold lower; (b) R111 did not spontaneously
reactivate in ganglionic organ cultures; however, viral genes were expressed if
the synthesis of REST was blocked by cycloheximide; and (c) histone deacetylase
inhibitors reactivated the WT parent but not the R111 recombinant virus. The
results suggest that REST plays a transient role in the establishment of latency 
but not in reactivation and suggest the existence of at least two phases at both 
establishment and reactivation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1222497110 
PMCID: PMC3568314
PMID: 23341636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

