
1. J Virol Methods. 2013 Apr;189(1):129-42. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2013.01.006.
Epub 2013 Jan 30.

A new StaRT-PCR approach to detect and quantify fish Viral Hemorrhagic Septicemia
virus (VHSv): enhanced quality control with internal standards.

Pierce LR(1), Willey JC, Crawford EL, Palsule VV, Leaman DW, Faisal M, Kim RK,
Shepherd BS, Stanoszek LM, Stepien CA.

Author information: 
(1)Great Lakes Genetics/Genomics Laboratory, Lake Erie Center and Department of
Environmental Sciences, The University of Toledo, 6200 Bayshore Road, Toledo, OH 
43616, United States.

Viral Hemorrhagic Septicemia virus (VHSv) causes one of the world's most
important finfish diseases, killing >80 species across Eurasia and North America.
A new and especially virulent strain (IVb) emerged in the North American Great
Lakes in 2003, threatening fisheries, baitfish, and aquaculture industries.
Weeks-long and costly cell culture is the OIE and USDA-APHIS approved diagnostic.
A new Standardized Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction (StaRT-PCR)
assay that uniquely incorporates internal standards to improve accuracy and
prevent false negatives was developed and evaluated for its ability to detect and
quantify VHSv. Results from StaRT-PCR, SYBR(®) green real time qRT-PCR, and cell 
culture were compared, as well as the effects of potential PCR inhibitors (EDTA
and high RNA). Findings show that StaRT-PCR is sensitive, detecting a single
molecule, with 100% accuracy at six molecules, and had no false negatives. In
comparison, false negatives ranged from 14 to 47% in SYBR(®) green real time
qRT-PCR tests, and 47-70% with cell culture. StaRT-PCR uniquely controlled for
EDTA and RNA interference. Range of VHSv quantitation by StaRT-PCR was
1.0×10(0)-1.2×10(5) VHSv/10(6)actb1 molecules in wild caught fishes and
1.0×10(0)-8.4×10(5) molecules in laboratory challenged specimens. In the latter
experiments, muskellunge with skin lesions had significantly more viral molecules
(mean=1.9×10(4)) than those without (1.1×10(3)) (p<0.04). VHSv infection was
detected earlier in injection than in immersion challenged yellow perch (two
versus three days), with molecule numbers in both being comparable and relatively
consistent over the remaining course of the experiment. Our results show that the
StaRT-PCR test accurately and reliably detects and quantifies VHSv.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2013.01.006 
PMID: 23375747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

