
1. Vet Microbiol. 2013 Jul 26;165(1-2):109-14. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.12.031.
Epub 2013 Jan 19.

Simultaneous diagnosis of Cetacean morbillivirus infection in dolphins stranded
in the Spanish Mediterranean sea in 2011 using a novel Universal Probe Library
(UPL) RT-PCR assay.

Rubio-Guerri C(1), Melero M, Rivera-Arroyo B, Bellière EN, Crespo JL,
García-Párraga D, Esperón F, Sánchez-Vizcaíno JM.

Author information: 
(1)VISAVET Center and Animal Health Department, Veterinary School, Complutense
University of Madrid, Avda. Puerta del Hierro s/n, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
consuelo@sanidadanimal.info

A highly sensitive and specific real-time (rt) RT-PCR assay has been developed
for rapid, simultaneous detection of three strains of cetacean morbillivirus
(CeMV). In this assay, two PCR primers and a hydrolysis probe from a commercially
available Universal Probe Library (UPL) are used to amplify a highly conserved
region within the fusion protein gene. RT-PCR is carried out on the same sample
using two primer sets in parallel: one set detects the more virulent strains,
dolphin morbillivirus (DMV) and porpoise morbillivirus (PMV), and the other set
detects the least virulent and least common strain, pilot whale morbillivirus
(PWMV). Sensitivity analysis using dilute samples containing purified DMV, PMV
and PWMV showed that viral RNA detection limits in this UPL RT-PCR assay were
lower than in a conventional RT-PCR assay. Our method gave no amplification
signal with field samples positive for viruses related and unrelated to CeMV,
such as phocine distemper virus (PDV). The reliability and robustness of the UPL 
RT-PCR assay were verified using tissue samples previously analyzed by
conventional methods, as well as a panel of clinical samples suspected of
containing CeMV. Using the UPL RT-PCR assay, we were able to associate DMV with a
mass stranding of striped dolphins in the Spanish Mediterranean in 2011 with
greater reliability than was possible with a conventional RT-PCR method. These
results suggest that this UPL RT-PCR method is more sensitive and specific than
the conventional approach, and that it may be an affordable and rapid test for
routine diagnosis of three CeMV strains.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.12.031 
PMID: 23380457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

