
1. J Chem Phys. 2013 Feb 21;138(7):071103. doi: 10.1063/1.4791708.

Communication: Origin of the contributions to DNA structure in phages.

Myers CG(1), Pettitt BM.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Structural and Computational Biology and Molecular Biophysics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030-3411, USA.

Cryo electron microscopy (cryo-EM) data of the interior of phages show ordering
of the interior DNA that has been interpreted as a nearly perfectly ordered
polymer. We show surface-induced correlations, excluded volume, and electrostatic
forces are sufficient to predict most of the major features of the current
structural data for DNA packaged within viral capsids without additional ordering
due to elastic bending forces for the polymer. Current models assume
highly-ordered, even spooled, hexagonally packed conformations based on
interpretation of cryo-EM density maps. We show herein that the surface induced
packing of short (6mer), unconnected DNA polymer segments is the only necessary
ingredient in creating ringed densities consistent with experimental density
maps. This implies the ensemble of possible conformations of polymeric DNA within
the capsid that are consistent with cryo-EM data may be much larger than implied 
by traditional interpretations where such rings can only result from
highly-ordered spool-like conformations. This opens the possibility of a more
disordered, entropically-driven view of phage packaging thermodynamics. We also
show the electrostatics of the DNA contributes a large portion of the internal
hydrostatic and osmotic pressures of a phage virion, suggesting that nonlinear
elastic anomalies might reduce the overall elastic bending enthalpy of more
disordered conformations to have allowable free energies.

DOI: 10.1063/1.4791708 
PMCID: PMC3592880
PMID: 23444988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

