
1. Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 2013 May;8(3):236-42. doi: 10.1097/COH.0b013e32835fd5cd.

Vaccine and immunotherapeutic interventions.

Pantaleo G(1), LÃ©vy Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Allergy and Swiss Vaccine Research Institute,
Lausanne University Hospital, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
giuseppe.pantaleo@chuv.ch

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: As we enter the fourth decade in HIV epidemic, advances in
understanding HIV pathogenesis and development of potent and safer antiretroviral
drugs have been spectacular. More than 30 antiviral drugs have been registered
and the impact of combination antiviral therapy on morbidity and mortality has
been dramatic. However, despite long-term virus suppression, HIV invariably
rebounds after interruption of therapy. Long-term antiviral therapy does not cure
HIV infection nor does it induce restoration/development of virus-specific immune
responses capable of controlling HIV replication. Therefore, development of
immune-based interventions is needed to restore effective defenses that can lead 
to HIV functional cure and ultimately eradication.
RECENT FINDINGS: Therapeutic vaccination and immune interventions that generate
de-novo or that boost preexisting HIV-specific T-cell responses are being
investigated as a potential means to achieve a 'functional HIV cure'. One major
hurdle in the quest of an HIV cure is control and elimination of the HIV latent
reservoir. Several immune interventions that target the latent reservoir have
been tried in recent years. In parallel, several therapeutic vaccination
strategies have been developed and tested in early clinical studies. Recent
encouraging studies show for the first time that vaccination can have an impact
on HIV load.
SUMMARY: This review summarizes the main immune interventions evaluated over the 
last years. Ways to improve them, as well as challenges in monitoring/evaluating 
effects of such strategies, are being discussed. In addition, clinical efficacy
and potential clinical benefits of immunotherapeutic interventions are
particularly difficult to measure. This review highlights current assays used and
their shortcoming.

DOI: 10.1097/COH.0b013e32835fd5cd 
PMID: 23478912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

