
1. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 22;8(4):e61269. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061269. Print 2013.

Quantifying dispersal of european culicoides (Diptera: Ceratopogonidae) vectors
between farms using a novel mark-release-recapture technique.

Kirkeby C(1), BÃ¸dker R, Stockmarr A, Lind P, Heegaard PM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Epidemiology, National Veterinary Institute, Technical University
of Denmark, Frederiksberg C, Denmark. ckir@vet.dtu.dk

Studying the dispersal of small flying insects such as Culicoides constitutes a
great challenge due to huge population sizes and lack of a method to efficiently 
mark and objectively detect many specimens at a time. We here describe a novel
mark-release-recapture method for Culicoides in the field using fluorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC) as marking agent without anaesthesia. Using a plate
scanner, this detection technique can be used to analyse thousands of individual 
Culicoides specimens per day at a reasonable cost. We marked and released an
estimated 853 specimens of the Pulicaris group and 607 specimens of the Obsoletus
group on a cattle farm in Denmark. An estimated 9,090 (8,918-9,260) Obsoletus
group specimens and 14,272 (14,194-14,448) Pulicaris group specimens were
captured in the surroundings and subsequently analysed. Two (0.3%) Obsoletus
group specimens and 28 (4.6%) Pulicaris group specimens were recaptured. The two 
recaptured Obsoletus group specimens were caught at the release point on the
night following release. Eight (29%) of the recaptured Pulicaris group specimens 
were caught at a pig farm 1,750 m upwind from the release point. Five of these
were recaptured on the night following release and the three other were
recaptured on the second night after release. This is the first time that
movement of Culicoides vectors between farms in Europe has been directly
quantified. The findings suggest an extensive and rapid exchange of disease
vectors between farms. Rapid movement of vectors between neighboring farms may
explain the the high rate of spatial spread of Schmallenberg and bluetongue virus
(BTV) in northern Europe.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061269 
PMCID: PMC3632603
PMID: 23630582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

