
1. Hum Gene Ther Clin Dev. 2013 Mar;24(1):29-37. doi: 10.1089/humc.2013.006. Epub
2013 Apr 3.

Preclinical safety, toxicology, and biodistribution study of adenoviral gene
therapy with sVEGFR-2 and sVEGFR-3 combined with chemotherapy for ovarian cancer.

Tuppurainen L(1), Sallinen H, Kokki E, Koponen J, Anttila M, Pulkkinen K, Heikura
T, Toivanen P, Hämäläinen K, Kosma VM, Heinonen S, Alitalo K, Ylä-Herttuala S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, A.I. Virtanen Institute, University of
Eastern Finland, Kuopio, FIN-70211, Finland.

Abstract Antiangiogenic and antilymphangiogenic gene therapy with soluble
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2) and soluble VEGFR-3 in
combination with chemotherapy is a potential new treatment for ovarian carcinoma.
We evaluated the safety, toxicology, and biodistribution of intravenous
AdsVEGFR-2 and AdsVEGFR-3 combined with chemotherapy in healthy rats (n=90)
before entering a clinical setting. The study groups were: AdLacZ and AdLacZ with
chemotherapy as control groups, low dose AdsVEGFR-2 and AdsVEGFR-3, high dose
AdsVEGFR-2 and AdsVEGFR-3, combination of low dose AdsVEGFR-2 and AdsVEGFR-3 with
chemotherapy, combination of high dose AdsVEGFR-2 and AdVEGFR-3 with
chemotherapy, and chemotherapy only. The follow-up time was 4 weeks. Safety and
toxicology were assessed by monitoring the clinical status of the animals and by 
histological, hematological, and clinical chemistry parameters. For the
biodistribution studies, quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (qRT-PCR) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) were used. Low
dose (2×10(10) vp) AdsVEGFR-2 and AdsVEGFR-3 gene therapy was well tolerated,
even when gene therapy was combined with chemotherapy. Notably, only transient
elevation of liver enzymes and mild regenerative changes were seen in liver after
the gene transfer in the groups that received high doses (2×10(11) vp) of
AdsVEGFR-2 and AdsVEGFR-3 with or without chemotherapy. No life-threatening
adverse effects were noticed in any of the treatment groups. The highest protein 
concentration of soluble VEGFR-2 (sVEGFR-2) in circulation was seen 1 week after 
the gene transfer. The combination of chemotherapy to gene therapy seemed to
prolong the time of detectable transgene protein at least 1 week in the
circulation. The expression of AdsVEGFR-2 and AdsVEGFR-3 transgenes was mainly
seen in the liver and spleen as detected by qRT-PCR. According to these results, 
AdsVEGFR-2 and AdsVEGFR-3 gene therapy combined with chemotherapy is safe and can
be brought to clinical testing in ovarian cancer patients.

DOI: 10.1089/humc.2013.006 
PMID: 23692381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

