
1. J Immunol. 2013 Jul 1;191(1):60-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202489. Epub 2013 May
31.

Human plasmacytoid dendritic cells efficiently capture HIV-1 envelope
glycoproteins via CD4 for antigen presentation.

Sandgren KJ(1), Smed-Sörensen A, Forsell MN, Soldemo M, Adams WC, Liang F,
Perbeck L, Koup RA, Wyatt RT, Karlsson Hedestam GB, Loré K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska
Institutet, 141 86 Stockholm, Sweden.

Advances in HIV-1 vaccine clinical trials and preclinical research indicate that 
the virus envelope glycoproteins (Env) are likely to be an essential component of
a prophylactic vaccine. Efficient Ag uptake and presentation by dendritic cells
(DCs) is important for strong CD4(+) Th cell responses and the development of
effective humoral immune responses. In this study, we examined the capacity of
distinct primary human DC subsets to internalize and present recombinant Env to
CD4(+) T cells. Consistent with their specific receptor expression, skin DCs
bound and internalized Env via C-type lectin receptors, whereas blood DC subsets,
including CD1c(+) myeloid DCs, CD123(+) plasmacytoid DCs (PDCs), and CD141(+) DCs
exhibited a restricted repertoire of C-type lectin receptors and relied on CD4
for uptake of Env. Despite a generally poor capacity for Ag uptake compared with 
myeloid DCs, the high expression of CD4 on PDCs allowed them to bind and
internalize Env very efficiently. CD4-mediated uptake delivered Env to EEA1(+)
endosomes that progressed to Lamp1(+) and MHC class II(+) lysosomes where
internalized Env was degraded rapidly. Finally, all three blood DC subsets were
able to internalize an Env-CMV pp65 fusion protein via CD4 and stimulate
pp65-specific CD4(+) T cells. Thus, in the in vitro systems described in this
paper, CD4-mediated uptake of Env is a functional pathway leading to Ag
presentation, and this may therefore be a mechanism used by blood DCs, including 
PDCs, for generating immune responses to Env-based vaccines.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202489 
PMCID: PMC4471340
PMID: 23729440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

