
1. J Immunol. 2013 Jul 1;191(1):135-44. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202692. Epub 2013 Jun
3.

Autologous Tax-specific CTL therapy in a primary adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma
cell-bearing NOD/Shi-scid, IL-2RÎ³null mouse model.

Masaki A(1), Ishida T, Suzuki S, Ito A, Mori F, Sato F, Narita T, Yamada T, Ri M,
Kusumoto S, Komatsu H, Tanaka Y, Niimi A, Inagaki H, Iida S, Ueda R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Immunology, Nagoya City University Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.

We expanded human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 Tax-specific CTL in vitro from PBMC
of three individual adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) patients and assessed
their therapeutic potential in an in vivo model using NOG mice bearing primary
ATL cells from the respective three patients (ATL/NOG). In these mice established
with cells from a chronic-type patient, treatment by i.p. injection of autologous
Tax-CTL resulted in greater infiltration of CD8-positive T cells into each ATL
lesion. This was associated with a significant decrease of ATL cell infiltration 
into blood, spleen, and liver. Tax-CTL treatment also significantly decreased
human soluble IL-2R concentrations in the sera. In another group of ATL/NOG mice,
Tax-CTL treatment led to a significant prolongation of survival time. These
findings show that Tax-CTL can infiltrate the tumor site, recognize, and kill
autologous ATL cells in mice in vivo. In ATL/NOG mice with cells from an
acute-type patient, whose postchemotherapeutic remission continued for >18 mo,
antitumor efficacy of adoptive Tax-CTL therapy was also observed. However, in
ATL/NOG mice from a different acute-type patient, whose ATL relapsed after 6 mo
of remission, no efficacy was observed. Thus, although the therapeutic effects
were different for different ATL patients, to the best of our knowledge, this is 
the first report that adoptive therapy with Ag-specific CTL expanded from a
cancer patient confers antitumor effects, leading to significant survival benefit
for autologous primary cancer cell-bearing mice in vivo. The present study
contributes to research on adoptive CTL therapy, which should be applicable to
several types of cancer.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202692 
PMID: 23733874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

