
1. Virus Genes. 2013 Oct;47(2):276-81. doi: 10.1007/s11262-013-0940-0. Epub 2013 Jun
20.

Torque teno sus virus (TTSuV) in tissues of pigs and its relation with the
occurrence of postweaning multisystemic wasting syndrome.

Teixeira TF(1), Dezen D, Cibulski SP, Varela AP, Sheffer CM, Holz CL, Dos Santos 
HF, Franco AC, Roehe PM.

Author information: 
(1)Virology, FEPAGRO Saúde Animal - Instituto de Pesquisas Veterinárias Desidério
Finamor (IPVDF), Estrada do Conde 6000, Eldorado do Sul, RS, 92990-000, Brazil,
thais.fumaco@gmail.com.

Torque teno sus virus (TTSuV) is a member of the recently created family
Anelloviridae. Two distinct species of TTSuVs, 1 (TTSuV1) and 2 (TTSuV2) have
been reported so far in domestic pigs and wild boars. Although TTSuVs have not
been clearly linked to any specific disease of pigs, a relation between TTSuV
infections and postweaning multisystemic wasting syndrome (PMWS) has been
suggested. To examine further this possibility, the present study was conducted
in search for TTSuV1 and TTSuV2 genomes in tissues of PMWS and non-PMWS-affected 
animals. PMWS diagnosis was established by clinical signs, characteristic
macroscopic and histopathologic lesions and the presence of porcine circovirus
type 2 DNA. Samples of five different tissues (lungs, kidneys, livers, spleens,
and lymph nodes) from PMWS-affected and non-PMWS-affected pigs were examined with
two specific PCR assays developed to amplify TTSuV1 and TTSuV2 genome segments.
TTSuV1 DNA was detected in tissues of non-diseased animals to significantly
higher levels than in tissues of PMWS-affected pigs (p ≤ 0.001). Regarding
TTSuV2, viral genomes were detected in nearly all samples from both PMWS-affected
(94.7 %) and non-affected pigs (100 %), with no significant differences in the
frequencies of detection of TTSuV2 genomes in both groups. No significant
differences were detected on the distribution of TTSuV1 and TTSuV2 in the
different tissues examined (p = 0.970).

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-013-0940-0 
PMID: 23783757  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

