
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jul 16;110(29):11698-703. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1302634110. Epub 2013 Jun 28.

Highly potent, synthetically accessible prostratin analogs induce latent HIV
expression in vitro and ex vivo.

Beans EJ(1), Fournogerakis D, Gauntlett C, Heumann LV, Kramer R, Marsden MD,
Murray D, Chun TW, Zack JA, Wender PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) decreases plasma viremia below the
limits of detection in the majority of HIV-infected individuals, thus serving to 
slow disease progression. However, HAART targets only actively replicating virus 
and is unable to eliminate latently infected, resting CD4(+) T cells. Such
infected cells are potentially capable of reinitiating virus replication upon
cessation of HAART, thus leading to viral rebound. Agents that would eliminate
these reservoirs, when used in combination with HAART, could thus provide a
strategy for the eradication of HIV. Prostratin is a preclinical candidate that
induces HIV expression from latently infected CD4(+) T cells, potentially leading
to their elimination through a virus-induced cytopathic effect or host anti-HIV
immunity. Here, we report the synthesis of a series of designed prostratin
analogs and report in vitro and ex vivo studies of their activity relevant to
induction of HIV expression. Members of this series are up to 100-fold more
potent than the preclinical lead (prostratin) in binding to cell-free PKC, and in
inducing HIV expression in a latently infected cell line and prostratin-like
modulation of cell surface receptor expression in primary cells from HIV-negative
donors. Significantly, selected members were also tested for HIV induction in
resting CD4(+) T cells isolated from infected individuals receiving HAART and
were found to exhibit potent induction activity. These more potent agents and by 
extension related tunable analogs now accessible through the studies described
herein should facilitate research and preclinical advancement of this strategy
for HIV/AIDS eradication.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1302634110 
PMCID: PMC3718093
PMID: 23812750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

