
1. Biosci Trends. 2013 Jun;7(3):129-37.

A recombinant protein containing highly conserved hemagglutinin residues 81-122
of influenza H5N1 induces strong humoral and mucosal immune responses.

Li Y(1), Du L, Qiu H, Zhao G, Wang L, Zhou Y, Jiang S, Gao J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Laboratory Science, Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou,
Zhejiang, China.

Influenza has long been considered a serious global health threat. The highly
pathogenic avian influenza A virus (IAV) H5N1, particularly the currently
identified IAV/H7N9 in humans in China, illustrates that influenza is still a
significant public health problem. Due to the high mortality of H5N1, development
of safe and effective vaccines against divergent strains of H5N1 influenza virus,
especially the one capable of inducing both strong systemic and local immune
responses in the vaccinated targets, is a challenge of immediate importance. In
the present study, we designed two recombinant proteins containing highly
conserved hemagglutinin (HA) residues 81-122 of H5N1 fused with Fc of human IgG
(HA-81-122-Fc) and/or foldon (Fd) trimeric motif (HA-81-122-Fdc), and identified 
their immunogenicity in vaccinated mice. We found that HA-81-122-Fc and
HA-81-122-Fdc proteins formed high molecular weight dimer and oligomer,
respectively, and induced potent IgG antibodies in vaccinated mouse sera and lung
wash. Stronger IgG1 (Th2-associated) and IgG2 (Th1-associated) antibody responses
could be raised in the sera of mice following last vaccination of HA-81-122-Fdc
than those raised by HA-81-122-Fc vaccination. Importantly, HA-81-122-Fdc is able
to elicit high titers of IgA antibodies in vaccinated mouse lung wash and sera
through the parenteral immunization pathway. Our data demonstrated that the
recombinant protein containing highly conserved HA residues 81-122 of H5N1 fused 
with Fd and Fc could induce strong local mucosal and systemic humoral immune
responses in the vaccinated animals, revealing the possibility of developing an
effective Fc-mediated mucosal influenza vaccine.


PMID: 23836036  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

