
1. Clin Transplant. 2013 Jul-Aug;27(4):E512-20. doi: 10.1111/ctr.12182. Epub 2013
Jul 16.

Excellent liver retransplantation outcomes in hepatitis C-infected recipients.

Kressel A(1), Therapondos G, Bohorquez H, Borg B, Bruce D, Carmody I, Cohen A,
Girgrah N, Joshi S, Reichman T, Loss GE.

Author information: 
(1)Multi-organ Transplant Institute, Ochsner Medical Center, New Orleans, LA
70121, USA.

Survival outcomes for liver retransplantation (LRTx) after graft loss in HCV
patients (HCV-LRTx) are generally considered inferior to those after
non-HCV-LRTx. Between January 1, 2005 and June 30, 2011, our center performed 663
LTx, including 116 (17.5%) LRTx, 41 (35.3%) of which were more than 90 d after
the LTx. Twenty-nine (70.7%) LRTx were performed in HCV antibody-positive
individuals. We compared patient demographics, baseline characteristics and
outcomes of our HCV-LRTx group with the HCV-LRTx patients from the most recent
OPTN database covering the same time period. Our Kaplan-Meier HCV-LRTx one-,
three-, and five-yr HCV-LRTx patient survival rates were 86.2%, 79.0%, and 72.4%,
respectively compared with the OPTN one-, three-, and five-yr HCV-LRTx survival
rates of 73.3%, 59.0%, and 51.3% respectively. Likewise, our graft survival rates
were higher than OPTN rates at all time points studied. We performed a higher
percentage of HCV-LRTx as simultaneous liver/kidney transplants (SLK) (37.9% vs. 
21.8%) and recorded shorter warm (30 ± 4 vs. 45 ± 23 min) and cold ischemic times
(5:44 ± 1:53 vs. 7:36 ± 3:12 h:min).CONCLUSION: In our experience, HCV-LRTx
patient and graft survival rates are comparable to LTx survival rates and are
higher than the rates described by OPTN.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/ctr.12182 
PMID: 23859312  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

