
1. J Virol Methods. 2013 Dec;194(1-2):113-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2013.08.013.
Epub 2013 Aug 23.

Comparison of SPF10 real-time PCR and conventional PCR in combination with the
INNO-LiPA HPV Genotyping Extra assay for the detection and typing of human
papillomavirus in cervical samples.

Micalessi MI(1), Boulet GA, Pillet S, Jacquet J, Pozzetto B, Bogers JJ, Bourlet
T.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Molecular Biology Research (AMBIOR) Group, Laboratory of Cell Biology 
and Histology, University of Antwerp, Groenenborgerlaan 171, B2020 Antwerp,
Belgium; Vaccine & Infectious Diseases Institute (VAXINFECTIO), University of
Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, B2610 Antwerp, Belgium. Electronic address:
Isabel.Micalessi@ua.ac.be.

The novel SPF10 real-time PCR assay allows the simultaneous amplification and
detection of the HPV target. That way, LiPA analysis of the HPV-negative samples 
can be avoided, reducing workload and cost. This study aims to evaluate the
performance of the SPF10 real-time PCR in combination with the LiPA assay for HPV
detection and typing in cervical samples. Thirty-nine cervical samples were
subjected to the SPF10 conventional PCR in combination with the LiPA assay.
Subsequently, the SPF10 real-time PCR was performed to enable the comparison
between the SPF10 conventional and the real-time PCR results. In case of
discrepancy, the samples were subjected to the CLART HPV2 assay. As a result, 27 
out of 39 samples were identified as HPV-positive by the SPF10 real-time PCR and 
were genotyped further by the LiPA assay. Twenty samples (74.1%) showed an
absolute agreement between the conventional and real-time SPF10 PCR (concordant),
three (11.1%) displayed additional or fewer types (compatible), two (7.4%) did
not show any similarity between both assays (discordant) and the remaining two
(7.4%) were LiPA-negative. The two assays showed an excellent strength of
agreement for individual (κ=0.932) and multiple genotype detection (κ=0.834). In 
conclusion, the two SPF10 PCR methods are comparable. Therefore, the SPF10
real-time PCR with subsequent LiPA could be used for the detection and genotyping
of HPV in cervical samples.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2013.08.013 
PMID: 23978605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

