
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2014 Feb;46(2):299-304. doi: 10.1007/s11250-013-0487-z.
Epub 2013 Oct 22.

Molecular characterization of Newcastle disease viruses isolated from rural
chicken in northwest Ethiopia reveals the circulation of three distinct genotypes
in the country.

Fentie T(1), Heidari A, Aiello R, Kassa T, Capua I, Cattoli G, Sahle M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia,
tsegawfentie2002@gmail.com.

Newcastle disease (ND) is a highly contagious disease that affects many species
of birds and causes significant economic losses to the poultry industry
worldwide. Fifteen Newcastle disease virus (NDV) isolates obtained from rural
chickens in northwest Ethiopia in 2011 and 2012 were characterized genotypically.
The main functional region of the F gene was amplified and sequenced (260
nucleotides). Among the Ethiopian NDV isolates, 2 isolates had the virulent motif
(112)R-R-Q-K-R-F(117) at the cleavage site of the fusion protein while 13
isolates contained the lentogenic motif (112)G-G/R-Q-G-R-L(117). Phylogenetic
analysis based on the variable region of the F gene indicated that the two
isolates exhibiting the virulent motif belonged to lineage 5 (genotype VII)
subgenotype d and the remaining 13 isolates were grouped into lineage 2 (genotype
II). The nucleotide sequences of lineage 5 isolates were genetically related to
the Sudanese NDV isolates, suggesting potential epidemiological link of ND
outbreaks between neighbouring countries. The lentogenic strains shared
similarities with La Sota vaccine strain and probably originated from the vaccine
strain either through direct exposure of birds to the live vaccine or to
infectious La Sota-like strains circulating in rural poultry. This study provides
genetic evidence on the existence of different NDV genotypes circulating in the
rural poultry in Ethiopia. The virulent NDV continues to be a problem in poultry 
sector in Ethiopia, and their continuous circulation in rural and commercial
poultry calls for improved surveillance and intensified vaccination and other
control measures.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-013-0487-z 
PMID: 24146293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

