
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Oct;9(10):e1003700. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003700. Epub
2013 Oct 17.

The microvesicle component of HIV-1 inocula modulates dendritic cell infection
and maturation and enhances adhesion to and activation of T lymphocytes.

Mercier SK(1), Donaghy H, Botting RA, Turville SG, Harman AN, Nasr N, Ji H,
Kusebauch U, Mendoza L, Shteynberg D, Sandgren K, Simpson RJ, Moritz RL,
Cunningham AL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Virus Research, Westmead Millennium Institute, Westmead, New South 
Wales, Australia ; University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2013 Oct;9(10). doi:
10.1371/annotation/059beb14-db84-4836-9fef-ec351946025a.

HIV-1 is taken up by immature monocyte derived dendritic cells (iMDDCs) into
tetraspanin rich caves from which the virus can either be transferred to T
lymphocytes or enter into endosomes resulting in degradation. HIV-1 binding and
fusion with the DC membrane results in low level de novo infection that can also 
be transferred to T lymphocytes at a later stage. We have previously reported
that HIV-1 can induce partial maturation of iMDDCs at both stages of trafficking.
Here we show that CD45⁺ microvesicles (MV) which contaminate purified HIV-1
inocula due to similar size and density, affect DC maturation, de novo HIV-1
infection and transfer to T lymphocytes. Comparing iMDDCs infected with
CD45-depleted HIV-1BaL or matched non-depleted preparations, the presence of
CD45⁺ MVs was shown to enhance DC maturation and ICAM-1 (CD54) expression, which 
is involved in DC∶T lymphocyte interactions, while restricting HIV-1 infection of
MDDCs. Furthermore, in the DC culture HIV-1 infected (p24⁺) MDDCs were more
mature than bystander cells. Depletion of MVs from the HIV-1 inoculum markedly
inhibited DC∶T lymphocyte clustering and the induction of alloproliferation as
well as limiting HIV-1 transfer from DCs to T lymphocytes. The effects of MV
depletion on these functions were reversed by the re-addition of purified MVs
from activated but not non-activated SUPT1.CCR5-CL.30 or primary T cells.
Analysis of the protein complement of these MVs and of these HIV-1 inocula before
and after MV depletion showed that Heat Shock Proteins (HSPs) and nef were the
likely DC maturation candidates. Recombinant HSP90α and β and nef all induced DC 
maturation and ICAM-1 expression, greater when combined. These results suggest
that MVs contaminating HIV-1 released from infected T lymphocytes may be
biologically important, especially in enhancing T cell activation, during uptake 
by DCs in vitro and in vivo, particularly as MVs have been detected in the
circulation of HIV-1 infected subjects.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003700 
PMCID: PMC3798598
PMID: 24204260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

