
1. Virus Genes. 2014 Feb;48(1):111-9. doi: 10.1007/s11262-013-1002-3. Epub 2013 Nov 
16.

Genomic characterisation of Felis catus papillomavirus 4, a novel papillomavirus 
detected in the oral cavity of a domestic cat.

Dunowska M(1), Munday JS, Laurie RE, Hills SF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary, Animal and Biomedical Sciences, Massey University,
Tennent Drive, Palmerston North, 4474, New Zealand, M.Dunowska@massey.ac.nz.

Three papillomaviruses (PVs) from the domestic cat have been fully sequenced so
far including Felis domesticus PV-1 (FdPV-1), FdPV-2, and a recently described
Felis catus PV-3 (FcaPV-4). In the current article, we describe the full genomic 
sequence of a fourth PV from the domestic cat. This PV was amplified from the
oral cavity of a cat with severe gingivitis. However, the aetiological
involvement of FcaPV-4 in development of lesions observed in this cat remains
uncertain. The complete genome of the novel virus comprised 7,616 bp and was
predicted to encode five early (E1, E2, E4, E6 and E7) and two late (L1 and L2)
genes, with the organisation typical for PVs. The L1 showed 65.1 % nucleotide
sequence identity to L1 of FcaPV-3 and approximately 60 % identity to L1 of
canine tau-papillomaviruses CPV-2 and CPV-7. The novel virus clustered with
FcaPV-3, CPV-2 and CPV-7 on a phylogenetic tree constructed from a concatenated
alignment of 3,013 bp from E1, E2, L1 and L2. Based on the genomic and
phylogenetic data, we propose that the novel virus is classified as a distinct
species within the same genus as FcaPV-3. We also propose that both viruses are
classified within the genus Taupapillomavirus, although this classification may
need to be re-visited after more tau-PV genomes become available.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-013-1002-3 
PMID: 24242846  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

