
1. Immunology. 2014 Apr;141(4):628-44. doi: 10.1111/imm.12226.

Analysis of human B-cell responses following ChAd63-MVA MSP1 and AMA1
immunization and controlled malaria infection.

Elias SC(1), Choudhary P, de Cassan SC, Biswas S, Collins KA, Halstead FD, Bliss 
CM, Ewer KJ, Hodgson SH, Duncan CJ, Hill AV, Draper SJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Acquisition of non-sterilizing natural immunity to Plasmodium falciparum malaria 
has been shown in low transmission areas following multiple exposures. However,
conflicting data from endemic areas suggest that the parasite may interfere with 
the induction of effective B-cell responses. To date, the impact of blood-stage
parasite exposure on antigen-specific B cells has not been reported following
controlled human malaria infection (CHMI). Here we analysed human B-cell
responses in a series of Phase I/IIa clinical trials, which include CHMI, using
candidate virus-vectored vaccines encoding two blood-stage antigens: merozoite
surface protein 1 (MSP1) and apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1). Previously
vaccinated volunteers show boosting of pre-existing antigen-specific memory
B-cell (mBC) responses following CHMI. In contrast, unvaccinated malaria-naive
control volunteers developed an mBC response against MSP1 but not AMA1. Serum IgG
correlated with the mBC response after booster vaccination but this relationship 
was less well maintained following CHMI. A significant reduction in peripheral
MSP1-specific mBC was observed at the point of diagnosis of blood-stage
infection. This was coincident with a reduction in peripheral blood B-cell
subsets expressing CXCR3 and elevated serum levels of interferon-γ and CXCL9,
suggesting migration away from the periphery. These CHMI data confirm that mBC
and antibody responses can be induced and boosted by blood-stage parasite
exposure, in support of epidemiological studies on low-level parasite exposure.

© 2013 The Authors. Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.12226 
PMCID: PMC3956436
PMID: 24303947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

