
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2013 Dec 10;13:582. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-13-582.

Lower incidence of CMV infection and acute rejections with valganciclovir
prophylaxis in lung transplant recipients.

Johansson I(1), Mårtensson G, Nyström U, Nasic S, Andersson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. inger.johansson@infect.gu.se.

BACKGROUND: Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is the most common opportunistic infection
following lung transplantation. CMV replication in the lung allograft is
described as accelerating the development of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome
(BOS). Finding a strategy to prevent CMV infection is an important issue.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective, single-centre study of 114 lung transplant
recipients (LTRs) who underwent lung transplantation from January 2001 to
December 2006. In a smaller cohort of 88 CMV seropositive (R+) LTRs, three months
of valganciclovir prophylaxis (2004-2006) was compared to three months of oral
ganciclovir (2001-2003) with respect to the incidence of CMV infection/disease,
the severity of CMV disease, acute rejection, BOS-free 4 year survival and 4 year
survival. In the whole group of 114 LTRs the impact of CMV infection on long-term
survival (BOS free 4 year survival and 6 year survival) was assessed.
RESULTS: For the cohort of 88 CMV seropositive LTRs, the incidence of CMV
infection/disease at one year was lower in the valganciclovir group compared to
the ganciclovir group (24% vs. 54%, p = 0.003). There was a tendency towards
reduced CMV disease, from 33% to 20% and a significant lower incidence of
asymptomatic CMV infection (22% vs. 4%, p = 0.005). A lower incidence of acute
rejection was observed in the valganciclovir group. However, there was no
significant difference between the two groups in BOS free 4 year survival and
4 year survival.For the entire group of 114 LTRs, BOS-free 4 year survival for
recipients with CMV disease was (32%, p = 0.005) and among those with
asymptomatic CMV infection (36%, p = 0.061) as compared with patients without CMV
infection (69%). Six year survival was lower among patients with CMV disease,
(64%, p = 0.042) and asymptomatic CMV infection (55%, p = 0.018) than patients
without CMV infection (84%).
CONCLUSIONS: A lower incidence of CMV infection/disease and acute rejections was 
observed with valganciclovir (3 months) when compared to oral ganciclovir
(3 months). The long-term impact of CMV infection/disease was significant for
BOS-free survival and survival.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2334-13-582 
PMCID: PMC3878887
PMID: 24325216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

