
1. Am J Epidemiol. 2014 May 1;179(9):1107-14. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwu035. Epub 2014 Mar
30.

Cervical screening and cervical cancer death among older women: a
population-based, case-control study.

Rustagi AS, Kamineni A, Weinmann S, Reed SD, Newcomb P, Weiss NS.

Recent research suggests that cervical screening of older women is associated
with a considerable decrease in cervical cancer incidence. We sought to quantify 
the efficacy of cervical cytology screening to reduce death from this disease.
Among enrollees of 2 US health plans, we compared Papanicolaou smear screening
histories of women aged 55-79 years who died of cervical cancer during 1980-2010 
(cases) to those of women at risk of cervical cancer (controls). Controls were
matched 2:1 to cases on health plan, age, and enrollment duration. Cytology
screening during the detectable preclinical phase, estimated as the 5-7 years
before diagnosis during which cervical neoplasia is asymptomatic but
cytologically detectable, was ascertained from medical records. A total of 39
cases and 80 controls were eligible. The odds ratio of cervical cancer death
associated with screening during the presumed detectable preclinical phase was
0.26 (95% confidence interval: 0.10, 0.63) after adjustment for matching
characteristics, smoking, marital status, and race/ethnicity using logistic
regression. We estimate that cervical cytology screening of all women aged 55-79 
years in the United States could avert 630 deaths annually. These results provide
a minimum estimate of the efficacy of human papillomavirus DNA screening-a more
sensitive test-to reduce cervical cancer death among older women.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwu035 
PMCID: PMC3992820
PMID: 24685531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

