
1. J Virol. 2014 Jun;88(12):6623-35. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02765-13. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

Airborne transmission of highly pathogenic H7N1 influenza virus in ferrets.

Sutton TC(1), Finch C(2), Shao H(2), Angel M(2), Chen H(2), Capua I(3), Cattoli
G(3), Monne I(3), Perez DR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Maryland, College Park, and
Virginia-Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine, Maryland Campus, College Park, 
Maryland, USA dperez1@umd.edu suttontroy27@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Maryland, College Park, and
Virginia-Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine, Maryland Campus, College Park, 
Maryland, USA.
(3)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, Padua, Italy.

Comment in
    J Virol. 2014 Jun;88(12):6533-4.
    MBio. 2014;5(5):e01882-14.
    MBio. 2014;5(5):e01985-14.

Avian H7 influenza viruses are recognized as potential pandemic viruses, as
personnel often become infected during poultry outbreaks. H7 infections in humans
typically cause mild conjunctivitis; however, the H7N9 outbreak in the spring of 
2013 has resulted in severe respiratory disease. To date, no H7 viruses have
acquired the ability for sustained transmission among humans. Airborne
transmission is considered a requirement for the emergence of pandemic influenza,
and advanced knowledge of the molecular changes or signature required for
transmission would allow early identification of pandemic vaccine seed stocks,
screening and stockpiling of antiviral compounds, and eradication efforts focused
on flocks harboring threatening viruses. Thus, we sought to determine if a highly
pathogenic influenza A H7N1 (A/H7N1) virus with no history of human infection
could become capable of airborne transmission among ferrets. We show that after
10 serial passages, A/H7N1 developed the ability to be transmitted to cohoused
and airborne contact ferrets. Four amino acid mutations (PB2 T81I, NP V284M, and 
M1 R95K and Q211K) in the internal genes and a minimal amino acid mutation
(K/R313R) in the stalk region of the hemagglutinin protein were associated with
airborne transmission. Furthermore, transmission was not associated with loss of 
virulence. These findings highlight the importance of the internal genes in host 
adaptation and suggest that natural isolates carrying these mutations be further 
evaluated. Our results demonstrate that a highly pathogenic avian H7 virus can
become capable of airborne transmission in a mammalian host, and they support
ongoing surveillance and pandemic H7 vaccine development.IMPORTANCE: The major
findings of this report are that a highly pathogenic strain of H7N1 avian
influenza virus can be adapted to become capable of airborne transmission in
mammals without mutations altering receptor specificity. Changes in receptor
specificity have been shown to play a role in the ability of avian influenza
viruses to cross the species barrier, and these changes are assumed to be
essential. The work reported here challenges this paradigm, at least for the
influenza viruses of the H7 subtype, which have recently become the focus of
major attention, as they have crossed to humans.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02765-13 
PMCID: PMC4054360
PMID: 24696487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

