
1. J BUON. 2014 Apr-Jun;19(2):474-83.

Proposal of a clinical typing system and generation of a prognostic model in
patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma from Southern China.

Sun P(1), Chen C, Chen XL, Cheng YK, Zeng L, Zeng ZJ, Liu LZ, Su Y, Gu MF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangzhou, Guangdong
Province, P. R. China.

PURPOSE: To propose a novel clinical typing classification focusing on the
distinct progression patterns of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), to supplement
our knowledge of the clinical-biological behavior, to provide useful knowledge
for treatment planning, and to contribute to basic research in NPC.
METHODS: 632 consecutive patients were retrospectively reviewed and analyzed
according to the novel typing system. We considered that NPC can be divided into 
5 types as follows: limited (L), ascending (A), descending (D) ascending-
descending (mixed) (AD), and distant metastasis types (M). The distribution of
these clinical types, their association with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) serology
and prognostic value were explored.
RESULTS: 55 (8.70%), 59 (9.34%), 177 (28.01%), 321 (50.79%) and 20 (3.16%)
patients were classified as Type L, A, D, AD and M, respectively. EBV (VCA)-IgA
titers, EBV early antigen (EA)-IgA serum titers, and capsid antigen lg(EBV DNA)
were positively associated with the clinical typing (p<0.05). The 3-year overall 
survival (OS) rates for Types L, A, D, AD and M were 100, 100, 95.10, 88.20 and
59.30%, respectively (p<0.001). A prognostic model was constructed based on
pretreatment lg (EBV DNA) and clinical type, which were independent predictors of
OS (multivariate Cox proportional model). The prognostic model stratified
patients into 4 risk subgroups. The 3-year OS rates of the low, intermediate,
high and extremely high risk groups were 99.5, 90.0, 85.5 and 53.2%, respectively
(p<0.001). Compared with the low-risk group, the risk of death was 4.96, 8.75 and
35.9 in the intermediate, high and extremely high risk groups, respectively
(p<0.001). The model also predicted OS independently of TNM classification.
CONCLUSION: This novel clinical typing system and prognostic model can supplement
TNM classification, and may help design novel treatment strategies, evaluate risk
stratification and investigate the varied biological characteristics of NPC.


PMID: 24965409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

