
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Sep;22(1):98-106. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.06.024.
Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Frequency of CD4+CXCR5+ TFH cells in patients with hepatitis b virus-associated
membranous nephropathy.

Liu Y(1), Zhao P(1), Qu Z(2), Ayana DA(3), Jiang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis Research, Ministry of Education, The First Hospital
of Jilin University, Changchun, 130032, China.
(2)Department of Nephrology, The First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun
130021, China.
(3)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Haramaya University, Dire Dawa,
Ethiopia.
(4)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis Research, Ministry of Education, The First Hospital
of Jilin University, Changchun, 130032, China. Electronic address:
yanfangjiang@hotmail.com.

The frequency of different subsets of CD4(+)CXCR5(+) TFH cells and serum cytokine
levels were analyzed in a total of 14 patients with newly diagnosed hepatitis B
virus-associated membranous nephropathy (HBV-MN), 12 individuals with
immune-tolerant HBV infection (HBV-IT) and 12 healthy controls (HC). Serum
cytokine levels were measured before and 10-12 weeks after treatment.
Significantly higher frequency of CD4(+)CXCR5(+), CD4(+)CXCR5(+)ICOS(+) and
CD4(+)CXCR5(+)PD-1(+) TFH cells, and higher serum levels of IL-17A, IFN-γ, IL-2, 
IL-10, IL-4 and IL-21 were detected in HBV-MN patients compared to the HC. The
percentage of CD4(+)CXCR5(+) TFH cells and serum IL-21 level in HBV-MN patients
were also higher than the HBV-IT. The percentage of CD4(+)CXCR5(+) TFH cell was
negatively correlated with the value of eGFR, and the percentage of
CD4(+)CXCR5(+)ICOS(+) TFH cells was positively correlated with the 24-h urinary
protein concentration. Notably, the percentage of CD4(+)CXCR5(+)PD-1(+) TFH cells
was positively correlated with serum IL-21 level and 24-h urinary protein
concentration. Treatment with prednisone or/and immunosuppressive drugs
significantly reduced the frequency of CD4(+)CXCR5(+), CD4(+)CXCR5(+)PD-1(+) TFH 
cells and serum IL-21 level, but increased IL-4 and IL-10 levels in the patients.
CD4(+)CXCR5(+) TFH cells, especially CD4(+)CXCR5(+)PD-1(+) TFH cells may
participate in the pathogenesis of HBV-MN.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.06.024 
PMID: 24975830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

