
1. Am J Kidney Dis. 1989 May;13(5):370-6.

Isolated presence of antibody to hepatitis B core antigen in dialysis patients:
occurrence of subclinical hepatitis?

Lai KN(1), Tam JS, Lai FM, Lin HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales
Hospital, Shatin.

Hepatitis B core antibody (anti-HBc) has recently been recognized as a
paradoxical (surrogate) marker for non-A, non-B hepatitis agents in donated
blood. We studied prospectively the hepatitis B virus antigen and antibody status
and liver functions in 63 uremic patients admitted consecutively to our dialysis 
program. Nineteen percent of uremic patients, negative for hepatitis B surface
antigen (HBsAg), hepatitis B virus surface antibody (anti-HBs), hepatitis B virus
DNA, and antibody to delta agents, had anti-HBc in their sera at the time of
admission to maintenance dialysis. This prevalence was significantly higher than 
that of the medical personnel working in the dialysis unit (P = 0.043) and
healthy controls (P = 0.027). The prevalence of persistent presence of isolated
anti-HBc increased to 31% in these uremic patients on long-term maintenance
dialysis. Four patients had developed anti-HBc alone during their course of
maintenance dialysis, and the appearance of anti-HBc was preceded by blood
transfusion within 4 to 8 weeks. Transient or recurrent hepatic dysfunction
occurred in three of these four patients. Patients with isolated anti-HBc were
characterized by a higher incidence of repeated liver dysfunction (P less than
0.005), elevated alanine transaminase levels (P less than 0.005), and a higher
transfusion requirement (P less than 0.01). Our data strongly suggest that these 
patients with isolated anti-HBc may have acquired either hepatitis B virus
infection or non-A, non-B hepatitis through repeated blood transfusions despite
careful screening of the donated blood to exclude transmission of hepatitis B
virus.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/s0272-6386(89)80019-8 
PMID: 2497642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

