
1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;818:213-27. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4471-6458-6_11.

Isolation and characterization of the anticancer gene organic cation transporter 
like-3 (ORCTL3).

AbuAli G(1), Grimm S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Campus, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK.

ORCTL3, an organic cation/anion transporter expressed in various tissue types,
was isolated in a genome-wide cDNA screen as a gene with a tumor-specific
apoptosis activity. When overexpressed it elicits an apoptosis response in many
transformed cells, while normal cells remain unaffected. It can be activated for 
apoptosis induction by individual tumorigenic mutations in renal cells. This
effect is independent of the tumor cells' proliferation status and mediated by an
incomplete ER stress response, characterized by the accumulation of the
endoplasmic reticulum-stress marker ATF4, but not BiP. Recent studies show that
for its apoptosis induction activity ORCTL3 targets the enzyme stearoyl-CoA
desaturase-1 (SCD-1) that is involved in the fatty acid metabolism. This is
evidenced by the inhibition of apoptosis induced through ORCTL3 when the SCD-1
product oleic acid is exogenously supplemented or when SCD-1 is co-transfected in
the transformed cells. ORCTL3's activity to specifically target tumor cells is
caused by the transmembrane domains 3 and 4 of the mouse, but not the human,
gene. In an in vivo model ORCTL3 shows a significant shrinkage in the size of
xenograft tumors when injected with an adenoviral carrier carrying the mouse
ORCTL3 gene. An ex vivo study using human renal cancer cells confirmed the
promising tumor-specific apoptosis effect of ORCTL3. Since ORCTL3 targets fatty
acid metabolism in transformed cells and induces an ER stress specifically in
these cells, it reveals a novel therapeutic interference option for tumor cells.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4471-6458-6_11 
PMID: 25001539  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

