
1. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 2014 Dec;27(12):1370-8. doi:
10.1094/MPMI-07-14-0201-R.

Interactions of Rice tungro bacilliform pararetrovirus and its protein P4 with
plant RNA-silencing machinery.

Rajeswaran R, Golyaev V, Seguin J, Zvereva AS, Farinelli L, Pooggin MM.

Small interfering RNA (siRNA)-directed gene silencing plays a major role in
antiviral defense. Virus-derived siRNAs inhibit viral replication in infected
cells and potentially move to neighboring cells, immunizing them from incoming
virus. Viruses have evolved various ways to evade and suppress siRNA production
or action. Here, we show that 21-, 22-, and 24-nucleotide (nt) viral siRNAs
together constitute up to 19% of total small RNA population of Oryza sativa
plants infected with Rice tungro bacilliform virus (RTBV) and cover both strands 
of the RTBV DNA genome. However, viral siRNA hotspots are restricted to a short
noncoding region between transcription and reverse-transcription start sites.
This region generates double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) precursors of siRNAs and, in
pregenomic RNA, forms a stable secondary structure likely inaccessible to
siRNA-directed cleavage. In transient assays, RTBV protein P4 suppressed
cell-to-cell spread of silencing but enhanced cell-autonomous silencing, which
correlated with reduced 21-nt siRNA levels and increased 22-nt siRNA levels. Our 
findings imply that RTBV generates decoy dsRNA that restricts siRNA production to
the structured noncoding region and thereby protects other regions of the viral
genome from repressive action of siRNAs, while the viral protein P4 interferes
with cell-to-cell spread of antiviral silencing.

DOI: 10.1094/MPMI-07-14-0201-R 
PMID: 25122481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

