
1. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 29;9(9):e107389. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107389.
eCollection 2014.

Defining differential genetic signatures in CXCR4- and the CCR5-utilizing HIV-1
co-linear sequences.

Aiamkitsumrit B(1), Dampier W(1), Martin-Garcia J(1), Nonnemacher MR(1), Pirrone 
V(1), Ivanova T(1), Zhong W(1), Kilareski E(1), Aldigun H(1), Frantz B(1), Rimbey
M(1), Wojno A(1), Passic S(1), Williams JW(1), Shah S(1), Blakey B(1), Parikh
N(1), Jacobson JM(2), Moldover B(3), Wigdahl B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Drexel University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Center for
Molecular Virology and Translational Neuroscience, Institute for Molecular
Medicine and Infectious Disease, Drexel University College of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Drexel University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of
Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and HIV Medicine, Drexel University
College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Center
for Clinical and Translational Medicine, Institute for Molecular Medicine and
Infectious Disease, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(3)B Tech Consulting, Ltd., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

The adaptation of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) to an array of
physiologic niches is advantaged by the plasticity of the viral genome, encoded
proteins, and promoter. CXCR4-utilizing (X4) viruses preferentially, but not
universally, infect CD4+ T cells, generating high levels of virus within
activated HIV-1-infected T cells that can be detected in regional lymph nodes and
peripheral blood. By comparison, the CCR5-utilizing (R5) viruses have a greater
preference for cells of the monocyte-macrophage lineage; however, while R5
viruses also display a propensity to enter and replicate in T cells, they infect 
a smaller percentage of CD4+ T cells in comparison to X4 viruses. Additionally,
R5 viruses have been associated with viral transmission and CNS disease and are
also more prevalent during HIV-1 disease. Specific adaptive changes associated
with X4 and R5 viruses were identified in co-linear viral sequences beyond the
Env-V3. The in silico position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM) algorithm was used 
to define distinct groups of X4 and R5 sequences based solely on sequences in
Env-V3. Bioinformatic tools were used to identify genetic signatures involving
specific protein domains or long terminal repeat (LTR) transcription factor sites
within co-linear viral protein R (Vpr), trans-activator of transcription (Tat),
or LTR sequences that were preferentially associated with X4 or R5 Env-V3
sequences. A number of differential amino acid and nucleotide changes were
identified across the co-linear Vpr, Tat, and LTR sequences, suggesting the
presence of specific genetic signatures that preferentially associate with X4 or 
R5 viruses. Investigation of the genetic relatedness between X4 and R5 viruses
utilizing phylogenetic analyses of complete sequences could not be used to
definitively and uniquely identify groups of R5 or X4 sequences; in contrast,
differences in the genetic diversities between X4 and R5 were readily identified 
within these co-linear sequences in HIV-1-infected patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107389 
PMCID: PMC4180074
PMID: 25265194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

