
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Oct 29;42(19):12169-76. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku854. Epub
2014 Sep 30.

Weak base pairing in both seed and 3' regions reduces RNAi off-targets and
enhances si/shRNA designs.

Gu S(1), Zhang Y(1), Jin L(1), Huang Y(1), Zhang F(1), Bassik MC(2), Kampmann
M(3), Kay MA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158,
USA.
(4)Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305, USA markay@stanford.edu.

The use of RNA interference is becoming routine in scientific discovery and
treatment of human disease. However, its applications are hampered by unwanted
effects, particularly off-targeting through miRNA-like pathways. Recent studies
suggest that the efficacy of such off-targeting might be dependent on binding
stability. Here, by testing shRNAs and siRNAs of various GC content in different 
guide strand segments with reporter assays, we establish that weak base pairing
in both seed and 3' regions is required to achieve minimal off-targeting while
maintaining the intended on-target activity. The reduced off-targeting was
confirmed by RNA-Seq analyses from mouse liver RNAs expressing various anti-HCV
shRNAs. Finally, our protocol was validated on a large scale by analyzing results
of a genome-wide shRNA screen. Compared with previously established work, the new
algorithm was more effective in reducing off-targeting without jeopardizing
on-target potency. These studies provide new rules that should significantly
improve on siRNA/shRNA design.

Â© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku854 
PMCID: PMC4231738
PMID: 25270879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

