
1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 16;290(3):1786-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.612226. Epub 2014 
Nov 26.

Expression, purification, and identification of associated proteins of the
full-length hCDK12/CyclinK complex.

Bartkowiak B(1), Greenleaf AL(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina 27710.
(2)From the Department of Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina 27710 arno@duke.edu.

The coupling of transcription and associated processes has been shown to be
dependent on the RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) C-terminal repeat domain (CTD) and
the phosphorylation of the heptad repeats of which it is composed (consensus
sequence Y1S2P3T4S5P6S7). Two primary S2 position CTD kinases have been
identified in higher eukaryotes: P-TEFb and CDK12/CyclinK. The more recently
discovered CDK12 appears to act at the 3'-end of the transcription unit and has
been identified as a tumor suppressor for ovarian cancer; however much is still
unknown about the in vivo roles of CDK12/CyclinK. In an effort to further
characterize these roles we have purified to near homogeneity and characterized, 
full-length, active, human CDK12/CyclinK, and identified hCDK12-associated
proteins via mass spectrometry. We find that employing a "2A" peptide-linked
multicistronic construct containing CDK12 and CyclinK results in the efficient
production of active, recombinant enzyme in the baculovirus/Sf9 expression
system. Using GST-CTD fusion protein substrates we find that CDK12/CyclinK
prefers a substrate with unmodified repeats or one that mimics prephosphorylation
at the S7 position of the CTD; also the enzyme is sensitive to the inhibitor
flavopiridol at higher concentrations. Identification of CDK12-associating
proteins reveals a strong enrichment for RNA-processing factors suggesting that
CDK12 affects RNA processing events in two distinct ways: Indirectly through
generating factor-binding phospho-epitopes on the CTD of elongating RNAPII and
directly through binding to specific factors.

Â© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.612226 
PMCID: PMC4340420
PMID: 25429106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

