
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2015;11(1):225-30. doi: 10.4161/hv.36155. Epub 2014 Nov 1.

Influenza vaccine effectiveness assessment through sentinel virological data in
three post-pandemic seasons.

Torner N(1), Martínez A, Basile L, Marcos MA, Antón A, Mar Mosquera M, Isanta R, 
Cabezas C, Jané M, Domínguez A, Program Of Catalonia TP.

Author information: 
(1)a Public Health Agency of Catalonia; Department of Health; Generalitat of
Catalonia; Barcelona, Spain.

Influenza vaccination aims at reducing the incidence of serious disease,
complications and death among those with the most risk of severe influenza
disease. Influenza vaccine effectiveness (VE) through sentinel surveillance data 
from the PIDIRAC program (Daily Acute Respiratory Infection Surveillance of
Catalonia) during 2010-2011, 2011-2012, and 2012-2013 influenza seasons, with
three different predominant circulating influenza virus (IV) types [A(H1N1)pdm09,
A(H3N2) and B, respectively] was assessed. The total number of sentinel samples
with known vaccination background collected during the study period was 3173,
14.7% of which had received the corresponding seasonal influenza vaccine. 1117
samples (35.2%) were positive for IV. A retrospective negative case control
design was used to assess vaccine effectiveness (VE) for the entire period and
for each epidemic influenza season. An overall VE of 58.1% (95% CI:46.8-67) was
obtained. Differences in VE according to epidemic season were observed, being
highest for the 2012-2013 season with predominance of IV type B (69.7% ;95%
CI:51.5-81) and for the 2010-2011 season, with predominance of the A(H1N1)pdm09
influenza virus strain (67.2% ;95%CI:49.5-78.8) and lowest for the 2011-2012
season with A(H3N2) subtype predominance (34.2% ;95%CI:4.5-54.6). Influenza
vaccination prevents a substantial number of influenza-associated illnesses.
Although vaccines with increased effectiveness are needed and the search for a
universal vaccine that is not subject to genetic modifications might increase VE,
nowadays only the efforts to increase vaccination rates of high-risk population
and healthcare personnel let reduce the burden of influenza and its
complications.

DOI: 10.4161/hv.36155 
PMCID: PMC4514250
PMID: 25483540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

