
1. Int J STD AIDS. 2015 Oct;26(12):909-11. doi: 10.1177/0956462414562050. Epub 2014 
Dec 9.

Human herpes virus-8-associated multicentric Castleman's disease in an
HIV-positive patient presenting with relapsing and remitting hyponatraemia.

Sasaki H(1), Maeda T(2), Hara Y(1), Osa M(1), Imai K(1), Moriguchi K(3), Mikita
K(1), Fujikura Y(1), Kaida K(3), Kawana A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, National Defense Medical College, Saitama, Japan.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases and Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, National Defense Medical College, Saitama, Japan tmaeda@ndmc.ac.jp.
(3)Division of Neurology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Defense
Medical College, Saitama, Japan.

We report a case of human herpes virus-8-associated multicentric Castleman's
disease in an HIV-positive patient with hyponatraemia. A 65-year-old man was
admitted with relapsing and remitting fever, scattered skin eruptions and
hepatosplenomegaly following combination antiretroviral therapy for his HIV
infection. Based on histopathological findings, he was diagnosed as having human 
herpes virus-8-associated multicentric Castleman's disease and was treated with
four-weekly infusions of rituximab. Prior to receiving chemotherapy, we observed 
several suspected biomarkers of disease activity, positive correlations between
plasma human herpes virus-8 viral load and the levels of plasma interleukin-6,
C-reactive protein and soluble interleukin-2 receptor, and negative correlations 
between platelet count, albumin levels and especially serum sodium levels. We
hypothesize that non-osmotic release of plasma antidiuretic hormone is a cause of
hyponatraemia in human herpes virus-8-associated multicentric Castleman's disease
and that relapsing and remitting hyponatraemia could be correlated with plasma
human herpes virus-8 viral load.

Â© The Author(s) 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/0956462414562050 
PMID: 25504830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

