
1. Trop Doct. 2015 Oct;45(4):231-5. doi: 10.1177/0049475514560211. Epub 2014 Dec 15.

Hepatitis B and C virus prevalence and association with demographics: report of
population screening in Nigeria.

Onyekwere CA(1), Hameed L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Senior Lecturer/Consultant Gastroenterologist, Lagos State University College 
of Medicine/Lagos State University Teaching Hospital Ikeja, Lagos, Nigeria
ifymobi@yahoo.com.
(2)Senior Medical Manager, Medical Affairs Department, Roche Pharmaceuticals,
Lagos, Nigeria.

Hepatitis B and C remain a major cause of chronic liver disease worldwide with
its attendant consequences. The burden of these viral infections in sub-Saharan
Africa including Nigeria rely on estimates based on small population studies in
some select populations. We present the report of a population survey in Nigeria 
during the period 2010-2012. A total of 5,558 adults participated in the
screening exercise. The minimum age recorded was 18 years, while the maximum age 
was 75 years. The mean ± S.D. was 36.07 ± 8.76 years. The prevalence of hepatitis
B (HBsAg) among the adults screened was determined to be 6.7% while that of
hepatitis C (HCV) was 0.9%. The peak prevalence for HBsAg carriage was in the
third to fourth decade in keeping with childhood acquisition while of HCV
antibody was in the sixth to seventh decade. Male gender was significantly
associated with HBsAg carriage while we noted a higher prevalence in those within
the lower socioeconomic status. Overall our findings suggest that hepatitis B is 
endemic in Nigeria, much less than previously reported, while the prevalence for 
HCV is low although reports of pockets of high prevalence exist in select
populations (hospital patients including those living with HIV).

© The Author(s) 2014.

DOI: 10.1177/0049475514560211 
PMID: 25515733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

