
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Jan 19;5:7846. doi: 10.1038/srep07846.

Bronchiolitis associated with Mycoplasma pneumoniae in infants in Suzhou China
between 2010 and 2012.

Wang Y(1), Hao C(1), Ji W(1), Yan Y(1), Shao X(2), Xu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Affiliated Children's Hospital,
Soochow University, Suzhou 215003, China.
(2)Department of Lab Medicine, The Affiliated Children's Hospital, Soochow
University, Suzhou 215003, China.

Viruses cause most cases of bronchiolitis in infants; consequently the importance
of other agents such as Mycoplasma pneumoniae (MP) in the etiology of
bronchiolitis may not be fully recognized. We investigated the prevalence and
seasonal distribution of bronchiolitis caused by MP in 674 children admitted to
the Children's Hospital affiliated with Soochow University from January 2010 to
December 2012. The presence of MP was confirmed by real-time PCR. During the 3
years, we identified MP in 17.2% of the children with bronchiolitis. The annual
MP detection rates were 16.6% in 2010, 17.8% in 2011, and 17.2% in 2012. MP was
detected throughout the year, with a peak from July to September. The median age 
of MP-positive children was 10 months. Common clinical manifestations included
cough, wheezing, and high fever. Moist and/or wheezing rales were frequent, and
pulmonary interstitial infiltration was seen in 66.4% of chest X-rays. Patients
with MP infection were older, were more likely to have pulmonary interstitial
infiltration, and had shorter hospital stays than those with respiratory
syncytial virus infection. Our study revealed MP as an important cause of
bronchiolitis, with peaks of occurrence during the summer and early autumn.
Pulmonary interstitial infiltrations were a common event.

DOI: 10.1038/srep07846 
PMCID: PMC4297954
PMID: 25597274  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

