
1. Health Place. 2015 Mar;32:59-64. doi: 10.1016/j.healthplace.2014.12.010. Epub
2015 Jan 23.

Exposure to neighborhood immigrant concentration from adolescence to young
adulthood and immune function among Latino young adults.

Ford JL(1), Browning CR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ohio State University, College of Nursing, 320 N Hall/1585 Neil Ave.,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Electronic address: ford.553@osu.edu.
(2)Ohio State University, Department of Sociology, 214 Townshend Hall/1885 Neil
Ave Mall, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Electronic address: browning.90@osu.edu.

The immune system plays a critical role in the prevention of infectious and
chronic disease. We investigate associations between exposure to neighborhood
immigrant concentration across the transition from adolescence to adulthood and
immune function among Latino young adults, including moderation by nativity. Data
from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (1994-2008) were
analyzed. Immune function was measured via Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) antibody
levels (higher levels indicate impaired immune function) among EBV-positive
Latino adults (N=1130). Results indicated the averaged individual exposure to
immigrant concentration (mean % of foreign-born residents in the census tract
across waves 1-4) was associated with immune function for foreign-born Latinos
only (b=-0.37, P<0.05). For waves of exposure, only the cumulative measure of
living in an immigrant enclave (census tracts with ≥40% foreign-born residents)
across all waves was associated with immune function and only for foreign-born
Latinos (b=-0.22, P<0.05). Research on the mechanisms through which neighborhood 
immigrant concentration confers salubrious physiological outcomes for
foreign-born Latinos is needed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.healthplace.2014.12.010 
PMCID: PMC4430189
PMID: 25618565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

