
1. Acc Chem Res. 2015 Apr 21;48(4):911-20. doi: 10.1021/ar500456w. Epub 2015 Mar 18.

Integrated electrochemical microsystems for genetic detection of pathogens at the
point of care.

Hsieh K(1), Ferguson BS(1), Eisenstein M(1), Plaxco KW(1), Soh HT(1).

Author information: 
(1)†Department of Mechanical Engineering, ‡Institute for Collaborative
Biotechnologies, §Interdepartmental Program in Biomolecular Science and
Engineering, ∥Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, and ⊥Materials
Department, University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California
93106, United States.

The capacity to achieve rapid, sensitive, specific, quantitative, and multiplexed
genetic detection of pathogens via a robust, portable, point-of-care platform
could transform many diagnostic applications. And while contemporary technologies
have yet to effectively achieve this goal, the advent of microfluidics provides a
potentially viable approach to this end by enabling the integration of
sophisticated multistep biochemical assays (e.g., sample preparation, genetic
amplification, and quantitative detection) in a monolithic, portable device from 
relatively small biological samples. Integrated electrochemical sensors offer a
particularly promising solution to genetic detection because they do not require 
optical instrumentation and are readily compatible with both integrated circuit
and microfluidic technologies. Nevertheless, the development of generalizable
microfluidic electrochemical platforms that integrate sample preparation and
amplification as well as quantitative and multiplexed detection remains a
challenging and unsolved technical problem. Recognizing this unmet need, we have 
developed a series of microfluidic electrochemical DNA sensors that have
progressively evolved to encompass each of these critical functionalities. For
DNA detection, our platforms employ label-free, single-step, and
sequence-specific electrochemical DNA (E-DNA) sensors, in which an
electrode-bound, redox-reporter-modified DNA "probe" generates a current change
after undergoing a hybridization-induced conformational change. After
successfully integrating E-DNA sensors into a microfluidic chip format, we
subsequently incorporated on-chip genetic amplification techniques including
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP)
to enable genetic detection at clinically relevant target concentrations. To
maximize the potential point-of-care utility of our platforms, we have further
integrated sample preparation via immunomagnetic separation, which allowed the
detection of influenza virus directly from throat swabs and developed strategies 
for the multiplexed detection of related bacterial strains from the blood of
septic mice. Finally, we developed an alternative electrochemical detection
platform based on real-time LAMP, which not is only capable of detecting across a
broad dynamic range of target concentrations, but also greatly simplifies
quantitative measurement of nucleic acids. These efforts represent considerable
progress toward the development of a true sample-in-answer-out platform for
genetic detection of pathogens at the point of care. Given the many advantages of
these systems, and the growing interest and innovative contributions from
researchers in this field, we are optimistic that iterations of these systems
will arrive in clinical settings in the foreseeable future.

DOI: 10.1021/ar500456w 
PMID: 25785632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

