
1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2015 Aug;72(15):2973-88. doi: 10.1007/s00018-015-1879-1. Epub 
2015 Mar 26.

Influenza infection induces host DNA damage and dynamic DNA damage responses
during tissue regeneration.

Li N(1), Parrish M, Chan TK, Yin L, Rai P, Yoshiyuki Y, Abolhassani N, Tan KB,
Kiraly O, Chow VT, Engelward BP.

Author information: 
(1)Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology, 1 CREATE Way, #03-10/11
Innovation Wing, #03-12/13/14 Enterprise Wing, Singapore, 138602, Singapore.

Influenza viruses account for significant morbidity worldwide. Inflammatory
responses, including excessive generation of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species
(RONS), mediate lung injury in severe influenza infections. However, the
molecular basis of inflammation-induced lung damage is not fully understood.
Here, we studied influenza H1N1 infected cells in vitro, as well as H1N1 infected
mice, and we monitored molecular and cellular responses over the course of 2
weeks in vivo. We show that influenza induces DNA damage to both, when cells are 
directly exposed to virus in vitro (measured using the comet assay) and also when
cells are exposed to virus in vivo (estimated via γH2AX foci). We show that DNA
damage, as well as responses to DNA damage persist in vivo until long after virus
has been cleared, at times when there are inflammation associated RONS (measured 
by xanthine oxidase activity and oxidative products). The frequency of lung
epithelial and immune cells with increased γH2AX foci is elevated in vivo,
especially for dividing cells (Ki-67-positive) exposed to oxidative stress during
tissue regeneration. Additionally, we observed a significant increase in
apoptotic cells as well as increased levels of DNA double strand break (DSB)
repair proteins Ku70, Ku86 and Rad51 during the regenerative phase. In
conclusion, results show that influenza induces DNA damage both in vitro and in
vivo, and that DNA damage responses are activated, raising the possibility that
DNA repair capacity may be a determining factor for tissue recovery and disease
outcome.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-015-1879-1 
PMCID: PMC4802977
PMID: 25809161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

