
1. Clin Transl Immunology. 2015 Mar 27;4(3):e35. doi: 10.1038/cti.2015.5.
eCollection 2015 Mar.

Adoptive T-cell immunotherapy for ganciclovir-resistant CMV disease after lung
transplantation.

Holmes-Liew CL(1), Holmes M(1), Beagley L(2), Hopkins P(3), Chambers D(3), Smith 
C(2), Khanna R(2).

Author information: 
(1)South Australian Lung Transplant Unit, Department of Thoracic Medicine, Royal 
Adelaide Hospital , Adelaide, South Australia, Australia ; Faculty of Health
Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Adelaide , Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia.
(2)QIMR Centre for Immunotherapy and Vaccine Development, QIMR Berghofer Medical 
Research Institute , Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(3)Queensland Lung Transplant Service, The Prince Charles Hospital , Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia ; School of medicine, The University of Queensland ,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Infections with cytomegalovirus (CMV) can induce severe complications after solid
organ transplantation (SOT). The prognosis for ganciclovir-resistant CMV
infection and disease is particularly poor. Whereas adoptive transfer of
CMV-specific T cells has emerged as a powerful tool in hematopoietic stem cell
transplant patients, its translation into the SOT setting remains a significant
challenge as underlying immunosuppression inhibits the virus-specific T-cell
response in vivo. Here, we demonstrate successful expansion and adoptive transfer
of autologous CMV-specific T cells from a seronegative recipient of a
seropositive lung allograft with ganciclovir-resistant CMV disease, resulting in 
the long-term reconstitution of protective anti-viral immunity, CMV infection,
disease-free survival and no allograft rejection.

DOI: 10.1038/cti.2015.5 
PMCID: PMC4386617
PMID: 25859390 

