
1. Autophagy. 2015 Apr 3;11(4):701-15. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1034407.

Elucidating the composition and conservation of the autophagy pathway in
photosynthetic eukaryotes.

Shemi A(1), Ben-Dor S, Vardi A.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Plant Sciences ; Weizmann Institute of Science ; Rehovot ,
Israel.

Aquatic photosynthetic eukaryotes represent highly diverse groups (green, red,
and chromalveolate algae) derived from multiple endosymbiosis events, covering a 
wide spectrum of the tree of life. They are responsible for about 50% of the
global photosynthesis and serve as the foundation for oceanic and fresh water
food webs. Although the ecophysiology and molecular ecology of some algal species
are extensively studied, some basic aspects of algal cell biology are still
underexplored. The recent wealth of genomic resources from algae has opened new
frontiers to decipher the role of cell signaling pathways and their function in
an ecological and biotechnological context. Here, we took a bioinformatic
approach to explore the distribution and conservation of TOR and
autophagy-related (ATG) proteins (Atg in yeast) in diverse algal groups. Our
genomic analysis demonstrates conservation of TOR and ATG proteins in green
algae. In contrast, in all 5 available red algal genomes, we could not detect the
sequences that encode for any of the 17 core ATG proteins examined, albeit TOR
and its interacting proteins are conserved. This intriguing data suggests that
the autophagy pathway is not conserved in red algae as it is in the entire
eukaryote domain. In contrast, chromalveolates, despite being derived from the
red-plastid lineage, retain and express ATG genes, which raises a fundamental
question regarding the acquisition of ATG genes during algal evolution. Among
chromalveolates, Emiliania huxleyi (Haptophyta), a bloom-forming coccolithophore,
possesses the most complete set of ATG genes, and may serve as a model organism
to study autophagy in marine protists with great ecological significance.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1034407 
PMCID: PMC4502668
PMID: 25915714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

