
1. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2015 Apr;23(4):254-7. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1007-3418.2015.04.005.

[Relationship between hepatitis B surface antigen, HBV DNA quantity and liver
fibrosis severity].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao Y(1), Zou G, Ye J, Pan G, Rao J, Li F, Wei Y, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Hepatopathy Department, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei 230601, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the correlation between serum hepatitis B surface antigen
(HBsAg) level and hepatic tissue pathological staging in patients with chronic
hepatitis B (CHB).
METHODS: Clinical data was collected from our hospital's records for 302 CHB
patients with HBsAg-positive status for more than 6 months and who had undergone 
hepatic biopsy. The HBsAg level,HBV DNA level and other clinical data were
measured using commercial diagnostic assays. Liver histology was scored using the
GS staging system. Correlation between serum HBsAg quantity, HBV DNA quantity,
stage of inflammation and degree of fibrosis was assessed statistically.
RESULTS: The correlation of serum HBsAg level and HBV DNA level was notable. The 
serum HBsAg level was a variable affecting hepatic tissue pathological stage
significantly. Serum HBsAg level appeared to be a highly specific and sensitive
diagnostic marker of hepatic fibrosis. As the severity of liver fibrosis
increased, the quantitative levels of platelet (PLT), HBsAg and HBV DNA gradually
decreased, and the APRI index gradually increased; there were significant
differences between the groups (all P<0.001). Serum HBsAg and HBV DNA levels in
patients with hepatitis B e antigen-positive (HBeAg(+)) status showed strong
correlation (r=0.721, P<0.0001) by Spearman analysis. HBeAg(+) patients with
moderate to severe fibrosis (S2-4) exhibited significantly lower serum HBsAg and 
HBV DNA levels compared with patients with no or mild fibrosis (S0-1; t=5.475 and
4.826, P<0.001). ROC analysis suggested that a serum HBsAg cutoff of 4.46 log 10 
IU/mL (28 800 IU/mL) would provide a theoretical sensitivity of 76.3%, with
theoretical specificity of 70.5% in HBeAg(+) CHB patients. A serum HBV DNA cutoff
of 7.13 log 10 IU/mL (1.35*10(7) copies/mL) would provide a theoretical
sensitivity of 71.1%, with theoretical specificity of 73.4% in HBeAg(+) CHB
patients. Logistic regression analysis showed that the level of HBsAg was an
independent prognostic factor of moderate to severe liver fibrosis, with alanine 
aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, HBsAg, HBV DNA and PLT (P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: HBsAg and HBV DNA levels decrease gradually along with aggravation of
liver fibrosis. The cutoff values of 28800 IU/mL for HBsAg and 1.35*10(7)
copies/mL ofHBV DNA provide higher specificity and sensitivity for predicting the
degree of liver fibrosis in HBeAg-positive CHB patients, and the former is an
independent predictor of severe liver fibrosis.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.1007-3418.2015.04.005 
PMID: 26133815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

