
1. J Med Virol. 2016 Jun;88(6):1027-34. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24427. Epub 2015 Nov 19.

Prediction of virologic response to tenofovir mono-rescue therapy for multidrug
resistant chronic hepatitis B.

Lee S(1)(2)(3)(4), Park JY(1)(2), Kim D Y(1)(2), Kim BK(1)(2), Kim SU(1)(2), Song
K(5), Ku HJ(1), Han KH(1)(2), Ahn SH(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.
(2)Institute of Gastroenterology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Catholic Kwandong University College of
medicine, International St. Mary's Hospital, Incheon, Republic of Korea.
(4)Institute for Integrative Medicine, Catholic Kwandong University College of
medicine, International St. Mary's Hospital, Incheon, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.

Most guidelines suggest combination therapy including nucleoside and nucleotide
analogues for the treatment of chronic hepatitis B (CHB) with multidrug
resistance (MD-R). However, long-term combination treatment can evoke high costs 
and safety problems. Therefore, we investigated the efficacy of tenofovir
disoproxil fumarate (TDF) mono-rescue therapy for viral suppression in patients
with CHB exhibiting MD-R. We reviewed patients with CHB exhibiting antiviral drug
resistance treated by TDF mono-rescue therapy from December 2012 to June 2014.
The patients were categorized into three groups: lamivudine-resistance (LAM-R)
group (n = 290), and LAM-R + adefovir-resistance (ADV-R) group (n = 43), and
LAM-R + entecavir-resistance (ETV-R) group (n = 113). We compared the virologic
response rate according to the multiplicity of resistance and investigated the
predictive factors of a virologic response. For a median of 15 months (range,
6-24 months) of TDF mono-rescue therapy, the cumulative virologic response rates 
were 82.8, 81.4, and 84.1% in the LAM-R, LAM-R + ADV-R, and LAM-R + ETV-R groups,
respectively (P = 0.239). Multivariate analysis revealed that multiplicity of
resistance did not influence the achievement of a virologic response (P = 0.218).
However, the baseline HBV DNA level significantly influenced the achievement of a
virologic response for the treatment of CHB with MD-R (P < 0.001). TDF
mono-rescue therapy is an appropriate treatment for CHB with MD-R, and the
baseline HBV DNA level is a significant predictive factor for a virologic
response. These factors should be considered before treating CHB with MD-R.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24427 
PMID: 26538234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

