
1. Avian Dis. 2015 Dec;59(4):492-7. doi: 10.1637/11113-043015-Reg.

Serological Surveillance of Wild Waterfowl in Northern Australia for Avian
Influenza Virus Shows Variations in Prevalence and a Cyclical Periodicity of
Infection.

Curran JM(1), Ellis TM(1), Robertson ID(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Murdoch University, 90 South Street, Murdoch, 
Western Australia, 6150, Australia.

The virological surveillance of 3582 wild waterfowl in northern Australia from
2004 to 2009 for avian influenza virus (AIV) found an apparent prevalence (AP) of
1% (31 of 2989 cloacal swabs; 95% CI: 0.71%-1.47%) using a Taqman Type A
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction test and no viral
isolations from 593 swabs tested by the embryonating chicken egg culture method. 
From serological testing using a nucleoprotein competitive enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay for AIV antibody, 1131 of 3645 sera had ≥ 40% inhibition,
indicating an apparent seroprevalence of 31% (95% CI: 29.5%-32.6%). This value
suggests that the low AP from virological testing does not reflect the dynamics
of AIV infection in these populations. Spatiotemporal and species variations in
seroprevalence were found at wetland sampling sites, with consistently higher
values at Kununurra in Western Australia (AP  =  39%, 95% CI: 36.9%-41.4%)
compared to other locations. At Kununurra, seroprevalence values had a two-year
cyclical periodicity and suggest this location is a hotspot of AIV activity. From
hemagglutination inhibition (HI) testing using multiple subtype antigens, the
highest AP of HI reactions were to H6 and H5 subtypes. The phenomenon of cyclic
periodicity in NP seroprevalence at Kununurra is hypothesized as being related to
the prevalent H6 subtype that may have either become predominant or cycled back
into a mostly AIV naïve flock. The inclusion of serological testing provided
insight into the dynamics of AIV infection in wild birds such as species risk
profiles and spatiotemporal patterns, important epidemiological information for a
risk-based approach to surveillance.

DOI: 10.1637/11113-043015-Reg 
PMID: 26629622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

