
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016 Feb;100(4):1925-1933. doi:
10.1007/s00253-015-7188-7. Epub 2015 Dec 8.

Seed-borne nature of a begomovirus, Mung bean yellow mosaic virus in black gram.

Kothandaraman SV(1), Devadason A(2), Ganesan MV(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Pulses Research Centre, Vamban, Pudukottai, Tamil Nadu, 622303,
India. vksatya81@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Plant Pathology, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore,
Tamil Nadu, 641001, India.

The yellow mosaic viruses (YMV) infecting legumes are considered to be the most
devastating begomoviruses as they incite considerable yield loss. The yellow
discoloration of pods and seeds of infected plants and symptom emergence in the
very first trifoliate leaf of the plants in the field were suggestive that the
virus may be seed borne, which was investigated in the present study. The
distribution of the virus in various parts of the seeds of black gram (Vigna
mungo L. Hepper) plants naturally infected in the field was determined by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), Southern blot analysis, and sequencing.
Nucleotide sequencing of the PCR amplicons from the seed parts from groups of ten
seeds revealed the presence of mung bean yellow mosaic virus (MYMV) in the seed
coat, cotyledon, and embryonic axes. The presence of virion particles was
confirmed through double antibody sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(DAS-ELISA) and immunosorbent electron microscopy (ISEM) even in a single whole
seed. In confocal microscopy, positive fluorescent signals were obtained using
coat protein gene-specific primers in the embryonic axes. However, in the growth 
tests performed with the same batch of seeds, there was no symptom development in
the seedlings though the virus (both DNA A and B components) was detected in 32 %
of tested seedlings. In this study, the MYMV was detected in seed coat,
cotyledon, and embryo. This study revealed that the MYMV is a seed-borne virus.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-015-7188-7 
PMID: 26646557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

