
1. J Med Microbiol. 2016 Feb;65(2):123-128. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.000208. Epub 2015 Dec
9.

Genotype analysis of varicella-zoster virus isolates from suburban Shanghai
Municipal Province, China.

Sun Z(1), Guo Y(1), Li M(2), Yao Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Fengxian Institute of Dermatosis Prevention,
Shanghai, PR China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, PR China.

To determine the predominant genotype of the varicella-zoster virus (VZV) in
suburban Shanghai Municipal Province, specimens were collected from the lesions
of 95 outpatients clinically diagnosed with varicella or herpes zoster. Of these,
69 patients (72.6%) were positive for VZV DNA. The 69 isolates were all genotyped
as the genotype J1/clade 2. Based on sequencing of the 447 bp sequence in ORF22, 
66 isolates were identified as genotype J/clade 2 strains and three were
identified as type M2/clade 4 strains. To confirm the classification of these
three strains, we determined the presence of 27 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) and found that isolates 1270/1450 shared seven SNPs that differed from
those of clade 2, in which three SNPs were unique to clade 3 and another three
were unique to clade 4. Isolate 1456 had two markers of clade 4 that differed
from clade 2. The phylogenetic tree showed that our isolates clustered primarily 
with clade 2 and that the three M2/J1 strains clustered between clades 2 and 4.
It is likely that isolates 1270/1450/1446 may represent a new subclade of either 
clade 2 or 4, or some recombinant events. In addition, our isolates were WT
strains. We also observed significant inter-strain variations.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.000208 
PMID: 26654224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

