
1. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 21;14(4):17630-40. doi: 10.4238/2015.December.21.36.

HPV infection-associated anogenital cyto-colpo-histological findings and
molecular typing in HIV-positive women.

Tso FK(1), Rodrigues CL(2), Levi JE(2), Mattosinho de Castro Ferraz MG(3), Speck 
NM(1), Ribalta JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Núcleo de Prevenção de Doenças Ginecológicas, Departamento de Ginecologia,
Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brasil.
(2)Laboratório de Virologia, Instituto de Medicina Tropical, Universidade de São 
Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.
(3)Departamento de Patologia, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal
de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

HIV and human papillomavirus (HPV) coinfection is increasing, especially in the
anal canal (AC) and cervico-vaginal regions. We identified anal epithelium
abnormalities related to high-risk HPV (HR-HPV) lesions in the lower genital
tracts (LGTs) of HIV-positive women, described the HPV genotypes identified, and 
assessed the expression of E6/E7 oncogenes in coinfected patients. Ninety-eight
women were enrolled in groups combining HIV status and presence or absence of HPV
in the LGT. Anal and cervical smears were collected for cytology and HR-HPV
assays using Cobas(®) and/or PapilloCheck(®). Samples with highly oncogenic HPV
genotypes were confirmed by NucliSENS EasyQ(®). Forty-two HIV-positive (25-52;
mean age 39.5) and 56 HIV-negative (18-58; mean age 35.7) patients were included.
E2 and C1 groups presented AC alterations (P = 0.002); altered images for
high-resolution anoscopy were higher in E1 and C2 (P < 0.001). Of the 29 women
with alterations, 41.38% were HIV-negative and 58.62% were HIV-positive (P <
0.001). HIV-positive patients accounted for 29% of the anal high-grade squamous
intraepithelial lesions (P = 0.015). The Cobas(®) positive result frequency was
higher in three AC groups than in the other groups. There was variation in the
number of HPV types in the cervico-vaginal samples among the study groups (P <
0.001). Anal cytology and anoscopy showed more altered findings in HIV-positive
patients with HPV in the LGT. HR-HPV anal infections by various genotypes are
common and are associated with cervical infections in HIV-positive patients.
E6/E7 expression is apparently more common in the AC of HIV-positive women.

DOI: 10.4238/2015.December.21.36 
PMID: 26782408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

