
1. Arch Virol. 2016 Apr;161(4):939-46. doi: 10.1007/s00705-016-2753-7. Epub 2016 Jan
18.

Detection and molecular characterization of astroviruses in turkeys.

Singh A(1), Mor SK(1), Jindal N(1), Patnayak D(1), Sobhy NM(1), Luong NT(1),
Goyal SM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Population Medicine and Veterinary Diagnostic
Laboratory, University of Minnesota, 1333 Gortner Ave, St. Paul, MN, 55108, USA.
(2)Department of Veterinary Population Medicine and Veterinary Diagnostic
Laboratory, University of Minnesota, 1333 Gortner Ave, St. Paul, MN, 55108, USA. 
goyal001@umn.edu.

This study was conducted to determine the prevalence and molecular
characteristics of turkey astrovirus 1 (TAstV-1) and avian nephritis virus (ANV) 
in turkeys with light turkey syndrome (LTS), which is characterized by lower body
weight in market-age turkeys than their standard breed character. We collected
pools of fecal samples from four LTS and two non-LTS turkey flocks in Minnesota
at 2, 3, 5 and 8 weeks of age. Of the 80 LTS pools tested, 16 (20.0 %) and 11
(13.8 %) were positive for TAstV-1 and ANV, respectively. For non-LTS flocks,
these numbers were 8 (20.0 %) and 5 (12.5 %), respectively. The maximum number of
birds was positive at five weeks of age. We also tested 130 fecal samples of
poult enteritis syndrome (PES) cases submitted to the Minnesota Veterinary
Diagnostic Laboratory and found 19 and 11 positive for TAstV-1 and ANV,
respectively. RdRp gene sequences were determined for a total of 29 TAstV-1 and
22 ANV samples. Phylogenetic analysis of the RdRp gene revealed 92-100 % and
88-100 % nucleotide sequence identity among TAstV-1 and ANV sequences,
respectively. A large number of nucleotide and amino acid substitutions were
observed in LTS and PES flocks than in non-LTS flocks. One of the PES sequences
grouped with ANV-like sequences detected in chickens, indicating that regular
screening of birds should be continued. Further, complete genome analysis should 
be conducted to determine whether this virus is a novel divergent strain or a
recombinant of chicken and turkey ANV-like viruses. The detection of TAstV-1 and 
ANV in a considerable number of non-LTS cases emphasizes the need for further
studies on the transmission pattern and pathogenesis of these viruses to
determine their role as pathogens of turkeys.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-016-2753-7 
PMID: 26780891  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

