
1. AIDS Care. 2016 Aug;28(8):1073-8. doi: 10.1080/09540121.2016.1139042. Epub 2016
Feb 1.

Maintaining the continuity of HIV-care records for patients transferring care
between centers: challenges, workloads, needs and risks.

Gill MJ(1)(2)(3), Ody M(1), Lynch T(1)(4), Jessiman-Perreault L(1), Krentz
HB(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Southern Alberta HIV Clinic, Alberta Health Services , Calgary , Canada.
(2)b Department of Medicine , University of Calgary , Calgary , Alberta , Canada.
(3)c Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Infectious Diseases , University
of Calgary , Calgary , Canada.
(4)d Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine , University of Calgary ,
Calgary , Canada.

With improved life expectancy, the medical records of HIV-infected patients are
likely to be transferred repeatedly between HIV caregivers. The challenges, and
risk for introducing medical error from incomplete record transfers are poorly
understood. We measured number of requests for record transfer, the workload
incurred, and explore, using genotypic antiretroviral resistance testing results 
(GART), the potential risk of incomplete records. Using retrospective database
and chart review, we examined all patients followed at the Southern Alberta
Clinic between 1 January 2004 and 1 January 2015, and determined how many
patients transferred care into and out our program, the associated requests and
the workload for record transfer. Using a complete record of all GART tests, the 
potential importance of absent historic records in current treatment decisions
was analyzed. The annual churn rate was 22 ± 3.4%. We received requests for only 
70% of patient records who had left our care. Median time for receipt of incoming
medical records was 28 days; average clerical time for processing data was 2
hours/record. Of all GART results, 25% exhibited resistance. Of 111 patients with
potentially misleading GART results (i.e., documented historical resistance not
visible on more recent GART), 34 (30.6%) had moved in from elsewhere. Rigorous
maintenance of the continuity of the HIV record is not universally practiced.
Resources, costs and logistic challenges as well as a lack of appreciation of
risks clearly shown by GART testing, may be relevant barriers. Addressing such
issues is pressing as aging and transfers of care are increasingly common.

DOI: 10.1080/09540121.2016.1139042 
PMID: 26829326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

