
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 19;6:21368. doi: 10.1038/srep21368.

Anal HPV/HIV co-infection among Men Who Have Sex with Men: a cross-sectional
survey from three cities in China.

Li X(1), Li M(1), Yang Y(2), Zhong X(3), Feng B(1), Xin H(1), Li Z(1), Jin Q(1), 
Gao L(1).

Author information: 
(1)MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, Institute of Pathogen
Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences &Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Peking 
University Health Science Centre, Beijing, China.
(3)MSD China Holding Co., Ltd, Beijing, China.

Anal human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, which is linked to anal warts and anal
cancer, is common among men who have sex with men (MSM), especially among those
HIV positives. MSM aged 18 years or older were recruited from mainland China.
Blood and anal cytologic samples were collected for HIV-1 serological test and
HPV genotyping. A total of 889 eligible participations were included. The
genotyping results of HPV were available for 822 participants (92.46%), 65.32% of
which were positive for the targeted 37 HPV types. Prevalence of infection with
any type of HPV was higher among HIV-infected participants (82.69%) as compared
to HIV-uninfected participants (62.81%) (p < 0.01). HPV06 (15.45%),
HPV18(13.50%), HPV16 (11.44%), and HPV11 (10.71%) were the most frequent types
identified in the study population. Ever had paid sex with man was found to be
independent predictor for HPV positivity with an adjusted odds ratios (OR) of
2.34 (1.16-4.74). Anal HPV positivity was observed to be independently associated
with HIV infection with an adjusted OR of 3.03 (1.76-5.21) in the study
population. In conclusion, the prevalence of anal HPV infection was observed to
be common among MSM from mainland China, and it was significantly associated with
the status of HIV infection.

DOI: 10.1038/srep21368 
PMCID: PMC4759533
PMID: 26892938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

