
1. J Vis Exp. 2016 Feb 28;(108):53670. doi: 10.3791/53670.

Development of an Alpha-synuclein Based Rat Model for Parkinson's Disease via
Stereotactic Injection of a Recombinant Adeno-associated Viral Vector.

Van der Perren A(1), Casteels C(2), Van Laere K(2), Gijsbers R(3), Van den Haute 
C(4), Baekelandt V(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Neurobiology and Gene Therapy, Department of Neurosciences, KU 
Leuven.
(2)Division of Nuclear Medicine, Leuven University Hospital - KU Leuven.
(3)Laboratory for Molecular Virology and Gene Therapy, Department of
Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Sciences, KU Leuven; Leuven Viral Vector Core,
KU Leuven.
(4)Laboratory for Neurobiology and Gene Therapy, Department of Neurosciences, KU 
Leuven; Leuven Viral Vector Core, KU Leuven.
(5)Laboratory for Neurobiology and Gene Therapy, Department of Neurosciences, KU 
Leuven; veerle.baekelandt@med.kuleuven.be.

In order to study the molecular pathways of Parkinson's disease (PD) and to
develop novel therapeutic strategies, scientific investigators rely on animal
models. The identification of PD-associated genes has led to the development of
genetic PD models. Most transgenic α-SYN mouse models develop gradual α-SYN
pathology but fail to display clear dopaminergic cell loss and dopamine-dependent
behavioral deficits. This hurdle was overcome by direct targeting of the
substantia nigra with viral vectors overexpressing PD-associated genes. Local
gene delivery using viral vectors provides an attractive way to express
transgenes in the central nervous system. Specific brain regions can be targeted 
(e.g. the substantia nigra), expression can be induced in the adult setting and
high expression levels can be achieved. Further, different vector systems based
on various viruses can be used. The protocol outlines all crucial steps to
perform a viral vector injection in the substantia nigra of the rat to develop a 
viral vector-based alpha-synuclein animal model for Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.3791/53670 
PMCID: PMC4828209
PMID: 26967677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

