
1. Food Environ Virol. 2016 Jun;8(2):141-7. doi: 10.1007/s12560-016-9234-8. Epub
2016 Mar 16.

Temperature-Dependent Persistence of Human Norovirus Within Oysters (Crassostrea 
virginica).

Choi C(1), Kingsley DH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, School of Food Science and Technology,
College of Biotechnology and Natural Resources, Chung-Ang University, Ansung,
456-756, Republic of Korea.
(2)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Food Safety and
Intervention Technologies, James W. W. Baker Center, Delaware State University,
Dover, DE, 19901, USA. david.kingsley@ars.usda.gov.

This study characterizes the persistence of human norovirus in Eastern oysters
(Crassostrea virginica) held at different seawater temperatures. Oysters were
contaminated with human norovirus GI.1 (Norwalk strain 8FIIa) by exposing them to
virus-contaminated water at 15 °C, and subsequently holding them at 7, 15, and
25 °C for up to 6 weeks. Viral RNA was extracted from oyster tissue and hemocytes
and quantitated by RT-qPCR. Norovirus was detected in hemocytes and oysters held 
at 7 and 15 °C for 6 weeks and in hemocytes and oysters held at 25 °C for up to 2
and 4 weeks, respectively. Results confirm that NoV is quite persistent within
oysters and demonstrate that cooler water temperatures extend norovirus clearance
times. This study suggests a need for substantial relay times to remove norovirus
from contaminated shellfish and suggests that regulatory authorities should
consider the effects of water temperature after a suspected episodic
norovirus-contamination event.

DOI: 10.1007/s12560-016-9234-8 
PMID: 26983441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

