
1. Vaccine. 2016 Jun 3;34(26):2976-2981. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.03.076. Epub
2016 Mar 26.

Status of research and development of vaccines for chikungunya.

Smalley C(1), Erasmus JH(2), Chesson CB(3), Beasley DWC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Pathology Graduate Program, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, USA.
(2)Human Pathophysiology and Translational Medicine Graduate Program, University 
of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.
(3)Human Pathophysiology and Translational Medicine Graduate Program, University 
of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA; Sealy Center for Vaccine
Development, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, USA; Sealy Center for Vaccine Development, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA; World Health Organization Collaborating
Center for Vaccine Research, Evaluation and Training on Emerging Infectious
Diseases, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. Electronic
address: dwbeasle@utmb.edu.

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is an arthritogenic alphavirus that during the last
decade has significantly expanded its geographical range and caused large
outbreaks of human disease around the world. Although mortality rates associated 
with CHIKV outbreaks are low, acute and chronic illnesses caused by CHIKV
represent a significant burden of disease largely affecting low and middle income
countries. This report summarizes the current status of vaccine development for
CHIKV.

Copyright Â© 2016 World Health Organization. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.03.076 
PMID: 27026149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

