
1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2016 May;363(10). pii: fnw077. doi: 10.1093/femsle/fnw077.
Epub 2016 Mar 29.

Computational prospecting the great viral unknown.

Hurwitz BL(1), U'Ren JM(2), Youens-Clark K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural and Biosystems Engineering, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ 85721, USA bhurwitz@email.arizona.edu.
(2)Department of Agricultural and Biosystems Engineering, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.

Bacteriophages play an important role in host-driven biological processes by
controlling bacterial population size, horizontally transferring genes between
hosts and expressing host-derived genes to alter host metabolism. Metagenomics
provides the genetic basis for understanding the interplay between uncultured
bacteria, their phage and the environment. In particular, viral metagenomes
(viromes) are providing new insight into phage-encoded host genes (i.e. auxiliary
metabolic genes; AMGs) that reprogram host metabolism during infection. Yet,
despite deep sequencing efforts of viral communities, the majority of sequences
have no match to known proteins. Reference-independent computational techniques, 
such as protein clustering, contig spectra and ecological profiling are
overcoming these barriers to examine both the known and unknown components of
viromes. As the field of viral metagenomics progresses, a critical assessment of 
tools is required as the majority of algorithms have been developed for analyzing
bacteria. The aim of this paper is to offer an overview of current computational 
methodologies for virome analysis and to provide an example of
reference-independent approaches using human skin viromes. Additionally, we
present methods to carefully validate AMGs from host contamination. Despite
computational challenges, these new methods offer novel insights into the
diversity and functional roles of phages in diverse environments.

Â© FEMS 2016. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/femsle/fnw077 
PMID: 27030726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

