
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Mar 30;7:334. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00334. eCollection
2016.

Cell Cycle Regulatory Functions of the KSHV Oncoprotein LANA.

Wei F(1), Gan J(2), Wang C(2), Zhu C(2), Cai Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)ShengYushou Center of Cell Biology and Immunology, School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Shanghai, China.
(2)MOE & MOH Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, School of Basic
Medicine, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University Shanghai, China.

Manipulation of cell cycle is a commonly employed strategy of viruses for
achieving a favorable cellular environment during infection. Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), the primary etiological agent of several
human malignancies including Kaposi's sarcoma, and primary effusion lymphoma,
encodes several oncoproteins that deregulate normal physiology of cell cycle
machinery to persist with endothelial cells and B cells and subsequently
establish a latent infection. During latency, only a small subset of viral
proteins is expressed. Latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA) is one of the
latent antigens shown to be essential for transformation of endothelial cells in 
vitro. It has been well demonstrated that LANA is critical for the maintenance of
latency, episome DNA replication, segregation and gene transcription. In this
review, we summarize recent studies and address how LANA functions as an
oncoprotein to steer host cell cycle-related events including proliferation and
apoptosis by interacting with various cellular and viral factors, and highlight
the potential therapeutic strategy of disrupting LANA-dependent signaling as
targets in KSHV-associated cancers.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00334 
PMCID: PMC4811921
PMID: 27065950 

