
1. Sci Rep. 2016 May 19;6:25735. doi: 10.1038/srep25735.

Development and evaluation of two subunit vaccine candidates containing antigens 
of hepatitis E virus, rotavirus, and astrovirus.

Xia M(1), Wei C(1), Wang L(1), Cao D(2), Meng XJ(2), Jiang X(1)(3), Tan M(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg,
Virginia, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Hepatitis E virus (HEV), rotavirus (RV), and astrovirus (AstV) are important
pathogens that transmit through a common fecal-oral route, causing hepatitis
(HEV) and gastroenteritis (RV and AstV) respectively in humans. In this study, we
developed and evaluated two subunit vaccine candidates that consisted of the same
protruding or spike protein antigens of the three viruses in two formats, a
fusion of the three antigens into one molecule (fused vaccine) vs. a mixture of
the three free antigens together (mixed vaccine). Both vaccines were easily made 
via E. coli expression system. Mouse immunization experiments showed that the
fused vaccine elicited significantly higher antibody responses against the three 
viral antigens than those induced by the mixed vaccine. In addition, the mouse
post-immune antisera of the fused vaccine revealed significantly higher
neutralizing titers against HEV infection in cell culture, as well as
significantly higher 50% blocking titers (BT50) against RV VP8-HBGA receptor
interactions than those of the post-immune antisera after immunization of the
mixed vaccine. Thus, the fused vaccine is a promising trivalent vaccine candidate
against HEV, RV, and AstV, which is worth for further development.

DOI: 10.1038/srep25735 
PMCID: PMC4872161
PMID: 27194006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

