
1. Res Vet Sci. 2016 Aug;107:132-140. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2016.05.014. Epub 2016 May
31.

Recombinant porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus expressing
luciferase genes provide a new indication of viral propagation in both permissive
and target cells.

Gao F(1), Qu Z(2), Li L(2), Yu L(2), Jiang Y(1), Zhou Y(2), Yang S(2), Zheng
H(2), Huang Q(2), Tong W(1), Tong G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Swine Infectious Diseases, Shanghai Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China;
Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou 225009, China.
(2)Department of Swine Infectious Diseases, Shanghai Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China.
(3)Department of Swine Infectious Diseases, Shanghai Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China;
Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou 225009, China. Electronic address:
gztong@shvri.ac.cn.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) has a condensed
single-stranded positive-sense RNA genome that contains several overlapping
regions. The transcription regulatory sequence (TRS) is the important cis-acting 
element participating in PRRSV discontinuous transcription process. Based on
reverse genetic system of type 2 highly pathogenic PRRSV cell-passage attenuated 
strain pHuN4-F112, firefly luciferase or Renilla luciferase genes were inserted
between ORF1b and ORF2. An extra TRS6 was embedded behind the foreign luciferase 
genes. pA-Fluc and pA-Rluc were constructed and successfully rescued in MARC-145 
cells. The phenotypical characteristics of the progeny virus were
indistinguishable from those of vHuN4-F112 and were genetically stable for at
least 25 cell passages. Mutant virus-infected cells were lysed at different time 
points to assess luciferase activities and measure foreign gene expression
levels. The results showed identical variations in the luciferase activities of
the recombinants in MARC-145 cells, indicating that they were suitable for
monitoring viral propagation in PRRSV-permissive cell cultures. They were also
used to infect pulmonary alveolar macrophages, which yielded similar variations
in luciferase activities. Therefore, vA-Fluc and vA-Rluc present powerful new
tools to monitor PRRSV propagation in both passaged and target cells.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2016.05.014 
PMID: 27473986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

