
1. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2017 Jan 1;96:99-106. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2016.08.013. Epub 2016
Aug 8.

In vitro permeation and biological activity of punicalagin and zinc (II) across
skin and mucous membranes prone to Herpes simplex virus infection.

Houston DMJ(1), Robins B(2), Bugert JJ(3), Denyer SP(4), Heard CM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Science, Cardiff University,
Cardiff CF10 3NB, Wales, United Kingdom; Department of Microbiology & Infectious 
Diseases, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF14 4XW, Wales, United
Kingdom.
(2)Cardiff School of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Science, Cardiff University,
Cardiff CF10 3NB, Wales, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Microbiology & Infectious Diseases, School of Medicine, Cardiff 
University, Cardiff CF14 4XW, Wales, United Kingdom; Institute of Microbiology,
Armed Forces Medical Academy, Neuherbergstraße 11, 80937 München, Germany.
(4)Cardiff School of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Science, Cardiff University,
Cardiff CF10 3NB, Wales, United Kingdom; University of Brighton, Mithras House,
Lewes Road, Brighton BN2 4AT, United Kingdom.
(5)Cardiff School of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Science, Cardiff University,
Cardiff CF10 3NB, Wales, United Kingdom. Electronic address: heard@cardiff.ac.uk.

Coadministration of pomegranate rind extract (PRE) and zinc (II) ions has
recently been reported as a potential new topical treatment for Herpes simplex
virus (HSV) infections. In the current work we examined the in vitro topical
delivery of punicalagin (major phytochemical of PRE) and zinc from hydrogels
across epithelial membranes that can become infected with HSV. Porcine epidermal,
buccal and vaginal mucous membranes were excised and mounted in Franz diffusion
cells and dosed with a simple hydrogel containing PRE and zinc sulphate (ZnSO4). 
The permeation of punicalagin and zinc were determined by HPLC and ICPMS
respectively; punicalagin was also determined in the basal layers by reverse tape
stripping. Receptor phases from the epidermal membrane experiment were also used 
to challenge HSV-1 in Vero host cells, and ex vivo porcine skin was used to probe
COX-2 modulation. Punicalagin and zinc permeated each of the three test
membranes, with significantly greater amounts of both delivered across the
epidermal membrane. The amounts of punicalagin permeating the buccal and vaginal 
membranes were similar, although the amount of zinc permeating the vaginal
membrane was comparatively very large - it is known that zinc interacts with
vaginal mucosa. The punicalagin recovered by reverse tape stripping of the
epidermal, buccal and vaginal membranes gave 0.47±0.016, 0.45±0.052 and
0.51±0.048nMcm-2 respectively, and were statistically the same (p<0.05). A 2.5
log reduction was achieved against HSV-1 using diffusion cell receptor phase, and
COX-2 expression was reduced by 64% in ex vivo skin after 6h. Overall, a hydrogel
containing 1.25mgmL-1 PRE and 0.25M ZnSO4 was able to topically deliver both the 
major bioactive compound within PRE and Zn (II) across all membranes and into the
site specific region of Herpes simplex vesicular clusters, while maintaining
potentiated virucidal and anti-inflammatory properties. This novel therapeutic
system therefore has potential for the topical treatment of HSV infections.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2016.08.013 
PMID: 27516148  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

