
1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2016 Sep 20;96(35):2772-2776. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0376-2491.2016.35.002.

[Clinical characteristics and associated risk factors of cytomegalovirus
infection in patients with underlying systemic Rheumatic diseases].

[Article in Chinese]

Ren LM(1), Li Y, Zhang CF, Zhao XT, Liu X, Li ZG.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Peking University People's
Hospital & Beijing Key Laboratory for Rheumatism Mechanism and Immune Diagnosis, 
Beijing 100044, China.

Objective: To retrospectively investigate the clinical characteristics, risk
factors of Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection in patients with underlying rheumatic 
diseases. Methods: Clinical records of 263 rheumatic patients with or without CMV
infection, hospitalized from March 2011 to June 2014 in Peking University
People's Hospital, were analyzed.Clinical characteristics were summarized and
compared in CMV positive and negative groups, to investigate the risk factors for
CMV infection.Statistical analyses were conducted with SPSS 20.0 software.
Results: A total of 62 rheumatic patients were found to have CMV infection, with 
48 regarded as CMV viremia, 7 diagnosed as CMV pneumonia, while the remaining 7
suffered both CMV viremia and pneumonia.Eleven of 62 patients (17.7%) had a fatal
outcome.Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) was the most commonly underlying
disease (41.9%), followed by Sj√∂gren syndrome (16.1%) and systemic vasculitis
(12.9%). Lymphopenia and the reduction of CD4+ T lymphocytes, corticosteroids,
cyclophosphamide (CTX) or mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), combined use of more than 
2 immunosuppressants and other severe underlying infections as risk factors for
CMV infection in rheumatic patients.Meanwhile, the total dose of CTX wasn't
different significantly between CMV positive and negative groups.Multivariate
analysis revealed that large or pulsed dose of corticosteroids, combined use of
immunosuppressants, and severe underlying infections remained independent risk
factors for CMV infection. Conclusions: Lymphocytes, particularly the CD4+ T
subsets, might play a vital role in the regulation and control of CMV
infection.Other underlying infections, undergoing large dose corticosteroids
therapy or combined use of immunosuppressants could be the risk factors for CMV
infection in rheumatic patients.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0376-2491.2016.35.002 
PMID: 27686540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

