
1. Geospat Health. 2016 Nov 21;11(3):447. doi: 10.4081/gh.2016.447.

Space-time epidemiology and effect of meteorological parameters on influenza-like
illness in Phitsanulok, a northern province in Thailand.

Nimbalkar PM(1), Tripathi NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geoinformatics, Cartography and Remote Sensing, University of
Warsaw, Warsaw. p.nimbalkar@uw.edu.pl.

Influenza-like illness (ILI) is an acute respiratory disease that remains a
public health concern for its ability to circulate globally affecting any age
group and gender causing serious illness with mortality risk. Comprehensive
assessment of the spatio-temporal dynamics of ILI is a prerequisite for effective
risk assessment and application of control measures. Though meteorological
parameters, such as rainfall, average relative humidity and temperature,
influence ILI and represent crucial information for control of this disease, the 
relation between the disease and these variables is not clearly understood in
tropical climates. The aim of this study was to analyse the epidemiology of ILI
cases using integrated methods (space-time analysis, spatial autocorrelation and 
other correlation statistics). After 2009s H1N1 influenza pandemic, Phitsanulok
Province in northern Thailand was strongly affected by ILI for many years. This
study is based on ILI cases in villages in this province from 2005 to 2012. We
used highly precise weekly incidence records covering eight years, which allowed 
accurate estimation of the ILI outbreak. Comprehensive methodology was developed 
to analyse the global and local patterns of the spread of the disease.
Significant space-time clusters were detected over the study region during eight 
different periods. ILI cases showed seasonal clustered patterns with a peak in
2010 (P&gt;0.05-9.999 iterations). Local indicators of spatial association
identified hotspots for each year. Statistically, the weather pattern showed a
clear influence on ILI cases and it strongly correlated with humidity at a lag of
1 month, while temperature had a weaker correlation.

DOI: 10.4081/gh.2016.447 
PMID: 27903058  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

