
1. Retrovirology. 2016 Dec 20;13(1):87. doi: 10.1186/s12977-016-0321-6.

Ultrasensitive single-genome sequencing: accurate, targeted, next generation
sequencing of HIV-1 RNA.

Boltz VF(1), Rausch J(2), Shao W(3), Hattori J(2), Luke B(3), Maldarelli F(2),
Mellors JW(4), Kearney MF(2), Coffin JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)HIV Dynamics and Replication Program, CCR, National Cancer Institute, NIH,
Translational Research Unit, 105 Boyles Street, Building 535 Room 111, Frederick,
MD, 21702-1201, USA. boltzv@mail.nih.gov.
(2)HIV Dynamics and Replication Program, CCR, National Cancer Institute, NIH,
Translational Research Unit, 105 Boyles Street, Building 535 Room 111, Frederick,
MD, 21702-1201, USA.
(3)Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Advanced Biomedical
Computing Center, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc, Frederick, MD, USA.
(4)Division of Infectious Disease, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University, Boston,
MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although next generation sequencing (NGS) offers the potential for
studying virus populations in unprecedented depth, PCR error, amplification bias 
and recombination during library construction have limited its use to population 
sequencing and measurements of unlinked allele frequencies. Here we report a
method, termed ultrasensitive Single-Genome Sequencing (uSGS), for NGS library
construction and analysis that eliminates PCR errors and recombinants, and
generates single-genome sequences of the same quality as the "gold-standard" of
HIV-1 single-genome sequencing assay but with more than 100-fold greater depth.
RESULTS: Primer ID tagged cDNA was synthesized from mixtures of cloned BH10
wild-type and mutant HIV-1 transcripts containing ten drug resistance mutations. 
First, the resultant cDNA was divided and NGS libraries were generated in
parallel using two methods: uSGS and a method applying long PCR primers to attach
the NGS adaptors (LP-PCR-1). Second, cDNA was divided and NGS libraries were
generated in parallel comparing 3 methods: uSGS and 2 methods adapted from more
recent reports using variations of the long PCR primers to attach the adaptors
(LP-PCR-2 and LP-PCR-3). Consistently, the uSGS method amplified a greater
proportion of cDNAs, averaging 30% compared to 13% for LP-PCR-1, 21% for LP-PCR-2
and 14% for LP-PCR-3. Most importantly, when the uSGS sequences were binned
according to their primer IDs, 94% of the bins did not contain PCR recombinant
sequences versus only 55, 75 and 65% for LP-PCR-1, 2 and 3, respectively.
Finally, when uSGS was applied to plasma samples from HIV-1 infected donors, both
frequent and rare variants were detected in each sample and neighbor-joining
trees revealed clusters of genomes driven by the linkage of these mutations,
showing the lack of PCR recombinants in the datasets.
CONCLUSIONS: The uSGS assay can be used for accurate detection of rare variants
and for identifying linkage of rare alleles associated with HIV-1 drug
resistance. In addition, the method allows accurate in-depth analyses of the
complex genetic relationships of viral populations in vivo.

DOI: 10.1186/s12977-016-0321-6 
PMCID: PMC5175307
PMID: 27998286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

