
1. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2017 Mar 2;50(3):e5796. doi: 10.1590/1414-431X20165796.

Influence of Treg cells and HBV genotype on sustained response and drug
resistance in the treatment with nucleoside drugs.

Zhang YR(1), Li B(2), Wang CX(3), Zhou N(1), Qi W(1), Li XL(1), Wu LY(1), Wei
SF(1), Zhang YD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First People's Hospital of Lanzhou,
Gansu, China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Gansu Province Tumor Hospital, Gansu, China.
(3)Department of Geriatrics, The First People's Hospital of Lanzhou, Gansu,
China.

We aimed to investigate the influence of regulatory T cells including CD4+CD25+, 
CD8+CD28- and hepatitis B virus (HBV) genotype on sustained virological response 
and tolerance of nucleoside drugs. One hundred and thirty-seven patients were
enrolled. Lamivudine was administered to 84 patients. Entecavir was administered 
to the other 53 patients. Before treatment, biochemical tests, HBV DNA load, HBV 
serum level, HBV genotype, PB CD3+, CD4+, CD8+, CD4+CD25+/CD3+, and
CD8+CD28-/CD3+ frequencies were measured. Based on HBV DNA loads after 4 weeks of
therapy, patients were divided into response group and suboptimal response group.
The lamivudine group received treatment continuously, and then patients were
categorized into non-resistance group and resistance group. Compared with the
suboptimal response and resistance groups for lamivudine, CD4+CD25+/CD3+ levels
were higher in the response and non-resistance groups (t=4.372, P=0.046; t=7.262,
P=0.017). In the non-resistance group, CD8+CD28-/CD3+ frequency was lower than in
the resistance group (t=5.527, P=0.037). Virus load and hepatitis B E antigen
(HBeAg)-positive rate were significantly lower than in the response and
resistance group (t=2.164, P=0.038; X2=4.239, P=0.040; t=2.015, P=0.044; X2=16.2,
P=0.000). Incidence of drug resistance was high in patients with virogene type C.
For the virological response to entecavir, CD8+CD28-/CD3+ level was significantly
lower than that of the suboptimal response group (t=6.283, P=0.036). Response and
suboptimal response groups were compared in CD3+, CD4+, CD8+, CD4+CD25+/CD3+ and 
virus genotype, and differences were not statistically significant (P>0.05).
Baseline regulatory T cells including CD4+CD25+/CD3+ and CD8+CD28-/CD3+
frequencies have a relationship with the incidence of rapid virological response 
and the resistance to nucleoside drugs. Patients with HBV genotype C receiving
lamivudine more often underwent drug resistance. Antiviral efficacy and the
resistance to lamivudine were closely correlated with baseline factors; the same 
cannot be found for entecavir.

DOI: 10.1590/1414-431X20165796 
PMCID: PMC5378451
PMID: 28273209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

