
1. Curr Stem Cell Res Ther. 2017;12(6):471-475. doi:
10.2174/1574888X12666170315105556.

Complications Following Stem Cell Therapy in Inflammatory Bowel Disease.

Wei H(1), Liu X(2), Ouyang C(1), Zhang J(1), Chen S(2), Lu F(1), Chen L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan 410008, China.

BACKGROUNDS: Pharmacotherapy and surgery constitute the mainstay of treatment for
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). But post-treatment relapsing and recurrence
persist as concerns in patients with IBD. Stem cell therapy (SCT) has emerged as 
a promising treatment strategy in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), including
hematopoietic stem cells (HST), mensenchymal stem cells (MSCs). However, severe
complications limit the clinical use of SCT in IBD. Therefore, this review aims
to summarize SCT-associated complications, and illustrate possible prevention
strategies.
METHODS: We searched Pubmed for studies which reported the use of SCT to treat
patients with IBD. Searching terms included 'IBD' or 'Inflammatory bowel disease'
or 'CD' or 'Crohn's disease' and 'stem cell therapy' or 'stem cell
transplantation'.
RESULTS: HSCT can restore the immune tolerance following chemotherapy-induced
immune ablation, and MSCs could affect immune cells or secret trophic factors to 
treat IBD. However, severe complications limit the clinical use of SCT in IBD.
Dominant SCT-associated complications include infection, ectopic tissues, and
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), especially for auto-HSCT. As for infection,
bacteremia and virus infection were found after SCT treatment, and the use of
anti-microbial regimens could reduce incidences of infection. Ectopic tissue
formation in the recipient was observed after treatment with HSCT or MSC. Homing 
and tissue integration might be the possible mechanisms for not forming ectopic
tissues. In addition, GVHD was also observed in allogeneic HSCT. Therefore,
autologous HSCT and MSCs transplantation were recommended to avoid GVHD.
CONCLUSIONS: MSCs with their low immunogenicity property eliminate the need for
chemotherapy, and are over HSCT in reducing the risk of severe complications. For
better application of SCT in IBD, antimicrobial prophylaxis should be used
combined with SCT.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1574888X12666170315105556 
PMID: 28302045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

