
1. J Biol Chem. 2017 Jun 9;292(23):9699-9710. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M117.777029. Epub
2017 Mar 29.

N-terminal half of transportin SR2 interacts with HIV integrase.

Tsirkone VG(1), Blokken J(2), De Wit F(2), Breemans J(1), De Houwer S(2), Debyser
Z(2), Christ F(2), Strelkov SV(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratory for Biocrystallography and.
(2)the Laboratory for Molecular Virology and Gene Therapy, KU Leuven, 3000
Leuven, Belgium.
(3)From the Laboratory for Biocrystallography and sergei.strelkov@kuleuven.be.

The karyopherin transportin SR2 (TRN-SR2, TNPO3) is responsible for shuttling
specific cargoes such as serine/arginine-rich splicing factors from the cytoplasm
to the nucleus. This protein plays a key role in HIV infection by facilitating
the nuclear import of the pre-integration complex (PIC) that contains the viral
DNA as well as several cellular and HIV proteins, including the integrase. The
process of nuclear import is considered to be the bottleneck of the viral
replication cycle and therefore represents a promising target for anti-HIV drug
design. Previous studies have demonstrated that the direct interaction between
TRN-SR2 and HIV integrase predominantly involves the catalytic core domain (CCD) 
and the C-terminal domain (CTD) of the integrase. We aimed at providing a
detailed molecular view of this interaction through a biochemical
characterization of the respective protein complex. Size-exclusion chromatography
was used to characterize the interaction of TRN-SR2 with a truncated variant of
the HIV-1 integrase, including both the CCD and CTD. These experiments indicate
that one TRN-SR2 molecule can specifically bind one CCD-CTD dimer. Next, the
regions of the solenoid-like TRN-SR2 molecule that are involved in the
interaction with integrase were identified using AlphaScreen binding assays,
revealing that the integrase interacts with the N-terminal half of TRN-SR2
principally through the HEAT repeats 4, 10, and 11. Combining these results with 
small-angle X-ray scattering data for the complex of TRN-SR2 with truncated
integrase, we propose a molecular model of the complex. We speculate that nuclear
import of the PIC may proceed concurrently with the normal nuclear transport.

Â© 2017 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M117.777029 
PMCID: PMC5465493
PMID: 28356354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

