
1. J Virol. 1988 Jun;62(6):1963-73.

Adeno-associated virus general transduction vectors: analysis of proviral
structures.

McLaughlin SK(1), Collis P, Hermonat PL, Muzyczka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Florida Medical School, Gainesville 
32610.

We used two kinds of adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors to transduce the
neomycin resistance gene into human cells. The first of these (dl52-91) retains
the AAV rep genes; the second (dl3-94) retains only the AAV terminal repeats and 
the AAV polyadenylation signal (428 base pairs). Both vectors could be packaged
into AAV virions and produced proviral structures that were essentially the same.
Thus, the AAV sequences that are required in cis for packaging (pac), integration
(int), rescue (res), and replication (ori) of viral DNA are located within a
284-base-pair sequence that includes the terminal repeat. Most of the G418r cell 
lines (73%) contained proviruses which could be rescued (Res+) when the cells
were superinfected with the appropriate helper viruses. Some produced high yields
of viral DNA; other rescued at a 50-fold lower level. Most of the lines that were
Res+ (79%) contained a tandem repeat of the AAV genome (2 to 20 copies) which was
integrated randomly with respect to cellular DNA. Junctions between two
consecutive AAV copies in a tandem array contained either one or two copies of
the AAV terminal palindrome. Junctions between AAV and cellular sequences
occurred predominantly at or within the AAV terminal repeat, but in some cases at
internal AAV sequences. Two lines were seen that contained free episomal copies
of AAV DNA. Res+ clones contained deleted proviruses or tandem repeats of a
deleted genome. Occasionally, flanking cellular DNA was also amplified. There was
no superinfection inhibition of AAV DNA integration. Our results suggest that AAV
sequences are amplified by DNA replication either before or after integration and
that the mechanism of replication is different from the one used during AAV lytic
infections. In addition, we have described a new AAV general transduction vector,
dl3-94, which provides the maximum amount of room for insertion of foreign DNA
and integrates at a high frequency (80%).

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.62.6.1963-1973.1988 
PMCID: PMC253280
PMID: 2835501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

