
1. J Virol. 2017 Jun 26;91(14). pii: e00331-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00331-17. Print
2017 Jul 15.

Differential Involvement during Latent Herpes Simplex Virus 1 Infection of the
Superior and Inferior Divisions of the Vestibular Ganglia: Implications for
Vestibular Neuritis.

Himmelein S(1)(2), Lindemann A(3)(2), Sinicina I(4), Horn AKE(2)(5), Brandt
T(2)(6), Strupp M(3)(2), Hüfner K(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Munich, Germany
susanne.himmelein@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(2)German Center for Vertigo and Balance Disorders, DSGZ, University Hospital
Munich, Munich, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Munich, Germany.
(4)Department of Legal Medicine, Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich, Germany.
(5)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology I, Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich,
Germany.
(6)Institute for Clinical Neurosciences, University Hospital Munich, Munich,
Germany.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, University Clinic for Psychosomatic Medicine,
Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.

Controversy still surrounds both the etiology and pathophysiology of vestibular
neuritis (VN). Especially uncertain is why the superior vestibular nerve (SVN) is
more frequently affected than the inferior vestibular nerve (IVN), which is
partially or totally spared. To address this question, we developed an improved
method for preparing human vestibular ganglia (VG) and nerve. Subsequently,
macro- and microanatomical as well as PCR studies were performed on 38 human
ganglia from 38 individuals. The SVN was 2.4 mm longer than the IVN, and in 65%
of the cases, the IVN ran in two separate bony canals, which was not the case for
the SVN. Anastomoses between the facial and cochlear nerves were more common for 
the SVN (14/38 and 9/38, respectively) than for the IVN (7/38 and 2/38,
respectively). Using reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), we found
only a few latently herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1)-infected VG (18.4%). In cases 
of two separate neuronal fields, infected neurons were located in the superior
part only. In summary, these PCR and micro- and macroanatomical studies provide
possible explanations for the high frequency of SVN infection in vestibular
neuritis.IMPORTANCE Vestibular neuritis is known to affect the superior part of
the vestibular nerve more frequently than the inferior part. The reason for this 
clinical phenomenon remains unclear. Anatomical differences may play a role, or
if latent HSV-1 infection is assumed, the etiology may be due to the different
distribution of the infection. To shed further light on this subject, we
conducted different macro- and microanatomical studies. We also assessed the
presence of HSV-1 in VG and in different sections of the VG. Our findings add new
information on the macro- and microanatomy of the VG as well as the
pathophysiology of vestibular neuritis. We also show that latent HSV-1 infection 
of VG neurons is less frequent than previously reported.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00331-17 
PMCID: PMC5487553
PMID: 28446678  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

