
1. Oncol Lett. 2017 Mar;13(3):1315-1318. doi: 10.3892/ol.2017.5583. Epub 2017 Jan
10.

Oculomotor nerve palsy as a preceding symptom of adult sporadic Burkitt lymphoma:
A case report and review of the literature.

Liang Y(1), Ding L(1), Li X(1), Wang W(1), Zhang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310009, P.R. China.

Adult sporadic Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is a rare aggressive neoplasm and represents
~1-5% of all lymphomas diagnosed in adults. The disease exhibits an aggressive
clinical manifestation, which frequently involves the central nervous system
(CNS) in the early stages, and is usually accompanied by abnormalities in
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examinations and/or neuroradiography. The current study
describes the rare case of a 29-year-old man who presented with oculomotor nerve 
palsy without palpated masses, B symptoms, peripheral blood anomaly and
abnormalities of the nervous system. The patient was initially misdiagnosed with 
abducens diplopia, but was subsequently confirmed to have BL with early CNS
invasion. Epstein-Barr virus and human immunodeficiency virus infection were
negative. Intensive systemic chemotherapy with hyperfractionated
cyclophosphamide, vincristine, therarubicin and dexamethasone (hyper-CVAD,
cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2 on days 2-4; vincristine 1.4 mg/m2 on days 5 and 12,
therarubicin 50 mg/m2 on day 5 and dexamethasone 40 mg on days 2-5 and 12-15),
including intrathecal chemotherapy with methotrexate (5 mg), arabinocytidine (5
mg) and dexamethasone (5 mg), was determined as an appropriate treatment.
Rituximab (375 mg/m2 on day 1) was administered alongside chemotherapy to
increase treatment efficacy. The patient temporarily underwent complete
remission, but subsequently relapsed as no suitable bone marrow donor was
available. Adult sporadic BL with early CNS invasion, which traditional tests
such as neuroradiography and CSF examination fail to identify, is uncommon.
Therefore, appropriate diagnostic tests are critical for accurate diagnosis and
must be performed immediately, particularly in patients that present with unusual
image and laboratory manifestations.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2017.5583 
PMCID: PMC5403323
PMID: 28454254 

