
1. J Virol. 2017 Jul 27;91(16). pii: e00158-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00158-17. Print
2017 Aug 15.

A Diverse Range of Novel RNA Viruses in Geographically Distinct Honey Bee
Populations.

Remnant EJ(1)(2), Shi M(3)(4), Buchmann G(5), Blacquière T(6), Holmes
EC(2)(3)(4), Beekman M(5)(2), Ashe A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Behaviour and Genetics of Social Insects Laboratory, School of Life and
Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
emily.remnant@sydney.edu.au.
(2)Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity, Sydney Medical
School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(3)Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(4)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney,
Australia.
(5)Behaviour and Genetics of Social Insects Laboratory, School of Life and
Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(6)Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, The Netherlands.

Understanding the diversity and consequences of viruses present in honey bees is 
critical for maintaining pollinator health and managing the spread of disease.
The viral landscape of honey bees (Apis mellifera) has changed dramatically since
the emergence of the parasitic mite Varroa destructor, which increased the spread
of virulent variants of viruses such as deformed wing virus. Previous genomic
studies have focused on colonies suffering from infections by Varroa and virulent
viruses, which could mask other viral species present in honey bees, resulting in
a distorted view of viral diversity. To capture the viral diversity within
colonies that are exposed to mites but do not suffer the ultimate consequences of
the infestation, we examined populations of honey bees that have evolved
naturally or have been selected for resistance to Varroa This analysis revealed
seven novel viruses isolated from honey bees sampled globally, including the
first identification of negative-sense RNA viruses in honey bees. Notably, two
rhabdoviruses were present in three geographically diverse locations and were
also present in Varroa mites parasitizing the bees. To characterize the antiviral
response, we performed deep sequencing of small RNA populations in honey bees and
mites. This provided evidence of a Dicer-mediated immune response in honey bees, 
while the viral small RNA profile in Varroa mites was novel and distinct from the
response observed in bees. Overall, we show that viral diversity in honey bee
colonies is greater than previously thought, which encourages additional studies 
of the bee virome on a global scale and which may ultimately improve disease
management.IMPORTANCE Honey bee populations have become increasingly susceptible 
to colony losses due to pathogenic viruses spread by parasitic Varroa mites. To
date, 24 viruses have been described in honey bees, with most belonging to the
order Picornavirales Collapsing Varroa-infected colonies are often overwhelmed
with high levels of picornaviruses. To examine the underlying viral diversity in 
honey bees, we employed viral metatranscriptomics analyses on three
geographically diverse Varroa-resistant populations from Europe, Africa, and the 
Pacific. We describe seven novel viruses from a range of diverse viral families, 
including two viruses that are present in all three locations. In honey bees,
small RNA sequences indicate that these viruses are processed by Dicer and the
RNA interference pathway, whereas Varroa mites produce strikingly novel small RNA
patterns. This work increases the number and diversity of known honey bee viruses
and will ultimately contribute to improved disease management in our most
important agricultural pollinator.

Copyright © 2017 Remnant et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00158-17 
PMCID: PMC5533899
PMID: 28515299  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

