
1. Tumour Biol. 2017 Jun;39(6):1010428317705763. doi: 10.1177/1010428317705763.

Diagnostic performance of tumor markers AFP and PIVKA-II in Chinese
hepatocellular carcinoma patients.

Huang S(1), Jiang F(1), Wang Y(1), Yu Y(1), Ren S(2), Wang X(2), Yin P(2), Lou
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Clinical Laboratory Center, Beijing You'an hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, P.R. China.
(2)2 Abbott Diagnostic Division R&D Shanghai Lab, Shanghai, P.R. China.

Alpha-fetoprotein is an effective biomarker as an aid in hepatocellular carcinoma
detection in many countries. However, alpha-fetoprotein has its limitations,
especially in early hepatocellular carcinoma diagnosis. Protein induced by
vitamin K absence or antagonist-II is another biomarker that is used for
hepatocellular carcinoma detection. The aim of this study is to compare the
diagnostic performance of alpha-fetoprotein and protein induced by vitamin K
absence or antagonist-II alone and in combination to explore improving biomarker 
performance as an aid in early hepatocellular carcinoma detection. In this study 
a total of 582 serum samples including 132 hepatocellular carcinoma patients, 250
non-hepatocellular carcinoma patients, and 200 healthy volunteers were collected.
Alpha-fetoprotein and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II
levels were measured by both chemiluminescent enzyme immunoassay on LUMIPULSE
platform and by chemiluminescent microparticle immunoassay on ARCHITECT platform.
Receiver operation characteristic curve analyses were performed for each
biomarker and in combination. The results showed that Alpha-fetoprotein and
protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II in combination have shown
higher area under the curve compared to alpha-fetoprotein alone for diagnosis in 
whole patients (0.906 vs 0.870) in hepatocellular carcinoma early-stage patients 
(0.809 vs 0.77) and in hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma
patients (0.851 vs 0.788) with ARCHITECT platform. Protein induced by vitamin K
absence or antagonist-II showed higher area under the curve than
alpha-fetoprotein for diagnosis of hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular
carcinoma patients (0.901 vs 0.788).We conclude that Combining alpha-fetoprotein 
and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II may improve the
diagnostic value for early detection of hepatocellular carcinoma. Protein induced
by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II performs better than alpha-fetoprotein in
diagnosis of hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma patients.

DOI: 10.1177/1010428317705763 
PMID: 28621228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

