
1. Vet Pathol. 2017 Sep;54(5):820-827. doi: 10.1177/0300985817716263. Epub 2017 Jun 
28.

Naturally Acquired Canine Herpesvirus-Associated Meningoencephalitis.

Jager MC(1), Sloma EA(1), Shelton M(1), Miller AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biomedical Sciences, Section of Anatomic Pathology, Cornell
University College of Veterinary Medicine, Ithaca, NY, USA.

Canid alphaherpesvirus 1 (CHV) causes morbidity and mortality in susceptible
puppies. While the neuropathology of experimentally infected puppies has been
detailed, characterization of naturally acquired infections is limited. The aim
of this study was to describe the histologic, immunohistochemical, and in situ
hybridization features of CHV encephalitis in the dog. Six female and 11 male
puppies ranging in age from stillborn to 57 days old were included.
Histologically, lesions included multifocal glial nodules (16/17, 94%), meningeal
infiltrates (15/17, 88%), and cerebellar cortical necrosis (6/9, 67%); however,
robust inflammation was not a significant feature in any of the cases.
Immunohistochemistry for CD3, CD20, MAC387, and Iba1 was performed. Although T
cells predominated over B cells, the overall number of cells was small in all
cases both within the glial nodules and the meninges. In 16 of 16 (100%) cases,
glial nodules were diffusely immunoreactive for Iba1; however, limited or no
immunoreactivity for MAC387 was present. In situ hybridization directed at the
CHV thymidine kinase gene revealed CHV nucleic acid in the granule neurons of the
cerebellar folia (8/9; 89%), endothelial cells in the meninges and parenchyma
(12/17, 71%), and individual randomly distributed neurons (6/17, 35%). These
results clarify the pathology of naturally acquired CHV infection and indicate
that developing cerebellar granule neurons are an important site of viral
replication.

DOI: 10.1177/0300985817716263 
PMID: 28655291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

