
1. Int J STD AIDS. 2018 Mar;29(3):306-308. doi: 10.1177/0956462417728856. Epub 2017 
Aug 30.

HPV-related squamous cell carcinoma in a neovagina after male-to-female gender
confirmation surgery.

Bollo J(1), Balla A(1)(2), Rodriguez Luppi C(1), Martinez C(1), Quaresima S(2),
Targarona EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 General and Digestive Surgery Unit, 16689 Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant
Pau , Carrer Sant Antoni Maria Claret, Universidad Aut√≥noma de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)2 Department of General Surgery and Surgical Specialties "Paride Stefanini",
Sapienza, University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Vaginoplasty by penile and scrotal skin inversion is a well-established technique
for male-to-female gender confirmation surgery. In this setting, chronic
inflammation and lacerations associated with history of human papillomavirus
(HPV) infection may induce a high risk of malignant degeneration in the long
term. A 78-year-old transgender woman was admitted with genital discomfort and
neovaginal discharge. The patient's history revealed male-to-female gender
confirmation surgery with construction of a neovagina by penile and scrotal skin 
inversion at 33 years of age. Physical examination of the genitalia revealed
presence of fecal material, suggestive of recto-neovaginal fistula. A biopsy
specimen was positive for well-differentiated HPV-related squamous cell
carcinoma. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a bulky mass in the posterior 
wall of the neovagina that infiltrated the urethra, prostatic gland and the
anterior rectal wall. Following a multidisciplinary evaluation, we performed a
definitive sigmoid colostomy and administered chemotherapy. Long-term follow-up
seems advisable in patients after vaginoplasty due to the possibility of delayed 
development of cancer. Following biopsy, we consider MRI as the modality of
choice to identify possible infiltration of the adjacent structures. As data
regarding these lesions are scarce and management is complex, a multidisciplinary
approach is recommended.

DOI: 10.1177/0956462417728856 
PMID: 28853678  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

