
1. Structure. 2017 Oct 3;25(10):1631-1639.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2017.07.018. Epub
2017 Sep 7.

Microsecond Dynamics and Network Analysis of the HIV-1 SOSIP Env Trimer Reveal
Collective Behavior and Conserved Microdomains of the Glycan Shield.

Lemmin T(1), Soto C(2), Stuckey J(3), Kwong PD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD 20892, USA;
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San Francisco
(UCSF), San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. Electronic address: thomas.lemmin@nih.gov.
(2)Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD 20892, USA;
Vanderbilt Vaccine Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
37232, USA.
(3)Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(4)Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
Electronic address: pdkwong@nih.gov.

The trimeric HIV-1-envelope (Env) spike is one of the most glycosylated protein
complexes known, with roughly half its mass comprising host-derived N-linked
glycan. Here we use molecular dynamics to provide insight into its structural
dynamics and into how both protomer and glycan movements coordinate to shield the
Env protein surface. A 2-μs molecular dynamics simulation of a fully glycosylated
atomistic model of the HIV-1 SOSIP Env trimer revealed a spectrum of
protomer-scissoring and trimer-opening movements. Network analysis showed that
highly conserved glycans combined with protomer scissoring to restrict access to 
the binding site of the CD4 receptor. The network property of betweenness
centrality appeared to identify whether glycans spread to restrict access or
cluster to maintain the high-mannose character of the shield. We also observed
stable microdomains comprising patches of glycan, with neutralizing antibodies
generally binding at the interface between glycan microdomains. Overall, our
results provide a microsecond-based understanding of the Env glycan shield.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2017.07.018 
PMID: 28890362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

