
1. BMJ Glob Health. 2018 Jan 4;3(Suppl 1):e000530. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000530.
eCollection 2018.

Zika, chikungunya and dengue: the causes and threats of new and re-emerging
arboviral diseases.

Paixão ES(1)(2), Teixeira MG(2), Rodrigues LC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology and Population Health, London Schoolof Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, Uk.
(2)Instituto de Saúde Coletiva, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Bahia,
Brazil.
(3)Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene and tropical
Medicine, London, uk.

Erratum in
    BMJ Glob Health. 2018 Jan 7;3(1):e000530corr1.

The recent emergence and re-emergence of viral infections transmitted by
vectors-Zika, chikungunya, dengue, Japanese encephalitis, West Nile, yellow fever
and others-is a cause for international concern. Using as examples Zika,
chikungunya and dengue, we summarise current knowledge on characteristics of the 
viruses and their transmission, clinical features, laboratory diagnosis, burden, 
history, possible causes of the spread and the expectation for future epidemics. 
Arboviruses are transmitted by mosquitoes, are of difficult diagnosis, can have
surprising clinical complications and cause severe burden. The current situation 
is complex, because there is no vaccine for Zika and chikungunya and no specific 
treatment for the three arboviruses. Vector control is the only comprehensive
solution available now and this remains a challenge because up to now this has
not been very effective. Until we develop new technologies of control mosquito
populations, the globalised and urbanised world we live in will remain vulnerable
to the threat of successive arbovirus epidemics.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000530 
PMCID: PMC5759716
PMID: 29435366 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

