
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 May;98(5):1435-1443. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0627. Epub
2018 Mar 1.

Phase I Randomized Study of a Tetravalent Dengue Purified Inactivated Vaccine in 
Healthy Adults from Puerto Rico.

Diaz C(1), Lin L(2), Martinez LJ(2), Eckels KH(2), Campos M(1), Jarman RG(2), De 
La Barrera R(2), Lepine E(3), Toussaint JF(4), Febo I(1), Innis BL(3), Thomas
SJ(2), Schmidt AC(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
(2)Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, Maryland.
(3)GlaxoSmithKline, Rockville, Maryland.
(4)GlaxoSmithKline, Rixensart, Belgium.

The safety and immunogenicity of four adjuvanted formulations of an
investigational tetravalent dengue purified inactivated vaccine (DPIV) were
evaluated in a predominantly dengue-primed population in Puerto Rico. In this
placebo-controlled, randomized, observer-blind, phase I trial, 100 healthy adults
were randomized 1:1:1:1:1 to receive DPIV at Day (D)0 and D28 (1 μg per dengue
virus [DENV] type 1-4 adjuvanted with either alum, AS01E or AS03B, or 4 μg per
DENV type adjuvanted with alum) or saline placebo. Functional antibody responses 
were assessed using a microneutralization assay at D56, Month (M)7, and M13. All 
DPIV formulations were well tolerated and no safety signals were identified
through M13. The M13 according-to-protocol (ATP) immunogenicity cohort included
83 participants. The ATP analysis of immunogenicity was performed only on the 78 
subjects seropositive for ≥ 1 DENV type at baseline: 69 tetravalent, three
trivalent, two bivalent, and four monovalent. In all DPIV groups, geometric mean 
antibody titers (GMTs) increased from D0 to D56 and waned modestly through M13,
while remaining well above prevaccination levels. The 4 μg + alum and the AS01E- 
and AS03B-adjuvanted formulations were highly immunogenic, with M13-neutralizing 
antibody GMTs against all four DENV types above 1,000. M13/D0 GMT ratios were
highest in the 1 μg + AS03B group (ranging 3.2-3.7 depending on the DENV type).
These results encourage continued clinical development of DPIV
(ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01702857).

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0627 
PMCID: PMC5953365
PMID: 29512481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

