
1. J Virol. 2018 May 29;92(12). pii: e00277-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00277-18. Print
2018 Jun 15.

Comparison of Uncleaved and Mature Human Immunodeficiency Virus Membrane Envelope
Glycoprotein Trimers.

Castillo-Menendez LR(1), Witt K(1), Espy N(1), Princiotto A(1), Madani N(1),
Pacheco B(2), Finzi A(2), Sodroski J(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Centre de Recherche du CHUM, Department of Microbiology, Infectiology and
Immunology, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada.
(3)Department of Cancer Immunology and Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA joseph_sodroski@dfci.harvard.edu.
(4)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School of
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The mature envelope glycoprotein (Env) spike on the surfaces of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)-infected cells and virions is derived from 
proteolytic cleavage of a trimeric gp160 glycoprotein precursor. In these
studies, we compared the conformations of cleaved and uncleaved membrane Envs
with truncated cytoplasmic tails to those of stabilized soluble gp140 SOSIP.664
Env trimers. Deletion of the gp41 cytoplasmic tail did not significantly affect
the sensitivity of viruses with the HIV-1AD8 Env to inhibition by antibodies or a
CD4-mimetic compound. After glutaraldehyde fixation and purification from
membranes, a cleaved Env exhibited a hydrodynamic radius of ∼10 nm and an
antibody-binding profile largely consistent with that expected based on virus
neutralization sensitivity. The purified cleaved Env trimers exhibited a hollow
architecture with a central void near the trimer axis. Uncleaved Env,
cross-linked and purified in parallel, exhibited a hydrodynamic radius similar to
that of the cleaved Env. However, the uncleaved Env was recognized by poorly
neutralizing antibodies and appeared by negative-stain electron microscopy to
sample multiple conformations. Compared with membrane Envs, stabilized soluble
gp140 SOSIP.664 Env trimers appear to be more compact, as reflected in their
smaller hydrodynamic radii and negative-stain electron microscopy structures. The
antigenic features of the soluble gp140 SOSIP.664 Env trimers differed from those
of the cleaved membrane Env, particularly in gp120 V3 and some CD4-binding-site
epitopes. Thus, proteolytic maturation allows the membrane-anchored Env to
achieve a conformation that retains functional metastability but masks epitopes
for poorly neutralizing antibodies.IMPORTANCE The entry of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) into host cells is mediated by the envelope glycoprotein
(Env) spike on the surface of the virus. Host antibodies elicited during natural 
HIV-1 infection or by vaccination can potentially recognize the Env spike and
block HIV-1 infection. However, the changing shape of the HIV-1 Env spike
protects the virus from antibody binding. Understanding the shapes of natural and
man-made preparations of HIV-1 Envs will assist the development of effective
vaccines against the virus. Here, we evaluate the effects of several Env
modifications commonly used to produce Env preparations for vaccine studies and
the determination of structure. We found that the cleavage of the HIV-1 Env
precursor helps Env to assume its natural shape, which resists the binding of
many commonly elicited antibodies. Stabilized soluble Envs exhibit more compact
shapes but expose some Env elements differently than the natural Env.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00277-18 
PMCID: PMC5974486
PMID: 29618643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

