
1. Oncol Lett. 2018 May;15(5):7751-7759. doi: 10.3892/ol.2018.8272. Epub 2018 Mar
15.

Downregulation of Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene 3 is associated with poor
prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma after curative resection.

Song Q(1), Chen X(2), Hu W(2), Mei G(2), Yang X(2), Wu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Qidong People's Hospital and Qidong Liver
Cancer Institute, Nantong, Jiangsu 226200, P.R. China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, 
Nantong, Jiangsu 226001, P.R. China.

Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene 3 (EBI3) encodes a secretory glycoprotein, and
has previously been identified as upregulated in various types of tumors. The
presnet study examined the clinical significance of EBI3 expression for
predicting tumor recurrence and survival after resection in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). EBI3 expression in various HCC cell lines and in 20 pairs of
tumor and peritumor tissue samples were detected using western blot analysis.
Immunohistochemical staining using tissue microarray with 312 samples from
randomly selected patients with HCC who underwent surgery. Survival analysis was 
performed using univariate and multivariate analyses. EBI3 protein level was
higher in L-02 cells and in peri-tumor tissues compared with tumor tissues.
Immunohistochemical staining of EBI3 was reduced in HCC tissues in comparison
with adjacent normal tissues and significantly associated with tumor invasive
characteristics, including tumor thrombus, poor differentiation and large size.
Notably, the results suggested that EBI3 was a predictor for tumor recurrence and
patient survival, and multivariate analysis indicated EBI3 to be an independent
prognostic factor. Even in early-stage disease, low EBI3 expression was also
independently associated with increased tumor recurrence and shortened survival. 
Downregulation of EBI3 in HCC indicated aggressive tumor behaviors and predicted 
a more severe clinical outcome, which suggests that EBI2 may be a useful
biomarker to identify patients at high risk of post-operative recurrence.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2018.8272 
PMCID: PMC5934722
PMID: 29740492 

