
1. Cell Discov. 2018 Sep 11;4:51. doi: 10.1038/s41421-018-0052-z. eCollection 2018.

HCV-associated exosomes promote myeloid-derived suppressor cell expansion via
inhibiting miR-124 to regulate T follicular cell differentiation and function.

Wang L(#)(1)(2)(3), Cao D(#)(1)(2), Wang L(1)(2), Zhao J(1)(2), Nguyen LN(1)(2), 
Dang X(1)(2), Ji Y(1)(2)(4), Wu XY(1)(2), Morrison ZD(1)(2), Xie Q(1), El Gazzar 
M(1), Ning S(1)(2), Moorman JP(1)(2)(5), Yao ZQ(1)(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)1Center of Excellence in Inflammation, Infectious Disease and Immunity, James 
H. Quillen College of Medicine, East Tennessee State University, Johnson City, TN
37614 USA.
(2)2Division of Infectious, Inflammatory and Immunologic Diseases, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Quillen College of Medicine, ETSU, Johnson City, TN 37614 USA.
(3)3Center of Infectious Disease, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, 100015 China.
(4)4Center of Cadre Health Care, Beijing 302 Hospital, Beijing, 100000 China.
(5)Hepatitis (HCV/HIV) Program, James H. Quillen VA Medical Center, Department of
Veterans Affairs, Johnson City, TN 37614 USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Virus-infected cells can regulate non-permissive bystander cells, but the precise
mechanisms remain incompletely understood. Here we report that this process can
be mediated by transfer of viral RNA-loaded exosomes shed from infected cells to 
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), which in turn regulate the
differentiation and function of T cells during viral infection. Specifically, we 
demonstrated that patients with chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection
exhibited significant increases in T follicular regulatory (TFR) cells and
decreases in T follicular helper (TFH) cells. These MDSC-mediated T-cell
dysregulations resulted in an increased ratio of TFR/TFH and IL-10 production in 
peripheral blood. Specifically, co-culture of MDSCs derived from HCV patients
with healthy peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) induced expansion of TFR,
whereas depletion of MDSCs from PBMCs of HCV patients reduced the increases in
TFR frequency and IL-10 production, and promoted the differentiation of
IFN-Î³-producing TFH cells. Importantly, we found that exosomes isolated from the 
plasma of HCV patients and supernatant of HCV-infected hepatocytes could drive
monocytic myeloid cell differentiation into MDSCs. These exosomes were enriched
in tetraspanins, such as CD63 and CD81, and contained HCV RNA, but exosomes
isolated from patients with antiviral treatment contained no HCV RNA and could
not induce MDSC differentiation. Notably, these HCV RNA-containing exosomes
(HCV-Exo) were sufficient to induce MDSCs. Furthermore, incubation of healthy
myeloid cells with these HCV-Exo inhibited the expression of miR-124, whereas
reconstitution of PBMCs with miR-124 abolished the effects of HCV-Exo on MDSC
induction. Taken together, these results indicate that HCV-associated exosomes
can transfer immunomodulatory viral RNA from infected cells to neighboring immune
cells and trigger MDSC expansion, which subsequently promotes TFR differentiation
and inhibits TFH function. This study reveals a previously unrecognized path that
represents a novel mechanism of immune dysregulation during chronic viral
infection.

DOI: 10.1038/s41421-018-0052-z 
PMCID: PMC6131392
PMID: 30210805 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

