
1. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2019 May;124(5):607-614. doi: 10.1111/bcpt.13178.
Epub 2018 Dec 18.

Risk factors associated with pseudoaldosteronism in patients with chronic
hepatitis: A retrospective cohort study.

Komatsu A(1), Yoshino T(2)(3), Suzuki T(4), Nakamura T(1), Kanai T(4), Watanabe
K(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Care Sciences, Keio University Faculty of Pharmacy,
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Center for Kampo Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Faculty of Environment and Information Studies, Keio University, Kanagawa,
Japan.

Glycyrrhizin is used to treat chronic hepatitis, but it also plays an important
role in pseudoaldosteronism. Multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 is
important for glycyrrhizin excretion. Dysfunction of this transporter increases
the serum levels of direct bilirubin, glycyrrhizin and its metabolites. Hence,
elevated direct-bilirubin levels could predict the risk of pseudoaldosteronism.
This study aimed to evaluate the relationship between elevated direct-bilirubin
levels and hypokalaemia, which is the most sensitive marker of
pseudoaldosteronism. This retrospective cohort study was conducted in a Japanese 
university hospital. The occurrence of hypokalaemia is defined as a serum
potassium level of ≤3.5 mEq/L after the administration of a
glycyrrhizin-containing medication, and a further decline of ≥0.5 mEq/L or an
increase of ≥0.5 mEq/L after discontinuing the glycyrrhizin-containing medication
was examined in patients with chronic hepatitis between January 2009 and December
2015. This analysis involved 1392 patients, including 596 women. Hepatitis C
virus infections were the most common cause of chronic hepatitis in this study.
Seventy-nine patients received glycyrrhizin (exposed group; mean age:
60.5 ± 14.2) and 1313 did not receive glycyrrhizin (control group; mean age:
58.3 ± 15.8 years). Synergistic effects of glycyrrhizin-containing medications
and elevated direct-bilirubin levels were associated with hypokalaemia. Elevated 
direct-bilirubin levels and hypoalbuminaemia were associated with hypokalaemia in
the exposed group. Older age, female sex, high daily glycyrrhizin dosage, longer 
duration of glycyrrhizin intake, and potassium-lowering medications were not
associated with hypokalaemia after the model adjustment. Elevated
direct-bilirubin levels and hypoalbuminaemia may predict pseudoaldosteronism
caused by glycyrrhizin.

© 2018 Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT (former Nordic
Pharmacological Society).

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.13178 
PMID: 30471199  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

