
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2019;15(7-8):1794-1802. doi:
10.1080/21645515.2018.1551670. Epub 2018 Dec 20.

'I also want to be vaccinated!' - adolescent boys' awareness and thoughts,
perceived benefits, information sources, and intention to be vaccinated against
Human papillomavirus (HPV).

Grandahl M(1), Nevéus T(1), Dalianis T(2), Larsson M(1), Tydén T(1), Stenhammar
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University , Uppsala , 
Sweden.
(2)b Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska
University Hospital , Stockholm , Sweden.

This study investigates boys' awareness and thoughts about human papillomavirus
(HPV) and HPV vaccination, perceived benefits of vaccinating men, information
sources and intention to be vaccinated against HPV. We used a qualitative
approach and interviews were conducted with 31 upper secondary school male
students. Two main themes 1) Promotion of equal health and 2) Increased knowledge
facilitates the decision about HPV vaccination emerged from the analysis. The
informants believed that it was important and fair to protect boys and girls
equally against HPV. If HPV vaccination could prevent both girls and boys against
an HPV-related disease, there was nothing to question or to discuss. It was not a
matter of sex; it was a matter of equal rights. Moreover, an important reason for
vaccinating boys was to prevent the transmission of the virus. However, the boys 
felt unsure and stated that they needed to know more. The school nurse and the
school health were considered suitable both for distributing information and for 
providing the vaccinations. In conclusion, the participants were in favor of
introducing HPV vaccination also for boys in the national vaccination program.
Sex-neutral HPV vaccinations were viewed both as a way to stop the virus
transmission and a means to promote equal health for the entire population.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2018.1551670 
PMCID: PMC6746528
PMID: 30481108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

