
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2019;15(9):2183-2186. doi: 10.1080/21645515.2019.1575712. 
Epub 2019 Mar 19.

Comparison of antibody response to hepatitis B vaccination in infants with
positive or negative maternal hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) in cord blood:
implication for the role of HBeAg as an immunotolerogen.

Huang H(1), Ning M(1), Liu J(1), Chen J(2), Feng J(2), Dai Y(2), Hu Y(2), Zhou
YH(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Molecular
Medicine, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing University Medical School ,
Jiangsu , China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing 
University Medical School , Jiangsu , China.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing
Medical University , Jiangsu , China.

Comment in
    Aktuelle Urol. 2018 Sep;49(5):389-390.
    Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2019;15(9):2187-2191.

Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) has been considered to cause immunotolerance to
hepatitis B virus (HBV) in newborn infants after fetal HBeAg exposure. This study
compared anti-HBs responses to hepatitis B vaccination in infants who were born
to HBeAg-positive and -negative mothers respectively, to investigate whether
fetal HBeAg exposure may induce immunotolerance to HBV. Totally 265 infants who
received recommended neonatal immunoprophylaxis against hepatitis B and had no
HBV infection were included. Anti-HBs levels were compared between 124 infants
with cord blood positive HBeAg and 141 infants with cord blood negative HBeAg at 
7-12 months of age. The infants in two groups had similar age at the follow-up
(10.0 ± 2.3 vs 10.1 ± 2.3 months, P = 0.590). Overall, 259 (97.7%) of 265 infants
achieved anti-HBs levels (mIU/ml) ≥10 and 6 (2.3%) others had anti-HBs <10. Of
124 HBeAg-positive infants at birth, 46.0%, 39.5%, 12.1%, and 2.4% had anti-HBs
levels (mIU/ml) ≥1000, 100-999.9, 10-99.9, and <10, respectively. Of 141
HBeAg-negative infants at birth, 35.5%, 48.9%, 13.5%, and 2.1% showed ≥1000,
100-999.9, 10-99.9, and <10, respectively. The proportions of each anti-HBs level
between the two groups were comparable (all P > 0.05). Additionally, the
distribution of anti-HBs response levels were also comparable in infants with
high and low HBeAg levels (P = 0.818). In conclusions, the fetal HBeAg exposure
does not inhibit the antibody response to neonatal hepatitis B vaccination. The
data suggest that HBeAg appears not inducing immunotolerance to HBV.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2019.1575712 
PMCID: PMC6773413
PMID: 30735449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

