
1. Immunol Rev. 1988 Dec;106:181-93.

Facts on the fragmentation of antigens in presenting cells, on the association of
antigen fragments with MHC molecules in cell-free systems, and speculation on the
cell biology of antigen processing.

Werdelin O(1), Mouritsen S, Petersen BL, Sette A, Buus S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Immunology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

The processing of a protein antigen is a multi-step event taking place in
antigen-presenting cells. Processing is a prerequisite for the recognition of
most antigens by T lymphocytes. The antigen is ingested by endocytosis,
transported to an acid cellular compartment and subjected to proteolytic
fragmentation. Some of the antigen fragments bind to MHC class II molecules and
are transported to the surface of the antigen-presenting cell where the actual
presentation to T lymphocytes occurs. The nature of the processed antigen, how
and where it is derived and subsequently becomes associated with MHC molecules
are the questions discussed in this review. To us, the entire concept of
processing has appeal not only because it explains some hitherto
well-established, but poorly understood, phenomena such as the fact that T
lymphocytes focus their attention entirely upon antigens on other cells. It has
appeal also because processing allows for a thorough scrutiny of all the proteins
of a cell including both the proteins which have been taken up from the
environment (mostly MHC class II-restricted) and the cell's own proteins (mostly 
MHC class I-restricted). Through the mechanism of processing fragments of all
these proteins including "internal" fragments which are not present on the
globular protein's surface are brought out on the cell surface in association
with MHC molecules and displayed to the T-lymphocyte system. This allows for the 
identification and, if necessary, the destruction of cells which in their
interior harbor abnormal proteins, be they derived from virus-encoded genes or
other abnormal genes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-065x.1988.tb00779.x 
PMID: 3075589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

