
1. FASEB J. 2019 Jun;33(6):6801-6812. doi: 10.1096/fj.201802044RR. Epub 2019 Feb 27.

Targeting STT3A-oligosaccharyltransferase with NGI-1 causes herpes simplex virus 
1 dysfunction.

Lu H(1), Cherepanova NA(2), Gilmore R(2), Contessa JN(3)(4), Lehrman MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Therapeutic Radiology and Pharmacology, Yale School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut,
USA.

Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) is a contagious neurotropic herpesvirus
responsible for oral lesions and herpesviral encephalitis. The HSV-1 envelope
contains N-glycosylated proteins involved in infection and that are candidate
drug targets. NGI-1 is a small-molecule inhibitor of oligosaccharyltransferase
(OST) complexes STT3A-OST and STT3B-OST, which catalyze cotranslational and
post-translational N-glycosylation, respectively. Because host OSTs attach HSV-1 
glycans, NGI-1 might have anti-HSV-1 activity. We evaluated HSV-1 function using 
NGI-1 and human embryonic kidney 293 knockout lines for OST isoform-specific
catalytic and accessory subunits. N-glycosylation of 2 representative envelope
proteins (gC and gD) was primarily dependent upon STT3A-OST, but to a large
extent replaceable by STT3B-OST. Knockouts impairing STT3A- or STT3B-OST
activity, by themselves, did not appreciably affect HSV-1 function
(plaque-forming units, normalized to viral particles measured by unglycosylated
capsid protein VP5 content). However, with cells lacking STT3B-OST activity
(missing the catalytic subunit STT3B or the oxidoreductase subunits magnesium
transporter 1/tumor suppressor candidate 3) and thus solely dependent upon
STT3A-OST for N-glycosylation, NGI-1 treatment resulted in HSV-1 having cell
type-dependent dysfunction (affecting infectivity with Vero cells much more than 
with the 293 lines). Ablation of post-translational N-glycosylation can therefore
make HSV-1 infectivity, and possibly masking of immunogenic peptide epitopes by
glycans, highly sensitive to pharmacological inhibition of cotranslational
N-glycosylation.-Lu, H., Cherepanova, N. A., Gilmore, R., Contessa, J. N.,
Lehrman, M. A. Targeting STT3A-oligosaccharyltransferase with NGI-1 causes herpes
simplex virus 1 dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.201802044RR 
PMCID: PMC6529348
PMID: 30811219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

