
1. Plant Dis. 2000 Nov;84(11):1185-1189. doi: 10.1094/PDIS.2000.84.11.1185.

Lisianthus Leaf Necrosis: A New Disease of Lisianthus Caused by Iris yellow spot 
virus.

Kritzman A(1), Beckelman H(1), Alexandrov S(1), Cohen J(1), Lampel M(1), Zeidan
M(2), Raccah B(1), Gera A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Agricultural Research Organization, The Volcani
Center, Bet Dagan 50250, Israel.
(2)The Plant Protection and Inspection Services, Ministry of Agriculture, Bet
Dagan 50250, Israel.

Unusual viral symptoms were seen on lisianthus (Eustoma russellianum) grown in
the Besor area in Israel. Symptoms included necrotic spots and rings on leaves
and systemic necrosis. Preliminary analyses suggested that the disease was caused
by a tospovirus. Virus particles typical of a tospovirus were observed with
electron microscopy in samples taken only from symptomatic leaves.
Double-antibody sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay tests of leaf sap,
extracted from lisianthus and mechanically inoculated indicator plants, gave a
strong positive reaction to Iris yellow spot virus (IYSV). Polyclonal antibodies 
prepared against IYSV enabled specific detection of the virus in crude sap from
infected plants. Western blot analysis showed that IYSV was serologically
distinct from Tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV). Primers specific to the
nucleocapsid gene of IYSV were used in a reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction assay (RT-PCR) to verify the presence of IYSV. RT-PCR gave an expected
PCR product of approximately 850 bp. The sequence of the cloned nucleocapsid gene
confirmed the identity of IYSV, thus confirming IYSV infection of lisianthus.
This is the first report of IYSV infection in dicotyledons.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS.2000.84.11.1185 
PMID: 30832165 

