
1. Biosens Bioelectron. 2019 May 1;132:38-46. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2019.02.036. Epub 
2019 Feb 21.

Localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) biosensor based on thermally annealed 
silver nanostructures with on-chip blood-plasma separation for the detection of
dengue non-structural protein NS1 antigen.

Austin Suthanthiraraj PP(1), Sen AK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras,
Chennai 600036, India.
(2)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras,
Chennai 600036, India. Electronic address: ashis@iitm.ac.in.

Early diagnosis of dengue biomarkers by employing a technology that is less
labor- and time-intensive and offers higher sensitivity and lower limits of
detection would find great significance in the developing world. Here, we report 
the development of a biosensor that exploits the localized surface plasmon
resonance (LSPR) effect of silver nanostructures, created via thermal annealing
of thin metal film, to detect dengue NS1 antigen, which appears as early as the
onset of infection. The biosensor integrates membrane-based blood-plasma
separation to develop lab-on-chip device that facilitates rapid diagnosis (within
30 min) of dengue NS1 antigen from a small volume (10 µL) of whole blood. The
refractive index (RI) sensitivity of the LSPR biosensor was verified by using
aqueous glycerol (0-100 wt%) which showed that it is sufficiently sensitive to
detect 10-3 change in RI, which is comparable to that observed with
protein-protein interaction. The RI sensitivity was utilized to demonstrate
protein binding by using bovine serum albumin and detection of antibody-antigen
immune reaction by binding human chorionic gonadotropin antigen to immunoglobulin
antibody immobilized in our LSPR biosensor. Next, we demonstrated the detection
of NS1 in plasma obtained via centrifugation and in plasma separated on-chip.
From 10 µL of whole blood spiked with NS1 antigen, our biosensor reliably detects
0.06 µg/mL of NS1, which lies within the clinical limit observed during the first
seven days of infection, with a sensitivity of 9 nm/(µg/mL). These results
confirm that the proposed LSPR biosensor can potentially be used in point-of-care
dengue diagnostics.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2019.02.036 
PMID: 30851494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

