
1. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2019 Apr 15;1113:20-29. doi:
10.1016/j.jchromb.2019.03.009. Epub 2019 Mar 11.

A novel application of ion exchange chromatography in recombinant hepatitis B
vaccine downstream processing: Improving recombinant HBsAg homogeneity by
removing associated aggregates.

Kimia Z(1), Hosseini SN(2), Ashraf Talesh SS(3), Khatami M(4), Kavianpour A(4),
Javidanbardan A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Recombinant Hepatitis B Vaccine, Production and Research
Complex, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran; Department of Chemical
Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University of Guilan, Rasht, Iran.
(2)Department of Recombinant Hepatitis B Vaccine, Production and Research
Complex, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
hosseini@pasteur.ac.ir.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University of
Guilan, Rasht, Iran. Electronic address: s_ashraf@guilan.ac.ir.
(4)Department of Recombinant Hepatitis B Vaccine, Production and Research
Complex, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.

Production of recombinant HBsAg as a main component of the hepatitis B vaccine
has already been established in commercial scale. So far, many studies have been 
performed to optimize the production process of this recombinant vaccine.
However, still aggregation and dissociation of rHBsAg virus-like particles (VLPs)
are major challenges in downstream processing of this biomedicine. The structural
diversity of rHBsAg is dependent on many factors including cell types, molecular 
characteristics of the expressed recombinant rHBsAg, buffer composition as well
as operation condition and specific characteristics of each downstream processing
unit. Hence, it is not relatively easy to implement a single strategy to prevent 
aggregation formation in already established rHBsAg production processes. In this
study, we examined the efficacy of weak anion exchange chromatography (IEC)-
packed with DEAE Sepharose Fast Flow medium- on isolation of rHBsAg VLPs from
aggregated structures. For this purpose, the influence of ionic strength of
elution buffer as a key factor was investigated in isolation and recovery of
rHBsAg VLPs. The elution buffer with electrical conductivity between 27 and
31 mS/cm showed the best results for removing aggregated rHBsAg based on SEC-HPLC
analysis. The results showed that in the selected conductivity range, about 79%
of rHBsAg was recovered with purity above 95%. The percentage of rHBsAg VLPs in
the recovered sample was between 94% and 97.5% indicating that we could obtain
highly homogeneous rHBsAg within the acceptable quality level. The TEM, SDS-PAGE 
and western blot analysis were also in agreement with our quantitative
measurements.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jchromb.2019.03.009 
PMID: 30877983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

