
1. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2019 Jun;43(6):1213-1219. doi: 10.1111/acer.14031. Epub
2019 May 6.

Changes in Drinking Patterns, and Attitudes Toward and Knowledge About Alcohol
Consumption During Pregnancy in a Population of Pregnant Danish Women.

Kesmodel US(1), Urbute A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Herlev University Hospital, Herlev, 
Denmark.
(2)Unit of Virus, Lifestyle and Genes, Danish Cancer Society Research Center,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: In 1997, The Danish Health Authority recommended that "it is safest
not to drink alcohol when you are pregnant," and in 1999 expanded
recommendations. There are only a few studies evaluating the possible change of
average alcohol consumption following changes in national recommendations, and no
studies have been found comparing the changes in pregnant women's attitudes
toward alcohol consumption during pregnancy. We aimed to evaluate the changes in 
drinking pattern, and knowledge about and attitudes toward alcohol consumption
during pregnancy before and after the change of national recommendations.
METHODS: This is a cross-sectional interview study with a representative sample
of 1,418 woman attending antenatal care at the beginning of their second
trimester in Aarhus, Denmark, in the year 2000, and a comparable sample of 439
pregnant women from 1998 in Aarhus. Participants were interviewed about their
average alcohol consumption, binge drinking, and attitudes toward and knowledge
about alcohol consumption during pregnancy. Data collection procedures and
questions were identical for both samples.
RESULTS: There were no differences between the 2 samples in terms of average
alcohol consumption before (p = 0.19) and during (p = 0.45) pregnancy, and binge 
drinking in early pregnancy (p = 0.47). Attitudes toward and knowledge about
alcohol in pregnancy did not change either (p > 0.5). Women's knowledge about
guidelines was less precise in 2000 (p < 0.001). Worse knowledge was associated
with younger age considering both samples (OR = 2.63, 95% CI: 1.63 to 4.26). Most
pregnant women reported that they had not been informed or advised about alcohol 
consumption during pregnancy, but they would like to be advised by their
healthcare professionals.
CONCLUSIONS: After the changes in the national guidelines about alcohol
consumption during pregnancy, there were no changes in behavior, attitudes, and
knowledge of pregnant women. This would indicate that healthcare specialists
should be encouraged to initiate a conversation about alcohol consumption during 
the first antenatal visit.

© 2019 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

DOI: 10.1111/acer.14031 
PMID: 30908663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

