
1. Indoor Air. 2019 Jul;29(4):563-576. doi: 10.1111/ina.12557. Epub 2019 May 8.

Airborne transmission between room occupants during short-term events:
Measurement and evaluation.

Ai Z(1), Hashimoto K(1)(2), Melikov AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Indoor Environment and Energy, Department of Civil
Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Architecture, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Waseda
University, Tokyo, Japan.

This study experimentally examines and compares the dynamics and short-term
events of airborne cross-infection in a full-scale room ventilated by stratum,
mixing and displacement air distributions. Two breathing thermal manikins were
employed to simulate a standing infected person and a standing exposed person.
Four influential factors were examined, including separation distance between
manikins, air change per hour, positioning of the two manikinsand air
distribution. Tracer gas technique was used to simulate the exhaled droplet
nuclei from the infected person and fast tracer gas concentration meters (FCM41) 
were used to monitor the concentrations. Real-time and average exposure indices
were proposed to evaluate the dynamics of airborne exposure. The time-averaged
exposure index depends on the duration of exposure time and can be considerably
different during short-term events and under steady-state conditions. The
exposure risk during short-term events may not always decrease with increasing
separation distance. It changes over time and may not always increase with time. 
These findings imply that the control measures formulated on the basis of
steady-state conditions are not necessarily appropriate for short-term events.

Â© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ina.12557 
PMID: 30980555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

