
1. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2019 May;54(5):546-562. doi:
10.1080/00365521.2019.1607897. Epub 2019 May 21.

Systematic review with meta-analyses: does the pathogen matter in post-infectious
irritable bowel syndrome?

Svendsen AT(1)(2), Bytzer P(1)(2), Engsbro AL(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Gastroenterology , Zealand University Hospital , KÃ¸ge ,
Denmark.
(2)b Department of Clinical Medicine , Copenhagen University , Copenhagen N ,
Denmark.
(3)c Department of Clinical Microbiology , Copenhagen University Hospital
Hvidovre , Hvidovre , Denmark.

Objective: Acute gastroenteritis (AGE) is a risk factor for post-infectious
irritable bowel syndrome (PI-IBS). This systematic review evaluates the
prevalence and risk-factors of PI-IBS after AGE by specific pathogens. Materials 
and methods: Medline (1966-2019) and Embase (1974-2019) were searched for studies
evaluating PI-IBS minimum 3 months after AGE with Campylobacter spp., Salmonella 
spp., Shigella spp., Escherischia coli, Clostridium difficile, norovirus,
rotavirus, Cryptosporidium spp. or Giardia intestinalis using validated criteria 
for IBS. Pooled prevalence (PP), odds ratios (OR) and risk factors were
determined for single pathogens, groups of bacteria, viruses and parasites, and
overall for AGE caused by any pathogen. Random-effect models were used for
meta-analyses. Results: A total of 34 articles were included. PP of PI-IBS after 
Campylobacter spp. was 12% (confidence interval 95% [CI]: 10-15%), Salmonellosis 
12% (CI: 9-15%), Shigellosis 11% (CI: 8-15%), C. difficile 14% (CI: 4-29%) and E.
coli spp. 12% (CI: 5-20%). OR of PI-IBS after salmonellosis was 5.5 (CI:
2.3-12.8) and after shigellosis 13.8 (CI: 4.2-45.4). Bacterial AGE overall showed
OR 5.8 (CI: 4.0-8.3) and AGE caused by any pathogen OR 4.9 (CI: 3.9-6.1). Few
studies exist on viral and parasitic gastroenteritis. Conclusions: Current
literature show similar risks for bacterial pathogens. Studies are limited for
viral and parasitic pathogens. The evaluated risk-factors for PI-IBS varied among
the included studies and the existing evidence is insufficient to identify
pathogen-specific risk factors.

DOI: 10.1080/00365521.2019.1607897 
PMID: 31112663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

