
1. Biosens Bioelectron. 2019 Aug 15;139:111325. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2019.111325.
Epub 2019 May 16.

Photoelectrochemical biosensor of HIV-1 based on cascaded photoactive materials
and triple-helix molecular switch.

Wang S(1), Zhao J(1), Zhang Y(1), Yan M(2), Zhang L(3), Ge S(4), Yu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Collaborative Innovation Center of Technology and Equipment for Biological
Diagnosis and Therapy in Universities of Shandong, Institute for Advanced
Interdisciplinary Research, University of Jinan, Jinan, Shandong, 250022, PR
China.
(2)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, University of Jinan, Jinan,
Shandong, 250022, PR China.
(3)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Preparation and Measurement of Building 
Materials, School of Material Science and Engineering, University of Jinan,
Jinan, 250022, PR China. Electronic address: zhanglina818@126.com.
(4)Collaborative Innovation Center of Technology and Equipment for Biological
Diagnosis and Therapy in Universities of Shandong, Institute for Advanced
Interdisciplinary Research, University of Jinan, Jinan, Shandong, 250022, PR
China. Electronic address: chm_gesg@163.com.

In this work, an ultrasensitive photoelectrochemical (PEC) biosensor was proposed
to detect nucleic acids on the basis of cascaded photoactive materials and
triple-helix molecular switch. DNA sequence of human immunodeficiency virus type 
1 (HIV-1) was chosen as the target DNA (T-DNA). Cascaded photoactive structure
was formed via different sizes of CdTe quantum dots (QDs) sensitized ZnO nanorods
(ZnO NRs), which was employed as a cascaded photoactive interface to amplify the 
photocurrent signal. A hairpin structure DNA (H-DNA) as capture probe was
conjugated onto the photoactive interface through amide bond, and then a
single-stranded DNA modified with gold nanoparticles labeled alkaline phosphatase
(ALP-Au NPs-DNA) at each end was introduced to hybridize with the H-DNA to form a
triple-helix conformation. The T-DNA detection was based on the photocurrent
response change resulted from conformation change of the triple-helix molecule
after hybridization with T-DNA. In the absence of T-DNA, the triple-helix
molecule was in a closed state and the ALP of ALP-Au NPs-DNA could specifically
catalyze the ascorbic acid 2-phosphate (AAP) to generate ascorbic acid (AA) as
electron donors, which resulted in a significant photocurrent response due to the
rapid electron transfer process. However, in the presence of T-DNA, the T-DNA
hybridized with the ALP-Au NPs-DNA molecule, which caused triple-helix molecule
in an opened state and compelled ALP-Au NPs-DNA away from the electrode surface, 
resulting in the absence of ALP which could catalyze AAP to generate AA.
Subsequently, the photocurrent response significantly decreased. The proposed PEC
biosensor not only had a wide detection range of 1fM-1nM and low detection limit 
(0.65 fM), but also showed excellent reproducibility, specificity and stability, 
which had great application prospect and opened up a new research method in the
early clinical diagnosis and cancer research.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2019.111325 
PMID: 31121436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

