
1. Vaccine. 2019 Jul 9;37(30):4022-4030. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.06.002. Epub
2019 Jun 15.

A rationally designed flagellin-L2 fusion protein induced serum and mucosal
neutralizing antibodies against multiple HPV types.

Zhang T(1), Chen X(1), Liu H(1), Bao Q(1), Wang Z(1), Liao G(2), Xu X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Structural Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)The Fifth Department of Biological Products, Institute of Medical Biology,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Yunnan, China.
Electronic address: liaogy@imbcams.com.cn.
(3)Department of Biophysics and Structural Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing, China. Electronic address: xuemeixu@vip.sina.com.

The amino terminus of human papillomavirus (HPV) minor capsid protein L2 harbors 
several conserved neutralizing epitopes, including aa.17-36 (RG-1 epitope) and
aa.65-85 consensus epitope (cL2 epitope), which are considered to be promising
for the construction of cost-effective pan-HPV vaccine candidates. However, the
immunogenicity of L2 epitope/peptide is rather weak, and the neutralizing
spectrum induced by single type of L2 antigen is suboptimal. In this study, we
constructed L2 concatemer with HPV18/33/58/59 RG-1 epitopes and 16L2 aa.11-88
peptide, and fused it with flagellin, a strong systemic and mucosal adjuvant, by 
hypervariable region replacement. A copy of cL2 epitope was also introduced to
the C-terminus of the recombinant protein. The resultant Fla-5PcL2 protein can be
produced in E. coli expression system with high yield and good stability. We
assessed the immunogenicity of Fla-5PcL2 in mouse model via systemic and mucosal 
route, and found that subcutaneous immunization with Fla-5PcL2 induced robust
serum neutralizing antibodies against divergent HPV types, while intranasal
immunization with Fla-5PcL2 induced remarkable L2-specific IgA and
cross-neutralizing antibodies in mucosal secretions, and medium titers of
cross-neutralizing antibodies in sera. Moreover, Fla-5PcL2 induced full
protection against vaginal HPV challenges. As mucosal antibodies provide the
first-line defense at infection sites, and needle-free immunizations may increase
vaccine compliance and require less public health resources, our results
demonstrate that Fla-5PcL2 is a promising vaccine candidate which possibly meet
the need in low-resource regions.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.06.002 
PMID: 31213378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

