
1. Res Vet Sci. 2019 Aug;125:272-278. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2019.07.003. Epub 2019 Jul
9.

Feline gut microbiota composition in association with feline coronavirus
infection: A pilot study.

Meazzi S(1), Stranieri A(2), Lauzi S(2), Bonsembiante F(3), Ferro S(3),
Paltrinieri S(2), Giordano A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan, Via Celoria 10, 20122 
Milano, MI, Italy; Veterinary Teaching Hospital, University of Milan, via
dell'Università, 6, 26900 Lodi, LO, Italy. Electronic address:
sara.meazzi@unimi.it.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan, Via Celoria 10, 20122 
Milano, MI, Italy; Veterinary Teaching Hospital, University of Milan, via
dell'Università, 6, 26900 Lodi, LO, Italy.
(3)Department of Comparative Biomedicine and Food Science, University of Padova, 
Viale dell'Università 15, 35020 Legnaro, PD, Italy.

Feline coronaviruses (FCoV) colonize the intestinal tract, however, due to not
fully understood mutations, they can spread systemically and cause feline
infectious peritonitis (FIP). Recent studies on human medicine report that gut
microbiota is involved in the development of systemic disorders and could
influence the immune response to viral diseases. The aim of this study was to
provide preliminary data on the fecal microbiota composition in healthy cats
compared to FCoV-infected cats, with and without FIP. Cats were equally grouped
as healthy FCoV-negative, healthy FCoV-positive or FIP affected (total n = 15).
Fecal sample were evaluated for the microbiota composition. A total of 3,231,916 
sequences were analyzed. The samples' alpha-diversity curves did not reach a
proper plateau and, for the beta-diversity, the samples seemed not to group
perfectly by category, even if the healthy FCoV-positive group showed a hybrid
microbial composition between FCoV-negative and FIP groups. Although there were
no taxa significantly linked to the different conditions, some peculiar patterns 
were recognized: Firmicutes was always the most represented phylum, followed by
Bacteroidetes and Actinobacteria. In FCoV-positive cats, the Firmicutes and
Bacteroidetes were respectively over- and under-represented, compared to the
other groups. Among FIP cats, three subjects shared a similar microbiome, one cat
showed a different microbial profile and the other one had the lowest number of
diverse phyla. Despite the limited number of animals, some differences in the
fecal microbiome between the groups were observed, suggesting to further
investigate the possible correlation between gut microbiota and FCoV infection in
cats.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2019.07.003 
PMCID: PMC7111766
PMID: 31326703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

