
1. J Anim Sci. 1987 Feb;64(2):414-9.

Genetic control of immune response to pseudorabies and atrophic rhinitis
vaccines: II. Comparison of additive direct and maternal genetic effects.

Meeker DL, Rothschild MF, Christian LL, Warner CM, Hill HT.

Data from 52 litters farrowed in two seasons of a cross-fostering experiment were
analyzed to estimate variances and covariances for additive direct and maternal
genetic effects on immune response to pseudorabies virus and B. bronchiseptica
vaccine. Twenty purebred boars and 44 sows of the Duroc, Landrace and Yorkshire
breeds were used. Immune response was measured after vaccine challenge. A
modified-live pseudorabies (PR) vaccine was administered to piglets at 28 d of
age; response was measured by log2 serum neutralization titers at 56 d. An
inactivated B. bronchiseptica bacterin was administered at 28, 42 and 112 d.
Antibody levels were measured relative to positive and negative controls at 28,
56 and 119 d by using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Results from 
this study for heritability were .18 +/- .09 for PR titer and .15 +/- .07 and .52
+/- .15 for 56- and 119-d ELISA values, respectively. The variability due to
nurse environment (maternal genetic variance and common environmental variance)
as a percentage of phenotypic variance was 11.1% for PR titers and 29.6 and 8.8% 
for 56- and 119-d ELISA values, respectively. The heritabilities estimated in
this study indicate that, if improved immune response to vaccines is desired,
selection may be useful. However, the importance of maternal environment would
make early selections less accurate than selections based on immune response
measured later in life.

DOI: 10.2527/jas1987.642414x 
PMID: 3558147  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

