
1. J Virol. 1987 Jul;61(7):2150-4.

Active synthesis of hemagglutinin-specific immunoglobulin A by lung cells of mice
that were immunized intragastrically with inactivated influenza virus vaccine.

Chen KS, Burlington DB, Quinnan GV Jr.

Intragastric inoculation with whole-virion vaccine of inactivated influenza virus
resulted in production of hemagglutinin (HA)-specific immunoglobulin A (IgA) and 
IgG both in lung lavage fluids and in serum samples of mice. HA-specific IgA was 
the predominant isotypic antibody secreted in the lung lavage fluids (average
IgA/IgG ratio, 13:1), whereas HA-specific IgG was the major antibody class in
serum (average IgA/IgG ratio, 0.3:1). These responses were similar to the
antibody responses stimulated by intranasal infection with live influenza virus. 
In vitro cultures of lymphoid cells from lungs and Peyer's patches, but not from 
spleens, in the presence of homologous antigen, from mice vaccinated
intragastrically synthesized mostly HA-specific IgA. Mice immunized parenterally 
with inactivated influenza virus produced only IgG in lung lavage fluids and
sera. Cultures of lymphoid cells from their spleens, but not their lungs,
synthesized HA-specific IgG upon antigenic stimulation in vitro; neither
synthesized IgA. These in vitro cell culture results, as well as the inverse
relationship of IgA/IgG ratios in lung lavage fluids and sera, demonstrated that 
the IgA antibody in lung lavage fluids was actively synthesized locally in the
lungs of intragastrically immunized mice. This finding was consistent with the
migratory distribution of antigen-primed lymphoid cells from Peyer's patches to
distant lymphoid tissue such as lung. Intragastric vaccination conferred
protection against intranasal challenge with a lethal dose of virulent virus.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.61.7.2150-2154.1987 
PMCID: PMC254236
PMID: 3586130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

