
1. J Virol Methods. 1981 Nov;3(4):229-39.

Heterogeneous chromatographic behaviour or soluble RNA replicase from healthy and
virus-infected tobacco leaves: an improvement of the purification methodology.

Sommer P, Andriamanantena AG, Stussigaraud C.

During purification of soluble RNA replicase from healthy and alfalfa mosaic
virus-infected tobacco leaves, crude extracts were chromatographed on
DEAE-Sephadex A-25, and three RNA-dependent RNA polymerase activities were
obtained; one of these was previously characterized as a true RNA replicase, the 
remaining two were not studied (Chifflot et al., 1980, Virology 100, 91). We now 
demonstrate that all of these activities correspond to the same RNA replicase,
complexed or not to cellular or viral RNA. Upon chromatography on DEAE-Sephadex
A-25, the free replicase did not bind to the gel at low ionic strength, whereas
the RNA-replicase complexes were bound to the gel through the medium of RNA.
Increasing the ionic strength allowed the dissociation of the complexes and
elution of the replicase only. From this observation, a new and rapid
purification procedure combining all these activities and yielding large amounts 
of replicase was developed; the first main step of purification was
chromatography on Blue-Sepharose CL6B under conditions conductive to the
dissociation of RNA-replicase complexes, and thus maximal adsorption of the
replicase. The enzyme was then eluted by increasing the ionic strength and was
further purified on coupled DEAE-Sephadex A-25 and phosphocellulose columns. The 
DEA-Sephadex A-25 was used to bind the remaining RNA, while the replicase passed 
through, and bound to the cationic ion exchanger. The final replicase
preparations which were obtained were very stable and had a purification factor
of 1100-1400. The recovery averaged 70% and specific activities were much higher 
than those already described for similar enzymes from healthy or virus-infected
tobacco leaves.

DOI: 10.1016/0166-0934(81)90073-2 
PMID: 6173393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

