
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1983 Nov;80(22):6745-9.

Selective cleavage in the avian retroviral long terminal repeat sequence by the
endonuclease associated with the alpha beta form of avian reverse transcriptase.

Duyk G, Leis J, Longiaru M, Skalka AM.

M13 recombinant DNA clones containing a 350-base sequence derived from the EcoRI 
fragment of two tandemly linked Rous-associated virus 2 (RAV-2) long terminal
repeat (LTR) sequences have been used to map reverse transcriptase-associated
endonuclease (RT-endonuclease) cleavage sites by primer extension studies. Under 
appropriate conditions, the alpha beta form of RT-endonuclease (composed of both 
the alpha and beta subunits) purified from Avian sarcoma virus (Pr-C and B-77
strains) introduces a specific break in the inverted complementary repeat
sequence found at the junction of the LTRs. The cleavage sites occur in the same 
nucleotide sequence in (-) and (+) DNA strands; together they have the potential 
of generating a 6-base-pair staggered overlap that spans the junction. This
supports the notion that the enzyme is involved in viral DNA integration. Other
RT-endonuclease sites were analyzed. A second site, which occurs in the lac
region of the M13 vector DNA upstream from the unique EcoRI cloning site, bears
no apparent sequence homology to the site at the junction of the LTRs. However,
it also lies within an inverted complementary repeat and, as is the case for the 
site in the LTR, the break occurs to the 5' side of the axis of symmetry.
Cleavage at this second site is suppressed when the vector contains the RAV-2 LTR
insert. Thus, the viral LTR appears to exert a cis effect that can influence a
region over 300 base pairs away.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.80.22.6745 
PMCID: PMC390062
PMID: 6196775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

