
1. Infect Immun. 1980 Feb;27(2):501-12.

Pathology of chickens infected with avian nephoblastoma virus MAV-2(N).

Watts SL, Smith RE.

A neophroblastoma-inducing myeloblastosis-associated virus, MAV-2(N), derived
from avian myeloblastosis virus was characterized with respect to biochemical
composition and avian pathogenesis. Purified fibroblast-grown virus contained the
same size 35S ribonucleic acid and the same relative amounts of viral
polypeptides as another myeloblastosis-associated virus inducing predominantly
osteopetrosis MAV-2(O). Plaque-purified MAV-2(N) induced a 76 to 93% incidence of
nephroblastoma and a 3 to 50% incidence of osteopetrosis in SPAFAS and line 15 x 
7 chickens: the oncogenic spectrum and the onset of nephroblastoma varied with
the line of chicken and the route of injection. Renal neoplasms were manifest in 
chickens older than 2 months and grew to a massive size. Furthermore, 29% of
control chickens housed with MAV-2(N)-infected chickens demonstrated
nephroblastoma. MAV-2(N)-infected chickens had growth rates and blood packed cell
volumes comparable to those of uninfected chickens. Infected chickens 2 months of
age had increased kidney, liver, and spleen weights; tumor-bearing chickens 3 to 
4 months of age had increased liver, lung, brain, pancreas, and bone weights. The
concentration of albumin was decreased and the concentration of gamma globulin
was increased in the serum of MAV-2(N)-INFECTED CHICKENS. Analysis of the sera of
nephroblastoma-bearing chickens for virus and antibody showed that three states
existed: (i) high levels of neutralizing antibody, (ii) high levels of virus, and
(iii) simultaneous presence of both at low levels. The pathological and
virological features of MAV-2(N) which distinguish it from MAV-2(O) are
discussed.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.27.2.501-512.1980 
PMCID: PMC550794
PMID: 6247276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

