
1. Eur J Biochem. 1983 Jul 15;134(1):7-11.

Protein disulphide-isomerase activity in various cells synthesizing collagen.

Myllyl√§ R, Koivu J, Pihlajaniemi T, Kivirikko KI.

A high correlation was found between the activities of protein disulphide
isomerase and prolyl 4-hydroxylase when assayed in cells synthesizing various
collagen types or the same type at markedly different rates. The highest
activities of both enzymes were found in freshly isolated chick-embryo tendon and
cartilage cells, intermediate activities in confluent cultures of human skin and 
lung fibroblasts and mouse 3T6 fibroblasts, and the lowest values in three human 
sarcoma cell lines, the difference in protein disulphide isomerase activity
between the freshly isolated tendon cells and confluent
simian-virus-40-transformed human lung fibroblasts being about 25-fold. All these
differences are in good agreement with differences reported between the various
cells in their rates of collagen synthesis. A great similarity was also found
between the changes in the two enzyme activities measured per cell during the
growth of 3T6 fibroblast cultures from the early logarithmic phase to the
stationary phase. No correlation was found between protein disulphide isomerase
activity and the type of collagen synthesized. The data suggest that protein
disulphide isomerase may be involved in the formation of intra-chain and
inter-chain disulphide bonds in procollagens, but there is no collagen
type-related variation in this enzyme activity of a magnitude that would explain 
the marked differences in the rates of formation of inter-chain disulphide bonds 
between the various collagen types.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1983.tb07523.x 
PMID: 6861763  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

