
1. Vaccine. 1995 Jun;13(9):871-7.

BHV-1 glycoprotein 1 and recombinant interleukin 1 beta efficiently elicit
mucosal IgA response.

Gao Y(1), Daley MJ, Splitter GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Health and Biomedical Sciences, University of
Wisconsin-Madison 53706, USA.

The mucosal immune response to most soluble antigens administered directly to the
mucosal system is low and requires a large amount of antigen and frequent
vaccinations. In this study we tested whether immunizing cattle at a site which
shares lymphatic drainage with the nasal mucosa could prime local mucosal
immunity. We further tested whether recombinant bovine IL-1 beta (rBoIL-1 beta)
could potentiate the induction of mucosal immunity. Animals were immunized
subcutaneously at the base of the ear (s.e.) with recombinant bovine
herpesvirus-1 (BHV-1) envelope glycoprotein I (gI) (35 micrograms animal-1)
emulsified in incomplete Freund's adjuvant with or without rBoIL-1 beta (500 ng
kg-1) followed by a second immunization 42 days later. Animals were challenged
with virulent BHV-1 intranasally 42 days after the second immunization. Mucosal
IgA from the nares was induced after only one immunization, and enhanced by
boosting. rBoIL-1 beta treated animals had higher levels of BHV-1 specific nasal 
IgA (p < 0.01) and serum neutralizing antibody (p < 0.05). rBoIL-1 beta-treated
animals also had increased numbers of surface IgA+ (p < 0.05) and IgG1+ (p <
0.001) B cells after in vitro antigen (gI) stimulation of peripheral blood
lymphocytes suggesting that there was a greater expension of IgA+ and IgG1+ B
cells in rBoIL-1 beta treated animals. When challenged with BHV-1, 3 of 4 animals
in the gI+rBoIL-1 beta group were fully protected from viral replication in the
nares, while only 1 of 4 animals receiving gI alone was protected.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/0264-410x(94)00004-7 
PMID: 7483811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

