
1. Artif Organs. 1995 Mar;19(3):251-5.

Environmental transmission of hepatitis B and hepatitis C viruses within the
hemodialysis unit.

Cendoroglo Neto M(1), Manzano SI, Canziani ME, Silva AE, Cirenza LF, Sesso Rde C,
Ajzen H, Draibe SA.

Author information: 
(1)Medicine Department, Escola Paulista de Medicina, SÃ£o Paulo, Brazil.

The hepatitis B virus (HBV) can be transmitted in the dialysis setting through
blood transfusions and environmental surfaces. Transfusion related hepatitis C
virus (HCV) infection is very well known, but only recently the environmental
transmission of this virus was postulated. In order to study the prevalence,
mechanisms of transmission, and the ALT patterns of HBV and HCV infections in
hemodialysis and CAPD patients before the implementation of HBV vaccination and
HCV screening in the blood bank, we conducted a study from January 1987 to
January 1990. Sera from 185 hemodialysis and 124 CAPD patients were stored in
this period and later analyzed for HBsAg, anti-HBc, anti-HBs, and anti-HCV
(second generation ELISA). The prevalence of any HBV marker was 55.7% (103/185)
for hemodialysis patients and 31.5% (39/124) for CAPD patients (hemodialysis vs. 
CAPD, p < 0.001). The prevalence of positive anti-HCV was 35.1% (65/185) for
hemodialysis and 33.9% (42/124) for CAPD patients (not significant). There was a 
significant association between HBV markers positivity and anti-HCV positivity.
The multivariate analysis of risk factors revealed an association of the
positivity of each virus with the duration of renal replacement therapy (RRT),
number of previous blood transfusions, and past history of hemodialysis
treatment. Thus, besides the transfusion-related transmission, hemodialysis
environmental transmission may also occur for both viruses. The findings of a
high prevalence of both viruses and evidence for environmental transmission in
the dialysis setting are of major importance for the planning of future
preventive measures.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1525-1594.1995.tb02323.x 
PMID: 7539998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

