
1. Hepatology. 1995 Jul;22(1):50-60.

Naturally occurring hepatitis B virus core gene mutations.

Akarca US(1), Lok AS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Tulane University New Orleans, LA 
70112, USA.

Mutations in the hepatitis B virus (HBV) core gene may influence disease activity
by altering immune recognition sites or level of virus replication. Sera from 69 
Chinese patients with chronic HBV infection were analyzed by direct sequencing of
polymerase chain reaction amplification of HBV DNA to determine the frequency and
location of naturally occurring HBV core gene mutations. All but one patient had 
nucleotide changes, and 44 (64%) patients had at least one amino acid change
(mean, 3.7; range, 1-13) when compared with published sequences. Multiple
regression analysis showed that the frequency of core gene mutations was
significantly associated with precore stop-codon mutation, hepatitis B e antigen 
negativity, and active liver disease, but not patients' age. The mean number of
amino acid changes/patient for hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg)-positive patients
with elevated versus normal aminotransferase levels were, respectively, 2.8 +/-
0.4 and 0.6 +/- 0.2. The corresponding values for HBeAg-negative patients were,
respectively, 5.0 +/- 1.2 and 6.0 +/- 1.5. Thirteen patients were serially
studied, the mean rates of amino acid substitution in HBeAg-positive patients who
did or did not clear HBeAg during follow-up were 5.7 +/- 0.8 and 0 per codon/yr. 
Most of the mutations were clustered in the codon/yr. Most of the mutations were 
clustered in the middle of the core gene that harbor several major B- and helper 
T-cell epitopes. Very few mutations were found in the C-terminal part of the core
gene. In summary, mutations in the core gene can be frequently detected in
patients with chronic HBV infection. These mutations occur predominantly around
the time of HBeAg clearance when liver disease is most active.


PMID: 7601433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

