
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 1993 Feb;91(2):266-71.

Immunization of mice with baculovirus-derived recombinant SV40 large tumour
antigen induces protective tumour immunity to a lethal challenge with
SV40-transformed cells.

Shearer MH(1), Bright RK, Lanford RE, Kennedy RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Immunology, Southwest Foundation for Biomedical
Research, San Antonio, TX 78228-0147.

In this study, we examined the humoral immune responses and in vivo tumour
immunity induced by baculovirus recombinant simian virus 40 (SV40) large tumour
antigen (rSV40 T-ag). BALB/c mice immunized with rSV40 T-ag produced antibody
responses that recognized SV40 large tumour antigen (T-ag) by ELISA. Analysis of 
these anti-SV40 T-ag responses indicated that the antibodies recognized epitopes 
associated with both the carboxy and amino terminus of SV40 T-ag. This pattern of
SV40 T-ag epitope recognition was similar to that observed in anti-SV40 T-ag
responses induced by inoculation with irradiated SV40-transformed cells. Mice
immunized with either rSV40 T-ag or with the inactivated transformed cells were
protected from a subsequent in vivo lethal tumour challenge with live
SV40-transformed cells. These studies suggest that humoral immune responses
induced by rSV40 T-ag are similar in epitope specificity to that induced by
inactivated SV40-transformed cells. In addition, recombinant tumour-specific
antigens from papovaviruses, such as SV40, can be used to induce tumour immunity 
which protects from a subsequent lethal tumour challenge. This study may provide 
insight into the use of recombinant tumour antigens as putative tumour vaccines
and in the development of active immunotherapeutic strategies for treating
virus-induced cancers.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.1993.tb05893.x 
PMCID: PMC1554672
PMID: 7679059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

