
1. J Egypt Public Health Assoc. 1994;69(1-2):115-28.

Study of the knowledge, attitude of Egyptian health care workers towards
occupational HIV infection.

Faris R(1), Shouman A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University.

Acquired immuno-deficiency syndrome (AIDS) was reported for the first time in
Egypt in 1986. Up to March 1993, 60 cases were notified to the Ministry of Health
and 359 were detected to be infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
Most cases had acquired infection abroad through blood, blood products or sexual 
contact. The number of cases is continuously increasing. Fear and ignorance about
HIV infection causes panic among health care workers (HCWs) whenever a case is
discovered and needs medical care. We assessed the knowledge and attitude of 346 
HCWs towards the probability of occupational HIV infection using a self
administered questionnaire. The sample included physicians, surgeons, nurses,
laboratory technicians and ambulance workers. 72.8% of HCWs believed that they
are in "great" danger of acquiring AIDS through occupational exposure, whereas
0.6% thought that there was no danger. 67% of HCWs had wrong ideas about
transmission of HIV (toilet seats, droplet infection, touching patients). 83.5%
mentioned that AIDS patients should be isolated in quarantine. The main source of
information about AIDS was the television, radio and ordinary press. 44.8% got
their information from textbooks or scientific literature. 95.4% felt the need
for more information about infection and disease. The results show an urgent need
to start a program of education of HCWs concerning the risk of occupational HIV
infection and the measures of its prevention.

PIP: The authors assessed via questionnaire the knowledge and attitude of 346
health care workers toward the probability of occupational HIV infection. The
sample included physicians, surgeons, nurses, laboratory technicians, and
ambulance workers. 72.8% believe themselves to be in great danger of acquiring
AIDS through occupational exposure, while 0.6% thought that there was no danger. 
67% were misinformed about the possibility of contracting HIV from toilet seats, 
droplets, and touching patients, and 83.5% believe that patients with AIDS should
be quarantined. Television, radio, and the ordinary press were their main sources
of information about AIDS. Only 44.8% received their information on AIDS from
textbooks or scientific literature. 95.4% felt the need for more information
about infection and disease. These results point to the urgent need to begin
educating health care workers about the true risk of occupational HIV infection
and how to prevent it.

PMID: 7775891  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

