
1. Dig Dis Sci. 1994 Sep;39(9):2014-21.

Hepatic expression of interferon-alpha in chronic hepatitis B virus infection.

Fang JW(1), Wu PC, Lai CL, Lo CK, Meager A, Lau JY.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hepatobiliary Diseases, University of Florida, Gainesville 32610.

Hepatic expression of interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) was examined by
immunohistochemistry in 90 Chinese patients (M/F 67:23, age: 14-69) with a
spectrum of hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related chronic liver diseases.
Immunoreactive IFN-alpha was detected in sinusoidal cells in 79 patients (88%)
and in mononuclear cells in 59 patients (65.6%). Patients with active liver
diseases (chronic active hepatitis, active cirrhosis, N = 55) had a higher level 
of IFN-alpha expression compared to patients with inactive histology (N = 35;
sinusoidal cells, P < 0.01; mononuclear cells, P < 0.01). Cytoplasmic HBsAg,
nuclear HBcAg, and cytoplasmic HBcAg were detected in 79 (88%), 42 (47%), and 23 
(27%) patients respectively. Expression of IFN-alpha in mononuclear cells
correlated with the expression of cytoplasmic HBcAg (P < 0.05) but not with
nuclear HBcAg or cytoplasmic HBsAg. When the patients were divided into four
different phases according to the natural history of chronic HBV infection,
patients in the active liver disease phase had higher IFN-alpha expression
compared to the immunotolerant and late phase patients (P < 0.01). Using double
immunohistochemical staining, both IFN-alpha and cytoplasmic HBcAg were
frequently detected near inflammatory infiltrates but no correlation existed
between the hepatic expression of HBsAg and IFN-alpha. These data indicate that
IFN-alpha is expressed in the liver in HBV-related active liver diseases and that
the reported suboptimal production of IFN-alpha by PBMC in HBV-related chronic
active liver diseases may be due to a redistribution of the IFN-alpha-producing
mononuclear cells into the liver, the site of inflammation.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02088140 
PMID: 8082512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

