
1. J Immunol. 1993 Sep 15;151(6):3206-14.

Reversible expression of mouse mast cell protease 2 mRNA and protein in cultured 
mast cells exposed to IL-10.

Ghildyal N(1), Friend DS, Nicodemus CF, Austen KF, Stevens RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

BALB/cJ mouse mast cells derived by culturing bone marrow progenitor cells in
WEHI-3 cell-conditioned medium (BMMCW) do not contain mouse mast cell protease 2 
(mMCP-2) mRNA, but these cells can be induced to express this transcript after
exposure to rIL-10. To study the translation and granule accumulation of mMCP-2
in rIL-10-treated BMMC (BMMCW+IL-10), a rabbit antibody was developed to a
synthetic peptide that corresponds to the novel amino acid sequence in mMCP-2 at 
residues 56 to 71. After affinity purification, this antibody, anti-mMCP-2(56-71)
IgG, reacted in SDS-PAGE/immunoblots against a 28-kDa protein in BMMCW+IL-10 that
had the N-terminal amino acid sequence of mMCP-2. As assessed
immunohistochemically, mMCP-2 protein accumulated in the secretory granules of
Kirsten sarcoma virus-immortalized mouse mast cells, BMMCW+IL-10, and the mucosal
mast cells present in the jejunum of Trichinella spiralis-infected BALB/cJ mice. 
Time course analyses of the induction of mMCP-2 mRNA and protein in BMMCW+IL-10
revealed that these cells contain a high steady-state level of mMCP-2 mRNA 24 h
after their exposure to rIL-10. Although a small amount of immunodetectable
mMCP-2 protein is present in the cells treated for 24 h, large amounts of this
protease are not obtained until 7 days of treatment of the cells with rIL-10.
Time course analyses of the loss of mMCP-2 mRNA and protein in BMMCW+IL-10
revealed that the steady-state level of mMCP-2 mRNA decreased dramatically 24 h
after rIL-10 was removed from the culture medium, but that the level of mMCP-2
protein did not decline measurably until day 5 of culture. The fact that the
steady-state levels of mMCP-2 mRNA and protein in BMMC can both be reversibly
altered by culturing these mast cells in the presence and absence of rIL-10
suggests that the phenotype of mast cells is not fixed. Rather, it is in a
dynamic state regulated by the cytokine network to which mast cells are exposed
in their different microenvironments.


PMID: 8376776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

