
1. Int J Cancer. 1993 Jan 2;53(1):29-35.

Bcl-2 proto-oncogene expression in Epstein-Barr-virus-associated nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.

Lu QL(1), Elia G, Lucas S, Thomas JA.

Author information: 
(1)Histopathology Unit, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

The bcl-2 proto-oncogene product inhibits apoptosis. Increased levels of bcl-2
protein are associated with prolonged B-cell survival and have been demonstrated 
in a high proportion of follicular B-cell lymphoma. Recent studies have shown
that bcl-2 protein expression in B cells immortalized by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
in vitro is up-regulated by the EBV-latency-associated antigen, latent membrane
protein (LMP) 1. The epithelial malignancy, undifferentiated nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (UNPC), has a well-established association with EBV and the tumour
cells characteristically display a restricted latent viral phenotype including
LMP 1. This study has investigated the relationship between the presence of EBV
DNA, EBV phenotypic profiles and bcl-2 protein expression in conventionally
processed and cryopreserved samples of NPC using in situ hybridization,
immunocytochemical and immunoblotting techniques. bcl-2 was detected in most
(80%) samples of UNPC as well as in 1/3 samples of keratinizing NPC and 2/2
samples of nasopharyngeal adenocarcinoma. However, no close correlation was found
between the presence of EBV DNA, and profiles for LMP 1 and bcl-2 protein
expression in 45 UNPC. In addition, bcl-2 protein was shown to be selectively
expressed in the basal compartment of normal nasopharyngeal epithelia. bcl-2
protein expression has not been reported previously in malignant tumours of
epithelial origin. The findings in this study implicate a role for bcl-2 both in 
normal keratinocyte differentiation and in the pathogenesis of epithelial
malignancy.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.2910530107 
PMID: 8380056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

