
1. J Invest Dermatol. 1993 Aug;101(2):227-31.

Skin test to assess immunity against cottontail rabbit papillomavirus antigens in
rabbits with progressing papillomas or after papilloma regression.

HÃ¶pfl RM(1), Christensen ND, Angell MG, Kreider JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Pennsylvania State University, Hershey.

This study analyzed in vivo antiviral cellular immune reactions in the Shope
rabbit papilloma-carcinoma model. Antigens studied in experimentally infected
domestic rabbits were cottontail rabbit papillomavirus particles produced with
the athymic (nu/nu) mouse xenograft system and bacterial fusion proteins
containing the major or minor capsid protein. Recall reactions to antigens were
tested by classic intracutaneous tests. Positive reactions had a biphasic course.
Histopathology of skin test biopsy specimens showed infiltrating
polymorphonuclear cells during the early stages. Later they were replaced by
predominantly perivascular infiltrates composed of mononuclear cells. Time course
of swelling and infiltrates resembled a delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction.
Ten of 11 regressor rabbits (p = 0.00006) and 10 of 20 progressors (p = 0.009)
had positive skin tests with intact and/or denaturated virus particles and
individual capsid proteins also could elicit specific skin reactions. Skin
reactivity to the cottontail rabbit papillomavirus particles was also greater (p 
= 0.042) in regressor rabbits (8 of 11) when compared to progressors (7 of 20).
Recall reactions remained detectable at post-regression times, ranging from
several months up to more than 2 years. We conclude that specific skin reactions 
against the cottontail rabbit papillomavirus in infected domestic rabbits exist, 
and are strongly positive to intact particles of this papillomavirus in animals
(regressors) clinically free of disease.

DOI: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12364825 
PMID: 8393903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

