
1. Am J Surg Pathol. 1993 Apr;17(4):321-8.

Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma of infancy and childhood. An aggressive neoplasm 
associated with Kasabach-Merritt syndrome and lymphangiomatosis.

Zukerberg LR(1), Nickoloff BJ, Weiss SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor
48109-0054.

We report the clinical and pathological features of nine distinctive, but
relatively unknown, vascular tumors of infancy and childhood presenting as soft
tissue masses often associated with locally aggressive disease, lymphangiomatosis
and Kasabach-Merritt syndrome. The patients, four males and five females, were
all in their first decade of life except for two (median, 2 years; range, 5
months to 19 years). These tumors involved deep soft tissues of the upper
extremity (four cases), retroperitoneum (two cases), chest wall, scalp, and neck 
(one case each). Four patients also had Kasabach-Merritt syndrome, and three
patients had lymphangiomatosis. Lymphangiomatosis consisted of diffusely
infiltrating lymphangioma of soft tissue (three cases) and in two by the
additional presence of bone lesions. In one of these three cases,
lymphangiomatosis antedated the diagnosis of the vascular tumor, and in the
remainder they were concurrently diagnosed. Tumors were characterized by
infiltrating, interconnecting sheets or irregular nodules of slender endothelial 
cells lining crescentic or slit-like vessels and, less commonly, rounded
capillary-type vessels. Within some tumors, nests of epithelioid endothelial
cells with prominent eosinophilic cytoplasm containing finely granular
hemosiderin, hyaline droplets, and cytoplasmic vacuoles were identified. Smaller 
amounts of hemosiderin were observed within the spindled endothelial cells and
microthrombi could be seen occasionally within the tiny lumina. Nuclear atypia
was minimal within these tumors and mitotic figures were infrequent, averaging 2 
to 3/10 high-power fields (HPF) (range 0-7/10 HPF). Larger, well-formed feeding
vessels were present at the periphery of the tumor. The endothelium of these
vessels expressed factor VIII-AG, CD34, and bound Ulex europaeus, and contained
an occasional perithelial cell expressing muscle-specific actin. In contrast, the
spindled tumor cells expressed only CD34. Human papilloma virus (HPV)-16-like DNA
transcripts, which have been identified in cases of Kaposi's sarcoma, were not
detected by polymerase chain reaction in two cases. Follow-up information
revealed that four patients were alive without disease after wide excision,
multiple excision(s), or amputation (one case); three were alive with disease;
and two died, one from lymphangiomatosis with respiratory compromise and the
other from hemorrhage complicating Kasabach-Merritt syndrome. It appears that
treatment should consist of wide local excision and supportive therapy for
associated symptoms.

DOI: 10.1097/00000478-199304000-00001 
PMID: 8494101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

