
1. J Neurochem. 1996 Jan;66(1):296-302.

Quinolinic acid levels in a murine retrovirus-induced immunodeficiency syndrome.

Sei Y(1), Paul IA, Saito K, Layar R, Hartley JW, Morse HC 3rd, Skolnick P, Heyes 
MP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroscience, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Mice infected with the retrovirus mixture designated LP-BM5 murine leukemia virus
(MuLV) develop an immunosuppressive disease. Quinolinic acid (QUIN) is an
endogenous neurotoxic N-methyl-D-aspartate agonist that may contribute to the
pathogenesis of HIV-associated neurologic disease. In the present study, the
levels of QUIN in brain and blood were measured in mice infected with LP-BM5 MuLV
and compared with those in uninfected mice and mice infected with the
nonpathogenic strain of ecotropic MuLV (helper component of LP-BM5 MuLV).
Infection with LP-BM5 MuLV resulted in progressive increases in blood QUIN levels
beginning 2 weeks after inoculation that peaked by 16 weeks postinfection. QUIN
levels were also increased in cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and striatum. In
systemic tissues, QUIN levels were increased in lung, liver, and spleen. In
contrast, infection with the ecotropic viral component of the LP-BM5 MuLV mixture
was not associated with any changes in brain, blood, or systemic tissue QUIN
levels, even though helper virus burdens were comparable to those in mice
infected with LP-BM5 MuLV. Treatment of LP-BM5 MuLV-infected mice with the
antiretroviral agent zidovudine (azidothymidine) significantly reduced blood and 
brain QUIN levels in association with reductions in viral load in brain and
spleen. These observations suggest that elevated QUIN production is not
attributable to productive infection with retrovirus per se but occurs in
response to an agent or agents, such as cytokines, that are produced by the host 
in response to virus infection.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1996.66010296.x 
PMID: 8522967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

