
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 1995 Dec;102(3):487-95.

An immunosuppressive murine leukaemia virus induces a Th1-->Th2 switch and
abrogates the IgM antibody response to sheep erythrocytes by suppressing the
production of IL-2.

Faxvaag A(1), Espevik T, Dalen A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Research, University of Trondheim, Medisinsk Teknisk
Centre, Norway.

Many retroviruses have tropism for cells in the immune system and have a
propensity to induce immunosuppression in the host. Some of the effects of
retroviruses on immune cell function are thought to be mediated through
cytokines. Friend ImmunoSuppressive virus-2 (FIS-2) is a low oncogenic murine
leukaemia virus (MuLV) that induces lymphadenopathy and immunosuppression in NMRI
mice. The role of T cell cytokines during the generation of a primary antibody
response in healthy and FIS-2-infected mice was studied following the antibody
response to sheep erythrocytes by an in vitro immunization (IVI) technique. In
cultures from FIS-2-infected mice, the antibody response was reduced compared
with cultures from uninfected mice and the production of the Th2 cytokines IL-4
and IL-6 was elevated, whereas the Th1 cytokines IL-2, interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) and tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) were reduced. The
suppressed anti-sheep erythrocyte antibody response in cultures from mice
infected with FIS-2 seemed to be caused by an insufficient production of IL-2,
since addition of recombinant IL-2 stimulated the antibody response. This effect 
was also observed in cultures depleted of T cells, indicating a direct effect of 
IL-2 on B cells. A switch to a Th2 cell response and suppression of IL-2
production might play a central role in the immune cell dysfunction induced by
FIS-2.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.1995.tb03842.x 
PMCID: PMC1553373
PMID: 8536362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

