
1. Endocrinology. 1996 May;137(5):1870-7.

Deoxyribonucleic acid-binding ability of androgen receptors in whole cells:
implications for the actions of androgens and antiandrogens.

Kuil CW(1), Mulder E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Reproduction, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. ckuil@endov.fgg.eur.nl

In whole cells, the effects of several androgens and antiandrogens on the in the 
induction of DNA binding for the human wild-type androgen receptor (AR) and a
mutant receptor ARL (LNCaP mutation; codon 868, Thr to Ala) were examined and
related to the transcription activation ability of these receptors. To study DNA 
binding, an AR expression vector was cotransfected in Chinese hamster ovary cells
with a promoter interference plasmid cytomegalovirus-(androgen-responsive
element)3-luciferase, containing one or more androgen-responsive elements between
the TATA box of the cytomegalovirus promoter and the start site of luciferase
gene transcription. Expression levels of the AR are up-regulated by some
agonists, but receptor expression levels are comparable for all antiandrogens
studied. In the presence of androgens, the wild-type AR is able to reduce
promoter activity of the cytomegalovirus-(androgen-responsive
element)3-luciferase plasmid, indicating androgen-dependent DNA binding of the
AR. The full antagonists hydroxyflutamide, ICI 176.334, and RU 23908 block AR
binding to DNA. The antagonists cyproterone acetate and RU 38486 induce
approximately 50% of the DNA binding found for androgens. In a transcription
activation assay, the RU 38646-bound receptor was almost inactive, and the
receptor complexed with cyproterone acetate showed partial agonistic activity.
Interaction of the antagonists cyproterone acetate, hydroxyflutamide, and RU
23908 with the mutant receptor ARL resulted in both DNA-bound and a
transcriptionally active receptor. In conclusion, transformation of the AR to a
DNA-binding state in whole cells is blocked by several antiandrogens.
Furthermore, studies with the antiandrogens cyproterone acetate and RU 38486 show
that DNA binding alone is not sufficient to accomplish full transcriptional
activity. Full activity requires additional changes, presumably in the protein
structure of the receptor.

DOI: 10.1210/endo.137.5.8612526 
PMID: 8612526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

