
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Jul 23;93(15):7540-5.

Interaction of the 82-kDa subunit of the vaccinia virus early transcription
factor heterodimer with the promoter core sequence directs downstream DNA binding
of the 70-kDa subunit.

Cassetti MA(1), Moss B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0455, USA.

The vaccinia virus early transcription factor (VETF), a heterodimeric protein
composed of 82- and 70-kDa subunits, interacts with viral early promoters at both
a sequence-specific core region upstream and a sequence-independent region
downstream of the RNA start site. To determine the VETF subunit-promoter
interactions, 32P-labeled DNA targets were chemically synthesized with uniquely
positioned phosphorothioates to which azidophenacyl bromide moieties were
coupled. After incubating the derivatized promoter with VETF and exposing the
complex to 302-nm light, the protein was denatured and the individual subunits
with or without covalently bound DNA were isolated with specific antiserum and
analyzed by SDS/polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Using a set of 26 duplex
probes, with uniquely positioned aryl azide moieties on the coding or template
strands, we found that the 82-kDa subunit interacted primarily with the core
region of the promoter, whereas the 70-kDa subunit interacted with the downstream
region. Nucleotide substitutions in the core region that downregulate
transcription affected the binding of both subunits: the 82-kDa subunit no longer
exhibited specificity for upstream regions of the promoter but also bound to
downstream regions, whereas the binding of the 70-kDa subunit was abolished even 
though the mutations were far upstream of its binding site. These results
suggested mechanisms by which the interaction of the 82-kDa subunit with the core
sequence directs binding of the 70-kDa subunit to DNA downstream.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.15.7540 
PMCID: PMC38781
PMID: 8755510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

