
1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi (Taipei). 1996 Jan;57(1):16-21.

The liver biochemical tests and serological markers of hepatitis B virus in the
very old-aged population in Taiwan.

Hsu SH(1), Chan CY, Tam TN, Lin SH, Tang KC, Lee SD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Veterans General Hospital-Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.

BACKGROUND: Human liver alters with aging. Lower serum albumin with elevation in 
serum cholesterol and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) has been reported in the elders,
but there was no further report on the very old people (i.e., >75 Y/O). We
evaluated changes of liver biochemical tests and hepatitis B virus (HBV)
serological markers in the very old-aged population.
METHODS: From October 1993 to June 1994, 2,549 subjects attended our hospital for
physical check-up. Of them 1,742 were healthy subjects (M/F = 1,058/648) and were
enrolled for analysis of the normal range of liver biochemical tests in different
age groups. They were divided into four groups; young-aged group (age between 18 
and 40, n = 231), middle-aged group (age between 41 and 64, n = 991), old-aged
group (age between 65 and 75, n = 424), and very old-aged group (age > or = 76, n
= 96). The items of liver biochemical tests included albumin, total bilirubin,
cholesterol, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST),
ALP and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT). The whole population, totally 2,549 
subjects, were used for the analysis of the prevalence of HBV serological markers
in different age groups.
RESULTS: Serum albumin was the only biochemical parameter that persisted to
decline after the age of 75 (p <0.05). Cholesterol began to elevate in the
middle-age but decreased after 75 Y/O. The old-aged and very old-aged subjects
had higher levels of serum bilirubin, AST, ALP, and GGT levels than the other two
groups (p <0.05), however, the changes of ALT levels among these groups were not 
so remarkable. The HBV carrier rates in the young-aged, middle-aged, old-aged and
the very old-aged groups were 16.8%, 12.3%, 6.8% and 7.0%, respectively (p
<0.001). Furthermore, the very old-aged group had a significantly higher
prevalence of negativity in both HBsAg and anti-HBs (p <0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Serum albumin is the only biochemical parameter that persists to
decline after the age of 75. In contrast, elevation of cholesterol tends to
reverse after that age. All the aging-related changes in biochemical tests are
clinically nonsignificant though some of them are significant in statistical
analysis. In addition, a low HBV carrier rate and a high prevalence of negativity
in both HBsAg and anti-HBs are noted in the very old-aged people, possibly due to
the progressive loss of HBV markers in the elders.


PMID: 8820031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

