
1. Gene Ther. 1996 Sep;3(9):780-8.

Analysis of the relative level of gene expression from different retroviral
vectors used for gene therapy.

Byun J(1), Kim SH, Kim JM, Yu SS, Robbins PD, Yim J, Kim S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics, Seoul National University,
Korea.

We have analyzed the relative level of gene expression and viral titer from
different types of retroviral vectors used for gene therapy, the LTR-based MFG
vector and the internal promoter-containing vectors, LNCX, LNSX and LXSN. The CAT
gene was used for comparison of retroviral vector gene expression in both
transfected and transduced cells, while the neo gene was used to evaluate viral
liter. In transfected cells, MFG-CAT expressed higher levels of CAT then the
other vectors, LNC-CAT was next, while L-CAT-SN and LNS-CAT produced much lower
levels. CAT expression from MFG-CAT was particularly high in the human T lymphoid
cell lines CEM-SS and H9. In nonselected transduced cells. CAT expression from
MFG was 10- to 50-fold higher than with the other vectors. Similar observations
were made with retroviral constructs expressing human EPO and murine GM-CSF. In
transient transfection assays, the titer of MFG was at least five-fold higher
than the other vectors as determined by Southern analysis and G418 resistance.
Analysis of the steady-state RNAs produced after transfection of the packaging
cell lines showed that MFG expressed a significantly higher level of genomic RNA,
which contains the packaging signal, than the other vectors while still
expressing a high level of the subgenomic RNA encoding CAT. The high level of
genomic RNA most likely contributes directly to the higher titer of MFG. We also 
compared viral titers from subcloned PA317 producer lines containing LNC-CAT and 
MFG-CAT-Neo, and confirmed that the titer of the MFG virus was higher than that
of the LNCX. In selected subcloned transduced NIH3T3 cells, average levels of CAT
activity were nine-fold higher from MFG-based vector. Our results suggest that
there are significant differences in both the titer and the level of gene
expression between retroviral vectors which are currently being used in gene
therapy clinical trials.


PMID: 8875226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

