
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Oct 28;94(22):11857-62.

Respiratory chain is required to maintain oxidized states of the DsbA-DsbB
disulfide bond formation system in aerobically growing Escherichia coli cells.

Kobayashi T(1), Kishigami S, Sone M, Inokuchi H, Mogi T, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-01, Japan.

DsbA, the disulfide bond catalyst of Escherichia coli, is a periplasmic protein
having a thioredoxin-like Cys-30-Xaa-Xaa-Cys-33 motif. The Cys-30-Cys-33
disulfide is donated to a pair of cysteines on the target proteins. Although
DsbA, having high oxidizing potential, is prone to reduction, it is maintained
essentially all oxidized in vivo. DsbB, an integral membrane protein having two
pairs of essential cysteines, reoxidizes DsbA that has been reduced upon
functioning. It is not known, however, what might provide the overall oxidizing
power to the DsbA-DsbB disulfide bond formation system. We now report that E.
coli mutants defective in the hemA gene or in the ubiA-menA genes markedly
accumulate the reduced form of DsbA during growth under the conditions of
protoheme deprivation as well as ubiquinone/menaquinone deprivation. Disulfide
bond formation of beta-lactamase was impaired under these conditions.
Intracellular state of DsbB was found to be affected by deprivation of quinones, 
such that it accumulates first as a reduced form and then as a form of a
disulfide-linked complex with DsbA. This is followed by reduction of the bulk of 
DsbA molecules. These results suggest that the respiratory electron transfer
chain participates in the oxidation of DsbA, by acting primarily on DsbB. It is
remarkable that a cellular catalyst of protein folding is connected to the
respiratory chain.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.22.11857 
PMCID: PMC23636
PMID: 9342327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

