
1. Can J Vet Res. 1998 Jan;62(1):49-55.

Pathogenesis and clinical signs of equine herpesvirus-1 in experimentally
infected ponies in vivo.

Sutton GA(1), Viel L, Carman PS, Boag BL.

Author information: 
(1)Koret School of Veterinary Medicine, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, 
Israel.

Equine herpesvirus-1 (EHV-1) causes respiratory disease, neonatal death, abortion
and neurologic disease. The main purpose of this study was to identify viral
antigen in respiratory tract samples by immunoperoxidase staining. Six pony foals
were selected on the basis of demonstrating seronegativity to EHV-1 by virus
neutralization and housed in isolation. They were infected experimentally by
administering EHV-1 nebulized ultrasonically through a face mask. Successful
infection was clinically apparent as each of the foals had febrile responses,
nasal discharge, and enlarged submandibular lymph nodes. Sporadic coughing was
also heard. EHV-1 was isolated from nasopharyngeal swabs of 4/6 ponies and
seroconversion was demonstrated in all foals. Bronchoscopic examination of the
large airways revealed hyperemia. The incidence of recovery of Actinobacillus
suis from nasopharyngeal swabs increased initially, with recovery of
Streptococcus zooepidemicus isolates predominating at 3 wk post-infection.
Cytology brushes were used to sequentially sample the respiratory tract of the
infected ponies at the nasopharynx, mid-trachea and the mainstem bronchus.
Bronchoalveolar lavage provided lung cells. Immunocytochemistry techniques were
applied to both types of samples to locate EHV-1 antigen. Indirect
immunoperoxidase staining of samples utilizing monoclonal antibodies specific for
EHV-1 demonstrated viral antigen associated with cellular debris, primarily in
the nasopharyngeal samples on days 3-9 post-infection.


PMCID: PMC1189442
PMID: 9442940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

