
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Apr 15;26(8):1991-5.

NMR evidence for a base triple in the HIV-2 TAR C-G.C+ mutant-argininamide
complex.

Brodsky AS(1), Erlacher HA, Williamson JR.

Author information: 
(1)MIT Department of Chemistry, Building 56-546, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Formation of a specific complex between the HIV Tat protein and the small RNA
element TAR is critical for activation of viral transcription. A model complex
for this interaction composed of HIV-2 TAR and the amide derivative of arginine
has been developed to study how Tat and TAR interact specifically. We have
previously determined a high resolution NMR structure of the HIV-2
TAR-argininamide complex. The argininamide guanidium group hydrogen bonds to the 
major groove face of G26 and is stacked between U23 and A22, forming an arginine 
sandwich. This structure also provided evidence for formation of a U38-A27.U38
base triple, as U23 is positioned in the major groove within hydrogen bonding
distance to A27. However, the expected U23 imino proton was not observed,
preventing unambiguous identification of the base triple. Previous work on an
isomorphic C38-G27.C23+ base triple mutant of the three base bulge HIV-1
TAR-argininamide complex demonstrated that the base triple is required for
specific argininamide binding. Here we investigate the same C38-G27.C23+ base
triple mutant in the context of two base bulge HIV-2 TAR. The improved NMR
spectral properties of HIV-2 TAR allowed observation of the C23 amino and imino
protons for the first time, providing direct evidence that a hydrogen bonding
interaction is occurring. The NOEs observed correspond to those observed in the
high resolution structure of the HIV-2 TAR-argininamide complex, confirming that 
a base triple is an important feature of the TAR-argininamide interaction.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/26.8.1991 
PMCID: PMC147484
PMID: 9518494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

