
1. Int J Psychiatry Med. 1997;27(2):159-71.

Psychological distress in HIV-1 disease in relationship to hypocholesterolemia.

Shor-Posner G(1), Baldewicz T, Feaster D, Blaney NT, Miguez-Burbano M, Szapocznik
J, Goodkin K, Eisdorfer C, Baum MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Miami School
of Medicine, FL 33101, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Altered levels of serum cholesterol, which are prevalent in early
HIV-1 infection, have been associated with disturbances in mood state and
behavior. The objective of this study was to evaluate the relationship of serum
cholesterol status and psychological distress in HIV-1 seropositive and
seronegative men.
METHOD: The association between serum cholesterol level and psychological
distress, measured with the Profile of Mood States (POMS), was examined in 169
individuals (117 HIV-1 seropositive and 52 seronegative homosexual men),
controlling for negative life events, social support, coping style, and HIV-1
serostatus.
RESULTS: Individuals with hypocholesterolemia (serum cholesterol levels < 150
mg/dL), exhibited significantly higher levels of distress, relative to
individuals with values of cholesterol > 150 mg/dL (p = 0.01). HIV-1 seropositive
men had significantly lower cholesterol levels (p = 0.0001) and higher levels of 
distress than the seronegative men (p = 0.03). A significant interaction between 
negative life events and cholesterol status was demonstrated as well (p = 0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Hypocholesterolemia appears to be associated with increased
psychological distress. Whereas the causal direction of the cholesterol-distress 
association cannot be specified, our results suggest that HIV-1 infected men with
low cholesterol levels may benefit from being monitored for changes in distress
level, so that appropriate psychosocial intervention can be instituted, as
necessary.

DOI: 10.2190/95F4-HWVJ-4C3C-XUDK 
PMID: 9565721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

