
1. Hum Gene Ther. 1998 Apr 10;9(6):845-54.

Suppression of tumorigenicity and metastasis of human renal carcinoma cells by
infection with retroviral vectors harboring the murine inducible nitric oxide
synthase gene.

Juang SH(1), Xie K, Xu L, Shi Q, Wang Y, Yoneda J, Fidler IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

The purpose of this study was to determine whether retrovirus-mediated transfer
of the murine macrophage inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) gene can inhibit 
tumorigenicity and metastasis of human renal cancer cells. Retroviral vectors
encoding murine macrophage iNOS were constructed in the pLXSN retroviral vector
with the iNOS gene under the control of a long terminal repeat promoter and a
neomycin resistance gene under the control of an internal simian virus 40
promoter. Highly metastatic human renal carcinoma SN12PM6 cells were infected
with control or iNOS retrovirus. Expression of iNOS was confirmed by Northern and
Western blot analyses, and expression of the functional iNOS protein, i.e.,
production of nitric oxide (NO), was determined by measuring nitrite accumulation
in culture supernatants. Noninfected or control cells produced large orthotopic
tumors in the kidney of nude mice and a larger number of experimental lung
metastases, whereas iNOS-infected cells produced small tumors in the kidneys and 
few to no lung metastases. The data indicate that the infection of human renal
cancer cells by retroviruses harboring the murine iNOS gene can induce the
production of high levels of NO, which is associated with autocytotoxicity,
suppression of tumorigenicity, and abrogation of metastasis.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.1998.9.6-845 
PMID: 9581907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

