
1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998 Aug;83(8):2817-23.

Serological reactivity of recombinant 1D autoantigen and its expression in human 
thyroid and eye muscle tissue: a possible autoantigenic link in Graves' patients.

Kromminga A(1), Hagel C, Arndt R, Schuppert F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Pathology and Molecular Biology, Hamburg, Germany.
kromminga@labor-keeser-arndt.de

Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO) is a potentially severe autoimmune
disease, in and around the orbit, usually accompanied by Graves' disease. It was 
the goal of this study to develop a serological indicator for TAO and to
characterize its expression in human thyroid and eye muscle tissue. Thus, we have
recloned the full-length 1D-complementary DNA and assessed its expression levels 
in 90 healthy and diseased human thyroids. Only Graves' patients suffering from
TAO (n = 29) displayed a significant, 2.1-fold increase of 1D expression levels
(P = 0.029), compared with normal controls (n = 9), as assessed using the
Mann-Whitney U-test for paired, nonnormally distributed samples. In contrast, a
decrease of 1D expression (to 40% of control normal values) was confined to
thyroid autonomy (n = 19, P = 0.032). In all other diseased human thyroids,
including Graves' thyroids from patients not suffering from clinically overt TAO 
(n = 9), 1D expression levels were not different from the healthy controls. 1D
gene expression was demonstrated in both healthy (n = 10) and diseased (n = 10)
eye muscle tissues. Furthermore, a recombinant protein derived from
baculovirus-infected Sf9 insect cells was purified under both nondenaturing and
denaturing conditions. While under nondenaturing conditions, the molecular mass
of recombinant 1D was determined to be 85 kDa; denaturing isolation yielded the
expected 64-kDa protein. Autoantibodies against denatured 1D protein were not
detectable in sera of diseased or healthy subjects. Immunoreactivity against the 
85-kDa, nondenatured protein, evaluated in a panel of 222 different human sera,
showed that 82% of Graves' patients suffering from TAO had autoantibodies against
recombinant 1D, whereas only 5% of the healthy controls were positive for
antibodies against 1D. Taken together, our results demonstrate a high disease
sensitivity and specificity of recombinant, nondenatured 1D, to distinguish
Graves' disease with or without TAO from other forms of thyroid and/or eye
disease. Prospective studies will have to show whether autoantibodies against 1D 
can also be used as a prognosticator of TAO.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.83.8.5018 
PMID: 9709953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

