
1. Mol Ecol. 2011 Mar;20(5):1049-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2010.04904.x. Epub
2010 Dec 6.

Nonspecific patterns of vector, host and avian malaria parasite associations in a
central African rainforest.

Njabo KY(1), Cornel AJ, Bonneaud C, Toffelmier E, Sehgal RN, Valkiūnas G, Russell
AF, Smith TB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tropical Research, UCLA Institute of the Environment, Los Angeles, 
CA 90095, USA. kynjabo@hotmail.com

Malaria parasites use vertebrate hosts for asexual multiplication and Culicidae
mosquitoes for sexual and asexual development, yet the literature on avian
malaria remains biased towards examining the asexual stages of the life cycle in 
birds. To fully understand parasite evolution and mechanism of malaria
transmission, knowledge of all three components of the vector-host-parasite
system is essential. Little is known about avian parasite-vector associations in 
African rainforests where numerous species of birds are infected with avian
haemosporidians of the genera Plasmodium and Haemoproteus. Here we applied high
resolution melt qPCR-based techniques and nested PCR to examine the occurrence
and diversity of mitochondrial cytochrome b gene sequences of haemosporidian
parasites in wild-caught mosquitoes sampled across 12 sites in Cameroon. In all, 
3134 mosquitoes representing 27 species were screened. Mosquitoes belonging to
four genera (Aedes, Coquillettidia, Culex and Mansonia) were infected with
twenty-two parasite lineages (18 Plasmodium spp. and 4 Haemoproteus spp.).
Presence of Plasmodium sporozoites in salivary glands of Coquillettidia aurites
further established these mosquitoes as likely vectors. Occurrence of parasite
lineages differed significantly among genera, as well as their probability of
being infected with malaria across species and sites. Approximately one-third of 
these lineages were previously detected in other avian host species from the
region, indicating that vertebrate host sharing is a common feature and that
avian Plasmodium spp. vector breadth does not always accompany vertebrate-host
breadth. This study suggests extensive invertebrate host shifts in
mosquito-parasite interactions and that avian Plasmodium species are most likely 
not tightly coevolved with vector species.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2010.04904.x 
PMCID: PMC3058369
PMID: 21134011  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

