
1. Malar J. 2010 Dec 23;9:374. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-374.

Protecting the malaria drug arsenal: halting the rise and spread of amodiaquine
resistance by monitoring the PfCRT SVMNT type.

Sa JM(1), Twu O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 12735 Twinbrook Parkway, Room
3E-10C, Rockville, MD 20852, USA. jsa@niaid.nih.gov

The loss of chloroquine due to selection and spread of drug resistant Plasmodium 
falciparum parasites has greatly impacted malaria control, especially in highly
endemic areas of Africa. Since chloroquine removal a decade ago, the guidelines
to treat falciparum malaria suggest combination therapies, preferentially with an
artemisinin derivative. One of the recommended partner drugs is amodiaquine, a
pro-drug that relies on its active metabolite monodesethylamodiaquine, and is
still effective in areas of Africa, but not in regions of South America. Genetic 
studies on P. falciparum parasites have shown that different pfcrt mutant
haplotypes are linked to distinct levels of chloroquine and amodiaquine
responses. The pfcrt haplotype SVMNT (termed after the amino acids from codon
positions 72-76) is stably present in several areas where amodiaquine was
introduced and widely used. Parasites with this haplotype are highly resistant to
monodesethylamodiaquine and also resistant to chloroquine. The presence of this
haplotype in Africa was found for the first time in 2004 in Tanzania and a role
for amodiaquine in the selection of this haplotype was suggested. This commentary
discusses the finding of a second site in Africa with high incidence of this
haplotype. The >50% SVMNT haplotype prevalence in Angola represents a threat to
the rise and spread of amodiaquine resistance. It is paramount to monitor pfcrt
haplotypes in every country currently using amodiaquine and to re-evaluate
current combination therapies in areas where SVMNT type parasites are prevalent.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-9-374 
PMCID: PMC3020158
PMID: 21182787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

