
1. J Vis Exp. 2010 Dec 26;(46). pii: 2355. doi: 10.3791/2355.

Transfection and mutagenesis of target genes in mosquito cells by locked nucleic 
acid-modified oligonucleotides.

Pakpour N(1), Cheung KW, Souvannaseng L, Concordet JP, Luckhart S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of California,
Davis, USA.

Plasmodium parasites, the causative agent of malaria, are transmitted through the
bites of infected Anopheles mosquitoes resulting in over 250 million new
infections each year. Despite decades of research, there is still no vaccine
against malaria, highlighting the need for novel control strategies. One
innovative approach is the use of genetically modified mosquitoes to effectively 
control malaria parasite transmission. Deliberate alterations of cell signaling
pathways in the mosquito, via targeted mutagenesis, have been found to regulate
parasite development (1). From these studies, we can begin to identify potential 
gene targets for transformation. Targeted mutagenesis has traditionally relied
upon the homologous recombination between a target gene and a large DNA molecule.
However, the construction and use of such complex DNA molecules for generation of
stably transformed cell lines is costly, time consuming and often inefficient.
Therefore, a strategy using locked nucleic acid-modified oligonucleotides
(LNA-ONs) provides a useful alternative for introducing artificial single
nucleotide substitutions into episomal and chromosomal DNA gene targets (reviewed
in (2)). LNA-ON-mediated targeted mutagenesis has been used to introduce point
mutations into genes of interest in cultured cells of both yeast and mice (3,4). 
We show here that LNA-ONs can be used to introduce a single nucleotide change in 
a transfected episomal target that results in a switch from blue fluorescent
protein (BFP) expression to green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression in both
Anopheles gambiae and Anopheles stephensi cells. This conversion demonstrates for
the first time that effective mutagenesis of target genes in mosquito cells can
be mediated by LNA-ONs and suggests that this technique may be applicable to
mutagenesis of chromosomal targets in vitro and in vivo.

DOI: 10.3791/2355 
PMCID: PMC3159651
PMID: 21206476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

