
1. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 Jan 5;11:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-4.

Phylogenomics of phosphoinositide lipid kinases: perspectives on the evolution of
second messenger signaling and drug discovery.

Brown JR(1), Auger KR.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology, Quantitative Sciences, GlaxoSmithKline, 1250 South
Collegeville Road, UP1345, P,O, Box 5089, Collegeville, PA 19426-0989, USA.
James.R.Brown@gsk.com

BACKGROUND: Phosphoinositide lipid kinases (PIKs) generate specific
phosphorylated variants of phosatidylinositols (PtdIns) that are critical for
second messenger signaling and cellular membrane remodeling. Mammals have 19 PIK 
isoforms spread across three major families: the PtIns 3-kinases (PI3Ks), PtdIns 
4-kinases (PI4Ks), and PtdIns-P (PIP) kinases (PIPKs). Other eukaryotes have
fewer yet varying PIK complements. PIKs are also an important, emerging class of 
drug targets for many therapeutic areas including cancer, inflammatory and
metabolic diseases and host-pathogen interactions. Here, we report the genomic
occurrences and evolutionary relationships or phylogenomics of all three PIK
families across major eukaryotic groups and suggest potential ramifications for
drug discovery.
RESULTS: Our analyses reveal four core eukaryotic PIKs which are type III PIK4A
and PIK4B, and at least one homolog each from PI3K (possibly PIK3C3 as the
ancestor) and PIP5K families. We also applied evolutionary analyses to PIK
disease ontology and drug discovery. Mutated PIK3CA are known to be oncogenic and
several inhibitors are in anti-cancer clinical trials. We found conservation of
activating mutations of PIK3CA in paralogous isoforms suggesting specific
functional constraints on these residues. By mapping published compound
inhibition data (IC50s) onto a phylogeny of PI3Ks, type II PI4Ks and distantly
related, MTOR, ATM, ATR and PRKDC kinases, we also show that compound
polypharmacology corresponds to kinase evolutionary relationships. Finally, we
extended the rationale for drugs targeting PIKs of malarial Plasmodium
falciparum, and the parasites, Leishmania sp. and Trypanosoma sp. by identifying 
those PIKs highly divergent from human homologs.
CONCLUSION: Our phylogenomic analysis of PIKs provides new insights into the
evolution of second messenger signaling. We postulate two waves of PIK
diversification, the first in metazoans with a subsequent expansion in
cold-blooded vertebrates that was post-emergence of Deutrostomia\Chordata but
prior to the appearance of mammals. Reconstruction of the evolutionary
relationships among these lipid kinases also adds to our understanding of their
roles in various diseases and assists in their development as potential drug
targets.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-4 
PMCID: PMC3024228
PMID: 21208444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

