
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Feb;7(2):e1001288. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001288. Epub 2011
Feb 17.

Targeted disruption of py235ebp-1: invasion of erythrocytes by Plasmodium yoelii 
using an alternative Py235 erythrocyte binding protein.

Ogun SA(1), Tewari R, Otto TD, Howell SA, Knuepfer E, Cunningham DA, Xu Z, Pain
A, Holder AA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, London,
UK. sogun@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Plasmodium yoelii YM asexual blood stage parasites express multiple members of
the py235 gene family, part of the super-family of genes including those coding
for Plasmodium vivax reticulocyte binding proteins and Plasmodium falciparum RH
proteins. We previously identified a Py235 erythrocyte binding protein
(Py235EBP-1, encoded by the PY01365 gene) that is recognized by protective mAb
25.77. Proteins recognized by a second protective mAb 25.37 have been identified 
by mass spectrometry and are encoded by two genes, PY01185 and PY05995/PY03534.
We deleted the PY01365 gene and examined the phenotype. The expression of the
members of the py235 family in both the WT and gene deletion parasites was
measured by quantitative RT-PCR and RNA-Seq. py235ebp-1 expression was
undetectable in the knockout parasite, but transcription of other members of the 
family was essentially unaffected. The knockout parasites continued to react with
mAb 25.77; and the 25.77-binding proteins in these parasites were the PY01185 and
PY05995/PY03534 products. The PY01185 product was also identified as erythrocyte 
binding. There was no clear change in erythrocyte invasion profile suggesting
that the PY01185 gene product (designated PY235EBP-2) is able to fulfill the role
of EBP-1 by serving as an invasion ligand although the molecular details of its
interaction with erythrocytes have not been examined. The PY01365, PY01185, and
PY05995/PY03534 genes are part of a distinct subset of the py235 family. In P.
falciparum, the RH protein genes are under epigenetic control and expression
correlates with binding to distinct erythrocyte receptors and specific invasion
pathways, whereas in P. yoelii YM all the genes are expressed and deletion of one
does not result in upregulation of another. We propose that simultaneous
expression of multiple Py235 ligands enables invasion of a wide range of host
erythrocytes even in the presence of antibodies to one or more of the proteins
and that this functional redundancy at the protein level gives the parasite
phenotypic plasticity in the absence of differences in gene expression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001288 
PMCID: PMC3040676
PMID: 21379566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

