
1. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Jul;112(7):1938-48. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23114.

Down-regulation of BMI-1 cooperates with artemisinin on growth inhibition of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells.

Wu J(1), Hu D, Yang G, Zhou J, Yang C, Gao Y, Zhu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Zhongshan School of
Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.

Artemisinin and its derivatives are well known antimalaria drugs, particularly
useful for the treatment of infection of Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasites 
resistant to traditional antimalarial pharmaceuticals. Artemisinin has inhibitory
effects on cancer cell growth and anti-angiogenetic activity, including many
drug- and radiation-resistant cancer cell lines. Moloney murine leukemia virus
insertion site 1 (BMI-1) has been shown to regulate proliferation by inhibiting
p16(ink4a) transcription. It is well known that BMI-1 over-expression was found
in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell lines and correlated with advanced invasive
stage of the tumor progression and poor prognosis. In the present investigation, 
we analyzed the inhibitory effects of artemisinin on proliferation of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell lines (CNE-1 and CNE-2, well-differentiated cells, 
and poorly differentiated cells). We demonstrated that artemisinin induced G1
cell cycle arrest in CNE-1 and CNE-2 cells. Artemisinin inhibited BMI-1 both in
protein and transcript levels. BMI-1 knockdown made the cells more sensitive to
artemisinin with an increase in G1 phase, but over-expression of BMI-1 partially 
reversed the artemisinin-induced G1 cell cycle arrest. Depletion of BMI-1 was
able to intensifying the increment of p16 and the reduction of CDK4 induced by
artemisinin. In addition, over-expression of BMI-1 was capable of attenuating the
increasing p16 and decreasing CDK4 in cells treated with artemisinin. Taking
together, the BMI1-p16/CDK4 axis was involved in the artemisinin-driven G1 arrest
in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells, and these results indicated that a potential
treatment that the combination of artemisinin and BMI-1 downregulation could
enhance the growth inhibitory affects on nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells.

Copyright Â© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.23114 
PMID: 21445878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

