
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2011 Jun;49(6):2191-5. doi: 10.1128/JCM.02156-10. Epub 2011 Apr
20.

Cytochrome b gene quantitative PCR for diagnosing Plasmodium falciparum infection
in travelers.

Farrugia C(1), Cabaret O, Botterel F, Bories C, Foulet F, Costa JM, Bretagne S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Parasitologie-Mycologie, groupe hospitalier Chenevier-Mondor,
AP-HP, Créteil, France.

A cytochrome b (cytb) gene quantitative PCR (qPCR) assay was developed to
diagnose malaria in travelers. First, manual and automated DNA extractions were
compared and automated DNA extraction of 400 μl of blood was found to be more
efficient. Sensitivity was estimated using the WHO international standard for
Plasmodium falciparum DNA and compared to that of a previously published qPCR
targeting the 18S rRNA coding gene (18S qPCR). The limit of detection of the cytb
qPCR assay was 20 DNA copies (i.e., 1 parasite equivalent) per 400 μl of
extracted whole blood and was comparable for the two qPCR assays. Both qPCR
assays were used on blood samples from 265 consecutive patients seen for
suspicion of malaria. There were no microscopy-positive and qPCR-negative
samples. Positive cytb qPCR results were observed for 51 samples, and all but 1
were also 18S qPCR positive. Eight (16%) of these 51 samples were negative by
microscopic examination. The 8 cytb qPCR-positive and microscopy-negative samples
were from African patients, 3 of whom had received antimalarial drugs. Three
non-P. falciparum infections were correctly identified using an additional qPCR
assay. The absence of PCR inhibitors was tested for by the use of an internal
control of mouse DNA to allow reliable quantification of circulating DNA. The
high analytical sensitivity of both qPCR assays combined with automated DNA
extraction supports its use as a laboratory tool for diagnosis and parasitemia
determination in emergencies. Whether to treat qPCR-positive and
microscopy-negative patients remains to be determined.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.02156-10 
PMCID: PMC3122771
PMID: 21508150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

