
1. Invest New Drugs. 2012 Aug;30(4):1289-301. doi: 10.1007/s10637-011-9676-7. Epub
2011 May 6.

The redox antimalarial dihydroartemisinin targets human metastatic melanoma cells
but not primary melanocytes with induction of NOXA-dependent apoptosis.

Cabello CM(1), Lamore SD, Bair WB 3rd, Qiao S, Azimian S, Lesson JL, Wondrak GT.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy & Arizona Cancer Center, Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, University of Arizona, 1515 North Campbell Avenue, Tucson, AZ 85724, 
USA.

Recent research suggests that altered redox control of melanoma cell survival,
proliferation, and invasiveness represents a chemical vulnerability that can be
targeted by pharmacological modulation of cellular oxidative stress. The
endoperoxide artemisinin and semisynthetic artemisinin-derivatives including
dihydroartemisinin (DHA) constitute a major class of antimalarials that kill
plasmodium parasites through induction of iron-dependent oxidative stress. Here, 
we demonstrate that DHA may serve as a redox chemotherapeutic that selectively
induces melanoma cell apoptosis without compromising viability of primary human
melanocytes. Cultured human metastatic melanoma cells (A375, G361, LOX) were
sensitive to DHA-induced apoptosis with upregulation of cellular oxidative
stress, phosphatidylserine externalization, and activational cleavage of
procaspase 3. Expression array analysis revealed DHA-induced upregulation of
oxidative and genotoxic stress response genes (GADD45A, GADD153, CDKN1A, PMAIP1, 
HMOX1, EGR1) in A375 cells. DHA exposure caused early upregulation of the
BH3-only protein NOXA, a proapototic member of the Bcl2 family encoded by PMAIP1,
and genetic antagonism (siRNA targeting PMAIP1) rescued melanoma cells from
apoptosis indicating a causative role of NOXA-upregulation in DHA-induced
melanoma cell death. Comet analysis revealed early DHA-induction of genotoxic
stress accompanied by p53 activational phosphorylation (Ser 15). In primary human
epidermal melanocytes, viability was not compromised by DHA, and oxidative
stress, comet tail moment, and PMAIP1 (NOXA) expression remained unaltered. Taken
together, these data demonstrate that metastatic melanoma cells display a
specific vulnerability to DHA-induced NOXA-dependent apoptosis and suggest
feasibility of future anti-melanoma intervention using artemisinin-derived
clinical redox antimalarials.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-011-9676-7 
PMCID: PMC3203350
PMID: 21547369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

