
1. Malar J. 2011 May 10;10:119. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-119.

Selection of drug resistant mutants from random library of Plasmodium falciparum 
dihydrofolate reductase in Plasmodium berghei model.

Tipsuwan W(1), Srichairatanakool S, Kamchonwongpaisan S, Yuthavong Y, Uthaipibull
C.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), National
Science and Technology Development Agency, 113 Thailand Science Park, Pathumthani
12120, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of drug resistance amongst the human malaria
Plasmodium species has most commonly been associated with genomic mutation within
the parasites. This phenomenon necessitates evolutionary predictive studies of
possible resistance mutations, which may occur when a new drug is introduced.
Therefore, identification of possible new Plasmodium falciparum dihydrofolate
reductase (PfDHFR) mutants that confer resistance to antifolate drugs is
essential in the process of antifolate anti-malarial drug development.
METHODS: A system to identify mutations in Pfdhfr gene that confer antifolate
drug resistance using an animal Plasmodium parasite model was developed. By using
error-prone PCR and Plasmodium transfection technologies, libraries of Pfdhfr
mutant were generated and then episomally transfected to Plasmodium berghei
parasites, from which pyrimethamine-resistant PfDHFR mutants were selected.
RESULTS: The principal mutation found from this experiment was S108N, coincident 
with the first pyrimethamine-resistance mutation isolated from the field. A
transgenic P. berghei, in which endogenous Pbdhfr allele was replaced with the
mutant PfdhfrS108N, was generated and confirmed to have normal growth rate
comparing to parental non-transgenic parasite and also confer resistance to
pyrimethamine.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated the power of the transgenic P. berghei system
to predict drug-resistant Pfdhfr mutations in an in vivo parasite/host setting.
The system could be utilized for identification of possible novel drug-resistant 
mutants that could arise against new antifolate compounds and for prediction the 
evolution of resistance mutations.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-119 
PMCID: PMC3100258
PMID: 21554743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

