
1. Cell Microbiol. 2011 Aug;13(8):1250-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01617.x.
Epub 2011 Jun 24.

Disruption of the Plasmodium falciparum liver-stage antigen-1 locus causes a
differentiation defect in late liver-stage parasites.

Mikolajczak SA(1), Sacci JB Jr, De La Vega P, Camargo N, VanBuskirk K, Krzych U, 
Cao J, Jacobs-Lorena M, Cowman AF, Kappe SH.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

The malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum infects humans and first targets the
liver where liver-stage parasites undergo pre-erythrocytic replication.
Liver-stage antigen-1 (LSA-1) is currently the only identified P. falciparum
protein for which expression is restricted to liver stages. Yet, the importance
of LSA-1 for liver-stage parasite development remains unknown. Here we deleted
LSA-1 in the NF54 strain of P. falciparum and analysed the lsa-1(-) parasites
throughout their life cycle. lsa-1(-) sporozoites had normal gliding motility and
invasion into hepatocytes. Six days after infection of a hepatocytic cell line,
lsa-1(-) parasites exhibited a moderate phenotype with an ~50% reduction of late 
liver-stage forms when compared with wild type. Strikingly, lsa-1(-) parasites
growing in SCID/Alb-uPA mice with humanized livers showed a severe defect in late
liver-stage differentiation and exo-erythrocytic merozoite formation 7 days after
infection, a time point when wild-type parasites develop into mature merozoites. 
The lsa-1(-) parasites also showed aberrant liver-stage expression of key
parasite proteins apical membrane antigen-1 and circumsporozoite protein. Our
data show that LSA-1 plays a critical role during late liver-stage schizogony and
is thus important in the parasite transition from the liver to blood. LSA-1 is
the first P. falciparum protein identified to be required for this transitional
stage of the parasite life cycle.

Â© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01617.x 
PMCID: PMC4155577
PMID: 21569184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

