
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20170. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020170. Epub 2011 May 20.

Changes in parasite virulence induced by the disruption of a single member of the
235 kDa rhoptry protein multigene family of Plasmodium yoelii.

Bapat D(1), Huang X, Gunalan K, Preiser PR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
Singapore.

Invasion of the erythrocyte by the merozoites of the malaria parasite is a
complex process involving a range of receptor-ligand interactions. Two protein
families termed Erythrocyte Binding Like (EBL) proteins and Reticulocyte Binding 
Protein Homologues (RH) play an important role in host cell recognition by the
merozoite. In the rodent malaria parasite, Plasmodium yoelii, the 235 kDa rhoptry
proteins (Py235) are coded for by a multigene family and are members of the RH.
In P. yoelii Py235 as well as a single member of EBL have been shown to be key
mediators of virulence enabling the parasite to invade a wider range of host
erythrocytes. One member of Py235, PY01365 is most abundantly transcribed in
parasite populations and the protein specifically binds to erythrocytes and is
recognized by the protective monoclonal antibody 25.77, suggesting a key role of 
this particular member in virulence. Recent studies have indicated that overall
levels of Py235 expression are essential for parasite virulence. Here we show
that disruption of PY01365 in the virulent YM line directly impacts parasite
virulence. Furthermore the disruption of PY01365 leads to a reduction in the
number of schizonts that express members of Py235 that react specifically with
the mcAb 25.77. Erythrocyte binding assays show reduced binding of Py235 to red
blood cells in the PY01365 knockout parasite as compared to YM. While our results
identify PY01365 as a mediator of parasite virulence, they also confirm that
other members of Py235 are able to substitute for PY01365.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020170 
PMCID: PMC3098881
PMID: 21625465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

