
1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2011 Aug;18(8):1221-8. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00064-11. Epub 2011
Jun 1.

Comparative Immunogenicities of full-length Plasmodium falciparum merozoite
surface protein 3 and a 24-kilodalton N-terminal fragment.

Imam M(1), Devi YS, Verma AK, Chauhan VS.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, ArunaAsaf Ali 
Marg, New Delhi 110067, India.

Recombinant Plasmodium falciparum merozoite surface protein 3 (PfMSP3F) and a
24-kDa fragment from its N terminus (MSP3N) that includes the essential conserved
domain, which elicits the maximum antibody (Ab)-dependent cellular inhibition
(ADCI), were expressed as soluble proteins in Escherichia coli. Both proteins
were found to be stable in both soluble and lyophilized forms. Immunization with 
MSP3F and MSP3N formulated separately with two human-compatible adjuvants,
aluminum hydroxide (Alhydrogel) and Montanide ISA 720, produced significant
antibody responses in mice and rabbits. Polyclonal Abs against both antigens
recognized native MSP3 in the parasite lysate. These two Abs also recognized two 
synthetic peptides, previously characterized to possess B cell epitopes from the 
N-terminal region. Antibody depletion assay showed that most of the IgG response 
is directed toward the N-terminal region of the full protein. Anti-MSP3F and
anti-MSP3N rabbit antibodies did not inhibit merozoite invasion or
intraerythrocytic development but significantly reduced parasitemia in the
presence of human monocytes. The ADCI demonstrated by anti-MSP3N antibodies was
comparable to that exhibited by anti-MSP3F antibodies (both generated in rabbit).
These results suggest that the N-terminal fragment of MSP3 can be considered a
vaccine candidate that can form part of a multigenic vaccine against malaria.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00064-11 
PMCID: PMC3147339
PMID: 21632889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

