
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2011 Aug;49(8):2946-53. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00276-11. Epub 2011
Jun 8.

Development of a highly sensitive genus-specific quantitative reverse
transcriptase real-time PCR assay for detection and quantitation of plasmodium by
amplifying RNA and DNA of the 18S rRNA genes.

Kamau E(1), Tolbert LS, Kortepeter L, Pratt M, Nyakoe N, Muringo L, Ogutu B,
Waitumbi JN, Ockenhouse CF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Malaria Vaccine Development, Center for Molecular Diagnostics and 
Genomic Studies, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, 503 Robert Grant Ave.,
Silver Spring, MD, USA. Edwin.kamau@us.army.mil

A highly sensitive genus-specific quantitative reverse transcriptase real-time
PCR (qRT-PCR) assay for detection of Plasmodium has been developed. The assay
amplifies total nucleic acids (RNA and DNA) of the 18S rRNA genes with a limit of
detection of 0.002 parasite/μl using cultured synchronized ring stage 3D7
parasites. Parasite densities as low as 0.000362 parasite/μl were detected when
analyzing clinical samples. Analysis of clinical samples showed that detection of
18S rRNA genes from total nucleic acids increased the analytical sensitivity of
the assay by more than 1 log unit compared to DNA only. When clinical samples
with no parasites present by microscopy were analyzed by qRT-PCR, 90% (117 of
130) were positive for the presence of Plasmodium nucleic acids. Quantification
of clinical samples by qRT-PCR using total nucleic acid versus DNA was compared
to microscopy. There was a significantly greater correlation of parasite density 
to microscopy when DNA alone was used than with total nucleic acid. We conclude
that analysis of total nucleic acids by qRT-PCR is a suitable assay for detection
of low parasite levels in patients with early-stage malaria and/or submicroscopic
infections and could greatly benefit malaria diagnosis, intervention trials, and 
malaria control and elimination efforts.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00276-11 
PMCID: PMC3147742
PMID: 21653767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

