
1. Cell Microbiol. 2011 Sep;13(9):1328-38. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01622.x.
Epub 2011 Jun 23.

Plasmodium falciparum soluble extracts potentiate the suppressive function of
polyclonal T regulatory cells through activation of TGFβ-mediated signals.

Clemente A(1), Caporale R, Sannella AR, Majori G, Severini C, Fadigati G, Cirelli
D, Bonini P, Garaci E, Cozzolino F, Torcia MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Physiopathology, University of Firenze, Firenze, Italy.

Increased numbers of T regulatory cells (Tregs), key mediators of immune
homeostasis, were reported in human and murine malaria and it is current opinion 
that these cells play a role in balancing protective immunity and pathogenesis
during infection. However, the mechanisms governing their expansion during
malaria infection are not completely defined. In this article we show that
soluble extracts of Plasmodium falciparum (PfSEs), but not equivalent preparation
of uninfected erythrocytes, induce the differentiation of polyclonally activated 
CD4(+) cells in Tregs endowed with strong suppressive activity. PfSEs activate
latent TGFβ bound on the membrane of Treg cells, thus allowing the cytokine
interaction with TGFβ receptor, and inducing Foxp3 gene expression and TGFβ
production. The activation of membrane-bound latent TGFβ by PfSEs is
significantly reduced by a broad-spectrum metalloproteinases inhibitor with
Zn(++) -chelating activity, and completely inhibited by the combined action of
such inhibitor and antibodies to a P. falciparum thrombospondin-related adhesive 
protein (PfTRAP). We conclude that Pf-Zn(++) -dependent proteinases and, to a
lesser extent, PfTRAP molecules are involved in the activation of latent TGFβ
bound on the membrane of activated Treg cells and suggest that, in malaria
infection, this mechanism could contribute to the expansion of Tregs with
different antigen specificity.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01622.x 
PMID: 21699642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

