
1. Vet Parasitol. 2011 Dec 29;183(1-2):47-53. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2011.06.020.
Epub 2011 Jun 30.

The discovery of the two types of small subunit ribosomal RNA gene in Eimeria
mitis contests the existence of E. mivati as an independent species.

Vrba V(1), Poplstein M, Pakandl M.

Author information: 
(1)BIOPHARM, Research Institute of Biopharmacy and Veterinary Drugs, a.s.,
Pohori-Chotoun, Jilove u Prahy 254 49, Czech Republic. vrba@bri.cz

Although the validity of the coccidian species, Eimeria mivati, has been
questioned by many researchers for a long time there has not been any molecular
analysis that would help resolve this issue. Here we report on the discovery of
the two types of small ribosomal subunit (18S) gene within the Eimeria mitis
genome that correspond to the known 18S sequences of E. mitis and E. mivati, and 
this is in conflict with the existence of E. mivati as an independent species. We
have carried out five single oocyst isolations to obtain five
single-oocyst-derived strains of E. mitis and these were analyzed by the
sequencing of 18S and mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I genes. The two
types of 18S gene were found to be present in each strain in roughly equal
ratios. This indicates that if the strains carrying only one or the other 18S
type exist, they will likely cross-breed and still represent a single species.
However, the more probable explanation is that all strains of E. mitis contain
two types of 18S gene and that the occasional detection of only one or the other 
type by sequencing might be caused by insufficient sampling. This is also the
first report of the two types of 18S gene in Eimeria, which has already been
described in some other apicomplexan species, most notably Plasmodium. We also
found that these two types of ribosomal RNA differ significantly in their
secondary structure. The biological significance of the two 18S gene variants in 
E. mitis is not known, however, we hypothesize that these variants might be used 
in different stages of the parasite's life-cycle as it is in other apicomplexan
species investigated so far.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2011.06.020 
PMID: 21767912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

