
1. Vaccine. 2011 Oct 6;29(43):7491-504. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.07.029. Epub
2011 Jul 23.

Evaluation of the genetic diversity of domain II of Plasmodium vivax Apical
Membrane Antigen 1 (PvAMA-1) and the ensuing strain-specific immune responses in 
patients from Sri Lanka.

Dias S(1), Somarathna M, Manamperi A, Escalante AA, Gunasekera AM, Udagama PV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of Colombo, No 94,
Cumaratunga Munidasa Mawatha, Colombo 03, Sri Lanka.

Antigenic polymorphism displayed by malaria parasites is a skewed schema to
escape the host immune system. The prevailing genetic diversity at domain II of
the Plasmodium vivax Apical Membrane Antigen-1 (Pvama-1DII) was characterized in 
64 single clone P. vivax isolates from Sri Lanka, where unstable malaria prevails
with low intensity. In Sri Lanka, the Pvama-1DII gene showed meager meiotic
recombination with the enclosure of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).
Eleven amino acid (a.a.) variant positions defined 21 a.a. haplotypes with 9
unique to the island, where the predominant haplotype, H1, was identical to the
reference Salvador I strain. A further 376 globally dispersed isolates defined 38
a.a. haplotypes (H22-H59), with 4 and 26 haplotypes exclusive to India and
Thailand, respectively. The phylogenetic tree revealed no clustering, where most 
isolates had a very recent common origin. The polymorphism detected in PvAMA-1DII
B and T cell epitopes evidenced an immune evasion mechanism exploited by the
parasite. Majority of Sri Lankan patients developed antibody responses to both
conformational and linear B cell epitopes. The ensuing strain-specific immunity
due to extensive antigenic polymorphism was evaluated by aligning a.a. sequences 
of PvAMA-1DII with the homologous total (IgM+IgG) antibody responses assayed by
in-house established indirect ELISAs against 7 PvAMA-1DII overlapping synthetic
peptides, P01-P07. While the antibody responses to P01-P03, P06, P07 harbouring
P. vivax clinical isolates with polymorphic a.a. haplotype to Sal I was clearly
strain-transcending (cross-reactive), individuals with isolates identical to the 
Sal I strain observed varying antibody prevalence against the seven PvAMA-1DII
Sal-I synthetic peptides, with the highest prevalence detected against P04.
Synthetic peptide P04, spanning a.a. positions 302-324 of the PvAMA-1DII of the
Sal I strain that included the epitope recognized by the invasion inhibitory 4G2 
monoclonal antibody of PfAMA-1, was highly conserved in all 440 local and global 
P. vivax isolates examined. A functional role for this region is reinforced by
the highly immunogenic nature of P04, and could point towards a presumably
"protective" anti-P04 antibody response that elicited an isotype switch from IgM 
to IgG, with increasing exposure to malaria exclusively in endemic residents.
Thus the conserved and seemingly "protective" nature of the domain II loop of
PvAMA-1 makes it a putative contender to be included in a cocktail vaccine
against P. vivax asexual erythrocytic stages in Sri Lanka.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.07.029 
PMID: 21784116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

