
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Nov;79(11):4674-80. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05161-11. Epub 2011 Aug
22.

Identification of inflammatory biomarkers for pediatric malarial anemia severity 
using novel statistical methods.

Ong'echa JM(1), Davenport GC, Vulule JM, Hittner JB, Perkins DJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of New Mexico Laboratories of Parasitic and Viral Diseases, Centre 
for Global Health Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute, P.O. Box 1578,
40100, Kisumu, Kenya. michaelongecha@yahoo.com

Areas where Plasmodium falciparum transmission is holoendemic are characterized
by high rates of pediatric severe malarial anemia (SMA) and associated mortality.
Although the etiology of SMA is complex and multifactorial, perturbations in
inflammatory mediator production play an important role in the pathogenic
process. As such, the current study focused on identification of inflammatory
biomarkers in children with malarial anemia. Febrile children (3 to 30 months of 
age) presenting at Siaya District Hospital in western Kenya underwent a complete 
clinical and hematological evaluation. Children with falciparum malaria and no
additional identifiable anemia-promoting coinfections were stratified into three 
groups: uncomplicated malaria (hemoglobin [Hb] levels of ≥11.0 g/dl; n = 31),
non-SMA (Hb levels of 6.0 to 10.9 g/dl; n = 37), and SMA (Hb levels of <6.0 g/dl;
n = 80). A Luminex hu25-plex array was used to determine potential biomarkers
(i.e., interleukin 1β [IL-1β], IL-1 receptor antagonist [IL-1Ra], IL-2, IL-2R,
IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12p70, IL-13, IL-15, IL-17, tumor
necrosis factor alpha [TNF-α], alpha interferon [IFN-α], IFN-γ,
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor [GM-CSF], macrophage
inflammatory protein 1 alpha [MIP-1α], MIP-1β, IFN-inducible protein of 10 kDa
[IP-10], monokine induced by IFN-γ [MIG], eotaxin, RANTES, and monocyte
chemoattractant protein 1 [MCP-1]) in samples obtained prior to any treatment
interventions. To determine the strongest biomarkers of anemia, a parsimonious
set of predictor variables for Hb was generated by least-angle regression (LAR)
analysis, controlling for the confounding effects of age, gender,
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, and sickle cell trait,
followed by multiple linear regression analyses. IL-12p70 and IFN-γ emerged as
positive predictors of Hb, while IL-2R, IL-13, and eotaxin were negatively
associated with Hb. The results presented here demonstrate that the
IL-12p70/IFN-γ pathway represents a set of biomarkers that predicts elevated Hb
levels in children with falciparum malaria, while activation of the IL-13/eotaxin
pathway favors more profound anemia.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.05161-11 
PMCID: PMC3257924
PMID: 21859849  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

