
1. Malar J. 2011 Aug 26;10:252. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-252.

Rapid whole genome optical mapping of Plasmodium falciparum.

Riley MC(1), Kirkup BC Jr, Johnson JD, Lesho EP, Ockenhouse CF.

Author information: 
(1)Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Division of Malaria Vaccine
Development, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA. matthew.curtis.riley@us.army.mil

BACKGROUND: Immune evasion and drug resistance in malaria have been linked to
chromosomal recombination and gene copy number variation (CNV). These events are 
ideally studied using comparative genomic analyses; however in malaria these
analyses are not as common or thorough as in other infectious diseases, partly
due to the difficulty in sequencing and assembling complete genome drafts.
Recently, whole genome optical mapping has gained wide use in support of genomic 
sequence assembly and comparison. Here, a rapid technique for producing whole
genome optical maps of Plasmodium falciparum is described and the results of
mapping four genomes are presented.
METHODS: Four laboratory strains of P. falciparum were analysed using the Argus™ 
optical mapping system to produce ordered restriction fragment maps of all 14
chromosomes in each genome. Plasmodium falciparum DNA was isolated directly from 
blood culture, visualized using the Argus™ system and assembled in a manner
analogous to next generation sequence assembly into maps (AssemblyViewer™, OpGen 
Inc.®). Full coverage maps were generated for P. falciparum strains 3D7, FVO, D6 
and C235. A reference P. falciparum in silico map was created by the digestion of
the genomic sequence of P. falciparum with the restriction enzyme AflII, for
comparisons to genomic optical maps. Maps were then compared using the MapSolver™
software.
RESULTS: Genomic variation was observed among the mapped strains, as well as
between the map of the reference strain and the map derived from the putative
sequence of that same strain. Duplications, deletions, insertions, inversions and
misassemblies of sizes ranging from 3,500 base pairs up to 78,000 base pairs were
observed. Many genomic events occurred in areas of known repetitive sequence or
high copy number genes, including var gene clusters and rifin complexes.
CONCLUSIONS: This technique for optical mapping of multiple malaria genomes
allows for whole genome comparison of multiple strains and can assist in
identifying genetic variation and sequence contig assembly. New protocols and
technology allowed us to produce high quality contigs spanning four P. falciparum
genomes in six weeks for less than $1,000.00 per genome. This relatively low cost
and quick turnaround makes the technique valuable compared to other genomic
sequencing technologies for studying genetic variation in malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-10-252 
PMCID: PMC3173401
PMID: 21871093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

