
1. Funct Integr Genomics. 2012 Mar;12(1):11-23. doi: 10.1007/s10142-011-0254-z. Epub
2011 Sep 29.

Prediction of biological functions of Shewanella-like protein phosphatases
(Shelphs) across different domains of life.

Kutuzov MA(1), Andreeva AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL
60612, USA. m.kutuzov@usa.net

PPP protein phosphatases are an important enzyme family involved in a variety of 
aspects of cellular signalling and metabolism. PPPs are ubiquitous in eukaryotes,
and are also present in many bacteria. Canonical eukaryotic PPP phosphotases are 
represented by five major subfamilies (PP1, PP2A, calcineurin, PP5 and PPEF/PP7).
We previously reported that three "bacterial-like" PPP groups span the
prokaryote-eukaryote boundary, including "Shewanella-like" phosphatases
(Shelphs), which are in the focus of this study. Here we predict possible
biological functions and functional partners of Shelphs by examining composition 
of bacterial operons and expression data for eukaryotes available in public
databases. In Arabidopsis thaliana, the predicted possible roles include
light-dependent regulation of chloroplast functions, signalling between the
nucleus and the chloroplast, and defence responses. In Plasmodium falciparum,
Shelphs are predicted to be associated with host cell invasion. One isoform has
been located in the apical complex, essential for the interaction with the host
cell. This makes P. falciparum Shelphs obvious potential candidates for
therapeutic targets. Shelphs are also present in bacteria that constitute a
considerable proportion of symbiotic microflora in humans. The predicted
involvement of bacterial Shelphs in sensing and import of nutrients and extrusion
of toxins may be relevant to the links between physiology of humans and our
symbionts. Thus, despite the absence of Shelphs in animals, including humans,
they may have a direct relationship to human health. Some predicted biological
processes and potential functional partners of Shelphs are common between
different bacterial and/or eukaryotic lineages, suggesting evolutionary
conservation of some Shelph regulatory modules.

DOI: 10.1007/s10142-011-0254-z 
PMID: 21960277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

