
1. Trop Med Health. 2011 Sep;39(3):77-82. doi: 10.2149/tmh.2011-12. Epub 2011 Sep
30.

Positive selection on the Plasmodium falciparum clag2 gene encoding a component
of the erythrocyte-binding rhoptry protein complex.

Alexandre JS(1), Kaewthamasorn M, Yahata K, Nakazawa S, Kaneko O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Protozoology, Institute of Tropical Medicine (NEKKEN) and the
Global COE Program, Nagasaki University, Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

A protein complex of high-molecular-mass proteins (PfRhopH) of the human malaria 
parasite Plasmodium falciparum induces host protective immunity and therefore is 
a candidate for vaccine development. Clarification of the level of polymorphism
and the evolutionary processes is important both for vaccine design and for a
better understanding of the evolution of cell invasion in this parasite. In a
previous study on 5 genes encoding RhopH1/Clag proteins, positive diversifying
selection was detected in clag8 and clag9 but not in the paralogous clag2,
clag3.1 and clag3.2. In this study, to extend the analysis of clag polymorphism, 
we obtained sequences surrounding the most polymorphic regions of clag2, clag8,
and clag9 from parasites collected in Thailand. Using sequence data obtained
newly in this study and reported previously, we classified clag2 sequences into 5
groups based on the similarity of the deduced amino acid sequences and number of 
insertions/deletions. By the sliding window method, an excess of nonsynonymous
substitutions over synonymous substitutions was detected in the group 1 and group
2 clag2 and clag8 sequences. Population-based analyses also detected a
significant departure from the neutral expectation for group 1 clag2 and clag8.
Thus, two independent approaches suggest that clag2 is subject to a positive
diversifying selection. The previously suggested positive selection on clag8 was 
also supported by population-based analyses. However, the positive selection on
clag9, which was detected by comparing the 5 sequences, was not detected using
the additional 34 sequences obtained in this study.

DOI: 10.2149/tmh.2011-12 
PMCID: PMC3191777
PMID: 22028613 

