
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2012 Feb;11(2):206-16. doi: 10.1128/EC.05161-11. Epub 2011 Oct 21.

SPM1 stabilizes subpellicular microtubules in Toxoplasma gondii.

Tran JQ(1), Li C, Chyan A, Chung L, Morrissette NS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of
California-Irvine, CA, USA.

We have identified two novel proteins that colocalize with the subpellicular
microtubules in the protozoan parasite Toxoplasma gondii and named these proteins
SPM1 and SPM2. These proteins have basic isoelectric points and both have
homologs in other apicomplexan parasites. SPM1 contains six tandem copies of a
32-amino-acid repeat, whereas SPM2 lacks defined protein signatures. Alignment of
Toxoplasma SPM2 with apparent Plasmodium SPM2 homologs indicates that the
greatest degree of conservation lies in the carboxy-terminal half of the protein.
Analysis of Plasmodium homologs of SPM1 indicates that while the central
32-amino-acid repeats have expanded to different degrees (7, 8, 9, 12, or 13
repeats), the amino- and carboxy-terminal regions remain conserved. In contrast, 
although the Cryptosporidium SPM1 homolog has a conserved carboxy tail, the five 
repeats are considerably diverged, and it has a smaller amino-terminal domain.
SPM1 is localized along the full length of the subpellicular microtubules but
does not associate with the conoid or spindle microtubules. SPM2 has a restricted
localization along the middle region of the subpellicular microtubules. Domain
deletion analysis indicates that four or more copies of the SPM1 repeat are
required for localization to microtubules, and the amino-terminal 63 residues of 
SPM2 are required for localization to the subpellicular microtubules. Gene
deletion studies indicate that neither SPM1 nor SPM2 is essential for tachyzoite 
viability. However, loss of SPM1 decreases overall parasite fitness and
eliminates the stability of subpellicular microtubules to detergent extraction.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.05161-11 
PMCID: PMC3272897
PMID: 22021240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

