
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012 Jan;56(1):302-14. doi: 10.1128/AAC.05540-11.
Epub 2011 Nov 14.

Phenotypic and genotypic analysis of in vitro-selected artemisinin-resistant
progeny of Plasmodium falciparum.

Tucker MS(1), Mutka T, Sparks K, Patel J, Kyle DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Health, College of Public Health, University of South
Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.

Emergence of artemisinin resistance in Cambodia highlights the importance of
characterizing resistance to this class of drugs. Previously, intermediate levels
of resistance in Plasmodium falciparum were generated in vitro for artelinic acid
(AL) and artemisinin (QHS). Here we expanded on earlier selection efforts to
produce levels of clinically relevant concentrations, and the resulting lines
were characterized genotypically and phenotypically. Recrudescence assays
determined the ability of resistant and parent lines to recover following
exposure to clinically relevant levels of drugs. Interestingly, the parent clone 
(D6) tolerated up to 1,500 ng/ml QHS, but the resistant parasite, D6.QHS340Ã—3,
recovered following exposure to 2,400 ng/ml QHS. Resistant D6, W2, and TM91c235
parasites all exhibited elevated 50% inhibitory concentrations (IC(50)s) to
multiple artemisinin drugs, with >3-fold resistance to QHS and AL; however, the
degree of resistance obtained with standard methods was remarkably less than
expected for parasite lines that recovered from 2,400-ng/ml drug pressure. A
novel assay format with radiolabeled hypoxanthine demonstrated a greater degree
of resistance in vitro than the standard SYBR green method. Analysis of merozoite
number in resistant parasites found D6 and TM91c235 resistant progeny had
significantly fewer merozoites than parent strains, whereas W2 resistant progeny 
had significantly more. Amplification of pfmdr1 increased proportionately to the 
increased drug levels tolerated by W2 and TM91c235, but not in resistant D6. In
summary, we define the artemisinin resistance phenotype as a decrease in
susceptibility to artemisinins along with the ability to recover from
drug-induced dormancy following supraclinical concentrations of the drug.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.05540-11 
PMCID: PMC3256069
PMID: 22083467  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

