
1. Parasitol Res. 2012 Jun;110(6):2255-62. doi: 10.1007/s00436-011-2757-x. Epub 2011
Dec 23.

In vitro antiplasmodial activity of bacterium RJAUTHB 14 associated with marine
sponge Haliclona Grant against Plasmodium falciparum.

Jacob Inbaneson S(1), Ravikumar S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Marine Sciences, Department of Oceanography and Coastal Area
Studies, Alagappa University, Thondi Campus, Thondi, 623 409, Ramanathapuram
District, Tamil Nadu, India.

Malaria is the most important parasitic disease, leading to annual death of about
one million people, and the Plasmodium falciparum develops resistance to
well-established antimalarial drugs. The newest antiplasmodial drug from a marine
microorganism helps in addressing this problem. In the present study, Haliclona
Grant were collected and subjected for enumeration and isolation of associated
bacteria. The count of bacterial isolates was maximum in November 2007
(18 × 10(4) colony-forming units (CFU) g(-1), and the average count was maximum
during the monsoon season (117 × 10(3) CFU g(-1)). Thirty-three morphologically
different bacterial isolates were isolated from Haliclona Grant, and the
extracellular ethyl acetate extracts were screened for antiplasmodial activity
against P. falciparum. The antiplasmodial activity of bacterium RJAUTHB 14 (11.98
μg[Symbol: see text]ml(-1)) is highly comparable with the positive control
chloroquine (IC(50) 19.59 μg[Symbol: see text]ml(-1)), but the other 21 bacterial
extracts showed an IC(50) value of more than 100 μg[Symbol: see text]ml(-1).
Statistical analysis reveals that significant in vitro antiplasmodial activity
(P < 0.05) was observed between the concentrations and time of exposure. The
chemical injury to erythrocytes showed no morphological changes in erythrocytes
by the ethyl acetate extract of bacterial isolates after 48 h of incubation. The 
in vitro antiplasmodial activity might be due to the presence of reducing sugars 
and alkaloids in the ethyl acetate extracts of bacterium RJAUTHB 14. The 16S rRNA
gene partial sequence of bacterium RJAUTHB 14 is deposited in NCBI (GenBank
accession no. GU269569). It is concluded from the present study that the ethyl
acetate extracts of bacterium RJAUTHB 14 possess lead compounds for the
development of antiplasmodial drugs.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-011-2757-x 
PMID: 22193522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

