
1. BMC Genomics. 2012 Jan 3;13:1. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-1.

Optimizing Illumina next-generation sequencing library preparation for extremely 
AT-biased genomes.

Oyola SO(1), Otto TD, Gu Y, Maslen G, Manske M, Campino S, Turner DJ, Macinnis B,
Kwiatkowski DP, Swerdlow HP, Quail MA.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK. so1@sanger.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Massively parallel sequencing technology is revolutionizing
approaches to genomic and genetic research. Since its advent, the scale and
efficiency of Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) has rapidly improved. In spite of 
this success, sequencing genomes or genomic regions with extremely biased base
composition is still a great challenge to the currently available NGS platforms. 
The genomes of some important pathogenic organisms like Plasmodium falciparum
(high AT content) and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (high GC content) display
extremes of base composition. The standard library preparation procedures that
employ PCR amplification have been shown to cause uneven read coverage
particularly across AT and GC rich regions, leading to problems in genome
assembly and variation analyses. Alternative library-preparation approaches that 
omit PCR amplification require large quantities of starting material and hence
are not suitable for small amounts of DNA/RNA such as those from clinical
isolates. We have developed and optimized library-preparation procedures suitable
for low quantity starting material and tolerant to extremely high AT content
sequences.
RESULTS: We have used our optimized conditions in parallel with standard methods 
to prepare Illumina sequencing libraries from a non-clinical and a clinical
isolate (containing ~53% host contamination). By analyzing and comparing the
quality of sequence data generated, we show that our optimized conditions that
involve a PCR additive (TMAC), produces amplified libraries with improved
coverage of extremely AT-rich regions and reduced bias toward GC neutral
templates.
CONCLUSION: We have developed a robust and optimized Next-Generation Sequencing
library amplification method suitable for extremely AT-rich genomes. The new
amplification conditions significantly reduce bias and retain the complexity of
either extremes of base composition. This development will greatly benefit
sequencing clinical samples that often require amplification due to low mass of
DNA starting material.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-1 
PMCID: PMC3312816
PMID: 22214261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

