
1. Tissue Antigens. 2012 Feb;79(2):104-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2011.01818.x.

Killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptors and malaria caused by Plasmodium
falciparum in The Gambia.

Yindom LM(1), Forbes R, Aka P, Janha O, Jeffries D, Jallow M, Conway DJ, Walther 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratories, Fajara, Banjul, The Gambia.
louis-marie.yindom@ndm.ox.ac.uk

The relevance of innate immune responses to Plasmodium falciparum infection, in
particular the central role of natural killer (NK) cell-derived interferon gamma 
(IFN-γ), is becoming increasingly recognised. Recently, it has been shown that
IFN-γ production in response to P. falciparum antigens is in part regulated by
killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) genes, and a study from
malaria-exposed Melanesians suggested an association between KIR genotypes and
susceptibility to infection. This prompted us to determine and compare the
frequencies of 15 KIR genes in Gambian children presenting with either severe
malaria (n = 133) or uncomplicated malaria (n = 188) and in cord-blood population
control samples (n = 314) collected from the same area. While no significant
differences were observed between severe and uncomplicated cases, proportions of 
individuals with KIR2DS2+C1 and KIR2DL2+C1 were significantly higher among
malaria cases overall than in population control samples. In an exploratory
analysis, activating KIR genes KIR2DS2, KIR3DS1 and KIR2DS5 were slightly higher 
in children in disease subgroups associated with the highest mortality. In
addition, our data suggest that homozygosity for KIR genotype A might be
associated with different malaria outcomes including protection from infection
and higher blood parasitaemia levels in those that do get infected. These
findings are consistent with a probable role of KIR genes in determining
susceptibility to malaria, and further studies are warranted in different
populations.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2011.01818.x 
PMCID: PMC3320664
PMID: 22220719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

