
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29881. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029881. Epub 2012 Jan 3.

Dynamic activation and repression of the plasmodium falciparum rif gene family
and their relation to chromatin modification.

Cabral FJ(1), Fotoran WL, Wunderlich G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

The regulation of variant gene expression in Plasmodium falciparum is still only 
partially understood. Regulation of var genes, the most studied gene family
involved in antigenic variation, is orchestrated by a dynamic pattern of
inherited chromatin states. Although recent evidence pointed to epigenetic
regulation of transcribed and repressed rif loci, little is known about specific 
on/off associated histone modifications of individual rif genes. To investigate
the chromatin marks for transcribed and repressed rif loci, we cultivated
parasites and evaluated the transcriptional status of chosen rif targets by
qRT-PCR and performed ChIP assays using H3K9ac and H3K9me3 antibodies. We then
monitored changes in the epigenetic patterns in parasites after several
reinvasions and also evaluated the "poised" mark in trophozoites and schizonts of
the same erythrocytic cycle by ChIP using H3K4me2 specific antibodies. Our
results show that H3K9 is acetylated in transcribed rif loci and trimethylated or
even unmodified in repressed rif loci. These transcriptional and epigenetic
states are inherited after several reinvasions. The poised modification H3K4me2
showed a tendency to be more present in loci in trophozoites that upon
progression to schizonts strongly transcribe the respective locus. However, this 
effect was not consistently observed for all monitored loci. While our data show 
important similarities to var transcription-associated chromatin modifications,
the observed swiftly occurring modifications at rif loci and the absence of H3K9 
modification point to a different dynamic of recruitment of chromatin modifying
enzymes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029881 
PMCID: PMC3250495
PMID: 22235345  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

