
1. Infect Immun. 2012 Mar;80(3):1150-5. doi: 10.1128/IAI.06008-11. Epub 2012 Jan 9.

Mild Plasmodium falciparum malaria following an episode of severe malaria is
associated with induction of the interferon pathway in Malawian children.

Krupka M(1), Seydel K, Feintuch CM, Yee K, Kim R, Lin CY, Calder RB, Petersen C, 
Taylor T, Daily J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Infectious Diseases), Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

Infection with Plasmodium falciparum can lead to a range of severe to minimal
symptoms, occasionally resulting in death in young children or nonimmune adults. 
In areas of high transmission, older children and adults generally suffer only
mild or asymptomatic malaria infections and rarely develop severe disease. The
immune features underlying this apparent immunity to severe disease remain
elusive. To gain insight into host responses associated with severe and mild
malaria, we conducted a longitudinal study of five children who first presented
with severe malaria and, 1 month later, with mild malaria. Employing peripheral
blood whole-genome profiling, we identified 68 genes that were associated with
mild malaria compared to their expression in the severe malaria episode (paired
Students t test, P < 0.05). These genes reflect the interferon (IFN) pathway and 
T cell biology and include IFN-induced protein transcripts 1 to 3, oligoadenylate
synthetases 1 and 3, and the T cell markers cathepsin W and perforin. Gene set
enrichment analysis identified Gene Ontology (GO) pathways associated with mild
malaria to include the type I interferon-mediated signaling pathway (GO 0060337),
T cell activation (GO 0042110), and other GO pathways representing many aspects
of immune activation. In contrast, only six genes were associated with severe
malaria, including thymidine kinase 1, which was recently found to be a biomarker
of cerebral malaria susceptibility in the murine model, and carbonic anhydrase,
reflecting the blood's abnormal acid base environment during severe disease.
These data may provide potential insights to inform pathogenesis models and the
development of therapeutics to reduce severe disease outcomes due to P.
falciparum infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.06008-11 
PMCID: PMC3294667
PMID: 22232187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

