
1. BMC Biol. 2012 Jan 31;10:5. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-10-5.

Involvement of Plasmodium falciparum protein kinase CK2 in the chromatin assembly
pathway.

Dastidar EG(1), Dayer G, Holland ZM, Dorin-Semblat D, Claes A, Chêne A, Sharma A,
Hamelin R, Moniatte M, Lopez-Rubio JJ, Scherf A, Doerig C.

Author information: 
(1)Biology of Host-Parasite Interactions Unit, Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr.
Roux, F-75724 Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Protein kinase CK2 is a pleiotropic serine/threonine protein kinase
with hundreds of reported substrates, and plays an important role in a number of 
cellular processes. The cellular functions of Plasmodium falciparum CK2 (PfCK2)
are unknown. The parasite's genome encodes one catalytic subunit, PfCK2α, which
we have previously shown to be essential for completion of the asexual
erythrocytic cycle, and two putative regulatory subunits, PfCK2β1 and PfCK2β2.
RESULTS: We now show that the genes encoding both regulatory PfCK2 subunits
(PfCK2β1 and PfCK2β2) cannot be disrupted. Using immunofluorescence and electron 
microscopy, we examined the intra-erythrocytic stages of transgenic parasite
lines expressing hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged catalytic and regulatory subunits
(HA-CK2α, HA-PfCK2β1 or HA-PfCK2β2), and localized all three subunits to both
cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments of the parasite. The same transgenic
parasite lines were used to purify PfCK2β1- and PfCK2β2-containing complexes,
which were analyzed by mass spectrometry. The recovered proteins were unevenly
distributed between various pathways, with a large proportion of components of
the chromatin assembly pathway being present in both PfCK2β1 and PfCK2β2
precipitates, implicating PfCK2 in chromatin dynamics. We also found that
chromatin-related substrates such as nucleosome assembly proteins (Naps),
histones, and two members of the Alba family are phosphorylated by PfCK2α in
vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Our reverse-genetics data show that each of the two regulatory PfCK2
subunits is required for completion of the asexual erythrocytic cycle. Our
interactome study points to an implication of PfCK2 in many cellular pathways,
with chromatin dynamics being identified as a major process regulated by PfCK2.
This study paves the way for a kinome-wide interactomics-based approach to
elucidate protein kinase function in malaria parasites.

DOI: 10.1186/1741-7007-10-5 
PMCID: PMC3296614
PMID: 22293287  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

