
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012 Feb;8(2):e1002554. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002554. Epub 2012
Feb 23.

A putative homologue of CDC20/CDH1 in the malaria parasite is essential for male 
gamete development.

Guttery DS(1), Ferguson DJ, Poulin B, Xu Z, Straschil U, Klop O, Solyakov L,
Sandrini SM, Brady D, Nieduszynski CA, Janse CJ, Holder AA, Tobin AB, Tewari R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genetics and Genomics, School of Biology Queens Medical Centre,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2012 Mar;8(3). doi:
10.1371/annotation/ef70d427-0816-4a63-aeaf-874b734793b0.

Cell-cycle progression is governed by a series of essential regulatory proteins. 
Two major regulators are cell-division cycle protein 20 (CDC20) and its
homologue, CDC20 homologue 1 (CDH1), which activate the anaphase-promoting
complex/cyclosome (APC/C) in mitosis, and facilitate degradation of mitotic APC/C
substrates. The malaria parasite, Plasmodium, is a haploid organism which, during
its life-cycle undergoes two stages of mitosis; one associated with asexual
multiplication and the other with male gametogenesis. Cell-cycle regulation and
DNA replication in Plasmodium was recently shown to be dependent on the activity 
of a number of protein kinases. However, the function of cell division cycle
proteins that are also involved in this process, such as CDC20 and CDH1 is
totally unknown. Here we examine the role of a putative CDC20/CDH1 in the rodent 
malaria Plasmodium berghei (Pb) using reverse genetics. Phylogenetic analysis
identified a single putative Plasmodium CDC20/CDH1 homologue (termed CDC20 for
simplicity) suggesting that Plasmodium APC/C has only one regulator. In our
genetic approach to delete the endogenous cdc20 gene of P. berghei, we
demonstrate that PbCDC20 plays a vital role in male gametogenesis, but is not
essential for mitosis in the asexual blood stage. Furthermore, qRT-PCR analysis
in parasite lines with deletions of two kinase genes involved in male sexual
development (map2 and cdpk4), showed a significant increase in cdc20
transcription in activated gametocytes. DNA replication and ultra structural
analyses of cdc20 and map2 mutants showed similar blockage of nuclear division at
the nuclear spindle/kinetochore stage. CDC20 was phosphorylated in asexual and
sexual stages, but the level of modification was higher in activated gametocytes 
and ookinetes. Changes in global protein phosphorylation patterns in the Δcdc20
mutant parasites were largely different from those observed in the Δmap2 mutant. 
This suggests that CDC20 and MAP2 are both likely to play independent but vital
roles in male gametogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002554 
PMCID: PMC3285604
PMID: 22383885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

