
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31847. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031847. Epub 2012 Feb 27.

Comparative gene expression profiling of P. falciparum malaria parasites exposed 
to three different histone deacetylase inhibitors.

Andrews KT(1), Gupta AP, Tran TN, Fairlie DP, Gobert GN, Bozdech Z.

Author information: 
(1)Eskitis Institute for Cell and Molecular Therapies, Griffith University,
Queensland, Australia. k.andrews@griffith.edu.au

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are being intensively pursued as potential 
new drugs for a range of diseases, including malaria. HDAC inhibitors are also
important tools for the study of epigenetic mechanisms, transcriptional control, 
and other important cellular processes. In this study the effects of three
structurally related antimalarial HDAC inhibitors on P. falciparum malaria
parasite gene expression were compared. The three hydroxamate-based compounds,
trichostatin A (TSA), suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA; VorinostatÂ®) and a
2-aminosuberic acid derivative (2-ASA-9), all caused profound transcriptional
effects, with ~2-21% of genes having >2-fold altered expression following 2 h
exposure to the compounds. Only two genes, alpha tubulin II and a hydrolase, were
up-regulated by all three compounds after 2 h exposure in all biological
replicates examined. The transcriptional changes observed after 2 h exposure to
HDAC inhibitors were found to be largely transitory, with only 1-5% of genes
being regulated after removing the compounds and culturing for a further 2 h.
Despite some structural similarity, the three inhibitors caused quite diverse
transcriptional effects, possibly reflecting subtle differences in mode of action
or cellular distribution. This dataset represents an important contribution to
our understanding of how HDAC inhibitors act on malaria parasites and identifies 
alpha tubulin II as a potential transcriptional marker of HDAC inhibition in
malaria parasites that may be able to be exploited for future development of HDAC
inhibitors as new antimalarial agents.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031847 
PMCID: PMC3288058
PMID: 22384084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

