
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2012;6(3):e1565. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001565. Epub 2012
Mar 13.

Anopheles gambiae antiviral immune response to systemic O'nyong-nyong infection.

Waldock J(1), Olson KE, Christophides GK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Life Sciences, Imperial 
College, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Mosquito-borne viral diseases cause significant burden in much of the
developing world. Although host-virus interactions have been studied extensively 
in the vertebrate host, little is known about mosquito responses to viral
infection. In contrast to mosquitoes of the Aedes and Culex genera, Anopheles
gambiae, the principal vector of human malaria, naturally transmits very few
arboviruses, the most important of which is O'nyong-nyong virus (ONNV). Here we
have investigated the A. gambiae immune response to systemic ONNV infection using
forward and reverse genetic approaches.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have used DNA microarrays to profile the
transcriptional response of A. gambiae inoculated with ONNV and investigate the
antiviral function of candidate genes through RNAi gene silencing assays. Our
results demonstrate that A. gambiae responses to systemic viral infection involve
genes covering all aspects of innate immunity including pathogen recognition,
modulation of immune signalling, complement-mediated lysis/opsonisation and other
immune effector mechanisms. Patterns of transcriptional regulation and
co-infections of A. gambiae with ONNV and the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium 
berghei suggest that hemolymph immune responses to viral infection are diverted
away from melanisation. We show that four viral responsive genes encoding two
putative recognition receptors, a galectin and an MD2-like receptor, and two
effector lysozymes, function in limiting viral load.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study is the first step in elucidating the
antiviral mechanisms of A. gambiae mosquitoes, and has revealed interesting
differences between A. gambiae and other invertebrates. Our data suggest that
mechanisms employed by A. gambiae are distinct from described invertebrate
antiviral immunity to date, and involve the complement-like branch of the humoral
immune response, supressing the melanisation response that is prominent in
anti-parasitic immunity. The antiviral immune response in A. gambiae is thus
composed of some key conserved mechanisms to target viral infection such as RNAi 
but includes other diverse and possibly species-specific mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001565 
PMCID: PMC3302841
PMID: 22428080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

