
1. Acta Trop. 2012 Aug;123(2):72-7. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2012.03.013. Epub
2012 Apr 5.

Association of the sickle cell trait and the ABO blood group with clinical
severity of malaria in southwest Nigeria.

Amodu OK(1), Olaniyan SA, Adeyemo AA, Troye-Blomberg M, Olumese PE, Omotade OO.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Child Health, College of Medicine, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, 
Nigeria. amkemi@hotmail.com

In regions of high Plasmodium falciparum malaria endemicity, certain erythrocyte 
polymorphisms confer resistance to severe disease. In this study, we evaluate the
role of the sickle cell trait (HbS) and ABO blood groups in the clinical
manifestations of childhood malaria in Southwest Nigeria. The subjects comprised 
3100 children (53% males, median age 39 months), including 1400 children with
uncomplicated malaria, 1000 children with asymptomatic malaria and 700 with
severe malaria. Haemoglobin (Hb) types were determined using electrophoresis and 
serum agglutination techniques were used to determine ABO blood groups. Blood
group O was the commonest ABO blood group (47.7%) in the study population, the
others were A (22.5%), B (25.2%) and AB (4.6%). The frequencies of the HbAS and
HbAC were 14.4% and 5.8%, respectively. In regression models adjusting for age,
gender, parasite density and blood group, HbAS was associated with a reduced risk
of severe malaria OR=0.46 (CI(95%): 0.273-0.773). Among severe malaria subjects, 
HbAS was associated with significantly lower parasite densities. The protective
effect of blood group O was demonstrated with a decreased risk of severe malaria 
OR=0.743 (CI(95%): 0.566-0.976) after adjusting for age, gender and parasite
density and Hb genotype. Blood group B was associated with increased risk of
severe malaria OR=1.638 (CI(95%): 1.128-2.380) after adjusting for age, gender,
packed cell volume, parasite density and Hb genotype. We have confirmed from this
large study of Nigerian children the major protective effective of the sickle
cell heterozygous state against both cerebral malaria and severe malarial
anaemia. We also show that the B blood group is associated with an increased risk
of severe malaria. In conclusion, the sickle cell haemoglobin type and ABO groups
modulate the risk of severe malaria in Nigerian children.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2012.03.013 
PMID: 22503377  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

