
1. Malar J. 2012 Apr 25;11:128. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-128.

Possible association of the Plasmodium falciparum T1526C resa2 gene mutation with
severe malaria.

Durand R(1), Migot-Nabias F, Andriantsoanirina V, Seringe E, Viwami F, Sagbo G,
Lalya F, Deloron P, Mercereau-Puijalon O, Bonnefoy S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Parasitologie-Mycologie, Hôpital Avicenne, AP-HP, 125 rue de
Stalingrad, 93009 Bobigny Cedex, France. remy.durand@avc.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum exports proteins that remodel the erythrocyte
membrane. One such protein, called Pf155/RESA (RESA1) contributes to parasite
fitness, optimizing parasite survival during febrile episodes. Resa1 gene is a
member of a small family comprising three highly related genes. Preliminary
evidence led to a search for clues indicating the involvement of RESA2 protein in
the pathophysiology of malaria. In the present study, cDNA sequence of resa2 gene
was obtained from two different strains. The proportion of P. falciparum isolates
having a non-stop T1526C mutation in resa2 gene was evaluated and the association
of this genotype with severity of malaria was investigated.
METHODS: Resa2 cDNAs of two different strains (a patient isolate and K1 culture
adapted strain) was obtained by RT-PCR and DNA sequencing was performed to
confirm its gene structure. The proportion of isolates having a T1526C mutation
was evaluated using a PCR-RFLP methodology on groups of severe malaria and
uncomplicated patients recruited in 1991-1994 in Senegal and in 2009 in Benin.
RESULTS: A unique ORF with an internal translation stop was found in the patient 
isolate (Genbank access number : JN183870), while the K1 strain harboured the
T1526C mutation (Genbank access number : JN183869) which affects the internal
stop codon and restores a full length coding sequence. About 14% of isolates
obtained from Senegal and Benin harboured mutant T1526C parasites. Some isolates 
had both wild and mutant resa alleles. The analysis excluding those mixed
isolates showed that the resa2 T1526C mutation was found more frequently in
severe malaria cases than in uncomplicated cases (p = 0.008). The association of 
the presence of the mutant allele and parasitaemia >4% was shown in multivariate 
analysis (p = 0.03) in the group of Beninese children.
CONCLUSIONS: All T1526C mutant parasites theoretically have the ability to give
rise to a full-length RESA2 protein. This study raises the hypothesis that the
RESA2 protein could favour high-density infections. Other studies in various
geographic settings and probably including more patients are now required to
replicate these results and to answer the questions raised by these results.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-128 
PMCID: PMC3422168
PMID: 22533816  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

