
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2012 May;86(5):764-74. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.2012.11-0433.

Genetic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum merozoite surface protein-1 block 2 in
sites of contrasting altitudes and malaria endemicities in the Mount Cameroon
region.

Wanji S(1), Kengne-Ouafo AJ, Eyong EE, Kimbi HK, Tendongfor N, Ndamukong-Nyanga
JL, Nana-Djeunga HC, Bourguinat C, Sofeu-Feugaing DD, Charvet CL.

Author information: 
(1)Research Foundation for Tropical Diseases and the Environment, Buea, South
West Region, Cameroon. swanji@yahoo.fr

The present study analyzed the relationship between the genetic diversity of
Plasmodium falciparum and parasitologic/entomologic indices in the Mount Cameroon
region by using merozoite surface protein 1 as a genetic marker. Blood samples
were collected from asymptomatic children from three altitude zones (high,
intermediate, and low). Parasitologic and entomologic indices were determined by 
microscopy and landing catch mosquito collection/circumsporozoite
protein-enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, respectively. A total of 142 randomly 
selected P. falciparum-positive blood samples were genotyped by using a nested
polymerase chain reaction-based technique. K-1 polymerase chain reaction products
were also sequenced. As opposed to high altitude, the highest malaria prevalence 
(70.65%) and entomologic inoculation rate (2.43 infective/bites/night) were
recorded at a low altitude site. Seven (18.91%), 22 (36.66%), and 19 (42.22%)
samples from high, intermediate, and low altitudes, respectively, contained
multiclonal infections. A new K-1 polymorphism was identified. This study shows a
positive non-linear association between low/intermediate altitude (high malaria
transmission) and an increase in P. falciparum merozoite surface protein 1 block 
2 polymorphisms.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.2012.11-0433 
PMCID: PMC3335678
PMID: 22556072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

