
1. Malar J. 2012 May 8;11:159. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-159.

Genetic variation of aldolase from Korean isolates of Plasmodium vivax and its
usefulness in serodiagnosis.

Kim JY(1), Kim HH, Shin HL, Sohn Y, Kim H, Lee SW, Lee WJ, Lee HW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Malaria and Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Health,
Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Cheongwon-gun 363-951, Republic
of Korea.

BACKGROUND: The malaria aldolase is widely used as rapid diagnostic test (RDT),
but the efficacy in aspect of its serological effectiveness in diagnosis is not
known. The genetic variation of Korean isolates was analysed and recombinant
aldolase was evaluated as a serological antigen in Plasmodium vivax malaria.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was purified and the aldolase gene of P. vivax from 25
patients' blood samples was amplified. The samples came from 5 epidemic areas;
Bucheon-si, Gimpo-si, Paju-si of Gyeonggido, Gangwha-gun of Incheon metropolitan 
city, and Cheorwon of Gangwon-do, South Korea. The antigenicity of the
recombinant aldolase was tested by western blot and enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: Sequence analysis of 25 Korean isolates of P. vivax showed that the open
reading frame (ORF) of 1,110 nucleotides encoded a deduced protein of 369 amino
acids (aa). This ORF showed 100% homology with the P. vivax Sal I strain
(XM_00165894) and P. vivax WDK strain (AF247063), 87.4% homology with Plasmodium 
falciparum (AF179421), 90.6% homology with Plasmodium chabaudi (AF247060), 89.5% 
homology with Plasmodium vinckei (AF247061), and 96.7% homology with Plasmodium
knowlesi. A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) at nucleotide 180 (G to A, n =
5) was also observed in the isolates. The expressed recombinant protein had a
molecular weight of approximately 31 kDa (monomeric form) and 62 kDa (dimeric
form) as analysed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) analysis. Among 109 P. vivax patients, 32 (29.4%) had positive in an
enzyme-linked absorbance assay (ELISA). This result showed significant
correlation between ELISA and an indirect fluorescent antibody test (IFAT) (P <
0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: The aldolase gene from Korean isolates of P. vivax showed one SNP at
nucleotide position 180; this SNP mutant was discovered in only the western part 
of Han River, and included the regions of Ganghwa, Gimpo, and Bucheon. Based on
the results, the relationship between antibody production against aldolase and
the pattern of disease onset should be more investigated before using aldolase
for serodiagnosis.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-11-159 
PMCID: PMC3413559
PMID: 22569198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

