
1. Parasitol Int. 2012 Dec;61(4):650-7. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2012.07.003. Epub 2012
Jul 20.

Prevalence of avian haemosporidian parasites and their host fidelity in the
central Philippine islands.

Silva-Iturriza A(1), Ketmaier V, Tiedemann R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Evolutionary Biology/Systematic Zoology, Institute of Biochemistry and
Biology, University of Potsdam, Karl-Liebknecht-Strasse 24-25, Haus 25, D-14476
Potsdam, Germany. silvaiturriza@gmail.com

We examined the prevalence and host fidelity of avian haemosporidian parasites
belonging to the genera Haemoproteus, Leucocytozoon and Plasmodium in the central
Philippine islands by sampling 23 bird families (42 species). Using
species-specific PCR assays of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene (471 base
pairs, bp), we detected infections in 91 of the 215 screened individuals (42%).
We also discriminated between single and multiple infections. Thirty-one infected
individuals harbored a single Haemoproteus lineage (14%), 18 a single
Leucocytozoon lineage (8%) and 12 a single Plasmodium lineage (6%). Of the 215
screened birds, 30 (14%) presented different types of multiple infections.
Intrageneric mixed infections were generally more common (18
Haemoproteus/Haemoproteus, 3 Leucocytozoon/Leucocytozoon, and 1
Plasmodium/Plasmodium) than intergeneric mixed infections (7
Haemoproteus/Leucocytozoon and 1 Haemoproteus/Leucocytozoon/Plasmodium). We
recovered 81 unique haemosporidian mitochondrial haplotypes. These clustered in
three strongly supported monophyletic clades that correspond to the three
haemosporidian genera. Related lineages of Haemoproteus and Leucocytozoon were
more likely to derive from the same host family than predicted by chance;
however, this was not the case for Plasmodium. These results indicate that
switches between host families are more likely to occur in Plasmodium. We
conclude that Haemoproteus has undergone a recent diversification across
well-supported host-family specific clades, while Leucocytozoon shows a longer
association with its host(s). This study supports previous evidence of a higher
prevalence and stronger host-family specificity of Haemoproteus and Leucocytozoon
compared to Plasmodium.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2012.07.003 
PMID: 22819957  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

