
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Oct;40(19):9903-16. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks735. Epub 2012
Aug 9.

A novel Plasmodium falciparum SR protein is an alternative splicing factor
required for the parasites' proliferation in human erythrocytes.

Eshar S(1), Allemand E, Sebag A, Glaser F, Muchardt C, Mandel-Gutfreund Y, Karni 
R, Dzikowski R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, The Kuvin Center for Study 
of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, IMRIC, The Hebrew University-Hadassah
Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Malaria parasites have a complex life cycle, during which they undergo
significant biological changes to adapt to different hosts and changing
environments. Plasmodium falciparum, the species responsible for the deadliest
form of human malaria, maintains this complex life cycle with a relatively small 
number of genes. Alternative splicing (AS) is an important post-transcriptional
mechanisms that enables eukaryotic organisms to expand their protein repertoire
out of relatively small number of genes. SR proteins are major regulators of AS
in higher eukaryotes. Nevertheless, the regulation of splicing as well as the AS 
machinery in Plasmodium spp. are still elusive. Here, we show that PfSR1, a
putative P. falciparum SR protein, can mediate RNA splicing in vitro. In
addition, we show that PfSR1 functions as an AS factor in mini-gene in vivo
systems similar to the mammalian SR protein SRSF1. Expression of PfSR1-myc in P. 
falciparum shows distinct patterns of cellular localization during intra
erythrocytic development. Furthermore, we determine that the predicted RS domain 
of PfSR1 is essential for its localization to the nucleus. Finally, we
demonstrate that proper regulation of pfsr1 is required for parasite
proliferation in human RBCs and over-expression of pfsr1 influences AS activity
of P. falciparum genes in vivo.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks735 
PMCID: PMC3479193
PMID: 22885299  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

