
1. J Immunol. 2012 Dec 1;189(11):5336-46. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201028. Epub 2012
Oct 24.

Prolonged neutrophil dysfunction after Plasmodium falciparum malaria is related
to hemolysis and heme oxygenase-1 induction.

Cunnington AJ(1), Njie M, Correa S, Takem EN, Riley EM, Walther M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infection, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, London WC1E 7HT, United Kingdom. aubrey.cunnington@lshtm.ac.uk

It is not known why people are more susceptible to bacterial infections such as
nontyphoid Salmonella during and after a malaria infection, but in mice, malarial
hemolysis impairs resistance to nontyphoid Salmonella by impairing the neutrophil
oxidative burst. This acquired neutrophil dysfunction is a consequence of
induction of the cytoprotective, heme-degrading enzyme heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) in
neutrophil progenitors in bone marrow. In this study, we assessed whether
neutrophil dysfunction occurs in humans with malaria and how this relates to
hemolysis. We evaluated neutrophil function in 58 Gambian children with
Plasmodium falciparum malaria [55 (95%) with uncomplicated disease] and examined 
associations with erythrocyte count, haptoglobin, hemopexin, plasma heme,
expression of receptors for heme uptake, and HO-1 induction. Malaria caused the
appearance of a dominant population of neutrophils with reduced oxidative burst
activity, which gradually normalized over 8 wk of follow-up. The degree of
neutrophil impairment correlated significantly with markers of hemolysis and HO-1
induction. HO-1 expression was increased in blood during acute malaria, but at a 
cellular level HO-1 expression was modulated by changes in surface expression of 
the haptoglobin receptor (CD163). These findings demonstrate that neutrophil
dysfunction occurs in P. falciparum malaria and support the relevance of the
mechanistic studies in mice. Furthermore, they suggest the presence of a
regulatory pathway to limit HO-1 induction by hemolysis in the context of
infection and indicate new targets for therapeutic intervention to abrogate the
susceptibility to bacterial infection in the context of hemolysis in humans.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201028 
PMCID: PMC3504608
PMID: 23100518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

