
1. Int J Parasitol. 2012 Dec;42(13-14):1185-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2012.10.006.
Epub 2012 Nov 5.

Flow cytometry-assisted rapid isolation of recombinant Plasmodium berghei
parasites exemplified by functional analysis of aquaglyceroporin.

Kenthirapalan S(1), Waters AP, Matuschewski K, Kooij TW.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Parasitology Unit, Berlin,
Germany.

The most critical bottleneck in the generation of recombinant Plasmodium berghei 
parasites is the mandatory in vivo cloning step following successful genetic
manipulation. This study describes a new technique for rapid selection of
recombinant P. berghei parasites. The method is based on flow cytometry to
isolate isogenic parasite lines and represents a major advance for the field, in 
that it will speed the generation of recombinant parasites as well as cut down on
animal use significantly. High expression of GFP during blood infection, a
prerequisite for robust separation of transgenic lines by flow cytometry, was
achieved. Isogenic recombinant parasite populations were isolated even in the
presence of a 100-fold excess of wild-type (WT) parasites. Aquaglyceroporin (AQP)
loss-of-function mutants and parasites expressing a tagged AQP were generated to 
validate this approach. aqp(-) parasites grow normally within the WT phenotypic
range during blood infection of NMRI mice. Similarly, colonization of the insect 
vector and establishment of an infection after mosquito transmission were
unaffected, indicating that AQP is dispensable for life cycle progression in vivo
under physiological conditions, refuting its use as a suitable drug target.
Tagged AQP localized to perinuclear structures and not the parasite plasma
membrane. We suggest that flow-cytometric isolation of isogenic parasites
overcomes the major roadblock towards a genome-scale repository of mutant and
transgenic malaria parasite lines.

Copyright Â© 2012 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2012.10.006 
PMCID: PMC3521960
PMID: 23137753  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

