
1. Parasit Vectors. 2012 Nov 12;5:252. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-5-252.

Mitochondrial peroxidase TPx-2 is not essential in the blood and insect stages of
Plasmodium berghei.

Masuda-Suganuma H(1), Usui M, Fukumoto S, Inoue N, Kawazu S.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Inada, Obihiro, 080-8555, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Malaria parasites actively proliferate in the body of their
vertebrate and insect hosts, and are subjected to the toxic effects of reactive
oxygen species. The antioxidant defenses of malaria parasites are considered to
play essential roles in their survival and are thus considered promising targets 
for intervention. We sought to identify the cellular function of thioredoxin
peroxidase-2 (TPx-2), which is expressed in the mitochondria, by disrupting the
TPx-2 gene (pbtpx-2) of the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei.
FINDINGS: In three independent experiments, two disruptant populations (TPx-2 KO)
and three wild-type parasite populations with pyrimethamine resistance
(dhfr-ts/mt at the DHFR-TS locus) and intact pbtpx-2 (TPx-2 WT) were obtained and
cloned. Null expression of TPx-2 in the KO population was confirmed by RT-PCR and
Western blot analyses. The TPx-2 KO parasite developed normally in mouse
erythrocytes and multiplied at a rate similar to that of the TPx-2 WT parasite
during the experimental period. The peak period of gametocytemia was delayed by 1
day in the TPx-2 KO compared with that of the TPx-2 WT and the parent parasite,
however, the highest gametocyte number was comparable. The number of midgut
oocysts in the TPx-2 KO at 14 days post feeding was comparable to that of the
TPx-2 WT.
CONCLUSIONS: The present finding suggests that mitochondrial Prx TPx-2 is not
essential for asexual and the insect stage development of the malaria parasite.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-5-252 
PMCID: PMC3507878
PMID: 23146411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

