
1. Infect Immun. 2013 Mar;81(3):789-800. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01108-12. Epub 2012 Dec
28.

Full-length Plasmodium falciparum circumsporozoite protein administered with
long-chain poly(I·C) or the Toll-like receptor 4 agonist glucopyranosyl lipid
adjuvant-stable emulsion elicits potent antibody and CD4+ T cell immunity and
protection in mice.

Kastenmüller K(1), Espinosa DA, Trager L, Stoyanov C, Salazar AM, Pokalwar S,
Singh S, Dutta S, Ockenhouse CF, Zavala F, Seder RA.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Research Center and Cellular Immunology Section, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.

The Plasmodium falciparum circumsporozoite (CS) protein (CSP) is a major vaccine 
target for preventing malaria infection. Thus, developing strong and durable
antibody and T cell responses against CSP with novel immunogens and potent
adjuvants may improve upon the success of current approaches. Here, we compare
four distinct full-length P. falciparum CS proteins expressed in Escherichia coli
or Pichia pastoris for their ability to induce immunity and protection in mice
when administered with long-chain poly(I · C) [poly(I · C)LC] as an adjuvant. CS 
proteins expressed in E. coli induced high-titer antibody responses against the
NANP repeat region and potent CSP-specific CD4(+) T cell responses. Moreover, E. 
coli-derived CS proteins in combination with poly(I · C)LC induced potent
multifunctional (interleukin 2-positive [IL-2(+)], tumor necrosis factor
alpha-positive [TNF-α(+)], gamma interferon-positive [IFN-γ(+)]) CD4(+) effector 
T cell responses in blood, in spleen, and particularly in liver. Using transgenic
Plasmodium berghei expressing the repeat region of P. falciparum CSP [Pb-CS(Pf)],
we showed that there was a 1- to 4-log decrease in malaria rRNA in the liver
following a high-dose challenge and ~50% sterilizing protection with a low-dose
challenge compared to control levels. Protection was directly correlated with
high-level antibody titers but not CD4(+) T cell responses. Finally, protective
immunity was also induced using the Toll-like receptor 4 agonist glucopyranosyl
lipid adjuvant-stable emulsion (GLA-SE) as the adjuvant, which also correlated
with high antibody titers yet CD4(+) T cell immunity that was significantly less 
potent than that with poly(I · C)LC. Overall, these data suggest that full-length
CS proteins and poly(I · C)LC or GLA-SE offer a simple vaccine formulation to be 
used alone or in combination with other vaccines for preventing malaria
infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01108-12 
PMCID: PMC3584875
PMID: 23275094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

