
1. Malar J. 2013 Jan 11;12:16. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-16.

Genetic diversity of Plasmodium vivax clinical isolates from southern Pakistan
using pvcsp and pvmsp1 genetic markers.

Raza A(1), Ghanchi NK, Thaver AM, Jafri S, Beg MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Aga Khan University, Stadium Road,
PO Box 3500, Karachi, 74800, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax is the prevalent malarial species accounting for 70%
of malaria burden in Pakistan; however, there is no baseline data on the
circulating genotypes. Studies have shown that polymorphic loci of gene encoding 
antigens pvcsp and pvmsp1 can be used reliably for conducting molecular
epidemiological studies. Therefore, this study aimed to bridge the existing
knowledge gap on population structure on P. vivax from Pakistan using these two
polymorphic genes.
METHODS: During the period January 2008 to May 2009, a total of 250 blood samples
were collected from patients tested slide positive for P. vivax, at the Aga Khan 
University Hospital, Karachi, or its collection units located in Baluchistan and 
Sindh Province. Nested PCR/RFLP was performed, using pvcsp and pvmsp1 markers to 
detect the extent of genetic diversity in clinical isolates of P. vivax from
southern Pakistan.
RESULTS: A total of 227/250 (91%) isolates were included in the analysis while
the remainder were excluded due to negative PCR outcome for P.vivax. Pvcsp
analysis showed that both VK 210 (85.5%, 194/227) and VK 247 type (14.5%, 33/227)
were found to be circulating in P. vivax isolates from southern Pakistan. A total
of sixteen and eighty-seven genotypes of pvcsp and pvmsp-1 were detected
respectively.
CONCLUSION: This is the first report from southern Pakistan on characterization
of P. vivax isolates confirming that extensively diverse pvcsp and pvmsp1
variants are present within this region. Results from this study provide valuable
data on genetic diversity of P. vivax that will be helpful for further
epidemiological studies.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-16 
PMCID: PMC3601996
PMID: 23311628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

