
1. BMC Evol Biol. 2013 Feb 11;13:37. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-13-37.

Horizontal gene transfer of epigenetic machinery and evolution of parasitism in
the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum and other apicomplexans.

Kishore SP(1), Stiller JW, Deitsch KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, NY 10065, USA.

BACKGROUND: The acquisition of complex transcriptional regulatory abilities and
epigenetic machinery facilitated the transition of the ancestor of apicomplexans 
from a free-living organism to an obligate parasite. The ability to control
sophisticated gene expression patterns enabled these ancient organisms to evolve 
several differentiated forms, invade multiple hosts and evade host immunity. How 
these abilities were acquired remains an outstanding question in protistan
biology.
RESULTS: In this work, we study SET domain bearing genes that are implicated in
mediating immune evasion, invasion and cytoadhesion pathways of modern
apicomplexans, including malaria parasites. We provide the first conclusive
evidence of a horizontal gene transfer of a Histone H4 Lysine 20 (H4K20)
modifier, Set8, from an animal host to the ancestor of apicomplexans. Set8 is
known to contribute to the coordinated expression of genes involved in immune
evasion in modern apicomplexans. We also show the likely transfer of a H3K36
methyltransferase (Ashr3 from plants), possibly derived from algal endosymbionts.
These transfers appear to date to the transition from free-living organisms to
parasitism and coincide with the proposed horizontal acquisition of cytoadhesion 
domains, the O-glycosyltransferase that modifies these domains, and the primary
family of transcription factors found in apicomplexan parasites. Notably,
phylogenetic support for these conclusions is robust and the genes clearly are
dissimilar to SET sequences found in the closely related parasite Perkinsus
marinus, and in ciliates, the nearest free-living organisms with complete genome 
sequences available.
CONCLUSIONS: Animal and plant sources of epigenetic machinery provide new
insights into the evolution of parasitism in apicomplexans. Along with the
horizontal transfer of cytoadhesive domains, O-linked glycosylation and key
transcription factors, the acquisition of SET domain methyltransferases marks a
key transitional event in the evolution to parasitism in this important protozoan
lineage.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-13-37 
PMCID: PMC3598677
PMID: 23398820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

