
1. Mol Ecol Resour. 2013 May;13(3):354-61. doi: 10.1111/1755-0998.12076. Epub 2013
Feb 11.

DNA Barcodes indicate members of the Anopheles fluviatilis (Diptera: Culicidae)
species complex to be conspecific in India.

Pradeep Kumar N(1), Krishnamoorthy N, Sahu SS, Rajavel AR, Sabesan S, Jambulingam
P.

Author information: 
(1)Vector Control Research Centre Field station (ICMR), Kottayam, Kerala 686002, 
India. kumar.dr.n.pradeep@gmail.com

Anopheles fluviatilis, a major vector of malaria in India has been described as a
complex of three sibling species members, named as S, T and U, based on
variations in chromosomal inversions. Also, ribosomal DNA markers (repetitive
Internal Transcribed Spacer 2 (ITS2) and 28S D3 region) were described to
differentiate these three sibling species members. However, controversies prevail
on the genetic isolation status of these cryptic species. Hence, we evaluated
this taxonomic incongruence employing DNA barcoding, the well established
methodology for species identification, using 60 An. fluviatilis sensu lato
specimens, collected from two malaria endemic eastern states of India. These
specimens were also subjected to sibling species characterization by ITS2 and D3 
DNA markers. The former marker identified 31 specimens among these as An.
fluviatilis S and 21 as An. fluviatilis T. Eight specimens amplified DNA
fragments specific for both S and T. The D3 marker characterized 39 specimens
belonging to species S and 21 to species T. Neither marker identified species U. 
Neighbor Joining analysis of mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase gene 1 sequences 
(the DNA barcode) categorized all the 60 specimens into a single operational
taxonomic unit, their Kimura 2 parameter (K2P) genetic variability being only
0.8%. The genetic differentiation (FST ) and gene flow (Nm ) estimates were
0.00799 and 62.07, respectively, indicating these two 'species' (S & T) as
genetically con-specific intermixing populations with negligible genetic
differentiation. Earlier investigations have refuted the existence of species U. 
Also, this study demonstrated that An. fluviatilis and the closely related An.
minimus could be taxonomically differentiated by the DNA Barcode approach
(K2P = 5.0%).

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1755-0998.12076 
PMID: 23398631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

