
1. Vaccine. 2013 Apr 3;31(14):1830-7. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.01.052. Epub 2013 
Feb 8.

Rh1 high activity binding peptides inhibit high percentages of Plasmodium
falciparum FVO strain invasion.

Arévalo-Pinzón G(1), Curtidor H, Muñoz M, Suarez D, Patarroyo MA, Patarroyo ME.

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Instituto de Inmunología de Colombia FIDIC, Carrera 50 # 26-20,
Bogotá, Colombia.

Identifying the minimal functional regions of the proteins which the malaria
parasite uses when invading its host cells constitutes the first and most
important approach in an effective design for a chemically synthesised,
multi-antigen, multi-stage, subunit-based vaccine. This work has been aimed at
identifying the PfRh1 protein binding regions (residues 1-2580) belonging to the 
reticulocyte binding-like (RBL or P. falciparum Rh [PfRh]) family implicated in
the parasite's alternative target cell invasion routes. Eighteen peptide regions 
(called high activity binding peptides - HABPs) binding to red blood cells (RBC) 
were identified in peptides mapped in a highly robust, specific and sensitive
receptor-ligand assay. These HABPs were saturable in the experimental conditions 
assayed here and most had an alpha helix structure. Polymorphism studies revealed
that only six of the eighteen HABPs identified had changes at amino acid level
amongst the seven P. falciparum strains evaluated. Most HABPs' specific binding
became altered when RBC were treated with neuraminidase, chymotrypsin and
trypsin, suggesting differing sensitivity for RBC membrane receptors. After
ascertaining that the Rh1 gene was transcribed and expressed in late-stage
schizonts of the FCB-2 strain, invasion inhibition assays were carried out. When 
most of these HABPs were assayed in P. falciparum in vitro culture they were able
to inhibit high percentages of FVO strain invasion compared to low inhibition
percentages observed with the FCB-2 strain. This data shows small Rh1 regions'
participation during invasion and suggests that these units should be included in
further immunological and structural studies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.01.052 
PMID: 23398931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

