
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56040. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056040. Epub 2013 Feb 13.

Designing antibiotic cycling strategies by determining and understanding local
adaptive landscapes.

Goulart CP(1), Mahmudi M, Crona KA, Jacobs SD, Kallmann M, Hall BG, Greene DC,
Barlow M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Natural Sciences, University of California Merced, Merced,
California, United States of America.

The evolution of antibiotic resistance among bacteria threatens our continued
ability to treat infectious diseases. The need for sustainable strategies to cure
bacterial infections has never been greater. So far, all attempts to restore
susceptibility after resistance has arisen have been unsuccessful, including
restrictions on prescribing [1] and antibiotic cycling [2], [3]. Part of the
problem may be that those efforts have implemented different classes of unrelated
antibiotics, and relied on removal of resistance by random loss of resistance
genes from bacterial populations (drift). Here, we show that alternating
structurally similar antibiotics can restore susceptibility to antibiotics after 
resistance has evolved. We found that the resistance phenotypes conferred by
variant alleles of the resistance gene encoding the TEM β-lactamase (bla(TEM))
varied greatly among 15 different β-lactam antibiotics. We captured those
differences by characterizing complete adaptive landscapes for the resistance
alleles bla(TEM-50) and bla(TEM-85), each of which differs from its ancestor
bla(TEM-1) by four mutations. We identified pathways through those landscapes
where selection for increased resistance moved in a repeating cycle among a
limited set of alleles as antibiotics were alternated. Our results showed that
susceptibility to antibiotics can be sustainably renewed by cycling structurally 
similar antibiotics. We anticipate that these results may provide a conceptual
framework for managing antibiotic resistance. This approach may also guide
sustainable cycling of the drugs used to treat malaria and HIV.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056040 
PMCID: PMC3572165
PMID: 23418506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

