
1. Exp Parasitol. 2013 May;134(1):115-21. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2013.02.012. Epub
2013 Feb 28.

Analysis of Fcgamma receptor IIa (cd32) gene polymorphism and anti-malarial IgG
subclass antibodies to asexual blood-stage antigen of Plasmodium falciparum in an
unstable malaria endemic area of Iran.

Zakeri S(1), Mashhadi R, Mehrizi AA, Djadid ND.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur
Institute of Iran, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran. zakeris@yahoo.com

One of the main host genetic factors involved in inflammation, immune responses
and pathogenesis of malaria is FcγRIIa (cd32) gene. A single point mutation at
position 131 replace an arginine (R) with a histidine (H) that can affect the
affinity of the receptor for human IgG subclasses. This investigation was
designed to explore the polymorphisms at FcγRIIa gene in association with both
anti-malarial total IgG antibody and IgG subclass profiles to C-terminal region
of Plasmodium falciparum merozoite surface protein 1 (PfMSP-1(19)). In this
study, 166 infected patients with P. falciparum who are living in a malaria
endemic area of Iran were studied using PCR-RFLP and ELISA methods. The results
showed that the frequency of FcγRIIa-R/R131, -R/H131 and -H/H131 genotypes was
9.6%, 42.8% and 47.6%, respectively. Level of total IgG to recombinant
PfMSP-1(19) antigen showed that there was no difference among the FcγRIIa-R/R131,
-R/H131 and -H/H131 groups. With regards to the IgG subclasses, the anti-malarial
IgG1 antibodies predominated. Also, there was a significant difference between
the frequency of positive responders for anti-PfMSP-1(19) IgG and IgG1 antibodies
in P. falciparum-infected individuals with FcγRIIa-R/R131, -R/H131 or -H/H131
genotypes (P<0.05, X(2) test). Regarding to IgG2-PfMSP-1(19) antibody, 27.27%
(FcγRIIa-R/R131), 25.71% (FcγRIIa-R/H131) and 22.2% (FcγRIIa-H/H131) of IgG
responders showed positive antibody response. Taken together, this study is the
first report that exhibits the high frequency of both FcγRIIa-H131H genotypes and
H131 allele in the Baluchi ethnic group, which was similar to the Fulani ethnic
group. The present results provide additional data to understand the role of
FcγRIIa-131 genotypes in the pathogenesis of malaria.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2013.02.012 
PMID: 23458236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

