
1. Malar J. 2013 Mar 21;12:109. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-109.

Effect of blood meal digestion and DNA extraction protocol on the success of
blood meal source determination in the malaria vector Anopheles atroparvus.

Martínez-de la Puente J(1), Ruiz S, Soriguer R, Figuerola J.

Author information: 
(1)Estación Biológica de Doñana (EBD-CSIC), C/Américo Vespucio, Seville, s/n,
E-41092, Spain. jmp@ebd.csic.es

BACKGROUND: Host identification is an essential step in studies on the
transmission dynamics of vector-borne disease. Nowadays, molecular tools allow
the identification of vertebrate hosts to the species level. However, the
proportion of successful identifications is variable and may be affected by the
quality of the samples and the laboratory protocols. Here, the effect of two of
these factors, namely the digestion status of mosquito blood meal and the DNA
extraction procedure, on the success of host identification by amplification and 
sequencing of a fragment of the cytochrome oxidase 1 gene were tested.
METHODS: Mosquitoes collected both outdoors and indoors during 2012 in southern
Spain were identified to species level and their blood meal digestion status
recorded using the Sella score, a visual estimation of the digestion status of
mosquito blood meals. Each mosquito was assigned randomly to one of two DNA
extraction procedures: the quick and cheap HotSHOT procedure or the QIAGEN DNeasy
Blood and Tissue(®) kit and their hosts identified by a molecular method.
RESULTS: Three hundred and forty-seven blood-fed mosquitoes belonging to
Anopheles atroparvus (n=171), Culex perexiguus (n=84), Culex pipiens (n=43),
Culex theileri (n=39), Culex modestus (n=5), Ochlerotatus caspius (n=4), Culiseta
sp. (n=1) were included in this study. Overall, hosts were identified from 234
blood meals compromising at least 25 species including mammals, birds and a
single reptile. The success of host identification was lower in mosquitoes with
an advanced stage of blood meal digestion and for blood meals extracted using the
HotSHOT procedure.
CONCLUSIONS: The success of host identification decreases with the advanced stage
of mosquito blood meal digestion, from 84.5% for recent blood meals to 25.0% for 
more digested ones. Using the QIAGEN kit, the identification success improved by 
17.6%, with larger increases at more advanced stages of blood meal digestion.
Availability of blood-fed females used to be very limited for studies of vector
ecology, and these results may help to increase the efficiency of blood meal
analyses. In addition, results obtained in this study clearly support that the
potential malaria vector An. atroparvus feeds on animals located outdoors but use
human-made shelters for resting after feeding.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-109 
PMCID: PMC3608947
PMID: 23517864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

