
1. BMC Immunol. 2013 Mar 25;14:15. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-14-15.

Interleukin (IL)-13 promoter polymorphisms (-7402 T/G and -4729G/A) condition
susceptibility to pediatric severe malarial anemia but not circulating IL-13
levels.

Okeyo WA(1), Munde EO, Okumu W, Raballah E, Anyona SB, Vulule JM, Ong'echa JM,
Perkins DJ, Ouma C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Technology, School of Public Health and 
Community Development, Maseno University, Maseno, Kenya.

In holoendemic Plasmodium falciparum transmission areas such as western Kenya,
severe malarial anemia [SMA, hemoglobin (Hb) < 6.0 g/dL, with any density
parasitemia] is the most common clinical manifestation of severe malaria
resulting in high rates of pediatric morbidity and mortality in these regions.
Previous studies associated interleukin (IL)-13 with pathogenesis of different
infectious diseases, including P. falciparum malaria. However, the functional
roles of polymorphic variants within the IL-13 promoter in conditioning
susceptibility to SMA remain largely unexplored. As such, the association between
the IL-13 variants -7402 T/G (rs7719175) and -4729G/A (rs3091307) and
susceptibility to SMA was determined in children (n = 387) presenting with
clinical symptoms of falciparum malaria and resident in a holoendemic
transmission region in western Kenya. Our results indicated no difference in the 
proportions of individual genotypes among children presenting with non-SMA (n =
222) versus SMA (n = 165). Similarly, there was no associations between the
individual genotypes (-7402 T/G and -4729G/A) and SMA. Additional analyses,
however, revealed that proportions of individuals with -7402 T/-4729A (TA)
haplotype was significantly higher in children presenting with SMA than non-SMA
group (P = 0.043). A further multivariate logistic regression analyses,
controlling for confounding factors, demonstrated that carriage of the TA
haplotype was associated with increased susceptibility to SMA (OR; 1.564, 95% CI;
1.023-2.389, P = 0.039). In addition, circulating levels of IL-13 were comparable
between the clinical groups as well as across genotypes and haplotypes.
Collectively, findings presented here suggest that haplotypes within the IL-13
promoter at -7402 T/G and -4729G/A may modulate SMA pathogenesis, but do not
affect circulating IL-13 levels.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2172-14-15 
PMCID: PMC3618200
PMID: 23521898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

