
1. BMC Genomics. 2013 Apr 15;14:256. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-256.

Changes in the transcriptome of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum during
the initial phase of transmission from the human to the mosquito.

Ngwa CJ(1), Scheuermayer M, Mair GR, Kern S, Brügl T, Wirth CC, Aminake MN,
Wiesner J, Fischer R, Vilcinskas A, Pradel G.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Infectious Diseases, University of Würzburg,
Josef-Schneider-Strasse 2/D15, 97080 Würzburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The transmission of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum from
the human to the mosquito is mediated by dormant sexual precursor cells, the
gametocytes, which become activated in the mosquito midgut. Because gametocytes
are the only parasite stages able to establish an infection in the mosquito, they
play a crucial role in spreading the tropical disease. The human-to-mosquito
transmission triggers important molecular changes in the gametocytes, which
initiate gametogenesis and prepare the parasite for life-cycle progression in the
insect vector.
RESULTS: To better understand gene regulations during the initial phase of
malaria parasite transmission, we focused on the transcriptome changes that occur
within the first half hour of parasite development in the mosquito. Comparison of
mRNA levels of P. falciparum gametocytes before and 30 min following activation
using suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH) identified 126 genes, which
changed in expression during gametogenesis. Among these, 17.5% had putative
functions in signaling, 14.3% were assigned to cell cycle and gene expression,
8.7% were linked to the cytoskeleton or inner membrane complex, 7.9% were
involved in proteostasis and 6.4% in metabolism, 12.7% were cell
surface-associated proteins, 11.9% were assigned to other functions, and 20.6%
represented genes of unknown function. For 40% of the identified genes there has 
as yet not been any protein evidence.For a subset of 27 genes, transcript changes
during gametogenesis were studied in detail by real-time RT-PCR. Of these, 22
genes were expressed in gametocytes, and for 15 genes transcript expression in
gametocytes was increased compared to asexual blood stage parasites. Transcript
levels of seven genes were particularly high in activated gametocytes, pointing
at functions downstream of gametocyte transmission to the mosquito. For selected 
genes, a regulated expression during gametogenesis was confirmed on the protein
level, using quantitative confocal microscopy.
CONCLUSIONS: The obtained transcriptome data demonstrate the regulations of gene 
expression immediately following malaria parasite transmission to the mosquito.
Our findings support the identification of proteins important for sexual
reproduction and further development of the mosquito midgut stages and provide
insights into the genetic basis of the rapid adaption of Plasmodium to the insect
vector.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-256 
PMCID: PMC3640944
PMID: 23586929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

