
1. Parasit Vectors. 2013 May 2;6:130. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-130.

Bioefficacy of long-lasting insecticidal nets against pyrethroid-resistant
populations of Anopheles gambiae s.s. from different malaria transmission zones
in Uganda.

Okia M(1), Ndyomugyenyi R, Kirunda J, Byaruhanga A, Adibaku S, Lwamafa DK,
Kironde F.

Author information: 
(1)National Malaria Control Programme, Ministry of Health, P.O. Box 7272,
Kampala, Uganda.

BACKGROUND: There are major concerns over sustaining the efficacy of current
malaria vector control interventions given the rapid spread of resistance,
particularly to pyrethroids. This study assessed the bioefficacy of five
WHO-recommended long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs) against
pyrethroid-resistant Anopheles gambiae field populations from Uganda.
METHODS: Adult An. gambiae from Lira, Tororo, Wakiso and Kanungu districts were
exposed to permethrin (0.75%) or deltamethrin (0.05%) in standard WHO
susceptibility tests. Cone bioassays were used to measure the bioefficacy of four
mono-treated LLINs (Olyset®, Interceptor®, Netprotect® and PermaNet® 2.0) and one
combination LLIN (PermaNet® 3.0) against the four mosquito populations. Wireball 
assays were similarly conducted to determine knockdown rates. Species composition
and kdr mutation frequency were determined for a sample of mosquitoes from each
population. Chemical assays confirmed that test nets fell within target dose
ranges.
RESULTS: Anopheles gambiae s.s. predominated at all four sites (86-99% of
Anopheles spp.) with moderate kdr L1014S allelic frequency (0.34-0.37). Confirmed
or possible resistance to both permethrin and deltamethrin was identified for all
four test populations. Reduced susceptibility to standard LLINs was observed for 
all four populations, with mortality rates as low as 45.8% even though the nets
were unused. The combination LLIN PermaNet®3.0 showed the highest overall
bioefficacy against all four An. gambiae s.l. populations (98.5-100% mortality). 
Wireball assays provided a more sensitive indicator of comparative bioefficacy,
and PermaNet 3.0 was again associated with the highest bioefficacy against all
four populations (76.5-91.7% mortality after 30 mins).
CONCLUSIONS: The bioefficacy of mono-treated LLINs against pyrethroid-resistant
field populations of An. gambiae varied by LLIN type and mosquito population,
indicating that certain LLINs may be more suitable than others at particular
sites. In contrast, the combination LLIN PermaNet 3.0 performed optimally against
the four An. gambiae populations tested. The observed reduced susceptibility of
malaria vectors to mono-treated LLINs is of particular concern, especially
considering all nets were unused. With ongoing scale-up of insecticidal tools in 
the advent of increasing resistance, it is essential that those interventions
with proven enhanced efficacy are given preference particularly in areas with
high resistance.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-130 
PMCID: PMC3656772
PMID: 23634798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

