
1. Genetika. 2013 Feb;49(2):279-88.

The 5q31 region in two African populations as a facet of natural selection by
infectious diseases.

Elhassan AA(1), Hussein AA, Mohamed HS, Rockett K, Kwiatkowski D, Elhassan AM,
Ibrahim ME.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Disease and Diversity, Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of
Endemic Diseases, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan. abjil04@yahoo.com

Cases of extreme natural selection could lead either to rapid fixation or
extinction of alleles depending on the population structure and size. It may also
manifest in excess of heterozygosity and the locus concerned will be displaying
such drastic features of allele change. We suspect the 5q31 in chromosome 5 to
mirror situation of such extreme natural selection particularly that the region
encompasses genes of type 2 cytokine known to associate with a number of
infectious and non-infectious diseases. We typed two sets of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPS) in two populations: an initial limited set of only 4 SNP
within the genes of IL-4, IL-13, IL-5 and IL-9 in 108 unrelated individuals and a
replicating set of 14 SN P in 924 individuals from the same populations with
disregard to relatedness. The results suggest the 5q31 area to be under intense
selective pressure as indicated by marked heterozygosity independent of Linkage
Disequilibrium (LD); difference in heterozygosity, allele, and haplotype
frequencies between generations and departure from Hardy-Weinberg expectations
(DHWE). The study area is endemic for several infectious diseases including
malaria and visceral leishmaniasis (VL). Malaria caused by Plasmodiumfalciparum, 
however, occurs mostly with mild clinical symptoms in all ages, which makes it
unlikely to account for these indices. The strong selection signals seems to
emanate from recent outbreaks of VL which affected both populations to varying
extent.

DOI: 10.7868/s0016675813020057 
PMID: 23668094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

