
1. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 2013 Jan;44(1):1-12.

C-terminal polymorphism of Plasmodium falciparium merozoite surface protein-1
(MSP-1) from Tak Province, Thailand.

Viputtigul K(1), Tungpukdee N, Ruangareerate T, Luplertlop N, Wilairatana P,
Gaywee J, Krudsood S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Hygiene, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

This study was undertaken to ascertain the extent of polymorphism in the
C-terminal region of Plasmodium falciparum merozoite surface protein (MSP-1) from
119 malaria patients in Tak Province on the western border of Thailand, who were 
admitted to the Bangkok Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. P. falciparum infection was
confirmed by microscopic examination of peripheral blood smears. Clinical
manifestations were categorized into 2 groups: uncomplicated (94 cases) and
complicated/severe (25 cases). A 1,040 basepair fragment of P. falciparum MSP-1
gene was compared with MSP-1 of reference strains retrieved from GenBank. The
consensus sequences of MSP-1 block 16 showed it belonged to MAD20 genotype, which
is the major allele of falciparum malaria from the western border of Thailand.
MSP-1 block 16 amino acid fragment could be separated into 2 groups: similar and 
dissimilar to reference sequence. Four variations in MSP-1 block 16 were -1494K, 
D1510G, D1556N, and K1696I. MSP-1 block 16 diversity is not significantly
associated with clinical manifestation although MAD 20 genotype is the
predominant genotype in this area. The genetic data of MSP1 gene of faciparum
malaria isolated from western Thai border contribute to the existing genetic
database of Thai P. falciparum strain.


PMID: 23682431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

