
1. Mol Ecol Resour. 2013 Nov;13(6):1082-92. doi: 10.1111/1755-0998.12126. Epub 2013 
May 24.

Wing geometric morphometrics and molecular assessment of members in the
Albitarsis Complex from Colombia.

Gómez G(1), Jaramillo L, Correa MM.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Microbiología Molecular, Escuela de Microbiología, Universidad de
Antioquia, Calle 67 No. 53-108, off. 5-430, Medellín, Colombia.

Malaria parasites are transmitted to humans by female mosquitoes of the genus
Anopheles. The Albitarsis Complex harbours at least eight species not readily
differentiable by morphology. This complicates the determination of those species
involved in malaria transmission and the implementation of targeted and effective
vector control strategies. In Colombia, there is little information about the
identity and distribution of the Albitarsis Complex members. In this work, COI
DNA barcoding was used to assign specimens Anopheles albitarsis s.l. to any of
the previously designated species of the Albitarsis Complex. Two molecular
operational taxonomic units (MOTUs), differentially distributed in Colombia, were
detected, A. albitarsis I in the NW and NE, and A. albitarsis F, E and NE
Colombia. In contrast, nuclear white gene and ITS2 sequence analyses did not
allow differentiating between the MOTUs. Wing landmark-based geometric
morphometrics applied to explore intertaxa phenotypic heterogeneity showed a
subtle but significant difference in size, while shape did not allow the
separation of the MOTUs. In general, the multiple marker analysis was not
supportive of the existence in Colombia of more than one species of the
Albitarsis Complex.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1755-0998.12126 
PMID: 23702155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

