
1. Parasit Vectors. 2013 May 24;6:150. doi: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-150.

Identification of novel arthropod vector G protein-coupled receptors.

Nowling RJ(1), Abrudan JL, Shoue DA, Abdul-Wahid B, Wadsworth M, Stayback G,
Collins FH, McDowell MA, Izaguirre JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre 
Dame, IN 46656, USA.

BACKGROUND: The control of vector-borne diseases, such as malaria, dengue fever, 
and typhus fever is often achieved with the use of insecticides. Unfortunately,
insecticide resistance is becoming common among different vector species. There
are currently no chemical alternatives to these insecticides because new
human-safe classes of molecules have yet to be brought to the vector-control
market. The identification of novel targets offer opportunities for rational
design of new chemistries to control vector populations. One target family, G
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), has remained relatively under explored in
terms of insecticide development.
METHODS: A novel classifier, Ensemble*, for vector GPCRs was developed. Ensemble*
was validated and compared to existing classifiers using a set of all known GPCRs
from Aedes aegypti, Anopheles gambiae, Apis Mellifera, Drosophila melanogaster,
Homo sapiens, and Pediculus humanus. Predictions for unidentified sequences from 
Ae. aegypti, An. gambiae, and Pe. humanus were validated. Quantitative RT-PCR
expression analysis was performed on previously-known and newly discovered Ae.
aegypti GPCR genes.
RESULTS: We present a new analysis of GPCRs in the genomes of Ae, aegypti, a
vector of dengue fever, An. gambiae, a primary vector of Plasmodium falciparum
that causes malaria, and Pe. humanus, a vector of epidemic typhus fever, using a 
novel GPCR classifier, Ensemble*, designed for insect vector species. We
identified 30 additional putative GPCRs, 19 of which we validated. Expression of 
the newly discovered Ae. aegypti GPCR genes was confirmed via quantitative
RT-PCR.
CONCLUSION: A novel GPCR classifier for insect vectors, Ensemble*, was developed 
and GPCR predictions were validated. Ensemble* and the validation pipeline were
applied to the genomes of three insect vectors (Ae. aegypti, An. gambiae, and Pe.
humanus), resulting in the identification of 52 GPCRs not previously identified, 
of which 11 are predicted GPCRs, and 19 are predicted and confirmed GPCRs.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-3305-6-150 
PMCID: PMC3680159
PMID: 23705687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

