
1. BMC Evol Biol. 2013 May 31;13:110. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-13-110.

Hypervariable antigen genes in malaria have ancient roots.

Zilversmit MM(1), Chase EK, Chen DS, Awadalla P, Day KP, McVean G.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Allergy of Infectious Disease, National Institutes of
Health, 12735 Twinbrook Parkway, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.
martine.zilversmit@nih.gov

BACKGROUND: The var genes of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum are
highly polymorphic loci coding for the erythrocyte membrane proteins 1 (PfEMP1), 
which are responsible for the cytoaherence of P. falciparum infected red blood
cells to the human vasculature. Cytoadhesion, coupled with differential
expression of var genes, contributes to virulence and allows the parasite to
establish chronic infections by evading detection from the host's immune system. 
Although studying genetic diversity is a major focus of recent work on the var
genes, little is known about the gene family's origin and evolutionary history.
RESULTS: Using a novel hidden Markov model-based approach and var sequences
assembled from additional isolates and species, we are able to reveal elements of
both the early evolution of the var genes as well as recent diversifying events. 
We compare sequences of the var gene DBLα domains from divergent isolates of P.
falciparum (3D7 and HB3), and a closely-related species, Plasmodium reichenowi.
We find that the gene family is equally large in P. reichenowi and P. falciparum 
-- with a minimum of 51 var genes in the P. reichenowi genome (compared to 61 in 
3D7 and a minimum of 48 in HB3). In addition, we are able to define large,
continuous blocks of homologous sequence among P. falciparum and P. reichenowi
var gene DBLα domains. These results reveal that the contemporary structure of
the var gene family was present before the divergence of P. falciparum and P.
reichenowi, estimated to be between 2.5 to 6 million years ago. We also reveal
that recombination has played an important and traceable role in both the
establishment, and the maintenance, of diversity in the sequences.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the remarkable diversity and rapid evolution found in these 
loci within and among P. falciparum populations, the basic structure of these
domains and the gene family is surprisingly old and stable. Revealing a common
structure as well as conserved sequence among two species also has implications
for developing new primate-parasite models for studying the pathology and
immunology of falciparum malaria, and for studying the population genetics of var
genes and associated virulence phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-13-110 
PMCID: PMC3680017
PMID: 23725540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

