
1. Int J Parasitol. 2013 Sep;43(10):825-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2013.05.004. Epub 
2013 Jun 7.

Multilocus population genetic analysis of the Southwest Pacific malaria vector
Anopheles punctulatus.

Seah IM(1), Ambrose L, Cooper RD, Beebe NW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Queensland, St Lucia, Brisbane,
Queensland 4072, Australia.

The population structure and history of the cryptic malaria vector species,
Anopheles punctulatus (Doenitz), was investigated throughout Papua New Guinea and
the Solomon Islands with the aim of detailing genetic subdivisions and the
potential for movement through this biogeographically complex region. We obtained
larval collections from over 80 sites and utilised a diverse array of molecular
markers that evolve through different processes. Individuals were initially
identified to species and genotyped using the ribosomal DNA second internal
transcribed spacer. DNA sequencing of a single copy nuclear ribosomal protein S9 
and the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I loci were then investigated and 12
nuclear microsatellite markers were developed and analysed. Our data revealed
three genetically distinct populations--one in Papua New Guinea, the second on
Buka Island (Bougainville Province, Papua New Guinea), and the third on
Guadalcanal Island (Solomon Islands). Genetic differentiation within Papua New
Guinea was much lower than that found in studies of other closely related species
in the region. The data does suggest that A. punctulatus has undergone a
population bottleneck followed by a recent population and range expansion in
Papua New Guinea. Humans and regional economic growth may be facilitating this
population expansion, as A. punctulatus is able to rapidly occupy human modified 
landscapes and traverse unsealed roads. We therefore anticipate extensive
movement of this species through New Guinea--particularly into the highlands,
with a potential increase in malaria frequency in a warming climate--as well as
relatively unrestricted gene flow of advantageous alleles that may confound
vector control efforts.

Copyright Â© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2013.05.004 
PMID: 23747927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

