
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 13;8(6):e66068. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066068. Print 2013.

Identification and analysis of putative homologues of mechanosensitive channels
in pathogenic protozoa.

Prole DL(1), Taylor CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom. dp350@cam.ac.uk

Mechanosensitive channels play important roles in the physiology of many
organisms, and their dysfunction can affect cell survival. This suggests that
they might be therapeutic targets in pathogenic organisms. Pathogenic protozoa
lead to diseases such as malaria, dysentery, leishmaniasis and trypanosomiasis
that are responsible for millions of deaths each year worldwide. We analyzed the 
genomes of pathogenic protozoa and show the existence within them of genes
encoding putative homologues of mechanosensitive channels. Entamoeba histolytica,
Leishmania spp., Trypanosoma cruzi and Trichomonas vaginalis have genes encoding 
homologues of Piezo channels, while most pathogenic protozoa have genes encoding 
homologues of mechanosensitive small-conductance (MscS) and K(+)-dependent (MscK)
channels. In contrast, all parasites examined lack genes encoding
mechanosensitive large-conductance (MscL), mini-conductance (MscM) and
degenerin/epithelial Na(+) (DEG/ENaC) channels. Multiple sequence alignments of
evolutionarily distant protozoan, amoeban, plant, insect and vertebrate Piezo
channel subunits define an absolutely conserved motif that may be involved in
channel conductance or gating. MscS channels are not present in humans, and the
sequences of protozoan and human homologues of Piezo channels differ
substantially. This suggests the possibility for specific targeting of
mechanosensitive channels of pathogens by therapeutic drugs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066068 
PMCID: PMC3681921
PMID: 23785469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

