
1. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Jun 27;4:e694. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.225.

Dual role of chloroquine in liver ischemia reperfusion injury: reduction of liver
damage in early phase, but aggravation in late phase.

Fang H(1), Liu A, Dahmen U, Dirsch O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China.

The anti-malaria drug chloroquine is well known as autophagy inhibitor.
Chloroquine has also been used as anti-inflammatory drugs to treat inflammatory
diseases. We hypothesized that chloroquine could have a dual effect in liver
ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury: chloroquine on the one hand could protect the 
liver against I/R injury via inhibition of inflammatory response, but on the
other hand could aggravate liver I/R injury through inhibition of autophagy. Rats
(n=6 per group) were pre-treated with chloroquine (60 mg/kg, i.p.) 1 h before
warm ischemia, and they were continuously subjected to a daily chloroquine
injection for up to 2 days. Rats were killed 0.5, 6, 24 and 48 h after
reperfusion. At the early phase (i.e., 0-6 h after reperfusion), chloroquine
treatment ameliorated liver I/R injury, as indicated by lower serum
aminotransferase levels, lower hepatic inflammatory cytokines and fewer
histopathologic changes. In contrast, chloroquine worsened liver injury at the
late phase of reperfusion (i.e., 24-48 h after reperfusion). The mechanism of
protective action of chloroquine appeared to involve its ability to modulate
mitogen-activated protein kinase activation, reduce high-mobility group box 1
release and inflammatory cytokines production, whereas chloroquine worsened liver
injury via inhibition of autophagy and induction of hepatic apoptosis at the late
phase. In conclusion, chloroquine prevents ischemic liver damage at the early
phase, but aggravates liver damage at the late phase in liver I/R injury. This
dual role of chloroquine should be considered when using chloroquine as an
inhibitor of inflammation or autophagy in I/R injury.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2013.225 
PMCID: PMC3702304
PMID: 23807223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

