
1. Can J Microbiol. 2013 Jul;59(7):485-93. doi: 10.1139/cjm-2013-0166. Epub 2013 Jun
3.

Molecular factors that are associated with early developmental arrest of
intraerythrocytic Plasmodium falciparum.

Asahi H(1), Tolba ME, Tanabe M, Ohmae H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, 23-1
Toyama 1-chome, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8640, Japan. asahih@nih.go.jp

Malaria continues to be a devastating disease. We investigated the factors that
control intraerythrocytic development of the parasite Plasmodium falciparum by
using a chemically defined medium (CDM) containing non-esterified fatty acid(s)
(NEFA) and phospholipids with specific fatty acid moieties, to identify
substances crucial for parasite development. Different NEFAs in the CDM played
distinct roles by altering the development of the parasite at various stages,
with effects ranging from complete growth to growth arrest at the ring stage. We 
used genome-wide transcriptome profiling to identify genes that were
differentially expressed among the different developmental stages of the
parasite, cultured in the presence of various NEFAs. We predicted 26 transcripts 
that were associated with the suppression of schizogony, of which 5 transcripts, 
including merozoite surface protein 2, a putative DEAD/DEAH box RNA helicase,
serine repeat antigen 3, a putative copper channel, and palmitoyl
acyltransferase, were particularly associated with blockage of trophozoite
progression from the ring stage. Furthermore, the involvement of copper ions in
developmental arrest was detected by copper-ion-chelating methods, implying a
critical function of copper homeostasis in the early growth stage of the
parasite. These results should help to elucidate the mechanisms behind the
development of P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1139/cjm-2013-0166 
PMID: 23826958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

