
1. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 2013 Nov-Dec;60(6):626-33. doi: 10.1111/jeu.12069. Epub
2013 Jul 24.

Characterization of a new pathogenic Acanthamoeba Species, A. byersi n. sp.,
isolated from a human with fatal amoebic encephalitis.

Qvarnstrom Y(1), Nerad TA, Visvesvara GS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global Health, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, 30329, Georgia.

Acanthamoeba spp. are free-living amoebae that are ubiquitous in natural
environments. They can cause cutaneous, nasopharyngeal, and disseminated
infection, leading to granulomatous amebic encephalitis (GAE) in
immunocompromised individuals. In addition, they can cause amoebic keratitis in
contact lens wearers. Acanthamoeba GAE is almost always fatal because of
difficulty and delay in diagnosis and lack of optimal antimicrobial therapy.
Here, we report the description of an unusual strain isolated from skin and brain
of a GAE patient. The amoebae displayed large trophozoites and star-shaped cysts,
characteristics for acanthamoebas belonging to morphology Group 1. However, its
unique morphology and growth characteristics differentiated this new strain from 
other Group 1 species. DNA sequence analysis, secondary structure prediction, and
phylogenetic analysis of the 18S rRNA gene confirmed that this new strain
belonged to Group 1, but that it was distinct from the other sequence types
within that group. Thus, we hereby propose the establishment of a new species,
Acanthamoeba byersi n. sp. as well as a new sequence type, T18, for this new
strain. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a Group 1 Acanthamoeba that
is indisputably pathogenic in humans.

Published 2013. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/jeu.12069 
PMCID: PMC4618466
PMID: 23879685  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

