
1. Acta Trop. 2013 Oct;128(1):137-43. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.07.005. Epub
2013 Jul 21.

Distribution of dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr) and dihydropteroate synthase
(dhps) mutant alleles in Plasmodium vivax isolates from Thailand.

Thongdee P(1), Kuesap J, Rungsihirunrat K, Tippawangkosol P, Mungthin M,
Na-Bangchang K.

Author information: 
(1)Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, Thammasat University, Pathum
Thani, Thailand.

The analysis of prevalence and distribution of pvdhfr and pvdhps mutations were
performed in 169 samples collected from patients with Plasmodium vivax infection 
who attended the malaria clinics in the provinces along the three international
borders of Thailand (Thai-Myanmar, Thai-Cambodian, and Thai-Malaysian borders).
SNP-haplotypes of the pvdhfr at amino acid positions 13, 33, 57, 58, 61, 117, and
173 and of the pvdhps at positions 383 and 553 were examined by nested PCR-RFLP. 
Significant differences in the prevalence and distribution of pvdhfr and pvdhps
combination alleles were observed in P. vivax isolates collected from all the
three border areas. The most prevalent combination alleles were triple mutant
pvdhfr 57L/58R/117T alleles/double wild-type pvdhps alleles (n=18), double mutant
pvdhfr 58R/117N alleles/double wild-type pvdhps alleles (n=10), and triple mutant
pvdhfr 58R/61M/117N alleles/double wild-type pvdhps alleles (n=52) or with single
mutant pvdhps 383G allele (n=28), respectively. These information on prevalence
and patterns of pvdhfr and pvdhps polymorphisms obtained from the present study
suggest the presence of SP pressure on P. vivax isolates in Thailand which could 
be linked to the introduction of malaria from neighboring countries. Results did 
not support the application of SP for P. vivax control program in Thailand as
well as the neighboring countries.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.07.005 
PMID: 23880285  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

