
1. Malar J. 2013 Jul 31;12:264. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-264.

Increased detection of Plasmodium knowlesi in Sandakan division, Sabah as
revealed by PlasmoNex™.

Goh XT(1), Lim YA, Vythilingam I, Chew CH, Lee PC, Ngui R, Tan TC, Yap NJ,
Nissapatorn V, Chua KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium knowlesi is a simian malaria parasite that is widespread
in humans in Malaysian Borneo. However, little is known about the incidence and
distribution of this parasite in the Sandakan division, Malaysian Borneo.
Therefore, the aim of the present epidemiological study was to investigate the
incidence and distribution of P. knowlesi as well as other Plasmodium species in 
this division based on a most recent developed hexaplex PCR system (PlasmoNex™).
METHODS: A total of 189 whole blood samples were collected from Telupid Health
Clinic, Sabah, Malaysia, from 2008 to 2011. All patients who participated in the 
study were microscopically malaria positive before recruitment. Complete
demographic details and haematological profiles were obtained from 85 patients
(13 females and 72 males). Identification of Plasmodium species was conducted
using PlasmoNex™ targeting the 18S ssu rRNA gene.
RESULTS: A total of 178 samples were positive for Plasmodium species by using
PlasmoNex™. Plasmodium falciparum was identified in 68 samples (38.2%) followed
by 64 cases (36.0%) of Plasmodium vivax, 42 (23.6%) cases of P. knowlesi, two
(1.1%) cases of Plasmodium malariae and two (1.1%) mixed-species infections (i e,
P. vivax/P. falciparum). Thirty-five PlasmoNex™ positive P. knowlesi samples were
misdiagnosed as P. malariae by microscopy. Plasmodium knowlesi was detected in
all four districts of Sandakan division with the highest incidence in the
Kinabatangan district. Thrombocytopaenia and anaemia showed to be the most
frequent malaria-associated haematological complications in this study.
CONCLUSIONS: The discovery of P. knowlesi in Sandakan division showed that
prospective studies on the epidemiological risk factors and transmission dynamics
of P. knowlesi in these areas are crucial in order to develop strategies for
effective malaria control. The availability of advanced diagnostic tool
PlasmoNex™ enhanced the accuracy and accelerated the speed in the diagnosis of
malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-264 
PMCID: PMC3733977
PMID: 23902626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

