
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 23;8(7):e69439. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069439. Print 2013.

Gene expression-based biomarkers for Anopheles gambiae age grading.

Wang MH(1), Marinotti O, Zhong D, James AA, Walker E, Guda T, Kweka EJ, Githure
J, Yan G.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Public Health, University of California Irvine, Irvine, California,
United States of America.

Information on population age structure of mosquitoes under natural conditions is
fundamental to the understanding of vectorial capacity and crucial for assessing 
the impact of vector control measures on malaria transmission. Transcriptional
profiling has been proposed as a method for predicting mosquito age for Aedes and
Anopheles mosquitoes, however, whether this new method is adequate for natural
conditions is unknown. This study tests the applicability of transcriptional
profiling for age-grading of Anopheles gambiae, the most important malaria vector
in Africa. The transcript abundance of two An. gambiae genes, AGAP009551 and
AGAP011615, was measured during aging under laboratory and field conditions in
three mosquito strains. Age-dependent monotonic changes in transcript levels were
observed in all strains evaluated. These genes were validated as age-grading
biomarkers using the mark, release and recapture (MRR) method. The MRR method
determined a good correspondence between actual and predicted age, and thus
demonstrated the value of age classifications derived from the transcriptional
profiling of these two genes. The technique was used to establish the age
structure of mosquito populations from two malaria-endemic areas in western
Kenya. The population age structure determined by the transcriptional profiling
method was consistent with that based on mosquito parity. This study demonstrates
that the transcription profiling method based on two genes is valuable for age
determination of natural mosquitoes, providing a new approach for determining a
key life history trait of malaria vectors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069439 
PMCID: PMC3720620
PMID: 23936017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

