
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Nov;1830(11):5326-34. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.08.006. Epub 2013 Aug 16.

Reduced glycerol incorporation into phospholipids contributes to impaired
intra-erythrocytic growth of glycerol kinase knockout Plasmodium falciparum
parasites.

Naidoo K(1), Coetzer TL.

Author information: 
(1)Wits Research Institute for Malaria, Department of Molecular Medicine and
Haematology, Faculty of Heath Sciences, School of Pathology, University of the
Witwatersrand, National Health Laboratory Service, 7 York Road, Parktown, 2193,
Johannesburg, South Africa. Electronic address: kubendran.naidoo@wits.ac.za.

BACKGROUND: Malaria is a devastating disease and Plasmodium falciparum is the
most lethal parasite infecting humans. Understanding the biology of this parasite
is vital in identifying potential novel drug targets. During every 48-hour
intra-erythrocytic asexual replication cycle, a single parasite can produce up to
32 progeny. This extensive proliferation implies that parasites require
substantial amounts of lipid precursors for membrane biogenesis. Glycerol kinase 
is a highly conserved enzyme that functions at the interface of lipid synthesis
and carbohydrate metabolism. P. falciparum glycerol kinase catalyzes the
ATP-dependent phosphorylation of glycerol to glycerol-3-phosphate, a major
phospholipid precursor.
METHODS: The P. falciparum glycerol kinase gene was disrupted using double
crossover homologous DNA recombination to generate a knockout parasite line.
Southern hybridization and mRNA analysis were used to verify gene disruption.
Parasite growth rates were monitored by flow cytometry. Radiolabelling studies
were used to assess incorporation of glycerol into parasite phospholipids.
RESULTS: Disruption of the P. falciparum glycerol kinase gene produced viable
parasites, but their growth was significantly reduced to 56.5±1.8% when compared 
to wild type parasites. (14)C-glycerol incorporation into the major phospholipids
of the parasite membrane, phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine, was
48.4±10.8% and 53.1±5.7% relative to an equivalent number of wild type parasites.
CONCLUSIONS: P. falciparum glycerol kinase is required for optimal
intra-erythrocytic asexual parasite development. Exogenous glycerol may be used
as an alternative carbon source for P. falciparum phospholipid biogenesis,
despite the lack of glycerol kinase to generate glycerol-3-phosphate.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: These studies provide new insight into glycerolipid
metabolism in P. falciparum.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.08.006 
PMID: 23954205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

