
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2013 Aug 8;7(8):e2362. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002362.
eCollection 2013.

Wolbachia-associated bacterial protection in the mosquito Aedes aegypti.

Ye YH(1), Woolfit M, Ranc√®s E, O'Neill SL, McGraw EA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria,
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Wolbachia infections confer protection for their insect hosts against
a range of pathogens including bacteria, viruses, nematodes and the malaria
parasite. A single mechanism that might explain this broad-based pathogen
protection is immune priming, in which the presence of the symbiont upregulates
the basal immune response, preparing the insect to defend against subsequent
pathogen infection. A study that compared natural Wolbachia infections in
Drosophila melanogaster with the mosquito vector Aedes aegypti artificially
transinfected with the same strains has suggested that innate immune priming may 
only occur in recent host-Wolbachia associations. This same study also revealed
that while immune priming may play a role in viral protection it cannot explain
the entirety of the effect.
METHODOLOGY/FINDINGS: Here we assess whether the level of innate immune priming
induced by different Wolbachia strains in A. aegypti is correlated with the
degree of protection conferred against bacterial pathogens. We show that
Wolbachia strains wMel and wMelPop, currently being tested for field release for 
dengue biocontrol, differ in their protective abilities. The wMelPop strain
provides stronger, more broad-based protection than wMel, and this is likely
explained by both the higher induction of immune gene expression and the
strain-specific activation of particular genes. We also show that Wolbachia
densities themselves decline during pathogen infection, likely as a result of the
immune induction.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This work shows a correlation between innate immune
priming and bacterial protection phenotypes. The ability of the Toll pathway,
melanisation and antimicrobial peptides to enhance viral protection or to provide
the basis of malaria protection should be further explored in the context of this
two-strain comparison. This work raises the questions of whether Wolbachia may
improve the ability of wild mosquitoes to survive pathogen infection or alter the
natural composition of gut flora, and thus have broader consequences for host
fitness.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002362 
PMCID: PMC3738474
PMID: 23951381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

