
1. Infect Immun. 2013 Nov;81(11):4290-8. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00690-13. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

RALP1 is a rhoptry neck erythrocyte-binding protein of Plasmodium falciparum
merozoites and a potential blood-stage vaccine candidate antigen.

Ito D(1), Hasegawa T, Miura K, Yamasaki T, Arumugam TU, Thongkukiatkul A, Takeo
S, Takashima E, Sattabongkot J, Han ET, Long CA, Torii M, Tsuboi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Malaria Research, Proteo-Science Center.

Erythrocyte invasion by merozoites is an obligatory stage of Plasmodium infection
and is essential to disease progression. Proteins in the apical organelles of
merozoites mediate the invasion of erythrocytes and are potential malaria vaccine
candidates. Rhoptry-associated, leucine zipper-like protein 1 (RALP1) of
Plasmodium falciparum was previously found to be specifically expressed in
schizont stages and localized to the rhoptries of merozoites by
immunofluorescence assay (IFA). Also, RALP1 has been refractory to gene knockout 
attempts, suggesting that it is essential for blood-stage parasite survival.
These characteristics suggest that RALP1 can be a potential blood-stage vaccine
candidate antigen, and here we assessed its potential in this regard. Antibodies 
were raised against recombinant RALP1 proteins synthesized by using the wheat
germ cell-free system. Immunoelectron microscopy demonstrated for the first time 
that RALP1 is a rhoptry neck protein of merozoites. Moreover, our IFA data showed
that RALP1 translocates from the rhoptry neck to the moving junction during
merozoite invasion. Growth and invasion inhibition assays revealed that
anti-RALP1 antibodies inhibit the invasion of erythrocytes by merozoites. The
findings that RALP1 possesses an erythrocyte-binding epitope in the C-terminal
region and that anti-RALP1 antibodies disrupt tight-junction formation, are
evidence that RALP1 plays an important role during merozoite invasion of
erythrocytes. In addition, human sera collected from areas in Thailand and Mali
where malaria is endemic recognized this protein. Overall, our findings indicate 
that RALP1 is a rhoptry neck erythrocyte-binding protein and that it qualifies as
a potential blood-stage vaccine candidate.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00690-13 
PMCID: PMC3811813
PMID: 24002067  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

