
1. Parasitol Res. 2013 Dec;112(12):4043-51. doi: 10.1007/s00436-013-3595-9. Epub
2013 Sep 5.

Possible relationship between Plasmodium falciparum ring-infected erythrocyte
surface antigen (RESA) and host cell resistance to destruction by chemicals.

Orjih AU(1), Cherian PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, 
Kuwait University, P.O. Box 31470, 90805, Sulaibikhat, Kuwait, orjih@hsc.edu.kw.

Repeated incubation of Plasmodium falciparum culture in 0.015% saponin solution
for a total of 35 min destroys most of the uninfected cells, leaving only the
ring-infected erythrocytes (RIEs). Parasites concentrated by this method can
subsequently complete the asexual cycle and infect other erythrocytes. It is
possible that resistance to saponin is mediated by one or more of the numerous
parasite proteins present in the host erythrocyte membrane. We have found that
schizonts are as susceptible as uninfected erythrocytes to saponin, indicating
that the protective protein is parasite stage specific. Studies with cultured
parasites have shown that ring-infected erythrocyte surface antigen (RESA)
strengthens host erythrocyte membrane and protects against destruction.
Therefore, we hypothesize that RESA could be involved in resistance to saponin.
Here, we have carried out PCR test on RESA gene, using three different primers.
One of them showed that P. falciparum isolates collected directly from infected
humans and cultured only for a few days, or not at all, have amplicon sizes
ranging from 372 to 510 bp. However, the amplicon size changed to 873 bp when in 
vitro growth was continued for one or more weeks. This genetic transformation
precedes acquisition of the ability to confer saponin resistance to RIEs.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-013-3595-9 
PMID: 24005477  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

