
1. Cytokine. 2013 Nov;64(2):503-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2013.08.007. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Dysregulation of cytokines expression in complicated falciparum malaria with
increased TGF-β and IFN-γ and decreased IL-2 and IL-12.

Lourembam SD(1), Sawian CE, Baruah S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, Tezpur
784028, Assam, India. Electronic address: sonialourembam@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: In Plasmodium falciparum infections, proinflammatory cytokine
response is implicated in control of parasite multiplication as well as in
disease pathogenesis. However, the regulation of proinflammatory and
anti-inflammatory cytokine balance and its relation to disease severity remains
poorly understood.
METHODS: We examined cytokines gene expression by quantitative real time-PCR
technique in a case control study comprising of P. falciparum infected (n=58) and
non infected (n=30) groups. P. falciparum infected were further stratified as
complicated and uncomplicated as per WHO criterion and parasitaemia levels.
RESULTS: Higher expression of IL-2, IL-12α and TGF-β with decreased levels of
IL-10 was seen in P. falciparum positivity. Complicated malaria was associated
with enhanced expression of IFN-γ and TGF-β but lower IL-2 and IL-12α in
comparison to uncomplicated malaria. Modeling of data suggested higher expression
of IL-12α to be predictive of uncomplicated malaria [Odds ratio=3.074, 95% CI
(1.254-7.536)] and was negatively associated with complicated malaria outcome
(p=0.014). Interestingly, the probability of complicated malaria in males with
elevated TNF-α expression was three times higher [p=0.05; Odds ratio=3.412, 95%
CI (0.98-11.848)]. Age was also seen to be a factor with higher IL-8 in diseased 
young (p=0.012).
CONCLUSION: Our data suggested induction of balanced cytokine response in
uncomplicated malaria while cytokine dysregulation with a role for TGF-β was
indicated in complicated malaria. TH cells did not appear to be the source of
increased IFN-γ expression associated with malaria severity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2013.08.007 
PMID: 24012048  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

