
1. Malar J. 2013 Sep 14;12:323. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-323.

Serological responses to a soluble recombinant chimeric Plasmodium vivax
circumsporozoite protein in VK210 and VK247 population.

Cheng Y(1), Ito D, Sattabongkot J, Lim CS, Kong DH, Ha KS, Wang B, Tsuboi T, Han 
ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Environmental Biology and Tropical Medicine, Kangwon
National University School of Medicine, Chuncheon, Gangwon-do 200-701, Republic
of Korea. tsuboi@ccr.ehime-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Circumsporozoite protein (CSP) is essential for sporozoite formation 
and sporozoite invasion into human hepatocyte. Previously, a recombinant P. vivax
CSP based on chimeric repeats (rPvCSP-c) representing two major alleles VK210 and
VK247 within central region has been designed. Naturally acquired humoral immune 
responses study show that antigenicity of rPvCSP-c was much higher than that of
native strain. However, the serologic reactivity of rPvCSP-c was still unclear in
detail.
METHODS: In present study, recognition of rPvCSP-c in vivax malaria typed VK210
and VK247 alleles was assessed. VK210 typed and VK247 typed sera from adult
residents reacted specifically with rPvCSP-c using protein array and immunoblot
assay. Additionally, anti-rPvCSP-c serum recognized the fixed VK210 and VK247
sporozoites by immunofluorescence assay. Furthermore, statistic analysis was
performed for correlational detection.
RESULTS: The rPvCSP-c reacted with both VK210 typed and VK247 typed P. vivax
infected patient sera and anti-rPvCSP-c immune serum also reacted with VK210 and 
VK247 sporozoite parasites of P. vivax specifically. There was a positive
correlation between increased antibody level, age of patients and also associated
with pvcsp repeat number, although the level of responses did vary considerably
in their reactivity to the rPvCSP-c from negative to very high level within each 
age group.
CONCLUSIONS: These data confirmed the serologic reactivity of the novel rPvCSP-c 
in exposed both VK210 and VK247 populations. These results strongly suggested
that this recombinant CSP was biologically active and potently immunogenic across
major strains and raised the prospect that this protein could be used as
serologic marker.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-323 
PMCID: PMC3847697
PMID: 24034268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

