
1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 23;8(9):e74269. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074269. eCollection
2013.

High performance of histidine-rich protein 2 based rapid diagnostic tests in
French Guiana are explained by the absence of pfhrp2 gene deletion in P.
falciparum.

Trouvay M(1), Palazon G, Berger F, Volney B, Blanchet D, Faway E, Donato D,
Legrand E, Carme B, Musset L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de parasitologie, Centre National de Référence de la
Chimiorésistance du Paludisme, région Antilles-Guyane, Institut Pasteur de la
Guyane, Cayenne, French Guiana, France.

BACKGROUND: Care for malaria patients in endemic areas has been improved through 
the increasing use of Rapid Diagnostic Tests (RDTs). Most RDTs target the
histidine-rich protein-2 antigen (PfHRP2) to detect P. falciparum, as it is
abundant and shows great heat stability. However, their use in South America has 
been widely questioned following a recent publication that pinpoints the high
prevalence of Peruvian field isolates lacking the gene encoding this protein. In 
the remote rural health centers of French Guiana, RDTs are the main diagnosis
tools. Therefore, a study of PfHRP2 RDT performances and pfhrp2 genotyping was
conducted to determine whether a replacement of the current pLDH-based kit could 
be considered.
METHODS: The performance study compared the SD Malaria Ag test P.f/Pan® kit with 
the current gold standard diagnosis by microscopy. The prevalence of pfhrp2 and
pfhrp3 deletions were evaluated from 221 P. falciparum isolates collected between
2009 and 2011 in French Guiana.
RESULTS: Between January 2010 and August 2011, 960 suspected cases of malaria
were analyzed using microscopy and RDTs. The sensitivity of the SD Malaria Ag
test P.f/Pan® for detection of P. falciparum was 96.8% (95% CI: 90.9-99.3), and
86.0% (95% CI: 78.9-91.5) for the detection of P. vivax. No isolates (95% CI:
0-4.5) lacking either exon of the pfhrp2 gene were identified among the 221 P.
falciparum isolates analyzed, but 7.4% (95% CI: 2.8-15.4) lacked the exon 2 part 
of the pfhrp3 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Field isolates lacking either exon of the pfhrp2 gene are absent in 
this western part of South America. Despite its sensibility to detect P. vivax,
the SD Malaria Ag test P.f/Pan® kit is a satisfying alternative to microscopy in 
remote health centers, where it is difficult to provide highly skilled
microscopists and to maintain the necessary equipment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074269 
PMCID: PMC3781074
PMID: 24086328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

