
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jan;42(1):370-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt881. Epub 2013 Oct
1.

Malaria parasites utilize both homologous recombination and alternative end
joining pathways to maintain genome integrity.

Kirkman LA(1), Lawrence EA, Deitsch KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New
York, NY 10065, USA.

Malaria parasites replicate asexually within their mammalian hosts as haploid
cells and are subject to DNA damage from the immune response and chemotherapeutic
agents that can significantly disrupt genomic integrity. Examination of the
annotated genome of the parasite Plasmodium falciparum identified genes encoding 
core proteins required for the homologous recombination (HR) pathway for
repairing DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), but surprisingly none of the
components of the canonical non-homologous end joining (C-NHEJ) pathway were
identified. To better understand how malaria parasites repair DSBs and maintain
genome integrity, we modified the yeast I-SceI endonuclease system to generate
inducible, site-specific DSBs within the parasite's genome. Analysis of repaired 
genomic DNA showed that parasites possess both a typical HR pathway resulting in 
gene conversion events as well as an end joining (EJ) pathway for repair of DSBs 
when no homologous sequence is available. The products of EJ were limited in
number and identical products were observed in multiple independent experiments. 
The repair junctions frequently contained short insertions also found in the
surrounding sequences, suggesting the possibility of a templated repair process. 
We propose that an alternative end-joining pathway rather than C-NHEJ, serves as 
a primary method for repairing DSBs in malaria parasites.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt881 
PMCID: PMC3874194
PMID: 24089143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

