
1. Parasite. 2013;20:37. doi: 10.1051/parasite/2013039. Epub 2013 Oct 21.

Genetic polymorphism of merozoite surface protein-1 and merozoite surface
protein-2 in Plasmodium falciparum isolates from children in South of Benin.

Ogouyèmi-Hounto A(1), Gazard DK, Ndam N, Topanou E, Garba O, Elegbe P,
Hountohotegbe T, Massougbodji A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Enseignement et de Recherche en Parasitologie-Mycologie de la Faculté 
des Sciences de la Santé, 01BP188 Cotonou, Bénin - Laboratoire du Centre de Lutte
Intégrée contre le Paludisme, 01BP188 Cotonou, Bénin.

The aim of this study was to determine the genetic diversity of Plasmodium
falciparum by analyzing the polymorphism of the msp-1 and msp-2 genes and the
multiplicity of infection in children with uncomplicated malaria in southern
Benin. Blood samples of children with fever or history of fever with thick smear 
positive P. falciparum were collected on filter paper. After extraction of DNA by
Chelex®, the samples underwent nested PCR. 93 isolates from children were
genotyped. For the msp-1 gene, the K1 and R033 sequences were the most
represented in the study population with 85.2% and 83% prevalence, respectively. 
Regarding the msp-2 gene, the FC27 family was more highly represented with 99%
prevalence against 81.5% for 3D7. Mixed infections accounted for 80.4% of the
samples. Twenty-five alleles were identified for msp-1 and 28 for msp-2. Fourteen
and ten alleles belonged to the K1 (100-500 bp) and MAD20 (100-500 bp) families, 
respectively. The RO33 sequence did not show any polymorphism, with only one
variant (160 bp) detected. The msp-2 gene was present as 16 FC27 family fragments
(250-800 bp) and 12 of the 3D7 family (350-700 bp). The multiplicity of infection
was estimated at 3.8 for msp-1 and 3.9 for msp-2 with 77 (87.5%) and 84 (91.3%)
samples harboring more than one parasite genotype for msp-1 and msp-2,
respectively. The multiplicity of infection (MOI) was influenced neither by age
nor by parasite density. This study shows a significant diversity of P.
falciparum in southern Benin with an MOI unaffected by age or by parasite
density.

© A. Ogouyèmi-Hounto et al., published by EDP Sciences, 2013.

DOI: 10.1051/parasite/2013039 
PMCID: PMC3798888
PMID: 24135216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

