
1. Blood. 2013 Dec 12;122(25):4094-106. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-08-517474. Epub 2013
Oct 24.

Desmolaris, a novel factor XIa anticoagulant from the salivary gland of the
vampire bat (Desmodus rotundus) inhibits inflammation and thrombosis in vivo.

Ma D(1), Mizurini DM, Assumpção TC, Li Y, Qi Y, Kotsyfakis M, Ribeiro JM,
Monteiro RQ, Francischetti IM.

Author information: 
(1)Vector Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD;

The identity of vampire bat saliva anticoagulant remained elusive for almost a
century. Sequencing the salivary gland genes from the vampire bat Desmodus
rotundus identified Desmolaris as a novel 21.5-kDa naturally deleted (Kunitz
1-domainless) form of tissue factor pathway inhibitor. Recombinant Desmolaris was
expressed in HEK293 cells and characterized as a slow, tight, and noncompetitive 
inhibitor of factor (F) XIa by a mechanism modulated by heparin. Desmolaris also 
inhibits FXa with lower affinity, independently of protein S. In addition,
Desmolaris binds kallikrein and reduces bradykinin generation in plasma activated
with kaolin. Truncated and mutated forms of Desmolaris determined that Arg32 in
the Kunitz-1 domain is critical for protease inhibition. Moreover, Kunitz-2 and
the carboxyl-terminus domains mediate interaction of Desmolaris with heparin and 
are required for optimal inhibition of FXIa and FXa. Notably, Desmolaris (100
μg/kg) inhibited FeCl3-induced carotid artery thrombus without impairing
hemostasis. These results imply that FXIa is the primary in vivo target for
Desmolaris at antithrombotic concentrations. Desmolaris also reduces the
polyphosphate-induced increase in vascular permeability and collagen- and
epinephrine-mediated thromboembolism in mice. Desmolaris emerges as a novel
anticoagulant targeting FXIa under conditions in which the coagulation
activation, particularly the contact pathway, plays a major pathological role.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2013-08-517474 
PMCID: PMC3862280
PMID: 24159172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

