
1. Trop Med Int Health. 2014 Jan;19(1):117-22. doi: 10.1111/tmi.12216. Epub 2013 Oct
31.

Anaemia, iron deficiency and a common polymorphism of iron-regulation, TMPRSS6
rs855791, in Rwandan children.

Danquah I(1), Gahutu JB, Zeile I, Musemakweri A, Mockenhaupt FP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Epidemiology, German Institute of Human Nutrition
Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Nuthetal, Germany.

Anaemia in children living in sub-Saharan Africa is common, but its causes are
diverse. In 545 children below 5 years of age from rural southern Rwanda, we
assessed the role of iron deficiency (ID) and of the TMPRSS6 736(V) (rs855791)
allele, known to reduce iron status and haemoglobin (Hb) levels, in anaemia and
Hb concentrations. Anaemia (Hb <11 g/dl) was present in 34.4% of the children and
ID (ferritin <12 ng/ml) in 17.6%. The TMPRSS6 736(V) allele was uncommon (allele 
frequency, 0.096) and not associated with ID. In multivariate analysis, ID was
positively associated with anaemia (adjusted odds ratio, 1.67) to an extent
comparable with α(+) -thalassaemia, breastfeeding, inflammation and low household
income, but the odds were substantially higher in Plasmodium falciparum infection
(adjusted odds ratio, 10.3). These findings were verified in a multivariate
analysis of Hb concentrations. The TMPRSS6 736(V) allele only tended to be
associated with low Hb levels. TMPRSS6 736(V) is comparatively rare among Rwandan
children and may only slightly contribute to low Hb concentrations. Preventable
causes of anaemia, notably ID and P. falciparum infection, largely outweigh its
impact and need to be addressed to improve the haematological status of children 
in the study area.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tmi.12216 
PMID: 24175968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

