
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2014 Jan;44:12-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2013.10.008. Epub
2013 Nov 4.

Involvement of the Anopheles gambiae Nimrod gene family in mosquito immune
responses.

Estévez-Lao TY(1), Hillyer JF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, VU Station B
35-1634, Nashville, TN 37235, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, VU Station B
35-1634, Nashville, TN 37235, USA. Electronic address:
julian.hillyer@vanderbilt.edu.

Insects fight infection using a variety of signaling pathways and immune effector
proteins. In Drosophila melanogaster, three members of the Nimrod gene family
(draper, nimC1 and eater) bind bacteria, and this binding leads to phagocytosis
by hemocytes. The Nimrod gene family has since been identified in other insects, 
but their function in non-drosophilids remains unknown. The purpose of this study
was to identify the members of the Nimrod gene family in the malaria mosquito,
Anopheles gambiae, and to assess their role in immunity. We identified and
sequenced three members of this gene family, herein named draper, nimrod and
eater, which are the orthologs of D. melanogaster draper, nimB2 and eater,
respectively. The three genes are preferentially expressed in hemocytes and their
peak developmental expression is in pupae and young adults. Infection induces the
transcriptional upregulation of all three genes, but the magnitude of this
upregulation becomes more attenuated as mosquitoes become older. RNAi-based
knockdown of eater, but not draper or nimrod, decreased a mosquito's ability to
kill Escherichia coli in the hemocoel. Knockdown of draper, eater, or any
combination of Nimrod family genes rendered mosquitoes more likely to die from
Staphylococcus epidermidis. Finally, knockdown of Nimrod family genes did not
impact mRNA levels of the antimicrobial peptides defensin (def1), cecropin (cecA)
or gambicin (gam1), but eater knockdown led to a decrease in mRNA levels of
nitric oxide synthase. Together, these data show that members of the A. gambiae
Nimrod gene family are positive regulators of the mosquito antibacterial
response.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2013.10.008 
PMID: 24200842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

