
1. Malar J. 2013 Nov 15;12:419. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-419.

Genetic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum among school-aged children from the
Man region, western Côte d'Ivoire.

Mara SE, Silué KD, Raso G, N'guetta SP, N'goran EK, Tanner M, Utzinger J, Ding
XC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département Environnement et Santé, Centre Suisse de Recherches Scientifiques 
en Côte d'Ivoire, 01 BP 1303 Abidjan 01, Côte d'Ivoire. xavier.ding@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The genetic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum allows the molecular
discrimination of otherwise microscopically identical parasites and the
identification of individual clones in multiple infections. The study reported
here investigated the P. falciparum multiplicity of infection (MOI) and genetic
diversity among school-aged children in the Man region, western Côte d'Ivoire.
METHODS: Blood samples from 292 children aged seven to 15 years were collected in
four nearby villages located at altitudes ranging from 340 to 883 m above sea
level. Giemsa-stained thick and thin blood films were prepared and examined under
a microscope for P. falciparum prevalence and parasitaemia. MOI and genetic
diversity of the parasite populations were investigated using msp2 typing by
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP).
RESULTS: Plasmodium falciparum prevalence and parasitaemia were both found to be 
significantly lower in the highest altitude village. Genotyping of the isolates
revealed 25 potentially new msp2 alleles. MOI varied significantly across
villages but did not correlate with altitude nor children's age, and only to a
limited extent with parasitaemia. An analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA)
indicated that a small, but close to statistical significance (p = 0.07),
fraction of variance occurs specifically between villages of low and high
altitudes.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher altitude was associated with lower prevalence of P.
falciparum but not with reduced MOI, suggesting that, in this setting, MOI is not
a good proxy for transmission. The evidence for partially parted parasite
populations suggests the existence of local geographical barriers that should be 
taken into account when deploying anti-malarial interventions.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-419 
PMCID: PMC3842749
PMID: 24228865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

