
1. Malar J. 2013 Nov 19;12:426. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-426.

Survey of Plasmodium falciparum multidrug resistance-1 and chloroquine resistance
transporter alleles in Haiti.

Elbadry MA, Existe A, Victor YS, Memnon G, Fukuda M, Dame JB, Yowell CA, Okech
BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Global Health, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. bokech@ufl.edu.

BACKGROUND: In Haiti where chloroquine (CQ) is widely used for malaria treatment,
reports of resistance are scarce. However, recent identification of CQ resistance
genotypes in one site is suggestive of an emerging problem. Additional studies
are needed to evaluate genetic mutations associated with CQ resistance,
especially in the Plasmodium falciparum multi-drug resistance-1 gene (pfmdr1)
while expanding the already available information on P. falciparum CQ transporter
gene (pfcrt) in Haiti.
METHODS: Blood samples were collected on Whatman filter cards (FTA) from eight
clinics spread across Haiti. Following the confirmation of P. falciparum in the
samples, PCR protocols were used to amplify regions of pfmdr1and pfcrt codons of 
interest, (86, 184, 1034, 1042, and 1246) and (72-76), respectively. Sequencing
and site-specific restriction enzyme digestions were used to analyse these DNA
fragments for the presence of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) known to
confer resistance to anti-malarial drugs.
RESULTS: P. falciparum infection was confirmed in160 samples by amplifying a
segment of the P. falciparum 18S small subunit ribosomal RNA gene (pfssurrna).
The sequence of pfmdr1 in 54 of these samples was determined between codons
86,184 codons 1034, 1042 and 1246. No sequence differences from that of the NF54 
clone 3D7 were found among the 54 samples except at codon 184, where a non-silent
mutation was found in all samples predicted to alter the amino acid sequence
replacing tyrosine with phenylalanine (Y184F). This altered sequence was also
confirmed by restriction enzyme digestion. The sequence of pfmdr1 at codons 86,
184, 1034 and 1042 encoded the NFSN haplotype. The sequence of pfcrt codons 72-76
from 79 samples was determined and found to encode CVMNK, consistent with a CQ
sensitive genotype.
CONCLUSION: The presence of the Y184F mutation in pfmdr1 of P. falciparum
parasites in Haiti may have implications for resistance to antimalarial drugs.
The absence of mutation in pfcrt at codon 76 among 79 isolates tested suggests
that sensitivity to CQ in Haiti remains common. Wide-spread screening of the
pfmdr1 and pfcrt especially among patients experiencing treatment failure may be 
a useful tool in early detection of the emergence of antimalarial drug resistance
in Haiti.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-12-426 
PMCID: PMC3879102
PMID: 24252305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

