
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Feb;42(4):2270-81. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1174. Epub 2013
Nov 18.

DNA secondary structures are associated with recombination in major Plasmodium
falciparum variable surface antigen gene families.

Sander AF(1), Lavstsen T, Rask TS, Lisby M, Salanti A, Fordyce SL, Jespersen JS, 
Carter R, Deitsch KW, Theander TG, Pedersen AG, Arnot DE.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University
of Copenhagen, Øster Farimagsgade 5, Building 22 & 23, PO Box 2099, 1014
Copenhagen K, Denmark, Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of Infectious 
Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital (Rigshospitalet), Copenhagen K, Denmark,
Department of Systems Biology, Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Technical
University of Denmark, 2800 Lyngby, Denmark, Department of Biology, University of
Copenhagen, Ole Maaloees Vej 5, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark, Centre for
GeoGenetics, Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of Copenhagen, Øster
Voldgade 5-7, 1350 Copenhagen, Denmark, Institute of Infection and Immunology
Research, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, West Mains
Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JT, Scotland, UK and Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Many bacterial, viral and parasitic pathogens undergo antigenic variation to
counter host immune defense mechanisms. In Plasmodium falciparum, the most lethal
of human malaria parasites, switching of var gene expression results in
alternating expression of the adhesion proteins of the Plasmodium
falciparum-erythrocyte membrane protein 1 class on the infected erythrocyte
surface. Recombination clearly generates var diversity, but the nature and
control of the genetic exchanges involved remain unclear. By experimental and
bioinformatic identification of recombination events and genome-wide
recombination hotspots in var genes, we show that during the parasite's sexual
stages, ectopic recombination between isogenous var paralogs occurs near low
folding free energy DNA 50-mers and that these sequences are heavily concentrated
at the boundaries of regions encoding individual Plasmodium
falciparum-erythrocyte membrane protein 1 structural domains. The recombinogenic 
potential of these 50-mers is not parasite-specific because these sequences also 
induce recombination when transferred to the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Genetic cross data suggest that DNA secondary structures (DSS) act as inducers of
recombination during DNA replication in P. falciparum sexual stages, and that
these DSS-regulated genetic exchanges generate functional and diverse P.
falciparum adhesion antigens. DSS-induced recombination may represent a common
mechanism for optimizing the evolvability of virulence gene families in
pathogens.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt1174 
PMCID: PMC3936766
PMID: 24253306  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

