
1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 18;8(11):e80549. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080549.
eCollection 2013.

Impacts of agricultural practices on insecticide resistance in the malaria vector
Anopheles arabiensis in Khartoum State, Sudan.

Abuelmaali SA(1), Elaagip AH, Basheer MA, Frah EA, Ahmed FT, Elhaj HF, Seidahmed 
OM, Weetman D, Mahdi Abdel Hamid M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Entomology, National Public Health Laboratory, Federal
Ministry of Health, Khartoum, Sudan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(12).
doi:10.1371/annotation/d40e811c-993d-40ec-8294-420402282448. Elhaj,
Hassabelrasoul F A [corrected to Elhaj, Hasabelrasol F A].

BACKGROUND: Agricultural pesticides may play a profound role in selection of
resistance in field populations of mosquito vectors. The objective of this study 
is to investigate possible links between agricultural pesticide use and
development of resistance to insecticides by the major malaria vector Anopheles
arabiensis in northern Sudan.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Entomological surveys were conducted during two
agricultural seasons in six urban and peri-urban sites in Khartoum state.
Agro-sociological data were collected from 240 farmers subjected to
semi-structured questionnaires based on knowledge attitude and practice (KAP)
surveys. Susceptibility status of An. arabiensis (n=6000) was assessed in all
sites and during each season using WHO bioassay tests to DDT, deltamethrin,
permethrin, Malathion and bendiocarb. KAP analysis revealed that pesticide
application was common practice among both urban and peri-urban farmers, with
organophosphates and carbamates most commonly used. Selection for resistance is
likely to be greater in peri-urban sites where farmers apply pesticide more
frequently and are less likely to dispose of surpluses correctly. Though variable
among insecticides and seasons, broad-spectrum mortality was slightly, but
significantly higher in urban than peri-urban sites and most marked for
bendiocarb, to which susceptibility was lowest. Anopheles arabiensis from all
sites showed evidence of resistance or suspected resistance, especially
pyrethroids. However, low-moderate frequencies of the L1014F kdr allele in all
sites, which was very strongly associated with DDT, permethrin and deltamethrin
survivorship (OR=6.14-14.67) suggests that resistance could increase rapidly.
CONCLUSIONS: Ubiquitous multiple-resistance coupled with presence of a clear
mechanism for DDT and pyrethroids (kdr L1014F) in populations of An. arabiensis
from Khartoum-Sudan suggests careful insecticide management is essential to
prolong efficacy. Our findings are consistent with agricultural insecticide use
as a source of selection for resistance and argue for coordination between the
integrated vector control program and the Ministry of Agriculture to permit
successful implementation of rational resistance management strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080549 
PMCID: PMC3832379
PMID: 24260414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

