
1. G3 (Bethesda). 2014 Jan 10;4(1):121-31. doi: 10.1534/g3.113.008326.

Diversity, differentiation, and linkage disequilibrium: prospects for association
mapping in the malaria vector Anopheles arabiensis.

Marsden CD(1), Lee Y, Kreppel K, Weakley A, Cornel A, Ferguson HM, Eskin E,
Lanzaro GC.

Author information: 
(1)Vector Genetics Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and
Immunology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California-Davis,
California 95616.

Association mapping is a widely applied method for elucidating the genetic basis 
of phenotypic traits. However, factors such as linkage disequilibrium and levels 
of genetic diversity influence the power and resolution of this approach.
Moreover, the presence of population subdivision among samples can result in
spurious associations if not accounted for. As such, it is useful to have a
detailed understanding of these factors before conducting association mapping
experiments. Here we conducted whole-genome sequencing on 24 specimens of the
malaria mosquito vector, Anopheles arabiensis, to further understanding of
patterns of genetic diversity, population subdivision and linkage disequilibrium 
in this species. We found high levels of genetic diversity within the An.
arabiensis genome, with ~800,000 high-confidence, single- nucleotide
polymorphisms detected. However, levels of nucleotide diversity varied
significantly both within and between chromosomes. We observed lower diversity on
the X chromosome, within some inversions, and near centromeres. Population
structure was absent at the local scale (Kilombero Valley, Tanzania) but detected
between distant populations (Cameroon vs. Tanzania) where differentiation was
largely restricted to certain autosomal chromosomal inversions such as 2Rb.
Overall, linkage disequilibrium within An. arabiensis decayed very rapidly
(within 200 bp) across all chromosomes. However, elevated linkage disequilibrium 
was observed within some inversions, suggesting that recombination is reduced in 
those regions. The overall low levels of linkage disequilibrium suggests that
association studies in this taxon will be very challenging for all but variants
of large effect, and will require large sample sizes.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.113.008326 
PMCID: PMC3887528
PMID: 24281424  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

