
1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 27;8(11):e81071. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081071.
eCollection 2013.

Association of cytokine and Toll-like receptor gene polymorphisms with severe
malaria in three regions of Cameroon.

Apinjoh TO(1), Anchang-Kimbi JK, Njua-Yafi C, Mugri RN, Ngwai AN, Rockett KA,
Mbunwe E, Besingi RN, Clark TG, Kwiatkowski DP, Achidi EA; MalariaGEN Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Buea, Buea,
Cameroon.

P. falciparum malaria is one of the most widespread and deadliest infectious
diseases in children under five years in endemic areas. The disease has been a
strong force for evolutionary selection in the human genome, and uncovering the
critical human genetic factors that confer resistance to the disease would
provide clues to the molecular basis of protective immunity that would be
invaluable for vaccine development. We investigated the effect of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on malaria pathology in a case- control study of 
1862 individuals from two major ethnic groups in three regions with intense
perennial P. falciparum transmission in Cameroon. Twenty nine polymorphisms in
cytokine and toll-like receptor (TLR) genes as well as the sickle cell trait
(HbS) were assayed on the Sequenom iPLEX platform. Our results confirm the known 
protective effect of HbS against severe malaria and also reveal a protective
effect of SNPs in interleukin-10 (IL10) cerebral malaria and hyperpyrexia.
Furthermore, IL17RE rs708567 GA and hHbS rs334 AT individuals were associated
with protection from uncomplicated malaria and anaemia respectively in this
study. Meanwhile, individuals with the hHbS rs334 TT, IL10 rs3024500 AA, and
IL17RD rs6780995 GA genotypes were more susceptible to severe malarial anaemia,
cerebral malaria, and hyperpyrexia respectively. Taken together, our results
suggest that polymorphisms in some immune response genes may have important
implications for the susceptibility to severe malaria in Cameroonians. Moreover
using uncomplicated malaria may allow us to identify novel pathways in the early 
development of the disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081071 
PMCID: PMC3842328
PMID: 24312262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

