
1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 6;8(12):e81663. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081663. eCollection
2013.

Modulation of malaria infection in Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes exposed to
natural midgut bacteria.

Tchioffo MT(1), Boissière A, Churcher TS, Abate L, Gimonneau G, Nsango SE,
Awono-Ambéné PH, Christen R, Berry A, Morlais I.

Author information: 
(1)UMR MIVEGEC (IRD 224- CNRS 5290- UM1- UM2), Institut de Recherche pour le
Développement, Montpellier, France ; Laboratoire d'entomologie médicale,
Organisation de Coordination pour la lutte contre les Endémies en Afrique
Centrale, Yaoundé, Cameroon.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(12).
doi:10.1371/annotation/d8908395-a526-428c-b9ed-4430aaf8f7d7.

The development of Plasmodium falciparum within the Anopheles gambiae mosquito
relies on complex vector-parasite interactions, however the resident midgut
microbiota also plays an important role in mediating parasite infection. In
natural conditions, the mosquito microbial flora is diverse, composed of
commensal and symbiotic bacteria. We report here the isolation of culturable
midgut bacteria from mosquitoes collected in the field in Cameroon and their
identification based on the 16S rRNA gene sequencing. We next measured the effect
of selected natural bacterial isolates on Plasmodium falciparum infection
prevalence and intensity over multiple infectious feedings and found that the
bacteria significantly reduced the prevalence and intensity of infection. These
results contrast with our previous study where the abundance of
Enterobacteriaceae positively correlated with P. falciparum infection (Boissière 
et al. 2012). The oral infection of bacteria probably led to the disruption of
the gut homeostasis and activated immune responses, and this pinpoints the
importance of studying microbe-parasite interactions in natural conditions. Our
results indicate that the effect of bacterial exposure on P. falciparum infection
varies with factors from the parasite and the human host and calls for deeper
dissection of these parameters for accurate interpretation of bacterial exposure 
results in laboratory settings.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081663 
PMCID: PMC3855763
PMID: 24324714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

