
1. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Feb;91(4):762-76. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12496. Epub 2014 Jan 16.

Plasmodium falciparum is dependent on de novo myo-inositol biosynthesis for
assembly of GPI glycolipids and infectivity.

Macrae JI(1), Lopaticki S, Maier AG, Rupasinghe T, Nahid A, Cowman AF, McConville
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Institute of Molecular
Science and Biotechnology, 30 Flemington Road, Melbourne, Vic., 3010, Australia.

Intra-erythrocytic stages of the malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, are
thought to be dependent on de novo synthesis of phosphatidylinositol, as red
blood cells (RBC) lack the capacity to synthesize this phospholipid. The
myo-inositol headgroup of PI can either be synthesized de novo or scavenged from 
the RBC. An untargeted metabolite profiling of P. falciparum infected RBC showed 
that trophozoite and schizont stages accumulate high levels of
myo-inositol-3-phosphate, indicating increased de novo biosynthesis of
myo-inositol from glucose 6-phosphate. Metabolic labelling studies with (13)
C-U-glucose in the presence and absence of exogenous inositol confirmed that de
novo myo-inositol synthesis occurs in parallel with myo-inositol salvage
pathways. Unexpectedly, while both endogenous and scavenged myo-inositol was used
to synthesize bulk PI, only de novo-synthesized myo-inositol was incorporated
into GPI glycolipids. Moreover, gene disruption studies suggested that the INO1
gene, encoding myo-inositol 3-phosphate synthase, is essential in asexual
parasite stages. Together these findings suggest that P. falciparum asexual
stages are critically dependent on de novo myo-inositol biosynthesis for assembly
of a sub-pool of PI species and GPI biosynthesis. These findings highlight
unexpected complexity in phospholipid biosynthesis in P. falciparum and a lack of
redundancy in some nutrient salvage versus endogenous biosynthesis pathways.

Â© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12496 
PMID: 24350823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

