
1. Pathog Glob Health. 2013 Dec;107(8):480-92. doi:
10.1179/2047772413Z.000000000180.

Cell biological analysis of mosquito midgut invasion: the defensive role of the
actin-based ookinete hood.

Schlegelmilch T, Vlachou D.

Successful completion of the Plasmodium lifecycle in the mosquito vector is
critical for malaria transmission. It has been documented that the fate of
Plasmodium in the mosquito ultimately depends on a fine interplay of molecular
mosquito factors that act as parasite agonists and antagonists. Here we
investigate whether the cellular responses of the invaded midgut epithelium can
also determine the parasite fate and development. We show that the parasite hood,
an actin-rich structure formed around the ookinete as it exits the epithelium, is
a local epithelial defence reaction observed around 60% of invading parasites.
The hood co-localizes with WASP, a promoter of actin filament nucleation,
suggesting that it is an active reaction of the invaded cell against invading
parasites. Importantly, depletion of WASP by RNAi leads to a significant
reduction in hood formation, which is consistent with the previously documented
role of this gene as a potent parasite antagonist. Indeed, in mosquitoes that are
either genetically selected or manipulated by RNAi to be refractory to
Plasmodium, most dead parasites exhibit an actin hood. In these mosquitoes,
invading ookinetes are killed by lysis or melanization while exiting the midgut
epithelium. Silencing WASP in these mosquitoes inhibits the formation of the hood
and allows many parasites to develop to oocysts. These data in conjunction with
fine microscopic observations suggest that the presence of the hood is linked to 
ookinete killing through lysis.

DOI: 10.1179/2047772413Z.000000000180 
PMCID: PMC4073529
PMID: 24428832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

