
1. Malar J. 2014 Jan 29;13:34. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-34.

Analysis of pfhrp2 genetic diversity in Senegal and implications for use of rapid
diagnostic tests.

Deme AB, Park DJ, Bei AK, Sarr O, Badiane AS, Gueye Pel H, Ahouidi A, Ndir O,
Mboup S, Wirth DF, Ndiaye D, Volkman SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute: The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, 
USA. svolkman@hsph.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Senegalese National Malaria Control Programme has recommended use
of rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) that target the histidine-rich protein 2 (HRP2),
specific to Plasmodium falciparum, to diagnose malaria cases. The target antigen 
has been shown to be polymorphic, which may explain the variability in HRP2-based
RDT results reported in field studies. The genetic diversity of the pfhrp2 gene
has not been investigated in depth in many African countries. The goal of this
study is to determine the extent of polymorphism in pfhrp2 among Senegal, Mali
and Uganda parasite populations, and discuss the implications of these findings
on the utility of RDTs that are based on HRP2 detection.
METHODS: Sequencing data from the pfhrp2 locus were used to analyze the genetic
diversity of this gene among three populations, with different transmission
dynamics and malaria parasite ecologies. Nucleotide diversity (π) and
non-synonymous nucleotide diversity (πNS) were studied in the pfhrp2 gene from
isolates obtained in Senegal. Amino acid repeat length polymorphisms in the
PfHRP2 antigen were characterized and parameters of genetic diversity, such as
frequency and correlation between repeats in these populations, were assessed.
RESULTS: The diversity survey of the pfhrp2 gene identified 29 SNPs as well as
insertion and deletion polymorphisms within a 918 bp region. The Senegal pfhrp2
exhibited a substantial level of diversity [π = 0.00559 and πNS = 0.014111
(πS = 0.0291627)], similar to several polymorphic genes, such as msp1, involved
in immune responses, and the gene encoding the SURFIN polymorphic antigen, which 
are surface exposed parasite proteins. Extensive repeat length polymorphisms in
PfHRP2, as well as similar patterns in the number, organization and the type of
predicted amino acid repeats were observed among the three populations,
characterized by an occurrence of Type 2, Type 4 and Type 7 repeats.
CONCLUSIONS: These results warrant deeper monitoring of the RDT target antigen
diversity and emphasize that development of other essential genes as a target for
diagnostic tools is critical.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-34 
PMCID: PMC3913323
PMID: 24472178  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

