
1. FASEB J. 2014 May;28(5):2158-70. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-241570. Epub 2014 Feb 7.

Two Plasmodium 6-Cys family-related proteins have distinct and critical roles in 
liver-stage development.

Annoura T(1), van Schaijk BC, Ploemen IH, Sajid M, Lin JW, Vos MW, Dinmohamed AG,
Inaoka DK, Rijpma SR, van Gemert GJ, Chevalley-Maurel S, KieÅ‚basa SM, Scheltinga 
F, Franke-Fayard B, Klop O, Hermsen CC, Kita K, Gego A, Franetich JF, Mazier D,
Hoffman SL, Janse CJ, Sauerwein RW, Khan SM.

Author information: 
(1)3Leiden Malaria Research Group, Department of Parasitology, Leiden University 
Medical Center, 2333 ZA Leiden, the Netherlands. s.m.khan@lumc.nl.

The 10 Plasmodium 6-Cys proteins have critical roles throughout parasite
development and are targets for antimalaria vaccination strategies. We analyzed
the conserved 6-cysteine domain of this family and show that only the last 4
positionally conserved cysteine residues are diagnostic for this domain and
identified 4 additional "6-Cys family-related" proteins. Two of these, sequestrin
and B9, are critical to Plasmodium liver-stage development. RT-PCR and
immunofluorescence assays show that B9 is translationally repressed in
sporozoites and is expressed after hepatocyte invasion where it localizes to the 
parasite plasma membrane. Mutants lacking B9 expression in the rodent malaria
parasites P. berghei and P. yoelii and the human parasite P. falciparum
developmentally arrest in hepatocytes. P. berghei mutants arrest in the livers of
BALB/c (100%) and C57BL6 mice (>99.9%), and in cultures of Huh7 human-hepatoma
cell line. Similarly, P. falciparum mutants while fully infectious to primary
human hepatocytes abort development 3 d after infection. This growth arrest is
associated with a compromised parasitophorous vacuole membrane a phenotype
similar to, but distinct from, mutants lacking the 6-Cys sporozoite proteins P52 
and P36. Our results show that 6-Cys proteins have critical but distinct roles in
establishment and maintenance of a parasitophorous vacuole and subsequent
liver-stage development.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.13-241570 
PMID: 24509910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

