
1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 6;9(2):e88205. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088205. eCollection 
2014.

An AAV vector-mediated gene delivery approach facilitates reconstitution of
functional human CD8+ T cells in mice.

Huang J(1), Li X(1), Coelho-dos-Reis JG(1), Wilson JM(2), Tsuji M(1).

Author information: 
(1)HIV and Malaria Vaccine Program, Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center, Affiliate
of The Rockefeller University, New York, New York, United States of America.
(2)Gene Therapy Program, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

In the present study, a novel adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector-mediated gene
delivery approach was taken to improve the reconstitution of functional CD8(+) T 
cells in humanized mice, thereby mimicking the human immune system (HIS). Human
genes encoding HLA-A2 and selected human cytokines (A2/hucytokines) were
introduced to an immune-deficient mouse model [NOD/SCID/IL2rÎ³(null) (NSG) mice]
using AAV serotype 9 (AAV9) vectors, followed by transplantation of human
hematopoietic stem cells. NSG mice transduced with AAV9 encoding A2/hucytokines
resulted in higher levels of reconstitution of human CD45(+) cells compared to
NSG mice transduced with AAV9 encoding HLA-A2 alone or HLA-A2-transgenic NSG
mice. Furthermore, this group of HIS mice also mounted the highest level of
antigen-specific A2-restricted human CD8(+) T-cell response upon vaccination with
recombinant adenoviruses expressing human malaria and HIV antigens. Finally, the 
human CD8(+) T-cell response induced in human malaria vaccine-immunized HIS mice 
was shown to be functional by displaying cytotoxic activity against hepatocytes
that express the human malaria antigen in the context of A2 molecules. Taken
together, our data show that AAV vector-mediated gene delivery is a simple and
efficient method to transfer multiple human genes to immune-deficient mice, thus 
facilitating successful reconstitution of HIS in mice. The HIS mice generated in 
this study should ultimately allow us to swiftly evaluate the T-cell
immunogenicity of various human vaccine candidates in a pre-clinical setting.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088205 
PMCID: PMC3916402
PMID: 24516613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

