
1. Int J Parasitol Parasites Wildl. 2013 Oct 3;2:286-91. doi:
10.1016/j.ijppaw.2013.09.008. eCollection 2013 Dec.

Plasmodium (Novyella) nucleophilum from an Egyptian Goose in São Paulo Zoo,
Brazil: microscopic confirmation and molecular characterization.

Chagas CR(1), Valkiūnas G(2), Nery CV(1), Henrique PC(1), Gonzalez IH(1),
Monteiro EF(3), Guimarães Lde O(3), Romano CM(4), Kirchgatter K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Zoological Park Foundation, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Institute of Ecology, Nature Research Centre, Lithuania.
(3)Malaria Research Center, Superintendence for Endemic Disease Control, São
Paulo Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Virology, São Paulo Institute of Tropical Medicine, University
of São Paulo, Brazil.

Plasmodium (Novyella) nucleophilum was identified using microscopy and PCR, in an
Egyptian Goose (Alopochen aegyptiacus) that died in São Paulo Zoo, Brazil. This
parasite is characterized by elongated gametocytes, small meronts with scant
cytoplasm, less than eight merozoites and mainly for having all the stages
appressed to the nuclei of infected erythrocytes. Additionally, Plasmodium
(Haemamoeba) sp. was identified by microscopy in the same blood sample. The
latter parasite lacks nucleophilic blood stages and is characterized by large
roundish trophozoites, each with a large prominent centrally collated vacuole.
This co-infection was not confirmed by PCR amplification of the mitochondrial
cytochrome b (cytb) gene and sequencing; only one Plasmodium sp. cytb sequence
was detected in the blood sample. Since parasitemia of P. nucleophilum (2.4%) was
much higher than that of P. (Haemamoeba) sp. (0.2%), PCR may have favored the
amplification of the cytb sequence of the former. Phylogenetic analysis is in
agreement with this conclusion because the reported cytb sequence was positioned 
in the same branch of sequences of several Novyella species. This is the first
assignment of the mitochondrial cytb gene sequence to P. nucleophilum. The P.
(Haemamoeba) parasite is particularly similar to Plasmodium (Haemamoeba) tejerai,
because its advanced trophozoites and young erythrocytic meronts possess a large 
vacuole with prominent pigment granules arranged around it, the characteristic
features of development in this species. For definitive identification of P.
(Haemamoeba) species, mature meronts and gametocytes are required; however, these
were absent from the thin blood smear. Representative images of the blood stages 
of P. nucleophilum and P. (Haemamoeba) sp. are provided. Together with microscopy
data, the P. nucleophilum cytb sequence will assist in molecular identification
(barcoding) of this Plasmodium species in other birds.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijppaw.2013.09.008 
PMCID: PMC3862519
PMID: 24533348 

