
1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Feb 22;15:150. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-150.

Strand-specific RNA-Seq reveals widespread and developmentally regulated
transcription of natural antisense transcripts in Plasmodium falciparum.

Siegel TN(1), Hon CC, Zhang Q, Lopez-Rubio JJ, Scheidig-Benatar C, Martins RM,
Sismeiro O, Copp√©e JY, Scherf A.

Author information: 
(1)Biology of Host-Parasite Interactions Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
nicolai.siegel@uni-wuerzburg.de.

BACKGROUND: Advances in high-throughput sequencing have led to the discovery of
widespread transcription of natural antisense transcripts (NATs) in a large
number of organisms, where these transcripts have been shown to play important
roles in the regulation of gene expression. Likewise, the existence of NATs has
been observed in Plasmodium but our understanding towards their genome-wide
distribution remains incomplete due to the limited depth and uncertainties in the
level of strand specificity of previous datasets.
RESULTS: To gain insights into the genome-wide distribution of NATs in P.
falciparum, we performed RNA-ligation based strand-specific RNA sequencing at
unprecedented depth. Our data indicate that 78.3% of the genome is transcribed
during blood-stage development. Moreover, our analysis reveals significant levels
of antisense transcription from at least 24% of protein-coding genes and that
while expression levels of NATs change during the intraerythrocytic developmental
cycle (IDC), they do not correlate with the corresponding mRNA levels.
Interestingly, antisense transcription is not evenly distributed across coding
regions (CDSs) but strongly clustered towards the 3'-end of CDSs. Furthermore,
for a significant subset of NATs, transcript levels correlate with mRNA levels of
neighboring genes.Finally, we were able to identify the polyadenylation sites
(PASs) for a subset of NATs, demonstrating that at least some NATs are
polyadenylated. We also mapped the PASs of 3443 coding genes, yielding an average
3' untranslated region length of 523 bp.
CONCLUSIONS: Our strand-specific analysis of the P. falciparum transcriptome
expands and strengthens the existing body of evidence that antisense
transcription is a substantial phenomenon in P. falciparum. For a subset of
neighboring genes we find that sense and antisense transcript levels are
intricately linked while other NATs appear to be regulated independently of mRNA 
transcription. Our deep strand-specific dataset will provide a valuable resource 
for the precise determination of expression levels as it separates sense from
antisense transcript levels, which we find to often significantly differ. In
addition, the extensive novel data on 3' UTR length will allow others to perform 
searches for regulatory motifs in the UTRs and help understand post-translational
regulation in P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-150 
PMCID: PMC4007998
PMID: 24559473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

