
1. Parasitology. 2015 Feb;142 Suppl 1:S98-S107. doi: 10.1017/S0031182014000067. Epub
2014 Feb 20.

Recurrent bottlenecks in the malaria life cycle obscure signals of positive
selection.

Chang HH(1), Hartl DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology,Harvard
University,Cambridge, MA 02138,USA.

Detecting signals of selection in the genome of malaria parasites is a key to
identify targets for drug and vaccine development. Malaria parasites have a
unique life cycle alternating between vector and host organism with a population 
bottleneck at each transition. These recurrent bottlenecks could influence the
patterns of genetic diversity and the power of existing population genetic tools 
to identify sites under positive selection. We therefore simulated the
site-frequency spectrum of a beneficial mutant allele through time under the
malaria life cycle. We investigated the power of current population genetic
methods to detect positive selection based on the site-frequency spectrum as well
as temporal changes in allele frequency. We found that a within-host selective
advantage is difficult to detect using these methods. Although a between-host
transmission advantage could be detected, the power is decreased when compared
with the classical Wright-Fisher (WF) population model. Using an adjusted null
site-frequency spectrum that takes the malaria life cycle into account, the power
of tests based on the site-frequency spectrum to detect positive selection is
greatly improved. Our study demonstrates the importance of considering the life
cycle in genetic analysis, especially in parasites with complex life cycles.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182014000067 
PMCID: PMC4139472
PMID: 24560397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

