
1. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2014 Jun;10(6):769-85. doi:
10.1517/17425255.2014.894020. Epub 2014 Mar 3.

Cytochrome P450 pharmacogenetics in African populations: implications for public 
health.

Dandara C(1), Swart M, Mpeta B, Wonkam A, Masimirembwa C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cape Town, Faculty of Health Sciences, Pharmacogenetics and
Cancer Research Group, Division of Human Genetics, Department of Clinical
Laboratory Sciences , Anzio Road Observatory, 7925, Cape Town , South Africa +27 
21 406 6506 ; collet.dandara@uct.ac.za.

INTRODUCTION: Africa harbors a disproportionate burden of disease when taking
into account the triple challenge caused by HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis (TB) and
malaria, against a backdrop of an increasing burden of noncommunicable diseases. 
More than 80% of therapeutic drugs used in the management of these
diseases/conditions are metabolized by CYP enzymes that exhibit genetic
polymorphisms.
AREAS COVERED: There is variability in the expression and activities of CYPs
resulting in interindividual differences in the response to standard doses of
therapeutic drugs, due to genetic polymorphisms, which exhibit both quantitative 
and qualitative differences between racial and between ethnic groups. The review 
aims to evaluate the implications of the genetic variation in CYPs on the public 
health of Africans. The CYPs reviewed here metabolize most of the commonly used
therapeutic drugs and include CYP1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 3A4 and 3A5.
Allele frequencies are compared between African ethnic groups and among
populations of African, Asian and European origin. Data are obtained from our own
studies and literature.
EXPERT OPINION: The variability in the pattern of genetic variation between
populations translates into differences in drug response. Understanding CYP
variability improves rational drug use and has public health significance.

DOI: 10.1517/17425255.2014.894020 
PMID: 24588448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

