
1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

PLoS One. 2014 Mar 7;9(3):e90951. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090951. eCollection 
2014.

Genetically engineered synthetic miniaturized versions of Plasmodium falciparum
UvrD helicase are catalytically active.

Ansari A(1), Tarique M(1), Tuteja R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi, India.

Retraction in
    PLoS One. 2016;11(6):e0158859.

Helicases catalyze unwinding of double stranded nucleic acids in an
energy-dependent manner. We have reported characterization of UvrD helicase from 
Plasmodium falciparum. We reported that the N-terminal and C-terminal fragments
of PfUvrD contain characteristic ATPase and DNA helicase activities. Here we
report the generation and characterization of a genetically engineered version of
PfUvrD and its derivatives. This synthetic UvrD (sUD) contains all the conserved 
domains of PfUvrD but only the intervening linker sequences are shortened. sUD (∼
45 kDa) and one of its smallest derivative sUDN1N2 (∼ 22 kDa) contain ATPase and 
DNA helicase activities. sUD and sUDN1N2 can utilize hydrolysis of all the NTPs
and dNTPs, can also unwind blunt end duplex DNA substrate and unwind DNA duplex
in 3 to 5 direction only. Some of the properties of sUD are similar to the PfUvrD
helicase. Mutagenesis in the conserved motif Ia indicate that the mutants sUDM
and sUDN1N2M lose all the enzyme activities, which further confirms that these
activities are intrinsic to the synthesized proteins. These studies show that for
helicase activity only the conserved domains are essentially required and
intervening sequences have almost no role. These observations will aid in
understanding the unwinding mechanism by a helicase.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090951 
PMCID: PMC3946578
PMID: 24608129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

