
1. Parasitol Int. 2015 Jun;64(3):282-9. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2014.02.004. Epub 2014
Mar 14.

Molecular cloning, characterization and expression profile of a glutathione
peroxidase-like thioredoxin peroxidase (TPxGl) of the rodent malaria parasite
Plasmodium berghei.

Haselton KJ(1), David R(1), Fell K(1), Schulte E(1), Dybas M(2), Olsen KW(3),
Kanzok SM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Loyola University Chicago, Department of Biology, 1032 W Sheridan Rd, Chicago,
IL 60660, USA.
(2)Loyola University Chicago, Department of Biology, 1032 W Sheridan Rd, Chicago,
IL 60660, USA; Loyola University Chicago, Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry,
1032 W Sheridan Rd, Chicago, IL 60660, USA.
(3)Loyola University Chicago, Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, 1032 W
Sheridan Rd, Chicago, IL 60660, USA.
(4)Loyola University Chicago, Department of Biology, 1032 W Sheridan Rd, Chicago,
IL 60660, USA. Electronic address: skanzok@luc.edu.

Glutathione peroxidases (GPx) comprise an important group of redox active
proteins with diverse functions, including antioxidant defense and signaling.
Although the genome of the malaria parasite Plasmodium does not contain a genuine
GPx gene a glutathione peroxidase-like thioredoxin peroxidase (TPx(Gl)) has
recently been identified and biochemically characterized in the human malaria
parasite P. falciparum. To gain more insight into the potential biological
function of this enzyme we have cloned and expressed TPx(Gl) of the rodent model 
system P. berghei (PbTPx(Gl)). Biochemical characterization confirmed that the
protein is redox active with the P. berghei thioredoxin system. We compared
PbTPx(Gl) to recently characterized thioredoxin-dependent GPx-type proteins of
other organisms, and generated the first hypothetical 3D model of a Plasmodium
TPx(Gl), which shows the conservation of the thioredoxin-fold as well as the
spatial orientation of a classic GPx catalytic tetrad. In vivo studies indicate
that PbTPx(Gl) is continuously expressed in all P. berghei asexual blood stages, 
gametocytes and in early mosquito-stage parasites. Confocal microscopy suggest a 
cytoplasmic localization of PbTPx(Gl) in all investigated parasite life stages,
specifically in mature ookinetes. Our data provides new insights into the
structure and ubiquitous expression of Plasmodium TPx(Gl) and warrants further
investigation into this potentially important redox enzyme.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2014.02.004 
PMID: 24637102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

