
1. J Bacteriol. 2014 Jul;196(13):2333-47. doi: 10.1128/JB.01572-14. Epub 2014 Apr 4.

Analysis of factors that affect FlgM-dependent type III secretion for protein
purification with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.

Guo S(1), Alshamy I(1), Hughes KT(2), Chevance FF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
kelly.hughes@utah.edu fabienne.chevance@utah.edu.

The FlgM protein is secreted in response to flagellar hook-basal body secretion
and can be used as a secretion signal to direct selected protein secretion via
the flagellar type III secretion (T3S) system [H. M. Singer, M. Erhardt, A. M.
Steiner, M. M. Zhang, D. Yoshikami, G. Bulaj, B. M. Olivera, and K. T. Hughes,
mBio 3(3):e00115-12, 2012, http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00115-12]. Conditions
known to affect flagellar gene expression, FlgM stability, and flagellar T3S were
tested either alone or in combination to determine their effects on levels of
secreted FlgM. These conditions included mutations that affect activity of the
flagellar FlhD4C2 master regulatory protein complex or the FlgM T3S chaperone
σ(28), the removal of Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 (Spi1), the removal of
flagellar late secretion substrates that could compete with FlgM for secretion,
and changes in the ionic strength of the growth medium. Conditions that enhanced 
FlgM secretion were combined in order to maximize levels of secreted FlgM. An
optimized FlgM secretion strain was used to secrete and isolate otherwise
difficult-to-produce proteins and peptides fused to the C terminus of FlgM. These
include cysteine-rich, hydrophobic peptides (conotoxins δ-SVIE and MrVIA),
nodule-specific, cysteine-rich antimicrobial peptides (NCR), and a malaria
surface antigen domain of apical membrane antigen AMA-1.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01572-14 
PMCID: PMC4054164
PMID: 24706743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

