
1. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2014 Apr 15;8(4):391-402. doi: 10.3855/jidc.3777.

Immune responses during gestational malaria: a review of the current knowledge
and future trend of research.

Maestre A(1), Carmona-Fonseca J.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo Salud y Comunidad, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Antioquia,
Medell√≠n, Colombia. aemaestre@gmail.com.

Women pregnant with their first child are susceptible to severe P. falciparum
disease from placental malaria because they lack immunity to placenta-specific
cytoadherence proteins. In subsequent pregnancies, as immunity against placental 
parasites is acquired, there is a reduced risk of adverse effects of malaria on
the mother and fetus and asymptomatic parasitaemia is common. In the case of
vivax malaria, with increasing reports of severe cases in Asia and South America,
the effects of infection by this species during pregnancy remain to be
elucidated. This review summarized the main aspects involved in the acquisition
of specific antimalarial immune responses during pregnancy with emphasis in
research carried out in America and Asia, in order to offer a framework of
interpretation for studies on pregnant women with malaria which are recently
being produced in these regions. The authors conclude that (1) Effective humoral 
responses during gestational malaria are mainly directed against variant surface 
antigens codified by genes of the var2Csa family of P. falciparum; (2)
Acquisition of immunity against these variant antigens depends on the degree and 
intensity of transmission, and the chance increases with age and successive
pregnancies; (3) Antibody development is guided by specific cellular immune
responses in cases of placental and maternal infection, and (4) The study of the 
significance of acquisition of specific immunity against both P. falciparum and
P. vivax in America, should be performed.

DOI: 10.3855/jidc.3777 
PMID: 24727503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

