
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Sep;1844(9):1427-36. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2014.04.017. Epub 2014 May 2.

Asn112 in Plasmodium falciparum glutathione S-transferase is essential for
induced reversible tetramerization by phosphate or pyrophosphate.

Quesada-Soriano I(1), Barón C(1), Téllez-Sanz R(1), García-Maroto F(1),
García-Fuentes L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Physics, University of Almería, Research Center
for Agrifood Biotechnology (BITAL), Agrifood Campus of International Excellence
ceiA3, Ctra de Sacramento s/n, 04120 Almería, Spain.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Physics, University of Almería, Research Center
for Agrifood Biotechnology (BITAL), Agrifood Campus of International Excellence
ceiA3, Ctra de Sacramento s/n, 04120 Almería, Spain. Electronic address:
lgarcia@ual.es.

The glutathione S-transferase from Plasmodium falciparum presents distinct
features which are absent from mammalian GST isoenzyme counterparts. Most
apparent among these are the ability to tetramerize and the presence of a
flexible loop. The loop, situated between the 113-119 residues, has been reported
necessary for the tetramerization process. In this article, we report that a
residue outside of this loop, Asn112, is a key to the process - to the point
where the single Asn112Leu mutation prevents tetramerization altogether. We
propose that a structural pattern involving the interaction of the Asn112 and
Lys117 residues from two neighboring subunits plays a role in keeping the
tetramer structure stable. We also report that, for the tetramerization of the
wild-type PfGST to occur, phosphate or pyrophosphate anions must be present. In
other words, tetramerization is a phosphate- or pyrophosphate-induced process.
Furthermore, the presence of magnesium reinforces this induction. We present
experimental evidence for these claims as well as a preliminary calorimetric and 
kinetic study of the dimeric Asn112Leu PfGST mutant. We also propose a putative
binding site for phosphate or pyrophosphate anions through a comparative
structural analysis of PfGST and pyrophosphatases from several organisms. Our
results highlight the differences between PfGST and the human isoenzymes, which
make the parasite enzyme a suitable antimalarial target.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2014.04.017 
PMID: 24792386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

