
1. Insect Mol Biol. 2014 Oct;23(5):558-65. doi: 10.1111/imb.12103. Epub 2014 May 28.

Knockdown of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signalling in the midgut of 
Anopheles stephensi mosquitoes using antisense morpholinos.

Pietri JE(1), Cheung KW, Luckhart S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of California, Davis, CA, USA.

Arthropod-borne infectious diseases are responsible for nearly 1.5 million deaths
annually across the globe, with malaria responsible for >50% of these deaths.
Recent efforts to enhance malaria control have focused on developing genetically 
modified Anopheles mosquitoes that are resistant to malaria parasite infection by
manipulating proteins that are essential to the immune response. Although this
approach has shown promise, the lack of efficient genetic tools in the mosquito
makes it difficult to investigate innate immunity using reverse genetics. Current
gene knockdown strategies based on small interfering RNA are typically
labourious, inefficient, and require extensive training. In the present study, we
describe the use of morpholino antisense oligomers to knockdown MEK-ERK
signalling in the midgut of Anopheles stephensi through a simple feeding
protocol. Anti-MEK morpholino provided in a saline meal was readily ingested by
female mosquitoes with minimal toxicity and resulted in knockdown of total MEK
protein levels 3-4 days after morpholino feeding. Further, anti-MEK morpholino
feeding attenuated inducible phosphorylation of the downstream kinase ERK and, as
predicted by previous work, reduced parasite burden in mosquitoes infected with
Plasmodium falciparum. To our knowledge, this is the first example of morpholino 
use for target protein knockdown via feeding in an insect vector. Our results
suggest this method is not only efficient for studies of individual proteins, but
also for studies of phenotypic control by complex cell signalling networks. As
such, our protocol is an effective alternative to current methods for gene
knockdown in arthropods.

© 2014 The Royal Entomological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/imb.12103 
PMCID: PMC4159403
PMID: 24866718  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

