
1. Sci Rep. 2014 May 30;4:5127. doi: 10.1038/srep05127.

A viral over-expression system for the major malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae.

Suzuki Y(1), Niu G(2), Hughes GL(1), Rasgon JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics and the Huck 
Institutes of the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
Pennsylvania, 16802, United States of America.
(2)1] Department of Entomology, Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics and the
Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, Pennsylvania, 16802, United States of America [2].

Understanding pathogen/mosquito interactions is essential for developing novel
strategies to control mosquito-borne diseases. Technical advances in
reverse-genetics, such as RNA interference (RNAi), have facilitated elucidation
of components of the mosquito immune system that are antagonistic to pathogen
development, and host proteins essential for parasite development. Forward
genetic approaches, however, are limited to generation of transgenic insects, and
while powerful, mosquito transgenesis is a resource- and time-intensive technique
that is not broadly available to most laboratories. The ability to easily
"over-express" genes would enhance molecular studies in vector biology and
expedite elucidation of pathogen-refractory genes without the need to make
transgenic insects. We developed and characterized an efficient Anopheles gambiae
densovirus (AgDNV) over-expression system for the major malaria vector Anopheles 
gambiae. High-levels of gene expression were detected at 3 days post-infection
and increased over time, suggesting this is an effective system for gene
induction. Strong expression was observed in the fat body and ovaries. We
validated multiple short promoters for gene induction studies. Finally, we
developed a polycistronic system to simultaneously express multiple genes of
interest. This AgDNV-based toolset allows for consistent transduction of genes of
interest and will be a powerful molecular tool for research in Anopheles gambiae 
mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1038/srep05127 
PMCID: PMC4038844
PMID: 24875042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

