
1. Malar J. 2014 May 3;13:168. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-168.

High proportion of knowlesi malaria in recent malaria cases in Malaysia.

Yusof R, Lau YL(1), Mahmud R, Fong MY, Jelip J, Ngian HU, Mustakim S, Hussin HM, 
Marzuki N, Mohd Ali M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Tropical Infectious Disease
Research and Education Center (TIDREC), University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. lauyeeling@um.edu.my.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium knowlesi is a simian parasite that has been recognized as 
the fifth species causing human malaria. Naturally-acquired P. knowlesi infection
is widespread among human populations in Southeast Asia. The aim of this
epidemiological study was to determine the incidence and distribution of malaria 
parasites, with a particular focus on human P. knowlesi infection in Malaysia.
METHODS: A total of 457 microscopically confirmed, malaria-positive blood samples
were collected from 22 state and main district hospitals in Malaysia between
September 2012 and December 2013. Nested PCR assay targeting the 18S rRNA gene
was used to determine the infecting Plasmodium species.
RESULTS: A total of 453 samples were positive for Plasmodium species by using
nested PCR assay. Plasmodium knowlesi was identified in 256 (56.5%) samples,
followed by 133 (29.4%) cases of Plasmodium vivax, 49 (10.8%) cases of Plasmodium
falciparum, two (0.4%) cases of Plasmodium ovale and one (0.2%) case of
Plasmodium malariae. Twelve mixed infections were detected, including P.
knowlesi/P. vivax (n = 10), P. knowlesi/P. falciparum (n = 1), and P.
falciparum/P. vivax (n = 1). Notably, P. knowlesi (Included mixed infections
involving P. knowlesi (P. knowlesi/P. vivax and P. knowlesi /P. falciparum))
showed the highest proportion in Sabah (84/115 cases, prevalence of 73.0%),
Sarawak (83/120, 69.2%), Kelantan (42/56, 75.0%), Pahang (24/25, 96.0%), Johor
(7/9, 77.8%), and Terengganu (4/5, 80.0%,). In contrast, the rates of P. knowlesi
infection in Selangor and Negeri Sembilan were found to be 16.2% (18/111 cases)
and 50.0% (5/10 cases), respectively. Sample of P. knowlesi was not obtained from
Kuala Lumpur, Melaka, Perak, Pulau Pinang, and Perlis during the study period,
while a microscopically-positive sample from Kedah was negative by PCR.
CONCLUSION: In addition to Sabah and Sarawak, which have been known for high
prevalence of P. knowlesi infection, the findings from this study highlight the
widespread distribution of P. knowlesi in many Peninsular Malaysia states.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-168 
PMCID: PMC4016780
PMID: 24886266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

