
1. BMC Genomics. 2014 May 8;15:347. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-347.

DNA-encoded nucleosome occupancy is associated with transcription levels in the
human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Bunnik EM, Polishko A, Prudhomme J, Ponts N, Gill SS, Lonardi S, Le Roch KG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Center for Disease Vector
Research, Institute for Integrative Genome Biology, University of California,
Riverside, 900 University Avenue, Riverside, CA 92521, USA.
karine.leroch@ucr.edu.

BACKGROUND: In eukaryotic organisms, packaging of DNA into nucleosomes controls
gene expression by regulating access of the promoter to transcription factors.
The human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum encodes relatively few
transcription factors, while extensive nucleosome remodeling occurs during its
replicative cycle in red blood cells. These observations point towards an
important role of the nucleosome landscape in regulating gene expression.
However, the relation between nucleosome positioning and transcriptional activity
has thus far not been explored in detail in the parasite.
RESULTS: Here, we analyzed nucleosome positioning in the asexual and sexual
stages of the parasite's erythrocytic cycle using chromatin immunoprecipitation
of MNase-digested chromatin, followed by next-generation sequencing. We observed 
a relatively open chromatin structure at the trophozoite and gametocyte stages,
consistent with high levels of transcriptional activity in these stages.
Nucleosome occupancy of genes and promoter regions were subsequently compared to 
steady-state mRNA expression levels. Transcript abundance showed a strong inverse
correlation with nucleosome occupancy levels in promoter regions. In addition,
AT-repeat sequences were strongly unfavorable for nucleosome binding in P.
falciparum, and were overrepresented in promoters of highly expressed genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The connection between chromatin structure and gene expression in P.
falciparum shares similarities with other eukaryotes. However, the remarkable
nucleosome dynamics during the erythrocytic stages and the absence of a large
variety of transcription factors may indicate that nucleosome binding and
remodeling are critical regulators of transcript levels. Moreover, the strong
dependency between chromatin structure and DNA sequence suggests that the P.
falciparum genome may have been shaped by nucleosome binding preferences.
Nucleosome remodeling mechanisms in this deadly parasite could thus provide
potent novel anti-malarial targets.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-347 
PMCID: PMC4035074
PMID: 24885191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

