
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 17;9(6):e100183. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100183.
eCollection 2014.

A var gene upstream element controls protein synthesis at the level of
translation initiation in Plasmodium falciparum.

Brancucci NM(1), Witmer K(1), Schmid C(1), Voss TS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology and Infection Biology, Swiss Tropical and
Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland; University of Basel, Basel,
Switzerland.

Clonally variant protein expression in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum
generates phenotypic variability and allows isogenic populations to adapt to
environmental changes encountered during blood stage infection. The underlying
regulatory mechanisms are best studied for the major virulence factor P.
falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1). PfEMP1 is encoded by the
multicopy var gene family and only a single variant is expressed in individual
parasites, a concept known as mutual exclusion or singular gene choice. var gene 
activation occurs in situ and is achieved through the escape of one locus from
epigenetic silencing. Singular gene choice is controlled at the level of
transcription initiation and var 5' upstream (ups) sequences harbour regulatory
information essential for mutually exclusive transcription as well as for the
trans-generational inheritance of the var activity profile. An additional level
of control has recently been identified for the var2csa gene, where an mRNA
element in the 5' untranslated region (5' UTR) is involved in the reversible
inhibition of translation of var2csa transcripts. Here, we extend the knowledge
on post-transcriptional var gene regulation to the common upsC type. We
identified a 5' UTR sequence that inhibits translation of upsC-derived mRNAs.
Importantly, this 5' UTR element efficiently inhibits translation even in the
context of a heterologous upstream region. Further, we found var 5' UTRs to be
significantly enriched in uAUGs which are known to impair the efficiency of
protein translation in other eukaryotes. Our findings suggest that regulation at 
the post-transcriptional level is a common feature in the control of PfEMP1
expression in P. falciparum.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100183 
PMCID: PMC4061111
PMID: 24937593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

