
1. Brain Behav Immun. 2014 Nov;42:123-37. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2014.06.009. Epub 2014 
Jun 19.

Single episode of mild murine malaria induces neuroinflammation, alters
microglial profile, impairs adult neurogenesis, and causes deficits in social and
anxiety-like behavior.

Guha SK(1), Tillu R(1), Sood A(1), Patgaonkar M(1), Nanavaty IN(1), Sengupta
A(2), Sharma S(1), Vaidya VA(3), Pathak S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Mumbai, India.
(2)Department of Chemical Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Mumbai, India.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Mumbai, India. Electronic address: vvaidya@tifr.res.in.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Mumbai, India. Electronic address: pathaksue@gmail.com.

Cerebral malaria is associated with cerebrovascular damage and neurological
sequelae. However, the neurological consequences of uncomplicated malaria, the
most prevalent form of the disease, remain uninvestigated. Here, using a mild
malaria model, we show that a single Plasmodium chabaudi adami infection in adult
mice induces neuroinflammation, neurogenic, and behavioral changes in the absence
of a blood-brain barrier breach. Using cytokine arrays we show that the infection
induces differential serum and brain cytokine profiles, both at peak parasitemia 
and 15days post-parasite clearance. At the peak of infection, along with the
serum, the brain also exhibited a definitive pro-inflammatory cytokine profile,
and gene expression analysis revealed that pro-inflammatory cytokines were also
produced locally in the hippocampus, an adult neurogenic niche. Hippocampal
microglia numbers were enhanced, and we noted a shift to an activated profile at 
this time point, accompanied by a striking redistribution of the microglia to the
subgranular zone adjacent to hippocampal neuronal progenitors. In the
hippocampus, a distinct decline in progenitor turnover and survival was observed 
at peak parasitemia, accompanied by a shift from neuronal to glial fate
specification. Studies in transgenic Nestin-GFP reporter mice demonstrated a
decline in the Nestin-GFP(+)/GFAP(+) quiescent neural stem cell pool at peak
parasitemia. Although these cellular changes reverted to normal 15days
post-parasite clearance, specific brain cytokines continued to exhibit
dysregulation. Behavioral analysis revealed selective deficits in social and
anxiety-like behaviors, with no change observed in locomotor, cognitive, and
depression-like behaviors, with a return to baseline at recovery. Collectively,
these findings indicate that even a single episode of mild malaria results in
alterations of the brain cytokine profile, causes specific behavioral
dysfunction, is accompanied by hippocampal microglial activation and
redistribution, and a definitive, but transient, suppression of adult hippocampal
neurogenesis.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2014.06.009 
PMID: 24953429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

