
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jul 17;10(7):e1004236. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004236.
eCollection 2014 Jul.

Real-time imaging reveals the dynamics of leukocyte behaviour during experimental
cerebral malaria pathogenesis.

Pai S(1), Qin J(2), Cavanagh L(1), Mitchell A(2), El-Assaad F(3), Jain R(1),
Combes V(4), Hunt NH(5), Grau GE(4), Weninger W(6).

Author information: 
(1)Immune Imaging Laboratory, The Centenary Institute, Newtown, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia; Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(2)Immune Imaging Laboratory, The Centenary Institute, Newtown, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia.
(3)Vascular Immunology Unit, Discipline of Pathology, Sydney Medical School,
University of Sydney, Camperdown, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(4)Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia; Vascular Immunology Unit, Discipline of Pathology, Sydney Medical
School, University of Sydney, Camperdown, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(5)Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia; Molecular Immunopathology Unit, Discipline of Pathology, Sydney
Medical School and Bosch Institute, University of Sydney, Camperdown, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia.
(6)Immune Imaging Laboratory, The Centenary Institute, Newtown, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia; Discipline of Dermatology, University of Sydney, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia; Department of Dermatology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, 
Camperdown, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

During experimental cerebral malaria (ECM) mice develop a lethal
neuropathological syndrome associated with microcirculatory dysfunction and
intravascular leukocyte sequestration. The precise spatio-temporal context in
which the intravascular immune response unfolds is incompletely understood. We
developed a 2-photon intravital microscopy (2P-IVM)-based brain-imaging model to 
monitor the real-time behaviour of leukocytes directly within the brain
vasculature during ECM. Ly6C(hi) monocytes, but not neutrophils, started to
accumulate in the blood vessels of Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbA)-infected
MacGreen mice, in which myeloid cells express GFP, one to two days prior to the
onset of the neurological signs (NS). A decrease in the rolling speed of
monocytes, a measure of endothelial cell activation, was associated with
progressive worsening of clinical symptoms. Adoptive transfer experiments with
defined immune cell subsets in recombinase activating gene (RAG)-1-deficient mice
showed that these changes were mediated by Plasmodium-specific CD8(+) T
lymphocytes. A critical number of CD8(+) T effectors was required to induce
disease and monocyte adherence to the vasculature. Depletion of monocytes at the 
onset of disease symptoms resulted in decreased lymphocyte accumulation,
suggesting reciprocal effects of monocytes and T cells on their recruitment
within the brain. Together, our studies define the real-time kinetics of
leukocyte behaviour in the central nervous system during ECM, and reveal a
significant role for Plasmodium-specific CD8(+) T lymphocytes in regulating
vascular pathology in this disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004236 
PMCID: PMC4102563
PMID: 25033406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

