
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014 Oct;58(10):5831-40. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02462-14. 
Epub 2014 Jul 21.

Ex vivo activity of endoperoxide antimalarials, including artemisone and
arterolane, against multidrug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum isolates from
Cambodia.

Lanteri CA(1), Chaorattanakawee S(2), Lon C(2), Saunders DL(2), Rutvisuttinunt
W(2), Yingyuen K(2), Bathurst I(3), Ding XC(3), Tyner SD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Sciences, Bangkok, Thailand charlotte.lanteri@afrims.org.
(2)Department of Immunology and Medicine, Armed Forces Research Institute of
Medical Sciences, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Medicines for Malaria Venture, Geneva, Switzerland.

Novel synthetic endoperoxides are being evaluated as new components of
artemisinin combination therapies (ACTs) to treat artemisinin-resistant
Plasmodium falciparum malaria. We conducted blinded ex vivo activity testing of
fully synthetic (OZ78 and OZ277) and semisynthetic (artemisone, artemiside,
artesunate, and dihydroartemisinin) endoperoxides in the histidine-rich protein 2
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay against 200 P. falciparum isolates from areas
of artemisinin-resistant malaria in western and northern Cambodia in 2009 and
2010. The order of potency and geometric mean (GM) 50% inhibitory concentrations 
(IC50s) were as follows: artemisone (2.40 nM) > artesunate (8.49 nM) >
dihydroartemisinin (11.26 nM) > artemiside (15.28 nM) > OZ277 (31.25 nM) > OZ78
(755.27 nM). Ex vivo activities of test endoperoxides positively correlated with 
dihydroartemisinin and artesunate. The isolates were over 2-fold less susceptible
to dihydroartemisinin than the artemisinin-sensitive P. falciparum W2 clone and
showed sensitivity comparable to those with test endoperoxides and artesunate,
with isolate/W2 IC50 susceptibility ratios of <2.0. All isolates had P.
falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter mutations, with negative
correlations in sensitivity to endoperoxides and chloroquine. The activities of
endoperoxides (artesunate, dihydroartemisinin, OZ277, and artemisone)
significantly correlated with that of the ACT partner drug, mefloquine. Isolates 
had mutations associated with clinical resistance to mefloquine, with 35%
prevalence of P. falciparum multidrug resistance gene 1 (pfmdr1) amplification
and 84.5% occurrence of the pfmdr1 Y184F mutation. GM IC50s for mefloquine,
lumefantrine, and endoperoxides (artesunate, dihydroartemisinin, OZ277, OZ78, and
artemisone) correlated with pfmdr1 copy number. Given that current ACTs are
failing potentially from reduced sensitivity to artemisinins and partner drugs,
newly identified mutations associated with artemisinin resistance reported in the
literature and pfmdr1 mutations should be examined for their combined
contributions to emerging ACT resistance.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02462-14 
PMCID: PMC4187925
PMID: 25049252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

