
1. Mol Ecol. 2014 Sep;23(18):4574-89. doi: 10.1111/mec.12866. Epub 2014 Aug 18.

Prominent intraspecific genetic divergence within Anopheles gambiae sibling
species triggered by habitat discontinuities across a riverine landscape.

Caputo B(1), Nwakanma D, Caputo FP, Jawara M, Oriero EC, Hamid-Adiamoh M, Dia I, 
Konate L, Petrarca V, Pinto J, Conway DJ, Della Torre A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica e Malattie Infettive, Istituto
Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci-Bolognetti, Università 'Sapienza', Piazzale Aldo Moro 5,
00185, Rome, Italy.

The Anopheles gambiae complex of mosquitoes includes malaria vectors at different
stages of speciation, whose study enables a better understanding of how
adaptation to divergent environmental conditions leads to evolution of
reproductive isolation. We investigated the population genetic structure of
closely related sympatric taxa that have recently been proposed as separate
species (An. coluzzii and An. gambiae), sampled from diverse habitats along the
Gambia river in West Africa. We characterized putatively neutral microsatellite
loci as well as chromosomal inversion polymorphisms known to be associated with
ecological adaptation. The results revealed strong ecologically associated
population subdivisions within both species. Microsatellite loci on chromosome-3L
revealed clear differentiation between coastal and inland populations, which in
An. coluzzii is reinforced by a unusual inversion polymorphism pattern,
supporting the hypothesis of genetic divergence driven by adaptation to the
coastal habitat. A strong reduction of gene flow was observed between An. gambiae
populations west and east of an extensively rice-cultivated region apparently
colonized exclusively by An. coluzzii. Notably, this 'intraspecific'
differentiation is higher than that observed between the two species and involves
also the centromeric region of chromosome-X which has previously been considered 
a marker of speciation within this complex, possibly suggesting that the two
populations may be at an advanced stage of differentiation triggered by
human-made habitat fragmentation. These results confirm ongoing ecological
speciation within these most important Afro-tropical malaria vectors and raise
new questions on the possible effect of this process in malaria transmission.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.12866 
PMID: 25040079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

