
1. Sci Rep. 2014 Jul 25;4:5829. doi: 10.1038/srep05829.

Starvation-response may not involve Atg1-dependent autophagy induction in
non-unikont parasites.

Földvári-Nagy L(1), Ari E(1), Csermely P(2), Korcsmáros T(3), Vellai T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Department of Medical Chemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University,
Budapest, Hungary.
(3)1] Department of Genetics, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary [2]
TGAC, The Genome Analysis Centre, Norwich, UK [3] Gut Health and Food Safety
Programme, Institute of Food Research, Norwich, UK.

Autophagy, the lysosome-mediated self-degradation process, is implicated in
survival during starvation in yeast, Dictyostelium and animals. In these
eukaryotic taxa (collectively called Unikonts), autophagy is induced primarily
through the Atg1/ULK1 complex in response to nutrient depletion. Autophagy has
also been well-studied in non-unikont parasites, such as Trypanosoma and
Plasmodium, and found important in their life-cycle transitions. However, how
autophagy is induced in non-unikonts remains largely unrevealed. Using a
bioinformatics approach, we examined the presence of Atg1 and of its complex in
the genomes of 40 non-unikonts. We found that these genomes do not encode typical
Atg1 proteins: BLAST and HMMER queries matched only with the kinase domain of
Atg1, while other segments responsible for regulation and protein-binding were
missing. Non-unikonts also lacked other components of the Atg1-inducing complex. 
Orthologs of an alternative autophagy inducer, Atg6 were found only in the half
of the species, indicating that the other half may possess other inducing
mechanisms. As key autophagy genes have differential expression patterns during
life-cycle, we raise the possibility that autophagy in these protists is induced 
mainly at the post-transcriptional level. Understanding Atg1-independent
autophagy induction mechanisms in these parasites may lead to novel
pharmacological interventions, not affecting human Atg1-dependent autophagy.

DOI: 10.1038/srep05829 
PMCID: PMC5376053
PMID: 25059978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

