
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 30;9(7):e101131. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101131.
eCollection 2014.

The quality of methods reporting in parasitology experiments.

Fl√≥rez-Vargas O(1), Bramhall M(1), Noyes H(2), Cruickshank S(3), Stevens R(1),
Brass A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bio-health Informatics Group, School of Computer Science, University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Biological Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United
Kingdom.
(3)Manchester Immunology Group, Faculty of Life Science, University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(4)Bio-health Informatics Group, School of Computer Science, University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom; Manchester Immunology Group, Faculty of
Life Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

There is a growing concern both inside and outside the scientific community over 
the lack of reproducibility of experiments. The depth and detail of reported
methods are critical to the reproducibility of findings, but also for making it
possible to compare and integrate data from different studies. In this study, we 
evaluated in detail the methods reporting in a comprehensive set of
trypanosomiasis experiments that should enable valid reproduction, integration
and comparison of research findings. We evaluated a subset of other parasitic
(Leishmania, Toxoplasma, Plasmodium, Trichuris and Schistosoma) and non-parasitic
(Mycobacterium) experimental infections in order to compare the quality of method
reporting more generally. A systematic review using PubMed (2000-2012) of all
publications describing gene expression in cells and animals infected with
Trypanosoma spp was undertaken based on PRISMA guidelines; 23 papers were
identified and included. We defined a checklist of essential parameters that
should be reported and have scored the number of those parameters that are
reported for each publication. Bibliometric parameters (impact factor, citations 
and h-index) were used to look for association between Journal and Author status 
and the quality of method reporting. Trichuriasis experiments achieved the
highest scores and included the only paper to score 100% in all criteria. The
mean of scores achieved by Trypanosoma articles through the checklist was 65.5%
(range 32-90%). Bibliometric parameters were not correlated with the quality of
method reporting (Spearman's rank correlation coefficient <-0.5; p>0.05). Our
results indicate that the quality of methods reporting in experimental
parasitology is a cause for concern and it has not improved over time, despite
there being evidence that most of the assessed parameters do influence the
results. We propose that our set of parameters be used as guidelines to improve
the quality of the reporting of experimental infection models as a pre-requisite 
for integrating and comparing sets of data.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101131 
PMCID: PMC4116335
PMID: 25076044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

