
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014 Oct;58(10):5909-15. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02762-14. 
Epub 2014 Jul 28.

Double mutation in the pfmdr1 gene is associated with emergence of
chloroquine-resistant Plasmodium falciparum malaria in Eastern India.

Das S(1), Mahapatra SK(2), Tripathy S(1), Chattopadhyay S(1), Dash SK(1), Mandal 
D(1), Das B(1), Hati AK(3), Roy S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Microbiology Laboratory, Department of Human Physiology with
Community Health, Vidyasagar University, Midnapore, West Bengal, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, School of Chemical and Biotechnology, SASTRA
University, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu, India.
(3)Department of Medical Entomology and Chairman, Division of Parasitology,
Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
(4)Immunology and Microbiology Laboratory, Department of Human Physiology with
Community Health, Vidyasagar University, Midnapore, West Bengal, India
roysomenath@hotmail.com.

Malaria is a major public health problem in tropical and subtropical countries,
including India. This study elucidates the cause of chloroquine treatment failure
(for Plasmodium falciparum infection) before the introduction of artemisinin
combination therapy. One hundred twenty-six patients were randomized to
chloroquine treatment, and the therapeutic efficacy was monitored from days 1 to 
28. An in vitro susceptibility test was performed with all isolates. Parasitic
DNA was isolated, followed by PCR and restriction digestion of different codons
of the pfcrt gene (codons 72 to 76) and the pfmdr1 gene (N86Y, Y184F, S1034C,
N1042D, and D1246Y). Finally, sequencing was done to confirm the mutations.
Forty-three (34.13%) early treatment failure cases and 16 (12.69%) late treatment
failure cases were observed after chloroquine treatment. In vitro chloroquine
resistance was found in 103 isolates (81.75%). Twenty-six (60.47%) early
treatment failure cases and 6 (37.5%) late treatment failure cases were
associated with the CVMNK-YYSNY allele (the underlined amino acids are those that
were mutated). Moreover, the CVIEK-YYSNY allele was found in 8 early treatment
failure (18.60%) and 2 late treatment failure (12.5%) cases. The presence of the 
wild-type pfcrt (CVMNK) and pfmdr1 (YYSNY) double mutant allele in
chloroquine-nonresponsive cases was quite uncommon. In vivo chloroquine treatment
failure and in vitro chloroquine resistance were strongly correlated with the
CVMNK-YYSNY and CVIEK-YYSNY haplotypes (P < 0.01).

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02762-14 
PMCID: PMC4187921
PMID: 25070111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

