
1. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Oct;94(2):353-66. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12762. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

Dominant negative mutant of Plasmodium Rad51 causes reduced parasite burden in
host by abrogating DNA double-strand break repair.

Roy N(1), Bhattacharyya S, Chakrabarty S, Laskar S, Babu SM, Bhattacharyya MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, 
Gachibowli, Hyderabad, 500046, Andhra Pradesh, India.

Malaria parasites survive through repairing a plethora of DNA double-stranded
breaks (DSBs) experienced during their asexual growth. In Plasmodium Rad51
mediated homologous recombination (HR) mechanism and homology-independent
alternative end-joining mechanism have been identified. Here we address whether
loss of HR activity can be compensated by other DSB repair mechanisms. Creating a
transgenic Plasmodium line defective in HR function, we demonstrate that HR is
the most important DSB repair pathway in malarial parasite. Using mouse malaria
model we have characterized the dominant negative effect of PfRad51(K143R) mutant
on Plasmodium DSB repair and host-parasite interaction. Our work illustrates that
Plasmodium berghei harbouring the mutant protein (PfRad51(K143R)) failed to
repair DSBs as evidenced by hypersensitivity to DNA-damaging agent. Mice infected
with mutant parasites lived significantly longer with markedly reduced parasite
burden. To better understand the effect of mutant PfRad51(K143R) on HR, we used
yeast as a surrogate model and established that the presence of PfRad51(K143R)
completely inhibited DNA repair, gene conversion and gene targeting. Biochemical 
experiment confirmed that very low level of mutant protein was sufficient for
complete disruption of wild-type PfRad51 activity. Hence our work provides
evidence that HR pathway of Plasmodium could be efficiently targeted to curb
malaria.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12762 
PMID: 25145341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

