
1. Acta Trop. 2014 Dec;140:77-83. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2014.08.008. Epub 2014 
Aug 19.

Inhibition of metalloproteinase-9 secretion and gene expression by artemisinin
derivatives.

Magenta D(1), Sangiovanni E(1), Basilico N(2), Haynes RK(3), Parapini S(1),
Colombo E(1), Bosisio E(1), Taramelli D(1), Dell'Agli M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, Università degli
Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical, Surgical and Dental Sciences, Università degli Studi
di Milano, Milano, Italy. Electronic address: nicoletta.basilico@unimi.it.
(3)Centre of Excellence for Pharmaceutical Sciences, North-West University,
Potchefstroom 2520, South Africa; Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, PR
China.

Malaria remains one of the world's most common infectious diseases, being
responsible for more deaths than any other communicable disease except
tuberculosis. There is strong evidence that tumour necrosis factor α and
interleukin-1β are important contributors to the systemic disease caused by the
infection with Plasmodium falciparum. Circulating levels of TNFα are increased
after infection, as a consequence of stimulation of monocyte-macrophages by
infected red blood cells or parasite products, as shown in vitro for the malaria 
pigment haemozoin. TNFα in turn enhances the synthesis of metalloproteinase-9 in 
monocytes and macrophages. Metalloproteinase-9 acts on the extracellular matrix
but also on non-traditional substrates, including precursors of inflammatory
cytokines, which are proteolytically activated and contribute to the
amplification of the inflammatory response. The aim of the present work was to
establish whether artemisinin and its derivatives artemisone, artesunate and
dihydroartemisinin possess immuno-modulatory properties. In particular, it is
necessary to evaluate their effects on mRNA levels and secretion of MMP-9 by the 
human monocytic cell line (THP-1 cells) stimulated by hemozoin or TNFα. 5μM of
each derivative, although not artemisinin itself, induced significantly inhibited
TNFα production. Artesunate, artemisone and DHA antagonized haemozoin-induced
MMP-9 secretion by 25%, 24% and 50%, respectively. mRNA levels were also
depressed by 14%, 20% and 27%, respectively, thus reflecting in part the effect
observed on protein production. The derivatives significantly inhibited both
TNFα-induced MMP-9 secretion and mRNA levels to a greater extent than haemozoin
itself. Both haemozoin and TNFα increased NF-κB driven transcription by 11 and
7.7 fold, respectively. Artesunate, artemisone and DHA inhibited
haemozoin-induced NF-κB driven transcription by 28%, 34%, and 49%, respectively. 
Similarly the derivatives, but not artemisinin, prevented TNFα-induced NF-κB
driven transcription by 47-51%. The study indicates that artemisinins may
attenuate the inflammatory potential of monocytes in vivo. Thus, in addition to
direct anti-parasitic activities, the beneficial clinical effects of artemisinins
for the treatment of malaria include the apparent ability to attenuate the
inflammatory response, thus limiting the risk of progression to the more severe
form of the disease, including the onset of cerebral malaria.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2014.08.008 
PMID: 25149353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

