
1. Virology. 2014 Nov;468-470:133-139. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.07.019. Epub 2014
Aug 28.

Aedes aegypti salivary protein "aegyptin" co-inoculation modulates dengue virus
infection in the vertebrate host.

McCracken MK(1), Christofferson RC(1), Grasperge BJ(1), Calvo E(2), Chisenhall
DM(1), Mores CN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Louisiana State University, Skip Bertman Drive, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, United
States.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institutes of Health,
12735 Twinbrook Parkway, Rockville, MD 20852, United States.
(3)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Louisiana State University, Skip Bertman Drive, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, United
States. Electronic address: cmores@lsu.edu.

Dengue virus (DENV) is transmitted in the saliva of the mosquito vector Aedes
aegypti during blood meal acquisition. This saliva is composed of numerous
proteins with the capacity to disrupt hemostasis or modulate the vertebrate
immune response. One such protein, termed "aegyptin," is an allergen and
inhibitor of clot formation, and has been found in decreased abundance in the
saliva of DENV-infected mosquitoes. To examine the influence of aegyptin on DENV 
infection of the vertebrate, we inoculated IRF-3/7(-/- -/-) mice with DENV
serotype 2 strain 1232 with and without co-inoculation of aegyptin. Mice that
received aegyptin exhibited decreased DENV titers in inoculation sites and in
circulation, as well as increased concentrations of GM-CSF, IFN-γ, IL-5, and
IL-6, at 48 h post-inoculation when compared to mice that received inoculation of
DENV alone. These and other data suggest that aegyptin impacts DENV perpetuation 
via elevated induction of the immune response.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.07.019 
PMCID: PMC4254699
PMID: 25173089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

