
1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Sep 8;15:769. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-769.

A functional genomics catalogue of activated transcription factors during
pathogenesis of pneumococcal disease.

Mahdi LK, Deihimi T, Zamansani F, Fruzangohar M, Adelson DL, Paton JC, Ogunniyi
AD(1), Ebrahimie E.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Infectious Diseases, School of Molecular and Biomedical
Science, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
david.ogunniyi@adelaide.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Streptococcus pneumoniae (the pneumococcus) is the world's foremost
microbial pathogen, killing more people each year than HIV, TB or malaria. The
capacity to penetrate deeper host tissues contributes substantially to the
ability of this organism to cause disease. Here we investigated, for the first
time, functional genomics modulation of 3 pneumococcal strains (serotype 2 [D39],
serotype 4 [WCH43] and serotype 6A [WCH16]) during transition from the
nasopharynx to lungs to blood and to brain of mice at both promoter and domain
activation levels.
RESULTS: We found 7 highly activated transcription factors (TFs) [argR, codY,
hup, rpoD, rr02, scrR and smrC] capable of binding to a large number of
up-regulated genes, potentially constituting the regulatory backbone of
pneumococcal pathogenesis. Strain D39 showed a distinct profile in employing a
large number of TFs during blood infection. Interestingly, the same highly
activated TFs used by D39 in blood are also used by WCH16 and WCH43 during brain 
infection. This indicates that different pneumococcal strains might activate a
similar set of TFs and regulatory elements depending on the final site of
infection. Hierarchical clustering analysis showed that all the highly activated 
TFs, except rpoD, clustered together with a high level of similarity in all 3
strains, which might suggest redundancy in the regulatory roles of these TFs
during infection. Discriminant function analysis of the TFs in various niches
highlights differential regulatory backgrounds of the 3 strains, and pathogenesis
data confirms codY as the most significant predictor discriminating between these
strains in various niches, particularly in the blood. Moreover, the predicted TF 
and domain activation profiles of the 3 strains correspond with their distinct
pathogenicity characteristics.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the pneumococcus changes the short binding
sites in the promoter regions of genes in a niche-specific manner to enhance its 
ability to disseminate from one host niche to another. This study provides a
framework for an improved understanding of the dynamics of pneumococcal
pathogenesis, and opens a new avenue into similar investigations in other
pathogenic bacteria.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-769 
PMCID: PMC4171566
PMID: 25196724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

