
1. mBio. 2014 Sep 9;5(5):e01606-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01606-14.

Critical glycosylated residues in exon three of erythrocyte glycophorin A engage 
Plasmodium falciparum EBA-175 and define receptor specificity.

Salinas ND(1), Paing MM(1), Tolia NH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Microbial Pathogenesis, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(2)tolia@wustl.edu.

Erythrocyte invasion is an essential step in the pathogenesis of malaria. The
erythrocyte binding-like (EBL) family of Plasmodium falciparum proteins
recognizes glycophorins (Gp) on erythrocytes and plays a critical role in
attachment during invasion. However, the molecular basis for specific receptor
recognition by each parasite ligand has remained elusive, as is the case with the
ligand/receptor pair P. falciparum EBA-175 (PfEBA-175)/GpA. This is due largely
to difficulties in producing properly glycosylated and functional receptors.
Here, we developed an expression system to produce recombinant glycosylated and
functional GpA, as well as mutations and truncations. We identified the essential
binding region and determinants for PfEBA-175 engagement, demonstrated that these
determinants are required for the inhibition of parasite growth, and identified
the glycans important in mediating the PfEBA-175-GpA interaction. The results
suggest that PfEBA-175 engages multiple glycans of GpA encoded by exon 3 and that
the presentation of glycans is likely required for high-avidity binding. The
absence of exon 3 in GpB and GpE due to a splice site mutation confers specific
recognition of GpA by PfEBA-175. We speculate that GpB and GpE may have arisen
due to selective pressure to lose the PfEBA-175 binding site in GpA. The
expression system described here has wider application for examining other EBL
members important in parasite invasion, as well as additional pathogens that
recognize glycophorins. The ability to define critical binding determinants in
receptor-ligand interactions, as well as a system to genetically manipulate
glycosylated receptors, opens new avenues for the design of interventions that
disrupt parasite invasion.IMPORTANCE: Plasmodium falciparum uses distinct ligands
that bind host cell receptors for invasion of red blood cells (RBCs) during
malaria infection. A key entry pathway involves P. falciparum EBA-175 (PfEBA-175)
recognizing glycophorin A (GpA) on RBCs. Despite knowledge of this
protein-protein interaction, the complete mechanism for specific receptor
engagement is not known. PfEBA-175 recognizes GpA but is unable to engage the
related RBC receptor GpB or GpE. Understanding the necessary elements that enable
PfEBA-175 to specifically recognize GpA is critical in developing specific and
potent inhibitors of PfEBA-175 that disrupt host cell invasion and aid in malaria
control. Here, we describe a novel system to produce and manipulate the host
receptor GpA. Using this system, we probed the elements in GpA necessary for
engagement and thus for host cell invasion. These studies have important
implications for understanding how ligands and receptors interact and for the
future development of malaria interventions.

Copyright Â© 2014 Salinas et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01606-14 
PMCID: PMC4173783
PMID: 25205096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

