
1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 16;9(10):e109059. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109059.
eCollection 2014.

Genetic characterization of human-derived hydatid cysts of Echinococcus
granulosus sensu lato in Heilongjiang Province and the first report of G7
genotype of E. canadensis in humans in China.

Zhang T(1), Yang D(2), Zeng Z(3), Zhao W(2), Liu A(2), Piao D(1), Jiang T(1), Cao
J(4), Shen Y(4), Liu H(4), Zhang W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang,
China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.
(4)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Health, WHO Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and Filariasis,
Shanghai, China.

Cystic echinococcosis (CE) caused by the larval stage of Echinococcus granulosus 
sensu lato (s.l.) is one of the most important zoonotic parasitic diseases
worldwide and 10 genotypes (G1-G10) have been reported. In China, almost all the 
epidemiological and genotyping studies of E. granulosus s.l. are from the west
and northwest pasturing areas. However, in Heilongjiang Province of northeastern 
China, no molecular information is available on E. granulosus s.l. To understand 
and to speculate on possible transmission patterns of E. granulosus s.l., we
molecularly identified and genotyped 10 hydatid cysts from hepatic CE patients in
Heilongjiang Province based on mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I
(cox1), cytochrome b (cytb) and NADH dehydrogenase subunit 1 (nad1) genes. Two
genotypes were identified, G1 genotype (n = 6) and G7 genotype (n = 4). All the
six G1 genotype isolates were identical to each other at the cox1 locus; three
and two different sequences were obtained at the cytb and nad1 loci,
respectively, with two cytb gene sequences not being described previously. G7
genotype isolates were identical to each other at the cox1, cytb and nad1 loci;
however, the cytb gene sequence was not described previously. This is the first
report of G7 genotype in humans in China. Three new cytb gene sequences from G1
and G7 genotypes might reflect endemic genetic characterizations. Pigs might be
the main intermediate hosts of G7 genotype in our investigated area by homology
analysis. The results will aid in making more effective control strategies for
the prevention of transmission of E. granulosus s.l.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109059 
PMCID: PMC4199617
PMID: 25329820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

