
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Feb 20;10(2):413-20. doi: 10.1021/cb500616x. Epub 2014 Nov 5.

Mutations in the P-type cation-transporter ATPase 4, PfATP4, mediate resistance
to both aminopyrazole and spiroindolone antimalarials.

Flannery EL(1), McNamara CW, Kim SW, Kato TS, Li F, Teng CH, Gagaring K, Manary
MJ, Barboa R, Meister S, Kuhen K, Vinetz JM, Chatterjee AK, Winzeler EA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Drug Discovery, Department of Pediatrics,
â€¡Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of
California San Diego School of Medicine , La Jolla, California 92093, United
States.

Aminopyrazoles are a new class of antimalarial compounds identified in a cellular
antiparasitic screen with potent activity against Plasmodium falciparum asexual
and sexual stage parasites. To investigate their unknown mechanism of action and 
thus identify their target, we cultured parasites in the presence of a
representative member of the aminopyrazole series, GNF-Pf4492, to select for
resistance. Whole genome sequencing of three resistant lines showed that each had
acquired independent mutations in a P-type cation-transporter ATPase, PfATP4
(PF3D7_1211900), a protein implicated as the novel Plasmodium spp. target of
another, structurally unrelated, class of antimalarials called the spiroindolones
and characterized as an important sodium transporter of the cell. Similarly to
the spiroindolones, GNF-Pf4492 blocks parasite transmission to mosquitoes and
disrupts intracellular sodium homeostasis. Our data demonstrate that PfATP4 plays
a critical role in cellular processes, can be inhibited by two distinct
antimalarial pharmacophores, and supports the recent observations that PfATP4 is 
a critical antimalarial target.

DOI: 10.1021/cb500616x 
PMCID: PMC4340351
PMID: 25322084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

