
1. BMC Biol. 2014 Oct 30;12:86. doi: 10.1186/s12915-014-0086-0.

A comprehensive evaluation of rodent malaria parasite genomes and gene
expression.

Otto TD, BÃ¶hme U, Jackson AP, Hunt M, Franke-Fayard B, Hoeijmakers WA, Religa AA,
Robertson L, Sanders M, Ogun SA, Cunningham D, Erhart A, Billker O, Khan SM,
Stunnenberg HG, Langhorne J, Holder AA, Waters AP, Newbold CI, Pain A, Berriman
M, Janse CJ.

BACKGROUND: Rodent malaria parasites (RMP) are used extensively as models of
human malaria. Draft RMP genomes have been published for Plasmodium yoelii, P.
berghei ANKA (PbA) and P. chabaudi AS (PcAS). Although availability of these
genomes made a significant impact on recent malaria research, these genomes were 
highly fragmented and were annotated with little manual curation. The fragmented 
nature of the genomes has hampered genome wide analysis of Plasmodium gene
regulation and function.
RESULTS: We have greatly improved the genome assemblies of PbA and PcAS, newly
sequenced the virulent parasite P. yoelii YM genome, sequenced additional RMP
isolates/lines and have characterized genotypic diversity within RMP species. We 
have produced RNA-seq data and utilised it to improve gene-model prediction and
to provide quantitative, genome-wide, data on gene expression. Comparison of the 
RMP genomes with the genome of the human malaria parasite P. falciparum and
RNA-seq mapping permitted gene annotation at base-pair resolution. Full-length
chromosomal annotation permitted a comprehensive classification of all
subtelomeric multigene families including the 'Plasmodium interspersed repeat
genes' (pir). Phylogenetic classification of the pir family, combined with pir
expression patterns, indicates functional diversification within this family.
CONCLUSIONS: Complete RMP genomes, RNA-seq and genotypic diversity data are
excellent and important resources for gene-function and post-genomic analyses and
to better interrogate Plasmodium biology. Genotypic diversity between P. chabaudi
isolates makes this species an excellent parasite to study genotype-phenotype
relationships. The improved classification of multigene families will enhance
studies on the role of (variant) exported proteins in virulence and immune
evasion/modulation.

DOI: 10.1186/s12915-014-0086-0 
PMCID: PMC4242472
PMID: 25359557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

