
1. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:713071. doi: 10.1155/2014/713071. Epub 2014 Aug 31.

A derived network-based interferon-related signature of human macrophages
responding to Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Wu K(1), Fang H(2), Lyu LD(3), Lowrie DB(4), Wong KW(4), Fan XY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan University, 2901 Caolang Road,
Shanghai 201508, China ; Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology of MOE/MOH,
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, 138 Yixueyuan Road, Shanghai 200032, 
China ; State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 197 Ruijin Road II, Shanghai
200025, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 197 Ruijin Road II, Shanghai
200025, China.
(3)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan University, 2901 Caolang Road,
Shanghai 201508, China.
(4)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan University, 2901 Caolang Road,
Shanghai 201508, China ; Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology of MOE/MOH,
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, 138 Yixueyuan Road, Shanghai 200032, 
China.

Network analysis of transcriptional signature typically relies on direct
interaction between two highly expressed genes. However, this approach misses
indirect and biological relevant interactions through a third factor (hub). Here 
we determine whether a hub-based network analysis can select an improved
signature subset that correlates with a biological change in a stronger manner
than the original signature. We have previously reported an interferon-related
transcriptional signature (THP1r2Mtb-induced) from Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M.
tb)-infected THP-1 human macrophage. We selected hub-connected THP1r2Mtb-induced 
genes into the refined network signature TMtb-iNet and grouped the excluded genes
into the excluded signature TMtb-iEx. TMtb-iNet retained the enrichment of
binding sites of interferon-related transcription factors and contained
relatively more interferon-related interacting genes when compared to
THP1r2Mtb-induced signature. TMtb-iNet correlated as strongly as
THP1r2Mtb-induced signature on a public transcriptional dataset of patients with 
pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB). TMtb-iNet correlated more strongly in CD4(+) and
CD8(+) T cells from PTB patients than THP1r2Mtb-induced signature and TMtb-iEx.
When TMtb-iNet was applied to data during clinical therapy of tuberculosis, it
resulted in the most pronounced response and the weakest correlation. Correlation
on dataset from patients with AIDS or malaria was stronger for TMtb-iNet,
indicating an involvement of TMtb-iNet in these chronic human infections.
Collectively, the significance of this work is twofold: (1) we disseminate a
hub-based approach in generating a biologically meaningful and clinically useful 
signature; (2) using this approach we introduce a new network-based signature and
demonstrate its promising applications in understanding host responses to
infections.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/713071 
PMCID: PMC4209755
PMID: 25371902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

