
1. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2015 Feb;175(3):1330-43. doi: 10.1007/s12010-014-1319-y.
Epub 2014 Nov 13.

Surface plasmon resonance based label-free detection of Salmonella using DNA self
assembly.

Singh A(1), Verma HN, Arora K.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Instrumentation Research Facility, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New
Delhi, 110067, India.

Typhoid is re-emerging as a biggest health threat to third world countries. One
of the major challenge is false negative diagnosis using existing
immunodiagnostic methods due to overlapping symptoms of other infections (like
brucellosis, malaria, hepatitis) that mimic this enteric fever (typhoid). Surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) based DNA hybridisation biosensor has been fabricated by 
generating self-assembled monolayer of 5'-thiolated single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)
probe onto gold surface. Highly specific DNA probe has been selected from
conserved Vi capsular antigen gene of Salmonella enterica serovars typhi. This
DNA biosensor has been investigated for label-free real-time monitoring of
Salmonella. Interestingly, 0.019 ng mL(-1) (2 fM) is the lowest detected
concentration in PBS with association (k a) and dissociation (k d) rate constants
to be k a (M(-1) s(-1)) = 6.68 × 10(4) ± 2.3 and k d (s(-1)) = 5.6 × 10(-3) ±
0.01, respectively. This biosensor was successfully demonstrated to distinguish
complementary, non-complementary and one-base mismatch sequences and reusability 
up to 40 hybridisation cycles at room temperature. Successful results were
obtained for hybridisation studies of genomic DNA isolated from spiked urine
sample. Performance characteristics of this biosensing device suggested further
scope to fine-tune such DNA-based assays to be implied for clinical, food and
environmental applications.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-014-1319-y 
PMID: 25391546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

