
1. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 26;9(11):e113220. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113220.
eCollection 2014.

Characterization of the autophagy marker protein Atg8 reveals atypical features
of autophagy in Plasmodium falciparum.

Navale R(1), Atul(1), Allanki AD(1), Sijwali PS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR)-Centre for Cellular and
Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, AP, India.

Conventional autophagy is a lysosome-dependent degradation process that has
crucial homeostatic and regulatory functions in eukaryotic organisms. As malaria 
parasites must dispose a number of self and host cellular contents, we
investigated if autophagy in malaria parasites is similar to the conventional
autophagy. Genome wide analysis revealed a partial autophagy repertoire in
Plasmodium, as homologs for only 15 of the 33 yeast autophagy proteins could be
identified, including the autophagy marker Atg8. To gain insights into autophagy 
in malaria parasites, we investigated Plasmodium falciparum Atg8 (PfAtg8)
employing techniques and conditions that are routinely used to study autophagy.
Atg8 was similarly expressed and showed punctate localization throughout the
parasite in both asexual and sexual stages; it was exclusively found in the
pellet fraction as an integral membrane protein, which is in contrast to the
yeast or mammalian Atg8 that is distributed among cytosolic and membrane
fractions, and suggests for a constitutive autophagy. Starvation, the best known 
autophagy inducer, decreased PfAtg8 level by almost 3-fold compared to the
normally growing parasites. Neither the Atg8-associated puncta nor the Atg8
expression level was significantly altered by treatment of parasites with
routinely used autophagy inhibitors (cysteine (E64) and aspartic (pepstatin)
protease inhibitors, the kinase inhibitor 3-methyladenine, and the lysosomotropic
agent chloroquine), indicating an atypical feature of autophagy. Furthermore,
prolonged inhibition of the major food vacuole protease activity by E64 and
pepstatin did not cause accumulation of the Atg8-associated puncta in the food
vacuole, suggesting that autophagy is primarily not meant for degradative
function in malaria parasites. Atg8 showed partial colocalization with the
apicoplast; doxycycline treatment, which disrupts apicoplast, did not affect Atg8
localization, suggesting a role, but not exclusive, in apicoplast biogenesis.
Collectively, our results reveal several atypical features of autophagy in
malaria parasites, which may be largely associated with non-degradative
processes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113220 
PMCID: PMC4245143
PMID: 25426852  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

