
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2015 Feb;109:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2014.11.016. Epub
2014 Dec 5.

In silico comparative genomics analysis of Plasmodium falciparum for the
identification of putative essential genes and therapeutic candidates.

Rout S(1), Warhurst DC(2), Suar M(1), Mahapatra RK(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, KIIT University, Bhubaneswar 751024, Orissa, India.
(2)Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(3)School of Biotechnology, KIIT University, Bhubaneswar 751024, Orissa, India.
Electronic address: rmahapatra@kiitbiotech.ac.in.

A sequence of computational methods was used for predicting novel drug targets
against drug resistant malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Comparative
genomics, orthologous protein analysis among same and other malaria parasites and
protein-protein interaction study provide us new insights into determining the
essential genes and novel therapeutic candidates. Among the predicted list of 21 
essential proteins from unique pathways, 11 proteins were prioritized as
anti-malarial drug targets. As a case study, we built homology models of two
uncharacterized proteins using MODELLER v9.13 software from possible templates.
Functional annotation of these proteins was done by the InterPro databases and
from ProBiS server by comparison of predicted binding site residues. The model
has been subjected to in silico docking study with screened potent lead compounds
from the ZINC database by Dock Blaster software using AutoDock 4. Results from
this study facilitate the selection of proteins and putative inhibitors for entry
into drug design production pipelines.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2014.11.016 
PMID: 25486552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

