
1. Mol Ecol. 2015 Jan;24(2):484-97. doi: 10.1111/mec.13033. Epub 2015 Jan 9.

Phylogeography of var gene repertoires reveals fine-scale geospatial clustering
of Plasmodium falciparum populations in a highly endemic area.

Tessema SK(1), Monk SL, Schultz MB, Tavul L, Reeder JC, Siba PM, Mueller I, Barry
AE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, 3052,
Melbourne, Vic., Australia; Department of Medical Biology, University of
Melbourne, 3052, Melbourne, Vic., Australia.

Plasmodium falciparum malaria is a major global health problem that is being
targeted for progressive elimination. Knowledge of local disease transmission
patterns in endemic countries is critical to these elimination efforts. To
investigate fine-scale patterns of malaria transmission, we have compared
repertoires of rapidly evolving var genes in a highly endemic area. A total of
3680 high-quality DBLα-sequences were obtained from 68 P. falciparum isolates
from ten villages spread over two distinct catchment areas on the north coast of 
Papua New Guinea (PNG). Modelling of the extent of var gene diversity in the two 
parasite populations predicts more than twice as many var gene alleles
circulating within each catchment (Mugil = 906; Wosera = 1094) than previously
recognized in PNG (Amele = 369). In addition, there were limited levels of var
gene sharing between populations, consistent with local parasite population
structure. Phylogeographic analyses demonstrate that while neutrally evolving
microsatellite markers identified population structure only at the catchment
level, var gene repertoires reveal further fine-scale geospatial clustering of
parasite isolates. The clustering of parasite isolates by village in Mugil, but
not in Wosera was consistent with the physical and cultural isolation of the
human populations in the two catchments. The study highlights the
microheterogeneity of P. falciparum transmission in highly endemic areas and
demonstrates the potential of var genes as markers of local patterns of parasite 
population structure.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.13033 
PMID: 25482097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

