
1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

BMC Genomics. 2014 Dec 11;15:1089. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-1089.

Species-specific chemosensory gene expression in the olfactory organs of the
malaria vector Anopheles gambiae.

Hodges TK, Cosme LV, Athrey G, Pathikonda S, Takken W, Slotman MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843,
USA. maslotman@tamu.edu.

Retraction in
    BMC Genomics. 2015;16:572.

BACKGROUND: The malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae has a high preference for
human hosts, a characteristic that contributes greatly to its capacity for
transmitting human malaria. A sibling species, An. quadriannulatus, has a quite
different host preference and feeds mostly on bovids. For this reason it does not
contribute to human malaria transmission. Host seeking in mosquitoes is modulated
by the olfactory system, which is primarily housed in the antennae and maxillary 
palps. Therefore, the detection of differing host odors by sibling species may be
reflected in the expression level of the olfactory genes involved. Accordingly,
we compared the transcriptomes of the antennae and maxillary palps of An. gambiae
and An. quadriannulatus.
RESULTS: We identified seven relatively abundant olfactory receptors, nine
ionotropic receptors and three odorant binding proteins that are substantially
up-regulated in An. gambiae antennae. Interestingly, we find that the maxillary
palps of An. gambiae contain a species-specific olfactory receptor, Or52, and
five An. gambiae-specific gustatory receptors (AgGr48-52) that are relatively
abundant. These five gustatory receptors are also expressed in An. gambiae
antennae, although at lower level, indicating a likely role in olfaction, rather 
than gustation. We also document an approximately three-fold higher overall
expression of olfaction genes in the maxillary palps of An. quadriannulatus,
indicating an important role of this organ in the olfaction system of this
species. Finally, the expression of the CO2 receptor genes is five to six-fold
higher in the zoophilic An. quadriannulatus, implying a much higher sensitivity
for detecting CO2.
CONCLUSIONS: These results identify potential human host preference genes in the 
malaria vector An. gambiae. Interestingly, species-specific expression of several
gustatory receptors in the olfactory organs indicate a role in olfaction rather
than gustation. Additionally, a more expansive role for maxillary palps in
olfaction is implicated than previously thought, albeit more so in the zoophilic 
An. quadriannulatus.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-1089 
PMCID: PMC4299676
PMID: 25495232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

