
1. PLoS Genet. 2014 Dec 18;10(12):e1004812. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004812.
eCollection 2014 Dec.

Generation of antigenic diversity in Plasmodium falciparum by structured
rearrangement of Var genes during mitosis.

Claessens A(1), Hamilton WL(1), Kekre M(1), Otto TD(1), Faizullabhoy A(1), Rayner
JC(1), Kwiatkowski D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Programme, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom.
(2)Malaria Programme, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom;
MRC Centre for Genomics and Global Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

The most polymorphic gene family in P. falciparum is the âˆ¼60 var genes
distributed across parasite chromosomes, both in the subtelomeres and in internal
regions. They encode hypervariable surface proteins known as P. falciparum
erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) that are critical for pathogenesis and
immune evasion in Plasmodium falciparum. How var gene sequence diversity is
generated is not currently completely understood. To address this, we constructed
large clone trees and performed whole genome sequence analysis to study the
generation of novel var gene sequences in asexually replicating parasites. While 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were scattered across the genome,
structural variants (deletions, duplications, translocations) were focused in and
around var genes, with considerable variation in frequency between strains.
Analysis of more than 100 recombination events involving var exon 1 revealed that
the average nucleotide sequence identity of two recombining exons was only 63%
(range: 52.7-72.4%) yet the crossovers were error-free and occurred in such a way
that the resulting sequence was in frame and domain architecture was preserved.
Var exon 1, which encodes the immunologically exposed part of the protein,
recombined in up to 0.2% of infected erythrocytes in vitro per life cycle. The
high rate of var exon 1 recombination indicates that millions of new antigenic
structures could potentially be generated each day in a single infected
individual. We propose a model whereby var gene sequence polymorphism is mainly
generated during the asexual part of the life cycle.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004812 
PMCID: PMC4270465
PMID: 25521112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

