
1. Malar J. 2014 Dec 18;13:509. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-509.

Pooled PCR testing strategy and prevalence estimation of submicroscopic
infections using Bayesian latent class models in pregnant women receiving
intermittent preventive treatment at Machinga District Hospital, Malawi, 2010.

Zhou Z(1), Mitchell RM, Gutman J, Wiegand RE, Mwandama DA, Mathanga DP,
Skarbinski J, Shi YP.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Branch and Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for
Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
zaz6@cdc.gov.

BACKGROUND: Low malaria parasite densities in pregnancy are a diagnostic
challenge. PCR provides high sensitivity and specificity in detecting low density
of parasites, but cost and technical requirements limit its application in
resources-limited settings. Pooling samples for PCR detection was explored to
estimate prevalence of submicroscopic malaria infection in pregnant women at
delivery. Previous work uses gold-standard based methods to calculate sensitivity
and specificity of tests, creating a challenge when newer methodologies are
substantially more sensitive than the gold standard. Thus prevalence was
estimated using Bayesian latent class models (LCMs) in this study.
METHODS: Nested PCR (nPCR) for the 18S rRNA gene subunit of Plasmodium falciparum
was conducted to detect malaria infection in microscopy-negative Malawian women
on IPTp. Two-step sample pooling used dried blood spot samples (DBSs) collected
from placenta or periphery at delivery. Results from nPCR and histology as well
as previously published data were used to construct LCMs to estimate assay
sensitivity and specificity. Theoretical confidence intervals for prevalence of
infection were calculated for two-step and one-step pooling strategies.
RESULTS: Of 617 microscopy-negative Malawian women, 39 (6.3%) were identified as 
actively infected by histology while 52 (8.4%) were positive by nPCR. One hundred
forty (22.7%) individuals had past infection assessed by histology. With
histology as a reference, 72% of women in the active infection group, 7.1% in the
past infection group and 3.2% in histology-negative group were nPCR positive.
Using latent class models without a gold standard, histology had a median
sensitivity of 49.7% and specificity of 97.6% for active infection while PCR had 
a median sensitivity of 96.0% and specificity of 99.1%. The true prevalence of
active infection was estimated at 8.0% (CI: 5.8-10.5%) from PCR. PCR also had
similar sensitivity for detecting either peripheral or placental malaria for
submicroscopic infections. One-step pooling would give similar confidence
intervals for pool sizes less than 20 while reducing the number of tests
performed.
CONCLUSIONS: Pooled nPCR testing was a sensitive and resource-efficient strategy 
and LCMs provided precise prevalence estimates of submicroscopic infections.
Compared to two-step pooling, one-step pooling could provide similar prevalence
estimates at population levels with many fewer tests required.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-509 
PMCID: PMC4301903
PMID: 25522751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

