
1. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014;2014:935846. doi: 10.1155/2014/935846. Epub 2014 Oct
28.

Full-length sequence analysis of chloroquine resistance transporter gene in
Plasmodium falciparum isolates from Sabah, Malaysia.

Tan LL(1), Lau TY(1), Timothy W(2), Prabakaran D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Jalan UMS, 88400 
Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia.
(2)Infectious Diseases Unit, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, 88560 Kota Kinabalu,
Sabah, Malaysia.
(3)Kudat District Hospital, 89057 Kudat, Sabah, Malaysia.

Chloroquine resistance (CQR) in falciparum malaria was identified to be
associated with several mutations in the chloroquine resistance transporter gene 
(pfcrt) that encodes the transmembrane transporter in digestive vacuole membrane 
of the parasite. This study aimed to investigate the point mutations across the
full-length pfcrt in Plasmodium falciparum isolates in Sabah, Malaysia. A total
of 31 P. falciparum positive samples collected from Keningau, Kota Kinabalu, and 
Kudat, Sabah, were analyzed. pfcrt was PCR amplified and cloned prior to sequence
analysis. This study showed that all the previously described 10 point mutations 
associated with CQR at codons 72, 74, 75, 76, 97, 220, 271, 326, 356, and 371
were found with different prevalence. Besides, two novel point mutations, I166V
and H273N, were identified with 22.5% and 19.3%, respectively. Three haplotypes, 
namely, CVMNK (29%), CVIET (3.2%), and SVMNT (67.7%), were identified. High
prevalence of SVMNT among P. falciparum isolates from Sabah showed that these
isolates are closer to the P. falciparum isolates from Papua New Guinea rather
than to the more proximal Southeast Asian CVIET haplotype. Full-length analysis
of pfcrt showed that chloroquine resistant P. falciparum in Sabah is still
prevalent despite the withdrawal of chloroquine usage since 1979.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/935846 
PMCID: PMC4276362
PMID: 25574497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

