
1. PLoS Genet. 2015 Feb 11;11(2):e1004960. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004960.
eCollection 2015 Feb.

African glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase alleles associated with protection from
severe malaria in heterozygous females in Tanzania.

Manjurano A(1), Sepulveda N(2), Nadjm B(1), Mtove G(1), Wangai H(1), Maxwell
C(1), Olomi R(1), Reyburn H(3), Riley EM(3), Drakeley CJ(3), Clark TG(4);
MalariaGEN Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Malaria Programme, Kilimanjaro Christian Medical College, Moshi,
Tanzania.
(2)Department of Infection and Immunology, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Joint Malaria Programme, Kilimanjaro Christian Medical College, Moshi,
Tanzania; Department of Infection and Immunology, Faculty of Infectious and
Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United
Kingdom.
(4)Pathogen Molecular Biology Department, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom;
Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Faculty of Epidemiology and
Population Health, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United
Kingdom.

X-linked Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) A- deficiency is prevalent in
sub-Saharan Africa populations, and has been associated with protection from
severe malaria. Whether females and/or males are protected by G6PD deficiency is 
uncertain, due in part to G6PD and malaria phenotypic complexity and
misclassification. Almost all large association studies have genotyped a limited 
number of G6PD SNPs (e.g. G6PD202 / G6PD376), and this approach has been too
blunt to capture the complete epidemiological picture. Here we have identified 68
G6PD polymorphisms and analysed 29 of these (i.e. those with a minor allele
frequency greater than 1%) in 983 severe malaria cases and controls in Tanzania. 
We establish, across a number of SNPs including G6PD376, that only female
heterozygotes are protected from severe malaria. Haplotype analysis reveals the
G6PD locus to be under balancing selection, suggesting a mechanism of protection 
relying on alleles at modest frequency and avoiding fixation, where protection
provided by G6PD deficiency against severe malaria is offset by increased risk of
life-threatening complications. Our study also demonstrates that the much-needed 
large-scale studies of severe malaria and G6PD enzymatic function across African 
populations require the identification and analysis of the full repertoire of
G6PD genetic markers.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004960 
PMCID: PMC4335500
PMID: 25671784  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

