
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 May;59(5):2540-7. doi: 10.1128/AAC.04067-14.
Epub 2015 Feb 17.

The Mu subunit of Plasmodium falciparum clathrin-associated adaptor protein 2
modulates in vitro parasite response to artemisinin and quinine.

Henriques G(1), van Schalkwyk DA(1), Burrow R(1), Warhurst DC(2), Thompson E(2), 
Baker DA(2), Fidock DA(3), Hallett R(1), Flueck C(2), Sutherland CJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infection, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York, USA Division of Infectious Diseases,
Department of Medicine, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons,
New York, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Immunology and Infection, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical
Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom 
Department of Clinical Parasitology, Hospital for Tropical Diseases, University
College London Hospital, London, United Kingdom Colin.sutherland@lshtm.ac.uk.

The emergence of drug-resistant parasites is a serious threat faced by malaria
control programs. Understanding the genetic basis of resistance is critical to
the success of treatment and intervention strategies. A novel locus associated
with antimalarial resistance, ap2-mu (encoding the mu chain of the adaptor
protein 2 [AP2] complex), was recently identified in studies on the rodent
malaria parasite Plasmodium chabaudi (pcap2-mu). Furthermore, analysis in Kenyan 
malaria patients of polymorphisms in the Plasmodium falciparum ap2-mu homologue, 
pfap2-mu, found evidence that differences in the amino acid encoded by codon 160 
are associated with enhanced parasite survival in vivo following combination
treatments which included artemisinin derivatives. Here, we characterize the role
of pfap2-mu in mediating the in vitro antimalarial drug response of P. falciparum
by generating transgenic parasites constitutively expressing codon 160 encoding
either the wild-type Ser (Ser160) or the Asn mutant (160Asn) form of pfap2-mu.
Transgenic parasites carrying the pfap2-mu 160Asn allele were significantly less 
sensitive to dihydroartemisinin using a standard 48-h in vitro test, providing
direct evidence of an altered parasite response to artemisinin. Our data also
provide evidence that pfap2-mu variants can modulate parasite sensitivity to
quinine. No evidence was found that pfap2-mu variants contribute to the
slow-clearance phenotype exhibited by P. falciparum in Cambodian patients treated
with artesunate monotherapy. These findings provide compelling evidence that
pfap2-mu can modulate P. falciparum responses to multiple drugs. We propose that 
this gene should be evaluated further as a potential molecular marker of
antimalarial resistance.

Copyright Â© 2015, Henriques et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.04067-14 
PMCID: PMC4394773
PMID: 25691625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

