
1. Protoplasma. 2015 Nov;252(6):1487-504. doi: 10.1007/s00709-015-0779-4. Epub 2015 
Feb 24.

Plasmodium falciparum XPD translocates in 5' to 3' direction, is expressed
throughout the blood stages, and interacts with p44.

Tajedin L(1), Tarique M(1), Tuteja R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
P. O. Box 10504, Aruna Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi, 110067, India.
(2)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
P. O. Box 10504, Aruna Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi, 110067, India.
renu@icgeb.res.in.

Comment in
    Protoplasma. 2015 Nov;252(6):1407-8.

XPD helicase, a TFIIH subunit, is essential for several processes including
transcription, NER, cell cycle regulation, and apoptosis in eukaryotes. Another
component of TFIIH, namely p44, is among the well-known interacting partners of
XPD and is vital in regulating the helicase activities of latter. However, none
of the aboveÂ mentioned proteins have been functionally characterized in
Plasmodium falciparum. Consequently, in this study, we performed detailed studies
on XPD and its interacting partner, p44, from P. falciparum 3D7 strain.
Accordingly, we expressed and purified recombinant PfXPD and its fragments and
Pfp44 proteins and characterized the enzymatic activities of PfXPD and its
fragments. The in vivo stage-specific expression and subcellular localizations of
PfXPD and Pfp44 proteins were studied using the specific antibodies in the
intraerythrocytic developmental stages of P. falciparum 3D7 strain. Our results
suggest that PfXPD displays the characteristic ssDNA-dependent ATPase and 5'-3'
DNA helicase activities. We also report the existence of two high molecular
weight forms of p44 in P. falciparum 3D7 strain. Both PfXPD and Pfp44 colocalize 
in the nucleus and interact with each other, which suggest that they are most
likely components of the same complex apparently, TFIIH. Furthermore, during
trophozoite and schizont stages, both proteins exhibit a distinct cytoplasmic
distribution pattern which implies that PfXPD and Pfp44 might also be involved in
other functions. These studies will aid in understanding the basic biology of
malaria parasite.

DOI: 10.1007/s00709-015-0779-4 
PMID: 25708921  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

