
1. Cell Microbiol. 2015 Aug;17(8):1230-40. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12433. Epub 2015 Mar 30.

Transcriptional silencing and activation of paternal DNA during Plasmodium
berghei zygotic development and transformation to oocyst.

Ukegbu CV(1), Cho JS(1), Christophides GK(1)(2), Vlachou D(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(2)The Cyprus Institute, Nicosia, Cyprus.

The malaria parasite develops sexually in the mosquito midgut upon entry with the
ingested blood meal before it can invade the midgut epithelium and embark on
sporogony. Recent data have identified a number of distinct transcriptional
programmes operating during this critical phase of the parasite life cycle. We
aimed at characterizing the parental contribution to these transcriptional
programmes and establish the genetic framework that would guide further studies
of Plasmodium zygotic development and ookinete-to-oocyst transition. To achieve
this we used in vitro and in vivo cross-fertilization experiments of various
parasite lines expressing fluorescent reporters under the control of constitutive
and stage-specific promoters. The results revealed that the zygote/ookinete stage
exhibits a maternal phenotype with respect to constitutively expressed reporters,
which is derived from either maternal mRNA inheritance or transcription of the
maternal allele. The respective paternal alleles are silenced in the
zygote/ookinete but reactivated after midgut invasion and transformation to
oocyst. Transcripts specifically produced in the zygote/ookinete are synthesized 
de novo by both parental alleles. These findings highlight a putative role of
epigenetic regulation of Plasmodium zygotic development and add substantially to 
the emerging picture of the molecular mechanisms regulating this important stage 
of malaria transmission.

Â© 2015 The Authors. Cellular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12433 
PMCID: PMC4678591
PMID: 25728487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

