
1. mBio. 2015 Mar 10;6(2):e01628. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01628-14.

New method for the orthogonal labeling and purification of Toxoplasma gondii
proteins while inside the host cell.

Wier GM(1), McGreevy EM(1), Brown MJ(1), Boyle JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Dietrich School of Arts and Sciences,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Dietrich School of Arts and Sciences,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA boylej@pitt.edu.

Toxoplasma gondii is an obligate intracellular protozoan parasite that is capable
of causing severe disease in immunocompromised humans. How T. gondii is able to
modulate the host cell to support itself is still poorly understood. Knowledge
pertaining to the host-parasite interaction could be bolstered by developing a
system to specifically label parasite proteins while the parasite grows inside
the host cell. For this purpose, we have created a strain of T. gondii that
expresses a mutant Escherichia coli methionyl-tRNA synthetase (MetRS(NLL)) that
allows methionine tRNA to be loaded with the azide-containing methionine analog
azidonorleucine (Anl). Anl-containing proteins are susceptible to a
copper-catalyzed "click" reaction to attach affinity tags for purification or
fluorescent tags for visualization. The MetRS(NLL)-Anl system labels nascent
T. gondii proteins in an orthogonal fashion, labeling proteins only in
MetRS(NLL)-expressing parasites. This system should be useful for nonradioactive 
pulse-chase studies and purification of nascently translated proteins. Although
this approach allows labeling of a diverse array of parasite proteins, secreted
parasite proteins appear to be only minimally labeled in MetRS(NLL)-expressing
T. gondii. The minimal labeling of secreted proteins is likely a consequence of
the selective charging of the initiator tRNA (and not the elongator methionine
tRNA) by the heterologously expressed bacterial MetRS.IMPORTANCE: Studying how
T. gondii modifies the host cell to permit its survival is complicated by the
complex protein environment of the host cell. The approach presented in this
article provides the first method for specific labeling of T. gondii proteins
while the parasite grows inside the host cell. We show that this approach is
useful for pulse-chase labeling of parasite proteins during in vitro growth. It
should also be applicable during in vivo infections and in other apicomplexan
parasites, including Plasmodium spp.

Copyright © 2015 Wier et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01628-14 
PMCID: PMC4453564
PMID: 25759504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

