
1. Mol Microbiol. 2015 Jul;97(1):64-76. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13010. Epub 2015 Apr 23.

The intracellular parasite Toxoplasma gondii depends on the synthesis of
long-chain and very long-chain unsaturated fatty acids not supplied by the host
cell.

Ramakrishnan S(1), Docampo MD(2), MacRae JI(3), Ralton JE(3), Rupasinghe T(4),
McConville MJ(3), Striepen B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.
(2)Center for Tropical & Emerging Global, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Vic., Australia.
(4)Metabolomics Australia, Bio21 Institute of Molecular Science and
Biotechnology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Vic., Australia.

Apicomplexa are parasitic protozoa that cause important human diseases including 
malaria, cryptosporidiosis and toxoplasmosis. The replication of these parasites 
within their target host cell is dependent on both salvage as well as de novo
synthesis of fatty acids. In Toxoplasma gondii, fatty acid synthesis via the
apicoplast-localized FASII is essential for pathogenesis, while the role of two
other fatty acid biosynthetic complexes remains unclear. Here, we demonstrate
that the ER-localized fatty acid elongation (ELO) complexes are essential for
parasite growth. Conditional knockdown of the nonredundant hydroxyacyl-CoA
dehydratase and enoyl-CoA reductase enzymes in the ELO pathway severely repressed
intracellular parasite growth. (13) C-glucose and (13) C-acetate labeling and
comprehensive lipidomic analyses of these mutants showed a selective defect in
synthesis of unsaturated long and very long-chain fatty acids (LCFAs and VLCFAs) 
and depletion of phosphatidylinositol and phosphatidylethanolamine species
containing unsaturated LCFAs and VLCFAs. This requirement for ELO pathway was
bypassed by supplementing the media with specific fatty acids, indicating active 
but inefficient import of host fatty acids. Our experiments highlight a gap
between the fatty acid needs of the parasite and availability of specific fatty
acids in the host cell that the parasite has to close using a dedicated synthesis
and modification pathway.

Â© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13010 
PMCID: PMC4632976
PMID: 25825226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

