
1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 16;10(4):e0124400. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124400.
eCollection 2015.

Low levels of polymorphisms and no evidence for diversifying selection on the
Plasmodium knowlesi Apical Membrane Antigen 1 gene.

Faber BW(1), Abdul Kadir K(2), Rodriguez-Garcia R(1), Remarque EJ(1), Saul FA(3),
Vulliez-Le Normand B(3), Bentley GA(3), Kocken CH(1), Singh B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Biomedical Primate Research Centre, Rijswijk, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Malaria Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti
Malaysia Sarawak, Kuching, Sarawak, Malaysia.
(3)Institut Pasteur, Unité d'Immunologie Structurale, Département de Biologie
Structurale et Chimie, Paris, France; CNRS URA 2185, Paris, France.

Infection with Plasmodium knowlesi, a zoonotic primate malaria, is a growing
human health problem in Southeast Asia. P. knowlesi is being used in malaria
vaccine studies, and a number of proteins are being considered as candidate
malaria vaccine antigens, including the Apical Membrane Antigen 1 (AMA1). In
order to determine genetic diversity of the ama1 gene and to identify epitopes of
AMA1 under strongest immune selection, the ama1 gene of 52 P. knowlesi isolates
derived from human infections was sequenced. Sequence analysis of isolates from
two geographically isolated regions in Sarawak showed that polymorphism in the
protein is low compared to that of AMA1 of the major human malaria parasites, P. 
falciparum and P. vivax. Although the number of haplotypes was 27, the frequency 
of mutations at the majority of the polymorphic positions was low, and only six
positions had a variance frequency higher than 10%. Only two positions had more
than one alternative amino acid. Interestingly, three of the high-frequency
polymorphic sites correspond to invariant sites in PfAMA1 or PvAMA1.
Statistically significant differences in the quantity of three of the six high
frequency mutations were observed between the two regions. These analyses suggest
that the pkama1 gene is not under balancing selection, as observed for pfama1 and
pvama1, and that the PkAMA1 protein is not a primary target for protective
humoral immune responses in their reservoir macaque hosts, unlike PfAMA1 and
PvAMA1 in humans. The low level of polymorphism justifies the development of a
single allele PkAMA1-based vaccine.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124400 
PMCID: PMC4400157
PMID: 25881166  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

