
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2014 Dec;2(6). doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.MDNA3-0022-2014.

Recombination and Diversification of the Variant Antigen Encoding Genes in the
Malaria Parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Kirkman LA(1), Deitsch KW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Weill
Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY, 10065.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, NY, 10065; Kirk W. Deitsch 1300 York Avenue, Box 62, New
York, NY 10065.

The most severe form of human malaria is caused by the protozoan parasite
Plasmodium falciparum. These parasites invade and replicate within the
circulating red blood cells of infected individuals leading to numerous disease
manifestations, including severe anemia, altered circulation, and tissue
inflammation. Malaria parasites are also known for their ability to maintain a
chronic infection through antigenic variation, the ability to systematically
alter the antigens displayed on the surface of infected cells and thereby avoid
clearance by the host's antibody response. The genome of P. falciparum includes
several large, multicopy gene families that encode highly variable forms of the
surface proteins that are the targets of host immunity. Alterations in expression
of genes within these families are responsible for antigenic variation. This
process requires the continuous generation of new antigenic variants within these
gene families, and studies have shown that new variants arise through extensive
recombination and gene conversion events between family members. Malaria
parasites possess an unusual complement of DNA repair pathways, thus the study of
recombination between variant antigen encoding genes provides a unique view into 
the evolution of mobile DNA in an organism distantly related to the more closely 
studied model eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1128/microbiolspec.MDNA3-0022-2014 
PMID: 26104446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

