
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 24;10(6):e0131339. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131339.
eCollection 2015.

Plasmodium simium, a Plasmodium vivax-related malaria parasite: genetic
variability of Duffy binding protein II and the Duffy antigen/receptor for
chemokines.

Camargos Costa D(1), Pereira de Assis GM(1), de Souza Silva FA(1), Araújo FC(1), 
de Souza Junior JC(2), Braga Hirano ZM(2), Satiko Kano F(1), Nóbrega de Sousa
T(1), Carvalho LH(1), Ferreira Alves de Brito C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Malária, Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou, Fiocruz Minas, Belo
Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)FURB, Universidade Regional de Blumenau, Blumenau, Santa Catarina, Brazil;
CEPESBI-Centro de Pesquisas Biológicas de Indaial, Indaial, Santa Catarina,
Brazil.

Plasmodium simium is a parasite from New World monkeys that is most closely
related to the human malaria parasite Plasmodium vivax; it also naturally infects
humans. The blood-stage infection of P. vivax depends on Duffy binding protein II
(PvDBPII) and its cognate receptor on erythrocytes, the Duffy antigen receptor
for chemokines (hDARC), but there is no information on the P. simium erythrocytic
invasion pathway. The genes encoding P. simium DBP (PsDBPII) and simian DARC
(sDARC) were sequenced from Southern brown howler monkeys (Alouatta guariba
clamitans) naturally infected with P. simium because P. simium may also depend on
the DBPII/DARC interaction. The sequences of DBP binding domains from P. vivax
and P. simium were highly similar. However, the genetic variability of PsDBPII
was lower than that of PvDBPII. Phylogenetic analyses demonstrated that these
genes were strictly related and clustered in the same clade of the evolutionary
tree. DARC from A. clamitans was also sequenced and contained three new
non-synonymous substitutions. None of these substitutions were located in the
N-terminal domain of DARC, which interacts directly with DBPII. The interaction
between sDARC and PvDBPII was evaluated using a cytoadherence assay of COS7 cells
expressing PvDBPII on their surfaces. Inhibitory binding assays in vitro
demonstrated that antibodies from monkey sera blocked the interaction between
COS-7 cells expressing PvDBPII and hDARC-positive erythrocytes. Taken together,
phylogenetic analyses reinforced the hypothesis that the host switch from humans 
to monkeys may have occurred very recently in evolution, which sheds light on the
evolutionary history of new world plasmodia. Further invasion studies would
confirm whether P. simium depends on DBP/DARC to trigger internalization into red
blood cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131339 
PMCID: PMC4480967
PMID: 26107662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

