
1. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 2014 Jul 16;9(1):71-83. eCollection 2015 Jun.

Resistance Mechanisms of Anopheles stephensi (Diptera: Culicidae) to Temephos.

Soltani A(1), Vatandoost H(2), Oshaghi MA(2), Ravasan NM(2), Enayati AA(3),
Asgarian F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Entomology and vector control, School of Health, Shiraz 
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran ; Department of Medical Entomology
and Vector Control, School of Public Health and National Institute of Health
Research, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Medical Entomology and Vector Control, School of Public Health
and National Institute of Health Research, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.
(3)School of Public Health and Health Research Centre, Mazandaran University of
Medical Sciences, Sari, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles stephensi is a sub-tropical species and has been considered
as one of the most important vector of human malaria throughout the Middle East
and South Asian region including the malarious areas of southern Iran. Current
reports confirmed An. stephensi resistance to temephos in Oman and India.
However, there is no comprehensive research on mechanisms of temephos resistance 
in An. stephensi in the literature. This study was designed in order to clarify
the enzymatic and molecular mechanisms of temephos resistance in this species.
METHODS: Profile activities of α- and ß-esterases, mixed function oxidase (MFO), 
glutathione-S-transferase (GST), insensitive acetylcholinesterase, and
para-nitrophenyl acetate (PNPA)-esterase enzymes were tested for An. stephensi
strain with resistance ratio of 15.82 to temephos in comparison with susceptible 
strain.
RESULTS: Results showed that the mean activity of α-EST, GST and AChE enzymes
were classified as altered indicating metabolic mechanisms have considerable role
in resistance of An. stephensi to temephos. Molecular study using PCR-RFLP method
to trace the G119S mutation in ACE-1 gene showed lack of the mutation responsible
for organophosphate insecticide resistance in the temephos-selected strain of An.
stephensi.
CONCLUSION: This study showed that the altered enzymes but not targets site
insensitivity of ACE-1 are responsible for temephos resistance in An. stephensi
in south of Iran.


PMCID: PMC4478420
PMID: 26114145 

