
1. FEBS J. 2015 Oct;282(19):3808-23. doi: 10.1111/febs.13380. Epub 2015 Aug 17.

Plasmodium falciparum glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 6-phosphogluconolactonase
is a potential drug target.

Allen SM(1), Lim EE(1), Jortzik E(2), Preuss J(2), Chua HH(1), MacRae JI(1),
Rahlfs S(2), Haeussler K(2), Downton MT(3), McConville MJ(1), Becker K(2), Ralph 
SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne,
Australia.
(2)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Interdisciplinary Research Center, Justus 
Liebig University Giessen, Germany.
(3)IBM Research - Australia, Carlton, Australia.

The malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum is exposed to substantial redox
challenges during its complex life cycle. In intraerythrocytic parasites,
haemoglobin breakdown is a major source of reactive oxygen species. Deficiencies 
in human glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, the initial enzyme in the pentose
phosphate pathway (PPP), lead to a disturbed redox equilibrium in infected
erythrocytes and partial protection against severe malaria. In P. falciparum, the
first two reactions of the PPP are catalysed by the bifunctional enzyme
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 6-phosphogluconolactonase (PfGluPho). This
enzyme differs structurally from its human counterparts and represents a
potential target for drugs. In the present study we used epitope tagging of
endogenous PfGluPho to verify that the enzyme localises to the parasite cytosol. 
Furthermore, attempted double crossover disruption of the PfGluPho gene indicates
that the enzyme is essential for the growth of blood stage parasites. As a
further step towards targeting PfGluPho pharmacologically, ellagic acid was
characterised as a potent PfGluPho inhibitor with an IC50 of 76 nM.
Interestingly, pro-oxidative drugs or treatment of the parasites with H2O2 only
slightly altered PfGluPho expression or activity under the conditions tested.
Furthermore, metabolic profiling suggested that pro-oxidative drugs do not
significantly perturb the abundance of PPP intermediates. These data indicate
that PfGluPho is essential in asexual parasites, but that the oxidative arm of
the PPP is not strongly regulated in response to oxidative challenge.

Â© 2015 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.13380 
PMID: 26198663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

