
1. Inflammation. 2016 Feb;39(1):10-15. doi: 10.1007/s10753-015-0217-y.

FOXO3 rs12212067: T > G Association with Active Tuberculosis in Han Chinese
Population.

Lu Y(1), Zhu Y(1), Wang X(1), Wang F(1), Peng J(1), Hou H(1), Sun Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095# Jiefangdadao, Wuhan, 430030,
China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095# Jiefangdadao, Wuhan, 430030,
China. tjszyong@163.com.

It is well known that the human innate immune and adaptive immune response play
important role in tuberculosis (TB) infection and progress. Emerging evidence
shows that FOXO3 plays an important role in the human immune system. Recent
research has shown that the FOXO3 genetic variants are associated malaria
infection. In this study, 268 confirmed TB patients, 321 patients with latent
tuberculosis infection (LTBI), and 475 TB-free controls were recruited; the
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs12212067: T > G in FOXO3 was genotyped
using predesigned TaqMan® allelic discrimination assays. The results showed that 
the G allele of rs12212067 in FOXO3 was more common in health control and the
latent TB group compared with the active TB group (p = 0.048, odds ratio (OR) 95 
% confidence intervals (CI) = 1.37 (1.00-1.89); p = 0.042, OR 95 % CI = 1.42
(1.01-1.99), respectively); furthermore, within active TB patients, the G allele 
of rs12212067 in FOXO3 was more frequent in extra-pulmonary tuberculosis (EPTB)
group compared to pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB) group (p = 0.035, OR 95 %
CI = 0.57 (0.33-0.97). In conclusion, this study found that rs12212067 in FOXO3
was associated with increased risk of active TB. The minor G allele might be a
protection factor which was found more common in latent TB patients and healthy
controls than active TB patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s10753-015-0217-y 
PMID: 26223437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

