
1. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 9;10(9):e0124300. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124300.
eCollection 2015.

Novel Cross-Border Approaches to Optimise Identification of Asymptomatic and
Artemisinin-Resistant Plasmodium Infection in Mobile Populations Crossing
Cambodian Borders.

Edwards HM(1), Canavati SE(1), Rang C(1), Ly P(2), Sovannaroth S(2), Canier L(3),
Khim N(3), Menard D(3), Ashton RA(1), Meek SR(1), Roca-Feltrer A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Consortium, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(2)National Center for Parasitology, Entomology and Malaria Control (CNM), Phnom 
Penh, Cambodia.
(3)Malaria Molecular Epidemiology Unit, Institut Pasteur in Cambodia, Phnom Penh,
Cambodia.

BACKGROUND: Human population movement across country borders presents a real
challenge for malaria control and elimination efforts in Cambodia and its
neighbouring countries. To quantify Plasmodium infection among the
border-crossing population, including asymptomatic and artemisinin resistant (AR)
parasites, three official border crossing points, one from each of Cambodia's
borders with Thailand, Laos and Vietnam, were selected for sampling.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: A total of 3206 participants (of 4110 approached) were
recruited as they crossed the border, tested for malaria and interviewed. By
real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), 5.4% of all screened individuals
were found to harbour Plasmodium parasites. The proportion was highest at the
Laos border (11.5%). Overall there were 97 P. vivax (55.7%), 55 P. falciparum
(31.6%), two P. malariae (1.1%) and 20 mixed infections (11.5%). Of identified
infections, only 20% were febrile at the time of screening. Of the 24 P.
falciparum samples where a further PCR was possible to assess AR, 15 (62.5%) had 
mutations in the K13 propeller domain gene, all from participants at the Laos
border point. Malaria rapid diagnostic test (RDT) pLDH/HRP-2 identified a
positivity rate of 3.2% overall and sensitivity compared to RT-PCR was very low
(43.1%). Main individual risk factors for infection included sex, fever, being a 
forest-goer, poor knowledge of malaria prevention methods and previous malaria
infection. Occupation, day of the week and time of crossing (morning vs.
afternoon) also appeared to play an important role in predicting positive cases.
CONCLUSIONS: This study offers a novel approach to identify asymptomatic
infections and monitor AR parasite flow among mobile and migrant populations
crossing the borders. Similar screening activities are recommended to identify
other hot borders and characterise potential hot spots of AR. Targeted
"customised" interventions and surveillance activities should be implemented in
these sites to accelerate elimination efforts in the region.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124300 
PMCID: PMC4564195
PMID: 26352262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

