
1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2015 Aug 27;5(3):149-62. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2015.07.001. eCollection 2015 Dec.

The malaria parasite cation ATPase PfATP4 and its role in the mechanism of action
of a new arsenal of antimalarial drugs.

Spillman NJ(1), Kirk K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research School of Biology, The Australian National University, Canberra,
Australian Capital Territory 2601, Australia ; Department of Medicine (Infectious
Diseases), Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(2)Research School of Biology, The Australian National University, Canberra,
Australian Capital Territory 2601, Australia.

The intraerythrocytic malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, maintains a low
cytosolic Na(+) concentration and the plasma membrane P-type cation translocating
ATPase 'PfATP4' has been implicated as playing a key role in this process. PfATP4
has been the subject of significant attention in recent years as mutations in
this protein confer resistance to a growing number of new antimalarial compounds,
including the spiroindolones, the pyrazoles, the dihydroisoquinolones, and a
number of the antimalarial agents in the Medicines for Malaria Venture's 'Malaria
Box'. On exposure of parasites to these compounds there is a rapid disruption of 
cytosolic Na(+). Whether, and if so how, such chemically distinct compounds
interact with PfATP4, and how such interactions lead to parasite death, is not
yet clear. The fact that multiple different chemical classes have converged upon 
PfATP4 highlights its significance as a potential target for new generation
antimalarial agents. A spiroindolone (KAE609, now known as cipargamin) has
progressed through Phase I and IIa clinical trials with favourable results. In
this review we consider the physiological role of PfATP4, summarise the current
repertoire of antimalarial compounds for which PfATP4 is implicated in their
mechanism of action, and provide an outlook on translation from target
identification in the laboratory to patient treatment in the field.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2015.07.001 
PMCID: PMC4559606
PMID: 26401486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

