
1. Front Microbiol. 2015 Sep 15;6:965. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.00965. eCollection
2015.

Malaria vaccines: identifying Plasmodium falciparum liver-stage targets.

Longley RJ(1), Hill AV(1), Spencer AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Jenner Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford
Oxford, UK.

The development of a highly efficacious and durable vaccine for malaria remains a
top priority for global health researchers. Despite the huge rise in recognition 
of malaria as a global health problem and the concurrent rise in funding over the
past 10-15 years, malaria continues to remain a widespread burden. The evidence
of increasing resistance to anti-malarial drugs and insecticides is a growing
concern. Hence, an efficacious and durable preventative vaccine for malaria is
urgently needed. Vaccines are one of the most cost-effective tools and have
successfully been used in the prevention and control of many diseases, however,
the development of a vaccine for the Plasmodium parasite has proved difficult.
Given the early success of whole sporozoite mosquito-bite delivered vaccination
strategies, we know that a vaccine for malaria is an achievable goal, with
sub-unit vaccines holding great promise as they are simple and cheap to both
manufacture and deploy. However a major difficulty in development of sub-unit
vaccines lies within choosing the appropriate antigenic target from the 5000 or
so genes expressed by the parasite. Given the liver-stage of malaria represents a
bottle-neck in the parasite's life cycle, there is widespread agreement that a
multi-component sub-unit malaria vaccine should preferably contain a liver-stage 
target. In this article we review progress in identifying and screening
Plasmodium falciparum liver-stage targets for use in a malaria vaccine.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.00965 
PMCID: PMC4569888
PMID: 26441899 

