
1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 28;10(10):e0141758. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141758.
eCollection 2015.

Enzymatic Characterization of Recombinant Food Vacuole Plasmepsin 4 from the
Rodent Malaria Parasite Plasmodium berghei.

Liu P(1), Robbins AH(1), Marzahn MR(1), McClung SH(2), Yowell CA(3), Stevens SM
Jr(2), Dame JB(3), Dunn BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida,
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.
(2)Protein Core, Interdisciplinary Center for Biotechnology Research, University 
of Florida, College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases and Pathology, University of Florida,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.

The rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei is a practical model organism for 
experimental studies of human malaria. Plasmepsins are a class of aspartic
proteinase isoforms that exert multiple pathological effects in malaria
parasites. Plasmepsins residing in the food vacuole (FV) of the parasite
hydrolyze hemoglobin in red blood cells. In this study, we cloned PbPM4, the FV
plasmepsin gene of P. berghei that encoded an N-terminally truncated pro-segment 
and the mature enzyme from genomic DNA. We over-expressed this PbPM4 zymogen as
inclusion bodies (IB) in Escherichia coli, and purified the protein following in 
vitro IB refolding. Auto-maturation of the PbPM4 zymogen to mature enzyme was
carried out at pH 4.5, 5.0, and 5.5. Interestingly, we found that the PbPM4
zymogen exhibited catalytic activity regardless of the presence of the
pro-segment. We determined the optimal catalytic conditions for PbPM4 and studied
enzyme kinetics on substrates and inhibitors of aspartic proteinases. Using
combinatorial chemistry-based peptide libraries, we studied the active site
preferences of PbPM4 at subsites S1, S2, S3, S1', S2' and S3'. Based on these
results, we designed and synthesized a selective peptidomimetic compound and
tested its inhibition of PbPM4, seven FV plasmepsins from human malaria
parasites, and human cathepsin D (hcatD). We showed that this compound exhibited 
a >10-fold selectivity to PbPM4 and human malaria parasite plasmepsin 4 orthologs
versus hcatD. Data from this study furthesr our understanding of enzymatic
characteristics of the plasmepsin family and provides leads for anti-malarial
drug design.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141758 
PMCID: PMC4624963
PMID: 26510189  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

