
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 6;5:15930. doi: 10.1038/srep15930.

Chemogenomic profiling of Plasmodium falciparum as a tool to aid antimalarial
drug discovery.

Pradhan A(1), Siwo GH(2), Singh N(1), Martens B(1), Balu B(1), Button-Simons
KA(2), Tan A(2), Zhang M(1), Udenze KO(1), Jiang RH(1), Ferdig MT(2), Adams
JH(1), Kyle DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Health, College of Public Health, University of South
Florida, Tampa, FL 33612.
(2)Eck Institute for Global Health, Department of Biological Sciences, University
of Notre Dame, IN 46556.

The spread of Plasmodium falciparum multidrug resistance highlights the urgency
to discover new targets and chemical scaffolds. Unfortunately, lack of
experimentally validated functional information about most P. falciparum genes
remains a strategic hurdle. Chemogenomic profiling is an established tool for
classification of drugs with similar mechanisms of action by comparing drug
fitness profiles in a collection of mutants. Inferences of drug mechanisms of
action and targets can be obtained by associations between shifts in drug fitness
and specific genetic changes in the mutants. In this screen, P. falciparum,
piggyBac single insertion mutants were profiled for altered responses to
antimalarial drugs and metabolic inhibitors to create chemogenomic profiles.
Drugs targeting the same pathway shared similar response profiles and multiple
pairwise correlations of the chemogenomic profiles revealed novel insights into
drugs' mechanisms of action. A mutant of the artemisinin resistance candidate
gene - "K13-propeller" gene (PF3D7_1343700) exhibited increased susceptibility to
artemisinin drugs and identified a cluster of 7 mutants based on similar enhanced
responses to the drugs tested. Our approach of chemogenomic profiling reveals
artemisinin functional activity, linked by the unexpected drug-gene relationships
of these mutants, to signal transduction and cell cycle regulation pathways.

DOI: 10.1038/srep15930 
PMCID: PMC4635350
PMID: 26541648  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

