
1. Am Nat. 2015 Oct;186 Suppl 1:S5-23. doi: 10.1086/682948. Epub 2015 Sep 8.

The Role of Standing Variation in Geographic Convergent Adaptation.

Ralph PL(1), Coop G.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, California 90089.

The extent to which populations experiencing shared selective pressures adapt
through a shared genetic response is relevant to many questions in evolutionary
biology. In this article, we explore how standing genetic variation contributes
to convergent genetic responses in a geographically spread population.
Geographically limited dispersal slows the spread of each selected allele, hence 
allowing other alleles to spread before any one comes to dominate the population.
When selectively equivalent alleles meet, their progress is substantially slowed,
dividing the species range into a random tessellation, which can be well
understood by analogy to a Poisson process model of crystallization. In this
framework, we derive the geographic scale over which an allele dominates and the 
proportion of adaptive alleles that arise from standing variation. Finally, we
explore how negative pleiotropic effects of alleles can bias the subset of
alleles that contribute to the species' adaptive response. We apply the results
to the malaria-resistance glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase-deficiency alleles,
where the large mutational target size makes it a likely candidate for adaptation
from deleterious standing variation. Our results suggest that convergent
adaptation may be common. Therefore, caution must be exercised when arguing that 
strongly geographically restricted alleles are the outcome of local adaptation.
We close by discussing the implications of these results for ideas of species
coherence and the nature of divergence between species.

DOI: 10.1086/682948 
PMCID: PMC4827716
PMID: 26656217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

