
1. Malar J. 2015 Dec 16;14:504. doi: 10.1186/s12936-015-1018-3.

Evaluation of artemether-lumefantrine efficacy in the treatment of uncomplicated 
malaria and its association with pfmdr1, pfatpase6 and K13-propeller
polymorphisms in Luanda, Angola.

Kiaco K(1)(2), Teixeira J(3), Machado M(4)(5), do Rosário V(6), Lopes D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Parasitologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008, Lisbon, Portugal.
kinanga.kiaco@ihmt.unl.pt.
(2)Serviços de Saúde das Forças Armadas Angolanas, Estado Maior General das
Forças Armadas, Luanda, Angola. kinanga.kiaco@ihmt.unl.pt.
(3)Unidade de Parasitologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008, Lisbon, Portugal.
joanafpteixeira@hotmail.com.
(4)Unidade de Parasitologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008, Lisbon, Portugal.
martamachado@medicina.ulisboa.pt.
(5)Global Health and Tropical Medicine (GHTM), Instituto de Higiene e Medicina
Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008, Lisbon,
Portugal. martamachado@medicina.ulisboa.pt.
(6)Unidade de Parasitologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008, Lisbon, Portugal.
virgilio.do.rosario@gmail.com.
(7)Global Health and Tropical Medicine (GHTM), Instituto de Higiene e Medicina
Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua da Junqueira 100, 1349-008, Lisbon,
Portugal. dferreira@ihmt.unl.pt.

BACKGROUND: Drug resistance in Plasmodium falciparum has posed an obstacle to
effective treatment and challenges many malaria control programmes in endemic
areas. In Angola, until 2003, chloroquine (CQ) was used as first-line therapy for
uncomplicated malaria. It was replaced initially by amodiaquine and, in 2006, by 
artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) with artemether-lumefantrine (AL,
Coartem(®)). Efficacy study of ACT, conducted in Angola between 2004 and 2005,
showed a baseline efficacy of ≈99%.
METHODS: 103 malaria patients were enrolled according to WHO proceedings.
Patients were followed up with clinical and parasitological evaluations for 28
days, parasite density and identification was evaluated by microscopy, the pfmsp2
were genotyped by nested-PCR, to distinguish parasite recrudescence from new
infections; the polymorphisms at codons 86 and 1246 of pfmdr1 gene, and 769 of
pfatp6 gene were assessed by PCR-RFLP and sequencing for pfk13-propeller
genotype.
RESULTS: The cure rate was 91.3%. The obtained results showed that from 103
patients, 12.6% (n = 13) still had parasitaemia 1 day after the treatment was
finished. On day 0, of the 94 evaluated samples, wild-type alleles were
identified in 73.4% (n = 69) for pfmdr1 N86Y position and only one sample carried
the mutant allele (Y) for pfmdr1 1246; 14% of these samples showed increased
pfmdr1 copy number; 100% (n = 21) had wild-type allele of k13 gene in all the
studied positions.
DISCUSSION: These results showed changes in parasite profile susceptibility to AL
in comparison to the baseline data from 2002 to 2004 and on the genotyping
characteristics; the clinical outcome after treatment with AL did not link a
particular genotype with treatment failure; observed changes do not provide
sufficient evidence for a treatment policy change, but they suggest that a
carefully monitoring is needed in this area.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-015-1018-3 
PMCID: PMC4681156
PMID: 26670642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

