
1. Cell Signal. 2016 Mar;28(3):125-135. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.12.003. Epub
2015 Dec 10.

Calmidazolium evokes high calcium fluctuations in Plasmodium falciparum.

Budu A(1), Gomes MM(2), Melo PM(1), El Chamy Maluf S(1), Bagnaresi P(1), Azevedo 
MF(3), Carmona AK(4), Gazarini ML(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biofísica, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Biociências, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Santos, SP,
Brazil.
(3)Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Biofísica, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil. Electronic address: ak.carmona@unifesp.br.
(5)Departamento de Biociências, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Santos, SP,
Brazil. Electronic address: marcos.gazarini@unifesp.br.

Calcium and calmodulin (CaM) are important players in eukaryote cell signaling.
In the present study, by using a knockin approach, we demonstrated the expression
and localization of CaM in all erythrocytic stages of Plasmodium falciparum.
Under extracellular Ca(2+)-free conditions, calmidazolium (CZ), a potent CaM
inhibitor, promoted a transient cytosolic calcium ([Ca(2+)]cyt) increase in
isolated trophozoites, indicating that CZ mobilizes intracellular sources of
calcium. In the same extracellular Ca(2+)-free conditions, the [Ca(2+)]cyt rise
elicited by CZ treatment was ~3.5 fold higher when the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
calcium store was previously depleted ruling out the mobilization of calcium from
the ER by CZ. The effects of the Ca(2+)/H(+) ionophore ionomycin (ION) and the
Na(+)/H(+) ionophore monensin (MON) suggest that the [Ca(2+)]cyt-increasing
effect of CZ is driven by the removal of Ca(2+) from at least one
Ca(2+)-CaM-related (CaMR) protein as well as by the mobilization of Ca(2+) from
intracellular acidic calcium stores. Moreover, we showed that the mitochondrion
participates in the sequestration of the cytosolic Ca(2+) elicited by CZ.
Finally, the modulation of membrane Ca(2+) channels by CZ and thapsigargin (THG) 
was demonstrated. The opened channels were blocked by the unspecific calcium
channel blocker Co(2+) but not by 2-APB (capacitative calcium entry inhibitor) or
nifedipine (L-type Ca(2+) channel inhibitor). Taken together, the results
suggested that one CaMR protein is an important modulator of calcium signaling
and homeostasis during the Plasmodium intraerythrocytic cell cycle, working as a 
relevant intracellular Ca(2+) reservoir in the parasite.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.12.003 
PMID: 26689736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

