
1. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 11;14(4):16728-35. doi: 10.4238/2015.December.11.20.

Effect of isodillapiole on the expression of the insecticide resistance genes
GSTE7 and CYP6N12 in Aedes aegypti from central Amazonia.

Lima VS(1), Pinto AC(2), Rafael MS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Genética, Conservação e Biologia Evolutiva PPG
GCBEv, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia, Manaus, AM, Brasil.
(2)Laboratório de Citogenética, Genômica e Evolução de Mosquitos de Malária e
Dengue, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisa da Amazônia, Manaus, AM, Brasil.

The yellow fever mosquito Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti is the main vector of dengue 
arbovirus and other arboviruses. Dengue prevention measures for the control of A.
aegypti involve mainly the use of synthetic insecticides. The constant use of
insecticides has caused resistance in this mosquito. Alternative studies on plant
extracts and their products have been conducted with the aim of controlling the
spread of the mosquito. Dillapiole is a compound found in essential oils of the
plant Piper aduncum (Piperaceae) which has been effective as a biopesticide
against A. aegypti. Isodillapiole is a semisynthetic substance obtained by the
isomerization of dillapiole. In the present study, isodillapiole was evaluated
for its potential to induce differential expression of insecticide resistance
genes (GSTE7 and CYP6N12) in 3rd instar larvae of A. aegypti. These larvae were
exposed to this compound at two concentrations (20 and 40 μg/mL) for 4 h during
four generations (G1, G2, G3, and G4). Quantitative RT-PCR was used to assess the
expression of GSTE7 and CYP6N12 genes. GSTE7 and CYP6N12 relative expression
levels were higher at 20 than at 40 μg/mL and varied among generations. The
decrease in GSTE7 and CYP6N12 expression levels at the highest isodillapiole
concentration suggests that larvae may have suffered from metabolic stress,
revealing a potential alternative product in the control of A. aegypti.

DOI: 10.4238/2015.December.11.20 
PMID: 26681019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

