
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2016 Apr;120:7-15. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2015.12.004. Epub 2015 
Dec 12.

Expression, purification and characterization of Plasmodium falciparum vacuolar
protein sorting 29.

Iqbal MS(1), Siddiqui AA(1), Alam A(1), Goyal M(1), Banerjee C(1), Sarkar S(1),
Mazumder S(1), De R(1), Nag S(1), Saha SJ(1), Bandyopadhyay U(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, CSIR-Indian Institute of
Chemical Biology, 4 Raja S. C. Mullick Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata 700032, West
Bengal, India.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, CSIR-Indian Institute of
Chemical Biology, 4 Raja S. C. Mullick Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata 700032, West
Bengal, India. Electronic address: ubandyo_1964@yahoo.com.

Translocation of various proteins to the subcellular organelles is an essential
mechanism to regulate the metabolic pathways and often vacuolar protein sorting
(VPS) proteins are involved in this transportation. Plasmodium falciparum VPS29
(PfVPS29) is predicted to be a functional component in the assembly of the
retromer complex; however, so far detailed characterization of PfVPS29 in its
native form is not yet done. We report the successful expression and purification
of tag-free recombinant PfVPS29 with a yield of 5.6 mg from 1 L of Escherichia
coli culture. PfVPS29 was purified by combined anion-exchange and size exclusion 
chromatography. The protein showed a single band in SDS-PAGE and it exhibited
molecular mass of 21.7 kDa as measured by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. Secondary 
structure was elucidated by circular dichroism spectroscopy. It was found to be a
monomeric protein in solution as evident from dynamic light scattering studies,
chemical cross-linking experiments and size exclusion chromatography.
Subsequently, polyclonal anti-PfVPS29 antibody was generated and used for
evaluating protein expression by western blot and following subcellular
localization in P. falciparum by confocal immunofluoroscence microscopy. PfVPS29 
was found to be located in cytoplasm and expressed from early trophozoite to
schizont stages with maximum expression in trophozoite stage. This study provides
purification, biophysical characterization and subcellular localization of
PfVPS29 in different asexual stages of P. falciparum.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2015.12.004 
PMID: 26690372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

