
1. Nat Commun. 2016 Jan 22;7:10519. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10519.

Functional profiles of orphan membrane transporters in the life cycle of the
malaria parasite.

Kenthirapalan S(1), Waters AP(2), Matuschewski K(1)(3), Kooij TW(1)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology Unit, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Charit√©platz 1,
10117 Berlin, Germany.
(2)Wellcome Trust Centre for Molecular Parasitology, Glasgow Biomedical Research 
Centre, University of Glasgow, 120 University Place, Glasgow G12 8TA, UK.
(3)Institute of Biology, Humboldt University, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life
Sciences, Radboud University Medical Centre, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.
(5)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Centre, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Assigning function to orphan membrane transport proteins and prioritizing
candidates for detailed biochemical characterization remain fundamental
challenges and are particularly important for medically relevant pathogens, such 
as malaria parasites. Here we present a comprehensive genetic analysis of 35
orphan transport proteins of Plasmodium berghei during its life cycle in mice and
Anopheles mosquitoes. Six genes, including four candidate aminophospholipid
transporters, are refractory to gene deletion, indicative of essential functions.
We generate and phenotypically characterize 29 mutant strains with deletions of
individual transporter genes. Whereas seven genes appear to be dispensable under 
the experimental conditions tested, deletion of any of the 22 other genes leads
to specific defects in life cycle progression in vivo and/or host transition. Our
study provides growing support for a potential link between heavy metal
homeostasis and host switching and reveals potential targets for rational design 
of new intervention strategies against malaria.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms10519 
PMCID: PMC4736113
PMID: 26796412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

