
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 25;11(1):e0148079. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148079.
eCollection 2016.

Hemoglobin E Prevalence among Ethnic Groups Residing in Malaria-Endemic Areas of 
Northern Thailand and Its Lack of Association with Plasmodium falciparum Invasion
In Vitro.

Lithanatudom P(1), Wipasa J(2), Inti P(1), Chawansuntati K(2), Svasti S(3),
Fucharoen S(3), Kangwanpong D(1), Kampuansai J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, 
Thailand.
(2)Research Institutes for Health Sciences, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai,
Thailand.
(3)Thalassemia Research Center, Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol
University, Nakornpathom, Thailand.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016;11(9):e0163430.

Hemoglobin E (HbE) is one of the most common hemoglobin variants caused by a
mutation in the Î²-globin gene, and found at high frequencies in various Southeast
Asian groups. We surveyed HbE prevalence among 8 ethnic groups residing in 5
villages selected for their high period malaria endemicity, and 5 for low
endemicity in northern Thailand, in order to uncover factors which may affect
genetic persistence of HbE in these groups. We found the overall HbE prevalence
6.7%, with differing frequencies from 0% in the Pwo Karen, the Lawa, and the Skaw
Karen to 24% in the Mon. All HbE genes were heterozygous (AE). Differences in HbE
prevalence among the studied ethnic groups indirectly documents that ancestries
and evolutionary forces, such as drift and admixture, are the important factors
in the persistence of HbE distribution in northern Thailand. Furthermore, the
presence of HbE in groups of northern Thailand had no effect on the in vitro
infectivity and proliferation of Plasmodium falciparum, nor the production of
hemozoin, a heme crystal produced by malaria parasites, when compared to normal
red-blood-cell controls. Our data may contribute to a better understanding on the
persistence of HbE among ethnic groups and its association with malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148079 
PMCID: PMC4726726
PMID: 26808200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

