
1. Parasit Vectors. 2016 Feb 4;9:67. doi: 10.1186/s13071-016-1346-3.

Spatial variation of insecticide resistance in the dengue vector Aedes aegypti
presents unique vector control challenges.

Deming R(1), Manrique-Saide P(2), Medina Barreiro A(3), Cardeña EU(4),
Che-Mendoza A(5), Jones B(6), Liebman K(7), Vizcaino L(8), Vazquez-Prokopec G(9),
Lenhart A(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
rldeming@gmail.com.
(2)Unidad Colaborativa para Bioensayos Entomológicos, Campus de Ciencias
Biológicas y Agropecuarias, Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán, Mérida, Mexico.
Pablo_manrique2000@hotmail.com.
(3)Unidad Colaborativa para Bioensayos Entomológicos, Campus de Ciencias
Biológicas y Agropecuarias, Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán, Mérida, Mexico.
anuar116@hotmail.com.
(4)Unidad Colaborativa para Bioensayos Entomológicos, Campus de Ciencias
Biológicas y Agropecuarias, Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán, Mérida, Mexico.
edgarkoyoc@gmail.com.
(5)Servicios de Salud de Yucatán, Gobierno del Estado de Yucatán, Mérida, Mexico.
achemendoza_vectores@hotmail.com.
(6)Department of Environmental Sciences, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
bdjone3@emory.edu.
(7)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Entomology Branch, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Center for Global Health, Atlanta, GA, USA.
Kelly.liebman@gmail.com.
(8)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Entomology Branch, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Center for Global Health, Atlanta, GA, USA.
VTB6@cdc.gov.
(9)Department of Environmental Sciences, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
gmvazqu@emory.edu.
(10)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Entomology Branch, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Center for Global Health, Atlanta, GA, USA.
AJL8@cdc.gov.

BACKGROUND: Dengue is a major public health problem in Mexico, where the use of
chemical insecticides to control the principal dengue vector, Aedes aegypti, is
widespread. Resistance to insecticides has been reported in multiple sites, and
the frequency of kdr mutations associated with pyrethroid resistance has
increased rapidly in recent years. In the present study, we characterized
patterns of insecticide resistance in Ae. aegypti populations in five small towns
surrounding the city of Merida, Mexico.
METHODS: A cross-sectional, entomological survey was performed between June and
August 2013 in 250 houses in each of the five towns. Indoor resting adult
mosquitoes were collected in all houses and four ovitraps were placed in each
study block. CDC bottle bioassays were conducted using F0-F2 individuals reared
from the ovitraps and kdr allele (Ile1016 and Cys1534) frequencies were
determined.
RESULTS: High, but varying, levels of resistance to chorpyrifos-ethyl was
detected in all study towns, complete susceptibility to bendiocarb in all except 
one town, and variations in resistance to deltamethrin between towns, ranging
from 63-88% mortality. Significant associations were detected between
deltamethrin resistance and the presence of both kdr alleles. Phenotypic
resistance was highly predictive of the presence of both alleles, however, not
all mosquitoes containing a mutant allele were phenotypically resistant. An
analysis of genotypic differentiation (exact G test) between the five towns based
on the adult female Ae. aegypti collected from inside houses showed highly
significant differences (p < 0.0001) between genotypes for both loci. When this
was further analyzed to look for fine scale differences at the block level within
towns, genotypic differentiation was significant for both loci in San Lorenzo
(Ile1016, p = 0.018 and Cys1534, p = 0.007) and for Ile1016 in Acanceh
(p = 0.013) and Conkal (p = 0.031).
CONCLUSIONS: The results from this study suggest that 3 years after switching
chemical groups, deltamethrin resistance and a high frequency of kdr alleles
persisted in Ae. aegypti populations. The spatial variation that was detected in 
both resistance phenotypes and genotypes has practical implications, both for
vector control operations as well as insecticide resistance management
strategies.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-016-1346-3 
PMCID: PMC4743324
PMID: 26846468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

