
1. Curr Top Med Chem. 2016;16(27):3048-3057.

Copper Homeostasis for the Developmental Progression of Intraerythrocytic
Malarial Parasite.

Asahi H(1), Kobayashi F, Inoue SI, Niikura M, Yagita K, Tolba ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tropical Diseases and Parasitology, Department of Infectious
Diseases, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Tokyo 181 8611, Japan.
isseix20@ks.kyorin-u.ac.jp.

Malaria is one of the world's most devastating diseases, particularly in the
tropics. In humans, Plasmodium falciparum lives mainly within red blood cells,
and malaria pathogenesis depends on the red blood cells being infected with the
parasite. Nonesterified fatty acids (NEFAs), including cis-9-octadecenoic acid,
and phospholipids have been critical for complete parasite growth in serum-free
culture, although the efficacy of NEFAs in sustaining the growth of P. falciparum
has varied markedly. Hexadecanoic acid and trans-9-octadecenoic acid have
arrested development of the parasite, in association with down-regulation of
genes encoding copper-binding proteins. Selective removal of Cu+ ions has
blockaded completely the ring-trophozoite-schizont progression of the parasite.
The importance of copper homeostasis for the developmental progression of P.
falciparum has been confirmed by inhibition of copper-binding proteins that
regulate copper physiology and function by associating with copper ions. These
data have provided strong evidence for a link between healthy copper homeostasis 
and successive developmental progression of P. falciparum. Perturbation of copper
homeostasis may be, thus, instrumental in drug and vaccine development for the
malaria medication. We review the importance of copper homeostasis in the asexual
growth of P. falciparum in relation to NEFAs, copperbinding proteins, apoptosis, 
mitochondria, and gene expression.

DOI: 10.2174/1568026616999160215151704 
PMCID: PMC5068492
PMID: 26881705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

