
1. Mod Pathol. 2016 Apr;29(4):381-90. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2016.27. Epub 2016 Feb 
26.

Evidence for spleen dysfunction in malaria-HIV co-infection in a subset of
pediatric patients.

Joice R(1), Frantzreb C(1)(2), Pradham A(2), Seydel KB(3)(4), Kamiza S(5), Wirth 
DF(1), Duraisingh MT(1), Molyneux ME(5)(6)(7), Taylor TE(3)(4), Marti M(1),
Milner DA Jr(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Disease, The Harvard School of Public 
Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, The Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)The Blantyre Malaria Project, University of Malawi College of Medicine,
Blantyre, Malawi.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Osteopathic Medicine, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(5)College of Medicine, University of Malawi, Blantyre, Malawi.
(6)Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Programme, Blantyre, Malawi.
(7)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, UK.

The spleen has an important role in the clearance of malaria parasites, and the
role of HIV co-infection on this process is yet to be described. Using a
combination of histological and molecular methods, we systematically evaluated
parasite load across multiple organs from HIV-positive and HIV-negative cases of 
an autopsy study of pediatric comatose children with malaria infection (n=103) in
Blantyre, Malawi. Quantification of parasite load across organs was done using
histology. A subset of cases was further characterized for parasite localization 
and stage of development using immunohistochemistry-based labeling of parasite
and host cells (5 HIV-positive, 10 HIV-negative), and quantitative RT-PCR
(qRT-PCR) of asexual and sexual-specific genes (4 HIV-positive, 5 HIV-negative). 
The results were compared with clinical information including HIV status. The
HIV-positive rate was 21% for the group studied (20 of 95) and HIV-positive
patients had a significantly shorter duration of time between onset of illness
and death, and were significantly older than HIV-negative patients. We found that
spleens of HIV-positive cases had significantly higher parasite loads compared
with those of HIV-negative cases in each of the three methods we used: (i)
standard histology, (ii) immunohistochemistry-based labeling of Plasmodium
lactate dehydrogenase (pLDH), and (iii) molecular detection of asexual parasite
transcript apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1). Immunohistochemistry-based labeling 
of macrophage marker CD163 in a subset of spleens revealed fewer activated
macrophages containing engulfed parasites and a greater number of free
unphagocytosed parasites in the HIV-positive cases. The mechanism by which HIV
infection is associated with more rapid progression to severe cerebral malaria
disease is possibly impairment of parasite destruction by splenic macrophages,
supported by published in vitro studies showing inefficient phagocytosis of
malaria parasites by HIV-infected macrophages.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2016.27 
PMCID: PMC4811692
PMID: 26916076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

