
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016 Jun 1;94(6):1266-75. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0904. Epub
2016 Mar 21.

Supplementation with Abscisic Acid Reduces Malaria Disease Severity and Parasite 
Transmission.

Glennon EK(1), Adams LG(1), Hicks DR(1), Dehesh K(1), Luckhart S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of California, Davis, Davis, California; Department of Veterinary
Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas; Department of Plant Biology, University of
California, Davis, Davis, California.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of California, Davis, Davis, California; Department of Veterinary
Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas; Department of Plant Biology, University of
California, Davis, Davis, California sluckhart@ucdavis.edu.

Nearly half of the world's population is at risk for malaria. Increasing drug
resistance has intensified the need for novel therapeutics, including treatments 
with intrinsic transmission-blocking properties. In this study, we demonstrate
that the isoprenoid abscisic acid (ABA) modulates signaling in the mammalian host
to reduce parasitemia and the formation of transmissible gametocytes and in the
mosquito host to reduce parasite infection. Oral ABA supplementation in a mouse
model of malaria was well tolerated and led to reduced pathology and enhanced
gene expression in the liver and spleen consistent with infection recovery. Oral 
ABA supplementation also increased mouse plasma ABA to levels that can signal in 
the mosquito midgut upon blood ingestion. Accordingly, we showed that
supplementation of a Plasmodium falciparum-infected blood meal with ABA increased
expression of mosquito nitric oxide synthase and reduced infection prevalence in 
a nitric oxide-dependent manner. Identification of the mechanisms whereby ABA
reduces parasite growth in mammals and mosquitoes could shed light on the balance
of immunity and metabolism across eukaryotes and provide a strong foundation for 
clinical translation.

Â© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0904 
PMCID: PMC4889743
PMID: 27001761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

