
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 29;11(3):e0152415. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152415.
eCollection 2016.

Genetic Diversity of Plasmodium falciparum Populations in Malaria Declining Areas
of Sabah, East Malaysia.

Mohd Abd Razak MR(1), Sastu UR(1), Norahmad NA(1), Abdul-Karim A(2), Muhammad
A(1), Muniandy PK(1), Jelip J(3), Rundi C(3), Imwong M(4), Mudin RN(5), Abdullah 
NR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Herbal Medicine Research Center, Institute for Medical Research, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.
(2)Zonal Public Health Laboratory, Tamale Teaching Hospital, Tamale, Northern
Region, Ghana, West Africa.
(3)Sabah State Health Department, Rumah Persekutuan, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah,
Malaysia.
(4)Department of Molecular Tropical Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Tropical
Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Vector Borne Disease Sector, Disease Control Division, Ministry of Health,
Federal Government Administrative Centre, Putrajaya, Malaysia.

Malaysia has a national goal to eliminate malaria by 2020. Understanding the
genetic diversity of malaria parasites in residual transmission foci can provide 
invaluable information which may inform the intervention strategies used to reach
elimination targets. This study was conducted to determine the genetic diversity 
level of P. falciparum isolates in malaria residual foci areas of Sabah. Malaria 
active case detection was conducted in Kalabakan and Kota Marudu. All individuals
in the study sites were screened for malaria infection by rapid diagnostic test. 
Blood from P. falciparum-infected individuals were collected on filter paper
prior to DNA extraction. Genotyping was performed using merozoite surface
protein-1 (MSP-1), merozoite surface protein-2 (MSP-2), glutamate rich protein
(GLURP) and 10 neutral microsatellite loci markers. The size of alleles,
multiplicity of infection (MOI), mean number of alleles (Na), expected
heterozygosity (He), linkage disequilibrium (LD) and genetic differentiation
(FST) were determined. In Kalabakan, the MSP-1 and MSP-2 alleles were
predominantly K1 and FC27 family types, respectively. The GLURP genotype VI
(751-800 bp) was predominant. The MOI for MSP-1 and MSP-2 were 1.65 and 1.20,
respectively. The Na per microsatellite locus was 1.70. The He values for MSP-1, 
MSP-2, GLURP and neutral microsatellites were 0.17, 0.37, 0.70 and 0.33,
respectively. In Kota Marudu, the MSP-1 and MSP-2 alleles were predominantly
MAD20 and 3D7 family types, respectively. The GLURP genotype IV (651-700 bp) was 
predominant. The MOI for both MSP-1 and MSP-2 was 1.05. The Na per microsatellite
locus was 3.60. The He values for MSP-1, MSP-2, GLURP and neutral microsatellites
were 0.24, 0.25, 0.69 and 0.30, respectively. A significant LD was observed in
Kalabakan (0.495, p<0.01) and Kota Marudu P. falciparum populations (0.601,
p<0.01). High genetic differentiation between Kalabakan and Kota Marudu P.
falciparum populations was observed (FST = 0.532). The genetic data from the
present study highlighted the limited diversity and contrasting genetic pattern
of P. falciparum populations in the malaria declining areas of Sabah.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152415 
PMCID: PMC4811561
PMID: 27023787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

