
1. J Infect Public Health. 2017 Jan - Feb;10(1):110-119. doi:
10.1016/j.jiph.2016.02.004. Epub 2016 Mar 26.

Synergism between Pfcrt and Pfmdr1 genes could account for the slow recovery of
chloroquine sensitive Plasmodium falciparum strains in Ghana after chloroquine
withdrawal.

Asare KK(1), Boampong JN(2), Duah NO(3), Afoakwah R(4), Sehgal R(5), Quashie
NB(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Forensic Sciences, University of Cape Coast, Cape
Coast, Ghana; Department of Protozoology, Institute of Tropical Medicine
(NEKKEN), Nagasaki University Sakamoto 1-12-4, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan; Leading 
Program, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, Japan.
Electronic address: kwamsare@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Forensic Sciences, University of Cape Coast, Cape
Coast, Ghana. Electronic address: jonboamus@yahoo.com.
(3)Epidemiology Department, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research,
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, PO Box LG581, Legon, Ghana.
Electronic address: nduah@noguchi.ug.edu.gh.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Forensic Sciences, University of Cape Coast, Cape
Coast, Ghana. Electronic address: aforich2007@yahoo.com.
(5)Department of Medical Parasitology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Education and Research, Chandigarh 160012, India. Electronic address:
sehgalpgi@gmail.com.
(6)Center for Tropical Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, School of Medicine
and Dentistry, College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, PO Box GP4236,
Accra, Ghana; Epidemiology Department, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical
Research, College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, PO Box LG581, Legon,
Ghana. Electronic address: nquashie@noguchi.ug.edu.gh.

Unlike other countries, the chloroquine resistant marker Pfcrt T76 mutant has
remained fairly stable in Ghana several years after official disuse of
chloroquine. Certain mutations in Pfmdr1 may potentiate Pfcrt T76, offering a
possible explanation for this observation. To understand the phenomenon, the
co-existence of mutations in Pfmdr1 with Pfcrt T76 in Ghanaian Plasmodium
falciparum isolates was studied. The reported presence of parasites with reduced 
sensitivity to amodiaquine and quinine in the country was also studied. Blood
samples collected from confirmed malaria patients presenting at health facilities
in two distinct ecological zones were analyzed. The prevalence of Pfcrt K76T and 
the five point mutations in Pfmdr1 were determined using nested PCR followed by
RFLP analysis. The association between genes was determined by chi square
analysis, and synergism between the two genes was ascertained using the
Jonckheere-Terptra (J-T) test followed by Monte Carlo simulation (MCS). Nearly
fifty-four percent (53.7%) of the P. falciparum isolates examined had the Pfcrt
T76 gene, out of which 18.3% had both K76 and T76 alleles. Mutations at codon 86,
184, 1034, 1042 and 1246 of the Pfmdr1 gene were detected in 36.0%, 87.9%, 71.0%,
91.6% and 8.4% of the isolates, respectively. The haplotypes of Pfmdr1 present
were NFCDD (43.46%), YFCDD (27.57%), NFSDD (7.48%), NYSNY (5.14%) and YFSDD
(4.67%). Pfcrt T76 was significantly associated with a double mutation at codon
86 and 184 of Pfmdr1 (YF; χ2=18.045, p=0.006). Associations were observed between
Pfcrt K76T and Pfmdr1 triple mutation at codons 86, 184 and 1034 (NFC; χ2=13.770,
p=0.032 and YFC; χ2=16.489, p=0.011). The J-T test showed significant synergism
between Pfcrt 76 and Pfmdr1 polymorphisms (p<0.0001), which was confirmed by MCS 
at 99% CI. Synergism between Pfcrt and Pfmdr1 mutant genes could account for the 
slow recovery of chloroquine sensitive P. falciparum in Ghana. The same
phenomenon could explain resistance to amodiaquine and quinine. The outcomes of
this study also indicated a possible emergence of artemether-lumefantrine
resistance in Ghana.

Copyright © 2016 King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiph.2016.02.004 
PMID: 27026134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

