
1. Malar J. 2016 Apr 12;15:205. doi: 10.1186/s12936-016-1217-6.

Evidence of new species for malaria vector Anopheles nuneztovari sensu lato in
the Brazilian Amazon region.

Scarpassa VM(1)(2), Cunha-Machado AS(3), Saraiva JF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Genética de Populações e Evolução de Mosquitos Vetores de
Malária e Dengue, Coordenação de Biodiversidade, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas 
da Amazônia (INPA), Avenida André Araujo, 2936. Bairro Petrópolis, Manaus,
Amazonas, 69067-375, Brazil. vera@inpa.gov.br.
(2)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Genética, Conservação e Biologia Evolutiva,
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia (INPA), Avenida André Araujo, 2936.
Bairro Petrópolis, Manaus, Amazonas, 69067-375, Brazil. vera@inpa.gov.br.
(3)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Genética, Conservação e Biologia Evolutiva,
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da Amazônia (INPA), Avenida André Araujo, 2936.
Bairro Petrópolis, Manaus, Amazonas, 69067-375, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Anopheles nuneztovari sensu lato comprises cryptic species in
northern South America, and the Brazilian populations encompass distinct genetic 
lineages within the Brazilian Amazon region. This study investigated, based on
two molecular markers, whether these lineages might actually deserve species
status.
METHODS: Specimens were collected in five localities of the Brazilian Amazon,
including Manaus, Careiro Castanho and Autazes, in the State of Amazonas;
Tucuruí, in the State of Pará; and Abacate da Pedreira, in the State of Amapá,
and analysed for the COI gene (Barcode region) and 12 microsatellite loci.
Phylogenetic analyses were performed using the maximum likelihood (ML) approach. 
Intra and inter samples genetic diversity were estimated using population
genetics analyses, and the genetic groups were identified by means of the ML,
Bayesian and factorial correspondence analyses and the Bayesian analysis of
population structure.
RESULTS: The Barcode region dataset (N = 103) generated 27 haplotypes. The
haplotype network suggested three lineages. The ML tree retrieved five
monophyletic groups. Group I clustered all specimens from Manaus and Careiro
Castanho, the majority of Autazes and a few from Abacate da Pedreira. Group II
clustered most of the specimens from Abacate da Pedreira and a few from Autazes
and Tucuruí. Group III clustered only specimens from Tucuruí (lineage III),
strongly supported (97 %). Groups IV and V clustered specimens of A. nuneztovari 
s.s. and A. dunhami, strongly (98 %) and weakly (70 %) supported, respectively.
In the second phylogenetic analysis, the sequences from GenBank, identified as A.
goeldii, clustered to groups I and II, but not to group III. Genetic distances
(Kimura-2 parameters) among the groups ranged from 1.60 % (between I and II) to
2.32 % (between I and III). Microsatellite data revealed very high
intra-population genetic variability. Genetic distances showed the highest and
significant values (P = 0.005) between Tucuruí and all the other samples, and
between Abacate da Pedreira and all the other samples. Genetic distances,
Bayesian (Structure and BAPS) analyses and FCA suggested three distinct
biological groups, supporting the barcode region results.
CONCLUSIONS: The two markers revealed three genetic lineages for A. nuneztovari
s.l. in the Brazilian Amazon region. Lineages I and II may represent genetically 
distinct groups or species within A. goeldii. Lineage III may represent a new
species, distinct from the A. goeldii group, and may be the most ancestral in the
Brazilian Amazon. They may have differences in Plasmodium susceptibility and
should therefore be investigated further.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1217-6 
PMCID: PMC4828892
PMID: 27068120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

