
1. Acta Trop. 2016 Aug;160:23-34. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.04.006. Epub 2016 
Apr 19.

Population genetics structure of Plasmodium vivax circumsporozoite protein during
the elimination process in low and unstable malaria transmission areas, southeast
of Iran.

Shabani SH(1), Zakeri S(2), Mehrizi AA(3), Mortazavi Y(4), Djadid ND(3).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Pasteur Avenue, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran;
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Nanotechnology, Faculty of Medicine,
Zanjan University of Medical Sciences (ZUMS), Zanjan, Iran.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Pasteur Avenue, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.
Electronic address: zakeris@yahoo.com.
(3)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Pasteur Avenue, P.O. Box 1316943551, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Nanotechnology, Faculty of Medicine,
Zanjan University of Medical Sciences (ZUMS), Zanjan, Iran.

In Iran, the prevalence of Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax has dropped
after a national malaria elimination program was launched. To estimate the
likelihood of success and to measure the outcome of malaria intervention tools
during elimination programs (2008-2012), the population genetic surveys of
Iranian P. vivax isolates (n=60) were carried out using the CSP genetic marker.
The results were compared with a similar work that was carried out during a
control phase (2000-2003) in the same study areas. Based on PCR-RFLP analysis, 49
(81.67%) of 60 studied samples were VK210 and 11 (18.33%) were VK247 with no
mixed genotypes. However, 10.97% of P. vivax isolates of control phase harbored
the mixed genotypes. Sequencing analysis of 50 pvcsp gene showed 14 distinct
haplotypes, of which 11 and 3 were VK210 and VK247 types, respectively. However, 
during the control phase, 19 distinct subtypes (11 VK210 and 8 VK247) were
reported. Also, 7 of 11 VK210 and the VK247F subtypes were new, and 3 out of 7
new VK210 and VK247F were isolated from the patients with Pakistani nationality. 
The lower nucleotide diversity per site (π=0.02017±0.00436 and π=0.04525±0.00255)
and haplotype diversity (Hd=0.513±0.093 and Hd=0.691±0.128) as well as lower
In/Del haplotype [Hd(i)=0.243 and 0] and nucleotide diversity [π(i)=0.00078 and
0] were recorded for VK210 and VK247of the elimination samples, respectively. In 
conclusion, the comparison of PRMs and RATs in CRR along with the polymorphism
analysis of the sequence lengths, SNPs, and In/Del polymorphisms in all analyzed 
samples showed lower genetic diversity for PvCSP in the elimination samples.
Also, although there is a turnover of P. vivax parasite genotypes in the study
areas, reduction in genetic diversity and transmission was detected due to
scaling-up of the intervention tools during an elimination program in Iran. This 
notable challenge of the elimination program must be taken into account and
controlled by active surveillance for limiting both reintroductions of new
allelic forms as well as the spread of drug-resistant parasite to prevent any
disease outbreaks.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2016.04.006 
PMID: 27102931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

