
1. Vet Microbiol. 2016 May 30;188:16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2016.03.019. Epub
2016 Mar 26.

Chloroquine inhibits Rhodococcus equi replication in murine and foal alveolar
macrophages by iron-starvation.

Gressler LT(1), Bordin AI(2), McQueen CM(2), Cohen ND(3), de Vargas AC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bacteriology, Department of Preventive Veterinary Medicine,
Federal University of Santa Maria, Av. Roraima 1000, Camobi, Santa Maria, RS
97105-900, Brazil.
(2)Equine Infectious Disease Laboratory, Department of Large Animal Clinical
Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX 77845, United States.
(3)Equine Infectious Disease Laboratory, Department of Large Animal Clinical
Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX 77845, United States. Electronic address: NCOHEN@cvm.tamu.edu.
(4)Laboratory of Bacteriology, Department of Preventive Veterinary Medicine,
Federal University of Santa Maria, Av. Roraima 1000, Camobi, Santa Maria, RS
97105-900, Brazil. Electronic address: agueda.vargas@gmail.com.

Rhodococcus equi preferentially infects macrophages causing pyogranulomatous
pneumonia in young foals. Both the vapA and rhbC genes are up-regulated in an
iron (Fe)-deprived environment, such as that found within macrophages.
Chloroquine (CQ) is a drug widely used against malaria that suppresses the
intracellular availability of Fe in eukaryotic cells. The main objective of this 
study was to evaluate the ability of CQ to inhibit replication of virulent R.
equi within murine (J774A.1) and foal alveolar macrophages (AMs) and to verify
whether the mechanism of inhibition could be Fe-deprivation-dependent. CQ effect 
on R. equi extracellular survival and toxicity to J774A.1 were evaluated. R. equi
survival within J774A.1 and foal AMs was evaluated under CQ (10 and 20μM), bovine
saturated transferrin (bHTF), and bovine unsaturated transferrin (bATF) exposure.
To explore the action mechanism of CQ, the superoxide anion production, the
lysozyme activity, as well as the relative mRNA expression of vapA and rhbC were 
examined. CQ at≤20μM had no effect on R. equi extracellular multiplication and
J774A.1 viability. Exposure to CQ significantly and markedly reduced survival of 
R. equi within J774A.1 and foal AMs. Treatment with bHTF did not reverse CQ
effect on R. equi. Exposure to CQ did not affected superoxide anion production or
lysozyme activity, however vapA and rhbC expression was significantly increased. 
Our results reinforce the hypothesis that intracellular availability of Fe is
required for R. equi survival, and our initial hypothesis that CQ can limit
replication of R. equi in J774A.1 and foal AMs, most likely by Fe starvation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2016.03.019 
PMID: 27139025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

