
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016 Jul 22;60(8):4453-63. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01835-15. Print 2016 Aug.

Role of Plasmodium vivax Dihydropteroate Synthase Polymorphisms in Sulfa Drug
Resistance.

Pornthanakasem W(1), Riangrungroj P(2), Chitnumsub P(2), Ittarat W(2),
Kongkasuriyachai D(2), Uthaipibull C(2), Yuthavong Y(2), Leartsakulpanich U(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Pathum Thani,
Thailand wichai.por@biotec.or.th ubolsree@biotec.or.th.
(2)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Pathum Thani,
Thailand.

Dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS) is a known sulfa drug target in malaria
treatment, existing as a bifunctional enzyme together with
hydroxymethyldihydropterin pyrophosphokinase (HPPK). Polymorphisms in key
residues of Plasmodium falciparum DHPS (PfDHPS) have been characterized and
linked to sulfa drug resistance in malaria. Genetic sequencing of P. vivax dhps
(Pvdhps) from clinical isolates has shown several polymorphisms at the positions 
equivalent to those in the Pfdhps genes conferring sulfa drug resistance,
suggesting a mechanism for sulfa drug resistance in P. vivax similar to that seen
in P. falciparum To characterize the role of polymorphisms in the PvDHPS in sulfa
drug resistance, various mutants of recombinant PvHPPK-DHPS enzymes were
expressed and characterized. Moreover, due to the lack of a continuous in vitro
culture system for P. vivax parasites, a surrogate P. berghei model expressing
Pvhppk-dhps genes was established to demonstrate the relationship between
sequence polymorphisms and sulfa drug susceptibility and to test the activities
of PvDHPS inhibitors on the transgenic parasites. Both enzyme activity and
transgenic parasite growth were sensitive to sulfadoxine to different degrees,
depending on the number of mutations that accumulated in DHPS. Ki values and 50% 
effective doses were higher for mutant PvDHPS enzymes than the wild-type enzymes.
Altogether, the study provides the first evidence of sulfa drug resistance at the
molecular level in P. vivax Furthermore, the enzyme inhibition assay and the in
vivo screening system can be useful tools for screening new compounds for their
activities against PvDHPS.

Copyright Â© 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01835-15 
PMCID: PMC4958149
PMID: 27161627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

