
1. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2016 Jun 3;111(6):391-8. doi: 10.1590/0074-02760150459.

Pathogenicity and phenotypic sulfadiazine resistance of Toxoplasma gondii
isolates obtained from livestock in northeastern Brazil.

Oliveira CB(1), Meurer YS(1)(2), Andrade JM(1), Costa ME(3), Andrade MM(1)(4),
Silva LA(4), Lanza DC(3), Vítor RW(4), Andrade-Neto VF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte, Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Norte, Centro de Biociências, Departamento de Microbiologia e
Parasitologia, Natal RN , Brasil, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte,
Centro de Biociências, Departamento de Microbiologia e Parasitologia, Laboratório
de Biologia da Malária e Toxoplasmose, Natal, RN, Brasil.
(2)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte, Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Norte, Centro de Biociências, Departamento de Fisiologia, Laboratório
de Estudos da Memória, Natal RN , Brasil, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do
Norte, Centro de Biociências, Departamento de Fisiologia, Laboratório de Estudos 
da Memória, Natal, RN, Brasil.
(3)Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte, Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Norte, Centro de Biociências, Departamento de Bioquímica, Natal RN ,
Brasil, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte, Centro de Biociências,
Departamento de Bioquímica, Laboratório de Biologia Molecular Aplicada, Natal,
RN, Brasil.
(4)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais,
Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Departamento de Parasitologia, Belo Horizonte
MG , Brasil, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Instituto de Ciências
Biológicas, Departamento de Parasitologia, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brasil.

Toxoplasma gondii is the causative protozoan agent of toxoplasmosis, which is a
common infection that is widely distributed worldwide. Studies revealed stronger 
clonal strains in North America and Europe and genetic diversity in South
American strains. Our study aimed to differentiate the pathogenicity and
sulfadiazine resistance of three T. gondii isolates obtained from livestock
intended for human consumption. The cytopathic effects of the T. gondii isolates 
were evaluated. The pathogenicity was determined by polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) using a CS3 marker
and in a rodent model in vivo. Phenotypic sulfadiazine resistance was measured
using a kinetic curve of drug activity in Swiss mice. IgM and IgG were measured
by ELISA, and the dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS) gene sequence was analysed. The
cytopathic effects and the PCR-RFLP profiles from chickens indicated a different 
infection source. The Ck3 isolate displayed more cytopathic effects in vitro than
the Ck2 and ME49 strains. Additionally, the Ck2 isolate induced a differential
humoral immune response compared to ME49. The Ck3 and Pg1 isolates, but not the
Ck2 isolate, showed sulfadiazine resistance in the sensitivity assay. We did not 
find any DHPS gene polymorphisms in the mouse samples. These atypical
pathogenicity and sulfadiazine resistance profiles were not previously reported
and served as a warning to local health authorities.

DOI: 10.1590/0074-02760150459 
PMCID: PMC4909038
PMID: 27276184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

