
1. Genome Biol. 2016 Jul 5;17(1):147. doi: 10.1186/s13059-016-1014-0.

The mRNA-bound proteome of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Bunnik EM(1), Batugedara G(1), Saraf A(2), Prudhomme J(1), Florens L(2), Le Roch 
KG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of California,
Riverside, 900 University Avenue, Riverside, CA, 92521, USA.
(2)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 E. 50th Street, Kansas City, MO, 
64110, USA.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of California,
Riverside, 900 University Avenue, Riverside, CA, 92521, USA.
karine.leroch@ucr.edu.

BACKGROUND: Gene expression is controlled at multiple levels, including
transcription, stability, translation, and degradation. Over the years, it has
become apparent that Plasmodium falciparum exerts limited transcriptional control
of gene expression, while at least part of Plasmodium's genome is controlled by
post-transcriptional mechanisms. To generate insights into the mechanisms that
regulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level, we undertook
complementary computational, comparative genomics, and experimental approaches to
identify and characterize mRNA-binding proteins (mRBPs) in P. falciparum.
RESULTS: Close to 1000 RNA-binding proteins are identified by hidden Markov model
searches, of which mRBPs encompass a relatively large proportion of the parasite 
proteome as compared to other eukaryotes. Several abundant mRNA-binding domains
are enriched in apicomplexan parasites, while strong depletion of mRNA-binding
domains involved in RNA degradation is observed. Next, we experimentally capture 
199 proteins that interact with mRNA during the blood stages, 64 of which with
high confidence. These captured mRBPs show a significant overlap with the in
silico identified candidate RBPs (p < 0.0001). Among the experimentally validated
mRBPs are many known translational regulators active in other stages of the
parasite's life cycle, such as DOZI, CITH, PfCELF2, Musashi, and PfAlba1-4.
Finally, we also detect several proteins with an RNA-binding domain abundant in
Apicomplexans (RAP domain) that is almost exclusively found in apicomplexan
parasites.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our results provide the most complete comparative
genomics and experimental analysis of mRBPs in P. falciparum. A better
understanding of these regulatory proteins will not only give insight into the
intricate parasite life cycle but may also provide targets for novel therapeutic 
strategies.

DOI: 10.1186/s13059-016-1014-0 
PMCID: PMC4933991
PMID: 27381095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

