
1. Curr Biol. 2016 Aug 22;26(16):2188-93. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.06.025. Epub 2016 
Jul 28.

Tyrosine Detoxification Is an Essential Trait in the Life History of
Blood-Feeding Arthropods.

Sterkel M(1), Perdomo HD(2), Guizzo MG(2), Barletta AB(2), Nunes RD(2), Dias
FA(2), Sorgine MH(3), Oliveira PL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Bioquímica Médica Leopoldo de Meis, Universidade Federal do Rio
de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro 21941-902, Brazil. Electronic address:
msterkel29@gmail.com.
(2)Instituto de Bioquímica Médica Leopoldo de Meis, Universidade Federal do Rio
de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro 21941-902, Brazil.
(3)Instituto de Bioquímica Médica Leopoldo de Meis, Universidade Federal do Rio
de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro 21941-902, Brazil; Instituto Nacional de Ciência e
Tecnologia em Entomologia Molecular.
(4)Instituto de Bioquímica Médica Leopoldo de Meis, Universidade Federal do Rio
de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro 21941-902, Brazil; Instituto Nacional de Ciência e
Tecnologia em Entomologia Molecular. Electronic address: pedro@bioqmed.ufrj.br.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2016 Aug 22;26(16):R763-5.

Blood-feeding arthropods are vectors of infectious diseases such as dengue, Zika,
Chagas disease, and malaria [1], and vector control is essential to limiting
disease spread. Because these arthropods ingest very large amounts of blood, a
protein-rich meal, huge amounts of amino acids are produced during digestion.
Previous work on Rhodnius prolixus, a vector of Chagas disease, showed that,
among all amino acids, only tyrosine degradation enzymes were overexpressed in
the midgut compared to other tissues [2]. Here we demonstrate that tyrosine
detoxification is an essential trait in the life history of blood-sucking
arthropods. We found that silencing Rhodnius tyrosine aminotransferase (TAT) and 
4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase (HPPD), the first two enzymes of the
phenylalanine/tyrosine degradation pathway, caused the death of insects after a
blood meal. This was confirmed by using the HPPD inhibitor mesotrione, which
selectively killed hematophagous arthropods but did not affect non-hematophagous 
insects. In addition, mosquitoes and kissing bugs died after feeding on mice that
had previously received a therapeutic effective oral dose (1 mg/kg) of
nitisinone, another HPPD inhibitor used in humans for the treatment of
tyrosinemia type I [3]. These findings indicate that HPPD (and TAT) can be a
target for the selective control of blood-sucking disease vector populations.
Because HPPD inhibitors are extensively used as herbicides and in medicine, these
compounds may provide an alternative less toxic to humans and more
environmentally friendly than the conventional neurotoxic insecticides that are
currently used, with the ability to affect only hematophagous arthropods.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.06.025 
PMID: 27476595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

