
1. Folia Parasitol (Praha). 2016 Jun 17;63. pii: 2016.023. doi:
10.14411/fp.2016.023.

Investigation of avian haemosporidian parasites from raptor birds in Turkey, with
molecular characterisation and microscopic confirmation.

Ciloglu A(1), Yildirim A(1), Duzlu O(1), Onder Z(1), Dogan Z(2), Inci A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Erciyes
University, Kayseri, Turkey;
(2)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Erciyes University,
Kayseri, Turkey.

Avian haemosporidians are common vector-borne blood parasites that have been
reported in birds all over the world. Investigations of avian haemosporidian
parasites are conducted mainly on passerine birds. However, studies that focus on
non-passerine avian hosts are important for our understanding of the true
diversity, host specificity and genetic variability among these widespread
parasites. In the present study, blood samples from a total of 22 raptor birds
belonging to two orders, two families and six species from the Central Anatolia
Region of Turkey were investigated for three genera of avian haemosporidians
(Plasmodium Marchiafava et Celli, 1885, Haemoproteus Kruse, 1890 and
Leucocytozoon Sambon, 1908) using a combination of microscopic examination of
blood films and nested PCR targeting the parasite mitochondrial cytochrome b gene
(cyt-b). In total, six individual raptor birds identified positive for species of
Plasmodium or Leucocytozoon and one individual was found co-infected with all
three haemosporidian genera. We identified five parasite cyt-b haplotypes, three 
of which were reported for the first time. Among these, one Plasmodium haplotype 
is linked to a corresponding morphospecies (P-TURDUS1, Plasmodium circumflexum
Kikuth, 1931). All haplotypes were clearly distinguishable in phylogenetic
analyses. As one of the first studies to investigate blood parasites from
non-passerine birds in the Central Anatolia Region of Turkey, this study provides
important new information on the phylogenetic relationships and genetic diversity
of avian haemosporidian parasites from raptor birds. We discuss these findings in
the context of avian haemosporidian host-parasite relationships and we draw
attention to the need for microscopy to detect parasite sexual development stages
in surveys of avian haemosporidians.

DOI: 10.14411/fp.2016.023 
PMID: 27507297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

