
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Aug 24;6:31965. doi: 10.1038/srep31965.

H3.3 demarcates GC-rich coding and subtelomeric regions and serves as potential
memory mark for virulence gene expression in Plasmodium falciparum.

Fraschka SA(1), Henderson RW(1), BÃ¡rtfai R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Radboud University, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands.

Histones, by packaging and organizing the DNA into chromatin, serve as essential 
building blocks for eukaryotic life. The basic structure of the chromatin is
established by four canonical histones (H2A, H2B, H3 and H4), while histone
variants are more commonly utilized to alter the properties of specific chromatin
domains. H3.3, a variant of histone H3, was found to have diverse localization
patterns and functions across species but has been rather poorly studied in
protists. Here we present the first genome-wide analysis of H3.3 in the
malaria-causing, apicomplexan parasite, P. falciparum, which revealed a complex
occupancy profile consisting of conserved and parasite-specific features. In
contrast to other histone variants, PfH3.3 primarily demarcates euchromatic
coding and subtelomeric repetitive sequences. Stable occupancy of PfH3.3 in these
regions is largely uncoupled from the transcriptional activity and appears to be 
primarily dependent on the GC-content of the underlying DNA. Importantly, PfH3.3 
specifically marks the promoter region of an active and poised, but not inactive 
antigenic variation (var) gene, thereby potentially contributing to immune
evasion. Collectively, our data suggest that PfH3.3, together with other histone 
variants, indexes the P. falciparum genome to functionally distinct domains and
contribute to a key survival strategy of this deadly pathogen.

DOI: 10.1038/srep31965 
PMCID: PMC4995406
PMID: 27555062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

