
1. PLoS One. 2016 Aug 29;11(8):e0161869. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0161869.
eCollection 2016.

Monitoring the Prevalence of Leucocytozoon sabrazesi in Southern China and
Testing Tricyclic Compounds against Gametocytes.

Zhao W(1), Pang Q(1), Xu R(1), Liu J(1), Liu S(1), Li J(1), Su XZ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Signaling Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian
361005, P. R. China.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland
20892, United States of America.

Leucocytozoon parasites infect many species of avian hosts, including domestic
chicken, and can inflict heavy economic loss on the poultry industry. Two major
species of Leucocytozoon parasites have been reported in China, L. sabrazesi and 
L. caulleryi, although L. sabrazesi appears to be more widespread than L.
caulleryi in southern China. The traditional method for detecting Leucocytozoon
infection is microscopic examination of blood smears for the presence of mature
gametocytes in circulation, which may miss infections with low parasitemia
(gametocytemia) or immature gametocytes. Here we developed a PCR-based method to 
monitor L. sabrazesi infections at seven sites in four provinces of China after
testing two PCR primer pairs based on parasite mitochondrial cytochrome b (cytb) 
and cytochrome c oxidase III (coxIII) genes. We compared the results of PCR
detection with those of microscopic observation. As expected, the PCR assays were
more sensitive than microscope examination in detecting L. sabrazesi infection
and were able to detect parasite DNA after gametocytes disappeared in the blood
stream. Using these methods, we investigated monthly dynamics of L. sabrazesi in 
chickens from a free-range farm in Xiamen, Fujian province of China, over one
year. Our results showed that chickens were infected with L. sabrazesi year-round
in southern China. Finally, we tested several compounds for potential treatment
of Leucocytozoon infections, including primaquine, ketotifen, clomipramine
hydrochloride, desipramine hydrochloride, sulfaquinoxaline, and pyrimethamine.
Only primaquine had activity against L. sabrazesi gametocytes. Our results
provide important information for controlling parasite transmission in southern
China and disease management.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0161869 
PMCID: PMC5003344
PMID: 27571513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

