
1. PLoS One. 2016 Sep 16;11(9):e0163137. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163137.
eCollection 2016.

Genetic Characterisation of Plasmodium falciparum Isolates with Deletion of the
pfhrp2 and/or pfhrp3 Genes in Colombia: The Amazon Region, a Challenge for
Malaria Diagnosis and Control.

Dorado EJ(1), Okoth SA(2)(3), Montenegro LM(1), Diaz G(1), Barnwell JW(2),
Udhayakumar V(2), Murillo Solano C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Research Group, Centro Internacional de Entrenamiento e
Investigaciones Medicas (CIDEIM), Cali, Valle, Colombia.
(2)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, Georgia,
United States of America.
(3)Atlanta Research and Education Foundation, Decatur, Georgia, United States of 
America.

Most Plasmodium falciparum-detecting rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) target
histidine-rich protein 2 (PfHRP2). However, P. falciparum isolates with deletion 
of the pfhrp2 gene and its homolog gene, pfhrp3, have been detected. We carried
out an extensive investigation on 365 P. falciparum dried blood samples collected
from seven P. falciparum endemic sites in Colombia between 2003 and 2012 to
genetically characterise and geographically map pfhrp2- and/or pfhrp3-negative P.
falciparum parasites in the country. We found a high proportion of
pfhrp2-negative parasites only in Amazonas (15/39; 38.5%), and these parasites
were also pfhrp3-negative. These parasites were collected between 2008 and 2009
in Amazonas, while pfhrp3-negative parasites (157/365, 43%) were found in all the
sites and from each of the sample collection years evaluated (2003 to 2012). We
also found that all pfhrp2- and/or pfhrp3-negative parasites were also negative
for one or both flanking genes. Six sub-population clusters were established with
93.3% (14/15) of the pfhrp2-negative parasites grouped in the same cluster and
sharing the same haplotype. This haplotype corresponded with the genetic lineage 
BV1, a multidrug resistant strain that caused two outbreaks reported in Peru
between 2010 and 2013. We found this BV1 lineage in the Colombian Amazon as early
as 2006. Two new clonal lineages were identified in these parasites from
Colombia: the genetic lineages EV1 and F. PfHRP2 sequence analysis revealed high 
genetic diversity at the amino acid level, with 17 unique sequences identified
among 53 PfHRP2 sequences analysed. The use of PfHRP2-based RDTs is not
recommended in Amazonas because of the high proportion of parasites with pfhrp2
deletion (38.5%), and implementation of new strategies for malaria diagnosis and 
control in Amazonas must be prioritised. Moreover, studies to monitor and
genetically characterise pfhrp2-negative P. falciparum parasites in the Americas 
are warranted, given the extensive human migration occurring in the region.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163137 
PMCID: PMC5026348
PMID: 27636709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

