
1. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2016;136(11):1533-1539.

Development of a Multi-functional Nano-device for Safe and Effective Gene
Delivery to Target Organs.

[Article in Japanese]

Kodama Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Nagasaki University.

Nucleic acids are expected as novel effective medicines, although they require a 
drug delivery system (DDS). Complexes of nucleic acids with cationic liposomes
and cationic polymers have been mainly used as DDS for clinical use. However,
most cationic complexes have disadvantages such as strong cytotoxicity and low
biocompatibility. We previously found that a plasmid DNA (pDNA) complex coated
with biodegradable γ-polyglutamic acid (γ-PGA) provided adequate gene expression 
without cytotoxicity. Based on these results, we developed a new DDS
(multi-functional Nano-device) of pDNA using biodegradable polyamino acids. A
typical cationic polyamino acid, poly-L-lysine (PLL), was complexed with pDNA.
The binary complexes, however, showed low gene expression and high cytotoxicity. 
Gene expression was enhanced by addition of poly-L-histidine (PLH) to the binary 
complexes. PLH can increase endosome escape of the complexes by inducing
pH-buffering effects. The quaternary complexes (pDNA-PLL-PLH-γ-PGA complexes)
exhibited high gene expression and low cytotoxicity. Furthermore, we used
dendrigraft poly-L-lysine (DGL) instead of PLL and PLH to enhance gene
expression. DGL had sterically congested cations and was biodegradable. The
ternary complexes (pDNA-DGL-γ-PGA complexes) exhibited markedly high gene
expression and low cytotoxicity. The pDNA-DGL-γ-PGA complexes also had high gene 
expression in the marginal zone (rich dendritic cells) of the spleen after
intravenous injection into mice. These results indicate that pDNA-DGL-γ-PGA
complexes may be useful as vaccine vectors. Therefore we prepared a novel malaria
DNA vaccine using Plasmodium yoelii GPI8p-transamidase-related protein pDNA
(PyTAM). The PyTAM-DGL-γ-PGA complexes markedly improved survival time of model
mice infected with malaria.

DOI: 10.1248/yakushi.16-00198 
PMID: 27803485  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

