
1. Genom Data. 2016 Nov 6;10:144-150. eCollection 2016 Dec.

Evidence of triple mutant Pfdhps ISGNGA haplotype in Plasmodium falciparum
isolates from North-east India: An analysis of sulfadoxine resistant haplotype
selection.

Das MK(1), Chetry S(2), Kalita MC(3), Dutta P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering & Technology, Gauhati University Institute of
Science and Technology (GUIST), Gauhati University, Gopinath Bordoloi Nagar,
Assam 786014, India.
(2)Division of Entomology and Filariasis, Regional Medical Research Centre
(RMRC), North East Region (ICMR), Post Box No.-105, Dibrugarh, Assam 786001,
India.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Gauhati University, Gopinath Bordoloi Nagar,
Assam 786014, India.

BACKGROUND: North-east region of India has consistent role in the spread of multi
drug resistant Plasmodium (P.) falciparum to other parts of Southeast Asia. After
rapid clinical treatment failure of Artemisinin based combination
therapy-Sulphadoxine/Pyrimethamine (ACT-SP) chemoprophylaxis,
Artemether-Lumefantrine (ACT-AL) combination therapy was introduced in the year
2012 in this region for the treatment of uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria. In 
a DNA sequencing based polymorphism analysis, seven codons of P. falciparum
dihydropteroate synthetase (Pfdhps) gene were screened in a total of 127 P.
falciparum isolates collected from Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and Tripura of
North-east India during the year 2014 and 2015 to document current sulfadoxine
resistant haplotypes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sequences were analyzed to rearrange both nucleotide and
protein haplotypes. Molecular diversity indices were analyzed in DNA Sequence
Polymorphism software (DnaSP) on the basis of Pfdhps gene sequences.
Disappearance from selective neutrality was assessed based on the ratio of
non-synonomous to synonomous nucleotide substitutions [dN/dS ratio]. Moreover,
two-tailed Z test was performed in search of the significance for probability of 
rejecting null hypothesis of strict neutrality [dN = dS]. Presence of mutant P.
falciparum multidrug resistance protein1 (Pfmdr1) was also checked in those
isolates that were present with new Pfdhps haplotypes. Phylogenetic relationship 
based on Pfdhps gene was reconstructed in Molecular Evolutionary Genetics
Analysis (MEGA).
RESULTS: Among eight different sulfadoxine resistant haplotypes found, IS GNG A
haplotype was documented in a total of five isolates from Tripura with
association of a new mutant M538 R allele. Sequence analysis of Pfmdr1 gene in
these five isolates came to notice that not all but only one isolate was mutant
at codon 86 (N86 Y ; Y YSND) in the multidrug resistance protein. Molecular
diversity based on Pfdhps haplotypes revealed that P. falciparum populations in
Assam and Tripura were under balancing selection for sulfadoxine resistant
haplotypes but population from Arunachal Pradesh was under positive selection
with comparatively high haplotype diversity (h = 0.870). In reconstructed
phylogenetic analysis, isolates having IS GNG A haplotype were grouped into two
separate sub-clusters from the other isolates based on their genetic distances
and diversities.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that sulfadoxine resistant isolates are still
migrating from its epicenter to the other parts of Southeast Asia and hence
control and elimination of the drug resistant isolates have become impedimental. 
Moreover, P. falciparum populations in different areas may undergo selection of
particular sulfadoxine resistant haplotypes either in the presence of drug or
after its removal to maintain their plasticity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gdata.2016.11.001 
PMCID: PMC5109277
PMID: 27872816 

