
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2017 Jan 24;61(2). pii: e01689-16. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01689-16. Print 2017 Feb.

Significant Divergence in Sensitivity to Antimalarial Drugs between Neighboring
Plasmodium falciparum Populations along the Eastern Border of Myanmar.

Zeng W(1), Bai Y(1), Wang M(2)(3), Wang Z(2), Deng S(4), Ruan Y(4), Feng S(1),
Yang Z(1), Cui L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, Yunnan Province, China.
(2)Department of Entomology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, College of Basic Medical
Sciences, China Medical University, Shenyang, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Kunming Medical University, Kunming, Yunnan Province,
China.
(5)Department of Entomology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
Pennsylvania, USA luc2@psu.edu.

Malaria parasites in different areas where malaria is endemic display different
levels of resistance to antimalarial drugs as the result of varied drug use
histories. To provide updated knowledge of drug sensitivities during the malaria 
elimination phase in Southeast Asia, an epicenter of multidrug resistance, we
determined in vitro susceptibilities of culture-adapted Plasmodium falciparum
isolates from two eastern border regions (Wa and Kachin) of Myanmar to 10 drugs. 
Despite their close proximity, the Kachin parasites displayed higher 50%
inhibitory concentrations than the Wa parasites to chloroquine, piperaquine,
naphthoquine, mefloquine, quinine, pyrimethamine, pyronaridine, lumefantrine, and
dihydroartemisinin. Genotyping of genes associated with drug resistance also
showed significant differences in the prevalence rates of mutant alleles between 
the two regions. Particularly, major pfdhfr mutations mediating pyrimethamine
resistance and the pfdhps A437G mutation had significantly higher frequencies in 
the Kachin parasites (P < 0.005). Moreover, when pfdhfr and pfdhps were
considered together, the wild-type allele was found only in the Wa samples
(22.6%). In addition, the pfmdr1 Y184F mutation reached 38.7% in the Kachin
parasites, compared to 9.7% in the Wa parasites, whereas N86Y was only detected
in the Wa parasites, at 22.6%. Furthermore, the F446I mutation and all mutations 
in the propeller domain of the PfK13 gene were significantly more frequent in the
Kachin parasites. Collectively, this work demonstrates that even in spatially
closely separated regions, parasites can exhibit drastic differences in drug
sensitivities and genetic makeups underlying drug resistance, which may reflect
regionally different drug histories and genetic drift of these isolated parasite 
populations.

Copyright Â© 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01689-16 
PMCID: PMC5278693
PMID: 27919892  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

