
1. PLoS Biol. 2016 Dec 5;14(12):e2000618. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2000618.
eCollection 2016 Dec.

The ace-1 Locus Is Amplified in All Resistant Anopheles gambiae Mosquitoes:
Fitness Consequences of Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Duplications.

Assogba BS(1)(2)(3), Milesi P(1), Djogbénou LS(2), Berthomieu A(1), Makoundou
P(1), Baba-Moussa LS(3), Fiston-Lavier AS(1), Belkhir K(1), Labbé P(1), Weill
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution de Montpellier (UMR 5554,
CNRS-UM-IRD-EPHE), Université de Montpellier, Place Eugène Bataillon,
Montpellier, France.
(2)Institut Régional de Santé Publique, Université d'Abomey Calavi, Cotonou,
Benin.
(3)Faculté des Sciences et Techniques, Laboratoire de Biologie et de Typage
Moléculaire en Microbiologie, Université d'Abomey Calavi, Cotonou, Bénin.

Gene copy-number variations are widespread in natural populations, but
investigating their phenotypic consequences requires contemporary duplications
under selection. Such duplications have been found at the ace-1 locus (encoding
the organophosphate and carbamate insecticides' target) in the mosquito Anopheles
gambiae (the major malaria vector); recent studies have revealed their intriguing
complexity, consistent with the involvement of various numbers and types
(susceptible or resistant to insecticide) of copies. We used an integrative
approach, from genome to phenotype level, to investigate the influence of
duplication architecture and gene-dosage on mosquito fitness. We found that both 
heterogeneous (i.e., one susceptible and one resistant ace-1 copy) and
homogeneous (i.e., identical resistant copies) duplications segregated in field
populations. The number of copies in homogeneous duplications was variable and
positively correlated with acetylcholinesterase activity and resistance level.
Determining the genomic structure of the duplicated region revealed that, in both
types of duplication, ace-1 and 11 other genes formed tandem 203kb amplicons. We 
developed a diagnostic test for duplications, which showed that ace-1 was
amplified in all 173 resistant mosquitoes analyzed (field-collected in several
African countries), in heterogeneous or homogeneous duplications. Each type was
associated with different fitness trade-offs: heterogeneous duplications
conferred an intermediate phenotype (lower resistance and fitness costs), whereas
homogeneous duplications tended to increase both resistance and fitness cost, in 
a complex manner. The type of duplication selected seemed thus to depend on the
intensity and distribution of selection pressures. This versatility of trade-offs
available through gene duplication highlights the importance of large mutation
events in adaptation to environmental variation. This impressive adaptability
could have a major impact on vector control in Africa.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2000618 
PMCID: PMC5137868
PMID: 27918584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

