
1. Parasit Vectors. 2016 Dec 7;9(1):633.

Insecticide resistance in malaria vectors in Kumasi, Ghana.

Baffour-Awuah S(1)(2), Annan AA(3)(4), Maiga-Ascofare O(3)(5), Dieudonné SD(6),
Adjei-Kusi P(3), Owusu-Dabo E(3)(7), Obiri-Danso K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Kumasi Centre for Collaborative Research (KCCR), College of Health Sciences,
Kumasi, Ghana. mamiboatemah@yahoo.co.uk.
(2)Department of Theoretical and Applied Biology, College of Science, Kwame
Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST), Kumasi, Ghana.
mamiboatemah@yahoo.co.uk.
(3)Kumasi Centre for Collaborative Research (KCCR), College of Health Sciences,
Kumasi, Ghana.
(4)Department of Theoretical and Applied Biology, College of Science, Kwame
Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST), Kumasi, Ghana.
(5)Bernhard-Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine (BNITM), Hamburg, Germany.
(6)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé (IRSS), Ouagadougou, Burkina
Faso.
(7)School of Public Health, College of Health Sciences, KNUST, Kumasi, Ghana.

BACKGROUND: There have been recent reports of surge in resistance to insecticides
in pocketed areas in Ghana necessitating the need for information about local
vector populations and their resistance to the insecticides approved by the World
Health Organization (WHO). We therefore studied a population of malaria vectors
from Kumasi in the Ashanti Region of Ghana and their resistance to currently used
insecticides. We conducted susceptibility tests to the four major classes of
insecticides by collecting larvae of anopheline mosquitoes from several
communities in the region. Surviving adults from these larvae were then subjected
to the WHO-approved susceptibility tests and characterization of knockdown
resistance and acetylcholinesterase mutant genes.
RESULTS: Out of 619 Anopheles specimens sampled, 537 (87%) were identified as
Anopheles gambiae (sensu stricto), which was also the species with the lowest
knockdown resistance mutant gene, 61% (P = 0.017). Knockdown resistance mutant
gene was as high as 91% in An. coluzzii. Mosquitoes collected showed
susceptibility ranging from 98-100% to organophosphates, 38-56% to carbamates and
15-47% and 38-46% to pyrethroids and organochlorides, respectively. The knockdown
resistance mutation frequency of Anopheles gambiae (sensu lato) mosquitoes that
were exposed to both pyrethroids and organochlorides was 404 (65%).
Acetylcholinesterase mutant gene was not found in this population of vectors.
CONCLUSION: Our study shows that pyrethroids have the highest level of resistance
in the population of mosquito vectors studied probably due to their frequent use,
especially in impregnation of insecticide-treated nets and in insecticides used
to control pests on irrigated vegetable farms. We recommend studies to monitor
trends in the use of all insecticides and of pyrethroids in particular.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-016-1923-5 
PMCID: PMC5142350
PMID: 27927238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

