
1. Lupus Sci Med. 2016 Nov 14;3(1):e000145. eCollection 2016.

CR1 exon variants are associated with lowered CR1 expression and increased
susceptibility to SLE in a Plasmodium falciparum endemic population.

Panda AK(1), Ravindran B(2), Das BK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Biology Group, Institute of Life Sciences, Bhubaneswar,
Odisha, India; Centre for Life Sciences, Central University of Jharkhand, Brambe,
Ranchi, India.
(2)Infectious Disease Biology Group , Institute of Life Sciences , Bhubaneswar,
Odisha , India.
(3)Infectious Disease Biology Group, Institute of Life Sciences, Bhubaneswar,
Odisha, India; Department of Medicine, S.C.B. Medical College, Cuttack, Odisha,
India.

BACKGROUND: Complement receptor 1 (CR1) plays an important role in immune complex
clearance by opsonisation and possibly protects subjects from development of
autoantibodies. Lower CR1 expression has been associated with susceptibility to
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In contrast, subjects displaying lower CR1
expression are protected against severe manifestations of falciparum malaria.
This study is the first of its kind to investigate the association of CR1
variants with development of SLE in a P. falciparum endemic population from
Odisha, India.
METHODS: CR1 polymorphisms (intron 27 (A>T), exon 22 (A>G) and exon 33 (G>C))
were typed by PCR and restriction length polymorphism in 297 cases of female
patients with SLE and 300 age-matched and sex-matched healthy controls from
malaria endemic areas in Odisha, India. CR1 expression on monocytes was
quantified by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: The homozygous mutants of CR1 exon 22 (GG) and exon 33 (GG) and their
minor alleles were associated with susceptibility to SLE. Furthermore, patients
with SLE who harboured the GG genotype of the exon 33 polymorphism had a
3.12-fold higher chance of developing lupus nephritis. CR1 exon (22 and 33)
variants were associated with lowered CR1 expression on monocytes in patients
with SLE and in healthy controls. Patients with lupus nephritis showed
significantly diminished CR1 expression than those without renal involvement
(p=0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present study demonstrate that common CR1 exon
variants are associated with diminished CR1 expression on monocytes and increased
susceptibility to development of SLE and lupus nephritis in a malaria endemic
area.

DOI: 10.1136/lupus-2016-000145 
PMCID: PMC5133404
PMID: 27933195 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.

