
1. PLoS One. 2016 Dec 20;11(12):e0168362. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0168362.
eCollection 2016.

Rapid Generation of Marker-Free P. falciparum Fluorescent Reporter Lines Using
Modified CRISPR/Cas9 Constructs and Selection Protocol.

Mogollon CM(1), van Pul FJ(1), Imai T(1), Ramesar J(1), Chevalley-Maurel S(1), de
Roo GM(2), Veld SA(2), Kroeze H(1), Franke-Fayard BM(1), Janse CJ(1), Khan SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leiden Malaria Research Group, Department of Parasitology, Leiden University
Medical Center (LUMC), Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Hematology, Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC), Leiden, The
Netherlands.

The CRISPR/Cas9 system is a powerful genome editing technique employed in a wide 
variety of organisms including recently the human malaria parasite, P.
falciparum. Here we report on further improvements to the CRISPR/Cas9
transfection constructs and selection protocol to more rapidly modify the P.
falciparum genome and to introduce transgenes into the parasite genome without
the inclusion of drug-selectable marker genes. This method was used to stably
integrate the gene encoding GFP into the P. falciparum genome under the control
of promoters of three different Plasmodium genes (calmodulin, gapdh and hsp70).
These genes were selected as they are highly transcribed in blood stages. We show
that the three reporter parasite lines generated in this study (GFP@cam,
GFP@gapdh and GFP@hsp70) have in vitro blood stage growth kinetics and
drug-sensitivity profiles comparable to the parental P. falciparum (NF54)
wild-type line. Both asexual and sexual blood stages of the three reporter lines 
expressed GFP-fluorescence with GFP@hsp70 having the highest fluorescent
intensity in schizont stages as shown by flow cytometry analysis of
GFP-fluorescence intensity. The improved CRISPR/Cas9 constructs/protocol will aid
in the rapid generation of transgenic and modified P. falciparum parasites,
including those expressing different reporters proteins under different (stage
specific) promoters.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0168362 
PMCID: PMC5172577
PMID: 27997583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

