
1. PLoS One. 2016 Dec 19;11(12):e0168279. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0168279.
eCollection 2016.

Molecular Analysis of Pfs47-Mediated Plasmodium Evasion of Mosquito Immunity.

Canepa GE(1), Molina-Cruz A(1), Barillas-Mury C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, Maryland, United
States of America.

Malaria is a life-threatening disease caused by Plasmodium falciparum parasites
that is transmitted through the bites of infected anopheline mosquitoes. P.
falciparum dispersal from Africa, as a result of human migration, required
adaptation of the parasite to several different indigenous anopheline species.
The mosquito immune system can greatly limit infection and P. falciparum evolved 
a strategy to evade these responses that is mediated by the Pfs47 gene. Pfs47 is 
a polymorphic gene with signatures of diversifying selection and a strong
geographic genetic structure at a continental level. Here, we investigated the
role of single four amino acid differences between the Pfs47 gene from African
(GB4 and NF54) and a New World (7G8) strains that differ drastically in their
ability to evade the immune system of A. gambiae L35 refractory mosquitoes. Wild 
type NF54 and GB4 parasites can survive in this mosquito strain, while 7G8
parasites are eliminated. Our studies indicate that replacement in any of these
four single amino acids in Pfs47 from the NF54 strain by those present in 7G8,
completely disrupts the ability of NF54 parasites to hide from the mosquito
immune system. One of these amino acid replacements had the opposite effect on A.
albimanus mosquitoes, and enhanced infection. We conclude that malaria
transmission involves a complex interplay between the genetic background of the
parasite and the mosquito and that Pfs47 can be critical in this interaction as
it mediates Plasmodium immune evasion through molecular interactions that need to
be precise in some parasite/vector combinations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0168279 
PMCID: PMC5167319
PMID: 27992481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

