
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 9;7:40407. doi: 10.1038/srep40407.

A Novel and Conserved Plasmodium Sporozoite Membrane Protein SPELD is Required
for Maturation of Exo-erythrocytic Forms.

Al-Nihmi FM(1), Kolli SK(1), Reddy SR(1), Mastan BS(1), Togiri J(1), Maruthi
M(1), Gupta R(2), Sijwali PS(3), Mishra S(2), Kumar KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of
Hyderabad, Hyderabad 500046, India.
(2)Division of Parasitology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow
226031, India.
(3)CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Habsiguda, Uppal Road,
Hyderabad 500007, India.

Plasmodium sporozoites are the infective forms of malaria parasite to vertebrate 
host and undergo dramatic changes in their transcriptional repertoire during
maturation in mosquito salivary glands. We report here the role of a novel and
conserved Plasmodium berghei protein encoded by PBANKA_091090 in maturation of
Exo-erythrocytic Forms (EEFs) and designate it as Sporozoite surface Protein
Essential for Liver stage Development (PbSPELD). PBANKA_091090 was previously
annotated as PB402615.00.0 and its transcript was recovered at maximal frequency 
in the Serial Analysis of the Gene Expression (SAGE) of Plasmodium berghei
salivary gland sporozoites. An orthologue of this transcript was independently
identified in Plasmodium vivax sporozoite microarrays and was designated as
Sporozoite Conserved Orthologous Transcript-2 (scot-2). Functional
characterization through reverse genetics revealed that PbSPELD is essential for 
Plasmodium liver stage maturation. mCherry transgenic of PbSPELD localized the
protein to plasma membrane of sporozoites and early EEFs. Global microarray
analysis of pbspeld ko revealed EEF attenuation being associated with down
regulation of genes central to general transcription, cell cycle, proteosome and 
cadherin signaling. pbspeld mutant EEFs induced pre-erythrocytic immunity with
50% protective efficacy. Our studies have implications for attenuating the human 
Plasmodium liver stages by targeting SPELD locus.

DOI: 10.1038/srep40407 
PMCID: PMC5220379
PMID: 28067322  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

