
1. BMC Genomics. 2017 Jan 19;18(1):100. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-3504-1.

Parasite infection of public databases: a data mining approach to identify
apicomplexan contaminations in animal genome and transcriptome assemblies.

Borner J(1), Burmester T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Biocenter Grindel, University of Hamburg,
Martin-Luther-King-Platz 3, D-20146, Hamburg, Germany.
janus.borner@uni-hamburg.de.
(2)Institute of Zoology, Biocenter Grindel, University of Hamburg,
Martin-Luther-King-Platz 3, D-20146, Hamburg, Germany.
thorsten.burmester@uni-hamburg.de.

BACKGROUND: Contaminations from various exogenous sources are a common problem in
next-generation sequencing. Another possible source of contaminating DNA are
endogenous parasites. On the one hand, undiscovered contaminations of animal
sequence assemblies may lead to erroneous interpretation of data; on the other
hand, when identified, parasite-derived sequences may provide a valuable source
of information.
RESULTS: Here we show that sequences deriving from apicomplexan parasites can be 
found in many animal genome and transcriptome projects, which in most cases
derived from an infection of the sequenced host specimen. The apicomplexan
sequences were extracted from the sequence assemblies using a newly developed
bioinformatic pipeline (ContamFinder) and tentatively assigned to distinct taxa
employing phylogenetic methods. We analysed 920 assemblies and found 20,907
contigs of apicomplexan origin in 51 of the datasets. The contaminating species
were identified as members of the apicomplexan taxa Gregarinasina, Coccidia,
Piroplasmida, and Haemosporida. For example, in the platypus genome assembly, we 
found a high number of contigs derived from a piroplasmid parasite (presumably
Theileria ornithorhynchi). For most of the infecting parasite species, no
molecular data had been available previously, and some of the datasets contain
sequences representing large amounts of the parasite's gene repertoire.
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that parasite-derived contaminations represent a
valuable source of information that can help to discover and identify new
parasites, and provide information on previously unknown host-parasite
interactions. We, therefore, argue that uncurated assembly data should routinely 
be made available in addition to the final assemblies.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-017-3504-1 
PMCID: PMC5244568
PMID: 28103801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

