
1. PLoS Genet. 2017 Feb 2;13(2):e1006539. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006539.
eCollection 2017 Feb.

Genomic Footprints of Selective Sweeps from Metabolic Resistance to Pyrethroids
in African Malaria Vectors Are Driven by Scale up of Insecticide-Based Vector
Control.

Barnes KG(1)(2)(3), Weedall GD(1), Ndula M(1), Irving H(1), Mzihalowa T(4),
Hemingway J(1), Wondji CS(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool,
United Kingdom.
(2)FAS Center for Systems Biology, Department of Organismic and Evolutionary
Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(4)Malaria Alert Centre, College of Medicine, University of Malawi, Blantyre,
Malawi.
(5)Organisation de Coordination pour la lutte contre les Endémies en Afrique
Centrale, Yaoundé, Cameroon.

Insecticide resistance in mosquito populations threatens recent successes in
malaria prevention. Elucidating patterns of genetic structure in malaria vectors 
to predict the speed and direction of the spread of resistance is essential to
get ahead of the 'resistance curve' and to avert a public health catastrophe.
Here, applying a combination of microsatellite analysis, whole genome sequencing 
and targeted sequencing of a resistance locus, we elucidated the continent-wide
population structure of a major African malaria vector, Anopheles funestus. We
identified a major selective sweep in a genomic region controlling cytochrome
P450-based metabolic resistance conferring high resistance to pyrethroids. This
selective sweep occurred since 2002, likely as a direct consequence of scaled up 
vector control as revealed by whole genome and fine-scale sequencing of pre- and 
post-intervention populations. Fine-scaled analysis of the pyrethroid resistance 
locus revealed that a resistance-associated allele of the cytochrome P450
monooxygenase CYP6P9a has swept through southern Africa to near fixation, in
contrast to high polymorphism levels before interventions, conferring high levels
of pyrethroid resistance linked to control failure. Population structure analysis
revealed a barrier to gene flow between southern Africa and other areas, which
may prevent or slow the spread of the southern mechanism of pyrethroid resistance
to other regions. By identifying a genetic signature of pyrethroid-based
interventions, we have demonstrated the intense selective pressure that control
interventions exert on mosquito populations. If this level of selection and
spread of resistance continues unabated, our ability to control malaria with
current interventions will be compromised.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006539 
PMCID: PMC5289422
PMID: 28151952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

