
1. BMC Genomics. 2017 Feb 13;18(1):153. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-3579-8.

Anopheline salivary protein genes and gene families: an evolutionary overview
after the whole genome sequence of sixteen Anopheles species.

Arcà B(1), Lombardo F(2), Struchiner CJ(3)(4), Ribeiro JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases - Division of
Parasitology, Sapienza University, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy.
bruno.arca@uniroma1.it.
(2)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases - Division of
Parasitology, Sapienza University, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy.
(3)Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Avenida Brasil, 4365, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Instituto de Medicina Social, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
(5)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, 12735 Twinbrook Parkway, Rockville, MD, 20852, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mosquito saliva is a complex cocktail whose pharmacological
properties play an essential role in blood feeding by counteracting host
physiological response to tissue injury. Moreover, vector borne pathogens are
transmitted to vertebrates and exposed to their immune system in the context of
mosquito saliva which, in virtue of its immunomodulatory properties, can modify
the local environment at the feeding site and eventually affect pathogen
transmission. In addition, the host antibody response to salivary proteins may be
used to assess human exposure to mosquito vectors. Even though the role of quite 
a few mosquito salivary proteins has been clarified in the last decade, we still 
completely ignore the physiological role of many of them as well as the extent of
their involvement in the complex interactions taking place between the mosquito
vectors, the pathogens they transmit and the vertebrate host. The recent release 
of the genomes of 16 Anopheles species offered the opportunity to get insights
into function and evolution of salivary protein families in anopheline
mosquitoes.
RESULTS: Orthologues of fifty three Anopheles gambiae salivary proteins were
retrieved and annotated from 18 additional anopheline species belonging to the
three subgenera Cellia, Anopheles, and Nyssorhynchus. Our analysis included 824
full-length salivary proteins from 24 different families and allowed the
identification of 79 novel salivary genes and re-annotation of 379 wrong
predictions. The comparative, structural and phylogenetic analyses yielded an
unprecedented view of the anopheline salivary repertoires and of their evolution 
over 100 million years of anopheline radiation shedding light on mechanisms and
evolutionary forces that contributed shaping the anopheline sialomes.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide here a comprehensive description, classification and
evolutionary overview of the main anopheline salivary protein families and
identify two novel candidate markers of human exposure to malaria vectors
worldwide. This anopheline sialome catalogue, which is easily accessible as
hyperlinked spreadsheet, is expected to be useful to the vector biology community
and to improve the capacity to gain a deeper understanding of mosquito salivary
proteins facilitating their possible exploitation for epidemiological and/or
pathogen-vector-host interaction studies.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-017-3579-8 
PMCID: PMC5307786
PMID: 28193177  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

