
1. Redox Biol. 2017 Aug;12:625-633. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2017.04.003. Epub 2017 Apr 
4.

Artemisinin protects PC12 cells against β-amyloid-induced apoptosis through
activation of the ERK1/2 signaling pathway.

Zeng Z(1), Xu J(1), Zheng W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Taipa, Macau, China.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Taipa, Macau, China.
Electronic address: wenhuazheng@umac.mo.

Accumulating evidence displays that an abnormal deposition of amyloid
beta-peptide (Aβ) is the primary cause of the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease
(AD). And therefore the elimination of Aβ is regarded as an important strategy
for AD treatment. The discovery of drug candidates using culture neuronal cells
against Aβ peptide toxicity is believed to be an effective approach to develop
drug for the treatment of AD patients. We have previously showed that
artemisinin, a FDA-approved anti-malaria drug, has neuroprotective effects
recently. In the present study, we aimed to investigate the effects and potential
mechanism of artemisinin in protecting neuronal PC12 cells from toxicity of β
amyloid peptide. Our studies revealed that artemisinin, in clinical relevant
concentration, protected and rescued PC12 cells from Aβ25-35-induced cell death. 
Further study showed that artemisinin significantly ameliorated cell death due to
Aβ25-35 insult by restoring abnormal changes in nuclear morphology, lactate
dehydrogenase, intracellular ROS, mitochondrial membrane potential and activity
of apoptotic caspase. Western blotting analysis demonstrated that artemisinin
activated extracellular regulated kinase ERK1/2 but not Akt survival signaling.
Consistent with the role of ERK1/2, preincubation of cells with ERK1/2 pathway
inhibitor PD98059 blocked the effect of artemisinin while PI3K inhibitor LY294002
has no effect. Moreover, Aβ1-42 also caused cells death of PC12 cells while
artemisinin suppressed Aβ1-42 cytotoxicity in PC12 cells. Taken together, these
results, at the first time, suggest that artemisinin is a potential protectant
against β amyloid insult through activation of the ERK1/2 pathway. Our finding
provides a potential application of artemisinin in prevention and treatment of
AD.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2017.04.003 
PMCID: PMC5385605
PMID: 28391183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

