
1. Front Physiol. 2017 Apr 7;8:185. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00185. eCollection 2017.

Apolipophorin-III Acts as a Positive Regulator of Plasmodium Development in
Anopheles stephensi.

Dhawan R(1), Gupta K(1), Kajla M(1), Kakani P(1), Choudhury TP(1), Kumar S(1)(2),
Kumar V(1), Gupta L(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Parasitology and Vector Biology Laboratory, Department of Biological
Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and SciencePilani, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Chaudhary Bansi Lal UniversityBhiwani, India.
(3)Department of Zoology, Chaudhary Bansi Lal UniversityBhiwani, India.

Apolipophorin III (ApoLp-III) is a well-known hemolymph protein having a
functional role in lipid transport and immune responses of insects. Here we
report the molecular and functional characterization of Anopheles stephensi
Apolipophorin-III (AsApoLp-III) gene. This gene consists of 679 nucleotides
arranged into two exons of 45 and 540 bp that give an ORF encoding 194 amino acid
residues. Excluding a putative signal peptide of the first 19 amino acid
residues, the 175-residues in mature AsApoLp-III protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 22 kDa. Phylogenetic analysis revealed the divergence of
mosquitoes (Order Diptera) ApoLp-III from their counterparts in moths (Order:
Lepidoptera). Also, it revealed a close relatedness of AsApoLp-III to ApoLp-III
of An. gambiae. AsApoLp-III mRNA expression is strongly induced in Plasmodium
berghei infected mosquito midguts suggesting its crucial role in parasite
development. AsApoLp-III silencing decreased P. berghei oocysts numbers by 7.7
fold against controls. These effects might be due to the interruption of
AsApoLp-III mediated lipid delivery to the developing oocysts. In addition,
nitric oxide synthase (NOS), an antiplasmodial gene, is also highly induced in
AsApoLp-III silenced midguts suggesting that this gene acts like an agonist and
protects Plasmodium against the mosquito immunity.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00185 
PMCID: PMC5383653
PMID: 28439240 

