
1. Cell Microbiol. 2017 Oct;19(10). doi: 10.1111/cmi.12754. Epub 2017 Jun 19.

LC3-association with the parasitophorous vacuole membrane of Plasmodium berghei
liver stages follows a noncanonical autophagy pathway.

Wacker R(1)(2), Eickel N(1)(2), Schmuckli-Maurer J(1), Annoura T(3), Niklaus
L(1)(2), Khan SM(4), Guan JL(5), Heussler VT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Graduate School for Cellular and Biomedical Sciences, University of Bern,
Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Parasitology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases (NIID), 
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Center of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Eukaryotic cells can employ autophagy to defend themselves against invading
pathogens. Upon infection by Plasmodium berghei sporozoites, the host hepatocyte 
targets the invader by labelling the parasitophorous vacuole membrane (PVM) with 
the autophagy marker protein LC3. Until now, it has not been clear whether LC3
recruitment to the PVM is mediated by fusion of autophagosomes or by direct
incorporation. To distinguish between these possibilities, we knocked out genes
that are essential for autophagosome formation and for direct LC3 incorporation
into membranes. The CRISPR/Cas9 system was employed to generate host cell lines
deficient for either FIP200, a member of the initiation complex for autophagosome
formation, or ATG5, responsible for LC3 lipidation and incorporation of LC3 into 
membranes. Infection of these knockout cell lines with P. berghei sporozoites
revealed that LC3 recruitment to the PVM indeed depends on functional ATG5 and
the elongation machinery, but not on FIP200 and the initiation complex,
suggesting a direct incorporation of LC3 into the PVM. Importantly, in
P. berghei-infected ATG5-/- host cells, lysosomes still accumulated at the PVM,
indicating that the recruitment of lysosomes follows an LC3-independent pathway.

© 2017 The Authors Cellular Microbiology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12754 
PMID: 28573684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

