
1. J Comput Biol. 2017 Aug;24(8):809-830. doi: 10.1089/cmb.2017.0022. Epub 2017 Jun 
21.

GeNICE: A Novel Framework for Gene Network Inference by Clustering, Exhaustive
Search, and Multivariate Analysis.

De Souza Jacomini R(1), Martins DC Jr(2), Da Silva FL(1), Costa AHR(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Escola Politécnica da Universidade de São Paulo , São Paulo, Brazil .
(2)2 Universidade Federal do ABC , Santo André, Brazil .

Gene network (GN) inference from temporal gene expression data is a crucial and
challenging problem in systems biology. Expression data sets usually consist of
dozens of temporal samples, while networks consist of thousands of genes, thus
rendering many inference methods unfeasible in practice. To improve the
scalability of GN inference methods, we propose a novel framework called GeNICE, 
based on probabilistic GNs; the main novelty is the introduction of a clustering 
procedure to group genes with related expression profiles and to provide an
approximate solution with reduced computational complexity. We use the defined
clusters to perform an exhaustive search to retrieve the best predictor gene
subsets for each target gene, according to multivariate criterion functions.
GeNICE greatly reduces the search space because predictor candidates are
restricted to one gene per cluster. Finally, a multivariate analysis is performed
for each defined predictor subset to retrieve minimal subsets and to simplify the
network. In our experiments with in silico generated data sets, GeNICE achieved
substantial computational time reduction when compared to solutions without the
clustering step, while preserving the gene expression prediction accuracy even
when the number of clusters is small (about 50) relative to the number of genes
(order of thousands). For a Plasmodium falciparum microarray data set, the
prediction accuracy achieved by GeNICE was roughly 97%, while the respective
topologies involving glycolytic and apicoplast seed genes had a very large
intramodularity, very small interconnection between modules, and some module hub 
genes, reflecting small-world and scale-free topological properties, as expected.

DOI: 10.1089/cmb.2017.0022 
PMID: 28636461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

