
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2017 Jun 1;9(6):1658-1672. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evx110.

Genetic Indicators of Drug Resistance in the Highly Repetitive Genome of
Trichomonas vaginalis.

Bradic M(1), Warring SD(1), Tooley GE(1), Scheid P(1), Secor WE(2), Land KM(3),
Huang PJ(4), Chen TW(4), Lee CC(4), Tang P(4), Sullivan SA(1), Carlton JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York
University, New York.
(2)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global Health, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GE.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, CA.
(4)Bioinformatics Center/Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Trichomonas vaginalis, the most common nonviral sexually transmitted parasite,
causes ∼283 million trichomoniasis infections annually and is associated with
pregnancy complications and increased risk of HIV-1 acquisition. The
antimicrobial drug metronidazole is used for treatment, but in a fraction of
clinical cases, the parasites can become resistant to this drug. We undertook
sequencing of multiple clinical isolates and lab derived lines to identify
genetic markers and mechanisms of metronidazole resistance. Reduced
representation genome sequencing of ∼100 T. vaginalis clinical isolates
identified 3,923 SNP markers and presence of a bipartite population structure.
Linkage disequilibrium was found to decay rapidly, suggesting genome-wide
recombination and the feasibility of genetic association studies in the parasite.
We identified 72 SNPs associated with metronidazole resistance, and a comparison 
of SNPs within several lab-derived resistant lines revealed an overlap with the
clinically resistant isolates. We identified SNPs in genes for which no function 
has yet been assigned, as well as in functionally-characterized genes relevant to
drug resistance (e.g., pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase). Transcription
profiles of resistant strains showed common changes in genes involved in drug
activation (e.g., flavin reductase), accumulation (e.g., multidrug resistance
pump), and detoxification (e.g., nitroreductase). Finally, we identified
convergent genetic changes in lab-derived resistant lines of Tritrichomonas
foetus, a distantly related species that causes venereal disease in cattle.
Shared genetic changes within and between T. vaginalis and Tr. foetus parasites
suggest conservation of the pathways through which adaptation has occurred. These
findings extend our knowledge of drug resistance in the parasite, providing a
panel of markers that can be used as a diagnostic tool.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evx110 
PMCID: PMC5522705
PMID: 28633446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

