
1. Nutrients. 2017 Jul 3;9(7). pii: E693. doi: 10.3390/nu9070693.

Prevalence of Inherited Hemoglobin Disorders and Relationships with Anemia and
Micronutrient Status among Children in Yaoundé and Douala, Cameroon.

Engle-Stone R(1), Williams TN(2), Nankap M(3), Ndjebayi A(4), Gimou MM(5), Oyono 
Y(6), Tarini A(7), Brown KH(8)(9), Green R(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
renglestone@ucdavis.edu.
(2)KEMRI/Wellcome Trust Research Programme, Kilifi, Kenya.
tom.williams@imperial.ac.uk.
(3)Helen Keller International, Cameroon, BP 14227 Yaoundé, Cameroon.
nankapm@gmail.com.
(4)Helen Keller International, Cameroon, BP 14227 Yaoundé, Cameroon.
andjebayi@hki.org.
(5)Centre Pasteur du Cameroun, BP 1274 Yaoundé, Cameroon. oyonoyannick@gmail.com.
(6)Centre Pasteur du Cameroun, BP 1274 Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(7)Helen Keller International, Cameroon, BP 14227 Yaoundé, Cameroon.
khbrown@ucdavis.edu.
(8)Department of Nutrition, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
khbrown@ucdavis.edu.
(9)Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA 98102, USA. khbrown@ucdavis.edu.
(10)Department of Medical Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UC Davis Medical
Center, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA. ralph.green@ucdmc.ucdavis.edu.

Information on the etiology of anemia is necessary to design effective anemia
control programs. Our objective was to measure the prevalence of inherited
hemoglobin disorders (IHD) in a representative sample of children in urban
Cameroon, and examine the relationships between IHD and anemia. In a cluster
survey of children 12-59 months of age (n = 291) in Yaoundé and Douala, we
assessed hemoglobin (Hb), malaria infection, and plasma indicators of
inflammation and micronutrient status. Hb S was detected by HPLC, and
α⁺thalassemia (3.7 kb deletions) by PCR. Anemia (Hb < 110 g/L), inflammation, and
malaria were present in 45%, 46%, and 8% of children. A total of 13.7% of
children had HbAS, 1.6% had HbSS, and 30.6% and 3.1% had heterozygous and
homozygous α⁺thalassemia. The prevalence of anemia was greater among HbAS
compared to HbAA children (60.3 vs. 42.0%, p = 0.038), although mean Hb
concentrations did not differ, p = 0.38). Hb and anemia prevalence did not differ
among children with or without single gene deletion α⁺thalassemia. In
multi-variable models, anemia was independently predicted by HbAS, HbSS, malaria,
iron deficiency (ID; inflammation-adjusted ferritin <12 µg/L), higher C-reactive 
protein, lower plasma folate, and younger age. Elevated soluble transferrin
receptor concentration (>8.3 mg/L) was associated with younger age, malaria,
greater mean reticulocyte counts, inflammation, HbSS genotype, and ID. IHD are
prevalent but contribute modestly to anemia among children in urban Cameroon.

DOI: 10.3390/nu9070693 
PMCID: PMC5537808
PMID: 28671630  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funding sponsors had no role in the design of the study; in the collection,
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the
decision to publish the results.

