
1. Int J Cancer. 2017 Nov 1;141(9):1849-1855. doi: 10.1002/ijc.30885. Epub 2017 Jul 
24.

Malaria, Epstein-Barr virus infection and the pathogenesis of Burkitt's lymphoma.

Mawson AR(1), Majumdar S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Professor, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public
Health, Jackson State University, Jackson, MS.
(2)Chief, Division of Hematology, Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders,
Children's National Medical Center, Associate Professor of Pediatrics, George
Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC.

Comment in
    Int J Cancer. 2018 Feb 15;142(4):863.
    Int J Cancer. 2018 Feb 15;142(4):864.

A geographical and causal connection has long been recognized between malaria,
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection and Burkitt's lymphoma (BL), but the
underlying mechanisms remain obscure. Potential clues are that the malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum selectively absorbs vitamin A from the host and
depends on it for its biological activities; secondly, alterations in vitamin A
(retinoid) metabolism have been implicated in many forms of cancer, including BL.
The first author has proposed that the merozoite-stage malaria parasite, emerging
from the liver, uses its absorbed vitamin A as a cell membrane destabilizer to
invade the red blood cells, causing anemia and other signs and symptoms of the
disease as manifestations of an endogenous form of hypervitaminosis A (Mawson AR,
Path Global Health 2013;107(3):122-9). Repeated episodes of malaria would
therefore be expected to expose the tissues of affected individuals to
potentially toxic doses of vitamin A. It is proposed that such episodes activate 
latent EBV infection, which in turn activates retinoid-responsive genes.
Expression of these genes enhances viral replication and induces germinal center 
(GC) B cell expansion, activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) expression,
and c-myc translocation, which in turn predisposes to BL. Thus, an endogenous
form of retinoid toxicity related to malaria infection may be the common factor
linking frequent malaria, EBV infection and BL, whereby prolonged exposure of
lymphatic tissues to high concentrations of retinoids may combine to induce
B-cell translocation and increase the risk of Burkitt's lymphoma.

Â© 2017 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.30885 
PMID: 28707393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

