
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2017 Jun;55(3):255-265. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2017.55.3.255. Epub 
2017 Jun 30.

Isolation and Characterization of Vaccine Candidate Genes Including CSP and MSP1 
in Plasmodium yoelii.

Kim SH(1), Bae YA(2), Seoh JY(3), Yang HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Seoul
07985, Korea.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Gachon University College of Medicine, Incheon
21936, Korea.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Seoul
07985, Korea.

Malaria is an infectious disease affecting humans, which is transmitted by the
bite of Anopheles mosquitoes harboring sporozoites of parasitic protozoans
belonging to the genus Plasmodium. Despite past achievements to control the
protozoan disease, malaria still remains a significant health threat up to now.
In this study, we cloned and characterized the full-unit Plasmodium yoelii genes 
encoding merozoite surface protein 1 (MSP1), circumsporozoite protein (CSP), and 
Duffy-binding protein (DBP), each of which can be applied for investigations to
obtain potent protective vaccines in the rodent malaria model, due to their
specific expression patterns during the parasite life cycle. Recombinant
fragments corresponding to the middle and C-terminal regions of PyMSP1 and PyCSP,
respectively, displayed strong reactivity against P. yoelii-infected mice sera.
Specific native antigens invoking strong humoral immune response during the
primary and secondary infections of P. yoelii were also abundantly detected in
experimental ICR mice. The low or negligible parasitemia observed in the
secondary infected mice was likely to result from the neutralizing action of the 
protective antibodies. Identification of these antigenic proteins might provide
the necessary information and means to characterize additional vaccine candidate 
antigens, selected solely on their ability to produce the protective antibodies.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2017.55.3.255 
PMCID: PMC5546161
PMID: 28719950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

