
1. J Virol. 2017 Sep 27;91(20). pii: e01184-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01184-17. Print
2017 Oct 15.

Immunodominance of Adenovirus-Derived CD8+ T Cell Epitopes Interferes with the
Induction of Transgene-Specific Immunity in Adenovirus-Based Immunization.

Schöne D(1), Hrycak CP(1), Windmann S(1), Lapuente D(2)(3), Dittmer U(1),
Tenbusch M(2)(3), Bayer W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virology, University Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, 
Essen, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular and Medical Virology, Institute for Microbiology, Ruhr
University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(3)Institute for Virology, University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(4)Institute for Virology, University Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, 
Essen, Germany wibke.bayer@uni-due.de.

Adenovirus (Ad)-based immunization is a popular approach in vaccine development, 
and Ad-based vectors are renowned for their potential to induce strong CD8+ T
cell responses to the encoded transgene. Surprisingly, we previously found in the
mouse Friend retrovirus (FV) model that Ad-based immunization did not induce CD8+
T cell responses to the FV Leader-Gag-derived immunodominant epitope GagL85-93 We
show now that induction of GagL85-93-specific CD8+ T cells was highly effective
when leader-Gag was delivered by plasmid DNA immunization, implying a role for
Ad-derived epitopes in mediating unresponsiveness. By immunizing with DNA
constructs encoding strings of GagL85-93 and the two Ad-derived epitopes
DNA-binding protein418-426 (DBP418-426) and hexon486-494, we confirmed that Ad
epitopes prevent induction of GagL85-93-specific CD8+ T cells. Interestingly,
while DBP418-426 did not interfere with GagL85-93-specific CD8+ T cell induction,
the H-2Dd-restricted hexon486-494 suppressed the CD8+ T cell response to the
H-2Db-restricted GagL85-93 strongly in H-2b/d mice but not in H-2b/b mice. This
finding indicates that competition occurs at the level of responding CD8+ T
cells, and we could indeed demonstrate that coimmunization with an interleukin 2 
(IL-2)-encoding plasmid restored GagL85-93-specific CD8+ T cell responses to
epitope strings in the presence of hexon486-494 IL-2 codelivery did not restore
GagL85-93 responsiveness in Ad-based immunization, however, likely due to the
presence of further epitopes in the Ad vector. Our findings show that seemingly
immunodominant transgene epitopes can be dominated by Ad-derived epitopes. These 
findings underline the importance of thorough characterization of vaccine
vectors, and modifications of vectors or immunogens may be required to prevent
impaired transgene-specific immune responses.IMPORTANCE Ad-based vectors are
widely used in experimental preclinical and clinical immunization studies against
numerous infectious agents, such as human immunodeficiency virus, Ebola virus,
Plasmodium falciparum, or Mycobacterium tuberculosis Preexisting immunity to
Ad-based vectors is widely recognized as a hindrance to the widespread use of
Ad-based vectors for immunizations in humans; however, our data show that an
immune response to Ad-derived T cell epitopes can also result in loss or
impairment of transgene-specific immune responses in prenaive vaccinees due to
immune competition. Our results highlight that seemingly immunodominant epitopes 
may be affected by dominance of vector-derived epitopes, and modifications of the
vector design or the immunogens employed in immunization may lead to more
effective vaccines.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01184-17 
PMCID: PMC5625516
PMID: 28768877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

