
1. PLoS One. 2017 Aug 22;12(8):e0182561. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0182561.
eCollection 2017.

A large scale Plasmodium vivax- Saimiri boliviensis trophozoite-schizont
transition proteome.

Anderson DC(1), Lapp SA(2), Barnwell JW(3), Galinski MR(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bioscience Division, SRI International, Harrisonburg, VA, United States of
America.
(2)Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA, United States of America.
(3)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States of America.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States of America.

Plasmodium vivax is a complex protozoan parasite with over 6,500 genes and
stage-specific differential expression. Much of the unique biology of this
pathogen remains unknown, including how it modifies and restructures the host
reticulocyte. Using a recently published P. vivax reference genome, we report the
proteome from two biological replicates of infected Saimiri boliviensis host
reticulocytes undergoing transition from the late trophozoite to early schizont
stages. Using five database search engines, we identified a total of 2000 P.
vivax and 3487 S. boliviensis proteins, making this the most comprehensive P.
vivax proteome to date. PlasmoDB GO-term enrichment analysis of proteins
identified at least twice by a search engine highlighted core metabolic processes
and molecular functions such as glycolysis, translation and protein folding, cell
components such as ribosomes, proteasomes and the Golgi apparatus, and a number
of vesicle and trafficking related clusters. Database for Annotation,
Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) v6.8 enriched functional
annotation clusters of S. boliviensis proteins highlighted vesicle and
trafficking-related clusters, elements of the cytoskeleton, oxidative processes
and response to oxidative stress, macromolecular complexes such as the proteasome
and ribosome, metabolism, translation, and cell death. Host and parasite proteins
potentially involved in cell adhesion were also identified. Over 25% of the P.
vivax proteins have no functional annotation; this group includes 45 VIR members 
of the large PIR family. A number of host and pathogen proteins contained highly 
oxidized or nitrated residues, extending prior trophozoite-enriched stage
observations from S. boliviensis infections, and supporting the possibility of
oxidative stress in relation to the disease. This proteome significantly expands 
the size and complexity of the known P. vivax and Saimiri host iRBC proteomes,
and provides in-depth data that will be valuable for ongoing research on this
parasite's biology and pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0182561 
PMCID: PMC5567661
PMID: 28829774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

