
1. PLoS One. 2017 Aug 25;12(8):e0183797. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0183797.
eCollection 2017.

Inverted recruitment of autophagy proteins to the Plasmodium berghei
parasitophorous vacuole membrane.

Schmuckli-Maurer J(1), Reber V(1), Wacker R(1)(2), Bindschedler A(1), Zakher
A(1), Heussler VT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Berne, Berne, Switzerland.
(2)Graduate School for Cellular and Biomedical Sciences, University of Berne,
Berne, Switzerland.

Selective autophagy and related mechanisms can act as variable defense mechanisms
against pathogens and can therefore be considered as intracellular immune
responses. When in hepatocytes, Plasmodium parasites reside in a parasitophorous 
vacuole (PV) and the PV membrane (PVM) is the main contact site between host cell
and parasite. Early in infection, the PVM is directly labeled with host cell
autophagy proteins LC3B and p62 (nucleoporin 62). We investigated the recruitment
of different selective autophagy receptors and could show that mainly p62 and
NBR1 (neighbour of BRCA1 gene 1) and to a lesser extent NDP52 (nuclear dot
protein 52) associate with the PVM. To investigate the recruitment of these
receptors to the PVM in Plasmodium-infected cells, we generated LC3B knock out
HeLa cells. In these cell lines, autophagosome formation and autophagic flux are 
not different to those in WT cells. Unexpectedly, p62 and NBR1 recruitment to the
PVM was strongly impaired in LC3B-negative host cells, suggesting that LC3B
recruits both receptors to the PVM of Plasmodium parasites. We also noticed that 
LC3B recruited ubiquitin to the PVM. This indicates that, in comparison to
classical selective autophagy, in P. berghei-infected cells the order of membrane
labeling with autophagy proteins appears to be inverted from canonical
ubiquitin-receptor-LC3B recruitment to LC3B-receptor and possibly ubiquitin.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0183797 
PMCID: PMC5571950
PMID: 28841718  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

