
1. mSphere. 2017 Sep 13;2(5). pii: e00287-17. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00287-17.
eCollection 2017 Sep-Oct.

The Gut Commensal Microbiome of Drosophila melanogaster Is Modified by the
Endosymbiont Wolbachia.

Simhadri RK(1), Fast EM(1), Guo R(1), Schultz MJ(1), Vaisman N(1), Ortiz L(1),
Bybee J(2), Slatko BE(2), Frydman HM(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Genome Biology Division, New England Biolabs, Inc., Ipswich, Massachusetts,
USA.
(3)NEIDL (National Emerging Infectious Diseases Laboratory), Boston University,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Endosymbiotic Wolbachia bacteria and the gut microbiome have independently been
shown to affect several aspects of insect biology, including reproduction,
development, life span, stem cell activity, and resistance to human pathogens, in
insect vectors. This work shows that Wolbachia bacteria, which reside mainly in
the fly germline, affect the microbial species present in the fly gut in a
lab-reared strain. Drosophila melanogaster hosts two main genera of commensal
bacteria-Acetobacter and Lactobacillus. Wolbachia-infected flies have
significantly reduced titers of Acetobacter. Sampling of the microbiome of axenic
flies fed with equal proportions of both bacteria shows that the presence of
Wolbachia bacteria is a significant determinant of the composition of the
microbiome throughout fly development. However, this effect is host genotype
dependent. To investigate the mechanism of microbiome modulation, the effect of
Wolbachia bacteria on Imd and reactive oxygen species pathways, the main
regulators of immune response in the fly gut, was measured. The presence of
Wolbachia bacteria does not induce significant changes in the expression of the
genes for the effector molecules in either pathway. Furthermore, microbiome
modulation is not due to direct interaction between Wolbachia bacteria and gut
microbes. Confocal analysis shows that Wolbachia bacteria are absent from the gut
lumen. These results indicate that the mechanistic basis of the modulation of
composition of the microbiome by Wolbachia bacteria is more complex than a direct
bacterial interaction or the effect of Wolbachia bacteria on fly immunity. The
findings reported here highlight the importance of considering the composition of
the gut microbiome and host genetic background during Wolbachia-induced
phenotypic studies and when formulating microbe-based disease vector control
strategies. IMPORTANCEWolbachia bacteria are intracellular bacteria present in
the microbiome of a large fraction of insects and parasitic nematodes. They can
block mosquitos' ability to transmit several infectious disease-causing
pathogens, including Zika, dengue, chikungunya, and West Nile viruses and malaria
parasites. Certain extracellular bacteria present in the gut lumen of these
insects can also block pathogen transmission. However, our understanding of
interactions between Wolbachia and gut bacteria and how they influence each other
is limited. Here we show that the presence of Wolbachia strain wMel changes the
composition of gut commensal bacteria in the fruit fly. Our findings implicate
interactions between bacterial species as a key factor in determining the overall
composition of the microbiome and thus reveal new paradigms to consider in the
development of disease control strategies.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00287-17 
PMCID: PMC5597968
PMID: 28932814 

