
1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Sep 21;8:1835. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01835. eCollection
2017.

Genotyping of Enterocytozoon bieneusi and Subtyping of Blastocystis in Cancer
Patients: Relationship to Diarrhea and Assessment of Zoonotic Transmission.

Zhang W(1), Ren G(1), Zhao W(1), Yang Z(1), Shen Y(2), Sun Y(3), Liu A(1), Cao
J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Harbin Medical UniversityHarbin, China.
(2)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, Ministry of
Health, WHO Collaborating Centre for Malaria, Schistosomiasis and
FilariasisShanghai, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Third Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
UniversityHarbin, China.

Enterocytozoon bieneusi (E. bieneusi) and Blastocystis are common pathogens
responsible for diarrhea in humans, especially in immunocompromised individuals. 
The number of cancer patients has been increasing and diarrhea is a common
clinical symptom in the treatment of cancers. To understand the prevalences and
genotypes/subtypes of E. bieneusi and Blastocystis in cancer patients in China,
to track the infection sources, and to explore the relationships between E.
bieneusi and Blastocystis infections and diarrhea, 381 fecal specimens were
collected from cancer patients. Each of them was analyzed for the presence of E. 
bieneusi and Blastocystis by PCR amplifying and sequencing the ITS region of the 
rRNA gene and the barcode region of the SSU rRNA gene, respectively. 1.3 and 7.1%
of cancer patients were positive for E. bieneusi and Blastocystis, respectively. 
No statistical differences were observed in the infection rates between the
groups by age, gender, and residence. E. bieneusi and Blastocystis were both
significantly more common in cancer patients with diarrhea, and significant
relationship of Blastocystis to diarrhea was found in chemotherapy group. Two E. 
bieneusi genotypes (D and a novel one named as HLJ-CP1) and two Blastocystis
subtypes (ST1 and ST3) were identified with three novel ST1 sequences. This is
the first report of occurrence and molecular characterizations of E. bieneusi and
Blastocystis in cancer patients in China. E. bieneusi genotype D and Blastocystis
ST1 and ST3 have been identified in humans and animals while one novel E.
bieneusi genotype falling into zoonotic group 1, implying a potential of zoonotic
transmission.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01835 
PMCID: PMC5613175
PMID: 28983297 

