
1. Wellcome Open Res. 2017 Sep 19;2:86. doi: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.12053.1.
eCollection 2017.

A re-assessment of gene-tag classification approaches for describing var gene
expression patterns during human Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasite
infections.

Githinji G(1), Bull PC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kenya Medical Research Institute (KEMRI)-Wellcome Trust Research Programme,
Centre for Geographic Medicine Research-Coast, Kilifi, Kenya.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

PfEMP1 are variant parasite antigens that are inserted on the surface of
Plasmodium falciparum infected erythrocytes (IE). Through interactions with
various host molecules, PfEMP1 mediate IE sequestration in tissues and play a key
role in the pathology of severe malaria. PfEMP1 is encoded by a diverse
multi-gene family called var. Previous studies have shown that that expression of
specific subsets of var genes are associated with low levels of host immunity and
severe malaria. However, in most clinical studies to date, full-length var gene
sequences were unavailable and various approaches have been used to make
comparisons between var gene expression profiles in different parasite isolates
using limited information. Several studies have relied on the classification of a
300 - 500 base-pair "DBLα tag" region in the DBLα domain located at the 5' end of
most var genes. We assessed the relationship between various DBLα tag
classification methods, and sequence features that are only fully assessable
through full-length var gene sequences. We compared these different sequence
features in full-length var gene from six fully sequenced laboratory isolates.
These comparisons show that despite a long history of recombination,  DBLα
sequence tag classification can provide functional information on important
features of full-length var genes. Notably, a specific subset of DBLα tags
previously defined as "group A-like" is associated with CIDRα1 domains proposed
to bind to endothelial protein C receptor. This analysis helps to bring together 
different sources of data that have been used to assess var gene expression in
clinical parasite isolates.

DOI: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.12053.1 
PMCID: PMC5635463
PMID: 29062916 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: No competing interests were 
disclosed.

