
1. Arch Pharm Res. 2017 Nov;40(11):1336-1343. doi: 10.1007/s12272-017-0965-3. Epub
2017 Oct 25.

Novel anti-adipogenic activity of anti-malarial amodiaquine through suppression
of PPARγ activity.

Kim TH(1), Kim HK(1), Hwang ES(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha
Womans University, 52 Ewhayeodae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 03760, Korea.
(2)College of Pharmacy and Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha
Womans University, 52 Ewhayeodae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 03760, Korea.
eshwang@ewha.ac.kr.

Amodiaquine (AQ) was developed as a selective drug against Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria infection and has received increasing attention as a therapeutic agent
for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, Parkinson's disease, and cancer due to
its anti-inflammatory, anti-proliferative, and autophagic-lysosomal blockade
properties. As autophagy activation is involved in promoting adipogenic
differentiation, we examined whether anti-autophagic AQ affected adipocyte
differentiation of 3T3-L1 pre-adipocytes. AQ dose-dependently and significantly
suppressed adipocyte differentiation in conjunction with decreases in lipid
droplet formation and expression of adipogenic markers including adiponectin,
adipocyte fatty acid-binding protein 2 (aP2), resistin, and leptin. Although
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) decreases by inhibition of
autophagy, AQ treatment did not induce PPARγ degradation despite the suppression 
of autophagolysosomal degradation. Instead, AQ suppressed the PPARγ activity to
transcriptionally activate the aP2 gene transcription through the selective
prevention of nuclear localization of PPARγ. These results demonstrated the novel
anti-adipogenic activity of AQ and identified its underlying mechanism that AQ
suppressed adipogenic gene expression and lipid formation by inhibiting nuclear
localization of PPARγ in an autophagy-independent manner. AQ is recommended as a 
safe and effective anti-obesity drug for controlling overweight and obesity.

DOI: 10.1007/s12272-017-0965-3 
PMID: 29071567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

