
1. Exp Ther Med. 2017 Nov;14(5):4083-4090. doi: 10.3892/etm.2017.5063. Epub 2017 Aug
29.

Artemether suppresses cell proliferation and induces apoptosis in diffuse large B
cell lymphoma cells.

Zhao X(1), Guo X(2)(3), Yue W(1), Wang J(1), Yang J(1), Chen J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200168, P.R. China.
(2)Clinical and Translational Research Centre of Shanghai First Maternity &
Infant Health Hospital, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Signaling and Disease
Research, Collaborative Innovation Centre for Brain Science, School of Life
Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, P.R. China.
(3)Institute of Regenerative Medicine, East Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200120, P.R. China.

Artemether (ART), a derivative of the well-known anti-malaria drug artemisinin,
demonstrates potent anti-cancer activity in various cancer cells, however its
effects on lymphoma remain unknown. The present study demonstrated that ART
significantly inhibited proliferation of diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) in
vivo and in vitro, and led to G0/G1 phase arrest. Mechanistic studies
demonstrated that ART suppressed the expression of the cell cycle proteins cyclin
dependent kinase (CDK) 2, 4, and Cyclin D1, and specifically repressed the
proto-oncogene c-Myc, rather than regulating the extracellular signal-regulated
kinase or protein kinase B signaling pathways (two key pathways involved in
regulating cell proliferation). In addition, high-concentration ART treatment
significantly induced the apoptosis of DLBCL cells by promoting the cleavage of
Caspase-3 and Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) 1. Overall, the data indicated 
that ART exhibited anti-cancer activity by inhibiting the expression of cell
cycle genes and c-Myc, and promoting Caspase-3 and PARP1 cleavage, which
suggested that ART may serve as a dual pharmaceutical for the treatment DLBCL.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2017.5063 
PMCID: PMC5658687
PMID: 29104626 

