
1. Protoplasma. 2018 Mar;255(2):669-684. doi: 10.1007/s00709-017-1178-9. Epub 2017
Nov 4.

Stress-induced Oryza sativa RuvBL1a is DNA-independent ATPase and unwinds DNA
duplex in 3' to 5' direction.

Saifi SK(1), Passricha N(1), Tuteja R(1), Tuteja N(2).

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali
Marg, New Delhi, 110067, India.
(2)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali
Marg, New Delhi, 110067, India. narendra@icgeb.res.in.

RuvB, a member of AAA+ (ATPases Associated with diverse cellular Activities)
superfamily of proteins, is essential, highly conserved and multifunctional in
nature as it is involved in DNA damage repair, mitotic assembly, switching of
histone variants and assembly of telomerase core complex. RuvB family is widely
studied in various systems such as Escherichia coli, yeast, human, Drosophila,
Plasmodium falciparum and mouse, but not well studied in plants. We have studied 
the transcript level of rice homologue of RuvB gene (OsRuvBL1a) under various
abiotic stress conditions, and the results suggest that it is upregulated under
salinity, cold and heat stress. Therefore, the OsRuvBL1a protein was
characterized using in silico and biochemical approaches. In silico study
confirmed the presence of all the four characteristic motifs of AAA+
superfamily-Walker A, Walker B, Sensor I and Sensor II. Structurally, OsRuvBL1a
is similar to RuvB1 from Chaetomium thermophilum. The purified recombinant
OsRuvBL1a protein shows unique DNA-independent ATPase activity. Using
site-directed mutagenesis, the importance of two conserved motifs (Walker B and
Sensor I) in ATPase activity has been also reported with mutants D302N and N332H.
The OsRuvBL1a protein unwinds the duplex DNA in the 3' to 5' direction. The
presence of unique DNA-independent ATPase and DNA unwinding activities of
OsRuvBL1a protein and upregulation of its transcript under abiotic stress
conditions suggest its involvement in multiple cellular pathways. The first
detailed characterization of plant RuvBL1a in this study may provide important
contribution in exploiting the role of RuvB for developing the stress tolerant
plants of agricultural importance.

DOI: 10.1007/s00709-017-1178-9 
PMID: 29103092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

