
1. Parasitology. 2018 Jun;145(7):865-870. doi: 10.1017/S0031182017001925. Epub 2017 
Nov 8.

Molecular detection of Cyclospora cayetanensis in human stool specimens using
UNEX-based DNA extraction and real-time PCR.

Qvarnstrom Y(1), Benedict T(1), Marcet PL(1), Wiegand RE(1), Herwaldt BL(1), da
Silva AJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria,Center for Global Health, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention,1600 Clifton Rd, Atlanta, GA 30329,USA.
(2)Office of Applied Research and Safety Assessment, Center for Food Safety and
Applied Nutrition,U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 8301 Muirkirk Rd,Laurel, MD 
20708,USA.

Cyclospora cayetanensis is a coccidian parasite associated with diarrheal
illness. In the USA, foodborne outbreaks of cyclosporiasis have been documented
almost every year since the mid-1990s. The typical approach used to identify this
parasite in human stools is an examination of acid-fast-stained smears under
bright-field microscopy. UV fluorescence microscopy of wet mounts is more
sensitive and specific than acid-fast staining but requires a fluorescence
microscope with a special filter not commonly available in diagnostic
laboratories. In this study, we evaluated a new DNA extraction method based on
the Universal Nucleic Acid Extraction (UNEX) buffer and compared the performances
of four published real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays for the
specific detection of C. cayetanensis in stool. The UNEX-based method had an
improved capability to recover DNA from oocysts compared with the FastDNA stool
extraction method. The best-performing real-time PCR assay was a C.
cayetanensis-specific TaqMan PCR that targets the 18S ribosomal RNA gene. This
new testing algorithm should be useful for detection of C. cayetanensis in human 
stool samples.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182017001925 
PMCID: PMC5940589
PMID: 29113617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

