
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2017 Oct;51(4):396-403. doi: 10.5578/mb.61822.

[The importance of the contribution of rapid test, serological and molecular
methods in the diagnosis of two imported malaria cases with atypical microscopy].

[Article in Turkish]

Zorbozan O(1), Pullukçu H(2), Atalay Şahar E(1), Karakavuk M(1), Can H(3), Tunali
V(1), Döşkaya M(1), Turgay N(1), Töz S(1), Özbilgin A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Parasitology, Izmir,
Turkey.
(2)Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Infectious Diseases and
Clinical Microbiology, Izmir, Turkey.
(3)Ege University Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Molecular Biology
Section, Izmir, Turkey.
(4)Celal Bayar University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical
Parasitology, Manisa, Turkey.

Malaria is a widespread and life-threatening disease in tropical and subtropical 
regions. In patients with typical clinical symptoms, malaria is considered as a
preliminary diagnosis if there is a travel history to malaria-endemic areas. The 
basis of the laboratory diagnosis of malaria is the microscopic examination of
Giemsa stained smears. On the other hand, the diagnosis and differentiation of
Plasmodium species with microscopic examination may have some difficulties. In
the first case, adifferent appearance from the classical Plasmodium vivax
erythrocytic forms in infected erythrocytes were detected in 1% of all
erythrocytes in thin smear blood preparations of a 26-year-old male with
complaints of fever and chills and a story of travel to Nigeria. It was observed 
that parasitic nuclei were not prominent, and were located in the cytoplasm
irregularly as chromatin or dye particles, nucleus fragments similar to
Schüffner's granules in the form of scattered and granular spots were present in 
some erythrocytes, the cytoplasm of some Plasmodium erythrocytic forms were
irregular and nuclei were not seen. There were no Schüffner's granules in any of 
the infected erythrocytes. P.vivax was detected by the rapid diagnostic test
(OptiMAL, DiaMed GmbH, Switzerland), which searches for the antigens of
Plasmodium species, in the peripheral blood sample of the patients. The P.vivax
18S rRNA gene was also detected by the multiplex real-time polymerase chain
reaction. Antibodies against Plasmodium species were searched by using the Pan
Malaria Antibody CELISA (CeLLabs Pty Ltd, Brookvale, Australia) kit in the
patient's serum sample and the optical density (OD) value of the patient sample
was measured five times the OD value of the positive control. In the second case,
adifferent appearance from the classical P.falciparum erythrocytic forms in
infected erythrocytes were detected in 12% of all erythrocytes in thin smear
blood preparations of a 31-year-old male who has been suffering from persistent
fever, severe headache, pain in the eyes and was known to be working in Nigeria. 
It was observed that some Plasmodium trophozoites have 1/3 of the size of
erythrocytes such as P.vivax and have non-granular cytoplasm, some erythrocytic
forms were round and the nucleus and cytoplasm were hardly distinguished, some of
them were seen as crescent and close to the nucleus of the cytoplasm and some
erythrocytic forms had characteristically a single nucleus and a scattered
cytoplasm, similar to mature trophozoites of P.vivax. Although the Plasmodium
young trophozoites were similar to P.vivax in means of magnitude, the forms in
which the nuclei adhered to the erythrocyte wall were common. There were no
P.falciparum gametocyte forms. P.falciparum like young trophozoite was
observedonly in one of the four smears. P.falciparum was detected by the
commercial rapid diagnostic test and P.falciparum 18S rRNA gene was also detected
by the multiplex real-time polymerase chain reaction. Antibody formation against 
Plasmodium species was not detected in the ELISA test. In these case reports, the
importance of the support of rapid diagnostic tests, serological and molecular
methods to microscopic diagnosis and species determination of two imported
malaria cases were demonstrated.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.61822 
PMID: 29153070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

