
1. Evol Appl. 2017 Jun 12;10(9):897-906. doi: 10.1111/eva.12492. eCollection 2017
Oct.

Genomic insights into adaptive divergence and speciation among malaria vectors of
the Anopheles nili group.

Fouet C(1), Kamdem C(1), Gamez S(1), White BJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology University of California Riverside CA USA.
(2)Center for Disease Vector Research Institute for Integrative Genome Biology
University of California Riverside CA USA.

Ongoing speciation in the most important African malaria vectors gives rise to
cryptic populations, which differ remarkably in their behavior, ecology, and
capacity to vector malaria parasites. Understanding the population structure and 
the drivers of genetic differentiation among mosquitoes is crucial for effective 
disease control because heterogeneity within vector species contributes to
variability in malaria cases and allow fractions of populations to escape control
efforts. To examine population structure and the potential impacts of recent
large-scale control interventions, we have investigated the genomic patterns of
differentiation in mosquitoes belonging to the Anopheles nili group-a large
taxonomic group that diverged ~3 Myr ago. Using 4,343 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), we detected strong population structure characterized by
high-FST values between multiple divergent populations adapted to different
habitats within the Central African rainforest. Delineating the cryptic species
within the Anopheles nili group is challenging due to incongruence between
morphology, ribosomal DNA, and SNP markers consistent with incomplete lineage
sorting and/or interspecific gene flow. A very high proportion of loci are fixed 
(FST = 1) within the genome of putative species, which suggests that ecological
and/or reproductive barriers are maintained by strong selection on a substantial 
number of genes.

DOI: 10.1111/eva.12492 
PMCID: PMC5680430
PMID: 29151881 

