
1. RNA Biol. 2018;15(4-5):659-666. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2017.1397262. Epub 2017 Dec
15.

A continuous assay for monitoring the synthetic and proofreading activities of
multiple aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases for high-throughput drug discovery.

Grube CD(1), Roy H(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine , University of
Central Florida , Orlando , Florida , United States of America.

Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs) catalyze the aminoacylation of tRNAs to
produce the aminoacyl-tRNAs (aa-tRNAs) required by ribosomes for translation of
the genetic message into proteins. To ensure the accuracy of tRNA aminoacylation,
and consequently the fidelity of protein synthesis, some aaRSs exhibit a
proofreading (editing) site, distinct from the aa-tRNA synthetic site. The aaRS
editing site hydrolyzes misacylated products formed when a non-cognate amino acid
is used during tRNA charging. Because aaRSs play a central role in protein
biosynthesis and cellular life, these proteins represent longstanding targets for
therapeutic drug development to combat infectious diseases. Most existing aaRS
inhibitors target the synthetic site, and it is only recently that drugs
targeting the proofreading site have been considered. In the present study, we
developed a robust assay for the high-throughput screening of libraries of
inhibitors targeting both the synthetic and the proofreading sites of up to four 
aaRSs simultaneously. Thus, this assay allows for screening of eight distinct
enzyme active sites in a single experiment. aaRSs from several prominent human
pathogens (i.e., Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Plasmodium falciparum, and
Escherichia coli) were used for development of this assay.

DOI: 10.1080/15476286.2017.1397262 
PMCID: PMC6103669
PMID: 29168435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

