
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Jan 4;46(D1):D601-D607. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1138.

FunCoup 4: new species, data, and visualization.

Ogris C(1), Guala D(1), Sonnhammer ELL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stockholm Bioinformatics Center, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics,
Stockholm University, Science for Life Laboratory, Box 1031, 17121 Solna, Sweden.

This release of the FunCoup database (http://funcoup.sbc.su.se) is the fourth
generation of one of the most comprehensive databases for genome-wide functional 
association networks. These functional associations are inferred via integrating 
various data types using a naive Bayesian algorithm and orthology based
information transfer across different species. This approach provides high
coverage of the included genomes as well as high quality of inferred
interactions. In this update of FunCoup we introduce four new eukaryotic species:
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Plasmodium falciparum, Bos taurus, Oryza sativa and
open the database to the prokaryotic domain by including networks for Escherichia
coli and Bacillus subtilis. The latter allows us to also introduce a new class of
functional association between genes - co-occurrence in the same operon. We also 
supplemented the existing classes of functional association: metabolic,
signaling, complex and physical protein interaction with up-to-date information. 
In this release we switched to InParanoid v8 as the source of orthology and base 
for calculation of phylogenetic profiles. While populating all other evidence
types with new data we introduce a new evidence type based on quantitative mass
spectrometry data. Finally, the new JavaScript based network viewer provides the 
user an intuitive and responsive platform to further evaluate the results.

Â© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx1138 
PMCID: PMC5755233
PMID: 29165593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

