
1. Mol Microbiol. 2018 Feb;107(3):277-297. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13887. Epub 2017 Dec 29.

Overview of carbon and nitrogen catabolite metabolism in the virulence of human
pathogenic fungi.

Ries LNA(1), Beattie S(2), Cramer RA(2), Goldman GH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Av.
Bandeirantes, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, 3900, CEP 14049-900, Brazil.
(2)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, 74 College Street Remsen 213, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.
(3)Faculdade de Ciências Farmacêuticas de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São
Paulo, Avenida do Café s/n°, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, CEP 14040903, Brazil.

It is estimated that fungal infections, caused most commonly by Candida albicans,
Aspergillus fumigatus and Cryptococcus neoformans, result in more deaths annually
than malaria or tuberculosis. It has long been hypothesized the fungal metabolism
plays a critical role in virulence though specific nutrient sources utilized by
human pathogenic fungi in vivo has remained enigmatic. However, the metabolic
utilisation of preferred carbon and nitrogen sources, encountered in a host
niche-dependent manner, is known as carbon catabolite and nitrogen catabolite
repression (CCR, NCR), and has been shown to be important for virulence. Several 
sensory and uptake systems exist, including carbon and nitrogen source-specific
sensors and transporters, that allow scavenging of preferred nutrient sources.
Subsequent metabolic utilisation is governed by transcription factors, whose
functions and essentiality differ between fungal species. Furthermore, additional
factors exist that contribute to the implementation of CCR and NCR. The role of
the CCR and NCR-related factors in virulence varies greatly between fungal
species and a substantial gap in knowledge exists regarding specific pathways.
Further elucidation of carbon and nitrogen metabolism mechanisms is therefore
required in a fungal species- and animal model-specific manner in order to screen
for targets that are potential candidates for anti-fungal drug development.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13887 
PMCID: PMC5777862
PMID: 29197127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

