
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Jan 10;8(1):335. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-18695-y.

Comparative analysis of low complexity regions in Plasmodia.

Chaudhry SR(1)(2), Lwin N(1), Phelan D(1), Escalante AA(3), Battistuzzi FU(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Oakland University, Rochester, MI, USA.
(2)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit,
MI, USA.
(3)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Oakland University, Rochester, MI, USA.
battistu@oakland.edu.
(5)Center for Data Science and Big Data Analytics, Oakland University, Rochester,
MI, USA. battistu@oakland.edu.

Low complexity regions (LCRs) are a common feature shared by many genomes, but
their evolutionary and functional significance remains mostly unknown. At the
core of the uncertainty is a poor understanding of the mechanisms that regulate
their retention in genomes, whether driven by natural selection or neutral
evolution. Applying a comparative approach of LCRs to multiple strains and
species is a powerful approach to identify patterns of conservation in these
regions. Using this method, we investigate the evolutionary history of LCRs in
the genus Plasmodium based on orthologous protein coding genes shared by 11
species and strains from primate and rodent-infecting pathogens. We find multiple
lines of evidence in support of natural selection as a major evolutionary force
shaping the composition and conservation of LCRs through time and signatures that
their evolutionary paths are species specific. Our findings add a comparative
analysis perspective to the debate on the evolution of LCRs and harness the power
of sequence comparisons to identify potential functionally important LCR
candidates.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-18695-y 
PMCID: PMC5762703
PMID: 29321589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

