
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Dec 18;8:1839. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01839. eCollection
2017.

Transcriptomics in Human Challenge Models.

Barton AJ(1), Hill J(1), Pollard AJ(1), Blohmke CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Vaccine Group, Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford and the 
NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Human challenge models, in which volunteers are experimentally infected with a
pathogen of interest, provide the opportunity to directly identify both natural
and vaccine-induced correlates of protection. In this review, we highlight how
the application of transcriptomics to human challenge studies allows for the
identification of novel correlates and gives insight into the immunological
pathways required to develop functional immunity. In malaria challenge trials for
example, innate immune pathways appear to play a previously underappreciated role
in conferring protective immunity. Transcriptomic analyses of samples obtained in
human challenge studies can also deepen our understanding of the immune responses
preceding symptom onset, allowing characterization of innate immunity and early
gene signatures, which may influence disease outcome. Influenza challenge studies
demonstrate that these gene signatures have diagnostic potential in the context
of pandemics, in which presymptomatic diagnosis of at-risk individuals could
allow early initiation of antiviral treatment and help limit transmission.
Furthermore, gene expression analysis facilitates the identification of host
factors contributing to disease susceptibility, such as C4BPA expression in
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli infection. Overall, these studies highlight the 
exceptional value of transcriptional data generated in human challenge trials and
illustrate the broad impact molecular data analysis may have on global health
through rational vaccine design and biomarker discovery.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01839 
PMCID: PMC5741696
PMID: 29326715 

