
1. Hum Genet. 2018 Feb;137(2):151-160. doi: 10.1007/s00439-018-1866-3. Epub 2018 Jan
23.

Complex signatures of natural selection at GYPA.

Bigham AW(1), Magnaye K(2), Dunn DM(3), Weiss RB(3), Bamshad M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, The University of Michigan, 222C West Hall, 1085
S. University, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109-1107, USA. awbigham@umich.edu.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, The University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(4)Departments of Pediatrics and Genome Sciences, The University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA.

The human MN blood group antigens are isoforms of glycophorin A (GPA) encoded by 
the gene, GYPA, and are the most abundant erythrocyte sialoglycoproteins. The
distribution of MN antigens has been widely studied in human populations yet the 
evolutionary and/or demographic factors affecting population variation remain
elusive. While the primary function of GPA is yet to be discovered, it serves as 
the major binding site for the 175-kD erythrocyte-binding antigen (EB-175) of the
malarial parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, a major selective pressure in recent
human history. More specifically, exon two of GYPA encodes the receptor-binding
ligand to which P. falciparum binds. Accordingly, there has been keen interest in
understanding what impact, if any, natural selection has had on the distribution 
of variation in GYPA and exon two in particular. To this end, we resequenced GYPA
in individuals sampled from both P. falciparum endemic (sub-Saharan Africa and
South India) and non-endemic (Europe and East Asia) regions of the world.
Observed patterns of variation suggest that GYPA has been subject to balancing
selection in populations living in malaria endemic areas and in Europeans, but no
such evidence was found in samples from East Asia, Oceania, and the Americas.
These results are consistent with malaria acting as a selective pressure on GYPA,
but also suggest that another selective force has resulted in a similar pattern
of variation in Europeans. Accordingly, GYPA has perhaps a more complex
evolutionary history, wherein on a global scale, spatially varying selective
pressures have governed its natural history.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-018-1866-3 
PMCID: PMC6223178
PMID: 29362874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

