
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Feb 20;9:148. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00148. eCollection
2018.

Interorgan Molecular Communication Strategies of "Local" and "Systemic" Innate
Immune Responses in Mosquito Anopheles stephensi.

Das De T(1)(2), Sharma P(1), Thomas T(1), Singla D(1), Tevatiya S(1), Kumari
S(1), Chauhan C(1), Rani J(1), Srivastava V(1), Kaur R(1), Pandey KC(3), Dixit
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Host-Parasite Interaction Biology Group, ICMR-National Institute of Malaria
Research, New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Delhi Technological University, Shahbad
Daulatpur, New Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, National Institute for Research in Environmental
Health, Indian Council of Medical Research, Bhopal, India.

Mosquitoes that transmit many deadly infectious diseases also need to keep
fighting against many microbial infections. Constitutive expression of multiple
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) in almost all body tissues is believed to
facilitate the effective management of these local infections. When any infection
breaches the local barrier, AMPs are induced rapidly in non-target tissues such
as hemocytes (HCs) and establish their co-ordination with systemic immune
effectors to clear off the body infection. But how interorgan immune
communication is managed during local and systemic infections remain largely
unknown. To understand this interorgan molecular relationship, we identified,
extensively profiled and compared the expression of AMPs in three important
mosquito tissues viz. midgut, fat body (FB), and HCs. dsRNA-mediated AMPs
silencing suggests that mosquito tissues are able to manage an optimal expression
of AMPs at the physiological level. We also examined the possible contribution of
two important immune regulator genes relish (REL) and nitric oxide synthase,
controlling AMPs expression in these tissues during local or systemic infections.
We show that each tissue has a unique ability to respond to local/systemic
challenges, but HCs are more specialized to recognize and discriminate-specific
antigens than gut and FB. Our investigation also revealed that both REL and NO
participate in the overall management of the interorgan immune responses, but at 
the same time each tissue also has its own ability to maintain the interorgan
flow of signals. In our knowledge, this is the first large-scale study examining 
the interorgan immune relationship in the mosquito.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00148 
PMCID: PMC5826171
PMID: 29515567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

