
1. Front Plant Sci. 2018 Apr 5;9:413. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2018.00413. eCollection
2018.

AaEIN3 Mediates the Downregulation of Artemisinin Biosynthesis by Ethylene
Signaling Through Promoting Leaf Senescence in Artemisia annua.

Tang Y(1), Li L(1), Yan T(1), Fu X(1), Shi P(1), Shen Q(1), Sun X(1), Tang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Joint International Research Laboratory of Metabolic & Developmental Sciences,
Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture (South) Ministry of Agriculture, Plant
Biotechnology Research Center, Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology R&D
Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China.

Artemisinin is an important drug for malaria treatment, which is exclusively
produced in Artemisia annua. It's important to dissect the regulatory mechanism
of artemisinin biosynthesis by diverse plant hormones and transcription factors. 
Our study shows ethylene, a plant hormone which accelerates flower and leaf
senescence and fruit ripening, suppressed the expression of genes encoding three 
key enzymes ADS, DBR2, CYP71AV1, and a positive regulator AaORA involved in
artemisinin biosynthesis. Then we isolated the gene encoding
ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE3 (EIN3), a key transcription factor in ethylene signaling
pathway, by screening the transcriptome and genome database from Artemisia annua,
named AaEIN3. Overexpressing AaEIN3 suppressed artemisinin biosynthesis, while
repressing its expression with RNAi enhanced artemisinin biosynthesis in
Artemisia annua, indicating AaEIN3 negatively regulates artemisinin biosynthesis.
Further study showed the downregulation of artemisinin biosynthesis by ethylene
required the mediation of AaEIN3. AaEIN3 could accelerate leaf senescence, and
leaf senescence attenuated the expression of ADS, DBR2, CYP71AV1, and AaORA that 
are involved in artemisinin biosynthesis. Collectively, our study demonstrated a 
negative correlation between ethylene signaling and artemisinin biosynthesis,
which is ascribed to AaEIN3-induced senescence process of leaves. Our work
provided novel knowledge on the regulatory network of plant hormones for
artemisinin metabolic pathway.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2018.00413 
PMCID: PMC5895717
PMID: 29675029 

