
1. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Apr 25;11(1):266. doi: 10.1186/s13071-018-2810-z.

DNA barcoding of morphologically characterized mosquitoes belonging toÂ the
subfamily Culicinae from Sri Lanka.

Weeraratne TC(1), Surendran SN(2), Parakrama Karunaratne SHP(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of Peradeniya,
Peradeniya, Sri Lanka.
(2)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of Jaffna, Jaffna, Sri
Lanka.
(3)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of Peradeniya,
Peradeniya, Sri Lanka. shppk@pdn.ac.lk.
(4)National Institute of Fundamental Studies, Hantana, Kandy, Sri Lanka.
shppk@pdn.ac.lk.

BACKGROUND: Vectors of mosquito-borne diseases in Sri Lanka, except for malaria, 
belong to the subfamily Culicinae, which includes nearly 84% of the mosquito
fauna of the country. Hence, accurate and precise species identification of
culicine mosquitoes is a crucial factor in implementing effective vector control 
strategies. During the present study, a combined effort using morphology and DNA 
barcoding was made to characterize mosquitoes of the subfamily Culicinae for the 
first time from nine districts of Sri Lanka. Cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1
(cox1) gene from the mitochondrial genome and the internal transcribed spacer 2
(ITS2) region from the nuclear ribosomal DNA were used for molecular
characterization.
RESULTS: According to morphological identification, the field collected adult
mosquitoes belonged to 5 genera and 14 species, i.e. Aedes aegypti, Ae.
albopictus, Ae. pallidostriatus, Aedes sp. 1, Armigeres sp. 1, Culex
bitaeniorhynchus, Cx. fuscocephala, Cx. gelidus, Cx. pseudovishnui, Cx.
quinquefasciatus, Cx. tritaeniorhynchus, Cx. whitmorei, Mansonia uniformis and
Mimomyia chamberlaini. Molecular analyses of 62 cox1 and 36 ITS2 sequences were
exclusively comparable with the morphological identifications of all the species 
except for Ae. pallidostriatus and Aedes sp. 1. Although the species
identification of Armigeres sp. 1 specimens using morphological features was not 
possible during this study, DNA barcodes of the specimens matched 100% with the
publicly available Ar. subalbatus sequences, giving their species status.
Analysis of all the cox1 sequences (14 clades supported by strong bootstrap value
in the Neighbor-Joining tree and interspecific distances of > 3%) showed the
presence of 14 different species. This is the first available DNA sequence in the
GenBank records for morphologically identified Ae. pallidostriatus. Aedes sp. 1
could not be identified morphologically or by publicly available sequences. Aedes
aegypti, Ae. albopictus and all Culex species reported during the current study
are vectors of human diseases. All these vector species showed comparatively high
diversity.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study reflects the significance of integrated systematic
approach and use of cox1 and ITS genetic markers in mosquito taxonomy. Results of
DNA barcoding were comparable with morphological identifications and, more
importantly, DNA barcoding could accurately identify the species in the instances
where the traditional morphological identification failed due to
indistinguishable characters of damaged specimens and the presence of subspecies.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-018-2810-z 
PMCID: PMC5918568
PMID: 29695263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

