
1. Cell Death Dis. 2018 May 1;9(5):498. doi: 10.1038/s41419-018-0540-y.

Artemether attenuates LPS-induced inflammatory bone loss by inhibiting
osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption via suppression of MAPK signaling pathway.

Wu H(1)(2), Hu B(1)(2), Zhou X(1)(2), Zhou C(1)(2), Meng J(1)(2), Yang Y(1)(2),
Zhao X(1)(2), Shi Z(1)(2), Yan S(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310009, China.
(2)Orthopedic Research Institute of Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310009, China.
(3)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310009, China. zrjwsj@zju.edu.cn.
(4)Orthopedic Research Institute of Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310009, China.
zrjwsj@zju.edu.cn.

Osteolysis is an osteolytic lesion featured by enhanced osteoclast formation and 
potent bone erosion. Lacking of effective regimen for treatment of the
pathological process highlights the importance of identifying agents that can
suppress the differentiation and function of osteoclast. Artemether is a natural 
compound derived from Artemisia annua L. and it is popularized for the treatment 
of malaria. In present study, we demonstrated that artemether could suppress
RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis and expression of osteoclast marker genes such
as tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase, cathepsin K, matrix metalloproteinase 9, 
nuclear factor of activated T-cell cytoplasmic 1, and dendritic cell-specific
transmembrane protein. It inhibited the osteoclastic bone resorption in a
dose-dependent manner in vitro. Furthermore, artemether attenuated RANKL-induced 
MAPKs (ERK, JNK, p-38) activity. In addition, we have showed that artemether was 
able to mitigate bone erosion in aÂ murine model of LPS-induced inflammatory bone 
loss. Taken together, these findings suggest that artemether reduces inflammatory
bone loss via inhibition of MAPKs activation during osteoclast differentiation,
and it might be a potential candidate for the treatment of osteoclast-related
disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-018-0540-y 
PMCID: PMC5924411
PMID: 29703893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

