
1. PLoS One. 2018 May 2;13(5):e0196765. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0196765.
eCollection 2018.

Polymorphism in merozoite surface protein-7E of Plasmodium vivax in Thailand:
Natural selection related to protein secondary structure.

Cheng CW(1), Putaporntip C(1), Jongwutiwes S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology of Malaria and Opportunistic Parasites Research Unit,
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand.

Merozoite surface protein 7 (MSP-7) is a multigene family expressed during
malaria blood-stage infection. MSP-7 forms complex with MSP-1 prior to merozoite 
egress from erythrocytes, and could affect merozoite invasion of erythrocytes. To
characterize sequence variation in the orthologue in P. vivax (PvMSP-7), a gene
member encoding PvMSP-7E was analyzed among 92 Thai isolates collected from 3
major endemic areas of Thailand (Northwest: Tak, Northeast: Ubon Ratchathani, and
South: Yala and Narathiwat provinces). In total, 52 distinct haplotypes were
found to circulate in these areas. Although population structure based on this
locus was observed between each endemic area, no genetic differentiation occurred
between populations collected from different periods in the same endemic area,
suggesting spatial but not temporal genetic variation. Sequence
microheterogeneity in both N- and C- terminal regions was predicted to display 4 
and 6 α-helical domains, respectively. Signals of purifying selection were
observed in α-helices II-X, suggesting structural or functional constraint in
these domains. By contrast, α-helix-I spanning the putative signal peptide was
under positive selection, in which amino acid substitutions could alter predicted
CD4+ T helper cell epitopes. The central region of PvMSP-7E comprised the
5'-trimorphic and the 3'-dimorphic subregions. Positive selection was identified 
in the 3' dimorphic subregion of the central domain. A consensus of intrinsically
unstructured or disordered protein was predicted to encompass the entire central 
domain that contained a number of putative B cell epitopes and putative protein
binding regions. Evidences of intragenic recombination were more common in the
central region than the remainders of the gene. These results suggest that the
extent of sequence variation, recombination events and selective pressures in the
PvMSP-7E locus seem to be differentially affected by protein secondary structure.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0196765 
PMCID: PMC5931635
PMID: 29718980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

