
1. Korean J Parasitol. 2018 Apr;56(2):153-165. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2018.56.2.153. Epub 
2018 Apr 30.

Unraveling Haplotype Diversity of the Apical Membrane Antigen-1 Gene in
Plasmodium falciparum Populations in Thailand.

Lumkul L(1), Sawaswong V(1), Simpalipan P(1), Kaewthamasorn M(2), Harnyuttanakorn
P(1), Pattaradilokrat S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok
10330, Thailand.
(2)Veterinary Parasitology Research Group, Department of Pathology, Faculty of
Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.

Development of an effective vaccine is critically needed for the prevention of
malaria. One of the key antigens for malaria vaccines is the apical membrane
antigen 1 (AMA-1) of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, the
surface protein for erythrocyte invasion of the parasite. The gene encoding AMA-1
has been sequenced from populations of P. falciparum worldwide, but the haplotype
diversity of the gene in P. falciparum populations in the Greater Mekong
Subregion (GMS), including Thailand, remains to be characterized. In the present 
study, the AMA-1 gene was PCR amplified and sequenced from the genomic DNA of 65 
P. falciparum isolates from 5 endemic areas in Thailand. The nearly full-length
1,848 nucleotide sequence of AMA-1 was subjected to molecular analyses, including
nucleotide sequence diversity, haplotype diversity and deduced amino acid
sequence diversity and neutrality tests. Phylogenetic analysis and pairwise
population differentiation (Fst indices) were performed to infer the population
structure. The analyses identified 60 single nucleotide polymorphic loci,
predominately located in domain I of AMA-1. A total of 31 unique AMA-1 haplotypes
were identified, which included 11 novel ones. The phylogenetic tree of the AMA-1
haplotypes revealed multiple clades of AMA-1, each of which contained parasites
of multiple geographical origins, consistent with the Fst indices indicating
genetic homogeneity or gene flow among geographically distinct populations of P. 
falciparum in Thailand's borders with Myanmar, Laos and Cambodia. In summary, the
study revealed novel haplotypes and population structure needed for the further
advancement of AMA-1-based malaria vaccines in the GMS.

DOI: 10.3347/kjp.2018.56.2.153 
PMCID: PMC5976018
PMID: 29742870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

