
1. J Immunol Res. 2018 Mar 25;2018:6529681. doi: 10.1155/2018/6529681. eCollection
2018.

Immune Response and Evasion Mechanisms of Plasmodium falciparum Parasites.

Belachew EB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, College of Natural Science, Mizan Tepi University, Tepi,
Ethiopia.

Malaria causes approximately 212 million cases and 429 thousand deaths annually. 
Plasmodium falciparum is responsible for the vast majority of deaths (99%) than
others. The virulence of P. falciparum is mostly associated with immune
response-evading ability. It has different mechanisms to evade both Anopheles
mosquito and human host immune responses. Immune-evading mechanisms in mosquito
depend mainly on the Pfs47 gene that inhibits Janus kinase-mediated activation.
Host complement factor also protects human complement immune attack of
extracellular gametes in Anopheles mosquito midgut. In the human host, evasion
largely results from antigenic variation, polymorphism, and sequestration. They
also induce Kupffer cell apoptosis at the preerythrocytic stage and interfere
with phagocytic functions of macrophage by hemozoin in the erythrocytic stage.
Lack of major histocompatibility complex-I molecule expression on the surface red
blood cells also avoids recognition by CD8+ T cells. Complement proteins could
allow for the entry of parasite into the red blood cell. Intracellular survival
also assists the escape of malarial parasite. Invading, evading, and immune
response mechanisms both in malaria vector and human host are critical to design 
appropriate vaccine. As a result, the receptors and ligands involved in different
stages of malaria parasites should be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/6529681 
PMCID: PMC5889876
PMID: 29765991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

