
1. Infect Immun. 2018 Jul 23;86(8). pii: e00929-17. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00929-17. Print
2018 Aug.

The Glycosylphosphatidylinositol Transamidase Complex Subunit PbGPI16 of
Plasmodium berghei Is Important for Inducing Experimental Cerebral Malaria.

Liu Q(1), Zhao Y(1), Zheng L(1), Zhu X(1), Cui L(2)(3), Cao Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China.
(2)Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China luc2@psu.edu ymcao@cmu.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania, USA.

In animal models of experimental cerebral malaria (ECM), the
glycosylphosphatidylinositols (GPIs) and GPI anchors are the major factors that
induce nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) activation and proinflammatory responses,
which contribute to malaria pathogenesis. GPIs and GPI anchors are transported to
the cell surface via a process called GPI transamidation, which involves the GPI 
transamidase (GPI-T) complex. In this study, we showed that GPI16, one of the
GPI-T subunits, is highly conserved among Plasmodium species. Genetic knockout of
pbgpi16 (Δpbgpi16) in the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei strain ANKA 
led to a significant reduction of the amounts of GPIs in the membranes of
merozoites, as well as surface display of several GPI-anchored merozoite surface 
proteins. Compared with the wild-type parasites, Δpbgpi16 parasites in C57BL/6
mice caused much less NF-κB activation and elicited a substantially attenuated T 
helper type 1 response. As a result, Δpbgpi16 mutant-infected mice displayed much
less severe brain pathology, and considerably fewer Δpbgpi16 mutant-infected mice
died from ECM. This study corroborated the GPI toxin as a significant inducer of 
ECM and further suggested that vaccines against parasite GPIs may be a promising 
strategy to limit the severity of malaria.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00929-17 
PMCID: PMC6056855
PMID: 29784863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

