
1. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2018 Jun;43(11):2264-2260. doi:
10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20180329.007.

[Molecular cloning and characterization of CMK from Artemisia annua].

[Article in Chinese]

Fan YF(1)(2), Zhang M(1)(2), Xiang LE(1)(2), Zhang FY(1)(2), Lan XZ(3), Liao
ZH(1)(2), Yang CX(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Eco-environments in Three Gorges Reservoir Region (Ministry 
of Education), School of Life Science, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715,
China.
(2)SWU-TAAHC Medicinal Plant Joint R & D Centre, Southwest University, Chongqing 
400715, China.
(3)TAAHC-SWU Medicinal Plant Joint R & D Centre, Xizang Agricultural and
Husbandry College, Nyingchi 860000, China.

Artemisinin is a preferred medicine in the treatment of malaria. In this study,
AaCMK, a key gene involved in the upstream pathway of artemisinin biosynthesis,
was cloned and characterized from Artemisia annua for the first time. The
full-length cDNA of AaCMK was 1 462 bp and contained an ORF of 1 197 bp that
encoded a 399-anomo-acid polypeptide. Tissue expression pattern analysis showed
that AaCMK was expressed in leaves, flowers, roots and stems, but with higher
expression level in glandular secretory trichomes. In addition, the expression of
AaCMK was markedly increased after MeJA treatment. Subcellular localization
showed that the protein encoded by AaCMK was localized in chloroplast.
Overexpression of AaCMK in Arabidopsis increased the contents of chlorophyll a,
chlorophyll b and carotenoids. These results suggest that AaCMK plays an
important role in the biosynthesis of terpenoids in A. annua and this research
provids a candidate gene that could be used for engineering the artemisinin
biosynthesis.

CopyrightÂ© by the Chinese Pharmaceutical Association.

DOI: 10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20180329.007 
PMID: 29945376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this article and the planning
committee members and staff have no relevant financial relationships with
commercial interests to disclose.

