
1. Gene. 2018 Oct 30;675:240-253. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2018.06.084. Epub 2018 Jun 26.

Deciphering the role of IspD (2‑C‑methyl‑D‑erythritol 4‑phosphate
cytidyltransferase) enzyme as a potential therapeutic drug target against
Plasmodium vivax.

Saggu GS(1), Garg S(2), Pala ZR(1), Kochar SK(3), Saxena V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, 
Pilani, Rajasthan, India.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, 
Pilani, Rajasthan, India. Electronic address: shilpi@pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in.
(3)Department of Medicine, Sardar Patel Medical College, Bikaner, Rajasthan,
India.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, 
Pilani, Rajasthan, India. Electronic address:
vishalsaxena@pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in.

Biosynthesis of isoprenoids (MEP Pathway) in apicoplast has an important role
during the erythrocytic stages of Plasmodium, as it is the sole pathway to
provide the major isoprene units required as metabolic precursor for various
housekeeping activities. With the intensifying need to identify a novel
therapeutic drug target against Plasmodium, the MEP pathway and its components
are considered as potential therapeutic targets, due to the difference in the
isoprenoid synthesis route (MVA) functional in the host cells. While few major
components have already been studied from this pathway for their potential as a
drug target, IspD (2-C-methyl-D-erythritol-4-phosphate cytidyltransferase)
enzyme, the enzyme catalyzing the third step of the pathway has only been tested 
against a synthetic compound from Malaria box called MMV008138, which also has
not shown adequate inhibitory activity against P. vivax IspD. In the present
study, to validate the potential of PvIspD as a drug target, various
antimicrobial agents were screened for their inhibition possibilities, using
in-vitro High Throughput Screening (HTS) technique. Shortlisted antimicrobial
drug molecules like Cefepime, Tunicamycin and Rifampicin were further validated
by in-vitro biochemical enzyme inhibition assays where they showed activity at
nanomolar concentrations suggesting them or their derivatives as prospective
future antimalarials. This study also confirmed the in-vivo expression of PvIspD 
protein during asexual stages by sub-cellular localization in apicoplast and
explores the importance of the IspD enzyme in the development of new
therapeutics.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2018.06.084 
PMID: 29958953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

