
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Jul 4;8(1):10097. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-28179-2.

Identifying Recrudescent Plasmodium falciparum in Treated Malaria Patients by
Real-time PCR and High Resolution Melt Analysis of Genetic Diversity.

Beshir KB(1), Diallo N(2), Sutherland CJ(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology & Infection, Faculty of Infectious & Tropical
Disease, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
Khalid.Beshir@lshtm.ac.uk.
(2)Malaria Research and Training Centre (MRTC), Department of Epidemiology of
Parasitic Diseases, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Sciences, Techniques and
Technologies of Bamako, Bamako, Mali.
(3)Department of Immunology & Infection, Faculty of Infectious & Tropical
Disease, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Clinical Parasitology, Hospital for Tropical Diseases,
University College London Hospitals Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.

Recurrent parasitaemia during follow up of clinical trials of antimalarial drug
efficacy results from either recrudescence of parasites surviving treatment or
from parasites newly emerging from the hepatic stage of infection. Nested PCR is 
used to distinguish these two possibilities and the technique is difficult to
standardise. There is risk of both false positive and false negative results,
leading to misclassification errors. The high-resolution melt (HRM) assay was
developed with pairs of conserved primers targeting blocks of merozoite surface
protein 1 and 2 (msp1 and msp2) genes, and polymorphisms were compared using
sequence-confirmed Plasmodium falciparum DNA samples from laboratory isolates. In
this study, the HRM dissociation profiles of msp1 and msp2 amplicons were
determined and validated against parasite isolates from malaria patients. The
msp1 and msp2 profiles of both laboratory and clinical isolates were reproducibly
differentiated by HRM. These rapid assays are performed in a closed-tube system, 
and so avoid cross-contamination while increasing throughput, which are two major
advantages. The HRM assays offer significant gains in simplicity, speed and
interpretation of results, and reduced analysis cost, for studies that require
discrimination of parasite clones. Assay performance in large-scale studies
utilizing DNA samples derived from filter-paper bloodspots should now be
evaluated.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-28179-2 
PMCID: PMC6031682
PMID: 29973679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

