
1. mBio. 2018 Jul 3;9(4). pii: e00905-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00905-18.

The Actinomyosin Motor Drives Malaria Parasite Red Blood Cell Invasion but Not
Egress.

Perrin AJ(1), Collins CR(1), Russell MRG(2), Collinson LM(2), Baker DA(3),
Blackman MJ(4)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Biochemistry Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United
Kingdom.
(2)Electron Microscopy Science Technology Platform, The Francis Crick Institute, 
London, United Kingdom.
(3)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene &
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Malaria Biochemistry Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United
Kingdom Mike.Blackman@crick.ac.uk.

Apicomplexa are obligate intracellular parasites that actively invade, replicate 
within, and egress from host cells. The parasite actinomyosin-based molecular
motor complex (often referred to as the glideosome) is considered an important
mediator of parasite motility and virulence. Mature intracellular parasites often
become motile just prior to egress from their host cells, and in some genera,
this motility is important for successful egress as well as for subsequent
invasion of new host cells. To determine whether actinomyosin-based motility is
important in the red blood cell egress and invasion activities of the malaria
parasite, we have used a conditional genetic approach to delete GAP45, a primary 
component of the glideosome, in asexual blood stages of Plasmodium falciparum Our
results confirm the essential nature of GAP45 for invasion but show that
P. falciparum does not require a functional motor complex to undergo egress from 
the red blood cell. Malarial egress therefore differs fundamentally from induced 
egress in the related apicomplexan Toxoplasma gondiiIMPORTANCE Clinical malaria
results from cycles of replication of single-celled parasites of the genus
Plasmodium in red blood cells. Intracellular parasite replication is followed by 
a highly regulated, protease-dependent process called egress, in which rupture of
the bounding membranes allows explosive release of daughter merozoites which
rapidly invade fresh red cells. A parasite actinomyosin-based molecular motor
(the glideosome) has been proposed to provide the mechanical force to drive
invasion. Studies of the related parasite Toxoplasma gondii have shown that
induced egress requires parasite motility, mediated by a functional glideosome.
However, whether the glideosome has a similar essential role in egress of malaria
merozoites from red blood cells is unknown. Here, we show that although a
functional glideosome is required for red blood cell invasion by Plasmodium
falciparum merozoites, it is not required for egress. These findings place
further emphasis on the key role of the protease cascade in malarial egress.

Copyright © 2018 Perrin et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00905-18 
PMCID: PMC6030552
PMID: 29970464  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

