
1. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2019 Jun;90:144-153. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2018.07.015. Epub
2018 Jul 27.

Unraveling the 3D genome of human malaria parasites.

Batugedara G(1), Le Roch KG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, University of California
Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, University of California
Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521, USA. Electronic address: karine.leroch@ucr.edu.

The chromosomes within the eukaryotic cell nucleus are highly dynamic and adopt
complex hierarchical structures. Understanding how this three-dimensional (3D)
nuclear architectureaffects gene regulation, cell cycle progression and disease
pathogenesis are important biological questions in development and disease.
Recently, many genome-wide technologies including chromosome conformation capture
(3C) and 3C-based methodologies (4C, 5C, and Hi-C) have been developed to
investigate 3D chromatin structure. In this review, we introduce 3D genome
methodologies, with a focus on their application for understanding the nuclear
architecture of the human malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum. An increasing 
amount of evidence now suggests that gene regulation in the parasite is largely
regulated by epigenetic mechanisms and nuclear reorganization. Here, we explore
the 3D genome architecture of P. falciparum, including local and global chromatin
structure. In addition, molecular components important for maintaining 3D
chromatin organization including architectural proteins and long non-coding RNAs 
are discussed. Collectively, these studies contribute to our understanding of how
the plasticity of 3D genome architecture regulates gene expression and cell cycle
progression in this deadly parasite.

Copyright Â© 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2018.07.015 
PMCID: PMC6348137
PMID: 30009946  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

