
1. PLoS Biol. 2018 Jul 16;16(7):e2005345. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2005345.
eCollection 2018 Jul.

Inter-subunit interactions drive divergent dynamics in mammalian and Plasmodium
actin filaments.

Douglas RG(1), Nandekar P(2)(3), Aktories JE(1), Kumar H(1)(2), Weber R(1),
Sattler JM(1), Singer M(1), Lepper S(1), Sadiq SK(2), Wade RC(2)(3)(4),
Frischknecht F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Parasitology, Center for Infectious Diseases, Heidelberg
University Medical School, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Molecular and Cellular Modeling, Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies 
(HITS), Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Center for Molecular Biology (ZMBH), DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing (IWR), Heidelberg, Germany.

Cell motility is essential for protozoan and metazoan organisms and typically
relies on the dynamic turnover of actin filaments. In metazoans, monomeric actin 
polymerises into usually long and stable filaments, while some protozoans form
only short and highly dynamic actin filaments. These different dynamics are
partly due to the different sets of actin regulatory proteins and partly due to
the sequence of actin itself. Here we probe the interactions of actin subunits
within divergent actin filaments using a comparative dynamic molecular model and 
explore their functions using Plasmodium, the protozoan causing malaria, and
mouse melanoma derived B16-F1 cells as model systems. Parasite actin tagged to a 
fluorescent protein (FP) did not incorporate into mammalian actin filaments, and 
rabbit actin-FP did not incorporate into parasite actin filaments. However,
exchanging the most divergent region of actin subdomain 3 allowed such reciprocal
incorporation. The exchange of a single amino acid residue in subdomain 2 (N41H) 
of Plasmodium actin markedly improved incorporation into mammalian filaments. In 
the parasite, modification of most subunit-subunit interaction sites was lethal, 
whereas changes in actin subdomains 1 and 4 reduced efficient parasite motility
and hence mosquito organ penetration. The strong penetration defects could be
rescued by overexpression of the actin filament regulator coronin. Through these 
comparative approaches we identified an essential and common contributor,
subdomain 3, which drives the differential dynamic behaviour of two highly
divergent eukaryotic actins in motile cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2005345 
PMCID: PMC6055528
PMID: 30011270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

