
1. Malar J. 2018 Aug 6;17(1):283. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2435-x.

A bioreactor system for the manufacture of a genetically modified Plasmodium
falciparum blood stage malaria cell bank for use in a clinical trial.

Pawliw R(1), Farrow R(1), Sekuloski S(1), Jennings H(1), Healer J(2), Phuong
T(1), Sathe P(2), Pasay C(1), Evans K(2), Cowman AF(2), Schofield L(2)(3), Chen
N(4), McCarthy J(1)(5), Trenholme K(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Tropical Medicine Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research
Institute, 300 Herston Rd, Herston, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(2)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Australian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine, James Cook University,
Cairns, Australia.
(4)Department of Drug Resistance and Diagnostics, Australian Army Malaria
Institute, Brisbane, Australia.
(5)School of Medicine, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(6)Clinical Tropical Medicine Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research
Institute, 300 Herston Rd, Herston, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
Katharine.Trenholme@qimrberghofer.edu.au.
(7)School of Medicine, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
Katharine.Trenholme@qimrberghofer.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Although the use of induced blood stage malaria infection has proven 
to be a valuable tool for testing the efficacy of vaccines and drugs against
Plasmodium falciparum, a limiting factor has been the availability of Good
Manufacturing Practice (GMP)-compliant defined P. falciparum strains for in vivo 
use. The aim of this study was to develop a cost-effective method for the
large-scale production of P. falciparum cell banks suitable for use in clinical
trials.
METHODS: Genetically-attenuated parasites (GAP) were produced by targeted
deletion of the gene encoding the knob associated histidine rich protein (kahrp) 
from P. falciparum strain 3D7. A GAP master cell bank (MCB) was manufactured by
culturing parasites in an FDA approved single use, closed system sterile plastic 
bioreactor. All components used to manufacture the MCB were screened to comply
with standards appropriate for in vivo use. The cryopreserved MCB was subjected
to extensive testing to ensure GMP compliance for a phase 1 investigational
product.
RESULTS: Two hundred vials of the GAP MCB were successfully manufactured. At
harvest, the GAP MCB had a parasitaemia of 6.3%, with 96% of parasites at ring
stage. Testing confirmed that all release criteria were met (sterility, absence
of viral contaminants and endotoxins, parasite viability following
cryopreservation, identity and anti-malarial drug sensitivity of parasites).
CONCLUSION: Large-scale in vitro culture of P. falciparum parasites using a wave 
bioreactor can be achieved under GMP-compliant conditions. This provides a
cost-effective methodology for the production of malaria parasites suitable for
administration in clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2435-x 
PMCID: PMC6080485
PMID: 30081913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

