
1. Int J Parasitol. 2018 Oct;48(12):947-954. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.05.009. Epub
2018 Aug 11.

The success of sequence capture in relation to phylogenetic distance from a
reference genome: a case study of avian haemosporidian parasites.

Huang X(1), Hansson R(2), Palinauskas V(3), Valkiūnas G(3), Hellgren O(2), Bensch
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Ecology and Evolution Lab, Department of Biology, Lund University,
Sölvegatan 37, SE-22362, Sweden. Electronic address: xi.huang@biol.lu.se.
(2)Molecular Ecology and Evolution Lab, Department of Biology, Lund University,
Sölvegatan 37, SE-22362, Sweden.
(3)Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, Vilnius 2100, LT-08412, Lithuania.

Genomic sequencing of avian haemosporidian parasites (Haemosporida) has been
challenging due to excessive contamination from host DNA. In this study, we
developed a cost-effective protocol to obtain parasite sequences from naturally
infected birds, based on targeted sequence capture and next generation
sequencing. With the genomic data of Haemoproteus tartakovskyi as a reference, we
successfully sequenced up to 1000 genes from each of the 15 selected samples
belonging to nine different cytochrome b lineages, eight of which belong to
Haemoproteus and one to Plasmodium. The targeted sequences were enriched to
∼104-fold, and mixed infections were identified as well as the proportions of
each mixed lineage. We found that the total number of reads and the proportions
of exons sequenced decreased when the parasite lineage became more divergent from
the reference genome. For each of the samples, the recovery of sequences from
different exons varied with the function and GC content of the exon. From the
obtained sequences, we detected within-lineage variation in both mitochondrial
and nuclear genes, which may be a result of local adaptation to different host
species and environmental conditions. This targeted sequence capture protocol can
be applied to a broader range of species and will open a new door for further
studies on disease diagnostics and comparative analysis of haemosporidians
evolution.

Copyright © 2018 Australian Society for Parasitology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2018.05.009 
PMID: 30107149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

