
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2018 Nov;65:340-349. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.08.013. Epub
2018 Aug 16.

Molecular evolution and functional divergence of IspD homologs in malarial
parasites.

Chellapandi P(1), Prathiviraj R(2), Prisilla A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Systems Engineering Lab, Department of Bioinformatics, School of
Life Sciences, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli 620024, Tamil Nadu,
India. Electronic address: pchellapandi@gmail.com.
(2)Molecular Systems Engineering Lab, Department of Bioinformatics, School of
Life Sciences, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli 620024, Tamil Nadu,
India.

Malaria is one of the leading parasitic diseases to humans caused by Plasmodium
falciparum. It is imperative to discover novel targets for the development of
antimalarial drugs. The 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol 4-phosphate cytidylyltransferase 
(IspD) in 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol-4-phosphate pathway has been considered as a
second in vivo off-target for antimalarial drugs discovery as its essentiality in
malarial parasites and devoid in mammals. Our study was intended to reveal the
molecular basis of its functional parts by inferring diversity, origin and
evolution across important malarial parasites. Phylogenetic analyses revealed its
conservation probability and sequence homology among bacterial IspD homologs. It 
also indicated that Plasmodium IspD homologs were distantly related to each other
and their functional counterparts originated from different progenitor genes.
Nucleotide-diphospho-sugar transferase fold and conserved domain of them might
have evolved from green sulphur bacteria, whereas coiled-coil region and
apicoplast targeting signal derived from protozoal origins. These homologs
contained prospectively definable motifs subject to neutral or nearly neutral
evolution on a scale that were diverged radically and subsequently converged in
making spatial structural arrangements. Our genetic diversity analysis has shown 
a constructive signal for identifying the evolutionary constraints, which has
imposed on their functional divergence in malarial parasites. Thus, this study
provides a novel insight into our understanding of the molecular basis of the
origin and evolution history of IspD homologs across apicomplexa.

Copyright Â© 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.08.013 
PMID: 30118875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

