
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2018 Aug 29;8:290. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00290.
eCollection 2018.

Comparative Evolution of Sand Fly Salivary Protein Families and Implications for 
Biomarkers of Vector Exposure and Salivary Vaccine Candidates.

Coutinho-Abreu IV(1), Valenzuela JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vector Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Rockville, MD, United States.

Sand fly salivary proteins that produce a specific antibody response in humans
and animal reservoirs have been shown to be promising biomarkers of sand fly
exposure. Furthermore, immunity to sand fly salivary proteins were shown to
protect rodents and non-human primates against Leishmania infection. We are
missing critical information regarding the divergence amongst sand fly salivary
proteins from different sand fly vectors, a knowledge that will support the
search of broad or specific salivary biomarkers of vector exposure and those for 
vaccines components against leishmaniasis. Here, we compare the molecular
evolution of the salivary protein families in New World and Old World sand flies 
from 14 different sand fly vectors. We found that the protein families unique to 
OW sand flies are more conserved than those unique to NW sand flies regarding
both sequence polymorphisms and copy number variation. In addition, the protein
families unique to OW sand flies do not display as many conserved cysteine
residues as the one unique to the NW group (28.5% in OW vs. 62.5% in NW).
Moreover, the expression of specific protein families is restricted to the
salivary glands of unique sand fly taxon. For instance, the ParSP15 family is
unique to the Larroussius subgenus whereas phospholipase A2 is only expressed in 
member of Larroussius and Adlerius subgenera. The SP2.5-like family is only
expressed in members of the Phlebotomus and Paraphlebotomus subgenera. The
sequences shared between OW and NW sand flies have diverged at similar rates
(38.7 and 45.3% amino acid divergence, respectively), yet differences in gene
copy number were evident across protein families and sand fly species. Overall,
this comparative analysis sheds light on the different modes of sand fly salivary
protein family divergence. Also, it informs which protein families are unique and
conserved within taxon for the choice of taxon-specific biomarkers of vector
exposure, as well as those families more conserved across taxa to be used as
pan-specific vaccines for leishmaniasis.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00290 
PMCID: PMC6123390
PMID: 30211125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

