
1. Parasitol Res. 2018 Nov;117(11):3537-3545. doi: 10.1007/s00436-018-6051-z. Epub
2018 Sep 20.

Ellipsomyxa arariensis n. sp. (Myxozoa: Ceratomyxidae), a new myxozoan parasite
of Pygocentrus nattereri Kner, 1858 (Teleostei: Characidae) and Pimelodus ornatus
Kner, 1858 (Teleostei: Pimelodidae) from Marajó Island, in the Brazilian Amazon
region.

da Silva DT(1)(2), Matos PS(1)(2), Lima AM(3), Furtado AP(4), Hamoy I(2), Matos
ER(5).

Author information: 
(1)Carlos Azevedo Research Laboratory, Federal Rural University of the Amazon
(UFRA), Avenida Presidente Tancredo Neves, 2501, Montese, Belém, 66077-901, Pará,
Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Applied Genetics, Federal Rural University of Amazonia (UFRA),
Belém, Pará, Brazil.
(3)Federal Rural University of the Amazon (UFRA), Campus Tomé-Açu, Belém, Pará,
Brazil.
(4)Federal University of Pará (UFPA), Campus Belém, Belém, Pará, Brazil.
(5)Carlos Azevedo Research Laboratory, Federal Rural University of the Amazon
(UFRA), Avenida Presidente Tancredo Neves, 2501, Montese, Belém, 66077-901, Pará,
Brazil. edilson.matos9@gmail.com.

Ellipsomyxa arariensis n. sp. was found in the gallbladder of Pygocentrus
nattereri Kner, 1858 and Pimelodus ornatus Kner, 1858 from the Arari River on
Marajó Island in Pará, Brazil. The new species has disporous plasmodium that
varies in size and shape, with ellipsoidal mature spores in the sutural view that
have a curved suture line. The spores are 12.6 (12.0-13.4) μm in length and 7.3
(6.7-8.0) μm in width. The two polar capsules present in the spore are pyriform
and of equal size, with subterminal openings that project in opposite directions.
The polar capsules are 3.5 (3.4-4.0) μm long and 2.6 (2.5-3.2) μm wide. Based on 
the partial sequences of the SSU rRNA gene of the Ellipsomyxa arariensis n. sp.
spores found in Pygocentrus nattereri Kner, 1858 (1325 bps) and Pimelodus ornatus
Kner, 1858 (1240 bps), the new species is clearly distinct from all the other
myxozoan sequences deposited in GenBank. Based on Bayesian inference and p
distances, the new species belongs to the "Ellipsomyxa clade", together with all 
the other Ellipsomxa species, reinforcing the monophyletic status of this genus. 
Overall, the morphological data and the partial sequences of the SSU rRNA gene
provide a conclusive diagnosis of Ellipsomyxa arariensis n. sp. as a species
distinct from all the other Ellipsomyxa species described previously.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-018-6051-z 
PMID: 30238187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

