
1. Malar J. 2018 Oct 11;17(1):356. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2498-8.

Dynamics of Plasmodium falciparum gametocyte carriage in pregnant women under
intermittent preventive treatment with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine in Benin.

Jafari-Guemouri S(1)(2), Dhiab J(3)(4), Massougbodji A(5), Deloron P(3)(4),
Tuikue NN(3)(6).

Author information: 
(1)UMR 216 Mère et Enfant Face aux Infections Tropicales, Institut de Recherche
pour le Développement (IRD), 4, Avenue de l'Observatoire, 75270, Paris, France.
sayeh.guemouri@ird.fr.
(2)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75006, Paris, France.
sayeh.guemouri@ird.fr.
(3)UMR 216 Mère et Enfant Face aux Infections Tropicales, Institut de Recherche
pour le Développement (IRD), 4, Avenue de l'Observatoire, 75270, Paris, France.
(4)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75006, Paris, France.
(5)Centre d'Etude et de Recherche pour le Paludisme associé à la Grossesse et à
l'Enfance, Faculté des Sciences de Santé, Université d'Abomey-Calavi, 01 BP 188, 
Cotonou, Benin.
(6)Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, University of Ghana, P.O. Box
LG 581, Accra, Ghana.

BACKGROUND: In sub-Saharan Africa, malaria is a major cause of morbidity and
mortality, in particular in children and pregnant women. During pregnancy,
Plasmodium falciparum infected red blood cells expressing VAR2CSA are selected
from circulation by selective cytoadherence to chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan
receptors expressed in the placenta, leading to an increased susceptibility to
malaria, long-lasting infections and poor pregnancy outcome. Partly because of
these long-lasting infections, women were reported to have a higher density of
gametocytes in their peripheral blood, and are considered as a potential
reservoir for malaria transmission. To improve pregnancy outcome in areas of high
malaria transmission, The WHO recommends intermittent preventive treatment with
sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine (IPTp-SP) during antenatal care visits. The effect of
IPTp-SP on gametocyte carriage in infected pregnant women was studied.
METHODS: The levels of transcription of three gametocytes stage-specific genes
Pfs16 (expressed by sexually-committed ring stage parasites and fully matured
gametocytes), Pfs25 (expressed by female mature gametocytes) and Pfs230
(expressed by male mature gametocytes) were assessed by real-time PCR in 50 P.
falciparum infected women at early pregnancy (before implementation of IPTp-SP), 
and in 50 infected women at delivery. Sex ratios of male and female gametocytes
were determined in these women to assess the effect of IPTp-SP on the gametocyte 
populations.
RESULTS: The data show that the three transcript types specific to Pfs16, Pfs25
and Pfs230 were detected in all samples, both at inclusion and delivery. Levels
of Pfs25 and Pfs230 transcripts were higher at delivery than at inclusion
(p = 0.042 and p = 0.003), while the opposite was observed for Pfs16 (p = 0.048).
The ratio of male/female gametocyte transcript levels was higher at delivery than
at inclusion (p = 0.018). Since a mixed gender late stage gametocyte culture was 
used as a positive control, male and female gametocytes could not be quantified
in an absolute way in the samples. However, the amplification reliability of the 
Pfs25 and Pfs230 markers in the samples could be checked. A relative quantity of 
each type of Pfs transcript was, therefore, used to calculate the sex ratio
proxy.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that IPTp-SP treatment contributes to modify 
the parasite populations' structure during pregnancy. In line with previous
studies, we suggest that the continued use of SP in pregnant women as IPTp,
despite having a beneficial effect on the pregnancy outcome, could be a risk
factor for increased transmission. This reinforces the need for an alternative to
the SP drug for malaria prevention during pregnancy.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2498-8 
PMCID: PMC6180446
PMID: 30305101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

