
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2018 Dec;66:222-228. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.10.007. Epub
2018 Oct 11.

Molecular epidemiology and evolution of drug-resistant genes in the malaria
parasite Plasmodium falciparum in southwestern Nigeria.

Oboh MA(1), Singh US(2), Antony HA(2), Ndiaye D(1), Badiane AS(1), Ali NA(2),
Bharti PK(2), Das A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology and Mycology Laboratory, Université Cheikh Anta Diop, Dakar,
Senegal.
(2)Division of Vector Borne Diseases, ICMR-National Institute of Research in
Tribal Health, Jabalpur, India.
(3)Division of Vector Borne Diseases, ICMR-National Institute of Research in
Tribal Health, Jabalpur, India. Electronic address: aparupdas@nirth.res.in.

Malaria is an age-old disease of human kind living in the tropical and
sub-tropical regions of the globe, with Africa contributing the highest incidence
of morbidity and mortality. Among many hurdles, evolution and spread of
drug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum parasites constitute major challenges to
malaria control and elimination. Information on molecular epidemiology and
pattern of evolution of genes conferring resistance to different antimalarials
are needed to track the route of the spread of resistant parasites and also to
inform if the drug-resistant genes are adapted in the population following the
Darwinian model of evolution. In the present study, we have followed molecular
methods to detect both the known and emerging mutations in three genes (Pfcrt,
Pfdhfr and Pfdhps) of P. falciparum conferring resistance to chloroquine and
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine from two different states (Edo: meso-endemic and Lagos:
hypo-endemic) in southwestern Nigeria. High diversities in haplotypes and
nucleotides in genes responsible for chloroquine (Pfcrt) and sulfadoxine (Pfdhps)
resistance are recorded. About 96% of Pfdhfr and Pfdhps gene in both the meso-
and hypo- endemic areas were mutant type, followed by 61% in Pfcrt gene. Many
unique haplotypes of Pfdhps and Pfcrt were found to be segregated in these two
populations. One particular mutant haplotype of Pfdhfr (AIRNI) was found to be in
very high frequency in both Lagos and Edo. While the net haplotype diversity was 
highest in Pfdhps (0.81 in Lagos, 0.87 in Edo), followed by Pfcrt (0.69 in Lagos,
0.65 in Edo); highest number of haplotype was found in Pfdhps with 13 distinct
haplotypes, followed by seven in Pfcrt and four in Pfdhfr gene. Moreover,
detection of strong linkage among mutations of Pfcrt and Pfdhfr and feeble
evidence for balancing selection in Pfdhps are indicative of evolutionary
potential of mutation in genes responsible for drug resistance in Nigerian
populations of P. falciparum.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.10.007 
PMID: 30316883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

