
1. Malar J. 2018 Oct 12;17(1):361. doi: 10.1186/s12936-018-2513-0.

Genetic polymorphism and natural selection of circumsporozoite surface protein in
Plasmodium falciparum field isolates from Myanmar.

Lê HG(1)(2), Kang JM(1)(2), Moe M(3), Jun H(4), Thái TL(1)(2), Lee J(4), Myint
MK(3), Lin K(3), Sohn WM(1), Shin HJ(5), Kim TS(4), Na BK(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology and Tropical Medicine and Institute of Health
Sciences, Gyeongsang National University College of Medicine, Jinju, 52727,
Republic of Korea.
(2)BK21Plus Team for Anti-aging Biotechnology and Industry, Department of
Convergence Medical Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, 52727,
Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Medical Research Pyin Oo Lwin Branch, Pyin Oo Lwin, Myanmar.
(4)Department of Tropical Medicine and Inha Research Institute for Medical
Sciences, Inha University College of Medicine, Incheon, 22212, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Ajou University College of Medicine, Suwon, 16499,
Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Parasitology and Tropical Medicine and Institute of Health
Sciences, Gyeongsang National University College of Medicine, Jinju, 52727,
Republic of Korea. bkna@gnu.ac.kr.
(7)BK21Plus Team for Anti-aging Biotechnology and Industry, Department of
Convergence Medical Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, 52727,
Republic of Korea. bkna@gnu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum circumsporozoite protein (PfCSP) is one of the 
most extensively studied malaria vaccine candidates, but the genetic polymorphism
of PfCSP within and among the global P. falciparum population raises concerns
regarding the efficacy of a PfCSP-based vaccine efficacy. In this study, genetic 
diversity and natural selection of PfCSP in Myanmar as well as global P.
falciparum were comprehensively analysed.
METHODS: Blood samples were collected from 51 P. falciparum infected Myanmar
patients. Fifty-one full-length PfCSP genes were amplified from the blood samples
through a nested polymerase chain reaction, cloned into a TA cloning vector, and 
then sequenced. Polymorphic characteristics and natural selection of Myanmar
PfCSP were analysed using the DNASTAR, MEGA6, and DnaSP programs. Polymorphic
diversity and natural selection in publicly available global PfCSP were also
analysed.
RESULTS: The N-terminal and C-terminal non-repeat regions of Myanmar PfCSP showed
limited genetic variations. A comparative analysis of the two regions in global
PfCSP displayed similar patterns of low genetic diversity in global population,
but substantial geographic differentiation was also observed. The most notable
polymorphisms identified in the N-terminal region of global PfCSP were A98G and
19-amino acid length insertion in global population with different frequencies.
Major polymorphic characters in the C-terminal region of Myanmar and global PfCSP
were found in the Th2R and Th3R regions, where natural selection and
recombination occurred. The central repeat region of Myanmar PfCSP was highly
polymorphic, with differing numbers of repetitive repeat sequences NANP and NVDP.
The numbers of the NANP repeats varied among global PfCSP, with the highest
number of repeats seen in Asian and Oceanian PfCSP. Haplotype network analysis of
global PfCSP revealed that global PfCSP clustered into 103 different haplotypes
with geographically-separated populations.
CONCLUSION: Myanmar and global PfCSP displayed genetic diversity. N-terminal and 
C-terminal non-repeat regions were relatively conserved, but the central repeat
region displayed high levels of genetic polymorphism in Myanmar and global PfCSP.
The observed geographic pattern of genetic differentiation and the points of
evidence for natural selection and recombination suggest that the functional
consequences of the polymorphism should be considered for developing a vaccine
based on PfCSP.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-018-2513-0 
PMCID: PMC6186114
PMID: 30314440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

