
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Oct 22;12(10):e0006555. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0006555. eCollection 2018 Oct.

Genetic diversity in two Plasmodium vivax protein ligands for reticulocyte
invasion.

Roesch C(1), Popovici J(1), Bin S(1), Run V(1), Kim S(1), Ramboarina S(2),
Rakotomalala E(2), Rakotoarison RL(2), Rasoloharimanana T(2), Andriamanantena
Z(2), Kumar A(3), Guillotte-Blisnick M(4), Huon C(4), Serre D(5), Chitnis
CE(3)(4), Vigan-Womas I(2), Menard D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Molecular Epidemiology Unit, Institut Pasteur in Cambodia, Phnom Penh,
Cambodia.
(2)Immunology of Infectious Diseases Unit, Institut Pasteur de Madagascar,
Antananarivo, Madagascar.
(3)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), New
Delhi, India.
(4)Malaria Parasite Biology and Vaccines Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(5)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States of America.

The interaction between Plasmodium vivax Duffy binding protein (PvDBP) and Duffy 
antigen receptor for chemokines (DARC) has been described as critical for the
invasion of human reticulocytes, although increasing reports of P. vivax
infections in Duffy-negative individuals questions its unique role. To
investigate the genetic diversity of the two main protein ligands for
reticulocyte invasion, PvDBP and P. vivax Erythrocyte Binding Protein (PvEBP), we
analyzed 458 isolates collected in Cambodia and Madagascar from individuals
genotyped as Duffy-positive. First, we observed a high proportion of isolates
with multiple copies PvEBP from Madagascar (56%) where Duffy negative and
positive individuals coexist compared to Cambodia (19%) where Duffy-negative
population is virtually absent. Whether the gene amplification observed is
responsible for alternate invasion pathways remains to be tested. Second, we
found that the PvEBP gene was less diverse than PvDBP gene (12 vs. 33 alleles)
but provided evidence for an excess of nonsynonymous mutations with the complete 
absence of synonymous mutations. This finding reveals that PvEBP is under strong 
diversifying selection, and confirms the importance of this protein ligand in the
invasion process of the human reticulocytes and as a target of acquired immunity.
These observations highlight how genomic changes in parasite ligands improve the 
fitness of P. vivax isolates in the face of immune pressure and receptor
polymorphisms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006555 
PMCID: PMC6211765
PMID: 30346980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

