
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Nov 8;8(1):16581. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-34964-w.

Inducing controlled cell cycle arrest and re-entry during asexual proliferation
of Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasites.

van Biljon R(1), Niemand J(1), van Wyk R(1), Clark K(1), Verlinden B(1), Abrie
C(1), von Grüning H(1), Smidt W(2), Smit A(1), Reader J(1), Painter H(3), Llinás 
M(3)(4), Doerig C(5), Birkholtz LM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Genetics & Microbiology, Institute for Sustainable
Malaria Control, University of Pretoria, Private Bag x20, Hatfield, 0028, South
Africa.
(2)Centre for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, Department of
Biochemistry, Genetics & Microbiology, University of Pretoria, Private Bag x20,
Hatfield, 0028, South Africa.
(3)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Centre for Malaria Research,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Harrisburg, PA, 16802, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Harrisburg, PA, 16802, USA.
(5)Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and
Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Victoria, 3800, Australia.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Genetics & Microbiology, Institute for Sustainable
Malaria Control, University of Pretoria, Private Bag x20, Hatfield, 0028, South
Africa. lbirkholtz@up.ac.za.

The life cycle of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum is tightly
regulated, oscillating between stages of intense proliferation and quiescence.
Cyclic 48-hour asexual replication of Plasmodium is markedly different from cell 
division in higher eukaryotes, and mechanistically poorly understood. Here, we
report tight synchronisation of malaria parasites during the early phases of the 
cell cycle by exposure to DL-α-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO), which results in
the depletion of polyamines. This induces an inescapable cell cycle arrest in G1 
(~15 hours post-invasion) by blocking G1/S transition. Cell cycle-arrested
parasites enter a quiescent G0-like state but, upon addition of exogenous
polyamines, re-initiate their cell cycle. This ability to halt malaria parasites 
at a specific point in their cell cycle, and to subsequently trigger re-entry
into the cell cycle, provides a valuable framework to investigate cell cycle
regulation in these parasites. We subsequently used gene expression analyses to
show that re-entry into the cell cycle involves expression of Ca2+-sensitive
(cdpk4 and pk2) and mitotic kinases (nima and ark2), with deregulation of the
pre-replicative complex associated with expression of pk2. Changes in gene
expression could be driven through transcription factors MYB1 and two ApiAP2
family members. This new approach to parasite synchronisation therefore expands
our currently limited toolkit to investigate cell cycle regulation in malaria
parasites.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-34964-w 
PMCID: PMC6224408
PMID: 30409996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

