
1. Parasitol Int. 2019 Jun;70:70-76. doi: 10.1016/j.parint.2019.02.002. Epub 2019
Feb 3.

Polymorphism evidence in Plasmodium (Haemamoeba) lutzi Lucena, 1939 (Apicomplexa,
Haemosporida) isolated from Brazilian wild birds.

de Oliveira L(1), Cedrola F(2), Senra MVX(2), Scopel KKG(3), Martinele I(2),
Tostes R(2), Dias RJP(2), D'Agosto M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Protozoologia, Programa de Pós-graduação em Comportamento e
Biologia Animal, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Juiz
de Fora, Campus Universitário, Juiz de Fora, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Electronic
address: luisa_oliveirasv@hotmail.com.
(2)Laboratório de Protozoologia, Programa de Pós-graduação em Comportamento e
Biologia Animal, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Juiz
de Fora, Campus Universitário, Juiz de Fora, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Parasitologia, Microbiologia e Imunologia, Instituto de
Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Campus Universitário, 
Juiz de Fora, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Plasmodium parasites can infect great variety of bird species around the world
inflicting the so called avian malaria, an illness that could be fatal in some
cases and consequently, should be monitored and widely included into conservation
programs. The aim of this study was to characterize two lineages of Plasmodium
(Haemamoeba) lutzi found in some birds in the Atlantic Forest of Minas Gerais -
Brazil, that were morphologically identified after blood smears analyses under
light microscopy and molecularly by sequencing the mitochondrial cytochrome b
gene (cyt b). Besides these two lineages could be clearly morphologically
identified as P.(H.) lutzi, some variations in comparison with its original
description were noticed: absence of meronts and gametocytes (early and fully
grown) in polychromatic erythrocytes, the larger size of pigment granules in
meronts and gametocytes, and the presence of small vacuoles between pigment
accumulation in fully grow macrogametocytes. Moreover, a certain degree of
genetic intraspecific diversity was also observed across the lineages of
P. (H.) lutzi, indicating the existence of polymorphisms within this taxon, which
is uncommon in Haemosporida. These results allow discussion about species
boundaries within avian hemosporidians and highlight the importance of
multidisciplinary approaches for a more efficient species identification and
characterization.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parint.2019.02.002 
PMID: 30726716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

