
1. mBio. 2019 Feb 19;10(1). pii: e02866-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02866-18.

Alternative Splicing in Apicomplexan Parasites.

Yeoh LM(1)(2), Lee VV(1), McFadden GI(2), Ralph SA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
(2)School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia
saralph@unimelb.edu.au.

Alternative splicing is a widespread, essential, and complex component of gene
regulation. Apicomplexan parasites have long been recognized to produce
alternatively spliced transcripts for some genes and can produce multiple protein
products that are essential for parasite growth. Recent approaches are now
providing more wide-ranging surveys of the extent of alternative splicing; some
indicate that alternative splicing is less widespread than in other model
eukaryotes, whereas others suggest levels comparable to those of previously
studied groups. In many cases, apicomplexan alternative splicing events appear
not to generate multiple alternative proteins but instead produce aberrant or
noncoding transcripts. Nonetheless, appropriate regulation of alternative
splicing is clearly essential in Plasmodium and Toxoplasma parasites, suggesting 
a biological role for at least some of the alternative splicing observed. Several
studies have now disrupted conserved regulators of alternative splicing and
demonstrated lethal effects in apicomplexans. This minireview discusses methods
to accurately determine the extent of alternative splicing in Apicomplexa and
discuss potential biological roles for this conserved process in a phylum of
parasites with compact genomes.

Copyright Â© 2019 Yeoh et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02866-18 
PMCID: PMC6381282
PMID: 30782661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

