
1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2019 Jan 29;2019:8264861. doi: 10.1155/2019/8264861.
eCollection 2019.

Effect of Indigofera oblongifolia on the Hepatic Oxidative Status and Expression 
of Inflammatory and Apoptotic Genes during Blood-Stage Murine Malaria.

Dkhil MA(1)(2), Al-Shaebi EM(1), Al-Quraishy S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia.
(2)Department of Zoology and Entomology, College of Science, Helwan University,
Cairo, Egypt.

Malaria is a dangerous disease spread across several countries. Recent studies
have focused on medicinal plants to discover alternative agents to the currently 
used drugs for malaria treatment. Here, we investigated the potential role of
Indigofera oblongifolia leaf extract (IE) on hepatic inflammation in mice with
Plasmodium chabaudi-infected erythrocytes. Female C57BL/6 mice were divided into 
three groups. The first group served as a control noninfected group, while the
second and third groups were intraperitoneally injected with 106 erythrocytes
parasitized by P. chabaudi. Mice from the third group were treated daily with a
dose of 100 mg/kg of IE for 7 days. IE significantly reduced the number of
leukocytes and apoptotic cells. The numbers of CD68-positive cells decreased in
the livers of mice from the treatment group. Moreover, IE raised the hepatic
antioxidant levels (glutathione and catalase) and reduced the levels of hepatic
oxidative stress markers (malondialdehyde, nitric oxide, and reactive oxygen
species). IE regulated some functions of the genes related to immune responses,
including apoptotic genes (B-cell lymphoma-2, Bax, and caspase-3) and cytokine
genes (interleukin-1β (IL-1β), IL-6, interferon-γ, and tumor necrosis factor-α). 
Therefore, IE exerts significant effects against malaria and protects the liver
from injury caused by P. chabaudi via antioxidant and anti-inflammatory ways.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/8264861 
PMCID: PMC6374864
PMID: 30838089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

