
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Mar 20;20(6). pii: E1409. doi: 10.3390/ijms20061409.

ATP-Binding Cassette (ABC) Transporter Genes Involved in Pyrethroid Resistance in
the Malaria Vector Anopheles sinensis: Genome-Wide Identification,
Characteristics, Phylogenetics, and Expression Profile.

He Q(1)(2), Yan Z(3), Si F(4), Zhou Y(5), Fu W(6), Chen B(7).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Chongqing University, Chongqing 401331, China.
hqy7171@126.com.
(2)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Vector Insects, Institute of Entomology and
Molecular Biology, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing 401331, China.
hqy7171@126.com.
(3)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Vector Insects, Institute of Entomology and
Molecular Biology, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing 401331, China.
yzt318@163.com.
(4)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Vector Insects, Institute of Entomology and
Molecular Biology, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing 401331, China.
sifengling1217@163.com.
(5)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Vector Insects, Institute of Entomology and
Molecular Biology, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing 401331, China.
zhouyong_320@163.com.
(6)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Vector Insects, Institute of Entomology and
Molecular Biology, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing 401331, China.
fuice@126.com.
(7)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Vector Insects, Institute of Entomology and
Molecular Biology, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing 401331, China.
bin.chen@cqnu.edu.cn.

background: The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters family is one of the
largest families of membrane proteins existing in all living organisms.
Pyrethroid resistance has become the largest unique obstacle for mosquito control
worldwide. ABC transporters are thought to be associated with pyrethroid
resistance in some agricultural pests, but little information is known for
mosquitoes. Herein, we investigated the diversity, location, characteristics,
phylogenetics, and evolution of ABC transporter family of genes in the Anopheles 
sinensis genome, and identified the ABC transporter genes associated with
pyrethroid resistance through expression profiles using RNA-seq and qPCR.
Results: 61 ABC transporter genes are identified and divided into eight
subfamilies (ABCA-H), located on 22 different scaffolds. Phylogenetic and
evolution analyses with ABC transporters of A. gambiae, Drosophila melanogaster, 
and Homo sapiens suggest that the ABCD, ABCG, and ABCH subfamilies are monophyly,
and that the ABCC and ABCG subfamilies have experienced a gene duplication event.
Both RNA-seq and qPCR analyses show that the AsABCG28 gene is uniquely
significantly upregulated gene in all three field pyrethroid-resistant
populations (Anhui, Chongqing, and Yunnan provinces) in comparison with a
laboratory-susceptible strain from Jiangsu province. The AsABCG28 is
significantly upregulated at 12-h and 24-h after deltamethrin exposure in
three-day-old female adults. Conclusion: This study provides the information
frame for ABC transporter subfamily of genes, and lays an important basis for the
better understanding and further research of ABC transporter function in
insecticide toxification. The AsABCG28 gene is associated with pyrethroid
detoxification, and it functions at later period in the detoxification process
for xenobiotics transportation.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20061409 
PMCID: PMC6471920
PMID: 30897799  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

