
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2019 Aug;160:56-65. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2019.04.001. Epub 2019
Apr 10.

Expression and purification optimization of an N-terminal Pfs230
transmission-blocking vaccine candidate.

Lee SM(1), Plieskatt J(2), Krishnan S(3), Raina M(3), Harishchandra R(3), King
CR(2).

Author information: 
(1)PATH's Malaria Vaccine Initiative (MVI), 455 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Suite
1000, Washington, DC, 20001-2621, USA. Electronic address: smlee@path.org.
(2)PATH's Malaria Vaccine Initiative (MVI), 455 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Suite
1000, Washington, DC, 20001-2621, USA.
(3)Syngene International Ltd, Plot No.2,3,4 &5 Phase IV, Bommasandra Jigani Link 
Road, Bommasandra Industrial Area, Bangalore, 560099, India.

In an effort to control and eventually eliminate malaria, the development of
transmission-blocking vaccines has long been sought. However, few antigens have
been evaluated in clinical trials, often due to limitations in the expression and
purification of the antigen in sufficient yield and quality. Pfs230, a surface
antigen of gametocytes, has recently advanced to clinical evaluation as a
conjugate vaccine using the Pseudomonas aeruginosa exoprotein A carrier protein. 
Here we continue to build upon prior work of developing a Pfs230 candidate in the
baculovirus system, Pfs230C1 (aa 443-731), through systematic process development
efforts to improve yield and purity. Various insect cells including High Five,
Sf9 and Super Sf9 were first evaluated for quality and quantity of antigen, along
with three insect cell media. In the selection of Sf9 cells, an intact Pfs230C1
was expressed and harvested at 48 h for downstream development. A downstream
process, utilizing immobilized metal affinity column (IMAC), followed by ion
exchange (IEX) membranes (Mustang S) and finally IEX chromatography (DEAE)
yielded a pure Pfs230C1 protein. The complete process was repeated three times at
the 20 L scale. To support the eventual chemistry manufacturing and controls
(CMC) of Pfs230C1, analytical tools, including monoclonal antibodies, were
developed to characterize the identity, integrity, and purity of Pfs230C1. These 
analytical tools, taken in combination with the optimized process, were
implemented with Current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMP) in mind with the
ultimate objective of Phase I clinical trials.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2019.04.001 
PMCID: PMC6547048
PMID: 30978392  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

