
1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2019 Aug;10:20-27. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2019.04.002. Epub 2019 Apr 10.

In vitro susceptibility of Plasmodium falciparum isolates from the China-Myanmar 
border area to artemisinins and correlation with K13 mutations.

Zhang J(1), Li N(1), Siddiqui FA(2), Xu S(1), Geng J(1), Zhang J(1), He X(1),
Zhao L(1), Pi L(1), Zhang Y(1), Li C(1), Chen X(1), Wu Y(1), Miao J(2), Cao Y(3),
Cui L(4), Yang Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, Yunnan Province, 650500, China.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of
South Florida, 3720 Spectrum Boulevard, Suite 304, Tampa, FL, 33612, USA.
(3)Department of Immunology, China Medical University, Shenyang, 110122,
Liaoning, China.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of
South Florida, 3720 Spectrum Boulevard, Suite 304, Tampa, FL, 33612, USA.
Electronic address: lcui@health.usf.edu.
(5)Department of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, Yunnan Province, 650500, China. Electronic address:
zhaoqingy92@hotmail.com.

Mutations in the Kelch domain of the K13 gene (PF3D7_1343700) were previously
associated with artemisinin resistance in Plasmodium falciparum. This study
followed the dynamics of the K13 polymorphisms in P. falciparum parasites from
the China-Myanmar border area obtained in 2007-2016, and their in vitro
sensitivities to artesunate (AS) and dihydroartemisinin (DHA). The 50% effective 
concentration (EC5072h) values of 133 culture-adapted field isolates to AS and
DHA, measured by the conventional 72 h SYBR Green I-based assay, varied
significantly among the parasites from different years; all were significantly
higher than that of the reference strain 3D7. Compared with parasites from 2007
to 2008, ring survival rates almost doubled in parasites obtained in later years.
Sequencing the full-length K13 genes identified 11 point mutations present in 85 
(63.9%) parasite isolates. F446I was the predominant (55/133) variant, and its
frequency was increased from 17.6% (3/17) in 2007 to 55.9% (19/34) in 2014-2016. 
No wild-type (WT) Kelch domain sequences were found in the 34 samples obtained
from 2014 to 2016. In the 2014-2016 samples, a new mutation (G533S) appeared and 
reached 44.1% (15/34). Collectively, parasites with the Kelch domain mutations
(after amino acid 440) had significantly higher ring survival rates than the WT
parasites. Individually, F446I, G533S and A676D showed significantly higher ring 
survival rates than the WT. Although the drug sensitivity phenotypes measured by 
the RSA6h and EC5072h assays may be intrinsically linked to the in vivo clinical 
efficacy data, the values determined by these two assays were not significantly
correlated. This study identified the trend of K13 mutations in parasite
populations from the China-Myanmar border area, confirmed an overall correlation 
of Kelch domain mutations with elevated ring-stage survival rates, and emphasized
the importance of monitoring the evolution and spread of parasites with reduced
artemisinin sensitivity along the malaria elimination course.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2019.04.002 
PMCID: PMC6479106
PMID: 31009824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

