
1. Pathog Glob Health. 2019 May;113(3):133-142. doi: 10.1080/20477724.2019.1624076. 
Epub 2019 May 30.

Dynamics of Plasmodium falciparum genetic diversity among asymptomatic and
symptomatic children in three epidemiological areas in Cote d'Ivoire.

Gnagne AP(1)(2), Konate A(1)(3), Bedia-Tanoh AV(1)(3), Amiah-Droh M(1)(2), Menan 
HIE(3), N'Guetta AS(2), Yavo W(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Centre de Recherche et de Lutte contre le Paludisme , Institut National de
Santé Publique , Abidjan , Côte d'Ivoire.
(2)b Laboratoire de Génétique , Université Félix Houphouët Boigny , Abidjan ,
Côte d'Ivoire.
(3)c Département de Parasitologie-Mycologie , UFR Sciences Pharmaceutiques et
Biologique , Abidjan , Côte d'Ivoire.

Asymptomatic carriers of Plasmodium are considered a reservoir of the parasite in
humans. Therefore, in order to be effective, new malaria elimination strategies
must take these targets into account. The aim of this study was to analyse
genetic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum among schoolchildren in three
epidemiological areas in Côte d'Ivoire. This was a cross-sectional study carried 
out from May 2015 to April 2016 in a primary school in rural and urban areas of
San Pedro, Grand-Bassam and Abengourou, during the rainy season and the dry
season. A total of 282 Plasmodium falciparum isolates were genotyped using Nested
PCR of Pfmsp1 and Pfmsp2 genes. The overall frequency of K1, Mad20 and RO33
alleles was 81.6%, 53.4% and 57% for Pfmsp1 respectively. For Pfmsp2, this
frequency was 84.3% and 72.2% for 3D7 and FC27. K1, Mad20 and FC27 Frequencies
were significantly higher in Abengourou compared to other sites. Overall, the
frequency of MIs was significantly higher in Abengourou for Pfmsp1 and Pfmsp2.
However, Mad20 and RO33 alleles were significantly higher in the rainy season. No
significant difference was observed between Pfmsp2 alleles in both seasons.
Frequency of the 3D7 allele was significantly higher in symptomatic patients. MIs
and COI increased with parasitemia for Pfmsp1and Pfmsp2. The data can be added to
that available for monitoring and control of P. falciparum malaria. Further
studies combining the entomological inoculation rate and the genetic diversity of
P. falciparum will allow us to shed light on our understanding of the
epidemiology of this parasite.

DOI: 10.1080/20477724.2019.1624076 
PMCID: PMC6586127
PMID: 31144611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

