
1. Acta Trop. 2019 Sep;197:105048. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.105048. Epub 2019
Jun 4.

Population genetics of Oncomelania hupensis snails, intermediate hosts of
Schistosoma japonium, from emerging, re-emerging or established habitats within
China.

Qiu C(1), Lu DB(2), Deng Y(1), Zou HY(1), Liang YS(3), Webster JP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Statistics, School of Public Health, Soochow
University, Suzhou 215123, China; Key Laboratory of National Health and Family
Planning Commission on Parasitic Disease Control and Prevention, Wuxi 214064,
China; Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory on Parasites and Vector Control
Technology, Wuxi 214064, China.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Statistics, School of Public Health, Soochow
University, Suzhou 215123, China; Key Laboratory of National Health and Family
Planning Commission on Parasitic Disease Control and Prevention, Wuxi 214064,
China; Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory on Parasites and Vector Control
Technology, Wuxi 214064, China. Electronic address: Ludabing@suda.edu.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of National Health and Family Planning Commission on Parasitic 
Disease Control and Prevention, Wuxi 214064, China; Jiangsu Provincial Key
Laboratory on Parasites and Vector Control Technology, Wuxi 214064, China;
Jiangsu Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Wuxi 214064, China. Electronic address: 
liangys58@163.com.
(4)Jiangsu Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Wuxi 214064, China; Centre for
Emerging, Endemic and Exotic Diseases (CEEED), Department of Pathology and
Population Sciences, Royal Veterinary College, University of London, Herts AL9
7TA, United Kingdom.

Schistosomiasis remains one of the world's most significant neglected tropical
diseases, second only to malaria in terms of socioeconomic impact. In 2014, China
proposed the goal of schistosomiasis japonicum elimination by 2025. However, one 
major challenge is the widely distributed, and in certain cases potentially
increasing, habitats of Oncomelania hupensis, the snail intermediate hosts of S. 
japonicum. Therefore, an understanding of population genetics of O. hupensis in
new or re-emerged habitats, together with that of the established habitats with
snail persistence, would be valuable in controlling and predicting the future
transmission dynamics of schistosomiasis in China. Using nine microsatellite
loci, we conducted population genetic analyses of snails sampled from one habitat
where snails were detected for the first time, one (previously eliminated)
habitat with re-emerged snails, and one habitat with established snail
persistence. Results showed lower diversities, in terms of number of observed
alleles per locus (Na), number of effective alleles per locus (NeA), observed
(Ho) and expected heterozygosity (He), in snails from new or re-emerged snail
habitats than from the habitat with snail persistence. The smallest effective
population size was inferred in the re-emerged snail habitat, but the largest was
in the new habitat rather than in the habitat with snail persistence. No
bottleneck effects were detected in new or re-merged habitats. No or low
sub-structure was inferred in new and persistent snail habitats. Snails from the 
three sites were clearly separated and low gene flow was estimated between sites.
We propose that snails at the new habitat may have been introduced through
immigration, whereas snails at the re-emerged habitat may be the consequence of
those few snails remaining subsequently expanding through reproduction. We
discuss our results in terms of their theoretical and applied implications.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.105048 
PMID: 31173738  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

