
1. Elife. 2019 Jun 17;8. pii: e45829. doi: 10.7554/eLife.45829.

Rapid and iterative genome editing in the malaria parasite Plasmodium knowlesi
provides new tools for P. vivax research.

Mohring F(1), Hart MN(1), Rawlinson TA(2), Henrici R(1), Charleston JA(1), Diez
Benavente E(1), Patel A(1), Hall J(3), Almond N(3), Campino S(1), Clark TG(1),
Sutherland CJ(1), Baker DA(1), Draper SJ(2), Moon RW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene &
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)The Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Division of Infectious Disease Diagnostics, National Institute for Biological 
Standards and Control, Health Protection Agency, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom.

Tackling relapsing Plasmodium vivax and zoonotic Plasmodium knowlesi infections
is critical to reducing malaria incidence and mortality worldwide. Understanding 
the biology of these important and related parasites was previously constrained
by the lack of robust molecular and genetic approaches. Here, we establish
CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing in a culture-adapted P. knowlesi strain and define
parameters for optimal homology-driven repair. We establish a scalable protocol
for the production of repair templates by PCR and demonstrate the flexibility of 
the system by tagging proteins with distinct cellular localisations. Using
iterative rounds of genome-editing we generate a transgenic line expressing P.
vivax Duffy binding protein (PvDBP), a lead vaccine candidate. We demonstrate
that PvDBP plays no role in reticulocyte restriction but can alter the
macaque/human host cell tropism of P. knowlesi. Critically, antibodies raised
against the P. vivax antigen potently inhibit proliferation of this strain,
providing an invaluable tool to support vaccine development.

Â© 2019, Mohring et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.45829 
PMCID: PMC6579517
PMID: 31205002  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: FM, MH, TR, RH, JC, ED, AP, JH, NA, SC, TC, CS,
DB, SD, RM No competing interests declared

