
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2019 Sep;232:111198. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2019.111198. Epub 2019 Jun 26.

Plasmodium berghei sporozoite specific genes- PbS10 and PbS23/SSP3 are required
for the development of exo-erythrocytic forms.

Togiri J(1), Segireddy RR(1), Mastan BS(1), Singh D(1), Kolli SK(1), Ghosh A(2), 
Al-Nihmi FMA(1), Maruthi M(1), Choudhary HH(2), Dey S(1), Mishra S(2), Kumar
KA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of
Hyderabad, Hyderabad, 500046, India.
(2)Division of Parasitology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow,
226031, India.
(3)Department of Animal Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of
Hyderabad, Hyderabad, 500046, India. Electronic address: kaksl@uohyd.ernet.in.

Plasmodium sporozoites are infective forms of the parasite to mammalian
hepatocytes. Sporozoite surface or secreted proteins likely play an important
role in recognition, invasion and successful establishment of hepatocyte
infection. By approaches of reverse genetics, we report the functional analysis
of two Plasmodium berghei (Pb) sporozoite specific genes- PbS10 and PbS23/SSP3
that encode for proteins with a putative signal peptide. The expression of both
genes was high in oocyst and salivary gland sporozoite stages as compared to
other life cycle stages and PbS23/SSP3 protein was detected in salivary gland
sporozoites. Both mutants were indistinguishable to wild-type parasites with
regard to asexual growth in RBC, ability to complete sexual reproduction and form
sporozoites in vector host. While the sporozoite stage of both mutants were able 
to glide and invade hepatocytes normally in vitro and in vivo, PbS10 mutants
suffered growth attenuation at an early stage while PbS23/SSP3 mutants manifested
defect during late exo-erythrocytic form maturation. Interestingly, both mutants 
gave rare breakthrough infections, suggesting that while both were critical for
liver stage development, their depletion did not completely abrogate blood stage 
infection. These findings have important implications for weakening sporozoites
by multiple gene attenuation towards the generation of a safe whole organism
vaccine.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2019.111198 
PMID: 31251952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

