
1. Malar J. 2019 Jul 16;18(1):241. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-2879-7.

Changing pattern of the genetic diversities of Plasmodium falciparum merozoite
surface protein-1 and merozoite surface protein-2 in Myanmar isolates.

Lê HG(1)(2), Kang JM(1)(2), Jun H(3), Lee J(3), Thái TL(1)(2), Myint MK(4), Aye
KS(4), Sohn WM(1), Shin HJ(5), Kim TS(3), Na BK(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology and Tropical Medicine, and Institute of Health
Sciences, Gyeongsang National University College of Medicine, Jinju, 52727,
Republic of Korea.
(2)BK21Plus Team for Anti-aging Biotechnology and Industry, Department of
Convergence Medical Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, 52727,
Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Tropical Medicine, and Inha Research Institute for Medical
Sciences, Inha University College of Medicine, Incheon, 22212, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Medical Research Pyin Oo Lwin Branch, Pyin Oo Lwin, Myanmar.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, 16499, 
Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Parasitology and Tropical Medicine, and Institute of Health
Sciences, Gyeongsang National University College of Medicine, Jinju, 52727,
Republic of Korea. bkna@gnu.ac.kr.
(7)BK21Plus Team for Anti-aging Biotechnology and Industry, Department of
Convergence Medical Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, 52727,
Republic of Korea. bkna@gnu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum merozoite surface protein-1 (PfMSP-1) and -2
(PfMSP-2) are major blood-stage vaccine candidate antigens. Understanding the
genetic diversity of the genes, pfmsp-1 and pfmsp-2, is important for recognizing
the genetic structure of P. falciparum, and the development of an effective
vaccine based on the antigens. In this study, the genetic diversities of pfmsp-1 
and pfmsp-2 in the Myanmar P. falciparum were analysed.
METHODS: The pfmsp-1 block 2 and pfmsp-2 block 3 regions were amplified by
polymerase chain reaction from blood samples collected from Myanmar patients who 
were infected with P. falciparum in 2013-2015. The amplified gene fragments were 
cloned into a T&A vector, and sequenced. Sequence analysis of Myanmar pfmsp-1
block 2 and pfmsp-2 block 3 was performed to identify the genetic diversity of
the regions. The temporal genetic changes of both pfmsp-1 and pfmsp-2 in the
Myanmar P. falciparum population, as well as the polymorphic diversity in the
publicly available global pfmsp-1 and pfmsp-2, were also comparatively analysed.
RESULTS: High levels of genetic diversity of pfmsp-1 and pfmsp-2 were observed in
the Myanmar P. falciparum isolates. Twenty-eight different alleles of pfmsp-1 (8 
for K1 type, 14 for MAD20 type, and 6 for RO33 type) and 59 distinct alleles of
pfmsp-2 (18 for FC27, and 41 for 3D7 type) were identified in the Myanmar P.
falciparum population in amino acid level. Comparative analyses of the genetic
diversity of the Myanmar pfmsp-1 and pfmsp-2 alleles in the recent (2013-2015)
and past (2004-2006) Myanmar P. falciparum populations indicated the dynamic
genetic expansion of the pfmsp-1 and pfmsp-2 in recent years, suggesting that a
high level of genetic differentiation and recombination of the two genes may be
maintained. Population genetic structure analysis of the global pfmsp-1 and
pfmsp-2 also suggested that a high level of genetic diversity of the two genes
was found in the global P. falciparum population.
CONCLUSION: Despite the recent remarkable decline of malaria cases, the Myanmar
P. falciparum population still remains of sufficient size to allow the generation
and maintenance of genetic diversity. The high level of genetic diversity of
pfmsp-1 and pfmsp-2 in the global P. falciparum population emphasizes the
necessity for continuous monitoring of the genetic diversity of the genes for
better understanding of the genetic make-up and evolutionary aspect of the genes 
in the global P. falciparum population.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-2879-7 
PMCID: PMC6636015
PMID: 31311565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

