
1. Acta Trop. 2020 Feb;202:105095. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.105095. Epub 2019
Jul 16.

Geographic Plasmodium falciparum sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase (PfSERCA)
genotype diversity in India.

Goomber S(1), Mishra N(2), Anvikar A(2), Valecha N(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Malaria Research (Indian Council of Medical Research),
Sector - 8, Dwarka, New Delhi 110 077, India. Electronic address:
shelly.sahni@rediffmail.com.
(2)National Institute of Malaria Research (Indian Council of Medical Research),
Sector - 8, Dwarka, New Delhi 110 077, India.

Plasmodium falciparum sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase (PfSERCA) is
sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane bound transporter to regulate cytosol Ca2+ ions. 
Ca2+ act as secondary messenger and play important role in differentiation of
parasite during its life cycle. Present study is epidemiological surveillance of 
PfSERCA (Pf3D7_0106300) gene fragment harboring 263, 402, 431 codon to look for
its single nucleotide polymorphism which is well documented to be associated with
Artemisinin tolerance. Filter paper with finger pricked blood samples for
Plasmodium falciparum infected uncomplicated malaria patients were obtained for
region as diverse as down the longitude from east to west of India i.e. Mizoram, 
Tripura, Meghalaya, Jharkhand, Odhisa. There observed no mutation for codon 263
at all study sites. Mizoram showed highest PfSERCA diversity with well known SNPs
of L402 V, E431 K, A438 V and novel mutations as well i.e. A338 V, S357Y, S379Y. 
Tripura reported highest proportion of Plasmodium isolates (18.5%) with E431 K
single nucleotide polymorphism. Moving towards the west i.e. Meghalaya,
Jharkhand, Odhisa showed no occurrence of most prevalent PfSERCA 431, 402
polymorphism worldwide but some novel mutations and its haplotypes. In present
study, significantly increased proportion of novel PfSERCA polymorphism among
children suggests the susceptibility of these Plasmodium falciparum strains to
acquired immunity. Mizoram, sharing open international border with south east
asia, demonstrated highest PfSERCA diversity. Spatial PfSERCA diversity from far 
north east India to moving towards west implies its association with antimalarial
susceptibility.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2019.105095 
PMID: 31323193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

