
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Sep 23;63(10). pii: e00552-19. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00552-19. Print 2019 Oct.

Molecular Surveillance of Drug Resistance of Plasmodium falciparum Isolates
Imported from Angola in Henan Province, China.

Zhou R(#)(1), Yang C(#)(1), Li S(1), Zhao Y(1), Liu Y(1), Qian D(1), Wang H(1),
Lu D(1), Zhang H(2), Huang F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasite Disease Control and Prevention, Henan Province Center
for Disease Control and Prevention, Zhengzhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Parasite Disease Control and Prevention, Henan Province Center
for Disease Control and Prevention, Zhengzhou, People's Republic of China
zhwei69@163.com huangfang@nipd.chinacdc.com.
(3)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Shanghai, People's Republic of China zhwei69@163.com
huangfang@nipd.chinacdc.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Angola was the main origin country for the imported malaria in Henan Province,
China. Antimalarial drug resistance has posed a threat to the control and
elimination of malaria. Several molecular markers were confirmed to be associated
with the antimalarial drug resistance, such as pfcrt, pfmdr1, pfdhfr, pfdhps, and
K13. This study evaluated the drug resistance of the 180 imported Plasmodium
falciparum isolates from Angola via nested PCR using Sanger sequencing. The
prevalences of pfcrt C72V73M74N75K76, pfmdr1 N86Y184S1034N1042D1246, pfdhfr
A16N51C59S108D139I164, and pfdhps S436A437A476K540A581 were 69.4%, 59.9%, 1.3%
and 6.3%, respectively. Three nonsynonymous (A578S, M579I, and Q613E) and one
synonymous (R471R) mutation of K13 were found, the prevalences of which were 2.5%
and 1.3%, respectively. The single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in pfcrt,
pfmdr1, pfdhfr, and pfdhps were generally shown as multiple mutations. The mutant
prevalence of pfcrt reduced gradually, but pfdhfr and pfdhps still showed high
mutant prevalence, while pfmdr1 was relatively low. The mutation of the K13 gene 
was rare. Molecular surveillance of artemisinin (ART) resistance will be used as 
a tool to evaluate the real-time efficacy of the artemisinin-based combination
therapies (ACTs) and the ART resistance situation.

Copyright Â© 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00552-19 
PMCID: PMC6761537
PMID: 31358591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

