
1. Parasitol Res. 2019 Sep;118(9):2705-2713. doi: 10.1007/s00436-019-06404-9. Epub
2019 Jul 29.

Artemisinin-resistant Leishmania parasite modulates host cell defense mechanism
and exhibits altered expression of unfolded protein response genes.

Verma A(1), Ghosh S(1), Salotra P(1), Singh R(2).

Author information: 
(1)ICMR-National Institute of Pathology, Safdarjung Hospital Campus, New Delhi,
110029, India.
(2)ICMR-National Institute of Pathology, Safdarjung Hospital Campus, New Delhi,
110029, India. ruchisp@gmail.com.

Artemisinin, extracted from a medicinal herb Artemisia annua, is widely used to
treat malaria and has shown potent anticancer activity. Artemisinin has been
found to be effective against experimental visceral and cutaneous leishmaniasis. 
Despite extensive research to understand the complex mechanism of resistance to
artemisinin, several questions remain unanswered. The artesunate (ART)-resistant 
line of Leishmania donovani was selected and cellular mechanisms associated with 
resistance to artemisinin were investigated. ART-resistant (AS-R) parasites
showed reduced susceptibility towards ART both at promastigote and amastigote
stage compared with ART sensitive (WT) parasites. WT and AS-R parasites were both
more susceptible to ART at the early log phase of growth compared with late log
phase. AS-R parasites were more infective to the host macrophages (p < 0.05).
Evaluation of parasites' tolerance towards host microbicidal mechanisms revealed 
that AS-R parasites were more tolerant to complement-mediated lysis and
nitrosative stress. ROS levels were modulated in presence of ART in AS-R
parasites infected macrophages. Interestingly, infection of macrophages by AS-R
parasites led to modulated levels of host interleukins, IL-2 and IL-10, in
addition to nitric oxide. Additionally, AS-R parasites showed upregulated
expression of genes of unfolded protein response pathway including
methyltransferase domain-containing protein (HSP40) and flagellar attachment zone
protein (prefoldin), that are reported to be associated with ART resistance in
Plasmodium falciparum malaria. This study presents in vitro model of
artemisinin-resistant Leishmania parasite and cellular mechanisms associated with
ART resistance in Leishmania.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-019-06404-9 
PMID: 31359134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

