
1. Parasit Vectors. 2019 Aug 9;12(1):396. doi: 10.1186/s13071-019-3657-7.

Resistance to pyrethroid and organophosphate insecticides, and the geographical
distribution and polymorphisms of target-site mutations in voltage-gated sodium
channel and acetylcholinesterase 1 genes in Anopheles sinensis populations in
Shanghai, China.

Fang Y(1), Shi WQ(1), Wu JT(1), Li YY(1), Xue JB(1), Zhang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Chinese Center for Tropical Diseases Research, WHO Collaborating 
Centre for Tropical Diseases, National Center for International Research on
Tropical Diseases, Ministry of Science and Technology, Key Laboratory of Parasite
and Vector Biology, Ministry of Health, Shanghai, 20025, China.
(2)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Chinese Center for Tropical Diseases Research, WHO Collaborating 
Centre for Tropical Diseases, National Center for International Research on
Tropical Diseases, Ministry of Science and Technology, Key Laboratory of Parasite
and Vector Biology, Ministry of Health, Shanghai, 20025, China.
zhang1972003@163.com.

BACKGROUND: In the final phase of China's national programme to eliminate malaria
by 2020, it is vitally important to monitor the resistance of malaria vectors for
developing effective vector control strategies. In 2017 Shanghai declared that it
had eliminated malaria; however, the insecticide resistance status of the primary
malaria vector Anopheles sinensis remains unknown.
METHODS: We examined the pyrethroid and organophosphate resistance of An.
sinensis via a bioassay of two populations from the Chongming District of
Shanghai. The voltage-gated sodium channel (VGSC) and acetylcholinesterase 1
(ace-1) genes were partially sequenced to examine the association between
resistance phenotype and target site genotype. In addition, the geographical
distribution, polymorphism and genotype frequencies of insecticide resistance
genes were examined using samples collected during routine mosquito surveillance 
in 2016 and 2017 from Chongming, Songjiang, Jiading and Qingpu Districts.
RESULTS: In Chongming District, the An. sinensis population near Dongtan National
Nature Reserve showed resistance to pyrethroids, sensitivity to organophosphate, 
no knockdown resistance (kdr) mutations in the VGSC gene, and a low frequency
(1.71%) of the ace-1 119S allele. An An. sinensis population near the Chongming
central area (CM-Xinhe population) showed high resistance to pyrethroids and
organophosphates and high frequencies of kdr 1014F and 1014C (80.73%) and ace-1
119S (85.98%) alleles. A significant association was detected between the
homozygous kdr mutation 1014F/1014F and pyrethroid resistance in the CM-Xinhe
population, indicating that the kdr mutation is probably recessive. Eight kdr
genotypes with 1014F and 1014C substitutions were detected in the four surveyed
districts of Shanghai. TTT and GGC/AGC were the dominant kdr allele and ace-1
genotype, respectively, and were prevalent in most Shanghai An. sinensis
populations.
CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of our assessment of insecticide resistance gene
mutations in Shanghai, we identified a kdr mutation-free population in Chongming 
Dongtan. However, high frequencies of target-site mutations of insecticide
resistance genes were observed in most areas of Shanghai. Bioassays of An.
sinensis populations in the central Chongming District indicated the high
insecticide resistance status of An. sinensis populations in Shanghai. We
accordingly recommend a restriction on insecticide usage and development of
effective integrated pest/vector management interventions to support disease
control efforts.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-019-3657-7 
PMCID: PMC6688361
PMID: 31399130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

