
1. Parasitol Res. 2019 Oct;118(10):2753-2766. doi: 10.1007/s00436-019-06420-9. Epub 
2019 Aug 15.

Plasmodium helical interspersed subtelomeric family-an enigmatic piece of the
Plasmodium biology puzzle.

Kumar V(1), Behl A(2), Sharma R(1), Sharma A(1), Hora R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Guru Nanak Dev University,
Amritsar, Punjab, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, Punjab,
India.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Guru Nanak Dev University,
Amritsar, Punjab, India. rachnahora@gmail.com.

Plasmodium falciparum (Pf) refurbishes the infected erythrocytes by exporting a
myriad of parasite proteins to the host cell. A novel exported protein family
'Plasmodium Helical Interspersed Subtelomeric' (PHIST) has gained attention for
its significant roles in parasite biology. Here, we have collected and analysed
available information on PHIST members to enhance understanding of their
functions, varied localization and structure-function correlation. Functional
diversity of PHIST proteins is highlighted by their involvement in PfEMP1 (Pf
erythrocyte membrane protein 1) expression, trafficking and switching. This
family also contributes to cytoadherence, gametocytogenesis, host cell
modification and generation of extracellular vesicles. While the PHIST domain
forms the hallmark of this family, existence and functions of additional domains 
(LyMP, TIGR01639) and the MEC motif underscores its diversity further. Since
specific PHIST proteins seem to form pairs with PfEMP1 members, we have used in
silico tools to predict such potential partners in Pf. This information and our
analysis of structural data on a PHIST member provide important insights into
their functioning. This review overall enables readers to view the PHIST family
comprehensively, while highlighting key knowledge gaps in the field.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-019-06420-9 
PMID: 31418110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

