
1. Cell Biol Int. 2019 Nov;43(11):1317-1322. doi: 10.1002/cbin.11220. Epub 2019 Aug 
30.

Artesunate inhibits myofibroblast formation via induction of apoptosis and
antagonism of pro-fibrotic gene expression in human dermal fibroblasts.

Larson SA(1), Dolivo DM(1), Dominko T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 100 
Institute Road, Worcester, Massachusetts, 01609, USA.

The anti-malaria drug artesunate and other chemical analogs of artemisinin have
demonstrated cytostatic and cytotoxic effects in bacterial and cancer cells.
Artemisinin-derived compounds have also been demonstrated to attenuate fibrosis
in preclinical animal models, but the mechanisms by which this inhibition occurs 
are not well-understood. We investigated the effects of artesunate on the
emergence of the myofibroblast, which is causally implicated in pro-fibrotic
pathologies. CRL-2097 human dermal fibroblasts were analyzed for protein and
transcript expression after treatment with artesunate to analyze fibroblast
activation. Proliferation and apoptosis were also evaluated following treatment
with artesunate in this cell line. Treatment of human dermal fibroblasts with
artesunate antagonized fibroblast activation and pro-fibrotic extracellular
matrix (ECM) deposition, both at basal culture conditions and when cultured in
the presence of exogenous transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1), a major
pro-fibrotic cytokine. Artesunate-treated fibroblasts also demonstrated decreased
proliferation and increased apoptosis. Transcript analysis by quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction demonstrated that artesunate downregulated
expression of pro-fibrotic genes including canonical myofibroblast markers, ECM
genes, and several TGF-β receptors and ligands, and upregulated expression of
cell cycle inhibitors and matrix-metalloproteinases. Together, these data
demonstrate that artesunate antagonizes fibroblast activation and decreases
expression of pro-fibrotic genes, while also promoting myofibroblast apoptosis,
suggesting that these mechanisms may be responsible in part for the anti-fibrotic
effects of artesunate described previously.

© 2019 International Federation for Cell Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/cbin.11220 
PMID: 31441159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

