
1. J Microbiol Immunol Infect. 2020 Oct;53(5):676-681. doi:
10.1016/j.jmii.2019.07.006. Epub 2019 Sep 10.

Importance of kelch 13 C580Y mutation in the studies of artemisinin resistance in
Plasmodium falciparum in Greater Mekong Subregion.

Zaw MT(1), Lin Z(2), Emran NA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological and Medical Diagnostics, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, 88400, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah,
Malaysia. Electronic address: myothurazaw@ums.edu.my.
(2)Department of Pathobiological and Medical Diagnostics, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, 88400, Kota Kinabalu, Sabah,
Malaysia.

The mortality caused by Plasmodium falciparum was reduced by Artemisinin (ART)
and ART combination therapy (ACT). However, Artemisinin resistance (ART-R) emerge
during 2008 in Cambodia and spread to Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS). ART-R was
confirmed not to spread to India, a gateway to whole Africa. The whole genome
sequencing approach of P. falciparum assumed the k13 gene encoded Kelch protein
was discovered to be associated with ART-R. Of the single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of k13 gene, C580Y mutant was commonly dominant in Cambodia,
Myanmar, Thailand, Laos and Vietnam and assumed to be one of strong molecular
markers for ART-R in P. falciparum isolates in GMS. Literatures published between
2017 and 2018 were reviewed in this work. F446I is observed to be doubtful
molecular marker as ART-R marker. Transgenic experiment showed that parasite with
F446I mutation displayed prolonged clearance in respond to ART while C580Y was
applied as positive control mutant. Furthermore, study of C580Y allele in four
countries Cambodia, Thailand, Laos resulted in single origin whereas the parasite
with this allele showed multi-origin in three Provinces of Vietnam. As
artemisinin was short acting drug, the role of long acting partner drug was
studied by using transgenic C580Y mutant and C580 to leave recrudescent P.
falciparum. Recently, there was treatment failure with ACT in some countries in
GMS. In this review, the importance of C580Y mutation in the study of ART-R was
discussed.

Copyright Â© 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmii.2019.07.006 
PMID: 31563454 

