
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Oct 10;9(1):14595. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-50768-y.

Reporter lines based on the gexp02 promoter enable early quantification of sexual
conversion rates in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum.

Portugaliza HP(1)(2)(3), Llorà-Batlle O(1), Rosanas-Urgell A(2), Cortés A(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)ISGlobal, Hospital Clinic - Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, 08036,
Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp,
2000, Belgium.
(3)Department of Global Health, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, location
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 1105, AZ, The
Netherlands.
(4)ISGlobal, Hospital Clinic - Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, 08036,
Catalonia, Spain. alfred.cortes@isglobal.org.
(5)ICREA, Barcelona, 08010, Catalonia, Spain. alfred.cortes@isglobal.org.

Transmission of malaria parasites from humans to mosquito vectors requires that
some asexual parasites differentiate into sexual forms termed gametocytes. The
balance between proliferation in the same host and conversion into transmission
forms can be altered by the conditions of the environment. The ability to
accurately measure the rate of sexual conversion under different conditions is
essential for research addressing the mechanisms underlying sexual conversion,
and to assess the impact of environmental factors. Here we describe new
Plasmodium falciparum transgenic lines with genome-integrated constructs in which
a fluorescent reporter is expressed under the control of the promoter of the
gexp02 gene. Using these parasite lines, we developed a sexual conversion assay
that shortens considerably the time needed for an accurate determination of
sexual conversion rates, and dispenses the need to add chemicals to inhibit
parasite replication. Furthermore, we demonstrate that gexp02 is expressed
specifically in sexual parasites, with expression starting as early as the sexual
ring stage, which makes it a candidate marker for circulating sexual rings in
epidemiological studies.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-50768-y 
PMCID: PMC6787211
PMID: 31601834 

