
1. Brain Res. 2020 Jan 1;1726:146518. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2019.146518. Epub 2019
Oct 21.

Chloroquine pretreatment attenuates ischemia-reperfusion injury in the brain of
ob/ob diabetic mice as well as wildtype mice.

Zhang YP(1), Cui QY(2), Zhang TM(2), Yi Y(2), Nie JJ(1), Xie GH(3), Wu JH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071,
China.
(2)Department of Physiology, School of Basic Medicine and Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 4030030, China; The
Institute for Brain Research, Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, 
China.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071,
China. Electronic address: jhwu@whu.edu.cn.

Chloroquine, a prototype anti-malaria drug, has been reported to possess
anti-inflammatory effects. Moreover, chloroquine pretreatment could improve DNA
damage repair. It is therefore reasonable to hypothesize that chloroquine
pretreatment could attenuate ischemia/reperfusion injury in the brain.
Considering the fact that chloroquine could also improve glucose metabolism, we
speculated that the potential effects of chloroquine on ischemia/reperfusion
injury might be particularly pronounced in diabetic mice. In this study,
chloroquine pretreatment protected neurons from Oxygen Glucose Deprivation (OGD) 
induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis. In vivo, Ob/ob mice and wildtype (WT) mice
were pretreated with chloroquine for 3 weeks. Then, ischemic stroke was induced
by 60 min Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion (MCAO). We found that chloroquine
pretreatment normalized blood glucose in diabetic ob/ob mice, and reduced
cerebral damage after ischemic stroke especially for diabetic mice. In addition, 
chloroquine pretreatment reduced High-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) content in the
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and serum and lowered myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity
and inflammatory cytokines gene expression both in the ob/ob diabetic mice and WT
mice. Moreover, harmful DNA damage-signaling responses, including PARP activation
and p53 activation, were also attenuated by chloroquine pretreatment in these two
kinds of mice. In conclusion, chloroquine pretreatment could reduce cerebral
damage after ischemic stroke especially in diabetic mice through multiple
mechanisms, which include reducing neural cell DNA injury, restoring euglycemia
and anti-inflammatory effects. The findings may provide potential for the
development of chloroquine in the prevention and treatment of stroke in diabetic 
high-risk patients.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2019.146518 
PMID: 31647899 

