
1. Hum Biol. 2018 Nov;90(4):271-280. doi: 10.13110/humanbiology.90.4.02.

Genetic Variants of Duffy and Hemoglobin S Genes in an Afrodescendant Population 
from Colombia.

Ortega DC(1), CÃ¡rdenas H(1), Barreto G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Group, Department of Biology, Universidad del Valle, 
Cali, Colombia.
(2)Human Molecular Genetics Group, Department of Biology, Universidad del Valle, 
Cali, Colombia, guillermo.barreto@correounivalle.edu.co.

Malaria is an endemic disease in a large part of Colombia, and the city of
Buenaventura reports one of the highest malaria infection rates. Some genetic
variants confer resistance to malaria, such as the heterozygote for hemoglobin S 
(HbS) and the homozygous variant FYBES/FYBES of the Duffy gene. The aim of this
work was the molecular characterization of these genes in an Afrodescendant
population from the urban area of Buenaventura. A total of 819 individuals from a
stratified random sampling in each of the 12 communities of this city were
analyzed. Molecular analysis was performed using PCR-RFLP, and data analysis was 
performed using Arlequin 3.5, SPSS 20.0, and R 3.4.1. Frequencies of 3.1% and
72.2% were obtained for the S and FYBES alleles, respectively, with 6.1% AS
heterozygous and 55% FYBES/FYBES homozygous genotypes. The highest percentages of
the resistant genotype (genotypic combination AA*FYBES/FYBES) were found for the 
13-27-year age group (8.2%) and communities 1 and 3 (18% and 10.3%,
respectively). Therefore, it would be pertinent to consider the remaining
communities and age groups when performing epidemiological studies and preventive
and health care campaigns on malaria in the urban areas of the city of
Buenaventura.

DOI: 10.13110/humanbiology.90.4.02 
PMID: 31714694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

