
1. Commun Biol. 2019 Dec 6;2:457. doi: 10.1038/s42003-019-0704-z. eCollection 2019.

Placental malaria vaccine candidate antigen VAR2CSA displays atypical domain
architecture in some Plasmodium falciparum strains.

Doritchamou JYA(1), Morrison R(1), Renn JP(1), Ribeiro J(2), Duan J(1), Fried
M(1), Duffy PE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Malaria Immunology & Vaccinology, National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD USA.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD USA.

Two vaccines based on Plasmodium falciparum protein VAR2CSA are currently in
clinical evaluation to prevent placental malaria (PM), but a deeper understanding
of var2csa variability could impact vaccine design. Here we identified atypical
extended or truncated VAR2CSA extracellular structures and confirmed one extended
structure in a Malian maternal isolate, using a novel protein fragment assembly
method for RNA-seq and DNA-seq data. Extended structures included one or two
additional DBL domains downstream of the conventional NTS-DBL1X-6ɛ domain
structure, with closest similarity to DBLɛ in var2csa and non-var2csa genes.
Overall, 4/82 isolates displayed atypical VAR2CSA structures. The maternal
isolate expressing an extended VAR2CSA bound to CSA, but its recombinant VAR2CSA 
bound less well to CSA than VAR2CSANF54 and showed lower reactivity to naturally 
acquired parity-dependent antibody. Our protein fragment sequence assembly
approach has revealed atypical VAR2CSA domain architectures that impact antigen
reactivity and function, and should inform the design of VAR2CSA-based vaccines.

© This is a U.S. government work and not under copyright protection in the U.S.; 
foreign copyright protection may apply 2019.

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-019-0704-z 
PMCID: PMC6897902
PMID: 31840102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no
competing interests.

