
1. mBio. 2020 Jan 21;11(1). pii: e03054-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.03054-19.

CRISPR Interference of a Clonally Variant GC-Rich Noncoding RNA Family Leads to
General Repression of var Genes in Plasmodium falciparum.

Barcons-Simon A(1)(2)(3)(4), Cordon-Obras C(1)(2)(3), Guizetti J(1)(2)(3), Bryant
JM(1)(2)(3), Scherf A(5)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biologie des Interactions Hôte-Parasite, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.
(2)INSERM U1201, Paris, France.
(3)CNRS ERL9195, Paris, France.
(4)Sorbonne Université, Ecole doctorale Complexité du Vivant ED515, Paris,
France.
(5)Unité de Biologie des Interactions Hôte-Parasite, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France artur.scherf@pasteur.fr.

The human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum uses mutually exclusive
expression of the PfEMP1-encoding var gene family to evade the host immune
system. Despite progress in the molecular understanding of the default silencing 
mechanism, the activation mechanism of the uniquely expressed var member remains 
elusive. A GC-rich noncoding RNA (ncRNA) gene family has coevolved with
Plasmodium species that express var genes. Here, we show that this ncRNA family
is transcribed in a clonally variant manner, with predominant transcription of a 
single member occurring when the ncRNA is located adjacent to and upstream of an 
active var gene. We developed a specific CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) strategy
that allowed for the transcriptional repression of all GC-rich members. A lack of
GC-rich ncRNA transcription led to the downregulation of the entire var gene
family in ring-stage parasites. Strikingly, in mature blood-stage parasites, the 
GC-rich ncRNA CRISPRi affected the transcription patterns of other clonally
variant gene families, including the downregulation of all Pfmc-2TM members. We
provide evidence for the key role of GC-rich ncRNA transcription in var gene
activation and discovered a molecular link between the transcriptional control of
various clonally variant multigene families involved in parasite virulence. This 
work opens new avenues for elucidating the molecular processes that control
immune evasion and pathogenesis in P. falciparum IMPORTANCE Plasmodium falciparum
is the deadliest malaria parasite species, accounting for the vast majority of
disease cases and deaths. The virulence of this parasite is reliant upon the
mutually exclusive expression of cytoadherence proteins encoded by the 60-member 
var gene family. Antigenic variation of this multigene family serves as an immune
evasion mechanism, ultimately leading to chronic infection and pathogenesis.
Understanding the regulation mechanism of antigenic variation is key to
developing new therapeutic and control strategies. Our study uncovers a novel
layer in the epigenetic regulation of transcription of this family of virulence
genes by means of a multigene-targeting CRISPR interference approach.

Copyright © 2020 Barcons-Simon et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.03054-19 
PMCID: PMC6974570
PMID: 31964736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

