
1. Pathogens. 2020 Feb 5;9(2). pii: E101. doi: 10.3390/pathogens9020101.

Molecular detection of antimalarial drug resistance in Plasmodium vivax from
returned travellers to NSW, Australia during 2008-2018.

Noisang C(1)(2), Meyer W(1)(2)(3), Sawangjaroen N(4), Ellis J(5), Lee R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity, The University
of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.
(2)Westmead Institute for Medical Research, Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia.
(3)Westmead Hospital (Research and Education Network), Westmead, NSW 2145,
Australia.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Prince of Songkla University, 
Hat Yai, Songkhla 90110, Thailand.
(5)School of Life Sciences, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW 2007,
Australia.
(6)Centre for Infectious Diseases and Microbiology Laboratory Services, NSW
Health Pathology-ICPMR, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia.

To monitor drug resistance in Plasmodium vivax, a multidrug resistance 1 (Pvmdr1)
gene and a putative transporter protein (Pvcrt-o) gene were used as molecular
markers for chloroquine resistance. The biomarkers, the dihydrofolate reductase
(Pvdhfr) gene and the dihydropteroate synthetase (Pvdhps) gene, were also used
for the detection of resistance to sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP); this drug is 
often accidentally used to treat P. vivax infections. Clinical blood samples (n =
120) were collected from patients who had been to one of eight malaria-endemic
countries and diagnosed with P. vivax infection. The chloroquine resistance
marker, the Pvmdr1 gene, showed F976:L1076 mutations and L1076 mutation. A K10
insertion in the Pvcrt-o gene was also found among the samples successfully
sequenced. A combination of L/I57:R58:M61:T117 mutations in the Pvdhfr gene and
G383:G553 mutations in the Pvdhps gene were also observed. Mutations found in
these genes indicate that drug resistance is present in these eight countries.
Whether or not countries are using chloroquine to treat P. vivax, there appears
to be an increase in mutation numbers in resistance gene markers. The detected
changes in mutation rates of these genes do suggest that there is still a trend
towards increasing P. vivax resistance to chloroquine. The presence of the
mutations associated with SP resistance indicates that P. vivax has had exposure 
to SP and this may be a consequence of either misdiagnosis or coinfections
with&nbsp;P. falciparum in the past.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens9020101 
PMCID: PMC7168284
PMID: 32033493 

Conflict of interest statement: Ethical statement: This research was approved by 
the human ethical review committee for research in human subjects, research and
development office, Western Sydney Local Health District (WSLHD) Research
Governance Officer (HREC reference No. LNR/18/WMEAD/139 and SSA reference No.
LNRSSA/18/WMEAD/140).

