
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2020 May;120:103339. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2020.103339.
Epub 2020 Feb 24.

Hemocyte-targeted gene expression in the female malaria mosquito using the
hemolectin promoter from Drosophila.

Pondeville E(1), Puchot N(2), Parvy JP(3), Carissimo G(2), Poidevin M(3),
Waterhouse RM(4), Marois E(5), Bourgouin C(6).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS Unit of Evolutionary Genomics, Modeling, and Health (UMR2000), Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France. Electronic address: emilie.pondeville@glasgow.ac.uk.
(2)CNRS Unit of Evolutionary Genomics, Modeling, and Health (UMR2000), Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France.
(3)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire, CNRS UPR 2167, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolution, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics,
University of Lausanne, 1015, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(5)CNRS UPR9022, INSERM U1257, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(6)CNRS Unit of Evolutionary Genomics, Modeling, and Health (UMR2000), Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France. Electronic address: catherine.bourgouin@pasteur.fr.

Hemocytes, the immune cells in mosquitoes, participate in immune defenses against
pathogens including malaria parasites. Mosquito hemocytes can also be infected by
arthropod-borne viruses but the pro- or anti-viral nature of this interaction is 
unknown. Although there has been progress on hemocyte characterization during
pathogen infection in mosquitoes, the specific contribution of hemocytes to
immune responses and the hemocyte-specific functions of immune genes and pathways
remain unresolved due to the lack of genetic tools to manipulate gene expression 
in these cells specifically. Here, we used the Gal4-UAS system to characterize
the activity of the Drosophila hemocyte-specific hemolectin promoter in the
adults of Anopheles gambiae, the malaria mosquito. We established an hml-Gal4
driver line that we further crossed to a fluorescent UAS responder line, and
examined the expression pattern in the adult progeny driven by the hml promoter. 
We show that the hml regulatory region drives hemocyte-specific transgene
expression in a subset of hemocytes, and that transgene expression is triggered
after a blood meal. The hml promoter drives transgene expression in
differentiating prohemocytes as well as in differentiated granulocytes. Analysis 
of different immune markers in hemocytes in which the hml promoter drives
transgene expression revealed that this regulatory region could be used to study 
phagocytosis as well as melanization. Finally, the hml promoter drives transgene 
expression in hemocytes in which o'nyong-nyong virus replicates. Altogether, the 
Drosophila hml promoter constitutes a good tool to drive transgene expression in 
hemocyte only and to analyze the function of these cells and the genes they
express during pathogen infection in Anopheles gambiae.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2020.103339 
PMCID: PMC7181189
PMID: 32105779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.

