
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Mar 5;10(1):4104. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-60968-6.

Antimicrobial biosynthetic potential and diversity of culturable soil
actinobacteria from forest ecosystems of Northeast India.

Sharma P(1)(2), Thakur D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Drug Discovery Laboratory, International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi, 110067,
India.
(2)Microbial Biotechnology Laboratory, Life Sciences Division, Institute of
Advanced Study in Science and Technology (IASST), An Autonomous Institute under
Department of Science and Technology (Govt. of India), Paschim Boragaon, Garchuk,
Guwahati, 781035, Assam, India.
(3)Microbial Biotechnology Laboratory, Life Sciences Division, Institute of
Advanced Study in Science and Technology (IASST), An Autonomous Institute under
Department of Science and Technology (Govt. of India), Paschim Boragaon, Garchuk,
Guwahati, 781035, Assam, India. debajitthakur@yahoo.co.uk.

Actinobacteria is a goldmine for the discovery of abundant secondary metabolites 
with diverse biological activities. This study explores antimicrobial
biosynthetic potential and diversity of actinobacteria from Pobitora Wildlife
Sanctuary and Kaziranga National Park of Assam, India, lying in the Indo-Burma
mega-biodiversity hotspot. A total of 107 actinobacteria were isolated, of which 
77 exhibited significant antagonistic activity. 24 isolates tested positive for
at least one of the polyketide synthase type I, polyketide synthase type II or
non-ribosomal peptide synthase genes within their genome. Their secondary
metabolite pathway products were predicted to be involved in the production of
ansamycin, benzoisochromanequinone, streptogramin using DoBISCUIT database.
Molecular identification indicated that these actinobacteria predominantly
belonged to genus Streptomyces, followed by Nocardia and Kribbella. 4 strains,
viz. Streptomyces sp. PB-79 (GenBank accession no. KU901725; 1313 bp),
Streptomyces sp. Kz-28 (GenBank accession no. KY000534; 1378 bp), Streptomyces
sp. Kz-32 (GenBank accession no. KY000536; 1377 bp) and Streptomyces sp. Kz-67
(GenBank accession no. KY000540; 1383 bp) showed ~89.5% similarity to the nearest
type strain in EzTaxon database and may be considered novel. Streptomyces sp.
Kz-24 (GenBank accession no. KY000533; 1367 bp) showed only 96.2% sequence
similarity to S. malaysiensis and exhibited minimum inhibitory concentration of
0.024 µg/mL against methicilin resistant Staphylococcus aureus ATCC 43300 and
Candida albicans MTCC 227. This study establishes that actinobacteria isolated
from the poorly explored Indo-Burma mega-biodiversity hotspot may be an extremely
rich reservoir for production of biologically active compounds for human welfare.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-60968-6 
PMCID: PMC7057963
PMID: 32139731 

