
1. Hum Immunol. 2020 Jul;81(7):361-365. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2020.05.005. Epub 2020
May 25.

CD1 gene polymorphism and susceptibility to celiac disease: Association of
CD1E*02/02 in Moroccans.

Aureli A(1), Aboulaghras S(2), Oumhani K(2), Del Beato T(1), Sebastiani P(1),
Colanardi A(1), El Aouad R(3), Ben El Barhdadi I(4), Piancatelli D(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Research Council (CNR)-Institute of Translational Pharmacology (IFT),
L'Aquila, Italy.
(2)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Institut National d'Hygiene, Rabat, Morocco.
(3)Hassan II Academy of Science and Technology, Rabat, Morocco.
(4)Medicine C, Department of Gastroenterology, Ibn Sina Hospital, Rabat, Morocco.
(5)National Research Council (CNR)-Institute of Translational Pharmacology (IFT),
L'Aquila, Italy. Electronic address: daniela.piancatelli@cnr.it.

CD1 glycoproteins are a class of antigen presenting molecules that bind and
present non-peptidic antigens (lipids and glycolipids) for immune recognition.
CD1 polymorphisms, although limited, could have a critical role in antimicrobial,
anticancer, and autoimmune responses and disease susceptibility. Ethnic
differences and interactions between genetic and environmental factors make it
attractive the study of these molecules in autoimmune inflammatory disorders,
such as celiac disease (CD), in which a strong genetic predisposition
(HLA-DQ2/DQ8) and pressure of environmental factors have a central role. CD1A,
CD1D and CD1E polymorphisms in exon 2 were assessed in patients from Morocco
affected by CD, using direct sequencing analysis, in order to investigate
possible associations with the disease in a North African population. Differences
in genotype and haplotype distribution of CD1E between celiac patients and
controls were found: in particular, an increase of CD1E*02/02 homozygous (OR
2.93, CI 1.30-6.59, p = 0.007) and CD1A*02-E*02 estimated haplotypes in CD,
compared with controls. Frequencies of CD1A and CD1D genotypes/alleles were not
different between groups. CD1E*02/02, previously suggested as a potential immune 
protective genotype to malaria susceptibility, could be an additional gene
involved in celiac risk in this geographic area.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2020.05.005 
PMID: 32467040 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

