
1. Parasitol Res. 2020 Sep;119(9):2975-2981. doi: 10.1007/s00436-020-06801-5. Epub
2020 Jul 18.

Haemosporidian parasites from captive Strigiformes in France.

Giorgiadis M(1)(2), Guillot J(3), Duval L(4), Landau I(4), Quintard B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Parc zoologique et botanique de Mulhouse, Mulhouse, France.
(2)Parasitology, BioPôle Alfort, EA Dynamic UPEC, Ecole nationale vétérinaire
d'Alfort, USC Anses, Maisons-Alfort, France.
(3)Parasitology, BioPôle Alfort, EA Dynamic UPEC, Ecole nationale vétérinaire
d'Alfort, USC Anses, Maisons-Alfort, France. jacques.guillot@vet-alfort.fr.
(4)Unité Molécules de Communication et Adaptation des Microorganismes (MCAM,
UMR7245), Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle, CNRS, Paris, France.

Haemosporidia infections may cause major damage to avian populations and
represent a concern for veterinarians working in zoological parks or wildlife
rescue centres. Following the fatal infection of 9 Great grey owls (Strix
nebulosa) at Mulhouse zoological park, between summer 2013 and 2015, a
prospective epidemiological investigation was performed in captive strigiform
birds in France in 2016. The purpose was to evaluate the prevalence of
haemosporidian parasites in captive Strigiformes and to estimate the infection
dynamics around the nesting period. Blood samples were taken from 122 strigiform 
birds representing 14 species from 15 French zoological parks. Parasites were
detected by direct examination of blood smears and by PCR targeting the
mitochondrial cytochrome b gene. Haemosporidian parasites were detected in 59
birds from 11 zoos. Three distinct Haemoproteus mitochondrial cytochrome b
sequences (haplotypes A and C for H. syrnii and haplotype B for Haemoproteus sp.)
as well as two species of Plasmodium were detected. The overall prevalence of
Haemoproteus infection was 12.8%. The percentage of birds infected by
Haemoproteus varied according to the period of sampling. Nesting season seemed to
be at greater risk with an average prevalence of 53.9% compared with winter
season with an average prevalence of 14.8%, related to the abundance of the
vectors. The prevalence of Plasmodium infection in Strigiformes did not exceed 8%
throughout the year. This study confirmed how significant Haemosporidia infection
could be in Strigiformes from zoological parks in France. The nesting season was 
identified as a period of higher risk of infection and consequently the
appropriate period to apply prophylactic measures.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-020-06801-5 
PMID: 32683557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

