
1. Res Sq. 2020 May 13. pii: rs.3.rs-28582. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-28582/v1.

The COVID-19 Gene and Drug Set Library.

Kuleshov MV(1), Clarke DJB(1), Kropiwnicki E(1), Jagodnik KM(1), Bartal A(1),
Evangelista JE(1), Zhou A(1), Ferguson LB(2), Lachmann A(1), Ma'ayan A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences; Mount Sinai Center for Bioinformatics;
Big Data to Knowledge, Library of Integrated Network-based Cellular Signatures,
Data Coordination and Integration Center (BD2K-LINCS DCIC); Knowledge Management 
Center for Illuminating the Druggable Genome (KMC-IDG); Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1603, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology; Dell Medical School; University of Texas at Austin;
1601 Trinity Street, Bldg B, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

The coronavirus (CoV) severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-CoV-2 (COVID-19)
pandemic has received rapid response by the research community to offer
suggestions for repurposing of approved drugs as well as to improve our
understanding of the COVID-19 viral life cycle molecular mechanisms. In a short
period, tens of thousands of research preprints and other publications have
emerged including those that report lists of experimentally validated drugs and
compounds as potential COVID-19 therapies. In addition, gene sets from
interacting COVID-19 virus-host proteins and differentially expressed genes when 
comparing infected to uninfected cells are being published at a fast rate. To
organize this rapidly accumulating knowledge, we developed the COVID-19 Gene and 
Drug Set Library (https://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/covid19/), a collection of gene and 
drug sets related to COVID-19 research from multiple sources. The COVID-19 Gene
and Drug Set Library is delivered as a web-based interface that enables users to 
view, download, analyze, visualize, and contribute gene and drug sets related to 
COVID-19 research. To evaluate the content of the library, we performed several
analyses including comparing the results from 6 in-vitro drug screens for
COVID-19 repurposing candidates. Surprisingly, we observe little overlap across
these initial screens. The most common and unique hit across these screen is
mefloquine, a malaria drug that should receive more attention as a potential
therapeutic for COVID-19. Overall, the library of gene and drug sets can be used 
to identify community consensus, make researchers and clinicians aware of the
development of new potential therapies, as well as allow the research community
to work together towards a cure for COVID-19.

DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-28582/v1 
PMCID: PMC7336700
PMID: 32702729 

