
1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2020 Sep 15;403:115159. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2020.115159. 
Epub 2020 Jul 25.

Dihydroartemisinin exposure impairs porcine ovarian granulosa cells by activating
PERK-eIF2α-ATF4 through endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Luo Y(1), Guo Q(1), Zhang L(1), Zhuan Q(2), Meng L(1), Fu X(2), Hou Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of
Agriculture and National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, College of
Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193,
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China. Electronic address:
hou@cau.edu.cn.

Dihydroartemisinin (DHA) is an artemisinin derivative commonly used in malaria
therapy, and a growing number of studies have focused on the potent anticancer
activity of DHA. However, the reproductive toxicity of anticancer drugs is a
major concern for young female cancer patients. Previous studies have suggested
that DHA can cause embryonic damage and affect oocyte maturation. Here, we
explored the side effects of DHA exposure on ovarian somatic cells. We exposed
porcine granulosa cells to 5 μM and 40 μM DHA for 24 h or 48 h in vitro. DHA
inhibited granulosa cell viability in a dose-dependent manner and, in the 48 h
treatment group, DHA enhanced the apoptotic rate. We observed that the levels of 
intracellular calcium, mitochondrial calcium, and ATP concentration were elevated
with DHA treatment. In granulosa cells exposed to DHA, the mRNA levels of
endoplasmic reticulum stress-related genes GRP78 and ATF4 were increased.
Furthermore, analysis of the unfolded protein response signaling pathway showed
that the protein levels of P-PERK, P-eIF2α, and ATF4 were upregulated by DHA
exposure. These results demonstrate that in granulosa cells, DHA exposure induces
endoplasmic reticulum stress that then activates the PERK/eIF2α/ATF4 signaling
pathway, thus providing insight into the mechanism underlying DHA-induced
reproductive toxicity, and giving reference to DHA use in females.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2020.115159 
PMID: 32721431 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.

