
1. Molecules. 2020 Jul 29;25(15). pii: E3451. doi: 10.3390/molecules25153451.

Mosquitocidal and Anti-Inflammatory Properties of The Essential Oils Obtained
from Monoecious, Male, and Female Inflorescences of Hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) and
Their Encapsulation in Nanoemulsions.

Rossi P(1), Cappelli A(1), Marinelli O(2), Valzano M(1), Pavoni L(2), Bonacucina 
G(2), Petrelli R(2), Pompei P(2), Mazzara E(2), Ricci I(1), Maggi F(2), Nabissi
M(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences and Veterinary Medicine, University of Camerino, 62032
Camerino, Italy.
(2)School of Pharmacy, University of Camerino, 62032 Camerino, Italy.

Among the various innovative products obtainable from hemp (Cannabis sativa L.)
waste biomass originating from different industrial processes, the essential oil 
(EO) deserves special attention in order to understand its possible application
in different fields, such as cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and botanical
insecticides. For the purpose, in the present work, we studied the chemical
composition of EOs obtained from different hemp varieties, namely Felina 32 and
Carmagnola Selezionata (CS) using monoecious, male, and female inflorescences,
and we evaluated their mosquitocidal activities on larvae and pupae of two main
malaria vectors, Anopheles gambiae and An. stephensi. Then, in order to evaluate 
the safe use of hemp EOs for operators, the potential pro- or anti-inflammatory
effect of hemp EOs together with their toxicological profile were determined on
dermal fibroblasts and keratinocytes. Given the promising results obtained by
insecticidal and anti-inflammatory studies, a preliminary evaluation of EOs
encapsulation into nanoemulsions (NEs) has been performed with the aim to develop
a formulation able to improve their poor physicochemical stability. Felina 32 and
CS inflorescences provided EOs with an interesting chemical profile, with
monoterpene and sesquiterpene hydrocarbons as the major components. This study
highlighted the potential application of male inflorescences, which are usually
discharged during hemp product processing. These EOs could be exploited as
potential sustainable and eco-friendly insecticides, given their capability to be
toxic against mosquitoes and the possibility to use them to prepare stable and
safe formulations. The LC50 values found in this study (<80 ppm) are lower, on
average, than those of many plant EOs, with the advantage of using an industrial 
waste product. From MTT assay and gene and protein expression analysis, EOs
showed no cytotoxicity at the appropriate doses and exerted an anti-inflammatory 
effect on the human cell lines tested. These findings encourage further applied
research on hemp EOs in order support their industrial exploitation.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25153451 
PMCID: PMC7435401
PMID: 32751258 

