
1. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2020 Aug 14;239:108869. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpc.2020.108869. [Epub ahead of print]

Embryotoxicity evaluation of atractylodin and β-eudesmol using the zebrafish
model.

Tshering G(1), Plengsuriyakarn T(2), Na-Bangchang K(2), Pimtong W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Studies, Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, Thammasat
University, Paholyothin Road, Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand.
(2)Graduate Studies, Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, Thammasat
University, Paholyothin Road, Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand; Center 
of Excellence in Pharmacology and Molecular Biology of Malaria and
Cholangiocarcinoma, Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, Thammasat
University, Paholyothin Road, Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand; Drug
Discovery and Development Center, Thammasat University, Paholyothin Road, Khlong 
Luang, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand.
(3)Nano Environmental and Health Safety Research Team, National Nanotechnology
Center (NANOTEC), National Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA),
Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand. Electronic address: wittaya.pimtong@nanotec.or.th.

Atractylodin and β-eudesmol are the major active ingredients of Atractylodes
lancea (Thunb) DC. (AL). Both compounds exhibit various pharmacological
activities, including anticancer activity against cholangiocarcinoma. Despite the
widespread use of this plant in traditional medicine in China, Japan, Korea, and 
Thailand, studies of their toxicological profiles are limited. The present study 
aimed to evaluate the embryotoxicity of atractylodin and β-eudesmol using the
zebrafish model. Zebrafish embryos were exposed to a series of concentrations
(6.3, 12.5, 25, 50, and 100 μM) of each compound up to 72 h post-fertilization
(hpf). The results showed that atractylodin and β-eudesmol induced mortality of
zebrafish embryos with the 50% lethal concentration (LC50) of 36.8 and 53.0 μM,
respectively. Both compounds also caused embryonic deformities, including
pericardial edema, malformed head, yolk sac edema, and truncated body. Only
β-eudesmol decreased the hatching rates, while atractylodin reduced the heart
rates of the zebrafish embryos. Additionally, both compounds increased reactive
oxygen species (ROS) production and altered the transcriptional expression levels
of superoxide dismutase 1 (sod1), catalase (cat), and glutathione S-transferase
pi 2 (gstp2) genes. In conclusion, atractylodin and β-eudesmol induce mortality, 
developmental toxicity, and oxidative stress in zebrafish embryos. These findings
may imply similar toxicity of both compounds in humans.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpc.2020.108869 
PMID: 32805444 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

