
1. Mol Ecol. 2020 Sep 28. doi: 10.1111/mec.15654. [Epub ahead of print]

Monitoring Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax using microsatellite
markers indicates limited changes in population structure after substantial
transmission decline in Papua New Guinea.

Kattenberg JH(1)(2), Razook Z(1), Keo R(1), Koepfli C(1)(3), Jennison C(1)(3),
Lautu-Gumal D(1)(2)(3), Fola AA(1)(3), Ome-Kaius M(1)(2)(3), Barnadas C(1)(2)(3),
Siba P(4), Felger I(5), Kazura J(6), Mueller I(1)(3)(7), Robinson LJ(1)(2)(3)(8),
Barry AE(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Population Health and Immunity Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(2)Vector Borne Diseases Unit, Papua New Guinea Institute of Medical Research,
Yagaum, Papua New Guinea.
(3)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia.
(4)Papua New Guinea Institute of Medical Research, Goroka, Papua New Guinea.
(5)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Centre for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(7)Department of Parasites and Insect Vectors, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(8)Disease Elimination, Burnet Institute, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Monitoring the genetic structure of pathogen populations may be an economical and
sensitive approach to quantify the impact of control on transmission dynamics,
highlighting the need for a better understanding of changes in population genetic
parameters as transmission declines. Here we describe the first population
genetic analysis of two major human malaria parasites, Plasmodium falciparum (Pf)
and Plasmodium vivax (Pv), following nationwide distribution of long-lasting
insecticide-treated nets (LLINs) in Papua New Guinea (PNG). Parasite isolates
from pre- (2005-2006) and post-LLIN (2010-2014) were genotyped using
microsatellite markers. Despite parasite prevalence declining substantially (East
Sepik Province: Pf = 54.9%-8.5%, Pv = 35.7%-5.6%, Madang Province:
Pf = 38.0%-9.0%, Pv: 31.8%-19.7%), genetically diverse and intermixing parasite
populations remained. Pf diversity declined modestly post-LLIN relative to
pre-LLIN (East Sepik: Rs  = 7.1-6.4, HE  = 0.77-0.71; Madang: Rs  = 8.2-6.1, HE
 = 0.79-0.71). Unexpectedly, population structure present in pre-LLIN populations
was lost post-LLIN, suggesting that more frequent human movement between
provinces may have contributed to higher gene flow. Pv prevalence initially
declined but increased again in one province, yet diversity remained high
throughout the study period (East Sepik: Rs  = 11.4-9.3, HE  = 0.83-0.80; Madang:
Rs  = 12.2-14.5, HE  = 0.85-0.88). Although genetic differentiation values
increased between provinces over time, no significant population structure was
observed at any time point. For both species, a decline in multiple infections
and increasing clonal transmission and significant multilocus linkage
disequilibrium post-LLIN were positive indicators of impact on the parasite
population using microsatellite markers. These parameters may be useful adjuncts 
to traditional epidemiological tools in the early stages of transmission
reduction.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.15654 
PMID: 32985031 

