
1. Pharmaceutics. 2020 Sep 25;12(10). pii: E919. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics12100919.

Interaction of Hydroxychloroquine with Pharmacokinetically Important Drug
Transporters.

Weiss J(1), Bajraktari-Sylejmani G(1), Haefeli WE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacoepidemiology, Heidelberg
University Hospital, Im Neuenheimer Feld 410, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

(1) Background: Hydroxychloroquine is used to treat malaria and autoimmune
diseases, and its potential use against COVID-19 is currently under
investigation. Thus far, information on interactions of hydroxychloroquine with
drug transporters mediating drug-drug interactions is limited. We assessed the
inhibition of important efflux (P-glycoprotein (P-gp), breast cancer resistance
protein (BCRP)) and uptake transporters (organic anion transporting polypeptide
(OATP)-1B1, OATP1B3, OATP2B1) by hydroxychloroquine, tested its P-gp and BCRP
substrate characteristics, and evaluated the induction of pharmacokinetically
relevant genes regulated by the nuclear pregnane X (PXR) (CYP3A4, ABCB1) and aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) (CYP1A1, CYP1A2). (2) Methods: Transporter inhibition 
was evaluated in transporter over-expressing cell lines using fluorescent probe
substrates. P-gp and BCRP substrate characteristics were assessed by comparing
growth inhibition of over-expressing and parental cell lines. Possible mRNA
induction was analysed in LS180 cells by quantitative real-time PCR. (3) Results:
Hydroxychloroquine did not inhibit BCRP or the OATPs tested but inhibited P-gp at
concentrations exceeding 10 ÂµM. P-gp overexpressing cells were 5.2-fold more
resistant to hydroxychloroquine than control cells stressing its substrate
characteristics. Hydroxychloroquine did not induce genes regulated by PXR or AhR.
(4) Conclusions: This is the first evidence that hydroxychloroquine's interaction
potential with drug transporters is low, albeit bioavailability of simultaneously
orally administered P-gp substrates might be increased by hydroxychloroquine.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics12100919 
PMID: 32992777 

