
1. Microb Cell. 2020 Sep 16;7(10):286-288. doi: 10.15698/mic2020.10.733.

Erythrocyte phospho-signalling is dynamically altered during infection with
Plasmodium falciparum.

Adderley JD(1), Doerig C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Chronic Infectious and Inflammation Disease, Biomedical Sciences
Cluster, School of Health and Biomedical Sciences, RMIT University, Bundoora VIC 
3083, Australia.

Comment on
    Nat Commun. 2020 Aug 11;11(1):4015.

It is well established that intracellular pathogens mobilise signalling pathways 
to manipulate gene expression of their host cell to promote their own survival.
Surprisingly, there is evidence that specific host signalling molecules are
likewise activated in a-nucleated erythrocytes in response to infection with
malaria parasites. In this paper (Adderley et al., Nature Communications 2020),
we report the system-wide assessment of host erythrocyte signalling during the
course of infection with Plasmodium falciparum. This was achieved through the use
of antibody microarrays containing >800 antibodies directed against human
signalling proteins, which enabled us to interrogate the status of host
erythrocyte signalling pathways at the ring, trophozoite and schizont stages of
parasite development. This not only confirmed the pre-existing fragmentary data
on the activation of a host erythrocyte PAK-MEK pathway, but also identified
dynamic changes to many additional signalling elements, with trophozoite-infected
erythrocytes displaying the largest mobilisation of host cell signalling. This
study generated a comprehensive dataset on the modulation of host erythrocyte
signalling during infection with P. falciparum, and provides the proof of
principle that human protein kinases activated by Plasmodium infection represent 
attractive targets for antimalarial intervention.

Copyright: Â© 2020 Adderley and Doerig.

DOI: 10.15698/mic2020.10.733 
PMCID: PMC7517008
PMID: 33015142 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no
conflict of interest.

