
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2020 Oct 5. pii: AAC.00720-20. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00720-20. [Epub ahead of print]

Tolerance of Gambian Plasmodium falciparum to Dihydroartemisinin and Lumefantrine
detected by Ex vivo Parasite Survival Rate Assay (PSRA).

Mbye H(1)(2), Bojang F(2), Jawara AS(2), Njie B(2), Mohammed NI(2), Okebe J(3),
D'Alessandro U(2)(4), Amambua-Ngwa A(5)(4).

Author information: 
(1)West African Centre for Cell Biology of Infectious Pathogens, Department of
Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana.
(2)MRC Unit The Gambia at London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Fajara,
The Gambia.
(3)Department of International Public health, Liverpool School of Tropical
Medicine, United Kingdom.
(4)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(5)MRC Unit The Gambia at London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Fajara,
The Gambia angwa@mrc.gm alfred.ngwa@lshtm.ac.uk.

Monitoring of Plasmodium falciparum sensitivity to antimalarial drugs in Africa
is vital for malaria elimination. However, the commonly used ex-vivo/in-vitro
IC50 test is inconsistent for several antimalarials, while the alternative
ring-stage survival assay (RSA) for artemisinin derivatives has not been widely
adopted. Here we applied an alternative two-colour flow-cytometry based parasite 
survival rate assay (PSRA) to detect ex-vivo antimalarial tolerance in P.
falciparum isolates from The Gambia.PSRA infers parasite viability from
quantifying re-invasion of uninfected cells following 3 consecutive days of drug 
exposure (10-fold the IC50 drug concentration of field isolates). The drug
survival rate for each isolate is obtained from the slope of the growth/death
curve. We obtained PSRA of 41 isolates for DHA and LUM, out of 51 infections
tested by RSA against DHA. We also determined the genotypes for known drug
resistance genetic loci in Pfdhfr, Pfdhps, Pfmdr, Pfcrt and Pfk13 genes.The PSRA 
for 41 Gambian isolates showed faster killing and lower variance by DHA compared 
to LUM, despite a strong correlation between both drugs. Four and three isolates 
were respectively tolerant to DHA and LUM, with continuous growth during drug
exposure. Isolates with the PfMDR1-Y184F mutant variant had increased LUM
survival though this was not statistically significant.
Sulphodoxine/Pyrimethamine (SP) resistance markers were fixed, while all other
antimalarial variants were prevalent in more than 50% of the population.The PSRA 
detected ex-vivo antimalarial tolerance in Gambian P. falciparum. This calls for 
its wider application and increased vigilance against resistance to ACTs in this 
population.

Copyright Â© 2020 Mbye et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00720-20 
PMID: 33020162 

