
1. Antiviral Res. 1999 Jan;40(3):139-44.

Effect of undecylenic acid as a topical microbicide against genital herpes
infection in mice and guinea pigs.

Bourne N(1), Ireland J, Stanberry LR, Bernstein DI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

There is increasing interest in the use of topical microbicides to help prevent
the spread of sexually transmitted diseases (STD). Undecylenic acid (UA), a
monosaturated fatty acid, is the active ingredient in a number of
over-the-counter (OTC) antifungal spray powders, that also exhibits in vitro
antibacterial and antiviral activity, including herpes simplex virus (HSV)
activity. We, therefore, evaluated UA as a topical microbicide against genital
HSV infection using the murine and guinea pig models of genital herpes. Mice were
administered a 20% solution of UA in polyethylene glycol (PEG) vehicle, vehicle
alone or phosphate buffered saline (PBS) intravaginally immediately prior to
vaginal challenge with HSV-2. Pre-treatment with UA decreased the number of mice 
that became infected (P < 0.001 vs. PBS or vehicle control), developed symptoms
(P <0.001) or died (P <0.001). However, when treatment was extended to either 5
min prior to or after viral inoculation, protection was lost. Similar findings
were found using the guinea pig model, where UA treatment completely prevented
HSV-2 vaginal infection when given immediately prior to HSV-2 inoculation
(P<0.001 vs. PBS or vehicle control). Thus, UA, an approved OTC medication,
provided significant protection against HSV disease and infection only when
applied immediately before viral inoculation, indicating that better formulations
were needed to extend the duration of protection.

DOI: 10.1016/s0166-3542(98)00055-2 
PMID: 10027648  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

