
1. Cancer Gene Ther. 1999 Jan-Feb;6(1):14-20.

Selective delivery of herpes virus vectors to experimental brain tumors using
RMP-7.

Barnett FH(1), Rainov NG, Ikeda K, Schuback DE, Elliott P, Kramm CM, Chase M,
Qureshi NH, Harsh G 4th, Chiocca EA, Breakefield XO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

RMP-7, a bradykinin analog, has been shown to selectively open the blood-tumor
barrier for the delivery of chemotherapeutic drugs to brain tumors. In contrast
to bradykinin, RMP-7 has no hypotensive effects and has been approved for human
use. This study was initiated to determine whether RMP-7 would open the
blood-tumor barrier to virus vectors encoding tumor-killing genes in an
experimental model. The herpes virus vector used, hrR3, which encodes virus
thymidine kinase gene and the lacZ reporter gene, is defective in a gene encoding
ribonucleotide reductase, replicates selectively in dividing tumor cells and not 
in postmitotic neural cells. It was determined that an optimum dose of RMP-7
(1.5-3.0 microg/kg over 10-15 minutes) enhanced viral delivery to brain tumors in
rats bearing intracranial 9 L gliosarcomas when infused through the carotid
artery immediately prior to virus vector application. Maximum expression of the
lacZ reporter gene occurred at 3 days after intracarotid infusion. By 8 days,
transgene expression was largely confined to tumor foci away from the main tumor 
mass. Viral delivery was essentially specific to tumor cells, with little
transgene expression elsewhere in the brain. Minimal uptake and pathology was
noted in the kidney, spleen, and liver. These findings indicate that intracarotid
delivery of RMP-7 can augment the selective delivery of virus vectors to brain
tumors in an experimental rat model, with the potential for application to human 
brain tumors.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cgt.7700003 
PMID: 10078959  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

