
1. J Med Virol. 1999 Apr;57(4):356-60.

Identification of a novel variant of hepatitis E virus in Italy.

Zanetti AR(1), Schlauder GG, Roman√≤ L, Tanzi E, Fabris P, Dawson GJ, Mushahwar
IK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, University of Milan, Italy.
zanetti@imiucca.csi.unimi.it

Hepatitis E infection is typically associated with areas in which hepatitis E
virus (HEV) is endemic. Except for a few cases in Europe and in the United
States, acute hepatitis E is usually associated with travel to endemic areas. We 
set out to determine the etiologic role of HEV in acute non-A-C hepatitis in
Italy. The presence of HEV-RNA and antibody was determined in 218 patients
diagnosed with acute viral non-A-C hepatitis. Acute hepatitis E infection was
defined by the presence of HEV-RNA in sera and positivity for IgM anti-HEV and
seroconversion to IgG anti-HEV. Acute hepatitis E was found in 10.1% of the
patients with acute non-A-C, with 95.5% exhibiting a benign course. A more severe
course was observed in a patient co-infected with HAV and HEV. Most cases were
travelers to endemic areas, although 18.2% reported no travel. One patient was
from a household with an infected patient. Sequence analyses of the polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) product derived from a patient who never visited endemic
areas, identified an isolate that is divergent significantly from all reported
isolates of HEV (79.5-85.8% nucleotide identity). Evidence from this study
suggests that HEV accounts for approximately 10% of acute non-A-C viral hepatitis
in Italy, diagnosed generally in travelers returning from endemic areas. However,
the identification of a new HEV variant in an individual who never indicated
travel or contact with individuals associated with endemic areas, suggests that
this virus may be native to Italy.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1096-9071(199904)57:4<356::aid-jmv5>3.0.co;2-d 
PMID: 10089046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

