
1. Clin Chem Lab Med. 1999 Jan;37(1):33-6.

Detection of GB virus C/hepatitis G virus RNA by reverse-transcription polymerase
chain reaction.

Chang J(1), Tao Q, Wei L, Du S, Wang H, Sun Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hepatology, People's Hospital, Beijing Medical University, P.R.
China.

Recently, a novel RNA virus, designated GB virus C or hepatitis G virus
(GBV-C/HGV) has been identified which may possibly be associated with human
hepatitis. In this study, the nucleotide sequences of the partial nonstructural 5
(NS5) gene of GBV-C/HGV derived from sera of eight Chinese patients were
determined. The overall degree of nucleotide conservation and the existence of
regional highly conserved sequences make this part of the genome suitable for the
development of diagnostic reagents. On the basis of sequence analysis, two sets
of oligonucleotide primers were designed to establish a nested polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) for detection of GBV-C/HGV RNA. The efficacy of three PCR methods 
(first, one stage PCR, second, nested PCR with primers from the NS5 region
designed according to the prototype sequence and the third, our newly developed
PCR) was compared in 133 Chinese patients with liver disease. The positive rates 
of these three methods were 8.3%, 11.3% and 18.0% respectively. The specificity
of our PCR detecting system was verified by sequencing and restriction fragment
length polymorphism (RFLP). In conclusion, because of the heterogeneity and
geographic distribution character of GBV-C/HGV, it is necessary to assess the
sequence variation among Chinese patients infected with GBV-C/HGV. This may allow
to identify GBV-C/HGV RNA with high sensitivity and specificity.

DOI: 10.1515/CCLM.1999.005 
PMID: 10094376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

