
1. Dev Biol Stand. 1976 Dec 13-15;37:273-86.

Post-exposure use of human diploid cell culture rabies vaccine.

Kuwert EK, Marcus I, Werner J, Scheiermann N, HÃ¶her PG, Thraenhart O, Hierholzer 
E, Wiktor TJ, Koprowski H.

880 individuals, 120 of which were exposed to rabid animals, were immunized pre- 
or post-exposure with 2 different BPL-inactivated and concentrated rabies
vaccines prepared in HDC strains WI-38 and MRC-5. The vaccines were well
tolerated and no major side effects were observed after primary immunization with
3-10 doses or 1 booster vaccination. The dynamics of neutralizing, antibody
formation and persistence of antibodies in 4 different groups of vaccinees are
described. The groups were vaccinated pre-exposure (I) on days 0, 28 and 56; (II)
on days 0, 7 and 14; (III) on days 0, 3, 7 and 21; and (IV) post-exposure on days
0, 3, 7, 14, 30 and 90. High antibody levels--persisting for at least 30
months--were obtained in all patients. The CFT, using a concentrated and purified
virion antigen, was highly specific for rabies virus antibody demonstration.
Since in some 50 patients under severe risk, after having been bitten and/or
scratched by proven rabid animals, not a single breakthough of immunity was
observed during an observation time between 1/2 and 3 years, the protective
effect of the HDCS-rabies vaccines seems to be excellent. With regard to their
high immunogenicity and extremely low reactogenicity, the new HDCS-vaccines can
be recommended for prophylactic and post-exposure immunization of man without any
reserve. Data on simultaneous application of homologous anti-rabies gammaglobulin
from man (20 I.E./kg body-weight) and HDCS-vaccines are also presented and
discussed.


PMID: 1031689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

