
1. Arch Virol. 1999;144(4):657-73.

Viral coinfection in salmonids: infectious pancreatic necrosis virus interferes
with infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus.

Alonso M(1), Rodríguez S, Pérez-Prieto SI.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiología Molecular, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas (CSIC), Madrid, Spain.

Coinfection of farm-reared salmonids involving two viruses has been described,
but there is no report on the interactions between viruses. Here we examine
whether infectious pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV) strain Sp interferes with the
growth of infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHNV) strain S46, a coinfected
isolate from rainbow trout. When BF-2 cell culture was inoculated with S46 the
infective titer of the IHNV fraction decreased by 3 log10 units compared to the
growth curve of IHNV in the single infection. RT-PCR assay confirmed this
reduction, which after successive passages of the co-infected sample led to a
decrease in IHNV mRNA and the absence of the specific PCR product for IHNV. Flow 
cytometry showed that only 13% of the cells inoculated with S46 strain were
infected with IHNV at 48-72 h post infection, in contrast to the 50-80% of cells 
that were positive for IPNV. Exposure of cells to IHNV for 24 h before infection 
with IPNV did not affect the infective titers of either virus or the PCR results 
obtained in simultaneous coinfections. Moreover IHNV was not inhibited when the
IPNV inoculum was reduced. So, a multiplicity of infection dependence was
demonstrated for IPNV-IHNV interference; the RT-PCR assay described here was
found to be a suitable technique for identifying and studying dual viral
infections.

DOI: 10.1007/s007050050534 
PMID: 10365159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

