
1. Int J Infect Dis. 1999 Summer;3(4):207-10.

Surgical procedures as a major risk factor for chronic hepatitis C virus
infection in Italy: evidence from a case-control study.

Gaeta GB(1), Stroffolini T, Taliani G, Ippolito FM, Giusti G, De Bac C.

Author information: 
(1)Clinica Malattie Infettive, Seconda Universit√†, Napoli, Italy. gaeta@unina.it

OBJECTIVES: The study was carried out to evaluate the risk factors associated
with chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection.
METHODS: This case-control study used multiple logistic regression analysis to
determine risk factors associated with HCV infection. Study participants were
followed at 10 liver or gastroenterologic units and included 294 subjects with
chronic HCV infection and 295 age and sex matched anti-HCV-negative controls.
RESULTS: The use of glass syringes and surgical procedures was reported by as
many as 77.6% and 73.8% of cases, respectively; blood transfusion was recorded in
nearly a quarter of cases; 10.2% of cases, but none of the controls, reported
past or current intravenous drug use. Multiple logistic regression analysis
showed that blood transfusion, being the sexual partner of an intravenous drug
user, and surgery all were independent predictors of the likelihood of HCV
infection.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that, besides the well-known sources of
infection, such as blood transfusion and intravenous drug use, surgical
procedures may play an important role in the spread of HCV infection in Italy.
Given that a large proportion of the general population undergoes surgery, a
rational and relatively inexpensive policy for the prevention of HCV infection
must focus on implementing efficient procedures for the sterilization of
instruments and the use of disposable materials in surgical units.

DOI: 10.1016/s1201-9712(99)90026-7 
PMID: 10575150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

