
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Feb 1;28(3):E9.

Nucleic acid mutation analysis using catalytic DNA.

Cairns MJ(1), King A, Sun LQ.

Author information: 
(1)Johnson and Johnson Research Laboratories, Australian Technology Park, Level
4, 1 Central Avenue, Eveleigh, NSW 1430, Australia.

The sequence specificity of the '10-23' RNA-cleaving DNA enzyme (deoxyribozyme)
was utilised to discriminate between subtle differences in nucleic acid sequence 
in a relatively conserved segment of the L1 gene from a number of different human
papilloma virus (HPV) genotypes. DNA enzymes specific for the different HPV types
were found to cleave their respective target oligoribonucleotide substrates with 
high efficiency compared with their unmatched counterparts, which were usually
not cleaved or cleaved with very low efficiency. This specificity was achieved
despite the existence of only very small differences in the sequence of one
binding arm. As an example of how this methodology may be applied to mutation
analysis of tissue samples, type-specific deoxyribozyme cleavable substrates were
generated by genomic PCR using a chimeric primer containing three bases of RNA.
The RNA component enabled each amplicon to be cleavable in the presence of its
matching deoxyribozyme. In this format, the specificity of deoxyribozyme cleavage
is defined by Watson-Crick interactions between one substrate-binding domain (arm
I) and the polymorphic sequence which is amplified during PCR.
Deoxy-ribozyme-mediated cleavage of amplicons generated by this method was used
to examine the HPV status of genomic DNA derived from Caski cells, which are
known to be positive for HPV16. This method is applicable to many types of
nucleic acid sequence variation, including single nucleotide polymorphisms.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/28.3.e9 
PMCID: PMC102564
PMID: 10637339  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

