
1. J Gen Virol. 2000 Feb;81(Pt 2):431-9.

Insertion sites for recombinant vaccinia virus construction: effects on
expression of a foreign protein.

Coupar BE(1), Oke PG, Andrew ME.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Australian Animal Health Laboratory, PO Bag 24, Geelong, Victoria 3220, 
Australia. barbara.coupar@dah.csiro.au

The expression of antigens or other molecules from recombinant vaccinia viruses
requires the insertion of coding sequence at specific sites in the viral genome. 
Here we investigate the influence of two different sites on the level of protein 
expressed during a viral infection. The level of immune response in mice to
vaccinia virus-expressed murine interleukin 2 (IL-2) or IL-4 varied depending on 
whether the coding sequence was inserted into the vaccinia virus thymidine kinase
(tk) gene or into the HindIII F fragment of the viral genome where herpes simplex
virus (HSV) tk was used as a selectable marker. In each case the intensity of the
response was greater when the relevant gene was expressed from the HindIII F
insertion site. In order to quantify these differences a series of recombinant
viruses expressing luciferase was constructed. Luciferase activity from coding
sequence inserted into the HindIII F fragment was significantly higher than that 
from the tk gene insertion, provided HSV tk(+) constructs were compared.
Insertion of a marker gene (HSV tk) into the HindIII F site with disruption of
the F7L open reading frame led to a reduced level of luciferase expressed from
the tk insert, despite more than 45 kb of intervening sequence. In mice,
luciferase expression was higher from the HindIII F inserted gene than from the
tk insert in both lungs and ovaries.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-81-2-431 
PMID: 10644842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

