
1. J Wildl Dis. 2000 Apr;36(2):231-40.

Bat rabies in urban centers in Chile.

de Mattos CA(1), Favi M, Yung V, Pavletic C, de Mattos CC.

Author information: 
(1)Rabies Section MSG33, Viral and Rickettsial Zoonosis Branch, Division of Viral
and Rickettsial Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, US
Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA.
cdd9@cdc.gov

One hundred and five rabies isolates obtained from domestic animals and
insectivorous bats in Chile between 1977 and 1998 were molecularly characterized 
by limited sequence analysis of their nucleoprotein genes. These isolates were
compared with viruses isolated from known domestic and wildlife rabies reservoirs
in the Americas to identify potential reservoirs of rabies in Chile. The
phylogenetic analyses showed that none of the Chilean isolates segregated with
viruses from the terrestrial reservoirs. No non-rabies lyssaviruses were found in
this study. The Chilean samples were not related to viruses of the sylvatic cycle
maintained by the common vampire bat (Desmodus rotundus) in Latin America. Five
genetic variants were identified from insectivorous bats in Chile. The Brazilian 
free-tailed bat (Tadarida brasiliensis) was identified as the reservoir for the
rabies genetic variant most frequently isolated in the country between 1977 and
1998. The close association of a group of viruses obtained from a domestic dog
(Canis familiaris), Brazilian free-tailed bats, and a red bat (Lasiurus borealis)
with viruses maintained by Lasiurus spp. in North America implicated species of
this genus as the possible reservoirs of this particular genetic variant in
Chile. Reservoirs for the other three variants remain unknown.

DOI: 10.7589/0090-3558-36.2.231 
PMID: 10813604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

