
1. Mutat Res. 2000 Jun 30;460(1):17-28.

Retroviral expression of the hepatitis B virus x gene promotes liver cell
susceptibility to carcinogen-induced site specific mutagenesis.

Sohn S(1), Jaitovitch-Groisman I, Benlimame N, Galipeau J, Batist G,
Alaoui-Jamali MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Oncology, Pharmacology and Therapeutics, and Center
for Translational Research in Cancer, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research
of the Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Mutational inactivation of the tumor suppressor gene p53 is common in
hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC). AGG to AGT transversion in codon 249 of exon 7
of the p53 gene occurs in over 50% of HCC from endemic regions, where both
chronic infection with the hepatitis B virus (HBV) and exposure to carcinogens
such as aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) prevail. In this study, we report the effect of the
HBV x protein (HBx) on carcinogen-induced cytotoxicity and AGG to AGT mutation in
codon 249 of the p53 gene in the human liver cell line CCL13. Expression of HBx, 
as revealed by its transactivation function, results in enhanced cell
susceptibility to cytotoxicity induced by the AFB1 active metabolite,
AFB1-8,9-epoxide, and benzo(a)pyrene diol-epoxide. Under similar conditions,
expression of HBx promotes apoptosis in a subset of cell population. Exposure to 
AFB1-8, 9-epoxide alone induces a low frequency of AGG to AGT mutation in codon
249 of the p53 gene, as determined by an allele-specific polymerase chain
reaction (AS-PCR) assay. However, expression of HBx enhances the frequency of
AFB1-epoxide-induced AGG to AGT mutation compared to control cells. In summary,
this study demonstrates that expression of HBx enhances liver cell susceptibility
to carcinogen-induced mutagenesis, possibly through alteration of the balance
between DNA repair and apoptosis, two cellular defense mechanisms against
genotoxic stress.

DOI: 10.1016/s0921-8777(00)00010-0 
PMID: 10856831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

