
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2000 Jun 10;16(9):871-82.

Critical role of enhanced CD4 affinity in laboratory adaptation of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1.

Platt EJ(1), Kozak SL, Kabat D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland 97201, USA.

Strains of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) that use the coreceptor
CXCR4 (X4 strains) become laboratory adapted (LA) when selected for ability to
replicate in leukemic T cell lines such as H9. Compared with patient X4 viruses, 
the gp120-gp41 complexes of LA viruses have a constellation of common properties 
including enhanced affinities for CD4, greater sensitivities to inactivations by 
diverse antibodies and by soluble CD4, increased shedding of gp120, and improved 
abilities to infect HeLa-CD4 cell clones that contain only trace quantities of
CD4. These common characteristics, which may result from a concerted structural
rearrangement of the gp120-gp41 complexes, have made it difficult to identify a
specific feature that is critical for laboratory adaptation. To test the
hypothesis that replication of patient X4 HIV-1 is limited by the low CD4
concentration in H9 cells (7.0 x 10(3) CD4/cell), we constructed H9 derivatives
that express at least 10 times more of this receptor. Interestingly, most patient
X4 isolates readily grew in these derivative cells, and the resulting virus
preparations retained the characteristics of primary viruses throughout multiple 
passages. In contrast, selection of the same viruses in the parental H9 cells
resulted in outgrowth of LA derivatives. We conclude that a weak interaction of
patient X4 HIV-1 isolates with CD4 is the primary factor that limits their
replication in leukemic T cell lines.

DOI: 10.1089/08892220050042819 
PMID: 10875613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

