
1. J Biomed Mater Res. 2000 Sep;53(5):577-83.

Biochemical properties of the fibrinogen component of a fibrin glue before and
after severe dry heat treatment.

Bolliger-Stucki B(1), Baillod P, MÃ¤der W, Furlan M.

Author information: 
(1)Central Hematology Laboratory, Inselspital, University Hospital, Bern,
Switzerland. bettina_bolliger@med.unc.edu

Functional biochemical properties of 5 batches of the fibrinogen component of a
fibrin glue produced by the ZLB Central Laboratory, Bern, each consisting of 4
different in-process samples (taken after the first and second precipitation
step, lyophilization, and dry-heat treatment) were studied in vitro. We focused
our attention on the effect of the anti-viral treatment of the lyophilized
product by dry heat for 1 h at 100 degrees C. A slight reduction in maximal
turbidity of all heat-treated samples was observed during the clotting assay
compared to nontreated samples. Treatment with dry heat did not result in
generation of fibrinogen fragments that might accelerate
tissue-plasminogen-activator (t-PA)-enhanced plasminogen to plasmin conversion.
The time course of fibrin cross-linking by factor XIII showed no differences
between heated and unheated samples. This result indicates that exposure of the
fibrinogen component to severe heat neither reduced activity of factor XIIIa nor 
affected the correct alignment of cross-linking sites in polymerized fibrin.
Incubation of fibrinogen with thrombin, plasminogen, and t-PA resulted in a
slightly enhanced degradation of fibrin derived from the heat-treated samples.
The amount of residual moisture, determined to be within the range of 0.6-2.1%
before heat treatment, did not influence clotting, cross-linking, and
fibrinolysis parameters. In conclusion, the virus inactivation treatment by dry
heat for 1 h at 100 degrees C induces no significant alterations of the in vitro 
biochemical properties of the fibrinogen component of this fibrin glue.

Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1097-4636(200009)53:5<577::aid-jbm18>3.0.co;2-3 
PMID: 10984707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

