
1. Mol Biol Cell. 2000 Nov;11(11):3765-75.

A point mutation in the transmembrane domain of the hemagglutinin of influenza
virus stabilizes a hemifusion intermediate that can transit to fusion.

Melikyan GB(1), Markosyan RM, Roth MG, Cohen FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Physiology, Rush Medical College,
Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

A hemagglutinin (HA) of influenza virus having a single semiconserved Gly residue
within the transmembrane domain mutated to Leu (G520L) was expressed on cells;
these cells were bound to red blood cells. By decreasing pH at 23 degrees C
rather than 37 degrees C, an intermediate with properties expected of hemifusion 
just as the membranes are about to transit to full fusion was captured. As
evidence: 1) increasing temperature to 37 degrees C at neutral pH allowed fusion 
to proceed; 2) after achieving the intermediate, the two membranes did not
separate from each other after proteolytic cleavage of G520L because cells
treated with proteinase K could not fuse upon temperature increase but could fuse
upon the addition of chlorpromazine; and 3) at the point of the intermediate,
adding exogenous lipids known to promote or inhibit the creation of hemifusion
did not significantly alter the lipid dye spread that occurred upon increasing
temperature, implying that at the intermediate, contacting membrane leaflets had 
already merged. A stable intermediate of hemifusion that could transit to fusion 
was also generated for wild-type HA, but pH had to be reduced at the
significantly lower temperature of 4 degrees C. The fusion pores generated by
G520L did not enlarge, whereas those induced by wild-type HA did. The finding
that a state of transitional hemifusion can be readily obtained via a point
mutation without the need for unusually low temperature supports the hypothesis
that hemifusion occurs before pore formation.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.11.11.3765 
PMCID: PMC15035
PMID: 11071905  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

