
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 9;276(6):3952-62. Epub 2000 Nov 9.

Inhibition of clathrin-dependent endocytosis has multiple effects on human
rhinovirus serotype 2 cell entry.

Bayer N(1), Schober D, HÃ¼ttinger M, Blaas D, Fuchs R.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathophysiology and Medical Chemistry, University of Vienna,
A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

Minor group human rhinoviruses (exemplified by human rhinovirus serotype 2
(HRV2)) use members of the low density lipoprotein receptor family for cell
entry; all these receptors possess clathrin-coated pit localization signals.
Viral infection should thus be inhibited under conditions of impaired
clathrin-mediated endocytosis. However, Madshus et al. reported an increase in
the cytopathic effect of HRV2 infection in HEp-2 cells upon suppression of
clathrin-dependent endocytosis by hypotonic shock and potassium depletion
(Madshus, I. H., Sandvig, K., Olsnes, S., and van Deurs, B. (1987) J. Cell.
Physiol. 131, 14-22.) To resolve this apparent contradiction, we investigated the
binding, internalization, conformational changes, and productive uncoating of
HRV2 in HeLa cells subjected to hypotonic shock and potassium depletion. This
treatment led to an increase in HRV2 binding, with internalization being barely
affected. The generation of C-antigenic particles requiring pH </=5.6 was
strongly reduced due to an elevation of the pH in endosomal compartments.
However, K(+) depletion only slightly affected de novo viral protein synthesis,
suggesting that productivity of viral RNA in the cytoplasm is enhanced and thus
compensates for the reduction in C-antigenic particles. The distinct steps in the
entry pathway of HRV2 are thus differently influenced by potassium depletion.
Viral internalization under conditions of inhibited clathrin-dependent
endocytosis without the need to disturb the ionic milieu was confirmed in HeLa
cells overexpressing the nonfunctional dynamin-1 mutant K44A. Unexpectedly,
overexpression of dynamin-1 K44A resulted in elevated endosomal pH compared with 
overexpression of wild-type dynamin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M004722200 
PMID: 11073943  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

