
1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2000 Oct;15(10):1165-70.

A multicenter, randomized, controlled trial of interferon alfacon-1 compared with
alpha-2a-interferon in Chinese patients with chronic hepatitis C virus infection.

Yao GB(1), Fu XX, Tian GS, Xu DZ, Hao LJ, Huangfu YS, Su CX.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Jin An Qu Central Hospital, China. GBYAO@81890.net

BACKGROUND: Alpha-interferons are the accepted therapy for patients infected with
chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) in China. However, consensus interferon (CIFN)
for HCV treatment is effective in patients with chronic hepatitis C from Western 
countries.
METHODS: This randomized, controlled trial was conducted to determine the safety 
and efficacy of CIFN at two doses, and to compare it with alpha-2a-interferon
(IFN-alpha-2a) in Chinese patients with chronic HCV. Interferon-naive patients
with chronic HCV infection (n = 187) were randomly chosen to receive 15 microg
CIFN or 9 microg or 3 MU IFN-alpha-2a subcutaneously, three times a week for 24
weeks, followed by a 24 week observation period. Efficacy was evaluated by the
normalization of serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and the non-detectability
disappearance of serum HCV-RNA by using reverse-transcription-polymerase chain
reaction. The safety of CIFN was evaluated by recording the type and severity of 
adverse effects.
RESULTS: The combined ALT and HCV-RNA end-of-treatment and sustained responses
were observed to be greater for treatment with 15 microg CIFN (59.0% and 55.7%,
respectively) compared to IFN alpha-2a (36.1% and 39.3%, respectively; P = 0.01
for the end-of-treatment, P = 0.07 for the sustained response). The combined ALT 
and HCV-RNA end-of-treatment and sustained responses for treatment with 9 microg 
CIFN (both 49.2%) were higher than those for IFN-alpha-2a (not statistically
significant). Data were analyzed by using a logistic-multiple-variate regression 
model, which indicated that the higher IFN dose (15 microg or 9 microg CIFN vs 3 
MU IFN-alpha-2a; P < 0.01) appeared to be associated with a better sustained
response. The type, frequency and severity of adverse effects were comparable
across treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Consensus interferon appears to be safe and effective at
concentrations of 9 and 15 microg, but 15 microg CIFN may be more effective than 
3 MU IFN-alpha-2a, without increased toxicity.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1440-1746.2000.02307.x 
PMID: 11106097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

