
1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2000 Dec;20(12):2696-701.

Identification and localization of a fatty acid response region in the human
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 gene.

Chen Y(1), Billadello JJ, Schneider DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Vermont (Burlington), USA.

The increased expression of plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1) is
associated with increased concentrations of fatty acids in blood and may
accelerate atherogenesis in diabetes. The present study was designed to define
mechanisms by which nonesterified (free) fatty acids (FFAs) augment the
expression of PAI-1. FFAs increased PAI-1 protein and mRNA expression by HepG2
cells. To identify potential regulatory elements, we constructed chimeric genes
by fusing 1313, 853, 610, or 328 bp of human PAI-1 5'-flanking DNA to a
luciferase reporter (PAI-LUC). A 2-fold increase in luciferase activity was seen 
when cells were transfected with PAI-LUC 1313, 863, or 610 and exposed to FFAs.
No response to FFAs was seen with PAI-LUC 328 and after deletion of a 72-bp (-599
to -528) fragment from PAI-LUC 1313. This 72-bp fragment conferred FFA
responsiveness to a different (simian virus 40) promoter. Two footprinted regions
were demonstrated by DNase I analysis. Gel mobility shift assays indicated
specific binding of extracted proteins to an FFA response element:
5'-TG(G/C)(1-2)CTG-3'. This sequence is repeated 4 times and is similar to an
Sp1-binding site. Sp1 consensus oligonucleotides inhibited binding of extracted
proteins to the regulatory elements. Accordingly, FFA-induced increased
expression of PAI-1 in HepG2 cells is mediated by the binding of a transcription 
factor or factors to the repeated fatty acid response element,
5'-TG(G/C)(1-2)CTG-3', that is highly homologous to an Sp1-binding site.

DOI: 10.1161/01.atv.20.12.2696 
PMID: 11116074  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

