
1. Prev Vet Med. 2001 Jan 17;48(1):55-64.

Cross-sectional study of the association between pathological conditions and
myxoma-virus seroprevalence in intensive rabbit farms in Europe.

Marlier D(1), Herbots J, Detilleux J, Lemaire M, Thiry E, Vindevogel H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bird and Rabbit Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Liège, Bld. de Colonster 20, Bat B42, Sart-Tilman, B4000, Liège,
Belgium. dmarlier@ulg.ac.be

Myxomatosis is a major viral disease of the European rabbit (Oryctolagus
cuniculus). Two forms of the disease (nodular and amyxomatous) exist. The
clinical diagnosis of the nodular form is easily performed on the basis of
typical skin lesions whereas that of amyxomatous forms must be based on virus
isolation or detection of specific antibodies to myxoma virus (MV). The
seroprevalence of MV was studied between March 1998 and February 1999 in 16 farms
from three European countries considered free of myxomatosis on the basis of the 
absence of typical clinical signs. MV antibodies were detected by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (sensitivity 100%, specificity 90%) in all 16 farms; 
the seroprevalences corrected for test inaccuracy (95% confidence interval) were 
55+/-7.7% and 37+/-6.1% for does and broilers, respectively. The association
between herd sizes, types of rabbitries, and presence of recurrent respiratory or
digestive troubles and seroprevalence of MV antibodies was tested in logistic
multiple regressions. In all models, the seroprevalence of MV antibodies was
significantly higher in herds (does and broilers) with recurrent respiratory or
digestive troubles than in herds without these problems. The seroprevalence was
also higher in herds (does and broilers) where animals were housed totally or
partially in outdoors rabbitries than in totally enclosed rabbitries. The effect 
of herd sizes on the presence of MV antibodies was the same in does and broilers;
intermediate sizes were at lower risk than the smaller and larger ones.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-5877(00)00177-x 
PMID: 11150634  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

