
1. J Clin Virol. 2001 Jan;20(1-2):7-13.

Validation and standardisation of nucleic acid amplification technology (NAT)
assays for the detection of viral contamination of blood and blood products.

Saldanha J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, National Institute for Biological Standards and Control,
Blanche Lane, South Mimms, Hertshire, EN6 3QG, UK. jsaldanha@nibsc.ac.uk

Standardisation of NAT assays is necessary before the introduction of such assays
for routine screening of blood and blood products for viral contaminants such as 
HBV, HCV, and HIV-1. Standardisation can be achieved by the use of
well-characterised reference materials (working reagents) to validate each assay 
run. Working reagents for HCV, HIV-1, HBV, HAV, and human parvovirus B19 have
been established by the NIBSC. Such reagents and reference panels are also
available from other official medicinal control laboratories and commercial
organisations. However, the nucleic acid content of these reagents are expressed 
in many different units, e. g. genome equivalents/ml, copies/ml, PCR detectable
units/ml, making comparisons of results from laboratories using different
reagents difficult. The establishment of internationally accepted standards
against which all working reagents could be calibrated, using a common standard
unit of measurement, IU, would overcome this major problem. The first
International Standard for HCV RNA assays was established in 1997. This reagent, 
96/790, is a lyophilised preparation of a genotype 1 isolate and the
concentration of the standard is 10(5) IU/ml. Two further International Standards
have since been established; for HIV-1 and HBV, containing 10(5) IU/ml and 10(6) 
IU/ml respectively. The establishment of the HCV International Standard has been 
critical in the introduction of mandatory testing. Since 1st July 1999, all
batches of blood products marketed in Europe have to be prepared from plasma
pools tested and found non-reactive for HCV RNA using a validated assay which can
detect a sample containing 100 IU/ml of HCV RNA. In Germany, screening of blood
donations for HCV RNA by NAT has been mandatory since 1st April 1999. The minimum
sensitivity of assays should be 5000 IU/ml for a single donation.

DOI: 10.1016/s1386-6532(00)00149-9 
PMID: 11163577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

