
1. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2001 Feb;3(1):71-8.

Extrahepatic manifestations of chronic viral hepatitis.

Pyrsopoulos NT(1), Reddy KR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatology, Center for Liver Diseases, University of Miami School 
of Medicine, 1500 NW 12th Avenue, Suite 1100, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Hepatitis B (HBV) and C (HCV) viruses are well-recognized causes for chronic
hepatitis, cirrhosis, and even for hepatocellular carcinoma. Apart from liver
disease, these viral infections are known to be associated with a spectrum of
extrahepatic manifestations. The prevalence of clinically significant
extrahepatic manifestations is relatively low, but it can be associated with
significant morbidity and even mortality. An awareness and recognition of these
manifestations is of paramount importance in facilitating early diagnosis and in 
offering treatment. However, treatments are not necessarily effective, and
patients may continue with disabling extrahepatic manifestations. Hepatitis B
virus has been well recognized as causing a variety of manifestations that
include skin rash, arthritis, arthralgia, glomerulonephritis, polyarteritis
nodosa, and papular acrodermatitis. More recently, infection with hepatitis C
virus has elicited considerable interest for its role in a spectrum of
extrahepatic manifestations. Among the best-reported are cryoglobulinemia,
glomerulonephritis, high titer of autoantibodies, idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura, lichen planus, Mooren's corneal ulcer, Sj√∂gren's syndrome, porphyria
cutanea tarda, and necrotizing cutaneous vasculitis. The precise pathogenesis of 
these extrahepatic complications has not been determined, although the majority
represent the clinical expression of autoimmune phenomena.

DOI: 10.1007/s11894-001-0044-1 
PMID: 11177698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

