
1. Gene Ther. 2000 Dec;7(24):2132-8.

Adenoviral vector design for high-level transgene expression in primitive human
hematopoietic progenitors.

Fan X(1), Brun A, Karlsson S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Wallenberg Neuroscience
Center, Lund University, SÃ¶lvegatan 17, 223 62 Lund, Sweden.

Adenoviral vector-mediated transient gene expression can provide new
possibilities for ex vivo manipulation of quiescent hematopoietic stem cells
(HSC). In order to define a suitable expression cassette for high levels of
transgene expression in HSCs, we have studied the level of transgene expression
in human CD34+CD38- cells using adenoviral vectors with various gene expression
cassettes encoding the enhanced green fluorescence protein (EGFP) gene. CD34+
hematopoietic cells were cultured in serum-free medium with megakaryocyte growth 
and development factor (MGDF) alone for supporting the survival of primitive
progenitors or with MGDF, c-kit ligand (KL) and flt3 ligand (FL) for inducing
proliferation of primitive progenitors. With all the vectors tested, higher
percentages of EGFP expressing cells were found in CD34+CD38- cells than those in
CD34+CD38high cells from all donors tested. The phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK)-1
promoter was found to allow higher levels of EGFP expression than the human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) promoter in CD34+CD38- cells. Replacing the SV40
polyadenylation signal with the human beta-globin gene IVS2 and polyadenylation
signal in the expression cassette (Ad5xPGK-EGFP-beta-globin) enhanced the level
of EGFP expression markedly further. These results provide a guideline for the
development of adenoviral vectors for gene expression in human primitive
hematopoietic progenitor cells. Gene Therapy (2000) 7, 2132-2138.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.gt.3301352 
PMID: 11223995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

