
1. Rev Neurol. 2000 Nov 16-30;31(10):991-3.

[Dynamics of intrathecal immunoglobulin synthesis].

[Article in Spanish]

Dorta-Contreras AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Neuroinmunología, Hospital Pediátrico San Miguel, Apartado
10.049, La Habana, Cuba. adorta@infomed.sld.cu

INTRODUCTION: Dynamics of the immune response in Central Nervous System (CSN) is 
different from the well-known switch of IgM synthesis to IgG synthesis in blood.
OBJECTIVE: Broadcast the behavior and the factors involved in the dynamics of the
intrathecal immune response in infectious neurological disorders.
DEVELOPMENT: The lack of a switch from IgM class response to IgG response could
be more related to regulation-modulation mechanisms of the CNS immune response
than differs from blood in a different cytokines composition, and the possibility
of chemokines synthesis during the neuroinflammatory process, and the
neuroimmune-endocrine mechanisms. The immune pattern can be stable like
neuroborreliosis, and can be modify like in herpes simplex meningoencephalitis.
It could have a typical pattern like in Neisseria meningitidis
meningoencephalitis and neurotuberculosis. Also the pattern could be still
detectable for many years after sufficient treatment and complete recovery of the
symptom-free patients like in neurosyphilis or an advanced precocious response
during the childhood. In HIV encephalopathy the pattern remains the same during
the evolution but in other virus infections, like Echo 6 or Coxsackie B5, depends
on the biological agent.
CONCLUSIONS: In order to know the acuity of the disease, we have to know the
physiopathologic characteristics of the biological agents, time courses,
locations of the pathological processes, and the host age. The main signs in
cerebrospinal fluid of an acute, active disease of CNS are the increased of
cerebrospinal fluid cell count and the increased of albumin ratio.


PMID: 11244694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

