
1. Vet Microbiol. 2001 Apr 19;79(4):285-99.

Experimental infection of pregnant ewes with bovine viral diarrhea virus type-2
(BVDV-2): effects on the pregnancy and fetus.

Scherer CF(1), Flores EF, Weiblen R, Caron L, Irigoyen LF, Neves JP, Maciel MN.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Medicina Veterin√°ria Preventiva (DMVP) e Departamento de
Microbiologia e Parasitologia (DMP), Universidade Federal de Santa Maria (UFSM), 
97105-900, RS, Santa Maria, Brazil.

The reproduction effects of bovine viral diarrhea virus type-2 (BVDV-2) infection
were investigated in ewes inoculated with a non-cytopathic BVDV-2 isolate at
three stages of gestation. Virus inoculation was followed by a transient viremia,
accompanied by a transient and mild hyperthermia and nasal discharge in a few
animals. Some ewes were sacrificed at different time-points after virus
inoculation to study the kinetics of fetal infection. Infectivity and viral
antigens were detected in placentomes from day 7 to 36 post-inoculation (pi) and 
in fetal fluids and tissues between days 10 and 28 pi. Cardiac petechial
hemorrhages and hemoperitoneum accompanied by a severe fibrinous ulcerative
placentitis were observed in fetuses examined at days 21, 28 and 36 pi.
Inoculation of ewes at days 55-60 of gestation resulted in a prolonged virus
replication in placentomes and fetal tissues; ewes that were allowed to proceed
with pregnancy had 77% of abortions or fetal and perinatal deaths. Seven
stillbirths, unviable and viable lambs born to these ewes were virus-positive at 
birth. Infectious virus was repeatedly isolated from leukocytes of two lambs up
to 2 and 6 months of age, indicating they were persistently infected. Ewes
inoculated at days 65-70 of gestation had 66.6% of fetal and perinatal losses.
Three viable lambs born to these ewes were healthy, BVDV antibody-positive and
virus-negative. A transient viral replication in placentomes and in a few fetal
tissues, followed by the rise of fetal neutralizing antibodies and virus
clearance was the result of inoculating ewes at days 120-125 of gestation. Lambs 
born to these ewes were healthy, antibody-positive and virus-negative. These
results demonstrate that the biology of BVDV-2 infection in pregnant sheep is
essentially similar to that of BVDV-1 in pregnant cattle and sheep. These
features make this species an attractive animal model for studying the
pathogenesis of congenital BVDV-2 infection.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1135(00)00357-6 
PMID: 11267789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

