
1. Virology. 2001 May 10;283(2):167-77.

Hepatitis C virus core protein transactivates insulin-like growth factor II gene 
transcription through acting concurrently on Egr1 and Sp1 sites.

Lee S(1), Park U, Lee YI.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cell Signal Transduction Laboratory, Bioscience Research Division, Korea
Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Taejon, Korea 305-606.

The possibility that hepatitis C virus core gene product (HCV-core) acts as a
transactivator in insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) gene transcription was
tested. HCV-core protein increases endogenous IGF-II expression from promoter 4
(P4) of the IGF-II gene through two cis-acting elements: Sp1 and Egr1 binding
sites. Sp1 and Egr1 both bind to IGF-II P4 and functionally cooperate in
mediating the maximal activity of IGF-II P4. HCV-core protein induced the binding
of Sp1 and Egr1 on its binding sites on IGF-II P4. In addition, Sp1 and Egr1 were
stimulated to phosphorylate by HCV-core, and its DNA binding activity was
up-regulated upon HCV-core transfection. Transfection with HCV-core in HepG2
cells stimulated the membrane translocation of protein kinase C (PKC) and the
treatment of HCV-core transfected cells with calphostin C, a PKC inhibitor,
blocked induction of Sp1 and Egr1 DNA binding activity, and eventually
transcriptional transactivations of the IGF-II gene. Increasing the DNA binding
activity of the phosphorylated form of Sp1 and Egr1 might be an important
mechanism for regulating IGF-II gene expression and for promoting cell division
during hepatic carcinogenesis. These results indicate that HCV-core functions as 
a positive regulator of IGF-II transcription through the PKC pathway and that Sp1
and Egr1 are direct targets of the transcriptional regulation of the IGF-II gene 
which plays an important role in hepatitis C virus pathogenesis during the
formation of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2001.0892 
PMID: 11336542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

