
1. Int J Cancer. 2001 Jun 1;92(5):687-91.

Adult Burkitt's lymphoma in patients with and without human immunodeficiency
virus infection in Kenya.

Otieno MW(1), Remick SC, Whalen C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology and Blood Transfusion, University of Nairobi,
College of Health Sciences, P.O. Box 19676, Nairobi, Kenya.

Prior to the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) epidemic, one or two cases
of adult Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) were seen annually at the Kenyatta National
Hospital, the national referral medical center in Nairobi, Kenya. To investigate 
the influence of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in adult BL in
Kenya, we conducted a national prevalence survey of all patients 16 years of age 
and older with BL. A systematic review of medical records of all patients
diagnosed with BL between 1992 and 1996 was performed. The diagnosis of BL was
based and confirmed on review of pathological material from time of original
diagnosis. HIV serology was confirmed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA). Twenty-nine adult patients with BL were identified during the 5-year
study period. Of these patients, 17 (59%) were males, 12 (41%) were females, and 
the median age was 26 years. Nineteen patients (66%) with BL were
HIV-seropositive. The proportion of men was similar in HIV-seropositive and
-seronegative patients (58% vs 60%). HIV-seropositive BL patients were
significantly older than seronegatives (median 35 vs 19.5 years, p < 0.001).
HIV-seropositive patients uniformly presented with constitutional or B symptoms
and advanced BL accompanied by diffuse lymph node involvement, whereas the
clinical presentation of HIV-seronegative patients during this time period was
reminiscent of the "typical" endemic pattern of disease with complete sparing of 
peripheral lymph nodes. The overall survival of HIV-seropositive cases was
significantly worse than that of the HIV-seronegative cases; median survival in
the HIV-seropositive patients was 15 weeks. There is an approximate 3-fold
increase in the incidence of adult BL during the time period of this study, which
is attributable to the AIDS epidemic. In this setting, patients often present
with disseminated disease, diffuse peripheral lymphadenopathy and fever, the
latter two of which heretofore have been commonly associated with
non-lymphoproliferative disorders such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis and sexually
transmitted diseases in Kenya. These observations warrant inclusion of
AIDS-related BL in the differential diagnosis of the adult patient with
unexplained fever and lymphadenopathy in Kenya. The corollary is that HIV
infection is virtually excluded in an adult patient without peripheral
lymphadenopathy and biopsy-proven BL.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1097-0215(20010601)92:5<687::aid-ijc1246>3.0.co;2-z 
PMID: 11340573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

