
1. Electrophoresis. 2001 May;22(9):1867-77.

Two-dimensional database of a Burkitt lymphoma cell line (DG 75) proteins:
protein pattern changes following treatment with 5'-azycytidine.

Poirier F(1), Pontet M, Labas V, le Caër JP, Sghiouar-Imam N, Raphaël M, Caron M,
Joubert-Caron R.

Author information: 
(1)Biochimie des Protéines et Protéomique, Université Paris 13, UFR SMBH Léonard 
de Vinci, Bobigny, France.

Hypermethylation is an important mechanism for repression of tumor gene
suppressor in cancer. The drug 5'-azacytidine (AZC) has been used as
demethylating agent to induce the expression of previously silencing genes. In
the present work, we attempted to determine, using proteomics, the changes in
protein expression profiles following a treatment of an Epstein Barr virus
(EBV)-negative Burkitt lymphoma (BL) cell line DG 75. The effects of the
treatment in terms of cell viability and growth were first examined. The
following observations were made: AZC treatment led to (i) a decrease in cell
growth with an arrest of the cell at G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle, (ii) the
expression of p16, a tumor-suppressor gene whose expression was dependent on its 
promoter demethylation. Proteomic study evidenced that AZC treatment affected
protein expression in two different ways. Twenty-one polypeptides were
down-expressed, while 14 showed an increased expression. Some of the upregulated 
proteins appeared related to the energy metabolism, to organization of
cytoskeletal structures, and to cell viability and protein synthesis. We also
established a reference map for proteins in DG 75 cell line, comprising 74
different polypeptides corresponding to 67 proteins. This map will be accessible 
via Internet as a resource for proteome analyses of B-cells. Taken together, the 
results presented here highlight new insights into lymphoma cell gene regulations
following a treatment of lymphoma cells with AZC and illustrate a use of
proteomics to evidence the direct and indirect effects of a drug and the pathways
it possibly regulates.

DOI: 10.1002/1522-2683(200105)22:9<1867::AID-ELPS1867>3.0.CO;2-7 
PMID: 11425244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

