
1. J Clin Invest. 2001 Jul;108(1):83-95.

Systemic IFN-beta gene therapy results in long-term survival in mice with
established colorectal liver metastases.

Tada H(1), Maron DJ, Choi EA, Barsoum J, Lei H, Xie Q, Liu W, Ellis L, Moscioni
AD, Tazelaar J, Fawell S, Qin X, Propert KJ, Davis A, Fraker DL, Wilson JM, Spitz
FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, University of
Pennsylvania Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Most patients succumbing to colorectal cancer fail with liver-predominant
metastases. To make a clinical impact in this disease, a systemic or whole-liver 
therapy may be required, whereas most cancer gene therapy approaches are limited 
in their ability to treat beyond local disease. As a preclinical model for cancer
gene therapy, recombinant adenovirus containing the human IFN-beta (hIFN-beta)
cDNA was delivered systemically in nude mouse xenograft models of human
colorectal cancer liver metastases. The vector targeted hepatocytes that produced
high levels of hIFN-beta in the liver, resulting in a profound apoptotic response
in the tumors and significant tumor regression. hIFN-beta gene therapy not only
resulted in improved survival and long-term cure in a micrometastatic model, but 
provided similar benefits in a clinically relevant gross disease model. A similar
recombinant adenovirus containing the murine IFN-beta (mIFN-beta) cDNA also
resulted in a therapeutic response and improved survival in syngeneic mouse
models of colorectal cancer liver metastases. Depletion studies demonstrate a
contribution of natural killer cells to this therapeutic response. The toxicity
of an adenoviral vector expressing murine IFN-beta in a syngeneic model is also
presented. These encouraging results warrant further investigation of the use of 
cancer gene therapy for targeting metastatic disease.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI9841 
PMCID: PMC209332
PMID: 11435460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

