
1. J Comp Pathol. 2001 May;124(4):246-54.

Classical swine fever: pathogenesis of glomerular damage and
immunocharacterization of immunocomplex deposits.

Ruiz-Villamor E(1), Quezada M, Bautista MJ, Romanini S, Carrasco L, Salguero FJ, 
Gómez-Villamandos JC.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía Patológica, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad de
Córdoba, Carretera de Madrid, 14014 Córdoba, Spain.

Twenty-six pigs were inoculated with a virulent isolate (Quillota strain) of
classical swine fever (hog cholera) virus to determine the chronological
development of lesions in the renal glomeruli and the pathogenesis of glomerular 
damage and immunocomplex deposition. The study included the use of
histopathological, ultrastructural and immunohistochemical (detection of viral
antigen gp55, myeloid-histiocyte antigen, IgM, IgG and C1q) techniques. The main 
changes in glomerular structure were observed from 7 days post-inoculation (dpi) 
onwards, at which time the glomeruli showed macrophage infiltrations in the
mesangium, and viral infection in circulating cells, glomerular endothelial cells
and podocytes. Moreover, significant subcellular changes were detected in
podocytes, which appeared swollen, with fusion of foot processes. Immunocomplex
deposits immunoreactive for IgM, IgG and C1q were detected in mesangial,
subepithelial and subendothelial areas from 10 dpi, but viral antigen was not
detected as a component of these deposits; fusion of foot processes had increased
in severity, especially near immunocomplex deposits. All these changes had
increased still further in the final phase of the experiment (14 dpi), with
neutrophil infiltrations in the mesangium.

DOI: 10.1053/jcpa.2000.0459 
PMID: 11437500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

