
1. Mol Ther. 2001 Aug;4(2):95-104.

Development of an MFG-based retroviral vector system for secretion of high levels
of functionally active human BMP4.

Peng H(1), Chen ST, Wergedal JE, Polo JM, Yee JK, Lau KH, Baylink DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Loma Linda University, and Musculoskeletal Disease
Center (151), Jerry L. Pettis VA Medical Center, Loma Linda, California 92357,
USA.

We sought to develop a retroviral vector system that would produce secretion of
high levels of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-4 by optimizing the expression
construct and developing an improved retroviral vector. Replacement of the
propeptide domain of BMP4 with that of BMP2 increased the secretion level of
mature BMP4 protein in transduced cells. The intact BMP2 pro-peptide sequence was
essential, as deletion of a small part of the propeptide sequence of BMP2 from
the BMP2/4 hybrid construct diminished BMP4 expression and secretion. Addition of
a hemaglutinin tag to the carboxy terminus of BMP4 abolished the bioactivity of
secreted BMP4. Transduction of rat marrow stromal cells (and fibroblasts) with an
MFG-based retroviral vector pseudotyped with VSV-G envelope containing this
BMP2/4 hybrid expression construct led to secretion of very high levels of mature
BMP4 in conditioned medium (up to 1 microg/10(6) cells/24 hours). The secreted
BMP4 was biologically active, as it induced alkaline phosphatase expression in
C2C12 cells. The transduced rat marrow stromal cells expressing mature BMP4
induced de novo ectopic bone formation in syngenic immune-competent rats. We have
developed an MFG-based retroviral vector system that causes secretion of high
levels of functionally active human BMP4 protein.

DOI: 10.1006/mthe.2001.0423 
PMID: 11482980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

