
1. J Virol. 2001 Oct;75(19):9077-86.

A novel nonnucleoside inhibitor specifically targets cytomegalovirus DNA
maturation via the UL89 and UL56 gene products.

Buerger I(1), Reefschlaeger J, Bender W, Eckenberg P, Popp A, Weber O, Graeper S,
Klenk HD, Ruebsamen-Waigmann H, Hallenberger S.

Author information: 
(1)Antiinfective Research, Virology, Business Group Pharma, Bayer AG, D-42096
Wuppertal, Germany.

3-Hydroxy-2,2-dimethyl-N-[4([[5-(dimethylamino)-1-naphthyl]sulfonyl]amino)-phenyl
]propanamide (BAY 38-4766) is a novel selective nonnucleoside inhibitor of
cytomegalovirus (CMV) replication with an excellent safety profile. This compound
and structural analogues inhibit neither viral DNA synthesis nor viral
transcription and translation. Accumulation of dense bodies and noninfectious
enveloped particles coincides with inhibition of both concatemer processing and
functional cleavage at intergenomic transitions, pointing to interference with
viral DNA maturation and packaging of monomeric genome lengths. Resistant virus
populations, including a murine CMV (MCMV) isolate with 566-fold-decreased drug
sensitivity, were selected in vitro. Sequencing of the six open reading frames
(ORFs) known to be essentially involved in viral DNA cleavage and packaging
identified mutations in ORFs UL56, UL89, and UL104. Construction of MCMV
recombinants expressing different combinations of murine homologues of mutant
UL56, UL89, and UL104 and analysis of drug susceptibilities clearly demonstrated 
that mutant ORFs UL89 exon II (M360I) and M56 (P202A I208N) individually confer
resistance to BAY 38-4766. A combination of both mutant proteins exhibited a
strong synergistic effect on resistance, reconstituting the high-resistance
phenotype of the in vitro mutant. These findings are consistent with genetic
mapping of resistance to TCRB (2,5,6-trichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosyl
benzimidazole) (P. M. Krosky et al., J. Virol. 72:4721-4728, 1998) and provide
further indirect evidence that proteins encoded by UL89 and UL56 function as two 
subunits of the CMV terminase. While these studies also suggest that the
molecular mechanism of BAY 38-4766 is distinct from that of benzimidazole
ribonucleosides, they also offer an explanation for the excellent specificity and
tolerability of BAY 38-4766, since mammalian DNA does not undergo comparable
maturation steps.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.19.9077-9086.2001 
PMCID: PMC114476
PMID: 11533171  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

