
1. J Oral Pathol Med. 2001 Sep;30(8):471-80.

Oral pseudomembranous candidiasis, herpes simplex virus-1 infection, and oral
mucositis in head and neck cancer patients receiving radiotherapy and
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) mouthwash.

Nicolatou-Galitis O(1), Dardoufas K, Markoulatos P, Sotiropoulou-Lontou A,
Kyprianou K, Kolitsi G, Pissakas G, Skarleas C, Kouloulias V, Papanicolaou V,
Legakis NJ, Velegraki A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology and Surgery, School of Dentistry, University of
Athens, Greece. nicolatou.galitis@mailcity.com

Oral pseudomembranous candidiasis (OPC) was evaluated in 61 patients receiving
head and neck radiotherapy (RT). Herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) reactivation was 
also investigated in 14 patients. According to the agreed protocol,
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) mouthwash was
administered in 46 patients with radiation-induced ulcers. Candidiasis was
diagnosed in 31 patients. Candida albicans was the most frequent isolate.
Multiple Candida species were isolated from the lesions of four patients.
Concurrent candidiasis and radiation-induced ulcers were observed in 17 patients.
Viral culture and the polymerase chain reaction disclosed the presence of HSV-1
in five patients. Twenty of the 46 patients, with initial mucositis grade II and 
grade III, completed RT with mucositis grade I, indicating a beneficial effect of
GMCSF mouthwash, although further controlled studies are necessary to verify
that. In conclusion, OPC was an important infection in patients undergoing
radiotherapy. The role of HSV-1 in oral mucositis during head and neck
radiotherapy needs additional study.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0714.2001.030008471.x 
PMID: 11545238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

