
1. Vaccine. 2001 Oct 12;20(1-2):226-34.

Optimal age for vaccination against measles in the State of São Paulo, Brazil,
taking into account the mother's serostatus.

Zanetta RA(1), Amaku M, Azevedo RS, Zanetta DM, Burattini MN, Massad E.

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo and LIM-01 HCFMUSP, São
Paulo, Brazil.

In order to investigate if the changing levels of measles antibody in women
resulting from extensive vaccination programs influence the susceptibility of
children, we measured the seroprevalence of measles virus antibody of children in
the first year of life and of their mothers. We compared maternal antibody decay 
of two groups of children: those whose mothers were 25 years old or more (mothers
born in the pre-vaccination era), and less than 25 years old (mothers born in the
vaccination era). Therefore, the 25-year-age cut-off was chosen to distinguish
between vaccinated and non-vaccinated mothers. We also compared the
immunogenicity of measles vaccine in children from 6 to 12 months of age, in
these two groups and also according to their mother's serostatus. The optimal age
of vaccination for a routine program was estimated by means of mathematical
models. This study was carried out in a sample of 1216 mothers and their
respective children. Our results indicate that the optimal age for vaccination of
the whole sample was 15 months, 17 months for children born from older mothers,
14 months for children born from younger mothers, 17 months for children born
from seropositive mothers and 12 months for children born from seronegative
mothers. Therefore, a change to an earlier age of routine vaccination is not
justified by our results.

DOI: 10.1016/s0264-410x(01)00267-5 
PMID: 11567768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

