
1. J Virol. 2001 Nov;75(21):10348-58.

Sustained activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases and activator protein 1
by the hepatitis B virus X protein in mouse hepatocytes in vivo.

Nijhara R(1), Jana SS, Goswami SK, Rana A, Majumdar SS, Kumar V, Sarkar DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Delhi South Campus, New
Delhi-110021, India.

Transcriptional activation of diverse cellular genes by the X protein (HBx) of
hepatitis B virus (HBV) has been suggested as one of the mechanisms for
HBV-associated hepatocellular carcinoma. However, such functions of HBx have been
studied using transformed cells in culture and have not been examined in the
normal adult hepatocytes, a natural host of HBV. Using an efficient
hepatocyte-specific virus-based gene delivery system developed in our laboratory 
earlier, we studied the HBx action in vivo. We demonstrate that following
virosome-mediated delivery of HBx DNA, a large population (>50%) of hepatocytes
express the HBx protein in a dose-dependent manner, which induces a significant
increase in the activity of extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) in the 
livers of HBx-transfected mice. Inhibition of HBx-induced ERK activation
following intravenous administration of PD98059, a mitogen-activated protein
kinase kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitor, confirmed the requirement for MEK in the
activation of ERKs by HBx. Induction of ERK activity by HBx was sustained for up 
to 30 days. Interestingly, sustained activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinases
(JNKs) for up to 30 days was also noted. Such constitutive ERK and JNK activation
as a consequence of continued HBx expression also led to sustained stimulation of
further downstream events, such as increased levels of c-Jun and c-Fos proteins
along with the persistent induction of activator protein 1 binding activity.
Taken together, our data suggest a critical role of these molecules in
HBx-mediated cell transformation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.21.10348-10358.2001 
PMCID: PMC114609
PMID: 11581403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

