
1. Jpn J Vet Res. 2001 Aug;49(2):105-14.

Epizootiological survey of hantavirus among rodent species in Ningxia Hui
Autonomous Province, China.

Kariwa H(1), Zhong CB, Araki K, Yoshimatsu K, Lokugamage K, Lokugamage N, Murphy 
ME, Mizutani T, Arikawa J, Fukushima H, Xiong H, Jiehua C, Takashima I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Public Health, Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido 
University, Sapporo, 060-0818, Japan. kariwa@vetmed.hokudai.ac.jp

Hantaviral antibodies were detected in the sera from Apodemus (A.) agrarius and
A. peninsulae captured in Ningxia province, China by several different
serological diagnostic methods. A total of 409 sera from rodent and insectivore
species were collected in 1999 and examined by indirect immunofluorescent
antibody assay (IFA). Among them, 19 of 191 (9.9%) sera of A. agrarius and 1 of
13 (7.7%) sera of A. peninsulae were positive for hantaviral antibodies. The
other species (Rattus norvegicus, Mus musculus, Cricetulus triton, and Sorex
cylindricauda) were negative. The reaction pattern of positive serum was
characterized as scattered and granular virus antigens in the cytoplasm of
hantavirus infected Vero E6 cells. Some of the A. agrarius sera positive for
hantavirus were further examined by Western blotting (WB), enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and the focus reduction neutralization test (FRNT). 
By WB, positive sera showed the same specific reaction pattern of
baculovirus-expressed recombinant hantaviral nucleocapsid protein, as shown in
hantavirus-immune serum. By ELISA, IFA-positive sera showed significantly higher 
optical densities (around 1.0) than the negative A. agrarius sera. Hantaan type
hantavirus was neutralized with the positive sera. These results suggest that A. 
agrarius have hantavirus infection and may play a role as a reservoir animal for 
hantavirus in Ningxia Hui Autonomous Province, China.


PMID: 11590918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

