
1. J Virol. 2001 Nov;75(22):10958-68.

Molecular determinants of peptide binding to two common rhesus macaque major
histocompatibility complex class II molecules.

Dzuris JL(1), Sidney J, Horton H, Correa R, Carter D, Chesnut RW, Watkins DI,
Sette A.

Author information: 
(1)Epimmune, Inc., San Diego, California 92121, USA.

Major histocompatibility complex class II molecules encoded by two common rhesus 
macaque alleles Mamu-DRB1*0406 and Mamu-DRB*w201 have been purified, and
quantitative binding assays have been established. The structural requirements
for peptide binding to each molecule were characterized by testing panels of
single-substitution analogs of the two previously defined epitopes HIV Env242
(Mamu-DRB1*0406 restricted) and HIV Env482 (Mamu-DRB*w201 restricted). Anchor
positions of both macaque DR molecules were spaced following a position 1 (P1),
P4, P6, P7, and P9 pattern. The specific binding motif associated with each
molecule was distinct, but largely overlapping, and was based on crucial roles of
aromatic and/or hydrophobic residues at P1, P6, and P9. Based on these results, a
tentative Mamu class II DR supermotif was defined. This pattern is remarkably
similar to a previously defined human HLA-DR supermotif. Similarities in binding 
motifs between human HLA and macaque Mamu-DR molecules were further illustrated
by testing a panel of more than 60 different single-substitution analogs of the
HLA-DR-restricted HA 307-319 epitope for binding to Mamu-DRB*w201 and
HLA-DRB1*0101. The Mamu-DRB1*0406 and -DRB*w201 binding capacity of a set of 311 
overlapping peptides spanning the entire simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)
genome was also evaluated. Ten peptides capable of binding both molecules were
identified, together with 19 DRB1*0406 and 43 DRB*w201 selective binders. The
Mamu-DR supermotif was found to be present in about 75% of the good binders and
in 50% of peptides binding with intermediate affinity but only in approximately
25% of the peptides which did not bind either Mamu class II molecule. Finally,
using flow cytometric detection of antigen-induced intracellular gamma
interferon, we identify a new CD4(+) T-lymphocyte epitope encoded within the Rev 
protein of SIV.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.22.10958-10968.2001 
PMCID: PMC114676
PMID: 11602736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

