
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2001 Nov;39(11):3823-9.

Genome sequence-based fluorescent amplified fragment length polymorphism of
Campylobacter jejuni, its relationship to serotyping, and its implications for
epidemiological analysis.

Desai M(1), Logan JM, Frost JA, Stanley J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Unit, Virus Reference Division, Central Public Health
Laboratory, London NW9 5HT, United Kingdom. mdesai@phls.org.uk

The published genome sequence of Campylobacter jejuni strain NCTC 11168 was used 
to model an accurate and highly reproducible fluorescent amplified fragment
length polymorphism (FAFLP) analysis. Predicted and experimentally observed
amplified fragments (AFs) generated with the primer pair HindIII+A and HhaI+A
were compared. All but one of the 61 predicted AFs were reproducibly detected,
and no unpredicted fragments were amplified. This FAFLP analysis was used to
genotype 74 C. jejuni strains belonging to the nine heat-stable (HS) serotypes
most prevalent in human disease in England and Wales. The 74 C. jejuni strains
exhibited 60 FAFLP profiles, and cluster analysis of them yielded a radial tree
showing genetic relationships between and within 13 major clusters. Some clusters
were related, and others were unrelated, to a single HS serotype. For example,
all strains belonging to serotypes HS6 and HS19 grouped into corresponding single
genotypic clusters, while strains of serotypes HS11 and HS18 each grouped into
two genotypic clusters. Strains of HS50, the most prevalent serotype infecting
humans, were found both in one large (multiserotype) cluster complex and
dispersed throughout the tree. The strain genotypes within each FAFLP cluster
were characterized by a particular combination of AFs, and among the cluster
there were additional differential AFs. Identification of such AFs could act as a
search tool to look for potential associations with disease or animal hosts, when
applied to large number of human isolates. Genome-sequence based FAFLP, thus, has
the potential to establish a genetic database for epidemiological investigations 
of Campylobacter.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.39.11.3823-3829.2001 
PMCID: PMC88450
PMID: 11682493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

