
1. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 1975 Mar;71(2):211-20.

[Effect of neurotropin on SART stress (stress caused by alteration of rhythms in 
environmental temperature) in mice and rats].

[Article in Japanese]

Kita T, Hata T, Okage T, Yoneda R, Hoshino K.

We reported previously that by altering the rhythm of environmental temperature
(ART) the physiological mechanism was changed to an abnormal state which we
termed specific ART-stress (SART-stress). In the present report, the effects of
neurotropin and other tranquilizers on this SART-stress state were investigated. 
Neurotropin is an extract containing many conjugated polysaccarides isolated from
the skin or tissues of rabbits which had been inoculated with the living cowpox
virus. Neurotropin prevented the decrease in body weight of both mice and rats
caused by the SART-stress. However, there was no such prevention when an extract 
isolated from vaccinia virus-uninjured, healthy rabbit skin was given.
Chlorpromazine (Cp), reserpine (Rp), diazepam (DZ), imipramine or diphenhydramine
gave no protection against the decrease in body weight. Slight increase in number
and variation of respirations in SART-stress animals was to some extent prevented
by neurotropin. Prolongation of the QRS interval was restored to control with the
administration of the above mentioned drugs. Decrease in ACh sensitivity of the
isolated duodenum tested by the Magnus-method was prevented by neurotropin. In
the galvanic skin response test in rats, decrease in electric resistance on the
skin, increase in reactivity and shortening of reaction time caused by
SART-stress was prevented to the greatest extent by neurotropin and also to a
considerable degree by parenteral administration of DZ or beta-hydroxy
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABOB), the effective results of the drugs being:
Neurotropin, DZ, GABOB in that order. Cp and Rp, major tranquilizers were found
to be the least effective.


PMID: 1169195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

