
1. Cancer Res. 2001 Nov 15;61(22):8188-93.

A genetically engineered influenza A virus with ras-dependent oncolytic
properties.

Bergmann M(1), Romirer I, Sachet M, Fleischhacker R, García-Sastre A, Palese P,
Wolff K, Pehamberger H, Jakesz R, Muster T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Vienna Medical School, Währinger Gürtel
18-20, 1090 Vienna, Austria. michael.bergmann@akh-wien.ac.at

The NS1 protein of influenza virus is a virulence factor that counteracts the
PKR-mediated antiviral response by the host. As a consequence, influenza NS1 gene
knockout virus delNS1 (an influenza A virus lacking the NS1 open reading frame)
fails to replicate in normal cells but produces infectious particles in
PKR-deficient cells. Because it is known that oncogenic ras induces an inhibitor 
of PKR, we addressed the question of whether the delNS1 virus selectively
replicates in cells expressing oncogenic ras. We show that upon transfection and 
expression of oncogenic N-ras, cells become permissive for productive delNS1
virus replication, suggesting that the delNS1 virus has specific oncolytic
properties. Viral growth in the oncogenic ras-transfected cells is associated
with a reduction of PKR activation during infection. Moreover, treatment of s.c. 
established N-ras-expressing melanomas in severe combined immunodeficiency mice
with the delNS1 virus revealed that this virus has tumor-ablative potentials. The
delNS1 virus does not replicate in nonmalignant cell lines such as melanocytes,
keratinocytes, or endothelial cells. The apathogenic nature of the delNS1 virus
combined with the selective replication properties of this virus in oncogenic
ras-expressing cells renders this virus an attractive candidate for the therapy
of tumors with an activated ras-signaling pathway.


PMID: 11719449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

