
1. J Virol. 2002 Jan;76(1):379-91.

Rapid and irreversible CD4+ T-cell depletion induced by the highly pathogenic
simian/human immunodeficiency virus SHIV(DH12R) is systemic and synchronous.

Igarashi T(1), Brown CR, Byrum RA, Nishimura Y, Endo Y, Plishka RJ, Buckler C,
Buckler-White A, Miller G, Hirsch VM, Martin MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

Highly pathogenic simian/human immunodeficiency virus chimeric viruses are known 
to induce a rapid, irreversible depletion of CD4+ T lymphocytes in the peripheral
blood of acutely infected macaque monkeys. To more fully assess the systemic
effects of this primary virus infection, specimens were collected serially
between days 3 and 21 postinfection from variety of lymphoid tissues (lymph
nodes, thymus, and spleen) and gastrointestinal tract and examined by DNA and RNA
PCR, in situ hybridization, and immunohistochemical assays. In addition, the
lymphoid tissues were evaluated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Virus
infection was initially detected by DNA PCR on day 3 postinfection in lymph node 
samples and peaked on day 10 in the T-lymphocyte-rich areas of this tissue. CD4+ 
T-cell levels remained stable through day 10 in several lymphoid tissue specimens
examined but fell precipitously between days 10 and 21. In situ terminal
deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling (TUNEL) assays
revealed the accumulation of apoptotic cells during the second week of infection 
in both lymph nodes and thymus, which colocalized, to a large extent, to sites of
both virus replication and CD4+ T-lymphocyte loss.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.1.379-391.2002 
PMCID: PMC135728
PMID: 11739702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

