
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2002 Jan;40(1):44-51.

Immune reactivity of human sera to the glycoprotein B of human herpesvirus 7.

Franti M(1), Aubin JT, De Saint-Maur G, Kosuge H, Yamanishi K, Gautheret-Dejean
A, Garbarg-Chenon A, Huraux JM, Agut H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie, C.E.R.V.I., UPRES EA 2387, Hôpital
Pitié-Salpétrière, 75651 Paris Cedex 13, France.

The glycoprotein B (gB) is highly conserved among distinct human herpesvirus 7
(HHV-7) strains. Similarly to other herpesvirus glycoproteins, gB has been
assumed to induce a specific human immune response. However, it did not appear as
an immunodominant protein in conventional immunoblot assays. Recombinant gB,
obtained from either Escherichia coli or baculovirus expression systems, did
react specifically with HHV-7-seropositive sera, and the main corresponding
epitopes were located in its N-terminal part. A 24-amino-acid peptide,
corresponding to a predicted hydrophilicity peak and presenting no extensive
homology with other betaherpesvirus glycoproteins, was selected in this region at
positions 129 to 152 of the gB sequence. When tested by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), this peptide specifically reacted with
HHV-7-seropositive sera. This reactivity was significantly inhibited by the
preincubation of sera with the peptide itself, lysates of gB-expressing cells, or
lysates of HHV-7-infected cells. The reactivity was not significantly modified
when sera were preincubated with lysates of either human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)- 
or HHV-6-infected cells. In cross-sectional studies including both children and
adults, 49 out of 61 serum samples (80%) were found to be positive by HHV-7
ELISA, independent of their reactivity to HCMV. A longitudinal serological study 
of 17 children during the first 4 years of life showed that the level of
ELISA-detected antibodies significantly decreased within a few weeks after birth 
and then increased in the following months, likely reflecting, respectively, the 
loss of maternal antibodies and the occurrence of seroconversion. These results
demonstrate that gB peptide ELISA might be a useful tool for the serological
study of HHV-7 infection.

DOI: 10.1128/jcm.40.1.44-51.2002 
PMCID: PMC120084
PMID: 11773091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

