
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2002 Mar 20;77(6):668-77.

Transduction rate constant as more reliable index quantifying efficiency of
retroviral gene delivery.

Kwon YJ(1), Peng CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California 90089, USA.

Although the efficiency of retrovirus-mediated gene delivery can be enhanced by
several physicochemical approaches reported (e.g., addition of polycations and
spinoculation), systematic analysis of retroviral transduction combined with
experimental data remains to be challenged. With the aid of a reasonable
mathematical description of an experimental system, we can therefore predict and 
optimize the retroviral gene delivery on a quantitative basis of understanding.
In this study, we formulated a mathematical model involved with diffusion, decay 
and uptake of retroviral vectors onto the target cells resided on a solid culture
surface. The model was solved analytically by the Laplace transform method. The
analytical solutions were then fitted with experimental data to compute two
unknown parameters: concentration of infectious retrovirus and transduction rate 
constant. Our results showed that the concentration of infectious retrovirus
determined by the titration method was approximately hundred-fold lower than the 
one calculated by fitting experimental data with the mathematical solutions. More
importantly, effects of polycation (i.e., Polybrene) on ex vivo retroviral
transduction were illustrated in a quantitative way by estimating the
transduction rate constant, which represents a more reliable parameter to
determine the degree of transduction of a retroviral vector to a given target
cell.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Biotechnol Bioeng 77: 668-677, 2002; DOI
10.1002/bit.10214

DOI: 10.1002/bit.10214 
PMID: 11807762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

