
1. Virology. 1995 Apr 1;208(1):408-13.

Intracellular phosphorylation of the Sendai virus P protein.

Byrappa S(1), Hendricks DD, Pan YB, Seyer JM, Gupta KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology/Microbiology, Rush Presbyterian St. Luke's Medical
Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Phosphorylation status of the Sendai virus P protein was examined during virus
infection and compared with cell-free phosphorylation. P protein from Sendai
virus-infected (VI) and P/C gene-transfected (PT) mammalian cells and from
purified virions (PV) was phosphorylated at only serine residues. In contrast,
cell-free phosphorylation of the P protein with virion-associated protein kinase 
(VAPK) occurred at both threonine and serine. Tryptic phosphopeptide maps of the 
P protein from VI, PT, and PV showed that the phosphorylation was primarily
localized on one peptide (TP1), while VAPK phosphorylated the P protein on
several peptides. There was no change in the steady-state phosphopeptide map of
the P protein during virus replication, indicating that the TP1 is constitutively
phosphorylated. Inhibition of cellular phosphatases (PP1 and PP2A) by okadaic
acid (OA) in virus-infected cells caused a sixfold increase in the P protein
phosphorylation, solely at serine residues. The phosphopeptide map of the OA-P
protein revealed that phosphorylation occurred on several peptides, but the OA-P 
map was significantly different from the VAPK-P map. However, additional
phosphorylation of the P protein did not block its association with
nucleocapsids. These results suggest that the Sendai virus P protein is
constitutively phosphorylated primarily at one locus but has the potential for
phosphorylation at additional sites. Further, our results do not show any
correlations between the intracellular and cell-free phosphorylation of the P
protein and, therefore, question the validity of cell-free phosphorylations.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1995.1169 
PMID: 11831729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

