
1. J Med Virol. 2002 Apr;66(4):506-11.

Multiplex detection of herpesviruses in tear fluid using the "stair primers" PCR 
method: prospective study of 93 patients.

Robert PY(1), Traccard I, Adenis JP, Denis F, Ranger-Rogez S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, CHRU Dupuytren, Limoges, France.

Human herpesviruses can infect the eye and be excreted subsequently in tears. The
aim of the present study was to use a multiplex PCR to detect herpesviruses
(HSV-1, -2, VZV, CMV, EBV, HHV-6) in tears from normal subjects and from patients
with pathological conditions (acute herpes, zoster, papillary conjunctivitis, and
dry eye). Schirmer test strips were used to collect tear fluid from 93 patients, 
sampling both eyes. DNA was then extracted from the 186 samples by
chromatography, and viral DNA amplified using a commercialised multiplex "stair
primer" method. Thirty-four samples (18.3%) contained Taq inhibitors. The
multiplex test gave positive results for HSV and VZV in tear fluid from patients 
with acute dendritic keratitis (3 patients) and acute ocular zoster (4 patients) 
and was, therefore, considered effective in testing samples from patients with
acute lesions. HSV-1 and HSV-2 were found in two samples from patients with
metaherpetic corneal scarring. Among 28 cases of dry eye, two were positive for
HHV-6, the latter being associated with EBV in one patient. HHV-6 was also found 
in 4 out of 54 cases of papillary conjunctivitis. This raised occurrence of HHV-6
in dry eye or papillary conjunctivitis, suggests new clinical patterns for HHV-6 
latency or reactivation. Detection of EBV in 1 out of 80 healthy eyes confirms
previous evidence that lacrimal glands constitute potentially a site for
latent-phase EBV.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.2173 
PMID: 11857529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

