
1. Vaccine. 2002 Mar 15;20(13-14):1733-40.

The level of protection against rotavirus shedding in mice following immunization
with a chimeric VP6 protein is dependent on the route and the coadministered
adjuvant.

Choi AH(1), McNeal MM, Flint JA, Basu M, Lycke NY, Clements JD, Bean JA, Davis
HL, McCluskie MJ, VanCott JL, Ward RL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Children's Hospital Medical Center, The
Children's Hospital Research Foundation, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH
45229-3039, USA. anthony.choi@chmcc.org

Intranasal (i.n.) immunization of BALB/c mice with chimeric murine rotavirus EDIM
(epizootic diarrhea of infant mice) VP6 and attenuated E. coli heat-labile toxin 
(LT), LT(R192G), stimulated >99% protection against rotavirus shedding after EDIM
challenge. Here, we evaluated other potential adjuvants with chimeric VP6
administered by two mucosal routes: i.n. and oral. Besides LT(R192G), the
adjuvants examined included Adjumer, CpG oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG ODN),
chimeric A1 subunit of cholera toxin (CTA1)-DD, and QS-21. All except QS-21
significantly (P<0.05) increased VP6-specific serum IgG responses after i.n.
immunization, but none significantly increased these responses when administered 
orally. The i.n. delivery of chimeric VP6 alone induced both rotavirus IgG1 and
IgG2a whose relative titers suggested a skewed Th2-like response. Inclusion of
Adjumer greatly increased Th2-like responses, while CpG ODN shifted the response 
to a less Th2-like response. The adjuvants CTA1-DD, LT(R192G), QS-21 had no
significant effect on ratios of IgG1/IgG2a titers. Following EDIM challenge of
mice immunized i.n. with chimeric VP6 and either LT(R192G), CTA1-DD, Adjumer or
CpG ODN, shedding was reduced >99, 95, 80, 74, respectively, relative to that
found in unimmunized mice (P<0.05). QS-21 induced less protection (43%, not
significant (N.S.)) while immunization with chimeric VP6 alone reduced shedding
by only 16% (N.S.). Oral immunization with chimeric VP6 and all selected
adjuvants except QS-21 was less effective than after i.n. immunization, with
protection levels of 94 (P<0.05), 71 (P<0.05), 55, 35 and 28% for LT(R192G),
QS-21, CpG ODN, CTA1-DD, and Adjumer, respectively, while immunization with
chimeric VP6 alone gave no protection. Thus, different adjuvants induced
different degrees of protection and oral immunization was generally less
effective then the i.n. route.

DOI: 10.1016/s0264-410x(02)00043-9 
PMID: 11906760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

