
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Apr 5;292(3):626-31.

The short MCK1350 promoter/enhancer allows for sufficient dystrophin expression
in skeletal muscles of mdx mice.

Larochelle N(1), Oualikene W, Dunant P, Massie B, Karpati G, Nalbantoglu J,
Lochmuller H.

Author information: 
(1)Genzentrum, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit√§t, Munich, Germany.

First-generation adenovirus vectors (AdV) have been used successfully to transfer
a human dystrophin minigene to skeletal muscle of mdx mice. In most studies,
strong viral promoters such as the cytomegalovirus promoter/enhancer (CMV) were
used to drive dystrophin expression. More recently, a short version of the muscle
creatine kinase promoter (MCK1350) has been shown to provide muscle-specific
reporter gene expression after AdV-mediated gene delivery. Therefore, we
generated a recombinant AdV where dystrophin expression is controlled by MCK1350 
(AdVMCKdys). AdVMCKdys was injected by the intramuscular route into anterior
tibialis muscle of mdx mice shortly after birth. Dystrophin expression was
assessed at 20, 30, and 60 days after AdV-injection. At 20 days, muscles of
AdVMCKdys-injected mdx mice showed a high number of dystrophin-positive fibers
(mean: 365). At 60 days, the number of dystrophin-positive fibers was not only
maintained, but increased significantly (mean: 600). In conclusion, MCK1350
allows for sustained dystrophin expression after AdV-mediated gene transfer to
skeletal muscle of newborn mdx mice. In contrast to previous studies, where
strong viral promoters were used, dystrophin expression driven by MCK1350 peaks
at later time points. This may have implications for the future use of
muscle-specific promoters for gene therapy of Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2002.6715 
PMID: 11922612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

