
1. J Virol. 2002 May;76(10):4810-21.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 neutralization measured by flow cytometric
quantitation of single-round infection of primary human T cells.

Mascola JR(1), Louder MK, Winter C, Prabhakara R, De Rosa SC, Douek DC, Hill BJ, 
Gabuzda D, Roederer M.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Research Center, National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
jmascola@nih.gov

There is currently intensive research on the design of novel human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) vaccine immunogens that can elicit potent
neutralizing antibodies. A prerequisite for comparing and optimizing these
strategies is the ability to precisely measure neutralizing antibody responses.
To this end, we sought to develop an assay that directly quantifies single-round 
HIV-1 infection of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Initial experiments
demonstrated that essentially all productively infected PBMC could be identified 
by flow cytometric detection of intracellular p24 antigen (p24-Ag). After
infection of PBMC with HIV-1, p24(+) lymphocytes could be distinguished beginning
1 day postinfection, and the majority of CD8(-) T cells were p24-Ag positive by 3
to 4 days postinfection. To directly quantify first-round infection, we included 
a protease inhibitor in PBMC cultures. The resulting 2-day assay was highly
sensitive and specific for the detection of HIV-1-infected PBMC. Serial dilutions
of virus stocks demonstrated that the number of target cells infected was
directly related to the amount of infectious virus input into the assay. In
neutralization assays, the flow cytometric enumeration of first-round infection
of PBMC provided quantitative data on the number of target cells infected and on 
the inactivation of infectious virus due to reaction with antibody. We also used 
this single-round assay to compare the percentage of cells expressing p24-Ag to
the number of copies of HIV-1 gag per 100 PBMC. The precision and reproducibility
of this assay will facilitate the measurement of HIV-1 neutralization,
particularly incrementally improved neutralizing antibody responses generated by 
new candidate vaccines.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.10.4810-4821.2002 
PMCID: PMC136170
PMID: 11967298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

