
1. J Infect. 2002 Jan;44(1):26-32.

Epidemiology of Norwalk-like human caliciviruses in hospital outbreaks of acute
gastroenteritis in the Stockholm area in 1996.

Billgren M(1), Christenson B, Hedlund KO, Vinj√© J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Communicable Disease Control, Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: Outbreaks of acute gastroenteritis associated with 'Norwalk-like
viruses' (NLVs) cause significant health problems in hospitals. Hospital
outbreaks in the Stockholm area in 1996 were investigated, in order to identify
the magnitude of the problem, the mode of transmission, the effect of control
measures and the genetic variability of outbreak strains. Determining the
epidemiological and clinical significance involves a broad range of
possibilities.
METHODS: Ten hospitals, representing 66% of the hospitals in the Stockholm area, 
participated in the study, which included 211 wards. Of these, 18 were selected
as control. A standardized protocol that included personal contacts was
administered. Outbreak wards were visited between 5 and 10 times. Wards that had 
reported outbreaks in 1996 were prospectively followed through 1999 by personal
contacts, and the available data from 1991 on outbreak reports were collected. A 
total of 253 stool samples from outbreaks in 1996 were analyzed by electron
microscopy (EM) for the presence of NLVs. Positive samples were confirmed by the 
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: In total, 4 326 patients and 1 119 staff were exposed on the 43 wards
that reported 54 outbreaks. The mean attack rate was 13% for patients and 21% for
staff. The number of outbreaks in 1996 outnumbered the reported outbreaks in the 
preceding years (4-70%) and later years (35-40%). Admission to 24 (56%) of the
outbreak wards was stopped. The mean duration of illness for patients was 35
hours and for staff, 30 hours. The main symptoms were diarrhoea (80%) and
vomiting (68%). Genotyping revealed that the majority of the hospital outbreaks
in the Stockholm area in 1996 were caused by a single NLV strain.
CONCLUSIONS: The study confirmed that outbreaks of NLV are an increasing
public-health problem in hospitals. The risk of being affected by an outbreak was
significantly greater on wards that had reported outbreaks in the previous year. 
It was not obvious which measures had helped to shorten the outbreaks to any
appreciable extent. Different managements must therefore be carefully interpreted
and adapted to the prevailing circumstances. Genotyping of strains is an
important tool of getting a better insight into transmission routes and the
mechanism behind the appearance of epidemic strains.

Copyright 2002 The Hospital Infection Society.

DOI: 10.1053/jinf.2001.0946 
PMID: 11972415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

