
1. J Immunol. 2002 May 15;168(10):5170-7.

Kinetic analysis of a unique direct prothrombinase, fgl2, and identification of a
serine residue critical for the prothrombinase activity.

Chan CW(1), Chan MW, Liu M, Fung L, Cole EH, Leibowitz JL, Marsden PA, Clark DA, 
Levy GA.

Author information: 
(1)Multi Organ Transplant Program, Toronto General Hospital and University of
Toronto, 621 University Avenue 10th Floor, Room 116, Toronto, Ontario M5G 2C4,
Canada.

fgl2 prothrombinase, by its ability to generate thrombin, has been shown to be
pivotal to the pathogenesis of viral-induced hepatitis, cytokine-induced fetal
loss syndrome, and xeno- and allograft rejection. In this study, the molecular
basis of fgl2 prothrombinase activity was examined in detail. Purified fgl2
protein generated in a baculovirus expression system had no measurable
prothrombinase activity, whereas the activity was restored when the purified
protein was reconstituted into phosphatidyl-L-serine-containing vesicles.
Reconstituted fgl2 catalyzed the cleavage of human prothrombin to thrombin with
kinetics consistent with a first order reaction, with an apparent V(max) value of
6 mol/min/mol fgl2 and an apparent K(m) value for prothrombin of 8.3 microM. The 
catalytic activity was totally dependent on calcium, and factor Va (500 nM)
enhanced the catalytic efficiency of fgl2 by increasing the apparent V(max) value
to 3670 mol/min/mol fgl2 and decreasing the apparent K(m) value for prothrombin
to 7.2 microM. By a combination of site-directed mutagenesis and production of
truncated proteins, it was clearly shown that residue Ser(89) was critical for
the prothrombinase activity of fgl2. Furthermore, fgl2 prothrombinase activity
was not inhibited by antithrombin III, soybean trypsin inhibitor,
4-aminobenzamidine, aprotinin, or phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, whereas
diisopropylfluorophosphate completely abrogated the activity. In this work we
provide direct evidence that fgl2 cleaves prothrombin to thrombin consistent with
serine protease activity and requires calcium, phospholipids, and factor Va for
its full activity.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.10.5170 
PMID: 11994472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

