
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2002 Jun;40(6):1938-46.

Multicenter evaluation of a new automated fourth-generation human
immunodeficiency virus screening assay with a sensitive antigen detection module 
and high specificity.

Weber B(1), Gürtler L, Thorstensson R, Michl U, Mühlbacher A, Bürgisser P,
Villaescusa R, Eiras A, Gabriel C, Stekel H, Tanprasert S, Oota S, Silvestre MJ, 
Marques C, Ladeira M, Rabenau H, Berger A, Schmitt U, Melchior W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoires Réunis Kutter-Lieners-Hastert, Junglinster, Luxembourg.
web@labo.lu

Fourth-generation assays for the simultaneous detection of human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) antigen and antibody that were available on the international market 
until now have antigen detection modules with relatively poor sensitivity and
produce a higher rate of false-positive results than third-generation enzyme
immunoassays (EIAs). The new Cobas Core HIV Combi EIA with an improved
sensitivity for HIV p24 antigen was compared to alternative fourth- and
third-generation assays, the p24 antigen test, and HIV type 1 (HIV-1) RNA reverse
transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR). A total of 94 seroconversion panels (n = 709 sera),
samples from the acute phase of infection after seroconversion (n = 32),
anti-HIV-1-positive specimens (n = 730) from patients in different stages of the 
disease, 462 subtyped samples from different geographical locations,
anti-HIV-2-positive sera (n = 302), dilutions of cell culture supernatants (n =
62) from cells infected with different HIV-1 subtypes, selected performance
panels from Boston Biomedica Inc., 7,579 unselected samples from blood donors,
303 unselected daily routine samples, 997 specimens from hospitalized patients,
and potentially interfering samples (n = 1,222) were tested with Cobas Core HIV
Combi EIA. The new assay showed a sensitivity comparable to that of the Abbott
HIV-1 AG Monoclonal A for early detection of HIV infection in seroconversion
panels. The mean time delay of Cobas Core HIV Combi EIA (last negative sample
plus 1 day) in comparison to that for HIV-1 RT-PCR for 87 panels tested with both
methods was 2.75 days. The diagnostic window was reduced with Cobas Core HIV
Combi EIA by between 3.6 and 5.7 days from that for third-generation assays. The 
specificities of Cobas Core HIV Combi EIA in blood donors were 99.84 and 99.85%
(after repeated testing). Overall, 30 repeatedly reactive false-positive results 
out of 10,031 HIV-negative samples were obtained with Cobas Core HIV Combi EIA.
Our results show that a fourth-generation assay with improved specificity such as
Cobas Core HIV Combi EIA is suitable for blood donor screening because of its low
number of false positives and because it detects HIV p24 antigen with a
sensitivity comparable to that of single-antigen assays.

DOI: 10.1128/jcm.40.6.1938-1946.2002 
PMCID: PMC130745
PMID: 12037046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

