
1. Clin Cancer Res. 2002 Jun;8(6):1800-7.

A novel gene from the human endogenous retrovirus K expressed in transformed
cells.

Armbruester V(1), Sauter M, Krautkraemer E, Meese E, Kleiman A, Best B, Roemer K,
Mueller-Lantzsch N.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie und Hygiene, Abteilung Virologie, Geb. 47,
Universitätskliniken des Saarlandes, Homburg/Saar D-66421, Germany.

PURPOSE: We investigated the expression of human endogenous retrovirus K (HERV-K)
transcripts in various tumor tissues and transformed cell lines.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We performed reverse transcription-PCR analysis to examine
expression of env reading frame transcripts in mammary carcinoma biopsies,
germ-cell tumor samples, ovarian carcinomas, and lymphocytes of leukemic
patients, as well as in a variety of transformed cell lines. The novel np9 gene
was analyzed by sequencing. Expression of the recombinant Np9 protein was shown
by Western blot analysis and immunofluorescence studies with polyclonal
Np9-specific antibodies. Subcellular localization was determined with a
Np9-enhanced-green fluorescence protein fusion protein, and the effects of Np9 on
cell proliferation and survival were studied in growth and standard colony
formation assays.
RESULTS: We have identified a novel gene, np9, within the HERV-K env-reading
frame that gives rise to a 9-kDa protein localized predominantly in the cell
nucleus. np9 transcript results from a novel, HERV-K type 1-specific splice donor
site and is expressed in various tumor tissues and transformed cell lines but not
in normal, nontransformed cells.
CONCLUSION: The highly specific expression of np9 in tumor tissue suggests that
the protein may possess a function in tumorigenesis.


PMID: 12060620  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

