
1. Cancer. 2002 Jul 15;95(2):331-9.

Impact of aging on the development of hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with
posttransfusion chronic hepatitis C.

Hamada H(1), Yatsuhashi H, Yano K, Daikoku M, Arisawa K, Inoue O, Koga M, Nakata 
K, Eguchi K, Yano M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Research, World Health Organization Collaborating
Center for Reference and Research on Viral Hepatitis, National Nagasaki Medical
Center, Nagasaki, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a heterogeneous disease, the
natural history of which remains controversial. There is solid evidence that
chronic HCV infection is responsible for the occurrence of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). The aim of the current cohort study was to determine the rate of
the development of HCC from the time of primary HCV infection and to assess the
risk factors for the development of HCC in chronic posttransfusion hepatitis C
patients.
METHODS: Four hundred sixty-nine patients with clinically compensated HCV, who
had undergone a single blood transfusion comprised the current study cohort.
Patients with other risk factors for chronic liver disease were excluded. All
patients were referred to the liver center at the National Nagasaki Medical
Center between December 1980 and December 1998 and were followed prospectively
until the end of the analysis (June 2000).
RESULTS: Follow-up data were obtained for 445 patients. The mean duration from
HCV infection to the end of the observation was 28 years. Fifty-two patients
(11.1%) progressed to HCC. The mean duration from the time of blood transfusion
to the diagnosis of HCC was 31 years. Multivariate Cox regression analyses
revealed age, fibrosis, duration from HCV infection to study entry, and alcohol
consumption to be the independent factors affecting the development of HCC. The
risk of developing HCC in patients age > or = 56 years was increased 7.8-fold
compared with that in patients age < 56 years. The mean age of patients at the
time of HCC diagnosis was 65 years (range, 58-79 years).
CONCLUSIONS: At the time of diagnosis, 92% of the 52 HCC patients were age > 60
years and 38 of the HCC patients (73%) were in their 60s. There was a
significantly negative correlation between the duration from HCV infection to the
development of HCC and the age of the patient at the time of infection
(correlation coefficient = 0.702; P < 0.0001; Y = 61.1-0.82X), indicating that
the age of patients, rather than the duration of HCV infection, is more
significant for HCC development in patients with posttransfusion HCV. Moreover,
these data may contribute to the design of an optimal follow-up schedule for
patients with posttransfusion HCV.

Copyright 2002 American Cancer Society.DOI 10.1002/cncr.10662

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.10662 
PMID: 12124834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

