
1. J Virol. 2002 Aug;76(16):8265-75.

Binding of human cytomegalovirus US2 to major histocompatibility complex class I 
and II proteins is not sufficient for their degradation.

Chevalier MS(1), Daniels GM, Johnson DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland 97201, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol 2002 Dec;76(24):13126.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) glycoprotein US2 causes degradation of major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I heavy-chain (HC), class II DR-alpha and 
DM-alpha proteins, and HFE, a nonclassical MHC protein. In US2-expressing cells, 
MHC proteins present in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) are degraded by cytosolic 
proteasomes. It appears that US2 binding triggers a normal cellular pathway by
which misfolded or aberrant proteins are translocated from the ER to cytoplasmic 
proteasomes. To better understand how US2 binds MHC proteins and causes their
degradation, we constructed a panel of US2 mutants. Mutants truncated from the N 
terminus as far as residue 40 or from the C terminus to amino acid 140 could bind
to class I and class II proteins. Nevertheless, mutants lacking just the
cytosolic tail (residues 187 to 199) were unable to cause degradation of both
class I and II proteins. Chimeric proteins were constructed in which US2
sequences were replaced with homologous sequences from US3, an HCMV glycoprotein 
that can also bind to class I and II proteins. One of these US2/US3 chimeras
bound to class II but not to class I, and a second bound class I HC better than
wild-type US2. Therefore, US2 residues involved in the binding to MHC class I
differ subtly from those involved in binding to class II proteins. Moreover, our 
results demonstrate that the binding of US2 to class I and II proteins is not
sufficient to cause degradation of MHC proteins. The cytosolic tail of US2 and
certain US2 lumenal sequences, which are not involved in binding to MHC proteins,
are required for degradation. Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that
US2 couples MHC proteins to components of the ER degradation pathway, enormously 
increasing the rate of degradation of MHC proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.76.16.8265-8275.2002 
PMCID: PMC155152
PMID: 12134032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

