
1. J Immunol Methods. 2002 Aug 1;266(1-2):87-103.

Quantitative real-time RT-PCR as a method for monitoring T lymphocyte reactivity 
to full-length tyrosinase protein in vaccinated melanoma patients.

Housseau F(1), Lindsey KR, Oberholtzer SD, Gonzales MI, Boutin P, Moorthy AK,
Shankara S, Roberts BL, Topalian SL.

Author information: 
(1)Surgery Branch, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-1502, USA.

The major goal of therapeutic cancer vaccine trials is to mediate tumor
regression. However, it is critically important to devise in vitro immunological 
assays that correlate with clinical outcome, for use as surrogate markers of
vaccine efficacy. To date, clinical emphasis has been placed on peptide vaccines,
but trends towards the use of more complex immunogens such as whole proteins
require the development of efficient and sensitive methods for monitoring their
immunological effects. In the context of a vaccination trial using full-length
tyrosinase (Ty) to immunize patients with metastatic melanoma, a monitoring
technique was developed in which autologous dendritic cells (DC) infected with a 
recombinant adenovirus encoding the Ty protein were used to assess the
Ty-specific reactivity of fresh peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) collected from
patients at different intervals during therapy. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR
(qRT-PCR) was used to measure the production of cytokine mRNA by T cells
following a 2.5-h incubation with Ty-expressing DC. Two out of ten patients
studied demonstrated Ty protein-specific reactivity that increased during and
after the period of vaccination. While one of these patients also reacted to an
HLA-A1-compatible Ty peptide, the second did not recognize any of the known Ty
epitopes, highlighting the importance of this technique for monitoring the
effects of complex vaccines.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-1759(02)00104-7 
PMID: 12133625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

