
1. Infect Immun. 2002 Oct;70(10):5808-15.

Immortalization of human urethral epithelial cells: a model for the study of the 
pathogenesis of and the inflammatory cytokine response to Neisseria gonorrhoeae
infection.

Harvey HA(1), Post DM, Apicella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242,
USA.

The primary human urethral epithelial cells developed by our laboratory have been
immortalized by transduction with a retroviral vector expressing the human
papillomavirus E6E7 oncogenes. Analysis of telomerase expression and comparison
to that in primary cells revealed detectable levels in the transduced human
urethral epithelial cells. Immortalized urethral cells could be passaged over 20 
times. Immunofluorescence microscopy studies showed that the immortalized cells
were phenotypically similar and responded to gonococcal infection similarly to
primary cells. Specifically, positive cytokeratin staining showed that the
immortalized cells are keratinocytes; cell surface levels of human
asialoglycoprotein receptor increase following gonococcal infection, and, like
the primary cells, the immortalized urethral epithelial cells are CD14 negative. 
Using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, we found that interleukin-6 (IL-6) and
IL-8 levels in primary urethral epithelial cell supernatants increase after
challenge with N. gonorrhoeae. Likewise, the immortalized urethral epithelial
cells produced higher levels of IL-6 and IL-8 cytokines in response to gonococcal
infection. Cells challenged with a gonococcal lipid A msbB mutant produced
reduced IL-6 and IL-8 levels when compared to the parent strain. Additionally,
these data suggest that the 1291 msbB lipooligosaccharide may suppress cytokine
induction.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.70.10.5808-5815.2002 
PMCID: PMC128333
PMID: 12228311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

