
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 15;277(46):44300-9. Epub 2002 Sep 11.

Recognition of eukaryotic initiation factor 4G isoforms by picornaviral
proteinases.

Foeger N(1), Glaser W, Skern T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Division of Biochemistry, University of
Vienna, Vienna Bio Center, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9/3, Austria.

The leader proteinase (L(pro)) of foot and mouth disease virus is a papain-like
cysteine proteinase. After processing itself from the polyprotein, L(pro) then
cleaves the host protein eukaryotic initiation factor (eIf) 4GI, thus preventing 
protein synthesis from capped mRNA in the infected cell. We have investigated
L(pro) interaction with eIF4GI and its isoform, eIF4GII. L(pro), expressed as a
catalytically inactive fusion protein with glutathione S-transferase, binds
specifically to eIF4G isomers in rabbit reticulocyte lysates. Deletion and
specific mutagenesis were used to map the binding domain on L(pro) to residues
183-195 of the C-terminal extension and to residue Cys(133). These residues of
the C-terminal extension and Cys(133) are adjacent in the crystal structure but
lie about 25 A from the active site. The region on eIF4GI recognized by the
L(pro) C-terminal extension was mapped to residues 640-669 using eIF4GI fragments
generated by proteolysis or by in vitro translation. The L(pro) cleavage site at 
Gly(674) downward arrow Arg(675) was not necessary for binding. Similar
experiments with human rhinovirus 2A proteinase (2A(pro)), a chymotrypsin-like
cysteine proteinase that also cleaves eIF4G isoforms, revealed that 2A(pro) can
also bind to eIF4GI fragments lacking its cleavage site. These experiments
strongly suggest a novel interaction between picornaviral proteinases and eIF4G
isoforms.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M208006200 
PMID: 12228254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

