
1. Am J Pathol. 2002 Oct;161(4):1207-13.

Different pattern of allelic loss in Epstein-Barr virus-positive gastric cancer
with emphasis on the p53 tumor suppressor pathway.

van Rees BP(1), Caspers E, zur Hausen A, van den Brule A, Drillenburg P, Weterman
MA, Offerhaus GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Both Helicobacter pylori (HP) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) have been implicated
in carcinogenesis of the stomach. Fifty-seven gastric carcinomas were tested for 
microsatellite instability and allelic loss at several tumor suppressor loci
using 21 polymorphic microsatellite markers. Furthermore, immunohistochemistry
for p53 and DPC4/SMAD4 was performed. Results were analyzed according to HP and
EBV status of the tumors, as assessed by immunohistochemistry and RNA in situ
hybridization, respectively. Fractional allelic loss was lower in EBV-positive
carcinomas (n = 15) when compared to EBV-negative carcinomas (P < 0.001). EBV
positivity was inversely associated with allelic loss at specific markers on
chromosomal arms 5q (APC), 17p (TP53), and 18q (DPC4/SMAD4). Allelic loss at the 
TP53 locus was not encountered in EBV-positive carcinomas, but occurred in 51% of
EBV-negative carcinomas (P < 0.005). Moreover, none of the EBV-positive
carcinomas showed unequivocal p53 immunopositivity in contrast to 39% of the
EBV-negative carcinomas (P < 0.01). EBV-status was not related to microsatellite 
instability. There was no correlation between HP-status and any of the molecular 
alterations tested. In conclusion, EBV-positive gastric carcinomas follow a
distinct pathogenesis at the molecular level, in which p53 is not, or differently
inactivated.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64397-0 
PMCID: PMC1867286
PMID: 12368194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

