
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2002 Dec 10;13(18):2185-95.

Preexisting antiadenoviral immunity and regional myocardial gene transfer:
modulation by nitric oxide.

Szelid Z(1), Sinnaeve P, Vermeersch P, Gillijns H, Pellens M, Laurysens V, Van
Pelt N, Flameng W, Sergeant P, Herijgers P, Pokreisz P, Van Zonneveld AJ,
Verbeken E, Collen D, Janssens S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Transgene Technology and Gene Therapy, University of Leuven and
Flanders Interuniversity Institute of Biotechnology, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

The utility of adenoviral vectors, currently used in cardiovascular gene transfer
protocols, is limited by the brevity of transgene expression and by
antiadenoviral immune responses. The effect of preexisting antiadenoviral
immunity on intracardiac gene transfer or its modulation by nitric oxide is
unknown. Adenoviral vectors, expressing the firefly luciferase gene (AdLuc) or
the human nitric oxide synthase 3 (NOS3) gene (AdNOS3), were infused into the
great cardiac vein of naive pigs or immunized pigs. Pigs were immunized by
intravenous injection of control virus AdRR5 and the resulting neutralizing
antibody titers (median, 1:178; p < 0.0001 vs. baseline) were similar to
preexisting titers in 54% of randomly selected coronary artery bypass graft
patients. In naive animals distribution of transgene expression in the left
ventricular free wall was focal. In immunized pigs myocardial luciferase
expression 3 days after AdLuc gene transfer was more than 1000-fold lower than in
naive pigs, whereas no change in NOS3 transcript levels was detected after AdNOS3
gene transfer. Severe, grade III-IV mononuclear cell infiltration and myocyte
apoptosis were observed in four of five AdLuc-infected, immunized animals,
compared with low-level inflammation and apoptosis in five of six AdNOS3-infected
pigs. Coinfusion of AdLuc and AdNOS3 in immunized pigs resulted in spatially
colocalized transgene expression, reduced T cell-mediated inflammation, and
myocyte apoptosis and was associated with 200-fold greater median reporter
transgene expression levels in the subendocardium (1.0 x 10(3) light units
[LU]/mg protein, n = 8, vs. 4.5 x 10(1) LU/mg protein in AdLuc- and
AdRR5-coinfected pigs, n = 7, p = 0.02). Preexisting antiadenoviral immunity
abrogates myocardial gene expression in pigs and is associated with severe
inflammation and myocyte apoptosis. Intracardiac NOS3 gene transfer may reduce
these barriers to adenovirus-mediated myocardial gene transfer.

DOI: 10.1089/104303402320987879 
PMID: 12542849  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

