
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 28;278(13):10928-33. Epub 2003 Jan 27.

A highly selective CCR2 chemokine agonist encoded by human herpesvirus 6.

Lüttichau HR(1), Clark-Lewis I, Jensen PØ, Moser C, Gerstoft J, Schwartz TW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Pharmacology, Panum Institute, DK-2200 Copenhagen,
Denmark. hrl@molpharm.dk

The chemokine-like, secreted protein product of the U83 gene from human
herpesvirus 6, here named vCCL4, was chemically synthesized to be characterized
in a complete library of the 18 known human chemokine receptors expressed
individually in stably transfected cell lines. vCCL4 was found to cause calcium
mobilization as efficiently as the endogenous chemokine ligand CCL2 through the
CCR2 receptor, whereas the virally encoded chemokine did not affect any of the
other 17 human chemokine receptors tested. Mutual cross-desensitization between
CCL2 and vCCL4 was demonstrated in the CCR2-transfected cells. The affinity of
vCCL4 for the CCR2 receptor was 79 nm as determined in competition binding
against radioactively labeled CCL2. In the murine pre-B lymphocyte cell line L1.2
stably transfected with the CCR2 receptor, vCCL4 acted as a relatively low
potency but highly efficacious chemoattractant being equally or more efficacious 
in causing cell migration than CCL2 and CCL7 and considerably more efficacious
than CCL8 and CCL13. It is concluded that human herpesvirus 6 encodes a highly
selective and efficacious CCR2 agonist, which will attract CCR2 expressing cells,
for example macrophages and monocytes, conceivably for the virus to infect and to
establish latency in. It is suggested that vCCL4 during reactivation of the virus
in for example monocyte-derived microglia could perhaps be involved in the
pathogenesis of the CCR2-dependent disease, multiple sclerosis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M211329200 
PMID: 12554737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

