
1. Am J Pharmacogenomics. 2003;3(1):53-63.

Baculovirus vectors: novel mammalian cell gene-delivery vehicles and their
applications.

HÃ¼ser A(1), Hofmann C.

Author information: 
(1)DeveloGen AG, NL Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Various methods have been developed to transfer and express genes in mammalian
cells. Each method, whether virally, non-virally, or physically-based, has unique
favorable features, but also drawbacks with respect to meeting desired and
specific needs. Baculoviruses have been used since 1983 to express recombinant
genes controlled by strong insect-virus promoters in their natural host (insect) 
cells. Today this is a well-established and easy to handle system for producing
large quantities of recombinant proteins for numerous purposes. In 1995 it was
first published that recombinant baculoviruses are able to deliver genes into
mammalian cells. These genes are expressed provided that they are controlled by a
promoter which is active in mammalian cells. Since then, various vector variants 
have been developed and numerous potential and meaningful applications have been 
described. It is not surprising that the use of baculovirus vectors as mammalian 
cell gene delivery vectors is constantly increasing and that the system is
undergoing permanent improvements. Based on the convenience of the system to
transfer genes into mammalian cells, baculoviruses can be applied in cell-based
assays for drug screening to overcome the long periods of time required to
generate stable cell lines. Baculovirus vectors are able to deliver very large
DNA sequences into mammalian cells and vectors for toxic gene products can also
be generated. In addition, baculoviruses are valuable tools for launching viral
infection in cases where there is no appropriate cell culture system. Moreover,
recent research has shown that the vectors can be applied in vivo. Depending on
the design of the study, baculovirus vectors allow for sustained gene expression 
or are able to induce an immune response directed against the delivered and/or
displayed gene product. The latter offers the opportunity to generate monoclonal 
antibodies against certain proteins that have failed by other means. In addition,
it points to the potential usefulness of baculovirus vectors as new kinds of
vaccines. Baculovirus vectors are therefore considered an enabling technology for
various product opportunities.


PMID: 12562216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

