
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2003 Feb 1;32(2):170-81.

Effect of cessation of zidovudine prophylaxis to reduce vertical transmission on 
maternal HIV disease progression and survival.

Bardeguez AD(1), Shapiro DE, Mofenson LM, Coombs R, Frenkel LM, Fowler MG, Huang 
S, Sperling RS, Cunningham B, Gandia J, Maupin R, Zorrilla CD, Jones T,
O'Sullivan MJ; Pediatrics AIDS Clinical Trials Group 288 Protocol Team.

Author information: 
(1)University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey 07103, 
USA. bardegad@umdnj.edu

Zidovudine prophylaxis is recommended to reduce perinatal HIV-1 transmission, but
there are limited data on long-term effects on women's health. Pediatrics AIDS
Clinical Trials Group (PACTG) 288 was a prospective observational study among US 
women randomized to zidovudine or placebo in PACTG 076 that was designed to
evaluate and compare postpartum clinical, immune, and viral parameters between
randomized treatment arms. Forty-eight percent (226/474) of eligible women
enrolled in the study (mean follow-up of 4.1 years). Progression and time to AIDS
or death were similar in both groups, observed in 21 (19%) zidovudine group women
and 29 (25%) placebo group women (RR = 0.73, 90% CI: 0.46-1.17). No significant
differences in CD4 lymphocyte count or HIV RNA levels were detected. Genotypic
zidovudine resistance was detected in 10% of 156 women (9% of zidovudine group
women and 11% of placebo group women). Based on our data, ZDV monotherapy could
be considered as chemoprophylaxis to reduce perinatal HIV transmission for
minimally symptomatic HIV-infected pregnant women with a low viral load and
normal CD4 cell count who do not want to receive highly active antiretroviral
therapy because of concern about potential side effects or who wish to reduce
fetal exposure to multiple drugs during pregnancy.

DOI: 10.1097/00126334-200302010-00009 
PMID: 12571527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

