
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2003 Mar;33(3):317-29.

In vitro expression and biochemical characterization of juvenile hormone esterase
from Manduca sexta.

Hinton AC(1), Hammock BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology and Cancer Research Center, University of California,
303 Briggs Hall, 1 Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Juvenile hormone esterase (JHE) is a selective enzyme that hydrolyzes the methyl 
ester of juvenile hormone. This enzyme plays an important role in the regulation 
of metamorphosis in caterpillars, and is implicated in additional roles in
development and reproduction in this and other orders of insect. The full length 
coding region of the JHE cDNA from Manduca sexta was subcloned into the
baculovirus AcMNPV genome under the control of the p10 promoter. The recombinant 
virus demonstrated the expression of high levels of JHE activity when infected
into Hi5 cells from Trichoplusia ni. The recombinant protein was partially
purified by anion exchange chromatography and its biochemical characterization
showed similar features to the wild type protein. The recombinant JHE has an
estimated MW of 66500 Da. Some heterogeneity with the enzyme was observed when
analyzed by isoelectric focusing, although the peak of JHE activity was observed 
at pI=6.0. It is highly sensitive to trifluoroketone inhibitors and certain
phosphoramidothiolates, while relatively insensitive to other common esterase
inhibitors. Incubating the enzyme with various organic solvents and detergents
showed that the enzyme is activated at lower concentrations of
solvents/detergents and remains significantly active even at high concentrations.
The high tolerance of organic solvents may make this JHE enzyme useful in future 
applications as a synthetic catalyst.

DOI: 10.1016/s0965-1748(02)00246-1 
PMID: 12609517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

