
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2003 Mar 1;32(3):255-8.

Relative anti-HIV-1 efficacy of lamivudine and emtricitabine in vitro is
dependent on cell type.

Hazen R(1), Lanier ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triange Park, North Carolina
27709, USA. rjh36583@gsk.com

Comment in
    J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2003 Oct 1;34(2):243-5; author reply 245-6.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the relative in vitro potency of the antiviral agents
emtricitabine (FTC), lamivudine (3TC), and zidovudine (ZDV) in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs), monocyte-derived macrophages, and MT-4 cells infected 
with HIV-1. DESIGN In vitro evaluation of the test compounds against M-tropic or 
T-tropic laboratory strains of HIV-1 and against clinical HIV-1 isolates from
antiretroviral therapy-naive subjects using PBMCs, monocyte-derived macrophages, 
and MT-4 cells.
METHODS: Standard methods for assessing antiviral potency based on 50% inhibitory
concentrations using propidium iodide staining of host cell DNA to assess
cytopathic effects or measurement of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase activity to
assess inhibition of viral replication.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in potency between 3TC and FTC in 
assays with HIV-1(IIIB)-infected PBMCs or HIV-1(Ba-L) -infected monocyte-derived 
macrophages, which are primary cell types for HIV-1 infection in vivo. In
agreement with earlier reports, FTC was approximately fourfold more active than
3TC in assays in the transformed T-cell line MT-4 infected with HIV-(1IIIB),
whereas ZDV was more active than FTC. 3TC, FTC, and ZDV were equally active
against a panel of eight primary HIV-1 isolates from antiretroviral-naive
subjects in PBMCs. These results demonstrate the in vitro similarity of 3TC and
FTC activity in primary cells. The variability in potency depending on cell types
and viral strains underscores our observation that antiviral effects in vitro are
not reliable predictors of in vivo clinical activity.

DOI: 10.1097/00126334-200303010-00003 
PMID: 12626884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

