
1. J Med Virol. 2003 May;70(1):156-62.

GB virus C epidemiology in Denmark: different routes of transmission in children 
and low- and high-risk adults.

Christensen PB(1), Fisker N, Mygind LH, Krarup HB, Wedderkopp N, Varming K,
Georgsen J.

Author information: 
(1)Departement C of Internal Medicine, Section of Infectious Diseases, Odense
University Hospital, Odense, Denmark. peer.christensen@dadlnet.dk

With the demonstration of an effect of GBV-C infection on the outcome of HIV
infection, it has become important to understand the epidemiology of GBV-C. The
purpose of this study was to determine the prevalence in high- and low-risk
populations. The following populations were tested: school children, 9 and 15
years of age (n = 901), blood donors (n = 5,203), hospital employees (n = 1,432),
and prisoners and injecting drug users (n = 447). In-house RT-PCR for GBV-CRNA
was used together with a commercial ELISA for anti-E2 (Boehringer, Germany). In
addition, questionnaires for risk factors for transmission and serological tests 
for HIV and hepatitis were applied. The overall prevalence of GBV-CRNA was 1.4%
among children, 2.2% among blood donors, 2.2% among hospital employees, 12.5%
among non-injecting prisoners, and 34.9% among drug injectors. Correspondingly
anti-E2 was found in 0.3%, 12.3%, 25.0%, and 42.7%. Among hospital employees,
independent risk factors for GBV-C were professions with blood exposure and
sexual risk partners. Among prisoners and drug users, injecting and a sexual risk
index were associated independently with GBV-C. Based on these results, the
following hypothesis is suggested: GBV-C is transmitted frequently at birth or
early childhood and this leads to chronic infection in most cases. Sexual
transmission is the most important route of transmission in the adult population 
but this infection is usually transient. Blood borne transmission plays a role
among health care workers and injecting drug users and GBV-C should be further
evaluated as a surrogate marker for professional blood exposure.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.10359 
PMID: 12629658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

