
1. Hepatology. 2003 Apr;37(4):795-801.

Racial differences in the relationship between hepatitis C infection and iron
stores.

Ioannou GN(1), Dominitz JA, Weiss NS, Heagerty PJ, Kowdley KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Division of Gastroenterology, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Black race and increased hepatic iron stores predict poor response to interferon 
treatment for chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. We tested the hypothesis
that these 2 observations are linked by investigating whether HCV-infected
African-Americans have increased iron stores relative to uninfected persons.
Using data from the third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES III), we determined the risk of having increased iron stores, defined as 
elevation of both serum ferritin and transferrin-iron saturation (TS), in
HCV-RNA-positive blacks (n = 100) and nonblacks (n = 126) relative to
HCV-RNA-negative blacks (n = 4,002) and nonblacks (n = 10,943). HCV-positive
blacks were 5.4 times (95% CI, 1.2 to 24) more likely to have increased iron
stores than HCV-positive nonblacks. The proportion of HCV-positive blacks who had
increased iron stores was 16.4% among those with abnormal liver enzymes and 2.8% 
among those with normal liver enzymes, compared with only 0.6% among HCV-negative
blacks. After adjustment for age, alcohol intake, gender, menopausal status,
education, body mass index, and poverty index, HCV-positive blacks with abnormal 
liver enzymes had an elevated risk of having increased iron stores (odds ratio,
17.8; 95% CI, 5.1 to 63). In contrast, among persons of other races, there was a 
much smaller difference in the proportion of persons with increased iron stores
between HCV-positive persons with (3.4%) or without (1.4%) abnormal liver enzymes
and HCV-negative persons (0.9%). In conclusion, a greater proportion of blacks
than persons of other races respond to HCV infection with an increase in iron
stores. This finding may partly explain the reduced response of HCV-positive
African-Americans to antiviral treatment.

DOI: 10.1053/jhep.2003.50147 
PMID: 12668972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

