
1. J Wildl Dis. 2003 Jan;39(1):73-83.

Health evaluation of free-ranging and semi-captive orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus
pygmaeus) in Sabah, Malaysia.

Kilbourn AM(1), Karesh WB, Wolfe ND, Bosi EJ, Cook RA, Andau M.

Author information: 
(1)Wildlife Conservation Society, 2300 Southern Blvd., Bronx, New York 10460,
USA.

Baseline data on health of free-ranging wildlife is essential to evaluate impacts
of habitat transformation and wildlife translocation, rehabilitation, and
reintroduction programs. Health information on many species, especially great
apes, is extremely limited. Between 1996 and 1998, 84 free-ranging orangutans
captured for translocation, underwent a complete health evaluation. Analogous
data were gathered from 60 semi-captive orangutans in Malaysia. Baseline
hematology and serology; vitamin, mineral and pesticide levels; and results of
health evaluations, including physical examination, provide a baseline for future
monitoring. Free-ranging and semi-captive orangutans shared exposure to 11 of 47 
viruses. The semi-captive orangutans had significantly higher prevalence of
antibodies to adenovirus (P < 0.0005) and rota (SA 11) virus (P < 0.008). More
free-ranging than semi-captive animals had antibodies to Japanese encephalitis
virus (P < 0.08) and foamy virus (P = 0.05). Exposure to parainfluenza and langat
viruses was detected exclusively in semi-captive animals and exposure to sinbis
virus was only found in free-ranging orangutans. There was evidence of exposure
to respiratory syncytial virus, coxsackie virus, dengue virus, and zika virus in 
both groups. Ebstein-Barr virus was ubiquitous in both groups. Prevalence of
antibodies against mumps virus changed from 0% in 1996 to 45% in 1998. No
antibodies were detected to many important zoonotic viral pathogens, including
herpesvirus and hepatitis virus. Prevalence of Balantidium coli and Plasmodium
pitheci infections and exposure to mycobacterium was higher in the semi-captive
animals. Differences in exposure to pathogens between the groups may be due to
environmental factors including differences in exposures to other species,
habitat quality, nutritional status, and other potential stressors. Differences
in health parameters between captive and free-ranging orangutans need to be
considered when planning conservation areas, translocation procedures, and
rehabilitation protocols. Because survival of the orangutan is linked to animal
and ecosystem health, results of this study will assist wildlife conservation
programs by providing baseline health information.

DOI: 10.7589/0090-3558-39.1.73 
PMID: 12685070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

