
1. J Virol. 2003 May;77(10):5678-84.

Redox-triggered infection by disulfide-shackled human immunodeficiency virus type
1 pseudovirions.

Binley JM(1), Cayanan CS, Wiley C, Sch√ºlke N, Olson WC, Burton DR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Immunology and Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA. jbinley@scripps.edu

We previously described a human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) envelope
mutant that introduces a disulfide bridge between the gp120 surface proteins and 
gp41 transmembrane proteins (J. M. Binley, R. W. Sanders, B. Clas, N. Schuelke,
A. Master, Y. Guo, F. Kajumo, D. J. Anselma, P. J. Maddon, W. C. Olson, and J. P.
Moore, J. Virol. 74:627-643, 2000). Here we produced pseudovirions bearing the
mutant envelope and a reporter gene to examine the mutant's infectious
properties. These pseudovirions attach to cells expressing CD4 and coreceptor but
infect only when triggered with reducing agent, implying that gp120-gp41
dissociation is necessary for infection. Further studies suggested that virus
entry was arrested after CD4 and coreceptor engagement. By measuring the
activities of various entry inhibitors against the arrested intermediate, we
found that gp120-targeting inhibitors typically act prior to virus attachment,
whereas gp41 inhibitors are able to act postattachment. Unexpectedly, a
significant fraction of antibodies in HIV-1-positive sera neutralized virus
postattachment, suggesting that downstream fusion events and structures figure
prominently in the host immune response. Overall, this disulfide-shackled virus
is a unique tool with potential utility in vaccine design, drug discovery, and
elucidation of the HIV-1 entry process.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.10.5678-5684.2003 
PMCID: PMC154040
PMID: 12719560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

