
1. Mol Ther. 2003 Apr;7(4):460-6.

Lentiviral-mediated gene delivery to synovium: potent intra-articular expression 
with amplification by inflammation.

Gouze E(1), Pawliuk R, Gouze JN, Pilapil C, Fleet C, Palmer GD, Evans CH,
Leboulch P, Ghivizzani SC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Orthopaedics, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Clinical translation of gene-based therapies for arthritis could be accelerated
by vectors capable of efficient intra-articular gene delivery and long-term
transgene expression. Previously, we have shown that lentiviral vectors transduce
rat synovium efficiently in vivo. Here, we evaluated the functional capacity of
transgene expression provided by lentiviral-mediated gene delivery to the joint. 
To do this, we measured the ability of a lentiviral vector containing the cDNA
for human interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (LV-hIL-1Ra) to suppress
intra-articular responses to IL-1beta. Groups of rats were injected in one knee
with 5 x 10(7) infectious units of LV-IL-1Ra. After 24 h, a range of doses of
fibroblasts (3 x 10(3), 10(4), 3 x 10(4), or 10(5) cells) genetically modified to
overexpress IL-1beta was injected into both knees. Intra-articular delivery of
LV-hIL-1Ra strongly prevented swelling in all treated knees, even in those
receiving the greatest dose of IL-1beta(+) cells. Cellular infiltration,
cartilage erosion, and invasiveness of inflamed synovium were effectively
prevented in LV-hIL-1Ra-treated knees and were significantly inhibited in
contralateral joints. Beneficial effects were also observed systemically in the
lentivirus-treated animals. Interestingly, intra-articular expression of the
IL-1Ra transgene was found to increase in relation to the number of IL-1beta(+)
cells injected. Further experiments using GFP suggest this is due to the
proliferation of cells, stably modified by the integrative lentivirus, in
response to inflammatory stimulation.

DOI: 10.1016/s1525-0016(03)00024-8 
PMID: 12727108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

