
1. Thyroid. 2003 Mar;13(3):233-8.

A major role for non-major histocompatibility complex genes but not for
microorganisms in a novel murine model of Graves' hyperthyroidism.

Nagayama Y(1), McLachlan SM, Rapoport B, Niwa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology 1, Nagasaki University School of Medicine,
Nagasaki, Japan. nagayama@net.nagaski-u.ac.jp

The etiology of Graves' disease is multifactorial. We investigated the role of
genetic and environmental factors on the susceptibility to Graves'
hyperthyroidism using a new murine model. Intramuscular injection of recombinant 
adenovirus expressing the thyrotropin receptor (AdCMVTSHR) induces Graves'-like
hyperthyroidism (thyrotropin receptor [TSHR] antibodies, elevated thyroxine, and 
diffuse goiter) in more than 50% of female BALB/c mice. The relative
contributions of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and non-MHC genes on the 
susceptibility to hyperthyroidism were studied by immunizing BALB/c (H-2d),
BALB.K (H-2k), and DBA/2J (H-2d) mice with AdCMVTSHR. Hyperthyroidism developed
in approximately 50% of BALB/c and BALB.K mice but only 5% of DBA/2J mice,
indicating a major role for non-MHC genes in disease development. The effect of
environmental microorganisms was evaluated by comparing disease incidence in
BALB/c mice maintained in pathogen-free conditions versus those in nonsterile,
conventional housing, as well as by coadministering microorganism components
(Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide or yeast zymosan A) as adjuvants with
AdCMVTSHR. Neither type of exposure to environmental pathogens influenced disease
induction. In conclusion, non-MHC genes, but not infectious organisms, play a
major role in the etiology of this novel murine model of Graves' disease.

DOI: 10.1089/105072503321582024 
PMID: 12729471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

