
1. Biochem J. 2003 Aug 15;374(Pt 1):165-73.

The acetyltransferase 60 kDa trans-acting regulatory protein of HIV type
1-interacting protein (Tip60) interacts with the translocation E26
transforming-specific leukaemia gene (TEL) and functions as a transcriptional
co-repressor.

Nordentoft I(1), Jørgensen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Aarhus University, C. F. Møllers Allé 130, DK
8000 Aarhus C, Denmark.

The translocation E26 transforming-specific (ETS) leukaemia (TEL), alias the ETS 
variant (ETV6), gene is expressed in most human tissues and encodes a
transcriptional repressor. The TEL gene is involved in more than 40 different
chromosomal translocations associated with haematological malignancies. As little
is known about the function of intact TEL, we searched for TEL-interacting
proteins by yeast two-hybrid screening. Among the interacting partners, we
identified the histone acetyltransferase protein Tip60 [60 kDa trans-acting
regulatory protein of HIV type 1 (Tat)-interacting protein]. The interaction was 
reproduced in vitro, and in mammalian cells we mapped the interaction regions in 
TEL to the ETS domain and those in Tip60 to the MYST ('MOZ, Ybf2/Sas3, SAS2 and
Tip60', where MOZ stands for male absent on the first, SAS for something about
silencing and Ybf2 for identical with SAS2) region. Detailed analysis of the
Tip60 MYST domain by introduction of point mutations revealed that an N-terminal 
C2HC zinc finger was essential for interaction with TEL. Finally, we showed that 
Tip60 functions in a reporter system as a co-repressor in TEL-mediated
transcription repression.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20030087 
PMCID: PMC1223570
PMID: 12737628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

