
1. J Periodontol. 1992 Dec;63(12):979-83.

HIV inactivation in a bone allograft.

Mellonig JT, Prewett AB, Moyer MP.

The use of exclusionary techniques in the procurement of donors for bone
allografts greatly reduces chances for disease transmission. Furthermore,
treatment of HIV with either chemical agents or strong acids will effectively
inactivate the AIDS virus. These data are taken as indirect proof that the risk
of obtaining AIDS from a freeze-dried bone allograft is highly remote. The
purpose of this study is to obtain direct evidence that the processing of a
demineralized freeze-dried bone allograft would render the allograft safe for
human use. In Part I, human cortical bone was obtained from a cadaveric source
and tested to be free of HIV contamination. The bone was spiked with 5.26 x 10(9)
viral particles. This corresponded to 148 micrograms of total viral protein. In
Part II, cortical bone was procured from a donor who died of AIDS. In both Parts 
I and II, the cortical bone was ground to yield particle sizes of 90 to 500
microns. Test samples were treated with a virucidal agent and demineralized in
HCl. Control samples were left untreated. All samples were cocultivated with
stimulated peripheral blood lymphocytes and assayed for p24 core protein, reverse
transcriptase, and viral gag gene by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In Part I, 
the HIV spiking experiment, untreated virus infected particulate bone was
positive for HIV replication. Treated samples were negative when assayed for HIV.
Bone samples in Part II, HIV infected bone, were positive by PCR. Replication of 
viable HIV could not be demonstrated after treatment. It was concluded that
demineralization and treatment with a virucidal agent inactivates HIV in spiked
and infected bone.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.1992.63.12.979 
PMID: 1282153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

