
1. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2003;20(4):301-9.

Modulation of glioma cell invasion and motility by adenoviral gene transfer of
PAI-1.

Hjortland GO(1), Bj√∏rnland K, Pettersen S, Garman-Vik SS, Emilsen E, Nesland JM, 
Fodstad O, Engebraaten O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian
Radium Hospital, University of Oslo, Montebello, Oslo, Norway.
g.o.hjortland@labmed.uio.no

A number of studies have emphasized the role of PAI-1 as an important regulator
of tumor cell invasion and metastasis. The hallmark of primary tumors of the
central nervous system and glioblastomas in particular is the diffuse invasion
into the normal brain tissue. Since PAI-1 is expressed in such tumors, we studied
the effect of adenoviral-mediated transfer of the PAI-1 gene in regulating the in
vitro invasiveness of D54Mg glioma cells into Matrigel, and into fetal rat brain 
aggregates. Treatment of D54Mg cells with 50 MOI (multiplicity of infection) of
the replication defective vector AdCMVPAI-1 increased PAI-1 expression 23-fold
compared to control vectors, and the invasion through Matrigel was reduced by
67%. The motility of the cells was reduced by 58% compared to controls
(indicating that inhibition of motility was the principal effect of PAI-1 in
these cells). The ability of D54Mg tumor spheroids to invade fetal rat brain
aggregates was not reduced by the PAI-1 gene transfer. The results show that
overexpression of PAI-1 can inhibit glioma cell motility and invasion through
extracellular matrix (ECM) components, like laminin and collagen, but does not
inhibit tumor cell invasion in a three-dimensional invasion assay, simulating
normal brain tissue having a different ECM and interstitial composition. The
different results obtained in the two invasion assays reflect the complex
biological effects of the uPA/PAI-1 system, and questions a simplistic view of
PAI- I as an inhibitor of brain tumor invasion.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1024040718238 
PMID: 12856717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

