
1. Int Immunol. 2003 Aug;15(8):955-62.

Membrane lymphotoxin is required for resistance to Theiler's virus infection.

Lin X(1), Ma X, Rodriguez M, Feng X, Zoecklein L, Fu YX, Roos RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Lymphotoxin (LT) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) are important in immune system
development and function. LT consists of soluble LT-alpha(3), which binds to
TNF-R1 and TNF-R2, and membrane LT-alpha(1)beta(2), which binds to LT-beta-R. We 
investigated the role of LT and TNF in disease induced by Daniel's (DA) strain of
Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV) since the immune response is
believed to be important in both resistance to DA infection as well as mediation 
of virus-induced demyelination. DA persisted and induced inflammatory
demyelination in LT-alpha(-/-) (but not TNF(-/-)) weanling mice of a normally
resistant haplotype (C57BL/6), suggesting that LT, but not TNF, is critical for
resistance to DA infection. This activity of LT depends on membrane
LT-alpha(1)beta(2) and not soluble LT-alpha(3), since DA virus persisted and
induced inflammatory demyelination in LT-beta-R(-/-), but not TNF-R1(-/-) or
TNF-R2(-/-), mice. The LT-alpha(-/-) and LT-beta-R(-/-) mice failed to mount a
virus-specific cytotoxic T cell response. Treatment of weanling C57BL/6 mice with
LT-beta-R-Ig, which blocks membrane LT activity, failed to increase
susceptibility, suggesting that the LT effect is related to its action on immune 
system development which is fixed by 3 weeks of age. Our data suggest that
membrane LT is important in resistance to DA infection (possibly through
interference with CD8+ T cell development and function). There was relatively
little demyelination associated with inflammation in LT-alpha(-/-) and
LT-beta-R(-/-) mice compared to susceptible SJL mice, suggesting the possibility 
that LT plays a role in mediating demyelination.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/mcg094 
PMID: 12882833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

