
1. Ann Pharm Fr. 1992;50(5-6):267-76.

[Affinity chromatography for extracorporeal purification or for separation of
molecules for biological use: technical and legal restraints].

[Article in French]

Stoltz JF(1), Rivat C, Regnault V.

Author information: 
(1)U. 284 INSERM, Vandoeuvre-l√®s-Nancy.

Affinity and/or immunoaffinity chromatography is one of the less commonly method 
used for large scale separation purposes. As this technic is greatly selective
and gives high yields, it allows in vivo removal, in an extracorporeal
circulation, of harmful substances in patient plasma as well as purification of
molecules for biological and therapeutic uses. Large development with increased
safety of such a method is dependent on some economic, technical and legal
requirements. Particular attention must be drawn to the following points.
Possibility of multiple uses of affinity supports contributes to lowering the
cost of the method. Desorption agents should be chosen according to the best
compromise between total desorption and preservation of adsorption capacity over 
runs. It is likewise essential to store affinity supports in conditions allowing 
prevention from contamination without loss of adsorption capacity. In developing 
and optimizing an affinity chromatography procedure, it is important to minimize 
the amount of ligand released from the affinity support. Besides economic and
technical aspects, it is necessary to take into account legal requirements,
particularly those related to the preparation of the ligand especially if it is
monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies. An important consideration for the
therapeutic use of antibodies (either in the preparation of biological products
or in an extracorporeal circulation procedure) is the possible presence of
viruses and/or potentially oncogenic macromolecules. Source material should be
shown to be free of viruses, the cell banks (for monoclonal antibodies) and the
production of antibodies must be closely controlled, viral inactivation of
antibodies should be performed and the inactivation process should be shown to be
effective.


PMID: 1307672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

