
1. Am J Pathol. 1992 Mar;140(3):739-47.

Demonstration of cytomegalovirus nucleic acids in the coronary arteries of
transplanted hearts.

Wu TC(1), Hruban RH, Ambinder RF, Pizzorno M, Cameron DE, Baumgartner WA, Reitz
BA, Hayward GS, Hutchins GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
Maryland.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection has been associated with the development of
accelerated arteriosclerosis in heart transplant recipients. This association
prompted the authors to examine, using in situ hybridization techniques, the
coronary arteries of 19 patients who had received heart transplants for the
presence of CMV nucleic acids. Two probes were employed on formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissues. The first was an S35-labeled nick translated probe
derived from CMV DNA. CMV nucleic acids were identified in the arterial intima of
5 (45%) of 11 transplanted hearts examined with this probe. Hybridization to
cells morphologically consistent with endothelial cells, lymphocytes, and smooth 
muscle cells was identified. Hybridization was not detected in any of the hearts 
when a control probe, a vector without CMV DNA, was employed. The second probe
that was used was a tritium-labeled strand-specific ribo-probe derived from the
immediate early (IE1) gene of CMV. Using this second probe, hybridization was
detected in the coronary arteries of three of five hearts that were positive with
the DNA probe, in one of the hearts that was negative with the DNA probe, and in 
three (38%) of eight additional transplanted hearts. The pattern of hybridization
was the same as that seen with the DNA probe, and no hybridization was detected
when a control sense probe for the IE1 gene of CMV was employed. These results
suggest that CMV nucleic acids are present in the coronary arteries of heart
transplant recipients.


PMCID: PMC1886167
PMID: 1312309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

