
1. J Virol Methods. 1992 Mar;36(3):249-64.

Indirect ELISA for the detection of HSV-2 specific IgG and IgM antibodies with
glycoprotein G (gG-2).

Ho DW(1), Field PR, Sj√∂gren-Jansson E, Jeansson S, Cunningham AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Institute of Clinical Pathology and Medical Research, 
New South Wales, Australia.

The glycoprotein G (gG-2) purified from HSV-2 infected cells has been reported to
be useful for determination of HSV-2 type-specific antibodies using conventional 
ELISA formats. This study further confirmed the specificity of gG-2 and
demonstrated the feasibility of a specific IgM assay. The gG-2 ELISA was
developed to detect HSV-2 specific IgG and IgM antibodies in human sera with high
levels of sensitivity and specificity. Of 45 patients with culture-proven
recurrent HSV-2 genital infection 44 were reactive for gG-2 IgG. Of 30 sera from 
patients with culture-proven recent initial HSV-2 genital infection 29 were
positive for gG-2 IgM. Three patients with primary HSV-2 genital infection showed
gG-2 IgM in the convalescent but not in the acute sera. The IgG- and IgM-gG-2
ELISA showed high specificity. None of 40 sera from children were reactive by
either assay. Only one of 94 sera from patients with antibody to herpesviruses
other than HSV reacted in the IgG assay but none reacted in the IgM assay. There 
was no cross-reaction with sera from patients with proven HSV-1 infection with
the gG-2 antigen. The results suggest that the IgG assay can be used for
demonstration of past HSV-2 infection and the IgM assay for the diagnosis of
HSV-2 in neonatal herpes and primary genital herpes, when cultures or rapid
diagnostic techniques are unavailable.

DOI: 10.1016/0166-0934(92)90056-j 
PMID: 1313824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

