
1. J Leukoc Biol. 1992 Apr;51(4):336-42.

In vitro modulation of the toxicity associated with the use of zidovudine on
normal murine, human, and murine retrovirus-infected hematopoietic progenitor
stem cells with basic fibroblast growth factor and synergistic activity with
interleukin-1.

Gallicchio VS(1), Hughes NK, Hulette BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Lucille P. Markey Cancer Center, University of
Kentucky Medical Center, Lexington 40536-0084.

The antiviral drug used in the treatment of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome,
zidovudine, has proved effective in ameliorating the morbidity and mortality
associated with human immunodeficiency virus infection. However, associated with 
zidovudine is the development of severe bone marrow toxicity manifested by
anemia, neutropenia, and occasionally thrombocytopenia. We report the results of 
studies that demonstrate the ability of basic fibroblast growth factor (B-FGF) to
reduce zidovudine toxicity to several classes of hematopoietic progenitors
(granulocyte-macrophage, CFU-GM; megakaryocyte. CFU-Meg; and erythroid, BFU-E)
from normal murine, human, and murine retrovirus-infected bone marrow cells when 
cocultured with zidovudine in vitro. Optimal response to B-FGF was observed at a 
dose concentration of 10 ng/ml. The specificity of B-FGF was demonstrated in the 
presence of protamine sulfate, an effective inhibitor of B-FGF mitogenic
activity. In addition, synergistic activity of B-FGF on zidovudine-induced
hematopoietic stem cell toxicity was observed in the presence of interleukin 1
(IL-1) (30 ng/ml). These studies demonstrate that B-FGF is capable of reducing
the hematopoietic toxicity associated with zidovudine and that such an effect can
be amplified in the presence of IL-1.

DOI: 10.1002/jlb.51.4.336 
PMID: 1314278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

