
1. J Gen Virol. 1992 Sep;73 ( Pt 9):2305-12.

Proteolytic processing of a Murray Valley encephalitis virus non-structural
polyprotein segment containing the viral proteinase: accumulation of a NS3-4A
precursor which requires mature NS3 for efficient processing.

Lobigs M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian
National University, Canberra.

The proteolytic processing of a non-structural polyprotein segment from the
cytoplasmic domain of NS2A to the C terminus of NS5 of Murray Valley encephalitis
(MVE) virus was examined, when expressed from cDNA via a vaccinia virus
recombinant, in transiently transfected COS cells, or synthesized by cell-free
translation. Cleavages mediated by the virus-encoded proteinase domain in NS3 at 
the junctions of NS2A-2B, NS2B-3 and NS4B-5 were catalysed efficiently. However, 
the cleavage at the NS3-4A junction, also mediated by the NS3 proteinase, was
greatly delayed. Little or no NS3 was found, but an 85K precursor molecule
accumulated; this was identified as NS3-4A. Termination codons were introduced by
site-directed mutagenesis at the junctions of the NS3-4A, NS4A-4B and NS4B-5
genes to generate C-terminal truncations of the MVE virus polyprotein segment. In
expression studies of these constructs the predicted NS3-mediated proteolytic
cleavages were catalysed, except for that at the NS3-4A junction. In
co-infections and co-transfections with constructs encoding the MVE virus
nonstructural polyprotein region truncated at the C termini of NS3 or NS4A,
efficient processing at the NS3-4A site was induced. Thus it appears that the MVE
virus polyprotein is cleaved inefficiently in cis at the NS3-4A junction, whereas
the site is processed efficiently in trans by mature NS3. The NS3-4A precursor is
also seen in flavivirus-infected cells. Its function remains to be determined,
but it could play a role in the replication of flavivirus, in view of the
importance of polyprotein processing in the regulation of gene expression of
positive-stranded RNA viruses, the modulation of processing at the NS3-4A site by
NS3 or NS3-containing precursors described in the present study and the
importance of NS3 as an integral part of the viral polymerase complex.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-73-9-2305 
PMID: 1328486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

