
1. Vet Med (Praha). 1992 Aug;37(8):463-70.

[Pathologic changes in the organs in chickens after infection with the turkey
herpesvirus THV-BIO-I].

[Article in Czech]

Halouzka R(1), Jurajda V.

Author information: 
(1)Vysoká skola veterinární, Brno.

The objective of our work was to investigate the dynamics of pathological lesions
of chicken organs after infection with high doses of turkey herpesvirus
THV-BIO-I. This virus strain is commonly used in form of the Marvak vaccine
against Marek's disease of poultry in Czechoslovakia. High doses of the vaccine
are used in practice with respect to the epizootological situation. The incidence
of pathological lesions in the organs of Brown Leghorn chickens was investigated 
in a five-week experiment. One-day chickens were infected intramuscularly with
the HVT strain at the doses of approximately 10(2), 10(3) and 10(4) PFU in 0.2 ml
of infective inoculum per chick. The body weights of ten chickens of each group
were recorded at intervals of 1, 2, 3 and 5 weeks after infection, serological
examination was performed for precipitating antibodies to MDV and the feather was
examined for MDV-antigen. Bursae Fabricii and spleens were weighed. Thymus,
bursae Fabricii, spleens, peripheral nerves (n. ischiadicus and pl. brachialis)
and gonads were sampled for histopathological examination. Neither maternal nor
post-infection antibodies were found in any chick. Cytolytic lesion severity of
lymphoid organs was scored using the scale of immunosuppression degrees (0-4).
Morphological criteria were published in a previous paper (Halouzka and Jurajda, 
1991b). The differences observed in the weights of bursa Fabricii and spleen
between the infected and control chickens were not statistically significant. The
observed lymphoid infiltrations in the skin, gonads, nerves and other tissues
following the HVT infection are well-known and correlate with the infection
dose.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 1336236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

