
1. Life Sci. 1992;50(19):1425-35.

Antiretroviral activity of mechanism-based irreversible inhibitors of
S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase.

Prakash NJ(1), Davis GF, Jarvi ET, Edwards ML, McCarthy JR, Bowlin TL.

Author information: 
(1)Marion Merrell Dow Research Institute, Cincinnati, Ohio 45215.

S-Adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase (AdoHcy-nase) is a key enzyme in
transmethylation reactions. The objective of the present study was to examine the
potential antiretroviral activities of novel mechanism-based irreversible
AdoHcy-nase inhibitors. (Z)-4',5'-didehydro-5'-deoxy-5'-fluoroadenosine (ZDDFA), 
(E)-4',5'-didehydro-5'-deoxy-5'-fluoroadenosine (EDDFA),
(Z)-4',5'-didehydro-5'-deoxy-5'-chloroadenosine (ZDDCA) and
5'-deoxy-5'-acetylenic adenosine (DAA) inhibited AdoHcy-nase activity with Ki
values of 0.55, 1.04, greater than 10.0 and 3.30 microM, respectively. These four
compounds were tested for antiviral activity in vitro against Moloney leukemia
virus (MoLV) in the XC-plaque assay. MoLV replication in murine fibroblasts
(SC-1) was inhibited by ZDDFA, EDDFA and DAA with IC50 values of 0.05, 0.25 and
3.30 micrograms/ml, respectively. ZDDCA did not inhibit MoLV infection at the
concentrations tested. Antiviral activity correlated with the ability of the
individual compounds to maintain sustained elevations in intracellular
S-adenosylhomocysteine (AdoHcy) concentrations in the SC-1 cells. ZDDFA, the most
potent inhibitor of AdoHcy-nase and MoLV was also the most active in maintaining 
sustained elevations in intracellular AdoHcy levels. The antiviral activity of
ZDDFA was also examined in murine C3H1OT1/2 fibroblasts which constitutively
produce MoLV. Pretreatment with ZDDFA (1.0 microgram/ml) for 24 hr inhibited
virus production by 88%. Similar to the SC-1 cells, and concomitant with enzyme
inhibition, there was a 300-fold increase in AdoHcy levels in ZDDFA (1.0
microgram/ml) treated C3H1OT1/2 cells. Incorporation of a [3H]methyl group from
tritiated S-adenosylmethionine into total RNA in C3H1OT1/2 cells was inhibited by
ZDDFA without affecting cell viability. These results suggest that
mechanism-based inhibitors of AdoHcy-nase, such as ZDDFA, may have potential as
antiretroviral agents.

DOI: 10.1016/0024-3205(92)90261-m 
PMID: 1374145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

