
1. Am J Clin Pathol. 1992 Jul;98(1):8-12.

Hepatitis C testing. Comparison of Ortho's EIA and RIBA II tests in 1,182
patients undergoing primary liver transplantation.

Rochlani M(1), Lewis JH, Ramsey GE, Bontempo FA, Shah G, Bowman RA, van Thiel DH,
Starzl TE.

Author information: 
(1)Central Blood Bank, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

Comment in
    Am J Clin Pathol. 1992 Jul;98(1):4.

Plasma samples from 1,182 patients undergoing primary liver transplantation were 
tested for anti-hepatitis C (HCV) virus by two methods: Ortho HCV ELISA Test
System (EIA) and Chiron RIBA HCV Test System (RIBA II). The EIA results, 0 or +, 
were recorded first, followed by RIBA results, N = negative, P = positive, or I =
indeterminate. Concordant results--0N, + P, + I--were found in 1,076 (91%), and
discordant results were found in 106 (9%). The EIA optical density did not relate
to concordant or discordant results. Band patterns were described by stating the 
band position (1, 2, 3, or 4) and inserting a dash (-) if no band was visualized.
Most + P samples fell into two patterns: 47% showed all four bands, pattern 1234,
and 15% showed the two-band pattern, 34. When the EIA was negative, 0P, the
opposite was seen: 8% showed the 1234 pattern and 81% showed the 34 pattern.
There were 226 samples that formed bands (+ P, 149; 0P, 31; + I, 15; 0I, 31). The
frequency of bands was as follows: 4, 32%; 3, 31%; 2, 19%; and 1, 18%. Band 2 and
the EIA test detected antibodies to the same c100-3 fragment and showed 74%
concordance. No explanation is apparent for the lower concordance rate here than 
that between the EIA test and bands 3 = 96% or 4 = 88%. The EIA and RIBA II
tests, together with positive liver function tests and abnormal tissue pathologic
findings, provide a basis for the diagnosis of HCV.

DOI: 10.1093/ajcp/98.1.8 
PMCID: PMC3034369
PMID: 1377442  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

