
1. Scand J Infect Dis. 1992;24(4):437-43.

Serologically indicated pneumococcal respiratory infection in children.

Korppi M(1), Koskela M, Jalonen E, Leinonen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Kuopio University Hospital, Finland.

Streptococcus pneumoniae infection was indicated serologically in 84 (19%) of 449
children hospitalized with middle or lower respiratory tract infection.
Pneumococcal antigen was detected in acute serum in 28 patients, but in acute
urine in only 2. An antibody response to type-specific capsular polysaccharides
of S. pneumoniae was indicated in 27 patients and to a protein antigen,
pneumolysin, in 25 patients, but to C-polysaccharide in only 10 patients. The
observations mentioned above suggest that each serological test for pneumococcal 
etiology is insensitive, and to get an optimal result, a large panel of
pneumococcal antigen and antibody assays must be used. Pneumococcal infection
could be indicated serologically although no focus of infection, such as
pneumonia or acute otitis media, or no laboratory evidence of bacterial infection
as elevated values of C-reactive protein concentration, erythrocyte sedimentation
rate or white blood cell count was present. Particularly antibody responses to
pneumococcal pneumolysin were present in children without pneumonia or acute
otitis media. Our results point out that no nonspecific parameter can be used for
the selection of patients with probable pneumococcal etiology among children with
respiratory tract infection. Concomitant viral infection, in most cases RSV
infection, was present in a third of the children with pneumococcal infection. It
is concluded that pneumococcal etiology should be actively sought for also in
patients with viral respiratory infection, especially in young children with RSV 
infection.

DOI: 10.3109/00365549209052629 
PMID: 1411309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

