
1. Avian Pathol. 2003 Oct;32(5):473-81.

Ability of Massachusetts-type infectious bronchitis virus to increase
colibacillosis susceptibility in commercial broilers: a comparison between
vaccine and virulent field virus.

Matthijs MG(1), van Eck JH, Landman WJ, Stegeman JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, P.O. Box
80151, 3508 TD Utrecht, The Netherlands. m.g.r.matthijs@vet.uu.nl

The abilities of Massachusetts-type vaccine virus and virulent infectious
bronchitis (IB) field virus to increase colibacillosis susceptibility were
compared. In four experiments, 29-day-old female commercial broilers housed in
isolators, were infected intratracheally and oculonasally with IB vaccine strains
(H120 and H52) or virulent IB field strains (D387 and M41) (4.8 or 6.8 log(10)
median embryo infective dose, per broiler). Five days later, Escherichia coli 506
strain was given intratracheally (5.6 to 8.8 log(10) colony forming
units/broiler). The incidence of nasal discharge at 3 and 5 days after IB virus
infection was used to assess the clinical effect of the IB infection, while
mortality, body weight uniformity and E. coli lesions at 7 days following E. coli
inoculation were used as parameters for colibacillosis. Nasal discharge was
observed in 6/117 (5%), 26/119 (22%), 35/119 (29%) and 115/120 (96%) of broilers 
infected with H120, H52, D387 and M41 virus, respectively. Apart from H52 and
D387, differences between IBV strains were significant. IB vaccine and virulent
IB viruses did not generally differ significantly in their ability to induce
colibacillosis susceptibility. Mean colibacillosis lesion scores of H52-infected 
birds even significantly exceeded those of birds infected with the other IB
viruses. The ability of H120 virus to induce colibacillosis susceptibility tended
to be the weakest. The practical consequences of these findings are discussed.

DOI: 10.1080/0307945031000154062 
PMID: 14522702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

