
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2003 Nov 1;34(3):267-73.

Field evaluation of an improved assay using a heat-dissociated p24 antigen for
adults mainly infected with HIV-1 CRF02_AG strains in Côte d'Ivoire, West Africa.

Bonard D(1), Rouet F, Toni TA, Minga A, Huet C, Ekouévi DK, Dabis F, Salamon R,
Rouzioux C; ANRS 1220 PRIMO-CI Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Diagnostic et de Recherches sur le SIDA, CHU de Treichville, BP V3
Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, West Africa. dbonard@hotmail.com

The aim of this study was to evaluate the heat-dissociated p24 antigen (HD p24
Ag) assay as an alternative low-cost tool for diagnosis of HIV-1 infection and
quantitation of HIV-1 RNA levels in African adults mainly infected with HIV-1
CRF02_AG strains. One hundred seventeen plasma specimens were obtained from
HIV-1-seropositive subjects enrolled in the ANRS 1220 PRIMO-CI cohort (Abidjan,
Côte d'Ivoire, West Africa). Results of the HD p24 Ag assay were comparable with 
those of HIV-1 RNA levels quantified in the same antibody-positive plasma samples
by the Amplicor HIV-1 Monitor assay (1.5 version; Roche Diagnostics,
Indianapolis, IN): sensitivity, 95.7% versus 96.6%, respectively; specificity
(evaluated with samples from 75 seronegative subjects), 94.7% versus 100%,
respectively. HD p24 Ag and HIV-1 RNA assays were weakly correlated (Spearman
coefficient correlation, r = 0.33; P < 0.001) except for HIV-1 RNA levels of >/=5
log10 copies/mL (r = 0.62; P < 0.001). Quantitation of HD p24 antigenemia in 76
plasma specimens from 14 patients treated with highly active antiretroviral
therapy demonstrated weaker changes during treatment than those observed with the
HIV-1 RNA assay. Follow-up of infected patients using both markers showed
different results. The reliability of the HD p24 Ag assay is questionable for
clinical and biologic management as a surrogate tool for measurement of HIV-1 RNA
levels in Africa.

DOI: 10.1097/00126334-200311010-00002 
PMID: 14600570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

