
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Nov 25;100(24):14223-8. Epub 2003 Nov 17.

Functional profiling of a human cytomegalovirus genome.

Dunn W(1), Chou C, Li H, Hai R, Patterson D, Stolc V, Zhu H, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, School of Public Health, 140 Warren Hall,
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), a ubiquitous herpesvirus, causes a lifelong
subclinical infection in healthy adults but leads to significant morbidity and
mortality in neonates and immunocompromised individuals. Its ability to grow in
different cell types is responsible for HCMV-associated diseases, including
mental retardation and retinitis, and vascular disorders. To globally assess
viral gene function for replication in cells, we determined the genomic sequence 
of a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)-based clone of HCMV Towne strain and
used this information to delete each of its 162 unique ORFs and generate a
collection of viral mutants. The growth of these mutants in different cultured
cells was examined to systematically investigate the necessity of each ORF for
replication. Our results showed that 45 ORFs are essential for viral replication 
in fibroblasts and 117 are nonessential. Some genes were found to be required for
viral replication in retinal pigment epithelial cells and microvascular
endothelial cells, but not in fibroblasts, indicating their role as tropism
factors. Interestingly, several viral mutants grew 10- to 500-fold better than
the parental strain in different cell types, suggesting that the deleted ORFs
encode replication temperance or repressing functions. Thus, HCMV encodes
supportive and suppressive growth regulators for optimizing its replication in
human fibroblasts, epithelial, and endothelial cells. Suppression of viral
replication by virus-encoded temperance factors represents a novel mechanism for 
regulating the growth of an animal virus, and may contribute to HCMV's optimal
infection of different tissues and successful proliferation among the human
population.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2334032100 
PMCID: PMC283573
PMID: 14623981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

