
1. J Med Microbiol. 2004 Feb;53(Pt 2):125-128. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.05447-0.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) study of 2916 cytological samples by PCR and DNA
sequencing: genotype spectrum of patients from the west German area.

Speich N(1), Schmitt C(1), Bollmann R(1), Bollmann M(1).

Author information: 
(1)IMoGen GmbH, Heilsbachstr. 17, D-53123 Bonn, Germany 2Institute of Pathology
Bonn-Duisdorf, Heilsbachstr. 15, D-53123 Bonn, Germany.

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are aetiological agents for cervical cancer. More
than 70 different HPV types that infect genital mucosa have been found. In order 
to develop a sensitive and specific detection and typing assay, a PCR/direct
sequencing approach was used. Two pairs of consensus primers were used for
amplification of HPV DNA and the PCR products obtained were analysed by automated
sequencing. Sequences were compared with those in GenBank by using the BLAST
program. In this study, 2916 cytological samples were screened for HPV, as well
as for triage. Nine hundred and forty-eight (32.5%) samples were positive for
HPV, of which 134 harboured more than one HPV type. Of the 948 PCR-positive
samples, 648 were typed. Thirty-nine different HPV types were identified by
sequencing. The two most frequently found HPV types, 16 and 31, together
accounted for 36.3% of the sequences (26.2 and 10.1%, respectively). This group
was followed by HPV types 6 (5.7%), 18 (5.3%), 58 (4.5%), 61 (4.5%), 53 (4.4%),
42 (4.3%) and 51 (4.0%). All other types were detected at frequencies <4% and
eight types were detected only once. PCR/direct sequencing is a reliable method
for routine detection of HPV in cytological samples. The data presented here
suggest a complex distribution of HPV types in the population tested. The results
accentuate the importance of PCR-based techniques in HPV diagnosis, as
hybridization-based methods can only detect a limited number of infections. This 
method can also be applied easily to the analysis of tissue samples and it
therefore also allows type-specific follow-up of women who have been treated for 
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.05447-0 
PMID: 14729933  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

