
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2004 Feb;42(2):841-3.

Use of an internal positive control in a multiplex reverse transcription-PCR to
detect West Nile virus RNA in mosquito pools.

Eisler DL(1), McNabb A, Jorgensen DR, Isaac-Renton JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratory Services, British Columbia Centre for Disease Control, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. diane.eisler@bccdc.ca

We report on the use of West Nile virus Armored RNA as an internal positive
control (IPC) for the extraction and reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) of RNA
extracted from field-collected mosquitoes and on a multiplex real-time Taqman
RT-PCR to simultaneously detect the 3' noncoding region of West Nile virus and
the West Nile virus NS5-2 region comprising the IPC. Mosquito pools from the
province of British Columbia, Canada (n = 635), were tested in duplicate and
found to be negative for West Nile virus and positive for the IPC. Known West
Nile virus-positive supernatants from mosquito pools from the provinces of
Alberta and Manitoba were tested in duplicate and found to be positive for both
regions of the West Nile virus genome. The mean cycle threshold (Ct) value for
the IPC in batch extraction controls +/- 2 standard deviations was found to be
36.43 +/- 1.78 cycles. IPCs of 98.4% (624) of West Nile virus-negative pools fell
within this range, indicating the reproducibility of RNA extraction and RT-PCR
for pools varying in mosquito genus and number. A comparison of mosquito pool
genera revealed no significant genus effect on the Ct value of the IPC. The
incorporation of West Nile virus Armored RNA as an IPC allows monitoring of RNA
extraction and RT-PCR and detection of false-negative results due to failures in 
these processes or to PCR inhibition, respectively.

DOI: 10.1128/jcm.42.2.841-843.2004 
PMCID: PMC344474
PMID: 14766868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

