
1. J Virol. 2004 Mar;78(5):2382-93.

The matrix protein of Marburg virus is transported to the plasma membrane along
cellular membranes: exploiting the retrograde late endosomal pathway.

Kolesnikova L(1), Bamberg S, Berghöfer B, Becker S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Virologie der Philipps-Universität Marburg, D-35037 Marburg,
Germany.

VP40, the matrix protein of Marburg virus, is a peripheral membrane protein that 
has been shown to associate with membranes of multivesicular bodies (MVBs) (L.
Kolesnikova, H. Bugany, H.-D. Klenk, and S. Becker, J. Virol. 76:1825-1838,
2002). The present study revealed that VP40 is bound to cellular membranes
rapidly after synthesis. Time course studies were performed to trace the
distribution of VP40 during the course of expression. First, VP40 was
homogenously distributed throughout the cytoplasm, although the majority of
protein (70%) was already membrane associated. Next, VP40 accumulated in MVBs and
in tubular protrusions emerging from MVBs. Finally, VP40 appeared in a patch-like
pattern beneath the plasma membrane. These morphological results were supported
by iodixanol density gradient analyses. The majority of VP40-positive membranes
were first detected comigrating with small vesicles. VP40 was then shifted to
fractions containing endosomal marker proteins, and later, to fractions
containing plasma membrane marker proteins. Blocking of protein synthesis by use 
of cycloheximide at the time when VP40 was mainly associated with the small
vesicles did not prevent the redistribution of VP40 to the late endosomes and
further to the plasma membrane. The inhibition of intracellular vesicular
trafficking by monensin significantly reduced the appearance of VP40 at the
plasma membrane. In conclusion, we suggest that the transport of the Marburg
virus matrix protein VP40 involves its accumulation in MVBs followed by the
redistribution of VP40-enriched membrane clusters to the plasma membrane.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.78.5.2382-2393.2004 
PMCID: PMC369247
PMID: 14963134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

