
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 16;101(11):3927-32. Epub 2004 Feb 20.

A single amino acid of APOBEC3G controls its species-specific interaction with
virion infectivity factor (Vif).

Schr√∂felbauer B(1), Chen D, Landau NR.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,
10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 16;101(11):3725-6.

The virion infectivity factor (Vif) accessory protein of HIV-1 forms a complex
with the cellular cytidine deaminase APOBEC3G (apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing
enzyme, catalytic polypeptide-like 3G) to block its antiviral activity. The
antiviral property of APOBEC3G is conserved in several mammalian species, but the
ability of Vif to block this activity is species-specific. HIV-1 Vif blocks human
APOBEC3G but does not block the mouse or African green monkey (AGM) enzyme.
Conversely, SIV(AGM) Vif blocks the antiviral activity of AGM but not human
APOBEC3G. We demonstrate that the species specificity is caused by a single amino
acid difference in APOBEC3G. Replacement of Asp-128 in human APOBEC3G with the
Lys-128 of AGM APOBEC3G caused the enzyme to switch its interaction, becoming
sensitive to SIV(AGM) Vif and resistant to HIV-1 Vif. Conversely, the reciprocal 
Lys to Asp switch in AGM APOBEC3G reversed its specificity for Vif. The reversal 
of biological activity was accompanied by the corresponding switch in the species
specificity with which the enzyme physically associated with Vif and was excluded
from virions. The charge of the amino acid at position 128 was a critical
determinant of species specificity. Based on the crystal structure of the
distantly related Escherichia coli cytidine deaminase, we propose that this amino
acid is positioned on a solvent-exposed loop of APOBEC3G on the same face of the 
protein as the catalytic site.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0307132101 
PMCID: PMC374346
PMID: 14978281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

