
1. J Virol. 2004 Mar;78(6):3162-9.

Inhibition of different Lassa virus strains by alpha and gamma interferons and
comparison with a less pathogenic arenavirus.

Asper M(1), Sternsdorf T, Hass M, Drosten C, Rhode A, Schmitz H, GÃ¼nther S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Bernhard-Nocht-Institute of Tropical Medicine, 20359
Hamburg, Germany.

The high pathogenicity of Lassa virus is assumed to involve resistance to the
effects of interferon (IFN). We have analyzed the effects of alpha IFN
(IFN-alpha), IFN-gamma, and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) on
replication of Lassa virus compared to the related, but less pathogenic,
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). Three low-passage Lassa virus strains 
(AV, NL, and CSF), isolated from humans with mild to fulminant Lassa fever, were 
tested. Lassa virus replication was inhibited by IFN-alpha and IFN-gamma, but not
TNF-alpha, in Huh7 and Vero cells. The degree of IFN sensitivity of a Lassa virus
isolate did not correlate with disease severity in human patients. Furthermore,
cytokine effects observed for Lassa virus and LCMV (strains CH-5692, Armstrong,
and WE) were similar. To address the mechanisms involved in the IFN effect, we
used cell lines in which overexpression of IFN-stimulated proteins promyelocytic 
leukemia protein (PML) and Sp100 could be induced. Both proteins reside in PML
bodies, a cellular target of the LCMV and Lassa virus Z proteins. Overexpression 
of PML or Sp100 did not affect replication of either virus. This, together with
the previous finding that PML knockout facilitates LCMV replication in vitro and 
in vivo (M. Djavani, J. Rodas, I. S. Lukashevich, D. Horejsh, P. P. Pandolfi, K. 
L. Borden, and M. S. Salvato, J. Virol. 75:6204-6208, 2001; W. V. Bonilla, D. D. 
Pinschewer, P. Klenerman, V. Rousson, M. Gaboli, P. P. Pandolfi, R. M.
Zinkernagel, M. S. Salvato, and H. Hengartner, J. Virol. 76:3810-3818, 2002),
describes PML as a mediator within the antiviral pathway rather than as a direct 
effector protein. In conclusion, the high pathogenicity of Lassa virus compared
to LCMV is probably not due to increased resistance to the effects of IFN-alpha
or IFN-gamma. Both cytokines inhibit replication which is relevant for the design
of antiviral strategies against Lassa fever with the aim of enhancing the IFN
response.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.78.6.3162-3169.2004 
PMCID: PMC353741
PMID: 14990737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

