
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 9;101(10):3575-80. Epub 2004 Feb 27.

Specific mutations of hepatitis B virus in plasma predict liver cancer
development.

Kuang SY(1), Jackson PE, Wang JB, Lu PX, Mu√±oz A, Qian GS, Kensler TW, Groopman
JD.

Author information: 
(1)Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, 615 North Wolfe
Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

A major risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is hepatitis B virus
(HBV), whose pathogenesis is exacerbated by the acquisition of mutations that
accelerate carcinogenesis. We examined, with mass spectrometry, the temporality
of an HBV 1762(T)/1764(A) double mutation in plasma and tumors. Initial studies
found that 52 of 70 (74.3%) tumors from patients residing in Qidong, People's
Republic of China, contained this HBV mutation. Paired plasma samples were
available for six of the tumor specimens; four tumors had the HBV 1762(T)/1764(A)
mutation, whereas three of the paired plasma samples were also positive. The
potential predictive value of this biomarker was explored by using stored plasma 
samples from a study of 120 residents of Qidong who had been monitored for
aflatoxin exposure and HBV infection. After 10 years of passive follow-up, there 
were six cases of major liver disease including HCC (four cases), hepatitis (one 
case), and cirrhosis (one case). All six cases had detectable levels of the HBV
1762(T)/1764(A) mutation up to 8 years before diagnosis. Finally, 15 liver
cancers were selected from a prospective cohort of 1,638 high-risk individuals in
Qidong on the basis of available plasma samples spanning the years before and
after diagnosis. The HBV 1762(T)/1764(A) mutation was detected in 8 of the 15
cases (53.3%) before cancer. The persistence of detection of this mutation was
statistically significant (P = 0.022, two-tailed). We therefore found that a
prediagnosis biomarker of specific HBV mutations can be measured in plasma and
suggest this marker for use as an intermediate endpoint in prevention and
intervention trials.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0308232100 
PMCID: PMC373504
PMID: 14990795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

