
1. J Virol. 2004 Apr;78(8):3827-36.

Repression of tax expression is associated both with resistance of human T-cell
leukemia virus type 1-infected T cells to killing by tax-specific cytotoxic T
lymphocytes and with impaired tumorigenicity in a rat model.

Nomura M(1), Ohashi T, Nishikawa K, Nishitsuji H, Kurihara K, Hasegawa A, Furuta 
RA, Fujisawa J, Tanaka Y, Hanabuchi S, Harashima N, Masuda T, Kannagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunotherapeutics, Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) causes adult T-cell leukemia (ATL).
Although the viral transactivation factor, Tax, has been known to have apparent
transforming ability, the exact function of Tax in ATL development is still not
clear. To understand the role of Tax in ATL development, we introduced
short-interfering RNAs (siRNAs) against Tax in a rat HTLV-1-infected T-cell line.
Our results demonstrated that expression of siRNA targeting Tax successfully
downregulated Tax expression. Repression of Tax expression was associated with
resistance of the HTLV-1-infected T cells to Tax-specific cytotoxic-T-lymphocyte 
killing. This may be due to the direct effect of decreased Tax expression,
because the Tax siRNA did not alter the expression of MHC-I, CD80, or CD86.
Furthermore, T cells with Tax downregulation appeared to lose the ability to
develop tumors in T-cell-deficient nude rats, in which the parental
HTLV-1-infected cells induce ATL-like lymphoproliferative disease. These results 
indicated the importance of Tax both for activating host immune response against 
the virus and for maintaining the growth ability of infected cells in vivo. Our
results provide insights into the mechanisms how the host immune system can
survey and inhibit the growth of HTLV-1-infected cells during the long latent
period before the onset of ATL.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.78.8.3827-3836.2004 
PMCID: PMC374260
PMID: 15047798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

