
1. Vnitr Lek. 2004 Feb;50(2):106-11.

[Distribution of HBV genotypes in the Czech population--pilot study].

[Article in Czech]

Krekulová L(1), Rehák V, Killoran P, Zavoral M, Riley LW.

Author information: 
(1)Interní oddĕlení Ustrední vojenské nemocnice, katedra gastroenterologie IPVZ, 
Praha.

Comment on
    Vnitr Lek. 2004 Feb;50(2):100-1.

A compact structure of the hepatitis B virus genome does not provide much space
for development of mutations capable of further replication. In spite of that, 7 
genotypes have been described so far. Discovery of the hepatitis B virus (HBV)
genome diversity led to a range of further questions. Individual genotypes are
subjects of investigation these days as for the pattern of disease transmission, 
course of disease, and consequences of an infection. The aim of this pilot study 
was to describe genotype distribution in the infected population of the Czech
Republic. Moreover, epidemiological and clinical characteristics were monitored
in our sample. We studied a group of 65 patients with positive HBsAg from which
48 samples of patients were genotyped. PCR (polymerase chain reaction) method was
used in order to amplify S region of the HBV genome. Direct sequencing of PCR
products was used, this is the most accurate method for genotype identification. 
A relatively uniform genotypic distribution was identified within the study
population--only 2 genotypes, A and D, were found. Genotype A was identified in
35 (73%) patients and genotype D in 13 (27%) patients. No statistically
significant association between the particular genotype and epidemiological and
clinical parameters was proved in this pilot study. This study brings basic
information on genotype distribution. A possible proof of correlation with
clinical and epidemiological characteristics will require examination of a larger
sample of patients.


PMID: 15077584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

