
1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Aug 25;267(24):17159-69.

4-oxatetradecanoic acid is fungicidal for Cryptococcus neoformans and inhibits
replication of human immunodeficiency virus I.

Langner CA(1), Lodge JK, Travis SJ, Caldwell JE, Lu T, Li Q, Bryant ML, Devadas
B, Gokel GW, Kobayashi GS, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110.

Candida albicans and Cryptococcus neoformans are major causes of systemic fungal 
infections, particularly in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
Metabolic labeling studies revealed that these organisms synthesize a small
number of N-myristoylproteins, the most prominent being 20-kDa ADP-ribosylation
factors (Arfs). C. albicans Arf has approximately 80% identity with the essential
Arf1 and Arf2 proteins of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. [3H]Myristic acid analogs
with oxygen for -CH2- substitutions at C4, C6, C11, and C13 are incorporated into
cellular N-myristoylproteins, phospholipids, and neutral lipids produced by these
three yeasts during exponential growth at 30 degrees C in complex media. Analog- 
and organism-specific differences in the efficiency of labeling of proteins and
lipid classes were observed. The effects of oxatetradecanoic acids with oxygen
for -CH2- substitutions at C3-C13 on C. neoformans, C. albicans, and S.
cerevisiae were assessed during mid-log phase growth at 30 degrees C. A single
dose of 3-oxa-, 4-oxa-, 5-oxa- or 6-oxatetradecanoic acid (O3-O6, final
concentration = 300 microM) was able to inhibit growth of C. neoformans in the
order O4 greater than O5 greater than O3 approximately O6. The other compounds
were inactive. 4-Oxatetradecanoic acid was fungicidal, producing a 10,000-fold
reduction in viable cell number 1 h after administration and continued
suppression of cell growth for 7 h. A clear dose response was observed over a
concentration range of 100-300 microM. 4-Oxatridecanoic acid was 100-fold less
potent in reducing cell viability than 4-oxatetradecanoic acid but more potent
than 5-oxatridecanoic acid. O4 produced approximately 10-100-fold reductions in
the viability of C. albicans and S. cerevisiae at 300-500 microM, respectively,
whereas O5 and O6 were less active. Since N-myristoylation of the Pr55gag
polyprotein precursor produced by human immunodeficiency virus I (HIV-I) is
essential for its assembly, we also assessed the antiviral effects of
4-oxatetradecanoic acid. O4 is able to produce a 50% reduction in the replication
of HIV-I in acutely infected human T-lymphocyte cell lines at a concentration of 
18 microM. Together, these data suggest that (i) the position of the oxygen for
methylene substitution is a critical determinant of the fungicidal activity of O4
and (ii) NMT may be an attractive therapeutic target for treating opportunistic
fungal infections in patients infected with HIV-I.


PMID: 1512254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

