
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 30;279(31):32287-93. Epub 2004 May 25.

The Met receptor and alpha 6 beta 4 integrin can function independently to
promote carcinoma invasion.

Chung J(1), Yoon SO, Lipscomb EA, Mercurio AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology and Angiogenesis, Department of Pathology, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02215, USA.

It has been proposed that a constitutive, physical association of the Met
receptor and the alpha(6)beta(4) integrin exists on the surface of invasive
carcinoma cells and that hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)-mediated invasion is
dependent on alpha(6)beta(4) (Trusolino, L., Bertotti, A., and Comoglio, P. M.
(2001) Cell 107, 643-654). The potential significance of these results prompted
us to re-examine this hypothesis. Using three different carcinoma cell lines that
express both Met and alpha(6)beta(4), we were unable to detect the constitutive
association of these receptors by co-immunoprecipitation. Moreover, carcinoma
cells that lacked expression of alpha(6)beta(4) exhibited Met-dependent invasion 
toward HGF, and increasing Met expression by viral infection of these cells
enhanced invasion without inducing alpha(6)beta(4) expression. Although
expression of alpha(6)beta(4) in such cells enhanced their invasion to HGF, it
also enhanced their ability to invade toward other chemoattractants such as
lysophosphatidic acid, and this latter invasion was not inhibited by a
function-blocking Met antibody. Finally, depletion of beta(4) by RNA interference
in invasive carcinoma cells that express both receptors reduced the ability of
these cells to invade toward HGF by approximately 25%, but it did not abrogate
their invasion. These data argue that the invasive function of Met can be
independent of alpha(6)beta(4) and that alpha(6)beta(4) has a generic influence
on the invasion of carcinoma cells that is not specific to Met.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M403809200 
PMID: 15161909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

