
1. Mol Immunol. 2004 Aug;41(10):1001-11.

Electron microscopic and immunochemical analysis of the broadly neutralizing
HIV-1-specific, anti-carbohydrate antibody, 2G12.

Roux KH(1), Zhu P, Seavy M, Katinger H, Kunert R, Seamon V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, 2nd Institute of Molecular Biophysics,
Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32306-4307, USA. kroux@bio.fsu.edu

2G12 is one of only a few cloned antibodies with broadly neutralizing specificity
to HIV-1 envelope proteins. Crystallographic and electron microscopic (EM) data
showed that the Fab arms are locked together via a novel VH domain exchange. Both
the conventional and the unprecedented additional VH-VH antigen binding sites
show specificity for high mannose oligosaccharides on the silent face of gp120.
We have now extended the EM and biochemical analysis of 2G12. Unligated 2G12 IgG1
molecules clearly show paired (parallel attached) Fab arms in the "doughnut"
configuration attached to the Fc both in individual and computationally averaged 
images. A minority of the IgG molecules in the 2G12 prep showed the open "Y"
configuration of conventional IgG. The averaged EM image compares well to the
atomic structure model of 2G12. Papain digests of 2G12 yielded paired Fab arms
(Fab dimer), as observed by EM, which dissociated into Fab-sized fragments in
non-reducing SDS-PAGE. Purified 2G12 reduced and alkylated H and L chains can
reassociate to form IgG molecules with the Fab dimer configuration and can
combine with L and H chains from conventional human IgG to form hybrid molecules.
2G12 is heavily aggregated following brief acid exposure possibly as a result of 
its unique structure. A model of the aggregation process is proposed. An anti-Id 
MAb was shown by EM to react with neither the conventional nor additional antigen
binding sites, but bound to the lateral faces of the Fab arms of intact, reduced 
and alkylated, and reconstructed 2G12 molecules. Efforts to identify IgG
molecules with a similar intertwined Fab dimer structure in a large IgG pool were
unsuccessful.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2004.05.008 
PMID: 15302162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

