
1. Genetics. 2004 Aug;167(4):2015-26.

Evolution of specialists in an experimental microcosm.

Dykhuizen DE(1), Dean AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, SUNY, Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA.

The impact of adaptation on the persistence of a balanced polymorphism was
explored using the lactose operon of Escherichia coli as a model system.
Competition in chemostats for two substitutable resources, methylgalactoside and 
lactulose, generates stabilizing frequency-dependent selection when two different
naturally isolated lac operons (TD2 and TD10) are used. The fate of this balanced
polymorphism was tracked over evolutionary time by monitoring the frequency of
fhuA-, a linked neutral genetic marker that confers resistance to the
bacteriophage T5. In four out of nine chemostats the lac polymorphism persisted
for 400-600 generations when the experiments were terminated. In the other five
chemostats the fhuA polymorphism, and consequently the lac operon polymorphism,
was lost between 86 and 219 generations. Four of 13 chemostat cultures
monomorphic for the lac operon retained the neutral fhuA polymorphism for 450-550
generations until they were terminated; the remainder became monomorphic at fhuA 
between 63 and 303 generations. Specialists on each galactoside were isolated
from chemostats that maintained the fhuA polymorphism, whether polymorphic or
monomorphic at the lac operon. Strains isolated from three of four chemostats in 
which the lac polymorphism was preserved had switched their galactoside
preference. Most of the chemostats where the fhuA polymorphism was lost also
contained specialists. These results demonstrate that the initial polymorphism at
lac was of little consequence to the outcome of long-term adaptive evolution.
Instead, the fitnesses of evolved strains were dominated by mutations arising
elsewhere in the genome, a fact confirmed by showing that operons isolated from
their evolved backgrounds were alone unable to explain the presence of both
specialists. Our results suggest that, once stabilized, ecological specialization
prevented selective sweeps through the entire population, thereby promoting the
maintenance of linked neutral polymorphisms.

Copyright 2004 Genetics Society of America

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.103.025205 
PMCID: PMC1470984
PMID: 15342537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

