
1. J Water Health. 2004 Jun;2(2):97-101.

Fate of Salmonella following application of swine manure to tile-drained clay
loam soil.

Malik YS(1), Randall GW, Goyal SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Diagnostic Medicine, University of Minnesota, St
Paul, MN 55108, USA.

Land application of animal manure is an important means of utilization of
nitrogen and phosphorus. However, the presence of pathogens in manure and their
occasional leaching into subsurface water has become a topic of concern during
the past few years. This study was undertaken to determine the extent to which
Salmonella anatum may leach through tile-drained clay loam soil on which swine
manure has been applied. For this purpose, swine manure was experimentally
contaminated with S. anatum and applied to three tile-drained plots in winter of 
2001 while another three plots served as negative controls. Following rainfall
events in the spring of 2002 the tiles started to flow and leachate samples of
subsurface water were collected at various time intervals and tested for S.
anatum. Salmonella anatum was not found to leach into the subsurface drainage
water indicating that it was either retained in the upper layers of soil or did
not survive over winter. The leaching of faecal coliforms and coliphages was also
tested. Faecal coliforms and coliphages were detected in the subsurface water
from both manure and control plots, indicating the ability of the tile drainage
system to transport these organisms to groundwater as the water percolates
through the soil. Additional temporal studies over a longer time period are
needed to determine the survival and leaching of pathogens and indicators into
subsurface water.


PMID: 15387133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

