
1. J Am Mosq Control Assoc. 2004 Sep;20(3):233-8.

Commercial mosquito trap and gravid trap oviposition media evaluation, Atlanta,
Georgia.

Burkett DA(1), Kelly R, Porter CH, Wirtz RA.

Author information: 
(1)Air Force Institute of Technology, Education with Industry, Wright Patterson
Air Force Base, OH 45433, USA.

Field trials evaluating the effectiveness of selected gravid trap oviposition
media and commercially available mosquito traps were conducted in southern Fulton
County (Atlanta), GA, from June 9 to June 18 and June 24 to July 4, 2002,
respectively. Total number of mosquitoes and number of each species captured
during the tests were compared using a Latin square design. For the gravid trap
infusion media, significant differences were found for total number of mosquitoes
collected where sod > or = hay > or = hay side-by-side diluted hay > dilute hay
side-by-side hay > or = oak > diluted hay. Only Aedes albopictus (oak), Culex
quinquefasciatus (sod and both concentrated hay infusions), and Culex restuans
(sod) were captured in significantly greater numbers using a particular infusion.
Significant differences for the total number of mosquitoes collected were also
observed in the commercial mosquito traps such that the gravid trap > ultra
violet up-draft > or = Mosquito Magnet Pro > or = omnidirectional Fay-Prince trap
with CO2 > up-draft CDC-style with CO2 > or = CDC-style with CO2. Significant
differences in numbers collected among traps were noted for several species,
including Aedes vexans, Aedes albopictus, Cx. quinquefasciatus, Cx. restuans, and
Culex salinarius. Results from these field trap and infusion evaluations can
enhance current surveillance efforts, especially for the primary vectors of West 
Nile virus and other arboviruses.


PMID: 15532919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

