
1. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2004 Dec;5(4):311-5.

Respiratory manifestations in HIV-infected children pre- and post-HAART in
Abidjan, the Ivory Coast.

Kouakoussui A(1), Fassinou P, Anaky MF, Elenga N, Laguide R, Wemin ML, Toure R,
Menan H, Rouet F, Msellati P.

Author information: 
(1)Projet Enfant Yopougon, PACCI, Abidjan, CÃ´te d'Ivoire.

Among children infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), respiratory
diseases are a frequent cause of morbidity and mortality. This review describes
respiratory manifestations of paediatric HIV infection before and after the
beginning of HAART in Abidjan, Ivory Coast. In an observational cohort, HIV
infected children had quarterly clinical visits and a day-clinic available all
week for ill children. CD4 and viral load were measured at baseline and every 6
months thereafter. All children with a CD4 percentage below 25% were prescribed
daily cotrimoxazole prophylaxis. Ninety-eight children (of a total of 282) were
recruited before HAART and treated during the follow-up, there were 56 boys and
42 girls, with a mean age of 6.2 years at inclusion. The mean percentage of CD4
before HAART was 8.7%. Twelve children had a history of pulmonary tuberculosis
and five were on antituberculosis treatment at inclusion. Fifty-one per cent
presented with abnormalities on chest X-ray at inclusion. Before initiation of
HAART, respiratory manifestations represented 32.4% of morbidity events and the
incidence for 100 child/months was 9.29 for URTI, 15.2 for bronchitis, 6.07 for
LRTI, 0.71 for tuberculosis and 0.36 for Pneumocystis carinii. After the
initiation of HAART, respiratory manifestations represented 40.9% of all
morbidity events and the incidence for 100 child/months was 5.35 for URTI, 9.48
for bronchitis, 2.17 for LRTI and 0.16 for tuberculosis. During HAART treatment, 
the incidence of respiratory infections decreased dramatically compared to before
the antiretroviral treatment. However, respiratory events still represented 40%
of all events occurring following the start of HAART therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prrv.2004.07.008 
PMID: 15531256  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

