
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2004 Dec;42(12):5604-8.

Genetic profile of an Oka varicella vaccine virus variant isolated from an infant
with zoster.

Sauerbrei A(1), Rubtcova E, Wutzler P, Schmid DS, Loparev VN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and Antiviral Therapy, Friedrich-Schiller University,
Jena, Germany.

Comment in
    J Clin Microbiol. 2005 Oct;43(10):5415-6; author reply 5416-7.

Varicella virus vaccine strain Oka (V-Oka) has in rare cases caused zoster in
vaccinated people. Despite broad usage of V-Oka, little is known about
varicella-zoster virus genomic sequence variation of strains in vaccine and
isolates from patients with vaccine adverse events. Direct sequencing of 20
regions of V-Oka-GSK was compared to the sequences of the original V-Oka-Biken,
GlaxoSmithKline Oka vaccine (V-Oka-GSK), and Oka-parental (P-Oka) strains. We
analyzed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) differentiating the Oka parental
and Oka vaccine strains identified in open reading frames (ORFs) 6, 9A, 10, 21,
31, 39, 50, 51, 52, 54, 55, and 59 and eight base substitutions within ORF 62.
Sixteen of these SNP impose an amino acid change in the corresponding gene
product. The genotypic analysis revealed that (i) both V-Oka-GSK and V-Oka-Biken 
comprise mixtures of strains represented in variable proportion from lot to lot; 
(ii) V-Oka-GSK/zoster isolated from the zoster patient had six wild-type SNP in
ORF 9A, 10, 21, 52, 55, and 62 (mutation 108838); (iii) none of the six revertant
SNP would reliably discriminate Oka vaccine from the wild type; and (iv) the
genomic variation found in V-Oka/zoster might be associated with changes in the
biological behavior of the virus. Further studies will be needed to identify
potential virulence factors in variant vaccine strains.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.42.12.5604-5608.2004 
PMCID: PMC535228
PMID: 15583288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

