
1. J Virol. 1992 May;66(5):2934-42.

Regulated expression of foreign genes in vaccinia virus under the control of
bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase and the Escherichia coli lac repressor.

Alexander WA(1), Moss B, Fuerst TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, MedImmune Inc., Gaithersburg, Maryland
20878.

The gene encoding bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase (T7gene1) was placed under the 
control of regulatory elements from the Escherichia coli lac operon to construct 
an inducible vaccinia virus expression system consisting entirely of prokaryotic 
transcriptional machinery. Regulated expression of T7 RNA polymerase was
necessary to construct a stable recombinant vaccinia virus harboring a T7
promoter; otherwise, uncontrolled expression led to interference with endogenous 
virus replication. To this end, the gene encoding the repressor protein of the
lac operon was fused to a viral early/late promoter so that it was expressed
constitutively, and the lac operator was interposed between a viral major late
promoter and T7gene1. Greater than 99% repression of T7 RNA polymerase, which was
relieved approximately 80-fold in the presence of the inducer
isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG), was obtained. An expression
cassette containing a T7 promoter-controlled beta-galactosidase reporter gene was
recombined into a different region of the viral genome containing T7gene1. A
stable, double recombinant virus was isolated and grown to a high titer. In the
absence of inducer, beta-galactosidase expression was substantially repressed.
Addition of increasing amounts of IPTG induced expression of beta-galactosidase
to the point of suppression of viral replication. This hybrid vaccinia virus
system (Vac/Op/T7) has potential applications for the efficient bioproduction of 
a wide variety of gene products.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.66.5.2934-2942.1992 
PMCID: PMC241052
PMID: 1560532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

