
1. Korean J Hepatol. 2004 Dec;10(4):260-70.

[Reappraisal of HBV genotypes and clinical significance in Koreans using
MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry].

[Article in Korean]

Lee JM(1), Ahn SH, Chang HY, Shin JE, Kim DY, Sim MK, Hong SP, Chung HJ, Kim SO, 
Han KH, Chon CY, Moon YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of Gastroenterology, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Recent studies have shown that the genotype of hepatitis B virus
(HBV) may correlate with the disease natural history and treatment outcome.
However, several of these studies used low sensitivity assays in a small number
of patients, and this has precluded an accurate evaluation of Korean HBV
genotypes. We analyzed Korean HBV genotypes in a large population by employing a 
new technology, restriction fragment mass polymorphism (RFMP) using MALDI-TOF
mass spectrometry, in a sensitive and specific manner.
METHODS: Between February 1995 and December 2003, a total of 475 patients with
chronic HBV infection were enrolled. The assay is based on the mass measurement
of oligonucleotides having genotypic variations of the S gene. Clinical features 
including the virologic status and disease progression were also evaluated.
RESULTS: The median age of the total patients was 35.5 years. Out of 475
patients, there were 162 (34.1%) inactive carriers, 172 (36.2%) had chronic
hepatitis, 77 (16.2%) had liver cirrhosis and 64 (13.5%) had hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). There were 454 patients (95.6%) with genotype C, 4 patients
(0.8%) with genotype A, 16 patients (3.4%) with the mixed A and C genotype [7
patients (1.4%) with A<C versus 9 patients (2.0%) with C>A], and 1 patient (0.2%)
with B genotype. Comparing genotype A and C, genotype A patients were all
inactive carriers without HCC, whereas genotype C patients included those with
chronic hepatitis, liver cirrhosis and HCC.
CONCLUSIONS: HBV genotype C is highly prevalent in Korea. Although it is a small 
percentage, genotype A also exists and it seems to take a more benign clinical
course than genotype C. Further studies are necessitated to assess the
relationship between HBV genotypes and the various aspects of the diseases'
clinical course.


PMID: 15613801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

