
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2005 Jan 1;40(1):38-45. Epub 2004 Dec 6.

Recommendations for the selective use of herpes simplex virus type 2 serological 
tests.

Guerry SL(1), Bauer HM, Klausner JD, Branagan B, Kerndt PR, Allen BG, Bolan G.

Author information: 
(1)California Department of Health Services, Sexually Transmitted Disease Control
Branch, Berkeley, CA, USA. sguerry@ladhs.org

BACKGROUND: Herpes simplex virus (HSV) type-specific serological tests are now
widely available, but indications for their use have not been well defined. The
California Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STD) Controllers Association convened a
committee of clinicians and researchers to make recommendations for the use of
type-specific HSV type 2 (HSV-2) serological tests.
METHODS: By means of a systematic review of the literature, evidence to support
screening in selected high-risk groups was compiled. Screening recommendations
were developed by applying standard screening criteria to each specific
population.
RESULTS: The committee concluded that, in addition to serological testing for the
diagnostic evaluation of patients with symptoms, screening of asymptomatic
patients is likely to be beneficial among the following groups: those at high
risk for STDs and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection who are motivated 
to reduce their sexual risk behavior, HIV-infected patients, and patients with
sex partners with genital herpes. In contrast, universal screening for HSV-2
infection in pregnant women is unlikely to be beneficial.
CONCLUSIONS: The targeted use of HSV-2 serological tests for specific diagnostic 
situations and selected populations should benefit patients, providers, and the
community. Until more data become available, these recommendations provide
justification for selective diagnostic and screening uses of HSV-2 serological
tests.

DOI: 10.1086/426438 
PMID: 15614690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

