
1. New Microbiol. 2004 Apr;27(2 Suppl 1):63-9.

Host factors and efficacy of antiretroviral treatment.

Turriziani O(1), Antonelli G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, Virology Section,
University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

It has been proposed that some host factors may affect the intracellular drug
concentration leading to the inability of drug regimens to inhibit human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) replication in cells. Among them, two factors, whose
description is the main aim of this review, have been considered during the last 
years with particular emphasis. They are: i) altered uptake and reduced
activation of nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) in target
cells, and ii) efflux of NRTIs and protease inhibitors (PIs) by cellular
transporter molecules. In fact, several authors have shown that: changes in the
activity of various purine and pyrimidine biosynthetic enzymes may occur in
lymphocytes of HIV-infected patients; HIV-infected patients on prolonged
treatment with nucleoside analogs, such as zidovudine, show significantly
decreased activity of thymidine kinase compared to untreated HIV-infected
persons; NRTI and PIs are substrates for the so-called multidrug membrane
transporters. With regard to the latter issue, it is known that the ATP-binding
cassette transporter proteins such as the P glycoprotein, and the newly
discovered family of multidrug resistance-associated proteins (MRP 1-9) promote
the active extracellular efflux of a wide variety of therapeutics and
overexpression of some of them lowers intracellular concentration of PIs. In the 
very near future such mechanisms, called by most authors "cellular
drug-resistance", might be taken into account, together with other immunological,
virological and behavioral factors, to explain "drug failure" and/or the
variability of response in HIV patients undergoing an antiretroviral treatment.


PMID: 15646066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

