
1. Analyst. 2005 Feb;130(2):163-70. Epub 2004 Dec 15.

Optical calcium sensors: development of a generic method for their introduction
to the cell using conjugated cell penetrating peptides.

Webster A(1), Compton SJ, Aylott JW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, The University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK NG7 2RD.

Probes Encapsulated By Biologically Localised Embedding (PEBBLEs) are optical
sensors with nanometer dimensions fabricated by microemulsion polymerisation. The
most beneficial characteristic of these sensors is the protection offered by the 
sensor matrix which decreases interaction between the fluorophore and the cell.
These sensors have been introduced to the cell by a number of methods; however
this paper discusses the development of a generic method to facilitate inclusion 
of this type of sensor in the cell by a simple incubation step. This was achieved
by covalent linkage of a synthetic Cell Penetrating Peptide (CPP) based on the
Human Immuno-deficiency Virus (HIV) -1 Tat, to the external sensor matrix.
Calcium sensors were used to demonstrate this approach to incorporate the sensors
within the cell. Characterisation revealed the calcium sensors were approximately
30 +/- 7 nm in diameter with a slightly negative zeta potential. The sensors
demonstrated a linear range of 0-50 microM with negligible interference from a
range of cellular ions and protein. Leaching of entrapped dyes from the calcium
sensors was determined as 3% in a 24 h period, while photobleaching of the
entrapped dye was minimal over a 40 min period. The sensors ability to cross the 
cell membrane using the covalently attached synthetic Tat peptide is
demonstrated. Cellular inclusion of the sensors occurred within a 30 min
incubation period.

DOI: 10.1039/b413725f 
PMID: 15665969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

