
1. Plant Biol (Stuttg). 2005 Jan;7(1):49-57.

Changes in the subcellular distribution of glutathione during virus infection in 
Cucurbita pepo (L.).

Zechmann B(1), Zellnig G, MÃ¼ller M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Sciences, University of Graz, Schubertstrasse 51, 8010
Graz, Austria. bernd.zechmann@uni-graz.at

Changes in the subcellular distribution and quantification of glutathione were
studied with electron microscopic immunogold cytochemistry in Zucchini yellow
mosaic virus (ZYMV)-infected Styrian pumpkin plants (Cucurbita pepo L. ssp. pepo 
var. styriaca Greb.) two weeks after inoculation. The amount of gold particles
bound to glutathione was statistically evaluated for different cell structures,
including mitochondria, plastids, nuclei, peroxisomes, and cytosol. In general,
ZYMV-infected plants showed higher gold labelling density in intact mesophyll
cells of the 5th (older leaves) and the youngest fully developed leaves (younger 
leaves), and decreased levels of glutathione within root tip cells when compared 
to the control. In general, within older and younger leaves the highest amount of
gold particles was found in mitochondria and the lowest amount in plastids. In
ZYMV-infected older leaves, an increase in glutathione was found in peroxisomes
(1.7-fold), the cytosol (1.6-fold), mitochondria (1.4-fold), and nuclei
(1.2-fold), whereas glutathione levels in plastids did not differ significantly
when compared to control cells. In ZYMV-infected younger leaves elevated
glutathione contents were found in the cytosol (3-fold), nuclei (2.1-fold),
peroxisomes (1.8-fold), and plastids (1.5-fold), whereas mitochondria showed an
insignificant decrease in glutathione levels in comparison to the control. In
root tip cells of ZYMV-infected plants the amount of gold particles bound to
glutathione was decreased in all investigated cell structures by between 0.7- to 
0.8-fold. Additionally, total glutathione contents were determined in older and
younger leaves using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), which
revealed no significant differences between control and ZYMV-infected leaves. The
relevance of the results of both methods were compared and are discussed.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2004-830477 
PMID: 15666214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

