
1. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 2004 Jun;35(2):421-4.

Laboratory acute flaccid paralysis surveillance in Malaysia: a decade of
commitment to the WHO global polio eradication initiative.

Saraswathy TS(1), Khairullah NS, Sinniah M, Fauziah MK, Apandi MY, Shamsuddin M.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Unit, Infectious Disease Research Center, Institute for Medical
Research, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. saras@imr.gov.my

The Institute for Medical Research, Malaysia, was designated the National
Reference Laboratory for Poliomyelitis Eradication (NRLPE) in 1992. Since then,
our Polio Laboratory has collaborated actively with the Disease Control Division,
Ministry of Health (MOH), Malaysia and WHO towards achieving polio eradication.
Since 1992, the NRLPE has investigated 1,063 stool specimens from 641 acute
flaccidparalysis (AFP) cases. One hundred and one enteroviruses were isolated
from these specimens. Positive cell cultures were confirmed by
microneutralization assay using standard WHO antisera. All enterovirus isolates
were sent to the Victorian Infectious Disease Reference Laboratory in Melbourne, 
Australia, for further identification and poliovirus intratypic differentiation. 
Thirty-one out of these 101 virus isolates (30%) were polioviruses (PV) and the
remaining 70 (70%) were non-polio enteroviruses (NPEV) which included coxsackie B
viruses, echoviruses and enterovirus 71. Three of the poliovirus isolates were
wild-type polioviruses isolated in 1992 which were the last wild-type
polioviruses isolated in Malaysia. The rest were vaccine-related Sabin-like
strains. Monthly reports of the virological investigation of AFP cases are sent
to WHO and to the MOH, AFP control committee. The NRLPE continues to play an
integral role in AFP surveillance and is committed to the WHO's goal of global
polio eradication by the year 2005.


PMID: 15691149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

