
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2005 Feb;43(2):726-32.

Five new genome types of adenovirus type 37 caused epidemic keratoconjunctivitis 
in Sapporo, Japan, for more than 10 years.

Ariga T(1), Shimada Y, Shiratori K, Ohgami K, Yamazaki S, Tagawa Y, Kikuchi M,
Miyakita Y, Fujita K, Ishiko H, Aoki K, Ohno S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Hokkaido University Graduate 
School of Medicine, North 15, West 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-8638, Japan.
tsariga@med.hokudai.ac.jp

Human adenovirus type 37 (HAdV-37) is a major cause of epidemic
keratoconjunctivitis and has recently been the largest causative agent of
keratoconjunctivitis in Japan. To investigate the genetic characteristics of
HAdV-37 strains isolated in Sapporo, we analyzed the genome types and genetic
relationships of 51 strains isolated there from 1990 through 2001. By using DNA
restriction analysis, eight genome types (HAdV-37/D1, HAdV-37/D3, and HAdV-37/D6 
to HAdV-37/D11) were identified, including five new ones. The restriction
fragments of these genome types shared more than 95% identity with those of the
prototype strain. By DNA sequence analysis, five and three single nucleotide
substitutions, respectively, were found in partial sequences of the hexon and
fiber genes. The combinations of mutations resulted in four hexon and fiber types
(hx1 to hx4 and f1 to f4) and six hexon/fiber pairs (hx1/f1, hx2/f1, hx1/f2,
hx1/f3, hx3/f4, and hx4/f4). The six pairs correlated well with certain genome
types. In all three epidemics of keratoconjunctivitis to strike Sapporo in the
past 12 years, specific genome types and fiber types were usually isolated: in
the first epidemic, HAdV-37/D1 (f1) and HAdV-37/D3 (f1); in the second,
HAdV-37/D6 (f2) and HAdV-37/D8 (f3); and in the third, HAdV-37/D10 (f4) and
HAdV-37/D11 (f4). We conclude that mutations in the adenovirus genome occurred
chronologically and that certain mutations were correlated with the epidemics of 
adenoviral keratoconjunctivitis.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.43.2.726-732.2005 
PMCID: PMC548033
PMID: 15695671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

