
1. Virol J. 2005 Feb 10;2:6.

Chromatography paper strip sampling of enteric adenoviruses type 40 and 41
positive stool specimens.

Zlateva KT(1), Maes P, Rahman M, Van Ranst M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical & Epidemiological Virology, Department of Microbiology 
and Immunology, Rega Institute for Medical Research, University of Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium. kalina.zlateva@uz.kuleuven.ac.be

BACKGROUND: The enteric subgroup F adenoviruses type 40 (Ad40) and 41 (Ad41) are 
the second most important cause of acute infantile gastroenteritis after
rotaviruses. Repeated community outbreaks have been associated with antigenic
changes among the Ad40 and Ad41 strains due to host immune pressure. Therefore
large field epidemiological surveys and studies on the genetic variations in
different isolates of Ad40 and Ad41 are important for disease control programs,
the design of efficient diagnostic kits and vaccines against subgroup F
adenoviruses. A novel method using sodium dodecyl sulphate SDS/EDTA-pretreated
chromatography paper strips was evaluated for the collection, storage and
shipping of Ad40/41 contaminated stool samples.
RESULTS: This study shows that adenoviral DNA can be successfully detected in the
filter strips by PCR after four months storage at -20 degrees C, 4 degrees C,
room temperature (20-25 degrees C) and 37 degrees C. Furthermore no adenoviral
infectivity was observed upon contact with the SDS/EDTA-pretreated strips.
CONCLUSIONS: Collecting, storing and transporting adenovirus type 40 and 41
positive stool samples on SDS/EDTA-pretreated chromatography filter strips is a
convenient, biosafe and cost effective method for studying new genome variants
and monitoring spread of enteric adenovirus strains during outbreaks.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-2-6 
PMCID: PMC549523
PMID: 15705203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

