
1. Hum Pathol. 2005 Jan;36(1):82-90.

Cervical adenoid basal tumors comprised of adenoid basal epithelioma associated
with various types of invasive carcinoma: clinicopathologic features, human
papillomavirus DNA detection, and P16 expression.

Parwani AV(1), Smith Sehdev AE, Kurman RJ, Ronnett BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and
Hospital, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Adenoid basal tumors are uncommon cervical lesions that some pathologists
consider invasive carcinomas but others consider "epitheliomas" due to their
low-grade histological appearance and rarely documented malignant behavior. We
report the clinicopathologic features of 10 tumors comprised of both typical
low-grade adenoid basal tumors (epitheliomas) intimately associated with invasive
carcinomas having infiltrative growth, increased cytological atypia and mitotic
activity, and various types of differentiation, including adenoid basal/squamous,
pure squamous, adenoid cystic, and small cell neuroendocrine. Tumors were
evaluated for the presence of human papillomavirus (HPV) DNA and
immunohistochemical p16 expression. The patients in the study group ranged in age
from 45 to 81 years (mean, 65 years). Most of the patients presented with
abnormal cervicovaginal smears. The initial diagnosis was made on specimens
obtained by cervical biopsy, laser electrocautery excision procedure (LEEP), or
cone biopsy in 8 patients. Two 2 patients were incidentally diagnosed in
hysterectomy specimens. All 10 patients had squamous intraepithelial lesions (9
high-grade, 1 low-grade). In all cases diagnosed in LEEP or cone biopsy
specimens, the invasive carcinoma component was present in the excisional
specimen and extended to the margins. Seven patients diagnosed on excisional or
biopsy specimens who underwent hysterectomy had residual tumor in the cervix,
ranging from microscopic foci to deeply invasive. No lymph node metastases were
identified in 4 patients who were staged. Seven patients with follow-up were
alive without evidence of disease after follow-up intervals of 8 to 84 months
(mean, 45 months; median, 29 months). One patient with a component of small cell 
carcinoma died of other causes without evidence of disease at 18 months. HPV 16
DNA was detected in both the adenoid basal epithelioma and invasive carcinoma
components in 9 tumors by in situ hybridization, and HPV 33 was detected by
polymerase chain reaction in 1 tumor. All tumors expressed p16 diffusely. Adenoid
basal tumors are high-risk HPV-related tumors that can be comprised of both a
low-grade adenoid basal tumor, which can be designated as epithelioma, and
invasive carcinomas of various types. The invasive component is usually evident
in the excisional biopsy specimen, allowing for recognition of a tumor that needs
further management.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2004.08.015 
PMID: 15712186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

