
1. J Virol. 2005 Mar;79(6):3289-96.

Amino acids 1055 to 1192 in the S2 region of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus S protein induce neutralizing antibodies: implications for the
development of vaccines and antiviral agents.

Keng CT(1), Zhang A, Shen S, Lip KM, Fielding BC, Tan TH, Chou CF, Loh CB, Wang
S, Fu J, Yang X, Lim SG, Hong W, Tan YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Proteos, 61 Biopolis Dr., Singapore
138673.

The spike (S) protein of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(SARS-CoV) interacts with cellular receptors to mediate membrane fusion, allowing
viral entry into host cells; hence it is recognized as the primary target of
neutralizing antibodies, and therefore knowledge of antigenic determinants that
can elicit neutralizing antibodies could be beneficial for the development of a
protective vaccine. Here, we expressed five different fragments of S, covering
the entire ectodomain (amino acids 48 to 1192), as glutathione S-transferase
fusion proteins in Escherichia coli and used the purified proteins to raise
antibodies in rabbits. By Western blot analysis and immunoprecipitation
experiments, we showed that all the antibodies are specific and highly sensitive 
to both the native and denatured forms of the full-length S protein expressed in 
virus-infected cells and transfected cells, respectively. Indirect
immunofluorescence performed on fixed but unpermeabilized cells showed that these
antibodies can recognize the mature form of S on the cell surface. All the
antibodies were also able to detect the maturation of the 200-kDa form of S to
the 210-kDa form by pulse-chase experiments. When the antibodies were tested for 
their ability to inhibit SARS-CoV propagation in Vero E6 culture, it was found
that the anti-SDelta10 antibody, which was targeted to amino acid residues 1029
to 1192 of S, which include heptad repeat 2, has strong neutralizing activities, 
suggesting that this region of S carries neutralizing epitopes and is very
important for virus entry into cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.6.3289-3296.2005 
PMCID: PMC1075733
PMID: 15731223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

