
1. Semin Liver Dis. 2005 Feb;25(1):33-51.

Treatment of chronic hepatitis C in human immunodeficiency virus/hepatitis C
virus-coinfected patients in the era of pegylated interferon and ribavirin.

Br√§u N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Bronx Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Infectious Diseases Section (111F), 130 West Kingsbridge Road, New York, NY 0468,
USA. norbert.brau@med.va.gov

A significant percentage of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) -infected
individuals are also infected with the hepatitis C virus (HCV). With the
much-improved survival of HIV-infected patients through the use of highly active 
antiretroviral therapy, liver disease caused by coinfection with HCV has emerged 
as a significant threat to the health and survival of persons with HIV disease.
HIV/HCV-coinfected patients with ongoing HIV viremia have a faster rate of
HCV-related liver fibrosis progression and a more rapid progression to liver
failure or hepatocellular carcinoma than HCV-monoinfected persons. In contrast to
the deleterious effect of HIV on HCV-related liver disease, most studies have
shown that HCV does not influence progression of HIV infection to AIDS or death. 
HCV therapy with peginterferon alfa (2a or 2b) plus ribavirin can achieve a
sustained viral response in HIV/HCV-coinfected patients of up to 38% in HCV
genotype 1 and up to 73% in genotypes 2 and 3. The safety profile is largely
similar to therapy in HIV-monoinfected patients, but there is a higher incidence 
of mitochondrial toxicity in patients taking didanosine or stavudine and of
anemia in patients taking zidovudine. There is no proven anti-HCV therapy for
HIV/HCV-coinfected patients with end-stage liver disease (ESLD). Liver
transplantation is being investigated as a potential therapeutic option for
HIV-infected individuals with ESLD, and initial reports are encouraging. Given
that pegylated interferon and ribavirin have been shown to be safe and effective 
for HIV/HCV coinfection as well as HCV monoinfection, all HIV/HCV-coinfected
patients should be evaluated for therapy.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2005-864780 
PMID: 15731996  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

