
1. Gynecol Oncol. 2005 Apr;97(1):35-40.

Is p16(INK4A) expression more useful than human papillomavirus test to determine 
the outcome of atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance-categorized
Pap smear? A comparative analysis using abnormal cervical smears with follow-up
biopsies.

Nieh S(1), Chen SF, Chu TY, Lai HC, Lin YS, Fu E, Gau CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, National Defense Medical Center
and Tri-Service General Hospital, No. 325, Cheng-Kung Road, Sec. 2, Neihu 114,
Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China. niehshin1014@yahoo.com.tw

OBJECTIVE: To correlate high-risk human papillomavirus (HR-HPV) viral load to
p16(INK4A) expression in atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance
(ASCUS)-categorized Pap smears with follow-up biopsies in order to elucidate
their relationships in gynecological pathology.
METHODS: We studied 66 ASCUS-categorized Pap smears with subsequent follow-up
biopsies. HR-HPV viral load was determined by Hybrid Capture II assay from the
cervical swab in each ASCUS-diagnosed Pap smear. Both smears and biopsies were
immunostained with a primary anti-p16 antibody, clone E6H4, and we analyzed the
correlations between HR-HPV viral load in each ASCUS-diagnosed Pap smear and p16 
expression of smears with follow-up biopsies.
RESULTS: Correlation analyses of the corresponding histological diagnoses from 66
ASCUS-diagnosed Pap smears revealed that 21 (32%) cases had only reactive changes
and 45 cases showed cervical intraepithelial neoplasia including LSIL (24 cases, 
36%) and HSIL or higher (21 cases, 32%). Tests for HR-HPV viral load revealed 17 
(26%) negative cases and 49 (74%) positive cases. Immunostaining showed that 26
cases (39%) were negative and 40 (61%) were positive for p16 expression.
Comparative analysis of these two tests indicated consistencies as well as
discrepancies. They showed significant differences (P < 0.001) between negative
p16 expressions of Pap smears with the presence of reactive lesions in follow-up 
biopsies and HR-HPV viral load. However, no significant difference (P = 0.739 and
0.606) between p16 expression of Pap smears with the presence of LSIL, HSIL or
higher in follow-up biopsies and high HR-HPV viral load was found. In addition,
there were significant differences (P < 0.001) in specificity and positive
predictive value, but no significant differences were found in sensitivity (P =
0.606) and negative predictive value (P = 0.062) between p16 immunostaining and
HR-HPV viral load.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that there is a close association between weak
or strong p16 expressions in ASCUS-categorized smears with the presence of SILs
in follow-up biopsies and positive HR-HPV viral loads. Conversely, there is also 
a clear association between the lack of p16 expression and the absence of
significant lesions in follow-up biopsies, but this is not consistent with a
negative HR-HPV viral load. It is concluded that p16 expression is an indicator
of pathogenic activity of HR-HPV, which is an objective biomarker for
clarification of ASCUS-categorized Pap smears in gynecological cytopathology.
Furthermore, through comparative analysis, directly visualized p16 immunostaining
on smears appears to be a more effective method than HR-HPV viral load for the
detection of reactive changes and LSILs from ASCUS-categorized Pap smears.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2004.11.034 
PMID: 15790434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

