
1. Curr Med Chem. 2005;12(6):741-7.

Regulatory and accessory HIV-1 proteins: potential targets for HIV-1 vaccines?

Yu XG(1), Lichterfeld M, Addo MM, Altfeld M.

Author information: 
(1)Partners AIDS Research Center and Infectious Disease Division, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

The HIV-1 regulatory proteins Tat and Rev and the accessory proteins Vpr, Vpu and
Vif are essential for efficient viral replication, and their cytoplasmic
production suggests that they should be processed for recognition by cytotoxic T 
lymphocytes. However, only limited data is available, evaluating the role of
immune responses directed against these proteins in natural HIV-1 infection.
Recent advances in the methods used for the characterization of HIV-1-specific
cellular immune responses, including quantification of antigen-specific IFN-gamma
production by ELISpot assay and flow-cytometry-based intracellular cytokine
quantification, have allowed for a much more comprehensive assessment of
virus-specific immune responses. Emerging data show that the regulatory and
accessory proteins serve as important targets for HIV-1-specific T cell
responses, and multiple CTL epitopes have been identified in functionally
important regions of these proteins. Moreover, the use of autologous peptides
have allowed for the detection of significantly stronger HIV-1-specific T cell
responses in the more variable regulatory and accessory HIV-1 proteins Tat and
Vpr. These data indicate that despite the small size of these proteins,
regulatory and accessory proteins are targeted by cellular immune responses in
natural HIV-1 infection and contribute importantly to the total HIV-1-specific
CD8+ T cell response. A multi-component vaccine, with the inclusion of these
proteins plus structural proteins remains the most promising choice for an
effective AIDS vaccine.

DOI: 10.2174/0929867053202205 
PMID: 15790309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

