
1. J Biopharm Stat. 2005;15(2):241-52.

Sampling strategies for detecting rare impurities: an application in gene therapy
products.

Wang C(1), Gheyas F.

Author information: 
(1)Schering-Plough Research Institute, Kenilworth, New Jersey 07033-1300, USA.

Detection of rare impurities in drug products presents special challenges.
Replication competent adenovirus (RCA) is a rare impurity found in
adenovirus-based gene therapy products. Various methods are used for detection of
RCAs. We primarily focus on qualitative assays. Acceptance sampling plans for
detecting RCAs in batches of gene therapy products are discussed. Assuming that
the number of RCA units per patient dose follows a Poisson distribution,
operating characteristics (OC) of these sampling plans can be studied. The OC
curves display the acceptance probabilities for batches with specific true but
unknown level of RCA and can be used to assess the specificity and sensitivity of
the test strategies. Application of Bayesian methodologies in the assessment of
RCA levels in drug batches is also discussed. Using observed data and prior
belief, a 95% credible region for the number of RCA units per patient dose can be
constructed. Both classical and Bayesian calculations display the impact of
sample size, sampling fraction, and assay quality on the detection of RCA. For
better sensitivity, the largest possible sampling fraction that does not
interfere with the logistics and the performance of the assay should be used. The
choice of sample size will depend on the upper limit of the biologically safe
level of RCA, the testing strategy, the desired level of sensitivity and
specificity, and also on practical issues.

DOI: 10.1081/bip-200049834 
PMID: 15796292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

