
1. Transplant Proc. 2005 Mar;37(2):945-6.

Human polyoma virus in kidney transplants: SV40 T-antigen demonstration in the
urine.

von Willebrand E(1), Savikko J, Merenmies J, Jalanko H.

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation Laboratory, University of Helsinki and Hospital for Children
and Adolescents, Helsinki, Finland. Eva.von.Willebrand@HUS.Fi

We wanted to develop an immunostaining method of urine cytopreparations to detect
polyoma virus infection by using fresh urine samples and staining with the
monoclonal SV40 antibody and to compare the findings to the demonstration of
decoy cells in the urine or to kidney histology. Routine urine samples from
pediatric kidney transplant patients were collected either early after
transplantation or later, cytocentrifuged, and immunostained with
SV40-T-antibody. The number of SV40-T-antigen-positive epithelial cells was
counted in the cytopreparations and compared to the findings in routine urine
cytology and transplant histology. Immunostaining of urine cytology with
SV40-T-ab demonstrated clearly that the infected epithelial cells and the rate of
infection could be estimated by semiquantitative counting. There was strong
correlation between the findings in the urine and in the biopsies, but in the
urine preparations the number of infected cells was much higher than in the
biopsies. The high number of SV40-positive cells in the urine also correlated to 
the severity of clinical infection and to the state of transplant. Immunostaining
of urine cytology with SV40-T-antibody seems to be useful in the diagnosis and
follow-up of polyoma virus reactivation disease in transplant patients,
especially in children with renal transplants.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2004.12.073 
PMID: 15848583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

