
1. Retrovirology. 2005 May 6;2:29.

Elevated expression of CD30 in adult T-cell leukemia cell lines: possible role in
constitutive NF-kappaB activation.

Higuchi M(1), Matsuda T, Mori N, Yamada Y, Horie R, Watanabe T, Takahashi M, Oie 
M, Fujii M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Niigata 951-8510, Japan. mhiguchi@med.niigata-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is associated with the
development of adult T-cell leukemia (ATL). HTLV-1 encoded Tax1 oncoprotein
activates the transcription of genes involved in cell growth and anti-apoptosis
through the NF-kappaB pathway, and is thought to play a critical role in the
pathogenesis of ATL. While Tax1 expression is usually lost or minimal in ATL
cells, these cells still show high constitutive NF-kappaB activity, indicating
that genetic or epigenetic changes in ATL cells induce activation independent of 
Tax1. The aim of this study was to identify the molecules responsible for the
constitutive activation of NF-kappaB in ATL cells using a retroviral functional
cloning strategy.
RESULTS: Using enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) expression and
blasticidin-resistance as selection markers, several retroviral cDNA clones
exhibiting constitutive NF-kappaB activity in Rat-1 cells, including full-length 
CD30, were obtained from an ATL cell line. Exogenous stable expression of CD30 in
Rat-1 cells constitutively activated NF-kappaB. Elevated expression of CD30 was
identified in all ATL lines examined, and primary ATL cells from a small number
of patients (8 out of 66 cases).
CONCLUSION: Elevated CD30 expression is considered one of the causes of
constitutive NF-kappaB activation in ATL cells, and may be involved in ATL
development.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-2-29 
PMCID: PMC1274245
PMID: 15876358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

