
1. Virus Res. 2005 Sep;112(1-2):123-31.

Origin and evolution of viruses causing classical swine fever in Cuba.

de Arce HD(1), Ganges L, Barrera M, Naranjo D, Sobrino F, Frías MT, Núñez JI.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Sanidad Agropecuaria (CENSA), Apdo 10, San José de las
Lajas, La Habana, Cuba. heidy@censa.edu.cu

We have analyzed the origin and evolution of viruses from the classical swine
fever (CSF) epidemic that affects Cuba since 2001 by nucleotide sequencing of
regions within the E2 glycoprotein and the NS5B (polymerase) genes. The sequence 
of 190 nucleotides from E2 gene was determined for 10 CSF viruses isolated at
different locations of the island, and used for phylogenetic analyses, including 
sequences from viruses of the 1993--1997 epizootic, previously determined, as
well as those from representatives of the different CSFV genotypes. The
phylogenetic tree obtained indicates that viruses circulating at present belong
to the subgroup 1.2 and are closely related to those isolated during the
1993--1997 epizootic, including the strain Margarita used for vaccine potency
tests in Cuba. However, the pattern of evolution revealed by these analyses was
different than that observed previously, in which western isolates were almost
identical to Margarita strain, while eastern isolates showed a higher level of
genetic diversification. In this case, all the viruses analyzed grouped in an
independent, define cluster that is closely related, albeit distinguishable, from
that of Margarita-related viruses that previously circulated in the western part 
of Cuba. In addition, the 2001--2003 viruses showed a branched pattern with a
level of sequence diversification similar to that observed in the eastern
1993--1997 viruses. Interestingly, a significant fraction (about 54%) of the
mutations found in the E2 sequence led to amino acid replacements. This high rate
of non-synonymous mutations was not found in the previous Cuban epizootic and has
not been reported for other CSF outbreaks. In spite of these amino acid
replacements, no antigenic changes were observed in the reactivity of different
isolates with CSFV-specific MAbs and polyclonal sera. The phylogenetic tree
derived from 409 nucleotides of NS5B gene of seven isolates and Margarita strain,
was consistent with that obtained from E2 sequences. In this region, encoding a
non-structural protein, a low level of fixation of non-synonymous mutations was
observed. The results obtained suggests that epidemiological factors affecting
CSFV spread during the current epizootic in Cuba can favour the fixation of
non-synonymous mutation in the E2 gene, which could be associated with a lower
severity in the clinical signs developed by most of the affected animals.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2005.03.018 
PMID: 15878213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

