
1. Math Biosci. 2005 May;195(1):92-126.

CXCR4 and CCR5 regulation and expression patterns on T- and monocyte-macrophage
cell lineages: implications for susceptibility to infection by HIV-1.

Joly M(1), Pinto JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of São Paulo, São Paulo SP
05508-900, Brazil.

Chemokine receptor expression may vary dramatically among cell subsets.
Therefore, the stage of differentiation and the lineage of CD4 cells may
profoundly affect their susceptibility to infection by human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1). However, the mechanisms of coreceptor competition for
association with HIV-1 glycoproteins remain unknown. Here, we propose
mathematical models that address the interdependence of the concentrations of CD4
and CCR5 for efficient infection by M-tropic HIV-1 as well as additional
complications originated by coreceptor competition caused by posttranslational
modifications that positively or negatively affect the coreceptor ability to form
complexes with CD4 and/or HIV-1 envelope. Furthermore, since CCR5 and CXCR4
expression on human leukocytes designate these cells as HIV-1 potential targets, 
the expression of the major HIV-1 coreceptors are also dynamically
modeled/quantified as function of the stage of cell differentiation. Results show
that although coreceptor competition degree has limited influence on R5 strain
infectivity, the infectivity of CXCR4-using isolates strongly depends on the CD4 
expression, according to the coreceptor competition model proposed in Lee et al. 
[J. Virol. 74(11) (2000) 5016]. Understanding the role of in vivo alterations in 
CD4, CCR5 and CXCR4 densities on HIV-1 cell entry may help the development of
optimal control strategies for AIDS pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mbs.2005.01.002 
PMID: 15893340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

