
1. Am J Perinatol. 2005 May;22(4):223-5.

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura in a patient with acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome at 28 weeks gestation.

Sherer DM(1), Sanmugarajah J, Dalloul M, Temkin SM, Thanus J, Abulafia O.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Maternal-Fetal Medicine and Gynecologic Oncology, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, State University of New York (SUNY), Downstate Medical
Center, 450 Clarkson Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA.

An increased incidence of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura has been reported
among human immunodeficiency virus-infected patients or those with acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Despite this association, hitherto only a
single case of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura has been reported in an
HIV-infected patient during pregnancy. We describe a young multiparous patient
with long-standing AIDS who presented with lower abdominal pain. Following
findings of thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, renal failure,
low-grade fever, and mental status changes, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
was diagnosed after initially considering the diagnosis of severe preeclampsia,
and the patient was delivered by cesarean section. The patient required multiple 
plasma exchanges during a protracted postpartum course, and was discharged in
good health. This first report of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and AIDS in
pregnancy demonstrates that when encountering preeclampsia in patients with AIDS,
thrombotic microangiopathy should be strongly considered. In addition, these
patients may exhibit an attenuated response to plasma exchange therapy and
despite previous reports in nonobstetric patients, a favorable outcome is
attainable in these critically ill patients.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2005-866605 
PMID: 15906217  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

