
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2005 Apr 18;64(2):91-8.

Taura syndrome virus from Belize represents a unique variant.

Erickson HS(1), Poulos BT, Tang KF, Bradley-Dunlop D, Lightner DV.

Author information: 
(1)Aquaculture Pathology Laboratory, Department of Veterinary Science and
Microbiology, The University of Arizona, 1117 East Lowell Street, Tucson, Arizona
85721, USA.

A Taura syndrome virus (TSV) isolate from cultured Penaeus vannamei grown in
Belize, Central America was characterized and shown to be a unique isolate.
Mortality rates in laboratory infections of specific pathogen-free (SPF) P.
vannamei, reactivity of the virus with monoclonal antibody (MAb) 1A1 and
phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that the Belize isolate (BLZ02TSV) is a new
valiant of TSV. The Hawaiian 1994 TSV isolate (HI94TSV, GenBank AF277675) was
used as the reference isolate for these studies. Laboratory infections of SPF P. 
vannamei with BLZ02TSV demonstrated higher mortalities and earlier onset of
mortalities compared to infections with HI94TSV. Shrimp tissues infected with
BLZ02TSV reacted with a TSV-specific gene probe by in situ hybridization and were
positive by RT-PCR using TSV diagnostic primers, thus indicating that the isolate
was TSV. However, Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry using MAb 1A1
demonstrated that BLZ02TSV did not react with the antibody, suggestive of changes
in the VP1 region of the genome that codes for the polypeptide to which MAb 1A1
binds. Phylogenetic analysis of a 1.3 kbp fragment of the TSV VP1 capsid region
revealed that BLZ02TSV represents a distinct group among more than 29 isolates of
TSV studied thus far. This research demonstrates that BLZ02TSV is a unique
isolate of TSV and reiterates a problem related to the use of MAb 1A1 for
detection of TSV in clinical specimens.

DOI: 10.3354/dao064091 
PMID: 15918471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

