
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2005 Jul;16(7):845-58.

Potent antitumor activity of oncolytic adenovirus expressing mda-7/IL-24 for
colorectal cancer.

Zhao L(1), Gu J, Dong A, Zhang Y, Zhong L, He L, Wang Y, Zhang J, Zhang Z,
Huiwang J, Qian Q, Qian C, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

It has been demonstrated that interleukin 24 (IL-24, also called melanoma
differentiation associated gene 7) exerts antitumor activity. In this study, we
investigated whether oncolytic adenovirus-mediated gene transfer of IL-24 could
induce strong antitumor activity. A tumor-selective replicating adenovirus
expressing IL-24 (ZD55-IL-24) was constructed by insertion of an IL-24 expression
cassette into the ZD55 vector, which is based on deletion of the adenoviral E1B
55-kDa gene. ZD55-IL-24 could express substantially more IL-24 than Ad-IL-24
because of replication of the vector. It has been shown that ZD55-IL-24 exerted a
strong cytopathic effect and significant apoptosis in tumor cells with p53
dysfunction. Moreover, no cytotoxic and apoptotic effects could be seen in normal
cells infected with ZD55-IL-24. Expression of IL-24 did not interfere with viral 
replication induced by oncolytic adenovirus. Activation of caspase 3 and caspase 
9, and induction of bax gene expression, were involved in tumor cell apoptosis
induced by ZD55-IL-24. Treatment of established tumors with ZD55-IL-24 showed
much stronger antitumor activity than that induced by ONYX-015 or Ad-IL- 24.
These data indicated that oncolytic adenovirus expressing IL-24 could exert
potential antitumor activity and offer a novel approach to cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.2005.16.845 
PMID: 16000066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

