
1. Theor Appl Genet. 2005 Sep;111(5):914-22. Epub 2005 Oct 18.

A physical map covering the nsv locus that confers resistance to Melon necrotic
spot virus in melon (Cucumis melo L.).

Morales M(1), Orjeda G, Nieto C, van Leeuwen H, Monfort A, Charpentier M, Caboche
M, Arús P, Puigdomènech P, Aranda MA, Dogimont C, Bendahmane A, Garcia-Mas J.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Genètica Vegetal, Laboratori de Genètica Molecular Vegetal
CSIC-IRTA, carretera de Cabrils s/n, 08348 Cabrils (Barcelona), Spain.

Melon necrotic spot virus (MNSV) is a member of the genus Carmovirus, which
produces severe yield losses in melon and cucumber crops. The nsv gene is the
only known natural source of resistance against MNSV in melon, and confers
protection against all widespread strains of this virus. nsv has been previously 
mapped in melon linkage group 11, in a region spanning 5.9 cM, saturated with
RAPD and AFLP markers. To identify the nsv gene by positional cloning, we started
construction of a high-resolution map for this locus. On the basis of the two
mapping populations, F(2) and BC1, which share the same resistant parent PI
161375 (nsv/nsv), and using more than 3,000 offspring, a high-resolution genetic 
map has been constructed in the region around the nsv locus, spanning 3.2 cM
between CAPS markers M 29 and M 132. The availability of two melon BAC libraries 
allowed for screening and the identification of new markers closer to the
resistance gene, by means of BAC-end sequencing and mapping. We constructed a BAC
contig in this region and identified the marker 52 K 20 sp 6, which co-segregates
with nsv in 408 F(2) and 2.727 BC1 individuals in both mapping populations. We
also identified a single 100 kb BAC that physically contains the resistance gene 
and covers a genetic distance of 0.73 cM between both BAC ends. These are the
basis for the isolation of the nsv recessive-resistance gene.

DOI: 10.1007/s00122-005-0019-y 
PMID: 16052354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

