
1. Nature. 1977 May 12;267(5607):175-7.

Nucleic acid sequences of primate type C viruses in normal and neoplastic human
tissues.

Prochownik EV(1), Kirsten WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Recent reports on the isolation of type C viruses from human cells have generated
considerable controversy because of the close relationship of the viruses to the 
type C viruses of subhuman primates. These findings have been interpreted as
evidence for contamination despite the repeated isolation of some type C viruses 
from separate clinical specimens or from separate frozen primary cell stocks of
the same donor. Our laboratory has described a type C virus which is released
from the HEL-12 strain of normal human embryonic lung fibroblasts. The HEL-12
virus is related immunologically to simian sarcoma (woolly monkey fibrosarcoma)
virus (SiSV) and the endogenous type C viruses of baboons and domestic cats. To
demonstrate that the HEL-12 virus is not an adventitious contaminant, fresh human
tissues were examined for antigenic cross-reactivity with HEL-12 virus antigens. 
Some patients with myelogenous leukemia contain circulating immunoglobulins which
specifically inhibit the reverse transcriptases of HEL-12 virus and primate type 
C viruses. In addition, the glomerular immune complexes in patients with systemic
lupus erythematosus contain antigens related to HEL-12 virus proteins. Using the 
techniques of molecular hybridisation, we demonstrate here that HEL-12 cells
contain proviral DNA sequences before antigen expression or spontaneous virus
release can be detected. We also present evidence for the existence of nucleic
acid sequences homologous to HEL-12 viral RNA in the DNAs from certain cancer
patients.

DOI: 10.1038/267175a0 
PMID: 16073438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

