
1. Pest Manag Sci. 2006 Jan;62(1):57-63.

Comparative biological activities of a plaque-purified variant and a Turkish
native isolate of SpliNPV-B against Spodoptera littoralis (Lepidoptera:
Noctuidae).

Toprak U(1), Bayram S, Gürkan OM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Ankara, Faculty of Agriculture, Department of Plant Protection, 
06110 Dişkapi, Ankara, Turkey. utoprak@agri.ankara.edu.tr

The noctuid moth Spodoptera littoralis (Boisduval) is an important pest of many
cultivated plants worldwide and five different geographical Nucleopolyhedrovirus 
(NPV) strains of this pest have been isolated to date. Two of these, a
plaque-purified variant of the S. littoralis NPV from Morocco (SpliNPV-M2) and a 
SpliNPV isolated from field-infected S. littoralis larvae found in Turkey
(SpliNPV-TR1), were compared biologically in terms of infectiveness (median
lethal dose, LD50) for third instars and in terms of virulence (median lethal
time, LT50) for neonates and third-instar S. littoralis larvae. The LD50 values
of SpliNPV-TR1 and SpliNPV-M2 were 20.73 and 185.21 occlusion bodies (OBs)/larva,
respectively, with non-overlapping confidence limits indicating they were
significantly different. Thus, SpliNPV-M2 was found to be significantly less
infective (about nine times higher LD50) than SpliNPV-TR1. The LT50 values of
neonates for SpliNPV-M2 and SpliNPV-TR1 were 37 and 43.9 h at a concentration of 
10(6) OBs ml(-1), respectively. For these same isolates, the LT50 values at a
concentration of 3 x 10(6) OBs ml(-1) were calculated as 35.6 and 41.7 h,
respectively. The LT(50) values of third instars for SpliNPV-M2 and SpliNPV-TR1
were 147.4 and 160.5 h, respectively, at a dose of 3000 OBs/larva and 145.4 and
152.4 h, respectively, for the same isolates at a dose of 20,000 OBs/larva. On
the other hand, Helicoverpa armigera (Hübner) and Agrotis ipsilon (Hufnagel)
revealed a lack of lethality of the SpliNPV-TR1 isolate.

Copyright 2005 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/ps.1128 
PMID: 16235266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

