
1. Indian J Chest Dis Allied Sci. 2005 Oct-Dec;47(4):259-65.

Diagnosis of Pneumocystis pneumonia by bronchoalveolar lavage cytology:
experience at a tertiary care centre in India.

Dahiya S(1), Mathur SR, Iyer VK, Kapila K, Verma K.

Author information: 
(1)Cytopathology Laboratory, Department of Pathology, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Diagnosis of Pneumocystis pneumonia requires morphological
demostration of P. carinii (now re-named as P. jiroveci). Although
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid cytology constitutes a formidable tool for
detecting this infection, few studies on the utility of BAL cytology in
diagnosing PCP are available from India. The present study reports the clinical
spectrum, cytomorphological features and the utility of BAL cytology in
diagnosing Pneumocystis infection from a tertiary care centre in India.
METHODS: Retrospective study of 13 patients with PCP, diagnosed on examination of
BAL fluid.
RESULTS: The mean age of the patients was 41.2 years. One patient had human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, while the other 10 were renal transplant 
receipients on immunosuppressive therapy. The immune status of two patients was
unknown. Fever, cough and shortness of breath were the main presenting symptoms. 
Radiological diagnosis of Pneumocystis pneumonia was offered in only one case.
Foamy alveolar casts were present in all cases. Silver methanamine stain enhanced
the rounded, helmet or cleft forms of sporozoites. Inflammatory infiltrate was
mainly polymorphonuclear.
CONCLUSIONS: BAL cytology, thus, constitutes a useful diagnostic modality for
morphological documentation and reliable diagnosis of Pneumocystis pneumonia in
an immunocompromised host. Pneumocystis pneumonia appears to be a common
opportunistic infection in renal transplant receipients in India.


PMID: 16255397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

