
1. Vaccine. 2006 Mar 6;24(10):1615-24. Epub 2005 Oct 21.

An autoimmune domain-reduced HCV core gene remains effective in stimulating
anti-core cytotoxic T lymphocyte activity.

Liu Y(1), Zhou W, You C, Zheng H, You H, Liu H, Zhang D, Luo R, Kay HH, Hermonat 
PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Slot 518, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, 4301 West Markham St., Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.

Comment in
    Vaccine. 2006 Sep 11;24(37-39):6173-4.

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection cases resistant to conventional
therapies might be treated by immunotherapy as cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) are 
the main mechanism through which viral infections are cleared. The HCV core gene,
with the highest homology between HCV types, deleted of its
autoimmune-stimulating regions (pseudo-GOR and pseudo-p450), may be an
appropriate antigen for targeting HCV-infected cells. Two recombinant
adeno-associated virus (rAAV) vectors, carrying either the full length (aa 1-190)
or truncated (aa 49-180, deleted of the pseudo-GOR and pseudo-p450 sequences)
versions of core, were generated. Both AAV/core (l-190) and AAV/core (49-180)
were used to transduce/load dendritic cells (DC) at high levels (88-95%). These
two genetically altered DC types then stimulated anti-core CTL. The DC and CTL
were analyzed by FACS and for killing efficiency (percent target killing). The
rAAV-altered DC displayed higher levels of CD80, CD83, CD86, and CD 1a than
control DC. The truncated core (aa 49-180) gene stimulated equivalent and strong 
killing of synthetic core-positive autologous peripheral blood lymphocyte (PBL)
targets to that stimulated by the full length core gene. However, the smaller
core (49-180) antigen gene stimulated lower levels of killing of core-negative
"self" PBL targets (GOR- and p450-positive) (p = 0.002). These AAV/core:
DC-stimulated CTL displayed higher IFN-gamma expression, higher CD8:CD4 ratios,
and lower CD56:CD8 ratios than controls. The rAAV-loading derived CD8+ T cells
had more CD69+ cells and the CD4+ T populations had fewer CD25+ cells than
controls. We conclude that the core (49-180) gene is an effect antigen, but has
the advantage of stimulating less self-recognition. Thus, core (49-180) may be
useful for further translational immunotherapy studies against HCV.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2005.09.055 
PMID: 16289277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

