
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2005 Dec 15;40(5):545-50.

Effectiveness of short-term and long-term zidovudine prophylaxis on detection of 
HIV-1 subtype E in human placenta and vertical transmission.

Bhoopat L(1), Khunamornpong S, Lerdsrimongkol P, Sirivatanapa P, Sethavanich S,
Limtrakul A, Gomutbuthra V, Kajanavanich S, Thorner PS, Bhoopat T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University, Chiang
Mai, Thailand. lbhoopat@mail.med.cmu.ac.th

Comment in
    J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2006 Aug 15;42(5):649; author reply 649-50.

Antiretroviral treatment with zidovudine (ZDV) from the 14th week until the end
of pregnancy has markedly reduced the vertical transmission rate of HIV-1 in
Europe and North America. A shorter duration of treatment has reduced this rate
in Africa and Southeast Asia to a lesser degree. In Southeast Asia, subtype E is 
the major subtype rather than subtype B as in Western countries. The goals of
this study were to determine the optimal duration of ZDV prophylaxis for subtype 
E and to confirm its effectiveness at the histologic level. Fifty pregnant women 
seropositive for HIV-1 subtype E were given ZDV prophylaxis consisting of 300 mg 
administered twice daily, switching to 300 mg administered every 3 hours from the
onset of labor until delivery. Twenty-seven received "short-term" ZDV lasting 14 
to 35 days before delivery, whereas the other 23 received "long-term" ZDV lasting
62 to 92 days. The effectiveness of ZDV prophylaxis was assessed by detection of 
HIV-1 in the placenta using in situ polymerase chain reaction (PCR). All babies
in this study were tested up to one year of age. Three were not positive until
after one month of age, but one was positive as a neonate. Four neonates were
positive for HIV-1 as detected by PCR on peripheral blood, including one in the
neonatal period. All cases were from the short-term prophylaxis group. Decidual
glandular epithelial cells were the only cell type in the placenta that expressed
HIV proviral DNA under ZDV prophylaxis. Sixty-seven percent of placentas in the
short-term ZDV group showed more than occasional positive cells compared with 22%
in the group receiving long-term ZDV prophylaxis (P < 0.02). This is first study 
to compare the effectiveness of short-term and long-term ZDV prophylaxis with
respect to the presence of HIV in the placenta. Our study shows that longer (at
least 60 days) prophylaxis is more effective in reducing HIV expression in the
placenta and is associated with reduced transmission to neonates.

DOI: 10.1097/01.qai.0000185572.90849.4d 
PMID: 16284530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

