
1. J Gen Virol. 1992 Jul;73 ( Pt 7):1609-14.

Virus-specific proteins in cells infected with tomato black ring nepovirus:
evidence for proteolytic processing in vivo.

Demangeat G(1), Hemmer O, Reinbolt J, Mayo MA, Fritsch C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Mol√©culaire des Plantes, Strasbourg, France.

The synthesis of proteins encoded by the RNA of tomato black ring virus (TBRV) in
vivo was studied in protoplasts by direct labelling with [35S]methionine, and in 
protoplasts and plants by immunoblotting experiments with specific antisera.
Comparison of the proteins synthesized in infected and mock-inoculated
protoplasts suggested that proteins of M(r) 120K, 90K, 80K, 57K and 46K were
virus-specific. The proteins derived from the RNA-1-encoded polyprotein detected 
by immunoblotting were a stable 120K protein and, only in protoplasts, small
amounts of a 90K protein which contains the C-terminal part of the 120K protein
and the polymerase domain. The results suggest that the polymerase and the
adjacent protease function in vivo largely or solely when combined in a 120K
protein. The proteins derived from the RNA-2-encoded polyprotein detected by
immunoblotting were 59K and 57K proteins, which reacted with antiserum to TBRV
particles, and a 46K protein. In extracts of infected Nicotiana clevelandii and
Chenopodium quinoa made soon after inoculation, the 59K protein was more abundant
than the 57K protein; later samples contained similar quantities of each protein.
The 57K protein comigrated with protein extracted from virus particles. The
results of amino acid sequencing suggested that the 57K protein is derived from
the 59K protein by the loss of nine C-terminal amino acids. Antiserum to a
peptide adjacent to the 57K protein in the 150K polyprotein detected a 46K
protein in protoplasts and plant tissue. The results support the processing
scheme for TBRV polyproteins proposed after analysis of the products of in vitro 
translation.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-73-7-1609 
PMID: 1629691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

