
1. Hum Pathol. 2005 Dec;36(12):1256-64.

Polyoma virus infection of renal allografts: relationships of the distribution of
viral infection, tubulointerstitial inflammation, and fibrosis suggesting viral
interstitial nephritis in untreated disease.

Meehan SM(1), Kadambi PV, Manaligod JR, Williams JW, Josephson MA, Javaid B.

Author information: 
(1)Nephropathology Laboratory, Department of Pathology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. shane.meehan@uchospitals.edu

Whether polyoma virus (PV) infection of renal allografts induces an antiviral or 
antigraft immune reaction is unclear. By examination of the relationships of
tubular PV to graft inflammation and scarring, this study sought histological
evidence of viral interstitial nephritis in allograft biopsies with untreated PV 
infection and compared the inflammatory indices to controls with acute rejection 
(AR). Morphological features including viral cytopathic changes (VCCs) and
modified Banff 97 histological indices were evaluated in sections of 28
diagnostic biopsies from a group of patients receiving prednisone, tacrolimus,
and mycophenolate mofetil at constant dosage before biopsy. Two-micrometer
paraffin sections were stained for PV large T antigen (TAg) and for C4d, by
immunohistochemistry. Tubular profiles with 1 or more nuclei expressing TAg per
x200 field were scored using an interval scale (0-10; none to 91-100%) by 2
observers. Controls with AR (n = 38, TAg negative) were matched for time after
transplantation and severity of Banff 97 interstitial inflammation (i) and
tubulitis (t) scores. Median t scores for tubules with VCC or TAg or both
exceeded scores for tubules without VCC or TAg (3 versus 0, P = .001). Tubular
TAg score correlated with i score (r = 0.58, P < .01) and sum ct + ci score (r = 
0.61, P < .001). Atrophic tubules in scars had persistent VCC and/or TAg.
Interstitial plasma cells (75% versus 21%) and neutrophils (32% versus 0%) were
more frequent, and interstitial fibrosis was more severe (ci >1 in 54% versus
21%) in polyoma virus nephropathy (PVN) than in the group with AR (P < .01).
Intimal arteritis (0% versus 35.7%), peritubular capillary C4d (0% versus 47.4%),
and interstitial hemorrhage (4% versus 37%) were almost exclusively found in AR
(P < .01). Tubular inflammation in untreated PVN involves infected tubular
profiles with greater severity than those without evidence of infection. The
extent of tubular PV infection is proportional to interstitial inflammation and
scarring. Tubulointerstitial inflammation in PV infection has significant
qualitative differences from AR. Observations in these examples of untreated PVN 
suggest that the allograft inflammatory reaction may exhibit features of viral
tubulointerstitial nephritis distinct from AR.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2005.08.026 
PMID: 16311118  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

