
1. FEBS J. 2005 Dec;272(24):6254-65.

Substrate specificity of vaccinia virus thymidylate kinase.

Topalis D(1), Collinet B, Gasse C, Dugué L, Balzarini J, Pochet S, Deville-Bonne 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Enzymologie Moléculaire et Fonctionnelle, FRE 2852 CNRS, Paris, 
France.

Anti-poxvirus therapies are currently limited to cidofovir
[(S)-1-(3-hydroxy-2-phosphonylmethoxypropyl)cytosine], but drug-resistant strains
have already been characterized. In the aim of finding a new target, the
thymidylate (TMP) kinase from vaccinia virus, the prototype of Orthopoxvirus, has
been overexpressed in Escherichia coli after cloning the gene (A48R). Specific
inhibitors and alternative substrates of pox TMP kinase should contribute to
virus replication inhibition. Biochemical characterization of the enzyme revealed
distinct catalytic features when compared to its human counterpart. Sharing 42%
identity with human TMP kinase, the vaccinia virus enzyme was assumed to adopt
the common fold of nucleoside monophosphate kinases. The enzyme was purified to
homogeneity and behaves as a homodimer, like all known TMP kinases. Initial
velocity studies showed that the Km for ATP-Mg2+ and dTMP were 0.15 mm and 20
microM, respectively. Vaccinia virus TMP kinase was found to phosphorylate dTMP, 
dUMP and also dGMP from any purine and pyrimidine nucleoside triphosphate.
5-Halogenated dUMP such as 5-iodo-2'-deoxyuridine 5'-monophosphate (5I-dUMP) and 
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine 5'-monophosphate (5Br-dUMP) were also efficient
alternative substrates. Using
thymidine-5'-(4-N'-methylanthraniloyl-aminobutyl)phosphoramidate as a fluorescent
probe of the dTMP binding site, we detected an ADP-induced conformational change 
enhancing the binding affinity of dTMP and analogues. Several thymidine and dTMP 
derivatives were found to bind the enzyme with micromolar affinities. The present
study provides the basis for the design of specific inhibitors or substrates for 
poxvirus TMP kinase.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.05006.x 
PMID: 16336263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

