
1. J Bacteriol. 2006 Mar;188(5):1920-8.

Involvement of the LlaKR2I methylase in expression of the AbiR bacteriophage
defense system in Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis biovar diacetylactis KR2.

Yang JM(1), Deurraza PJ, Matvienko N, O'Sullivan DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Nutrition, Cargill Building for Microbial and
Plant Genomics, University of Minnesota, 1500 Gortner Avenue, Saint Paul, MN
55108, USA.

The native lactococcal plasmid, pKR223, from Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis
biovar diacetylactis KR2 encodes two distinct bacteriophage-resistant mechanisms,
the LlaKR2I restriction and modification (R/M) system and the abortive infection 
(Abi) mechanism, AbiR, that impedes bacteriophage DNA replication. This study
completed the characterization of AbiR, revealing that it is the first Abi system
to be encoded by three genes, abiRa, abiRb, and abiRc, arranged in an operon and 
that it requires the methylase gene from the LlaKR2I R/M system. An analysis of
deletion and insertion clones demonstrated that the AbiR operon was toxic in L.
lactis without the presence of the LlaKR2I methylase, which is required to
protect L. lactis from AbiR toxicity. The novelty of the AbiR system resides in
its original gene organization and the unusual protective role of the LlaKR2I
methylase. Interestingly, the AbiR genetic determinants are flanked by two IS982 
elements generating a likely transposable AbiR composite. This observation not
only substantiated the novel function of the LlaKR2I methylase in the AbiR system
but also illustrated the evolution of the LlaKR2I methylase toward a new and
separate cellular function. This unique structure of both the LlaKR2I R/M system 
and the AbiR system may have contributed to the evolution of the LlaKR2I
methylase toward a novel role comparable to that of the cell cycle-regulated
methylases that include Dam and CcrM methylases. This new role for the LlaKR2I
methylase offers a unique snapshot into the evolution of the cell cycle-regulated
methylases from an existing R/M system.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.188.5.1920-1928.2006 
PMCID: PMC1426540
PMID: 16484203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

