
1. J Gen Virol. 1991 Jul;72 ( Pt 7):1591-9.

Host cell phenotype-dependent methylation patterns of Epstein-Barr virus DNA.

Minarovits J(1), Minarovits-Kormuta S, Ehlin-Henriksson B, Falk K, Klein G,
Ernberg I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

We have shown previously that the EBNA 1 and latent membrane protein encoding
regions of the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) genome are highly methylated at CCGG
sequences in the Burkitt's lymphoma (BL)-derived cell line Rael, but are
unmethylated in a lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL) harbouring the same virus. To
examine whether this is a regular phenomenon, we compared the methylation
patterns of selected regions (BamHI C, W, H, M, E, K and N fragments) of EBV DNA 
in representative EBV-carrying cell types of normal and neoplastic origin.
Analysis of HpaII and MspI cleavage patterns showed that all probed regions were 
highly methylated in all six BL biopsy samples, but hypomethylated in the four
LCLs immortalized by the virus. EBV DNA was also highly methylated in the nude
mouse-passaged C15 nasopharyngeal carcinoma strain and partially methylated in
the C18 strain. Eight BL lines propagated in vitro, ranging from a typical BL
group I to a more LCL-like group III phenotype, showed heterogeneous levels of
methylation. Rael, the only stable group I cell line, carried highly methylated
viral genomes. The other cell lines, which have drifted to an LCL-like blastic
phenotype to various degrees, showed more moderate or low viral DNA methylation. 
Two sublines of the BL cell line Jijoye, which could be classified as groups II
and III, respectively, showed a corresponding difference in EBV DNA
methylation.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-72-7-1591 
PMID: 1649897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

