
1. J Virol. 2006 Apr;80(7):3582-91.

Enhanced local symmetry interactions globally stabilize a mutant virus capsid
that maintains infectivity and capsid dynamics.

Speir JA(1), Bothner B, Qu C, Willits DA, Young MJ, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North
Torrey Pines Rd., La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Structural transitions in viral capsids play a critical role in the virus life
cycle, including assembly, disassembly, and release of the packaged nucleic acid.
Cowpea chlorotic mottle virus (CCMV) undergoes a well-studied reversible
structural expansion in vitro in which the capsid expands by 10%. The swollen
form of the particle can be completely disassembled by increasing the salt
concentration to 1 M. Remarkably, a single-residue mutant of the CCMV N-terminal 
arm, K42R, is not susceptible to dissociation in high salt (salt-stable CCMV
[SS-CCMV]) and retains 70% of wild-type infectivity. We present the combined
structural and biophysical basis for the chemical stability and viability of the 
SS-CCMV particles. A 2.7-A resolution crystal structure of the SS-CCMV capsid
shows an addition of 660 new intersubunit interactions per particle at the center
of the 20 hexameric capsomeres, which are a direct result of the K42R mutation.
Protease-based mapping experiments of intact particles demonstrate that both the 
swollen and closed forms of the wild-type and SS-CCMV particles have highly
dynamic N-terminal regions, yet the SS-CCMV particles are more resistant to
degradation. Thus, the increase in SS-CCMV particle stability is a result of
concentrated tethering of subunits at a local symmetry interface (i.e.,
quasi-sixfold axes) that does not interfere with the function of other key
symmetry interfaces (i.e., fivefold, twofold, quasi-threefold axes). The result
is a particle that is still dynamic but insensitive to high salt due to a new
series of bonds that are resistant to high ionic strength and preserve the
overall particle structure.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.80.7.3582-3591.2006 
PMCID: PMC1440388
PMID: 16537626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

