
1. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2006 Mar;35(2):154-60.

[Application of PCR-based tRNAval Pol III-shRNA expression cassettes in screening
of efficient siRNA for inhibiting hepatitis B virus].

[Article in Chinese]

Pan XC(1), Chen Z, Ni Q, Yang ZG, Xu N, Jin HY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Disease, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310003, China.

OBJECTIVE: To screen efficient siRNA for inhibiting hepatitis B virus using the
technique of PCR-based tRNA(val) Pol III-shRNA expression cassettes (SECs).
METHODS: Based on core gene sequence of HBV, five target sites of siRNA were
designed. tRNAval Pol III-shRNA expression cassettes produced by one-step
overlapping extension PCR strategy were co-transfected with HBV C gene and
pC-EGFP plasmid into AD293 cells respectively. Forty-eight hours after
transfection, fluorescence of HBVC-GFP protein was detected by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS); HBV C mRNA was detected by
semi-quantitative RT-PCR. HBV-producing HepG2. 2. 15 cells were transfected with 
selected SECs for 72 h, HBsAg and HBeAg in the cell culture medium were detected 
by radioimmunoassay assay (RIA). HBV pgRNA from cell total RNA was detected by
semi-quantitative PCR.
RESULT: Co-transfection with pC-GFP plasmid and SECs into AD293 cells resulted in
inhibition expression of HBV C gene and decrease of EGFP fluorescence intensity. 
SEC-492i showed most significant inhibition effect on HBV C-EGFP expression
compared with other SECs. Selected SEC-492i or SEC-282i targeting core gene could
efficiently decrease expression of HBeAg and the level of HBV pgRNA in a
dose-dependent manner. SEC-492i inhibited HBV replication and antigen expression 
in a more efficient way than SEC-282i at the same final concentration.
CONCLUSION: The expressed shRNA, which targets sites on HBV C mRNA in 492i, is to
have having most efficient RNAi effect. tRNAval Pol III-shRNA expression
cassettes produced by one-step overlapping extension PCR strategy should be
useful for identification of optimal siRNA.


PMID: 16610081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

