
1. J Med Assoc Thai. 2005 Sep;88 Suppl 4:S7-11.

The prevalence of varicella-zoster virus infection in normal healthy individuals 
aged above 6 months.

Kowitdamrong E(1), Pancharoen C, Thammaborvorn R, Bhattarakosol P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand.

The prevalence of varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infection was studied by
determining the presence of IgG antibody to VZV (anti-VZV IgG) using ELISA
method. Three hundred and fifty sera collected from Thai healthy individuals aged
above 6 months (mean age +/- standard deviation = 14.9 +/- 11.4) were tested, the
prevalence of VZV infection was 64.6% (225/350). All samples were randomly
sampling from healthy children and blood donors who visited the hospital and
clssified into 7 groups, 50 samples each, according to their age, i.e., group 1; 
6 months-3 years, group 2; 4-6 years, group 3; 7-9 years, group 4; 10-14 years,
group 5; 15-19 years, group 6; 20-24 years and group 7; above 25 years. The
prevalence of VZV infection were 12%, 42%, 64%, 70%, 78%, 84% and 100%
respectively. The mean amount of anti-VZV IgG among groups of positive VZV
infection (225 samples) was 86.8 +/- 29.7 unit/ml. The mean amount of anti-VZV
IgG was highest in 6 months-3 years age group (113.6 +/- 39.2 unit/ml).
Significant difference of the mean amount of anti- VZV IgG was found between
group 1, 3, 6 and other groups (p-value < 0.05). There was a correlation between 
history of varicella and the presence of anti-VZV IgG in the serum. 95.3% of
individuals with positive history has already had the antibody. The important
associated factors that might involve VZV infection were age, number of members
in family and place of exposure to VZV infection. Other factors, such as sex and 
income did not show any association to VZV infection.


PMID: 16622994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

