
1. J Interferon Res. 1991 Dec;11(6):371-7.

The induction of interferon-alpha and interferon-beta mRNA in human natural
interferon-producing blood leukocytes requires de novo protein synthesis.

Cederblad B(1), Gobl AE, Alm GV.

Author information: 
(1)Interferon Laboratory, Uppsala University, Sweden.

The induction of interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) and IFN-beta mRNA in natural IFN
producing (NIP) cells in cultures of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs), stimulated by glutaraldehyde-fixed Herpes simplex virus type 1
(HSV)-infected WISH cells, was studied. The protein synthesis inhibitor
cycloheximide (CHX) totally prevented the appearance of both IFN-alpha and
IFN-beta mRNA, also in cultures supplemented with a conditioned medium (CM)
assumed to contain soluble factors necessary for the IFN induction. However, when
PBMCs were preincubated for 4 h in medium supplemented with fetal bovine serum
(FBS) with or without addition of CM, the subsequent induction of IFN-alpha/beta 
mRNA became partially resistant to CHX. In serum-free medium containing
interleukin-3 (IL-3) or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF), the early induction of IFN-alpha mRNA became resistant to CHX, and, in 
contrast to FBS and CM supplemented medium, this was observed also without a
preincubation of the PBMCs. In contrast, IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), IFN-alpha, or IFN-gamma had no such effects. Our
results suggests that de novo synthesis of proteins normally is required for the 
induction of IFN-alpha/beta mRNA. Such proteins might be cytokines, possibly
CSFs, which in turn also may require protein synthesis for their actions. In
contrast, the actual triggering signal provided by the HSV-inducer is independent
of protein synthesis.

DOI: 10.1089/jir.1991.11.371 
PMID: 1666118  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

