
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2006 Jul;17(7):780-94.

Functional assessment of the engraftment potential of gammaretrovirus-modified
CD34+ cells, using a short serum-free transduction protocol.

Budak-Alpdogan T(1), Przybylowski M, Gonen M, Sadelain M, Bertino J, Rivi√®re I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson
Medical School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, 08903, USA.

The successful transduction and engraftment of human mobilized peripheral blood
(MBP) CD34(+) cells are determined to a large extent by the ex vivo
cell-processing conditions. In preparation for upcoming clinical trials, we
investigated essential culture parameters and devised a short and efficient
gammaretroviral transduction protocol entailing minimal manipulation of MBP
CD34(+) cells. The engraftment potential and in vivo transgene expression in the 
progeny of repopulating CD34(+) cells were measured to assess the functionality
of CD34(+) cells transduced under these conditions. Using a competitive in vivo
repopulation assay in nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient mice, we 
demonstrate equivalent engraftment of CD34(+) cells transduced under serum-free
conditions as compared with CD34(+) cells cultured with serum. We also took
advantage of this in vivo model to demonstrate that ex vivo manipulation of
CD34(+) cells can be shortened to 60 hr, using 36 hr of prestimulation and two
cycles of transduction 12 hr apart. These minimally manipulated CD34(+) cells
engraft in a manner similar to cells transduced under longer protocols and the
vector-encoded transgene is expressed at the same frequency in cells derived from
repopulating CD34(+) cells in vivo. We have thus developed a short and efficient 
human MBP CD34(+) transduction protocol under serum-free conditions that is
suitable and broadly applicable for phase I clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.2006.17.780 
PMID: 16839276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

