
1. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2006 Sep;102(3):344-52. Epub
2006 Mar 20.

Expression of p16(INK4A), p53, and Rb proteins are independent from the presence 
of human papillomavirus genes in oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Nemes JA(1), Deli L, Nemes Z, MÃ¡rton IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, Medical and Health Science Center, University of
Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. nemesj@jaguar.unideb.hu

BACKGROUND: The overexpression of p16(INK4A) and suppression of p53 and Rb
proteins are key features of oncogenic transformation by human papillomaviruses
(HPV) in anogenital cancers. HPV genomes are often detected in cancers of the
oral cavity, but it is unclear whether HPV has a specific oncogenic role there.
OBJECTIVES: The objectives of the study were to investigate the expression of
p53, Rb, and p16(INK4A) proteins and identify HPV infection and viral integration
into the host genome.
METHODS: Seventy-nine cases of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) were studied
by immunohistochemistry. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed to
identify HPV DNA from the samples. The results were correlated with clinical
data.
RESULTS: Thirty-three cases were HPV positive for high-risk HPV (HR-HPV) types,
of which 27 harbored HPV16. In 25 of 27 HPV16-positive tumors, the HPV16 genome
was fully integrated into the host genome, as evidenced by the lack of
PCR-amplifiable E2 gene sequences. Forty-five patients were p53 overexpressing,
20 with HR-HPV-positive and 25 with HR-HPV-negative tumors. p16(INK4A) protein
was overexpressed in 4 of 31 HR-HPV-positive and 9of 45 HR-HPV-negative cases.
Twenty-six of 32 HR-HPV-positive and 37 of 44 HR-HPV-negative samples exhibited
pRb nuclear staining. These differences between HR-HPV-positive and -negative
tumors were not statistically significant. No correlation was found between these
biological factors and tumor location, stage, differentiation grade, or alcohol
or tobacco abuse.
CONCLUSIONS: A tumor immunophenotype, similar to HPV-related anogenital cancers, 
is not present in OSCC and highly oncogenic HPV types are therefore unlikely to
be specific or independent risk factors for oral cancer.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tripleo.2005.10.069 
PMID: 16920543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

