
1. Diabetologia. 2006 Nov;49(11):2697-703. Epub 2006 Sep 13.

Induction of the chemokine interferon-gamma-inducible protein-10 in human
pancreatic islets during enterovirus infection.

Berg AK(1), Korsgren O, Frisk G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University, Akademiska
Sjukhuset, ing 95/96, SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Enterovirus infections have long been suspected to be
environmental factors that may cause type 1 diabetes, but the pathways leading
from infection to beta cell destruction are still unknown. We therefore examined 
whether enterovirus infection of human islets leads to upregulation of
interferon-gamma-inducible protein (IP-10, now known as chemokine [C-X-C motif]
ligand 10 [CXCL10]), a chemokine important for the induction of insulitis.
METHODS: Isolated human islets were infected with three different strains of
Coxsackie B4 virus. IP-10 expression and secretion from the infected human islets
were then measured using RT-PCR and ELISA at several time points.
RESULTS: IP-10 was clearly upregulated in and secreted from human islets during
enterovirus infection. This was demonstrated with three different strains of
Coxsackie B4 virus, two of which are lytic to islets and one which is non-lytic
and can establish a persistent infection in human islets.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We propose that enterovirus-induced upregulation of
IP-10 during infection of the islets in vivo is the first step towards
destructive insulitis. Our findings support the idea that enterovirus infection
triggers immune-mediated beta cell destruction, and for the first time suggest a 
possible mechanism behind enterovirus-induced diabetes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00125-006-0429-7 
PMID: 16969644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

