
1. J Virol. 2006 Dec;80(23):11678-85. Epub 2006 Sep 13.

Mimivirus giant particles incorporate a large fraction of anonymous and unique
gene products.

Renesto P(1), Abergel C, Decloquement P, Moinier D, Azza S, Ogata H, Fourquet P, 
Gorvel JP, Claverie JM.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Rickettsies, CNRS UMR 6020, IFR-48, Faculté de Médecine, 27
Boulevard Jean Moulin, 13385 Marseille, France.
patricia.renesto@medecine.univ-mrs.fr

Acanthamoeba polyphaga mimivirus is the largest known virus in both particle size
and genome complexity. Its 1.2-Mb genome encodes 911 proteins, among which only
298 have predicted functions. The composition of purified isolated virions was
analyzed by using a combined electrophoresis/mass spectrometry approach allowing 
the identification of 114 proteins. Besides the expected major structural
components, the viral particle packages 12 proteins unambiguously associated with
transcriptional machinery, 3 proteins associated with DNA repair, and 2
topoisomerases. Other main functional categories represented in the virion
include oxidative pathways and protein modification. More than half of the
identified virion-associated proteins correspond to anonymous genes of unknown
function, including 45 "ORFans." As demonstrated by both Western blotting and
immunogold staining, some of these "ORFans," which lack any convincing similarity
in the sequence databases, are endowed with antigenic properties. Thus, anonymous
and unique genes constituting the majority of the mimivirus gene complement
encode bona fide proteins that are likely to participate in well-integrated
processes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00940-06 
PMCID: PMC1642625
PMID: 16971431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

