
1. J Virol. 2006 Dec;80(23):11827-32. Epub 2006 Sep 13.

Recombination patterns in aphthoviruses mirror those found in other
picornaviruses.

Heath L(1), van der Walt E, Varsani A, Martin DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Faculty of Science, University of
Cape Town, Rondebosch 7701, South Africa.

Foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) is thought to evolve largely through genetic 
drift driven by the inherently error-prone nature of its RNA polymerase. There
is, however, increasing evidence that recombination is an important mechanism in 
the evolution of these and other related picornoviruses. Here, we use an
extensive set of recombination detection methods to identify 86 unique potential 
recombination events among 125 publicly available FMDV complete genome sequences.
The large number of events detected between members of different serotypes
suggests that horizontal flow of sequences among the serotypes is relatively
common and does not incur severe fitness costs. Interestingly, the distribution
of recombination breakpoints was found to be largely nonrandom. Whereas there are
clear breakpoint cold spots within the structural genes, two statistically
significant hot spots precisely separate these from the nonstructural genes. Very
similar breakpoint distributions were found for other picornovirus species in the
genera Enterovirus and Teschovirus. Our results suggest that genome regions
encoding the structural proteins of both FMDV and other picornaviruses are
functionally interchangeable modules, supporting recent proposals that the
structural and nonstructural coding regions of the picornaviruses are evolving
largely independently of one another.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01100-06 
PMCID: PMC1642601
PMID: 16971423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

