
1. Arch Anim Nutr. 2006 Oct;60(5):427-35.

Effects of chicken intestinal antimicrobial peptides on humoral immunity of
chickens and antibody titres after vaccination with infectious bursal disease
virus vaccine in chicken.

Yurong Y(1), Yibao J, Ruiping S, Qingqiang Y, Kaisong P, Huihui B, Decheng W,
Tianlong L, Xuemei Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing.
yangyu7712@sina.com

Sixty chickens were randomly divided into two groups (30 chickens in each group) 
to determine the effect of oral administration of chicken intestinal
antimicrobial peptides (CIAMP) on the humoral immune response. Chickens of both
groups were fed the same diet. In the treatment group chickens received drinking 
water supplemented with CIAMP (1 microg/ml) right after hatching. Samples of
blood, bursa of Fabricus, spleen and intestine were taken at day 1, 4, 7, 10 and 
17 of experiment. CIAMP supplementation enhanced the content of IgG and IgM in
serum from day 4-10 and day 10-17, respectively, (p < 0.05), IgM-forming cells in
bursa of Fabricus and spleen at the age of 7 days (p < 0.05) and IgG-forming
cells in bursa of Fabricus at the age of 4 days (p < 0.05). In addition, CIAMP
enhanced the IgA-forming cells in caecal tonsils diffuse area at day 4 (p <
0.05). Furthermore, CIAMP enhanced the antibody response to infectious bursal
disease virus vaccine (IBDV) in chickens 21 days following IBDV vaccine
administration (p < 0.05). These results suggested that CIAMP could modulate the 
humoral immune response of chickens and increased the antibody titres of
infectious bursal disease virus vaccine.

DOI: 10.1080/17450390600884484 
PMID: 17036752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

