
1. Vaccine. 2007 Jan 26;25(7):1225-35. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

Multicomponent anthrax toxin display and delivery using bacteriophage T4.

Shivachandra SB(1), Li Q, Peachman KK, Matyas GR, Leppla SH, Alving CR, Rao M,
Rao VB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, 103 McCort Ward Hall, The Catholic University of
America, 620 Michigan Ave., NE, Washington, DC 20064, USA.

We describe a multicomponent antigen display and delivery system using
bacteriophage T4. Two dispensable outer capsid proteins, Hoc (highly antigenic
outer capsid protein, 155 copies) and Soc (small outer capsid protein, 810
copies), decorate phage T4 capsid. These proteins bind to the symmetrically
localized capsid sites, which appear following prohead assembly and expansion. We
hypothesized that multiple antigens fused to Hoc can be displayed on the same
capsid and such particles can elicit broad immunological responses. Anthrax toxin
proteins, protective antigen (PA), lethal factor (LF), and edema factor (EF), and
their functional domains, were fused to Hoc with an N-terminal hexa-histidine tag
and the recombinant proteins were over-expressed in E. coli and purified. Using a
defined in vitro assembly system, the anthrax-Hoc fusion proteins were
efficiently displayed on T4 capsid, either individually or in combinations. All
of the 155 Hoc binding sites can be occupied by one antigen, or they can be split
among two or more antigens by varying their molar ratio in the binding reaction. 
Immunization of mice with T4 phage carrying PA, LF, and EF elicited strong
antigen-specific antibodies against all antigens as well as lethal toxin
neutralization titers. The triple antigen T4 phage elicited stronger PA-specific 
immune responses than the phage displaying PA alone. These features offer novel
avenues to develop customized multicomponent vaccines against anthrax and other
pathogenic diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2006.10.010 
PMCID: PMC1888565
PMID: 17069938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

