
1. Biomaterials. 2007 Feb;28(6):1267-79. Epub 2006 Nov 21.

Nanostructured calcium phosphates (NanoCaPs) for non-viral gene delivery:
influence of the synthesis parameters on transfection efficiency.

Olton D(1), Li J, Wilson ME, Rogers T, Close J, Huang L, Kumta PN, Sfeir C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 
PA 15213, USA.

Calcium phosphate (CaP) based approaches remain an attractive option for
delivering plasmid DNA (pDNA) into cultured cells. However, despite their appeal,
current synthesis methodologies typically yield lower, less consistent
transfection efficiencies when compared to viral approaches. Therefore, we report
here a novel method to consistently synthesize efficient, nano-sized,
mono-dispersed CaP-pDNA particles; accomplished by optimizing both the
stoichiometry (Ca/P ratio) of the CaP particles as well as the mode in which the 
calcium and phosphate precursor solutions are mixed. Our results indicate that
calcium and phosphate precursors when mixed in a controlled and regulated manner 
reproducibly result in nano-sized particles that consistently yield higher
transfection efficiencies when compared to particles synthesized via manual
mixing (a two-fold increase was observed). Also, maximum transfection
efficiencies in both HeLa and MC3T3-E1 cells lines were obtained when a Ca/P
ratio between 100 and 300 was used. Particles synthesized within this optimum
Ca/P ratio range were between 25 and 50 nm. Our data suggests that these
maximized transfection efficiencies were obtained because these particles not
only effectively condensed (70% efficient) but also efficiently bound (90%
efficient) the pDNA. In addition, X-ray diffraction and Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy analyses confirmed that all of the synthesized CaP
structures exhibited the hydroxyapatite phase.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2006.10.026 
PMID: 17123600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

