
1. J Struct Biol. 2007 May;158(2):224-32. Epub 2006 Nov 26.

A thermally induced phase transition in a viral capsid transforms the hexamers,
leaving the pentamers unchanged.

Conway JF(1), Cheng N, Ross PD, Hendrix RW, Duda RL, Steven AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.

Scanning calorimetry combined with cryo-electron microscopy affords a powerful
approach to investigating hierarchical interactions in multi-protein complexes.
Calorimetry can detect the temperatures at which certain interactions are
disrupted and cryo-EM can reveal the accompanying structural changes. The
procapsid of bacteriophage HK97 (Prohead I) is a 450A-diameter shell composed of 
60 hexamers and 12 pentamers of gp5, organized with icosahedral symmetry. Gp5
consists of the N-terminal Delta-domain (11kDa) and gp5* (31 kDa): gp5* forms the
contiguous shell from which clusters of Delta-domains extend inwards. At neutral 
pH, Prohead I exhibits an endothermic transition at 53 degrees C with an enthalpy
change of 14 kcal/mole (of gp5 monomer). We show that this transition is
reversible. To capture its structural expression, we incubated Prohead I at 60
degrees C followed by rapid freezing and, by cryo-EM, observed a capsid species
10% larger than Prohead I. At 11A resolution, visible changes are confined to the
gp5 hexamers. Their Delta-domain clusters have disappeared and are presumably
disordered, either by unfolding or dispersal. The gp5* hexamer rings are thinned 
and flattened as they assume the conformation observed in Expansion Intermediate 
I, a transition state of the normal, proteolysis-induced, maturation pathway. We 
infer that, at ambient temperatures, the hexamer Delta-domains restrain their
gp5* rings from switching to a lower free energy, EI-I-like, state; above 53
degrees, this restraint is overcome. Pentamers, on the other hand, are more
stably anchored and resist this thermal perturbation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsb.2006.11.006 
PMCID: PMC1978070
PMID: 17188892  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

