
1. Gene Ther. 2007 Mar;14(6):491-502. Epub 2007 Jan 4.

Cotransduction of CCL27 gene can improve the efficacy and safety of IL-12 gene
therapy for cancer.

Gao JQ(1), Kanagawa N, Motomura Y, Yanagawa T, Sugita T, Hatanaka Y, Tani Y,
Mizuguchi H, Tsutsumi Y, Mayumi T, Okada N, Nakagawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Therapeutics, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a potent antitumoral cytokine, but high doses are
toxic. Herein, we demonstrate that combinational transduction of IL-12 and
CC-chemokine ligand-27 (CCL27) genes into pre-existing murine OV-HM ovarian
carcinoma and Meth-A fibrosarcoma, by using RGD fiber-mutant adenoviral vectors, 
could induce tumor regression and relieve systemic side effects more effectively 
than either treatment alone. The antitumor activity of the IL-12 and CCL27
combination treatment was T-cell-dependent, and development of long-term specific
immunity was confirmed in rechallenge experiments. Immunohistochemical analysis
of tumors transduced with CCL27 gene alone or cotransduced with IL-12 and CCL27
genes showed significant increases in numbers of infiltrating CD3(+) T cells,
which included both CD4(+) and CD8(+) cells. Additionally, cotransduction with
IL-12 and CCL27 genes could more efficiently activate tumor-infiltrating immune
cells than transduction with CCL27 alone, as determined by the frequency of
perforin-positive cells and expression levels of IFN-gamma. Furthermore, mice
treated with the IL-12 and CCL27 combination compared with those treated with
IL-12 alone showed milder pathological changes, for example, lymphocyte
infiltration and extramedullary hematopoiesis, in lung, liver and spleen. Our
data provide evidence that combinational in vivo transduction with IL-12 and
CCL27 genes is a promising approach for the development of cancer immunogene
therapy that can simultaneously recruit and activate tumor-infiltrating immune
cells.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.gt.3302892 
PMID: 17203106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

