
1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2007 Feb;26(2):107-15.

Humoral and cellular immune responses in children given annual immunization with 
trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine.

Zeman AM(1), Holmes TH, Stamatis S, Tu W, He XS, Bouvier N, Kemble G, Greenberg
HB, Lewis DB, Arvin AM, Dekker CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305-5208, USA.

BACKGROUND: There have been no prior reports of the frequency of circulating
influenza-specific, interferon gamma-producing memory CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells in
healthy children who have received multiple influenza immunizations.
METHODS: We evaluated 21 previously immunized children, ages 3 to 9 years, before
and 1 month after administration of trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine.
Frequencies of influenza-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells stimulated with trivalent
inactivated influenza vaccine or A/Panama (H3N2) virus were determined by flow
cytometry, and antibody responses to vaccine strains and a drifted H3N2 strain
were measured by hemagglutination inhibition assay and neutralizing antibody
assays.
RESULTS: Mean change in CD4+ and in CD8+ T-cell frequencies after immunization
was 0.01% (P > 0.39) with postimmunization CD4+ frequencies higher than CD8+
frequencies. Children with more previous vaccinations had a higher baseline
frequency of CD4+ T-cells (P = 0.0002) but a smaller increase or even a decline
from baseline after immunization (P = 0.003). An association between age and
change in frequency was not detected. Baseline geometric mean titers (GMTs) and
seroprotection rates were significantly higher in older children against A/Panama
(neutralizing baseline GMT, P = 0.0488) and A/New Caledonia (hemagglutination
inhibition baseline GMT and seroprotection, P < 0.0297). Baseline GMTs against
B/Hong Kong were not associated with age or quantity of prior vaccinations.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that children may plateau in CD4+ T-cell
responses to influenza antigens with repeated exposures and that the number of
exposures may play a large role in building a memory CD4+ T-cell response to
influenza A, perhaps independently from age.

DOI: 10.1097/01.inf.0000253251.03785.9b 
PMID: 17259871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

