
1. Curr HIV Res. 2007 Jan;5(1):69-78.

Alteration of the proline at position 7 of the HIV-1 spacer peptide p1 suppresses
viral infectivity in a strain dependent manner.

Hill MK(1), Bellamy-McIntyre A, Vella LJ, Campbell SM, Marshall JA, Tachedjian G,
Mak J.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Program, Macfarlane Burnet Institute for Medical Research and Public 
Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. mel@burnet.edu.au

The HIV-1 spacer peptide p1 is located in the C-terminus of the Gag polyprotein
and separates the nucleocapsid (NC) and p6(Gag). Research centered on p1 has been
limited and as yet no function has been ascribed to this spacer peptide. We have 
previously found that the conserved p1 proline residues (position 7 and 13) are
critical for replication in the HIV-1 strain HXB2-BH10. In this study we have
focused on the proline rich p1-p6(Gag) C-terminus of HIV-1. We individually
examined the role of p1 proline's in multiple strains of HIV-1 and investigated
the role of three proline residues in p6(Gag) (P24, P25 and P30). Assessment of
the HXB2-BH10 based mutants revealed that Gag-Pol incorporation relative to Gag
decreased in the p1 mutant virions, with the double proline mutant the most
impaired. Mutating both p1 proline residues was found to abolish infectivity in
multiple strains of HIV-1. Independent mutation of the p1 proline at position 7
resulted in a strain-dependent suppression of viral infectivity. This defect
correlates with the presence of a tyrosine residue at position 9 of p1 and occurs
in the early phase of the HIV-1 replication cycle. The p1 proline residues were
found to be functionally distinct from P24, P25 and P30 in p6(Gag). This work
affords novel insights into our understanding of the role of p1 in HIV-1
replication.

DOI: 10.2174/157016207779316323 
PMID: 17266558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

