
1. J Food Prot. 2007 Feb;70(2):504-8.

An efficient and rapid method for recovery of norovirus from food associated with
outbreaks of gastroenteritis.

Boxman IL(1), Tilburg JJ, te Loeke NA, Vennema H, de Boer E, Koopmans M.

Author information: 
(1)Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority, Regionale dienst Oost, P.O. Box
202, 7200 AE, Zutphen, The Netherlands. ingeborg.boxman@vwa.nl

Noroviruses have emerged as the most common cause of foodborne outbreaks of acute
nonbacterial gastroenteritis. In this study, two methods for the extraction of
viruses from deli ham were compared. Using both methods, as little as 1 to 10
reverse transcription (RT)-PCR units of inoculated norovirus and enterovirus
could be detected by nested RT-PCR assays. The fastest and most efficient
extraction method based on TRIzol LS Reagent was chosen to identify viruses in
food items associated with three different outbreaks. Norovirus was detected
using nested (real time) RT-PCR assays that target the genome region routinely
used for diagnosis of human cases, thereby facilitating the comparison of
sequences detected in food and clinical specimens. For one outbreak, a norovirus 
sequence (163/163 nucleotides) identical to those detected in clinical samples
was found on salami sliced by a food handler with a recent history of
gastroenteritis. For the other two outbreaks, norovirus was detected on leftovers
of spareribs and ham, but fecal samples from affected persons were not available.
The methods used in this study may be useful in future outbreak investigations
because the extraction method is easy to perform and suitable for this particular
type of food and the detection method facilitates direct comparison of patient
and food data.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028x-70.2.504 
PMID: 17340891  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

