
1. J Wildl Dis. 2007 Jan;43(1):116-23.

Does human proximity affect antibody prevalence in marine-foraging river otters
(Lontra canadensis)?

Gaydos JK(1), Conrad PA, Gilardi KV, Blundell GM, Ben-David M.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Davis, Wildlife Health Center, Orcas Island Office, 
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, 1016 Deer Harbor 
Road, Eastsound, Washington 98245, USA. jkgaydos@ucdavis.edu

The investigation of diseases of free-ranging river otters (Lontra canadensis) is
a primary conservation priority for this species; however, very little is known
about diseases of river otters that forage in marine environments. To identify
and better understand pathogens that could be important to marine-foraging river 
otters, other wildlife species, domestic animals, and humans and to determine if 
proximity to human population could be a factor in disease exposure, serum
samples from 55 free-ranging marine-foraging river otters were tested for
antibodies to selected pathogens. Thirty-five animals were captured in Prince
William Sound, Alaska (USA), an area of low human density, and 20 were captured
in the San Juan Islands, Washington State (USA), an area characterized by higher 
human density. Of 40 river otters tested by indirect immunofluorescent antibody
test, 17.5% were seropositive (titer > or =320) for Toxoplasma gondii. All
positive animals came from Washington. Of 35 river otters tested for antibodies
to Leptospira interrogans using the microscopic agglutination test, 10 of 20
(50%) from Washington were seropositive (titer > or =200). None of the 15 tested 
animals from Alaska were positive. Antibodies to Neospora caninum (n=40),
Sarcocystis neurona (n=40), Brucella abortus (n=55), avian influenza (n=40),
canine distemper virus (n=55), phocine distemper virus (n=55), dolphin
morbillivirus (n=55), porpoise morbillivirus (n=55), and Aleutian disease
parvovirus (n=46) were not detected. Identifying exposure to T. gondii and L.
interrogans in otters from Washington State but not in otters from Alaska
suggests that living proximal to higher human density and its associated
agricultural activities, domestic animals, and rodent populations could enhance
river otter exposure to these pathogens.

DOI: 10.7589/0090-3558-43.1.116 
PMID: 17347401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

