
1. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2007 Feb;28(1):58-69.

Psychosocial functioning of children with AIDS and HIV infection: review of the
literature from a socioecological framework.

Steele RG(1), Nelson TD, Cole BP.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Child Psychology Program, Dole Human Development Center, University
of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-7555, USA. rsteele@ku.edu

Despite the development of highly effective treatments for the disease, pediatric
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection continues to affect a substantial
number of families both in the United States and worldwide. This article reviews 
the psychosocial functioning of children with HIV, taking a socioecological
perspective to organize the literature. When compared to children from similar
socioeconomic situations, children with HIV demonstrate a range of possible
outcomes. However, beyond the direct effects on children's neurocognitive and
psychological functioning, HIV infection may disrupt many of the social support
systems that children depend on for optimal development. Further, unlike many
other illnesses, children with HIV infection are more likely to experience
parental illness and possible death, social stigmatization, and the prospect of
lifelong adherence to complicated medical regimens. Families face difficult
decisions regarding disclosure of the illness both to the child and to others
within and outside of the family. Children who are disclosed to about their
illness generally evidence better adjustment. Similarly, appropriate disclosure
outside of the immediate family may confer some benefits to the child in terms of
psychological and physical health. However, research into the larger social
ecologies of youth with HIV remains lacking, limiting the conclusions that can be
drawn regarding longer term outcomes.

DOI: 10.1097/DBP.0b013e31803084c6 
PMID: 17353739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

