
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Feb 27;104(9):3396-401. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

HIV-1 gp120 inhibits TLR9-mediated activation and IFN-{alpha} secretion in
plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Martinelli E(1), Cicala C, Van Ryk D, Goode DJ, Macleod K, Arthos J, Fauci AS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Disease, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. martinee1@niaid.nih.gov

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) play a central role in innate and adaptive
immune responses against viral infections. pDCs secrete type I IFNs and
proinflammatory cytokines upon stimulation by either TLR7 or TLR9. Throughout the
course of HIV infection, the production of type-I IFNs is profoundly impaired,
and total pDC cell counts in peripheral blood correlates inversely with viral
load and positively with CD4(+) T cell count. The origin of these defects is
unclear. pDCs express CD4, CCR5, and CXCR4, the primary receptor and coreceptors,
respectively, for the HIV envelope; yet little is known concerning the effects of
the viral envelope on these cells. Here, we show that exposure of pDCs to gp120
results in the suppression of activation of these cells. This suppression is
specific for TLR9-mediated responses, because TLR7-mediated responses are
unaffected by gp120. gp120 also suppressed TLR9-mediated induction of
proinflammatory cytokines and expression of CD83, a marker of DC activation.
Finally, gp120 suppressed pDC-induced cytolytic activity of natural killer cells.
Taken together, these data demonstrate that the direct interaction of HIV-1 gp120
with pDCs interferes with TLR9 activation resulting in a decreased ability of
pDCs to secrete antiviral and inflammatory factors that play a central role in
initiating host immune responses against invading pathogens.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0611353104 
PMCID: PMC1805537
PMID: 17360657  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

