
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2007 Apr 15;44(8):1115-22. Epub 2007 Mar 9.

The effect of antiretroviral therapy on secondary transmission of HIV among men
who have sex with men.

McCormick AW(1), Walensky RP, Lipsitch M, Losina E, Hsu H, Weinstein MC, Paltiel 
AD, Freedberg KA, Seage GR 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. amccormi@hsph.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Antiretroviral therapy (ART) reduces human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) RNA load and the probability of transmitting HIV to an HIV-uninfected
partner. However, the potential reduction in secondary transmission associated
with ART may be offset by the longer duration of infectiousness.
METHODS: To estimate the effects of ART on the secondary transmission of HIV
among men who have sex with men, we used a previously published state-transition 
model of HIV disease to simulate the clinical and virologic course of HIV
infection among 2 cohorts of men who have sex with men: (1) a cohort of
individuals who were not receiving ART and (2) a cohort of individuals treated
with US guideline-concordant ART. The model tracked the number of acts of
unprotected insertive anal intercourse, transmission risk per act as determined
by HIV RNA level, and the number of secondary cases generated in each cohort.
RESULTS: The estimated mean number of secondary transmissions from an
HIV-infected individual after 10, 20, and 30 years of infection were 1.9, 2.5,
and 2.5, respectively, in the untreated cohort, compared with 1.4, 1.8, and 2.3, 
respectively, in the treated cohort. The total number of transmissions for the
treated cohort began to exceed the total number of transmissions for the
untreated cohort 33 years after infection; over the entire course of infection,
treatment with ART led to a 23% increase in secondary infections. All estimates
of the impact of ART on secondary transmission were sensitive to changes in risk 
behaviors.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that ART must be accompanied by effective
HIV-related risk reduction interventions. Programs that target prevention to
decrease further HIV transmission are crucial to epidemic control.

DOI: 10.1086/512816 
PMCID: PMC2365722
PMID: 17366461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

