
1. Commun Agric Appl Biol Sci. 2006;71(3 Pt B):1275-80.

New indicator plants for potato virus X.

Esfandiari N(1), Habibi MK, Mosahebi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Protection, Faculty of Horticultural Sciences and Plant
Protection Agriculture, Tehran University, Karaj, Iran.

For over 2 years (2002-2004); a sever virus like disease on leaves in Pisum
sativum was observed from Tehran in Iran. The identity of which was established
by the following host reactions and serological and molecular assays. Collected
samples were tested for the presence of the virus using the DAS-ELISA (direct
double antibody sandwich-ELISA). Leaf sap of each test samples was diluted 1:10
in ELISA sample buffer. The samples reacted in ELISA with antibody against Potato
virus (x)(PVX). The samples were passed through three single chlorotic local
lesion transfers on Gompherena globosa, which showed chlorosis 5 to 7 days after 
mechanical inoculation. Finally one local was homogenized in phosphate buffer
(0.05 M, pH 7.2) and rubbing the inoculums on carbourundum--dusted leaves of
Nicotiana glutinosa. For host range studies extracts prepared from infected N.
glutinosa leave were inoculated to the 35 species. The virus induces systemic
mosaic symptoms on Petunia hybrida, Physalis floridana, Nicandera physaloides and
Solanum nigrum. This has not been yet record as assay hosts for PVX. Total RNA
extracted from symptomatic, plants and RNA extracted from purified virus
preparations were tested using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) with specific primers designed to amplify a fragment of the
RNA-dependent RNA-polymerase gen. Back inoculation from different symptomatic
plants, had been done to Pisum sativum and confirmed by DAS-ELISA. This is the
first report of Petunia hybrida, Physalis floridana, Nicandera physaloides and
Solanum nigrum as new indicator plants for PVX.


PMID: 17390890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

