
1. Virology. 2007 Aug 15;365(1):144-56. Epub 2007 Apr 24.

TLR-4 and -6 agonists reverse apoptosis and promote maturation of simian virus
5-infected human dendritic cells through NFkB-dependent pathways.

Arimilli S(1), Johnson JB, Alexander-Miller MA, Parks GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Wake Forest University School of
Medicine, Medical Center Blvd., Winston-Salem, NC 27157-1064, USA.

Infection of primary cultures of human immature monocyte-derived dendritic cells 
(moDC) with the paramyxovirus Simian Virus 5 (SV5) results in extensive
cytopathic effect (CPE) and induction of apoptosis, but DC maturation pathways
are not activated. In this study, we investigated the relationship between
SV5-induced apoptosis and the lack of DC maturation. Reducing CPE and apoptosis
in SV5-infected immature DC by the addition of a pancaspase inhibitor resulted in
only low level expression of maturation markers CD40, CD80 and CD86, suggesting
that SV5 infection either actively blocked maturation pathways or failed to
provide sufficient signals to activate maturation. To distinguish between these
hypotheses, SV5-infected immature DC were challenged with agonists that stimulate
toll-like receptors (TLRs). Treatment with the TLR-4 agonist LPS or TLR-6 agonist
FSL1 enhanced cell surface expression of CD40, CD80 and CD86 on SV5-infected
cells to levels approaching that of mock-infected TLR-treated moDC, but treatment
with agonists for TLR-2, -3, -5 or -8 had little effect. Addition of TLR-4 or -6 
agonists to SV5-infected DC also dramatically reduced CPE and apoptosis, but the 
levels of viral protein and virus yield were not affected. Similarly,
SV5-infected immature moDC were matured by treatment with IL-1beta, and these
mature infected cells also showed reduced CPE and apoptosis. In the presence of
NFkB inhibitors, TLR-4 and -6 agonists did not promote maturation or reduce
apoptosis of SV5-infected DC, indicating that maturation and cell survival were
both dependent on signaling through NFkB-dependent pathways. Our results suggest 
a model whereby SV5 replication induces apoptosis in immature DC but fails to
provide strong maturation signals, while activation of NFkB-dependent pathways by
exogenous ligands can lead to moDC maturation and override SV5-induced cell
death.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2007.02.035 
PMCID: PMC1949023
PMID: 17459446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

