
1. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2007 Mar-Apr;28(2):210-5.

Characterization of the N-glycans of recombinant bee venom hyaluronidase (Api m
2) expressed in insect cells.

Soldatova LN(1), Tsai C, Dobrovolskaia E, MarkoviÄ‡-Housley Z, Slater JE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Honeybee venom hyaluronidase (Api m 2) is a major glycoprotein allergen. Previous
studies have indicated that recombinant Api m 2 expressed in insect cells has
enzyme activity and IgE binding comparable with that of native Api m 2. In
contrast, Api m 2 expressed in Escherichia coli does not. In this study, we
characterized the carbohydrate side chains of Api m 2 expressed in insect cells, 
and compared our data with the established carbohydrate structure of native Api m
2. We assessed both the monosaccharide and the oligosaccharide content of
recombinant Api m 2 using fluorophore-assisted carbohydrate electrophoresis and
HPLC. To identify the amino acid residues at which glycosylation occurs, we
digested recombinant Api m 2 with endoproteinase Glu-C and identified the
fragments that contained carbohydrate by specific staining. Recombinant Api m 2
expressed in insect cells contains N-acetylglucosamine, mannose, and fucose, as
well as trace amounts of glucose and galactose, and the oligosaccharide analysis 
is consistent with heterogeneous oligosaccharide chains consisting of two to
seven monosaccharides. No sialic acid or N-acetylgalactosamine were detected.
These results are similar to published data for native Api m 2, although some
monosaccharide components appear to be absent in the recombinant protein.
Analysis of proteolytic digests indicates that of the four candidate
N-glycosylation sites, carbohydrate chains are attached at asparagines 115 and
263. Recombinant Api m 2 expressed in insect cells has enzymic activity and IgE
binding comparable with the native protein, and its carbohydrate composition is
very similar.

DOI: 10.2500/aap.2007.28.2947 
PMID: 17479607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

