
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2007 May;3(5):e87.

HIV-1 subtype B protease and reverse transcriptase amino acid covariation.

Rhee SY(1), Liu TF, Holmes SP, Shafer RW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California, United States of America.

Despite the high degree of HIV-1 protease and reverse transcriptase (RT) mutation
in the setting of antiretroviral therapy, the spectrum of possible virus variants
appears to be limited by patterns of amino acid covariation. We analyzed patterns
of amino acid covariation in protease and RT sequences from more than 7,000
persons infected with HIV-1 subtype B viruses obtained from the Stanford HIV Drug
Resistance Database (http://hivdb.stanford.edu). In addition, we examined the
relationship between conditional probabilities associated with a pair of
mutations and the order in which those mutations developed in viruses for which
longitudinal sequence data were available. Patterns of RT covariation were
dominated by the distinct clustering of Type I and Type II thymidine analog
mutations and the Q151M-associated mutations. Patterns of protease covariation
were dominated by the clustering of nelfinavir-associated mutations (D30N and
N88D), two main groups of protease inhibitor (PI)-resistance mutations associated
either with V82A or L90M, and a tight cluster of mutations associated with
decreased susceptibility to amprenavir and the most recently approved PI
darunavir. Different patterns of covariation were frequently observed for
different mutations at the same position including the RT mutations T69D versus
T69N, L74V versus L74I, V75I versus V75M, T215F versus T215Y, and K219Q/E versus 
K219N/R, and the protease mutations M46I versus M46L, I54V versus I54M/L, and
N88D versus N88S. Sequence data from persons with correlated mutations in whom
earlier sequences were available confirmed that the conditional probabilities
associated with correlated mutation pairs could be used to predict the order in
which the mutations were likely to have developed. Whereas accessory nucleoside
RT inhibitor-resistance mutations nearly always follow primary nucleoside RT
inhibitor-resistance mutations, accessory PI-resistance mutations often preceded 
primary PI-resistance mutations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030087 
PMCID: PMC1866358
PMID: 17500586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

