
1. J Virol. 2007 Aug;81(16):8784-92. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

Neutralization of human papillomavirus with monoclonal antibodies reveals
different mechanisms of inhibition.

Day PM(1), Thompson CD, Buck CB, Pang YY, Lowy DR, Schiller JT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Center for Cancer Research, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. pmd@nih.gov

The mechanisms of human papillomavirus (HPV) neutralization by antibodies are
incompletely understood. We have used HPV16 pseudovirus infection of HaCaT cells 
to analyze how several neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) generated
against HPV16 L1 interfere with the process of keratinocyte infection. HPV16
capsids normally bind to both the cell surface and extracellular matrix (ECM) of 
HaCaT cells. Surprisingly, two strongly neutralizing MAbs, V5 and E70, did not
prevent attachment of capsids to the cell surface. However, they did block
association with the ECM and prevented internalization of cell surface-bound
capsids. In contrast, MAb U4 prevented binding to the cell surface but not to the
ECM. The epitope recognized by U4 was inaccessible when virions were bound to the
cell surface but became accessible after endocytosis, presumably coinciding with 
receptor detachment. Treatment of capsids with heparin, which is known to
interfere with binding to cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs),
also resulted in HPV16 localization to the ECM. These results suggest that the U4
epitope on the intercapsomeric C-terminal arm is likely to encompass the critical
HSPG interaction residues for HPV16, while the V5 and E70 epitopes at the apex of
the capsomer overlap the ECM-binding sites. We conclude that neutralizing
antibodies can inhibit HPV infection by multiple distinct mechanisms, and
understanding these mechanisms can add insight to the HPV entry processes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00552-07 
PMCID: PMC1951340
PMID: 17553881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

