
1. J Viral Hepat. 2007 Jul;14(7):478-83.

Long-term surveillance of haematopoietic stem cell recipients with resolved
hepatitis B: high risk of viral reactivation even in a recipient with a
vaccinated donor.

Kn√∂ll A(1), Boehm S, Hahn J, Holler E, Jilg W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany. antje.knoell@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

Reactivation of resolved hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is increasingly
recognized in patients with severe immunosuppression. We monitored seven patients
with pretransplant antibodies to hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs) and
hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc) for HBV reactivation after allogeneic
haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT). Reverse seroconversion
(from anti-HBs to HBsAg) was observed in six recipients occurring 12, 14, 16, 22,
31 and 39 months after allo-HSCT, respectively. The only patient without HBV
reactivation had the highest pretransplant anti-HBs titre and died after the
shortest follow-up period (25 months). A novel HBV surface mutant (D144G/G145E)
was isolated from one recipient of stem cells from a donor vaccinated against
HBV. Another surface mutant (P142L/G145R) was detected in a recipient from a
non-immune donor. Serum ALT elevation was measured in only two of the six
patients with viral reactivation, followed by spontaneous clearance of HBsAg in
one of them. Antiviral treatment reduced viral load in five patients, but the
emergence of YMDD motif polymerase mutations resulted in lamivudine resistance in
two patients. In conclusion, the risk of reactivation of a resolved HBV infection
is close to 100% in allogeneic stem cell recipients and vaccination of the donor 
does not always warrant reliable protection.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2006.00830.x 
PMID: 17576389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

