
1. Virology. 2007 Nov 25;368(2):309-16. Epub 2007 Aug 6.

Adeno-associated virus mediated gene transfer into lung cancer cells promoting
CD40 ligand-based immunotherapy.

Wu JQ(1), Zhao WH, Li Y, Zhu B, Yin KS.

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 300 Guangzhou
Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, PR China. jianqingwu@gmail.com

Expression of the CD40 ligand (CD40L) on tumors can activate host immune systems 
and produce antitumor effects against the tumors. To deliver the CD40L gene
efficiently, we evaluated the efficiency of transduction of different serotypes
of adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors in lung cancer A549 cells and compared
the transduction efficiency of a conventional AAV vector with that of
self-complementary AAV (scAAV) vectors as well. We determined that serotype
AAV2/5 transduced A549 cells much more efficiently than serotypes AAV2/1, AAV2/2,
AAV2/6, AAV2/7, AAV2/8, AAV2/9 and AAV2/10. And the transduction efficiency of
scAAV2/5 was significantly higher than conventional AAV2/5. Furthermore,
pre-treatment with carboplatin, which is a chemotherapeutic agent used in lung
cancer chemotherapy, substantially increased AAV-mediated transgene expression.
The scAAV2/5 vectors encoding human CD40L were used to tranduce CD40L into A549
cells, which were then co-cultivated with immature human dendritic cells (DCs).
Interleukin 12 (IL-12) that was released was measured in the culture supernatant.
Specificity of the immunostimulatory effect of CD40L was confirmed by blocking
with a monoclonal antibody binding to human CD40L. The in vivo antitumor activity
was evaluated in BALB/c nude mice bearing A549 lung cancer. scAAV2/5-CD40L showed
significant inhibitory effects on the growth of transplanted tumor cells as
compared with control group. These studies suggest that recombinant AAV2/5-CD40L 
may provide an effective form of therapy for lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2007.07.006 
PMID: 17675129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

