
1. Anticancer Res. 2007 Jul-Aug;27(4B):2311-6.

Adenovirus type 5 substituted with type 11 or 35 fiber structure increases its
infectivity to human cells enabling dual gene transfer in CD46-dependent and
-independent manners.

Yu L(1), Shimozato O, Li Q, Kawamura K, Ma G, Namba M, Ogawa T, Kaiho I, Tagawa
M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Chiba Cancer Center Research Institute, 666-2 Nitona,
Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8717, Japan.

Infectivity of adenovirus type 5 (Ad5) to cells depends primarily on its
fiber-mediated binding to the coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor (CAR) on
target cells. Down-regulated CAR expression, often found in human tumors,
hampered Ad5-mediated gene transfer. Ad 11 and Ad 35, belonging to a subtype B
group, use CD46 as their cellular receptors; accordingly, chimeric Ad5 whose
fiber structure was substituted with that of the type 11 or 35 (Ad5/11 or Ad5/35)
could infect human cells in a different manner from Ad5. We found that Ad5/35
infected human tumors, including pancreatic and breast cancer, and human
fibroblasts better than Ad5 and Ad5/11. Infectivity of Ad5/35 to these cells was 
correlated with that of Ad5/11, but efficacy of Ad5/35- and Ad5/11-mediated
transduction was not directly correlated with the expression level of CD46 in the
target cells. Infection of human hepatoma cells with measles virus, whose
cellular receptor is CD46, down-regulated the CD46 expression and reduced
subsequent infectivity of Ad5/35 but not Ad5/11. Infection of Ad5 suppressed
subsequent gene transfer by Ad5 but not by Ad5/11 orAd5/35. Likewise infection of
Ad5/35 decreased following gene transduction by Ad5/35 and Ad5/11, but to a
lesser extent by Ad5. These data collectively showed that combinatory use of Ad5 
and the chimeric Ad enables dual gene transfer into target cells and suggest that
infectivity of subtype B Ad does not completely depend on CD46 expression and
that other receptors possibly influence the infectivity.


PMID: 17695519  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

