
1. Pharmazie. 2007 Aug;62(8):625-9.

Studies on the flavonoid substrates of human UDP-glucuronosyl transferase (UGT)
2B7.

Xie S(1), You L, Zeng S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Analysis and Drug Metabolism, College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, People's
Republic of China.

Flavonoids are found in fruits, vegetables, nuts, seeds, herbs, spices, stems and
flowers, as well as in tea and red wine. They are prominent components of citrus 
fruits and other food sources, are consumed regularly with the human diet, and
have been shown to have many biological functions, including antioxidant and
chelating properties. This study suggests features of the flavonoid structure
necessary for it to act as a substrate of human UGT2B7. Generally speaking,
flavonol has higher glucuronidation activity than flavones and isoflavones.
Differences in C3' position have an important effect on UGT2B7 glucuronidation
activity, and the various substituents have different influences on
glucuronidation activity. For flavonol, the bulky group at C4' can enhance
glucuronidation activity. Increasing the number of hydroxyl groups of flavonoids 
will increase their glucuronidation activity towards UGT2B7, while conjugation of
glycon will weaken the activity, and hydroxyl position can also have an important
role in activity. The high glucuronidation efficiency observed with many
flavonoids suggests that the contribution of UGT2B7 to the metabolism of
flavonoids may be significant. The results suggest that we should not only pay
attention to glucuronidation activity, but should also attach importance to the
regioselectivity of glucuronidation.


PMID: 17867560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

