
1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2008 Feb;41(3):279-85. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Plasma HHV-6 viral load-guided preemptive therapy against HHV-6 encephalopathy
after allogeneic stem cell transplantation: a prospective evaluation.

Ogata M(1), Satou T, Kawano R, Goto K, Ikewaki J, Kohno K, Ando T, Miyazaki Y,
Ohtsuka E, Saburi Y, Saikawa T, Kadota JI.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Transfusion Center, Oita University Faculty of Medicine, Oita, Japan.
mogata@med.oita-u.ac.jp

Human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) causes life-threatening encephalopathy in recipients 
of allogeneic SCT, but no consensus has been reached regarding appropriate
preventive methods. This study evaluated a plasma HHV-6 viral load-guided
preemptive approach against HHV-6-associated encephalopathy. Plasma real-time PCR
assay was performed once a week. Among 29 patients, 19 developed positive plasma 
HHV-6 DNA. Median maximum plasma HHV-6 DNA was 4593.5 copies/ml plasma (range,
150.0-127 891.0 copies/ml plasma). In one of eight events with low-level HHV-6
DNA (defined as <1000 copies/ml plasma) and four of seven events with mid-level
HHV-6 DNA (1000-9999.5 copies/ml plasma), HHV-6 loads in plasma subsequently
continued increasing. Ganciclovir was administered against six of nine patients
with high-level HHV-6 DNA (> or =10,000 copies/ml plasma). High-level HHV-6 DNA
resolved similarly in both groups with or without ganciclovir therapy. Among the 
nine patients with high-level HHV-6 DNA two developed encephalopathy. As
encephalopathy developed before the detection of high-level HHV-6 DNA in plasma, 
these two patients had not received preemptive ganciclovir therapy. In
conclusion, our preemptive approach against HHV-6-associated encephalopathy
cannot prevent all cases of HHV-6 encephalopathy in SCT recipients due to the
dynamic kinetics of plasma HHV-6 viral load.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1705907 
PMID: 18037945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

