
1. BMC Biotechnol. 2007 Nov 30;7:85.

A new generation of pPRIG-based retroviral vectors.

Albagli-Curiel O(1), LÃ©cluse Y, Pognonec P, Boulukos KE, Martin P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U790 and IFR54, Institut Gustave Roussy, PR1, 39 Rue Camille
Desmoulins, 94805 Villejuif, France. oalbagli@igr.fr

BACKGROUND: Retroviral vectors are valuable tools for gene transfer. Particularly
convenient are IRES-containing retroviral vectors expressing both the protein of 
interest and a marker protein from a single bicistronic mRNA. This coupled
expression increases the relevance of tracking and/or selection of transduced
cells based on the detection of a marker protein. pAP2 is a retroviral vector
containing eGFP downstream of a modified IRES element of EMCV origin, and a CMV
enhancer-promoter instead of the U3 region of the 5'LTR, which increases its
efficiency in transient transfection. However, pAP2 contains a limited
multicloning site (MCS) and shows weak eGFP expression, which previously led us
to engineer an improved version, termed pPRIG, harboring: i) the wild-type ECMV
IRES sequence, thereby restoring its full activity; ii) an optimized MCS flanked 
by T7 and SP6 sequences; and iii) a HA tag encoding sequence 5' of the MCS (pPRIG
HAa/b/c).
RESULTS: The convenience of pPRIG makes it a good basic vector to generate
additional derivatives for an extended range of use. Here we present several
novel pPRIG-based vectors (collectively referred to as PRIGs) in which : i) the
HA tag sequence was inserted in the three reading frames 3' of the MCS (3'HA
PRIGs); ii) a functional domain (ER, VP16 or KRAB) was inserted either 5' or 3'
of the MCS (<< modular >> PRIGs); iii) eGFP was replaced by either eCFP, eYFP,
mCherry or puro-R (<< single color/resistance >> PRIGs); and iv) mCherry, eYFP or
eGFP was inserted 5' of the MCS of the IRES-eGFP, IRES-eCFP or IRES-Puro-R
containing PRIGs, respectively (<< dual color/selection >> PRIGs). Additionally, 
some of these PRIGs were also constructed in a pMigR MSCV background which has
been widely used in pluripotent cells.
CONCLUSION: These novel vectors allow for straightforward detection of any
expressed protein (3'HA PRIGs), for functional studies of chimeric proteins (<<
modular >> PRIGs), for multiple transductions and fluorescence analyses of
transduced cells (<< single color/resistance >> PRIGs), or for quantitative
detection of studied proteins in independently identified/selected transduced
cells (<< dual color/selection >> PRIGs). They maintain the original advantages
of pPRIG and provide suitable tools for either transient or stable expression and
functional studies in a large range of experimental settings.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6750-7-85 
PMCID: PMC2241607
PMID: 18053131  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

