
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2008 Feb 1;46(3):434-9. doi: 10.1086/525264.

Human herpesvirus 6 infection of the gastroduodenal mucosa.

Halme L(1), Arola J, HÃ¶ckerstedt K, Lautenschlager I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transplantation and Liver Surgery, Transplant Unit Research
Laboratory, Helsinki University Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland. leena.halme@hus.fi

BACKGROUND: Human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) infections are usually asymptomatic
reactivations in adult liver transplant recipients, but they may also cause fever
or graft dysfunction. HHV-6 infection can also present symptoms of
gastroenteritis. In this study, we investigated the presence of HHV-6 in the
gastroduodenal mucosa of liver transplant recipients and in immunocompetent
patients undergoing gastroscopic examination because of dyspeptic symptoms.
METHODS: HHV-6 and cytomegalovirus (CMV) examinations were performed on
gastroduodenal biopsy specimens obtained during upper gastrointestinal endoscopic
examinations from 90 liver transplant recipients and from 31 immunocompetent
patients with upper gastrointestinal symptoms. In the gastroduodenal mucosa,
HHV-6 and CMV was demonstrated by immunohistochemistry in frozen sections using
monoclonal antibodies against HHV-6- and CMV-specific antigens.
RESULTS: HHV-6-positive cells were found in biopsy specimens from 21 (23%) of the
liver transplant recipients and 6 (19%) of the immunocompetent patients,
CMV-positive cells were found in specimens from 55 (61%) of the transplant
recipients and 7 (23%) of the immunocompetent patients, and 12 transplant
recipients were found to have both HHV-6 and CMV infection. Fifteen transplant
recipients with positive HHV-6 findings in the gastroduodenal mucosa also had
HHV-6 antigenemia, whereas 30 patients with HHV-6 antigenemia did not have
gastroduodenal involvement. Endoscopic findings in these patients included
biliary complications in 10 patients and gastritis in 2 patients.
Histopathological findings were nonspecific and included very mild inflammation. 
A total of 30 (94%) of the transplant recipients with biliary complications also 
had HHV-6 or CMV detected in the duodenal mucosa.
CONCLUSIONS: HHV-6-positive cells and CMV-positive cells were frequently found in
the gastroduodenal mucosa of liver transplant recipients and of immunocompetent
patients undergoing gastroscopic examination because of dyspeptic symptoms.

DOI: 10.1086/525264 
PMID: 18181741  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

