
1. PLoS Med. 2008 Jan 15;5(1):e16. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0050016.

Antiretroviral pre-exposure prophylaxis prevents vaginal transmission of HIV-1 in
humanized BLT mice.

Denton PW(1), Estes JD, Sun Z, Othieno FA, Wei BL, Wege AK, Powell DA, Payne D,
Haase AT, Garcia JV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas, United States of
America.

Comment in
    PLoS Med. 2008 Jan 15;5(1):e13.

BACKGROUND: Worldwide, vaginal transmission now accounts for more than half of
newly acquired HIV-1 infections. Despite the urgency to develop and implement
novel approaches capable of preventing HIV transmission, this process has been
hindered by the lack of adequate small animal models for preclinical efficacy and
safety testing. Given the importance of this route of transmission, we
investigated the susceptibility of humanized mice to intravaginal HIV-1
infection.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We show that the female reproductive tract of humanized
bone marrow-liver-thymus (BLT) mice is reconstituted with human CD4+ T and other 
relevant human cells, rendering these humanized mice susceptible to intravaginal 
infection by HIV-1. Effects of HIV-1 infection include CD4+ T cell depletion in
gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) that closely mimics what is observed in
HIV-1-infected humans. We also show that pre-exposure prophylaxis with
antiretroviral drugs is a highly effective method for preventing vaginal HIV-1
transmission. Whereas 88% (7/8) of BLT mice inoculated vaginally with HIV-1
became infected, none of the animals (0/5) given pre-exposure prophylaxis of
emtricitabine (FTC)/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) showed evidence of
infection (Chi square = 7.5, df = 1, p = 0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: The fact that humanized BLT mice are susceptible to intravaginal
infection makes this system an excellent candidate for preclinical evaluation of 
both microbicides and pre-exposure prophylactic regimens. The utility of
humanized mice to study intravaginal HIV-1 transmission is particularly
highlighted by the demonstration that pre-exposure prophylaxis can prevent
intravaginal HIV-1 transmission in the BLT mouse model.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0050016 
PMCID: PMC2194746
PMID: 18198941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

