
1. Ai Zheng. 2008 Feb;27(2):165-9.

[Impact of up-regulating Ezrin expression by Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane
protein 1 on metastasis ability of nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Shen ZH(1), Chen XY, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang,
Guangdong, 524023, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Ezrin, a cytoskeleton-related protein, contributes to the
invasion and metastasis of tumors; our previous study had also shown that
Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 (EBV-LMP1) can promote the
metastasis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cells. This study was to investigate
whether EBV-LMP1 could change the expression of Ezrin and the role of Ezrin on
the metastasis of NPC cells.
METHODS: The expression of EBV-LMP1 and Ezrin in NPC cell lines CNE1 (well
differentiated NPC cell line) and CNE1-GL (CNE1 cells stably transfected with
EBV-LMP1) were detected by SP immunohistochemistry and Western blot. The adhesive
abilities of CNE1, CNE1-GL and AntiEzrin-CNE1-GL (CNE1-GL cells pretreated with
Ezrin antibody) cells were assessed by cell-matrix adhesion assay. The invasion
and migration of these cell lines were investigated by Transwell method.
RESULTS: Ezrin was not expressed in CNE1 cells while strongly expressed in
CNE1-GL cells. The adhesive ability of CNE1-GL cells with matrix was
significantly higher than those of CNE1 and AntiEzrin-CNE1-GL cells [adhesive
rate: (89.38+/-6.12)% vs. (49.42+/-5.37)% and (56.94+/-4.08)%, P<0.001, P<0.05]. 
The invasion and migration of CNE1-GL cells were significantly higher than those 
of CNE1 and AntiEzrin-CNE1-GL cells (invasive cells: 107+/-11 vs. 27+/-3 and
38+/-4, P<0.001; migratory cells: 179+/-25 vs. 46+/-6 and 51+/-5, P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: EBV-LMP1 contributes to the metastasis ability of CNE1 cells by
up-regulating the expression of Ezrin.


PMID: 18279614  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

