
1. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2008 May-Jun;42(5):527-32. doi:
10.1097/MCG.0b013e318030e3ab.

Changing epidemiology of HCV and HBV infections in Northern Italy: a survey in
the general population.

Fabris P(1), Baldo V, Baldovin T, Bellotto E, Rassu M, Trivello R, Tramarin A,
Tositti G, Floreani A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine, S. Bortolo Hospital, 
Vicenza, Italy. pfabris@yahoo.com

AIM: To evaluate the hepatitis B virus (HBV) and the hepatitis C virus (HCV)
epidemiology in the general population of Northern Italy, a cohort of 965
subjects, all residents (including 47 immigrants), were anonymously tested for
HBV and HCV infections.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Serum samples were assayed for anti-HCV and anti-HBV
markers by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and for HCV-RNA by polymerase chain 
reaction, and the positive cases were genotyped. HBsAg-positive cases were
assayed for HBeAg/anti-HBe, whereas HBsAg negatives were tested for both anti-HBc
and anti-HBs.
RESULTS: The overall prevalence of anti-HCV was 2.6%, with a bimodal distribution
characterized by the highest prevalence (12%) in subjects over 75 years old. None
of the subjects under 25 years old was anti-HCV positive. Anti-HCV positivity was
similar in males and females (2.4% vs. 2.7%). HCV-RNA was positive in 40% of
cases and genotype 1 was the most common. The HBsAg prevalence was 1%, with a
significant difference according to country of origin (0.8% in Italian subjects
vs. 6.4% in immigrants, P=0.01). HBsAg positivity increased significantly with
age (R2=0.57, P<0.02). The overall percentages for the prevalence of isolated
anti-HBs, anti-HBs+/anti-HBc+, and isolated anti-HBc were 23.8%, 8.4%, and 4.2%, 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides a new picture of HCV and HBV epidemiology in
Northern Italy, with these features: (1) a cohort effect showing a reduction of
HCV infection in the elderly, possible due to age-related mortality; (2) an
unchanged overall prevalence of HBV infection, despite continuing immigration of 
subjects from endemic countries.

DOI: 10.1097/MCG.0b013e318030e3ab 
PMID: 18277889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

