
1. Vet Med Nauki. 1976;13(4):84-91.

[Study of Aujeszky's disease virus replication by using an immunofluorescent
method].

[Article in Bulgarian]

Tatarov G.

Studied was the interrelationship between the Aujeszky's disease virus (the
avirulent mutant strain MK and the virulent strain 2) and chick embryo cells
during cultivation with and without 5-iod-2-desoxiuridine. In experiments with
the virulent strain the presence of a granular antigen could be observed at the
4th hour following the infection of the nucleus. After the 10th hour the antigen 
showed migration from the nucleus toward the cytoplasm. After the 24th hour a
complete destruction of the cellular monolayer was observed, along with the
production of polynuclear cells. In the experiments with strain MK the antigen
seemed to appear first in the cytoplasm after the 10th hour of infecting the
cells, and after the 12th hour it was found in the nucleoplasm too. In this case 
full destruction of the cells set in after the 48th hour of infection. In the
cultivation of strain MK in cell cultures containing 5-iod-2-desoxiuridine no
disturbances in the normal cycle of reproduction was observed. The virus
replicated equally well both with and without the antimetabolite. In the
cultivation of the virulent strain 2 in cell cultures that contained
5-iod-2-desoxiuridine a coarse, granular antigen was noticed in the cytoplasm of 
single cells after the eighth hour of infection. After the 12th hour the nuclei
of these cells manifested slight flourescence (hardly visible single granules).
After the 48th hour the nuclei of the involved cells were swollen, and the
cytoplasm presented slight, diffuse fluorescence, some of the cells being
destroyed.


PMID: 183344  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

