
1. J Gen Virol. 2008 Apr;89(Pt 4):915-921. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.83365-0.

In vivo characterization of two granuloviruses in larvae of Mythimna separata
(Lepidoptera: Noctuidae).

Mukawa S(1), Goto C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Insect Pest Management Research Team, National Agricultural Research Center,
Kannondai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8666, Japan.

The pathogenicity of two granuloviruses (GVs), Xestia c-nigrum GV (XecnGV) and
Pseudaletia unipuncta GV (PsunGV), was examined in Mythimna separata. Partial
sequencing of the genome of PsunGV indicated that it is related closely to
XecnGV, but considered to be a different species. PsunGV and XecnGV showed
similar pathogenicity in terms of dose-mortality response and pattern of host
mass changes following infection. Both GVs killed infected larvae in 2-3 weeks.
Temporal changes in the concentrations of GV-specific DNA in the larval
haemolymph were measured by using a real-time quantitative PCR. Viral DNA
concentration increased quickly and reached a plateau at 60-72 h
post-inoculation. Rates of budded virus (BV) production of each GV were estimated
on the basis of viral DNA concentrations by a modified Gompertz model. The slopes
of the estimated BV growth curves of both XecnGV and PsunGV in M. separata larvae
were equivalent to that of Mamestra brassicae nucleopolyhedrovirus (NPV) in its
original host, reported in our previous study. This suggested that BV production 
is not a major factor in the slower killing speed of GVs in comparison to NPVs.
The GV-infected larvae survived for an additional 10 days or more after reaching 
a maximum level of BV concentration, and kept growing without pupation. These
findings also suggested that the GVs have a unique mechanism to regulate the
growth of host larvae.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.83365-0 
PMID: 18343832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

