
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2008 May;152(2):364-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2008.03631.x. 
Epub 2008 Mar 12.

Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis analysis in simultaneous influenza pneumonia 
and bacterial infection in mice.

Kosai K(1), Seki M, Yanagihara K, Nakamura S, Kurihara S, Imamura Y, Izumikawa K,
Kakeya H, Yamamoto Y, Tashiro T, Kohno S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Nagasaki University
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University School of Medicine,
Nagasaki, Japan.

Severe pneumonia is found in simultaneous influenza pneumonia and bacterial
infection, and suggests a relationship with immunological mechanisms. Here, we
performed two-dimensional gel electrophoresis to detect immunological molecules
related to the fulminant pneumonia caused by influenza virus and Streptococcus
pneumoniae co-infection in mice. We found two spots that were expressed strongly 
in co-infected mouse lungs, compared with S. pneumoniae or influenza virus singly
infected mouse lungs. The spots were analysed by mass spectrometry, and
identified as alpha-1 anti-trypsin (A1AT), known as an anti-protease for
neutrophil-derived proteolytic enzymes, and creatine kinase, which reflects a
greater degree of lung damage and cell death. A1AT expression was increased
significantly, and proteolytic enzymes from neutrophils, such as neutrophil
elastase, myeloperoxidase and lysozyme, were also secreted abundantly in
influenza virus and S. pneumoniae co-infected lungs compared with S. pneumoniae
or influenza virus singly infected lungs. These data suggest that A1AT may play a
central role as a molecule with broad anti-inflammatory properties, and
regulation of the neutrophil-mediated severe lung inflammation is important in
the pathogenesis of co-infection with influenza virus and bacteria.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2008.03631.x 
PMCID: PMC2384112
PMID: 18341613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

