
1. J Mol Biol. 2008 Apr 25;378(2):468-80. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.02.018. Epub 2008 
Feb 15.

Genome comparison and proteomic characterization of Thermus thermophilus
bacteriophages P23-45 and P74-26: siphoviruses with triplex-forming sequences and
the longest known tails.

Minakhin L(1), Goel M, Berdygulova Z, Ramanculov E, Florens L, Glazko G,
Karamychev VN, Slesarev AI, Kozyavkin SA, Khromov I, Ackermann HW, Washburn M,
Mushegian A, Severinov K.

Author information: 
(1)Waksman Institute for Microbiology, 190 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ
08854, USA. minakhin@waksman.rutgers.edu

The genomes of two closely related lytic Thermus thermophilus siphoviruses with
exceptionally long (approximately 800 nm) tails, bacteriophages P23-45 and
P74-26, were sequenced completely. The P23-45 genome consists of 84,201 bp with
117 putative open reading frames (ORFs), and the P74-26 genome has 83,319 bp and 
116 putative ORFs. The two genomes are 92% identical with 113 ORFs shared. Only
25% of phage gene product functions can be predicted from similarities to
proteins and protein domains with known functions. The structural genes of
P23-45, most of which have no similarity to sequences from public databases, were
identified by mass spectrometric analysis of virions. An unusual feature of the
P23-45 and P74-26 genomes is the presence, in their largest intergenic regions,
of long polypurine-polypyrimidine (R-Y) sequences with mirror repeat symmetry.
Such sequences, abundant in eukaryotic genomes but rare in prokaryotes, are known
to form stable triple helices that block replication and transcription and induce
genetic instability. Comparative analysis of the two phage genomes shows that the
area around the triplex-forming elements is enriched in mutational variations. In
vitro, phage R-Y sequences form triplexes and block DNA synthesis by Taq DNA
polymerase in orientation-dependent manner, suggesting that they may play a
regulatory role during P23-45 and P74-26 development.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.02.018 
PMCID: PMC2440725
PMID: 18355836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

