
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2008 Jun;74(11):3349-55. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02878-07. Epub 
2008 Mar 31.

Evaluation of the persistence of infectious human noroviruses on food surfaces by
using real-time nucleic acid sequence-based amplification.

Lamhoujeb S(1), Fliss I, Ngazoa SE, Jean J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Nutraceutiques et des Aliments Fonctionnels, Université Laval,
Québec, Québec G1K 7P4, Canada.

Noroviruses (NoV) are the major cause of nonbacterial gastroenteritis. However,
there is no published study to ascertain their survival on foodstuffs which are
directly related to human health risk. In the present study, we developed a
rapid, simple, and sensitive real-time nucleic acid sequence-based amplification 
(NASBA) combined with an enzymatic treatment for distinguishing infectious from
noninfectious human NoV. The developed method was validated using spiked
ready-to-eat food samples. When feline calicivirus (FCV) was used as a NoV
surrogate in the preliminary assays, it appeared more sensitive to heat
inactivation and enzymatic pretreatment than the human NoV. This suggests that
FCV may not be an ideal model for studying NoV. Our results reveal clearly that
the developed enzymatic pretreatment/real-time NASBA combination successfully
distinguished the infectious from heat-inactivated NoV. Moreover, we demonstrate 
that NoV survived for at least 10 days on refrigerated ready-to-eat foods, such
as lettuce and turkey. However, the survival rate was higher on turkey than on
lettuce, probably because of their different surface natures. The approach
developed in this study may be suitable for more in-depth studies of the
persistence and inactivation of human NoV and may be applied to other
nonculturable RNA viruses. Moreover, the evaluation of infectious NoV survival
provided valuable information concerning its persistence on ready-to-eat food.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02878-07 
PMCID: PMC2423024
PMID: 18378643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

