
1. J Infect Dis. 2008 May 15;197(10):1427-35. doi: 10.1086/587694.

Reemergence of recombinant vaccine-derived poliovirus outbreak in Madagascar.

Rakoto-Andrianarivelo M(1), Gumede N, Jegouic S, Balanant J, Andriamamonjy SN,
Rabemanantsoa S, Birmingham M, Randriamanalina B, Nkolomoni L, Venter M, Schoub
BD, Delpeyroux F, Reynes JM.

Author information: 
(1)Unit√© de Virologie, Institut Pasteur de Madagascar, Madagascar.
mala@pasteur.mg

BACKGROUND: After the 2001-2002 poliomyelitis outbreak due to recombinant
vaccine-derived polioviruses (VDPVs) in the Toliara province of Madagascar,
another outbreak reoccurred in the same province in 2005.
METHODS: We conducted epidemiological and virological investigations for each
polio case patient and for their contacts.
RESULTS: From May to August 2005, a total of 5 cases of acute flaccid paralysis
were reported among unvaccinated or partially vaccinated children 2-3 years old. 
Type-3 or type-2 VDPV was isolated from case patients and from healthy contacts. 
These strains were classified into 4 recombinant lineages that showed complex
mosaic genomic structures originating from different vaccine strain serotypes and
probably from human enterovirus C (HEV-C) species. Genetic relatedness could be
observed among these 4 lineages. Vaccination coverage of the population was very 
low (<50%).
CONCLUSIONS: The broad distribution of VDPVs in the province and their close
genetic relationship indicate intense and rapid cocirculation and coevolution of 
the vaccine strains and of their related HEV-C strains. The occurrence of an
outbreak due to VDPV 3 years after a previous outbreak indicates that a short
period with low vaccination coverage is enough to create favorable conditions for
the emergence of VDPV in this setting.

DOI: 10.1086/587694 
PMID: 18419577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

