
1. Antivir Ther. 2008;13(2):161-75.

A systematic review of T-cell epitopes in hepatitis B virus: identification,
genotypic variation and relevance to antiviral therapeutics.

Desmond CP(1), Bartholomeusz A, Gaudieri S, Revill PA, Lewin SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.

BACKGROUND: The immune response to hepatitis B virus (HBV) is important for both 
viral control and disease pathogenesis. A detailed understanding of the
HBV-specific T-cell responses may potentially lead to novel therapeutic
strategies for HBV.
METHODS: All English language journal articles (including articles in press) up
to October 2007 were retrieved using searches of MEDLINE, EMBASE and the Cochrane
Controlled Trial Registry. An extensive database of HBV sequences (SeqHepB) and
GenBank were used to assess the degree of sequence variation in each epitope. The
new standardized nomenclature for HBV amino acid position number was applied to
all previously defined epitopes.
RESULTS: Forty-four HBV-specific human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I restricted
and 32 HBV-specific HLA class II restricted epitopes have been defined and have
been identified in all HBV genes. The majority of HLA class I restricted epitopes
have been defined in HLA-A2-positive individuals in the setting of acute HBV
infection. There is significant sequence variation of these epitopes within and
between HBV genotypes. Newer HBV immunotherapeutics appear promising but are
still in early phases of development.
CONCLUSIONS: Identification of HBV-specific epitopes in non-HLA-A2-positive
individuals and recognition of genotypic variation across epitopes are important 
for the future development of novel immunotherapeutic strategies for the
management of chronic HBV infection.


PMID: 18505168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

