
1. Am J Hematol. 2008 Aug;83(8):649-53. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21215.

Impact of alemtuzumab as conditioning regimen component on transplantation
outcomes in case of CMV-seropositive recipients and donors.

Chae YS(1), Sohn SK, Kim JG, Cho YY, Moon JH, Yang DH, Lee JJ, Kim YK, Kim HJ,
Shin HJ, Chung JS, Cho GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Kyungpook National University Hospital,
Daegu, Korea.

We studied the incidence of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection, clinical outcomes,
and complications in 39 recipients of alemtuzumab-containing conditioning-stem
cell transplantation, who were classified into two groups based on the median
dose (35 mg) of alemtuzumab. All the recipients and donors were CMV-seropositive 
before transplantation. The median survival duration was 321 days (range, 46-1098
days) and the 2-year survival rate was 47.8%. The probability of nonrelapse
mortality at 100 days and 2 years was 14.6% and 31.2%, respectively. The
cumulative incidence of Grade II-IV acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) at Day
100 was 21.8%. The overall incidence of chronic GVHD (cGVHD) was 28.6%, including
a 17.9% incidence of extensive cGVHD. The cumulative incidence of CMV antigenemia
was 68.0%. There were no statistical differences in the engraftment, acute and
cGVHD, relapse, CMV antigenemia, and overall survival (OS) between the two
groups. Yet, the nonrelapse mortality (NRM) was significantly lower for the
low-dose group (5.9% vs. 51.7%, P = 0.010). The present study showed that
alemtuzumab was effective for GVHD prevention, yet caused a relatively high
incidence of CMV antigenemia, regardless of the dose. Thus, a low dose of
alemtuzumab (< or = 35 mg) would seem to be preferable in an allogeneic SCT
setting when both the recipient and the donor are CMV seropositive.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.21215 
PMID: 18528826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

