
1. J Virol. 1976 Oct;20(1):211-21.

Sequence arrangement in herpes simplex virus type 1 DNA: identification of
terminal fragments in restriction endonuclease digests and evidence for
inversions in redundant and unique sequences.

Wilkie NM, Cortini R.

It has been proposed by Sheldrick and Berthelot (1974) that the terminal
sequences of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) DNA are repeated in an internal 
inverted form and that the inverted redundant sequences delimit and separate two 
unique sequences, S and L. In this study the sequence arrangement in HSV-1 DNA
has been investigated with restriction endonuclease cleavage, end-labeling
studies, and molecular hybridization experiments. The terminal fragments in
digests with restriction endonucleases Hind III, Hpa-1, EcoRI and Bum were
identified and shown to be consistent with the Sheldrick and Berthelot model.
Inverted fragments which contain unique sequences as well as redundant sequences,
and which the model predicts, were identified by DNA-DNA hybridization studies.
Further cleavage of Bum fragments with Hpa-1 also revealed inversions of the
terminal sequences that contained unique sequences. The results obtained showed
that the unique sequences S and L are relatively inverted in different DNA
molecules in the population, resulting in the presence of four related genomes
with rearranged sequences in apparently equal amounts. The redundant sequences
bounding S do not share complete sequence homology with those bounding L, but
hybridization studies are presented which show that the terminal 0.3% of the
genome is repeated in every redundant sequence.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.20.1.211-221.1976 
PMCID: PMC354982
PMID: 185412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

