
1. Drugs. 2008;68(9):1273-317.

Peginterferon-alpha-2a (40 kD) plus ribavirin: a review of its use in the
management of chronic hepatitis C mono-infection.

Keam SJ(1), CvetkoviÄ‡ RS.

Author information: 
(1)Wolters Kluwer Health | Adis, Auckland, New Zealand. demail@adis.co.nz

Peginterferon-alpha-2a (40 kD) [PEGASYS] is a conjugate of recombinant
interferon-alpha-2a and a 40 kD branched polyethylene glycol (PEG) moiety that is
highly active against hepatitis C virus (HCV). Ribavirin (COPEGUS) is a synthetic
nucleoside analogue that acts in synergy with the antiviral activity of
peginterferon-alpha-2a (40 kD). The combination of subcutaneous
peginterferon-alpha-2a (40 kD) once weekly plus oral ribavirin twice daily is
widely approved for use in adult patients with chronic hepatitis C, including
those with persistently 'normal' ALT activity or HIV-HCV co-infection, and is
recommended as a first-line treatment option for patients with chronic hepatitis 
C and compensated liver disease. In randomized, phase III trials, the combination
has consistently demonstrated good therapeutic efficacy (i.e. high sustained
virological response [SVR] rates) and has been generally well tolerated in both
treatment-naive and treatment-experienced patients with chronic hepatitis C,
including those with compensated advanced liver disease. Several baseline and
dynamic (on-treatment) predictors of SVR that can be used to guide and optimize
therapy were also determined in these trials and in subsequent analyses. By
utilizing these predictors, therapy with peginterferon-alpha-2a (40 kD) plus
ribavirin can be individualized to achieve the optimal balance between efficacy
and tolerability, further increasing the usefulness of this drug combination.
Thus, peginterferon-alpha-2a (40 kD) plus ribavirin remains a valuable therapy in
patients with chronic hepatitis C, as a first-line option in those with
compensated liver disease and as a second-line therapy in those with advanced
liver disease.

DOI: 10.2165/00003495-200868090-00006 
PMID: 18547135  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

