
1. Cell Signal. 2008 Sep;20(9):1687-94. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.05.014. Epub
2008 Jun 3.

CCR5 internalisation and signalling have different dependence on membrane lipid
raft integrity.

Cardaba CM(1), Kerr JS, Mueller A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical Sciences and Pharmacy, University of East Anglia, Norwich
NR4 7TJ, UK.

The chemokine receptor, CCR5, acts as a co-receptor for human immunodeficiency
virus entry into cells. CCR5 has been shown to be targeted to cholesterol- and
sphingolipid-rich membrane microdomains termed lipid rafts or caveolae.
Cholesterol is essential for CCL4 binding to CCR5 and for keeping the
conformational integrity of the receptor. Filipin treatment leads to loss of
caveolin-1 from the membrane and therefore to a collapse of the caveolae. We have
found here that sequestration of membrane cholesterol with filipin did not affect
receptor signalling, however a loss of ligand-induced internalisation of CCR5 was
observed. Cholesterol extraction with methyl-beta-cyclodextrin (MCD) reduced
signalling through CCR5 as measured by release of intracellular Ca(2+) and
completely abolished the inhibition of forskolin-stimulated cAMP accumulation
with no effect on internalisation. Pertussis toxin (PTX) treatment inhibited the 
intracellular release of calcium that is transduced via Galphai G-proteins.
Depletion of cholesterol destroyed microdomains in the membrane and switched
CCR5/G-protein coupling to a PTX-independent G-protein. We conclude that
cholesterol in the membrane is essential for CCR5 signalling via the Galphai
G-protein subunit, and that integrity of lipid rafts is not essential for
effective CCR5 internalisation however it is crucial for proper CCR5 signal
transduction via Galphai G-proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.05.014 
PMID: 18573334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

