
1. J Med Microbiol. 2008 Aug;57(Pt 8):1000-1006. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.47799-0.

A convenient rapid culture assay for the detection of enteroviruses in clinical
samples: comparison with conventional cell culture and RT-PCR.

Terletskaia-Ladwig E(1), Meier S(1), Hahn R(1), Leinmüller M(1), Schneider F(1), 
Enders M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Labor Prof. Gisela Enders & Partner und Institut für Virologie, Infektiologie 
and Epidemiologie, 70193 Stuttgart, Germany.

A convenient rapid culture assay (RCA) for the detection of enteroviruses was
evaluated against RT-PCR using 576 stool and 102 cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
samples. One hundred and ninety stool samples were also tested by conventional
cell culture (CCC). The RCA used immunoperoxidase staining of cell culture plates
with a blend of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against enterovirus VP1 on the
second and sixth days after inoculation. This blend was composed of 5D8/1 (Dako) 
and four 'in-house' mAbs. CCC was performed using fluorescence staining with the 
Enterovirus Screening Set (Chemicon International) for culture confirmation.
Detection of enteroviruses by the RCA was more successful in colonic carcinoma
(CaCo-2) and rhabdomyosarcoma (RD) cells than in human embryonic lung
fibroblasts, HEp2 and A549 cells. The performance of CCC in RD cells was hindered
by rapid cell degeneration and non-specific staining of cells during culture
confirmation. The sensitivity of the RCA compared to RT-PCR in stool samples was 
found to be 71 % (115/161) on the second day and 87 % (140/161) on the sixth day.
The sensitivity of the RCA in CSF samples was 38 % (22/58) after 2 days and 59 % 
(34/58) after 6 days. The specificity of the RCA was 100 %. All CCC-positive
samples were positive by the RCA. CCC required 3-14 days for virus recovery. In
conclusion, the RCA has the same sensitivity as CCC, significantly shortens the
time required for the detection of enteroviruses, and prevents pitfalls
associated with using RD cells for CCC. For diagnosis of aseptic meningitis in
CSF samples, RT-PCR should be performed.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.47799-0 
PMID: 18628502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

