
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2008 Oct;27(10):891-9. doi:
10.1007/s10096-008-0520-8. Epub 2008 Jul 16.

Clinical relevance of prevention of respiratory syncytial virus lower respiratory
tract infection in preterm infants born between 33 and 35 weeks gestational age.

Carbonell-Estrany X(1), Bont L, Doering G, Gouyon JB, Lanari M.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Clínic, Institut Clínic de Ginecologia Obstetricia i Neonatologia,
Neonatology Service, Barcelona, Spain. xcarbo@clinic.ub.es

Premature infants are vulnerable to severe respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
lower respiratory tract infection (LRTI) resulting in hospitalisation and the
potential for longer-term respiratory morbidity. Whilst the severity and
consequence of RSV LRTI are generally accepted and recognised in infants born
<or=32 weeks gestational age (GA), there is less acknowledgment of the potential 
consequences in infants born 33-35 weeks GA. However, there is a growing body of 
evidence suggesting that infants born between 33 and 35 weeks GA may be equally
at risk for RSV LRTI as infants born <32 weeks GA. Interrupted lung development
and an immature immune system have been linked with an increased susceptibility
for RSV LRTI, along with other environmental, social, and physiological risk
factors. Currently, the only effective method of preventing RSV LRTI is
prophylaxis with palivizumab. Often with limited healthcare resources,
identifying infants at greatest risk of RSV LRTI who would potentially benefit
most from prophylaxis is highly desirable, particularly in the 33-35-week GA
group. The purpose of this article is to examine the causes and consequences of
RSV LRTI in infants born 33-35 weeks GA, and look at the potential for using risk
factors to identify high risk infants and, thereby, optimise prophylaxis. The
causes and consequences of RSV LRTI in infants born 33-35 weeks GAA were
determined via literature review. A number of underlying risk factors that
significantly increase the risk of severe RSV LRTI and subsequent hospitalisation
in this group of infants have been identified, most notably from the FLIP and
PICNIC studies. A European predictive model based on the risk factors in the FLIP
study has recently been developed and validated, which will aid identification of
infants born between 33 and 35 weeks GA with the highest risk of RSV
hospitalisation. Implementation of this model and prophylaxis of infants born
between 33 and 35 weeks GA should be a national or regional decision, taken in
perspective of other public health needs.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-008-0520-8 
PMID: 18629558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

