
1. Virology. 1983 Oct 30;130(2):351-9.

Evidence for pH-induced release of RNA from belladonna mottle virus and the
stabilizing effect of polyamines and cations.

Virudachalam R(1), Sitaraman K, Heuss KL, Markley JL, Argos P.

Author information: 
(1)Purdue University Biochemical Magnetic Resonance Laboratory, Department of
Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA.

The RNA of belladonna mottle virus (BDMV) is released from virions by increasing 
the pH to neutrality or above, leaving behind intact protein shells. In contrast,
much harsher conditions are required to release the RNA from the closely related 
turnip yellow mosaic virus (TYMV). The heat-induced or pH-dependent escape of RNA
from BDMV has been investigated by 31P NMR spectroscopy and ultracentrifugation. 
The methods show a transition pH near 6.8 at which the RNA undergoes a structural
alteration probably caused by disruption of protein-RNA linkages. Addition of
cations or polyamines to BDMV prevents the RNA loss at alkaline pH; the virions
become stable to pH values up to 11.5 as observed for TYMV. We suggest that
repulsion of the negatively charged phosphate groups of the nucleic acid provides
the driving force for RNA release at pH values above the threshold point where
protein-RNA interactions are broken. The polyamines effectively counter the
phosphate charge in BDMV and thereby prevent RNA loss. Since TYMV is packaged
with polyamines and BDMV is not (R. Virudachalam, K. Sitaraman, K. L. Heuss, P.
Argos, and J. L. Markley, Virology 130, 360-371, 1983), the different conditions 
required for RNA escape from the two viruses are explained. Heating of BDMV
virions at pH 7.0 to 40 degrees resulted in their partial disruption; the product
some intact particles, empty capsids, and RNA fragments with a sedimentation
coefficient of 5S.

DOI: 10.1016/0042-6822(83)90089-2 
PMID: 18639151 

