
1. Zoonoses Public Health. 2008 Sep;55(7):342-51. doi:
10.1111/j.1863-2378.2008.01138.x.

Seroprevalence and risk factors for influenza A viruses in pigs in Peninsular
Malaysia.

Suriya R(1), Hassan L, Omar AR, Aini I, Tan CG, Lim YS, Kamaruddin MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology and Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Selangor DE, Malaysia.

Following a series of H5N1 cases in chickens and birds in a few states in
Malaysia, there was much interest in the influenza A viruses subtypes that
circulate among the local pig populations. Pigs may act as a mixing vessel for
avian and mammal influenza viruses, resulting in new reassorted viruses. This
study investigated the presence of antibodies against influenza H1N1 and H3N2
viruses in pigs from Peninsular Malaysia using Herdcheck Swine Influenza H1N1 and
H3N2 Antibody Test Kits. At the same time, the presence of influenza virus was
examined from the nasal swabs of seropositive pigs by virus isolation and real
time RT-PCR. The list of pig farms was obtained from the headquarters of the
Department of Veterinary Services, Malaysia, and pig herds were selected randomly
from six of 11 states in Peninsular Malaysia. A total of 727 serum and nasal swab
samples were collected from 4- to 6-month-old pigs between May and August 2005.
By ELISA, the seroprevalences of swine influenza H1N1 and H3N2 among pigs were
12.2% and 12.1% respectively. Seropositivity for either of the virus subtypes was
detected in less than half of the 41 sampled farms (41.4%). Combination of both
subtypes was detected in 4% of all pigs and in 22% of sampled farms. However, no 
virus or viral nucleic acid was detected from nasal samples. This study
identified that the seropositivity of pigs to H1N1 and H3N2 based on ELISA was
significantly associated with factors such as size of farm, importation or
purchase of pigs, proximity of farm to other pig farms and the presence of
mammalian pets within the farm.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1863-2378.2008.01138.x 
PMID: 18667027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

