
1. J Infect Dis. 2008 Oct 1;198(7):1075-82. doi: 10.1086/591503.

Analysis of nevirapine (NVP) resistance in Ugandan infants who were HIV infected 
despite receiving single-Dose (SD) NVP versus SD NVP plus daily NVP up to 6 weeks
of age to prevent HIV vertical transmission.

Church JD(1), Omer SB, Guay LA, Huang W, Lidstrom J, Musoke P, Mmiro F, Jackson
JB, Eshleman SH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

BACKGROUND: Single-dose nevirapine (SD NVP) at birth plus NVP prophylaxis for the
infant up to 6 weeks of age is superior to SD NVP alone for prevention of
vertical transmission of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) through
breastfeeding. We analyzed NVP resistance in HIV-infected Ugandan infants who
received either SD NVP or extended NVP prophylaxis.
METHODS: We tested plasma HIV by using a genotyping assay (ViroSeq; Celera
Diagnostics), a phenotypic resistance assay (PhenoSense; Monogram Biosciences),
and sensitive point mutation assay (LigAmp, for K103N, Y181C, and G190A).
RESULTS: When infants were 6 weeks old, ViroSeq detected NVP resistance in a
higher proportion of infants in the extended NVP arm than in the SD NVP arm (21
of 25 [84%] vs. 12 of 24 [50%]; P = .01). Similar results were obtained with
LigAmp and PhenoSense. In both study arms, infants who were HIV infected at birth
frequently had NVP resistance detected. In contrast, infants in the extended NVP 
arm who were HIV infected after birth were more likely to have resistance
detected at 6 weeks, compared with infants in the SD NVP arm. The use of extended
NVP prophylaxis was also associated with detection of NVP resistance by ViroSeq
at 6 months (7 of 7 [100%] infants in the extended NVP arm had resistance
detected, compared with 1 of 6 [16.7%] infants in the SD NVP arm; P = .005).
CONCLUSIONS: The use of extended NVP prophylaxis was associated with increased
selection for and persistence of NVP resistance in HIV-infected Ugandan infants.

DOI: 10.1086/591503 
PMCID: PMC2587235
PMID: 18684096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

