
1. J Virol Methods. 2008 Nov;153(2):134-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2008.07.017.
Epub 2008 Sep 19.

A new and rapid genotypic assay for the detection of neuraminidase inhibitor
resistant influenza A viruses of subtype H1N1, H3N2, and H5N1.

Duwe S(1), Schweiger B.

Author information: 
(1)National Reference Centre for Influenza, Robert Koch-Institut, Nordufer 20,
13353 Berlin, Germany.

The neuraminidase of influenza viruses is the target of the inhibitors
oseltamivir and zanamivir. Recent reports on influenza viruses with reduced
susceptibility to neuraminidase inhibitors (NAI) are a cause for concern. Several
amino acid substitutions, each as a consequence of one single nucleotide
mutation, are known to confer resistance to NAI. An increase of NAI-resistant
viruses appears to be likely as a result of a wider application of NAI for
treatment and prophylaxis of seasonal influenza infections. Monitoring the
occurrence and spread of resistant viruses is an important task. Therefore,
RT-PCR assays were developed with subsequent pyrosequencing analysis (PSQ-PCR).
These assays allow a rapid, high-throughput and cost-effective screening of
subtype A/H1N1, A/H3N2, and A/H5N1 viruses. Various specimens such as respiratory
swabs, allantoic fluid, or cell-propagated viruses can be used and results are
available within hours. Several A/H1N1, A/H3N2, and A/H5N1 viruses isolated from 
human and avian specimens were tested to evaluate the method. Positive controls
encoding resistance-associated mutations were created using site-directed
mutagenesis. The results obtained with these controls showed that the assay can
discriminate clearly the wild-type virus from a mutant virus. The detection limit
of minor virus variants within the viral quasispecies amounts to 10%.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2008.07.017 
PMID: 18725246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

