
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2009 Jan;53(1):129-35. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00708-08.
Epub 2008 Oct 13.

Pharmacodynamics of cidofovir for vaccinia virus infection in an in vitro
hollow-fiber infection model system.

McSharry JJ(1), Deziel MR, Zager K, Weng Q, Drusano GL.

Author information: 
(1)Antiviral Pharmacodynamics Laboratory, Emerging Infections and Host Defense
Group, Ordway Research Institute, Albany, New York 12208, USA.

Variola major virus remains a potent weapon of bioterror. There is currently an
investigational-new-drug application for cidofovir for the therapy of variola
major virus infections. Stittelaar and colleagues compared the levels of
effectiveness of postexposure smallpox vaccination (Elstree-RIVM) and antiviral
treatment with cidofovir or an acyclic nucleoside phosphonate analogue
6-[2-(phosphonomethoxy)alkoxy]-2,4-diaminopyrimidine (HPMPO-DAPy) after lethal
intratracheal infection of cynomolgus monkeys with monkeypox virus, a variola
virus surrogate. Their results demonstrated that either compound was more
effective than vaccination with the Ellstree vaccine (K. J. Stittelaar et al.,
Nature 439:745-748, 2006). An unanswered question is how to translate this
information into therapy for poxvirus infections in people. In a
proof-of-principle study, we used a novel in vitro hollow-fiber infection model
system to determine the pharmacodynamics of vaccinia virus infection of HeLa-S3
cells treated with cidofovir. Our results demonstrate that the currently licensed
dose of cidofovir of 5 mg/kg of body weight weekly with probenecid (which
ameliorates nephrotoxicity) is unlikely to provide protection for patients
intentionally exposed to Variola major virus. We further demonstrate that the
antiviral effect is independent of the schedule of drug administration. Exposures
(area under the concentration-time curve) to cidofovir that will have a robust
protective effect will require doses that are 5 to 10 times that currently
administered to humans. Such doses may cause nephrotoxicity, and therefore,
approaches that include probenecid administration as well as schedules of
administration that will help ameliorate the uptake of cidofovir into renal
tubular epithelial cells need to be considered when addressing such treatment for
people.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00708-08 
PMCID: PMC2612146
PMID: 18852271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

