
1. Placenta. 2008 Dec;29(12):1016-23. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2008.09.005. Epub 2008
Oct 31.

Proteomic analyses associate cystatin B with restricted HIV-1 replication in
placental macrophages.

Luciano-Montalvo C(1), Ciborowski P, Duan F, Gendelman HE, Mel√©ndez LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Medical Zoology, University of Puerto Rico,
Medical Sciences Campus, Puerto Rico.

Mononuclear phagocytes (MP; monocytes, tissue macrophages, and dendritic cells)
are reservoirs, vehicles of dissemination, and targets for persistent HIV
infection. However, not all MP population equally support viral growth. Such
differential replication is typified by the greater ability of placental
macrophages (PM), as compared to blood borne monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM), 
to restrict viral replication. Since cytosolic protein patterns can differentiate
macrophage subtypes, we used a proteomics approach consisting of surface-enhanced
laser desorption ionization time-of-flight (SELDI-TOF), tandem mass spectrometry,
and Western blots to identify differences between the uninfected and HIV-infected
PM and MDM protein profiles linked to viral growth. We performed proteome
analysis of PM in the molecular range of 5-20kDa. We found that a SELDI-TOF
protein peak with an m/z of 11,100, which was significantly lower in uninfected
and HIV-infected PM than in MDM, was identified as cystatin B (CSTB). Studies of 
siRNA against CSTB treatment in MDM associated its expression with HIV
replication. These data demonstrate that the low molecular weight placental
macrophage cytosolic proteins are differentially expressed in HIV-infected PM and
MDM and identify a potential role for CSTB in HIV replication. This work also
serves to elucidate a mechanism by which the placenta protects the fetus from HIV
transmission.

DOI: 10.1016/j.placenta.2008.09.005 
PMCID: PMC3867668
PMID: 18951626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

