
1. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2008 Dec 15;49(5):557-62. doi:
10.1097/QAI.0b013e31818d5bf8.

Prevalence and correlates of human herpesvirus 8 infection among Peruvian men who
have sex with men.

Guanira JV(1), Casper C, Lama JR, Morrow R, Montano SM, Caballero P, Suárez L,
Whittington WL, Wald A, Sanchez J, Celum C; Peruvian HIV Sentinel Surveillance
Working Group.

Collaborators: Pun LS, Pun M, Cabezas C, C P, S J, L JR, G JV, Lucchetti A,
Goicochea P, Vergara J, Casapia M, Hinojosa JC, Zamalloa V, Ortiz A, Ojeda N,
Tataje A, Campos P, Garcia P, Carcamo C, Celum CL, Holmes KK, Zunt J, L W, W H,
Hughes JP, Sánchez JL, Laguna-Torres VA, Kochel T.

Author information: 
(1)Investigaciones Médicas en Salud (INMENSA), Lima, Peru. jguanira@inmensa.org

BACKGROUND: Infection with human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) is common among men who
have sex with men (MSM) in North America and Europe and is also found to be
endemic in some regions of South America. Little is known about HHV-8 prevalence 
and its correlates among MSM in the Andean region.
METHODS: We assessed HHV-8 seroprevalence among 497 MSM recruited for the 2002
Peruvian HIV sentinel surveillance program using a combined HHV-8 enzyme
immunoassay and immunofluorescence assay algorithm. Logistic regression analysis 
was used to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs)
to determine the association between selected covariates and HHV-8
seropositivity.
RESULTS: One hundred thirty-one (66.5%, 95% CI 63.1% to 69.9%) of 197
HIV-infected and 80 (26.7%, 95% CI 24.4% to 29.0%) of 300 HIV-uninfected MSM had 
serologic evidence of HHV-8 infection. Factors independently associated with
HHV-8 infection were education<12 years (OR 1.7, 95% CI 1.1 to 2.7), anal
receptive sex with the last partner (OR 2.0, 95% CI 1.2 to 3.3), self-reported
sexually transmitted infection symptoms during the last year (OR 1.9, 95% CI 1.2 
to 3.0), coinfection with HIV (OR 4.2, 95% CI 2.8 to 6.4) and chronic hepatitis B
(OR 4.9, 95% CI 1.5 to 15.8). MSM with long-standing HIV infection were more
likely to have serologic evidence of HHV-8 infection when compared with men with 
recently acquired HIV (OR 3.8, 95% CI 1.7 to 9.1).
CONCLUSIONS: HHV-8 infection is common among both HIV-infected and HIV-negative
MSM in Lima, Peru. HHV-8 seropositivity is correlated with anal receptive sex,
self-reported sexually transmitted infection symptoms, and HIV infection among
these MSM and thus seems to be sexually transmitted. HHV-8 infection seems to be 
acquired after HIV infection, suggesting that future studies should evaluate the 
mode of HHV-8 transmission and prevention strategies among HIV-uninfected MSM.

DOI: 10.1097/QAI.0b013e31818d5bf8 
PMCID: PMC3138205
PMID: 18989224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

