
1. Hepatology. 2008 Dec;48(6):1843-50. doi: 10.1002/hep.22550.

Cell culture-produced hepatitis C virus does not infect peripheral blood
mononuclear cells.

Marukian S(1), Jones CT, Andrus L, Evans MJ, Ritola KD, Charles ED, Rice CM,
Dustin LB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Study of Hepatitis C, Laboratory of Virology and Infectious
Disease, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) replicates primarily in the liver, but HCV RNA has been
observed in association with other tissues and cells including B and T
lymphocytes, monocytes, and dendritic cells. We have taken advantage of a
recently described, robust system that fully recapitulates HCV entry, replication
and virus production in vitro to re-examine the issue of HCV infection of blood
cell subsets. The HCV replicase inhibitor 2'C-methyl adenosine was used to
distinguish HCV RNA replication from RNA persistence. Whereas cell culture-grown 
HCV replicated in Huh-7.5 hepatoma cells, no HCV replication was detected in B or
T lymphocytes, monocytes, macrophages, or dendritic cells from healthy donors. No
blood cell subset tested expressed significant levels of Claudin-1, a tight
junction protein needed for HCV infection of Huh-7.5 cells. A B cell line
expressing high levels of Claudin-1, CD81, and scavenger receptor BI remained
resistant to HCV pseudoparticle infection. We bypassed the block in HCV entry by 
transfecting HCV RNA into blood cell subsets. Transfected RNA was not detectably 
translated and induced high levels of interferon-alpha. Supernatants from HCV
RNA-transfected macrophages inhibited HCV replication in Huh-7.5
cells.CONCLUSION: We conclude that multiple blocks prevent blood cells from
supporting HCV infection.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.22550 
PMCID: PMC2592497
PMID: 19003912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

