
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2009 Jan;63(1):184-8. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkn461. Epub 2008 
Nov 11.

Influence of repeated cycles of structured therapy interruption on the rate of
recovery of CD4+ T cells after highly active antiretroviral therapy resumption.

Le√≥n A(1), Martinez E, Milinkovic A, Mora B, Mallolas J, Blanco JL, Larrousse M, 
Laguno M, Gallart T, Plana M, Gatell JM, Garcia F.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Department, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Villarroel 170, 
08036 Barcelona, Spain. aleon@clinic.ub.es

BACKGROUND: CD4+ T cell recovery dynamics were analysed during the 'on treatment'
periods in structured therapy interruption (STI) as well as the long-term immune 
reconstitution with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) after finishing 
STI.
METHODS: One hundred and twenty HIV-1-infected patients on successful HAART were 
randomized to receive for 2 years continuous HAART (n=37) or two different
strategies of STI (n=83). After this period, most patients received continuous
HAART for 2 years.
RESULTS: During the STI period, the rate of recovery of CD4+ T cells decreased
progressively from the first to the last resumption of HAART {median change of
increase: +232 [interquartile range (IQR): +126, +318], +116 (IQR: +10, +471),
+87 (IQR: -54, +252) and -26 (IQR: -352, +211) cells/mm3 after the first, second,
third and fourth resumption, respectively}. After the STI period and 2 years of
continuous HAART, the median CD4+ count remained significantly lower than at
baseline in STI arms, both in the virological arm [559 (IQR: 383, 727) versus 771
(IQR: 625, 913) cells/mm3, P<0.0001] and the immunological arm [619 (IQR: 501,
789) versus 787 (IQR: 657, 954) cells/mm3, P<0.0001], but not in the control arm 
[886 (IQR: 564, 1122) versus 780 (IQR: 539, 945) cells/mm3, P=0.68]. In a
multivariate analysis, the nadir of CD4+ T cells and the baseline value of CD4+
before the STI period independently predicted the level of CD4+ T cells 2 years
after resumption of HAART (in both cases, P<0.0001).
CONCLUSION: The drop in CD4+ cell count after a first and a second period of 3
months of interruption of HAART was completely recovered after resuming HAART;
conversely, interruptions longer than 6 months were deleterious for the recovery 
of CD4+. CD4+ cell count did not rebound completely in patients who received 2
years of HAART after 2 years of STIs.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkn461 
PMID: 19001447  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

