
1. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2008 Dec;24(12):1527-36. doi: 10.1089/aid.2008.0105.

High-affinity binding of southern African HIV type 1 subtype C envelope protein, 
gp120, to the CCR5 coreceptor.

Fromme BJ(1), Coetsee M, Van Der Watt P, Chan MC, Sperling KM, Katz AA, Flanagan 
CA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC/UCT Research Group for Receptor Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape
Town, South Africa.

HIV-1 subtype C is the fastest spreading subtype worldwide and predominantly uses
the CCR5 coreceptor, showing minimal transition to the X4 phenotype. This raises 
the possibility that envelope proteins of HIV-1 subtype C have structural
features that favor interaction with CCR5. Preference for CCR5 could arise from
enhanced affinity of HIV-1 subtype C for CCR5. To test this, we have
characterized the interaction of gp120 envelope proteins from HIV-1 subtype C
clones with CD4 and CCR5. Recombinant gp120 proteins from isolates of HIV-1
subtypes B and C were expressed, purified, and assessed in a CD4 binding assay
and a CCR5 chemokine competition binding assay. All gp120 proteins bound to
CD4-expressing cells, except one, 97ZA347ts, which had Arg substituted for the
Cys239 in the conserved C2 loop. Reconstitution of Cys239, using site-directed
mutagenesis, restored CD4 binding, while introducing Arg or Ser into position 239
of the functional Du151 gp120 protein abrogated CD4 binding. This shows that the 
Cys228-Cys239 disulfide bond of gp120 is required for high-affinity binding to
CD4. Recombinant gp120 proteins from two HIV-1 subtype B clones bound CCR5 in the
presence of CD4, while gp120 from the X4-tropic, HxB2, clone did not bind CCR5.
gp120 from two functional HIV-1 subtype C clones, Du151 and MOLE1, bound CCR5
with high affinity in the presence of CD4 and Du151 showed significant CCR5
binding in the absence of CD4. A gp120 from a nonfunctional subtype C clone had
lower affinity for CCR5. These results indicate that HIV-1 subtype C proteins
have high affinity for CCR5 with variable dependence on CD4.

DOI: 10.1089/aid.2008.0105 
PMID: 19018669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

