
1. Antiviral Res. 2009 Feb;81(2):147-55. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2008.10.008. Epub 
2008 Nov 24.

Telbivudine, a nucleoside analog inhibitor of HBV polymerase, has a different in 
vitro cross-resistance profile than the nucleotide analog inhibitors adefovir and
tenofovir.

Seifer M(1), Patty A, Serra I, Li B, Standring DN.

Author information: 
(1)Idenix Pharmaceuticals Inc., 60 Hampshire Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Telbivudine, a nucleoside analog inhibitor of the viral polymerase of hepatitis B
virus (HBV), has been approved for the treatment of chronic HBV infection, along 
with the nucleoside inhibitors lamivudine and entecavir, and the nucleotide
inhibitors adefovir and tenofovir. The resistance profiles of these agents were
investigated via drug treatment of HepG2 cells stably transfected with wild-type 
or mutant HBV genomes bearing known resistance mutations. Telbivudine was not
active against HBV strains bearing lamivudine mutations L180M/M204V/I but
remained active against the M204V single mutant in vitro, potentially explaining 
the difference in resistance profiles between telbivudine and lamivudine. Against
HBV genomes with known telbivudine-resistance mutations, M204I and L80I/M204I,
telbivudine, lamivudine and entecavir lost 353- to >1000-fold activity whereas
adefovir and tenofovir exhibited no more than 3-5-fold change. Conversely,
against HBV cell lines expressing adefovir resistance mutations N236T and A181V, 
or the A194T mutant associated with resistance to tenofovir, telbivudine remained
active as shown by respective fold-changes of 0.5 (N236T) and 1.0 (A181V and
A194T). These in vitro results indicate that nucleoside and nucleotide drugs have
different cross-resistance profiles. The addition of telbivudine to ongoing
adefovir therapy could provide effective antiviral therapy to patients who
develop adefovir resistance.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2008.10.008 
PMID: 19028525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

