
1. J Virol. 2009 Feb;83(4):1563-71. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01617-08. Epub 2008 Dec 10.

Vaccinia virus-mediated inhibition of type I interferon responses is a
multifactorial process involving the soluble type I interferon receptor B18 and
intracellular components.

Waibler Z(1), Anzaghe M, Frenz T, Schwantes A, Pöhlmann C, Ludwig H, Palomo-Otero
M, Alcamí A, Sutter G, Kalinke U.

Author information: 
(1)Paul-Ehrlich-Institut, Langen, Germany.

Poxviruses such as virulent vaccinia virus (VACV) strain Western Reserve encode a
broad range of immune modulators that interfere with host responses to infection.
Upon more than 570 in vitro passages in chicken embryo fibroblasts (CEF),
chorioallantois VACV Ankara (CVA) accumulated mutations that resulted in highly
attenuated modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA). MVA infection of mice and of
dendritic cells (DC) induced significant type I interferon (IFN) responses,
whereas infection with VACV alone or in combination with MVA did not. These
results implied that VACV expressed an IFN inhibitor(s) that was functionally
deleted in MVA. To further characterize the IFN inhibitor(s), infection
experiments were carried out with CVA strains isolated after 152 (CVA152) and 386
CEF passages (CVA386). Interestingly, neither CVA152 nor CVA386 induced
IFN-alpha, whereas the latter variant did induce IFN-beta. This pattern suggested
a consecutive loss of inhibitors during MVA attenuation. Similar to supernatants 
of VACV- and CVA152-infected DC cultures, recombinantly expressed soluble IFN
decoy receptor B18, which is encoded in the VACV genome, inhibited MVA-induced
IFN-alpha but not IFN-beta. In the same direction, a B18R-deficient VACV variant 
triggered only IFN-alpha, confirming B18 as the soluble IFN-alpha inhibitor.
Interestingly, VACV infection inhibited IFN responses induced by a multitude of
different stimuli, including oligodeoxynucleotides containing CpG motifs,
poly(I:C), and vesicular stomatitis virus. Collectively, the data presented show 
that VACV-mediated IFN inhibition is a multistep process involving secreted
factors such as B18 plus intracellular components that cooperate to efficiently
shut off systemic IFN-alpha and IFN-beta responses.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01617-08 
PMCID: PMC2643777
PMID: 19073732  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

