
1. Microbes Infect. 2009 Mar;11(3):334-43. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2008.12.008. Epub
2008 Dec 27.

Phenotypic studies on recombinant human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
containing CRF01_AE env gene derived from HIV-1-infected patient, residing in
central Thailand.

Utachee P(1), Jinnopat P, Isarangkura-Na-Ayuthaya P, de Silva UC, Nakamura S,
Siripanyaphinyo U, Wichukchinda N, Tokunaga K, Yasunaga T, Sawanpanyalert P,
Ikuta K, Auwanit W, Kameoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Thailand-Japan Research Collaboration Center on Emerging and Re-emerging
Infections (RCC-ERI), Nonthaburi 11000, Thailand.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) env genes were cloned from blood
samples of HIV-1-infected Thai patients, and 35 infectious CRF01_AE envelope
glycoprotein (Env)-recombinant viruses were established. In this report, we
examined the neutralization susceptibility of these viruses to human monoclonal
antibodies, 2G12, IgG1 b12, 2F5 and 4E10, pooled patient plasma, coreceptor
antagonists and fusion inhibitor, T-20. The neutralization susceptibility of
CRF01_AE Env-recombinant viruses to 2F5, 4E10, patient plasma, coreceptor
antagonists and T-20 varied, while most viruses showed low susceptibility to 2G12
and IgG1 b12. Several dual-tropic viruses showed lower susceptibility to 2F5 and 
4E10 than CXCR4- or CCR5-tropic viruses. Neutralization susceptibility of the
CRF01_AE Env-recombinant virus to pooled patient plasma was negatively correlated
with the length of the V1/V2 region or the number of potential N-linked
glycosylation sites in conserved regions of gp120. No correlation was found
between the coreceptor usage and neutralization susceptibility of the virus to
T-20, whereas several dual-tropic viruses showed higher susceptibility to
coreceptor antagonists than CXCR4- or CCR5-tropic viruses. We propose that these 
CRF01_AE Env-recombinant viruses are useful to further study the molecular
mechanism of the susceptibility of CRF01_AE Env to neutralizing antibodies and
viral entry inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2008.12.008 
PMID: 19136072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

