
1. Virus Res. 2009 Jun;142(1-2):19-27. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2009.01.005. Epub
2009 Jan 29.

SARS coronavirus spike protein-induced innate immune response occurs via
activation of the NF-kappaB pathway in human monocyte macrophages in vitro.

Dosch SF(1), Mahajan SD, Collins AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Allergy, Immunology and
Rheumatology, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, United
States.

A purified recombinant spike (S) protein was studied for its effect on
stimulating human peripheral blood monocyte macrophages (PBMC). We examined
inflammatory gene mRNA abundances found in S protein-treated PBMC using gene
arrays. We identified differential mRNA abundances of genes with functional
properties associated with antiviral (CXCL10) and inflammatory (IL-6 and IL-8)
responses. We confirmed cytokine mRNA increases by real-time quantitative(q)
RT-PCR or ELISA. We further analyzed the sensitivity and specificity of the
prominent IL-8 response. By real-time qRT-PCR, S protein was shown to stimulate
IL-8 mRNA accumulation in a dose dependent manner while treatment with E protein 
did not. Also, titration of S protein-specific production and secretion of IL-8
by ELISA showed that the dose of 5.6nM of S produced a significant increase in
IL-8 (p=0.003) compared to mock-treated controls. The increase in IL-8 stimulated
by a concentration of 5.6nM of S was comparable to concentrations seen for S
protein binding to ACE2 or to neutralizing monoclonal antibody suggesting a
physiological relevance. An NF-kappaB inhibitor, TPCK (N-Tosyl-L-Phenylalanine
Chloromethyl Ketone) could suppress IL-8 production and secretion in response to 
S protein in PBMC and THP-1 cells and in HCoV-229E virus-infected PBMC.
Activation and translocation of NF-kappaB was shown to occur rapidly following
exposure of PBMC or THP-1 cells to S protein using a highly sensitive assay for
active nuclear NF-kappaB p65 transcription factor. The results further suggested 
that released or secreted S protein could activate blood monocytes through
recognition by toll-like receptor (TLR)2 ligand.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2009.01.005 
PMCID: PMC2699111
PMID: 19185596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

