
1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009 Jan 30;10 Suppl 1:S41. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-S1-S41.

Co-evolution positions and rules for antigenic variants of human influenza A/H3N2
viruses.

Huang JW(1), King CC, Yang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, 30050,
Taiwan. popblue.bi93g@nctu.edu.tw

BACKGROUND: In pandemic and epidemic forms, avian and human influenza viruses
often cause significant damage to human society and economics. Gradually
accumulated mutations on hemagglutinin (HA) cause immunologically distinct
circulating strains, which lead to the antigenic drift (named as antigenic
variants). The "antigenic variants" often requires a new vaccine to be formulated
before each annual epidemic. Mapping the genetic evolution to the antigenic drift
of influenza viruses is an emergent issue to public health and vaccine
development
RESULTS: We developed a method for identifying antigenic critical amino acid
positions, rules, and co-mutated positions for antigenic variants. The
information gain (IG) and the entropy are used to measure the score of an amino
acid position on hemagglutinin (HA) for discriminating between antigenic variants
and similar viruses. A position with high IG and entropy implied that this
position is highly correlated to an antigenic drift. Nineteen positions with high
IG and high genetic diversity are identified as antigenic critical positions on
the HA proteins. Most of these antigenic critical positions are located on five
epitopes or on the surface based on the HA structure. Based on IG values and
entropies of these 19 positions on the HA, the decision tree was applied to
create a rule-based model and to identify rules for predicting antigenic variants
of a given two HA sequences which are often a vaccine strain and a circulating
strain. The predicting accuracies of this model on two sets, which consist of a
training set (181 hemagglutination inhibition (HI) assays) and an independent
test set (31,878 HI assays), are 91.2% and 96.2% respectively.
CONCLUSION: Our method is able to identify critical positions, rules, and
co-mutated positions on HA for predicting the antigenic variants. The information
gains and the entropies of HA positions provide insight to the antigenic drift
and co-evolution positions for influenza seasons. We believe that our method is
robust and is potential useful for studying influenza virus evolution and vaccine
development.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-S1-S41 
PMCID: PMC2648776
PMID: 19208143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

