
1. Eur J Heart Fail. 2009 Apr;11(4):349-53. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfp023. Epub 2009
Feb 12.

Anti-inflammatory effects of eplerenone on viral myocarditis.

Xiao J(1), Shimada M, Liu W, Hu D, Matsumori A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

AIMS: Inflammation contributes to increased cardiovascular morbidity and
mortality associated with activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether eplerenone, a selective
aldosterone receptor antagonist, has anti-inflammatory effects on viral
myocarditis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Four-week-old inbred male DBA/2 mice were inoculated
intraperitoneally with 10 plaque-forming units (pfu) of the encephalomyocarditis 
(EMC) virus. Mice were fed with standard chow (control) or with chow containing
2.5 mg/kg of eplerenone, starting either on day 0 (inoculation) or day 7.
Survival at 28 days was significantly higher in the mice which started eplerenone
treatment on day 0 (35 vs. 15% in controls, each n = 40, P < 0.05). The area of
myocardial fibrosis on day 28 was significantly smaller in the eplerenone-treated
mice than in controls (19.8 +/- 2.6%, n = 14, vs. 33.4 +/- 5.4%, n = 6, mean +/- 
SEM, P < 0.05). Gene expression of mouse mast cell proteases-4 and -5, matrix
metalloproteinase-9, and type I procollagen on day 6 after EMC virus inoculation 
was significantly decreased in the hearts of eplerenone-treated mice.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that eplerenone has anti-inflammatory effects, 
and exerts its beneficial effects on viral myocarditis by suppression of genes
related to mast cells and cardiac remodelling in the hearts of mice.

DOI: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfp023 
PMID: 19213804  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

