
1. Brain Res. 2009 May 1;1268:135-141. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.02.051. Epub
2009 Mar 6.

Some observations on the tropism of Japanese encephalitis virus in rat brain.

Kumar S(1), Kalita J(1), Saxena V(2), Khan MY(3), Khanna VK(4), Sharma S(5),
Dhole TN(2), Misra UK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Science, Raebareily Road, Lucknow 226014, India.
(2)Microbiology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences,
Lucknow, India.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow,
India.
(4)Developmental Toxicology Division, Indian Institute of Toxicology Research,
Lucknow, India.
(5)Toxicology Division, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, India.
(6)Department of Neurology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Science, Raebareily Road, Lucknow 226014, India. Electronic address:
drukmisra@rediffmail.com.

The clinical picture of viral encephalitis is determined by the affinity and
persistence of the virus to different brain regions. Therefore, the present study
was aimed to investigate the neuropathological changes following Japanese
encephalitis virus (JEV) infection in rat at different time points. Twelve days
old Wistar rats were infected by intracerebral inoculation of JEV. Presence of
JEV antigen was detected in thalamus, striatum, cortex and mid brain on 3, 6, 10 
and 20 days post inoculation (d.p.i.). Histopathological changes were also
studied in different brain regions at different time points. The highest
expression of JEV antigen was found on 6 dpi in all the brain regions studied.
JEV antigen was maximum in thalamus on 6 d.p.i. and mid brain on 10 d.p.i. JEV
antigen, however, was almost undetectable on 20 d.p.i. in all the regions. The
classical pathological changes such as cellular infiltration, perivascular
cuffing, meningeal disruption, neuronal damage, neuronal shrinkage, and plaque
formation were observed up to 10 d.p.i. The present study reveals high affinity
of JEV to thalamus, brainstem and striatum. Rat model of JEV infection may serve 
as a useful model for studying mechanism of cell injury and recovery in JE.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.02.051 
PMID: 19269279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

