
1. Phytopathology. 2009 Apr;99(4):404-10. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-99-4-0404.

Variation in Tomato spotted wilt virus titer in Frankliniella occidentalis and
its association with frequency of transmission.

Rotenberg D(1), Krishna Kumar NK, Ullman DE, Montero-Ast√∫a M, Willis DK, German
TL, Whitfield AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Kansas State University, Manhattan 66506, USA.

Tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV) is transmitted in a persistent propagative
manner by Frankliniella occidentalis, the western flower thrips. While it is well
established that vector competence depends on TSWV acquisition by young larvae
and virus replication within the insect, the biological factors associated with
frequency of transmission have not been well characterized. We hypothesized that 
the number of transmission events by a single adult thrips is determined, in
part, by the amount of virus harbored (titer) by the insect. Transmission
time-course experiments were conducted using a leaf disk assay to determine the
efficiency and frequency of TSWV transmission following 2-day inoculation access 
periods (IAPs). Virus titer in individual adult thrips was determined by
real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR (qRT-PCR) at the end of the
experiments. On average, 59% of adults transmitted the virus during the first IAP
(2 to 3 days post adult-eclosion). Male thrips were more efficient at
transmitting TSWV multiple times compared with female thrips of the same cohort. 
However, females harbored two to three times more copies of TSWV-N RNA per
insect, indicating that factors other than absolute virus titer in the insect
contribute to a successful transmission event. Examination of virus titer in
individual insects at the end of the third IAP (7 days post adult-eclosion)
revealed significant and consistent positive associations between frequency of
transmission and virus titer. Our data support the hypothesis that a viruliferous
thrips is more likely to transmit multiple times if it harbors a high titer of
virus. This quantitative relationship provides new insights into the biological
parameters that may influence the spread of TSWV by thrips.

DOI: 10.1094/PHYTO-99-4-0404 
PMID: 19271982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

