
1. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 22;284(21):14572-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808531200. Epub 2009
Mar 13.

Intracellular transport of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 genomic RNA and
viral production are dependent on dynein motor function and late endosome
positioning.

Lehmann M(1), Milev MP, Abrahamyan L, Yao XJ, Pante N, Mouland AJ.

Author information: 
(1)HIV-1 RNA Trafficking Laboratory, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
Quebec.

Our earlier work indicated that the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
genomic RNA (vRNA) is trafficked to the microtubule-organizing center (MTOC) when
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2/B1 is depleted from cells. Also,
Rab7-interacting lysosomal protein promoted dynein motor complex, late endosome
and vRNA clustering at the MTOC suggesting that the dynein motor and late
endosomes were involved in vRNA trafficking. To investigate the role of the
dynein motor in vRNA trafficking, dynein motor function was disrupted by small
interference RNA-mediated depletion of the dynein heavy chain or by p50/dynamitin
overexpression. These treatments led to a marked relocalization of vRNA and viral
structural protein Gag to the cell periphery with late endosomes and a
severalfold increase in HIV-1 production. In contrast, rerouting vRNA to the MTOC
reduced virus production. vRNA localization depended on Gag membrane association 
as shown using both myristoylation and Gag nucleocapsid domain proviral mutants. 
Furthermore, the cytoplasmic localization of vRNA and Gag was not attributable to
intracellular or internalized endocytosed virus particles. Our results
demonstrate that dynein motor function is important for regulating Gag and vRNA
egress on endosomal membranes in the cytoplasm to directly impact on viral
production.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M808531200 
PMCID: PMC2682905
PMID: 19286658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

