
1. J Virol. 2009 Jun;83(11):5606-14. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00276-09. Epub 2009 Mar 25.

Efficient reverse genetics generation of infectious junin viruses differing in
glycoprotein processing.

Albari√±o CG(1), Bergeron E, Erickson BR, Khristova ML, Rollin PE, Nichol ST.

Author information: 
(1)Special Pathogens Branch, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
GA 30333, USA.

The New World arenaviruses, Junin, Machupo, Guanarito, Sabia, and Chapare, are
associated with rapidly progressing severe hemorrhagic fever with a high rate of 
case fatality in various regions of South America. The threat of natural or
deliberate outbreaks associated with these viruses makes the development of
preventive or therapeutic measures important. Here we describe a Junin virus
functional minigenome system and a reverse genetics system for production of
infectious Junin virus. This robust, highly efficient system involves
transfection of cells with only two plasmids which transcribe the virus S and L
antigenomic RNAs. The utility of the system is demonstrated by generating Junin
viruses which encode a glycoprotein precursor (GPC) containing the following: (i)
the wild-type (SKI-1/S1P peptidase) cleavage site, (ii) no cleavage site, or
(iii) a cleavage site where the SKI-1/S1P motif (RSLK) is replaced by a furin
cleavage site (RRKR). In contrast to the wild-type virus, Junin virus lacking a
GPC cleavage site replicated within successfully transfected cells but failed to 
yield infectious virus particles. This confirms observations with other
arenaviruses suggesting that GPC cleavage is essential for arenavirus
infectivity. In contrast, infectious Junin virus which encoded GPC cleaved by
furin-like proteases was easily generated. The two-plasmid, high efficiency
aspects of this Junin virus reverse genetics system show great promise for
addressing important questions regarding arenavirus hemorrhagic fever disease and
for development of precisely attenuated live arenavirus vaccines.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00276-09 
PMCID: PMC2681955
PMID: 19321606  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

