
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2009 Jan;43(1):133-9.

[Evaluation of the patients with low levels of anti-HCV positivity].

[Article in Turkish]

Zer Y(1), Karaoğlan I, Ciçek H, Karağoz ID, Sağlam M.

Author information: 
(1)Gaziantep Universitesi Tip Fakültesi, Merkez Laboratuvari, Gaziantep.
yaseminzer@hotmail.com

Laboratory diagnosis of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is based on the
detection of anti-HCV antibodies by enzyme immunoassay (EIA) or chemiluminescence
immunoassay (CIA) techniques. However, a consensus related to the problem of low 
titer (Serum/Cut-off; S/C= 1.0) anti-HCV antibodies is still lacking. This study 
was aimed to evaluate the clinical status of the patients with low titer anti-HCV
antibodies detected by third generation anti-HCV tests during january
2007-December 2007. Two hundred and fifteen sera with anti-HCV S/C values between
1-5, detected by a commercial test system (Vitros EC Immunodiagnostic System, 3rd
generation anti-HCV test, Ortho-Clinical Diagnostics, USA) with a sensitivity of 
100% and specificity of 99.7%, as indicated by the supplier, were included to the
study. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels
were determined by using chemiluminescence assay (Roche Diagnostics, Germany) and
HCV-RNA was detected by real-time PCR (Flurion HCV QNP 2.1). Hundred and thirty
six (63.3%) of the patients were female and 79 (36.7%) were male. The mean age of
the patients was 50.2 +/- 18.9 years. In 18 (8.3%) patients ALT and/or AST levels
were high and two of them were infected with hepatitis A while the remaining two 
with hepatitis B virus. HCV-RNA positivity (15.6 x 10(6); 4.3 x 10(5) and 2.6 x
10(3) IU/ml, respectively) was detected in three patients (1.4%) with S/C values 
of 3.69, 4.46 and 4.59, respectively. These three patients were older than 50
years, had high ALT levels and were chronic renal failure patients undergoing
dialysis for at least one year. It was observed that after 4-6 weeks anti-HCV
titers increased (S/C values were 15.1, 6.5 and 11.8, respectively) in the serum 
samples of these patients. The data obtained from this study emphasizes the
problem of low titer positive anti-HCV results. It could be concluded that in
case of low titer anti-HCV values, the result should be confirmed by RIBA,
although its use is a matter of debate due to its low sensitivity, and HCV-RNA
tests. Based on these data it seemed that changing the anti-HCV S/C ratio would
not be a solution for the problem of low titer anti-HCV positive results.


PMID: 19334390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

