
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2009 Sep;67(1):15-22. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2009.04.003. Epub
2009 Apr 11.

The use of Group 3 LEA proteins as fusion partners in facilitating recombinant
expression of recalcitrant proteins in E. coli.

Singh J(1), Whitwill S, Lacroix G, Douglas J, Dubuc E, Allard G, Keller W,
Schernthaner JP.

Author information: 
(1)Eastern Cereal and Oilseed Research Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food, 960
Carling Ave., Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) proteins are intrinsically disordered proteins 
that accumulate in organisms during the development of dehydration stress
tolerance and cold acclimation. Group 3 LEA proteins have been implicated in the 
prevention of cellular protein denaturation and membrane damage during
desiccation and anhydrobiosis. We tested the ability of LEA proteins to
facilitate recombinant expression of recalcitrant and intrinsic membrane
proteins. Two Brassica napus Group 3 LEA proteins, BN115m and a truncated
fragment of BNECP63, were fused to two target proteins identified as recalcitrant
to overexpression in soluble form or outside of inclusion bodies. Fusion of a
truncated peptide of BNECP63 is sufficient to provide soluble and high levels of 
recombinant overexpression of BNPsbS (an intrinsic membrane chlorophyll-binding
protein of photosystem II light harvesting complex) and a peptide of the
Hepatitis C viral polyprotein. Furthermore, fusion of the recombinant target
proteins to BNECP63 or BN115 prevented irreversible heat- and freeze-induced
precipitation. These experiments not only underscore the exploitation of LEA-type
peptides in facilitating protein overexpression and protection, but also provide 
insights into the mechanism of LEA proteins in cellular protection.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2009.04.003 
PMID: 19364534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

