
1. J Mol Graph Model. 2009 Jun-Jul;27(8):921-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2009.02.007.
Epub 2009 Mar 9.

Bridge water mediates nevirapine binding to wild type and Y181C HIV-1 reverse
transcriptase--evidence from molecular dynamics simulations and MM-PBSA
calculations.

Treesuwan W(1), Hannongbua S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, Bangkok
10900, Thailand.

The important role of the bridge water molecule in the binding of HIV-1 reverse
transcriptase (RT) inhibitor complex was elucidated by molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations using an MM-PBSA approach. Binding free energies and thermodynamic
property differences for nevirapine bound to wild type and Y181C HIV-1 reverse
transcriptase were investigated, and the results were compared with available
experimental data. MD simulations over 3 ns revealed that the bridge water formed
three characteristic hydrogen bonds to nevirapine and two residues, His235 and
Leu234, in the binding pocket. The energetic derived model, which was determined 
from the consecutive addition of a water molecule, confirmed that only the
contribution from the bridge water was essential in the binding configuration.
Including this bridge water in the MM-PBSA calculations reoriented the binding
energies from -32.20 to -37.65 kcal/mol and -28.07 to -29.82 kcal/mol in the wild
type and Y181C HIV-1 RT, respectively. From the attractive interactions via the
bridge water, His235 and Leu234 became major contributions. We found that the
bridge water is the key in stabilizing the bound complex; however, in the Y181C
RT complex this bridge water showed weaker hydrogen bond formation, lack of
attractive force to nevirapine and lack of binding efficiency, leading to the
failure of nevirapine against the Y181C HIV-1 RT. Moreover, the dynamics of
Val179, Tyr181Cys, Gly190 and Leu234 in the binding pocket showed additional
attractive energetic contributions in helping nevirapine binding. These findings 
that the presence of a water molecule in the hydrophobic binding site plays an
important role are a step towards a quantitative understanding of the character
of bridge water in enzyme-inhibitor binding. This can be helpful in developing
designs for novel non-nucleoside HIV-1 RT inhibitors active against the mutant
enzyme.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2009.02.007 
PMID: 19414275  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

