
1. Int J Cancer. 2009 Sep 1;125(5):1161-7. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24444.

High prevalence of human papillomavirus infection in the female population of
Guatemala.

Vallès X(1), Murga GB, Hernández G, Sabidó M, Chuy A, Lloveras B, Alameda F, de
San José S, Bosch FX, Pedroza I, Castellsagué X, Casabona J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Català d'Oncologia, IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona,
Spain. xavier_valles04@hotmail.com

The potential introduction of the newly licensed HPV-vaccines at affordable
prices could play a central role in preventing cervical cancer in middle and
low-income countries, where most of the cases occur. In spite of this, basic
epidemiological data about HPV and HPV-related lesions are still scarce. To
determine the prevalence of cervical abnormalities, HPV prevalence, genotype
distribution and related risk factors, we carried out a cross-sectional study in 
a population from Guatemala that included 297 women from the general population
(GP women) and 297 sex workers (SW). All participating women were interviewed and
underwent a complete gynecological examination that included collection of
cervical cells for cytological diagnosis, HPV DNA detection and typing by PCR
methods. Cervical HPV DNA prevalence among GP women and from SW was 38.1% (95%
CI: 32.5-43.8) and 67.3% (95% CI: 61.7-72.6), respectively. The prevalence of
abnormal cytology among GP women was 7.7% (ASCUS = 1.4%, LSIL = 4.7%, ASC-H =
0.3% and HSIL = 1.4%) and among SW was 21.6% (ASCUS = 7.5%, LSIL = 10.6%, ASC-H =
1.4% and HSIL = 2.1%). The most prevalent HPV types among women with normal
cytology were HPVs 51 (n = 30), 66 (n = 25) and 16 (n = 25), and among women with
HSIL or ASC-H (n = 14) HPVs 58 (n = 5) and 16 (n = 5). Determinants associated
with HPV DNA detection were having had an occasional partner during the last 6
months and smoking habit among GP women, and being a minor among SW. HPV and
abnormal cytology prevalence is high among women in Guatemala. The introduction
of a HPV vaccination program would prevent an important fraction of HPV-related
disease burden.

2009 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.24444 
PMID: 19415744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

