
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2009 Apr;15(4):364-71.

Clinical and microbiological assessment of patients with a long-term diagnosis of
human immunodeficiency virus infection and Candida oral colonization.

Delgado AC(1), de Jesus Pedro R, Aoki FH, Resende MR, Trabasso P, Colombo AL, de 
Oliveira MS, Mikami Y, Moretti ML.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, University of Campinas, UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil.

The objective of this study was to evaluate Candida oral colonization in human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients undergoing long-term highly active
antiretroviral therapy (ARV). The cross-sectional study included 331 HIV
patients, diagnosed from 1983 to 2003. Oral swabs were performed, and Candida
species were determined using ID 32C. Isolates were tested for antifungal
susceptibility. Clinical and laboratory data were collected to identify the
association with Candida colonization. In total, 161 Candida isolates were
detected among 147 of the 331 patients (44%), independently of the time when HIV 
infection was diagnosed. Candida albicans strains represented 137 (85%) of the
isolates, and were susceptible to all of the tested antifungal drugs. Among the
non-C. albicans strains, six isolates were dose-dependently susceptible to
fluconazole, nine to itraconazole, and seven to ketoconazole. The isolation of
Candida was significantly higher in patients with virological failure (83/147; p 
0.0002) and CD4(+) T-lymphocyte counts <200 cells/mm(3) (30/83; p 0.0003).
Recovery of Candida in the oral cavity was independent of protease inhibitor (PI)
usage (p 0.60). Colonized patients typically underwent salvage therapy (p 0.003),
and had more episodes of opportunistic fungal infections (p 0.046) and
malignancies (p 0.004).Oral Candida colonization in patients under ARV therapy
was associated with the immunosupressed status of HIV-infected patients, i.e. low
number of CD4(+) T-cells per cubic millimetre, failure of ARV therapy (salvage
therapy), and higher number of opportunistic infections and malignancies. Despite
the fact that PIs have in vitro antifungal activity, the use of this class of
antiretroviral agent did not influence the presence of Candida in the oral cavity
of AIDS patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2009.02707.x 
PMID: 19431223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

