
1. Gene Ther. 2009 Aug;16(8):1021-33. doi: 10.1038/gt.2009.58. Epub 2009 May 28.

Analysis of neuronal proliferation, migration and differentiation in the
postnatal brain using equine infectious anemia virus-based lentiviral vectors.

Jacquet BV(1), Patel M, Iyengar M, Liang H, Therit B, Salinas-Mondragon R, Lai C,
Olsen JC, Anton ES, Ghashghaei HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh, NC, USA.

Ongoing neurogenesis in discrete sectors of the adult central nervous system
depends on the mitotic activity of an elusive population of adult stem cells. The
existence of adult neural stem cells provides an alternative approach to
transplantation of embryonic stem cells in cell-based therapies. Owing to the
limited intrinsic fate of adult stem cells and inhibitory nature of the adult
brain for neurogenesis, accommodation for circuit replacement in the brain will
require genetic and epigenetic manipulation. Here, we show that a
replication-incompetent Equine Infectious Anemia Virus (EIAV) is highly suitable 
for stable and persistent gene transfer to adult neural stem cells. The
transduced regions were free of long-lasting neuroimmune responses to EIAV.
Transduction in the subventricular zone was specific to the stem cell niche, but 
spared the progeny of adult neural stem cells that includes transit amplifying
progenitors (TAPs) and migrating neuroblasts. With time, EIAV-transduced stem
cells passed on the transgene to TAPs and migrating neuroblasts, which ultimately
differentiated into neurons in the olfactory bulbs. We show that EIAV is highly
suitable for discovery and assessment of mechanisms that regulate proliferation, 
migration and differentiation in the postnatal brain.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2009.58 
PMCID: PMC3016938
PMID: 19474809  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

