
1. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2009 Feb;22(1):28-34. doi: 10.1097/QCO.0b013e328320a849.

Cardiovascular disease and HIV infection: host, virus, or drugs?

Martínez E(1), Larrousse M, Gatell JM.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Unit, Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain. esteban@fundsoriano.es

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: With effective antiretroviral therapy, cardiovascular disease 
has gained importance as a cause of morbidity and mortality in HIV-infected
persons. We review the risk of cardiovascular disease in HIV-infected persons
compared with that in uninfected persons and discuss the relative contributions
of host, HIV, and antiretroviral therapy in the light of current knowledge.
RECENT FINDINGS: The incidence of cardiovascular disease in HIV-infected patients
receiving antiretroviral therapy is low. However, the risk of cardiovascular
disease increased compared with that in uninfected persons. This fact is
substantially due to a higher prevalence of underlying traditional cardiovascular
risk factors that are mostly host dependent. HIV may additionally contribute both
directly through immune activation and inflammation, and indirectly through
immunodeficiency. In a more modest way than that of HIV infection, the type of
antiretroviral therapy may also contribute through its impact on metabolic and
body fat parameters, and possibly through other factors that are currently
unclear.
SUMMARY: Prevention of cardiovascular disease in HIV-infected patients should be 
standard of care. Traditional risk factors should be investigated and
aggressively treated when possible. Antiretroviral therapy should be initiated
earlier in patients with high cardiovascular risk. From a purely cardiovascular
perspective, the benefits of antiretroviral therapy clearly outweigh any
potential risk.

DOI: 10.1097/QCO.0b013e328320a849 
PMID: 19532078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

