
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2009 Sep;9(5):927-32. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2009.06.014. Epub 
2009 Jun 24.

Bayesian coalescent inference reveals high evolutionary rates and expansion of
Norovirus populations.

Victoria M(1), Miagostovich MP, Ferreira MS, Vieira CB, Fioretti JM, Leite JP,
Colina R, Cristina J.

Author information: 
(1)Laborat√≥rio de Virologia Comparada e Ambiental, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz,
FIOCRUZ, Av. Brasil 4365, Manguinhos, 21040-360 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

Noroviruses (NoV) are a leading cause of outbreaks of nonbacterial acute
gastroenteritis in humans worldwide and have become an important cause of
hospitalization of children in South America. NoV belong to the family
Caliciviridae and are non-enveloped single stranded, positive sense, RNA viruses.
NoV of genotype GII/4 have emerged worldwide, causing four epidemic seasons of
viral gastroenteritis during which four novel variants emerged. Despite the
importance of NoV outbreaks, little is known about the evolutionary rates, viral 
spread and population dynamics of NoV populations. In order to gain insight into 
these matters, a Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach was used to
analyze region D or full-length VP1 gene sequences of GII/4 NoV populations
isolated in Brazil or Japan, respectively. The results of these studies revealed 
that the expansion population growth model was the best to fit the data in both
datasets. The dates of the most common recent ancestors revealed that these
viruses can quickly emerge in a geographical location. A mean evolutionary rate
of 1.21 x 10(-2) nucleotide substitution/site/year (s/s/y) was obtained for the
VP1 gene using full-length sequences. This rate is higher than the rates reported
for other rapidly evolving RNA. Roughly similar rates (1.44 x 10(-2)s/s/y) were
found using region D sequences, revealing the suitability of this region for
evolutionary studies, in agreement with previous reports. High evolutionary rates
and fast population growth may have contributed to the vigorous initial
transmission dynamics of the GII/4 NoV populations studied.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2009.06.014 
PMID: 19559104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

