
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2009 Sep;53(9):3803-14. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00263-09.
Epub 2009 Jun 29.

Profound antiviral effect of oral administration of MIV-210 on chronic
hepadnaviral infection in a woodchuck model of hepatitis B.

Michalak TI(1), Zhang H, Churchill ND, Larsson T, Johansson NG, Oberg B.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology and Hepatology Research Group, Faculty of Medicine, The
Health Sciences Centre, Memorial University, St. John's, Newfoundland A1B 3V6,
Canada.

MIV-210 is a prodrug of 3'-fluoro-2',3'-dideoxyguanosine with high oral
bioavailability in humans and potent activity against hepatitis B virus (HBV).
Woodchucks infected with woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHV) represent an accurate
model of HBV infection that is utilized for evaluation of the efficacy and safety
of novel anti-HBV agents. Oral administration of MIV-210 at 20 or 60 mg/kg of
body weight/day induced a rapid virological response in chronically infected
woodchucks, reducing serum WHV DNA levels by 4.75 log10 and 5.72 log10,
respectively, in 2 weeks. A progressive decline in WHV viremia occurred
throughout the 10-week therapy, giving final reductions of 7.23 log10 and 7.68
log10 in the 20- and 60-mg/kg/day groups, respectively. Further, a daily dose of 
10 mg/kg decreased the serum WHV load 400-fold after 4 weeks of treatment, and a 
dose of 5 mg/kg/day was sufficient to maintain this antiviral effect during the
following 6-week period. MIV-210 at 20 or 60 mg/kg/day reduced the liver WHV DNA 
load 200- to 2,500-fold from pretreatment levels and, importantly, led to a 2.0
log10 drop in the hepatic content of WHV covalently closed circular DNA. The
treatment with 60 mg/kg/day was well tolerated. Liver biopsy specimens obtained
after the 10-week treatment with 20 or 60 mg/kg/day and after the 10-week
follow-up showed hepatocyte and mitochondrial ultrastructures comparable to those
in the placebo-treated group. It was concluded that MIV-210 is highly effective
against chronic WHV infection. These findings, together with the previously
demonstrated inhibitory activity of MIV-210 against lamivudine-, adefovir-, and
entecavir-resistant HBV variants, make MIV-210 a highly valuable candidate for
further testing as an agent against chronic hepatitis B.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00263-09 
PMCID: PMC2737870
PMID: 19564357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

