
1. J Gen Virol. 2009 Nov;90(Pt 11):2788-2797. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.011791-0. Epub 2009
Jul 8.

Bovine leukemia virus can be classified into seven genotypes: evidence for the
existence of two novel clades.

Rodriguez SM(1), Golemba MD(2), Campos RH(2), Trono K(1), Jones LR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Virología, CNIA, INTA-Castelar, Argentina.
(2)Cátedra de Virología, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, UBA, Argentina.
(3)Division of Molecular Biology, Estación de Fotobiología Playa Unión, CC 15,
Rawson, Chubut 9103, Argentina.

Previous studies have classified the env sequences of bovine leukemia virus (BLV)
provirus from different locations worldwide into between two and four genetic
groupings. These different studies gave unique names to the identified groups and
no study has yet integrated all the available sequences. Thus, we hypothesized
that many of the different groups previously identified actually correspond to a 
limited group of genotypes that are unevenly distributed worldwide. To examine
this hypothesis, we sequenced the env gene from 28 BLV field strains and compared
these sequences to 46 env sequences that represent all the genetic groupings
already identified. By using phylogenetic analyses, we recovered six clades, or
genotypes, that we have called genotypes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6. Genotypes 1-5 have 
counterparts among the sequence groupings identified previously. One env sequence
did not cluster with any of the others and was highly divergent when compared
with the six genotypes identified here. Thus, an extra genotype, which we named
7, may exist. Similarity comparisons were highly congruent with phylogenetic
analyses. Furthermore, our analyses confirmed the existence of geographical
clusters.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.011791-0 
PMID: 19587134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

