
1. Int J Cancer. 2010 Apr 1;126(7):1562-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24764.

Down-regulation of BiP/GRP78 sensitizes resistant prostate cancer cells to
gene-therapeutic overexpression of REIC/Dkk-3.

Tanimoto R(1), Sakaguchi M, Abarzua F, Kataoka K, Kurose K, Murata H, Nasu Y,
Kumon H, Huh NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

We have recently shown that an adenovirus carrying REIC/Dkk-3 (Ad-REIC) exhibits 
a potent tumor-specific cell-killing function for various human cancers. It has
also become evident that some human cancers are resistant to Ad-REIC-induced
apoptosis. The aim of the present study was to determine the molecular mechanisms
of resistance to Ad-REIC. First, we isolated resistant clones from a human
prostate cancer cell line, PC3, after repeated exposure to Ad-REIC. Infection
efficiency of the adenovirus vector and expression level of REIC/Dkk-3 in the
resistant clones were similar to those in the parental PC3 cells. By screening
for alteration in levels and functional status of proteins involved in
Ad-REIC-induced apoptosis, we found that BiP/GRP78, an ER-residing chaperone
protein, was expressed at higher levels consistently among resistant cells.
Expression levels of BiP and rates of apoptosis induced by Ad-REIC were inversely
correlated. Down-regulation of BiP with siRNA sensitized the resistant cells to
Ad-REIC in vivo as well as in culture. These results indicate that BiP is a major
determinant of resistance to Ad-REIC-induced apoptosis. Thus BiP is useful for
diagnosis of inherent and acquired resistance of cancers and also as a target
molecule to overcome resistance to the gene therapeutic Ad-REIC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.24764 
PMID: 19626590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

