
1. Transpl Infect Dis. 2009 Dec;11(6):497-502. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-3062.2009.00429.x. Epub 2009 Aug 5.

Human herpesvirus-7 in Brazilian liver transplant recipients: a follow-up
comparison between molecular and immunological assays.

Peigo MF(1), Thomasini RL, Puglia AL, Costa SC, Bonon SH, Boin IF, Leonardi M,
Mota NG.

Author information: 
(1)Hermínio Ometto Foundation, University Center, Araras, São Paulo, Brazil.

Comment in
    Transpl Infect Dis. 2009 Dec;11(6):477-9.

Human herpesvirus-6 and -7 (HHV-6, HHV-7) remain latent after primary infection
and can reactivate after transplantation. HHV-6 active infection has been related
to some clinical manifestation, but the role of HHV-7 remains unclear. The
clinical significance of HHV-7 DNAemia is not completely known and the immune
response against HHV-7 has been poorly studied in transplantation. In this study,
we investigated HHV-7 DNAemia in liver transplant recipients and evaluated the
immunoglobulin (Ig) G and IgM response against HHV-7. A total of 22 adult liver
transplant recipients were followed up for 90 days. HHV-7 DNAemia was detected by
nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in DNA extracted from sera. IgG and IgM
detection was performed by immunofluorescent assay using HHV-7-infected cord
blood mononuclear cells. A significant virus antibody response was defined as
either a positive IgM or a > or =4-fold rise in the virus IgG antibody. All
patients had pre-transplant HHV-7-positive serostatus. Nine of 22 (40.9%)
patients presented HHV-7 DNAemia during follow-up. All these patients had
anti-HHV-7-positive IgM and/or significant increase in IgG titers with concurrent
or subsequent DNAemia. In patients without DNAemia and low persistent IgG
antibody titers, IgM was not detected. Correlation between nested PCR and IgM
detection was statistically significant (P=0.01). Our study indicates that nested
PCR in DNA extraction from serum can be useful to detect and monitor HHV-7 active
infection in liver transplant recipients. IgM antibody detection also can be
useful as a first immunological technique to detect active infection, especially 
if combined with PCR.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-3062.2009.00429.x 
PMID: 19671120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

