
1. Gene Ther. 2009 Dec;16(12):1441-51. doi: 10.1038/gt.2009.103.

A modified E2F-1 promoter improves the efficacy to toxicity ratio of oncolytic
adenoviruses.

Rojas JJ(1), Cascallo M, Guedan S, Gros A, Martinez-Quintanilla J, Hemminki A,
Alemany R.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Laboratory, IDIBELL-Institut Catal√† d'Oncologia,
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.

The E2F-1 promoter has been used to confer tumor-selective E1A expression in
oncolytic adenoviruses. Tumor specificity is mainly conferred by a unique
structure of E2F-responsive sites organized in palindromes. Binding of the
E2F-pRb complex to these palindromes results in repression of transcription in
normal cells. Owing to deregulation of the Rb/p16 pathway in tumor cells, binding
of free E2F activates transcription and initiates an autoactivation loop
involving E1A and E4-6/7. ICOVIR-7 is a new oncolytic adenovirus designed to
increase the E2F dependency of E1A gene expression. It incorporates additional
palindromes of E2F-responsive sites in an insulated E2F-1 promoter controlling
E1A-Delta24. The E2F palindromes inhibited replication in normal cells, resulting
in a low systemic toxicity at high doses in immunocompetent mice. The Delta24
deletion avoids a loop of E2F-mediated self-activation in nontumor cells.
Importantly, the additional E2F-binding hairpins boost the positive feedback loop
on the basis of E1A-mediated transcriptional regulation of E4-6/7 turned on in
cancer cells and increased antitumoral potency as shown in murine subcutaneous
xenograft models treated by intravenous injection. These results suggest that the
unique genetic combination featured in ICOVIR-7 may be promising for treating
disseminated neoplasias.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2009.103 
PMID: 19710704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

