
1. Ann Intern Med. 1990 Sep 15;113(6):438-43.

Increasing viral burden in CD4+ T cells from patients with human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) infection reflects rapidly progressive immunosuppression and clinical
disease.

Schnittman SM(1), Greenhouse JJ, Psallidopoulos MC, Baseler M, Salzman NP, Fauci 
AS, Lane HC.

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

OBJECTIVE: To determine over time the relation between viral burden and
immunologic decline in patients with asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) infection.
DESIGN: Blind analysis of cell samples from matched cohorts for HIV proviral DNA 
by polymerase chain reaction, retrospective analysis of clinical data on
patients, and prospective follow-up of patients seropositive for the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1).
SETTING: National research clinic and academic medical centers.
PATIENTS: Cohort 1 included 12 healthy HIV-1-seropositive patients (average
follow-up, 14 months): Six patients had stable disease and 6 developed rapidly
progressive disease. Cohort 2 included 15 healthy HIV-1-seropositive patients
from the Multi-center AIDS Cohort Study (average follow-up, 32 months): Eight
patients had stable disease and 7 developed rapidly progressive disease.
LABORATORY STUDIES: Quantitative polymerase chain reaction was done to determine 
the HIV-1 viral burden in sort-purified CD4+ T cells obtained from patients at
various timepoints.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: In patients who remained asymptomatic, frequencies
of HIV-infected CD4+ T cells were low (less than 1/10,000 to 1/1000) at study
entry and increased only minimally (none higher than 1/1000). In contrast, among 
patients who developed HIV-related symptoms including the acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) despite having similar CD4 counts, frequencies
of HIV-infected CD4+ T cells were higher at entry (greater than 1/1000) and
increased substantially (greater than 1/100) in most within 3 months of
developing progressive disease. This increase in HIV burden coincided with a
significant decline over time in the percent of T4 cells (31% to 16%), whereas
the percent of T4 cells was unchanged in persons who remained asymptomatic (33%
to 34%).
CONCLUSIONS: Increasing viral burden in peripheral blood CD4+ T-cells is directly
associated with a progressive decline in CD4+ T cells and deteriorating clinical 
course in HIV-infected patients.

DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-113-6-438 
PMID: 1974752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

