
1. Prev Vet Med. 2009 Dec 1;92(4):324-32. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2009.07.013. Epub
2009 Sep 20.

A flock-tailored early warning system for low pathogenic avian influenza (LPAI)
in commercial egg laying flocks.

Beltr√°n-Alcrudo D(1), Carpenter TE, Cardona C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Health and Reproduction, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California - Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, 
USA. dbeltran76@yahoo.co.uk

The aim of this study was to develop and evaluate an early warning system (EWS)
for commercial egg laying flocks to detect the subtle mortality and egg
production changes that characterize low pathogenic avian influenza virus (LPAIV)
infections. An EWS will create an alert when the recommended 'trigger point' is
reached or exceeded. Previously used EWSs are based on fixed alert levels, while 
the proposed EWS customizes the alert level to each flock. While a fixed approach
may be valid for highly pathogenic diseases, it results in a lower detection
probability for low pathogenic diseases. The EWS was based on daily data
collected from flocks affected by the 2000-2004 H6N2 LPAI epidemic in California.
Three EWSs were evaluated: (1) EWS1, which is triggered when the observed
mortality increase or production decrease exceeds more than "x" times the
expected daily value (2.75-3.50 times the expected mortality), (2) EWS2, which is
triggered when the observed mortality increase or production decrease exceeds
more than "y" times during each of 2 consecutive days the expected daily values
(1.75-2.15 times the expected mortality), and (3) a combination of the two. The
EWSs were evaluated according to three parameters: detection delay (days) of a
LPAI outbreak, false alerts (%) and outbreaks missed (%). Results showed that an 
egg production-based EWS added no benefit to a mortality-based system, mainly
because H6N2 LPAI-related egg production decrease always occurred after increase 
in mortality. Combining the two EWSs resulted in a reduced detection delay and no
missed outbreaks, but at the expense of a slight increase in the number of false 
alerts triggered. The system presented in this study also outperformed fixed EWSs
in all three evaluated parameters. The proposed EWS, if used as part of a poultry
cooperative program and combined with a rapid laboratory diagnosis, could be a
useful tool in the detection and control of LPAI outbreaks and other poultry
diseases. Built in a spreadsheet, the system could be inexpensively, easily and
quickly incorporated into a commercial egg production farm decision support
system. In addition, the proposed system could be quickly adjusted to changing
epidemic situations, and easily customized to individual flocks.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2009.07.013 
PMID: 19767114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

