
1. Liver Transpl. 2009 Oct;15(10):1343-50. doi: 10.1002/lt.21788.

Survival after orthotopic liver transplantation: the impact of antibody against
hepatitis B core antigen in the donor.

Yu L(1), Koepsell T, Manhart L, Ioannou G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Puget
Sound Health Care System and University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98195-6424, USA. leiy@medicine.washington.edu

Comment in
    Liver Transpl. 2009 Oct;15(10):1164-8.

Liver transplantation using grafts from donors with antibody against hepatitis B 
core antigen (anti-HBc) increases the recipients' risk of developing hepatitis B 
virus (HBV) infection post-transplantation. Our aim was to assess whether using
such grafts was associated with reduced posttransplantation survival and whether 
this association depended on recipients' prior exposure to HBV on the basis of
their pretransplantation serological patterns. Data were derived from the United 
Network for Organ Sharing on adult, cadaveric, first-time liver transplants
performed between 1994 and 2006. Among recipients who did not have HBV infection 
before transplantation, those with anti-HBc-positive donors had significantly
worse unadjusted posttransplantation patient survival than recipients with
anti-HBc-negative donors [hazard ratio, 1.35; 95% confidence interval (CI),
1.21-1.50]. However, after adjustments for other predictors of
posttransplantation survival, including donor age, donor race, and recipient
underlying liver diseases, patient survival was not significantly different
between the 2 groups (hazard ratio, 1.09; 95% CI, 0.97-1.24). Among recipients
without antibody against hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs), use of
anti-HBc-positive donor grafts was associated with a trend toward worse survival 
(adjusted hazard ratio, 1.18; 95% CI, 0.95-1.46), whereas no such trend was
observed among recipients positive for anti-HBs. In conclusion, in patients
without HBV infection before transplantation, using anti-HBc-positive donors was 
not independently associated with worse posttransplantation survival. Matching
these donors to recipients with anti-HBs pre-transplantation may be especially
safe.

Copyright 2009 AASLD

DOI: 10.1002/lt.21788 
PMID: 19790164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

