
1. Cancer Sci. 2010 Jan;101(1):87-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01352.x. Epub
2009 Sep 8.

Suppression of gastric cancer dissemination by ephrin-B1-derived peptide.

Tanaka M(1), Kamata R, Yanagihara K, Sakai R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Growth Factor Division, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

Interaction of the Eph family of receptor protein tyrosine kinases and their
ligands, ephrin family members, induces bidirectional signaling through cell-cell
contacts. High expression of B-type ephrin is associated with high invasion
potential of tumors, and we previously observed that signaling through the
C-terminus of ephrin-B1 mediates the migration and invasion of cells, and is
involved in the promotion of carcinomatous peritonitis in vivo. Here we show that
the intracellular introduction of a synthetic peptide derived from ephrin-B1
C-terminus blocks ephrin-B1 mediated signaling in scirrhous gastric cancer cells.
Treatment of cancer cells with a fusion peptide consisting of HIV-TAT and amino
acids 331-346 of ephrin-B1 (PTD-EFNB1-C) suppressed the activation of RhoA,
mediated by the association of ephrin-B1 with an adaptor protein Dishevelled, and
also inhibited extracellular secretion of metalloproteinase. Moreover, injection 
of PTD-EFNB1-C peptide into the peritoneal cavity of nude mice suppressed
carcinomatous peritonitis of intraperitoneally transplanted scirrhous gastric
cancer cells. These results indicate the possible application of ephrin-B1
C-terminal peptide to develop novel protein therapy for scirrhous gastric
carcinoma, especially in the stage of tumor progression, including peritoneal
dissemination.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01352.x 
PMID: 19804421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

