
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2009 Nov 1;49(9):1433-40. doi: 10.1086/630209.

Retention in opioid substitution treatment: a major predictor of long-term
virological success for HIV-infected injection drug users receiving
antiretroviral treatment.

Roux P(1), Carrieri MP, Cohen J, Ravaux I, Poizot-Martin I, Dellamonica P, Spire 
B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U912 (SE4S),
Marseille, France. perrine.roux@inserm.fr

BACKGROUND: The positive impact of opioid substitution treatment (OST) on
opioid-dependent individuals with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection is
well documented, especially with regard to adherence to highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART). We used the data from a 5-year longitudinal study
of the MANIF 2000 cohort of individuals infected with HIV (as a result of
injection drug use) and receiving HAART to investigate the predictors of
long-term virological success. Design. Data were collected every 6 months from
outpatient hospital services delivering HIV care in France. We selected all
patients who were receiving HAART for at least 6 months (baseline visit) and who 
had indications for OST (ie, still dependent on opioids). We selected a total of 
113 patients, accounting for a total of 562 visits for all the analyses.
METHODS: Long-term virological success was defined as an undetectable viral load 
after at least 6 months on HAART. Retention in OST was defined as the time
interval between the last initiation or reinitiation of OST during HAART
follow-up and any given visit on OST. A mixed logistic model was used to identify
predictors of long-term virological success.
RESULTS: At baseline, 53 patients were receiving buprenorphine, 28 patients were 
receiving methadone, and 32 patients were not on OST. The median duration of OST 
was 25 months (range, 3-42 months). In the multivariate analysis, after
adjustment for significant predictors of long-term virological success such as
adherence to HAART and early virological response, retention in OST was
associated with long-term virological success (odds ratio, 1.20 per 6-month
increase; 95% confidence interval, 1.09-1.32).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study presents important evidence of the positive impact of
retention in OST on HIV outcomes. Increasing access to OST based on a
comprehensive model of care for HIV-infected patients who have indications for
OST may foster adherence and ensure long-term response to HAART.

DOI: 10.1086/630209 
PMID: 19807275  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

