
1. Immunol Invest. 2009;38(6):526-50.

Proteomic analyses of the effects of drugs of abuse on monocyte-derived mature
dendritic cells.

Reynolds JL(1), Mahajan SD, Aalinkeel R, Nair B, Sykes DE, Schwartz SA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology,
State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo General Hospital, Buffalo, New
York, USA. jlr8@buffalo.edu

Drug abuse has become a global health concern. Understanding how drug abuse
modulates the immune system and how the immune system responds to pathogens
associated with drug abuse, such hepatitis C virus (HCV) and human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1), can be assessed by an integrated approach
comparing proteomic analyses and quantitation of gene expression. Two-dimensional
(2D) difference gel electrophoresis was used to determine the molecular
mechanisms underlying the proteomic changes that alter normal biological
processes when monocyte-derived mature dendritic cells were treated with cocaine 
or methamphetamine. Both drugs differentially regulated the expression of several
functional classes of proteins including those that modulate apoptosis, protein
folding, protein kinase activity, and metabolism and proteins that function as
intracellular signal transduction molecules. Proteomic data were validated using 
a combination of quantitative, real-time PCR and Western blot analyses. These
studies will help to identify the molecular mechanisms, including the expression 
of several functionally important classes of proteins that have emerged as
potential mediators of pathogenesis. These proteins may predispose
immunocompetent cells, including dendritic cells, to infection with viruses such 
as HCV and HIV-1, which are associated with drug abuse.

DOI: 10.1080/08820130902874110 
PMCID: PMC2812871
PMID: 19811410  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

