
1. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2009 Aug;19(6):1099-106. doi: 10.1111/IGC.0b013e3181a83cf4.

Human leukocyte antigens I and II haplotypes associated with human papillomavirus
16-positive invasive cervical cancer in Mexican women.

Hernández-Hernández DM(1), Cerda-Flores RM, Juárez-Cedillo T, Granados-Arriola J,
Vargas-Alarcón G, Apresa-García T, Alvarado-Cabrero I, García-Carrancá A,
Salcedo-Vargas M, Mohar-Betancourt A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Medical Research Unit in Oncology Diseases,
Epidemiological Research and Health Services Unit Oncology Hospital, Centro
Medico Siglo XXI, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Av Cuauhtémoc 330, Mexico
City, Mexico. dulcema@servidor.unam.mx

Infection with human papillomavirus (HPV), mainly HPV type 16, is the major
etiologic factor associated with cervical cancer (CC), but HPV infection alone is
not sufficient for progression of precursor lesions. Host genetic susceptibility 
may lead to abnormal immune response resulting from virus persistence. Several
studies have suggested a possible association with specific human leukocyte
antigen (HLA) class I and II alleles and CC, but results are not consistent. The 
association of genetic HLA class I (A and B) and HLA class II (DR*B1 and DQ*B1)
haplotypes with HPV16-positive CC (n = 104) and base population controls (n =
104) was evaluated in this Mexican population study. Sequence-specific primer HLA
genes were determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based methods in
peripheral blood cell counts (PCR sequence-specific oligonucleotides). The
cervical swabs of 208 women were tested for HPV16 by Hybrid Capture II. Allele
and haplotype HLA frequencies, Hardy-Weinberg tests, and a haplotype homogeneity 
test were estimated using the Arlequin software v. 3.01. Odds ratio (OR) was
calculated to compare cases and control women. Consistent associations across
other studies in women with CC and infected by HPV16 were observed for
HLA-DRB1*15 (OR, 3.9; 95% CI, 1.6-10.2) and the haplotype DRB1*15 DQB1*0602 (OR, 
4.1; 95% CI, 1.4-12.7) compared with control women. The HLA-A2-B44-DR4-DQ*0302,
HLA-A24-B35-DR16-DQ*0301, and HLA-A2-B40-DR4-DQ*0302 haplotypes showed a positive
association with CC (OR, >1), whereas HLA-A2-B39-DR4-DQ*0302,
HLA-A24-B35-DR4-DQ*0302, and HLA-A68-B40-DR4-DQ*0302 showed a negative
association (OR, <1). These results support the hypothesis that some HLA class I 
and II haplotypes could be involved with susceptibility for developing CC.

DOI: 10.1111/IGC.0b013e3181a83cf4 
PMID: 19820376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

