
1. J Virol. 2010 Jan;84(1):372-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01690-09.

Both RIG-I and MDA5 RNA helicases contribute to the induction of alpha/beta
interferon in measles virus-infected human cells.

Ikegame S(1), Takeda M, Ohno S, Nakatsu Y, Nakanishi Y, Yanagi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Measles virus (MV), a member of the family Paramyxoviridae, is a nonsegmented
negative-strand RNA virus. The RNA helicases retinoic acid-inducible gene I
(RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) are differentially 
involved in the detection of cytoplasmic viral RNAs and induction of alpha/beta
interferon (IFN-alpha/beta). RIG-I is generally believed to play a major role in 
the recognition of paramyxoviruses, whereas many viruses of this family produce V
proteins that can inhibit MDA5. To determine the individual roles of MDA5 and
RIG-I in IFN induction after MV infection, small interfering RNA-mediated
knockdown of MDA5 or RIG-I was performed in the human epithelial cell line H358, 
which is susceptible to wild-type MV isolates. The production of IFN-beta mRNA in
response to MV infection was greatly reduced in RIG-I knockdown clones compared
to that in H358 cells, confirming the importance of RIG-I in the detection of MV.
The IFN-beta mRNA levels were also moderately reduced in MDA5 knockdown clones,
even though these clones retained fully functional RIG-I. A V protein-deficient
recombinant MV (MVDeltaV) induced higher amounts of IFN-beta mRNA at the early
stage of infection in H358 cells compared to the parental virus. The reductions
in the IFN-beta mRNA levels in RIG-I knockdown clones were less pronounced after 
infection with MVDeltaV than after infection with the parental virus. Taken
together, the present results indicate that RIG-I and MDA5 both contribute to the
recognition of MV and that the V protein promotes MV growth at least partly by
inhibiting the MDA5-mediated IFN responses.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01690-09 
PMCID: PMC2798399
PMID: 19846522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

