
1. Microbiol Immunol. 2009 Nov;53(11):621-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.2009.00166.x.

Archetype JC virus efficiently propagates in kidney-derived cells stably
expressing HIV-1 Tat.

Nukuzuma S(1), Kameoka M, Sugiura S, Nakamichi K, Nukuzuma C, Miyoshi I, Takegami
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kobe Institute of Health, 4-6,
Minatojima-Nakamachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0046, Japan.
s-nuku@gj8.so-net.ne.jp

Pathogenic JCV with rearranged regulatory regions (PML-type) causes PML, a
demyelinating disease, in the brains of immunocompromised patients. On the other 
hand, archetype JCV persistently infecting the kidney is thought to be converted 
to PML-type virus during JCV replication in the infected host under
immunosuppressed conditions. In addition, Tat protein, encoded by HIV-1, markedly
enhances the expression of a reporter gene under control of the JCV late
promoter. In order to examine the influence of Tat on JCV propagation, we used
kidney-derived COS-7 cells, which only permit archetype JCV, and established
COS-tat cells, which express HIV-1 Tat stably. We found that the extent of
archetype JCV propagation in COS-tat cells is significantly greater than in COS-7
cells. On the other hand, COS-7 cells express SV40 T antigen, which is a strong
stimulator of archetype JCV replication. The expression of SV40 T antigen was
enhanced by HIV-1 Tat slightly according to real-time RT-PCR, this was not
closely related to JCV replication in COS-tat cells. The efficiency of JCV
propagation depended on the extent of expression of functional Tat. To our
knowledge, this is the first report of increased production of archetype JCV in a
culture system using cell lines stably expressing HIV-1 Tat. We propose here that
COS-tat cells are a useful tool for studying the role of Tat in archetype JCV
replication in the development of PML.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.2009.00166.x 
PMID: 19903262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

