
1. J Strength Cond Res. 2010 Aug;24(8):2249-54. doi: 10.1519/JSC.0b013e3181aff28b.

Salivary secretory immunoglobulin a response of elite speed skaters during a
competition period.

Kon M(1), Iizuka T, Maegawa T, Hashimoto E, Yuda J, Aoyanagi T, Akimoto T,
Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sports Sciences, Japan Institute of Sports Sciences, Tokyo,
Japan. kon.michihiro@jiss.naash.go.jp

We aimed to determine the responses of salivary secretory immunoglobulin A (SIgA)
and the incidence of upper respiratory tract infections (URTI) symptoms among
elite speed skaters during an actual competition period. The subjects were 8
international-class elite speed skaters. Saliva samples were obtained 3, 2, and 1
days before the race, the day of the race, and 1 day after the race. Salivary
secretory immunoglobulin A concentration was measured by enzyme immunoassay, and 
SIgA secretion rate was calculated. A visual analogue scale was used to
subjectively assess fatigue and tension. Daily URTI symptoms were recorded by
using a questionnaire. There was no statistically significant difference in the
saliva flow rate (p = 0.69), SIgA concentration (p = 0.07), and subjective
fatigue (p = 0.07) during the competition period. The SIgA secretion rate
recorded for the day of the race was significantly high compared with that of 3
and 2 days before and 1 day after the race (p < 0.05). The subjective tension
recorded on the race day was significantly high compared with that for 3, 2, and 
1 days before the race (p < 0.05). Two subjects exhibited URTI symptoms after the
race. These findings suggest that salivary SIgA in elite speed skaters increased 
after a tapering period and that an actual high-intensity speed skating race
decreased salivary SIgA in elite speed skaters. These data also suggest that the 
incidence of URTI symptoms might be related to the SIgA level. Coaches may need
to take precautions after competitions to minimize their athletes' contact with
cold viruses and adjust training load for a few days after competition to improve
the decreased mucosal immune function.

DOI: 10.1519/JSC.0b013e3181aff28b 
PMID: 19918193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

