
1. J Comput Biol. 2009 Nov;16(11):1539-47. doi: 10.1089/cmb.2009.0046.

Categorizing host-dependent RNA viruses by principal component analysis of their 
codon usage preferences.

Su MW(1), Lin HM, Yuan HS, Chu WC.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Biomedical Engineering, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei,
Taiwan, Republic of China.

Viruses have to exploit host transcription and translation mechanisms to
replicate in a hostile host cellular environment, and therefore, it is likely
that the infected host may impose pressure on viral evolution. In this study, we 
investigated differences in codon usage preferences among the highly mutable
single strain RNA viruses which infect vertebrate or invertebrate hosts,
respectively. We incorporate principal component analysis (PCA) and k-mean
methods to clustering viruses infected with different type of hosts. The relative
synonymous codon usage (RSCU) indices of all genes in 32 RNA viruses were
calculated, and the correlation of the RSCU indices among different viruses was
analyzed by the PCA. Our results show a positive correlation in codon usage
preferences among viruses that target the same host category. Results of k-means 
clustering analysis further confirmed the statistical significance of this study,
demonstrating that viruses infecting vertebrate hosts have different codon usage 
preferences to those of invertebrate viruses. Based on the analysis of the
effective number of codons (ENC) in relation to the GC-content at the synonymous 
third codon position (GC3s), we further identified that mutational pressure was
the dominant evolution driving force in making the different codon usage
preferences. This study suggests a new and effective way to characterize
host-dependent RNA viruses based on the codon usage pattern.

DOI: 10.1089/cmb.2009.0046 
PMID: 19958082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

