
1. Biochemistry. 1991 Mar 5;30(9):2395-406.

Carbohydrate structures of recombinant soluble human CD4 expressed in Chinese
hamster ovary cells.

Spellman MW(1), Leonard CK, Basa LJ, Gelineo I, van Halbeek H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal and Analytical Chemistry, Genentech, Inc., South San
Francisco, California 94080.

Infection of T-lymphocytes and macrophages by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
is mediated by the binding of the HIV envelope glycoprotein to the cell-surface
receptor glycoprotein CD4. A soluble, recombinant CD4 molecule (rCD4), produced
by expression of a truncated CD4 gene in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells [Smith
et al. (1987) Science 238, 1704-1707], is in clinical trials as a potential
therapeutic agent in the treatment of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). 
In the present study, the structures of the Asn-linked oligosaccharides of
soluble rCD4 have been elucidated. The rCD4 molecule has two potential sites for 
N-glycosylation, Asn-271 and Asn-300. Tryptic glycopeptides containing either of 
the sites were purified by reversed-phase HPLC, and their oligosaccharides were
released enzymatically. The structures of the oligosaccharides were determined by
methylation analysis, high-pH anion-exchange chromatography, fast-atom
bombardment mass spectrometry, and 1H NMR spectroscopy at 500 MHz. Asn-271 was
found to carry diantennary N-acetyllactosamine-type ("complex") oligosaccharides,
of which 8% were asialo, 55% were monosialyl, and 37% were disialyl.
Approximately 18% of these structures contained fucose alpha(1-->6) linked to the
reducing GlcNAc residue. Two different hybrid structures were found to account
for 34% of the oligosaccharides attached to Asn-300. The remainder of the
oligosaccharides attached to Asn-300 were diantennary N-acetyllactosamine-type,
of which 10% were asialo, 61% were monosialyl, and 29% were disialyl.
Approximately 9% of the hybrid structures and 40% of the N-acetyllactosamine
structures at Asn-300 were found to contain fucose alpha(1-->6) linked to the
innermost GlcNAc residue.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00223a015 
PMID: 2001369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

