
1. Virus Genes. 2010 Apr;40(2):256-66. doi: 10.1007/s11262-009-0430-6. Epub 2009 Dec
19.

Molecular characterization and phylogeny of two begomoviruses infecting
Malvastrum americanum in Jamaica: evidence of the contribution of inter-species
recombination to the evolution of malvaceous weed-associated begomoviruses from
the northern Caribbean.

Graham AP(1), Martin DP, Roye ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Centre, 2 St. John's Close, University of the West Indies (Mona 
Campus), Kingston 7, Jamaica. andre.graham@uwimona.edu.jm

Two distinct full-length begomovirus DNA-A components and a DNA-B component were 
PCR amplified, cloned and sequenced from Jamaican Malvastrum americanum plants
exhibiting yellow mosaic symptoms. Whereas one of the DNA-A components is from a 
potentially new species that we have tentatively named Malvastrum yellow mosaic
Helshire virus (MaYMHV), the other DNA-A and the DNA-B form a cognate pair and
represent a new virus species tentatively named Malvastrum yellow mosaic Jamaica 
virus (MaYMJV). The MaYMJV genome components together infected M. americanum and 
produced yellow mosaic symptoms similar to those seen in naturally infected
plants. Both the MaYMJV and MaYMHV DNA-A components are typical of those of
bipartite begomoviruses from the Western Hemisphere. The DNA-As of MaYMJV and
MaYMHV are most closely related to each other (sharing 84% sequence identity) and
cluster phylogenetically with begomoviruses found infecting malvaceous weeds in
Cuba and Florida. The DNA-B component of MaYMJV is most similar to that of Sida
golden mosaic virus-[USA:Florida] (SiGMV-[US:Flo]) and Sida golden mosaic Costa
Rica virus-[Costa Rica] (SiGMCRV-[CR]). As with many other geminivirus species,
the genomes of MaYMJV and MaYMHV bear traces of inter-species recombination.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-009-0430-6 
PMID: 20024609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

