
1. Virus Genes. 2010 Dec;41(3):361-8. doi: 10.1007/s11262-009-0444-0. Epub 2010 Jan 
6.

Molecular characterisation of African swine fever viruses from Nigeria
(2003-2006) recovers multiple virus variants and reaffirms CVR epidemiological
utility.

Owolodun OA(1), Bastos AD, Antiabong JF, Ogedengbe ME, Ekong PS, Yakubu B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and AMB, National Veterinary Research Institute,
Vom, Plateau State, Nigeria. jidecoy@yahoo.com

Samples collected from wild and domestic suids in Nigeria, over a 3-year period
(2003-2006), were evaluated for African swine fever (ASF) virus genome presence
by targeting three discrete genome regions, namely the 478-bp C-terminal p72 gene
region advocated for genotype assignment, a 780-bp region spanning the 5'-ends of
the pB125R and pB646L (p72) genes and the hypervariable central variable region
(CVR) encoded within the 9RL ORF (pB602L). ASF virus (ASFV) presence was
confirmed in 23 of the 26 wild and domestic pigs evaluated. No evidence of ASF
infection was found in two warthogs from Adamawa State; however, one bushpig from
Plateau State was positive. Nucleotide sequences of the 478-bp and 780-bp
amplicons were identical across all ASFV-positive samples sequenced. However,
five discrete CVR variants were recovered, bringing the total number identified
to date, from Nigeria, to six. The largest of the CVR variants, termed 'Tet-36'
was identical to a virus causing outbreaks in neighbouring Benin in 1997,
indicating a prolonged persistence of this virus type in Nigeria. Co-circulation 
of three tetramer types (Tet-36, Tet-27 and Tet-20) was found in Plateau State in
July 2004, whilst in Benue State, two tetramer types (Tet-20 and Tet-21) were
present in August 2005. Despite simultaneous field presence, individual
co-infection was not observed. This study has reaffirmed the epidemiological
utility of the CVR genome region for distinguishing between geographically and
temporally constrained genotype I viruses, and has revealed the presence of
multiple ASFV variants in Nigeria.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-009-0444-0 
PMID: 20052526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

