
1. Epidemiol Infect. 2010 Sep;138(9):1298-307. doi: 10.1017/S0950268810000166. Epub 
2010 Jan 29.

Heterogeneity and penetration of HIV-1 non-subtype B viruses in an Italian
province: public health implications.

Torti C(1), Lapadula G, Izzo I, Brindicci G, Labbate G, Quiros-Roldan E, Diallo
I, Gargiulo F, Castelnuovo F, Calabresi A, Carosi G, Manca N, Monno L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious and Tropical Disease, University of Brescia, Brescia, 
Italy. torti.carlo@libero.it

This study assessed changes in prevalence and distribution of HIV-1 non-subtype B
viruses in Italian and immigrant patients over two decades in a province in
Italy. All HIV-positive patients who underwent genotypic resistance testing were 
selected. Prevalence of non-subtype B viruses in 3-year periods was calculated.
All sequences of non-subtype B and those provided by REGA as unassigned were
analysed for phylogenetic relationships. In total, 250/1563 (16%) individuals
were infected with a non-subtype B virus. Prevalence increased over time,
reaching a peak (31.5%) in 2004-2006. In Italian patients, the most frequent
subtypes were B (92.5%) and F1 (4%). F1 subtype was also prevalent in patients
from South America (13.6%); in patients of African origin, CRF02_AG (54.9%) and G
(12.3%) were the most frequent. HIV-1 non-subtype B infections in Italians were
mostly found in patients who acquired HIV sexually. A phylogenetic relationship
between F subtypes in Italian and representative HIV-1 sequences from Brazil was 
found. C subtypes in Italians were phylogenetically related to subtypes
circulating in Brazil. Inter-subtype recombinants were also found in the latest
years. The HIV-1 epidemic in Brescia province evolved to the point where about
1/3 patients recently diagnosed harboured non-B HIV subtypes. The distribution of
HIV-1 non-B subtypes in Italian patients resembled that in South American
patients and phylogenetic relatedness between some Italian and South American
HIV-1 strains was found. The possible epidemiological link between these two
populations would have been missed by looking only at risk factors for HIV
acquisition declared by patients. The evidence of inter-subtype recombinants
points to significant genetic assortment. Overall our results support
phylogenetic analysis as a tool for epidemiological investigation in order to
guide targeted prevention strategies.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268810000166 
PMID: 20109261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

