
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Feb 26;393(1):131-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.01.100. Epub 2010 Feb 1.

Real-time monitoring of RNA helicase activity using fluorescence resonance energy
transfer in vitro.

Tani H(1), Fujita O, Furuta A, Matsuda Y, Miyata R, Akimitsu N, Tanaka J, Tsuneda
S, Sekiguchi Y, Noda N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Medical Bio-Science, Waseda University,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8480, Japan.

We have developed a continuous fluorescence assay based on fluorescence resonance
energy transfer (FRET) for the monitoring of RNA helicase activity in vitro. The 
assay is tested using the hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS3 helicase as a model. We
prepared a double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) substrate with a 5' fluorophore-labeled
strand hybridized to a 3' quencher-labeled strand. When the dsRNA is unwound by
helicase, the fluorescence of the fluorophore is emitted following the separation
of the strands. Unlike in conventional gel-based assays, this new assay
eliminates the complex and time-consuming steps, and can be used to simply
measure the real-time kinetics in a single helicase reaction. Our results
demonstrate that Alexa Fluor 488 and BHQ1 are an effective fluorophore-quencher
pair, and this assay is suitable for the quantitative measurement of the RNA
helicase activity of HCV NS3. Moreover, we found that several extracts of marine 
organisms exhibited different inhibitory effects on the RNA and DNA helicase
activities of HCV NS3. We propose that this assay will be useful for monitoring
the detailed kinetics of RNA unwinding mechanisms and screening RNA helicase
inhibitors at high throughput.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.01.100 
PMID: 20117090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

