
1. Vaccine. 2010 Mar 24;28(15):2749-53. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2010.01.028. Epub
2010 Jan 30.

Colostral antibody protection and interference with immunity in lambs born from
sheep vaccinated with an inactivated Bluetongue serotype 8 vaccine.

Oura CA(1), Wood JL, Floyd T, Sanders AJ, Bin-Tarif A, Henstock M, Edwards L,
Simmons H, Batten CA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, Ash Road, Woking, Surrey
GU240NF, UK. chris.oura@bbsrc.ac.uk

Widespread vaccination programmes against Bluetongue virus serotype 8 (BTV-8),
using inactivated vaccines, are being carried out across many countries in
northern, western and southern Europe. This study investigates the extent and
length of colostral antibody protection, as well as the degree of colostral
antibody induced interference of the immune response to BTV-8, in sheep.
Significantly lower titres of neutralising antibodies were transferred in
colostrum to lambs born from sheep vaccinated once as opposed those vaccinated
twice (single vaccine in the first year and a booster vaccine in the second
year). On BTV-8 challenge, lambs born from sheep vaccinated on two occasions,
with the second booster vaccine given approximately 1 month prior to lambing,
were protected from clinical disease for up to 14 weeks. BTV-8 was isolated from 
5 of the 22 challenged lambs, although only one of these lambs showed a transient
rise in body temperature with no other clinical signs. Lambs born from ewes given
a second booster vaccine 1 month prior to lambing, are likely to be protected
from clinical disease for at least 14 weeks, whereas lambs born from ewes
vaccinated once are likely to be protected for a shorter time. Colostral
antibodies present in the 13-14-week-old lambs appeared to interfere with the
humoral response to challenge virus. These results suggest that colostral
antibodies may interfere with vaccination in lambs up to at least 14 weeks of
age.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2010.01.028 
PMID: 20123052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

