
1. Hepatology. 2010 Jun;51(6):2069-76. doi: 10.1002/hep.23528.

Sustained virologic response prevents the development of esophageal varices in
compensated, Child-Pugh class A hepatitis C virus-induced cirrhosis. A 12-year
prospective follow-up study.

Bruno S(1), Crosignani A, Facciotto C, Rossi S, Roffi L, Redaelli A, de Franchis 
R, Almasio PL, Maisonneuve P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, A.O. Fatebenefratelli e Oftalmico, Milan,
Italy. savino.bruno@fbf.milano.it

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2010 Jun;51(6):1891-3.
    Hepatology. 2011 Mar;53(3):1070-1.

The incidence of de novo development of esophageal varices (EV) in patients with 
compensated liver cirrhosis has been determined by few studies in the short term 
and never in the long term. The aims of the present study were to determine the
incidence and the risk factors associated with the development of EV and to
assess whether antiviral treatment and achievement of sustained virologic
response (SVR) may prevent de novo EV development in patients with HCV-induced
cirrhosis. We studied 218 patients with compensated EV-free, HCV-induced
cirrhosis consecutively enrolled between 1989 and 1992 at three referral centers 
in Milan, Italy. Endoscopic surveillance was performed at 3-year intervals
according to international guidelines. SVR was defined as undetectable serum
HCV-RNA 24 weeks after treatment discontinuation. During a median follow-up of
11.4 years, 149/218 (68%) patients received antiviral treatment and 34 (22.8%)
achieved SVR. None of the SVR patients developed EV compared with 22 (31.8%) of
the 69 untreated subjects (P < 0.0001) and 45 (39.1%) of the 115 non-SVR patients
(P < 0.0001). On multivariate analysis, HCV genotype 1b (hazard ratio [HR] 2.40; 
95% confidence interval [CI] 1.17-4.90) and baseline model for end-stage liver
disease (MELD) score (HR 1.20; 95% CI 1.07-1.35 for 1 point increase) were
independent predictors of EV.CONCLUSION: In the long term, the achievement of SVR
prevents the development of EV in patients with compensated HCV-induced
cirrhosis. Therefore, in these patients, endoscopic surveillance can be safely
delayed or avoided. Genotype 1b infection and MELD score identify the subset of
patients at higher risk of EV development who need tailored endoscopic
surveillance.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.23528 
PMID: 20196120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

