
1. J Virol Methods. 2010 Jul;167(1):74-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2010.03.013. Epub 
2010 Mar 19.

Validation of a loop-mediated isothermal amplification assay for visualised
detection of wild-type classical swine fever virus.

Zhang XJ(1), Sun Y, Liu L, Bel√°k S, Qiu HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Swine Infectious Diseases, National Key Laboratory of Veterinary
Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150001, Heilongjiang, China.

Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) is a nucleic acid amplification
method applied and adapted to the detection of a number of pathogens. A LAMP
assay was developed for the specific detection of wild-type classical swine fever
virus (CSFV). Based on an alignment of genomic sequences of pestiviruses
available in GenBank, four primers were selected targeting six positions in the
NS5B gene region of the viral genome. The assay was performed in a simple water
bath at a constant temperature of 62 degrees C, and after adding SYBR Green I,
the results were visualised by the naked eye. This assay allowed easy
applicability in a laboratory that is equipped simply, or even on site, close to 
the outbreaks and under field conditions. For confirmation, the results could
also be visualised under UV light or by separation of the amplified products on
2% agarose gels. The detection limit of the assay was 2.5 medium tissue culture
infectious dose (TCID(50)). The assay was validated with 116 clinical samples
from vaccinated swineherds and 53 blood samples from experimental infections, and
the results were comparable to a real-time RT-PCR assay. In summary, the LAMP
assay provides a simple, rapid, and sensitive tool for the detection of wild-type
CSFV under field conditions.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2010.03.013 
PMID: 20304010  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

