
1. J Immunol. 2010 May 1;184(9):5130-40. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901871. Epub 2010
Mar 26.

Induction of TGF-beta 1, not regulatory T cells, impairs antiviral immunity in
the lung following bone marrow transplant.

Coomes SM(1), Wilke CA, Moore TA, Moore BB.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109,
USA.

Comment in
    J Immunol. 2010 Aug 1;185(3):1350-1; author reply 1351.

Patients receiving hematopoietic stem cell transplantation or bone marrow
transplantation (BMT) as therapy for various malignancies or autoimmune diseases 
have an increased risk for infectious complications posttransplant, especially in
the lung. We have used BMT in mice and murine gammaherpesvirus, gammaHV-68, to
study the efficacy of adaptive immune responses post-BMT. Five weeks
posttransplant, mice have fully reconstituted their hematopoietic lineages in
both the lung and periphery. When challenged with virus, however, BMT mice have a
reduced ability to clear lytic virus from the lung. Defective viral control in
BMT mice is not related to impaired leukocyte recruitment or defective APC
function. Rather, BMT mice are characterized by defective CD4 cell proliferation,
skewing of effector CD4 T cells from a Th1 to a Th17 phenotype, and an
immunosuppressive lung environment at the time of infection that includes
overexpression of TGF-beta1 and PGE(2) and increased numbers of regulatory T
cells. Neither indomethacin treatment to block PG synthesis nor anti-CD25
depletion of regulatory T cells improved antiviral host defense post-BMT.
Transplanting mice with transgenic bone marrow expressing a dominant-negative
TGF-betaRII under the permissive CD4 promoter created mice in which effector CD4 
and CD8 cells were unresponsive to TGF-beta1. Mice with TGF-beta1-nonresponsive
effector T cells had restored antiviral immunity and improved Th1 responses
post-BMT. Thus, our results indicate that overexpression of TGF-beta1 following
myeloablative conditioning post-BMT results in impaired effector T cell responses
to viral infection.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901871 
PMCID: PMC3314499
PMID: 20348421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

