
1. APMIS. 2010 Apr;118(4):261-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2010.02586.x.

Circulating Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2, TLR4, and regulatory T cells in patients 
with chronic hepatitis C.

Wang JP(1), Zhang Y, Wei X, Li J, Nan XP, Yu HT, Li Y, Wang PZ, Bai XF.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infectious Diseases, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China.

The mechanism of hepatitis C virus (HCV) involvement in innate immune responses
and immune modulation has not been well characterized. In the present work, we
studied Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 and TLR4, which were recently recognized as
the important components of innate immunity, as well as CD4+ CD25+ CD127low/-
regulatory T cells (Tregs), which actively suppress pathological and
physiological immune response during HCV infection. The study involved 31 chronic
hepatitis C patients and 20 healthy controls. TLR2 and TLR4 expression in
peripheral blood monocytes and the number of Tregs were examined by flow
cytometric analysis. Overexpression of TLR2 and TLR4 was found in chronic
hepatitis C patients as compared with controls. Furthermore, increased cytokine
production, including that of beta-interferon, tumor necrosis factor-alpha,
interleukin (IL)-6, and IL-8, was observed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
from chronic hepatitis C patients after challenge with TLR2 and TLR4 agonists.
The number of Tregs was significantly higher in chronic hepatitis C patients and 
the increased Tregs were associated with HCV genotype 1b. In vitro studies
demonstrated that circulating Tregs suppress T-cell responses in chronic
hepatitis C patients. Significant correlations were found between the viral load 
and Treg number and between TLR2 and TLR4 level in chronic hepatitis C patients. 
Taken together with other published data, these results suggest that TLR2, TLR4, 
and Tregs correlate closely with chronic HCV infection.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2010.02586.x 
PMID: 20402671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

