
1. Nat Cell Biol. 2010 May;12(5):513-9. doi: 10.1038/ncb2054. Epub 2010 Apr 25.

miR-132 regulates antiviral innate immunity through suppression of the p300
transcriptional co-activator.

Lagos D(1), Pollara G, Henderson S, Gratrix F, Fabani M, Milne RS, Gotch F,
Boshoff C.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Viral Oncology Group, UCL Cancer Institute, University
College London, London WC1E 6BT, U.K.

MicroRNAs are small, non-coding RNAs that negatively regulate gene expression. It
has been proposed that microRNAs could function in the regulation of innate
immunity, but this has not been demonstrated for viral infection. Here we test
this hypothesis using the human pathogenic virus Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus (KSHV) and one of its putative natural cellular targets, primary
lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs). We show that an early antiviral microRNA
response (6 h post-infection) includes expression of microRNAs that enhance viral
gene expression. In particular, the CREB-induced miR-132 microRNA is highly
upregulated after infection and has a negative effect on the expression of
interferon-stimulated genes, facilitating viral replication. We show a similar
function for miR-132 during infection of monocytes with herpes simplex virus-1
(HSV-1) and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV). miR-132 regulates innate antiviral
immunity by inhibiting expression of the p300 transcriptional co-activator. p300 
is downregulated early after KSHV infection, and inhibition of miR-132 induction 
restores p300 expression. Furthermore, p300 regulates miR-132 levels, revealing a
dynamic equilibrium between miR-132 and p300. By targeting p300, rather than a
transcription factor or signalling protein, miR-132 has a broad role in the
regulation of antiviral immunity.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb2054 
PMID: 20418869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

