
1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 2;285(27):20882-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.102590. Epub 2010
Apr 30.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition abolishes the susceptibility of polarized
epithelial cell lines to measles virus.

Shirogane Y(1), Takeda M, Tahara M, Ikegame S, Nakamura T, Yanagi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Kyushu University, 3-1-1
Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. yuuta@virology.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Measles virus (MV), an enveloped negative-strand RNA virus, remains a major cause
of morbidity and mortality in developing countries. MV predominantly infects
immune cells by using signaling lymphocyte activation molecule (SLAM; also called
CD150) as a receptor, but it also infects polarized epithelial cells, forming
tight junctions in a SLAM-independent manner. Although the ability of MV to
infect polarized epithelial cells is thought to be important for its
transmission, the epithelial cell receptor for MV has not been identified. A
transcriptional repressor, Snail, induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), in which epithelial cells lose epithelial cell phenotypes, such as
adherens and tight junctions. In this study, EMT was induced by expressing Snail 
in a lung adenocarcinoma cell line, II-18, which is highly susceptible to
wild-type MV. Snail-expressing II-18 cells lost adherens and tight junctions.
Microarray analysis confirmed the induction of EMT in II-18 cells and suggested a
novel function of Snail in protein degradation and distribution. Importantly,
wild-type MV no longer entered EMT-induced II-18 cells, suggesting that the
epithelial cell receptor is down-regulated by the induction of EMT. Other
polarized cell lines, NCI-H358 and HT-29, also lost susceptibility to wild-type
MV when EMT was induced. However, the complete formation of tight junctions
rather reduced MV entry into HT-29 cells. Taken together, these data suggest that
the unidentified epithelial cell receptor for MV is involved in the formation of 
epithelial intercellular junctions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.102590 
PMCID: PMC2898294
PMID: 20435897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

