
1. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2006 Mar;2(2):267-76. doi: 10.1586/1744666X.2.2.267.

Lymphoid and extralymphoid CD4 T cells that orchestrate the antiviral immune
response.

Topham DJ(1), Chapman TJ, Richter M.

Author information: 
(1)David H Smith Center for Vaccine Biology & Immunology, Aab Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
david_topham@urmc.rochester.edu

This review summarizes the present understanding of the biology of CD4 T cells
during both the acute and memory phases of the response to nonpersisting viral
infection. Elucidating the precise role of CD4 T cells in viral infections has
been a challenge due to characteristics intrinsic to the CD4 response and the
slow development of tools that allow accurate identification of the
virus-specific cells in vitro and in vivo. This is especially apparent in
comparison with antiviral CD8 T cells, for which immunologists possess many tools
for tracking the cells throughout a response. However, recent developments in
technology to follow antigen-specific CD4 T cells in virus infections have
improved our understanding greatly. Ex vivo technologies such as the
enzyme-linked spot forming assays and more recently the FluoroSPOT assays,
cytokine capture and the advent of class II major histocompatibility complex
multimers have improved our ability to accurately enumerate the virus-specific
CD4 T-cell response. The development of virus-primed T-cell receptor transgenic
CD4 T cells and imaging technologies that take advantage of allotype marking and 
luciferase or fluorescent transgenes now allow for high-resolution tracking of
virus-specific CD4 T cells in many tissues. Inspite of these new technologies,
many questions remain regarding the dynamics of CD4 memory T-cell populations and
their contribution to immune protection against viral infections.

DOI: 10.1586/1744666X.2.2.267 
PMID: 20477077 

