
1. J Virol. 2010 Aug;84(16):8181-92. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00634-10. Epub 2010 Jun 2.

The ESCRT-associated protein Alix recruits the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-1 to
facilitate HIV-1 release through the LYPXnL L domain motif.

Sette P(1), Jadwin JA, Dussupt V, Bello NF, Bouamr F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

The p6 region of HIV-1 Gag contains two late (L) domains, PTAP and LYPX(n)L, that
bind Tsg101 and Alix, respectively. Interactions with these two cellular proteins
recruit members of the host's fission machinery (ESCRT) to facilitate HIV-1
release. Other retroviruses gain access to the host ESCRT components by utilizing
a PPXY-type L domain that interacts with cellular Nedd4-like ubiquitin ligases.
Despite the absence of a PPXY motif in HIV-1 Gag, interaction with the ubiquitin 
ligase Nedd4-2 was recently shown to stimulate HIV-1 release. We show here that
another Nedd4-like ubiquitin ligase, Nedd4-1, corrected release defects resulting
from the disruption of PTAP (PTAP(-)), suggesting that HIV-1 Gag also recruits
Nedd4-1 to facilitate virus release. Notably, Nedd4-1 remediation of HIV-1
PTAP(-) budding defects is independent of cellular Tsg101, implying that
Nedd4-1's function in HIV-1 release does not involve ESCRT-I components and is
therefore distinct from that of Nedd4-2. Consistent with this finding, deletion
of the p6 region decreased Nedd4-1-Gag interaction, and disruption of the
LYPX(n)L motif eliminated Nedd4-1-mediated restoration of HIV-1 PTAP(-). This
result indicated that both Nedd4-1 interaction with Gag and function in virus
release occur through the Alix-binding LYPX(n)L motif. Mutations of basic
residues located in the NC domain of Gag that are critical for Alix's
facilitation of HIV-1 release, also disrupted release mediated by Nedd4-1,
further confirming a Nedd4-1-Alix functional interdependence. In fact we found
that Nedd4-1 binds Alix in both immunoprecipitation and yeast-two-hybrid assays. 
In addition, Nedd4-1 requires its catalytic activity to promote virus release.
Remarkably, RNAi knockdown of cellular Nedd4-1 eliminated Alix ubiquitination in 
the cell and impeded its ability to function in HIV-1 release. Together our data 
support a model in which Alix recruits Nedd4-1 to facilitate HIV-1 release
mediated through the LYPX(n)L/Alix budding pathway via a mechanism that involves 
Alix ubiquitination.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00634-10 
PMCID: PMC2916511
PMID: 20519395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

