
1. J Infect Dis. 2010 Jul 15;202(2):192-201. doi: 10.1086/653622.

The prevalence of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States in the era of 
vaccination.

Wasley A(1), Kruszon-Moran D, Kuhnert W, Simard EP, Finelli L, McQuillan G, Bell 
B.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA. acw5@cdc.gov

BACKGROUND: Our objective was to assess trends in the prevalence of hepatitis B
virus (HBV) infection in the United States after widespread hepatitis B
vaccination.
METHODS: The prevalence of HBV infection and immunity was determined in a
representative sample of the US population for the periods 1999-2006 and
1988-1994. National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys participants 6 years
of age were tested for antibody to hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc), hepatitis
B surface antigen (HBsAg), and antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen
(anti-HBs). Prevalence estimates were weighted and age-adjusted.
RESULTS: During the period 1999-2006, age-adjusted prevalences of anti-HBc (4.7%)
and HBsAg (0.27%) were not statistically different from what they were during
1988-1994 (5.4% and 0.38%, respectively). The prevalence of anti-HBc decreased
among persons 6-19 years of age (from 1.9% to 0.6%; P < .01) and 20-49 years of
age (from 5.9% to 4.6%; P < .01) but not among persons 50 years of age (7.2% vs
7.7%). During 1999-2006, the prevalence of anti-HBc was higher among non-Hispanic
blacks (12.2%) and persons of "Other" race (13.3%) than it was among non-Hispanic
whites (2.8%) or Mexican Americans (2.9%), and it was higher among foreign-born
participants (12.2%) than it was among US-born participants (3.5%). Prevalence
among US-born children 6-19 years of age (0.5%) did not differ by race or
ethnicity. Disparities between US-born and foreign-born children were smaller
during 1999-1996 (0.5% vs 2.0%) than during 1988-1994 (1.0% vs 12.8%). Among
children 6-19 years of age, 56.7% had markers of vaccine-induced immunity.
CONCLUSIONS: HBV prevalence decreased among US children, which reflected the
impact of global and domestic vaccination, but it changed little among adults,
and approximately 730,000 US residents (95% confidence interval, 550,000-940,000)
are chronically infected.

DOI: 10.1086/653622 
PMID: 20533878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

