
1. Virology. 1991 Jul;183(1):427-32.

Protection of chickens from lethal influenza virus infection by influenza
A/chicken/Pennsylvania/1/83 virus: characterization of the protective effect.

Chambers TM(1), Webster RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Molecular Biology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38101.

The influenza A/chicken/Pennsylvania/1/83 (H5N2) virus is the first known example
of an influenza virus isolated from a natural infection which contained primarily
defective interfering particles (T. M. Chambers and R. G. Webster, J. Virol. 61, 
1517-1523, 1987). In chickens, coinoculation of this virus together with the
closely related but highly virulent influenza A/chicken/Pennsylvania/1370/83
virus results in reduced mortality compared to virulent virus infection alone
(Bean et al., J. Virol. 54, 151-160, 1985). The biological basis of this
protective effect has not been established. Protective activity required greater 
than or equal to 100-fold excess input of protecting virus over virulent virus,
functioned effectively during the first generations of virulent virus
multiplication, and also functioned against an antigenically heterologous (H7N7) 
virulent influenza virus. Protection was correlated with the complete inhibition 
of virulent virus spread to the brain of infected chickens. Plaque-purified
chicken/Pennsylvania/1/83 virus depleted of defective interfering particles, and 
beta-propiolactone-inactivated virus, had no protective effect. These
characteristics are consistent with the hypothesis that protection was the result
of defective interfering particle-mediated interference with virulent virus
multiplication within the respiratory tract of the chicken.

DOI: 10.1016/0042-6822(91)90160-d 
PMID: 2053293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

