
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2010 Jun 21;16(23):2907-12.

Endoscopic diagnosis of cytomegalovirus gastritis after allogeneic hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation.

Kakugawa Y(1), Kami M, Matsuda T, Saito Y, Kim SW, Fukuda T, Mori S, Shimoda T,
Tanosaki R, Saito D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endoscopy, National Cancer Center Hospital, 5-1-1 Tsukiji,
Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. yakakuga@ncc.go.jp

AIM: To clarify the endoscopic and clinical findings of cytomegalovirus (CMV)
gastritis after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-SCT).
METHODS: Between 1999 and 2005, 523 patients underwent allo-SCT at our hospital, 
and 115 of these patients with gastrointestinal symptoms underwent
esophagogastroduodenoscopy.
RESULTS: CMV gastritis was diagnosed pathologically in seven patients (1.3%) with
the other 108 patients serving as controls. Six of the seven patients developed
positive CMV antigenemia, and five complained of abdominal pain. Development of
abdominal pain preceded CMV antigenemia in four of the five patients. Endoscopic 
examination showed oozing (n = 2), erosion (n = 6), and redness (n = 5) in the
seven patients with CMV gastritis, while the control patients showed oozing (n = 
3), erosion (n = 24), and redness (n = 100). Erosion and oozing were more
frequently documented in patients with CMV gastritis compared with the controls, 
and the differences were statistically significant (P = 0.0012 and 0.029,
respectively). CMV inclusion bodies were documented in 12 of 14 biopsy specimens 
obtained from erosive lesions, while they were identified in 4 of 15 biopsy
specimens obtained from lesions other than erosions (P = 0.0025).
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that erosion and oozing, as well as abdominal
pain, are useful indicators in the diagnosis of CMV gastritis following allo-SCT.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v16.i23.2907 
PMCID: PMC2887587
PMID: 20556837  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

