
1. Mol Plant Pathol. 2005 May 1;6(3):269-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1364-3703.2005.00284.x.

A plant EPF-type zinc-finger protein, CaPIF1, involved in defence against
pathogens.

Oh SK(1), Park JM, Joung YH, Lee S, Chung E, Kim SY, Yu SH, Choi D.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Genomics Laboratory, Genome Research Center, KRIBB, PO Box 115, Yusung, 
Taejon, 305-600, Republic of Korea.

SUMMARY To understand better the defence responses of plants to pathogen attack, 
we challenged hot pepper plants with bacterial pathogens and identified
transcription factor-encoding genes whose expression patterns were altered during
the subsequent hypersensitive response. One of these genes, CaPIF1 (Capsicum
annuum Pathogen-Induced Factor 1), was characterized further. This gene encodes a
plant-specific EPF-type protein that contains two Cys(2)/His(2) zinc fingers.
CaPIF1 expression was rapidly and specifically induced when pepper plants were
challenged with bacterial pathogens to which they are resistant. In contrast,
challenge with a pathogen to which the plants are susceptible only generated weak
CaPIF1 expression. CaPIF1 expression was also strongly induced in pepper leaves
by the exogenous application of ethephon, an ethylene-releasing compound, and
salicylic acid, whereas methyl jasmonate had only moderate effects. CaPIF1
localized to the nuclei of onion epidermis when expressed as a CaPIF1-smGFP
fusion protein. Transgenic tobacco plants over-expressing CaPIF1 driven by the
CaMV 35S promoter showed increased resistance to challenge with a
tobacco-specific pathogen or non-host bacterial pathogens. These plants also
showed constitutive up-regulation of multiple defence-related genes. Moreover,
virus-induced silencing of the CaPIF1 orthologue in Nicotiana benthamiana
enhanced susceptibility to the same host or non-host bacterial pathogens. These
observations provide evidence that an EPF-type Cys(2)/His(2) zinc-finger protein 
plays a crucial role in the activation of the pathogen defence response in
plants.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1364-3703.2005.00284.x 
PMID: 20565656 

