
1. Head Neck Pathol. 2008 Dec;2(4):265-71. doi: 10.1007/s12105-008-0089-7. Epub 2008
Oct 19.

Ber-EP4, CK1, CK7 and CK14 are useful markers for basaloid squamous carcinoma: a 
study of 45 cases.

Winters R(1), Naud S, Evans MF, Trotman W, Kasznica P, Elhosseiny A.

Author information: 
(1)Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, USA. Ryan.Winters@gmail.com

Diagnosis of basaloid squamous carcinoma (BSCC) currently relies mainly on
histological criteria, with variable immunohistochemical results reported in
small series. We explored the use of a battery of immunohistochemical stains to
elucidate this diagnosis on 45 cases of BSCC. To further elucidate the
immunohistochemical profile of BSCC, to explore potential genetic pathways of
malignant transformation using proliferation markers, and to investigate a
possible link with Human Papillomavirus (HPV). Forty-five cases of BSCC and 34
site-matched cases of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) were obtained from the
archives of the pathology department at our institution. Extensive literature
review was undertaken utilizing Medline. Ber-EP4 is a useful diagnostic marker
for BSCC, positive in 82% (37/45) of the cases and in 68% (23/34) of SCC. An
alternative is the combination of cytokeratins CK14 and CK7, known to be
negative, and CK1, known to be positive, which achieves an accuracy of 73%
(33/45) in BSCC and 88% (30/34) in SCC. The two diagnostic approaches were in
agreement in 66% of the cases; both methods were equally accurate in the
divergent cases. Increased expression of the proliferation markers supports the
concept that BSCC is a rapidly growing tumor. Results of p16 stains support an
etiological link between BSCC and HPV; interestingly, HPV was present
significantly more in BSCC (71% (32/45)), than in SCC (59% (20/34)) in this study
(P=0.02).

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-008-0089-7 
PMCID: PMC2807584
PMID: 20614292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

