
1. Blood. 2010 Nov 18;116(20):4360-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-01-262089. Epub 2010
Jul 12.

Adoptive transfer of pp65-specific T cells for the treatment of chemorefractory
cytomegalovirus disease or reactivation after haploidentical and matched
unrelated stem cell transplantation.

Feuchtinger T(1), Opherk K, Bethge WA, Topp MS, Schuster FR, Weissinger EM, Mohty
M, Or R, Maschan M, Schumm M, Hamprecht K, Handgretinger R, Lang P, Einsele H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, University Children's Hospital,
Tübingen, Germany. obias.feuchtinger@med.uni-tuebingen.de

Comment in
    Blood. 2011 May 26;117(21):5772-4.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) disease and infection refractory to antiviral treatment
after allogeneic stem cell transplantation (allo-SCT) is associated with a high
mortality. Adoptive transfer of CMV-specific T cells could reconstitute viral
immunity after SCT and could protect from CMV-related complications. However,
logistics of producing virus-specific T-cell grafts limited the clinical
application. We treated 18 patients after allo-SCT from human leukocyte
antigen-mismatched/haploidentical or human leukocyte antigen-matched unrelated
donors with polyclonal CMV-specific T cells generated by ex vivo stimulation with
pp65, followed by isolation of interferon-γ-producing cells. Patients with CMV
disease or viremia refractory to antiviral chemotherapy or both were eligible for
adoptive T-cell transfer and received a mean of 21 × 10³/kg pp65-specific T
cells. In 83% of cases CMV infection was cleared or viral burden was
significantly reduced, even in cases of CMV encephalitis (n = 2). Viral control
was associated with in vivo expansion of CMV-specific T lymphocytes in 12 of 16
evaluable cases, resulting in reconstitution of antiviral T-cell responses,
without graft-versus-host disease induction or acute side effects. Our findings
indicate that the infusion of low numbers of CMV-specific T cells is safe,
feasible, and effective as a treatment on demand for refractory CMV infection and
CMV disease after allo-SCT.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-01-262089 
PMID: 20625005  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

