
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2010 Oct;57(5):330-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1865-1682.2010.01153.x. Epub 2010 Jul 23.

Spatio-temporal dynamics of African swine fever outbreaks in Nigeria, 2002-2007.

Owolodun OA(1), Yakubu B, Antiabong JF, Ogedengbe ME, Luka PD, John Audu B, Ekong
PS, Shamaki D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Applied Molecular Biology, National Veterinary
Research Institute, Vom, Plateau State, Nigeria. jidecoy@yahoo.com

African swine fever (ASF) was first introduced into Nigeria through Lagos state
in 1997. The disease rapidly spread to Ogun state in 1998 and extended to the
Niger Delta (Delta, Rivers and Akwa Ibom states) in the same year. In 1998,
Kaduna, Plateau and Benue states all north of the country experienced ASF for the
first time. Poor farm biosecurity, bad abattoir practices and extensive/free
range pig farming systems led to extensive spread of the diseases to about 16
Nigerian states excluding the far northwest and north east. A total of 1036 field
samples collected over a 6-year period covering 19 Nigerian states were analysed 
during the period under review; 805 samples were PCR positive and 231 negative.
Positive samples were detected in all three surveillance phases and from all
agroecological zones across the country. For the first time since its incursion, 
ASF was identified in some states; Bauchi, Adamawa Taraba and Gombe with chances 
of control very slim and further spread of the virus northward envisaged.
Outbreaks of the disease are now a perennial problem with an increasing disease
burden in areas where high numbers of pigs are produced in the country. The
National Veterinary Research Institute (NVRI), Vom, since 2002 investigated ASF
based on tissue submissions and reports made by individuals, private & commercial
farms and agricultural bodies. We present an analysis of geographical and
temporal distribution of ASF in the country from 2002 to 2007 and a review of
historic outbreaks since the first incursion. Risk factors and prospects for
control are discussed.

Â© 2010 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1865-1682.2010.01153.x 
PMID: 20659268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

