
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2010 Oct;162(1):41-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2010.04224.x.
Epub 2010 Aug 19.

Copy number variation in chemokine superfamily: the complex scene of CCL3L-CCL4L 
genes in health and disease.

Colobran R(1), Pedrosa E, Carretero-Iglesia L, Juan M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology for Research and Application to Diagnosis (LIRAD),
Tissue and Blood Bank (BST), Institut d'Investigació en Ciències de la Salut
Germans Trias i Pujol (IGTP) Servei d'Immunologia, Centre de Diagnòstic Biomèdic 
(CDB), Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS (Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi 
i Sunyer), Barcelona, Spain.

Genome copy number changes (copy number variations: CNVs) include inherited, de
novo and somatically acquired deviations from a diploid state within a particular
chromosomal segment. CNVs are frequent in higher eukaryotes and associated with a
substantial portion of inherited and acquired risk for various human diseases.
CNVs are distributed widely in the genomes of apparently healthy individuals and 
thus constitute significant amounts of population-based genomic variation. Human 
CNV loci are enriched for immune genes and one of the most striking examples of
CNV in humans involves a genomic region containing the chemokine genes CCL3L and 
CCL4L. The CCL3L-CCL4L copy number variable region (CNVR) shows extensive
architectural complexity, with smaller CNVs within the larger ones and with
interindividual variation in breakpoints. Furthermore, the individual genes
embedded in this CNVR account for an additional level of genetic and mRNA
complexity: CCL4L1 and CCL4L2 have identical exonic sequences but produce a
different pattern of mRNAs. CCL3L2 was considered previously as a CCL3L1
pseudogene, but is actually transcribed. Since 2005, CCL3L-CCL4L CNV has been
associated extensively with various human immunodeficiency virus-related
outcomes, but some recent studies called these associations into question. This
controversy may be due in part to the differences in alternative methods for
quantifying gene copy number and differentiating the individual genes. This
review summarizes and discusses the current knowledge about CCL3L-CCL4L CNV and
points out that elucidating their complete phenotypic impact requires dissecting 
the combinatorial genomic complexity posed by various proportions of distinct
CCL3L and CCL4L genes among individuals.

© 2010 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Immunology © 2010 British Society
for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2010.04224.x 
PMCID: PMC2990928
PMID: 20659124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

