
1. Protein Sci. 2010 Oct;19(10):2006-13. doi: 10.1002/pro.472.

A filamentous phage display system for N-linked glycoproteins.

Celik E(1), Fisher AC, Guarino C, Mansell TJ, DeLisa MP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca,
New York 14853, USA.

We have developed a filamentous phage display system for the detection of
asparagine-linked glycoproteins in Escherichia coli that carry a plasmid encoding
the protein glycosylation locus (pgl) from Campylobacter jejuni. In our assay,
fusion of target glycoproteins to the minor phage coat protein g3p results in the
display of glycans on phage. The glyco-epitope displayed on phage is the product 
of biosynthetic enzymes encoded by the C. jejuni pgl pathway and minimally
requires three essential factors: a pathway for oligosaccharide biosynthesis, a
functional oligosaccharyltransferase, and an acceptor protein with a
D/E-X(1)-N-X(2)-S/T motif. Glycosylated phages could be recovered by lectin
chromatography with enrichment factors as high as 2 Ã— 10(5) per round of panning 
and these enriched phages retained their infectivity after panning. Using this
assay, we show that desired glyco-phenotypes can be reliably selected by panning 
phage-displayed glycoprotein libraries on lectins that are specific for the
glycan. For instance, we used our phage selection to identify permissible
residues in the -2 position of the bacterial consensus acceptor site sequence.
Taken together, our results demonstrate that a genotype-phenotype link can be
established between the phage-associated glyco-epitope and the phagemid-encoded
genes for any of the three essential components of the glycosylation process.
Thus, we anticipate that our phage display system can be used to isolate
interesting variants in any step of the glycosylation process, thereby making it 
an invaluable tool for genetic analysis of protein glycosylation and for
glycoengineering in E. coli cells.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.472 
PMCID: PMC2998736
PMID: 20669235  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

