
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Aug 17;107(33):14733-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1009731107. Epub 2010 Aug 2.

Cooperation of Tim-3 and PD-1 in CD8 T-cell exhaustion during chronic viral
infection.

Jin HT(1), Anderson AC, Tan WG, West EE, Ha SJ, Araki K, Freeman GJ, Kuchroo VK, 
Ahmed R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Emory Vaccine Center, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Inhibitory receptors play a crucial role in regulating CD8 T-cell function during
chronic viral infection. T-cell Ig- and mucin-domain-containing molecule-3
(Tim-3) is well known to negatively regulate T-cell responses, but its role in
CD8 T-cell exhaustion during chronic infection in vivo remains unclear. In this
study, we document coregulation of CD8 T cell exhaustion by Tim-3 and PD-1 during
chronic lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection. Whereas Tim-3 was only
transiently expressed by CD8 T cells after acute infection, virus-specific CD8 T 
cells retained high Tim-3 expression throughout chronic infection. The majority
(approximately 65% to 80%) of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus-specific CD8 T
cells in lymphoid and nonlymphoid organs coexpressed Tim-3 and PD-1. This
coexpression of Tim-3 and PD-1 was associated with more severe CD8 T-cell
exhaustion in terms of proliferation and secretion of effector cytokines such as 
IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha, and IL-2. Interestingly, CD8 T cells expressing both
inhibitory receptors also produced the suppressive cytokine IL-10. Most
importantly, combined blockade of Tim-3 and PD-1 pathways in vivo synergistically
improved CD8 T cell responses and viral control in chronically infected mice.
Taken together, our study defines a parameter for determining the severity of CD8
T cell dysfunction and for identifying virus-specific CD8 T cells that produce
IL-10, and shows that targeting both PD-1 and Tim-3 is an effective immune
strategy for treating chronic viral infections.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1009731107 
PMCID: PMC2930455
PMID: 20679213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

