
1. Mol Ther. 2010 Nov;18(11):1907-16. doi: 10.1038/mt.2010.170. Epub 2010 Aug 10.

Proteasome inhibitors enhance gene delivery by AAV virus vectors expressing large
genomes in hemophilia mouse and dog models: a strategy for broad clinical
application.

Monahan PE(1), Lothrop CD, Sun J, Hirsch ML, Kafri T, Kantor B, Sarkar R, Tillson
DM, Elia JR, Samulski RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Therapy Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599-7352, USA. Paul_Monahan@med.unc.edu

Delivery of genes that are larger than the wild-type adeno-associated virus (AAV)
4,681 nucleotide genome is inefficient using AAV vectors. We previously
demonstrated in vitro that concurrent proteasome inhibitor (PI) treatment
improves transduction by AAV vectors encoding oversized transgenes. In this
study, an AAV vector with a 5.6 kilobase (kb) factor VIII expression cassette was
used to test the effect of an US Food and Drug Administration-approved PI
(bortezomib) treatment concurrent with vector delivery in vivo. Intrahepatic
vector delivery resulted in factor VIII expression that persisted for >1 year in 
hemophilia mice. Single-dose bortezomib given with AAV2 or AAV8 factor VIII
vector enhanced expression on average ~600 and ~300%, respectively. Moreover,
coadministration of AAV8.canineFVIII (1 Ã— 10(13) vg/kg) and bortezomib in
hemophilia A dogs (n = 4) resulted in normalization of the whole blood clotting
time (WBCT) and 90% reduction in hemorrhages for >32 months compared to untreated
hemophilia A dogs (n = 3) or dogs administered vector alone (n = 3).
Demonstration of long-term phenotypic correction of hemophilia A dogs with
combination adjuvant bortezomib and AAV vector expressing the oversized transgene
establishes preclinical studies that support testing in humans and provides a
working paradigm to facilitate a significant expansion of therapeutic targets for
human gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/mt.2010.170 
PMCID: PMC2990516
PMID: 20700109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

