
1. Protein Sci. 2010 Oct;19(10):1967-77. doi: 10.1002/pro.485.

The lambda spanin components Rz and Rz1 undergo tertiary and quaternary
rearrangements upon complex formation.

Berry J(1), Savva C, Holzenburg A, Young R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 2128 TAMU, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas 77843-2128, USA.

Phage holins and endolysins have long been known to play key roles in lysis of
the host cell, disrupting the cytoplasmic membrane and peptidoglycan (PG) layer, 
respectively. For phages of Gram-negative hosts, a third class of proteins, the
spanins, are involved in disrupting the outer membrane (OM). Rz and Rz1, the
components of the lambda spanin, are, respectively, a class II inner membrane
protein and an OM lipoprotein, are thought to span the entire periplasm by virtue
of C-terminal interactions of their soluble domains. Here, the periplasmic
domains of Rz and Rz1 have been purified and shown to form dimeric and monomeric 
species, respectively, in solution. Circular dichroism analysis indicates that Rz
has significant alpha-helical character, but much less than predicted, whereas
Rz1, which is 25% proline, is unstructured. Mixture of the two proteins leads to 
complex formation and an increase in secondary structure, especially
alpha-helical content. Moreover, transmission electron-microscopy reveals that
Rz-Rz1 complexes form large rod-shaped structures which, although heterogeneous, 
exhibit periodicities that may reflect coiled-coil bundling as well as a long
dimension that matches the width of the periplasm. A model is proposed suggesting
that the formation of such bundles depends on the removal of the PG and underlies
the Rz-Rz1 dependent disruption of the OM.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.485 
PMCID: PMC2998730
PMID: 20734329  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

