
1. Prev Vet Med. 2010 Oct 1;97(1):45-50. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2010.07.010.

Detection and characterization of infectious bursal disease viruses in broilers
at processing.

Jackwood DJ(1), Sommer-Wagner SE.

Author information: 
(1)Food Animal Health Research Program, Ohio Agricultural Research and
Development Center, The Ohio State University, 1680 Madison Avenue, Wooster, OH
44691, USA. jackwood.2@osu.edu

The presence of infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV) in broilers entering
processing plants was examined. The dissemination of IBDV and the introduction of
non-native strains for example very virulent (vv) IBDV have had a negative
economic impact on poultry production in many countries. Restrictions have been
placed on the import and export of poultry products by some countries. There is a
perceived risk that IBDV can be spread through transportation and contamination
of processing equipment, poultry protein products and processing plant personnel.
This risk, however, is fundamentally unknown because scientific studies have not 
been conducted on the presence of IBDV in birds entering processing plants or the
variables that may affect this risk during and post-harvest. The goal of this
study was to determine if infectious IBDV was present in broilers entering
processing plants. A total of 47 pooled bursa samples from 26 processing plants
in the Eastern U.S. were examined. Molecular testing indicated that an IBDV
specific RT-PCR was positive in 12 (25.5%) of the samples from 11 different
processing plants. Nucleotide sequence analysis was conducted on the 12 RT-PCR
positive samples and indicated the IBDV was not commercially available attenuated
vaccine strains. Most of the sequences were unique and a phylogenic analysis
indicated they were most closely related to variant strains of IBDV. Five RT-PCR 
positive samples were selected at random for testing in specific-pathogen-free
chickens. All five samples contained infectious IBDV as evidenced by macroscopic 
lesions and bursa/body weight ratios that were significantly lower in infected
birds than in the non-inoculated controls. The five viruses were re-identified in
bursa tissue from chickens in their respective groups at necropsy using RT-PCR
and nucleotide sequencing. The results indicate that infectious and pathogenic
IBDV are entering processing plants in this geographic region of the U.S.
Additional studies are needed on post-harvest variables that could increase or
decrease the risk that these viruses are being disseminated during this process.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2010.07.010 
PMID: 20801535  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

