
1. Am J Dermatopathol. 2010 Dec;32(8):780-6. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0b013e3181dbc5de.

Cutaneous colesional acquired immunodeficiency syndrome associated Kaposi sarcoma
and cryptococcosis.

Ramdial PK(1), Sing Y, Subrayan S, Calonje E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Pathology, University of KwaZulu Natal, Durban,
KwaZulu Natal, South Africa. ramdial@ukzn.ac.za

The clinicopathologic features of 4 AIDS patients with cutaneous colesional
Kaposi sarcoma (KS) and cryptococcosis, a rare phenomenon, are described.
Biopsies from 3 patients who were highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART)-naive demonstrated predominant KS with a conspicuous spindle cell
component and small aggregates of cryptococcal yeasts in 2 biopsies and
predominant gelatinous cryptococcosis with attenuated KS spindle cells in 1
biopsy. One patient was HAART exposed. He had childhood pulmonary tuberculosis,
was treated for disseminated cutaneous cryptococcosis 18 months earlier and
presented with cutaneous lesions, odynophagia and massive cervical
lymphadenopathy in the eighth week of HAART, after achieving viral suppression
and a CD4 cell increase from 28 to 184 cells/Î¼L. His skin biopsy demonstrated a
dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate, neutrophils, and granulomas with admixed
aggregates and single Cryptococcus neoformans and focal aggregation of human
herpes virus 8-immunopositive spindle cells. Acid fast bacilli were not
identified and mycobacterial molecular studies were negative. The features were
compatible with cutaneous cryptococcal immune reconstitution inflammatory
syndrome. His nodal and oropharyngeal biopsies demonstrated dense mixed,
including granulomatous, inflammation with few cryptococcal yeasts and acid fast 
bacilli, confirmed to be Mycobacterium tuberculosis on polymerase chain reaction 
testing, without KS. These features were also compatible with immune
reconstitution inflammatory syndrome, but the exact role of each infection in the
extracutaneous sites was unconfirmed. Colesional KS and cryptococcosis served as 
the sentinel lesion of AIDS in 3 patients and of immune reconstitution
inflammatory syndrome in 1 patient.

DOI: 10.1097/DAD.0b013e3181dbc5de 
PMID: 20802305  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

