
1. Glia. 2011 Jan;59(1):58-67. doi: 10.1002/glia.21076. Epub 2010 Sep 27.

Interferon lambda inhibits herpes simplex virus type I infection of human
astrocytes and neurons.

Li J(1), Hu S, Zhou L, Ye L, Wang X, Ho J, Ho W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

Herpes simplex virus Type I (HSV-1) is a neurotropic virus that is capable of
infecting not only neurons, but also microglia and astrocytes and can establish
latent infection in the central nervous system (CNS). We investigated whether IFN
lambda (IFN-λ), a newly identified member of IFN family, has the ability to
inhibit HSV-1 infection of primary human astrocytes and neurons. Both astrocytes 
and neurons were found to be highly susceptible to HSV-1 infection. However, upon
IFN-λ treatment, HSV-1 replication in both astrocytes and neurons was
significantly suppressed, which was evidenced by the reduced expression of HSV-1 
DNA and proteins. This IFN-λ-mediated action on HSV-1 could be partially
neutralized by antibody to IFN-λ receptor. Investigation of the mechanisms showed
that IFN-λ treatment of astrocytes and neurons resulted in the upregulation of
endogenous IFN-α/β and several IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). To block IFN-α/β
receptor by a specific antibody could compromise the IFN-λ actions on HSV-1
inhibition and ISG induction. In addition, IFN-λ treatment induced the expression
of IFN regulatory factors (IRFs) in astrocytes and neurons. Furthermore, IFN-λ
treatment of astrocytes and neurons resulted in the suppression of suppressor of 
cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS-1), a key negative regulator of IFN pathway. These
data suggest that IFN-λ possesses the anti-HSV-1 function by promoting Type I
IFN-mediated innate antiviral immune response in the CNS cells.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/glia.21076 
PMCID: PMC3082435
PMID: 20878770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

