
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2011 Mar;22(3):263-70. doi: 10.1089/hum.2010.119. Epub 2011 Feb 7.

Correction of SCID-X1 using an enhancerless Vav promoter.

Almarza E(1), Zhang F, Santilli G, Blundell MP, Howe SJ, Thornhill SI, Bueren JA,
Thrasher AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Energéticas, Medioambientales y Tecnológicas y
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, 28040 Madrid,
España.

Comment in
    Hum Gene Ther. 2011 Mar;22(3):255-6.

The efficacy of gene therapy for the treatment of inherited immunodeficiency has 
been highlighted in recent clinical trials, although in some cases complicated by
insertional mutagenesis and silencing of vector genomes through methylation. To
minimize these effects, we have evaluated the use of regulatory elements that
confer reliability of gene expression, but also lack potent indiscriminate
enhancer activity. The Vav1 proximal promoter is particularly attractive in this 
regard and may be useful in situations where high-level or complex regulation of 
gene expression is not necessary. X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency
(SCID-X1) is a good candidate for such an approach, particularly as there may be 
additional disease-related intrinsic risks of leukemogenesis, and where safety is
therefore a paramount concern. We have tested whether lentiviral vectors
expressing the common cytokine receptor gamma chain under the control of the
proximal Vav1 gene promoter are effective for correction of signaling defects and
the disease phenotype. Despite low-level gene expression, we observed
near-complete restoration of cytokine-mediated STAT5 phosphorylation in a model
cell line. Furthermore, at low vector copy number, highly effective T- and
B-lymphocyte reconstitution was achieved in vivo in a murine model of SCID-X1, in
both primary and secondary graft recipients. This vector configuration deserves
further evaluation and consideration for future clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.2010.119 
PMID: 20887212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

