
1. J Clin Virol. 2010 Dec;49(4):290-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2010.08.015. Epub 2010 Oct
8.

Polymyositis/dermatomyositis and nasopharyngeal carcinoma: the Epstein-Barr virus
connection?

Chen DY(1), Chen YM, Lan JL, Chen HH, Hsieh CW, Wey SJ, Lu JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology, Taichung Veterans General
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Polymyositis (PM) and dermatomyositis (DM) are associated with high
risk of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) in Asian countries. Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) might induce autoimmunity and malignancies in susceptible individuals.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the association of EBV with PM/DM and NPC in PM/DM
patients.
STUDY DESIGN: Serum levels of anti-EBV viral capsid antigens (VCA) and
anti-EBV-coded nuclear antigens-1 (EBNA-1) antibodies were measured by ELISA, and
EBV DNA loads were determined using real-time PCR for 98 PM/DM patients, 94
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients and 370 healthy controls (HC).
Anti-transfer-RNA synthetase antibodies (ASA) were determined by
radioimmunoprecipitation for PM/DM patients.
RESULTS: Thirteen (13.3%) of PM/DM patients vs. none of SLE patients had
detectable NPC. ASA were detectable in 31.7% of PM/DM without malignancy, while
lack of ASA in any PM/DM patient with NPC. IgA anti-EBNA-1 were detectable in
30.6% of PM/DM patients and 31.9% of SLE patients, but only in 4.1% of HC (odds
ratio [OR] 10.44 and 11.12 respectively, both p<0.001). Significantly higher
positivity for IgA anti-EBNA-1 were observed in PM/DM with NPC than in those
without malignancy (OR 44.7, p<0.01). Significantly higher positivity for EBV
genome were observed in PM/DM with NPC than in those without malignancy (OR 43.9,
p<0.01), in SLE patients (OR 13.2, p<0.05) and in HC (OR 99.4, p<0.001). EBV DNA 
loads were significantly higher in PM/DM with NPC compared with those without
malignancy and HC.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed a positive association of EBV with PM/DM and NPC.
PM/DM patients who have IgA anti-EBNA-1 or increased EBV DNA loads should be
highly suspected to have occult NPC.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2010.08.015 
PMID: 20934910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

