
1. Cancer Gene Ther. 2011 Apr;18(4):240-9. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2010.73. Epub 2010 Nov
19.

Novel adenovirus-based helper system to support production of recombinant
parvovirus.

El-Andaloussi N(1), Endele M, Leuchs B, Bonifati S, Kleinschmidt J, Rommelaere J,
Marchini A.

Author information: 
(1)Infection and Cancer Program, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany.

Preclinical studies using various cell culture and animal systems highlight the
potential of recombinant rodent parvoviruses (recPVs) for cancer therapy.
Production of these viruses is, however, not efficient and this hampers the
clinical applications of these agents. In this study, we show that the adenovirus
genes E2a, E4(orf6) and VA RNA increase the production of recPVs by more than
10-fold and reduce the time of production from 3 to 2 days in HEK293T cells. The 
helper effects of these genes can be observed with different recPVs, regardless
of the nature and size of the inserted transgene. Furthermore, we generated a
recombinant Adenovirus 5 carrying the parvovirus VP transcription unit. This
helper, named Ad-VP, allows recPVs to be efficiently produced through a protocol 
based only on cell infection, making possible to use cell lines, such as NB324K, 
which are good producers of parvoviruses but are hardly transfectable. Hence, we 
could further improve viral titers and reduce time and costs of production. This 
Ad-VP helper-based protocol could be scaled up to a bioreactor format for the
generation of the large amounts of recPVs needed for future clinical
applications.

DOI: 10.1038/cgt.2010.73 
PMID: 21102423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

