
1. Cell Death Differ. 2011 Jun;18(6):925-36. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2010.160. Epub 2010
Dec 10.

Interferon-stimulated gene ISG12b2 is localized to the inner mitochondrial
membrane and mediates virus-induced cell death.

Lu MY(1), Liao F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Interferons (IFNs) are crucial for host defence against viruses. Many
IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) induced by viral infection exert antiviral effects.
Microarray analysis of gene expression induced in liver tissues of mice on dengue
virus (DENV) infection has led to identification of the ISG gene ISG12b2. ISG12b2
is also dramatically induced on DENV infection of Hepa 1-6 cells (mouse hepatoma 
cell line). Here, we performed biochemical and functional analyses of ISG12b2. We
demonstrate that ISG12b2 is an inner mitochondrial membrane (IMM) protein
containing a cleavable mitochondrial targeting sequence and multiple
transmembrane segments. Overexpression of ISG12b2 in Hepa 1-6 induced release of 
cytochrome c from mitochondria, disruption of the mitochondrial membrane
potential, and activation of caspase-9, caspase-3, and caspase-8. Treatment of
ISG12b2-overexpressing Hepa 1-6 with inhibitors of pan-caspase, caspase-9, or
caspase-3, but not caspase-8, reduced apoptotic cell death, suggesting that
ISG12b2 activates the intrinsic apoptotic pathway. Of particular interest, we
further demonstrated that ISG12b2 formed oligomers, and that ISG12b2 was able to 
mediate apoptosis through both Bax/Bak-dependent and Bax/Bak-independent
pathways. Our study demonstrates that the ISG12b2 is a novel IMM protein induced 
by IFNs and regulates mitochondria-mediated apoptosis during viral infection.

DOI: 10.1038/cdd.2010.160 
PMCID: PMC3131945
PMID: 21151029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

