
1. Curr Med Res Opin. 2011 Mar;27(3):489-96. doi: 10.1185/03007995.2010.546392. Epub
2011 Jan 3.

Online survey: knowledge about risks, prevention and consequences of infections
with HBV among travellers from four European countries.

Herbinger KH(1), Nothdurft HD, Prymula R.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital, Department of Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine, 
Ludwig-Maximilians University of Munich, Munich, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate knowledge about risks, prevention and consequences of
infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) among travellers from four low HBV risk,
European countries.
METHODS: Individuals from an internet panel and based in the Czech Republic, the 
Netherlands, Spain and Sweden were invited to take part in an online survey. A
total of 4203 respondents met the inclusion criteria and completed the survey.
RESULTS: The majority (62.3%) of respondents did not know the main travel
destinations with moderate or high prevalence for HBV. Also, 20.1% were somewhat 
or very unaware of the ways in which HBV can be caught and travellers aged 18-35 
years were significantly more likely (p < 0.01) to have participated in at least 
one risky activity abroad. Three-quarters (74.9%) thought they were somewhat or
very aware of the health implications of contracting HBV, but only 11.8% of
participants selected more than three out of the six correct answers relating to 
conditions caused by HBV. Only 39.3% of those who knew their vaccination status
had received vaccination against HBV within the previous 5 years, although some
patients may have been vaccinated prior to this period.
CONCLUSIONS: As country-specific variables were not analysed in this study, the
results do not allow interpretation by country. A high proportion of the
respondents were at an elevated risk of HBV infection while visiting moderate or 
high prevalence countries. They were unlikely to be immunised or take appropriate
precautions; participation in risk activities abroad was high, and knowledge of
HBV was limited. These findings indicate there is a need for healthcare
professionals and the travel industry to educate travellers on the risks of HBV
infections while abroad and the importance of preventing infection through
vaccination.

DOI: 10.1185/03007995.2010.546392 
PMID: 21194400  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

