
1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

PLoS One. 2010 Dec 29;5(12):e14460. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014460.

Identification of histone deacetylase 3 as a biomarker for tumor recurrence
following liver transplantation in HBV-associated hepatocellular carcinoma.

Wu LM(1), Yang Z, Zhou L, Zhang F, Xie HY, Feng XW, Wu J, Zheng SS.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Combined Multi-Organ Transplantation, Key Lab of Organ
Transplantation, Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of 
Surgery, Ministry of Public Health, First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

Retraction in
    PLoS One. 2019 Jul 31;14(7):e0220822.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown that high expression levels of class I
histone deacetylases (HDACs) correlate with malignant phenotype and poor
prognosis in some human tumors. However, the expression patterns and prognostic
role of class I HDAC isoforms in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remain unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The expression patterns and clinical significance
of class I HDAC isoforms were assessed by immunohistochemistry in a cohort of 43 
hepatitis B virus-associated HCC patients treated with liver transplantation. In 
addition, the effects of HDAC inhibition on HCC cell behavior were investigated
by knockdown of the HDAC isoform with short interfering RNA. Class I HDACs were
highly expressed in a subset of HCCs with positivity for HDAC1 in 51.2%, HDAC2 in
48.8%, and HDAC3 in 32.6% of cases. The expression levels of HDAC isoforms were
significantly associated with the proliferation index of HCC. Kaplan-Meier curves
showed that a high expression level of HDAC2 or HDAC3 implicated significantly
reduced recurrence-free survival. Cox proportional hazards model analysis
revealed HDAC3 overexpression was an unfavorable independent prognostic factor
(P = 0.002; HR 3.907). In vitro, inhibition of HDAC2 and HDAC3, but not HDAC1,
suppressed proliferation and the invasiveness of liver cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings demonstrate that HDAC3 plays a significant
role in regulating tumor cell proliferation and invasion, and it could be served 
as a candidate biomarker for predicting the recurrence of hepatitis B
virus-associated HCC following liver transplantation and a potential therapeutic 
target.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014460 
PMCID: PMC3012077
PMID: 21206745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

