
1. Immunogenetics. 2011 Jun;63(6):363-75. doi: 10.1007/s00251-010-0509-1. Epub 2011 
Feb 1.

Association of Mx1 Asn631 variant alleles with reductions in morbidity, early
mortality, viral shedding, and cytokine responses in chickens infected with a
highly pathogenic avian influenza virus.

Ewald SJ(1), Kapczynski DR, Livant EJ, Suarez DL, Ralph J, McLeod S, Miller C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Auburn University, 166 Greene Hall, Auburn, AL
36849-5519, USA. ewaldsj@auburn.edu

Myxovirus-resistance (Mx) proteins are produced by host cells in response to type
I interferons, and some members of the Mx gene family in mammals have been shown 
to limit replication of influenza and other viruses. According to an early
report, chicken Mx1 variants encoding Asn at position 631 have antiviral
activity, whereas variants with Ser at 631 lack activity in experiments
evaluating Mx1 complementary DNA (cDNA) expressed ectopically in a cell line. We 
evaluated whether the Mx1 631 dimorphism influenced pathogenesis of highly
pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAIV) infection in chickens of two commercial 
broiler lines, each segregating for Asn631 and Ser631 variants. Following
intranasal infection with HPAIV strain A/Chicken/Queretaro/14588-19/1995 H5N2,
chickens homozygous for Asn631 allele were significantly more resistant to
disease based on early mortality, morbidity, or virus shedding than Ser631
homozygotes. Higher amounts of splenic cytokine transcripts were observed in the 
Ser631 birds after infection, consistent with higher viral loads seen in this
group and perhaps contributing to their higher morbidity. Nucleotide sequence
determination of Mx1 cDNAs demonstrated that the Asn631 variants in the two
chicken lines differed at several amino acid positions outside 631. In vitro
experiments with a different influenza strain (low pathogenicity) failed to
demonstrate an effect of Mx1 Asn631 on viral replication suggesting that in vivo 
responses may differ markedly from in vitro, or that choice of virus strain may
be critical in demonstrating effects of chicken Mx1. Overall, these studies
provide the first evidence that Mx1 has antiviral effects in chickens infected
with influenza virus.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-010-0509-1 
PMID: 21286706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

