
1. J Virol. 2011 May;85(9):4558-66. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02142-10. Epub 2011 Feb 9.

Immune-induced evolutionary selection focused on a single reading frame in
overlapping hepatitis B virus proteins.

Maman Y(1), Blancher A, Benichou J, Yablonka A, Efroni S, Louzoun Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics and Gonda Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan
University, Ramat Gan 52900, Israel.

Viruses employ various means to evade immune detection. Reduction of CD8(+) T
cell epitopes is one of the common strategies used for this purpose. Hepatitis B 
virus (HBV), a member of the Hepadnaviridae family, has four open reading frames,
with about 50% overlap between the genes they encode. We computed the CD8(+) T
cell epitope density within HBV proteins and the mutations within the epitopes.
Our results suggest that HBV accumulates escape mutations that reduce the number 
of epitopes. These mutations are not equally distributed among genes and reading 
frames. While the highly expressed core and X proteins are selected to have low
epitope density, polymerase, which is expressed at low levels, does not undergo
the same selection. In overlapping regions, mutations in one protein-coding
sequence also affect the other protein-coding sequence. We show that mutations
lead to the removal of epitopes in X and surface proteins even at the expense of 
the addition of epitopes in polymerase. The total escape mutation rate for
overlapping regions is lower than that for nonoverlapping regions. The lower
epitope replacement rate for overlapping regions slows the evolutionary escape
rate of these regions but leads to the accumulation of mutations more robust in
the transfer between hosts, such as mutations preventing proteasomal cleavage
into epitopes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02142-10 
PMCID: PMC3126273
PMID: 21307195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

