
1. Biomaterials. 2011 May;32(14):3627-36. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.01.061.
Epub 2011 Feb 12.

Modulation of immune responses by the antimicrobial peptide, epinecidin (Epi)-1, 
and establishment of an Epi-1-based inactivated vaccine.

Huang HN(1), Pan CY, Rajanbabu V, Chan YL, Wu CJ, Chen JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, National Taiwan Ocean University, 2 Pei-Ning Road,
Keelung 20224, Taiwan.

Current efforts to improve the effectiveness of vaccines include incorporating
antimicrobial peptides mixed with a virus. The antimicrobial peptide, epinecidin 
(Epi)-1, was reported to have an antiviral function, and an Epi-1-based
inactivated vaccine was postulated as a model and discussed. In this report, we
demonstrated modulation of immune responses by Epi-1 and an Epi-1-based Japanese 
encephalitis virus (JEV)-inactivated vaccine against JEV infection in mice. Under
in vitro conditions, Epi-1 prevented JEV infection-mediated loss of cell
viability in BHK-21 cells. When Epi-1 and JEV were co-injected into mice and mice
were re-challenged with JEV after 14 days, all mice survived. In addition, Epi-1 
modulated the expressions of immune-responsive genes like interleukin (IL)-6,
IL-10, MCP-1, tumor necrosis factor-α, interferon-γ and IL-12, and elevated the
levels of anti-JEV-neutralizing antibodies in the serum. The presence of Epi-1
suppressed the multiplication of JEV in brain sections at 4 days after an
injection. Mice immunized with the developed vaccine showed complete survival
against JEV infection, and it was superior to the traditional formalin-based
JEV-inactivated vaccine. This study demonstrates the use of Epi-1 to develop an
inactivated vaccine can provide guidelines for the future design of Epi-1-virus
formulations for various in vivo applications.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.01.061 
PMID: 21316756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

