
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2011 Aug;89(6):663-9. doi: 10.1038/icb.2011.7. Epub 2011 Feb
22.

A critical role for IL-15 in TLR-mediated innate antiviral immunity against
genital HSV-2 infection.

Thatte A(1), DeWitte-Orr SJ, Lichty B, Mossman KL, Ashkar AA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Gene Therapeutics, Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, 
McMaster University Health Sciences Centre, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Innate antiviral immunity, particularly at mucosal surfaces, has a critical role 
in early control of viral infections. Both type I interferons (IFNs) and
interleukin-15 (IL-15) are essential components of innate antiviral immunity. It 
has been shown that toll-like receptor (TLR) ligand-induced innate antiviral
immunity requires IFN-α/β and -λ receptor signaling. However, it is not known if 
IL-15 has a role in TLR ligand-mediated antiviral responses. Here, we report that
ligands for TLR-3 and TLR-9 cannot confer protection against genital herpes
simplex virus-2 (HSV-2) in the absence of IL-15 in vivo. Interestingly, wild-type
mice depleted of natural killer (NK) cells and treated with TLR ligands are
protected upon HSV-2 challenge, suggesting that the critical role of IL-15 is
independent of NK cell-mediated activity. To examine the cytokine response in the
absence of IL-15, we investigated TLR ligand-induced IFN-β and -λ production in
the vaginal washes, but found no impairment in IL-15(-/-) mice. Finally, we
report no impairment in the expression of the IFN-stimulated genes in IL-15(-/-) 
mice. Collectively, the data suggest that TLR ligands induce an IFN-mediated
response in the vaginal tract of both wild-type and IL-15(-/-) mice, but its
induction is insufficient for providing protection against HSV-2 in the absence
of IL-15.

DOI: 10.1038/icb.2011.7 
PMID: 21339766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

