
1. J Gen Virol. 2011 Jun;92(Pt 6):1467-1474. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.029355-0. Epub 2011 
Feb 23.

Interactions between a luteovirus and the GroEL chaperonin protein of the
symbiotic bacterium Buchnera aphidicola of aphids.

Bouvaine S(1)(2), Boonham N(3), Douglas AE(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Comstock Hall, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850,
USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of York, York YO10 5YW, UK.
(3)The Food and Environment Research Agency, Sand Hutton, York YO41 1LZ, UK.

Luteoviruses and poleroviruses are important plant viruses transmitted
exclusively by aphids in a circulative manner via the aphid haemolymph. A
chaperonin protein, GroEL, synthesized in aphids by a symbiotic bacterium,
Buchnera aphidicola, is hypothesized to bind to virus particles in the
haemolymph, thereby promoting transmission. To investigate this hypothesis, the
GroEL-binding site for barley yellow dwarf virus (BYDV) was determined in vitro, 
and the abundance of GroEL protein in different aphid tissues was investigated.
Virus binding to a peptide library representing the full GroEL molecule revealed 
a single binding site that coincides with the site that anchors two GroEL rings
to form the native GroEL tetradecamer. In the functional form of the GroEL
protein, virus binding would compete with the formation of the two GroEL rings.
Using a mAb raised against a Buchnera-specific GroEL epitope, GroEL was detected 
in Buchnera cells by immunoblotting and immunocytochemistry, but not in the aphid
haemolymph, fat body or gut. From the prediction here that GroEL-virus
interactions are probably severely limited by competition with other GroEL
molecules, and the evidence that GroEL is not available to interact with virus
particles in vivo, it is concluded that GroEL-virus interactions are unlikely to 
contribute to virus transmission by aphids.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.029355-0 
PMID: 21346031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

