
1. Am J Pathol. 2011 Mar;178(3):1167-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.11.055.

γδ T cells attenuate bleomycin-induced fibrosis through the production of CXCL10.

Pociask DA(1), Chen K, Choi SM, Oury TD, Steele C, Kolls JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New
Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA. dpocia@lsuhsc.edu

γδ T cells are a subset of T cells associated with epithelial mucosal tissues and
play a prominent role in both promoting and dampening inflammatory responses to
pathogens; in addition, they strongly mediate epithelial repair. By using a
bleomycin model of pulmonary fibrosis, we found that γδ T-cell populations
dramatically increased after bleomycin administration. To determine the
importance of these cells, we exposed mice lacking the δ chain of the γδ T-cell
receptor (γδ knockout [KO]) to bleomycin. Pulmonary fibrosis was more severe in
γδ KO mice, as measured by collagen deposition (hydroxyproline) and
histopathological features. Furthermore, there was no evidence of resolution of
the fibrotic response up to 45 days after bleomycin therapy. In contrast to
control mice, γδ KO mice had decreased concentrations of IL-6, granulocyte colony
stimulating factor, chemokine CXC ligand (CXCL) 1, and interferon inducible
protein 10/CXCL10. In vitro culture of γδ T cells purified from lungs 17 days
after bleomycin exposure (a time of peak influx of these cells) demonstrated that
γδ T cells produced substantial quantities of all four of these cytokines,
suggesting that γδ T cells are a predominant source of these proteins. To
demonstrate that γδ T cells are effector cells in the fibrotic response, we
performed adoptive transfer experiments with γδ T cells sorted from
bleomycin-treated lungs; these cells were sufficient to resolve fibrosis in γδ KO
mice and restore CXCL10 levels comparable to wild-type mice. Furthermore,
overexpression of CXCL10 in the lung decreased the severity of fibrosis seen in
the γδ KO mice. Finally, adoptive transfer of γδ T cells from CXCL10(-/-) mice
failed to reverse the severe fibrosis in γδ KO mice. These results indicate that 
γδ T cells promote the resolution of fibrosis through the production of CXCL10.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.11.055 
PMCID: PMC3070585
PMID: 21356368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

