
1. Biomaterials. 2011 Jun;32(16):3910-20. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.02.014.
Epub 2011 Mar 5.

The promotion of cartilage defect repair using adenovirus mediated Sox9 gene
transfer of rabbit bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells.

Cao L(1), Yang F, Liu G, Yu D, Li H, Fan Q, Gan Y, Tang T, Dai K.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Orthopaedic Implant, Department of Orthopaedics,
Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, 639 Zhizaoju Road, Shanghai 200011, PR China.

Although Sox9 is essential for chondrogenic differentiation and matrix
production, its application in cartilage tissue engineering has been rarely
reported. In this study, the chondrogenic effect of Sox9 on bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) in vitro and its application in articular
cartilage repair in vivo were evaluated. Rabbit BMSCs were transduced with
adenoviral vector containing Sox9. Toluidine blue, safranin O staining and
real-time PCR were performed to check chondrogenic differentiation. The results
showed that Sox9 could induce chondrogenesis of BMSCs both in monolayer and on
PGA scaffold effectively. The rabbit model with full-thickness cartilage defects 
was established and then repaired by PGA scaffold and rabbit BMSCs with or
without Sox9 transduction. HE, safranin O staining and immunohistochemistry were 
used to assess the repair of defects by the complex. Better repair, including
more newly-formed cartilage tissue and hyaline cartilage-specific extracellular
matrix and greater expression of several chondrogenesis marker genes were
observed in PGA scaffold and BMSCs with Sox9 transduction, compared to that
without transduction. Our findings defined the important role of Sox9 in the
repair of cartilage defects in vivo and provided evidence that Sox9 had the
potential and advantage in the application of tissue engineering.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.02.014 
PMID: 21377725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

