
1. J Virol. 2011 Jun;85(12):5880-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02643-10. Epub 2011 Apr 6.

CD4+ T cells, including Th17 and cycling subsets, are intact in the gut mucosa of
HIV-1-infected long-term nonprogressors.

Ciccone EJ(1), Greenwald JH, Lee PI, Biancotto A, Read SW, Yao MA, Hodge JN,
Thompson WL, Kovacs SB, Chairez CL, Migueles SA, Kovacs JA, Margolis LB, Sereti
I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, NIH, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

During acute human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, there is a massive
depletion of CD4(+) T cells in the gut mucosa that can be reversed to various
degrees with antiretroviral therapy. Th17 cells have been implicated in mucosal
immunity to extracellular bacteria, and preservation of this subset may support
gut mucosal immune recovery. However, this possibility has not yet been evaluated
in HIV-1-infected long-term nonprogressors (LTNPs), who maintain high CD4(+) T
cell counts and suppress viral replication in the absence of antiretroviral
therapy. In this study, we evaluated the immunophenotype and function of CD4(+) T
cells in peripheral blood and gut mucosa of HIV-uninfected controls, LTNPs, and
HIV-1-infected individuals treated with prolonged antiretroviral therapy (ART)
(VL [viral load]<50). We found that LTNPs have intact CD4(+) T cell populations, 
including Th17 and cycling subsets, in the gut mucosa and a preserved T cell
population expressing gut homing molecules in the peripheral blood. In addition, 
we observed no evidence of higher monocyte activation in LTNPs than in
HIV-infected (HIV(-)) controls. These data suggest that, similar to nonpathogenic
simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection, LTNPs preserve the balance of
CD4(+) T cell populations in blood and gut mucosa, which may contribute to the
lack of disease progression observed in these patients.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02643-10 
PMCID: PMC3126290
PMID: 21471231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

