
1. J Immunother. 2011 May;34(4):343-52. doi: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e3182187600.

Genetic engineering of murine CD8+ and CD4+ T cells for preclinical adoptive
immunotherapy studies.

Kerkar SP(1), Sanchez-Perez L, Yang S, Borman ZA, Muranski P, Ji Y, Chinnasamy D,
Kaiser AD, Hinrichs CS, Klebanoff CA, Scott CD, Gattinoni L, Morgan RA, Rosenberg
SA, Restifo NP.

Author information: 
(1)Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

T-cell receptor (TCR) gene therapy enables for the rapid creation of
antigen-specific T cells from mice of any strain and represents a valuable tool
for preclinical immunotherapy studies. Here, we describe the superiority of
γ-retroviral vectors compared with lentiviral vectors for transduction of murine 
T cells and surprisingly illustrate robust gene-transfer into phenotypically
naive/memory-stem cell like (TN/TSCM; CD62L(hi)/CD44(low)) and central memory
(TCM; CD62L(hi)/CD44(hi)) CD8+ T cells using murine stem cell-based γ-retroviral 
vectors (MSGV1). We created MSGV1 vectors for a major histocompatibility
complex-class I-restricted TCR specific for the melanocyte-differentiation
antigen, glycoprotein 100 (MSGV1-pmel-1), and a major histocompatibility
complex-class II-restricted TCR specific for tyrosinase-related protein-1
(MSGV1-TRP-1), and found that robust gene expression required codon optimization 
of TCR sequences for the pmel-1 TCR. To test for functionality, we adoptively
transferred TCR-engineered T cells into mice bearing B16 melanomas and observed
delayed growth of established tumors with pmel-1 TCR engineered CD8+ T cells and 
significant tumor regression with TRP-1 TCR transduced CD4 T cells. We
simultaneously created lentiviral vectors encoding the pmel-1 TCR, but found that
these vectors mediated low TCR expression in murine T cells, but robust gene
expression in other murine and human cell lines. These results indicate that
preclinical murine models of adoptive immunotherapies are more practical using
γ-retroviral rather than lentiviral vectors.

DOI: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e3182187600 
PMCID: PMC3100770
PMID: 21499127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

