
1. Hepatol Res. 2011 Jun;41(6):564-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1872-034X.2011.00799.x. Epub
2011 Apr 19.

Data mining reveals complex interactions of risk factors and clinical feature
profiling associated with the staging of non-hepatitis B virus/non-hepatitis C
virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma.

Kawaguchi T(1), Kakuma T, Yatsuhashi H, Watanabe H, Saitsu H, Nakao K, Taketomi
A, Ohta S, Tabaru A, Takenaka K, Mizuta T, Nagata K, Komorizono Y, Fukuizumi K,
Seike M, Matsumoto S, Maeshiro T, Tsubouchi H, Muro T, Inoue O, Akahoshi M, Sata 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Digestive Disease Information and Research and Department of
Medicine, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume. takumi@med.kurume-u.ac.jp

AIM:   Non-hepatitis B virus/non-hepatitis C virus-related hepatocellular
carcinoma (NBNC-HCC) is often detected at an advanced stage, and the pathology
associated with the staging of NBNC-HCC remains unclear. Data mining is a set of 
statistical techniques which uncovers interactions and meaningful patterns of
factors from a large data collection. The aims of this study were to reveal
complex interactions of the risk factors and clinical feature profiling
associated with the staging of NBNC-HCC using data mining techniques.
METHODS:   A database was created from 663 patients with NBNC-HCC at 20
institutions. The Milan criteria were used as staging of HCC. Complex
associations of variables and clinical feature profiling with the Milan criteria 
were analyzed by graphical modeling and decision tree algorithm methods,
respectively.
RESULTS:   Graphical modeling identified six factors independently associated
with the Milan criteria: diagnostic year of HCC; diagnosis of liver cirrhosis;
serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST); alanine aminotransferase (ALT);
α-fetoprotein (AFP); and des-γ-carboxy prothrombin (DCP) levels. The decision
trees were created with five variables to classify six groups of patients.
Sixty-nine percent of the patients were within the Milan criteria, when patients 
showed an AFP level of 200 ng/mL or less, diagnosis of liver cirrhosis and an AST
level of less than 93 IU/mL. On the other hand, 18% of the patients were within
the Milan criteria, when patients showed an AFP level of more than 200 ng/mL and 
ALT level of 20 IU/mL or more.
CONCLUSION:   Data mining disclosed complex interactions of the risk factors and 
clinical feature profiling associated with the staging of NBNC-HCC.

© 2011 The Japan Society of Hepatology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1872-034X.2011.00799.x 
PMID: 21501351 

