
1. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 28;6(4):e19187. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019187.

Functional interaction of nuclear domain 10 and its components with
cytomegalovirus after infections: cross-species host cells versus native cells.

Cosme RC(1), Mart√≠nez FP, Tang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/AIDS Research Program, Ponce School of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Ponce, Puerto Rico, United States of America.

Species-specificity is one of the major characteristics of cytomegaloviruses
(CMVs) and is the primary reason for the lack of a mouse model for the direct
infection of human CMV (HCMV). It has been determined that CMV cross-species
infections are blocked at the post-entry level by intrinsic cellular defense
mechanisms, but few details are known. It is important to explore how CMVs
interact with the subnuclear structure of the cross-species host cell. In our
present study, we discovered that nuclear domain 10 (ND10) of human cells was not
disrupted by murine CMV (MCMV) and that the ND10 of mouse cells was not disrupted
by HCMV, although the ND10-disrupting protein, immediate-early protein 1 (IE1),
also colocalized with ND10 in cross-species infections. In addition, we found
that the UL131-repaired HCMV strain AD169 (vDW215-BADrUL131) can infect mouse
cells to produce immediate-early (IE) and early (E) proteins but that neither DNA
replication nor viral particles were detectable in mouse cells. Unrepaired AD169 
can express IE1 only in mouse cells. In both HCMV-infected mouse cells and
MCMV-infected human cells, the knocking-down of ND10 components (PML, Daxx, and
SP100) resulted in significantly increased viral-protein production. Our
observations provide evidence to support our hypothesis that ND10 and ND10
components might be important defensive factors against the CMV cross-species
infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019187 
PMCID: PMC3084273
PMID: 21552525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

