
1. Virol J. 2011 May 10;8:215. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-8-215.

Dynamic variations in the peripheral blood lymphocyte subgroups of patients with 
2009 pandemic H1N1 swine-origin influenza A virus infection.

Guo X(1), Chen Y, Li X, Kong H, Yang S, Ye B, Cui D, Wu W, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, First
Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310003,
PR China.

BACKGROUND: Novel Influenza A (H1N1) is an acute respiratory infectious disease. 
Animal experiments indicated that when H1N1 virus infected early hosts, it showed
strong CD4(+), CD8(+), and CD4(+)CD25(+) T cell reactions. The aim of this study 
was to investigate the dynamic fluctuations of the peripheral blood lymphocyte
subgroups in patients infected with H1N1 swine-origin influenza A virus (S-OIV).
METHODS: The frequency of T cells, B cells, natural killer (NK) cells, and
regulatory T cells (Treg) in 36 severe H1N1 and 40 moderate H1N1 patients were
detected at different periods by flow cytometry. In parallel, serum cytokines
were detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and C-reactive protein (CRP)
was analyzed through an image-type automatic biochemical analyzer. In addition,
20 healthy volunteers, who were not infected with 2009 H1N1 virus, were selected 
as controls.
RESULTS: The frequency of NK cells were decreased in all cases and CD19(+) B
cells were increased in severe cases than those of the controls. At 1-2d from
onset, the frequency of CD4(+) and CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells in moderate cases was
higher than in the severe cases. Serum cytokines, specifically IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, 
IL-10, and IFN-Î³ exhibited no significant change both in the moderate and the
severe cases during the whole monitoring process. In the early stage of the
disease, serum CRP levels in the severe and moderate groups were significantly
higher than that in the control group.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients showed different lymphocyte subgroup distributions between 
mild and severe cases, which might affect the incidence and development of 2009
H1N1.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-8-215 
PMCID: PMC3104371
PMID: 21569236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

