
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Jul-Aug;1811(7-8):476-83. doi:
10.1016/j.bbalip.2011.04.013. Epub 2011 May 13.

Genetic and functional studies of phosphatidyl-inositol 4-kinase type IIIα.

Szentpetery Z(1), Szakacs G, Bojjireddy N, Tai AW, Balla T.

Author information: 
(1)Program for Developmental Neuroscience, NICHD, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase type IIIa (PI4KIIIα) is one of four mammalian PI
4-kinases that catalyzes the first committed step in polyphosphoinositide
synthesis. PI4KIIIα has been linked to regulation of ER exit sites and to the
synthesis of plasma membrane phosphoinositides and recent studies have also
revealed its importance in replication of the Hepatitis C virus in liver. Two
isoforms of the mammalian PI4KIIIα have been described and annotated in GenBank: 
a larger, ~230kDa (isoform 2) and a shorter splice variant containing only the
~97kDa C-terminus that includes the catalytic domain (isoform 1). However,
Northern analysis of human tissues and cancer cells showed only a single
transcript of ~7.5kb with the exception of the proerythroleukemia line K562,
which contained significantly higher level of the 7.5kb transcript along with
smaller ones of 2.4, 3.5 and 4.2kb size. Bioinformatic analysis also confirmed
the high copy number of PI4KIIIα transcript in K562 cells along with several
genes located in the same region in Chr22, including two pseudogenes that cover
most exons coding for isoform 1, consistent with chromosome amplification. A
panel of polyclonal antibodies raised against peptides within the C-terminal half
of PI4KIIIα failed to detect the shorter isoform 1 either in COS-7 cells or K562 
cells. Moreover, expression of a cDNA encoding isoform 1 yielded a protein of
~97kDa that showed no catalytic activity and failed to rescue hepatitis C virus
replication. These data draw attention to PI4KIIIα as one of the genes found in
Chr22q11, a region affected by chromosomal instability, but do not substantiate
the existence of a functionally relevant short form of PI4KIIIα.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2011.04.013 
PMCID: PMC3253529
PMID: 21601653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

