
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2011 Aug;55(8):3854-60. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01152-10.
Epub 2011 May 31.

Antiviral efficacy upon administration of a HepDirect prodrug of
2'-C-methylcytidine to hepatitis C virus-infected chimpanzees.

Carroll SS(1), Koeplinger K, Vavrek M, Zhang NR, Handt L, MacCoss M, Olsen DB,
Reddy KR, Sun Z, van Poelje PD, Fujitaki JM, Boyer SH, Linemeyer DL, Hecker SJ,
Erion MD.

Author information: 
(1)Merck Research Laboratories, West Point, PA 19486, USA.
steve_carroll@merck.com

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infects an estimated 170 million individuals worldwide,
and the current standard of care, a combination of pegylated interferon alpha and
ribavirin, is efficacious in achieving sustained viral response in ~50% of
treated patients. Novel therapies under investigation include the use of
nucleoside analog inhibitors of the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. NM283, a 
3'-valyl ester prodrug of 2'-C-methylcytidine, has demonstrated antiviral
efficacy in HCV-infected patients (N. Afdhal et al., J. Hepatol. 46[Suppl. 1]:S5,
2007; N. Afdhal et al., J. Hepatol. 44[Suppl. 2]:S19, 2006). One approach to
increase the antiviral efficacy of 2'-C-methylcytidine is to increase the
concentration of the active inhibitory species, the 5'-triphosphate, in infected 
hepatocytes. HepDirect prodrug technology can increase intracellular
concentrations of a nucleoside triphosphate in hepatocytes by introducing the
nucleoside monophosphate into the cell, bypassing the initial kinase step that is
often rate limiting. Screening for 2'-C-methylcytidine triphosphate levels in rat
liver after oral dosing identified 1-[3,5-difluorophenyl]-1,3-propandiol as an
efficient prodrug modification. To determine antiviral efficacy in vivo, the
prodrug was administered separately via oral and intravenous dosing to two
HCV-infected chimpanzees. Circulating viral loads declined by ~1.4 log(10) IU/ml 
and by >3.6 log(10) IU/ml after oral and intravenous dosing, respectively. The
viral loads rebounded after the end of dosing to predose levels. The results
indicate that a robust antiviral response can be achieved upon administration of 
the prodrug.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01152-10 
PMCID: PMC3147631
PMID: 21628542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

