
1. J Wildl Dis. 1990 Jul;26(3):299-306.

Mortality from duck plague virus in immunosuppressed adult mallard ducks.

Goldberg DR(1), Yuill TM, Burgess EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53706.

Environmental contaminants contain chemicals that, if ingested, could affect the 
immunological status of wild birds, and in particular, their resistance to
infectious disease. Immunosuppression caused by environmental contaminants, could
have a major impact on waterfowl populations, resulting in increased
susceptibility to contagious disease agents. Duck plague virus has caused
repeated outbreaks in waterfowl resulting in mortality. In this study, several
doses of cyclophosphamide (CY), a known immunosuppressant, were administered to
adult mallards (Anas platyrhynchos) to determine if a resultant decrease in
resistance to a normally sub-lethal strain of duck plague virus would occur, and 
induce mortality in these birds. Death occurred in birds given CY only, and in
birds given virus and CY, but not in those given virus only. There was
significantly greater mortality and more rapid deaths in the duck plague
virus-infected groups than in groups receiving only the immunosuppressant. A
positively correlated dose-response effect was observed with CY mortalities,
irrespective of virus exposure. A fuel oil and a crude oil, common environmental 
contaminants with immunosuppressive capabilities, were tested to determine if
they could produce an effect similar to that of CY. Following 28 days of oral oil
administration, the birds were challenged with a sub-lethal dose of duck plague
virus. No alteration in resistance to the virus (as measured by mortality) was
observed, except in the positive CY control group.

DOI: 10.7589/0090-3558-26.3.299 
PMID: 2167392  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

