
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20593. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020593. Epub 2011 Jun 9.

Estimating the disease burden of 2009 pandemic influenza A(H1N1) from
surveillance and household surveys in Greece.

Sypsa V(1), Bonovas S, Tsiodras S, Baka A, Efstathiou P, Malliori M,
Panagiotopoulos T, Nikolakopoulos I, Hatzakis A.

Author information: 
(1)National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
ahatzak@med.uoa.gr

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to assess the disease burden of the 2009
pandemic influenza A(H1N1) in Greece.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Data on influenza-like illness (ILI), collected
through cross-sectional nationwide telephone surveys of 1,000 households in
Greece repeated for 25 consecutive weeks, were combined with data from H1N1
virologic surveillance to estimate the incidence and the clinical attack rate
(CAR) of influenza A(H1N1). Alternative definitions of ILI (cough or sore throat 
and fever>38°C [ILI-38] or fever 37.1-38°C [ILI-37]) were used to estimate the
number of symptomatic infections. The infection attack rate (IAR) was
approximated using estimates from published studies on the frequency of fever in 
infected individuals. Data on H1N1 morbidity and mortality were used to estimate 
ICU admission and case fatality (CFR) rates. The epidemic peaked on week 48/2009 
with approximately 750-1,500 new cases/100,000 population per week, depending on 
ILI-38 or ILI-37 case definition, respectively. By week 6/2010, 7.1%-15.6% of the
population in Greece was estimated to be symptomatically infected with H1N1.
Children 5-19 years represented the most affected population group (CAR:27%-54%),
whereas individuals older than 64 years were the least affected (CAR:0.6%-2.2%). 
The IAR (95% CI) of influenza A(H1N1) was estimated to be 19.7% (13.3%, 26.1%).
Per 1,000 symptomatic cases, based on ILI-38 case definition, 416 attended health
services, 108 visited hospital emergency departments and 15 were admitted to
hospitals. ICU admission rate and CFR were 37 and 17.5 per 100,000 symptomatic
cases or 13.4 and 6.3 per 100,000 infections, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Influenza A(H1N1) infected one fifth and caused
symptomatic infection in up to 15% of the Greek population. Although individuals 
older than 65 years were the least affected age group in terms of attack rate,
they had 55 and 185 times higher risk of ICU admission and CFR, respectively.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020593 
PMCID: PMC3111416
PMID: 21694769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

