
1. J Med Virol. 2011 Sep;83(9):1522-9. doi: 10.1002/jmv.22138.

Assessment of dried blood spot samples as a simple method for detection of
hepatitis B virus markers.

Villar LM(1), de Oliveira JC, Cruz HM, Yoshida CF, Lampe E, Lewis-Ximenez LL.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Hepatitis Laboratory, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, FIOCRUZ, RJ, Brazil.
lvillar@ioc.fiocruz.br

Detection of hepatitis B virus (HBV) serological markers in dried blood spot
(DBS) samples by enzyme immunoassay (ELISA) has not yet been fully optimized. In 
this study, the ability to detect three HBV markers (HBsAg, anti-HBc, and
anti-HBs) was evaluated in DBS samples using a modified commercial ELISA. Matched
serum and DBS samples were obtained from individuals with or without a past
history of HBV infection. Sera samples were tested according to the
manufacturer's instructions, but for DBS testing, paper diameters, elution
buffer, volume of input sample, and cut-off values were evaluated to optimize the
assay. Stability studies were done on DBS stored at for up to 180 days at
different temperatures. The absorbance values that yielded the maximum
sensitivity and specificity were determined based on the area under the ROC curve
(AUROC) and chosen as the cut-off value. Using this parameter, sensitivity was
90.5%, 97.6%, and 78% for anti-HBc, HBsAg, anti-HBs assays, respectively.
Specificity was 92.6%, 96.7%, and 97.3% for anti-HBc, HBsAg, and anti-HBs assays,
respectively. HBV markers could be detected in DBS samples until 63 days after
sample collection at most temperatures, but storage at -20°C yielded more
consistent results. These results indicate that modified ELISA can be used to
detect HBV markers in DBS samples, particularly if the samples are stored
appropriately.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.22138 
PMID: 21739441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

