
1. Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011 Sep-Oct;27(5):360-3. doi:
10.1097/IOP.0b013e31821c4c6f.

Human immunodeficiency virus-associated blepharoptosis.

Moscato EE(1), Bloomer MM, Garcia-Kennedy R, Seiff SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg. 2012 Jan-Feb;28(1):75; author reply 75-6.
    Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg. 2012 Nov-Dec;28(6):468-9; author reply 469.

PURPOSE: To better characterize an unusual blepharoptosis observed in
HIV-positive patients and to evaluate histopathology.
METHODS: This retrospective case series evaluated patients with HIV/AIDS and
blepharoptosis with reduced levator excursion. Exclusion criteria included
patients with identifiable causes of ptosis (e.g., aponeurotic dehiscences, prior
eyelid trauma or surgery), known myopathic/neuropathic systemic disorders,
congenital ptosis, cranial neuropathies, and systemic infiltrative processes.
RESULTS: All 10 patients had bilateral symptomatic blepharoptosis. All patients
(100%) were men with a mean age at presentation of 54 years (range, 42-77 years).
Mean duration of HIV infection among 7 of 10 patients was 19 years (range, 13-24 
years). Mean (±SD) MRD1 was 0.7 (±0.8) OD and 0.6 (±0.8) OS. Mean (±SD) levator
excursion was 12 (±2.3) OD and 13 (±1.8) OS (normal levator excursion >15 mm). No
patient was taking zidovudine (AZT) at the time of presentation. Nine patients
(90%) underwent large bilateral levator resections for correction of
blepharoptosis. Histopathologic specimens revealed abnormal levator muscle fibers
with various degrees of atrophy, fibrosis, and regeneration without inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: The HIV-associated blepharoptosis observed among patients in this
study is most consistent with a myopathy. Levator muscle histopathologic findings
are virtually identical to muscle biopsies in individuals with HIV-associated
myopathy, described before the advent of AZT or highly active antiretroviral
therapy (HAART). Surgical management with levator resection provides optimal
correction of HIV-associated blepharoptosis.

DOI: 10.1097/IOP.0b013e31821c4c6f 
PMID: 21743372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

