
1. Oral Oncol. 2011 Sep;47(9):883-7. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2011.06.506. Epub
2011 Jul 23.

Dominant genetic aberrations and coexistent EBV infection in HIV-related oral
plasmablastic lymphomas.

Boy SC(1), van Heerden MB, Babb C, van Heerden WF, Willem P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology and Oral Biology, School of Dentistry, Faculty of
Health Sciences, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
sonja.boy@up.ac.za

We present common cytogenetic features in the largest cohort of plasmablastic
lymphoma (PBL) of the oral cavity published to date. This cohort included 45
patients, 32 of whom had a known HIV status, of which 31 were HIV positive.
Ninety eight per cent of all PBL cases were known to be EBV positive. In line
with previous studies, we found that rearrangements of the MYC gene was the most 
common genetic abnormality seen in 60% of cases with the immunoglobulin heavy
chain (IGH) locus as a partner in 51% of cases. Additional complex genetic
aberrations were frequent, in particular, an increased copy number of the CCND1
gene was seen in 41% of cases with true amplification of CCND1 in 15% of cases.
Aneuploidy was also observed for the BCL6 gene in 28% of cases. Interestingly,
rearrangements of both IGH genes were detected in 16% of cases with t(14;18) and 
t(11;14) respectively involved in conjunction with a t(8;14) in two cases. These 
bi-allelic IGH rearrangements have not been described before in oral PBL. Our
results reinforce the notion that EBV infection and MYC rearrangements are
important events in the pathogenesis of oral PBL. The genetic diversity and
complexity observed in these cases, underlines the importance to genetically
characterise PBL patients at presentation as this may inform the choice of more
effective treatment modalities.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2011.06.506 
PMID: 21783402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

