
1. J Mol Biol. 2011 Sep 23;412(3):354-64. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.07.055. Epub 2011 
Jul 29.

HIV-1 reverse transcriptase dissociates during strand transfer.

Muchiri JM(1), Rigby ST, Nguyen LA, Kim B, Bambara RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Steps in the replication of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) occurring
in the virus but not in the host are preferred targets of antiretroviral therapy.
Strand transfer is unique; the DNA strand being made by viral reverse
transcriptase (RT) is moved from one RNA template position to another.
Understanding the mechanism requires knowing whether the RT directly mediates the
template exchange or dissociates during the exchange, so that it occurs by
polymer dynamics. Earlier work in vitro showed that the presence of an
RT-trapping polymer would allow synthesis on the original or donor template but
completely block transfer and subsequent synthesis on the second or acceptor
template. One interpretation is that the RT must dissociate during transfer, but 
an alternative is that sequestration of non-polymerizing RTs prevents
polymerization-independent ribonuclease H (RNase H) cleavages of the donor
template necessary for strand exchange. To resolve this ambiguity, we designed a 
primer-template system that allows strand transfer without RNase H activity.
Using an RNase H negative mutant RT, we showed that a polymer trap still
prevented strand transfer. This confirms that RT dissociates during strand
transfer. The presence of HIV-1 nucleocapsid protein, which promotes strand
exchange, had little effect on this outcome. Additional assays showed that both
the wild-type RT and a multiple nucleoside RT inhibitor-resistant HIV-1 RT
containing an extended fingers domain, which is characterized by its enhanced
primer-template binding affinity, were unable to transfer with the trapping
polymer. This implies that common sequence variations among RTs are unlikely to
alter dissociation feature.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.07.055 
PMCID: PMC3166975
PMID: 21821047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

