
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22979. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022979. Epub 2011 Jul 29.

The X-linked tumor suppressor TSPX interacts and promotes degradation of the
hepatitis B viral protein HBx via the proteasome pathway.

Kido T(1), Ou JH, Lau YF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Developmental Genetics, Department of Medicine, Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California, United States of America.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major risk for hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), and it is a serious global health problem with two billion people exposed 
to it worldwide. HBx, an essential factor for viral replication and a putative
oncoprotein encoded by the HBV genome, has been shown to promote oncogenic
properties at multiple sites in HBV-infected liver cells. The expression level of
HBx closely associates with the development and progression of HCC, therefore the
mechanism(s) regulating the stability of HBx is important in oncogenesis of
HBV-infected cells. We demonstrate that the X-linked tumor suppressor TSPX
enhances the degradation of HBx through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. TSPX
interacts with both HBx and a proteasome 19S lid subunit RPN3 via its C-terminal 
acidic tail. Most importantly, over-expression of RPN3 protects HBx from, and
hence acts as a negative regulator for, proteasome-dependent degradation. TSPX
abrogates the RPN3-depedent stabilization of HBx, suggesting that TSPX and RPN3
act competitively in regulation of HBx stability. Since mutation and/or
epigenetic repression of X-located tumor suppressor gene(s) could significantly
predispose males to human cancers, our data suggest that TSPX-induced HBx
degradation could play key role(s) in hepatocarcinogenesis among HBV-infected HCC
patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022979 
PMCID: PMC3146538
PMID: 21829568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

