
1. Antiviral Res. 2011 Nov;92(2):237-46. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2011.08.010. Epub 
2011 Aug 16.

In vitro inhibitory effect of carrageenan oligosaccharide on influenza A H1N1
virus.

Wang W(1), Zhang P, Hao C, Zhang XE, Cui ZQ, Guan HS.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Marine Drugs, Ministry of Education, Ocean University of
China, Qingdao 266003, PR China. wangweidragon@yahoo.com.cn

Carrageenan polysaccharide has been reported to be able to inhibit the infection 
and replication of many different kinds of viruses. Here, we demonstrated that a 
2 kDa κ-carrageenan oligosaccharide (CO-1) derived from the carrageenan
polysaccharide, effectively inhibited influenza A (H1N1) virus replication in
MDCK cells (selectivity index >25.0). Moreover, the 2 kDa CO-1 inhibited
influenza A virus (IAV) replication better than that of 3 kDa and 5 kDa
κ-carrageenan oligosaccharides (CO-2 and CO-3). IAV multiplication was suppressed
by carrageenan oligosaccharide treatment in a dose-dependent manner. Carrageenan 
oligosaccharide CO-1 did not bind to the cell surface of MDCK cells but
inactivated virus particles after pretreatment. Different to the actions of
carrageenan polysaccharide, CO-1 could enter into MDCK cells and did not
interfere with IAV adsorption. CO-1 also inhibited IAV mRNA and protein
expression after its internalization into cells. Moreover, carrageenan
oligosaccharide CO-1 had an antiviral effect on IAV replication subsequent to
viral internalization but prior to virus release in one replication cycle.
Therefore, inhibition of IAV intracellular replication by carrageenan
oligosaccharide might be an alternative approach for anti-influenza A virus
therapy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2011.08.010 
PMID: 21867732  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

