
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2011 Dec;31(6):970-7. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2011.08.015.
Epub 2011 Aug 31.

Zebrafish anti-apoptotic gene Bcl-xL can prevent aquatic birnavirus-induced cell 
death in fish cells without affecting expression of viral proteins.

Huang HL(1), Liu YT, Chen MC, Wu JL, Hong JR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Biotechnology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan.

The aquatic birnavirus induces mitochondria-mediated cell death in fish; however,
the molecular mechanism remains unknown. In the present study, we demonstrated
that aquatic birnavirus-induced mitochondria-mediated cell death is regulated by 
the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member, zfBcl-xL, which is anti-apoptotic and
enhances host cell viability. First, CHSE-214 cells carrying EGFP-zfBcl-xL fused 
genes were selected, established in culture, and used to examine the involvement 
of zfBcl-xL in host cell protection from the effects of viral infection.
EGFP-zfBcl-xL was found to prevent infectious pancreatic necrosis virus
(IPNV)-induced phosphatidylserine exposure up to 40% at 12 h and 24 h
post-infection (p.i.), block IPNV-induced loss of mitochondrial membrane
potential (ΔΨm), and enhance host viability at the middle and late replication
stages. In addition, zfBcl-xL overexpression prevented IPNV-induced caspase-9
activation up to 25% and 85% at the middle (12 h p.i.) and late (24 h p.i.)
replication stages without affecting expression of viral proteins such as VP3 (as
a viral death protein) protein. In the present study, we demonstrated that
aquatic birnavirus-induced cell death is prevented by the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2
family member, zfBcl-xL, which enhances host cell viability through blockage of
mitochondrial disruption and caspase-9 activation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2011.08.015 
PMID: 21906684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

