
1. J Virol Methods. 2011 Dec;178(1-2):239-42. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2011.07.015.
Epub 2011 Aug 30.

Development and evaluation of a reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal
amplification assay for H3N8 equine influenza virus.

Nemoto M(1), Yamanaka T, Bannai H, Tsujimura K, Kondo T, Matsumura T.

Author information: 
(1)Epizootic Research Center, Equine Research Institute, Japan Racing
Association, 1400-4 Shiba, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0412, Japan.
nemoto_manabu@epizoo.equinst.go.jp

Reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP) was
applied to the detection of equine influenza virus (EIV). Because equine
influenza is caused currently by EIV of the H3H8 subtype, the RT-LAMP primer set 
was designed to target the hemagglutinin gene of this subtype. The detection
limit of the RT-LAMP assay was a virus dilution of 10(-5); which was 10(3) times 
more sensitive than the Espline Influenza A&B-N test and 10 times more sensitive 
than a reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay. The
specificity of the RT-LAMP assay was examined by using several equine pathogens
and nasal swabs collected from horses with fever in 2010 after EIV was eradicated
in Japan. No cross-reactions were observed. Using 100 nasal swabs collected from 
horses with fever during an EIV outbreak in 2007, the RT-LAMP assay detected EIV 
in 52 samples, whereas the Espline test and the RT-PCR assay detected EIV in only
17 and 41 samples, respectively. These results indicate that the RT-LAMP assay is
specific for EIV and more sensitive than the Espline test and the RT-PCR assay.
Because it provides high sensitivity and ease of manipulation without the need
for a thermal cycler or gel electrophoresis, the RT-LAMP assay should be
applicable for laboratory diagnosis of EIV.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2011.07.015 
PMID: 21907240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

