
1. Mod Rheumatol. 2012 Jun;22(3):438-45. doi: 10.1007/s10165-011-0519-3. Epub 2011
Sep 14.

Reactivation of cytomegalovirus predicts poor prognosis in patients on intensive 
immunosuppressive treatment for collagen-vascular diseases.

Hanaoka R(1), Kurasawa K, Maezawa R, Kumano K, Arai S, Fukuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, Dokkyo Medical University School of
Medicine, 880 Kita-Kobayashi, Mibu, Tochigi 321-0293, Japan.

Reactivation of cytomegalovirus (CMV) occurs during intensive immunosuppressive
therapies. However, the influence of CMV reactivation on prognosis in patients
with immunosuppressive therapies for collagen-vascular diseases (CVD) is not
fully understood. To determine whether CMV reactivation affects the prognosis of 
patients with CVD and to identify risk factors of CMV reactivation, we reviewed, 
retrospectively, the medical records of 109 CVD patients who were treated with
glucocorticoid (prednisolone ≥20 mg/day) and were tested for CMV antigen
(CMV-Ag). CMV-Ag was detected in 34 of the 109 patients. First-time CMV-Ag
detection was within 50 days from the start of intensive immunosuppressive
therapy in 82% of the patients. Common manifestations at first-time CMV-Ag
detection were fever, arthralgia, and rash, although 52.9% of the patients were
asymptomatic. The risk factors for CMV reactivation were old age (>65 years) and 
high-dose glucocorticoids (PSL ≥50 mg). During the 4-year study period, 18% of
patients with positive CMV-Ag and 5% of those without CMV-Ag died. Patients with 
CMV-Ag (max CMV number ≥5/10(5) WBC) had a significantly poorer prognosis.
Multivariate analysis confirmed CMV reactivation as an independent poor
prognostic factor in CVD patients. Causes of death were exacerbation of
pre-existing interstitial pneumonia and infection other than CMV. Our results
demonstrate that CMV reactivation, particularly with a high CMV-Ag number, is a
poor prognostic factor in CVD patients. Patients with older age and high-dose
glucocorticoids have a high risk of CMV reactivation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10165-011-0519-3 
PMID: 21915676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

