
1. Transgenic Res. 2012 Jun;21(3):511-21. doi: 10.1007/s11248-011-9548-0. Epub 2011 
Sep 28.

Human U6 promoter drives stronger shRNA activity than its schistosome orthologue 
in Schistosoma mansoni and human fibrosarcoma cells.

Duvoisin R(1), Ayuk MA, Rinaldi G, Suttiprapa S, Mann VH, Lee CM, Harris N,
Brindley PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology & Tropical Medicine, The George
Washington University Medical Center, Ross Hall 448, 2300 I Street NW,
Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Blood flukes or schistosomes are the causative agents of human schistosomiasis,
one of the major neglected tropical diseases. Draft genome sequences have been
reported for schistosomes, but functional genomics tools are needed to
investigate the role and essentiality of the newly reported genes. Vector based
RNA interference can contribute to functional genomics analysis for schistosomes.
Using mRNA encoding reporter firefly luciferase as a model target, we compared
the performance of a schistosome and a human promoter from the U6 gene in driving
shRNA in human fibrosarcoma cells and in cultured schistosomes. Further, both a
retroviral [Murine leukemia virus (MLV)] and plasmid (piggyBac, pXL-Bac II)
vector were utilized. The schistosome U6 gene promoter was 270 bp in length, the 
human U6 gene promoter was 264 bp; they shared 41% identity. Following
transduction of both HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells and schistosomules of Schistosoma 
mansoni with pseudotyped MLV virions, stronger knockdown of luciferase activity
was seen with the virions encoding the human U6 promoter driven shRNA than the
schistosome U6 promoter. A similar trend was seen after transfection of HT1080
cells and schistosomules with the pXL-Bac-II constructs-stronger knockdown of
luciferase activity was seen with constructs encoding the human compared to
schistosome U6 promoter. The findings indicate that a human U6 gene promoter
drives stronger shRNA activity than its schistosome orthologue, not only in a
human cancer cell line but also in larval schistosomes. This RNA polymerase III
promoter represents a potentially valuable component for vector based RNA
interference studies in schistosomes and related platyhelminth parasites.

DOI: 10.1007/s11248-011-9548-0 
PMCID: PMC3271131
PMID: 21953124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

