
1. Virol J. 2011 Oct 9;8:466. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-8-466.

Determination of HCV genotypes and viral loads in chronic HCV infected patients
of Hazara Pakistan.

Ali A(1), Nisar M, Ahmad H, Saif N, Idrees M, Bajwa MA.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Biotechnology University of Malakand, Chakdara, Khyber
Pakhtoonkhaw, Pakistan.

Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) genotype and viral load are two significant predictive
variables knowledge of which might persuade treatment decisions. The objective of
the present study was to identify the distribution of different HCV genotypes
circulating in the study area and to estimate viral load in chronically HCV
infected patients. Out of total 305 HCV positive patients, 177 (58%) were males
and 128 (42%) were females. Frequency breakup of the HCV positive patients was
169, 69, 38 and 29 from Abbottabad, Mansehra, Haripur and Battagram districts
respectively. Out of the total 305 tested serum samples, 255 (83.06%) were
successfully genotyped whereas 50 (16.4%) samples were found with unclassified
genotypes. Among typable genotypes, 1a accounted for 21 (6.8%) 1b for 14 (4.6%), 
2a for 4 (1.31%) 3a for 166 (54.42%) and genotype 3b for (8.19%). Twenty five
(8.19%) patients were infected with mixed HCV genotypes. Viral load distribution 
was classified into three categories based on its viral load levels such as low
(< 60, 0000 IU/mL), intermediate (60,0000-80,0000 IU/mL) and high (> 80,0000
IU/mL). The baseline HCV RNA Viral load in HCV genotype 3 infected patients was
50 (26.17%), 46 (24.08%) and 95 (49.73%) for low, intermediate and high
categories respectively. For genotypes other than 3, these values for low,
intermediate and high viral load categories were 50 (43.85), 35 (30.70) and 29
(25.43) respectively. Pre-treatment viral load in patients with untypable
genotype was 19 (38.00%), 5 (20.00%) and 11 (44.00%) for low, intermediate and
high viral load categories. Viral load distribution was also categorized sex
wise; for males it was 58 (32.76%), 26 (14.68%) and 93 (52.54%) whereas for
females it was 40 (31.25%), 34 (26.56%) and 54 (42.18%) for low, intermediate and
high viral load respectively. In conclusion HCV genotype 3a is the most prevalent
genotype circulating in Hazara Division like other parts of pakistan.
Pre-treatment viral load is significantly high (p 0.014) in patients infected
with HCV genotype 3 as compared to other genotypes.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-8-466 
PMCID: PMC3198714
PMID: 21982599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

