
1. Viruses. 2010 Jul;2(7):1367-81. doi: 10.3390/v2071367. Epub 2010 Jun 28.

The revolution in viral genomics as exemplified by the bioinformatic analysis of 
human adenoviruses.

Torres S(1), Chodosh J, Seto D, Jones MS.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Investigation Facility, David Grant USAF Medical Center, Travis AFB, 
CA 94535, USA; E-Mail: sarah.torres1@travis.af.mil.

Over the past 30 years, genomic and bioinformatic analysis of human adenoviruses 
has been achieved using a variety of DNA sequencing methods; initially with the
use of restriction enzymes and more currently with the use of the GS FLX
pyrosequencing technology. Following the conception of DNA sequencing in the
1970s, analysis of adenoviruses has evolved from 100 base pair mRNA fragments to 
entire genomes. Comparative genomics of adenoviruses made its debut in 1984 when 
nucleotides and amino acids of coding sequences within the hexon genes of two
human adenoviruses (HAdV), HAdV-C2 and HAdV-C5, were compared and analyzed. It
was determined that there were three different zones (1-393, 394-1410, 1411-2910)
within the hexon gene, of which HAdV-C2 and HAdV-C5 shared zones 1 and 3 with 95%
and 89.5% nucleotide identity, respectively. In 1992, HAdV-C5 became the first
adenovirus genome to be fully sequenced using the Sanger method. Over the next
seven years, whole genome analysis and characterization was completed using
bioinformatic tools such as blastn, tblastx, ClustalV and FASTA, in order to
determine key proteins in species HAdV-A through HAdV-F. The bioinformatic
revolution was initiated with the introduction of a novel species, HAdV-G, that
was typed and named by the use of whole genome sequencing and phylogenetics as
opposed to traditional serology. HAdV bioinformatics will continue to advance as 
the latest sequencing technology enables scientists to add to and expand the
resource databases. As a result of these advancements, how novel HAdVs are typed 
has changed. Bioinformatic analysis has become the revolutionary tool that has
significantly accelerated the in-depth study of HAdV microevolution through
comparative genomics.

DOI: 10.3390/v2071367 
PMCID: PMC3185712
PMID: 21994684 

