
1. BMJ Open. 2011 Jan 1;1(2):e000167. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2011-000167.

Effectiveness and safety of the A-H1N1 vaccine in children: a hospital-based
case-control study.

Italian Multicenter Study Group for Drug and Vaccine Safety in Children.

Objective To verify whether vaccination against the A-H1N1 virus in the
paediatric population was effective in preventing the occurrence of
influenza-like illness (ILI) or was associated with adverse events of special
interest. Design, setting and patients A case-control analysis was performed as
part of surveillance of children hospitalised through the emergency departments
of eight paediatric hospitals/wards for ILI, neurological disorders,
non-infectious muco-cutaneous diseases and vasculitis, thrombocytopaenia and
gastroduodenal lesions. Results Among 736 children enrolled from November 2009 to
August 2010, only 25 had been vaccinated with the pandemic vaccine. Out of 268
children admitted for a diagnosis compatible with the adverse events of special
interest, six had received the A-H1N1 vaccine, although none of the adverse
events occurred within the predefined risk windows. Only 35 children out of 244
admitted with a diagnosis of ILI underwent laboratory testing: 11 were positive
and 24 negative for the A-H1N1 virus. None of the A-H1N1 positive children had
received the pandemic vaccine. The OR of ILI associated with any influenza
vaccination was 0.9 (95% CI 0.1 to 5.5). Conclusions The study provides
additional information on the benefit-risk profile of the pandemic vaccine. No
sign of risk associated with the influenza A-H1N1 vaccine used in Italy was
found, although several limitations were observed: in Italy, pandemic vaccination
coverage was low, the epidemic was almost over by mid December 2009 and the
A-H1N1 laboratory test was performed only during the epidemic phase (in <10% of
children). This study supports the importance of the existing network of
hospitals for the evaluation of signals relevant to new vaccines and drugs.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2011-000167 
PMCID: PMC3191592
PMID: 22021877 

