
1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011 Nov;128(5):939-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2011.09.020.

New insights into the natural history of asthma: primary prevention on the
horizon.

Martinez FD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Arizona Respiratory Center and BIO5 Institute, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
Ariz 85712, USA. fernando@arc.arizona.edu

Recent studies of the natural history of asthma have shifted attention toward
viral respiratory tract illness in early life as a major risk factor associated
with the development of the most persistent forms of the disease. Although early 
aeroallergen sensitization is strongly associated with chronic asthma, several
trials in which single-aeroallergen exposure in pregnancy and early childhood was
successfully accomplished and compared with sham avoidance have failed to show
any decrease in asthma incidence. New evidence suggests that complex interactions
occur between viral infection and aeroallergen sensitization in genetically
susceptible subjects that trigger the immune responses and airway changes that
are characteristic of persistent asthma. The finding that exposure to bacterial
products among children raised on farms is associated with diminished asthma
prevalence during the school years has now been replicated, and experimental
studies have suggested that these effects are mediated by the activation of
regulatory T cells in the airway. It is thus plausible to hypothesize that
primary prevention of asthma could be attained through surrogate therapeutic
interventions that activate similar mechanisms in young children at high risk for
asthma.

Copyright Â© 2011 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2011.09.020 
PMCID: PMC3963825
PMID: 22036094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

