
1. J Gen Virol. 2012 Mar;93(Pt 3):651-661. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.035832-0. Epub 2011
Nov 9.

JC virus promoter/enhancers contain TATA box-associated Spi-B-binding sites that 
support early viral gene expression in primary astrocytes.

Marshall LJ(1), Moore LD(1), Mirsky MM(1), Major EO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Neuroscience, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
20892-1296, USA.

JC virus (JCV) is the aetiological agent of the demyelinating disease progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy, an AIDS defining illness and serious complication
of mAb therapies. Initial infection probably occurs in childhood. In the working 
model of dissemination, virus persists in the kidney and lymphoid tissues until
immune suppression/modulation causes reactivation and trafficking to the brain
where JCV replicates in oligodendrocytes. JCV infection is regulated through
binding of host factors such as Spi-B to, and sequence variation in the
non-coding control region (NCCR). Although NCCR sequences differ between sites of
persistence and pathogenesis, evidence suggests that the virus that initiates
infection in the brain disseminates via B-cells derived from latently infected
haematopoietic precursors in the bone marrow. Spi-B binds adjacent to TATA boxes 
in the promoter/enhancer of the PML-associated JCV Mad-1 and Mad-4 viruses but
not the non-pathogenic, kidney-associated archetype. The Spi-B-binding site of
Mad-1/Mad-4 differs from that of archetype by a single nucleotide, AAAAGGGAAGGGA 
to AAAAGGGAAGGTA. Point mutation of the Mad-1 Spi-B site reduced early viral
protein large T-antigen expression by up to fourfold. Strikingly, the reverse
mutation in the archetype NCCR increased large T-antigen expression by 10-fold.
Interestingly, Spi-B protein binds the NCCR sequence flanking the viral
promoter/enhancer, but these sites are not essential for early viral gene
expression. The effect of mutating Spi-B-binding sites within the JCV
promoter/enhancer on early viral gene expression strongly suggests a role for
Spi-B binding to the viral promoter/enhancer in the activation of early viral
gene expression.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.035832-0 
PMCID: PMC3352355
PMID: 22071512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

