
1. J Virol. 2012 Feb;86(3):1696-705. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06069-11. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Sequence-divergent chordopoxvirus homologs of the o3 protein maintain functional 
interactions with components of the vaccinia virus entry-fusion complex.

Satheshkumar PS(1), Moss B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Composed of 35 amino acids, O3 is the smallest characterized protein encoded by
vaccinia virus (VACV) and is an integral component of the entry-fusion complex
(EFC). O3 is conserved with 100% identity in all orthopoxviruses except for
monkeypox viruses, whose O3 homologs have 2 to 3 amino acid substitutions. Since 
O3 is part of the EFC, high conservation could suggest an immutable requirement
for interaction with multiple proteins. Chordopoxviruses of other genera also
encode small proteins with a characteristic predicted N-terminal Î±-helical
hydrophobic domain followed by basic amino acids and proline in the same relative
genome location as that of VACV O3. However, the statistical significance of
their similarity to VACV O3 is low due to the large contribution of the
transmembrane domain, their small size, and their sequence diversity.
Nevertheless, trans-complementation experiments demonstrated the ability of a
representative O3-like protein from each chordopoxvirus genus to rescue the
infectivity of a VACV mutant that was unable to express endogenous O3. Moreover, 
recombinant viruses expressing O3 homologs in place of O3 replicated and formed
plaques as well or nearly as well as wild-type VACV. The O3 homologs expressed by
the recombinant VACVs were incorporated into the membranes of mature virions and,
with one exception, remained stably associated with the detergent-extracted and
affinity-purified EFC. The ability of the sequence-divergent O3 homologs to
coordinate function with VACV entry proteins suggests the conservation of
structural motifs. Analysis of chimeras formed by swapping domains of O3 with
those of other proteins indicated that the N-terminal transmembrane segment was
responsible for EFC interactions and for the complementation of infectivity.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.06069-11 
PMCID: PMC3264392
PMID: 22114343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

