
1. Antivir Ther. 2011;16(8):1287-95. doi: 10.3851/IMP1931.

Pharmacokinetics and safety of a new paediatric fixed-dose combination of
zidovudine/lamivudine/nevirapine in HIV-infected children.

Chokephaibulkit K(1), Cressey TR, Capparelli E, Sirisanthana V, Muresan P,
Hongsiriwon S, Ngampiyaskul C, Limwongse C, Wittawatmongkol O, Aurpibul L, Kabat 
B, Toye M, Smith ME, Eksaengsri A, McIntosh K, Yogev R; IMPAACT P1069 Team.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand. sikch@mahidol.ac.th

BACKGROUND: Alternatives to the available stavudine-containing paediatric
fixed-dose combination (FDC) tablets are rapidly needed due to concerns regarding
the cumulative toxicity of long-term stavudine exposure. We report the
bioavailability and short-term safety of a novel paediatric FDC tablet of
zidovudine (ZDV)/lamivudine (3TC)/nevirapine (NVP; 30/15/28 mg) in HIV-infected
children.
METHODS: In this Phase I/II open-label pharmacokinetic study, 42 children
weighing 6-30 kg treated with NVP-based HAART for ≥4 weeks were randomized to
receive the FDC tablets (GPO-VIR Z30) or the liquid formulations. Dosing was
weight-based. Intensive 12-h blood sampling was performed after 2 weeks; subjects
then crossed-over to the alternate formulation at equal doses and sampling
repeated 2 weeks later. Pharmacokinetic parameters were determined by
non-compartmental analysis. Buccal-swab samples were collected for cytochrome
P450 (CYP)2B6 polymorphism analysis.
RESULTS: With the FDC tablet, the geometric mean (90% CI) area under the curve
(AUC) for ZDV, 3TC and NVP was 1.58 (1.49-1.68), 7.78 (7.38-8.19) and 68.88
(62.13-76.36) μg•h/ml, respectively. Rules for NVP therapeutic inadequacy were
defined a priori, and despite lower NVP exposure with the tablet (P<0.001), the
levels remained therapeutically adequate. ZDV AUC was similar between
formulations. 3TC exposure was significantly higher with the tablet but
comparable to historical data in adults and children taking branded tablets.
While receiving the tablet, NVP AUC in children with CYP2B 516 GG (45%), GT (45%)
and TT (10%) genotypes were 67.0, 74.5 and 106.4 μg•h/ml, respectively (P=0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Disparities in drug exposure between formulations were observed;
however, the FDC tablet delivered therapeutically adequate exposures of each drug
and could well play an important role in simplifying antiretroviral treatment for
children.

DOI: 10.3851/IMP1931 
PMCID: PMC3348490
PMID: 22155910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

