
1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012 Mar;27(3):425-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2011.07054.x.

Discovery of critical host factor, IL-28B, associated with response to hepatitis 
C virus treatment.

Mizokami M(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Research Center for Hepatitis and Immunology, National Center for Global
Health and Medicine, Ichikawa, Japan. mmizokami@hospk.ncgm.go.jp

Chronic hepatitis C affects 2.2-3.0% of the world population (130 million-170
million). Pegylated interferon-α (PEG-IFN-α) in combination with ribavirin (RBV),
the approved and standard therapy, leads to viral eradication in about 50% of
treated patients. In 2009, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identified host
genetic variation to be critical for predicting treatment response and
spontaneous clearance in patients infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV). A
correlated set of polymorphisms in the region of the interleukin-28B (IL-28B)
gene on chromosome 19, coding for interferon (IFN)-λ3 were associated with
clearance of genotype 1 hepatitis C virus (HCV) in patients treated with
PEG-IFN-α and RBV. The same polymorphisms were subsequently associated with
spontaneous clearance of HCV in untreated patients. In addition, prediction of
viral response to PEG-IFN-α and RBV therapy of patients with recurrent HCV
infection after orthotopic liver transplantation depends on the IL-28B genotype
of both recipient and donor tissues. Diagnosis of a patient's IL-28B genotype is 
likely to aid in clinical decision making with standard-of-care regimens. Future 
studies will investigate the possibility of individualizing treatment duration
and novel regimens according to IL-28B genotype. As GWAS yield unexpected data,
this approach could lead to the development of novel drug therapy, such as
already appears promising with IFN-λ. In this Okuda lecture, I present the
current understanding in regard to the relationship between host variations and
clinical outcome of hepatitis C.

© 2011 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Blackwell
Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2011.07054.x 
PMID: 22168813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

