
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2012 Feb;78(4):981-7. doi: 10.1128/AEM.06537-11. Epub
2011 Dec 16.

Dead or alive: deformed wing virus and Varroa destructor reduce the life span of 
winter honeybees.

Dainat B(1), Evans JD, Chen YP, Gauthier L, Neumann P.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Bee Research Centre, Agroscope Liebefeld-Posieux Research Station ALP,
Bern, Switzerland. benjamin.dainat@alp.admin.ch

Elevated winter losses of managed honeybee colonies are a major concern, but the 
underlying mechanisms remain controversial. Among the suspects are the parasitic 
mite Varroa destructor, the microsporidian Nosema ceranae, and associated
viruses. Here we hypothesize that pathogens reduce the life expectancy of winter 
bees, thereby constituting a proximate mechanism for colony losses. A monitoring 
of colonies was performed over 6 months in Switzerland from summer 2007 to winter
2007/2008. Individual dead workers were collected daily and quantitatively
analyzed for deformed wing virus (DWV), acute bee paralysis virus (ABPV), N.
ceranae, and expression levels of the vitellogenin gene as a biomarker for
honeybee longevity. Workers from colonies that failed to survive winter had a
reduced life span beginning in late fall, were more likely to be infected with
DWV, and had higher DWV loads. Colony levels of infection with the parasitic mite
Varroa destructor and individual infections with DWV were also associated with
reduced honeybee life expectancy. In sharp contrast, the level of N. ceranae
infection was not correlated with longevity. In addition, vitellogenin gene
expression was significantly positively correlated with ABPV and N. ceranae
loads. The findings strongly suggest that V. destructor and DWV (but neither N.
ceranae nor ABPV) reduce the life span of winter bees, thereby constituting a
parsimonious possible mechanism for honeybee colony losses.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.06537-11 
PMCID: PMC3273028
PMID: 22179240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

