
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29485. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029485. Epub 2012 Jan 6.

Mutational analyses of the influenza A virus polymerase subunit PA reveal
distinct functions related and unrelated to RNA polymerase activity.

Liang Y(1), Danzy S, Dao LD, Parslow TG, Liang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta,
Georgia, United States of America.

Influenza A viral polymerase is a heterotrimeric complex that consists of PA,
PB1, and PB2 subunits. We previously reported that a di-codon substitution
mutation (G507A-R508A), denoted J10, in the C-terminal half of PA had no apparent
effect on viral RNA synthesis but prevented infectious virus production,
indicating that PA may have a novel role independent of its polymerase activity. 
To further examine the roles of PA in the viral life cycle, we have now generated
and characterized additional mutations in regions flanking the J10 site from
residues 497 to 518. All tested di-codon mutations completely abolished or
significantly reduced viral infectivity, but they did so through disparate
mechanisms. Several showed effects resembling those of J10, in that the mutant
polymerase supported normal levels of viral RNA synthesis but nonetheless failed 
to generate infectious viral particles. Others eliminated polymerase activity, in
most cases by perturbing the normal nuclear localization of PA protein in cells. 
We also engineered single-codon mutations that were predicted to pack near the
J10 site in the crystal structure of PA, and found that altering residues K378 or
D478 each produced a J10-like phenotype. In further studies of J10 itself, we
found that this mutation does not affect the formation and release of virion-like
particles per se, but instead impairs the ability of those particles to
incorporate each of the eight essential RNA segments (vRNAs) that make up the
viral genome. Taken together, our analysis identifies mutations in the C-terminal
region of PA that differentially affect at least three distinct activities:
protein nuclear localization, viral RNA synthesis, and a trans-acting function
that is required for efficient packaging of all eight vRNAs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029485 
PMCID: PMC3253111
PMID: 22238617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

