
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 24;109(4):1233-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1115154109. Epub 2012 Jan 9.

T helper cell- and CD40-dependent germline IgM prevents chronic virus-induced
demyelinating disease.

Gil-Cruz C(1), Perez-Shibayama C, Firner S, Waisman A, Bechmann I, Thiel V,
Cervantes-Barragan L, Ludewig B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunobiology, Kantonal Hospital St Gallen, St Gallen CH-9007,
Switzerland.

Generation of antiviral IgM is usually considered as a marker of a short-lived
initial antibody response that is replaced by hypermutated and more-efficient
IgG. However, once viruses have established a particular niche for their
persistence (e.g., within the CNS), the immune system has to specifically
mobilize a broad range of antimicrobial effectors to contain the pathogen in the 
long term. Infection of the CNS with the mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) provides a
unique model situation in which the extent of inflammatory CNS disease is
determined by the balance between antiviral immune control, viral replication,
and immune-mediated damage. We show here that whereas antibody- or B
cell-deficient mice failed to contain MHV CNS infection and developed progressive
demyelinating disease, germline IgM produced in activation-induced cytidine
deaminase-deficient mice (aicda(-/-)) provided long-term protection against the
chronic multiple sclerosis-like disease. Furthermore, we found that appropriate
B-cell activation within the CNS-draining lymph node and subsequent
CXCR3-mediated migration of antiviral IgM-secreting cells to the infected CNS was
dependent on CD40-mediated interaction of B cells with T helper cells. These data
indicate that the CD40-mediated collaboration of T and B cells is critical to
secure neuroprotective IgM responses during viral CNS infection.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1115154109 
PMCID: PMC3268283
PMID: 22232667  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

