
1. Curr Biol. 2012 Jan 24;22(2):124-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.11.055. Epub 2012 Jan
12.

Marine viruses exploit their host's two-component regulatory system in response
to resource limitation.

Zeng Q(1), Chisholm SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Phosphorus (P) availability, which often limits productivity in marine
ecosystems, shapes the P-acquisition gene content of the marine cyanobacteria
Prochlorococcus [1-4] and its viruses (cyanophages). As in other bacteria, in
Prochlorococcus these genes are regulated by the PhoR/PhoB two-component
regulatory system that is used to sense and respond to P availability and is
typical of signal transduction systems found in diverse organisms. Replication of
cyanophage genomes requires a significant amount of P, and therefore these phages
could gain a fitness advantage by influencing host P acquisition in P-limited
environments. Here we show that the transcription of a phage-encoded
high-affinity phosphate-binding protein gene (pstS) and alkaline phosphatase gene
(phoA)-both of which have host orthologs-is elevated when the phages are
infecting host cells that are P starved, relative to P-replete control cells. We 
further show that the phage versions of these genes are regulated by the host's
PhoR/PhoB system. This not only extends this fundamental signaling mechanism to
viruses but is also the first example of regulation of lytic phage genes by
nutrient limitation in the host. As such, it reveals an important new dimension
of the intimate coevolution of phage, host, and environment in the world's
oceans.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.11.055 
PMID: 22244998  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

