
1. Liver Transpl. 2012 Jun;18(6):671-9. doi: 10.1002/lt.23402.

Early viral load and recipient interleukin-28B rs12979860 genotype are predictors
of the progression of hepatitis C after liver transplantation.

Graziadei IW(1), Zoller HM, Schloegl A, Nachbaur K, Pfeiffer KP, Mark W, Mikuz G,
Pratschke J, Margreiter R, Vogel W.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine II (Gastroenterology and Hepatology), Medical
University of Innsbruck, Anichstraße 35, Innsbruck, Austria.
ivo.graziadei@i-med.ac.at

There have been few detailed studies of viral kinetics after liver
transplantation (LT), and conflicting data have been reported on viral loads and 
the severity of recurrent hepatitis C virus (HCV) disease. This long-term study
aimed to examine (1) the impact of HCV RNA levels at specific points in time
within the first year and (2) the influence of interleukin-28B (IL-28B) genotypes
on patient outcomes and the severity of recurrent HCV disease. The viral loads
were measured 2, 4, 12, 24, and 48 weeks after LT, and the recipient/donor IL-28B
genotypes of 164 patients were determined. A Cox regression analysis showed that 
the viral load at week 2 was an independent negative predictor of recipient
outcomes. A week 2 viral load ≥ 6.0 log(10) IU/mL was significantly associated
with reduced patient survival. After a mean follow-up of 6.5 years, 21 of 164
patients (12.8%) developed a cholestatic type of HCV recurrence and/or rapidly
progressed to cirrhosis within 1 year. A multivariate binary regression analysis 
showed that HCV viremia at week 2 and a non-C/C recipient IL-28B genotype were
independent risk factors for cholestatic recurrent HCV. No predictive factors
could be found for the occurrence of recurrent liver cirrhosis 5 and 10 years
after LT. Our study shows that the HCV RNA level at week 2 and the recipient
IL-28B genotype are independent, statistically significant risk factors for
post-LT cholestatic HCV, and it emphasizes the importance of viral load
monitoring and IL-28B genotyping for identifying HCV recipients at risk for
severe HCV recurrence.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/lt.23402 
PMID: 22298465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

