
1. Cytotechnology. 1995 Jan;19(1):43-54. doi: 10.1007/BF00749754.

Complementation cell lines for viral vectors to be used in gene therapy.

Mehtali M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Transg√®ne S.A., 11 Rue de Molsheim, 67000, Strasbourg, France.

Viral vectors provide a highly efficient method for the transfer of foreign genes
into a variety of quiescent or dividing eukaryotic cells from many animal
origins. While recombinant vectors derived from an increasing number of mammalian
viruses (herpes simplex virus, autonomous and non-autonomous parvoviruses,
poxviruses, retroviruses, adenoviruses available today, vectors based on murine
retroviruses and human adenoviruses constitute preferential candidates for the
delivery of marker or therapeutic genes into human somatic cells. The
availability of such vectors has made possible the recent transition of human
gene therapy from laboratory benches to clinical settings. Most current
recombinant vectors have been generated by deleting essential viral genes in
order to make space available for the introduction of passenger genes. Such
vectors are therefore unable to replicate in the absence of these critical gene
products and their production relies on the development of stable complementation
cell lines providingin trans the missing viral functions. Although
complementation (or packaging) cell lines are available for both adenovirus and
retrovirus vectors, their respective drawbacks still limit their use to research 
applications and phase I clinical trials. The future success or failure of human 
gene therapy will therefore rely on the production of improved generations of
packaging cell lines that can produce safer and more efficient vectors which are 
fully adapted to large scale production and clinical applications.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00749754 
PMID: 22358904 

