
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e31698. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031698. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

A method for generation phage cocktail with great therapeutic potential.

Gu J(1), Liu X, Li Y, Han W, Lei L, Yang Y, Zhao H, Gao Y, Song J, Lu R, Sun C,
Feng X.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University,
Changchun, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Bacteriophage could be an alternative to conventional antibiotic
therapy against multidrug-resistant bacteria. However, the emergence of resistant
variants after phage treatment limited its therapeutic application.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, an approach, named "Step-by-Step" 
(SBS), has been established. This method takes advantage of the occurrence of
phage-resistant bacteria variants and ensures that phages lytic for wild-type
strain and its phage-resistant variants are selected. A phage cocktail lytic for 
Klebsiella pneumoniae was established by the SBS method. This phage cocktail
consisted of three phages (GH-K1, GH-K2 and GH-K3) which have different but
overlapping host strains. Several phage-resistant variants of Klebsiella
pneumoniae were isolated after different phages treatments. The virulence of
these variants was much weaker [minimal lethal doses (MLD)>1.3×10(9) cfu/mouse]
than that of wild-type K7 countpart (MLD = 2.5×10(3) cfu/mouse). Compared with
any single phage, the phage cocktail significantly reduced the mutation frequency
of Klebsiella pneumoniae and effectively rescued Klebsiella pneumoniae bacteremia
in a murine K7 strain challenge model. The minimal protective dose (MPD) of the
phage cocktail which was sufficient to protect bacteremic mice from lethal K7
infection was only 3.0×10(4) pfu, significantly smaller (p<0.01) than that of
single monophage. Moreover, a delayed administration of this phage cocktail was
still effective in protection against K7 challenge.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data showed that the phage cocktail was more
effective in reducing bacterial mutation frequency and in the rescue of murine
bacteremia than monophage suggesting that phage cocktail established by SBS
method has great therapeutic potential for multidrug-resistant bacteria
infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031698 
PMCID: PMC3291564
PMID: 22396736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

