
1. Virol J. 2012 Mar 8;9:62. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-9-62.

A low proportion of HBeAg among HBsAg-positive pregnant women with known HIV
status could suggest low perinatal transmission of HBV in Cameroon.

Kfutwah AK(1), Tejiokem MC, Njouom R.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Service, Centre Pasteur du Cameroun, Membre du RÃ©seau International
des Instituts Pasteur, BP 1274 Yaounde, Cameroon. kfutwah@pasteur-yaounde.org

BACKGROUND: Transmission of hepatitis B virus (HBV) from HBV-positive mothers to 
their infants is common and usually occurs when the mother is hepatitis B e
antigen (HBeAg) positive and/or has a high HBV DNA load. In this study, we
determined the prevalence of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and HBeAg among 
pregnant women with known HIV status.
FINDINGS: A total of 650 pregnant women with a mean age of 26.2 years including
301 HIV-positives and 349 HIV-negatives were screened for HBsAg (Monolisa AgHBs
Plus Biorad, France). Among the HBsAg-positives, HBeAg and anti-HBe were tested
(Monolisa Ag HBe Plus Biorad, France). Overall, 51 (7.85%) were positive for
HBsAg. The prevalence of HBsAg was not statistically different between
HIV-positive and HIV-negative pregnant women [28/301 (9.3%) vs 23/349 (6.59%); p 
= 0.2]. None of the 45 HBsAg-positive samples was reactive for HBeAg.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates a high prevalence of HBsAg with very low
proportion of HBeAg in Cameroonian pregnant women. Since perinatal transmission
of HBV is mostly effective when the mother is also HBeAg-positive, our data could
suggest that perinatal transmissions play a minor role in HBV prevalence in
Cameroon. In line with previous African studies, these findings further suggests 
that horizontal transmission could be the most common mechanism of HBV infections
in Cameroon.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-9-62 
PMCID: PMC3315739
PMID: 22401702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

