
1. Biochemistry. 2012 Apr 3;51(13):2899-910. doi: 10.1021/bi201791s. Epub 2012 Mar
22.

Structural studies of E73 from a hyperthermophilic archaeal virus identify the
"RH3" domain, an elaborated ribbon-helix-helix motif involved in DNA recognition.

Schlenker C(1), Goel A, Tripet BP, Menon S, Willi T, Dlakić M, Young MJ, Lawrence
CM, Copié V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Montana State University, Bozeman,
Montana 59717, United States.

Hyperthermophilic archaeal viruses, including Sulfolobus spindle-shaped viruses
(SSVs) such as SSV-1 and SSV-Ragged Hills, exhibit remarkable morphology and
genetic diversity. However, they remain poorly understood, in part because their 
genomes exhibit limited or unrecognizable sequence similarity to genes with known
function. Here we report structural and functional studies of E73, a 73-residue
homodimeric protein encoded within the SSV-Ragged Hills genome. Despite lacking
significant sequence similarity, the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) structure
reveals clear similarity to ribbon-helix-helix (RHH) domains present in numerous 
proteins involved in transcriptional regulation. In vitro double-stranded DNA
(dsDNA) binding experiments confirm the ability of E73 to bind dsDNA in a
nonspecific manner with micromolar affinity, and characterization of the K11E
variant confirms the location of the predicted DNA binding surface. E73 is
distinct, however, from known RHH domains. The RHH motif is elaborated upon by
the insertion of a third helix that is tightly integrated into the structural
domain, giving rise to the "RH3" fold. Within the homodimer, this helix results
in the formation of a conserved, symmetric cleft distal to the DNA binding
surface, where it may mediate protein-protein interactions or contribute to the
high thermal stability of E73. Analysis of backbone amide dynamics by NMR
provides evidence of a rigid core, fast picosecond to nanosecond time scale NH
bond vector motions for residues located within the antiparallel β-sheet region
of the proposed DNA-binding surface, and slower microsecond to millisecond time
scale motions for residues in the α1-α2 loop. The roles of E73 and its SSV
homologues in the viral life cycle are discussed.

DOI: 10.1021/bi201791s 
PMCID: PMC3326356
PMID: 22409376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

