
1. Hum Immunol. 2012 Jun;73(6):677-85. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2012.03.004. Epub 2012 
Apr 12.

TLR3 and RIG-I gene variants: associations with functional effects on receptor
expression and responses to measles virus and vaccine in vaccinated infants.

Clifford HD(1), Yerkovich ST, Khoo SK, Zhang G, Upham J, Le Souëf PN, Richmond P,
Hayden CM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Western Australia,
Perth, WA, Australia. holly.clifford@gmail.com

Measles virus causes severe morbidity and mortality, despite the availability of 
measles vaccines. Successful defence against viral pathogens requires early
recognition of virus-specific patterns by innate receptors like Toll-like
receptor (TLR)3 and the RNA helicase, retinoic acid inducible gene-I (RIG-I).
Genetic differences in these receptors may influence the primary immune responses
to measles and the efficacy of measles vaccine. In 1-year-old Australian infants 
after their first measles vaccine dose, we investigated functional effects of
TLR3 and RIG-I polymorphisms on intracellular protein expression using flow
cytometry, cytokine responses to receptor ligands and measles lysate, and
post-vaccination measles IgG levels. We found that TLR3 Leu412Phe was
significantly associated with IFN-α/β response after stimulation with TLR3
ligand, poly(I:C) (P=0.024). Downregulation of TLR3 protein expression in NK
cells after poly(I:C) was also associated with this variant (P=0.011). In
contrast, measles-specific expression, cytokine responses and antibody responses 
were not associated with TLR3 polymorphisms. No associations were found with
RIG-I variants. These results suggest that a TLR3 polymorphism has functional
effects on receptor expression and cytokine response. However, this did not
translate to an effect on specific responses to measles virus or vaccine. We
found no evidence that RIG-I polymorphisms were involved in measles immune
responses.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2012.03.004 
PMID: 22504413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

