
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2012 Aug;23(8):847-58. doi: 10.1089/hum.2011.142. Epub 2012 Jul
20.

Efficacy of codelivery of dual AAV2/5 vectors in the murine retina and
hippocampus.

Palfi A(1), Chadderton N, McKee AG, Blanco Fernandez A, Humphries P, Kenna PF,
Farrar GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.
palfia@tcd.ie

Recombinant adeno-associated virus (AAV) represents an efficient system for
neuronal transduction. However, a potential drawback of AAV is its restricted
packaging capacity of approximately 5 kb. To bypass this limitation, a number of 
dual- and triple-vector strategies divide the transgene(s) between two or three
AAVs. The success of these approaches relies directly on efficient cotransduction
of the component AAVs. Although proof of concept for these stratagems has been
demonstrated, the underlying cotransduction rate has not been analyzed
quantitatively. In this study, cotransduction efficiencies in both retina and
hippocampus have been investigated, using two reporter AAVs expressing either a
green (GFP) or red (DsR) fluorescent protein. Transduction efficiencies were
monitored via microscopy, flow cytometry, and quantitative PCR. After viral
transduction with 1.5Ã—10(9) viral particles of each of the reporter AAVs,
approximately one-third of the retinal cells expressed one or both transgenes at 
levels detectable by native fluorescence. Notably, the majority of the remaining 
retinal cells were also transduced and expressed the reporters at lower levels,
which were detectable only by immunolabeling. Flow cytometric analysis
demonstrated cotransduction rates of up to 55% with the two reporter AAVs in
retinal cells. Modifying the ratio of the two coadministered AAVs resulted in
altered mRNA expression levels of the two reporter genes in cotransduced cell
populations. The study suggests that codelivery of AAV is an efficient means of
expanding the therapeutic application of AAV in neurons.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.2011.142 
PMID: 22545762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

