
1. J Virol. 2012 Jul;86(14):7520-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.07204-11. Epub 2012 May 2.

Autophagic clearance of Sin Nombre hantavirus glycoprotein Gn promotes virus
replication in cells.

Hussein IT(1), Cheng E, Ganaie SS, Werle MJ, Sheema S, Haque A, Mir MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA.

Hantavirus glycoprotein precursor (GPC) is posttranslationally cleaved into two
glycoproteins, Gn and Gc. Cells transfected with plasmids expressing either GPC
or both Gn and Gc revealed that Gn is posttranslationally degraded. Treatment of 
cells with the autophagy inhibitors 3-methyladenine, LY-294002, or Wortmanin
rescued Gn degradation, suggesting that Gn is degraded by the host autophagy
machinery. Confocal microscopic imaging showed that Gn is targeted to
autophagosomes for degradation by an unknown mechanism. Examination of autophagy 
markers LC3-I and LC3-II demonstrated that both Gn expression and Sin Nombre
hantavirus (SNV) infection induce autophagy in cells. To delineate whether
induction of autophagy and clearance of Gn play a role in the virus replication
cycle, we downregulated autophagy genes BCLN-1 and ATG7 using small interfering
RNA (siRNA) and monitored virus replication over time. These studies revealed
that inhibition of host autophagy machinery inhibits Sin Nombre virus replication
in cells, suggesting that autophagic clearance of Gn is required for efficient
virus replication. Our studies provide mechanistic insights into viral
pathogenesis and reveal that SNV exploits the host autophagy machinery to
decrease the intrinsic steady-state levels of an important viral component for
efficient replication in host cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.07204-11 
PMCID: PMC3416297
PMID: 22553339  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

