
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 May 25;422(1):28-35. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.088. Epub 2012 Apr 25.

Combined introduction of Bmi-1 and hTERT immortalizes human adipose
tissue-derived stromal cells with low risk of transformation.

Tátrai P(1), Szepesi Á, Matula Z, Szigeti A, Buchan G, Mádi A, Uher F, Német K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Enzymology, Research Center for Natural Sciences, Hungarian
Academy of Sciences, Karolina út 29, H-1113 Budapest, Hungary.
peter.tatrai@biomembrane.hu

Adipose tissue-derived stromal cells (ASCs) are increasingly being studied for
their usefulness in regenerative medicine. However, limited life span and
donor-dependent variation of primary cells such as ASCs present major hurdles to 
controlled and reproducible experiments. We therefore aimed to establish
immortalized ASC cell lines that provide steady supply of homogeneous cells for
in vitro work while retain essential features of primary cells. To this end,
combinations of human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT), murine Bmi-1, and
SV40 large T antigen (SV40T) were introduced by lentiviral transduction into
ASCs. The resulting cell lines ASC(hTERT), ASC(Bmi-1), ASC(Bmi-1+hTERT) and
ASC(SV40T+hTERT) were tested for transgene expression, telomerase activity,
surface immunomarkers, proliferation, osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation, 
karyotype, tumorigenicity, and cellular senescence. All cell lines have
maintained expression of characteristic surface immunomarkers, and none was
tumorigenic. However, ASC(Bmi-1) had limited replicative potential, while the
rapidly proliferating ASC(SV40T+hTERT) acquired chromosomal aberrations, departed
from MSC phenotype, and lost differentiation capacity. ASC(hTERT) and
ASC(hTERT+Bmi-1), on the other hand, preserved all essential MSC features and did
not senesce after 100 population doublings. Notably, a subpopulation of
ASC(hTERT) also acquired aberrant karyotype and showed signs of transformation
after long-term culture. In conclusion, hTERT alone was sufficient to extend the 
life span of human ASC, but ASC(hTERT) are prone to transformation during
extensive subculturing. The combination of Bmi-1 and hTERT successfully
immortalized human ASCs without significantly perturbing their phenotype or
biological behavior.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.088 
PMID: 22554522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

