
1. Virus Res. 2012 Aug;167(2):267-72. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2012.05.008. Epub 2012
May 19.

In vitro template-dependent synthesis of Pepino mosaic virus positive- and
negative-strand RNA by its RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.

Osman TA(1), Olsthoorn RC, Livieratos IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sustainable Agriculture, Mediterranean Agronomic Institute of
Chania, Alsylio Agrokepion, GR-73100 Chania, Crete, Greece.
tosmantosman@yahoo.co.uk

Pepino mosaic virus (PepMV)-infected tomato plants were used to develop an in
vitro template-dependent system for the study of viral RNA synthesis.
Differential sedimentation and sucrose-gradient purification of PepMV-infected
tomato extracts resulted in fractions containing a transcriptionally active
membrane-bound RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp). In the presence of Mg(2+)
ions, (32)P-labelled UTP and unlabelled ATP, CTP, GTP, the PepMV RdRp catalysed
the conversion of endogenous RNA templates into single- and double-stranded (ds) 
genomic RNAs and three 3'-co-terminal subgenomic dsRNAs. Hybridisation
experiments showed that the genomic ssRNA was labelled only in the plus strand,
the genomic dsRNA mainly in the plus strand and the three subgenomic dsRNAs
equally in both strands. Following removal of the endogenous templates from the
membrane-bound complex, the purified template-dependent RdRp could specifically
catalyse transcription of PepMV virion RNA, in vitro-synthesized full-length
plus-strand RNA and the 3'-termini of both the plus- and minus-strand RNAs.
Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against an immunogenic epitope of the PepMV RdRp
(anti-RdRp) detected a protein of approximately 164kDa in the membrane-bound and 
template-dependent RdRp preparations and exclusively inhibited PepMV RNA
synthesis when added to the template-dependent in vitro transcription system. The
300 nucleotides long 3'-terminal region of the PepMV genome, containing a stretch
of at least 20 adenosine (A) residues, was an adequate exogenous RNA template for
RdRp initiation of the minus-strand synthesis but higher transcription efficiency
was observed as the number of A residues increased. This observation might
indicate a role for the poly(A)-tail in the formation and stabilisation of
secondary structure(s) essential for initiation of transcription. The
template-dependent specific RdRp system described in this article will facilitate
identification of RNA elements and host components required for PepMV RNA
synthesis.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2012.05.008 
PMID: 22617023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

