
1. Rev Med Virol. 2012 Sep;22(5):339-49. doi: 10.1002/rmv.1719. Epub 2012 May 30.

Hepatitis E virus: neutralizing sites, diagnosis, and protective immunity.

Zhang J(1), Li SW, Wu T, Zhao Q, Ng MH, Xia NS.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Diagnostics and Vaccine Development in Infectious
Diseases, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.

There have been increased attentions on HEV and its associated diseases in recent
years as a result of an increased number of reports on autochthonous patients
from many developed countries. Vaccine development and better disease management 
are expected from protective immunity with increased knowledge on the
pathogenesis and virology of HEV. This review summarizes the current
understanding of the HEV virology, the key neutralization sites (epitopes) on the
surface of the viral capsid, the host humoral immune responses for HEV infection,
and the protective immunity conferred by natural infection and vaccination.
Recombinant VLPs were prepared to mimic the protective and neutralizing epitopes 
on the virion surface, thus being capable of eliciting protective immunity when
injected to nonhuman primates or human volunteers during preclinical tests and
clinical trials. Four markers-viral RNA, anti-HEV IgM, anti-HEV IgG, and low
avidity of anti-HEV IgG-are important in the diagnosis of HEV infection,
particularly for patients presenting with acute hepatitis symptoms. This toolbox 
of genomic and immunological assays is valuable in furthering our understanding
of the time course of HEV infection and the subsequent hepatitis during
preclinical and clinical development of an efficacious vaccine. Two vaccine
candidates had shown good tolerability, high immunogenicity, and high efficacy
against symptomatic and/or asymptomatic HEV infection. One of them has been
licensed in China recently. However, many issues need to be resolved before new
technological progresses can benefit the people who need them most.

Copyright Â© 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/rmv.1719 
PMID: 22645002  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

