
1. Virus Genes. 2012 Oct;45(2):295-303. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

Deletion of the UL4 gene sequence of equine herpesvirus 1 precludes the
generation of defective interfering particles.

Charvat RA(1), Zhang Y, O'Callaghan DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Tumor Virology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 1501 Kings
Highway, P.O. Box 33932, Shreveport, LA 71130-3932, USA.

Serial, high multiplicity passage of equine herpesvirus 1 (EHV-1) leads to the
generation of defective interfering particles (DIP). EHV-1 DIP inhibit and
interfere with the replication of standard EHV-1, establishing a state of
persistent infection. These DIP package severely truncated and rearranged forms
of the standard viral genome. Contained within the DIP genome are only three
genes: UL3, UL4, and a unique hybrid gene (Hyb). The hybrid gene forms through a 
recombination event that fuses portions of the early regulatory IR4 and UL5 genes
and is essential for DIP-mediated interference. The UL4 gene is an early gene
dispensable for lytic replication and inhibits viral and cellular gene
expression. However, the contribution of the UL4 gene during DIP-mediated
persistent infection is unknown. Here, we describe the generation of a completely
deleted UL4 virus and its use to investigate the role of the UL4 gene in the
generation of the defective genome. Deletion of the UL4 gene resulted in delayed 
virus growth at late times post-infection. Cells infected with a mutant EHV-1
that lacked expression of the UL4 protein due to an inserted stop codon in the
UL4 gene produced defective particles, while cells infected with a mutant EHV-1
that had the complete UL4 gene sequence deleted were unable to produce DIP. These
data suggest that the UL4 gene sequence, but not the UL4 protein, is critical for
the generation of defective interfering particles.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-012-0781-2 
PMCID: PMC3595000
PMID: 22752566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

