
1. Med Hypotheses. 2012 Sep;79(3):408-12. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2012.06.008. Epub 2012
Jul 12.

Sperm-mediated host-derived DNA transfer as a new mechanism for immune system
evasion of sexually transmitted genital tract pathogens.

Landau EY(1), Wainrach B.

Author information: 
(1)Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
yuval.landau@childrens.harvard.edu

Over one century of extensive efforts directed towards investigating the immune
response and the immuno-protection associated with sexually transmitted
infections have failed to produce any effective vaccines against most of the
major pathogens, among them Neisseria gonorrhea, herpes simplex virus type 2, and
Chlamydia trachomatis. Attempts to design and develop protective vaccines against
them have also yielded disappointing results. It has long been felt that there
might be another yet undiscovered complicating factor, in addition to the
recognized difficulties, which might be impeding the development of successful
vaccines. Unlike the other body organs and systems, the genital tract and the
elements found within it (e.g., spermatozoa) are endowed with unique features,
some of which are associated with inherent DNA transferability skills as
physiologically required from such an environment. We hypothesize that there is a
novel evasion mechanism that involves an unusual sperm-mediated host-derived DNA 
transfer by which sexually transmitted genital tract microorganisms can express
brand new chimeric antigens and epitopes and, by doing so, thus evade the
surveillance of the immune system. This hypothesis may describe what would be the
long-awaited breakthrough in the search for a vaccine against sexually
transmitted infections. It may also assist in developing better-designed vaccines
in general, and may have implications on other microorganism-related challenges
(e.g., antibiotic resistance).

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2012.06.008 
PMID: 22795612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

