
1. J Virol Methods. 2012 Dec;186(1-2):73-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2012.07.024.
Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Development and validation of quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
assays to detect elephant endotheliotropic herpesviruses-2, 3, 4, 5, and 6.

Stanton JJ(1), Nofs SA, Peng R, Hayward GS, Ling PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, One Baylor Plaza, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. stantoje@ohsu.edu

Elephant endotheliotropic herpesviruses (EEHVs) can cause lethal hemorrhagic
disease in both African and Asian elephants. At least seven EEHV types have been 
described, and sensitive real-time PCR tests have been developed for EEHV1A and
1B, which are associated with the majority of characterized Asian elephant
deaths. Despite growing knowledge of the different EEHV types, the prevalence of 
each type within African and Asian elephants remains to be determined and there
is considerable need for diagnostic tests to detect and discriminate between each
EEHV species for clinical management of African and Asian elephants that develop 
illness from one or more of these viruses. To begin to address these issues, we
developed real-time PCR assays for EEHV2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. Overall, each assay had
robust PCR efficiency, a dynamic linear range over 5log(10) concentrations, a
limit of detection of 10 copies/test reaction with 100% sensitivity, and low
intra- and inter-assay variability. Each assay proved to be specific for the EEHV
targets for which it was designed, with the exception of EEHV3 and EEHV4, which
was expected because of greater DNA sequence similarity between these two EEHV
species than the others. These new tools will be useful for conducting surveys of
EEHV prevalence within captive and range country elephants, for diagnostic
testing of elephants with suspected EEHV-associated disease, and for managing the
treatment of elephants with EEHV-induced illness.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2012.07.024 
PMCID: PMC3506426
PMID: 22842286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

