
1. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 May;46(5):440-2.

[Early detection of HIV infection with Dried Blood Spot testing among infants in 
Yunnan province].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang CJ(1), Chen M, Chen L, Su YZ, Chen HC, Yan WY, Yang L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for STDs/AIDS Prevention and Control, Yunnan Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Kunming 650022, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the application of Dried Blood Spot (DBS) testing for early
detection of HIV infection among infants.
METHODS: All of the infants aged between 6 weeks and 18 months and born by HIV
positive mothers from 14 Maternity and Child Health Care Hospitals in Kunming,
Dali, Dehong, Lincang of Yunnan province were investigated from 2010 to 2011. By 
using DBS and Roche HIV-1 DNA test techniques, 286 infants were tested for HIV
early diagnosis and compared with HIV antibody results of 18 months infants. DBS 
from uninfected infants were taken periodically and screened of HIV antibody to
find their time of antibody-disappearing. The information of treatment for
pregnant women and feeding methods for infants was also investigated.
RESULTS: A total of 286 infants were tested with HIV-1 DNA among which 148
infants were male and 138 infants female, and 8 infants were HIV-1 DNA positive
and the infection rate was 2.8% (8/286) that was in accord with their antibodies 
results in 18 months old; the other 278 infants whose HIV-1 DNA was negative was 
also negative with their antibodies. By following up the antibody test of 143 HIV
negative infants the cumulate rates of antibody-disappearing at the age of 6, 9, 
12 and 18 months were 14.0% (20/143), 61.5% (88/143), 88.1% (126/143) and 100.0% 
(143/143), respectively. Among 286 HIV positive pregnant women, the group with
anti-viral treatment had a lower rate of HIV infection with their infants that
was 2.14% (6/280) while the group without anti-viral treatment had a high rate of
HIV infection with their infants that was 33.33% (2/6). There was significantly
different in the rates of two groups (P < 0.01). The HIV infection rate of
infants fed with milk powder was 2.55% (7/274) and the rate was 8.33% (1/12) with
breast milk.
CONCLUSION: The HIV-1 DNA detection techniques with DBS sample was effective for 
the early diagnosis of HIV in infants from 6 weeks to 18 months.


PMID: 22883732  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

