
1. Vaccine. 2012 Oct 5;30(45):6483-91. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.07.081. Epub 2012
Aug 9.

Safety and immunogenicity of an AS03-adjuvanted A(H1N1)pmd09 vaccine administered
simultaneously or sequentially with a seasonal trivalent vaccine in adults 61
years or older: data from two multicentre randomised trials.

Peeters M(1), Regner S, Vaman T, Devaster JM, Rombo L.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, Wavre, Belgium.

During the 2009-2010 Northern Hemisphere influenza season, both seasonal and
pandemic influenza vaccines were expected to be administered to elderly people,
which is an important target group for influenza vaccination. Two multicentre
randomised clinical studies were conducted in participants aged ≥61 years to
assess the immunogenicity and reactogenicity following vaccination with two doses
of an AS03-adjuvanted A(H1N1)pmd09 vaccine when either sequentially administered 
(21 days before first dose [N=73] or 21 days after second dose [N=72]) or
co-administered (first dose [N=84] or second dose [N=84]) with a licensed
trivalent seasonal influenza vaccine (TIV). Overall, 313 participants from 2
centres in Sweden (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT00968890) and 6 centres in Germany
(NCT00971425) were randomised to one of the four treatment groups. The
AS03-adjuvanted A(H1N1)pmd09 vaccine elicited a good immune response against
A(H1N1)pmd09-like virus in all treatment groups after the first and second dose, 
meeting and exceeding the European licensing criteria for pandemic influenza
vaccines. After one dose of the AS03-adjuvanted A(H1N1)pmd09 vaccine,
haemagglutination inhibition seroconversion rates ranged from 85% (95% confidence
interval: 74-93%) to 93% (85-97%), seroprotection rates from 87% (76-94%) to 96% 
(90-99%) and geometric mean fold rise from 15 (11-19) to 20 (16-25). The
haemagglutination inhibition immune responses to the AS03-adjuvanted A(H1N1)pmd09
vaccine seemed lower when TIV was administered 3 weeks before, while immune
responses to TIV seemed not affected by either vaccination schedule. Solicited
symptoms were more frequently reported following administration of the
AS03-adjuvanted A(H1N1)pmd09 vaccine compared to TIV, but these were mainly mild 
to moderate in intensity and transient in the four treatment groups. These
results suggest that sequential or co-administration of the AS03-adjuvanted
A(H1N1)pmd09 vaccine and TIV induced a good immune response to both vaccines and 
had a clinically acceptable safety profile in people aged ≥61 years.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.07.081 
PMID: 22885014  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

