
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42099. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042099. Epub 2012 Aug 30.

The spectrum of central nervous system infections in an adult referral hospital
in Hanoi, Vietnam.

Taylor WR(1), Nguyen K, Nguyen D, Nguyen H, Horby P, Nguyen HL, Lien T, Tran G,
Tran N, Nguyen HM, Nguyen T, Nguyen HH, Nguyen T, Tran G, Farrar J, de Jong M,
Schultsz C, Tran H, Nguyen D, Vu B, Le H, Dao T, Nguyen T, Wertheim H.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Hanoi, Vietnam. bob@tropmedres.ac

OBJECTIVES: To determine prospectively the causative pathogens of central nervous
system (CNS) infections in patients admitted to a tertiary referral hospital in
Hanoi, Vietnam.
METHODS: From May 2007 to December 2008, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples from
352 adults with suspected meningitis or encephalitis underwent routine testing,
staining (Gram, Ziehl-Nielsen, India ink), bacterial culture and polymerase chain
reaction targeting Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, S. suis,
Haemophilus influenzae type b, Herpes simplex virus (HSV), Varicella Zoster virus
(VZV), enterovirus, and 16S ribosomal RNA. Blood cultures and clinically
indicated radiology were also performed. Patients were classified as having
confirmed or suspected bacterial (BM), tuberculous (TBM), cryptococcal (CRM),
eosinophilic (EOM) meningitis, aseptic encephalitis/meningitis (AEM),
neurocysticercosis and others.
RESULTS: 352 (male: 66%) patients were recruited: median age 34 years (range
13-85). 95/352 (27.3%) diagnoses were laboratory confirmed and one by cranial
radiology: BM (n = 62), TBM (n = 9), AEM (n = 19), CRM (n = 5), and
neurocysticercosis (n = 1, cranial radiology). S. suis predominated as the cause 
of BM [48/62 (77.4%)]; Listeria monocytogenese (n = 1), S. pasteurianus (n = 1)
and N. meningitidis (n = 2) were infrequent. AEM viruses were: HSV (n = 12), VZV 
(n = 5) and enterovirus (n = 2). 5 patients had EOM. Of 262/352 (74.4%) patients 
with full clinical data, 209 (79.8%) were hospital referrals and 186 (71%) had
been on antimicrobials. 21 (8%) patients died: TBM (15.2%), AEM (10%), and BM
(2.8%).
CONCLUSIONS: Most infections lacked microbiological confirmation. S. suis was the
most common cause of BM in this setting. Improved diagnostics are needed for
meningoencephalitic syndromes to inform treatment and prevention strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042099 
PMCID: PMC3431395
PMID: 22952590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

