
1. J Fish Dis. 2013 Feb;36(2):89-102. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2012.01423.x. Epub
2012 Sep 12.

Study of virulence in field isolates of infectious pancreatic necrosis virus
obtained from the northern part of Norway.

Julin K(1), Mennen S, Sommer AI.

Author information: 
(1)Nofima AS, Tromsø, Norway. kjersti.julin@uit.no

In order to study the variety of infectious pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV)
strains involved in outbreaks of infectious pancreatic necrosis (IPN) in Atlantic
salmon fish farms, samples were collected from 19 different outbreaks of IPN in
the northern part of Norway. The main objective of this study was to examine
whether IPNV isolates of different virulence were involved in the outbreaks and
could explain the variable IPN protection observed in vaccinated post-smolts in
the field. Both the molecular basis of virulence of all field isolates and
virulence expressed by mortality after bath challenge of unvaccinated post-smolts
with eight of the isolates were studied. Very little variation among the field
isolates was detected when the 578-bp variable region encoding the VP2 protein
known to be involved in virulence was sequenced. The cumulative mortality after
experimental challenge with field isolates genetically characterized as highly
virulent was always high (40-56%), while the cumulative mortality of the same
strains in vaccinated post-smolts during the field outbreaks varied from 1 to
50%. Although the tested samples came from fish vaccinated with the same vaccine 
product, the protection against IPN varied. These results demonstrate that
differences in virulence of the isolates were not the main reason for the
variation in mortality in the field outbreaks. Most of the field isolates were of
high virulence, which is shown in experimental challenges to be important for
mortality, but clearly other factors that might affect the susceptibility of IPN 
also play an important role in the outcome of an IPNV infection.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2012.01423.x 
PMID: 22966863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

