
1. J Virol. 2012 Dec;86(24):13360-70. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01850-12. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

The cellular ataxia telangiectasia-mutated kinase promotes epstein-barr virus
lytic reactivation in response to multiple different types of lytic
reactivation-inducing stimuli.

Hagemeier SR(1), Barlow EA, Meng Q, Kenney SC.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Oncology, University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent-to-lytic switch is mediated by the viral
proteins BZLF1 (Z), BRLF1 (R), and BRRF1 (Na). Since we previously showed that
DNA-damaging agents (including chemotherapy and irradiation) can induce EBV lytic
reactivation and recently demonstrated that wild-type p53 contributes to lytic
reactivation, we investigated the role of the ATM kinase during EBV reactivation.
ATM phosphorylates and activates p53, as well as numerous other substrates
involved in the cellular DNA damage response. Using an ATM inhibitor (KU55933),
we found that ATM activity is required for efficient induction of EBV lytic gene 
expression by a variety of different stimuli, including a histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitor, the transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) cytokine, a
demethylating agent (5-azacytidine), B cell receptor engagement with anti-IgG
antibody, hydrogen peroxide, and the proteosome inhibitor bortezomib. In
EBV-infected AGS (gastric) cells, knockdown of ATM, or p53, expression inhibits
EBV reactivation. Conversely, treatment of these cells with nutlin-3 (which
activates p53 and ATM) robustly induces lytic reactivation in a p53- and
ATM-dependent manner. The ability of the EBV R and Na proteins to induce lytic
reactivation in EBV-infected AGS cells is ATM dependent. However, overexpression 
of Z induces lytic gene expression in the presence or absence of ATM activity.
Our results suggest that ATM enhances Z promoter activity in the context of the
intact EBV genome and that p53 contributes to the ATM effect. Nevertheless, since
we found that ATM inhibitors also reduce lytic reactivation in Burkitt lymphoma
cells that have no p53, additional ATM substrates must also contribute to the ATM
effect.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01850-12 
PMCID: PMC3503132
PMID: 23015717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

