
1. J Med Virol. 2013 Jan;85(1):121-7. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23405. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

Role of DNA methylation in the development of Epstein-Barr virus-associated
gastric carcinoma.

Saito M(1), Nishikawa J, Okada T, Morishige A, Sakai K, Nakamura M, Kiyotoki S,
Hamabe K, Okamoto T, Oga A, Sasaki K, Suehiro Y, Hinoda Y, Sakaida I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Yamaguchi University Graduate
School of Medicine, Yamaguchi, Japan.

The frequencies of DNA methylation of certain tumor-related genes are higher in
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated gastric carcinomas than in EBV-negative
gastric carcinomas. EBV-associated gastric carcinomas have distinct
clinicopathological features; however, there are no case-control studies
comparing methylation frequency between EBV-associated gastric carcinomas and
controls that have been adjusted according to the clinicopathological features of
EBV-associated gastric carcinomas. This study evaluated 25 EBV-associated gastric
carcinomas that were positive for EBV-encoded small RNA 1 (EBER-1) by in situ
hybridization and 50 EBV-negative gastric carcinomas that were matched with the
EBV-associated gastric carcinomas by age, sex, histology, depth of tumor
invasion, and stage. Methylation status of 16 loci associated with tumor-related 
genes was analyzed by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to
identify genes in which DNA methylation specifically occurred in EBV-associated
gastric carcinomas. Methylation frequencies of 12 of the 16 genes were higher in 
EBV-associated gastric carcinomas than in EBV-negative controls, and the
frequency of methylation of 6 specific loci (MINT2, MINT31, p14, p16, p73, and
RUNX3) was significantly higher in EBV-associated gastric carcinomas than in
EBV-negative controls. There were no significant differences in the methylation
frequencies of the other genes. The mean methylation index in EBV-associated
gastric carcinomas was significantly higher than that in EBV-negative controls.
DNA methylation of tumor suppressor genes that regulate the cell cycle and
apoptosis specifically occurred in EBV-associated gastric carcinomas. Aberrant
DNA methylation might lead to the development and progression of EBV-associated
gastric carcinoma.

Copyright Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.23405 
PMID: 23073987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

