
1. J Med Virol. 2013 Feb;85(2):282-7. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23437. Epub 2012 Nov 14.

Genotyping of human papillomavirus in paraffin embedded cervical tissue samples
from women in Ethiopia and the Sudan.

Abate E(1), Aseffa A, El-Tayeb M, El-Hassan I, Yamuah L, Mihret W, Bekele L,
Ashenafi S, El-Dawi N, Belayneh M, El-Hassan A, Engers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Molecular Biology, University of Gondar, Gondar, 
Ethiopia. ebbaabate@yahoo.com

Cervical cancer is the most frequent female malignancy in most developing
countries. Previous studies have demonstrated a strong association of human
papillomavirus (HPV) infection with dysplasia and carcinoma of the uterine
cervix. The objective of this study was to identify the prevailing HPV genotypes 
responsible for the development of cervical cancer among women in Ethiopia and
the Sudan. A molecular characterization of HPV was done on 245 paraffin embedded 
cervical biopsy samples collected from the two countries. Amplification of HPV
and subsequent genotyping was done using SPF10 primers and Line probe assay. Of
samples collected from Ethiopian patients, 93% (149/160) and 13% (21/160) had
high risk and low risk HPV genotypes, respectively. Among samples collected from 
the Sudan, 94% (80/85) harbored high risk and 11.7% (10/85) low risk HPV
genotypes. Human papillomavirus 16 was the most frequent genotype identified in
samples from Ethiopia (91%, 136/149) and the Sudan (82.5%, 66/80). HPV 52, 58,
and 18 were the second, third and fourth common genotypes identified in Ethiopia,
whereas HPV 18, 45, and 52 were the second, third, and fourth genotypes
identified in samples collected from the Sudan. Thus, individuals living in
different geographical localities should receive vaccines based on the specific
genotypes circulating in the area and a vaccine targeting HPV 16, 18, 45, 52, and
58 may be optimal for the control of cervical cancer in the two countries.

Copyright Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.23437 
PMID: 23160919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

