
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):20661-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1213559109. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

Structural basis for Marburg virus VP35-mediated immune evasion mechanisms.

Ramanan P(1), Edwards MR, Shabman RS, Leung DW, Endlich-Frazier AC, Borek DM,
Otwinowski Z, Liu G, Huh J, Basler CF, Amarasinghe GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Filoviruses, marburgvirus (MARV) and ebolavirus (EBOV), are causative agents of
highly lethal hemorrhagic fever in humans. MARV and EBOV share a common genome
organization but show important differences in replication complex formation,
cell entry, host tropism, transcriptional regulation, and immune evasion.
Multifunctional filoviral viral protein (VP) 35 proteins inhibit innate immune
responses. Recent studies suggest double-stranded (ds)RNA sequestration is a
potential mechanism that allows EBOV VP35 to antagonize retinoic-acid inducible
gene-I (RIG-I) like receptors (RLRs) that are activated by viral
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), such as double-strandedness and
dsRNA blunt ends. Here, we show that MARV VP35 can inhibit IFN production at
multiple steps in the signaling pathways downstream of RLRs. The crystal
structure of MARV VP35 IID in complex with 18-bp dsRNA reveals that despite the
similar protein fold as EBOV VP35 IID, MARV VP35 IID interacts with the dsRNA
backbone and not with blunt ends. Functional studies show that MARV VP35 can
inhibit dsRNA-dependent RLR activation and interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) phosphorylation by IFN kinases TRAF family member-associated NFkb
activator (TANK) binding kinase-1 (TBK-1) and IFN kB kinase e (IKKe) in
cell-based studies. We also show that MARV VP35 can only inhibit RIG-I and
melanoma differentiation associated gene 5 (MDA5) activation by double
strandedness of RNA PAMPs (coating backbone) but is unable to inhibit activation 
of RLRs by dsRNA blunt ends (end capping). In contrast, EBOV VP35 can inhibit
activation by both PAMPs. Insights on differential PAMP recognition and
inhibition of IFN induction by a similar filoviral VP35 fold, as shown here,
reveal the structural and functional plasticity of a highly conserved virulence
factor.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1213559109 
PMCID: PMC3528546
PMID: 23185024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

