
1. Semin Oncol. 2012 Dec;39(6):664-73. doi: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2012.09.007.

New approaches to graft engineering for haploidentical bone marrow
transplantation.

Handgretinger R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's University Hospital, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
Rupert.Handgretinger@med.uni-tuebingen.de

Haploidentical transplantation opens the possibility to offer this treatment to a
large number of patients with an otherwise incurable disease, such as some
hematologic or oncologic malignancies, inborn or acquired bone marrow failure
syndromes, hemoglobinopathies, immunodeficiencies, or other genetic diseases.
Initial attempts at haploidentical transplantation using unmanipulated bone
marrow were associated with a high transplant-related mortality. However, recent 
insights into the biology of haploidentical transplantation, the availability of 
effective in vivo large-scale graft-manipulation technology, and improved
supportive care strategies have led to and are still leading to significantly
better outcomes compared to previous decades. Methods for the in vitro depletion 
of T lymphocytes from mobilized peripheral blood stem cells (PBSC) to prevent
graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) have facilitated the wider use and acceptance of
haploidentical transplantation in children and adult patients. Besides in vitro
T-cell depletion techniques, other methods, such as the isolation of alloreactive
natural killer (NK) cells, virus-specific T lymphocytes, and other effector or
regulatory cells are nowadays available to rapidly rebuild the immune system
after haploidentical transplantation for the prevention of severe infections or
relapses of the underlying diseases.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2012.09.007 
PMID: 23206843  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

