
1. Z Kardiol. 1990 Feb;79(2):83-8.

[Cardiac involvement within the scope of HIV-1 infection: preliminary results of 
echocardiography study].

[Article in German]

Steffen HM(1), Schrappe-Bächer M, Müller R, Salzberger B, Fätkenheuer G, Geisler 
S, Degenhardt S, Griebenow R.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik II, Universität Köln.

The results of one- and two-dimensional echocardiography in 128 patients (117
males, 11 females; median age 37 years) who were seropositive for HIV-1 were
analyzed in addition to clinical, electrocardiographic, and laboratory data.
Follow-up controls are available for 51 patients over an observation period of 1 
to 24 months, median 9.5 months. Probably HIV-related echocardiographic
abnormalities were identified in 36 patients (28%): small to moderate pericardial
effusions (n = 34) and left ventricular dilation (n = 5). Pericardial effusions
resolved in seven patients during follow-up, in three cases after tuberculostatic
chemotherapy. Compared to patients without cardiac involvement patients with
HIV-related echocardiographic abnormalities showed lower CD4-lymphocyte counts
(143 +/- 138 vs 289 +/- 219/microliters, p less than or equal to 0.01), and left 
ventricular endsystolic dimensions were increased (34.2 +/- 4.5 vs 32.6 +/- 3.0
mm, p less than or equal to 0.05). Cardiac involvement occurred predominantly in 
the advanced stages of the HIV-1 infection with unclear etiology in the majority 
of cases, even though active concomitant diseases could be frequently
demonstrated. The clinical course of some patients might be consistent with
intercurrently completed perimyocarditis, probably of viral genesis.
CD4-lymphocyte counts less than or equal to 100/microliters could be identified
as a risk factor for the development of cardiac manifestations. The significance 
of a demonstrated involvement of the heart with regard to therapeutic
consequences and prognosis appeared to be slight. Use of echocardiography as a
routine method for the detection of cardiac involvement in HIV-1 infection has
proved to be valuable, since indicative clinical symptoms were lacking in almost 
all cases.


PMID: 2321414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

