
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Feb 1;41(3):e48. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1214. Epub 2012 Dec 
11.

EMdeCODE: a novel algorithm capable of reading words of epigenetic code to
predict enhancers and retroviral integration sites and to identify H3R2me1 as a
distinctive mark of coding versus non-coding genes.

Santoni FA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, 1211
Geneva 4, Switzerland. federico.santoni@unige.ch

Existence of some extra-genetic (epigenetic) codes has been postulated since the 
discovery of the primary genetic code. Evident effects of histone
post-translational modifications or DNA methylation over the efficiency and the
regulation of DNA processes are supporting this postulation. EMdeCODE is an
original algorithm that approximate the genomic distribution of given DNA
features (e.g. promoter, enhancer, viral integration) by identifying relevant
ChIPSeq profiles of post-translational histone marks or DNA binding proteins and 
combining them in a supermark. EMdeCODE kernel is essentially a two-step
procedure: (i) an expectation-maximization process calculates the mixture of
epigenetic factors that maximize the Sensitivity (recall) of the association with
the feature under study; (ii) the approximated density is then recursively
trimmed with respect to a control dataset to increase the precision by reducing
the number of false positives. EMdeCODE densities improve significantly the
prediction of enhancer loci and retroviral integration sites with respect to
previous methods. Importantly, it can also be used to extract distinctive factors
between two arbitrary conditions. Indeed EMdeCODE identifies unexpected
epigenetic profiles specific for coding versus non-coding RNA, pointing towards a
new role for H3R2me1 in coding regions.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks1214 
PMCID: PMC3561958
PMID: 23234700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

