
1. Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz. 2013
Jan;56(1):67-75. doi: 10.1007/s00103-012-1582-4.

The 2009 influenza A (H1N1) pandemic. Management and vaccination strategies in
The Netherlands.

van der Sande MA(1), Jacobi A, Meijer A, Wallinga J, van der Hoek W, van der
Lubben M.

Author information: 
(1)RIVM - Centre Infectious Disease Control, National Institute for Public Health
and the Environment, Bilthoven, 3720 BA, Bilthoven, The Netherlands.
marianne.van.der.sande@rivm.nl

Prior to 2009, The Netherlands had prepared itself extensively for a potential
pandemic. Multidisciplinary guidelines had been drafted to control transmission
and limit adverse outcomes for both a phase of early incidental introduction and 
for a phase with widespread transmission. The Ministry of Health had ensured a
supply and distribution schedule for antivirals and negotiated a contract for
vaccine purchases. During the pandemic, existing surveillance was expanded, the
established infectious disease response structure was activated, and the
previously prepared protocols for communication, diagnostics, use of antivirals, 
and vaccination implementation were operationalized and implemented. When the
pandemic turned out to be less severe than many had anticipated, risk
communication and rapid modification of guidelines and communication became a
major challenge. Antivirals and pandemic vaccines were reserved for those at high
risk for severe outcomes only. Overall, the impact of the pandemic was comparable
to the impact of an average seasonal influenza epidemic, but with a shift in
(severe) outcomes from the very young and elderly toward young adults.
Established prepared protocols enabled timely coordinated responses. In preparing
for the worst, sufficient attention must be given to preparing for a mild
scenario as well.

DOI: 10.1007/s00103-012-1582-4 
PMCID: PMC7079869
PMID: 23275958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

