
1. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2012 Nov 26;6(11):786-97. doi: 10.3855/jidc.2793.

Influenza monitoring in Sardinia, Italy identifies H3 subtype in Mediterranean
wild migratory birds.

Kelvin AA(1), Meloni D, Sansonetti P, Borghetto I, Rowe T, Santangelo R, Pisu D, 
Cameron CM, Paglietti B, Banner D, Farooqui A, Marongiu P, Santona A, Fadda G,
Kelvin DJ, Rubino S.

Author information: 
(1)SaRD - Sardinia Research and Development, University di Sassari, Sassari,
Italy. akelvinphd@jidc.org

INTRODUCTION: Wild migratory birds are global distributors of pathogens.
Sardinia, Italy, is the second largest Island in the Mediterranean and is a land 
bridge between Europe and Africa.
METHODOLOGY: We designed a surveillance protocol to investigate wild migratory
birds for presence, frequency, and type of avian influenza viruses. We collected 
over 4,000 avian samples and compared three sampling methods, fecal, cloacal, and
tracheal, to determine the most productive for virus identification. To determine
frequency of infection, RNA was extracted and RT-PCRs for avian influenza virus
genes were run. Positive samples were cultivated for live virus, sub typed and
sequenced.
RESULTS: Forty-four samples were positive for influenza nucleoprotein gene. We
identified two previously unidentified H3 subtype strains and found cloacae to
have the highest rate of virus identification and fecal sampling to provide
quality RNA and repeatable results for determination of virus presence.
CONCLUSION: Our investigation provides information on the frequency of
Mediterranean avian influenza viruses, and validates the initiation of an avian
influenza surveillance protocol.Â  Taken together with global avian influenza
findings, these results give insight into infectious disease distributions which 
is important for viral pandemic monitoring and design of preventative measures.

DOI: 10.3855/jidc.2793 
PMID: 23277504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

