
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51493. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051493. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Cell-free (RNA) and cell-associated (DNA) HIV-1 and postnatal transmission
through breastfeeding.

Ndirangu J(1), Viljoen J, Bland RM, Danaviah S, Thorne C, Van de Perre P, Newell 
ML.

Author information: 
(1)Africa Centre for Health and Population Studies, University of KwaZulu-Natal, 
Somkhele, South Africa. jndirangu@africacentre.ac.za

INTRODUCTION: Transmission through breastfeeding remains important for
mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) in resource-limited settings. We quantify the
relationship between cell-free (RNA) and cell-associated (DNA) shedding of HIV-1 
virus in breastmilk and the risk of postnatal HIV-1 transmission in the first 6
months postpartum.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-six HIV-positive mothers who transmitted HIV-1 by
breastfeeding were matched to 36 non-transmitting HIV-1 infected mothers in a
case-control study nested in a cohort of HIV-infected women. RNA and DNA were
quantified in the same breastmilk sample taken at 6 weeks and 6 months. Cox
regression analysis assessed the association between cell-free and
cell-associated virus levels and risk of postnatal HIV-1 transmission.
RESULTS: There were higher median levels of cell-free than cell-associated HIV-1 
virus (per ml) in breastmilk at 6 weeks and 6 months. Multivariably, adjusting
for antenatal CD4 count and maternal plasma viral load, at 6 weeks, each 10-fold 
increase in cell-free or cell-associated levels (per ml) was significantly
associated with HIV-1 transmission but stronger for cell-associated than
cell-free levels [2.47 (95% CI 1.33-4.59) vs. aHR 1.52 (95% CI, 1.17-1.96),
respectively]. At 6 months, cell-free and cell-associated levels (per ml) in
breastmilk remained significantly associated with HIV-1 transmission but was
stronger for cell-free than cell-associated levels [aHR 2.53 (95% CI 1.64-3.92)
vs. 1.73 (95% CI 0.94-3.19), respectively].
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that cell-associated virus level (per ml) is
more important for early postpartum HIV-1 transmission (at 6 weeks) than
cell-free virus. As cell-associated virus levels have been consistently detected 
in breastmilk despite antiretroviral therapy, this highlights a potential
challenge for resource-limited settings to achieve the UNAIDS goal for 2015 of
eliminating vertical transmission. More studies would further knowledge on
mechanisms of HIV-1 transmission and help develop more effective drugs during
lactation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051493 
PMCID: PMC3532207
PMID: 23284701  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

