
1. Ann Hepatol. 2013 Jan-Feb;12(1):54-61.

Liver fibrosis in young Egyptian beta-thalassemia major patients: relation to
hepatitis C virus and compliance with chelation.

Elalfy MS(1), Esmat G, Matter RM, Abdel Aziz HE, Massoud WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Ain Shams University, Cairo 11566, Egypt. 
elalfym@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: The main causes of liver fibrosis in transfusion-dependent
thalassemia major are hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and hepatic iron
overload. The study aimed to assess liver fibrosis in Egyptian adolescents and
young adult poly-transfused beta thalassemia patients infected with HCV using
liver FibroScan in relation to iron overload and Liver iron concentration (LIC).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Fifty-one regularly transfused beta thalassemia patients
above 12 years old were subjected to measurement of serum alanine transaminase
(ALT), serum ferritin (SF), HCV (antibody and RNA), LIC assessed by hepatic R2*
and transient elastography (TE) (FibroScan). FibroTest and liver biopsy were done
to 25 patients.
RESULTS: Eighty two% of studied thalassemia patients were HCV antibody positive; 
21(49%) of them were viremic (HCV RNA positive); median LIC was 12 mg/gm dry
weight. There were strong positive correlation between the degree of liver
stiffness and Ishak fibrosis score assessed in liver biopsy specimens (P = 0.002)
and between FibroScan and FibroTest results (P < 0.001). Patients with HCV
viremia showed significantly higher ALT, Î³-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), SF, LIC
and increased liver stiffness compared to patients with no viremia (P = 0.0001,
0.001, 0.012, 0.006 and 0.001) respectively. Liver cirrhosis (TE values >
12.5kPa) was encountered in 23.5% and variable degrees of liver fibrosis (TE
values > 6-12.5 kPa) in 35% of studied thalassemic patients.
CONCLUSION: Young beta thalassemia patients with active hepatitis C infection may
have hepatic cirrhosis or fibrosis at young age when accompanied with hepatic
siderosis. Non invasive Liver FibroScan and Fibro-Test were reliable methods to
assess liver fibrosis in young thalassemic-patients.


PMID: 23293194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

