
1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2014 Oct;61(5):469-72. doi: 10.1111/tbed.12047. Epub 2013
Jan 7.

Preliminary survey on the impact of Schmallenberg virus on sheep flocks in South 
of Belgium.

Saegerman C(1), Martinelle L, Dal Pozzo F, Kirschvink N.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Epidemiology and Risk Analysis Applied to Veterinary Sciences
(UREAR-ULg), Department of Infectious and Parasitic Diseases, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.

Between late February and May 2012, a preliminary anonym survey was conducted
among sheep farmers in south of Belgium in order to contribute to future
estimations of the economic losses caused by Schmallenberg virus (SBV). Based on 
clinical signs consistent with SBV infection, this survey involved 13 meat sheep 
flocks considered as positive flocks with subsequent SBV detection by RT-qPCR
[SBV-positive flocks (PF); total of 961 animals], and 13 meat sheep flocks
considered as negative flocks (NF; total of 331 animals). These preliminary
results indicated several significant characteristics that were more present in
PF than in NF. These include an increased rate of abortions (6.7% in PF versus
3.2% in NF), of lambs born at term but presenting malformations (10.1% in PF
versus 2.0% in NF) and of dystocia (10.1% in PF versus 3.4% in NF). Lamb
mortality during the first week of life was reported more frequently in PF (8 of 
13 PF, 61.5%) than in NF (1 of 13 NF, 7.7%). In PF, the observed prolificacy rate
was 2-fold lower (93%) than expected (186%). The implementation of a survey at
larger scale, including a high number of breeders, is necessary to allow a more
detailed analysis of the SBV impact in the sheep sector.

© 2013 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.12047 
PMID: 23294537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

