
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51715. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051715. Epub 2012 Dec 27.

An automated HIV-1 Env-pseudotyped virus production for global HIV vaccine
trials.

Schultz A(1), Koch S, Fuss M, Mazzotta AS, Sarzotti-Kelsoe M, Ozaki DA,
Montefiori DC, von Briesen H, Zimmermann H, Meyerhans A.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Biomedical Engineering, St. Ingbert, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Infections with HIV still represent a major human health problem
worldwide and a vaccine is the only long-term option to fight efficiently against
this virus. Standardized assessments of HIV-specific immune responses in vaccine 
trials are essential for prioritizing vaccine candidates in preclinical and
clinical stages of development. With respect to neutralizing antibodies, assays
with HIV-1 Env-pseudotyped viruses are a high priority. To cover the increasing
demands of HIV pseudoviruses, a complete cell culture and transfection automation
system has been developed.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The automation system for HIV pseudovirus
production comprises a modified Tecan-based Cellerity system. It covers an area
of 5Ã—3 meters and includes a robot platform, a cell counting machine, a CO(2)
incubator for cell cultivation and a media refrigerator. The processes for cell
handling, transfection and pseudovirus production have been implemented according
to manual standard operating procedures and are controlled and scheduled
autonomously by the system. The system is housed in a biosafety level II cabinet 
that guarantees protection of personnel, environment and the product. HIV
pseudovirus stocks in a scale from 140 ml to 1000 ml have been produced on the
automated system. Parallel manual production of HIV pseudoviruses and comparisons
(bridging assays) confirmed that the automated produced pseudoviruses were of
equivalent quality as those produced manually. In addition, the automated method 
was fully validated according to Good Clinical Laboratory Practice (GCLP)
guidelines, including the validation parameters accuracy, precision, robustness
and specificity.
CONCLUSIONS: An automated HIV pseudovirus production system has been successfully
established. It allows the high quality production of HIV pseudoviruses under
GCLP conditions. In its present form, the installed module enables the production
of 1000 ml of virus-containing cell culture supernatant per week. Thus, this
novel automation facilitates standardized large-scale productions of HIV
pseudoviruses for ongoing and upcoming HIV vaccine trials.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051715 
PMCID: PMC3531445
PMID: 23300558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

