
1. J Infect Dis. 2013 May 1;207(9):1389-96. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jit030. Epub 2013
Jan 16.

Quantitative assessment of altered rectal mucosal permeability due to rectally
applied nonoxynol-9, biopsy, and simulated intercourse.

Fuchs EJ(1), Grohskopf LA, Lee LA, Bakshi RP, Hendrix CW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287-5554, USA. ejfuchs@jhmi.edu

BACKGROUND: Microbicide toxicity may reduce the efficacy of topical preexposure
prophylaxis for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) transmission. Noninvasive
quantitative measures of microbicide toxicity would usefully inform microbicide
development.
METHODS: Ten subjects received 3 one-time interventions: 5 mL of Normosol-R fluid
alone (negative control), 5 mL of 2% nonoxynol-9 (N-9) gel, and 5 mL of
Normosol-R with coital simulation and sigmoidoscopic biopsy (CS + BX). Each dose 
of N-9 and Normosol-R contained 500 ÂµCi of (99m)technetium-diethylene triamine
pentaacetic acid. Plasma and urine radioactivity was assessed over 24 hours.
RESULTS: The plasma radioisotope concentration peaked 1 hour after N-9 dosing.
The mean maximum radioisotope concentration after N-9 receipt was 12.0 times (95%
confidence interval [CI], 6.8-21.0) and 8.4 times (95% CI, 5.2-13.5) the mean
concentration after Normosol-R control receipt and CS + BX receipt, respectively;
paired differences persisted for 24 hours. After N-9 dosing, the urine isotope
level was 3.6 times (95% CI, 1.1-11.4) the level observed 8 hours after
Normosol-R control receipt and 4.0 times (95% CI, 1.4-11.4) the level observed 4 
hours after CS + BX receipt. Permeability after CS + BX receipt was greater than 
that after Normosol-R control receipt in 0-2-hour urine specimens only (mean
permeability, 2.4; 95% CI, 1.0-5.8) but was not greater in blood.
CONCLUSIONS: Plasma sampling after rectal radioisotope administration provided
quantitative estimates of altered mucosal permeability after chemical and
mechanical stresses. Permeability testing may provide a useful noninvasive
adjunct to assess the mucosal effects of candidate microbicides. Clinical Trials 
Registration. NCT00389311.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jit030 
PMCID: PMC3693591
PMID: 23325915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

