
1. Prev Vet Med. 2013 Mar 1;108(4):276-84. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2012.11.004.
Epub 2013 Jan 16.

Estimation of the reproduction ratio (R(0)) of bluetongue based on serological
field data and comparison with other BTV transmission models.

Santman-Berends IM(1), Stegeman JA, Vellema P, van Schaik G.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Health Service, PO Box 9, 7400AA Deventer, The Netherlands.
i.berends@gddeventer.com

Bluetongue virus serotype 8 (BTV-8) emerged in north-western Europe in 2006. In
2007, one of the affected countries (the Netherlands) implemented a sentinel
network in dairy cattle. This data offered the opportunity to estimate
transmission parameters. From our field data, the number of secondary infected
cows that became infected by one infectious cow in a completely susceptible herd 
through the bites of infectious Culicoides i.e. the basic reproduction ratio
(R(0)) was calculated. With that information, the R(0) of BTV-8 was estimated
using an formulae of a general SIR model. In 2007, the BTV-8 epidemic started in 
the south and spread northwards in the following months. R(0) could be estimated 
for 197 herds in which transmission occurred. The median R(0) was 2.3 and the
mean R(0) was 3.7 (5th percentile=1.8; 95th percentile=11.0). In the northern
region where BTV-8 transmission occurred later in the season with less favorable 
conditions for transmission, R(0) remained significantly lower than in the south.
Our model differed from earlier published more theoretical models on BTV-8
transmission because we estimated transmission from serological field data while 
other models used literature based assumptions for the majority of the parameters
included in their models. Although there were many differences between our model 
and the previously developed more theoretical models, the results showed similar 
ranges of R(0) for BTV-8. The reasons for the similarity between the results may 
be that, although the part of the vector was not included with parameters in our 
model, the transmission based on serological field data in cows represented both 
BTV-8 transmission influenced by cows and by its vector, Culicoides. Furthermore,
in the earlier models the assumptions made on the vector part, although derived
from literature, probably gave a good representation of the true behavior of the 
Culicoides species that were associated with BTV-8 transmission in north-western 
Europe.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2012.11.004 
PMID: 23332969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

