
1. Cell Signal. 2013 May;25(5):1037-43. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.01.019. Epub
2013 Jan 30.

Epigenetic repression of miR-132 expression by the hepatitis B virus x protein in
hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma.

Wei X(1), Tan C, Tang C, Ren G, Xiang T, Qiu Z, Liu R, Wu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.

Hepatitis B virus x (HBx) protein is involved in the initiation and progression
of HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by regulating host protein-coding
genes. However, the role of HBx in the epigenetic repression of miRNAs, which
play important roles in gene regulation during hepatocarcinogenesis, remains
largely unknown. In this study, the expression of miR-132 in HCC cells,
HBV-related HCC tissues, and serum were determined using real-time PCR. The level
of DNA methylation on the promoter of miR-132 was examined using
methylation-specific PCR (MSP). MiR-132 was functionally characterized in HCC
cells with transiently altered miR-132 expression. HBx-induced DNA
hypermethylation of the promoter of miR-132 was found to be more prevalent in
HBx-expressing HepG2 cells than in control cells. Consistently, MiR-132
expression was also more frequently down-regulated in HBV-related HCC tissues
than in adjacent noncancerous hepatic tissues and had a significant inverse
correlation with HBx expression in HBV-related HCCs. Serum miR-132 levels were
found to be significantly correlated with levels in tumor tissue. Finally,
proliferation and colony formation of HCC cells were found to be suppressed by
miR-132-mediated inhibition of the Akt-signaling pathway in miR132 transfected
cells. Our study has demonstrated the epigenetic repression of miR-132 expression
through DNA methylation induced by HBx. This work provides novel mechanistic
insights into HBV-mediated hepatocarcinogenesis and suggests that miR-132 may be 
a promising biochemical marker and may have therapeutic applications in
HBV-related HCC.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.01.019 
PMID: 23376496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

