
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e50627. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050627. Epub 2013 Jan 28.

Silencing of the host factor eIF(iso)4E gene confers plum pox virus resistance in
plum.

Wang X(1), Kohalmi SE, Svircev A, Wang A, Sanfa√ßon H, Tian L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

Plum pox virus (PPV) causes the most economically-devastating viral disease in
Prunus species. Unfortunately, few natural resistance genes are available for the
control of PPV. Recessive resistance to some potyviruses is associated with
mutations of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) or its isoform
eIF(iso)4E. In this study, we used an RNA silencing approach to manipulate the
expression of eIF4E and eIF(iso)4E towards the development of PPV resistance in
Prunus species. The eIF4E and eIF(iso)4E genes were cloned from plum (Prunus
domestica L.). The sequence identity between plum eIF4E and eIF(iso)4E coding
sequences is 60.4% at the nucleotide level and 52.1% at the amino acid level.
Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis showed that these two genes have a similar
expression pattern in different tissues. Transgenes allowing the production of
hairpin RNAs of plum eIF4E or eIF(iso)4E were introduced into plum via
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. Gene expression analysis confirmed
specific reduced expression of eIF4E or eIF(iso)4E in the transgenic lines and
this was associated with the accumulation of siRNAs. Transgenic plants were
challenged with PPV-D strain and resistance was evaluated by measuring the
concentration of viral RNA. Eighty-two percent of the eIF(iso)4E silenced
transgenic plants were resistant to PPV, while eIF4E silenced transgenic plants
did not show PPV resistance. Physical interaction between PPV-VPg and plum
eIF(iso)4E was confirmed. In contrast, no PPV-VPg/eIF4E interaction was observed.
These results indicate that eIF(iso)4E is involved in PPV infection in plum, and 
that silencing of eIF(iso)4E expression can lead to PPV resistance in Prunus
species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050627 
PMCID: PMC3557289
PMID: 23382802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

