
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54416. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054416. Epub 2013 Jan 28.

Application and validation of case-finding algorithms for identifying individuals
with human immunodeficiency virus from administrative data in British Columbia,
Canada.

Nosyk B(1), Colley G, Yip B, Chan K, Heath K, Lima VD, Gilbert M, Hogg RS,
Harrigan PR, Montaner JS; STOP HIV/AIDS Study Group.

Collaborators: Barrios R, Daly P, Gustafson R, Kendall PR, Panessa C, South N.

Author information: 
(1)BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To define a population-level cohort of individuals infected with the
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the province of British Columbia from
available registries and administrative datasets using a validated case-finding
algorithm.
METHODS: Individuals were identified for possible cohort inclusion from the BC
Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS (CfE) drug treatment program (antiretroviral
therapy) and laboratory testing datasets (plasma viral load (pVL) and CD4
diagnostic test results), the BC Centre for Disease Control (CDC) provincial HIV 
surveillance database (positive HIV tests), as well as databases held by the BC
Ministry of Health (MoH); the Discharge Abstract Database (hospitalizations), the
Medical Services Plan (physician billing) and PharmaNet databases (additional
HIV-related medications). A validated case-finding algorithm was applied to
distinguish true HIV cases from those likely to have been misclassified. The
sensitivity of the algorithms was assessed as the proportion of confirmed cases
(those with records in the CfE, CDC and MoH databases) positively identified by
each algorithm. A priori hypotheses were generated and tested to verify excluded 
cases.
RESULTS: A total of 25,673 individuals were identified as having at least one
HIV-related health record. Among 9,454 unconfirmed cases, the selected
case-finding algorithm identified 849 individuals believed to be HIV-positive.
The sensitivity of this algorithm among confirmed cases was 88%. Those excluded
from the cohort were more likely to be female (44.4% vs. 22.5%; p<0.01), had a
lower mortality rate (2.18 per 100 person years (100PY) vs. 3.14/100PY; p<0.01), 
and had lower median rates of health service utilization (days of medications
dispensed: 9745/100PY vs. 10266/100PY; p<0.01; days of inpatient care: 29/100PY
vs. 98/100PY; p<0.01; physician billings: 602/100PY vs. 2,056/100PY; p<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The application of validated case-finding algorithms and subsequent 
hypothesis testing provided a strong framework for defining a population-level
cohort of HIV infected people in BC using administrative databases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054416 
PMCID: PMC3557280
PMID: 23382898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

