
1. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2013 Feb;108(1):36-40.

Detection of replication-defective hepatitis A virus based on the correlation
between real-time polymerase chain reaction and ELISA in situ results.

Costa AM(1), Amado LA, Paula VS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Desenvolvimento Tecnológico em Virologia, Instituto Oswaldo
Cruz, Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil.

ELISA in situ can be used to titrate hepatitis A virus (HAV) particles and
real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) has been shown to be a fast method
to quantify the HAV genome. Precise quantification of viral concentration is
necessary to distinguish between infectious and non-infectious particles. The
purpose of this study was to compare cell culture and RT-PCR quantification
results and determine whether HAV genome quantification can be correlated with
infectivity. For this purpose, three stocks of undiluted, five-fold diluted and
10-fold diluted HAV were prepared to inoculate cells in a 96-well plate.
Monolayers were then incubated for seven, 10 and 14 days and the correlation
between the ELISA in situ and RT-PCR results was evaluated. At 10 days
post-incubation, the highest viral load was observed in all stocks of HAV via
RT-PCR (10(5) copies/mL) (p = 0.0002), while ELISA revealed the highest quantity 
of particles after 14 days (optical density = 0.24, p < 0.001). At seven days
post-infection, there was a significant statistical correlation between the
results of the two methods, indicating equivalents titres of particles and HAV
genome during this period of infection. The results reported here indicate that
the duration of growth of HAV in cell culture must be taken into account to
correlate genome quantification with infectivity.

DOI: 10.1590/s0074-02762013000100006 
PMCID: PMC3974324
PMID: 23440112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

