
1. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2013 Jun;26(6):389-99. doi: 10.1093/protein/gzt010. Epub
2013 Mar 10.

Thermodynamic stability of domain III from the envelope protein of flaviviruses
and its improvement by molecular design.

Zidane N(1), Dussart P, Bremand L, Villani ME, Bedouelle H.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Prevention and Therapy of Human Diseases, Department of
Infection and Epidemiology, Institut Pasteur, Rue du Dr. Roux, F-75015 Paris,
France.

The Flavivirus genus includes widespread and severe human pathogens like the four
serotypes of dengue virus (DENV1 to DENV4), yellow fever virus, Japanese
encephalitis virus and West Nile virus. Domain III (ED3) of the viral envelope
protein interacts with cell receptors and contains epitopes recognized by virus
neutralizing antibodies. Its structural, antigenic and immunogenic properties
have been thoroughly studied contrary to its physico-chemical properties. Here,
the ED3 domains of the above pathogenic flaviviruses were produced in the
periplasm of Escherichia coli. Their thermodynamic stabilities were measured and 
compared in experiments of unfolding equilibriums, induced with chemicals or heat
and monitored through protein fluorescence. A designed ED3 domain, with the
consensus sequence of DENV strains from all serotypes, was highly stable. The low
stability of the ED3 domain from DENV3 was increased by three changes of residues
in the protein core without affecting its reactivity towards DENV-infected human 
serums. Additional changes showed that the stability of ED3 varied with the DENV3
genotype. The T(m) of ED3 was higher than 69°C for all the tested viruses and
reached 86°C for the consensus ED3. The latter, deprived of its disulfide bond by
mutations, was predominantly unfolded at 20°C. These results will help better
understand and design the properties of ED3 for its use as diagnostic, vaccine or
therapeutic tools.

DOI: 10.1093/protein/gzt010 
PMID: 23479674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

