
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 3;288(18):13110-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.444554. Epub 2013
Mar 15.

Minute time scale prolyl isomerization governs antibody recognition of an
intrinsically disordered immunodominant epitope.

Fassolari M(1), Chemes LB, Gallo M, Smal C, Sánchez IE, de Prat-Gay G.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Structure-Function and Engineering Laboratory, Fundación Instituto
Leloir, IIBBA-CONICET, Patricias Argentinas 435, 1405 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Conformational rearrangements in antibody·antigen recognition are essential
events where kinetic discrimination of isomers expands the universe of
combinations. We investigated the interaction mechanism of a monoclonal antibody,
M1, raised against E7 from human papillomavirus, a prototypic viral oncoprotein
and a model intrinsically disordered protein. The mapped 12-amino acid
immunodominant epitope lies within a "hinge" region between the N-terminal
intrinsically disordered and the C-terminal globular domains. Kinetic experiments
show that despite being within an intrinsically disordered region, the hinge E7
epitope has at least two populations separated by a high energy barrier. Nuclear 
magnetic resonance traced the origin of this barrier to a very slow (t(1/2)∼4
min) trans-cis prolyl isomerization event involving changes in secondary
structure. The less populated (10%) cis isomer is the binding-competent species, 
thus requiring the 90% of molecules in the trans configuration to isomerize
before binding. The association rate for the cis isomer approaches 6 × 10(7)
M(-1) s(-1), a ceiling for antigen-antibody interactions. Mutagenesis experiments
showed that Pro-41 in E7Ep was required for both binding and isomerization. After
a slow postbinding unimolecular rearrangement, a consolidated complex with K(D) =
1.2 × 10(-7) M is reached. Our results suggest that presentation of this viral
epitope by the antigen-presenting cells would have to be "locked" in the cis
conformation, in opposition to the most populated trans isomer, in order to
select the specific antibody clone that goes through affinity and kinetic
maturation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.444554 
PMCID: PMC3642352
PMID: 23504368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

