
1. Viruses. 2013 Mar 18;5(3):858-72. doi: 10.3390/v5030858.

Deregulation of epigenetic mechanisms by the hepatitis B virus X protein in
hepatocarcinogenesis.

Andrisani OM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Science and Center for Cancer Research, Purdue
University West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. andrisao@purdue.edu

This review focuses on the significance of deregulation of epigenetic mechanisms 
by the hepatitis B virus (HBV) X protein in hepatocarcinogenesis and HBV
replication. Epigenetic mechanisms, DNA methylation, and specific histone
modifications, e.g., trimethylation of H3 on lysine-27 or lysine-4, maintain
'cellular memory' by silencing expression of lineage-inducing factors in stem
cells and conversely, of pluripotency factors in differentiated cells. The X
protein has been reported to induce expression of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs),
likely promoting epigenetic changes during hepatocarcinogenesis. Furthermore, in 
cellular and animal models of X-mediated oncogenic transformation, protein levels
of chromatin modifying proteins Suz12 and Znf198 are down-regulated. Suz12 is
essential for the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) mediating the repressive
trimethylation of H3 on lysine-27 (H3K27me3). Znf198, stabilizes the
LSD1-CoREST-HDAC complex that removes, via lysine demethylase1 (LSD1), the
activating trimethylation of H3 on lysine-4 (H3K4me3). Down-regulation of Suz12
also occurs in liver tumors of woodchucks chronically infected by woodchuck
hepatitis virus, an animal model recapitulating HBV-mediated hepatocarcinogenesis
in humans. Significantly, subgroups of HBV-induced liver cancer re-express
hepatoblast and fetal markers, and imprinted genes, suggesting hepatocyte
reprogramming during oncogenic transformation. Lastly, down-regulation of Suz12
and Znf198 enhances HBV replication. Collectively, these observations suggest
deregulation of epigenetic mechanisms by HBV X protein influences both the viral 
cycle and the host cell.

DOI: 10.3390/v5030858 
PMCID: PMC3705300
PMID: 23507839  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

