
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59161. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059161. Epub 2013 Mar 12.

Prospective validation of a prognostic model for respiratory syncytial virus
bronchiolitis in late preterm infants: a multicenter birth cohort study.

Blanken MO(1), Koffijberg H, Nibbelke EE, Rovers MM, Bont L; Dutch RSV Neonatal
Network.

Collaborators: Breukels MA, Pestman-Harms MM, Westra M, Adeel AO, Verhallen JT,
van Zoest JG, Rijk-van Gent H, ten Tusscher GW, Hoffman-van der Meer AE, Smeets
CC, van Leer EH, van Kempen AA, van Gent R, Miedema CJ, de Groot EP, Essink AH,
Blok GJ, Smal JC, Oele MJ, van der Meer-Kappelle LH, Hubregtse T, Jacobs MA,
Faber TE, de Winter JP, van Kessel AC, Rosias PP, Schellekens SL, Liem KD, Sprij 
AJ, van Rijssel PW, von Rosenstiel IA, Blankman EI, Rehbock JJ, Massar CG,
Geesing CL, Heikens WF, Bakker JC, Dolman KM, Kreijen-Meinesz JH,
Smit-Kleinlugtenbeld EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department Pediatric Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University Medical
Center, Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to update and validate a prediction rule for
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) hospitalization in preterm infants 33-35 weeks 
gestational age (WGA).
STUDY DESIGN: The RISK study consisted of 2 multicenter prospective birth cohorts
in 41 hospitals. Risk factors were assessed at birth among healthy preterm
infants 33-35 WGA. All hospitalizations for respiratory tract infection were
screened for proven RSV infection by immunofluorescence or polymerase chain
reaction. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was used to update an
existing prediction model in the derivation cohort (n = 1,227). In the validation
cohort (n = 1,194), predicted versus actual RSV hospitalization rates were
compared to determine validity of the model.
RESULTS: RSV hospitalization risk in both cohorts was comparable (5.7% versus
4.9%). In the derivation cohort, a prediction rule to determine probability of
RSV hospitalization was developed using 4 predictors: family atopy (OR 1.9;
95%CI, 1.1-3.2), birth period (OR 2.6; 1.6-4.2), breastfeeding (OR 1.7; 1.0-2.7) 
and siblings or daycare attendance (OR 4.7; 1.7-13.1). The model showed good
discrimination (c-statistic 0.703; 0.64-0.76, 0.702 after bootstrapping).
External validation showed good discrimination and calibration (c-statistic
0.678; 0.61-0.74).
CONCLUSIONS: Our prospectively validated prediction rule identifies infants at
increased RSV hospitalization risk, who may benefit from targeted preventive
interventions. This prediction rule can facilitate country-specific,
cost-effective use of RSV prophylaxis in late preterm infants.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059161 
PMCID: PMC3595233
PMID: 23554987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

