
1. J Virol. 2013 Jun;87(12):6911-24. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02943-12. Epub 2013 Apr 17.

Interleukin-22 reduces lung inflammation during influenza A virus infection and
protects against secondary bacterial infection.

Ivanov S(1), Renneson J, Fontaine J, Barthelemy A, Paget C, Fernandez EM, Blanc
F, De Trez C, Van Maele L, Dumoutier L, Huerre MR, Eberl G, Si-Tahar M, Gosset P,
Renauld JC, Sirard JC, Faveeuw C, Trottein F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur de Lille, Centre d'Infection et d'Immunité de Lille, Lille,
France.

Interleukin-22 (IL-22) has redundant, protective, or pathogenic functions during 
autoimmune, inflammatory, and infectious diseases. Here, we addressed the
potential role of IL-22 in host defense and pathogenesis during lethal and
sublethal respiratory H3N2 influenza A virus (IAV) infection. We show that IL-22,
as well as factors associated with its production, are expressed in the lung
tissue during the early phases of IAV infection. Our data indicate that retinoic 
acid receptor-related orphan receptor-γt (RORγt)-positive αβ and γδ T cells, as
well as innate lymphoid cells, expressed enhanced Il22 transcripts as early as 2 
days postinfection. During lethal or sublethal IAV infections, endogenous IL-22
played no role in the control of IAV replication and in the development of the
IAV-specific CD8(+) T cell response. During lethal infection, where wild-type
(WT) mice succumbed to severe pneumonia, the lack of IL-22 did not accelerate or 
delay IAV-associated pathogenesis and animal death. In stark contrast, during
sublethal IAV infection, IL-22-deficient animals had enhanced lung injuries and
showed a lower airway epithelial integrity relative to WT littermates. Of
importance, the protective effect of endogenous IL-22 in pulmonary damages was
associated with a more controlled secondary bacterial infection. Indeed, after
challenge with Streptococcus pneumoniae, IAV-experienced Il22(-/-) animals were
more susceptible than WT controls in terms of survival rate and bacterial burden 
in the lungs. Together, IL-22 plays no major role during lethal influenza but is 
beneficial during sublethal H3N2 IAV infection, where it limits lung inflammation
and subsequent bacterial superinfections.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02943-12 
PMCID: PMC3676141
PMID: 23596287  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

