
1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(5):e1003338. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003338. Epub 2013 May
2.

Phosphorylation of CDK9 at Ser175 enhances HIV transcription and is a marker of
activated P-TEFb in CD4(+) T lymphocytes.

Mbonye UR(1), Gokulrangan G, Datt M, Dobrowolski C, Cooper M, Chance MR, Karn J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

The HIV transactivator protein, Tat, enhances HIV transcription by recruiting
P-TEFb from the inactive 7SK snRNP complex and directing it to proviral
elongation complexes. To test the hypothesis that T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling
induces critical post-translational modifications leading to enhanced
interactions between P-TEFb and Tat, we employed affinity purification-tandem
mass spectrometry to analyze P-TEFb. TCR or phorbal ester (PMA) signaling
strongly induced phosphorylation of the CDK9 kinase at Ser175. Molecular modeling
studies based on the Tat/P-TEFb X-ray structure suggested that pSer175
strengthens the intermolecular interactions between CDK9 and Tat. Mutations in
Ser175 confirm that this residue could mediate critical interactions with Tat and
with the bromodomain protein BRD4. The S175A mutation reduced CDK9 interactions
with Tat by an average of 1.7-fold, but also completely blocked CDK9 association 
with BRD4. The phosphomimetic S175D mutation modestly enhanced Tat association
with CDK9 while causing a 2-fold disruption in BRD4 association with CDK9. Since 
BRD4 is unable to compete for binding to CDK9 carrying S175A, expression of CDK9 
carrying the S175A mutation in latently infected cells resulted in a robust
Tat-dependent reactivation of the provirus. Similarly, the stable knockdown of
BRD4 led to a strong enhancement of proviral expression. Immunoprecipitation
experiments show that CDK9 phosphorylated at Ser175 is excluded from the 7SK RNP 
complex. Immunofluorescence and flow cytometry studies carried out using a
phospho-Ser175-specific antibody demonstrated that Ser175 phosphorylation occurs 
during TCR activation of primary resting memory CD4+ T cells together with
upregulation of the Cyclin T1 regulatory subunit of P-TEFb, and Thr186
phosphorylation of CDK9. We conclude that the phosphorylation of CDK9 at Ser175
plays a critical role in altering the competitive binding of Tat and BRD4 to
P-TEFb and provides an informative molecular marker for the identification of the
transcriptionally active form of P-TEFb.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003338 
PMCID: PMC3642088
PMID: 23658523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

