
1. BMC Microbiol. 2013 May 10;13:104. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-13-104.

Effect of avian influenza A H5N1 infection on the expression of microRNA-141 in
human respiratory epithelial cells.

Lam WY(1), Yeung AC, Ngai KL, Li MS, To KF, Tsui SK, Chan PK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, New Territories, Hong Kong Special Administration Region, Shatin,
People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Avian influenza remains a serious threat to human health. The
consequence of human infection varies markedly among different subtypes of avian 
influenza viruses. In addition to viral factors, the difference in host cellular 
response is likely to play a critical role. This study aims at elucidating how
avian influenza infection perturbs the host's miRNA regulatory pathways that may 
lead to adverse pathological events, such as cytokine storm, using the miRNA
microarray approach.
RESULTS: The results showed that dysregulation of miRNA expression was mainly
observed in highly pathogenic avian influenza A H5N1 infection. We found that
miR-21*, miR-100*, miR-141, miR-574-3p, miR-1274a and miR1274b were
differentially expressed in response to influenza A virus infection.
Interestingly, we demonstrated that miR-141, which was more highly induced by
H5N1 than by H1N1 (p < 0.05), had an ability to suppress the expression of a
cytokine - transforming growth factor (TGF)-β2. This was supported by the
observation that the inhibitory effect could be reversed by antagomiR-141.
CONCLUSIONS: Since TGF-β2 is an important cytokine that can act as both an
immunosuppressive agent and a potent proinflammatory molecule through its ability
to attract and regulate inflammatory molecules, and previous report showed that
only seasonal influenza H1N1 (but not the other avian influenza subtypes) could
induce a persistent expression of TGF-β2, we speculate that the modulation of
TGF-β2 expression by different influenza subtypes via miR-141 might be a critical
step for determining the outcome of either normal or excessive inflammation
progression.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-13-104 
PMCID: PMC3663648
PMID: 23663545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

