
1. J Biomech. 2013 Jun 21;46(10):1670-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2013.04.006. Epub
2013 May 9.

The effect of sterilization on the dynamic mechanical properties of paired rabbit
cortical bone.

Russell N(1), Rives A, Bertollo N, Pelletier MH, Walsh WR.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical and Orthopaedic Research Laboratories, Prince of Wales Clinical
School, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. n.russell@unsw.edu.au

The optimal sterilization method for load bearing allografts remains a clinical
concern. Recently, supercritical carbon dioxide (SCCO2) treatments have been
shown to be capable of terminally sterilizing a range of bacteria and viruses,
while preserving the static mechanical properties of cortical bone. This study
evaluated the effect of SCCO2 treatment compared with two doses of gamma
irradiation, on clinically relevant dynamic mechanical properties of cortical
bone. Quasi-static testing was also performed to compare the impairment of
treatment. Whole paired adult rabbit humeri were dissected and randomly assigned 
into either SCCO2 Control, SCCO2 Additive or gamma irradiation at 10 or 25kGy
treatment groups. The bones were treated and mechanically tested in three-point
bending, with the lefts acting as controls for the treated rights. Maximum load, 
energy to failure and stiffness were evaluated from static tests. The number of
cycles to failure was determined for fatigue at 6-60% of the ultimate load. This 
study found that SCCO2 treatment with or without additive did not alter static or
dynamic mechanical properties. Gamma irradiation had a deleterious dose dependent
effect, with statistically significant (p<0.05) reductions in all static
mechanical parameters at 25kGy. This effect was increased in fatigue with
statistically significant decreases in both the 10 and 25kGy dose groups. This
study highlights the expediency of SCCO2 treatment for load bearing bone
allograft processing as terminal sterilization can be achieved while maintaining 
both the quasi-static and dynamic mechanical properties of the graft.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2013.04.006 
PMID: 23664240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

