
1. Transgenic Res. 2013 Dec;22(6):1191-205. doi: 10.1007/s11248-013-9721-8. Epub
2013 Jun 8.

Transgenic accumulation of a defective cucumber mosaic virus (CMV) replicase
derived double stranded RNA modulates plant defence against CMV strains O and Y
in potato.

Ntui VO(1), Kynet K, Azadi P, Khan RS, Chin DP, Nakamura I, Mii M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Cell Technology, Graduate School of Horticulture, Chiba
University, 648 Matsudo, Matsudo, Chiba, 271-8510, Japan, ntuival@yahoo.com.

Cucumber mosaic virus is an important plant pathogen with a broad host range
encompassing many plant species. This study demonstrates the production of
transgenic potato lines exhibiting complete resistance to cucumber mosaic virus
strain O and Y by post transcriptional gene silencing. Two constructs were used, 
one, pEKH2IN2CMVai, contains inverted repeat of 1,138 bp fragment of a defective 
CMV replicase gene derived from RNA2 of cucumber mosaic virus strain O (CMV-O),
while the other, TRV-based VIGS vector (pTRV2CMVai), contains the same fragment
of the replicase gene, but without inverted repeat. These constructs were used to
produce transgenic potato lines of cultivar 'Danshaku', a susceptible genotype to
CMV. Transgenic lines derived from pEKH2IN2CMVai accumulated small interfering
RNA (siRNA) before and after virus challenge, whereas those derived from
pTRV2CMVai showed siRNA expression after virus challenge. When transgenic lines
were challenged with CMV-O or CMV-Y, four lines exhibited complete (100%)
resistance to both strains, whereas the other lines had high levels of
resistance. Infectivity of CMV-O was lower than that of CMV-Y in the highly
resistant plants. There were no significant differences with regard to resistance
between plants derived from pEKH2IN2CMVai and those obtained from pTRV2CMVai. The
presence of CMV-specific siRNA in the resistant phenotypes indicates that the
resistance was acquired through RNA silencing.

DOI: 10.1007/s11248-013-9721-8 
PMID: 23748933  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

