
1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013;991:15-26. doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-6331-9_2.

The driving force of alpha-synuclein insertion and amyloid channel formation in
the plasma membrane of neural cells: key role of ganglioside- and
cholesterol-binding domains.

Fantini J(1), Yahi N.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté des Sciences Saint-Jérôme, Aix Marseille University, Marseille,
France. jacques.fantini@univ-amu.fr

Alpha-synuclein is an amyloidogenic protein expressed in brain and involved in
Parkinson's disease. It is an intrinsically disordered protein that folds into an
alpha-helix rich structure upon binding to membrane lipids. Helical
alpha-synuclein can penetrate the membrane and form oligomeric ion channels,
thereby eliciting important perturbations of calcium fluxes. The study of
alpha-synuclein/lipid interactions had shed some light on the molecular
mechanisms controlling the targeting and functional insertion of alpha-synuclein 
in neural membranes. The protein first interacts with a cell surface
glycosphingolipid (ganglioside GM3 in astrocytes or GM1 in neurons). This induces
the folding of an alpha-helical domain containing a tilted peptide (67-78) that
displays a high affinity for cholesterol. The driving force of the insertion
process is the formation of a transient OH-Pi hydrogen bond between the
ganglioside and the aromatic ring of the alpha-synuclein residue Tyr-39. The
higher polarity of Tyr-39 vs. the lipid bilayer forces the protein to cross the
membrane, allowing the tilted peptide to reach cholesterol. The tilted geometry
of the cholesterol/alpha-synuclein complex facilitates the formation of an
oligomeric channel. Interestingly, this functional cooperation between
glycosphingolipids and cholesterol presents a striking analogy with virus fusion 
mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1007/978-94-007-6331-9_2 
PMID: 23775688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

