
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jul 16;110(29):12036-41. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1307157110. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

BET proteins promote efficient murine leukemia virus integration at transcription
start sites.

Sharma A(1), Larue RC, Plumb MR, Malani N, Male F, Slaughter A, Kessl JJ,
Shkriabai N, Coward E, Aiyer SS, Green PL, Wu L, Roth MJ, Bushman FD,
Kvaratskhelia M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Retrovirus Research, College of Pharmacy, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

The selection of chromosomal targets for retroviral integration varies markedly, 
tracking with the genus of the retrovirus, suggestive of targeting by binding to 
cellular factors. Î³-Retroviral murine leukemia virus (MLV) DNA integration into
the host genome is favored at transcription start sites, but the underlying
mechanism for this preference is unknown. Here, we have identified bromodomain
and extraterminal domain (BET) proteins (Brd2, -3, -4) as cellular-binding
partners of MLV integrase. We show that purified recombinant Brd4(1-720) binds
with high affinity to MLV integrase and stimulates correct concerted integration 
in vitro. JQ-1, a small molecule that selectively inhibits interactions of BET
proteins with modified histone sites impaired MLV but not HIV-1 integration in
infected cells. Comparison of the distribution of BET protein-binding sites
analyzed using ChIP-Seq data and MLV-integration sites revealed significant
positive correlations. Antagonism of BET proteins, via JQ-1 treatment or RNA
interference, reduced MLV-integration frequencies at transcription start sites.
These findings elucidate the importance of BET proteins for MLV integration
efficiency and targeting and provide a route to developing safer MLV-based
vectors for human gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1307157110 
PMCID: PMC3718171
PMID: 23818621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

