
1. Brain Behav Immun. 2013 Nov;34:31-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2013.06.009. Epub 2013
Jul 8.

Childhood socioeconomic status, telomere length, and susceptibility to upper
respiratory infection.

Cohen S(1), Janicki-Deverts D, Turner RB, Marsland AL, Casselbrant ML, Li-Korotky
HS, Epel ES, Doyle WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213,
USA. Electronic address: scohen@andrew.cmu.edu.

Low socioeconomic status (SES) during childhood and adolescence has been found to
predict greater susceptibility to common cold viruses in adults. Here, we test
whether low childhood SES is associated with shorter leukocyte telomere length in
adulthood, and whether telomere length mediates the association between childhood
SES and susceptibility to acute upper respiratory disease in adulthood. At
baseline, 196 healthy volunteers reported whether they currently owned their home
and, for each year of their childhood, whether their parents owned the family
home. Volunteers also had blood drawn for assessment of specific antibody to the 
challenge virus, and for CD8+ CD28- T-lymphocyte telomere length (in a subset,
n=135). They were subsequently quarantined in a hotel, exposed to a virus
(rhinovirus [RV] 39) that causes a common cold and followed for infection and
illness (clinical cold) over five post-exposure days. Lower childhood SES as
measured by fewer years of parental home ownership was associated with shorter
adult CD8+ CD28- telomere length and with an increased probability of developing 
infection and clinical illness when exposed to a common cold virus in adulthood. 
These associations were independent of adult SES, age, sex, race, body mass,
neuroticism, and childhood family characteristics. Associations with infections
and colds were also independent of pre-challenge viral-specific antibody and
season. Further analyses do not support mediating roles for smoking, alcohol
consumption or physical activity but suggest that CD8+ CD28- cell telomere length
may act as a partial mediator of the associations between childhood SES and
infection and childhood SES and colds.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2013.06.009 
PMCID: PMC3795973
PMID: 23845919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

