
1. J Infect Dis. 2013 Oct 15;208(8):1212-20. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jit308. Epub 2013
Jul 12.

The distribution of HIV DNA and RNA in cell subsets differs in gut and blood of
HIV-positive patients on ART: implications for viral persistence.

Yukl SA(1), Shergill AK, Ho T, Killian M, Girling V, Epling L, Li P, Wong LK,
Crouch P, Deeks SG, Havlir DV, McQuaid K, Sinclair E, Wong JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, San Francisco VA Medical Center and University of
California, San Francisco.

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 2013 Oct 15;208(8):1189-93.

Even with optimal antiretroviral therapy, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
persists in plasma, blood cells, and tissues. To develop new therapies, it is
essential to know what cell types harbor residual HIV. We measured levels of HIV 
DNA, RNA, and RNA/DNA ratios in sorted subsets of CD4+ T cells (CCR7+,
transitional memory, and effector memory) and non-CD4+ T leukocytes from blood,
ileum, and rectum of 8 ART-suppressed HIV-positive subjects. Levels of HIV
DNA/million cells in CCR7+ and effector memory cells were higher in the ileum
than blood. When normalized by cell frequencies, most HIV DNA and RNA in the
blood were found in CCR7+ cells, whereas in both gut sites, most HIV DNA and RNA 
were found in effector memory cells. HIV DNA and RNA were observed in non-CD4+ T 
leukocytes at low levels, particularly in gut tissues. Compared to the blood, the
ileum had higher levels of HIV DNA and RNA in both CD4+ T cells and non-CD4+ T
leukocytes, whereas the rectum had higher HIV DNA levels in both cell types but
lower RNA levels in CD4+ T cells. Future studies should determine whether
different mechanisms allow HIV to persist in these distinct reservoirs, and the
degree to which different therapies can affect each reservoir.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jit308 
PMCID: PMC3778964
PMID: 23852128  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

