
1. Virus Res. 2013 Oct;177(1):1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2013.07.001. Epub 2013
Jul 11.

Infectious salmon anaemia virus nuclear export protein is encoded by a spliced
gene product of genomic segment 7.

Ramly RB(1), Olsen CM, Braaen S, Rimstad E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Safety and Infection Biology, Norwegian School of
Veterinary Science, Postboks 8146 Dep, N-0033 Oslo, Norway.

Infectious salmon anaemia virus (ISAV) is an orthomyxovirus causing anaemia and
circulatory disease with high mortality in farmed Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). 
Orthomyxoviruses are unusual as RNA viruses as they replicate in the nucleus and 
some viral transcripts undergo splicing. The nuclear replication necessitates a
tightly controlled nuclear import and export of viral proteins. From ISAV genomic
segment 7 two known mRNAs are transcribed; one collinear with the genomic
segment, coding for the non-structural protein, and one spliced transcript,
S7ORF2, coding for a protein with unknown function. Here we report initial
functional analysis of the S7ORF2 protein. The results indicate that S7ORF2
protein gradually accumulates in the host cell during virus replication cycle,
locates predominantly in the cytoplasm and is a part of purified virus particles.
Trapping of S7ORF2 in the nucleus was obtained by treatment with leptomycin B, an
inhibitor of CRM1-mediated nuclear export, indicating that S7ORF2 use CRM1 for
the nuclear exit. Immunofluorescent staining of cells over-expressing both S7ORF2
and matrix protein (M) showed co-localization in the nucleus. However, S7ORF2
protein was found to interact with both the viral nucleoprotein (NP) and M
proteins in ISAV infected cells as well as in purified viral particles. These
results indicate that the S7ORF2 could be called the ISAV nuclear export protein,
ISAV/NEP.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2013.07.001 
PMID: 23850870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

