
1. J Med Virol. 1990 Jul;31(3):215-21.

Typing of hepatitis B virus genomes by a simplified polymerase chain reaction.

Norder H(1), Hammas B, Magnius LO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Bacteriological Laboratory, Stockholm,
Sweden.

The amplification of hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA sequences in sera for molecular 
epidemiology of HBV is an important application of the polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) with regard to HBV. To simplify the PCR for this purpose, the optimal
concentrations of SDS and detergents for carrying out the proteinase K digestion 
and the amplification of DNA by Taq polymerase were evaluated. It was found that 
by using 1% deoxycholic acid as detergent for the proteinase K step and diluting 
the digest 10 times before carrying out the PCR, the phenol extraction of DNA
became superfluous. The sensitivity of this procedure equalled that of PCR after 
phenol extraction on comparable amounts of serum. Four pairs of oligonucleotide
primers were compared for amplification of HBV DNA sequences in 48 sera
previously subtyped with respect to hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), and in
eight sera with different genotypes of HBV, representing the subtypes of HBsAg P1
to P8, defined at an international meeting [Courouc√©-Pauty et al.: "HBs Antigen
Subtypes." Basel: Karger, 1976]. Two primer pairs, selected from conserved
regions in the X and S genes of HBV, gave a positive PCR with sera harbouring all
the eight different strains of HBV, resulting in DNA fragments consistent with
the sizes deduced from genome sequence data. Two other primer pairs were selected
in order to discriminate genotypes with regard to differences between d/y and w/r
strains.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.1890310308 
PMID: 2391509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

