
1. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2013 Aug 12;368(1626):20120499. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2012.0499. Print 2013 Sep 19.

Comprehensive analysis of endogenous bornavirus-like elements in eukaryote
genomes.

Horie M(1), Kobayashi Y, Suzuki Y, Tomonaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene,
University of Freiburg, , 79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Bornaviruses are the only animal RNA viruses that establish a persistent
infection in their host cell nucleus. Studies of bornaviruses have provided
unique information about viral replication strategies and virus-host
interactions. Although bornaviruses do not integrate into the host genome during 
their replication cycle, we and others have recently reported that there are DNA 
sequences derived from the mRNAs of ancient bornaviruses in the genomes of
vertebrates, including humans, and these have been designated endogenous
borna-like (EBL) elements. Therefore, bornaviruses have been interacting with
their hosts as driving forces in the evolution of host genomes in a previously
unexpected way. Studies of EBL elements have provided new models for virology,
evolutionary biology and general cell biology. In this review, we summarize the
data on EBL elements including what we have newly identified in eukaryotes
genomes, and discuss the biological significance of EBL elements, with a focus on
EBL nucleoprotein elements in mammalian genomes. Surprisingly, EBL elements were 
detected in the genomes of invertebrates, suggesting that the host range of
bornaviruses may be much wider than previously thought. We also review our new
data on non-retroviral integration of Borna disease virus.

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2012.0499 
PMCID: PMC3758186
PMID: 23938751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

