
1. Int J STD AIDS. 2014 Mar;25(4):253-60. doi: 10.1177/0956462413499010. Epub 2013
Aug 6.

The impact of comprehensive prevention of mother-to-child HIV transmission in
Dehong prefecture, Yunnan province, 2005-2010: a hard-hit area by HIV in Southern
China.

Shan D(1), Sun J, Khoshnood K, Fu J, Duan S, Jiang C, Zhang Y, Bulterys M, Guo H,
Sante M, Liu H, Hu Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for AIDS/STD Control and Prevention, China CDC, Beijing,
China.

The burden of HIV/AIDS in China has been disproportionately concentrated in
Yunnan Province, where in Dehong prefecture, the HIV prevalence rate among
pregnant women reached 1.3% in 2003, a rate that is indicative of a generalized
epidemic. Since then, there have been extensive efforts to expand prevention to
reduce mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) in this high-prevalence region. These 
intensified MTCT reduction efforts and their impact on MTCT are yet to be
examined. We described the changes in access to HIV screening and antiretroviral 
therapy (ART) among pregnant women from 2005 to 2010 in this region and the
corresponding reduction in MTCT over this period. Between 2005 and 2010, the
annual number of pregnant women screened for HIV in Dehong Prefecture more than
doubled. The proportion of pregnant women screened for HIV rose from an estimated
15-20% to 99.8%, and the proportion of HIV-infected pregnant women receiving ART 
increased from 63% to 99%. We estimate that the proportion of children born with 
HIV to HIV-infected mothers decreased from 15.4% to 7.2% over this period.
Sustained low-level MTCT following comprehensive interventions in this region is 
encouraging. Over the last decade, comprehensive PMTCT efforts, coupled with
national and local government policy support in this area appear to be effective.

DOI: 10.1177/0956462413499010 
PMID: 23970653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

