
1. Biosecur Bioterror. 2013 Sep;11 Suppl 1:S17-24. doi: 10.1089/bsp.2012.0080.

Historical perspective on agroterrorism: lessons learned from 1945 to 2012.

Keremidis H, Appel B, Menrath A, Tomuzia K, Normark M, Roffey R, Knutsson R.

This article presents a historical perspective on agroterrorism cases from 1945
until 2012. The threat groups and perpetrators associated with bio- and
agroterrorism are clustered into several groups: apocalyptic sects, lone wolves, 
political groups, and religious groups. We used open-source information, and 4
biological agroterrorism cases are described: (1) in 1952, Mau Mau poisoned
cattle in Kenya by using a plant toxin from the African milk bush plant; (2) in
1985, the USDA claimed that Mexican contract workers were involved in
deliberately spreading screwworm (Cochliomyia hominivorax) among livestock; (3)
in 2000, Palestinian media reported that Israeli settlers released sewer water
into Palestinian agricultural fields; and (4) in 2011, a person was sentenced to 
prison after threatening US and UK livestock with the deliberate spread of
foot-and-mouth disease virus. All 4 cases can be assigned to political groups.
These cases have not attracted much attention in literature nor in the public
media, and the credibility of the sources of information varies. We concluded
that agroterrorism has not been a problem during the period studied. Lessons
learned from the few cases have generated awareness about the fact that
nontypical biological weapons and non-high-risk agents, such as African milk
bush, screwworm, and sewer water, have been used by attackers to influence local 
decision makers. This review will be useful in improving future preparedness
planning and developing countermeasures.

DOI: 10.1089/bsp.2012.0080 
PMID: 23971803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

