
1. ISRN Pharmacol. 2013 Jul 30;2013:849412. doi: 10.1155/2013/849412. eCollection
2013.

Some Haematological and Biochemical Investigations on Duck Virus Hepatitis
following Administration of Glycyrrhizin.

Okda FA(1), Yassein S, Ahmed AR, Soufy H, Nasr SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology and Animal Diseases, National Research Center,
El-Behouse Street, Dokki, P.O. Box 12622, Giza, Egypt.

The present study aimed to investigate the protective effect of glycyrrhizin
(locally isolated and purified from licorice root) against duck hepatitis virus
through the assessment of some hematological and biochemical parameters. One
hundred and sixty white Pekin ducklings-one day old-were randomly divided into
four equal groups. Group (1) was kept as normal control. Group (2) was inoculated
I/P with 10 mg glycyrrhizin/kg BW, three times per week for four weeks. Group (3)
was inoculated I/M with 0.5 ml of live attenuated DHV vaccine. Group (4) was
inoculated with both glycyrrhizin (10 mg/kg BW I/P, three times per week for four
weeks) and live attenuated DHV vaccine (0.5 ml, I/M). Then, all groups of
treatment were challenged using virulent DHV except for 20 ducklings from the
normal control group which were continued to be kept as negative control. The
results revealed that duck hepatitis virus (DHV) caused macrocytic hypochromic
anemia, leukopenia, hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia, hyperglycemia,
hypercholesterolemia, and marked elevation of liver enzymes and renal parameters.
In conclusion, glycyrrhizin injected alone or in combination with DHV vaccine
protected or ameliorated the deteriorating effects induced by DHV vaccine and/or 
duck hepatitis virus infection by improvement of erythrogram and leukogram, as
well as liver and kidney functions.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/849412 
PMCID: PMC3747462
PMID: 23984091 

