
1. Biotechnol Prog. 2013 Nov-Dec;29(6):1573-86. doi: 10.1002/btpr.1807. Epub 2013
Sep 30.

Near-infrared spectroscopic evaluation of lyophilized viral vaccine formulations.

Hansen L(1), Beer TD, Pieters S, Heyden YV, Vervaet C, Remon JP, Montenez JP,
Daoussi R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Process Analytical Technology, Ghent University, 
Harelbekestraat 72, 9000, Ghent, Belgium.

This article examines the applicability of near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) to
evaluate the virus state in a freeze-dried live, attenuated vaccine formulation. 
Therefore, this formulation was freeze-dried using different virus volumes and
after applying different pre-freeze-drying virus treatments (resulting in
different virus states): (i) as used in the commercial formulation; (ii) without 
antigen (placebo); (iii) concentrated via a centrifugal filter device; and (iv)
stressed by 96 h exposure to room temperature. Each freeze-dried product was
measured directly after freeze-drying with NIR spectroscopy and the spectra were 
analyzed using principal component analysis (PCA). Herewith, two NIR spectral
regions were evaluated: (i) the 7300-4000 cm(-1) region containing the amide A/II
band which might reflect information on the coated proteins of freeze-dried live,
attenuated viruses; and (ii) the C-H vibration overtone regions (10,000-7500 and 
6340-5500 cm(-1) ) which might supply information on the lipid layer surrounding 
the freeze-dried live, attenuated viruses. The different pre-freeze-drying
treated live, attenuated virus formulations (different virus states and virus
volumes) resulted in different clusters in the scores plots resulting from the
PCA of the collected NIR spectra. Secondly, partial least squares discriminant
analysis models (PLS-DA) were developed and evaluated, allowing classification of
the freeze-dried formulations according to virus pretreatment. The results of
this study suggest the applicability of NIR spectroscopy for evaluating live,
attenuated vaccine formulations with respect to their virus pretreatment and
virus volume.

Â© 2013 American Institute of Chemical Engineers.

DOI: 10.1002/btpr.1807 
PMID: 24014045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

