
1. Luminescence. 2014 Sep;29(6):591-7. doi: 10.1002/bio.2587. Epub 2013 Oct 18.

A rapid and sensitive method based on magnetic beads for the detection of
hepatitis B virus surface antigen in human serum.

Ren ZQ(1), Liu TC, Hou JY, Chen MJ, Chen ZH, Lin GF, Wu YS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Antibody Engineering, School of Biotechnology, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, 510515, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.

Current clinically assays, such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and
chemiluminescence immunoassay, for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) are
inferior in terms of either sensitivity and accuracy or rapid and high-throughput
analysis. A novel assay based on magnetic beads and time-resolved
fluoroimmunoassay was developed for the quantitative determination of HBsAg in
human serum. HBsAg was captured using two types of anti-HBsAg monoclonal
antibodies (B028, S015) immobilized on to magnetic beads and detected using
europium-labeled anti-HBsAg polyclonal detection antibody. Finally, the assay
yielded a high sensitivity (0.02 IU/mL) and a wide dynamic range (0.02-700 IU/mL)
for HBsAg when performed under optimal conditions. Satisfactory accuracy,
recovery and specificity were also demonstrated. The intra- and interassay
coefficients of variation were 4.7-8.7% and 3.8-7.5%, respectively. The
performance of this assay was further assessed against a well-established
commercial chemiluminescence immunoassay kit with 399 clinical serum samples. It 
was revealed that the test results for the two methods were in good correlation
(Y = 1.182X - 0.017, R = 0.989). In the current study, we demonstrated that this 
novel time-resolved fluoroimmunoassay could be used: as a highly sensitive,
automated and high-throughput immunoassay for the diagnosis of acute or chronic
hepatitis B virus infection; for the screening of blood or organ donors; and for 
the surveillance of persons at risk of acquiring or transmitting hepatitis B
virus.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/bio.2587 
PMID: 24136927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

