
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2014 Apr;33(4):587-90. doi:
10.1007/s10096-013-1988-4. Epub 2013 Oct 19.

Clinical presentation of Puumala virus infections in southern Austria in the peak
year 2012.

Fabian E(1), Valentin T, Hoenigl M, Krause R, Zollner-Schwetz I.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Medical University of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 15, 8036, Graz, Austria.

In 2012, an extraordinary rise in Puumala infections causing nephropathia
epidemica (NE) was observed in southern Austria. We investigated differences in
epidemiology, clinical presentation, laboratory results, treatment parameters,
and outcome between patients in 2012 and previous years (2007-2011). All patients
diagnosed with Puumala virus infections between 2007 and 2012 using a point of
care Puumala IgM test at the microbiology laboratory, Department of Internal
Medicine, Medical University of Graz, were included. In 2012, 42 and in 2007-2011
a total of 40 patients were diagnosed with NE. In 2007-2011, patients presented
more frequently with arthromyalgias (25% vs 7%, p = 0.027), while lower back pain
was reported more often in 2012 (21% vs 5%, p = 0.029). Other symptoms occurred
at the same rate. In 2012, patients were diagnosed significantly faster (time
from first contact with a physician to diagnosis 1.3 ± 0.2 vs 2.7 ± 0.4 days, p =
0.01). Significantly fewer patients required haemodialysis in 2012 (2.4% vs 20%, 
p = 0.01). There were no significant differences in laboratory parameters between
the two groups. In the peak year 2012, patients were diagnosed faster and fewer
patients required haemodialysis possibly because of the earlier diagnosis and
earlier onset of therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-013-1988-4 
PMID: 24136061  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

