
1. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2014 Mar;38(3):604-10. doi: 10.1111/acer.12282. Epub 2013
Oct 17.

HIV-1 and alcohol: interactions in the central nervous system.

Silverstein PS(1), Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology , School of Pharmacy, University of
Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri.

Comment in
    Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2014 Mar;38(3):624-5.

The use of alcohol has been associated with both an increased risk of acquisition
of HIV-1 infection and an increased rate of disease progression among those
already infected by the virus. The potential for alcohol to exacerbate the
effects of HIV infection is especially important in the central nervous system
(CNS) because this area is vulnerable to the combined effects of alcohol and HIV 
infection. The effects of alcohol on glial cells are mediated through receptors
such as Toll-like receptor 4 and N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor. This causes the
activation of signaling molecules such as interleukin-1 receptor-associated
kinase and various members of the P38 mitogen-activated protein kinase family and
subsequent activation of transcription factors such as nuclear factor-kappa beta 
and activator protein 1. The eventual outcome is an increase in pro-inflammatory 
cytokine production by glial cells. Alcohol also induces higher levels of NADPH
oxidase in glial cells, which leads to an increased production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS). Viral invasion of the CNS occurs early after infection, and HIV
proteins have also been demonstrated to increase levels of pro-inflammatory
cytokines and ROS in glial cells through activation of some of the same pathways 
activated by alcohol. Both cell culture systems and animal models have
demonstrated that concomitant exposure to alcohol and HIV/HIV proteins results in
increased levels of expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as
interleukin-1 beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha, along with increased levels
of oxidative stress. Clinical studies also suggest that alcohol exacerbates the
CNS effects of HIV-1 infection. This review focuses on the mechanisms by which
alcohol causes increased CNS damage in HIV-1 infection.

Copyright Â© 2013 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

DOI: 10.1111/acer.12282 
PMCID: PMC4086304
PMID: 24134164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

