
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Nov 27;135(47):17793-803. doi: 10.1021/ja406907h. Epub 2013
Nov 13.

Magic angle spinning NMR reveals sequence-dependent structural plasticity,
dynamics, and the spacer peptide 1 conformation in HIV-1 capsid protein
assemblies.

Han Y(1), Hou G, Suiter CL, Ahn J, Byeon IJ, Lipton AS, Burton S, Hung I, Gor'kov
PL, Gan Z, Brey W, Rice D, Gronenborn AM, Polenova T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware , Newark,
Delaware 19716, United States.

A key stage in HIV-1 maturation toward an infectious virion requires sequential
proteolytic cleavage of the Gag polyprotein leading to the formation of a conical
capsid core that encloses the viral RNA genome and a small complement of
proteins. The final step of this process involves severing the SP1 peptide from
the CA-SP1 maturation intermediate, which triggers the condensation of the CA
protein into the capsid shell. The details of the overall mechanism, including
the conformation of the SP1 peptide in CA-SP1, are still under intense debate. In
this report, we examine tubular assemblies of CA and the CA-SP1 maturation
intermediate using magic angle spinning (MAS) NMR spectroscopy. At magnetic
fields of 19.9 T and above, outstanding quality 2D and 3D MAS NMR spectra were
obtained for tubular CA and CA-SP1 assemblies, permitting resonance assignments
for subsequent detailed structural characterization. Dipolar- and scalar-based
correlation experiments unequivocally indicate that SP1 peptide is in a random
coil conformation and mobile in the assembled CA-SP1. Analysis of two CA protein 
sequence variants reveals that, unexpectedly, the conformations of the SP1 tail, 
the functionally important CypA loop, and the loop preceding helix 8 are
modulated by residue variations at distal sites. These findings provide support
for the role of SP1 as a trigger of the disassembly of the immature CA capsid for
its subsequent de novo reassembly into mature cores and establish the importance 
of sequence-dependent conformational plasticity in CA assembly.

DOI: 10.1021/ja406907h 
PMCID: PMC3928671
PMID: 24164646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

