
1. Eur J Pediatr. 2014 Dec;173(12):1615-8. doi: 10.1007/s00431-013-2181-6. Epub 2013
Oct 30.

The emergence of CD20-/CD19- tumor cells after rituximab therapy for Epstein-Barr
virus-associated post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder complicated with
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.

Yamamoto N(1), Nishimura N, Takeuchi M, Ito T, Yokozaki H, Hirase S, Kubokawa I, 
Mori T, Yanai T, Hayakawa A, Takeshima Y, Nishio H, Matsuo M, Imadome K, Iijima
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1
Kusunoki-Cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, 650-0017, Japan.

Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) is a well-recognized
aggressive disease commonly associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection
after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Although rituximab (RTX) is
incorporated into the first-line therapy for EBV-PTLD patients, the outcome of
the clinically overt disease is still not optimal mainly due to the regrowth of
tumor cells. The proliferation of CD20-/CD19+ tumor cells is increasingly
reported in RTX-treated EBV-PTLD patients, whereas the emergence of CD20-/CD19-
tumor cells is barely recognized. Here, we report a fatal case of an 18-year-old 
patient who developed EBV-PTLD after allogeneic HSCT for anaplastic large-cell
lymphoma. On day 60 after HSCT, the patient developed abdominal pain, watery
diarrhea, and low-grade fever. Colon biopsy revealed the proliferation of
CD20+/CD19+/EBV-encoded RNA (EBER)+ tumor cells, and an increase of EBV DNA was
detected in peripheral blood (PB). He was treated with RTX for EBV-PTLD and was
cleared of EBV DNA in PB. However, he manifested high-grade fever, pancytopenia, 
and elevated soluble interleukin-2 receptor with a prominent hemophagocytosis in 
bone marrow aspirates and was treated with etoposide for hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) complication. He then developed EBV DNA positivity in
PB and finally died of Bacteroides fragilis sepsis subsequent to bloody stool and
ileus on day 163. Autopsy revealed erosion and bleeding in the whole colon with
the proliferation of CD20-/CD19-/EBER+ tumor cells. Immunohistochemical analysis 
uncovered the CD3-/CD56-/CD79a+/CD79b+ B-cell origin of tumor cells. This case
clinically demonstrates the removal of both CD20 and CD19 antigens from EBER+ B
cells in an RTX-treated EBV-PTLD patient with HLH complication.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-013-2181-6 
PMID: 24169729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

