
1. J Clin Invest. 1986 Mar;77(3):958-63.

Virus-induced alterations in cyclic adenosine monophosphate generation in hamster
islets of Langerhans.

Rayfield EJ, Kelly KJ.

Inoculation of golden Syrian hamsters with Venezuelan encephalitis (VE) virus
results in a sustained diminution in glucose-stimulated insulin release that is
correctable by cyclic (c) AMP analogs and phosphodiesterase inhibitors. This
suggested the importance of directly measuring cAMP content in VE-infected and
control islets in response to insulin secretagogues. The basal cAMP content of
VE-infected islets (0.14 +/- 0.02 pmol/micrograms islet DNA) was approximately
half that of control islets (0.27 +/- 0.02 pmol/micrograms islet DNA) (P less
than 0.05). In the presence of 10 microM glucagon (and 3 mM glucose), the rate of
cAMP generation in VE-infected islets was only half that of control islets. With 
10 mM alpha-ketoisocaproic acid, the rates of cAMP generation were
indistinguishable between control and experimental groups. In response to 20 mM
glucose and 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX) (a phosphodiesterase inhibitor),
cAMP generation in VE-infected islets was 81% (NS) of the control rate. When a
more specific phosphodiesterase inhibitor, RO 20-1724, was used with 20 mM
glucose, cAMP generation in the infected islets was only 44% (P less than 0.001) 
of the control value. Insulin secretion over the perifusion period paralleled the
cAMP levels. In the presence of 10 mM alpha-ketoisocaproic acid, there was no
difference in insulin secretion between VE-infected and control islets, while
there was a statistically significant (P less than 0.05) difference with 10
microM glucagon or 20 mM glucose (in 1 mM RO 20-1724). These data point to a
defect in the cAMP generation system of VE-infected islets, although additional
factors involved in insulin secretion may also be impaired by the virus.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI112396 
PMCID: PMC423492
PMID: 2419363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

