
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2013 Nov 6;106(3):197-206. doi: 10.3354/dao02660.

Isolation and identification of a lethal rhabdovirus from farmed rice field eels 
Monopterus albus.

Ou T(1), Zhu RL, Chen ZY, Zhang QY.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Graduate University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, PR China.

We provide the first description of a virus responsible for a systemic
hemorrhagic disease causing high mortality in farmed rice field eels Monopterus
albus in China. Typical signs exhibited by the diseased fish were extensive
hemorrhages in the skin and viscera and some neurological signs, such as loss of 
equilibrium and disorganized swimming. Histopathological examination revealed
various degrees of necrosis within the spleen and liver. Virus isolation was
attempted from visceral tissues of diseased fish by inoculation on 6 fish cell
lines. Typical cytopathic effects (CPE) were produced in bluegill fry (BF2)
cells, so this cell line was chosen for further isolation and propagation of the 
virus. Electron microscopy observation showed that the negative stained viral
particles had the characteristic bullet shape of rhabdoviruses and an estimated
size of 60 Ã— 120 nm. We therefore tentatively refer to this virus as Monopterus
albus rhabdovirus (MoARV). Molecular characterization of MoARV, including
sequence analysis of the nucleoprotein (N), phosphoprotein (P), and glycoprotein 
(G) genes, revealed 94.5 to 97.3% amino acid similarity to that of Siniperca
chuatsi rhabdovirus. Phylogenetic analysis based on the amino acid sequences of N
and G proteins indicated that MoARV should be a member of the genus
Vesiculovirus. Koch's postulates were fulfilled by infecting healthy rice field
eels with MoARV, which produced an acute infection. RT-PCR analysis demonstrated 
that MoARV RNA could be detected in both naturally and experimentally infected
fish. The data suggest that MoARV was the causative pathogen of the disease.

DOI: 10.3354/dao02660 
PMID: 24191997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

