
1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 19;8(11):e80684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080684.
eCollection 2013.

Genome variations associated with viral susceptibility and calcification in
Emiliania huxleyi.

Kegel JU(1), John U, Valentin K, Frickenhaus S.

Author information: 
(1)Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar- and Marine Research Bremerhaven,
Bremerhaven, Germany.

Emiliania huxleyi, a key player in the global carbon cycle is one of the best
studied coccolithophores with respect to biogeochemical cycles, climatology, and 
host-virus interactions. Strains of E. huxleyi show phenotypic plasticity
regarding growth behaviour, light-response, calcification, acidification, and
virus susceptibility. This phenomenon is likely a consequence of genomic
differences, or transcriptomic responses, to environmental conditions or threats 
such as viral infections. We used an E. huxleyi genome microarray based on the
sequenced strain CCMP1516 (reference strain) to perform comparative genomic
hybridizations (CGH) of 16 E. huxleyi strains of different geographic origin. We 
investigated the genomic diversity and plasticity and focused on the
identification of genes related to virus susceptibility and coccolith production 
(calcification). Among the tested 31940 gene models a core genome of 14628 genes 
was identified by hybridization among 16 E. huxleyi strains. 224 probes were
characterized as specific for the reference strain CCMP1516. Compared to the
sequenced E. huxleyi strain CCMP1516 variation in gene content of up to 30
percent among strains was observed. Comparison of core and non-core transcripts
sets in terms of annotated functions reveals a broad, almost equal functional
coverage over all KOG-categories of both transcript sets within the whole
annotated genome. Within the variable (non-core) genome we identified genes
associated with virus susceptibility and calcification. Genes associated with
virus susceptibility include a Bax inhibitor-1 protein, three LRR receptor-like
protein kinases, and mitogen-activated protein kinase. Our list of transcripts
associated with coccolith production will stimulate further research, e.g. by
genetic manipulation. In particular, the V-type proton ATPase 16 kDa proteolipid 
subunit is proposed to be a plausible target gene for further calcification
studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080684 
PMCID: PMC3834299
PMID: 24260453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

