
1. Vet J. 2013 Dec;198(3):631-7. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2013.09.017. Epub 2013 Sep 20.

Associations between bovine viral diarrhoea virus (BVDV) seropositivity and
performance indicators in beef suckler and dairy herds.

Gates MC(1), Humphry RW, Gunn GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology Group, Centre for Immunity, Infection and Evolution, School of
Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Ashworth Laboratories, Kings
Buildings, West Mains Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JT, UK. Electronic address:
m.c.gates@sms.ed.ac.uk.

Data from 255 Scottish beef suckler herds and 189 Scottish dairy herds surveyed
as part of national bovine viral diarrhoea virus (BVDV) prevalence studies from
October 2006 to May 2008 were examined retrospectively to determine the
relationship between serological status and key performance indicators derived
from national cattle movement records. On average, calf mortality rates were 1.35
percentage points higher in seropositive beef herds and 3.05 percentage points
higher in seropositive dairy herds than in negative control herds. Seropositive
beef herds were also more likely to show increases in calf mortality rates and
culling rates between successive years. There were no discernible effects of BVDV
on the average age at first calving or calving interval for either herd type.
Accompanying questionnaire data revealed that only 27% of beef farmers and 25% of
dairy farmers with seropositive herds thought their cattle were affected by BVDV,
which suggests that the clinical effects of exposure may be inapparent under
field conditions or masked by other causes of reproductive failure and culling.
Beef farmers were significantly more likely to perceive a problem when their herd
experienced acute changes in calf mortality rates, culling rates, and calving
intervals between successive years. However, only 35% of these perceived positive
herds were actually seropositive for BVDV. These findings emphasize both the
importance of routinely screening herds to determine their true infection status 
and the potential for using national cattle movement records to identify herds
that may be experiencing outbreaks from BVDV or other infectious diseases that
impact herd performance.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2013.09.017 
PMID: 24269107  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

