
1. Sci China Life Sci. 2013 Dec;56(12):1107-12. doi: 10.1007/s11427-013-4570-5. Epub
2013 Dec 5.

TinII intron, an enhancer to affect the function of the cytoplasmic male
sterility related gene T in Brassica juncea.

Jin Z(1), Wu L, Cao J, Chen Z, Pei Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, 030006, China.

The T gene, which was cloned from the mitochondria of tumorous stem mustard
(Brassica juncea var. tumida), is a cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS)-related gene
that can produce two transcripts, T1170 and T1243. The latter is transcribed with
the uncleaved intron TinII. In our previous study, transgenic Arabidopsis
thaliana plants over-expressing the T1243 transcript (OE-T1243) showed a severe
male-sterile phenotype, whereas OE-T1170 plants did not. However, the functional 
mechanism of the T gene in B. Juncea remained unknown. In this study, microscopic
analyses of paraffin sections of anthers confirmed that OE-T1243 plants did not
produce normal pollen, whereas OE-T1170 plants did. We analyzed the transcription
of 15 anther development-related genes and found that transcript levels of
nozzle/sporocyteless and barely any meristem 1 and 2 were markedly lower in
OE-T1243 plants than those in wild type, while the transcript levels of these
genes in OE-T1170 plants were unchanged. To investigate the potential roles of
TinII, we inserted the TinII sequence upstream of a minimal region (-60) of the
cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter fused to the 5' end of the Î²-glucuronidase 
(GUS) reporter gene. Analysis of the transgenic plants suggested that TinII acted
as an enhancer to significantly increase GUS expression. The potential action
mechanism is that the TinII intron acts as an enhancer to affect the function of 
the CMS-related gene T.

DOI: 10.1007/s11427-013-4570-5 
PMID: 24302291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

