
1. Zhonghua Shi Yan He Lin Chuang Bing Du Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Jun;27(3):212-4.

[Value of high risk human papilloma virus detection in screening and diagnosing
cervical lesion in littoral of Zhejiang province].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu J(1), Lin Y, Ruan HB, Zhang XH, Yang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Wenling First People's Hospital, Zhejiang, China. zjzhujun888@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To analyse the infection of high-risk human papiliomavirus (HR-HPV) in
cervical lesion wome, and evaluate the significance of high-risk human
pappilomavirus detection by hybrid capture II (HV-II) in screening and diagnosing
cervical lesion, especially high grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN).
METHODS: A series of 1130 patients of cervical lesion were preliminarily
diagnosed by cervical cytological examination, HR-HPV detection by HC-II ,
colposcopy and biopsy under the colposcopy between June 2009 and December 2008,
including 212 CIN I and (or) condyloma (CIN I/HPV I), 442 CIN II/III, 28 invasive
cervical cancer. cervical cytological examination is by thin prep liquid-based
cytology test(TCT),and HR-HPV detection is by HC-II.
RESULTS: In 1130 cases the positive of HR-HPV was 65.84% (744/1130). Unusual
cytology result were 862 cases, with 356 ASCUS, 84 ASCH, 216 LSIL, 184HSIL and 22
cancer. The number of biopsy > or = CINI/HPVI was 682, positive rate of HR-HPV
was 78.59% (536/682). In screening CIN II or above, sensitivity, specificity, PPV
and NPV of TCT were 88.94%, 32.73%, 48.49%, 80.60%, of HR-HPV DNA detectiort by
HC-II were 90.21%, 51.82%, 57.14%, 88.14%, and of HR-HPV detection combined with 
cytology were 97.45%, 22.42%, 47.22%, 92.50%.
CONCLUSION: The infection rate of HR-HPV in cervical lesions is higher in each
age group. Infection rate of HR-HPV is ascending with serious degree of cervical 
lesion. HR-HPV detection by HC- II is an important method in screening cervical
lesion. HR-HPV detection is a viable option in the management of women with ASCUS
and LSIL of TCT, with higher sensitivity and NPV.


PMID: 24319961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

