
1. J Gen Virol. 2014 Apr;95(Pt 4):779-786. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.061721-0. Epub 2014
Jan 6.

The PB2 E627K mutation contributes to the high polymerase activity and enhanced
replication of H7N9 influenza virus.

Zhang H(1), Li X(2), Guo J(2), Li L(1), Chang C(1), Li Y(2), Bian C(3), Xu K(1), 
Chen H(2), Sun B(3)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology & Immunology, Institut Pasteur of
Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150001, PR China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, PR China.

Human infection by H7N9 influenza virus was first identified in China in March
2013. As of 12 August 2013, a total of 135 documented cases with 44 fatalities
had been reported. Genetic and laboratory analyses of the novel H7N9 viruses
isolated from patients indicate that these viruses possess several polymerase
gene mutations previously associated with human adaptation and potential pandemic
capabilities. However, the function of these mutations in the emergence and
pathogenicity of the viruses is not well known. In this study, we demonstrate
that the PB2 E627K mutation, which occurs in over 70â€Š% of the H7N9 patient
isolates, promotes the replication of H7N9 virus by enhancing PB2 polymerase
activity and enhances virulence in mice. Our results show the PB2 E627K mutation 
has played an important role in this H7N9 influenza outbreak and in the
pathogenicity of the H7N9 virus.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.061721-0 
PMID: 24394699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

