
1. Virology. 2014 Jan 20;449:109-19. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.11.006. Epub 2013 Nov
28.

Direct evidence for intracellular anterograde co-transport of M-PMV Gag and Env
on microtubules.

Pereira LE(1), Clark J(2), Grznarova P(3), Wen X(4), LaCasse R(5), Ruml T(6),
Spearman P(7), Hunter E(8).

Author information: 
(1)Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National Primate Research Center, 954 Gatewood
Road NE, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA. Electronic address: vvg3@cdc.gov.
(2)Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National Primate Research Center, 954 Gatewood
Road NE, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA. Electronic address: jrainey@emory.edu.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Institute of Chemical Technology,
Technicka 3, 166 28 Prague, Czech Republic. Electronic address:
Petra.Grznarova@vscht.cz.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, 2015 Uppergate 
Drive, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. Electronic address: xiaoyun.wen@emory.edu.
(5)Laboratory of Persistent Viral Diseases, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Hamilton, MT, USA. Electronic
address: RLaCasse@niaid.nih.gov.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Institute of Chemical Technology,
Technicka 3, 166 28 Prague, Czech Republic. Electronic address:
Tomas.Ruml@vscht.cz.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, 2015 Uppergate 
Drive, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. Electronic address: paul.spearman@emory.edu.
(8)Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National Primate Research Center, 954 Gatewood
Road NE, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA. Electronic address: eric.hunter2@emory.edu.

The intracellular transport of Mason-Pfizer monkey virus (M-PMV) assembled
capsids from the pericentriolar region to the plasma membrane (PM) requires
trafficking of envelope glycoprotein (Env) to the assembly site via the recycling
endosome. However, it is unclear if Env-containing vesicles play a direct role in
trafficking capsids to the PM. Using live cell microscopy, we demonstrate, for
the first time, anterograde co-transport of Gag and Env. Nocodazole disruption of
microtubules had differential effects on Gag and Env trafficking, with
pulse-chase assays showing a delayed release of Env-deficient virions. Particle
tracking demonstrated an initial loss of linear movement of GFP-tagged capsids
and mCherry-tagged Env, followed by renewed movement of Gag but not Env at 4h
post-treatment. Thus, while delayed capsid trafficking can occur in the absence
of microtubules, efficient anterograde transport of capsids appears to be
mediated by microtubule-associated Env-containing vesicles.

Â© 2013 Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.11.006 
PMCID: PMC4219502
PMID: 24418544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

