
1. J Gen Virol. 2014 Apr;95(Pt 4):874-882. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.062059-0. Epub 2014
Jan 17.

The ORF4b-encoded accessory proteins of Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus and two related bat coronaviruses localize to the nucleus and inhibit
innate immune signalling.

Matthews KL(1), Coleman CM(1), van der Meer Y(2), Snijder EJ(2), Frieman MB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland at
Baltimore, 685 West Baltimore St, Room 380, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(2)Molecular Virology Laboratory, Department of Medical Microbiology, Leiden
University Medical Center, PO Box 9600, 2300RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

The recently emerged Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), a
betacoronavirus, is associated with severe pneumonia and renal failure. The
environmental origin of MERS-CoV is as yet unknown; however, its genome sequence 
is closely related to those of two bat coronaviruses, named BtCoV-HKU4 and
BtCoV-HKU5, which were derived from Chinese bat samples. A hallmark of highly
pathogenic respiratory viruses is their ability to evade the innate immune
response of the host. CoV accessory proteins, for example those from severe acute
respiratory syndrome CoV (SARS-CoV), have been shown to block innate antiviral
signalling pathways. MERS-CoV, similar to SARS-CoV, has been shown to inhibit
type I IFN induction in a variety of cell types in vitro. We therefore
hypothesized that MERS-CoV and the phylogenetically related BtCoV-HKU4 and
BtCoV-HKU5 may encode proteins with similar capabilities. In this study, we have 
demonstrated that the ORF4b-encoded accessory protein (p4b) of MERS-CoV,
BtCoV-HKU4 and BtCoV-HKU5 may indeed facilitate innate immune evasion by
inhibiting the type I IFN and NF-ÎºB signalling pathways. We also analysed the
subcellular localization of p4b from MERS-CoV, BtCoV-HKU4 and BtCoV-HKU5 and
demonstrated that all are localized to the nucleus.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.062059-0 
PMCID: PMC3973478
PMID: 24443473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

