
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Mar;37(1):122-30. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.01.012.
Epub 2014 Jan 24.

Gene expression of pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins in rock bream (Oplegnathus
fasciatus) infected with megalocytivirus (family Iridoviridae).

Jung MH(1), Nikapitiya C(2), Song JY(3), Lee JH(4), Lee J(5), Oh MJ(2), Jung
SJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aqualife Medicine, Chonnam National University, Chonnam 550-749,
Republic of Korea; Aquatic Animal Hospital, Chonnam National University, Chonnam 
550-749, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Aqualife Medicine, Chonnam National University, Chonnam 550-749,
Republic of Korea.
(3)National Fisheries Research and Development Institute, Busan, Republic of
Korea.
(4)Genetic & Breeding Research Center, National Fisheries Research & Development 
Institute, Geoje 656-842, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Marine Life Sciences, School of Marine Biomedical Sciences, Jeju
National University, Jeju Self-Governing Province 690-756, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Aqualife Medicine, Chonnam National University, Chonnam 550-749,
Republic of Korea; Aquatic Animal Hospital, Chonnam National University, Chonnam 
550-749, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: sungju@chonnam.ac.kr.

Viruses belonging to the genus Megalocytivirus cause diseases in marine fishes
primarily in East and Southeast Asian countries. Rock bream iridovirus (RBIV),
which is a member of the Megalocytivirus genus, causes severe mass mortalities in
rock beam (Oplegnathus fasciatus) in Korea. In this study, we assessed
apoptosis-related gene expression patterns in Megalocytivirus-infected rock bream
in high mortality and low mortality conditions to determine important
apoptosis-related factors, which may affect fish survival/or death. In the high
mortality group (100% mortality at 15 dpi), significantly high levels of
perforin, granzyme, Fas ligand and caspase 9 expression (5.6-, 10.2-, 13.4- and
4.2-fold, respectively) were observed in the kidney at 8 dpi. Basal expression
levels of Fas and caspase 3 were observed at 8 d (1.5-/0.7-fold) and 10 dpi
(1.3-/0.6-fold), accompanied by heavy viral loads (8.12 × 10(6)-2.21 × 10(7)/μl).
Inhibitor of apoptosis 1 (IAP1) was highly expressed (3.5- to 4.8-fold) at 1 d
and 4 dpi; however, IAP1 was reduced when fish died at 8 d and 10 dpi (1.7- to
2.0-fold), which was not significantly different from that of the control group. 
A similar expression pattern was observed in the low mortality group (18%
expected mortality at 30 dpi), which was characterised by a delayed lower
magnitude of expression with lower viral loads than the high mortality group.
Perforin, granzyme and Fas ligand expression was significantly higher in the low 
mortality group than in the control group at several sampling points until
30 dpi. Fas and caspases 8, 9 and 3 expression levels showed no statistical
significance until 30 dpi. In the low mortality group, significantly higher IAP1 
expression compared with the control was observed at 10 d (2.2-fold), 20 d
(3.6-fold) and 22 dpi (2.0-fold). In summary, perforin- and granzyme-related
apoptosis initiation signals were activated; however, the Fas-induced apoptosis
pathway did not efficiently respond. Upregulated IAP1 in RBIV-infected rock
bream, which was reported for the first time in this study, exhibited inhibited
apoptotic responses in RBIV-infected fish. Although it remains unclear whether
apoptosis inhibition aids or impedes fish survival, our data clearly show that
the apoptotic response is inhibited in RBIV-infected rock bream.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.01.012 
PMID: 24463468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

