
1. Microbiol Immunol. 2014 Apr;58(4):227-38. doi: 10.1111/1348-0421.12141.

Molecular evolution of VP3, VP1, 3C(pro) and 3D(pol) coding regions in
coxsackievirus group A type 24 variant isolates from acute hemorrhagic
conjunctivitis in 2011 in Okinawa, Japan.

Nidaira M(1), Kuba Y, Saitoh M, Taira K, Maeshiro N, Mahoe Y, Kyan H, Takara T,
Okano S, Kudaka J, Yoshida H, Oishi K, Kimura H.

Author information: 
(1)Okinawa Prefectural Institute of Health and Environment, 2085 Ozato,
Nanjo-Shi, Okinawa, 901-1202.

A large acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis (AHC) outbreak occurred in 2011 in
Okinawa Prefecture in Japan. Ten strains of coxsackievirus group A type 24
variant (CA24v) were isolated from patients with AHC and full sequence analysis
of the VP3, VP1, 3C(pro) and 3D(pol) coding regions performed. To assess
time-scale evolution, phylogenetic analysis was performed using the Bayesian
Markov chain Monte Carlo method. In addition, similarity plots were constructed
and pairwise distance (p-distance) and positive pressure analyses performed. A
phylogenetic tree based on the VP1 coding region showed that the present strains 
belong to genotype 4 (G4). In addition, the present strains could have divided in
about 2010 from the same lineages detected in other countries such as China,
India and Australia. The mean rates of molecular evolution of four coding regions
were estimated at about 6.15 to 7.86 × 10(-3) substitutions/site/year. Similarity
plot analyses suggested that nucleotide similarities between the present strains 
and a prototype strain (EH24/70 strain) were 0.77-0.94. The p-distance of the
present strains was relatively short (<0.01). Only one positive selected site
(L25H) was identified in the VP1 protein. These findings suggest that the present
CA24v strains causing AHC are genetically related to other AHC strains with rapid
evolution and emerged in around 2010.

© 2014 The Societies and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1348-0421.12141 
PMID: 24517637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

