
1. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed. 2015 Jun;100(3):155-61. doi:
10.1136/archdischild-2013-305271. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

How to use... eye swabs.

Drew RJ(1), Cole TS(2), Newman W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Alder Hey Children's NHS Foundation Trust,
Liverpool, UK.
(2)Department of Paediatric Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Alder Hey
Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK.
(3)Department of Paediatric Ophthalmology, Alder Hey Children's NHS Foundation
Trust, Liverpool, UK.

Conjunctivitis is a very common presentation to general practitioners and general
paediatricians. The investigation of conjunctivitis can be a significant cost to 
microbiology laboratories due to the high volume of samples that can be
submitted, particularly from patients in the community. The key issue is to send 
eye swabs in clinical situations where it can make a difference to management,
and limiting the use of eye swabs in routine cases of conjunctivitis which are
likely to be due to viruses. For investigation of neonatal conjunctivitis we
recommend sending a bacterial swab for routine culture, and also a swab for
molecular detection of Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae. In older 
children with mild conjunctivitis no swab is necessary unless there is marked
conjunctival injection. In this article we also highlight patient populations
that require specialist tests to be sent as part of their assessment such as
contact lens wearers and sexually active teenagers.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/archdischild-2013-305271 
PMID: 24523487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

