
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 4;289(14):9961-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.542761. Epub 2014
Feb 13.

Sensitivity of the polymerase of vesicular stomatitis virus to 2' substitutions
in the template and nucleotide triphosphate during initiation and elongation.

Morin B(1), Whelan SP.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

The RNA synthesis machinery of non-segmented negative-sense RNA viruses comprises
a ribonucleoprotein complex of the genomic RNA coated by a nucleocapsid protein
(N) and associated with polymerase. Work with vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), a
prototype, supports a model of RNA synthesis whereby N is displaced from the
template to allow the catalytic subunit of the polymerase, the large protein (L) 
to gain access to the RNA. Consistent with that model, purified L can copy
synthetic RNA that contains requisite promoter sequences. Full processivity of L 
requires its phosphoprotein cofactor and the template-associated N. Here we
demonstrate the importance of the 2' position of the RNA template and the
substrate nucleotide triphosphates during initiation and elongation by L. The VSV
polymerase can initiate on both DNA and RNA and can incorporate dNTPs. During
elongation, the polymerase is sensitive to 2' modifications, although dNTPs can
be incorporated, and mixed DNA-RNA templates can function. Modifications to the
2' position of the NTP, including 2',3'-ddCTP, arabinose-CTP, and
2'-O-methyl-CTP, inhibit polymerase, whereas 2'-amino-CTP is incorporated. The
inhibitory effects of the NTPs were more pronounced on authentic N-RNA with the
exception of dGTP, which is incorporated. This work underscores the sensitivity
of the VSV polymerase to nucleotide modifications during initiation and
elongation and highlights the importance of the 2'-hydroxyl of both template and 
substrate NTP. Moreover, this study demonstrates a critical role of the
template-associated N protein in the architecture of the RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase domain of L.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.542761 
PMCID: PMC3975040
PMID: 24526687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

