
1. New Microbiol. 2014 Jan;37(1):17-24. Epub 2014 Jan 15.

No evidence of XMRV provirus sequences in patients with myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and individuals with unspecified
encephalopathy.

Rasa S(1), Nora-Krukle Z, Chapenko S, Krumina A, Roga S, Murovska M.

Author information: 
(1)August Kirchenstein Institute of Microbiology and Virology, Riga Stradins
University, Latvia.

Xenotropic murine leukemia virus-related virus (XMRV) has been considered a
possible trigger of myalgic encephalomyelitis/ chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) 
and could also be linked with unspecified encephalopathy. The aim of this study
was to analyse the frequency of XMRV proviral sequences in peripheral blood
leukocyte (PBL) DNA from 150 patients with ME/CFS and 30 apparently healthy
individuals, as well as in PBL and brain tissue DNA from 61 individuals
with/without unspecified encephalopathy. Targeting the XMRV proviral gag gene
sequence by nested polymerase chain reaction (nPCR) with previously reported
primer sets, provirus was not detected either in DNA from patients with ME/CFS
and individuals with unspecified encephalopathy, or in apparently healthy
individuals. Only the positive control gave the amplimer of 410 base pairs (bp)
after the second round that corresponds to the expected XMRV gag gene fragment.
In addition, DNA was found to be negative in nPCR assays, targeting XMRV specific
env gene sequence, using previously described primer sets. Also only positive
control gave the amplimer of 218 bp after the second round, corresponding to the 
expected XMRV env gene fragment. Using nPCR we found no evidence of XMRV
infection either in apparently healthy individuals or in patients with ME/CFS and
individuals with unspecified encephalopathy.


PMID: 24531167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

