
1. Arch Virol. 1988;101(1-2):49-63.

Monoclonal antibodies against avian paramyxovirus-3: antigenic mapping and
functional analysis of the haemagglutinin-neuraminidase protein and the
characterization of nonspecific monoclonal antibodies.

Anderson CL(1), Russell PH.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Veterinary College, University of London, England.

Sixteen monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) which immunoprecipitated the haemagglutinin 
neuraminidase (HN) of chorio-allantoic membrane-grown avian paramyxovirus-3
(PMV-3) of British turkeys were produced. Thirteen were PMV-3 specific. Three
were nonspecific because they also bound to other viral proteins and to bovine
kidney cells treated with neuraminidase enzyme or infected with influenza virus. 
The thirteen specific Mab defined four antigenic regions A-D by competition and
variant selection assays. Region A was subdivided into five epitopes and region B
into two epitopes. The thirteen Mab neutralized and were active in
haemagglutination inhibition (HI) and twelve were active in haemolysis inhibition
(HLI) tests. Neuraminidase inhibition (NI) was epitope-dependent. Mabs to five of
the epitopes A1, A2, A3, A5, and C bound to the 1981 British turkey isolates but 
not the 1968 American turkey isolate. The Mab to epitope A4 bound to both
viruses. The Mabs to epitopes B1, B2, and D also bound to a parakeet isolate of
PMV-3 which was the third PMV-3 tested. The Mab to B2 gave identical titres to
all three viruses and had HI, HLI, and NI activities. This made it a potential
diagnostic reagent for avian PMV-3 viruses. One of the nonspecific Mabs bound to 
lactose-like moieties as reported on influenza virus and one to maltose-like
moieties as on retroviruses. Immunoglobulin from all three nonspecific Mab had
some HI activity.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01314651 
PMID: 2458087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

