
1. J Virol Methods. 1988 Sep;21(1-4):147-59.

Epitope-mapping on the Epstein-Barr virus major capsid protein using systematic
synthesis of overlapping oligopeptides.

Middeldorp JM(1), Meloen RH.

Author information: 
(1)Scientific Development Group, Organon International BV, Oss, The Netherlands.

Systematic solid-phase synthesis of all possible overlapping nonapeptides of the 
1381 amino acid sequence of the Epstein-Barr virus major capsid protein (EBV-MCP)
was used to identify the position of linear antigen epitopes on this protein as
recognised by human polyclonal antisera. Antisera were selected for reactivity
with EBV-MCP on immunoblots. The results show that antibodies from different
individual donors may recognise EBV-MCP through binding to a variety of different
epitopes. These epitopes are localized at random over the protein backbone though
some non-binding areas are also present. In addition, ten 'hot-spots' were
identified containing closely-spaced reactive peptides (epitope-clusters)
recognised by most (greater than or equal to 70%) individuals. No significant
correlation was found between the actual location of these epitope-clusters and
computer predictions using either hydrophilicity plots, secondary structure plots
or a combination of (additional) parameters. Epitope-clusters generally were
located in regions of indifferent or hydrophilic nature and mostly contained
predicted beta-turn configurations. Only one epitope-cluster was located within a
region of sequence homology with the MCPs of herpes simplex virus type 1 and
varicella-zoster virus. The present study demonstrates the potential of using
systematic peptide synthesis to define serologically relevant linear epitopes on 
large and relatively unexplored viral polypeptides.

DOI: 10.1016/0166-0934(88)90061-4 
PMID: 2460480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

