
1. BMC Cancer. 2014 Mar 19;14:207. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-207.

Rationale and design of the iPap trial: a randomized controlled trial of
home-based HPV self-sampling for improving participation in cervical screening by
never- and under-screened women in Australia.

Sultana F, English DR, Simpson JA, Brotherton JM, Drennan K, Mullins R, Heley S, 
Wrede CD, Saville M, Gertig DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population and 
Global Health, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. dgertig@vcs.org.au.

BACKGROUND: Organized screening based on Pap tests has substantially reduced
deaths from cervical cancer in many countries, including Australia. However, the 
impact of the program depends upon the degree to which women participate. A new
method of screening, testing for human papillomavirus (HPV) DNA to detect the
virus that causes cervical cancer, has recently become available. Because women
can collect their own samples for this test at home, it has the potential to
overcome some of the barriers to Pap tests. The iPap trial will evaluate whether 
mailing an HPV self-sampling kit increases participation by never- and
under-screened women within a cervical screening program.
METHODS/DESIGN: The iPap trial is a parallel randomized controlled, open label,
trial. Participants will be Victorian women age 30-69 years, for whom there is
either no record on the Victorian Cervical Cytology Registry (VCCR) of a Pap test
(never-screened) or the last recorded Pap test was between five to fifteen years 
ago (under-screened). Enrolment information from the Victorian Electoral
Commission will be linked to the VCCR to determine the never-screened women.
Variables that will be used for record linkage include full name, address and
date of birth. Never- and under-screened women will be randomly allocated to
either receive an invitation letter with an HPV self-sampling kit or a reminder
letter to attend for a Pap test, which is standard practice for women overdue for
a test in Victoria. All resources have been focus group tested. The primary
outcome will be the proportion of women who participate, by returning an HPV
self-sampling kit for women in the self-sampling arm, and notification of a Pap
test result to the Registry for women in the Pap test arm at 3 and 6 months after
mailout. The most important secondary outcome is the proportion of test-positive 
women who undergo further investigations at 6 and 12 months after mailout of
results.
DISCUSSION: The iPap trial will provide strong evidence about whether HPV
self-sampling could be used in Australia to improve participation in cervical
screening for never-and under-screened women.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ANZCTR Identifier: ACTRN12613001104741; UTN: U1111-1148-3885.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-207 
PMCID: PMC3994873
PMID: 24646201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

