
1. Biologicals. 2014 May;42(3):153-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2014.01.002. Epub
2014 Mar 20.

Immunological evaluation of mannosylated chitosan nanoparticles based foot and
mouth disease virus DNA vaccine, pVAC FMDV VP1-OmpA in guinea pigs.

Nanda RK(1), Hajam IA(1), Edao BM(1), Ramya K(1), Rajangam M(1), Chandra Sekar
S(1), Ganesh K(1), Bhanuprakash V(1), Kishore S(2).

Author information: 
(1)FMD Quality Control and Quality Assurance Laboratory, Indian Veterinary
Research Institute, H A Farm, Hebbal, Bangalore 560 024, Karnataka, India.
(2)FMD Quality Control and Quality Assurance Laboratory, Indian Veterinary
Research Institute, H A Farm, Hebbal, Bangalore 560 024, Karnataka, India.
Electronic address: subodhkishore@gmail.com.

A DNA vaccine for foot and mouth disease (FMD) based on mannosylated chitosan
nanoparticles was evaluated in guinea pigs. The DNA construct was comprised of
FMD virus full length-VP1 gene and outer membrane protein A (Omp A) gene of
Salmonella typhimurium as a Toll-like receptor (TLR)-ligand in pVAC vector.
Groups of guinea pigs immunized either intramuscularly or intra-nasally were
evaluated for induction of virus neutralizing antibodies, Th1(IgG2) and Th2
(IgG1) responses, lymphocyte proliferation, reactive nitrogen intermediate
production, secretory IgA for naso-mucosal immune response and protection upon
homotypic type O virulent FMD virus challenge. The results indicate the
synergistic effect of OmpA on the immunogenic potential of FMD DNA vaccine
construct delivered using mannosylated chitosan nano-particles by different
routes of administration. These observations suggest the substantial improvement 
in all the immunological parameters with enhanced protection in guinea pigs.

Copyright Â© 2014 The International Alliance for Biological Standardization.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2014.01.002 
PMID: 24656961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

