
1. J Gen Virol. 2014 Jun;95(Pt 6):1221-1232. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.063537-0. Epub 2014 
Apr 2.

Evaluation of a mouse model for the West Nile virus group for the purpose of
determining viral pathotypes.

Bingham J(1), Payne J(1), Harper J(1), Frazer L(1), Eastwood S(1), Wilson S(1),
Lowther S(1), Lunt R(1), Warner S(2), Carr M(3), Hall RA(4), Durr PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation (CSIRO), 5 Portarlington Road, Geelong, Victoria 3220,
Australia.
(2)Biosciences Research Division, Department of Environment and Primary
Industries Victoria, AgriBio Centre, 5 Ring Road, La Trobe University Campus,
Bundoora, Victoria 3083, Australia.
(3)Biosecurity SA, Primary Industries and Regions South Australia, GPO Box 1671, 
Adelaide, South Australia 5001, Australia.
(4)Australian Infectious Disease Research Centre, School of Chemistry and
Molecular Biosciences, University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland 4072,
Australia.

West Nile virus (WNV; family Flaviviridae; genus Flavivirus) group members are an
important cause of viral meningoencephalitis in some areas of the world. They
exhibit marked variation in pathogenicity, with some viral lineages (such as
those from North America) causing high prevalence of severe neurological disease,
whilst others (such as Australian Kunjin virus) rarely cause disease. The aim of 
this study was to characterize WNV disease in a mouse model and to elucidate the 
pathogenetic features that distinguish disease variation. Tenfold dilutions of
five WNV strains (New York 1999, MRM16 and three horse isolates of WNV-Kunjin:
Boort and two isolates from the 2011 Australian outbreak) were inoculated into
mice by the intraperitoneal route. All isolates induced meningoencephalitis in
different proportions of infected mice. WNVNY99 was the most pathogenic, the
three horse isolates were of intermediate pathogenicity and WNVKUNV-MRM16 was the
least, causing mostly asymptomatic disease with seroconversion. Infectivity, but 
not pathogenicity, was related to challenge dose. Using cluster analysis of the
recorded clinical signs, histopathological lesions and antigen distribution
scores, the cases could be classified into groups corresponding to disease
severity. Metrics that were important in determining pathotype included
neurological signs (paralysis and seizures), meningoencephalitis, brain antigen
scores and replication in extra-neural tissues. Whereas all mice infected with
WNVNY99 had extra-neural antigen, those infected with the WNV-Kunjin viruses only
occasionally had antigen outside the nervous system. We conclude that the mouse
model could be a useful tool for the assessment of pathotype for WNVs.

Â© 2014 CSIRO.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.063537-0 
PMID: 24694397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

