
1. Vaccine. 2014 May 13;32(23):2675-81. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.03.074. Epub
2014 Apr 4.

Characterization of live-attenuated Japanese encephalitis vaccine virus
SA14-14-2.

Yang D(1), Li XF(2), Ye Q(2), Wang HJ(2), Deng YQ(2), Zhu SY(2), Zhang Y(2), Li
SH(2), Qin CF(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Xinjiang Agricultural University, Urumqi
830052, China; Department of Virology, State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and
Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing 100071, 
China.
(2)Department of Virology, State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity,
Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing 100071, China.
(3)Department of Virology, State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity,
Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing 100071, China.
Electronic address: qincf@bmi.ac.cn.

The live attenuated Japanese encephalitis (JE) vaccine SA14-14-2 was licensed
decades ago and now approved for clinical use in most JE endemic countries.
Large-scale clinical trials demonstrate ideal safety and efficacy profile of this
Chinese vaccine. The SA14-14-2 vaccine was derived from a virulent strain SA14
after hundreds of serial passaging in cells and animals, concern about virulence 
reversion remains exist. In the present study, to study the in vitro and in vivo 
genetic and attenuation stability of the vaccine virus, SA14-14-2 was serially
passaged in Vero cells and mouse brain followed by sequence comparison and
attenuation phenotype analysis. The results showed that no significant mutation
was acquired after serial passaging in Vero cells except a single Ser66Leu
mutation within capsid protein, which had no effect on viral virulence in mice.
Importantly, serial passaging of SA14-14-2 in suckling mouse brain resulted in
emergence of adaptive mutations and increased virulence in mice. Population and
plaque-purified clone consensus sequence analysis showed four adaptive mutations 
in envelope (E) protein, F107L, K138E, T226R and I270T, sequentially occurred and
become predominant during serial passaging in suckling mouse brain. Especially,
these adaptive mutations were close related with the enhanced neurovirulence and 
neuroinvasiveness in mice. Our results provide experimental evidence of highly
genetic and attenuation stability of SA14-14-2 following passaging in Vero cells,
and reveal the potential virulence reversion during passaging in mouse brain in
association with critical adaptive mutations in E protein. These findings are
important for quality control and evaluation of live JE vaccines and will help
understand the attenuation mechanism of flavivirus vaccine.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.03.074 
PMID: 24709585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

