
1. Trends Microbiol. 2014 Jul;22(7):379-88. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2014.03.009. Epub
2014 Apr 23.

PIP2: choreographer of actin-adaptor proteins in the HIV-1 dance.

Rocha-Perugini V(1), Gordon-Alonso M(2), Sánchez-Madrid F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria de la Princesa, Madrid, Spain; Vascular Biology and
Inflammation Department, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares,
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria de la Princesa, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria de la Princesa, Madrid, Spain; Vascular Biology and
Inflammation Department, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares,
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: fsmadrid@salud.madrid.org.

The actin cytoskeleton plays a key role during the replication cycle of human
immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1). HIV-1 infection is affected by cellular
proteins that influence the clustering of viral receptors or the subcortical
actin cytoskeleton. Several of these actin-adaptor proteins are controlled by the
second messenger phosphatidylinositol 4,5-biphosphate (PIP2), an important
regulator of actin organization. PIP2 production is induced by HIV-1 attachment
and facilitates viral infection. However, the importance of PIP2 in regulating
cytoskeletal proteins and thus HIV-1 infection has been overlooked. This review
examines recent reports describing the roles played by actin-adaptor proteins
during HIV-1 infection of CD4+ T cells, highlighting the influence of the
signaling lipid PIP2 in this process.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2014.03.009 
PMCID: PMC4171680
PMID: 24768560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

