
1. Transplant Proc. 2014 Apr;46(3):995-8. doi: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2013.09.047.

Fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis developing within one month after living donor
liver transplantation for chronic hepatitis C-related cirrhosis: a case report.

Murakami K(1), Kawagishi N(2), Ishida K(3), Sekiguchi S(2), Fujishima F(4),
Sasano H(4), Ohuchi N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Transplantation, Reconstruction and Endoscopic Surgery, Tohoku
University Hospital, Sendai, Japan. Electronic address: kehgo@med.tohoku.ac.jp.
(2)Division of Transplantation, Reconstruction and Endoscopic Surgery, Tohoku
University Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
(3)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Iwate Medical School of Medicine, Morioka,
Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Tohoku University Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
(5)Division of Surgical Oncology, Tohoku University Hospital, Sendai, Japan.

Fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis (FCH) is a life-threatening consequence of
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection occurring in a small minority of liver
transplantation (LT) recipients. We herein report a case of early-onset FCH after
living donor LT in a 47-year-old woman with HCV-related cirrhosis. The patient
underwent balloon-occluded retrograde transvenous obliteration of a splenorenal
shunt to treat an impaired portal flow on the sixth postoperative day (POD 6) and
a bypass operation for hepatic artery thrombosis on POD 12. Thereafter, the serum
bilirubin levels increased gradually; however, computed tomography revealed no
evidence of biliary stricture. The serum HCV-RNA level on POD 27 was >7.8 log
IU/mL. Histopathology of a needle graft biopsy performed on POD 28 revealed FCH
with extensive portal fibrosis accompanied by mild inflammation, hepatocyte
ballooning, and ductular proliferation with cholestasis. The patient received
combination therapy with pegylated interferon, ribavirin, and double-filtration
plasmapheresis for the treatment of early-onset FCH. Both the recipient and the
donor carried the major genotype single nucleotide polymorphism (TT) at rs8099917
near the interleukin-28B gene. Furthermore, the HCV genotype was
treatment-sensitive 2a. Nonetheless, the recipient died of hepatic failure on POD
211. Thus far, few cases of FCH occurring within 1 month after LT have been
reported. In addition, the early onset of FCH may be an adverse prognostic
factor.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2013.09.047 
PMID: 24767401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

