
1. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2014 Jul;7(7):738-47. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0445. Epub 2014 May 13.

Mammary cancer chemoprevention by withaferin A is accompanied by in vivo
suppression of self-renewal of cancer stem cells.

Kim SH(1), Singh SV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliation: Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology,
University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(2)Authors' Affiliation: Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology,
University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania singhs@upmc.edu.

Current dogma favors elimination of therapy-resistant cancer stem cells for
chemoprevention of breast cancer. We showed recently that mammary cancer
development in a transgenic mouse model (mouse mammary tumor virus-neu; MMTV-neu)
was inhibited significantly upon treatment with withaferin A (WA), a steroidal
lactone derived from a medicinal plant. Herein, we demonstrate that the mammary
cancer prevention by WA is accompanied by in vivo suppression of breast cancer
stem cells (bCSC). In vitro mammosphere formation was dose-dependently inhibited 
by WA treatment in MCF-7 and SUM159 human breast cancer cells. Other markers of
bCSC, including aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) activity and
CD44(high)/CD24(low)/epithelial-specific antigen-positive (ESA+) fraction, were
also decreased significantly in the presence of plasma achievable doses of WA.
However, WA exposure resulted in cell line-specific changes in Oct4, SOX-2, and
Nanog mRNA expression. WA administration to MMTV-neu mice (0.1 mg/mouse, 3
times/week for 28 weeks) resulted in inhibition of mammosphere number and ALDH1
activity in vivo. Mechanistic studies revealed that although urokinase-type
plasminogen activator receptor overexpression conferred partial protection
against bCSC inhibition by WA, Notch4 was largely dispensable for this response. 
WA treatment also resulted in sustained (MCF-7) or transient (SUM159)
downregulation of Bmi-1 (B-cell-specific Moloney murine leukemia virus insertion 
region-1) protein. Ectopic expression of Bmi-1 conferred partial but significant 
protection against ALDH1 activity inhibition by WA. Interestingly, WA treatment
caused induction of Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) and its knockdown augmented bCSC
inhibition by WA. In conclusion, this study shows in vivo effectiveness of WA
against bCSC.

Â©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0445 
PMCID: PMC4083822
PMID: 24824039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

