
1. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Jul;26(7):761-73. doi:
10.1097/MEG.0000000000000084.

VX-222, a non-nucleoside NS5B polymerase inhibitor, in telaprevir-based regimens 
for genotype 1 hepatitis C virus infection.

Di Bisceglie AM(1), Sulkowski M, Gane E, Jacobson IM, Nelson D, DeSouza C, Alves 
K, George S, Kieffer T, Zhang EZ, Kauffman R, Asmal M, Koziel MJ.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University Liver Center, St
Louis, Missouri bJohns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
cWeill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York dUniversity of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida eVertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA fUniversity of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate in this phase 2a study (ZENITH) the safety,
tolerability, and antiviral activity of VX-222, a selective, non-nucleoside
inhibitor of hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS5B polymerase, combined with various
telaprevir-based regimens for treatment of genotype 1 HCV.
METHODS: In total, 152 treatment-naive patients received VX-222+telaprevir
('DUAL' regimen; n=47), with ribavirin ('TRIPLE' regimen; n=46), or with
peginterferon+ribavirin ('QUAD' regimen; n=59) for 12 weeks. Patients with
detectable HCV RNA at weeks 2 and/or 8 received peginterferon+ribavirin for 24
(DUAL and TRIPLE) or 12 (QUAD) additional weeks.
RESULTS: VX-222 (100 or 400 mg twice daily) was well tolerated, with an increased
rate of gastrointestinal adverse events observed with the higher dose. Across
VX-222 400-mg twice-daily regimens, the QUAD was associated with the highest
frequency of grade 3/4 adverse events. The DUAL was discontinued because of high 
viral breakthrough before week 12. Sustained virologic response (SVR) 24 weeks
after end of treatment (SVR24), including patients treated with 12 or 24
additional weeks of peginterferon+ribavirin, was 67% for TRIPLE (VX-222 400 mg
twice daily) and 79 and 90% for QUAD (VX-222 100 and 400 mg twice daily,
respectively).
CONCLUSION: These results provide valuable information regarding the safety,
tolerability, and efficacy of telaprevir combined with a non-nucleoside
polymerase inhibitor, as dual therapy or with ribavirin without or with
peginterferon. Telaprevir and VX-222, alone or with ribavirin without or with
peginterferon, were generally well tolerated, with improved tolerability without 
peginterferon. SVR24 rates achieved with TRIPLE and QUAD regimens containing
telaprevir and VX-222 were comparable to those observed with telaprevir-based
therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/MEG.0000000000000084 
PMID: 24901821  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

