
1. J Gen Virol. 2014 Sep;95(Pt 9):2019-2029. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.065615-0. Epub 2014 
Jun 9.

Bluetongue virus without NS3/NS3a expression is not virulent and protects against
virulent bluetongue virus challenge.

Feenstra F(1)(2), van Gennip RGP(2), Maris-Veldhuis M(2), Verheij E(2), van Rijn 
PA(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases & Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Virology, Central Veterinary Institute of Wageningen UR (CVI),
Lelystad, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Centre for Human Metabonomics, North-West
University, Potchefstroom, South Africa.

Bluetongue is a disease in ruminants caused by the bluetongue virus (BTV), and is
spread by Culicoides biting midges. Bluetongue outbreaks cause huge economic
losses and death in sheep in several parts of the world. The most effective
measure to control BTV is vaccination. However, both commercially available
vaccines and recently developed vaccine candidates have several shortcomings.
Therefore, we generated and tested next-generation vaccines for bluetongue based 
on the backbone of a laboratory-adapted strain of BTV-1, avirulent BTV-6 or
virulent BTV-8. All vaccine candidates were serotyped with VP2 of BTV-8 and did
not express NS3/NS3a non-structural proteins, due to induced deletions in the
NS3/NS3a ORF. Sheep were vaccinated once with one of these vaccine candidates and
were challenged with virulent BTV-8 3 weeks after vaccination. The NS3/NS3a
knockout mutation caused complete avirulence for all three BTV backbones,
including for virulent BTV-8, indicating that safety is associated with the
NS3/NS3a knockout phenotype. Viraemia of vaccine virus was not detected using
sensitive PCR diagnostics. Apparently, the vaccine viruses replicated only
locally, which will minimize spread by the insect vector. In particular, the
vaccine based on the BTV-6 backbone protected against disease and prevented
viraemia of challenge virus, showing the efficacy of this vaccine candidate. The 
lack of NS3/NS3a expression potentially enables the differentiation of infected
from vaccinated animals, which is important for monitoring virus spread in
vaccinated livestock. The disabled infectious single-animal vaccine for
bluetongue presented here is very promising and will be the subject of future
studies.

Â© 2014 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.065615-0 
PMID: 24914064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

