
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1989 Feb;86(3):911-5.

Induction of class I major histocompatibility complex antigen expression by West 
Nile virus on gamma interferon-refractory early murine trophoblast cells.

King NJ(1), Maxwell LE, Kesson AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian
National University, Canberra.

Primary murine trophoblast giant cells (TGC) do not express detectable major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens and are refractory to the
MHC-increasing effects of alpha and beta (virus-induced) interferons and gamma
(immune type) interferon during early implantation (postcoital days 3.5-6). West 
Nile virus infection of primary TGC monolayers from postcoital-day-3.5
preimplantation blastocysts induced paternal MHC antigen expression within 16 hr,
as detected by immunogold labeling for electron microscopy. Induction is unlikely
to have been mediated by secreted virus-induced interferons or other factors, as 
it occurred in the presence of high concentrations of anti-alpha/beta interferon 
antibodies and was not induced by virus-inactivated supernatants from MHC-induced
primary TGC cultures. Attempts to induce MHC antigen expression with poly(I.C) or
recombinant tumor necrosis factor alpha in primary TGC cultures also failed.
Thus, the apparent inhibition of MHC antigen expression in primary TGC during
early implantation and their refractoriness to induction of de novo MHC antigen
expression is not absolute. This may represent a maternal-and/or
species-protective evolutionary device. As such, manipulation of this phenomenon 
may allow a conclusive assessment of the significance of inhibition of MHC
antigen expression on trophoblast cells in the implanting semiallogeneic embryo.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.86.3.911 
PMCID: PMC286588
PMID: 2492666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

