
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 30;9(6):e101373. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101373.
eCollection 2014.

A herpes simplex virus 2 (HSV-2) glycoprotein D-expressing nonreplicating
dominant-negative HSV-2 virus vaccine is superior to a gD2 subunit vaccine
against HSV-2 genital infection in guinea pigs.

Zhang P(1), Xie L(1), Balliet JW(2), Casimiro DR(2), Yao F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Vaccine Research, Merck Research Laboratories, Merck & Co., Inc., West Point, 
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

We recently constructed a novel non-replicating dominant-negative HSV-2
recombinant viral vaccine (CJ2-gD2) capable of expressing various HSV-2 antigens 
that are dominant targets of HSV-2-specific CD8 T-cell response. Importantly,
CJ2-gD2 expresses gD2, the HSV-2 major antigen glycoprotein D, as efficiently as 
wild-type HSV-2 infection and can lead to a nearly 500-fold reduction in
wild-type HSV-2 viral replication in cells co-infected with CJ2-gD2 and wild-type
HSV-2. In this report, we show that CJ2-gD2 elicits a strong antibody response to
various HSV-2 antigens and is highly effective in the prevention of primary and
recurrent HSV-2 genital infection and disease in the immunized guinea pigs. The
direct comparison study between CJ2-gD2 and a gD2 subunit vaccine (gD2-alum/MPL) 
with a formulation akin to a vaccine tested in phase III clinical trials shows
that CJ2-gD2 is 8 times more effective than the gD2-alum/MPL subunit vaccine in
eliciting an anti-HSV-2 specific neutralizing antibody response and offers
significantly superior protection against primary and recurrent HSV-2 genital
infections. Importantly, no challenge wild-type HSV-2 viral DNA was detectable in
dorsal root ganglia DNA isolated from CJ2-gD2-immunized guinea pigs on day 60
post-challenge. CJ2-gD2 should be an excellent HSV-2 vaccine candidate for
protection against HSV-2 genital infection and disease in humans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101373 
PMCID: PMC4076306
PMID: 24979708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

