
1. J Med Virol. 2014 Oct;86(10):1683-93. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24005. Epub 2014 Jul 1.

Molecular epidemiology of hepatitis B virus genotypes circulating in acute
hepatitis B patients in the Campania region.

Sagnelli C(1), Ciccozzi M, Pisaturo M, Zehender G, Lo Presti A, Alessio L,
Starace M, Lovero D, Sagnelli E, Coppola N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine and Surgery "F. Magrassi e A.
Lanzara", Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

Fifty-three HBV-DNA-positive patients with symptomatic acute hepatitis B were
enrolled from 1999 to 2010 to evaluate molecular and phylogenetic changes in HBV 
in southern Italy. HBV polymerase region was evaluated by direct sequencing in
plasma samples obtained at first observation. Different data sets were aligned
and a phylogenetic tree was inferred using PhyML program. Statistical robustness 
was confirmed with a bootstrap analysis. A Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo
method and a Bayesian skyline plot were used to estimate the evolution of our
samples. The dN/dS rate (ω) was estimated by the maximum likelihood approach to
investigate the presence of codons under positive selection. The MacClade program
was used to test viral gene out/in flow only among HBV-D3 subgenotype patients
with different risk factors. Of the 53 patients, 83% were born in Italy and 17%
were foreigners. HBV genotype D was prevalent (64.1%), followed by genotype A
(26.4%), E (3.8%), and F (5.7%). The prevalent subgenotype was D3 (70.6%). The
Bayesian tree of the 24 D3 subgenotypes showed two main clades both dated 1994;
40% of viral gene flow observed was from intravenous drugs users and heterosexual
patients. Phylogenetic analysis of HBV isolates showed that HBV-D3 remains the
prevalent genotype, but also subgenotype A2 has become frequent in southern
Italy. This may be of clinical relevance in years to come, since patients with
HBV-genotype-A chronic infection less frequently than those with genotype D
develop HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis and respond more frequently to
alfa-interferon treatment.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24005 
PMID: 24980631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

