
1. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:546479. doi: 10.1155/2014/546479. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Antiangiogenesis therapy of endometriosis using PAMAM as a gene vector in a
noninvasive animal model.

Wang N(1), Liu B(1), Liang L(1), Wu Y(1), Xie H(1), Huang J(1), Guo X(1), Tan
J(1), Zhan X(1), Liu Y(2), Wang L(2), Ke P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun 
Yat-sen University, 58th Zhongshan 2nd Road, Guangzhou 510080, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, No. 58th Zhongshan 2nd Road, Guangzhou 510080, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the characteristics and antiangiogenic effects of
endostatin-loaded PAMAM on endometriosis in a noninvasive animal model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A noninvasive animal model was established by injecting
adenovirus-GFP transfected endometrial stromal and glandular epithelial cells
subcutaneously into nude mice. Endostatin-loaded PAMAM was prepared and
identified by transmission electron microscopy. For in vitro studies, the DNA
protection and cytotoxicity of PAMAM were investigated and compared with
Lipofectamine 2000. For in vivo study, endostatin-loaded PAMAM was injected into 
the noninvasive model and evaluated by continuously observing the fluorescent
lesion, lesion weight, microvessel density and VEGF immunostaining.
RESULTS: Compared with Lipofectamine 2000, PAMAM and HC PAMAM-ES group, MC
PAMAM-ES group and LC PAMAM-ES group demonstrated a better stromal cells
protective such that MC PAMAM-ES group of CCK8 was 0.617 ± 0.122 at 24 hr and
0.668 ± 0.143 at 48 hr and LC PAMAM-ES group of CCK8 was 0.499 ± 0.103 at 24 hr
and 0.610 ± 0.080 at 48 hr in stromal cells (P < 0.05) but similar cytotoxicity
in glandular epithelial cells in vitro. After 16 hrs of digestion, DNA decreased 
slightly under the protection of PAMAM. Endostatin-loaded PAMAM of HD PAMAM-ES
group and LD PAMAM-ES group inhibited the growth of the endometriotic lesion in
vivo at days 15, 20, 25 and 30 detected by noninvasive observation after
injecting one dose endostatin of various medicines into the endometrial lesion in
each mouse on day 10 (P < 0.05) and confirmed by lesion weight at day 30 with HD 
PAMAM-ES group being 0.0104 ± 0.0077 g and LD PAMAM-ES group being 0.0140 ±
0.0097 g (P < 0.05). Immunohistochemistry results showed that endostatin-loaded
PAMAM reduced the microvessel density 3.8 ± 2.4 especially in HD PAMAM-ES group
in the lesion (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Endostatin-loaded PAMAM inhibits the development of endometriosis
through an antiangiogenic mechanism and can be observed through the noninvasive
endometriosis model.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/546479 
PMCID: PMC4094709
PMID: 25050361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

