
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Aug 12;111(32):E3252-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1405635111. Epub 2014 Jul 28.

Tautomerism provides a molecular explanation for the mutagenic properties of the 
anti-HIV nucleoside 5-aza-5,6-dihydro-2'-deoxycytidine.

Li D(1), Fedeles BI(1), Singh V(1), Peng CS(2), Silvestre KJ(2), Simi AK(3),
Simpson JH(2), Tokmakoff A(4), Essigmann JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Chemistry andBiological Engineering, andCenter for
Environmental Health Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
MA 02139.
(2)Departments of Chemistry and.
(3)Biological Engineering, and.
(4)Departments of Chemistry and jessig@mit.edu tokmakoff@uchicago.edu.
(5)Departments of Chemistry andBiological Engineering, andCenter for
Environmental Health Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
MA 02139 jessig@mit.edu tokmakoff@uchicago.edu.

Viral lethal mutagenesis is a strategy whereby the innate immune system or
mutagenic pool nucleotides increase the error rate of viral replication above the
error catastrophe limit. Lethal mutagenesis has been proposed as a mechanism for 
several antiviral compounds, including the drug candidate
5-aza-5,6-dihydro-2'-deoxycytidine (KP1212), which causes A-to-G and G-to-A
mutations in the HIV genome, both in tissue culture and in HIV positive patients 
undergoing KP1212 monotherapy. This work explored the molecular mechanism(s)
underlying the mutagenicity of KP1212, and specifically whether tautomerism, a
previously proposed hypothesis, could explain the biological consequences of this
nucleoside analog. Establishing tautomerism of nucleic acid bases under
physiological conditions has been challenging because of the lack of sensitive
methods. This study investigated tautomerism using an array of spectroscopic,
theoretical, and chemical biology approaches. Variable temperature NMR and 2D
infrared spectroscopic methods demonstrated that KP1212 existed as a broad
ensemble of interconverting tautomers, among which enolic forms dominated. The
mutagenic properties of KP1212 were determined empirically by in vitro and in
vivo replication of a single-stranded vector containing a single KP1212. It was
found that KP1212 paired with both A (10%) and G (90%), which is in accord with
clinical observations. Moreover, this mutation frequency is sufficient for
pushing a viral population over its error catastrophe limit, as observed before
in cell culture studies. Finally, a model is proposed that correlates the
mutagenicity of KP1212 with its tautomeric distribution in solution.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1405635111 
PMCID: PMC4136561
PMID: 25071207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

