
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Nov;1838(11):2919-28. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2014.07.023. Epub 2014 Aug 7.

Global fold and backbone dynamics of the hepatitis C virus E2 glycoprotein
transmembrane domain determined by NMR.

Shalom-Elazari H(1), Zazrin-Greenspon H(1), Shaked H(1), Chill JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan 52900, Israel.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan 52900, Israel.
Electronic address: Jordan.Chill@biu.ac.il.

E1 and E2 are two hepatitis C viral envelope glycoproteins that assemble into a
heterodimer that is essential for membrane fusion and penetration into the target
cell. Both extracellular and transmembrane (TM) glycoprotein domains contribute
to this interaction, but study of TM-TM interactions has been limited because
synthesis and structural characterization of these highly hydrophobic segments
present significant challenges. In this NMR study, by successful expression and
purification of the E2 transmembrane domain as a fusion construct we have
determined the global fold and characterized backbone motions for this peptide
incorporated in phospholipid micelles. Backbone resonance frequencies, relaxation
rates and solvent exposure measurements concur in showing this domain to adopt a 
helical conformation, with two helical segments spanning residues 717-726 and
732-746 connected by an unstructured linker containing the charged residues D728 
and R730 involved in E1 binding. Although this linker exhibits increased local
motions on the ps timescale, the dominating contribution to its relaxation is the
global tumbling motion with an estimated correlation time of 12.3ns. The
positioning of the helix-linker-helix architecture within the mixed micelle was
established by paramagnetic NMR spectroscopy and phospholipid-peptide cross
relaxation measurements. These indicate that while the helices traverse the
hydrophobic interior of the micelle, the linker lies closer to the micelle
perimeter to accommodate its charged residues. These results lay the groundwork
for structure determination of the E1/E2 complex and a molecular understanding of
glycoprotein heterodimerization.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2014.07.023 
PMID: 25109935 

