
1. J Control Release. 2014 Oct 28;192:271-83. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.08.003.
Epub 2014 Aug 10.

Targeting strategies for delivery of anti-HIV drugs.

Ramana LN(1), Anand AR(2), Sethuraman S(1), Krishnan UM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Nanotechnology & Advanced Biomaterials, SASTRA University,
Thanjavur, India; School of Chemical & Biotechnology, SASTRA University,
Thanjavur, India.
(2)School of Chemical & Biotechnology, SASTRA University, Thanjavur, India.
(3)Centre for Nanotechnology & Advanced Biomaterials, SASTRA University,
Thanjavur, India; School of Chemical & Biotechnology, SASTRA University,
Thanjavur, India. Electronic address: umakrishnan@sastra.edu.

Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection remains a significant cause of
mortality globally. Though antiretroviral therapy has significantly reduced
AIDS-related morbidity and mortality, there are several drawbacks in the current 
therapy, including toxicity, drug-drug interactions, development of drug
resistance, necessity for long-term drug therapy, poor bio-availability and lack 
of access to tissues and reservoirs. To circumvent these problems, recent
anti-HIV therapeutic research has focused on improving drug delivery systems
through drug delivery targeted specifically to host cells infected with HIV or
could potentially get infected with HIV. In this regard, several surface
molecules of both viral and host cell origin have been described in recent years,
that would enable targeted drug delivery in HIV infection. In the present review,
we provide a comprehensive overview of the need for novel drug delivery systems, 
and the successes and challenges in the identification of novel viral and
host-cell molecules for the targeted drug delivery of anti-HIV drugs. Such
targeted anti-retroviral drug delivery approaches could pave the way for
effective treatment and eradication of HIV from the body.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.08.003 
PMCID: PMC7114626
PMID: 25119469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

