
1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Aug 28;10(8):e1004339. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004339.
eCollection 2014 Aug.

TLR2 signaling decreases transmission of Streptococcus pneumoniae by limiting
bacterial shedding in an infant mouse Influenza A co-infection model.

Richard AL(1), Siegel SJ(1), Erikson J(2), Weiser JN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(2)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

While the importance of transmission of pathogens is widely accepted, there is
currently little mechanistic understanding of this process. Nasal carriage of
Streptococcus pneumoniae (the pneumococcus) is common in humans, especially in
early childhood, and is a prerequisite for the development of disease and
transmission among hosts. In this study, we adapted an infant mouse model to
elucidate host determinants of transmission of S. pneumoniae from inoculated
index mice to uninfected contact mice. In the context of co-infection with
influenza A virus, the pneumococcus was transmitted among wildtype littermates,
with approximately half of the contact mice acquiring colonization. Mice
deficient for TLR2 were colonized to a similar density but transmitted S.
pneumoniae more efficiently (100% transmission) than wildtype animals and showed 
decreased expression of interferon Î± and higher viral titers. The greater viral
burden in tlr2-/- mice correlated with heightened inflammation, and was
responsible for an increase in bacterial shedding from the mouse nose. The role
of TLR2 signaling was confirmed by intranasal treatment of wildtype mice with the
agonist Pam3Cys, which decreased inflammation and reduced bacterial shedding and 
transmission. Taken together, these results suggest that the innate immune
response to influenza virus promotes bacterial shedding, allowing the bacteria to
transit from host to host. These findings provide insight into the role of host
factors in the increased pneumococcal carriage rates seen during flu season and
contribute to our overall understanding of pathogen transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004339 
PMCID: PMC4148449
PMID: 25166617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

