
1. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 2;9(9):e106312. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106312. eCollection
2014.

The construction and evaluation of reference spectra for the identification of
human pathogenic microorganisms by MALDI-TOF MS.

Xiao D(1), Ye C(1), Zhang H(1), Kan B(1), Lu J(1), Xu J(1), Jiang X(1), Zhao
F(1), You Y(1), Yan X(1), Wang D(1), Hu Y(1), Zhang M(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, National
Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China; Collaborative Innovation Center
for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Hangzhou, China.

Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry
(MALDI-TOF MS) is an emerging technique for the rapid and high-throughput
identification of microorganisms. There remains a dearth of studies in which a
large number of pathogenic microorganisms from a particular country or region are
utilized for systematic analyses. In this study, peptide mass reference spectra
(PMRS) were constructed and evaluated from numerous human pathogens (a total of
1019 strains from 94 species), including enteric (46 species), respiratory (21
species), zoonotic (17 species), and nosocomial pathogens (10 species), using a
MALDI-TOF MS Biotyper system (MBS). The PMRS for 380 strains of 52 species were
new contributions to the original reference database (ORD). Compared with the
ORD, the new reference database (NRD) allowed for 28.2% (from 71.5% to 99.7%) and
42.3% (from 51.3% to 93.6%) improvements in identification at the genus and
species levels, respectively. Misidentification rates were 91.7% and 57.1% lower 
with the NRD than with the ORD for genus and species identification,
respectively. Eight genera and 25 species were misidentified. For genera and
species that are challenging to accurately identify, identification results must 
be manually determined and adjusted in accordance with the database parameters.
Through augmentation, the MBS demonstrated a high identification accuracy and
specificity for human pathogenic microorganisms. This study sought to provide
theoretical guidance for using PMRS databases in various fields, such as clinical
diagnosis and treatment, disease control, quality assurance, and food safety
inspection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106312 
PMCID: PMC4152241
PMID: 25181391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

