
1. Patholog Res Int. 2014;2014:748740. doi: 10.1155/2014/748740. Epub 2014 Aug 11.

The regulation of inflammatory pathways and infectious disease of the cervix by
seminal fluid.

Adefuye A(1), Katz AA(1), Sales KJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC/UCT Receptor Biology Research Unit, Institute of Infectious Disease and
Molecular Medicine and Division of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Cape Town, Room No. 2.02 Wernher and Beit North,
Observatory 7925, South Africa.

The connection between human papillomavirus (HPV) infection and the consequent
sequelae which establishes cervical neoplastic transformation and invasive
cervical cancer has redefined many aspects of cervical cancer research. However
there is still much that we do not know. In particular, the impact of external
factors, like seminal fluid in sexually active women, on pathways that regulate
cervical inflammation and tumorigenesis, have yet to be fully understood. HPV
infection is regarded as the initiating noninflammatory cause of the disease;
however emerging evidence points to resident HPV infections as drivers of
inflammatory pathways that play important roles in tumorigenesis as well as in
the susceptibility to other infections such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection. Moreover there is emerging evidence to support a role for seminal
fluid, in particular, the inflammatory bioactive lipids, and prostaglandins which
are present in vast quantities in seminal fluid in regulating pathways that can
exacerbate inflammation of the cervix, speed up tumorigenesis, and enhance
susceptibility to HIV infection. This review will highlight some of our current
knowledge of the role of seminal fluid as a potent driver of inflammatory and
tumorigenic pathways in the cervix and will provide some evidence to propose a
role for seminal plasma prostaglandins in HIV infection and AIDS-related cancer.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/748740 
PMCID: PMC4144323
PMID: 25180120 

