
1. Ann Hematol. 2015 Feb;94(2):239-47. doi: 10.1007/s00277-014-2188-8. Epub 2014 Sep
6.

Analysis of prognostic factors and comparison of prognostic scores in peripheral 
T cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified: a single-institution study of 105
Chinese patients.

Xu P(1), Yu D, Wang L, Shen Y, Shen Z, Zhao W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Shanghai Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 197 
Rui Jin Er Road, Shanghai, 200025, China.

Peripheral T cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS) is a heterogeneous
subtype of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. This study aims to better define the
prognostic factors and compare the predictive value of the prognostic scores in
Chinese patients with PTCL-NOS. One hundred and five patients diagnosed as
PTCL-NOS from our institution were retrospectively studied and grouped according 
to four previously described prognostic scores [International Prognostic Index
(IPI), Prognostic Index for PTCL-NOS (PIT), modified PIT (m-PIT), and
International PTCL Project (IPTCLP)]. In addition to clinical parameters,
peripheral lymphopenia and thrombocytopenia, serum Epstein-Barr virus positivity,
and tumor Ki-67 were significantly associated with poor disease outcome.
Multivariate analysis revealed that age >60Â years, poor performance status,
elevated lactic dehydrogenase, and bone marrow involvement were independent
adverse variables for survival. All prognostic scores were successful for
survival estimation. Risk subgroups in IPI and PIT could be further discriminated
by platelet count (IPTCLP factor) and Ki-67 (m-PIT factor), respectively.
Together, patient- and tumor-specific characteristics may be incorporated in risk
stratification of PTCL-NOS patients. The prognostic scores could be mutually
active to improve their predictive value of disease outcome.

DOI: 10.1007/s00277-014-2188-8 
PMID: 25193354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

