
1. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 11;9(9):e106263. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106263.
eCollection 2014.

Development and evaluation of single domain antibodies for vaccinia and the L1
antigen.

Walper SA(1), Liu JL(1), Zabetakis D(1), Anderson GP(1), Goldman ER(1).

Author information: 
(1)Naval Research Laboratory, Center for Bio/Molecular Science and Engineering,
Washington, DC, United States of America.

There is ongoing interest to develop high affinity, thermal stable recognition
elements to replace conventional antibodies in biothreat detection assays. As
part of this effort, single domain antibodies that target vaccinia virus were
developed. Two llamas were immunized with killed viral particles followed by
boosts with the recombinant membrane protein, L1, to stimulate the immune
response for envelope and membrane proteins of the virus. The variable domains of
the induced heavy chain antibodies were selected from M13 phage display libraries
developed from isolated RNA. Selection via biopanning on the L1 antigen produced 
single domain antibodies that were specific and had affinities ranging from
4×10(-9) M to 7.0×10(-10) M, as determined by surface plasmon resonance. Several 
showed good ability to refold after heat denaturation. These L1-binding single
domain antibodies, however, failed to recognize the killed vaccinia antigen.
Useful vaccinia binding single domain antibodies were isolated by a second
selection using the killed virus as the target. The virus binding single domain
antibodies were incorporated in sandwich assays as both capture and tracer using 
the MAGPIX system yielding limits of detection down to 4×10(5) pfu/ml, a
four-fold improvement over the limit obtained using conventional antibodies. This
work demonstrates the development of anti-vaccinia single domain antibodies and
their incorporation into sandwich assays for viral detection. It also highlights 
the properties of high affinity and thermal stability that are hallmarks of
single domain antibodies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106263 
PMCID: PMC4161341
PMID: 25211488  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

