
1. Vet Microbiol. 2014 Nov 7;174(1-2):27-38. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2014.08.030. Epub
2014 Sep 10.

Efficacy of CSF vaccine CP7_E2alf in piglets with maternally derived antibodies.

Eblé PL(1), Quak S(1), Geurts Y(1), Moonen-Leusen HW(1), Loeffen WL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Central Veterinary Institute of Wageningen UR (CVI), P.O. Box 65, 8200 AB
Lelystad, The Netherlands.
(2)Central Veterinary Institute of Wageningen UR (CVI), P.O. Box 65, 8200 AB
Lelystad, The Netherlands. Electronic address: willie.loeffen@wur.nl.

There is a need for live DIVA (differentiating infected from vaccinated animals) 
vaccines against classical swine fever (CSF). The aim of this study was to
investigate whether vaccination with the chimeric pestivirus vaccine CP7_E2alf is
efficacious to protect young piglets born from vaccinated sows, thus with
maternally derived antibodies (MDAs). Groups of 10 piglets each, with or without 
MDAs, were vaccinated either intramuscularly (IM), at an age of 3 or 6 weeks, or 
orally (OR), at an age of 6 weeks. Five piglets of each group were challenged
with CSFV strain Koslov and protection against clinical disease, virus shedding
and transmission were studied. Vaccination with CP7_E2alf, both in the presence
of MDA's and in piglets without MDA's, protected against severe clinical signs,
but virus shedding from most inoculated piglets and transmission to contact pigs 
was observed. However, virus transmission in the vaccinated piglets was
significantly reduced as compared to non-vaccinated piglets, although the
reproduction ratio's R calculated from the results in the vaccinated pigs from
our study were not yet significantly below 1. The efficacy of vaccination with
CP7_E2alf in the presence of MDAs (R IMvac=0.8, R ORvac=0.4) seemed to be
slightly less as compared to vaccination in the absence of MDAs (R IMvac=0.2, R
ORvac=0). On a population level, the results suggest that the CP7_E2alf vaccine
is an effective tool in the control and eradication of CSF and, moreover, can be 
applied for both IM and oral use for young age groups, with MDAs having a limited
effect on the efficacy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2014.08.030 
PMID: 25265929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

