
1. Virology. 2014 Nov;468-470:621-630. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.09.010. Epub 2014
Oct 11.

Recombinant rabies virus expressing IFNα1 enhanced immune responses resulting in 
its attenuation and stronger immunogenicity.

Wang Y(1), Tian Q(1), Xu X(1), Yang X(1), Luo J(1), Mo W(1), Peng J(1), Niu X(2),
Luo Y(1), Guo X(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou, China.
(2)The First Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: xfguo@scau.edu.cn.

Several studies have shown that type 1 interferons (IFNs) exert multiple
biological effects on both innate and adaptive immune responses. Here, we
investigated the pathogenicity and immunogenicity of recombinant rabies virus
(RABV) expressing canine interferon α1 (rHEP-CaIFNα1). It was shown that Kun Ming
(KM) mice that received a single intramuscular immunization with rHEP-CaIFNα1 had
an earlier increase and a higher level of virus-neutralizing antibody titers
compared with immunization of the parent HEP-Flury. A challenge experiment
further confirmed that more mice that were immunized with rHEP-CaIFNα1 survived
compared with mice immunized with the parent virus. Quantitative real-time PCR
indicated that rHEP-CaIFNα1 induced a stronger innate immune response, especially
the type 1 IFN response. Flow cytometry was conducted to show that rHEP-CaIFNα1
recruited more activated B cells in lymph nodes and CD8 T cells in the peripheral
blood, which is beneficial to achieve virus clearance in the early infective
stage.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.09.010 
PMID: 25310498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

