
1. Transplantation. 2014 Oct 27;98(8):835-43. doi: 10.1097/TP.0000000000000327.

Adeno-associated viral vector 2.9 thymosin ß4 application attenuates rejection
after heart transplantation: results of a preclinical study in the pig.

Postrach J(1), Schmidt M, Thormann M, Thein E, Burdorf L, Reichart B, Sotlar K,
Walz C, Faber C, Bauer A, Schmoeckel M, Kupatt C, Hinkel R.

Author information: 
(1)1 Herzchirurgischen Klinik und Poliklinik, Klinikum Großhadern, LMU, Munich,
Germany. 2 DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research), partner site Munich 
Heart Alliance, Munich, Germany. 3 Institut für Chirurgische Forschung am
Walter-Brendel-Zentrum für Experimentelle Medizin, LMU, Munich, Germany. 4
Pathologisches Institut, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München. 5 Klinik für
Anästhesiologie, Klinikum Großhadern, LMU, Munich, Germany. 6 Medizinische Klinik
Und Poliklinik I, Klinikum Großhadern, LMU, Munich, Germany. 7 Address
correspondence to: Rabea Hinkel, D.V.M., Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik I,
Klinikum Großhadern, LMU, Marchioninistr. 15, 81377 München.

BACKGROUND: Graft survival is the most important factor for morbidity and
mortality in cardiac transplantation. Improved immunosuppression significantly
reduced early graft rejection. However, acute rejection may predispose to chronic
rejection. Targeting both phases of the recipient's immune-reactivity by means of
long-acting recombinant adeno-associated viral vectors (AAVs) encoding
anti-inflammatory and cardioprotective factors appears to be a promising
therapeutic approach. We investigate thymosin ß4 (Tß4) possessing
anti-inflammatory and prosurvival abilities, as a means for pretransplant gene
therapy.
METHODS: Heterotopic, abdominal transplantation of cardiac allografts into
landrace or into Munich mini pigs (n=5 per group) was performed. Transplants were
transduced with AAV2.9 before transplantation by means of in situ perfusion of
the donor organ. Vascuar endothelial growth factor and AAV2.9.Tß4 or AAV2.9.LacZ 
were added to the autologous blood used for perfusing the grafts for a period of 
45 min. Immunosuppression was applied for 10 days after the operation. Transgene 
expression, capillary density, graft function, survival, and rejection were
assessed.
RESULTS: The AAV2.9 transduction induced robust overexpression of the transgene. 
In addition, Tß4 ameliorated inflammation, necrosis, vascular reaction (acute
rejection) and in parallel improved capillary density. In addition, graft
survival was significantly prolonged (10±3 days AAV2.9.LacZ vs. 31±4 days
AAV2.9.Tß4). In the mini pig model, regional myocardial function of the grafts
was improved by Tß4 transduction compared to LacZ (9.1%±0.9% subendocardial
segment shortening in AAV2.9.LacZ vs. 15.8%±2.3% in AAV2.9.Tß4).
CONCLUSION: In situ AAV2.9-mediated gene transfer of thymosin β4 attenuated graft
rejection in a heterotopic heart transplantation model. Perioperative
cardioprotection by means of gene therapy might improve graft survival in cardiac
allotransplantation.

DOI: 10.1097/TP.0000000000000327 
PMID: 25321165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

