
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2015 Feb 15;60(4):549-56. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciu868. Epub 2014 Oct
30.

Pharmacokinetics and safety of moxifloxacin in children with multidrug-resistant 
tuberculosis.

Thee S(1), Garcia-Prats AJ(2), Draper HR(2), McIlleron HM(3), Wiesner L(3),
Castel S(3), Schaaf HS(2), Hesseling AC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Desmond Tutu Tuberculosis Centre, Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, South Africa
Department of Paediatric Pneumology and Immunology, Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Charité, Germany.
(2)Desmond Tutu Tuberculosis Centre, Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, South Africa.
(3)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, University of Cape 
Town, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Moxifloxacin is currently recommended at a dose of 7.5-10 mg/kg for
children with multidrug-resistant (MDR) tuberculosis, but pharmacokinetic and
long-term safety data of moxifloxacin in children with tuberculosis are lacking. 
An area under the curve (AUC) of 40-60 µg × h/mL following an oral moxifloxacin
dose of 400 mg has been reported in adults.
METHODS: In a prospective pharmacokinetic and safety study, children 7-15 years
of age routinely receiving moxifloxacin 10 mg/kg daily as part of multidrug
treatment for MDR tuberculosis in Cape Town, South Africa, for at least 2 weeks, 
underwent intensive pharmacokinetic sampling (predose and 1, 2, 4, 8, and either 
6 or 11 hours) and were followed for safety. Assays were performed using liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, and pharmacokinetic measures calculated 
using noncompartmental analysis.
RESULTS: Twenty-three children were included (median age, 11.1 years;
interquartile range [IQR], 9.2-12.0 years); 6 of 23 (26.1%) were human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected. The median maximum serum concentration
(Cmax), area under the curve from 0-8 hours (AUC0-8), time until Cmax (Tmax), and
half-life for moxifloxacin were 3.08 (IQR, 2.85-3.82) µg/mL, 17.24 (IQR,
14.47-21.99) µg × h/mL, 2.0 (IQR, 1.0-8.0) h, and 4.14 (IQR, 3.45-6.11),
respectively. Three children, all HIV-infected, were underweight for age. AUC0-8 
was reduced by 6.85 µg × h/mL (95% confidence interval, -11.15 to -2.56) in
HIV-infected children. Tmax was shorter with crushed vs whole tablets (P = .047).
Except in 1 child with hepatotoxicity, all adverse effects were mild and
nonpersistent. Mean corrected QT interval was 403 (standard deviation, 30) ms,
and no prolongation >450 ms occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: Children 7-15 years of age receiving moxifloxacin 10 mg/kg/day as
part of MDR tuberculosis treatment have low serum concentrations compared with
adults receiving 400 mg moxifloxacin daily. Higher moxifloxacin dosages may be
required in children. Moxifloxacin was well tolerated in children treated for MDR
tuberculosis.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciu868 
PMCID: PMC4366580
PMID: 25362206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

