
1. J Gen Virol. 1989 Mar;70 ( Pt 3):695-704.

Complementation of a herpes simplex virus type 1 Vmw110 deletion mutant by human 
cytomegalovirus.

Stow EC(1), Stow ND.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Institute of Virology, Glasgow, U.K.

The herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) mutant dl1403 contains a 2 kb deletion
within the sequences encoding the immediate early polypeptide Vmw110. Previous
experiments showed that although dl1403 exhibits normal patterns of gene
expression following infection at an m.o.i. of 5 p.f.u./cell its growth and
plaquing efficiency are impaired in low multiplicity infections, particularly in 
human foetal lung (HFL) cells. We have now investigated the ability of two other 
human herpesviruses, varicella-zoster virus (VZV) and human cytomegalovirus
(HCMV), to compensate for this defect at low m.o.i. in HFL cells. Co-infection
with HCMV resulted in greatly increased plaque numbers and the apparent
particle/p.f.u. ratios of dl1403 stocks were reduced to values similar to those
exhibited by wild-type HSV-1 stocks. Complementation of dl1403 in low
multiplicity infections by HCMV and VZV was also demonstrated by an increased
yield of the mutant virus and an increase in synthesis of dl1403 DNA. Ultraviolet
irradiation of HCMV abolished its ability to complement dl1403 and the presence
of adenovirus 5 had no stimulatory effect on dl1403 DNA replication. When HFL
monolayers were infected with dilutions of dl1403 stocks such that no plaques
were produced, replication of the mutant virus could be induced by superinfection
with HCMV 7 days after the initial infection. These results indicate that a
non-lytic interaction between dl1403 and HFL cells is a more likely consequence
of a low multiplicity infection than plaque formation.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-70-3-695 
PMID: 2543754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

