
1. Presse Med. 2014 Dec;43(12 Pt 2):e405-11. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2014.09.008. Epub
2014 Nov 6.

Merkel cell carcinoma: The first human cancer shown to be associated with a
polyomavirus.

Samimi M(1), Touzé A(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Tours, Molecular virology and immunology, ISP 1282, INRA, 37044 
Tours cedex, France; University Hospital of Tours, Dermatology department, 37044 
Tours cedex, France. Electronic address: samimi.mahtab@yahoo.fr.
(2)University of Tours, Molecular virology and immunology, ISP 1282, INRA, 37044 
Tours cedex, France.

Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a rare, malignant primary neuroendocrine cancer of
the skin, usually affecting elderly, white people in sun-exposed areas. This is a
highly aggressive tumor with strong propensity to metastasize. Surgery and
radiation therapy remain the mainstay of treatment, with no curative treatment in
case of disseminated metastases. Until 2008, MCC was thought to be caused by the 
malignant transformation of resident Merkel cells, but no investigation of a
predominant molecular pathway that could be involved in MCC pathogenesis was
successful. A real revolution in MCC understanding and management occurred in
2008, when a new human polyomavirus (MCPyV) was found to be the main etiological 
agent of this skin cancer. Following the discovery of MCPyV, the association of
MCPyV with MCC has been confirmed worldwide, with detection of MCPyV in about 80%
of MCCs. At the same time it had been shown that MCPyV infection is almost
ubiquitous in healthy subjects, and MCPyV is thought to be persistent resident of
the skin microbiome although the route of transmission, the host cell, the viral 
cycle and/or latency remain unknown. Most studies suggest that there may be two
subtypes of MCC: MCPyV-positive (80%) and MCPyV-negative (20%) MCCs, and various 
studies have reported a better prognosis associated with MCPyV infection. The
discovery of MCPyV in MCC patients opens up new therapeutic insights. The
necessity and persistence of expression of MCPyV oncoproteins during MCC
development make these proteins promising therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2014.09.008 
PMID: 25455636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

