
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Apr;1853(4):858-71. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.11.014.
Epub 2014 Nov 18.

Plasma membrane reorganization: A glycolipid gateway for microbes.

Aigal S(1), Claudinon J(2), Römer W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestraße 1,
79104 Freiburg, Germany; BIOSS Centre for Biological Signaling Studies,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestraβe 18, 79104 Freiburg, Germany;
International Max Planck Research School for Molecular and Cellular Biology
(IMPRS-MCB), Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Stübeweg 51, 
79108 Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address: aigal@ie-freiburg.mpg.de.
(2)Faculty of Biology, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestraße 1,
79104 Freiburg, Germany; BIOSS Centre for Biological Signaling Studies,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestraβe 18, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Faculty of Biology, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestraße 1,
79104 Freiburg, Germany; BIOSS Centre for Biological Signaling Studies,
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Schänzlestraβe 18, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
Electronic address: winfried.roemer@bioss.uni-freiburg.de.

Ligand-receptor interactions, which represent the core for cell signaling and
internalization processes are largely affected by the spatial configuration of
host cell receptors. There is a growing piece of evidence that receptors are not 
homogeneously distributed within the plasma membrane, but are rather
pre-clustered in nanodomains, or clusters are formed upon ligand binding.
Pathogens have evolved many strategies to evade the host immune system and to
ensure their survival by hijacking plasma membrane receptors that are most often 
associated with lipid rafts. In this review, we discuss the early stage molecular
and physiological events that occur following ligand binding to host cell
glycolipids. The ability of various biological ligands (e.g. toxins, lectins,
viruses or bacteria) that bind to glycolipids to induce their own uptake into
mammalian cells by creating negative membrane curvature and membrane
invaginations is explored. We highlight recent trends in understanding nanoscale 
plasma membrane (re-)organization and present the benefits of using synthetic
membrane systems. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Nanoscale
membrane organisation and signalling.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.11.014 
PMID: 25450969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

