
1. Arch Virol. 1989;106(3-4):261-79.

Changes in the bovine herpesvirus 1 genome during acute infection, after
reactivation from latency, and after superinfection in the host animal.

Whetstone CA(1), Miller JM, Bortner DM, Van der Maaten MJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Animal Disease Center, USDA, Agricultural Research Service, Ames,
Iowa.

Three subtypes, as defined by HindIII restriction endonuclease (RE) analysis
patterns, of bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV 1) were used to inoculate seronegative,
BHV 1-free cattle. These included: infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus
(IBRV), subtype 1.1; infectious pustular vulvovaginitis virus (IPPV) isolate K22,
subtype 1.2b; and IPVV isolate FI, subtype 1.2a. Nasal, vaginal, and buffy coat
samples were taken for virus isolation from each animal. RE analysis was done on 
virus isolates collected during acute infection, after reactivation from latency,
and after reactivation followed by superinfection with a subtype of BHV 1 that
differed from the primary inoculation virus. Changes occurred in the BHV 1 genome
after only 1 passage in the host animal, and varied from tissue to tissue within 
the same animal. Viruses reactivated from latency also displayed genome
variability. Only animals that received IPVV as the primary inoculation virus
were successfully superinfected. After superinfection, cattle shed both
superinfecting and reactivated viruses, and genome variability was observed.
These data suggest that the application of RE analysis in diagnostic and
epidemiologic studies of BHV 1 is limited to analysis between types and subtypes,
and is not applicable for the examination of isolates from within a BHV 1
subtype.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01313957 
PMID: 2549919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

