
1. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Feb 10;4(2):239-54. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.12.007.
Epub 2015 Jan 15.

Disequilibrium of BMP2 levels in the breast stem cell niche launches epithelial
transformation by overamplifying BMPR1B cell response.

Chapellier M(1), Bachelard-Cascales E(2), Schmidt X(1), Clément F(1), Treilleux
I(3), Delay E(3), Jammot A(1), Ménétrier-Caux C(3), Pochon G(1), Besançon R(1),
Voeltzel T(1), Caron de Fromentel C(1), Caux C(3), Blay JY(3), Iggo R(2),
Maguer-Satta V(4).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR5286, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, 69000 Lyon, France;
Inserm U1052, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, 69000 Lyon, France;
Université de Lyon, 69000 Lyon, France; Department of Immunity, Virus, and
Microenvironment, 69000 Lyon, France; Université de Lyon 1, ISPB, 69000 Lyon,
France.
(2)Inserm U916, Institut Bergonié, University of Bordeaux, 33076 Bordeaux,
France.
(3)CNRS UMR5286, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, 69000 Lyon, France;
Inserm U1052, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, 69000 Lyon, France;
Université de Lyon, 69000 Lyon, France; Department of Immunity, Virus, and
Microenvironment, 69000 Lyon, France; Université de Lyon 1, ISPB, 69000 Lyon,
France; Centre Léon Bérard, 69000 Lyon, France.
(4)CNRS UMR5286, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, 69000 Lyon, France;
Inserm U1052, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, 69000 Lyon, France;
Université de Lyon, 69000 Lyon, France; Department of Immunity, Virus, and
Microenvironment, 69000 Lyon, France; Université de Lyon 1, ISPB, 69000 Lyon,
France. Electronic address: veronique.maguer-satta@lyon.unicancer.fr.

Understanding the mechanisms of cancer initiation will help to prevent and manage
the disease. At present, the role of the breast microenvironment in
transformation remains unknown. As BMP2 and BMP4 are important regulators of stem
cells and their niches in many tissues, we investigated their function in early
phases of breast cancer. BMP2 production by tumor microenvironment appeared to be
specifically upregulated in luminal tumors. Chronic exposure of immature human
mammary epithelial cells to high BMP2 levels initiated transformation toward a
luminal tumor-like phenotype, mediated by the receptor BMPR1B. Under
physiological conditions, BMP2 controlled the maintenance and differentiation of 
early luminal progenitors, while BMP4 acted on stem cells/myoepithelial
progenitors. Our data also suggest that microenvironment-induced overexpression
of BMP2 may result from carcinogenic exposure. We reveal a role for BMP2 and the 
breast microenvironment in the initiation of stem cell transformation, thus
providing insight into the etiology of luminal breast cancer.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.12.007 
PMCID: PMC4325271
PMID: 25601208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

