
1. J Invertebr Pathol. 2015 Mar;126:1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jip.2015.02.001. Epub 2015
Feb 9.

Artemia franciscana as a vector for infectious myonecrosis virus (IMNV) to
Litopenaeus vannamei juvenile.

da Silva SM(1), Lavander HD(1), de Santana Luna MM(1), de Melo Eloi da Silva
AO(1), Gálvez AO(1), Coimbra MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Pesca e Aquicultura, Universidade Federal Rural de Pernambuco,
Av. Dom Manoel de Medeiros, 52171-900 Dois Irmãos, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Pesca e Aquicultura, Universidade Federal Rural de Pernambuco,
Av. Dom Manoel de Medeiros, 52171-900 Dois Irmãos, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil.
Electronic address: raquel@depaq.ufrpe.br.

In 2004, the infectious myonecrosis virus (IMNV) was recognized as the main cause
of Litopenaeusvannamei shrimp culture's drop in Brazil. In health animal control 
programs, in order to reduce virus prevalence in production units it is necessary
to screen live feed used. Among live diets used in aquaculture, the brine shrimp 
Artemia sp. is essential in crustacean larviculture and maturation. The aim of
the present study was to investigate the susceptibility of Artemiafranciscana to 
IMNV through an immersion challenge and virus-phytoplankton adhesion route and to
elucidate its role as a vector for IMNV transmission to L.vannamei. A.
franciscana adults were infected with IMNV through both routes, as demonstrated
by PCR-positive reactions. However, infected A. franciscana showed no signs of
infection. More than 40% of L. vannamei juveniles fed with IMNV-infected A.
franciscana by virus-phytoplankton adhesion route were positive by real-time PCR,
whereas only a 10% infection rate was found among shrimp fed with IMNV-infected
brine shrimp using the immersion challenge. Significant differences were found in
mean viral load between immersion and virus-phytoplankton adhesion shrimp
treatments (p ⩽ 0.05). Moreover, the mean viral loads were 1.34 × 10(2) and 1.48 
× 10(4) copies/μg(-1) of total RNA for virus-phytoplankton adhesion and
IMNV-infected tissue treatments, respectively, and the difference was not
significant (p ⩾ 0.05). The results indicated that A. franciscana act as a vector
for IMNV transmission under the experimental conditions examined. Although no
mass mortalities were detected in L. vannamei fed with IMNV-infected brine
shrimp, these infected shrimp should not be disregarded as a source of IMNV in
grow-out units.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jip.2015.02.001 
PMID: 25676109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

