
1. Mol Plant. 2015 Jun;8(6):911-21. doi: 10.1016/j.molp.2015.02.010. Epub 2015 Feb
28.

Targeted Lipidomics Studies Reveal that Linolenic Acid Promotes Cotton Fiber
Elongation by Activating Phosphatidylinositol and Phosphatidylinositol
Monophosphate Biosynthesis.

Liu GJ(1), Xiao GH(1), Liu NJ(1), Liu D(1), Chen PS(1), Qin YM(2), Zhu YX(1).

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, College of Life
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.
(2)The State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, College of Life
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. Electronic address:
qinym@pku.edu.cn.

The membrane lipids from fast-elongating wild-type cotton (Gossypium hirsutum)
fibers at 10 days post-anthesis, wild-type ovules with fiber cells removed, and
ovules from the fuzzless-lintless mutant harvested at the same age, were
extracted, separated, and quantified. Fiber cells contained significantly higher 
amounts of phosphatidylinositol (PI) than both ovule samples with PI 34:3 being
the most predominant species. The genes encoding fatty acid desaturases
(Δ(15)GhFAD), PI synthase (PIS) and PI kinase (PIK) were expressed in a
fiber-preferential manner. Further analysis of phosphatidylinositol monophosphate
(PIP) indicated that elongating fibers contained four- to five-fold higher
amounts of PIP 34:3 than the ovules. Exogenously applied linolenic acid (C18:3), 
soybean L-α-PI, and PIPs containing PIP 34:3 promoted significant fiber growth,
whereas a liver PI lacking the C18:3 moiety, linoleic acid, and PIP 36:2 were
completely ineffective. The growth inhibitory effects of carbenoxolone,
5-hydroxytryptamine, and wortmannin were reverted by C18:3, PI, or PIP,
respectively, suggesting that PIP signaling is essential for fiber cell growth.
Furthermore, cotton plants expressing virus-induced gene-silencing constructs
that specifically suppressed GhΔ(15)FAD, GhPIS, or GhPIK expression, resulted in 
significantly short-fibered phenotypes. Our data provide the basis for in-depth
studies on the roles of PI and PIP in mediating cotton fiber growth.

Copyright © 2015 The Author. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molp.2015.02.010 
PMID: 25731673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

