
1. Arch Virol. 2015 May;160(5):1229-38. doi: 10.1007/s00705-015-2387-1. Epub 2015
Mar 15.

Molecular characterization and multiple infections of rotavirus, norovirus,
sapovirus, astrovirus and adenovirus in outpatients with sporadic gastroenteritis
in Shanghai, China, 2010-2011.

Lu L(1), Jia R, Zhong H, Xu M, Su L, Cao L, Dong Z, Dong N, Xu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Children's Hospital of Fudan University,
399 Wanyuan Road, Shanghai, 201102, China.

Rotavirus (RV), norovirus (NoV), sapovirus (SaV), human astrovirus (HAstV) and
human adenovirus (HAdV) are significant because they are the most common
pathogens that cause diarrhea in young children. The aim of this study was to
investigate the genetic characteristics and compare the roles of these five
viruses in outpatient children with diarrhea in Shanghai. A total of 436 fecal
samples were collected from pediatric patients with acute gastroenteritis from
January 2010 to December 2011. The selected samples were subjected to reverse
transcription PCR (RT-PCR) or PCR to detect and genotype RV, NoV, SaV, HAstV and 
HAdV. RV (43.3 %, 189/436) was the most prevalent virus, followed by NoV (28.9 %,
126/436), HAdV (7.1 %, 31/436). HAstV (1.8 %, 8/436) and SaV (0.5 %, 2/436). The 
percentage of multiple infection cases was 14.9 % (65/436), and RV + NoV was the 
predominant mixed infection. The RV genotype combinations of P[8]G3 (52/189, 27.5
%), P[8]G1 (51/189, 26.9 %) and P[8]G9 (48/189, 25.4 %) occurred most frequently.
The predominant NoV genotype was GII.4 (73.0 %, 92/126), and the majority of
GII.4 clustered as GII.4-2006b (65.2 %, 60/92). Two of the SaV cases were
identified as GI.2 and GII.1. All HAstV-positive samples belonged to HAstV-1. The
predominant HAdV type was HAdV-41 (45.2 %, 14/31). This study clearly shows the
diversity of the viral causative agents of acute gastroenteritis in outpatient
children in Shanghai, which will provide baseline information for future
vaccination strategies and development in this area.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-015-2387-1 
PMID: 25772574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

