
1. Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2015;2015:126532. doi: 10.1155/2015/126532. Epub 2015
Feb 18.

Hepatitis B virus-related glomerulonephritis: not a predominant cause of
proteinuria in korean patients with chronic hepatitis B.

Yoo JJ(1), Lee JH(1), Yoon JH(1), Lee M(1), Lee DH(1), Cho Y(1), Jang ES(2), Cho 
EJ(1), Yu SJ(1), Kim YJ(1), Lee HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Liver Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul 110744,
Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam City, Gyeonggi-do,
Seoul 110744, Republic of Korea.

Background/Aims. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) can form immune complexes which may
result in various types of glomerulonephritis (GN). However, proteinuria can
occur because of other kidney diseases besides HBV-related GN (HBV-GN). The aim
of this study is to elucidate the causes of proteinuria and report on the
clinical outcomes of HBV-GN. Methods. We reviewed the medical records of patients
positive for serum hepatitis B surface antigen who underwent renal biopsies due
to proteinuria at a tertiary medical center in Korea. Results. A total of 55
patients were included. HBV-GN was diagnosed in 20 (36.4%) of the patients by
confirming the presence of immune complexes (12 of 13 membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis, 7 of 8 membranous glomerulonephritis, and 1 of 13
immunoglobulin A nephropathy). Twenty-one patients had other types of GN. A total
of 13 (65%) HBV-GN patients were treated with antiviral agents for a median of 11
months. However, the degrees of proteinuria were not significantly reduced in the
antiviral intervention group when compared to the control group. Conclusions.
Proteinuria can be caused by various glomerular diseases and HBV-GN accounts for 
one-third of total GN cases. Well-designed prospective study is needed to assess 
whether antiviral therapy against HBV infection may improve the prognosis of
HBV-GN.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/126532 
PMCID: PMC4348579
PMID: 25788940 

