
1. Virology. 2015 May;479-480:234-46. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.03.009. Epub 2015
Mar 24.

Transmission of influenza A viruses.

Neumann G(1), Kawaoka Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Influenza Research Institute, Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 575 Science Drive,
Madison, WI 53711, USA.
(2)Influenza Research Institute, Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 575 Science Drive,
Madison, WI 53711, USA; Division of Virology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology and International Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Institute
of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. Electronic
address: kawaokay@svm.vetmed.wisc.edu.

Influenza A viruses cause respiratory infections that range from asymptomatic to 
deadly in humans. Widespread outbreaks (pandemics) are attributable to 'novel'
viruses that possess a viral hemagglutinin (HA) gene to which humans lack
immunity. After a pandemic, these novel viruses form stable virus lineages in
humans and circulate until they are replaced by other novel viruses. The factors 
and mechanisms that facilitate virus transmission among hosts and the
establishment of novel lineages are not completely understood, but the HA and
basic polymerase 2 (PB2) proteins are thought to play essential roles in these
processes by enabling avian influenza viruses to infect mammals and replicate
efficiently in their new host. Here, we summarize our current knowledge of the
contributions of HA, PB2, and other viral components to virus transmission and
the formation of new virus lineages.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.03.009 
PMCID: PMC4424116
PMID: 25812763  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

