
1. Vet Microbiol. 2015 Jun 12;177(3-4):347-52. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2015.03.020.
Epub 2015 Mar 27.

Epidemiology and molecular characterisation of duck hepatitis A virus from
different duck breeds in Egypt.

Erfan AM(1), Selim AA(2), Moursi MK(2), Nasef SA(2), Abdelwhab EM(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory for Veterinary Quality Control on Poultry Production,
Animal Health Research Institute, Dokki, P.O. Box 246, Giza 12618, Egypt.
Electronic address: ahmed.erfan82@yahoo.com.
(2)National Laboratory for Veterinary Quality Control on Poultry Production,
Animal Health Research Institute, Dokki, P.O. Box 246, Giza 12618, Egypt.
(3)National Laboratory for Veterinary Quality Control on Poultry Production,
Animal Health Research Institute, Dokki, P.O. Box 246, Giza 12618, Egypt; The
Federal Research Institute for Animal Health, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut -
Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology, Suedufer 10, Greifswald
Insel-Riems 17493, Germany. Electronic address: sayed.abdel-whab@fli.bund.de.

Duck hepatitis virus (DHV) is an acute highly contagious disease of ducklings
caused by three distinct serotypes of duck hepatitis A virus (DHAV), a member of 
the RNA family Picornaviridae, where serotype 1 is the most widespread serotype
worldwide. To date, little if any is known about the prevalence and genetic
characterisation of DHAV outside Asia. The current study describes surveillance
on DHV in 46 commercial duck farms in Egypt with a history of high mortality in
young ducklings from 3 to 15 day-old from 2012 to 2014. Clinical samples were
examined by generic RT-PCR assays followed by partial sequence analysis of the
5'UTR, VP1 and 3D genes of the vaccine strain and 15 field viruses. The overall
positive rate was 37% (n=17/46). All duck breeds (Pekin, Muscovy, Mallard and
Green Winged) were susceptible to the disease with mortality ranged from 15% to
96.7%. Sequence and phylogenetic analyses indicated that the Egyptian strains
cluster in the DHAV serotype 1 with Asian viruses and distinguishable from the
vaccine strains. So far, this is the first report on the genetic characterisation
of DHAV in Egypt. This study may be useful to better understand the epidemiology 
and evolution of DHAV.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2015.03.020 
PMID: 25862279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

