
1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2015 Jul;25(7):1163-9. doi: 10.4014/jmb.1503.03106.

Efficacy of Poly-Gamma-Glutamic Acid in Women with High-Risk Human
Papillomavirus-Positive Vaginal Intraepithelial Neoplasia: an Observational Pilot
Study.

Koo YJ(1), Min KJ(1), Hong JH(1), Lee JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Korea University Medical Center,
Seoul 152-730, Republic of Korea.

Poly-gamma-glutamic acid (γ-PGA) is a natural polymer that is synthesized by
Bacillus species and has been reported to have antitumor activity. The aim of
this study was to investigate the effect of γ-PGA on the treatment of vaginal
intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN). A retrospective observational study on γ-PGA
therapy for biopsy-proven VAIN was conducted. The efficacy was assessed by
evaluating the results of Pap cytology and the viral load of high-risk HPV at
three time points: at enrollment, and at the first and second post-treatment
visits. Of 17 patients treated with γ-PGA, only 12 patients who had a high-risk
HPV infection were included in the analysis. Histology was VAIN1 in seven
patients, VAIN2 in two patients, and VAIN3 in three patients. γ-PGA was
administered for newly diagnosed VAIN in five (41.7%) patients and persistent
VAIN in seven (58.3%) patients for the mean time of 4.5 months. At the first and 
second post-treatment visits, cytological regression was observed in five (41.7%)
and six (50%) patients, respectively. Regarding the HPV load, the overall
response rate was 66.7%, and the mean level was 670.6 ± 292.5 RLU at the first
follow-up, which was lower than the initial viral load of 1,494.8 ± 434.5 RLU (p 
= 0.084). At the second follow-up, the overall response rate was 58.3%, and the
mean viral load level was 924.2 ± 493.7 RLU. γ-PGA may be helpful for the
cytological regression and reduction of viral load in patients with high-risk
HPV-positive VAIN, suggesting that γ-PGA is a promising treatment option for
primary or persistent VAIN.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1503.03106 
PMID: 25907060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

