
1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 23;10(4):e0122640. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122640.
eCollection 2015.

Equid herpesvirus type 1 activates platelets.

Stokol T(1), Yeo WM(1), Burnett D(1), DeAngelis N(1), Huang T(2), Osterrieder
N(2), Catalfamo J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, United States of
America.
(2)Institut für Virologie, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2020 Aug 19;15(8):e0237679.

Equid herpesvirus type 1 (EHV-1) causes outbreaks of abortion and neurological
disease in horses. One of the main causes of these clinical syndromes is
thrombosis in placental and spinal cord vessels, however the mechanism for
thrombus formation is unknown. Platelets form part of the thrombus and amplify
and propagate thrombin generation. Here, we tested the hypothesis that EHV-1
activates platelets. We found that two EHV-1 strains, RacL11 and Ab4 at 0.5 or
higher plaque forming unit/cell, activate platelets within 10 minutes, causing
α-granule secretion (surface P-selectin expression) and platelet
microvesiculation (increased small events double positive for CD41 and Annexin
V). Microvesiculation was more pronounced with the RacL11 strain. Virus-induced
P-selectin expression required plasma and 1.0 mM exogenous calcium. P-selectin
expression was abolished and microvesiculation was significantly reduced in
factor VII- or X-deficient human plasma. Both P-selectin expression and
microvesiculation were re-established in factor VII-deficient human plasma with
added purified human factor VIIa (1 nM). A glycoprotein C-deficient mutant of the
Ab4 strain activated platelets as effectively as non-mutated Ab4. P-selectin
expression was abolished and microvesiculation was significantly reduced by
preincubation of virus with a goat polyclonal anti-rabbit tissue factor antibody.
Infectious virus could be retrieved from washed EHV-1-exposed platelets,
suggesting a direct platelet-virus interaction. Our results indicate that EHV-1
activates equine platelets and that α-granule secretion is a consequence of
virus-associated tissue factor triggering factor X activation and thrombin
generation. Microvesiculation was only partly tissue factor and
thrombin-dependent, suggesting the virus causes microvesiculation through other
mechanisms, potentially through direct binding. These findings suggest that
EHV-1-induced platelet activation could contribute to the thrombosis that occurs 
in clinically infected horses and provides a new mechanism by which viruses
activate hemostasis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122640 
PMCID: PMC4407896
PMID: 25905776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

