
1. Biotechnol Appl Biochem. 2016 May;63(3):312-9. doi: 10.1002/bab.1386. Epub 2015
Jul 6.

Overexpression and purification of HSV-2 glycoprotein D in suspension CHO cells
with serum-free medium and immunogenicity analysis.

Qi Y(1), Xu Y(1)(2), Pan Y(1), Li S(1), Li B(1), Pan M(1)(2), Zhang S(3), Li
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Huadong Research Institute for Medicine and Biotechniques, Nanjing, People's
Republic of China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Preclinical
Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(3)National Institutes for Food and Drug Control, Beijing, People's Republic of
China.

Glycoprotein D (gD2) is the most important candidate antigen for herpes simplex
virus type 2 (HSV-2) vaccine development. Establishment of a stable eukaryotic
cell line to overexpress gD2 and an efficient purification process to purify is
essential for the development of subunit vaccine against HSV-2. The DNA sequence 
of the extracellular epitope-rich fragment of gD2 was optimized, chemically
synthesized, and cloned into plasmid pMD902. The recombinant plasmid pMD902-gD
was stably transfected into CHO-DG44 cells, and cell lines with high levels of
expression of gD2 were established. The recombinant gD2 was purified efficiently 
using an anion exchange column and a Sephadex G-25 desalting column. The yield of
the purified gD2 was 57 mg/L of serum-free culture medium, and its purity was
determined to be about 95% by HPLC analysis. Finally, the immunogenicity of the
purified gD2 was measured and it induced strong and specific humoral immunity and
higher level of cellular immune response than gD2 expressed in prokaryotic cells.
We established a stable, secretory, and high-yield gD2-expression cell line and
an easy and efficient gD2-purification process, which lays the foundation for
preparation of large amount of gD2 that is essential for HSV-2 subunit vaccine
development.

© 2015 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bab.1386 
PMID: 25906680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

