
1. J Med Virol. 2015 Aug;87(8):1268-75. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24096. Epub 2015 Apr 24.

Genetic changes in influenza A(H3N2) viruses circulating during 2011 to 2013 in
northern India (Lucknow).

Jain A(1), Dangi T(1), Jain B(1), Singh AK(1), Singh JV(2), Kumar R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, King George's Medical University, Lucknow, India.
(2)Department of Community, Medicine King George's Medical University, Lucknow,
India.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, King George's Medical University, Lucknow, India.

Genetic variability in the hemagglutinin (HA1) and the neuraminidase (NA) genes
of influenza viruses results in the emergence of new strains which differ in
pathogenicity and severity. The present study was undertaken for genotypic
characterization of the HA1 and NA genes of the influenza A(H3N2) strains,
detected during the 2011-2013. A total of fifty five influenza A(H3N2) positive
samples [2011 (n = 20), 2012 (n = 4) and 2013 (n = 31)] were studied. The 824 bp 
segment of HA1 gene and 931 bp segment of NA gene were amplified and sequenced by
Big-Dye terminator kit on ABI3130, Genetic analyzer. Molecular and phylogenetic
analysis was done by MEGA 5.05 software and PhyML program (v3.0). Mutations were 
determined by comparing the deduced amino acid sequences of study strains with
that of 2009-2013 vaccine strains. The studied influenza A(H3N2) strains showed
98.1-99.6% similarity in HA1 and NA amino acid sequences with the influenza
A/Victoria/361/2011 vaccine strain. Four mutations in the HA1 amino acid
sequences (T128A, R142G, L157S and N278K) and three unique mutations in the NA
amino acid sequences [D251V, S315G and V313A] were found. These mutations were
observed only in strains from the year 2013 (cluster II). None of the strains
showed the presence of mutations, N294S and R292K, markers of oseltamivir
resistance. In conclusion, Lucknow strains have accumulated the significant
number of mutations in the antigenic sites of the HA and the NA coding sequences 
and continue to be evolving from the 2013 vaccine strain [A/Victoria/361/2011],
however, mutations specific for oseltamivir resistance were not detected.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24096 
PMID: 25914198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

