
1. J Gen Virol. 2015 Aug;96(8):2176-2187. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.000164. Epub 2015 Apr
27.

Characterization of the IFN pathway in the teleost fish gonad against vertically 
transmitted viral nervous necrosis virus.

Valero Y(1), Morcillo P(2), Meseguer J(2), Buonocore F(3), Esteban MA(2),
Chaves-Pozo E(1), Cuesta A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Oceanográfico de Murcia, Instituto Español de Oceanografía (IEO),
Carretera de la Azohía s/n, Puerto de Mazarrón, 30860 Murcia, Spain.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Faculty of Biology, Regional Campus 
of International Excellence 'Campus Mare Nostrum', University of Murcia, 30100
Murcia, Spain.
(3)Dipartimento per l'Innovazione nei Sistemi Biologici Agroalimentari e
Forestali, Università della Tuscia, Italy.

One of the most powerful innate immune responses against viruses is mediated by
type I IFN. In teleost fish, it is known that virus infection triggers the
expression of ifn and many IFN-stimulated genes, but the viral RNA sensors and
mediators leading to IFN production are scarcely known. Thus, we have searched
for the presence of these genes in gilt-head sea bream (Sparus aurata) and
European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax), and evaluated their expression after
infection with viral nervous necrosis virus (VNNV) in the brain, the main viral
target tissue, and the gonad, used to transmit the virus vertically. In sea
bream, a fish species resistant to the VNNV strain used, we found an upregulation
of the genes encoding MDA5 (melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5), TBK1
(TANK-binding kinase 1), IRF3 (IFN regulatory factor 3), IFN, Mx [myxovirus
(influenza) resistance protein] and PKR (dsRNA-dependent protein kinase receptor)
proteins in the brain, which were unaltered in the gonad and could favour the
dissemination by gonad fluids or gametes. Strikingly, in European sea bass, a
very susceptible species, we also identified, transcripts coding for LGP2
(Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology 2), MAVS (mitochondrial antiviral
signalling), TRAF3 (TNF receptor-associated factor 3), TANK (TRAF family
member-associated NFκB activator) and IRF7 (IFN regulatory factor 7), and found
that all the genes analysed were upregulated in the gonad, but only mda5, lgp2,
irf3, mx and pkr were upregulated in the brain. These findings supported the
notion that the European sea bass brain innate immune response is unable to clear
the virus and pointed to the importance of gonad immunity to control the
dissemination of VNNV to the progeny--an aspect that is worth investigating in
aquatic animals.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.000164 
PMID: 25918238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

