
1. Theor Appl Genet. 2015 Aug;128(8):1569-78. doi: 10.1007/s00122-015-2532-y. Epub
2015 May 10.

Resistance to wheat yellow mosaic virus in Madsen wheat is controlled by two
major complementary QTLs.

Suzuki T(1), Murai MN, Hayashi T, Nasuda S, Yoshimura Y, Komatsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Research Department, Hokkaido Research Organization, Chuo
Agricultural Experiment Station, Higashi-6, Kita-15, Naganuma, Hokkaido,
069-1395, Japan, suzuki-takako@hro.or.jp.

KEY MESSAGE: Wheat yellow mosaic virus resistance of Madsen is governed by two
complementary QTLs, Qym1 and Qym2 , located on chromosome arms 2DL and 3BS. Wheat
yellow mosaic, caused by Wheat yellow mosaic virus (WYMV), is one of the most
serious wheat diseases in East Asia. In this study, recombinant inbred lines
(RILs, F9) from a cross between cultivars Madsen (resistant) and Hokushin
(susceptible) grown in a WYMV-infected nursery field were tested for the presence
of WYMV in leaves by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and genotyped by
using genome-wide molecular markers. Two major QTLs were detected: Qym1 located
between Xgwm539 and Xgwm349 on chromosome 2DL and Qym2 located between Xbarc147
and Xwmc623 on chromosome 3BS. The resistance alleles for both QTLs originated
from Madsen. The third QTL Qym3 located near Xwmc457 on chromosome 4D, where the 
resistant allele for this QTL originated from Hokushin. Although the Qym3 was
rather minor, it was essential to complement Qym1 and Qym2 for complete avoidance
of WYMV infection. Near-isogenic lines carrying the resistance QTLs were
developed by repeated backcrosses using Madsen as the donor parent and Hokushin
as the recurrent parent. The lines that were resistant to WYMV (as tested by
ELISA) were homozygous for the Madsen alleles at both Qym1 and Qym2. Qym1
dominance was partial, whereas that of Qym2 was nearly complete. Qym1 was closely
linked to Xwmc41; Qym2 was closely linked to Xwmc754. These markers will be
useful in marker-assisted selection in wheat breeding for WYMV resistance; this
study will facilitate cloning the WYMV resistance genes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00122-015-2532-y 
PMID: 25957645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

