
1. Dig Dis Sci. 2015 Sep;60(9):2590-603. doi: 10.1007/s10620-015-3691-z. Epub 2015
May 14.

Gastrointestinal and Hepatic Manifestations of Ebola Virus Infection.

Sharma N(1), Cappell MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Westchester Medical Center, Valhalla, NY, USA.

AIM: Although Ebola virus infection (EVI) clinically presents with common,
prominent, gastroenterologic manifestations, this subject has not been previously
reviewed. This work critically and comprehensively reviews this subject.
METHODS: This study is a comprehensive literature review generated by
computerized search of literature, supplemented by review of monographs and
textbooks in pathology, gastroenterology, infectious diseases, and virology.
RESULTS: Common gastrointestinal manifestations include diarrhea-70 %, nausea and
vomiting-60 %, and abdominal pain-45 %. The diarrhea and nausea and vomiting
frequently produce profound, life-threatening hypovolemia requiring intravenous
administration of crystalloid solutions, and frequently produce electrolyte
disorders requiring electrolyte supplementation. Although gastrointestinal
hemorrhage was commonly reported in early epidemics, its frequency has decreased 
to 10 % with prevention of disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Hyperamylasemia is commonly reported, but the frequency of pancreatitis is
unknown. The mean serum AST and ALT levels are each about 200/UL, with an unusual
pattern for viral hepatitis of AST > ALT. The serum alkaline phosphatase averages
about 160 IU/L, whereas the total bilirubin averages about 0.8 mg/dL. Risks of
contracting infection during endoscopy performed on infected patients are
unknown, but may be significant, as indicated by hundreds of healthcare workers
contracting EVI during epidemics before instituting strict infectious control
measures and anecdotal evidence of one endoscopist contracting EVI from
performing endoscopy on an infected patient.
CONCLUSIONS: Physicians must be vigilant for gastroenterologic manifestations of 
EVI for appropriate diagnosis and therapy. This work should stimulate
clinicopathologic studies to improve the current understanding of the
gastroenterologic pathophysiology. Endoscopy is currently not standardly
recommended to evaluate diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, or abdominal pain
associated with EVI due to potential risks, but may be considered for endoscopic 
therapy for active, life-threatening, GI hemorrhage.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-015-3691-z 
PMID: 25972150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

