
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 10;5:11233. doi: 10.1038/srep11233.

A live attenuated vaccine prevents replication and transmission of H7N9 virus in 
mammals.

Kong H(1), Zhang Q(2), Gu C(1), Shi J(1), Deng G(1), Ma S(1), Liu J(1), Chen
P(1), Guan Y(1), Jiang Y(1), Chen H(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150001, People's
Republic of China.
(2)1] State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150001,
People's Republic of China [2] Department of Inspection Technology Research
&National Classical Swine Fever Reference Laboratory, China Institute of
Veterinary Drug Control, Beijing 100081, People's Republic of China.

The continued spread of the newly emerged H7N9 viruses among poultry in China,
together with the emergence of drug-resistant variants and the possibility of
human-to-human transmission, has spurred attempts to develop an effective
vaccine. An MF59-adjuvant H7N9 inactivated vaccine is reported to be
well-tolerated and immunogenic in humans; however a study in ferrets indicated
that while a single dose of the inactivated H7N9 vaccine reduced disease
severity, it did not prevent virus replication and transmission. In this study,
we used reverse genetics to produce a cold-adapted, live attenuated H7N9 vaccine 
(H7N9/AAca) that contains wild-type HA and NA genes from AH/1, and the backbone
of the cold-adapted influenza H2N2 A/Ann Arbor/6/60 virus (AAca). H7N9/AAca was
attenuated in mice and ferrets, and induced robust neutralizing antibody
responses in rhesus mice, ferrets, and guinea pigs immunized once or twice
intranasally. The animals immunized twice were completely protected from H7N9
virus challenge. Importantly, the animals vaccinated once were fully protected
from transmission when exposed to or in contact with the H7N9 virus-inoculated
animals. These results demonstrate that a cold-adapted H7N9 vaccine can prevent
H7N9 virus transmission; they provide a compelling argument for further testing
of this vaccine in human trials.

DOI: 10.1038/srep11233 
PMCID: PMC4462025
PMID: 26058711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

