
1. Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2015 Nov;9(6):331-340. doi: 10.1111/irv.12333.

Optimisation of a micro-neutralisation assay and its application in antigenic
characterisation of influenza viruses.

Lin Y(1), Gu Y(1), Wharton SA(1), Whittaker L(1), Gregory V(1), Li X(1), Metin
S(1), Cattle N(1), Daniels RS(1), Hay AJ(1), McCauley JW(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, London, UK.

OBJECTIVES: The identification of antigenic variants and the selection of
influenza viruses for vaccine production are based largely on antigenic
characterisation of the haemagglutinin (HA) of circulating viruses using the
haemagglutination inhibition (HI) assay. However, in addition to evolution
related to escape from host immunity, variants emerging as a result of
propagation in different cell substrates can complicate the interpretation of
HI results. The objective was to develop further a micro-neutralisation (MN)
assay to complement the HI assay in antigenic characterisation of influenza
viruses to assess the emergence of new antigenic variants and reinforce the
selection of vaccine viruses.
DESIGN AND SETTING: A 96-well-plate plaque reduction MN assay based on the
measurement of infected cell population using a simple imaging technique.
SAMPLE: Representative influenza A (H1N1) pdm09, A(H3N2) and B viruses isolated
between 2004 and 2013 MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES AND RESULTS: Improvements to the
plaque reduction MN assay included selection of the most suitable cell line
according to virus type or subtype, and optimisation of experimental design and
data quantitation. Comparisons of the results of MN and HI assays showed the
importance of complementary data in determining the true antigenic relationships 
among recent human influenza A(H1N1)pdm09, A(H3N2) and type B viruses.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that the improved MN assay has certain
advantages over the HI assay: it is not significantly influenced by the
cell-selected amino acid substitutions in the neuraminidase (NA) of A(H3N2)
viruses, and it is particularly useful for antigenic characterisation of viruses 
which either grow to low HA titre and/or undergo an abortive infection resulting 
in an inability to form plaques in cultured cells.

© 2015 The Authors. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses Published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/irv.12333 
PMCID: PMC4605415
PMID: 26073976 

