
1. PLoS Curr. 2015 May 27;7. pii:
ecurrents.outbreaks.0371243baa7f3810ba1279e30b96d3b6. doi:
10.1371/currents.outbreaks.0371243baa7f3810ba1279e30b96d3b6.

Surveillance of Acute Respiratory Infections Using Community-Submitted Symptoms
and Specimens for Molecular Diagnostic Testing.

Goff J(1), Rowe A(2), Brownstein JS(3), Chunara R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)San Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.
(4)New York University, New York, New York, USA; Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Participatory systems for surveillance of acute respiratory infection give
real-time information about infections circulating in the community, yet to-date 
are limited to self-reported syndromic information only and lacking methods of
linking symptom reports to infection types. We developed the GoViral platform to 
evaluate whether a cohort of lay volunteers could, and would find it useful to,
contribute self-reported symptoms online and to compare specimen types for
self-collected diagnostic information of sufficient quality for respiratory
infection surveillance. Volunteers were recruited, given a kit (collection
materials and customized instructions), instructed to report their symptoms
weekly, and when sick with cold or flu-like symptoms, requested to collect
specimens (saliva and nasal swab). We compared specimen types for respiratory
virus detection sensitivity (via polymerase-chain-reaction) and ease of
collection. Participants were surveyed to determine receptivity to participating 
when sick, to receiving information on the type of pathogen causing their
infection and types circulating near them. Between December 1 2013 and March 1
2014, 295 participants enrolled in the study and received a kit. Of those who
reported symptoms, half (71) collected and sent specimens for analysis.
Participants submitted kits on average 2.30 days (95 CI: 1.65 to 2.96) after
symptoms began. We found good concordance between nasal and saliva specimens for 
multiple pathogens, with few discrepancies. Individuals report that saliva
collection is easiest and report that receiving information about what pathogen
they, and those near them, have is valued and can shape public health behaviors. 
Community-submitted specimens can be used for the detection of acute respiratory 
infection with individuals showing receptivity for participating and interest
in a real-time picture of respiratory pathogens near them.

DOI: 10.1371/currents.outbreaks.0371243baa7f3810ba1279e30b96d3b6 
PMCID: PMC4455990
PMID: 26075141 

