
1. Epidemiol Infect. 2016 Feb;144(3):560-6. doi: 10.1017/S0950268815001405. Epub
2015 Jul 6.

A case-control study of risk factors for rotavirus infections in adults, Denmark,
2005-2009.

Dorleans F(1), Falkenhorst G(1), Böttiger B(2), Howitz M(1), Midgley S(2),
Nielsen J(1), Mølbak K(1), Ethelberg S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology,Statens Serum
Institut,Copenhagen,Denmark.
(2)Department of Microbiological Diagnostics and Virology,Statens Serum
Institut,Copenhagen,Denmark.

Rotavirus (RV) infections affect young children, but can also occur in adults. We
sought to identify risk factors for RV infections in adults aged ⩾18 years in
Denmark, and to describe illness and genotyping characteristics. From March 2005 
to February 2009, we recruited consecutive cases of laboratory-confirmed RV
infection and compared them with healthy controls matched by age, gender and
municipality of residence. We collected information on illness characteristics
and exposures using postal questionnaires. We calculated univariable and
multivariable matched odds ratios (mOR) with conditional logistic regression. The
study comprised 65 cases and 246 controls. Illness exceeded 10 days in 31% of
cases; 22% were hospitalized. Cases were more likely than controls to suffer
serious underlying health conditions [mOR 5·6, 95% confidence interval (CI)
1·7-18], and to report having had close contact with persons with
gastrointestinal symptoms (mOR 9·4, 95% CI 3·6-24), in particular young children 
aged 18 years. Close contact with young children or adults with gastrointestinal 
symptoms is the main risk factor for RV infection in adults in Denmark. RV
vaccination assessments should consider that RV vaccination in children may
indirectly reduce the burden of disease in adults.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268815001405 
PMID: 26143648  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

