
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2015 Nov;99(21):9037-48. doi:
10.1007/s00253-015-6778-8. Epub 2015 Jul 10.

Versatile vector suite for the extracytoplasmic production and purification of
heterologous His-tagged proteins in Lactococcus lactis.

Neef J(1), Milder FJ(2), Koedijk DG(1), Klaassens M(1), Heezius EC(2), van Strijp
JA(2), Otto A(3), Becher D(3), van Dijl JM(1), Buist G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, P.O. Box 30001, 9700 RB, Groningen, The
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, PO
G04.614, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt Universität Greifswald,
Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Str. 15, D-17489, Greifswald, Germany.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, P.O. Box 30001, 9700 RB, Groningen, The
Netherlands. g.buist@umcg.nl.

Recent studies have shown that the Gram-positive bacterium Lactococcus lactis can
be exploited for the expression of heterologous proteins; however, a versatile
set of vectors suitable for inducible extracellular protein production and
subsequent purification of the expressed proteins by immobilized metal affinity
chromatography was so far lacking. Here we describe three novel vectors that,
respectively, facilitate the nisin-inducible production of N- or C-terminally
hexa-histidine (His6)-tagged proteins in L. lactis. One of these vectors also
encodes a tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease cleavage site allowing removal of the
N-terminal His6-tag from expressed proteins. Successful application of the
developed vectors for protein expression, purification and/or functional studies 
is exemplified with six different cell wall-bound or secreted proteins from
Staphylococcus aureus. The results show that secretory production of S. aureus
proteins is affected by the position, N- or C-terminal, of the His6-tag. This
seems to be due to an influence of the His6-tag on protein stability.
Intriguingly, the S. aureus IsdB protein, which is phosphorylated in S. aureus,
was also found to be phosphorylated when heterologously produced in L. lactis,
albeit not on the same Tyr residue. This implies that this particular
post-translational protein modification is to some extent conserved in S. aureus 
and L. lactis. Altogether, we are confident that the present vector set combined 
with the L. lactis expression host has the potential to become a very useful tool
in optimization of the expression, purification and functional analysis of
extracytoplasmic bacterial proteins.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-015-6778-8 
PMCID: PMC4619460
PMID: 26160391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

