
1. Biol Reprod. 1989 Oct;41(4):715-27.

Differentiation of blastocysts derived from in vitro-fertilized rhesus monkey
ova.

Enders AC(1), Boatman D, Morgan P, Bavister BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of California,
Davis 95616.

Six in vitro-fertilized ova were cultured for 10 to 13 days in vitro. All six had
formed blastocysts with cavities, five had hatched from the zona pellucida, and
one had attached to the substrate. After fixation and preparation for examination
by light and electron microscopy, it was determined that all but the youngest
blastocysts had developed substantial amounts of syncytial trophoblast, which
morphologically resembled the syncytial trophoblast present in the first 2 days
of implantation in vivo. One of the smaller blastocysts had developed syncytial
trophoblast but had not hatched from the zona. All of the blastocysts showed
indications of loss or inadequate development of the inner cell mass
constituents, indicating that the culture conditions were suboptimal for these
constituents. Apparent C-type virus particles were abundant, budding from the
basal surface of the syncytial trophoblast. Because the type of trophoblast
formed was that normally associated with epithelial invasion and formation of the
trophoblast plate, it is suggested that such blastocysts would be useful for in
vitro implantation studies as well as studies of formation of syncytial
trophoblast. However, other methods should be developed for study of
postimplantation embryo development. It is also noted that the inadequate
differentiation of the epiblast and endoderm would not have been apparent without
microscopic examination.

DOI: 10.1095/biolreprod41.4.715 
PMID: 2620078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

