
1. Cancer Immunol Res. 2015 Dec;3(12):1344-55. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-15-0097.
Epub 2015 Aug 7.

Progression of Lung Cancer Is Associated with Increased Dysfunction of T Cells
Defined by Coexpression of Multiple Inhibitory Receptors.

Thommen DS(1), Schreiner J(2), Müller P(2), Herzig P(2), Roller A(3), Belousov
A(3), Umana P(4), Pisa P(4), Klein C(4), Bacac M(4), Fischer OS(5), Moersig W(5),
Savic Prince S(6), Levitsky V(4), Karanikas V(4), Lardinois D(5), Zippelius A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
Laboratory of Cancer Immunology, Department of Biomedicine, University and
University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland. alfred.zippelius@usb.ch
daniela.thommen@usb.ch.
(2)Laboratory of Cancer Immunology, Department of Biomedicine, University and
University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Center Penzberg,
Penzberg, Germany.
(4)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Center Zurich,
Schlieren, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Dysfunctional T cells present in malignant lesions are characterized by a
sustained and highly diverse expression of inhibitory receptors, also referred to
as immune checkpoints. Yet, their relative functional significance in different
cancer types remains incompletely understood. In this study, we provide a
comprehensive characterization of the diversity and expression patterns of
inhibitory receptors on tumor-infiltrating T cells from patients with non-small
cell lung cancer. In spite of the large heterogeneity observed in the amount of
PD-1, Tim-3, CTLA-4, LAG-3, and BTLA expressed on intratumoral CD8(+) T cells
from 32 patients, a clear correlation was established between increased
expression of these inhibitory coreceptors and progression of the disease.
Notably, the latter was accompanied by a progressively impaired capacity of T
cells to respond to polyclonal activation. Coexpression of several inhibitory
receptors was gradually acquired, with early PD-1 and late LAG-3/BTLA expression.
PD-1 blockade was able to restore T-cell function only in a subset of patients. A
high percentage of PD-1(hi) T cells was correlated with poor restoration of
T-cell function upon PD-1 blockade. Of note, PD-1(hi) expression marked a
particularly dysfunctional T-cell subset characterized by coexpression of
multiple inhibitory receptors and thus may assist in identifying patients likely 
to respond to inhibitory receptor-specific antibodies. Overall, these data may
provide a framework for future personalized T-cell-based therapies aiming at
restoration of tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte effector functions.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-15-0097 
PMID: 26253731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

