
1. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Nov;12(5):6517-26. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4300. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Defective heat shock factor 1 inhibits the growth of fibrosarcoma derived from
simian virus 40/T antigen‑transformed MEF cells.

Jiang Q(1), Zhang Z(1), Li S(1), Wang Z(1), Ma Y(1), Hu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Henan Key Laboratory of Engineering Antibody Medicine, Henan International
Union Laboratory of Antibody Medicine and Chaperone, Henan University School of
Medicine, Kaifeng, Henan 475004, P.R. China.

Heat shock factor 1 (Hsf1) serves an important role in regulating the
proliferation of human tumor cell lines in vitro and tissue specific
tumorigenesis in certain mouse models. However, its role in viral‑oncogenesis
remains to be fully elucidated. In the current study, the role of Hsf1 in
fibroblastoma derived from simian virus 40/T antigen (SV40/TAG)‑transformed mouse
embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cell lines was investigated. Knockout of Hsf1
inhibited MEF cell proliferation in vitro and fibroblastoma growth and metastasis
to the lungs in vivo in nude mice. Knockout of Hsf1 increased the protein
expression levels of p53 and phosphorylated retinoblastoma protein (pRb), however
reduced the expression of heat shock protein 25 (Hsp25) in addition to the
expression of the angiogenesis markers vascular endothelial growth factor,
cluster of differentiation 34 and factor VIII related antigen. Furthermore,
immunoprecipitation indicated that knockout of Hsf1 inhibited the association
between SV40/TAG and p53 or pRb. These data suggest that Hsf1 is involved in the 
regulation of SV40/TAG‑derived fibroblastoma growth and metastasis by modulating 
the association between SV40/TAG and tumor suppressor p53 and pRb. The current
study provides further evidence that Hsf1 may be a novel therapeutic target in
the treatment of cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4300 
PMCID: PMC4626195
PMID: 26352782  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

