
1. Micron. 2015 Dec;79:84-92. doi: 10.1016/j.micron.2015.08.006. Epub 2015 Aug 28.

Ultrastructural insights into tomato infections caused by three different
pathotypes of Pepino mosaic virus and immunolocalization of viral coat proteins.

Minicka J(1), Otulak K(2), Garbaczewska G(2), Pospieszny H(1), Hasiów-Jaroszewska
B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Bacteriology, Institute of Plant Protection -
National Research Institute, Wl. Wegorka 20, 60-318 Poznan, Poland.
(2)Department of Botany, Faculty of Agriculture and Biology, Warsaw University of
Life Sciences (WULS-SGGW), Nowoursynowska 159, 02-776 Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Virology and Bacteriology, Institute of Plant Protection -
National Research Institute, Wl. Wegorka 20, 60-318 Poznan, Poland. Electronic
address: beatahasiow@tlen.pl.

This paper presents studies on an ultrastructural analysis of plant tissue
infected with different pathotypes of Pepino mosaic virus (PepMV) and the
immunolocalization of viral coat proteins. Because the PepMV virus replicates
with a high mutation rate and exhibits significant genetic diversity, therefore, 
isolates of PepMV display a wide range of symptoms on infected plants. In this
work, tomato plants of the Beta Lux cultivar were inoculated mechanically with
three pathotypes representing the Chilean 2 (CH2) genotype: mild (PepMV-P22),
necrotic (PepMV-P19) and yellowing (PepMV-P5-IY). The presence of viral particles
in all infected plants in the different compartments of various cell types (i.e. 
spongy and palisade mesophyll, sieve elements and xylem vessels) was revealed via
ultrastructural analyses. For the first time, it was possible to demonstrate the 
presence of crystalline inclusions, composed of virus-like particles. In the
later stage of PepMV infection (14 dpi) various pathotype-dependent changes in
the structure of the individual organelles (i.e. mitochondria, chloroplasts) were
found. The strongest immunogold labeling of the viral coat proteins was also
observed in plants infected by necrotic isolates. A large number of viral coat
proteins were marked in the plant conductive elements, both xylem and phloem.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micron.2015.08.006 
PMID: 26369497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

