
1. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 24;10(9):e0139173. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139173.
eCollection 2015.

Imported Genotype 2B Rubella Virus Caused the 2012 Outbreak in Anqing City,
China.

Zhu Z(1), Pan G(2), Zhou S(3), Dai J(4), Chen X(3), Tang J(3), Chen S(2), Zheng
Y(2), Song J(5), Xu W(1).

Author information: 
(1)WHO WPRO Regional Reference Measles/Rubella Laboratory and Key Laboratory of
Medical Virology Ministry of Health, National Institute for Viral Disease Control
and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing,
People's Republic of China.
(2)Anqing Prefecture Center for Diseases Control and Prevention, Anqing, People's
Republic of China.
(3)Anhui Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Hefei, People's
Republic of China.
(4)School of Medical, Anhui University of Science & Technology, Huainan, People's
Republic of China.
(5)The Second Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic of
China.

A rubella outbreak occurred in Anqing city of Anhui province, China, from
February to July of 2012, and a total of 241 clinically diagnosed or
lab-confirmed patients were reported. The highest number of rubella cases during 
this outbreak was recorded in teenagers between 10 and 19 years of age who had
not previously received the rubella vaccine. Genotyping results indicated that
the genotype 2B rubella virus (RV) was responsible for the outbreak. However, a
phylogenetic analysis showed that the genotype 2B RVs isolated in Anqing City
were not related to 2B RVs found in other cities of Anhui province and in other
provinces of China, thus providing evidence for importation. After importation,
the transmission of Anqing RVs was interrupted owing to an effective immunization
campaign against rubella, suggesting the timeliness and effectiveness of
contingency vaccination. Strengthening rubella surveillance, including the
integration of epidemiologic information and laboratory data, is a vital strategy
for rubella control and elimination. In addition, except for routine
immunization, targeted supplementary immunization activities aimed at susceptible
groups according to sero-epidemiological surveillance data also play a key role
in stopping the continuous transmission of rubella viruses and in preventing
further congenital rubella syndrome cases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139173 
PMCID: PMC4581689
PMID: 26402467  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

