
1. Sci Transl Med. 2015 Sep 23;7(306):306ra150. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aac8691.
Epub 2015 Sep 23.

Broadly neutralizing human monoclonal JC polyomavirus VP1-specific antibodies as 
candidate therapeutics for progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.

Jelcic I(1), Combaluzier B(2), Jelcic I(1), Faigle W(1), Senn L(2), Reinhart
BJ(1), Ströh L(3), Nitsch RM(4), Stehle T(5), Sospedra M(1), Grimm J(6), Martin
R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology and Multiple Sclerosis Research Section, Department of
Neurology, University of Zurich, University Hospital Zurich, 8091 Zurich,
Switzerland.
(2)Neurimmune Holding AG, 8952 Schlieren, Switzerland.
(3)Interfaculty Institute of Biochemistry, University of Tübingen, 72076
Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Neurimmune Holding AG, 8952 Schlieren, Switzerland. Division of Psychiatry
Research, University of Zurich, 8952 Schlieren, Switzerland.
(5)Interfaculty Institute of Biochemistry, University of Tübingen, 72076
Tübingen, Germany. Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232,
USA.
(6)Neurimmune Holding AG, 8952 Schlieren, Switzerland. roland.martin@usz.ch
jan.grimm@neurimmune.com.
(7)Neuroimmunology and Multiple Sclerosis Research Section, Department of
Neurology, University of Zurich, University Hospital Zurich, 8091 Zurich,
Switzerland. roland.martin@usz.ch jan.grimm@neurimmune.com.

In immunocompromised individuals, JC polyomavirus (JCPyV) may mutate and gain
access to the central nervous system resulting in progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy (PML), an often fatal opportunistic infection for which no
treatments are currently available. Despite recent progress, the contribution of 
JCPyV-specific humoral immunity to controlling asymptomatic infection throughout 
life and to eliminating JCPyV from the brain is poorly understood. We examined
antibody responses against JCPyV major capsid protein VP1 (viral protein 1)
variants in the serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of healthy donors (HDs),
JCPyV-positive multiple sclerosis patients treated with the anti-VLA-4 monoclonal
antibody natalizumab (NAT), and patients with NAT-associated PML. Before and
during PML, CSF antibody responses against JCPyV VP1 variants show "recognition
holes"; however, upon immune reconstitution, CSF antibody titers rise, then
recognize PML-associated JCPyV VP1 variants, and may be involved in elimination
of the virus. We therefore reasoned that the memory B cell repertoire of
individuals who recovered from PML could be a source for the molecular cloning of
broadly neutralizing antibodies for passive immunization. We generated a series
of memory B cell-derived JCPyV VP1-specific human monoclonal antibodies from HDs 
and a patient with NAT-associated PML-immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome
(IRIS). These antibodies exhibited diverse binding affinity, cross-reactivity
with the closely related BK polyomavirus, recognition of PML-causing VP1
variants, and JCPyV neutralization. Almost all antibodies with exquisite
specificity for JCPyV, neutralizing activity, recognition of all tested JCPyV PML
variants, and high affinity were derived from one patient who had recovered from 
PML. These antibodies are promising drug candidates for the development of a
treatment of PML.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aac8691 
PMCID: PMC4820754
PMID: 26400911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

