
1. Parasitol Res. 2016 Feb;115(2):651-62.

Fighting arboviral diseases: low toxicity on mammalian cells, dengue growth
inhibition (in vitro), and mosquitocidal activity of Centroceras
clavulatum-synthesized silver nanoparticles.

Murugan K, Aruna P, Panneerselvam C, Madhiyazhagan P, Paulpandi M, Subramaniam J,
Rajaganesh R, Wei H, Alsalhi MS, Devanesan S, Nicoletti M, Syuhei B, Canale A,
Benelli G.

Dengue is a mosquito-borne viral disease that has rapidly spread in all regions
of the world in recent years. Female mosquitoes, mainly Aedes aegypti, transmit
dengue. Approximately 3,900 million people, in 128 countries, are at risk of
dengue infection. Recently, a focus has been provided on the potential of
green-synthesized nanoparticles as inhibitors of the production of dengue viral
envelope (E) protein in Vero cells and downregulators of the expression of dengue
viral E gene. Algae are an outstanding reservoir of novel compounds, which may
help in the fight against mosquito-borne diseases. In this research, silver
nanoparticles (AgNP) were rapidly synthesized using a cheap extract of the alga
Centroceras clavulatum. AgNP were characterized by UV–vis spectrophotometry,
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), scanning electron microscopy
(SEM), energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX), and X-ray diffraction (XRD).
In mosquitocidal assays, LC50 values of C. clavulatum extract against A. aegypti 
larvae and pupae were 269.361 ppm (larva I), 309.698 ppm (larva II), 348.325 ppm 
(larva III), 387.637 ppm (larva IV), and 446.262 ppm (pupa). C. clavulatum
extract also exhibited moderate antioxidant activity, both in
2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) and nitric oxide (NO) radical scavenging
assays. LC50 values of C. clavulatum-synthesized AgNP were 21.460 ppm (larva I), 
23.579 ppm (larva II), 25.912 ppm (larva III), 29.155 ppm (larva IV), and 33.877 
ppm (pupa). Furthermore, C. clavulatum-synthesized AgNP inhibited dengue
(serotype dengue virus type-2 (DEN-2)) viral replication in Vero cells. Notably, 
50 μg/ml of green-synthesized AgNP showed no cytotoxicity on Vero cells while
reduced DEN-2 viral growth of more than 80%; 12.5 μg/ml inhibited viral growth of
more than 50%. Cellular internalization assays highlighted that untreated
infected cells showed high intensity of fluorescence emission, which denotes high
level of viral internalization. Conversely, AgNP-treated infected cells showed
reduced levels of fluorescence, failing to show significant viral load. Overall, 
our study showed that alga-mediated synthesis of metal nanoparticles may be
considered to develop newer, safer, and cheap tools in the fight against the
dengue virus, serotype DEN-2, and its vector A. aegypti, with little cytotoxicity
on mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-015-4783-6 
PMID: 26462804  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

