
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 1989 Jan;23 Suppl A:9-27.

Potential target sites for antiviral inhibitors of human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV).

Oxford JS(1), Coates AR, Sia DY, Brown K, Asad S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, London Hospital Medical College, UK.

The rapid identification of anti-HIV compounds in the laboratory following the
isolation of the causative virus in 1983 and their subsequent use in the clinic
was not unexpected. Three decades of previous work had established a scientific
basis for the evaluation of antiviral compounds. However, no antiviral yet
discovered can cause total blockade of a virus replicating in a cell. The
combination of properties of HIV including latency, antigenic and biochemical
variation is unusual and the virus represents a daunting challenge for
chemotherapy. But at least 90 antiviral compounds have been discovered, many
inhibiting the virus reverse transcriptase. Other targets for inhibition are
possible including viral regulatory gene products, viral protease and
endonuclease enzymes but compounds for initial study will have to be found by
random searching. X-ray crystallography of HIV proteins will shortly be possible,
enabling the commencement of a more molecular specific search for inhibitors.
Meanwhile, advantage can be taken of comparative nucleotide sequences of the
HIV-1 and -2 genomes to test short oligonucleotides as potential inhibitors of
mRNA transcription. The pol gene also has a zinc finger amino acid sequence
suggesting that chelation chemotherapy may have a potential role. In the absence 
of HIV vaccines, and associated theoretical problems in their development,
antiviral chemotherapy is expected to occupy a central role in combating the AIDS
epidemic.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/23.suppl_a.9 
PMID: 2654120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

