
1. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 9;10(11):e0142292. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142292.
eCollection 2015.

Raw Sap Consumption Habits and Its Association with Knowledge of Nipah Virus in
Two Endemic Districts in Bangladesh.

Nahar N(1)(2), Paul RC(1), Sultana R(1), Gurley ES(1), Garcia F(3), Abedin J(1), 
Sumon SA(1), Banik KC(1), Asaduzzaman M(1), Rimi NA(1), Rahman M(4), Luby SP(5).

Author information: 
(1)ICDDRB, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)FHI360, Washington DC Office, Washington, D.C., United States of America.
(4)Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research (IEDCR), Dhaka,
Bangladesh.
(5)Infectious Diseases and Geographic Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, United States of America.

Human Nipah virus (NiV) infection in Bangladesh is a fatal disease that can be
transmitted from bats to humans who drink contaminated raw date palm sap
collected overnight during the cold season. Our study aimed to understand date
palm sap consumption habits of rural residents and factors associated with
consumption. In November-December 2012 the field team interviewed adult
respondents from randomly selected villages from Rajbari and Kushtia Districts in
Bangladesh. We calculated the proportion of people who consumed raw sap and had
heard about a disease from raw sap consumption. We assessed the factors
associated with raw sap consumption by calculating prevalence ratios (PR)
adjusted for village level clustering effects. Among the 1,777 respondents
interviewed, half (50%) reported drinking raw sap during the previous sap
collection season and 37% consumed raw sap at least once per month. Few
respondents (5%) heard about NiV. Thirty-seven percent of respondents reported
hearing about a disease transmitted through raw sap consumption, inclusive of a
10% who related it with milder illness like diarrhea, vomiting or indigestion
rather than NiV. Respondents who harvested date palm trees in their household
were more likely to drink sap than those who did not own date palm trees (79% vs.
65% PR 1.2, 95% CI 1.1-1.3, p<0.001). When sap was available, respondents who
heard about a disease from raw sap consumption were just as likely to drink it as
those who did not hear about a disease (69% vs. 67%, PR 1.0, 95% CI 0.9-1.1, p = 
0.512). Respondents' knowledge of NiV was low. They might not have properly
understood the risk of NiV, and were likely to drink sap when it was available.
Implementing strategies to increase awareness about the risks of NiV and protect 
sap from bats might reduce the risk of NiV transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142292 
PMCID: PMC4638332
PMID: 26551202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

