
1. Vaccine. 2015 Dec 16;33(51):7194-7202. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.10.128. Epub
2015 Nov 6.

Novel CD8(+) cytotoxic T cell epitopes in bovine leukemia virus with cattle.

Bai L(1), Takeshima SN(2), Isogai E(3), Kohara J(4), Aida Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Infectious Diseases Unit, RIKEN, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan;
Laboratory of Animal Microbiology, Department of Microbial Biotechnology,
Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi
981-8555, Japan.
(2)Viral Infectious Diseases Unit, RIKEN, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Animal Microbiology, Department of Microbial Biotechnology,
Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi
981-8555, Japan.
(4)Animal Research Center, Hokkaido Research Organization, Shintoku, Hokkaido
081-0038, Japan.
(5)Viral Infectious Diseases Unit, RIKEN, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.
Electronic address: aida@riken.jp.

Bovine leukemia virus (BLV) is associated with enzootic bovine leukosis and is
closely related to human T cell leukemia virus (HTLV). The cytotoxic T lymphocyte
(CTL) plays a key role in suppressing the progression of disease caused by BLV. T
and B cell epitopes in BLV have been studied, but CD8(+) CTL epitopes remain
poorly understood. We used a library of 115 synthetic peptides covering the
entirety of the Env proteins (gp51 and gp30), the Gag proteins (p15, p24, and
p12), and the Tax protein of BLV to identify 11 novel CD8(+) T cell epitopes
(gp51N5, gp51N11, gp51N12, gp30N5, gp30N6, gp30N8, gp30N16, tax16, tax18, tax19, 
and tax20) in four calves experimentally infected with BLV. The number of CD8(+) 
T cell epitopes that could be identified in each calf correlated with the BLV
proviral load. Interestingly, among the 11 epitopes identified, only gp51N11 was 
capable of inducing CD8(+) T cell-mediated cytotoxicity in all four calves, but
it is not a suitable vaccine target because it shows a high degree of
polymorphism according to the Wu-Kabat variability index. By contrast, no CTL
epitopes were identified from the Gag structural protein. In addition, several
epitopes were obtained from gp30 and Tax, indicating that cellular immunity
against BLV is strongly targeted to these proteins. CD8(+) CTL epitopes from gp30
and Tax were less polymorphic than epitopes from. Indeed, peptides tax16, tax18, 
tax19, and tax20 include a leucine-rich activation domain that encompasses a
transcriptional activation domain, and the gp30N16 peptide contains a
proline-rich region that interacts with a protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP1 to
regulate B cell activation. Moreover, at least one CD8(+) CTL epitope derived
from gp30 was identified in each of the four calves. These results indicate that 
BLV gp30 may be the best candidate for the development of a BLV vaccine.

Copyright Â© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.10.128 
PMID: 26552001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

