
1. Vet Microbiol. 2015 Dec 31;181(3-4):283-8. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2015.10.010.
Epub 2015 Oct 22.

Sensitivity of porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) to pH and heat treatment in
the presence or absence of porcine plasma.

Quist-Rybachuk GV(1), Nauwynck HJ(2), Kalmar ID(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University,
Salisburylaan 133, B-9820 Merelbeke, Belgium; Veterinary R&D - Veos, Akkerstraat 
4A, B-8750 Zwevezele, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Virology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University,
Salisburylaan 133, B-9820 Merelbeke, Belgium.
(3)Veterinary R&D - Veos, Akkerstraat 4A, B-8750 Zwevezele, Belgium. Electronic
address: Isabelle.Kalmar@veos.be.

Emergence of porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) resulted in massive neonatal 
mortality in the North-American and Asian pork industry. Measures to prevent its 
geographical spread are of utmost importance to safeguard susceptible porcine
populations. The major infection route is direct or indirect faecal-oral contact.
Adequate biosafety measures should be in place at all levels of the swine
production chain, including feed and feed ingredients. Present study aimed to
investigate the sensitivity of PEDV to thermal inactivation at neutral and
alkaline pH in presence or absence of porcine plasma. Cell culture medium and
porcine plasma at different pH (7.2, 9.2, 10.2) and temperature conditions (4 °C,
40 °C, 44 °C, 48 °C) were inoculated to a final titer of 5.5 log10 TCID50
PEDV/ml, incubated for up to 120 min and the residual infectivity was determined 
by endpoint dilution assay. Irrespective of presence of plasma, PEDV was not
sensitive to pH 7.2-10.2 at 4 °C. At moderate temperatures (≥40 °C), both
alkaline pH and presence of plasma potentiated thermal inactivation. Inactivation
of 8 log10 TCID50/ml plasma within 30 min (8D value<30 min) by moderate pH and
temperature would denote potential industrial processing conditions that ensure
safety towards PEDV while limiting denaturation of bioactive components.
Virus-spiked plasma required heat treatment of 40 °C and alkalinization to pH 9.2
to achieve 8 log10 reduction within such time. At pH 10.2 and 48 °C, the 8D value
was 4.6 min in plasma and 15.2 min in MEM. Here we propose heat-alkalinity-time
(HAT) pasteurization as a highly efficient method to inactivate PEDV during
industrial processing of porcine plasma.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2015.10.010 
PMID: 26602207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

