
1. Biochimie. 2016 Apr;123:95-102. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2016.02.003. Epub 2016 Feb 
5.

Pentoxifylline as a modulator of anticancer drug doxorubicin. Part II: Reduction 
of doxorubicin DNA binding and alleviation of its biological effects.

Gołuński G(1), Borowik A(1), Derewońko N(2), Kawiak A(3), Rychłowski M(2),
Woziwodzka A(4), Piosik J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biophysics, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG,
Abrahama 58, 80-307 Gdańsk, Poland.
(2)Laboratory of Virus Molecular Biology, Intercollegiate Faculty of
Biotechnology UG-MUG, Abrahama 58, 80-307 Gdańsk, Poland.
(3)Division of Plant Protection and Biotechnology, Department of Biotechnology,
Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Gdansk and Medical
University of Gdansk, Abrahama 58, 80-307 Gdańsk, Poland; Laboratory of Human
Physiology, Medical University of Gdansk, Tuwima 15, 80-210 Gdańsk, Poland.
(4)Laboratory of Biophysics, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG,
Abrahama 58, 80-307 Gdańsk, Poland. Electronic address:
anna.woziwodzka@biotech.ug.edu.pl.
(5)Laboratory of Biophysics, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG,
Abrahama 58, 80-307 Gdańsk, Poland. Electronic address: piosik@biotech.ug.edu.pl.

Anticancer drug doxorubicin is commonly used in cancer treatment. However, drug's
severe side effects make toxicity reduction important matter. Another
biologically active aromatic compound, pentoxifylline, can sequester aromatic
compounds in stacking complexes reducing their bioactivity. This work deals with 
the problem of alleviating doxorubicin side effects by pentoxifylline. We
employed a wide spectrum of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cellular assays. In
addition, we used the doxorubicin-pentoxifylline mixed association constant to
quantitatively assess pentoxifylline influence on the doxorubicin mutagenic
activity. Obtained results indicate strong protective effects of pentoxifylline
towards doxorubicin, observed on bacteria and human keratinocytes with no such
effects observed on the cancer cells. It may be hypothesized that, considering
much shorter half-life of pentoxifylline than doxorubicin, simultaneous
administration of doxorubicin and pentoxifylline will lead to gradual release of 
doxorubicin from complexes with pentoxifylline to reach desired therapeutic
concentration. Proposed results shed light on the possible doxorubicin
chemotherapy modification and its side effects reduction without the loss of its 
therapeutic potential.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2016.02.003 
PMID: 26855172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

