
1. Virology. 2016 Apr;491:106-14. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2016.01.023. Epub 2016 Feb
16.

Metabolic profiling during HIV-1 and HIV-2 infection of primary human
monocyte-derived macrophages.

Hollenbaugh JA(1), Montero C(1), Schinazi RF(1), Munger J(2), Kim B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Drug Discovery, Department of Pediatrics, Health Sciences Research 
Building, Emory University, 1760 Haygood Drive, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, NY 14627, USA.
(3)Center for Drug Discovery, Department of Pediatrics, Health Sciences Research 
Building, Emory University, 1760 Haygood Drive, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA;
Department of Pharmacy, Kyung-Hee University, Seoul, South Korea; Children's
Healthcare of Atlanta, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. Electronic
address: baek.kim@emory.edu.

We evaluated cellular metabolism profiles of HIV-1 and HIV-2 infected primary
human monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs). First, HIV-2 GL-AN displays faster
production kinetics and greater amounts of virus as compared to HIV-1s: YU-2,
89.6 and JR-CSF. Second, quantitative LC-MS/MS metabolomics analysis demonstrates
very similar metabolic profiles in glycolysis and TCA cycle metabolic
intermediates between HIV-1 and HIV-2 infected macrophages, with a few notable
exceptions. The most striking metabolic change in MDMs infected with HIV-2
relative to HIV-1-infected MDMs was the increased levels of quinolinate, a
metabolite in the tryptophan catabolism pathway that has been linked to HIV/AIDS 
pathogenesis. Third, both HIV-1 and HIV-2 infected MDMs showed elevated levels of
ribose-5-phosphate, a key metabolic component in nucleotide biosynthesis.
Finally, HIV-2 infected MDMs display increased dNTP concentrations as predicted
by Vpx-mediated SAMHD1 degradation. Collectively, these data show differential
metabolic changes during HIV-1 and HIV-2 infection of macrophages.

Copyright Â© 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2016.01.023 
PMCID: PMC4834987
PMID: 26895248  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

