
1. Liver Transpl. 2016 May;22(5):635-43. doi: 10.1002/lt.24422.

Simeprevir and sofosbuvir with or without ribavirin to treat recurrent genotype 1
hepatitis C virus infection after orthotopic liver transplantation.

Crittenden NE(1), Buchanan LA(2), Pinkston CM(3), Cave B(1)(4), Barve A(1)(4)(5),
Marsano L(1)(4)(5), McClain CJ(1)(6)(4)(5), Jones CM(7)(4), Marvin MR(7)(4),
Davis EG(7)(4), Kuns-Adkins CB(2), Gedaly R(8)(9), Brock G(3), Shah MB(8)(9),
Rosenau J(2)(9), Cave MC(1)(6)(10)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and
Nutrition, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY.
(2)Departments of Medicine, Division of Digestive Health, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY.
(3)School of Public Health and Information Sciences, University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY.
(4)KentuckyOne Health Transplant Center, Louisville, KY.
(5)Robley Rex Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Louisville, KY.
(6)Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY.
(7)Surgery, Division of Transplantation, University of Louisville, Louisville,
KY.
(8)Surgery, Division of Transplantation, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY.
(9)Healthcare Transplant Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY.
(10)Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Louisville, Louisville,
KY.

Although combination simeprevir (SIM) plus sofosbuvir (SOF) is an approved
regimen for genotype 1 chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV), data regarding its safety
and efficacy in liver transplant recipients remain limited. A multicenter
retrospective study was performed to determine the efficacy and tolerability of a
12-week regimen of SIM/SOF with or without ribavirin (RBV) in 56 consecutive
liver transplant recipients in 2014; 79% of patients had genotype 1a, 14% had
cirrhosis, and 73% were treatment experienced. Sustained virological response at 
12 weeks (SVR12) was 88% by intention to treat analysis (95% confidence interval,
84%-90%). Four patients relapsed, but no on-treatment virological failures
occurred. The Q80K polymorphism did not impact SVR12, but there was a trend
toward decreased sustained virological response with advanced fibrosis
(P = 0.18). HCV RNA was detectable at treatment week 4 in 21% of patients, and
those who had detectable levels were less likely to achieve SVR12 (58% versus
95%; P = 0.003). Five patients had baseline Child-Pugh class B cirrhosis, and 2
of them died (1 following early discontinuation of therapy). An additional
discontinuation resulted from a severe photosensitivity reaction in a patient on 
concomitant cyclosporine. Seven patients receiving RBV developed progressive
anemia requiring intervention. Immunosuppression dose modifications were minimal.
SIM/SOF for 12 weeks was effective and well tolerated by compensated liver
transplant recipients especially when administered without concomitant RBV or
cyclosporine. SIM/SOF appears to have a niche as the only 12-week RBV-free
treatment regimen currently recommended by guidelines for compensated transplant 
recipients. However, 12 weeks may not be the optimal duration of therapy for
those with detectable virus at week 4 or possibly for those with cirrhosis. These
data require confirmation by prospective randomized clinical trials. Liver
Transplantation 22 635-643 2016 AASLD.

© 2016 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/lt.24422 
PMID: 26915588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

