
1. Arch Virol. 2016 Jun;161(6):1437-45. doi: 10.1007/s00705-016-2767-1. Epub 2016
Mar 3.

Genotypic evolution and antigenicity of H9N2 influenza viruses in Shanghai,
China.

Ge F(1), Li X(2), Ju H(2), Yang D(2), Liu J(2), Qi X(2), Wang J(2), Yang X(2),
Qiu Y(3), Liu P(2), Zhou J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Animal Disease Control Center, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. 
qyfgff2369@yahoo.com.cn.
(2)Shanghai Animal Disease Control Center, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(3)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Shanghai, 200241, People's Republic of China.
(4)Shanghai Animal Disease Control Center, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. 
shzjpvet@163.com.

H9N2 influenza viruses have been circulating in China since 1994, but a
systematic investigation of H9N2 in Shanghai has not previously been undertaken. 
Here, using 14 viruses we isolated from poultry and pigs in Shanghai during 2002 
and 2006-2014, together with the commercial vaccine A/chicken/Shanghai/F/1998
(Ck/SH/F/98), we analyzed the evolution of H9N2 influenza viruses in Shanghai and
showed that all 14 isolates originated from Ck/SH/F/98 antigenically. We
evaluated the immune protection efficiency of the vaccine. Our findings
demonstrate that H9N2 viruses in Shanghai have undergone extensive reassortment. 
Various genotypes emerged in 2002, 2006 and 2007, while during 2009-2014 only one
genotype was found. Four antigenic groups, A-D, could be identified among the 14 
isolates and a variety of antigenically distinct H9N2-virus-derived avian
influenza viruses (AIVs) circulated simultaneously in Shanghai during this
period. Challenge experiments using vaccinated chickens indicated that the
vaccine prevented shedding of antigenic group A and B viruses, but not those of
the more recent groups C and D. Genetic analysis showed that compared to the
vaccine strain, representative viruses of antigenic groups C and D possess
greater numbers of amino acid substitutions in the hemagglutinin (HA) protein
than viruses in antigenic groups A and B. Many of these substitutions are located
in antigenic sites. Our results indicate that the persistence of H9N2 AIV in
China might be due to incomplete vaccine protection and that the avian influenza 
vaccine should be regularly evaluated and updated to maintain optimal protection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00705-016-2767-1 
PMID: 26935915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

