
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 Mar;95(9):e2946. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002946.

AST to Platelet Ratio Index Predicts Mortality in Hospitalized Patients With
Hepatitis B-Related Decompensated Cirrhosis.

Mao W(1), Sun Q, Fan J, Lin S, Ye B.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Clinical Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital,
College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang (WM, JF, SL, BY) and
Department of Urology, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Xinjiang (S-QQ), China.

Aspartate aminotransferase to platelet ratio index (APRI) has originally been
considered as a noninvasive marker for detecting hepatic fibrosis in patients
with chronic hepatitis B and C. APRI has been used for predicting liver-related
mortality in patients with chronic hepatitis C virus infection or alcoholic liver
disease. However, whether APRI could be useful for predicting mortality in
chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection remains unevaluated. This study aims to
address this knowledge gap. A total of 193 hospitalized chronic HBV-infected
patients (cirrhosis, n = 100; noncirrhosis, n = 93) and 88 healthy subjects were 
retrospectively enrolled. All patients were followed up for 4 months. Mortality
that occurred within 90 days of hospital stay was compared among patients with
different APRI. APRI predictive value was evaluated by univariate and
multivariate regression embedded in a Cox proportional hazards model. APRI varied
significantly in our cohort (range, 0.16-10.00). Elevated APRI was associated
with increased severity of liver disease and 3-month mortality in hospitalized
patients with HBV-related cirrhosis. Multivariate analysis demonstrated that APRI
(odds ratio: 1.456, P < 0.001) and the model for end-stage liver disease score
(odds ratio: 1.194, P < 0.001) were 2 independent markers for predicting
mortality. APRI is a simple marker that may serve as an additional predictor of
3-month mortality in hospitalized patients with HBV-related decompensated
cirrhosis.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002946 
PMCID: PMC4782890
PMID: 26945406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

