
1. J Virol Methods. 2016 Jun;232:8-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2016.02.011. Epub
2016 Mar 4.

Scalable chromatography-based purification of virus-like particle carrier for
epitope based influenza A vaccine produced in Escherichia coli.

Lagoutte P(1), Mignon C(1), Donnat S(1), Stadthagen G(1), Mast J(2), Sodoyer
R(1), Lugari A(3), Werle B(4).

Author information: 
(1)BIOASTER, Protein and Expression System Engineering unit, 40 avenue Tony
Garnier, 69007 Lyon, France.
(2)EM Service, CODA-CERVA, Groeselenbergstraat 99, B-1180 Brussels, Belgium.
(3)BIOASTER, Protein and Expression System Engineering unit, 40 avenue Tony
Garnier, 69007 Lyon, France. Electronic address: adrien.lugari@bioaster.org.
(4)BIOASTER, Protein and Expression System Engineering unit, 40 avenue Tony
Garnier, 69007 Lyon, France. Electronic address: bettina.werle@bioaster.org.

Virus-like particles (VLPs) are promising molecular structures for the design and
construction of novel vaccines, diagnostic tools, and gene therapy vectors. Size,
oligomer assembly and repetitiveness of epitopes are optimal features to induce
strong immune responses. Several VLP-based vaccines are currently licensed and
commercialized, and many vaccine candidates are now under preclinical and
clinical studies. In recent years, the development of genetically engineered
recombinant VLPs has accelerated the need for new, improved downstream processes.
In particular, a rapid low cost purification process has been identified as a
remaining key challenge in manufacturing process development. In the present
study we set up a size-exclusion chromatography-based, scalable purification
protocol for the purification of a VLP-based influenza A vaccine produced in
Escherichia coli. Recombinant VLPs derived from the RNA bacteriophage MS2
displaying an epitope from the ectodomain of Matrix 2 protein from influenza A
virus were produced and purified. The 3 steps purification protocol uses a
recently developed multimodal size-exclusion chromatography medium (Capto™ Core
700) in combination with detergent extraction and size-exclusion polishing to
reach a 89% VLP purity with a 19% yield. The combination of this downstream
strategy following production in E. coli would be suited for production of
VLP-based veterinary vaccines targeting livestock and companion animals where
large amounts of doses must be produced at an affordable price.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2016.02.011 
PMID: 26947397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

