
1. Biochemistry. 2016 Apr 12;55(14):2174-86. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00125. Epub 
2016 Mar 31.

Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer Characterization of DNA Wrapping in Closed
and Open Escherichia coli RNA Polymerase-λP(R) Promoter Complexes.

Sreenivasan R(1)(2), Heitkamp S(1)(2), Chhabra M(1)(2), Saecker R(1)(2), Lingeman
E(1)(2), Poulos M(1)(2), McCaslin D(1)(2), Capp MW(1)(2), Artsimovitch I(1)(2),
Record MT Jr(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biophysics Program, ‡Department of Biochemistry, and §Department of Chemistry,
University of Wisconsin-Madison , Madison, Wisconsin 53706, United States.
(2)Department of Microbiology and ⊥Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State
University , Columbus, Ohio 43210, United States.

Initial recognition of promoter DNA by RNA polymerase (RNAP) is proposed to
trigger a series of conformational changes beginning with bending and wrapping of
the 40-50 bp of DNA immediately upstream of the -35 region. Kinetic studies
demonstrated that the presence of upstream DNA facilitates bending and entry of
the downstream duplex (to +20) into the active site cleft to form an advanced
closed complex (CC), prior to melting of ∼13 bp (-11 to +2), including the
transcription start site (+1). Atomic force microscopy and footprinting revealed 
that the stable open complex (OC) is also highly wrapped (-60 to +20). To test
the proposed bent-wrapped model of duplex DNA in an advanced RNAP-λP(R) CC and
compare wrapping in the CC and OC, we use fluorescence resonance energy transfer 
(FRET) between cyanine dyes at far-upstream (-100) and downstream (+14) positions
of promoter DNA. Similarly large intrinsic FRET efficiencies are observed for the
CC (0.30 ± 0.07) and the OC (0.32 ± 0.11) for both probe orientations.
Fluorescence enhancements at +14 are observed in the single-dye-labeled CC and
OC. These results demonstrate that upstream DNA is extensively wrapped and the
start site region is bent into the cleft in the advanced CC, reducing the
distance between positions -100 and +14 on promoter DNA from >300 to <100 Å. The 
proximity of upstream DNA to the downstream cleft in the advanced CC is
consistent with the proposed mechanism for facilitation of OC formation by
upstream DNA.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00125 
PMCID: PMC4830751
PMID: 26998673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

