
1. Immun Inflamm Dis. 2016 Jan 18;4(1):52-63. doi: 10.1002/iid3.93. eCollection 2016
Mar.

Bovine leukemia virus reduces anti-viral cytokine activities and NK cytotoxicity 
by inducing TGF-β secretion from regulatory T cells.

Ohira K(1), Nakahara A(1), Konnai S(1), Okagawa T(1), Nishimori A(1), Maekawa
N(1), Ikebuchi R(1), Kohara J(2), Murata S(1), Ohashi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Disease Control Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine Hokkaido 
University Sapporo 060-0818 Japan.
(2)Hokkaido Research Organization Agriculture Research Department, Animal
Research Center Shintoku 081-0038 Japan.

CD4(+)CD25(high)Foxp3(+) T cells suppress excess immune responses that lead to
autoimmune and/or inflammatory diseases, and maintain host immune homeostasis.
However, CD4(+)CD25(high)Foxp3(+) T cells reportedly contribute to disease
progression by over suppressing immune responses in some chronic infections. In
this study, kinetic and functional analyses of CD4(+)CD25(high)Foxp3(+) T cells
were performed in cattle with bovine leukemia virus (BLV) infections, which have 
reported immunosuppressive characteristics. In initial experiments, production of
the Th1 cytokines IFN-γ and TNF-α was reduced in BLV-infected cattle compared
with uninfected cattle, and numbers of IFN-γ or TNF-α producing CD4(+) T cells
decreased with disease progression. In contrast, IFN-γ production by NK cells was
inversely correlated with BLV proviral loads in infected cattle. Additionally,
during persistent lymphocytosis disease stages, NK cytotoxicity was depressed as 
indicated by low expression of the cytolytic protein perforin. Concomitantly,
total CD4(+)CD25(high)Foxp3(+) T cell numbers and percentages of TGF-β(+) cells
were increased, suggesting that TGF-β plays a role in the functional declines of 
CD4(+) T cells and NK cells. In further experiments, recombinant bovine TGF-β
suppressed IFN-γ and TNF-α production by CD4(+) T cells and NK cytotoxicity in
cultured cells. These data suggest that TGF-β from CD4(+)CD25(high)Foxp3(+) T
cells is immunosuppressive and contributes to disease progression and the
development of opportunistic infections during BLV infection.

DOI: 10.1002/iid3.93 
PMCID: PMC4768061
PMID: 27042304 

