
1. PLoS One. 2016 Apr 29;11(4):e0153849. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0153849.
eCollection 2016.

Regulation of Gag- and Env-Specific CD8+ T Cell Responses in ART-Naïve
HIV-Infected Patients: Potential Implications for Individualized Immunotherapy.

Prebensen C(1)(2)(3), Lind A(1), Dyrhol-Riise AM(1)(2)(3), Kvale D(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)K.G. Jebsen Inflammation Research Centre, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Strategies to develop a functional cure for HIV infection will likely require
boosting of effector T cell responses to eliminate reactivated, latently infected
cells. We have recently explored an assay for assessing antigen-specific
regulation of T cell proliferation, which was related to clinical progression in 
untreated patients and to vaccine efficacy in two trials of therapeutic Gag-based
vaccines. We here expand the same assay to further investigate regulation
mediated by various inhibitory pathways. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 
26 asymptomatic HIV-infected, antiretroviral therapy-naïve patients were
stimulated with Gag and Env overlapping peptide panels for 5 days. Monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) blocking inhibitory mediators interleukin (IL) 10, transforming
growth factor (TGF) β, programmed death ligand (PD-L) 1 and herpes virus entry
mediator (HVEM) were added to parallel cultures. Functional T cell regulation
(FTR) was defined as the difference in proliferation between stimulated cultures 
with and without blocking mAbs. FTR was detected in 54% of patients. Blockade of 
IL-10/PD-L1 and IL10/TGF-β detected all cases with Gag- and Env-associated FTR,
respectively. In accordance with previous findings, isolated Env FTR was
associated with higher plasma HIV RNA and lower CD4 counts, while patients with
both Gag and Env FTR also had higher Gag- and Env-specific proliferative CD8+ T
cell responses. There was no association between FTR and frequencies of activated
regulatory T cells. In conclusion, we observed substantial heterogeneity in FTR
between patients, inhibitory pathways and HIV antigens. FTR may help to
individualize immunomodulation and warrants further assessment in clinical
immunotherapy trials.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0153849 
PMCID: PMC4851414
PMID: 27128502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

