
1. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2016 Jul;104:171-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2016.05.003. Epub
2016 May 7.

Development of a multi-layered vaginal tablet containing dapivirine,
levonorgestrel and acyclovir for use as a multipurpose prevention technology.

McConville C(1), Major I(2), Devlin B(3), Brimer A(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Institute of Clinical Sciences, College of Medical and
Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK. Electronic 
address: C.McConville.2@bham.ac.uk.
(2)Materials Research Institute, Athlone Institute of Technology, Athlone,
Ireland.
(3)International Partnership for Microbicide, Silver Spring, MD, USA.

Multipurpose prevention technologies (MPTs) are preferably single dosage forms
designed to simultaneously address multiple sexual and reproductive health needs,
such as unintended pregnancy, HIV infection and other sexually transmitted
infections (STIs). This manuscript describes the development of a range of
multi-layered vaginal tablets, with both immediate and sustained release layers
capable of delivering the antiretroviral drug dapivirine, the contraceptive
hormone levonorgestrel, and the anti-herpes simplex virus drug acyclovir at
independent release rates from a single dosage form. Depending on the design of
the tablet in relation to the type (immediate or sustained release) or number of 
layers, the dose of each drug could be individually controlled. For example one
tablet design was able to provide immediate release of all three drugs, while
another tablet design was able to provide immediate release of both acyclovir and
levonorgestrel, while providing sustained release of Dapivirine for up to 8h. A
third tablet design was able to provide immediate release of both acyclovir and
levonorgestrel, a large initial burst of Dapivirine, followed by sustained
release of Dapivirine for up to 8h. All of the tablets passed the test for
friability with a percent friability of less than 1%. The hardness of all tablet 
designs was between 115 and 153N, while their drug content met the European
Pharmacopeia 2.9.40 Uniformity of Dosage units acceptance value at levels 1 and
2. Finally, the accelerated stability of all three actives was significantly
enhanced in comparison with a mixed drug control.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2016.05.003 
PMID: 27163243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

