
1. Mol Immunol. 2016 Aug;76:55-61. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2016.06.002. Epub 2016 Jun 
25.

The kinetics and protection of the antiviral state induced by recombinant iIFN1a 
in rainbow trout against infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus.

Cao Y(1), Xu L(2), LaPatra SE(3), Zhao J(4), Liu M(5), Liu H(6), Lu T(7), Zhang
Q(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquaculture, Heilongjiang River Fisheries Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Harbin 150070, China; State Key Laboratory
of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China. Electronic address:
caoyongsheng@hrfri.ac.cn.
(2)Department of Aquaculture, Heilongjiang River Fisheries Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Harbin 150070, China. Electronic address:
lmxu0917@163.com.
(3)Research Division, Clear Springs Foods Inc., P.O. Box 712, Buhl, ID 83316,
USA. Electronic address: scott.lapatra@clearsprings.com.
(4)Department of Aquaculture, Heilongjiang River Fisheries Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Harbin 150070, China. Electronic address:
zhaojingzhuang@hrfri.ac.cn.
(5)Department of Aquaculture, Heilongjiang River Fisheries Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Harbin 150070, China. Electronic address:
446048847@qq.com.
(6)Department of Aquaculture, Heilongjiang River Fisheries Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Harbin 150070, China. Electronic address:
liuhongbai@sina.com.
(7)Department of Aquaculture, Heilongjiang River Fisheries Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Harbin 150070, China. Electronic address:
lutongyan@hotmail.com.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China. Electronic
address: zhangqy@ihb.ac.cn.

The iIFN1a (intracellular IFN-a1), that is one of the IFN-a1 variants, was shown 
to be functional intracellularly and act as a novel defense against an infectious
hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHNV). To determine its antiviral properties, a
recombinant iIFN1a was generated in Escherichia coli. Its antiviral activity
against IHNV was 1.69×10(7)U/mg in CHSE-214 cells. Additionally, iIFN1a was
capable of inducing comparable levels of IRF-1, IRF-2, IFN-I, IFN-γ and Mx
transcription in head kidney, spleen and liver tissues at an early time point
(6h), that was followed by a rapid decline 24h after induction. The recombinant
protein also elicited protection against IHNV in vivo. At 6 and 24h after
induction there was 100% protection against the virus, however, at 48 and 72h the
protection decreased to 57 and 40%, respectively. The in vivo protection kinetics
correlated with the kinetics of gene expression. The results of this study
provide details of the antiviral state that was induced by iIFN1a in vivo for the
first time. Additionally, this information will facilitate the development of
this recombinant protein as a potential anti-viral treatment and/or adjuvant.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2016.06.002 
PMID: 27348633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

