
1. Top Antivir Med. 2016 May-Jun;24(1):59-81.

CROI 2016: Advances in Antiretroviral Therapy.

Taylor BS(1), Olender SA(2), Tieu HV(3), Wilkin TJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonia, TX, USA.
(2)Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Columbia University Medical Center and New York Blood Center, New York, NY,
USA.
(4)Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

The 2016 Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections highlighted
exciting advances in antiretroviral therapy, including important data on
investigational antiretroviral drugs and clinical trials. Clinical trials
demonstrated benefits from a long-acting injectable coformulation given as
maintenance therapy, examined intravenous and subcutaneous administration of a
monoclonal antibody directed at the CD4 binding site of HIV-1, and provided novel
data on tenofovir alafenamide. Several studies focused on the role of HIV drug
resistance, including the significance of minority variants, transmitted drug
resistance, use of resistance testing, and drug class-related resistance. Novel
data on the HIV care continuum in low- and middle-income settings concentrated on
differentiated HIV care delivery models and outcomes. Data on progress toward
reaching World Health Organization 90-90-90 targets as well as outcomes related
to expedited initiation of HIV treatment and adherence strategies were presented.
Results from a trial in Malawi showed reduced rates of mother-to-child
transmission among HIV-infected women who initiated antiretroviral therapy prior 
to pregnancy, and several studies highlighted the effect of antiretroviral
therapy in pediatric populations. A special session was dedicated to the findings
of studies of Ebola virus disease and treatment during the outbreak in West
Africa.


PMCID: PMC6148924
PMID: 27398863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

