
1. J Neurol. 2016 Oct;263(10):2004-21. doi: 10.1007/s00415-016-8217-x. Epub 2016 Jul
11.

Drug-associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy: a clinical,
radiological, and cerebrospinal fluid analysis of 326 cases.

Maas RP(1), Muller-Hansma AH(2), Esselink RA(3), Murk JL(4), Warnke C(5),
Killestein J(6), Wattjes MP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Route 935, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. roderick.maas@radboudumc.nl.
(2)Netherlands Pharmacovigilance Center Lareb, 's-Hertogenbosch, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Route 935, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University,
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(6)Department of Neurology, VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, VU Medical Center, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.

The implementation of a variety of immunosuppressive therapies has made
drug-associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) an increasingly 
prevalent clinical entity. The purpose of this study was to investigate its
diagnostic characteristics and to determine whether differences herein exist
between the multiple sclerosis (MS), neoplasm, post-transplantation, and
autoimmune disease subgroups. Reports of possible, probable, and definite PML
according to the current diagnostic criteria were obtained by a systematic search
of PubMed and the Dutch pharmacovigilance database. Demographic, epidemiologic,
clinical, radiological, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and histopathological features
were extracted from each report and differences were compared between the disease
categories. In the 326 identified reports, PML onset occurred on average
29.5 months after drug introduction, varying from 14.2 to 37.8 months in the
neoplasm and MS subgroups, respectively. The most common overall symptoms were
motor weakness (48.6 %), cognitive deficits (43.2 %), dysarthria (26.3 %), and
ataxia (24.1 %). The former two also constituted the most prevalent
manifestations in each subgroup. Lesions were more often localized
supratentorially (87.7 %) than infratentorially (27.4 %), especially in the
frontal (64.1 %) and parietal lobes (46.6 %), and revealed enhancement in 27.6 % 
of cases, particularly in the MS (42.9 %) subgroup. Positive JC virus results in 
the first CSF sample were obtained in 63.5 %, while conversion after one or more 
negative outcomes occurred in 13.7 % of cases. 52.2 % of patients died, ranging
from 12.0 to 83.3 % in the MS and neoplasm subgroups, respectively. In
conclusion, despite the heterogeneous nature of the underlying diseases, motor
weakness and cognitive changes were the two most common manifestations of
drug-associated PML in all subgroups. The frontal and parietal lobes invariably
constituted the predilection sites of drug-related PML lesions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-016-8217-x 
PMCID: PMC5037162
PMID: 27401179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Compliance with ethical standards Ethical
standards The manuscript does not contain clinical studies or patient data.
Conflicts of interest Roderick Maas reports no disclosures. Annemarie
Muller-Hansma reports no disclosures. Rianne Esselink reports no disclosures.
Jean-Luc Murk received personal fees from Biogen. Clemens Warnke received
compensation for consulting and/or research support from Novartis, Biogen, Bayer,
and TEVA. Joep Killestein accepted speaker and consulting fees from Merck-Serono,
Biogen Idec, TEVA, Genzyme, and Novartis. Mike Wattjes serves as a consultant for
Roche, Novartis, and Biogen. MS Center Amsterdam of the VU University Medical
Center received financial support for research activities from Bayer Schering
Pharma, Biogen Idec, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck-Serono, Novartis, and TEVA. Funding
Not applicable.

