
1. Viruses. 2016 Aug 2;8(8). pii: E206. doi: 10.3390/v8080206.

Clomiphene and Its Isomers Block Ebola Virus Particle Entry and Infection with
Similar Potency: Potential Therapeutic Implications.

Nelson EA(1), Barnes AB(2), Wiehle RD(3), Fontenot GK(4), Hoenen T(5)(6), White
JM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908,
USA. en2b@virginia.edu.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908,
USA. abb9uu@virginia.edu.
(3)Repros Therapeutics, Inc., The Woodlands, TX 77380, USA. rwiehle@reprosrx.com.
(4)Repros Therapeutics, Inc., The Woodlands, TX 77380, USA.
GFontenot@reprosrx.com.
(5)Laboratory of Virology, Division of Intramural Research, National Institutes
of Health, Hamilton, MT 59840, USA. thomas.hoenen@fli.bund.de.
(6)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, D-17493, Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.
thomas.hoenen@fli.bund.de.
(7)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908,
USA. jw7g@virginia.edu.

The 2014 outbreak of Ebola virus (EBOV) in Western Africa highlighted the need
for anti-EBOV therapeutics. Clomiphene is a U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)-approved drug that blocks EBOV entry and infection in cells and
significantly protects EBOV-challenged mice. As provided, clomiphene is,
approximately, a 60:40 mixture of two stereoisomers, enclomiphene and
zuclomiphene. The pharmacokinetic properties of the two isomers vary, but both
accumulate in the eye and male reproductive tract, tissues in which EBOV can
persist. Here we compared the ability of clomiphene and its isomers to inhibit
EBOV using viral-like particle (VLP) entry and
transcription/replication-competent VLP (trVLP) assays. Clomiphene and its
isomers inhibited the entry and infection of VLPs and trVLPs with similar
potencies. This was demonstrated with VLPs bearing the glycoproteins from three
filoviruses (EBOV Mayinga, EBOV Makona, and Marburg virus) and in two cell lines 
(293T/17 and Vero E6). Visual problems have been noted in EBOV survivors, and
viral RNA has been isolated from semen up to nine months post-infection. Since
the clomiphene isomers accumulate in these affected tissues, clomiphene or one of
its isomers warrants consideration as an anti-EBOV agent, for example, to
potentially help ameliorate symptoms in EBOV survivors.

DOI: 10.3390/v8080206 
PMCID: PMC4997570
PMID: 27490565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

