
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2016 Aug 11;16(1):406. doi: 10.1186/s12879-016-1731-8.

Impact of dengue virus (DENV) co-infection on clinical manifestations, disease
severity and laboratory parameters.

Dhanoa A(1), Hassan SS(2), Ngim CF(3), Lau CF(3), Chan TS(3), Adnan NA(2), Eng
WW(4)(5), Gan HM(4)(5), Rajasekaram G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Jeffrey Cheah School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Monash University
Malaysia, Bandar Sunway, 47500, Selangor, Malaysia. amreeta.dhanoa@monash.edu.
(2)Jeffrey Cheah School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Monash University
Malaysia, Bandar Sunway, 47500, Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Clinical School Johor Bahru, Jeffrey Cheah School of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Monash University Malaysia, 80100, Johor Bahru, Johor, Malaysia.
(4)Monash University Malaysia Genomics Facility, Bandar Sunway, 47500, Selangor, 
Malaysia.
(5)School of Science, Monash University Malaysia, Bandar Sunway, 47500, Selangor,
Malaysia.
(6)Department of Pathology, Hospital Sultanah Aminah Johor Bahru, 80100, Johor
Bahru, Johor, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: The co-circulation of 4 DENV serotypes in geographically expanding
area, has resulted in increasing occurrence of DENV co-infections. However,
studies assessing the clinical impact of DENV co-infections have been scarce and 
have involved small number of patients. This study explores the impact of DENV
co-infection on clinical manifestations and laboratory parameters.
METHODS: This retrospective study involved consecutive hospitalized patients with
non-structural protein 1 (NS1) antigen positivity during an outbreak (Jan to
April 2014). Multiplex RT-PCR was performed directly on NS1 positive serum
samples to detect and determine the DENV serotypes. All PCR-positive serum
samples were inoculated onto C6/36 cells. Multiplex PCR was repeated on the
supernatant of the first blind passage of the serum-infected cells. Random
samples of supernatant from the first passage of C6/36 infected cells were
subjected to whole genome sequencing. Clinical and laboratory variables were
compared between patients with and without DENV co-infections.
RESULTS: Of the 290 NS1 positive serum samples, 280 were PCR positive for DENV.
Medical notes of 262 patients were available for analysis. All 4 DENV serotypes
were identified. Of the 262 patients, forty patients (15.3 %) had DENV
co-infections: DENV-1/DENV-2(85 %), DENV-1/DENV-3 (12.5 %) and DENV-2/DENV-3 (2.5
%). Another 222 patients (84.7 %) were infected with single DENV serotype
(mono-infection), with DENV- 1 (76.6 %) and DENV- 2 (19.8 %) predominating.
Secondary dengue infections occurred in 31.3 % patients. Whole genome sequences
of random samples representing DENV-1 and DENV-2 showed heterogeneity amongst the
DENVs. Multivariate analysis revealed that pleural effusion and the presence of
warning signs were significantly higher in the co-infected group, both in the
overall and subgroup analysis. Diarrhoea was negatively associated with
co-infection. Additionally, DENV-2 co-infected patients had higher frequency of
patients with severe thrombocytopenia (platelet count < 50,000/mm(3)), whereas
DENV-2 mono-infections presented more commonly with myalgia. Elevated creatinine 
levels were more frequent amongst the co-infected patients in univariate
analysis. Haemoconcentration and haemorrhagic manifestations were not higher
amongst the co-infected patients. Serotypes associated with severe dengue were:
DENV-1 (n = 9), DENV-2 (n = 1), DENV-3 (n = 1) in mono-infected patients and
DENV-1/DENV-2 (n = 5) and DENV-1/DENV-3 (n = 1) amongst the co-infected patients.
CONCLUSION: DENV co-infections are not uncommon in a hyperendemic region and
co-infected patients are skewed towards more severe clinical manifestations
compared to mono-infected patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-016-1731-8 
PMCID: PMC4982428
PMID: 27514512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

