
1. Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2016 Aug 18;126(9):672-680. doi: 10.20452/pamw.3508. Epub 2016
Aug 18.

Risk factors for chronic kidney disease do not influence the serum levels of
asymmetric dimethylarginine in HIV-1-infected patients without significant renal 
disease.

Szymanek-Pasternak A, Szymczak A, Zalewska M, Małyszczak K, Knysz B.

Comment in
    Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2016 Sep 28;126(9):621-622.

INTRODUCTION Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is one of the consequences of human
immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) infection. The disease increases the risk of
progression to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome and death and complicates
antiretroviral therapy. The prevalence of CKD in HIV-1-infected patients is
difficult to estimate and depends on the diagnostic criteria for CKD. OBJECTIVES 
The aim of the study was to evaluate the usefulness of a single measurement of
serum asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) levels in the diagnosis of kidney damage
in patients infected with HIV-1.  PATIENTS AND METHODS The study included 119
HIV-1-infected individuals (88 males [74%]), both on antiretroviral treatment and
treatment-naive, with a negative history of kidney disease, and 31
healthy volunteers. We analyzed demographic characteristics as well as data on
concomitant diseases, antiretroviral regimen, serum ADMA concentrations,
parameters of renal function, CD4+ cell count, and HIV-1 viral load. RESULTS No
significant impairment of renal function was observed. Mean serum ADMA levels in 
all HIV-1-infected patients, as well as in treatment-naive patients and treated
patients, were significantly higher (P <0.0001; P = 0.0001; P <0.0001;
respectively) compared with those in the control group. The difference between
treatment-naive and treated HIV-1-infected patients was nonsignificant.
ADMA levels were not correlated with the mean duration of antiretroviral therapy,
antiretroviral drugs used, or other risk factors for CKD. CONCLUSIONS A single
measurement of ADMA levels is not useful for the diagnosis of CKD in patients
without significant renal pathology or as an indicator of kidney damage related
to antiretroviral therapy. The significance of repeated measurements of ADMA
levels in renal function assessment requires further research.

DOI: 10.20452/pamw.3508 
PMID: 27535326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

