
1. Leg Med (Tokyo). 2016 Sep;22:13-7. doi: 10.1016/j.legalmed.2016.07.005. Epub 2016
Jul 25.

A case of sudden unexpected infant death involving a homozygotic twin with the
thermolabile CPT2 variant, accompanied by rotavirus infection and treatment with 
an antibiotic containing pivalic acid.

Takahashi Y(1), Sano R(2), Kominato Y(2), Kubo R(2), Takahashi K(2), Nakajima
T(2), Takeshita H(3), Ishige T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Legal Medicine, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine,
Japan. Electronic address: y.takahashi@gunma-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Legal Medicine, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine,
Japan.
(3)Department of Legal Medicine, Shimane University School of Medicine, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Gunma University Hospital, Japan.

We investigated a case of sudden unexpected death involving a 22-month-old male
homozygotic twin infant. After both of the twins had suffered from
gastroenteritis, one was found dead in his bed, but his brother survived and has 
since been healthy. Notably, only the deceased had been treated with an
antibiotic containing pivalic acid, which may sometimes cause hypocarnitinemia.
Postmortem computed tomography and medicolegal autopsy demonstrated severe liver 
steatosis, and subsequent genetic analysis revealed that the twin had the
thermolabile variant of carnitine palmitoyl transferase 2 (CPT2). On the basis of
these facts, we concluded that the cause of death had been fatty acid oxidation
deficiency accelerated by an antibiotic containing pivalic acid and virus
infection in this infant harboring the thermolabile genetic variant of CPT2.
Although each factor alone was not fatal, their combination appeared to have
resulted in sudden unexpected infant death.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.legalmed.2016.07.005 
PMID: 27591533  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

