
1. Virology. 2016 Dec;499:105-113. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2016.09.011. Epub 2016 Sep
17.

Neutralization resistant HIV-1 primary isolates from antiretroviral naïve
chronically infected children in India.

Makhdoomi MA(1), Singh D(1), Nair Pananghat A(2), Lodha R(3), Kabra SK(3), Luthra
K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
110029, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
110029, India; Department of Biochemistry, Jamia Hamdard University, 110062 New
Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
110029, India.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
110029, India. Electronic address: kalpanaluthra@gmail.com.

Anti-HIV-1 broadly neutralizing antibodies (bnAbs) have been extensively tested
against pesudoviruses of diverse strains. We generated and characterized HIV-1
primary isolates from antiretroviral naïve infected Indian children, and
determined their susceptibility to known NAbs. All the 8 isolates belonged to
subtype-C and were R5 tropic. Majority of these viruses were resistant to
neutralization by NAbs, suggesting that the bnAbs, known to efficiently
neutralize pseudoviruses (adult and pediatric) of different strains, are less
effective against pediatric primary isolates. Interestingly, AIIMS_329 isolate
displayed high susceptibility to neutralization by PG9 and PG16bnAbs, with IC50
titer of 1.3 and 0.97μg/ml, suggesting exposure of this epitope on this virus.
All isolates except AIIMS_506 were neutralized by contemporaneous plasma
antibodies. Our findings suggest that primary isolates, due to close resemblance 
to viruses in natural infection, should be used to evaluate NAbs as effective
vaccine candidates in both children and adults.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2016.09.011 
PMID: 27643887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

