
1. Histopathology. 2017 Mar;70(4):579-594. doi: 10.1111/his.13100. Epub 2016 Dec 16.

Grey zone lymphoma with features intermediate between diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma and classical Hodgkin lymphoma: a clinicopathological study of 14
Epstein-Barr virus-positive cases.

Elsayed AA(1)(2), Satou A(1), Eladl AE(1)(2), Kato S(1), Nakamura S(1), Asano
N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Nagoya University Hospital,
Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University, Mansoura,
Egypt.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Nagano Prefectural Suzaka Hospital, Nagano,
Japan.

AIMS: To investigate the clinicopathological features of Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-positive grey zone lymphoma (GZL) with features intermediate between
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and classical Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We investigated the clinicopathological features of 14 cases
of EBV-positive GZL in Japan. The control group included 173 cases of
EBV-positive CHL and 64 cases of EBV-positive DLBCL of the elderly (polymorphous 
type). The patients were 10 men and four women with a median age of 62 years.
Twelve patients (86%) had advanced clinical stage, 11 (79%) had B-symptoms, eight
(57%) had mediastinal disease, 10 (71%) had elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase 
(LDH) levels, and five (36%) had thrombocytopenia. All cases had CHL-like
morphology but strongly expressed at least one B-cell marker. The neoplastic
cells were Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg-like cells, but with a large number of
mononuclear variants. EBV-positive GZL patients were more significantly more
likely than EBV-positive CHL patients to have advanced clinical stage (P =
0.023), presence of B-symptoms (P = 0.011), elevated serum LDH levels (P =
0.047), thrombocytopenia (P = 0.042), and mediastinal involvement (P = 0.023).
The progression-free survival (PFS) of EBV-positive GZL patients was
significantly poorer than that of EBV-positive CHL patients (P = 0.043) but no
difference from EBV-positive DLBCL patients was observed (P = 0.367).
CONCLUSIONS: EBV-positive GZL patients have significantly worse PFS than
EBV-positive CHL patients, and are significantly more likely to have adverse
clinical parameters such as advanced clinical stage, presence of B-symptoms, and 
thrombocytopenia. Further studies are needed to better characterize this entity, 
which may require the development of innovative therapeutic strategies.

Â© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/his.13100 
PMID: 27735994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

