
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Oct 7;17(10). pii: E1679.

Ultra-Deep Sequencing Characterization of HCV Samples with Equivocal Typing
Results Determined with a Commercial Assay.

Minosse C(1), Giombini E(2), Bartolini B(3), Capobianchi MR(4), Garbuglia AR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, National Institute for Infectious Diseases "Lazzaro
Spallanzani"-IRCCS, Via Portuense 292, Rome 00149, Italy.
claudia.minosse@inmi.it.
(2)Laboratory of Virology, National Institute for Infectious Diseases "Lazzaro
Spallanzani"-IRCCS, Via Portuense 292, Rome 00149, Italy.
emanuela.giombini@inmi.it.
(3)Laboratory of Virology, National Institute for Infectious Diseases "Lazzaro
Spallanzani"-IRCCS, Via Portuense 292, Rome 00149, Italy.
barbara.bartolini@inmi.it.
(4)Laboratory of Virology, National Institute for Infectious Diseases "Lazzaro
Spallanzani"-IRCCS, Via Portuense 292, Rome 00149, Italy.
maria.capobianchi@inmi.it.
(5)Laboratory of Virology, National Institute for Infectious Diseases "Lazzaro
Spallanzani"-IRCCS, Via Portuense 292, Rome 00149, Italy. argarbuglia@iol.it.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is classified into seven phylogenetically distinct
genotypes, which are further subdivided into related subtypes. Accurate
assignment of genotype/subtype is mandatory in the era of directly acting
antivirals. Several molecular methods are available for HCV genotyping; however, 
a relevant number of samples with indeterminate, mixed, or unspecified subtype
results, or even with misclassified genotypes, may occur. Using NS5B direct (DS) 
and ultra-deep pyrosequencing (UDPS), we have tested 43 samples, which resulted
in genotype 1 unsubtyped (n = 17), mixed infection (n = 17), or indeterminate (n 
= 9) with the Abbott RealTime HCV Genotype II assay. Genotype 1 was confirmed in 
14/17 samples (82%): eight resulted in subtype 1b, and five resulted in subtype
1a with both DS and UDPS, while one was classified as subtype 1e by DS and mixed 
infection (1e + 1a) by UDPS. Three of seventeen genotype 1 samples resulted in
genotype 3h with both sequencing approaches. Only one mixed infection was
confirmed by UDPS (4d + 1a), while in 88% of cases a single component of the
mixture was detected (five genotype 1a, four genotype 1b, two genotype 3a, two
genotype 4m, and two genotype 4d); 44% of indeterminate samples resulted genotype
2c by both DS and UDPS, 22% resulted genotype 3a; one indeterminate sample by
Abbott resulted in genotype 4d, one resulted in genotype 6n, and one was
classified as subtype 3a by DS, and resulted mixed infection (3a + 3h) by UDPS.
The concordance between DS and UDPS was 94%, 88%, and 89% for genotype 1,
co-infection, and indeterminate results, respectively. UDPS should be considered 
very useful to resolve ambiguous HCV genotyping results.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms17101679 
PMCID: PMC5085712
PMID: 27739414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

