
1. Food Environ Virol. 2017 Mar;9(1):89-102. doi: 10.1007/s12560-016-9266-0. Epub
2016 Oct 22.

In Situ Dynamics of F-Specific RNA Bacteriophages in a Small River: New Way to
Assess Viral Propagation in Water Quality Studies.

Fauvel B(1)(2)(3), Gantzer C(2)(3), Cauchie HM(1), Ogorzaly L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Research and Innovation (ERIN), Luxembourg
Institute of Science and Technology (LIST), 41, rue du Brill, 4422, Belvaux,
Luxembourg.
(2)Laboratoire de Chimie, Physique et Microbiologie pour l'Environnement (LCPME),
UMR 7564, Faculté de Pharmacie, Université de Lorraine, 5 rue Albert Lebrun,
Nancy, 54000, France.
(3)CNRS, LCPME, UMR 7564, Nancy, 54000, France.
(4)Department of Environmental Research and Innovation (ERIN), Luxembourg
Institute of Science and Technology (LIST), 41, rue du Brill, 4422, Belvaux,
Luxembourg. leslie.ogorzaly@list.lu.

The occurrence and propagation of enteric viruses in rivers constitute a major
public health issue. However, little information is available on the in situ
transport and spread of viruses in surface water. In this study, an original in
situ experimental approach using the residence time of the river water mass was
developed to accurately follow the propagation of F-specific RNA bacteriophages
(FRNAPHs) along a 3-km studied river. Surface water and sediment of 9 sampling
campaigns were collected and analyzed using both infectivity and RT-qPCR assays. 
In parallel, some physico-chemical variables such as flow rate, water
temperature, conductivity and total suspended solids were measured to investigate
the impact of environmental conditions on phage propagation. For campaigns with
low flow rate and high temperature, the results highlight a decrease of
infectious phage concentration along the river, which was successfully modelled
according to a first-order negative exponential decay. The monitoring of
infectious FRNAPHs belonging mainly to the genogroup II was confirmed with direct
phage genotyping and total phage particle quantification. Reported k decay
coefficients according to exponential models allowed for the determination of the
actual in situ distance and time necessary for removing 90 % of infectious phage 
particles. This present work provides a new way to assess the true in situ viral 
propagation along a small river. These findings can be highly useful in water
quality and risk assessment studies to determine the viral contamination spread
from a point contamination source to the nearest recreational areas.

DOI: 10.1007/s12560-016-9266-0 
PMCID: PMC5309317
PMID: 27771874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

