
1. J Virol Methods. 2017 Feb;240:21-25. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2016.11.001. Epub
2016 Nov 4.

Establishment and validation of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for IgG
antibody against cytomegalovirus based on pp150 antigen.

Xi H(1), Jinjie L(1), Shengxiang G(2), Tingdong L(1), Han W(1), Xiaoyi G(1),
Tong-Ming F(3), Jun Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Vaccinology and Molecular Diagnostics,
National Institute of Diagnostics and Vaccine Development in Infectious Diseases,
School of Life Science and School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen
361005, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Vaccinology and Molecular Diagnostics,
National Institute of Diagnostics and Vaccine Development in Infectious Diseases,
School of Life Science and School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen
361005, China. Electronic address: sxge@xmu.edu.cn.
(3)Merck Research Laboratories, West Point, PA 19486, USA.

The development of HCMV vaccines for the prevention of congenital HCMV has been
identified as a top priority by the Institute of Medicine (USA), and virus
infection is an important endpoint for the efficacy evaluation of the candidate
vaccines. However, it is technically difficult to capture the HCMV viremia or
uremia in infected individuals because the viremia or uremia can be detected only
transiently during acute infection, and most people who are infected are
asymptomatic. Thus, it is much desired to develop a serological assay for
effectively distinguishing anti-HCMV antibodies as a result of natural infection 
from those elicited by subunit antigen vaccination. In this study, five HCMV
proteins other than antigens commonly used as subunit vaccine candidates were
expressed in Escherichia coli and purified, and out of them, the HCMV tegument
protein pp150 exhibited the most robust reactivity to seropositive sera and the
faintest cross reaction to seronegative sera. With a coefficient of variability
less than 15%, an ELISA based on pp150 antigen (pp150-ELISA) showed 100%
(366/366) sensitivity and 100% (77/77) specificity (using neutralizing activity
as a gold standard) and good quantitative correlation with an in-house ELISA
based on virus lysate antigens. Taken together, these results indicate that
pp150-ELISA, which has comparable performance to generally used assays based on
virus lysate antigens, might provide a simple method to detect HCMV infection or 
reactivation and could be useful in future HCMV subunit vaccine efficacy trials.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2016.11.001 
PMID: 27825854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

