
1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Dec 30;291(53):27087-27097. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.761908. Epub 
2016 Nov 11.

A Conserved Tripeptide Sequence at the C Terminus of the Poxvirus DNA
Processivity Factor D4 Is Essential for Protein Integrity and Function.

Nuth M(1), Guan H(1), Ricciardi RP(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology, School of Dental Medicine and.
(2)From the Department of Microbiology, School of Dental Medicine and
ricciard@upenn.edu.
(3)the Abramson Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104.

Vaccinia virus (VACV) is a poxvirus, and the VACV D4 protein serves both as a
uracil-DNA glycosylase and as an essential component required for processive DNA 
synthesis. The VACV A20 protein has no known catalytic function itself but
associates with D4 to form the D4-A20 heterodimer that functions as the poxvirus 
DNA processivity factor. The heterodimer enables the DNA polymerase to
efficiently synthesize extended strands of DNA. Upon characterizing the
interaction between D4 and A20, we observed that the C terminus of D4 is
susceptible to perturbation. Further analysis demonstrated that a conserved
hexapeptide stretch at the extreme C terminus of D4 is essential for maintaining 
protein integrity, as assessed by its requirement for the production of soluble
recombinant protein that is functional in processive DNA synthesis. From the
known crystal structures of D4, the C-terminal hexapeptide is shown to make
intramolecular contact with residues spanning the inner core of the protein. Our 
mutational analysis revealed that a tripeptide motif (215GFI217) within the
hexapeptide comprises apparent residues necessary for the contact. Prediction of 
protein disorder identified the hexapeptide and several regions upstream of
Gly215 that comprise residues of the interface surfaces of the D4-A20
heterodimer. Our study suggests that 215GFI217 anchors these potentially dynamic 
upstream regions of the protein to maintain protein integrity. Unlike uracil-DNA 
glycosylases from diverse sources, where the C termini are disordered and do not 
form comparable intramolecular contacts, this feature may be unique to
orthopoxviruses.

Â© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.761908 
PMCID: PMC5207139
PMID: 27836975  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

