
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Nov 17;6:37350. doi: 10.1038/srep37350.

Solid-state NMR reveals differential carbohydrate utilization in diapausing Culex
pipiens.

Chang J(1), Singh J(1), Kim S(2), Hockaday WC(3), Sim C(2), Kim SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Baylor University, One Bear Place
#97348, Waco, TX 76706, USA.
(2)Biology, Baylor University, One Bear Place #97348, Waco, TX 76706, USA.
(3)Geoscience, Baylor University, One Bear Place #97348, Waco, TX 76706, USA.

Culex pipiens is the mosquito that vectors West Nile Virus and other
human-pathogenic flavivruses in North America. In response to shortened day
length and lower temperatures, female Cx. pipiense prepares for the diapause by
actively feeding on carbohydrates to increase the biosynthesis of glycogen and
lipid to store energy for overwintering. The effect of feeding different
carbohydrates on glycogen and lipid biosynthesis in diapausing mosquitoes was
investigated in vivo using 13C solid-state NMR. Diapause-destined adult females
and nondiapausing counterparts after adult eclosion were fed with three different
carbohydrate sources for 7 days: 1) 10% sucrose, 2) 10% D-[13C6]glucose, and 3)
1% D-[13C6]glucose co-provisioned with 10% sucrose. NMR measurements show that
sucrose and glucose are metabolized differently in diapausing mosquitoes.
Mosquitoes fed on sucrose primarily accumulate glycogen with increased branching 
structures, but less of lipids. In contrast, mosquitoes fed exclusively on
glucose show accumulation of both glycogen and lipid with increased aliphatic
chain length. Glucose is exclusively metabolized for the biosynthesis of
triacylglyceride when mosquitoes were co-fed with sucrose. Our findings provide
novel insights into the insect carbohydrate metabolism that governs glycogen and 
lipid biosynthesis during diapause, which is fundamental for the insect survival 
during inimical environments.

DOI: 10.1038/srep37350 
PMCID: PMC5112589
PMID: 27853281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

