
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2017 Mar 4;13(3):717-723. doi:
10.1080/21645515.2016.1236164. Epub 2016 Nov 30.

Acute flaccid paralysis laboratorial surveillance in a polio-free country:
Brazil, 2005-2014.

Sousa IP Jr(1), Burlandy FM(1), Oliveira SS(1), Nunes AM(1), Sousa C(1), da Silva
EM(1), Souza JG(1), de Paula VA(1), Oliveira IC(1), Tavares FN(2), da Costa
EV(1), da Silva EE(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Laboratório de Enterovírus , Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz ,
Rio de Janeiro , Brazil.
(2)b Laboratório de Enterovírus, divisão de virologia , Instituto Evandro Chagas 
, Belém , Brazil.

The last case of paralytic poliomyelitis caused by wild poliovirus in Brazil
occurred in 1989. The interruption of the indigenous poliovirus transmission was 
obtained through mass immunization campaigns to eligible children and an active
epidemiological and laboratorial surveillance of all cases of acute flaccid
paralysis (AFP) among children under 15 y of age. This paper describes and
evaluates the performance of the AFP surveillance system in different geographic 
areas of Brazil between 2005 and 2014, using indicators recommended by WHO. AFP
surveillance indicators as well as virological investigation of polio and
non-polio enteroviruses in stool samples received in the laboratory were assessed
from 2005-2014. During the period, 5463 cases of AFP were investigated. Of these,
55% were males and 45% were females. Those under 5 y of age represented 48% of
all cases reported and investigated. AFP notification rate was within the
acceptable values with mean value of 1.3 (North), 1.4 (Northeast), 1.1
(Southern), 1.0 (Southeast) and 1.4 (Midwest) cases of AFP per 100.000 population
aged 15 y as well as the adequacy of fecal specimens received in the laboratory. 
Sabin- related polioviruses accounted for 1.7% of the isolates while, 6.7% were
non-polio enterovirus with the values ranging from 5.0% to 8.9 %. No wild-type
polio was found. The AFP epidemiological and laboratorial surveillance activities
have been kept at appropriate levels in Brazil. These data are a very strong
indication, which supports the status of country free of polio.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2016.1236164 
PMCID: PMC5360118
PMID: 27901633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

