
1. J Gen Virol. 2016 Dec;97(12):3103-3119. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.000637. Epub 2016 Oct 
21.

Markers of dengue severity: a systematic review of cytokines and chemokines.

Lee YH(1)(2), Leong WY(3), Wilder-Smith A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Interdisciplinary Group, Singapore-MIT Alliance for
Research and Technology, 1 CREATE Way, #03-12/13/14 Enterprise Wing, Singapore
138602, Singapore.
(2)KK Research Centre, KK Women's and Children's Hospital, 100 Bukit Timah Road, 
Singapore 229899, Singapore.
(3)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, 11
Mandalay Road, Singapore 308232, Singapore.

The prognosis of dengue remains a challenge in the early, objective triage of
patients with dengue fever of differing severity. Circulating immuno-modulating
proteins have brought new possibilities as prognostic markers of severe dengue
(SD). This systematic review is devoted to understanding the potential utility of
blood-based cytokines and chemokines as prognostication markers of SD based on
the current literature. PubMed and Embase were searched. Of 794 candidate
articles, 685 abstracts were screened against our exclusion/inclusion criteria
and 25 (3.6 %) studies met the quality assessments. A total of 18 studies were
retrospective observational and 2 were prospective cohort studies. Elevated
IL-10, up to day 7 of fever onset, stood out as a candidate prognostic marker for
SD using the 1997 and 2009 World Health Organization (WHO) case definitions. IFNγ
was another potential prognostic marker of SD (1997 WHO case definition), but its
levels varied between studies. Significant heterogeneity in methodologies and
patient cohorts prevent ready application of IL-10 and IFNγ as prognostic markers
to other dengue populations. Our results suggest that the current non-randomized 
studies are delivering inconsistent messages and higher-quality studies, with
consistent methodologies and validation in independent patient cohorts, are
needed to delineate confounding variables. Major gaps identified were full
accounting and transparency of sampling days, dengue virus type, infection status
and age group.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.000637 
PMID: 27902364  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

