
1. J Virol Methods. 2017 Mar;241:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2016.12.002. Epub
2016 Dec 7.

Variables influencing the efficiency and interpretation of reverse transcription 
quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR): An empirical study using Bacteriophage MS2.

Miranda JA(1), Steward GF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Microbial Oceanography: Research and Education, Department of
Oceanography, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, 1950 East-West Road, Honolulu,
Hawai'i 96822, United States.
(2)Center for Microbial Oceanography: Research and Education, Department of
Oceanography, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, 1950 East-West Road, Honolulu,
Hawai'i 96822, United States. Electronic address: grieg@hawaii.edu.

Reverse transcription, quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) is a sensitive method for
quantification of specific RNA targets, but the first step of the assay, reverse 
transcription, is notoriously variable and sensitive to reaction conditions. In
this study, we used purified Bacteriophage MS2 genomic RNA as a model virus
target to test two different RT enzymes (SuperScript II and SuperScript III), two
RT-priming strategies (gene-specific primers and random hexamers), and varying
background RNA concentrations (0-50ngμl-1) to determine how these variables
influence the efficiency of reverse transcription over a range of target
concentrations (101-107 copies μl-1). The efficiency of the RT reaction was
greatly improved by increasing both background RNA and primer concentrations, but
the benefit provided by background RNA was source dependent. At a given target
concentration, similar RT efficiencies were achieved with gene-specific primers
and random hexamers, but the latter required much higher concentrations. With
random hexamers, we observed a systematic variation in RT reaction efficiency as 
a function of target concentration. Using an RNA standard curve that was also
subject to RT effectively normalized for this systematic variability, but the
assay accuracy depended critically on the length of the standard RNA extending to
the 3' end of the qPCR target site. Our results shed some light on previous
contradictory conclusions in the literature, and provide insights that may aid in
the design of RT-qPCR assays and the design of synthetic RNA standards when
full-length material is not available.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2016.12.002 
PMID: 27940257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

