
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1540:157-177.

In Vitro Assays for RNA Binding and Protein Priming of Hepatitis B Virus
Polymerase.

Clark DN(1), Jones SA(2)(3), Hu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology-H107, The Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, 500 University Dr., Hershey, PA, 17033, USA.
dnc142@psu.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology-H107, The Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, 500 University Dr., Hershey, PA, 17033, USA.
(3)Nevada Division of Public and Behavioral Health, Primary Care Office, 4150
Technology Way, Suite 104, Carson City, NV, 89706, USA.

The hepatitis B virus (HBV) polymerase synthesizes the viral DNA genome from the 
pre-genomic RNA (pgRNA) template through reverse transcription. Initiation of
viral DNA synthesis is accomplished via a novel protein priming mechanism, so
named because the polymerase itself acts as a primer, whereby the initiating
nucleotide becomes covalently linked to a tyrosine residue on the viral
polymerase. Protein priming, in turn, depends on specific recognition of the
packaging signal on pgRNA called epsilon. These early events in viral DNA
synthesis can now be dissected in vitro as described here.The polymerase is
expressed in mammalian cells and purified by immunoprecipitation. The purified
protein is associated with host cell factors, is enzymatically active, and its
priming activity is epsilon dependent. A minimal epsilon RNA construct from pgRNA
is co-expressed with the polymerase in cells. This RNA binds to and
co-immunoprecipitates with the polymerase. Modifications can be made to either
the epsilon RNA or the polymerase protein by manipulating the expression
plasmids. Also, the priming reaction itself can be modified to assay for the
initiation or subsequent DNA synthesis during protein priming, the susceptibility
of the polymerase to chemical inhibitors, and the precise identification of the
DNA products upon their release from the polymerase. The identity of associated
host factors can also be evaluated. This protocol closely mirrors our current
understanding of the RNA binding and protein priming steps of the HBV replication
cycle, and it is amenable to modification. It should therefore facilitate both
basic research and drug discovery.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6700-1_13 
PMID: 27975315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

