
1. Protein Cell. 2017 Apr;8(4):284-295. doi: 10.1007/s13238-016-0350-x. Epub 2016
Dec 19.

Functional characterization of human equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1.

Huang W(1), Zeng X(1), Shi Y(1), Liu M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Structural Biology, Tsinghua-Peking
Joint Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, 100084, China.
(2)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Structural Biology, Tsinghua-Peking
Joint Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, 100084, China. liuminhao@biomed.tsinghua.edu.cn.

Equilibrative nucleoside transporters (ENTs), which facilitate cross-membrane
transport of nucleosides and nucleoside-derived drugs, play an important role in 
the salvage pathways of nucleotide synthesis, cancer chemotherapy, and treatment 
for virus infections. Functional characterization of ENTs at the molecular level 
remains technically challenging and hence scant. In this study, we report
successful purification and biochemical characterization of human equilibrative
nucleoside transporter 1 (hENT1) in vitro. The HEK293F-derived, recombinant hENT1
is homogenous and functionally active in proteoliposome-based counter flow
assays. hENT1 transports the substrate adenosine with a Km of 215 ± 34 µmol/L and
a Vmax of 578 ± 23.4 nmol mg-1 min-1. Adenosine uptake by hENT1 is competitively 
inhibited by nitrobenzylmercaptopurine ribonucleoside (NBMPR), nucleosides,
deoxynucleosides, and nucleoside-derived anti-cancer and anti-viral drugs.
Binding of hENT1 to adenosine, deoxyadenosine, and adenine by isothermal
titration calorimetry is in general agreement with results of the competitive
inhibition assays. These results validate hENT1 as a bona fide target for
potential drug target and serve as a useful basis for future biophysical and
structural studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s13238-016-0350-x 
PMCID: PMC5359181
PMID: 27995448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

