
1. Virus Evol. 2016 Oct 20;2(2):vew031. doi: 10.1093/ve/vew031. eCollection 2016
Jul.

Impacts and shortcomings of genetic clustering methods for infectious disease
outbreaks.

Poon AF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Western University, London,
Canada.

For infectious diseases, a genetic cluster is a group of closely related
infections that is usually interpreted as representing a recent outbreak of
transmission. Genetic clustering methods are becoming increasingly popular for
molecular epidemiology, especially in the context of HIV where there is now
considerable interest in applying these methods to prioritize groups for public
health resources such as pre-exposure prophylaxis. To date, genetic clustering
has generally been performed with ad hoc algorithms, only some of which have
since been encoded and distributed as free software. These algorithms have seldom
been validated on simulated data where clusters are known, and their
interpretation and similarities are not transparent to users outside of the
field. Here, I provide a brief overview on the development and
inter-relationships of genetic clustering methods, and an evaluation of six
methods on data simulated under an epidemic model in a risk-structured
population. The simulation analysis demonstrates that the majority of clustering 
methods are systematically biased to detect variation in sampling rates among
subpopulations, not variation in transmission rates. I discuss these results in
the context of previous work and the implications for public health applications 
of genetic clustering.

DOI: 10.1093/ve/vew031 
PMCID: PMC5210024
PMID: 28058111 

