
1. Can J Microbiol. 2017 Apr;63(4):296-302. doi: 10.1139/cjm-2016-0482. Epub 2016
Dec 2.

Development of a quantitative real-time PCR assay for sapovirus in children under
5-years-old in Regina Margherita Hospital of Turin, Italy.

Bergallo M(1), Galliano I(1), Montanari P(1), Brusin MR(2), Finotti S(1), Paderi 
G(1), Gabiano C(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Public Health and Pediatric Sciences, University of Turin,
Medical School, 10136 Turin, Italy.
(2)b Struttura Complessa, Pediatric University Regina Margherita Hospital, Piazza
Polonia 94, 1016 Turin, Italy.

Gastroenteritis is a common disease in children. It is characterized by diarrhea,
vomiting, abdominal pain, and fever. Sapovirus (SaV) is a causative agent of
acute gastroenteritis, but it causes milder illness than do rotavirus and
norovirus. There is high variability in the analytical performance of
quantitative PCR-based assays among clinical laboratories. This study developed a
reverse transcription real-time PCR method to detect SaV in fecal specimens
collected from children under 5-years-old with acute gastroenteritis. Of 137
episodes of acute gastroenteritis, 15 (10.9%) were associated with SaV genomic
detection, with a median viral load of 6.6(log10) Â± 7.1(log10) genomes/mg fecal
specimens. There was a significant difference in detection rate between males and
females (9.48% (13/15) vs. 1.46% (2/15), p = 0.0232). Among the 15 SaV-positive
cases, 6 were also positive for rotavirus. Viral RNA recovery rate ranged from
46% to 77% in the manual RNAzol protocol and from 31% to 90% in the automated
Maxwell protocol. We also studied whether human genomic DNA influences the
sensitivity of the assay: its presence caused a decrease in PCR sensitivity. The 
development of a laboratory-designed real-time PCR TaqMan assay for quantitative 
detection of SaV and the optimization and standardization of this assay, using
stools of children with acute gastroenteritis, are described.

DOI: 10.1139/cjm-2016-0482 
PMID: 28177797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

