
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Feb 13;7:42253. doi: 10.1038/srep42253.

Predicting short-term survival after liver transplantation on eight score
systems: a national report from China Liver Transplant Registry.

Ling Q(1), Dai H(1), Zhuang R(1), Shen T(1), Wang W(1), Xu X(1), Zheng S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Collaborative innovation center for diagnosis and treatment of infectious
diseases, the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, 
Hangzhou, China.

To compare the performance of eight score systems (MELD, uMELD, MELD-Na. iMELD,
UKELD, MELD-AS, CTP, and mCTP) in predicting the post-transplant mortality, we
analyzed the data of 6,014 adult cirrhotic patients who underwent liver
transplantation between January 2003 and December 2010 from the China Liver
Transplant Registry database. In hepatitis B virus (HBV) group, MELD, uMELD and
MELD-AS showed good predictive accuracies at 3-month mortality after liver
transplantation; by comparison with other five models, MELD presented the best
ability in predicting 3-month, 6-month and 1-year mortality, showing a
significantly better predictive ability than UKELD and iMELD. In hepatitis C
virus and Alcohol groups, the predictive ability did not differ significantly
between MELD and other models. Patient survivals in different MELD categories
were of statistically significant difference. Among patients with MELD score >35,
a new prognostic model based on serum creatinine, need for hemodialysis and
moderate ascites could identify the sickest one. In conclusion, MELD is superior 
to other score systems in predicting short-term post-transplant survival in
patients with HBV-related liver disease. Among patients with MELD score >35, a
new prognostic model can identify the sickest patients who should be excluded
from waiting list to prevent wasteful transplantation.

DOI: 10.1038/srep42253 
PMCID: PMC5304182
PMID: 28198820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interests.

