
1. J Med Chem. 2017 Mar 23;60(6):2411-2424. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b01766. Epub 
2017 Mar 3.

Synthesis and Cytostatic and Antiviral Profiling of Thieno-Fused 7-Deazapurine
Ribonucleosides.

Tichý M(1), Smoleń S(1), Tloušt'ová E(1), Pohl R(1), Oždian T(2), Hejtmánková
K(2), Lišková B(2), Gurská S(2), Džubák P(2), Hajdúch M(2), Hocek M(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Sciences,
Gilead Sciences & IOCB Research Center , Flemingovo nam. 2, CZ-16610 Prague 6,
Czech Republic.
(2)Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Palacky University and
University Hospital in Olomouc, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry , Hněvotínská
5, CZ-775 15 Olomouc, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Charles University in
Prague , Hlavova 8, CZ-12843 Prague 2, Czech Republic.

Two isomeric series of new thieno-fused 7-deazapurine ribonucleosides (derived
from 4-substituted thieno[2',3':4,5]pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidines and
thieno[3',2':4,5]pyrrolo[2,3-d]pyrimidines) were synthesized by a sequence
involving Negishi coupling of 4,6-dichloropyrimidine with iodothiophenes,
nucleophilic azidation, and cyclization of tetrazolopyrimidines, followed by
glycosylation and cross-couplings or nucleophilic substitutions at position 4.
Most nucleosides (from both isomeric series) exerted low micromolar or
submicromolar in vitro cytostatic activities against a broad panel of cancer and 
leukemia cell lines and some antiviral activity against HCV. The most active were
the 6-methoxy, 6-methylsulfanyl, and 6-methyl derivatives, which were highly
active to cancer cells and less toxic or nontoxic to fibroblasts.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b01766 
PMID: 28221790  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

