
1. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2017 Mar 31;66(12):329-334. doi:
10.15585/mmwr.mm6612a4.

Zika Virus Transmission - Region of the Americas, May 15, 2015-December 15, 2016.

Ikejezie J, Shapiro CN, Kim J, Chiu M, Almiron M, Ugarte C, Espinal MA,
Aldighieri S.

Zika virus, a mosquito-borne flavivirus that can cause rash with fever, emerged
in the Region of the Americas on Easter Island, Chile, in 2014 and in northeast
Brazil in 2015 (1). In response, in May 2015, the Pan American Health
Organization (PAHO), which serves as the Regional Office of the Americas for the 
World Health Organization (WHO), issued recommendations to enhance surveillance
for Zika virus. Subsequently, Brazilian investigators reported Guillain-Barr√©
syndrome (GBS), which had been previously recognized among some patients with
Zika virus disease, and identified an association between Zika virus infection
during pregnancy and congenital microcephaly (2). On February 1, 2016, WHO
declared Zika virus-related microcephaly clusters and other neurologic disorders 
a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.* In March 2016, PAHO
developed case definitions and surveillance guidance for Zika virus disease and
associated complications (3). Analysis of reports submitted to PAHO by countries 
in the region or published in national epidemiologic bulletins revealed that Zika
virus transmission had extended to 48 countries and territories in the Region of 
the Americas by late 2016. Reported Zika virus disease cases peaked at different 
times in different areas during 2016. Because of ongoing transmission and the
risk for recurrence of large outbreaks, response efforts, including surveillance 
for Zika virus disease and its complications, and vector control and other
prevention activities, need to be maintained.

DOI: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6612a4 
PMCID: PMC5657956
PMID: 28358795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

