
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2017 Apr 27;18(5). pii: E917. doi: 10.3390/ijms18050917.

Sulfiredoxin May Promote Cervical Cancer Metastasis via Wnt/β-Catenin Signaling
Pathway.

Lan K(1), Zhao Y(2), Fan Y(3), Ma B(4), Yang S(5), Liu Q(6), Linghu H(7), Wang
H(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. kangyun_lan@126.com.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. tutoo250@sina.com.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. lemon.1993@163.com.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. 13220309803@163.com.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. yss133yss133@126.com.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. liudier771@126.com.
(7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. linghu_hua@126.com.
(8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. cqhrong@tom.com.

The abnormal elevation of sulfiredoxin (Srx/SRXN1)-an antioxidant enzyme whose
main function is to protect against oxidative stress-has been shown to be closely
correlated with the progression of several types of cancer, including human
cervical cancer. However, the molecular mechanism by which Srx promotes tumor
progression, especially cancer metastasis in cervical cancer, has not been
elucidated. Here, we show that Srx expression gradually increases during the
progression of human cervical cancer and its expression level is closely
correlated with lymph node metastasis. Our study also reveals a significant
positive correlation between the expression of Srx and β-catenin in cervical
cancer tissues. Loss-of-function studies demonstrate that Srx knockdown using a
lentiviral vector-mediated specific shRNA decreases the migration and invasion
capacity in HeLa (human papilloma virus 18 type cervical cancer cell line) and
SiHa SiHa (cervical squamous cancer cell line). Notably, the exact opposite
effects were observed in gain-of-function experiments in C-33A cells.
Mechanistically, downregulation or upregulation of Srx leads to an altered
expression of proteins associated with the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway.
Furthermore, blockage of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway contributed to
attenuated Srx expression and resulted in significant inhibition of cell
migration and invasion in cervical cancer cell lines. Combined, Srx might be an
oncoprotein in cervical cancer, playing critical roles in activating the
Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway; it may therefore be a therapeutic target for
cervical cancer.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms18050917 
PMCID: PMC5454830
PMID: 28448437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

