
1. J Am Mosq Control Assoc. 1987 Jun;3(2):142-7.

Vector competence of geographic strains of Aedes albopictus and Aedes
polynesiensis and certain other Aedes (Stegomyia) mosquitoes for Ross River
virus.

Mitchell CJ(1), Gubler DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vector-Borne Viral Diseases, Centers for Disease Control, Fort
Collins, CO 80522.

The vector competence of geographic strains of Aedes albopictus and Ae.
polynesiensis and Fiji strains of Ae. pseudoscutellaris and Ae. aegypti was
assessed for Ross River (RR) virus, the etiologic agent of epidemic
polyarthritis. Strains of Ae. polynesiensis from Fiji, Rarotonga, Somoa and
Tahiti were the most susceptible to infection per os (MID50 less than or equal to
10(1.2) Vero cell plaque-forming units [PFU]/blood meal). Virus transmission data
were variable, but all strains except the one from Fiji transmitted virus at 14
to 21 days postinfection. Shanghai and Hawaii Ae. albopictus and Fiji Ae.
pseudoscutellaris were also highly susceptible to per os infection with RR virus 
(MID50 10(2.0) to 10(2.6) PFU). Singapore and Sri Lanka Ae. albopictus and Fiji
Ae. aegypti were the least susceptible (MID50 10(4.0) to 10(4.2) PFU). With one
exception, virus transmission rates for Ae. pseudoscutellaris and Ae. aegypti and
the four strains of Ae. albopictus ranged from 52 to 100%. A total of 4,718
third- and fourth-instar larvae from the second gonotrophic cycle of potentially 
infected females were tested for RR virus in 39 pools. Infection rates in
parental females ranged from 87 to 100% in Ae. albopictus, Ae. pseudoscutellaris 
and Ae. polynesiensis and 40 to 48% in Ae. aegypti. Virus was not isolated from
larval progeny.


PMID: 2849637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

