
1. Rev Neurol. 2017 May 17;64(s03):S29-S33.

[Update on congenital and neonatal herpes infections: infection due to
cytomegalovirus and herpes simplex].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Baquero-Artigao F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Espana.

Newborn infants are a population which is especially susceptible to viral
infections that frequently affect the central nervous system. Herpes infections
can be transmitted to the foetus and to the newborn infant, and give rise to
severe clinical conditions with long-term sensory and cognitive deficits. Two
thirds of newborn infants with encephalitis due to herpes simplex virus and half 
of the children with symptomatic congenital infection by cytomegalovirus develop 
sequelae, which results in high community health costs in the long term.
Fortunately, the better knowledge about these infections gained in recent years
together with the development of effective antiviral treatments have improved the
patients' prognosis. Valganciclovir (32 mg/kg/day in two doses for six months)
prevents the development of hypoacusis and improves the neurological prognosis in
symptomatic congenital infection due to cytomegalovirus. Acyclovir (60 mg/kg/day 
in three doses for 2-3 weeks) prevents the development of severe forms in
skin-eyes-mouth herpes disease, and lowers the rate of mortality and sequelae
when the disease has disseminated and is located in the central nervous system.

Publisher: Actualizacion en infecciones herpeticas congenitas y neonatales:
infeccion por citomegalovirus y herpes simple.Los neonatos son una poblacion
especialmente susceptible a las infecciones viricas que frecuentemente afectan al
sistema nervioso central. Las infecciones herpeticas pueden transmitirse al feto 
y al recien nacido, y ocasionar cuadros clinicos graves con deficits sensoriales 
y cognitivos a largo plazo. Dos terceras partes de los neonatos con encefalitis
por virus herpes simple y la mitad de los niños con infeccion congenita
sintomatica por citomegalovirus desarrollan secuelas, lo cual supone un alto
coste sociosanitario a largo plazo. Afortunadamente, el mejor conocimiento de
estas infecciones en los ultimos años y el desarrollo de tratamientos antivirales
efectivos han mejorado el pronostico de los pacientes. El valganciclovir (32
mg/kg/dia en dos dosis durante seis meses) previene el desarrollo de hipoacusia y
mejora el pronostico neurologico en la infeccion congenita sintomatica por
citomegalovirus. El aciclovir (60 mg/kg/dia en tres dosis durante 2-3 semanas)
previene el desarrollo de formas graves en la enfermedad herpetica
cutanea-ocular-oral, y disminuye la mortalidad y las secuelas en la enfermedad
diseminada y localizada en el sistema nervioso central.

PMID: 28524216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

