
1. PLoS One. 2017 May 22;12(5):e0178033. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0178033.
eCollection 2017.

Epidemiological investigation of the relationship between common lower genital
tract infections and high-risk human papillomavirus infections among women in
Beijing, China.

Zhang D(1), Li T(1), Chen L(2), Zhang X(1), Zhao G(1), Liu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking University First Hospital,
Beijing China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Haidian Maternal & Child Health
Hospital, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of lower genital tract infections in China has been
increasing in recent years. The link between high-risk human papillomavirus
(HR-HPV) and other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) remains unclear.
METHODS: From March to October 2014, gynecological examinations and
questionnaires were conducted on 1218 married women. Cervical secretions and
vaginal swab specimens were tested for Chlamydia trachomatis (CT), Neisseria
gonorrhoeae (NG), Ureaplasma urealyticum (UU), yeast, clue cells and HR-HPV.
RESULTS: Laboratory results were available for 1195 of 1218 married women. HR-HPV
was detected in 7.0% of participants. Forty-seven percent of women had lower
genital tract infections (LGTIs). UU was the most common infection (35.5%),
followed by bacterial vaginosis (BV) (10.5%), yeast infection (3.7%), CT (2.2%), 
and Trichomonas vaginalis (1.7%). BV was associated with an increased risk of HR-
HPV (P < 0.0001; odds ratio, 3.0 [95% CI, 1.7-5.4]). There was a strong
correlation between abnormal cervical cytology and HR-HPV infection (P < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of LGTIs in Beijing is at a high level. It is
clinically important to screen for the simultaneous presence of pathogens that
cause co-infections with HR-HPV.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0178033 
PMCID: PMC5439700
PMID: 28531212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

