
1. PLoS One. 2017 May 26;12(5):e0178225. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0178225.
eCollection 2017.

Partial sequencing analysis of the NS5B region confirmed the predominance of
hepatitis C virus genotype 1 infection in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

El Hadad S(1)(2), Al-Hamdan H(1), Linjawi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Research Center of Genetic Engineering and Bioinformatics, VACSERA, Cairo,
Egypt.

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and its progression are major health
problems that many countries including Saudi Arabia are facing. Determination of 
HCV genotypes and subgenotypes is critical for epidemiological and clinical
analysis and aids in the determination of the ideal treatment strategy that needs
to be followed and the expected therapy response. Although HCV infection has been
identified as the second most predominant type of hepatitis in Saudi Arabia,
little is known about the molecular epidemiology and genetic variability of HCV
circulating in the Jeddah province of Saudi Arabia. The aim of this study was to 
determine the dominance of various HCV genotypes and subgenotypes circulating in 
Jeddah using partial sequencing of the NS5B region. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first study of its kind in Saudi Arabia. To characterize HCV
genotypes and subgenotypes, serum samples from 56 patients with chronic HCV
infection were collected and subjected to partial NS5B gene amplification and
sequence analysis. Phylogenetic analysis of the NS5B partial sequences revealed
that HCV/1 was the predominant genotype (73%), followed by HCV/4 (24.49%) and
HCV/3 (2.04%). Moreover, pairwise analysis also confirmed these results based on 
the average specific nucleotide distance identity: ±0.112, ±0.112, and ±0.179 for
HCV/1, HCV/4, and HCV/3, respectively, without any interference between
genotypes. Notably, the phylogenetic tree of the HCV/1 subgenotypes revealed that
all the isolates (100%) from the present study belonged to the HCV/1a
subgenotype. Our findings also revealed similarities in the nucleotide sequences 
between HCV circulating in Saudi Arabia and those circulating in countries such
as Morocco, Egypt, Canada, India, Pakistan, and France. These results indicated
that determination of HCV genotypes and subgenotypes based on partial sequence
analysis of the NS5B region is accurate and reliable for HCV subtype
determination.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0178225 
PMCID: PMC5446157
PMID: 28552946  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

