
1. Pharmacol Res Perspect. 2017 Jan 23;5(1):e00293. doi: 10.1002/prp2.293.
eCollection 2017 Feb.

Targeting endosomal acidification by chloroquine analogs as a promising strategy 
for the treatment of emerging viral diseases.

Al-Bari MAA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy University of Rajshahi Rajshahi 6205 Bangladesh.

Emerging viruses such as HIV, dengue, influenza A, SARS coronavirus, Ebola, and
other viruses pose a significant threat to human health. Majority of these
viruses are responsible for the outbreaks of pathogenic lethal infections. To
date, there are no effective therapeutic strategies available for the prophylaxis
and treatment of these infections. Chloroquine analogs have been used for decades
as the primary and most successful drugs against malaria. Concomitant with the
emergence of chloroquine-resistant Plasmodium strains and a subsequent decrease
in the use as antimalarial drugs, other applications of the analogs have been
investigated. Since the analogs have interesting biochemical properties, these
drugs are found to be effective against a wide variety of viral infections. As
antiviral action, the analogs have been shown to inhibit acidification of
endosome during the events of replication and infection. Moreover,
immunomodulatory effects of analogs have been beneficial to patients with severe 
inflammatory complications of several viral diseases. Interestingly, one of the
successful targeting strategies is the inhibition of HIV replication by the
analogs inÂ vitro which are being tested in several clinical trials. This review
focuses on the potentialities of chloroquine analogs for the treatment of
endosomal low pH dependent emerging viral diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/prp2.293 
PMCID: PMC5461643
PMID: 28596841 

