
1. Microbiol Res. 2017 Aug;201:63-74. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2017.04.012. Epub 2017
May 10.

Panacea in progress: CRISPR and the future of its biological research
introduction.

Carroll M(1), Zhou X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pathobiology and Veterinary Science, the University of
Connecticut, 61 N. Eagleville Rd, Storrs, CT, 06269-3089, United States; Jiangsu 
Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China; Jiangsu
Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious
Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou, China. Electronic address:
xiaohui.zhou@uconn.edu.

The elucidation of the CRISPR (clustered, regularly interspaced, short
palindromic repeats) adaptive immune system endogenous to most microbial life has
culminated in progress in a diversity of scientific disciplines. The concurrently
promising and eccentric nature of its theoretically plausible applications has
wrought enthusiasm in the research community globally, potentiating advancements 
in human and animal health, ecological stability, and economic wellbeing, that
would hitherto be considered the unattainable fancies of a futurist. It may be
supposed that the tomes of science fiction are the true books of prophecy. Here, 
we narrate the scientific dialogue regarding CRISPR/Cas biotechnologies, from the
happenstantial initial observation of the locus to the litany of intriguing
contemporary endeavors. We discuss the mechanistic underpinnings in detail, and
the corpulent body of literature on CRISPR-based biotech is digested into a
germane and informative review. CRISPR applications such as microbiome
engineering in order to enhance the human immune system beyond the fortitude of
the wild type, bacterial genome editing in industrial and medical aspects,
conquering antibiotic resistance, the development of novel antimicrobial
techniques, the harvesting of solventogenic microbes, the development of
antifungal therapies, and investigation of the genetic properties of fungi, are
here represented, and the authors posit unconventional, and at times gainfully
tangential, thoughts and concepts in order to encourage a reflective disposition 
towards this sophisticated device of nature: a panacea in progress, such that the
most impassive and technical writing still carries the ring of poetry.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micres.2017.04.012 
PMID: 28602403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

