
1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Jun 20;8:1079. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01079. eCollection
2017.

Long-Read Isoform Sequencing Reveals a Hidden Complexity of the Transcriptional
Landscape of Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1.

Tombácz D(1), Csabai Z(1), Szűcs A(1), Balázs Z(1), Moldován N(1), Sharon D(2),
Snyder M(2), Boldogkői Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
SzegedSzeged, Hungary.
(2)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, Stanford UniversityStanford, CA,
United States.

In this study, we used the amplified isoform sequencing technique from Pacific
Biosciences to characterize the poly(A)+ fraction of the lytic transcriptome of
the herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1). Our analysis detected 34 formerly
unidentified protein-coding genes, 10 non-coding RNAs, as well as 17
polycistronic and complex transcripts. This work also led us to identify many
transcript isoforms, including 13 splice and 68 transcript end variants, as well 
as several transcript overlaps. Additionally, we determined previously
unascertained transcriptional start and polyadenylation sites. We analyzed the
transcriptional activity from the complementary DNA strand in five convergent HSV
gene pairs with quantitative RT-PCR and detected antisense RNAs in each gene.
This part of the study revealed an inverse correlation between the expressions of
convergent partners. Our work adds new insights for understanding the complexity 
of the pervasive transcriptional overlaps by suggesting that there is a crosstalk
between adjacent and distal genes through interaction between their transcription
apparatuses. We also identified transcripts overlapping the HSV replication
origins, which may indicate an interplay between the transcription and
replication machineries. The relative abundance of HSV-1 transcripts has also
been established by using a novel method based on the calculation of sequencing
reads for the analysis.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01079 
PMCID: PMC5476775
PMID: 28676792 

