
1. Virol Sin. 2017 Aug;32(4):290-297. doi: 10.1007/s12250-017-3973-z. Epub 2017 Jul 
17.

Detection and characterization of three zoonotic viruses in wild rodents and
shrews from Shenzhen city, China.

Wang B(1), Cai CL(2), Li B(1), Zhang W(1), Zhu Y(1), Chen WH(2), Zhuo F(2), Shi
ZL(1), Yang XL(3).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese 
Academy of Science, Wuhan, 430071, China.
(2)Luohu Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shenzhen, 518020, China.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese 
Academy of Science, Wuhan, 430071, China. yangxl@wh.iov.cn.

Diverse species of rodents and shrews, which are abundant worldwide, harbor a
variety of viruses; some of these are closely related to human viruses and
possess zoonotic potential. Previously studies have demonstrated that the
mammarenavirus and hantavirus carried by rodents or shrews could cause diseases
in human population. To determine the distribution of zoonotic viruses in
Shenzhen city, the major city in southern China with a high population density,
we analyzed 225 rodents (Rattus norvegicus and Rattus flavipectus) and 196 shrews
(Suncus murinus) from urban and rural districts for the presence of
mammarenavirus, hantavirus, and hepatitis E virus (HEV) by RT-PCR targeting the
conserved regions. The infection rates for mammarenavirus, hantaviruses, and HEV 
in rodents and shrews were 3.56%, 6.89%, and 1.66%, respectively. Partial genome 
fragment analysis indicated that mammarenavirus and hantavirus strains had more
than 90% and 99% nucleic acid identity with Cardamones virus and Seoul virus,
respectively, which cause diseases in humans. Although the present HEV strains
identified are typically found worldwide, phylogenetic analysis demonstrated a
divergence of 16%. To our knowledge, the present work is the first report of the 
prevalence of mammarenavirus, hantaviruses, and rat HEV strains in rodents and
shrews from Shenzhen city, China. Our findings highlight the zoonotic potential
of rodent- and shrew-borne mammarenavirus and hantavirus, and the biodiversity of
rat HEV isolates in Shenzhen city. The present work suggests that utilization of 
good hygiene habits is important to minimize the risk of zoonosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s12250-017-3973-z 
PMCID: PMC6598888
PMID: 28721632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

