
1. Vaccine. 2019 Jan 7;37(2):223-225. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.07.046. Epub 2017 
Jul 22.

Hepatitis B vaccines: WHO position paper, July 2017 - Recommendations.

World Health Organization(1).

Author information: 
(1)World Health Organization, Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals, 20 Ave
Appia, CH-1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland. Electronic address: sageexecsec@who.int.

This article presents the World Health Organization's (WHO) recommendations on
the use of hepatitis B vaccines excerpted from the Hepatitis B vaccines: WHO
position paper, July 2017, published in the Weekly Epidemiological Record
(Hepatitis B vaccines, 2017) [1]. This position paper replaces the May 2009 WHO
position paper on hepatitis B vaccines (Hepatitis B vaccines, 2009) [2]. The
position paper gives updated information on hepatitis B vaccines and their
storage, transport and deployment. The recommendations concern the target groups 
for vaccination and the appropriate schedules. In particular, the recommendations
stress the importance of vaccination of all infants at birth as the most
effective intervention for the prevention of hepatitis B virus-associated disease
worldwide. Footnotes to this paper provide a number of core references including 
references to grading tables that assess the quality of the scientific evidence, 
and to the evidence-to-recommendation table. In accordance with its mandate to
provide guidance to Member States on health policy matters, WHO issues a series
of regularly updated position papers on vaccines and combinations of vaccines
against diseases that have an international public health impact. These papers
are concerned primarily with the use of vaccines in large-scale immunization
programmes; they summarize essential background information on diseases and
vaccines, and conclude with WHO's current position on the use of vaccines in the 
global context. Recommendations on the use of hepatitis B vaccines were discussed
by SAGE in October 2016; evidence presented at these meetings can be accessed at:
http://www.who.int/immunization/sage/meetings/2016/October/presentations_backgrou
nd_docs/en/.

Copyright Â© 2017. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.07.046 
PMID: 28743487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

