
1. Nat Commun. 2017 Aug 29;8(1):375. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-00354-5.

Poliovirus intrahost evolution is required to overcome tissue-specific innate
immune responses.

Xiao Y(1), Dolan PT(1)(2), Goldstein EF(1), Li M(1), Farkov M(3), Brodsky L(3),
Andino R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco, CA, 94158, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94158, USA.
(3)Tauber Bioinformatics Research Center and Department of Evolutionary &
Environmental Biology, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa, 31905, Israel.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco, CA, 94158, USA. raul.andino@ucsf.edu.

RNA viruses, such as poliovirus, have a great evolutionary capacity, allowing
them to quickly adapt and overcome challenges encountered during infection. Here 
we show that poliovirus infection in immune-competent mice requires adaptation to
tissue-specific innate immune microenvironments. The ability of the virus to
establish robust infection and virulence correlates with its evolutionary
capacity. We further identify a region in the multi-functional poliovirus protein
2B as a hotspot for the accumulation of minor alleles that facilitate a more
effective suppression of the interferon response. We propose that population
genetic dynamics enables poliovirus spread between tissues through optimization
of the genetic composition of low frequency variants, which together cooperate to
circumvent tissue-specific challenges. Thus, intrahost virus evolution determines
pathogenesis, allowing a dynamic regulation of viral functions required to
overcome barriers to infection.RNA viruses, such as polioviruses, have a great
evolutionary capacity and can adapt quickly during infection. Here, the authors
show that poliovirus infection in mice requires adaptation to innate immune
microenvironments encountered in different tissues.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00354-5 
PMCID: PMC5575128
PMID: 28851882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

