
1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2017 Sep 27;18(9):2573-2579.

Human Papillomavirus Investigation in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma:
Initial Report from the Low Risk HPV Types Associations

Karbalaie Niya MH(1), Safarnezhad Tameshkel F, Panahi M, Bokharaei Salim F,
Monavari SHR, Keyvani H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
Email: keyvanlab@yahoo.com

Background: Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) are a major health
issue in many parts of the world. Recently, attention has focused on the human
papilloma virus (HPV) as a potential causative agent for HNSCC. This study aimed 
to survey HPV occurrence in HNSCCs as part of a comprehensive molecular
epidemiology approach. Methods: In this retrospective study, patients were
recruited from hospitals affiliated to the Iran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) blocks were subjected to
DNA isolation by QIAamp® DNA FFPE Tissue Kit and nested PCR, HPV-16 specific
conventional PCR, and extra INNO-LiPA HPV genotyping assays were subsequently
performed. PCR products were purified with a High Pure PCR Product Purification
Kit and sequenced with an ABI 3730 XL sequencer. CLC Main Workbench 5 and MEGA5
bioinformatics software was used to analyze the raw data and to create the
phylogenetic tree. SPSS v.20 was applied for statistical analysis. Results: A
total of 156 FFPE blocks were collected from 2011 to 2017. Total mean age (y) of 
participants was 60.5 ± 12.6; 77.6 % (121/156) being men and 22.4% (35/156) e
women. Overall, 5/156 (3.2%) patients (3 females and 2 males) were found to be
HPV positive using the three methods. HPV genotyping revealed HPV types 16, 2,
27, and 43 in these malignancies. Tumor location and lymph node involvement
indicated significant differences between the sexes. Conclusion: Although high
risk HPV genotypes have been associated with HNSCCs, our findings indicate a
potential of low risk HPV types to also contribute to such malignancies.

Creative Commons Attribution License

DOI: 10.22034/APJCP.2017.18.9.2573 
PMCID: PMC5720669
PMID: 28952562 

