
1. Biochem Biophys Rep. 2016 Aug 4;8:14-22. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrep.2016.07.018.
eCollection 2016 Dec.

Is unphosphorylated Rex, as multifunctional protein of HTLV-1, a fully
intrinsically disordered protein? An in silico study.

Kheirabadi M(1), Taghdir M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Science, Hakim Sabzevari University,
9617976487 Sabzevar, Iran.
(2)Departmentof Biophysics, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran.

Intracellularlocation of a viral unspliced mRNA in host cell is a crucial factor 
for normal life of the virus. Rex is a neucleo-cytoplasmic shuffling protein of
Human T-cell Leukemia Virus-1(HTLV-1)which has important role in active transport
of cargo-containing RNA from nucleus to cytoplasm. Therefore, it plays a crucial 
role in the disease development by the virus. In spite of its importance, the
3d-structurephosphorylated and unphosphorylated of this protein has not been
determined. In this study, first we predicted whether Rex protein is an ordered
or disordered protein. In second step protein 3Dstructure of Rex was obtained.
The content of disorder-promoting amino acids, flexibility, hydrophobicity, short
linear motifs (SLiMs) and protein binding regions and probability of Rex
crystallization were calculated by various In Silico methods. The3D models of Rex
protein were obtained by various In Silico methods, such as homology modeling,
threading and ab initio, including; I-TASSER, LOMETS, SPARSKS, ROBBETA and QUARK 
servers. By comparing and analyzing Qmean, z-scores and energy levels of selected
models, the best structures with highest favored region in Ramachandran plot
(higher than 90%) was refined with MODREFINER software. In silico analysis of Rex
physicochemical properties and also predicted SLiMs and binding regions sites
confirms that unphosphorylated Rex protein in HTLV-1 as Rev protin in HIV is
wholly disordered protein belongs to the class of intrinsically disordered
proteins with extended disorder (native coils, native pre-molten globules).

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrep.2016.07.018 
PMCID: PMC5613702
PMID: 28955936 

