
1. Viruses. 2017 Sep 29;9(10). pii: E279. doi: 10.3390/v9100279.

Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis Virus Capsid-The Clever Caper.

Lundberg L(1), Carey B(2), Kehn-Hall K(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biodefense and Infectious Diseases, School of Systems
Biology, George Mason University, Manassas, VA 20110, USA.
lhill10@masonlive.gmu.edu.
(2)National Center for Biodefense and Infectious Diseases, School of Systems
Biology, George Mason University, Manassas, VA 20110, USA.
bcarey4@masonlive.gmu.edu.
(3)National Center for Biodefense and Infectious Diseases, School of Systems
Biology, George Mason University, Manassas, VA 20110, USA. kkehnhal@gmu.edu.

Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV) is a New World alphavirus that is
vectored by mosquitos and cycled in rodents. It can cause disease in equines and 
humans characterized by a febrile illness that may progress into encephalitis.
Like the capsid protein of other viruses, VEEV capsid is an abundant structural
protein that binds to the viral RNA and interacts with the membrane-bound
glycoproteins. It also has protease activity, allowing cleavage of itself from
the growing structural polypeptide during translation. However, VEEV capsid
protein has additional nonstructural roles within the host cell functioning as
the primary virulence factor for VEEV. VEEV capsid inhibits host transcription
and blocks nuclear import in mammalian cells, at least partially due to its
complexing with the host CRM1 and importin α/β1 nuclear transport proteins. VEEV 
capsid also shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm and is susceptible to
inhibitors of nuclear trafficking, making it a promising antiviral target.
Herein, the role of VEEV capsid in viral replication and pathogenesis will be
discussed including a comparison to proteins of other alphaviruses.

DOI: 10.3390/v9100279 
PMCID: PMC5691631
PMID: 28961161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
founding sponsors had no role in the design of the study; in the collection,
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the
decision to publish the results.

