
1. Mol Pain. 2017 Jan-Dec;13:1744806917740681. doi: 10.1177/1744806917740681.

DNMT3a contributes to the development and maintenance of bone cancer pain by
silencing Kv1.2 expression in spinal cord dorsal horn.

Miao XR, Fan LC, Wu S, Mao Q(1), Li Z, Lutz B, Xu JT, Lu Z(2), Tao YX.

Author information: 
(1)Xinqiao Hospital, The Third Military Medical University.
(2)Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, Second Military Medical University.

Abstract: Metastatic bone tumor-induced changes in gene transcription and
translation in pain-related regions of the nervous system may participate in the 
development and maintenance of bone cancer pain. Epigenetic modifications
including DNA methylation regulate gene transcription. Here, we report that
intrathecal injection of decitabine, a DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor,
dose dependently attenuated the development and maintenance of bone cancer pain
induced by injecting prostate cancer cells into the tibia. The level of the de
novo DNMT3a, but not DNMT3b, time dependently increased in the ipsilateral L4/5
dorsal horn (not L4/5 dorsal root ganglion) after prostate cancer cells
injection. Blocking this increase through microinjection of recombinant
adeno-associated virus 5 (AAV5) expressing Dnmt3a shRNA into dorsal horn rescued 
prostate cancer cells-induced downregulation of dorsal horn Kv1.2 expression and 
impaired prostate cancer cells-induced pain hypersensitivity. In turn, mimicking 
this increase through microinjection of AAV5 expressing full-length Dnmt3a into
dorsal horn reduced dorsal horn Kv1.2 expression and produced pain
hypersensitivity in the absence of prostate cancer cells injection.
Administration of neither decitabine nor virus affected locomotor function and
acute responses to mechanical, thermal, or cold stimuli. Given that Dnmt3a mRNA
is co-expressed with Kcna2 mRNA (encoding Kv1.2) in individual dorsal horn
neurons, our findings suggest that increased dorsal horn DNMT3a contributes to
bone cancer pain through silencing dorsal horn Kv1.2 expression. DNMT3a may
represent a potential new target for cancer pain management.

DOI: 10.1177/1744806917740681 
PMCID: PMC5676500
PMID: 29056068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

