
1. J Viral Hepat. 2018 Mar;25(3):254-261. doi: 10.1111/jvh.12812. Epub 2017 Dec 19.

Lower levels of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate are associated with more advanced 
liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis C.

de Araujo Neto JM(1), Coelho HSM(1), Chindamo MC(1), Rezende GFM(1), Nunes
Pannain VL(2), Bottino AMCF(2), Bruzzi Porto LF(3), Luiz RR(4), Villela-Nogueira 
CA(1), Perez RM(1)(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine Department, Hepatology Division, Federal University of Rio
de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Pathology Department, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil.
(3)D'Or Institute for Research and Education (IDOR), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Public Health institute, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil.
(5)Gastroenterology Department, University of the State of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Chronic infection with the hepatitis C virus induces liver fibrosis, but it is
unknown why some patients progress to advanced fibrosis while others remain with 
mild disease. Recently, an inverse association between serum levels of
dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEA-S) and liver fibrosis in patients with
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease was described, and it was postulated that
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) has antifibrotic effects. Our aim was to compare
serum DHEA-S levels with liver fibrosis in hepatitis C patients. We collected
serum samples from hepatitis C patients at the same day they underwent a liver
biopsy. S-DHEA was compared to different stages of fibrosis. Binary logistic
regression models were applied to evaluate independent variables associated to
fibrosis. We included 287 patients (43.9% male). According to fibrosis stages 0, 
1, 2, 3 and 4, median serum DHEA-S levels were 103 (26-462), 73 (5-391), 46
(4-425), 35 (6-292) and 28 (2-115) μg/dL, respectively (P < .001). Median serum
DHEA-S levels were 74 (5-462) vs 36 (2-425) μg/dL for mild (F0-1) vs significant 
(F2-4) fibrosis, respectively (P < .001). Median serum DHEA-S levels were 64
(4-462) vs 31 (2-292) μg/dL for non advanced (F0-2) vs advanced fibrosis (F3-4), 
respectively (P < .001). The same association was found when the subgroup of HCV 
patients with and without steatosis or steatohepatitis was analysed. The
association between lower DHEA-S levels and advanced fibrosis was independent of 
age, gender, diabetes mellitus, obesity and steatosis. Lower circulating DHEA-S
levels are associated with more advanced stages of liver fibrosis in hepatitis C 
patients.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jvh.12812 
PMID: 29091323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

