
1. Eur Surg. 2017;49(5):199-209. doi: 10.1007/s10353-017-0491-z. Epub 2017 Sep 18.

Notch and its oncogenic activity in human malignancies.

Brzozowa-Zasada M(1), Piecuch A(1), Michalski M(1), Segiet O(1), Kurek J(2),
Harabin-Słowińska M(1), Wojnicz R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, School of Medicine with the Division
of Dentistry in Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia, Jordana 19, 41-808 Zabrze,
Poland.
(2)Municipal Hospital, Jaworzno, Poland.

Background: Increasing evidence has demonstrated that Notch signaling is
deregulated in human hematological malignancies and solid tumors. This signaling 
has a protumorigenic effect but may also act as a tumor suppressor. How induction
of a single pathway gives rise to the opposite effects in different cell types is
still unknown.
Methods: This review article includes available data from peer-reviewed
publications associated with the role of Notch signaling during cancer
pathogenesis.
Results: Numerous reports have indicated that alterations in Notch signaling and 
its oncogenic activity were originally associated with the pathogenesis of T‑cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma (T-ALL), an aggressive hematologic tumor
affecting children and adolescents. The possibility that Notch could play a
significant role in human breast cancer development comes from studies on mouse
mammary tumor virus-induced cancer. Numerous findings over the past several years
have indicated that alterations in Notch signaling are also responsible for
ovarian cancer development. Mention should also be made of the connection between
expression of Notch 3 and increased resistance to chemotherapy, which remains
a major obstacle to successful treatment. Notch as an oncogenic factor is also
involved in the development of colon cancer, lung carcinoma and Kaposi's sarcoma.
Conclusion: Notch is a binary cell fate determinant and its overexpression has
been described as oncogenic in a wide array of human malignancies. This finding
led to interest in therapeutically targeting this pathway, especially by the use 
of gamma-secretase inhibitors (GSIs) blocking the cleavage of Notch receptors at 
the cell membrane by the inhibition of Notch intracellular domain (NICD)
releasing. Preclinical cancer models have revealed that GSIs suppress the growth 
of cancers such as pancreatic, breast and lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s10353-017-0491-z 
PMCID: PMC5653712
PMID: 29104587 

