
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2018 Dec;36(16):4255-4269. doi:
10.1080/07391102.2017.1413422. Epub 2017 Dec 20.

The inhibitory performance of flavonoid cyanidin-3-sambubiocide against H274Y
mutation in H1N1 influenza virus.

Kannan S(1), Kolandaivel P(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Physics , Bharathiar University , Coimbatore , India.

Oseltamivir (Tamiflu) is the most accepted antiviral drug that targets the
neuraminidase (NA) protein to inhibit the viral release from the host cell. Few
H1N1 influenza strains with the H274Y mutation creates drug resistance to
oseltamivir. In this study, we report that flavonoid cyanidin-3-sambubiocide
(C3S) compound acts as a potential inhibitor against H274Y mutation. The drug
resistance mechanism and inhibitory activity of C3S and oseltamivir against
wild-type (WT) and H274Y mutant-type (MT) have been studied and compared based on
the results of molecular docking, molecular dynamics, and quantum chemical
methods. Oseltamivir has been found less binding affinity with MT. C3S has more
binding affinity with WT and MT proteins. From the dynamical study, the 150th
loop of the MT protein has found more deformation than WT. A single H274Y
mutation induces the conformational changes in the 150th loop which leads to
produce more resistance to oseltamivir. The 150th cavity is more attractive
target for C3S to stop the conformational changes in the MT, than 430th cavity of
NA protein. The C3S is stabilized with MT by more number of hydrogen bonds than
oseltamivir. The electrostatic interaction energy shows a stronger C3S binding
with MT and this compound may be more effective against oseltamivir-resistant
virus strains.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2017.1413422 
PMID: 29199545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

