
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2018 Feb;73:220-227. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.12.027. Epub
2017 Dec 19.

Identification of an interferon-stimulated gene, isg15, involved in host immune
defense against viral infections in gilthead seabream (Sparus aurata L.).

Álvarez-Torres D(1), Gómez-Abellán V(2), Arizcun M(3), García-Rosado E(4), Béjar 
J(5), Sepulcre MP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Málaga,
29071 Málaga, Spain; Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad 
de Málaga, 29071 Málaga, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Biología Celular e Histología, Facultad de Biología,
Universidad de Murcia, IMIB-Arrixaca, 30100 Murcia, Spain.
(3)Centro Oceanográfico de Murcia, Instituto Español de Oceanografía (IEO), 30860
Murcia, Spain.
(4)Departamento de Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Málaga,
29071 Málaga, Spain.
(5)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Málaga, 29071
Málaga, Spain.
(6)Departamento de Biología Celular e Histología, Facultad de Biología,
Universidad de Murcia, IMIB-Arrixaca, 30100 Murcia, Spain. Electronic address:
mpsepul@um.es.

Interferons (IFNs) play a key role in the innate immunity of vertebrates against 
viral infections by inducing hundreds of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs), such as
isg15. Isg15 is an ubiquitin-like protein, which can conjugate cellular and viral
proteins in a process called ISGylation, although it can also act as a
cytokine-like protein. Gilthead seabream (Sparus aurata L.) is an important
asymptomatic carrier of viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus (VHSV) and
nodavirus, representing a threat to other co-cultivated susceptible species. In
order to better understand virus-host interactions in this fish species, this
study addresses the identification and molecular characterization of seabream
isg15 (sb-isg15). In addition, the modulation of transcript levels of sb-isg15
was analysed in SAF-1 cells and seabream acidophilic granulocytes (AGs)
stimulated in vitro with different pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs)
or inoculated with VHSV and striped jack nervous necrosis virus (SJNNV). The
full-length cDNA of sb-isg15 gene, encoding a predicted protein of 155 amino
acids, was identified and seen to share the same characteristics as other fish
and mammalian isg15 genes. Here we report the clear induction of sb-isg15
transcript levels in SAF-1 cells and AGs stimulated with toll-like receptor (TLR)
ligands, such as polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly I:C) or genomic DNA from
Vibrio anguillarum (VaDNA), respectively. Furthermore, VHSV and SJNNV inoculation
induced a significant degree of sb-isg15 transcription in SAF-1 cells and AGs.
However, the relative levels of viral RNA transcription showed that SJNNV
replication seems to be more efficient than VHSV in both in vitro systems.
Interestingly, sb-isg15 transcript induction elicited by VaDNA was reduced in
VHSV- and SJNNV-inoculated AGs, suggesting an interference prompted by the
viruses against the type I IFN system. Taken together, these findings support the
use of seabream AGs as a valuable experimental system to study virus-host
interactions, in which sb-isg15 seems to play an important role.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.12.027 
PMID: 29277364  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

