
1. J Med Entomol. 2018 Feb 28;55(2):423-428. doi: 10.1093/jme/tjx235.

Resistance to Lysinibacillus sphaericus and Other Commonly Used Pesticides in
Culex pipiens (Diptera: Culicidae) from Chico, California.

Su T(1), Thieme J(1), Ocegueda C(2), Ball M(2), Cheng ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)West Valley Mosquito and Vector Control District, Ontario, CA.
(2)Butte County Mosquito and Vector Control District, Oroville, CA.

Bacillus sphaericus Neide, recently renamed as Lysinibacillus sphaericus Meyer
and Neide, is a spore-forming bacterium that possesses various levels of
larvicidal activity, depending on the strains, against some mosquito species.
Products based on most active strains such as 2362, 2297, 1593, C3-41 that bear
binary toxins, as well as mosquitocidal toxins at various levels, have been
developed to combat mosquito larvae worldwide. Resistance in wild Culex mosquito 
populations has been reported since 1994 from France, Brazil, India, China,
Thailand, and Tunisia. Laboratory studies to evaluate resistance development risk
have been conducted by many groups of scientists worldwide. Products based on L. 
sphaericus strain 2362 were registered in the United States in 1990s, and their
use for mosquito control has been increased considerably since invasion of West
Nile virus. This report documents the first occurrence of high-level resistance
to L. sphaericus in a natural population of Culex pipiens L. in Chico, CA, where 
resistance ratio was 537.0 at LC50 and 9,048.5 at LC90 when compared with
susceptible laboratory colony of the same species. Susceptibility profile to
other groups of pesticides with different modes of action was also determined.
Various levels of resistance or tolerance were noticed to abamectin,
pyriproxyfen, permethrin, and indoxacarb. Resistance management and
susceptibility monitoring strategies are discussed and recommended.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjx235 
PMID: 29272497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

