
1. Mol Pharm. 2018 Aug 6;15(8):2946-2953. doi: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.7b00921.
Epub 2018 Jan 22.

Tobacco Mosaic Virus with Peroxidase-Like Activity for Cancer Cell Detection
through Colorimetric Assay.

Guo J(1)(2), Zhao X(1), Hu J(1), Lin Y(1), Wang Q(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry , Changchun
Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences , Changchun 130022 , 
P. R. China.
(2)University of Science and Technology of China , Hefei 230026 , P. R. China.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , University of South Carolina ,
Columbia , South Carolina 29208 , United States.

Cell-based ELISA (CELLISA) has been widely used in disease diagnosis due to its
simplicity and low cost. Recently, peroxidase-like nanomaterials have emerged as 
promising systems for CELLISA applications. In this work, tobacco mosaic virus
(TMV) was simultaneously tailored with peroxidase-like inorganic nanoparticles
(platinum nanoparticles) and cancer cell target groups (folic acid, FA) to obtain
TMV-FA-Pt nanoparticles for cancer cell detection. Induced by the uniformly
distributed reactive groups and well-defined structure of the TMV particle,
platinum nanoparticles could be grown in situ on the exterior surface of TMV with
excellent monodispersity and uniform spatial distribution. Meanwhile, FA with a
PEG1000 linker was successfully conjugated to the coat proteins of TMV through
the Cu(I)-catalyzed alkyne-azide cycloaddition reaction, an efficient "click"
chemistry. Our study demonstrated that the resultant TMV-FA-Pt had specific
affinity to cancer cells and was successfully used to detect cancer cells through
CELLISA. Less than 1.0 Ã— 104 cells/mL of cancer cells could be readily detected.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.7b00921 
PMID: 29300485  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

