
1. Ann Hepatol. 2018 January-February;17(1):64-75. doi: 10.5604/01.3001.0010.7536.

Worsening of Serum Lipid Profile after Direct Acting Antiviral Treatment.

Gitto S(1), Cicero AFG(2), Loggi E(1), Giovannini M(2), Conti F(1), Grandini
E(1), Guarneri V(1), Scuteri A(1), Vitale G(1), Cursaro C(1), Borghi C(2),
Andreone P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hepatology Unit. Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of
Bologna and Sant'Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Internal Medicine Unit. Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences,
University of Bologna and Sant'Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Host lipid metabolism influences viral replication and lifecycle of
hepatitis C virus. Our aim was to evaluate changes in glucose and lipid
metabolism of patients with chronic hepatitis C after therapy with direct acting 
antivirals (DAA).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We considered patients consecutively treated between
January and November 2015 recording clinical data at baseline and week 24 of
follow-up. Frozen serum samples were used for apolipoprotein A1 (apoA1),
apolipoprotein B (apoB) and lipoprotein (a) [Lp(a)]. Wilcoxon test was utilized
to estimate trends and Logistic Regression for predictors of lipid changes.
RESULTS: We enrolled 100 patients, mostly cirrhotic (81%) and with genotype 1b
(59%). Ninety-three patients achieved sustained virological response (SVR), while
7 relapsed. Homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance declined (from 3
to 2.7, p &lt; 0.001); non-high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol increased
from 102 ± 29 to 116 ± 35 (p &lt; 0.001), and Lp(a) from 5.6 ± 6.5 to 9.8 ± 11.5 
mg/dL (p &lt; 0.001). Rise of low-density lipoprotein/HDL and apoB/apoA1 ratio
were registered (from 1.79 ± 1.10 to 2.08 ± 1.05 and from 0.48 ± 0.18 to 0.53 ±
0.18 mg/dL, p &lt; 0.001). We conducted a subanalysis on patients with relapse.
In this subgroup, no change of lipid profile was recorded. At multivariate
analysis emerged that the addition of ribavirin to DAA, represented an
independent predictor of increased Lp(a) (OR 3.982, 95% CI 1.206-13.144, p =
0.023).
CONCLUSION: DAA therapy led to reduction of insulin resistance. In contrast,
pro-atherogenic lipid changes were observed in patients with SVR. Further studies
will be necessary to evaluate the cardiovascular balance between amelioration of 
glucose metabolism and negative changes of lipid profile.

DOI: 10.5604/01.3001.0010.7536 
PMID: 29311405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

