
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Apr 20;46(7):e42. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky022.

Diff-seq: A high throughput sequencing-based mismatch detection assay for DNA
variant enrichment and discovery.

Aggeli D(1), Karas VO(1), Sinnott-Armstrong NA(1), Varghese V(2), Shafer RW(2),
Greenleaf WJ(1)(3)(4), Sherlock G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA 94305, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA 94305, USA.
(3)Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(4)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Much of the within species genetic variation is in the form of single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs), typically detected by whole genome sequencing (WGS) or
microarray-based technologies. However, WGS produces mostly uninformative reads
that perfectly match the reference, while microarrays require genome-specific
reagents. We have developed Diff-seq, a sequencing-based mismatch detection assay
for SNP discovery without the requirement for specialized nucleic-acid reagents. 
Diff-seq leverages the Surveyor endonuclease to cleave mismatched DNA molecules
that are generated after cross-annealing of a complex pool of DNA fragments.
Sequencing libraries enriched for Surveyor-cleaved molecules result in increased 
coverage at the variant sites. Diff-seq detected all mismatches present in an
initial test substrate, with specific enrichment dependent on the identity and
context of the variation. Application to viral sequences resulted in increased
observation of variant alleles in a biologically relevant context. Diff-Seq has
the potential to increase the sensitivity and efficiency of high-throughput
sequencing in the detection of variation.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky022 
PMCID: PMC5909455
PMID: 29361139  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

