
1. Vet Microbiol. 2018 Feb;215:57-65. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2018.01.005. Epub 2018
Jan 27.

Seroprevalence and risk factors for selected respiratory and reproductive tract
pathogen exposure in European bison (Bison bonasus) in Poland.

Krzysiak MK(1), Jabłoński A(2), Iwaniak W(3), Krajewska M(3), Kęsik-Maliszewska
J(4), Larska M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Białowieża National Park, Park Pałacowy 11, 17-230, Białowieża, Poland;
Department of Epizootiology and Clinic of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Life Sciences, 20-612, Lublin, Poland.
(2)Department of Swine Diseases, National Veterinary Research Institute (NVRI),
Al. Partyzantów 57, 24-100, Puławy, Poland.
(3)Department of Microbiology, National Veterinary Research Institute (NVRI), Al.
Partyzantów 57, 24-100, Puławy, Poland.
(4)Department of Virology, National Veterinary Research Institute (NVRI), Al.
Partyzantów 57, 24-100 Puławy, Poland.
(5)Department of Virology, National Veterinary Research Institute (NVRI), Al.
Partyzantów 57, 24-100 Puławy, Poland. Electronic address:
m.larska@piwet.pulawy.pl.

After the complete extinction from the wild of European bison (Bison bonasus) at 
the beginning of the twentieth century, the worldwide species population was
restored to approximately 5500 individuals, with the species however remaining
endangered. Despite numerous studies on the ecology and genetics of European
bison, the threats of infectious diseases have been largely unexamined. The aim
of this study was to screen the exposure of the world's largest population of
European bison to the pathogens, which may influence the condition and
development of the endangered species. A total of 240 free-ranging and captive
European bison from eight main Polish populations sampled were tested for the
presence of specific antibodies against ten different viruses, bacteria or
protozoan. The samples were collected from chemically immobilized, selectively
culled or found dead animals. Based on serology, the exposure to bovine viral
diarrhea virus (BVDV), bovine herpesvirus type 1 (BoHV-1), Mycoplasma and
Brucella spp. was determined as rather accidental. Using gamma-interferon assay
followed by Mycobacterium tuberculosis subs. caprae detection in tissues,
diagnosis of bovine tuberculosis was made for 6 out of 78 (7.7%) bison from one
captive herd. The highest seroprevalence was found for bovine adenovirus type 3
(BAdV-3) -60.2% and bovine parainfluenza type 3 (PIV-3) -34.0%, while the
antibodies against bovine respiratory syncytial virus (BRSV), Toxoplasma gondii
and Leptospira spp. were found in 10.4%, 10.4% and 8.7% of samples, respectively.
In the multivariable statistical analysis using generalized linear mixed models
(GLMMS), the risk factors for PIV-3 seropositivity included population type
(free-living/captive), age and health status (apparently healthy/eliminated due
to the poor condition). Higher risk of BAdV-3 seropositive result was observed in
free-living female European bison. The high BAdV-3 and PIV-3 seroprevalences may 
suggest involvement of these pathogens in the most frequently observed
respiratory disorders in European bison. Moreover, this is the first study
demonstrating BAdV-3 exposure in the species.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2018.01.005 
PMID: 29426407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

