
1. Liver Int. 2018 Feb;38 Suppl 1:71-78. doi: 10.1111/liv.13631.

Hepatitis B: Who and when to treat?

Vlachogiannakos J(1), Papatheodoridis GV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Laiko General Hospital, Medical School of
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.

As current treatment options almost never achieve eradication of hepatitis B
virus (HBV), the most realistic goal for HBV treatment is persistent inhibition
of viral replication and ALT normalization. Thus, the decision to start treatment
should be based on careful patient selection and individualized decisions.
Treatment is generally indicated in chronic hepatitis B patients with HBV DNA
>2000 IU/mL, elevated ALT and/or at least moderate histological lesions, while
all patients with cirrhosis and detectable HBV DNA should be treated. Patients
with HBV DNA >20 000 IU/mL and ALT >2xULN (upper limit of normal), HBV DNA
>2000 IU/mL and liver stiffness >9 or >12 kPa in case of normal or ≤5xULN, HBV
DNA >2000 IU/mL and a family history of cirrhosis and/or HCC as well as
HBeAg-positive patients with HBV DNA >20 000 IU/mL and over 30 years old can
begin treatment whatever the liver histology. Moreover, patients with HBV DNA
>2000 IU/mL and at least moderate histological lesions can begin treatment
whatever the ALT levels. Prophylactic treatment is indicated in HBV-related liver
transplantation patients to prevent recurrence, in the last trimester of
pregnancy in women with high viraemia to prevent vertical transmission and in
patients receiving immunosuppression/chemotherapy to prevent the reactivation of 
HBV. Treatment is also indicated in patients with co-infections, extrahepatic
manifestations and severe acute hepatitis B, or healthcare workers with viraemia.
These treatment indications can only change if HBV eradication or at least HBsAg 
clearance can be achieved in the future in a significant proportion of patients.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.13631 
PMID: 29427495  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

