
1. Acta Trop. 2018 Jun;182:64-68. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.02.024. Epub 2018 
Feb 21.

Detection of West Nile Virus - Lineage 2 in Culex pipiens mosquitoes, associated 
with disease outbreak in Greece, 2017.

Mavridis K(1), Fotakis EA(2), Kioulos I(2), Mpellou S(3), Konstantas S(3), Varela
E(4), Gewehr S(5), Diamantopoulos V(6), Vontas J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, 70013, Greece. Electronic address:
konstantinos_mavridis@imbb.forth.gr.
(2)Pesticide Science Laboratory, Department of Crop Science, Agricultural
University of Athens, 11855, Athens, Greece.
(3)Bioefarmoges Eleftheriou LP -Integrated Mosquito Control, Marathon, 19007,
Greece.
(4)Inseco LP -Integrated Mosquito Control, Elefsina, 19200, Greece.
(5)EcoDevelopment SA-Integrated Mosquito Control, Thessaloniki, 57010, Greece.
(6)Public Health Director, Region of Peloponnese, Tripoli, 22100, Greece.
(7)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, 70013, Greece; Pesticide Science Laboratory,
Department of Crop Science, Agricultural University of Athens, 11855, Athens,
Greece.

During July-October 2017 a WNV outbreak took place in the Peloponnese, Southern
Greece with five confirmed deaths. During routine monitoring survey in the
Peloponnese, supported by the local Prefecture, we have confirmed the presence of
all three Culex pipiens biotypes in the region, with a high percentage of Culex
pipiens/molestus hybrids (37.0%) which are considered a highly competent vector
of WNV. Kdr mutations related to pyrethroid resistance were found at relatively
low levels (14.3% homozygosity) while no mosquitoes harboring the recently
identified chitin synthase diflubenzuron-resistance mutations were detected in
the region. As an immediate action, following the disease outbreak (within days),
we collected a large number of mosquitoes using CO2 CDC traps from the villages
in the Argolis area of the Peloponnese, where high incidence of WNV human
infections were reported. WNV lineage 2 was detected in 3 out of 47 Cx. pipiens
mosquito pools (detection rate = 6.38%). The virus was not detected in any other 
mosquito species, such as Aedes albopictus, sampled from the region at the time
of the disease outbreak. Our results show that detection of WNV lineage 2 in Cx. 
pipiens pools is spatially and chronologically associated with human clinical
cases, thus implicating Cx. pipiens mosquitoes as the most likely WNV vector. The
absence of diflubenzuron resistance mutations and the low frequency of pyrethroid
(kdr) resistance mutations indicates the suitability of these insecticides for
Cx. pipiens control, in the format of larvicides and/or residual spraying
applications respectively, which was indeed the main (evidence based) response,
following the disease outbreak.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2018.02.024 
PMID: 29474832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

