
1. HIV Med. 2018 Feb;19 Suppl 1:52-57. doi: 10.1111/hiv.12590.

HIV/HCV/HBV testing in the emergency department: a feasibility and seroprevalence
study.

Bradshaw D(1), Rae C(1), Rayment M(1), Turner N(1), Turner R(1), Pickard G(2),
Pillay K(1), Roberts P(1), Foxton M(1), Sullivan AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chelsea and Westminster Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(2)Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK.

OBJECTIVES: The aims of this study were to to assess the feasibility of
simultaneous testing for the blood-borne viruses (BBV), HIV, hepatitis C (HCV)
and hepatitis B (HBV), in the Emergency Department (ED) and ascertain the
seroprevalence for these three viruses in this setting.
METHODS: A pilot BBV testing program was undertaken as part of routine clinical
care in the ED. All ED attendees aged between 16 and 65 years old who were able
to consent were tested over a 55 week period on an opt out basis. Patients with
positive test results were linked to clinical services. Interventions aimed at
improving testing rates were implemented and evaluated by quality improvement
(QI) methodology.
RESULTS: Of 25,520 age-eligible ED attendees, 6108 (24%) underwent BBV testing;
an additional 1160 (4.5%) underwent a standalone HIV test (total of 7268 (28%)
individuals).There were 83/7268 (1.1%) non-negative (ie reactive or equivocal)
results for HIV and 103/6108 (1.7%) and 32/6108 (0.52%) for anti-HCV IgG and
HBsAg, respectively. Of these, 12 (0.17%), 16 (0.26%) and 8 (0.13%) were new
reactive tests for HIV, HCV and HBV, respectively, which were able to be
confirmed on a second test. Specific QI interventions led to temporary increases 
in testing rates.
CONCLUSIONS: An opt out BBV testing program in the ED is feasible and effective
at finding new cases. However, the testing rate was low at 24%. Although QI
interventions led to some improvement in testing rates, further studies are
required to identify ways to achieve sustained increases in testing in this
setting.

© 2018 British HIV Association.

DOI: 10.1111/hiv.12590 
PMID: 29488696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

