
1. Oncol Lett. 2018 Apr;15(4):4053-4060. doi: 10.3892/ol.2018.7829. Epub 2018 Jan
19.

Advances in the mechanisms of action of cancer-targeting oncolytic viruses.

Lin CZ(1), Xiang GL(1), Zhu XH(2), Xiu LL(1), Sun JX(1), Zhang XY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao
University, Qingdao, Shandong 266003, P.R. China.
(2)Department of General Medicine, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Qingdao, Shandong 
266071, P.R. China.

Cancer virotherapy mediated by oncolytic viruses (OV), has emerged as a novel and
effective strategy in cancer therapeutics. Preclinical models have demonstrated
anticancer activity against numerous types of cancer. Currently, a number of
recombinant viruses are in late phase clinical trials, many of which have
demonstrated promising results regarding the safety and reliability of the
treatments, particularly when combined with standard antineoplastic therapies. In
addition to molecular-targeted therapeutics, genetic engineering of the viruses
allows functional complementation to chemotherapy or radiotherapy agents.
Co-administration of chemotherapy or radiotherapy is imperative for an effective 
treatment regime. Additionally, these approaches may be used in combination with 
current treatments to assist in cancer management. The near future may reveal
whether this renewed interest in oncological virotherapy will result in
meaningful therapeutic effects in patients. The aim of the present review was to 
highlight how the knowledge of oncolytic viral specificity and cytotoxicity has
advanced in recent years, with a view to discuss OV in clinical application and
the future directions of this field.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2018.7829 
PMCID: PMC5835897
PMID: 29541169 

