
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Apr 3;115(14):E3201-E3210. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1720897115. Epub 2018 Mar 19.

Diversification of AID/APOBEC-like deaminases in metazoa: multiplicity of clades 
and widespread roles in immunity.

Krishnan A(1), Iyer LM(1), Holland SJ(2), Boehm T(2), Aravind L(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20894.
(2)Department of Developmental Immunology, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology 
and Epigenetics, 79108 Freiburg, Germany.
(3)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20894; aravind@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.

AID/APOBEC deaminases (AADs) convert cytidine to uridine in single-stranded
nucleic acids. They are involved in numerous mutagenic processes, including those
underpinning vertebrate innate and adaptive immunity. Using a multipronged
sequence analysis strategy, we uncover several AADs across metazoa,
dictyosteliida, and algae, including multiple previously unreported vertebrate
clades, and versions from urochordates, nematodes, echinoderms, arthropods,
lophotrochozoans, cnidarians, and porifera. Evolutionary analysis suggests a
fundamental division of AADs early in metazoan evolution into secreted deaminases
(SNADs) and classical AADs, followed by diversification into several clades
driven by rapid-sequence evolution, gene loss, lineage-specific expansions, and
lateral transfer to various algae. Most vertebrate AADs, including AID and
APOBECs1-3, diversified in the vertebrates, whereas the APOBEC4-like clade has a 
deeper origin in metazoa. Positional entropy analysis suggests that several AAD
clades are diversifying rapidly, especially in the positions predicted to
interact with the nucleic acid target motif, and with potential viral inhibitors.
Further, several AADs have evolved neomorphic metal-binding inserts, especially
within loops predicted to interact with the target nucleic acid. We also observe 
polymorphisms, driven by alternative splicing, gene loss, and possibly intergenic
recombination between paralogs. We propose that biological conflicts of AADs with
viruses and genomic retroelements are drivers of rapid AAD evolution, suggesting 
a widespread presence of mutagenesis-based immune-defense systems. Deaminases
like AID represent versions "institutionalized" from the broader array of AADs
pitted in such arms races for mutagenesis of self-DNA, and similar recruitment
might have independently occurred elsewhere in metazoa.

Copyright Â© 2018 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1720897115 
PMCID: PMC5889660
PMID: 29555751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

