
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 May;98(5):1498-1501. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0771. Epub
2018 Mar 22.

Knowledge of Norovirus and Attitudes toward a Potential Norovirus Vaccine in
Rural Guatemala: A Cross-Sectional Exploratory Survey.

Olson D(1)(2)(3)(4), Krager S(5), Lamb MM(2)(4), Rick AM(3)(4)(1), Asturias
EJ(2)(1)(4)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Colorado School of Public Health, Aurora,
Colorado.
(3)Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado.
(4)Center for Global Health, Colorado School of Public Health, Aurora, Colorado.
(5)Preventive Medicine Residency Program, Colorado School of Public Health,
Aurora, Colorado.

Given limited data on norovirus vaccine acceptance, we performed an exploratory
survey in a rural Guatemalan community on knowledge, interest, and willingness to
pay (WTP) for a norovirus vaccine. Cluster-randomized households with children
aged 6 weeks to 17 years were enrolled into one of two norovirus surveillance
studies: 1) a prospective cohort (N = 207 households) and 2) two separate,
community-based, cross-sectional surveys (N = 420 households). After completion
of the surveillance study, vaccine surveys were completed by 564 (90%) of 627
households. Most households correctly answered questions regarding norovirus
symptoms and transmission; 97% indicated interest in a hypothetical norovirus
vaccine. Households with higher education had greater WTP for a vaccine
(prevalence ratios = 2.2, 95% confidence interval: 1.2-3.1) and households with
lower WTP were more likely to use pharmacies, the Ministry of Health, and radios 
for health care and information. These results suggest that a future norovirus
vaccination program could be acceptable and feasible even in rural areas.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0771 
PMCID: PMC5953375
PMID: 29582734  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

