
1. J Cell Physiol. 1988 Mar;134(3):445-52.

Potassium inhibition of transforming protein P85gag-mos and reversal of the
transformed phenotype in 6m2 cells.

Lai CN(1), Gallick GE, Maxwell SA, Brinkley BR, Becker FF.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Pathology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Hospital 
and Tumor Institute, Houston 77030.

K+ at high concentrations (52-72 mM hypertonic KCl) has been reported to induce
reverse transformation in the 6m2 cell, which is a clone of normal rat kidney
cells (NRK) infected with a temperature-sensitive transformation virus. When
exposed to high K+, 6m2 cells grown at the permissive temperature (33 degrees C) 
exhibit normal morphology and reduced soft agar growth, characteristics of cells 
grown at nonpermissive temperature (39 degrees C). In the current study,
flattening of cells and rearrangement of surface microvilli were demonstrated by 
scanning electron microscopy to occur within 6 hr of exposure to high K+, similar
to the effect of temperature shift to 39 degrees C. Exposure to K+ resulted in a 
90% inhibition of P85gag-mos-associated serine kinase activity within 5 min, with
a subsequent reduction of up to 75% of the synthesis of this protein. These
alterations in the putative transforming protein were similar to those induced by
temperature shift and were considered to be the basis for retrotransformation.
The cell microtubular system and F-actin cables were affected more slowly by K+
than by a temperature shift to 39 degrees C. The former did not achieve the fine 
reticulum network seen in NRK cells until 72 hr later, but the latter remained
aberrant. The effect on the enzyme might be mediated by alteration in
phosphorylation, but the mechanism by which kinase inactivation induces
retrotransformation is not yet known.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.1041340316 
PMID: 2965157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

