
1. Hemodial Int. 2018 Oct;22(4):474-479. doi: 10.1111/hdi.12661. Epub 2018 Apr 14.

Development of a risk-prediction model for Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus infection in dialysis patients.

Ahmed AE(1), Alshukairi AN(2), Al-Jahdali H(1), Alaqeel M(1), Siddiq SS(3),
Alsaab HA(4), Sakr EA(3), Alyahya HA(3), Alandonisi MM(3), Subedar AT(3), Aloudah
NM(5), Baharoon S(1), Alsalamah MA(1), Al Johani S(1), Alghamdi MG(3).

Author information: 
(1)King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences (KSAU-HS)/King Abdullah
International Medical Research Center (KAIMRC)/King Abdulaziz Medical City
(KAMC), Ministry of National Guard - Health Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(3)King Fahad General Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Medical Records Department, Ministry of Health, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(5)King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Comment in
    Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2020 May-Jun;31(3):699-700.

Introduction The Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV)
infection can cause transmission clusters and high mortality in hemodialysis
facilities. We attempted to develop a risk-prediction model to assess the early
risk of MERS-CoV infection in dialysis patients. Methods This two-center
retrospective cohort study included 104 dialysis patients who were suspected of
MERS-CoV infection and diagnosed with rRT-PCR between September 2012 and June
2016 at King Fahd General Hospital in Jeddah and King Abdulaziz Medical City in
Riyadh. We retrieved data on demographic, clinical, and radiological findings,
and laboratory indices of each patient. Findings A risk-prediction model to
assess early risk for MERS-CoV in dialysis patients has been developed.
Independent predictors of MERS-CoV infection were identified, including chest
pain (OR = 24.194; P = 0.011), leukopenia (OR = 6.080; P = 0.049), and elevated
aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (OR = 11.179; P = 0.013). The adequacy of this
prediction model was good (P = 0.728), with a high predictive utility (area under
curve [AUC] = 76.99%; 95% CI: 67.05% to 86.38%). The prediction of the model had 
optimism-corrected bootstrap resampling AUC of 71.79%. The Youden index yielded a
value of 0.439 or greater as the best cut-off for high risk of MERS infection.
Discussion This risk-prediction model in dialysis patients appears to depend
markedly on chest pain, leukopenia, and elevated AST. The model accurately
predicts the high risk of MERS-CoV infection in dialysis patients. This could be 
clinically useful in applying timely intervention and control measures to prevent
clusters of infections in dialysis facilities or other health care settings. The 
predictive utility of the model warrants further validation in external samples
and prospective studies.

© 2018 International Society for Hemodialysis.

DOI: 10.1111/hdi.12661 
PMCID: PMC7165861
PMID: 29656480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

