
1. Genome Res. 2018 Jun;28(6):846-858. doi: 10.1101/gr.227280.117. Epub 2018 May 4.

A CRISPR knockout screen identifies SETDB1-target retroelement silencing factors 
in embryonic stem cells.

Fukuda K(1), Okuda A(2), Yusa K(3), Shinkai Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Memory Laboratory, Cluster for Pioneering Research, RIKEN, 2-1
Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.
(2)Division of Developmental Biology, Research Center for Genomic Medicine,
Saitama Medical University, 1397-1 Yamane Hidaka Saitama 350-1241, Japan.
(3)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SA, United Kingdom.

In mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs), the expression of provirus and endogenous 
retroelements is epigenetically repressed. Although many cellular factors
involved in retroelement silencing have been identified, the complete molecular
mechanism remains elusive. In this study, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR
screen to advance our understanding of retroelement silencing in mESCs. The
Moloney murine leukemia virus (MLV)-based retroviral vector MSCV-GFP, which is
repressed by the SETDB1/TRIM28 pathway in mESCs, was used as a reporter provirus,
and we identified more than 80 genes involved in this process. In particular,
ATF7IP and the BAF complex components are linked with the repression of most of
the SETDB1 targets. We characterized two factors, MORC2A and RESF1, of which
RESF1 is a novel molecule in retroelement silencing. Although both factors are
recruited to repress provirus, their roles in repression are different. MORC2A
appears to function dependent on repressive epigenetic modifications, while RESF1
regulates repressive epigenetic modifications associated with SETDB1. Our
genome-wide CRISPR screen cataloged genes which function at different levels in
silencing of SETDB1-target retroelements and provides a useful resource for
further molecular studies.

Â© 2018 Fukuda et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.227280.117 
PMCID: PMC5991520
PMID: 29728365  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

