
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2018 Sep;63:79-88. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.05.013. Epub
2018 May 18.

Whole-genome sequencing and analyses identify high genetic heterogeneity,
diversity and endemicity of rotavirus genotype P[6] strains circulating in
Africa.

Nyaga MM(1), Tan Y(2), Seheri ML(3), Halpin RA(4), Akopov A(4), Stucker KM(4),
Fedorova NB(4), Shrivastava S(4), Duncan Steele A(5), Mwenda JM(6), Pickett
BE(4), Das SR(2), Jeffrey Mphahlele M(7).

Author information: 
(1)South African Medical Research Council/Diarrhoeal Pathogens Research Unit,
Faculty of Health Sciences, Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences University, Medunsa, 
Pretoria, South Africa; Next Generation Sequencing Unit, Department of Medical
Virology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Free State, Bloemfontein,
South Africa.
(2)Infectious Diseases Group, J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD, USA;
Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)South African Medical Research Council/Diarrhoeal Pathogens Research Unit,
Faculty of Health Sciences, Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences University, Medunsa, 
Pretoria, South Africa.
(4)Infectious Diseases Group, J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD, USA.
(5)South African Medical Research Council/Diarrhoeal Pathogens Research Unit,
Faculty of Health Sciences, Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences University, Medunsa, 
Pretoria, South Africa; Enteric and Diarrhoeal Diseases Programme, Global Health 
Program, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)World Health Organization, Regional Office for Africa, Brazzaville, People's
Republic of Congo.
(7)South African Medical Research Council/Diarrhoeal Pathogens Research Unit,
Faculty of Health Sciences, Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences University, Medunsa, 
Pretoria, South Africa. Electronic address: Jeffrey.Mphahlele@mrc.ac.za.

Rotavirus A (RVA) exhibits a wide genotype diversity globally. Little is known
about the genetic composition of genotype P[6] from Africa. This study
investigated possible evolutionary mechanisms leading to genetic diversity of
genotype P[6] VP4 sequences. Phylogenetic analyses on 167 P[6] VP4 full-length
sequences were conducted, which included six porcine-origin sequences. Of the 167
sequences, 57 were newly acquired through whole genome sequencing as part of this
study. The other 110 sequences were all publicly-available global P[6] VP4
full-length sequences downloaded from GenBank. The strength of association
between the phenotypic features and the phylogeny was also determined. A number
of reassortment and mixed infections of RVA genotype P[6] strains were observed
in this study. Phylogenetic analyses demostrated the extensive genetic diversity 
that exists among human P[6] strains, porcine-like strains, their concomitant
clades/subclades and estimated that P[6] VP4 gene has a higher substitution rate 
with the mean of 1.05E-3 substitutions/site/year. Further, the phylogenetic
analyses indicated that genotype P[6] strains were endemic in Africa,
characterised by an extensive genetic diversity and long-time local evolution of 
the viruses. This was also supported by phylogeographic clustering and G-genotype
clustering of the P[6] strains when Bayesian Tip-association Significance testing
(BaTS) was applied, clearly supporting that the viruses evolved locally in Africa
instead of spatial mixing among different regions. Overall, the results
demonstrated that multiple mechanisms such as reassortment events, various
mutations and possibly interspecies transmission account for the enormous
diversity of genotype P[6] strains in Africa. These findings highlight the need
for continued global surveillance of rotavirus diversity.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2018.05.013 
PMCID: PMC6364979
PMID: 29782933  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

