
1. J Pathol Transl Med. 2018 Jul;52(4):232-237. doi: 10.4132/jptm.2018.05.17. Epub
2018 May 25.

Combined Hepatocellular Carcinoma and Neuroendocrine Carcinoma with Ectopic
Secretion of Parathyroid Hormone: A Case Report and Review of the Literature.

Kwon HJ(1), Kim JW(2), Kim H(3), Choi Y(4), Ahn S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam,
Korea.
(2)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Surgery, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam,
Korea.

Primary combined hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and neuroendocrine carcinoma is a
rare entity, and so is hypercalcemia due to ectopic parathyroid hormone (PTH)
secretion by tumor. A 44-year old man with hepatitis B virus associated chronic
liver disease presented with a hepatic mass. Hemihepatectomy discovered the mass 
as combined HCC and poorly differentiated cholangiocarcinoma. During adjuvant
chemoradiation therapy, he presented with nausea, and multiple systemic
metastases were found. Laboratory tests revealed hypercalcemia with markedly
elevated PTH and neuron specific enolase. Parathyroid scan showed normal uptake
in parathyroid glands, suggestive of ectopic PTH secretion. Subsequently,
immunohistochemistry of neuroendocrine marker was performed on the primary
lesion, and confirmed the neuroendocrine differentiation in non-HCC component.
The patient died 71 days after surgery. This report may suggest the possibility
of ectopic PTH secretion by neuroendocrine carcinoma of hepatic origin causing
hypercalcemia. Caution for neuroendocrine differentiation should be exercised
when diagnosing poorly differentiated HCC.

DOI: 10.4132/jptm.2018.05.17 
PMCID: PMC6056365
PMID: 29794961 

