
1. Plant Cell. 2018 Jul;30(7):1582-1595. doi: 10.1105/tpc.18.00122. Epub 2018 May
30.

Barley stripe mosaic virus γb Protein Subverts Autophagy to Promote Viral
Infection by Disrupting the ATG7-ATG8 Interaction.

Yang M(1), Zhang Y(1), Xie X(1), Yue N(1), Li J(2), Wang XB(1), Han C(1), Yu
J(1), Liu Y(3), Li D(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agro-Biotechnology and Ministry of Agriculture Key
Laboratory of Soil Microbiology, College of Biological Sciences, China
Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, P.R. China.
(2)MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Center for Plant Biology,
Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, P.R. China.
(3)MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Center for Plant Biology,
Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, P.R. China dawei.li@cau.edu.cn
yuleliu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Agro-Biotechnology and Ministry of Agriculture Key
Laboratory of Soil Microbiology, College of Biological Sciences, China
Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, P.R. China dawei.li@cau.edu.cn
yuleliu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

Autophagy is a conserved defense strategy against viral infection. However,
little is known about the counterdefense strategies of plant viruses involving
interference with autophagy. Here, we show that γb protein from Barley stripe
mosaic virus (BSMV), a positive single-stranded RNA virus, directly interacts
with AUTOPHAGY PROTEIN7 (ATG7). BSMV infection suppresses autophagy, and
overexpression of γb protein is sufficient to inhibit autophagy. Furthermore,
silencing of autophagy-related gene ATG5 and ATG7 in Nicotiana benthamiana plants
enhanced BSMV accumulation and viral symptoms, indicating that autophagy plays an
antiviral role in BSMV infection. Molecular analyses indicated that γb interferes
with the interaction of ATG7 with ATG8 in a competitive manner, whereas a single 
point mutation in γb, Tyr29Ala (Y29A), made this protein deficient in the
interaction with ATG7, which was correlated with the abolishment of autophagy
inhibition. Consistently, the mutant BSMVY29A virus showed reduced symptom
severity and viral accumulation. Taken together, our findings reveal that BSMV γb
protein subverts autophagy-mediated antiviral defense by disrupting the ATG7-ATG8
interaction to promote plant RNA virus infection, and they provide evidence that 
ATG7 is a target of pathogen effectors that functions in the ongoing arms race of
plant defense and viral counterdefense.

© 2018 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.18.00122 
PMCID: PMC6096602
PMID: 29848767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

