
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2018 Jul 5;140(26):8246-8259. doi: 10.1021/jacs.8b04010. Epub 2018
Jun 22.

Oligomeric Structure and Three-Dimensional Fold of the HIV gp41 Membrane-Proximal
External Region and Transmembrane Domain in Phospholipid Bilayers.

Kwon B(1), Lee M(1), Waring AJ(2), Hong M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , 170 Albany
Street , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 , United States.
(2)Department of Medicine , Harbor-UCLA Medical Center , 1000 West Carson Street,
Building RB2 , Torrance , California 90502 , United States.

The HIV-1 glycoprotein, gp41, mediates fusion of the virus lipid envelope with
the target cell membrane during virus entry into cells. Despite extensive studies
of this protein, inconsistent and contradictory structural information abounds in
the literature about the C-terminal membrane-interacting region of gp41. This
C-terminal region contains the membrane-proximal external region (MPER), which
harbors the epitopes for four broadly neutralizing antibodies, and the
transmembrane domain (TMD), which anchors the protein to the virus lipid
envelope. Due to the difficulty of crystallizing and solubilizing the MPER-TMD,
most structural studies of this functionally important domain were carried out
using truncated peptides either in the absence of membrane-mimetic solvents or
bound to detergents and lipid bicelles. To determine the structural architecture 
of the MPER-TMD in the native environment of lipid membranes, we have now carried
out a solid-state NMR study of the full MPER-TMD segment bound to
cholesterol-containing phospholipid bilayers. 13C chemical shifts indicate that
the majority of the peptide is α-helical, except for the C-terminus of the TMD,
which has moderate β-sheet character. Intermolecular 19F-19F distance
measurements of singly fluorinated peptides indicate that the MPER-TMD is
trimerized in the virus-envelope mimetic lipid membrane. Intramolecular 13C-19F
distance measurements indicate the presence of a turn between the MPER helix and 
the TMD helix. This is supported by lipid-peptide and water-peptide 2D 1H-13C
correlation spectra, which indicate that the MPER binds to the membrane surface
whereas the TMD spans the bilayer. Together, these data indicate that full-length
MPER-TMD assembles into a trimeric helix-turn-helix structure in lipid membranes.
We propose that the turn between the MPER and TMD may be important for inducing
membrane defects in concert with negative-curvature lipid components such as
cholesterol and phosphatidylethanolamine, while the surface-bound MPER helix may 
interact with N-terminal segments of the protein during late stages of membrane
fusion.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.8b04010 
PMCID: PMC6382510
PMID: 29888593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

