
1. Pediatr Neonatol. 2019 Feb;60(1):3-11. doi: 10.1016/j.pedneo.2018.03.007. Epub
2018 Mar 30.

Acute kidney injury after pediatric cardiac surgery.

Yuan SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The First Hospital of Putian, Teaching
Hospital, Fujian Medical University, 389 Longdejing Street, Chengxiang District, 
Putian 351100, Fujian Province, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
shiminyuan@126.com.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a common complication of pediatric cardiac surgery
and is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Literature of AKI after
pediatric cardiac surgery is comprehensively reviewed in terms of incidence, risk
factors, biomarkers, treatment and prognosis. The novel RIFLE (pediatric RIFLE
for pediatrics), Acute Kidney Injury Network (AKIN) and Kidney Disease Improving 
Global Outcomes (KDIGO) criteria have brought about unified diagnostic standards 
and comparable results for AKI after cardiac surgery. Numerous risk factors,
either renal or extrarenal, can be responsible for the development of AKI after
cardiac surgery, with low cardiac output syndrome being the most pronounced
predictor. Early fluid overload is also crucial for the occurrence of AKI and
prognosis in pediatric patients. Three sensitive biomarkers, neutrophil
gelatinase-associated lipocalin, cystatin C (CysC) and liver fatty acid-binding
protein, are regarded as the earliest (increase at 2-4 h), and another two,
kidney injury molecule-1 and interleukin-18 represent the intermediate
respondents (increase at 6-12 h after surgery). To ameliorate the cardiopulmonary
bypass techniques, improve renal perfusion and eradicate the causative risk
factors are imperative for the prevention of AKI in pediatric patients. The early
and intermediate biomarkers are helpful for an early judgment of occurrence of
postoperative AKI. Improved survival has been achieved by prevention, renal
support and modifications of hemofiltration techniques. Further development is
anticipated in small children.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pedneo.2018.03.007 
PMID: 29891225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

