
1. Virus Res. 2018 Jul 15;253:77-86. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2018.06.004. Epub 2018 
Jun 18.

Giant viruses as protein-coated amoeban mitochondria?

Seligmann H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche sur les Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales Emergentes, UMR
MEPHI, Aix-Marseille Université, IRD, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, 
Institut Hospitalo-Universitaire Méditerranée-Infection, 19-21 Boulevard Jean
Moulin, 13005, Marseille, France; The National Natural History Collections, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 91904, Jerusalem, Israel. Electronic address:
varanuseremius@gmail.com.

Mimivirus' genome includes parts of 5S, 16S and 23S ribosomal RNAs encoded by
Acanthamoeba's mitogenome, the giant virus' host. Two non-exclusive hypotheses
for rRNA remnants in giant viruses are examined: 1. mitogenomes invade viral
genomes as they do for nuclear chromosomes (producing numts); 2. megaviral
genomes evolved from an ancestral mitogenome. Alignment analyses confirm
mitochondrial, rather than alphaproteobacterial origins of megaviral rRNAs. Other
mitogenes have likely megaviral homologues. These megaviral homologues coevolve
to much larger extents than candidate rRNA homologues, suggesting rRNA decay in
viruses. Megaviral mitogene homologues overall follow mitochondrial gene order,
suggesting mitogenome ancestry. Ancestral synteny decreases with megaviral genome
size, suggesting that subsequent mitogene insertions blur ancestral gene order.
Putative defenses against DNA invasion conserve mitogene order in short megaviral
genomes. Synteny between mitogenome and megaviral genomes confirms the RNA/DNA
polymerase-homologies-based hypothesis that giant viruses have mitochondrial-like
ancestors, viral rRNA remnants are corollary of mitogenomic origins of megaviral 
genomes. Note that giant viruses, mitochondria and bacterial spores all have
double membranes, spores and viruses have protein coats. Mitochondria might
occasionally form spore-like structures that drifted into megaviruses. These
missing links could confirm mitogenome ancestry of giant viruses rather than
giant virus ancestry of mitochondria.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2018.06.004 
PMID: 29913250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

