
1. Gene. 2018 Oct 20;674:70-79. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2018.06.070. Epub 2018 Jun 22.

Association between IFITM3 rs12252 polymorphism and influenza susceptibility and 
severity: A meta-analysis.

Prabhu SS(1), Chakraborty TT(1), Kumar N(1), Banerjee I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Virology Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences, Indian
Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Mohali, India.
(2)Cellular Virology Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences, Indian
Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Mohali, India. Electronic
address: indranil@iisermohali.ac.in.

Intrinsic host susceptibility to viral infections plays a major role in
determining infection severity in different individuals. In human influenza virus
infections, multiple genetic association studies have identified specific human
gene variants that might contribute to enhanced susceptibility or resistance to
influenza. Recent studies suggested, the rs12252 T > C polymorphism in the
interferon-inducible transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3) gene might be associated
with susceptibility to severe influenza. However, the studies reported
conflicting and inconclusive results. To resolve the controversy, we conducted a 
systematic meta-analysis to evaluate the role of the IFITM3 rs12252 polymorphism 
in influenza susceptibility and severity, including twelve studies published
before February 19, 2018 with a total 16,263 subjects (1836 influenza cases and
14,427 controls). Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals were used to
assess the strength of the association. Our results indicated increased risk of
both severe and mild influenza in subjects carrying the IFITM3 rs12252
polymorphism in the allele contrast C vs. T: OR (severe) = 1.69, 95%
CI = 1.23-2.33, P = 0.001, and OR (mild) = 1.46, 95% CI = 1.13-1.87, P = 0.004.
Similar results were obtained in the homozygote comparison and dominant model.
Stratified analyses by ethnicity revealed increased risk of severe influenza in
both the White and East Asian populations, but significant association with mild 
influenza was found only in the White population. Overall, our meta-analysis
suggests a significant association between the IFITM3 rs12252 polymorphism and
the risk of influenza in both the White and East Asian populations.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2018.06.070 
PMID: 29940276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

