
1. PLoS One. 2018 Jun 26;13(6):e0199171. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0199171.
eCollection 2018.

Exploring the role of NCCR variation on JC polyomavirus expression from dual
reporter minicircles.

L'Honneur AS(1)(2), Leh H(3), Laurent-Tchenio F(3), Hazan U(3), Rozenberg
F(1)(2), Bury-Moné S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Descartes, INSERM Paris, France.
(2)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Cochin, Service de Virologie,
Paris, France.
(3)LBPA, Université Paris Saclay, CNRS, ENS Paris Saclay, Cachan, France.
(4)Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université
Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, Gif-Sur-Yvette, France.

JC virus (JCV), a ubiquitous human polyomavirus, can cause fatal progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) in immune compromised patients. The viral
genome is composed of two conserved coding regions separated by a highly variable
non-coding control region (NCCR). We analyzed the NCCR sequence from 10 PML JCV
strains and found new mutations. Remarkably, the NCCR f section was mutated in
most cases. We therefore explored the importance of this section in JCV
expression in renal (HEK293H) and glioblastoma (U-87MG) cell lines, by adapting
the emerging technology of DNA minicircles. Using bidirectional fluorescent
reporters, we revealed that impaired NCCR-driven late expression in glioblastoma 
cells was restored by a short deletion overlapping e and f sections. This study
evidenced a relevant link between JCV NCCR polymorphism and cell-type dependent
expression. The use of DNA minicircles opens new insights for monitoring the
impact of NCCR variation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0199171 
PMCID: PMC6019678
PMID: 29944671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

