
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1985 Oct;82(19):6470-4.

Formaldehyde-mediated DNA-protein crosslinking: a probe for in vivo chromatin
structures.

Solomon MJ, Varshavsky A.

Formaldehyde (HCHO) produces DNA-protein crosslinks both in vitro and in vivo.
Simian virus 40 (SV40) chromosomes that have been fixed by prolonged incubation
with HCHO either in vitro or in vivo (within SV40-infected cells) can be
converted to nearly protein-free DNA by limit-digestion with Pronase in the
presence of NaDodSO4. The remaining Pronase-resistant DNA-peptide adducts retard 
the DNA upon gel electrophoresis, allowing resolution of free and
crosslink-containing DNA. Though efficiently crosslinking histones to DNA within 
nucleosomes both in vitro and in vivo, HCHO does not crosslink either purified
lac repressor to lac operator-containing DNA or an (A + T)-DNA-binding protein
(alpha-protein) to its cognate DNA in vitro. Furthermore, a protein that does not
bind to DNA, such as serum albumin, is not crosslinked to DNA by HCHO even at
extremely high protein concentrations. These properties of HCHO as a DNA-protein 
crosslinker are used to probe the distribution of nucleosomes in vivo. We show
that there are no HCHO-crosslinkable DNA-protein contacts in a subset of SV40
chromosomes in vivo within a 325-base-pair stretch that spans the "exposed"
(nuclease-hypersensitive) region of the SV40 chromosome. This replication
origin-proximal region has been found previously to lack nucleosomes in a subset 
of isolated SV40 chromosomes. We discuss other applications of the HCHO
technique, including the possibility of obtaining base-resolution in vivo
nucleosome "footprints."

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.82.19.6470 
PMCID: PMC390738
PMID: 2995966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

