
1. J Med Virol. 2018 Nov;90(11):1687-1694. doi: 10.1002/jmv.25252. Epub 2018 Jul 25.

Epidemiology of rubella infection and genotyping of rubella virus in Cote
d'Ivoire, 2012-2016.

Kadjo HA(1), Waku-Kouomou D(2), Adagba M(1), Abernathy ES(3), Abdoulaye O(1),
Adjogoua E(1), Coulibaly-Traore F(1), Aboubacar S(1), Daniel E(4), Icenogle J(3),
Dosso M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemic Viruses, Pasteur Institute of Cote d'Ivoire, Abidjan,
Cote d'Ivoire.
(2)IHRC Inc, Contracting Agency to the Division of Viral Diseases, National
Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, United States Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.
(3)Division of Viral Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases, United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia.
(4)Direction du Programme Elargi de Vaccination (Ministere de la Sante).

Rubella is a contagious disease caused by the rubella virus (RuV) that can lead
to serious birth defects when women are infected in early pregnancy. This study
aimed to describe the epidemiology and genetic diversity of rubella viruses in
Cote d'Ivoire (CIV). Blood or oral fluid samples collected from suspected measles
cases were first tested for the presence of measles specific IgM antibodies by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). All measles IgM negative or
indeterminate samples were tested for rubella IgM antibody using ELISA.
Rubella-IgM-positive samples were tested by real-time reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for the presence of rubella virus RNA.
Real-time RT-PCR-positive RNA samples were used as template to amplify the 739 nt
region used for rubella genotyping. PCR-positive samples were sequenced and
phylogenetic analysis performed. Between 2012 and 2016, 4121 serums and 126 oral 
fluids were collected through the measles surveillance system. Of these, 3823 and
108 respectively were measles IgM negative or indeterminate. Subsequent testing
for rubella found that 690 of 3823 (18%) serum samples and 25 of 108 (23%) oral
fluid samples were rubella IgM-positive. The 739 nt segment of the E1
glycoprotein gene was amplified and sequenced for two serums and seven oral
fluids samples. Phylogenetic analysis showed that the rubella viruses from CIV
belonged to genotypes 1G (eight samples) and 2B (one sample). Rubella virus
genotype 2B was found in CIV for the first time. These data contribute to
baseline information on rubella virus strains found in CIV before the
introduction of rubella vaccine.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.25252 
PMID: 29984523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

