
1. J Virol. 2018 Sep 12;92(19). pii: e00879-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00879-18. Print
2018 Oct 1.

Engineered Oncolytic Poliovirus PVSRIPO Subverts MDA5-Dependent Innate Immune
Responses in Cancer Cells.

Walton RW(1), Brown MC(2), Sacco MT(1), Gromeier M(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA grome001@mc.duke.edu.

We are pursuing cancer immunotherapy with a neuro-attenuated recombinant
poliovirus, PVSRIPO. PVSRIPO is the live attenuated type 1 (Sabin) poliovirus
vaccine carrying a heterologous internal ribosomal entry site (IRES) of human
rhinovirus type 2 (HRV2). Intratumoral infusion of PVSRIPO is showing promise in 
the therapy of recurrent WHO grade IV malignant glioma (glioblastoma), a
notoriously treatment-refractory cancer with dismal prognosis. PVSRIPO exhibits
profound cytotoxicity in infected neoplastic cells expressing the poliovirus
receptor CD155. In addition, it elicits intriguing persistent translation and
replication, giving rise to sustained type I interferon (IFN)-dominant
proinflammatory stimulation of antigen-presenting cells. A key determinant of the
inflammatory footprint generated by neoplastic cell infection and its role in
shaping the adaptive response after PVSRIPO tumor infection is the virus's
inherent relationship to the host's innate antiviral response. In this report, we
define subversion of innate host immunity by PVSRIPO, enabling productive viral
translation and cytopathogenicity with extremely low multiplicities of infection 
in the presence of an active innate antiviral IFN response.IMPORTANCE Engaging
innate antiviral responses is considered key for instigating
tumor-antigen-specific antitumor immunity with cancer immunotherapy approaches.
However, they are a double-edged sword for attempts to enlist viruses in such
approaches. In addition to their role in the transition from innate to adaptive
immunity, innate antiviral IFN responses may intercept the viral life cycle in
cancerous cells, prevent viral cytopathogenicity, and restrict viral spread. This
has been shown to reduce overall antitumor efficacy of several proposed oncolytic
virus prototypes, presumably by limiting direct cell killing and the ensuing
inflammatory profile within the infected tumor. In this report, we outline how an
unusual recalcitrance of polioviruses toward innate antiviral responses permits
viral cytotoxicity and propagation in neoplastic cells, combined with engaging
active innate antiviral IFN responses.

Copyright Â© 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00879-18 
PMCID: PMC6146809
PMID: 29997212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

