
1. SAHARA J. 2018 Dec;15(1):60-70. doi: 10.1080/17290376.2018.1492960.

Violence, abuse and discrimination: key factors militating against control of
HIV/AIDS among the LGBTI sector.

Abaver DT(1), Cishe EN(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Academic Affairs and Research, Directorate of Research,
Innovation and Development , Walter Sisulu University, NMD , Mthatha , South
Africa.
(2)b Directorate of Research Innovation and Development , Walter Sisulu
University , Nelson Mandela Drive, Mthatha , Eastern Cape.

The Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex (LGBTI) South Africans
continue to face considerable challenges, including societal stigma, homophobic
violence (particularly corrective rape), and high rates of sexually transmitted
diseases and infections (particularly Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)/AIDS)
even when discrimination based on sexual orientation was outlawed by South
African's post-apartheid constitution. This study was conducted to ascertain
violence, abuse and discrimination against the LGBTI sector as key factors that
hinder the smooth implementation of HIV/AIDS programme among sexually minority
(LGBTI) group in Walter Sisulu University, South Africa. The self-structured
questionnaire was used to collect data. The study involved 3048 purposively
selected participants (1285 male and 1763 female) aged 17-38 years. About 70.5%
of the participants witnessed physical attack as a form of violence against
people in same-gender relationship; 47.7% disagreed that violent targeted at this
sexually minority group is justified. The LGBTI face challenges which include
verbal insults (937, 32.4%), bullying (532, 18.4%) and name-calling (1389, 48%). 
Discrimination against members of the LGBTI sector was witnessed in various
forms: non-acceptance (981, 33.9%), disapproval of act of homosexuals (1308,
45.2) and denial of rights (327, 11.3). Violence, abuse and discrimination which 
constitute stigmatisation among the LGBTI sector are received with mix feeling.
Some respondents justified the use of one or more of these key elements of
stigmatisation against the LGBTI (6.6%, supports violence), others condemned
these acts of stigmatisation (28.8%), against discrimination). Social stigma
which resulted from violence, abuse and discrimination exist in this institution 
and is responsible for the unwillingness of disclosure of sexual orientation
among the LGBTI members. An enabling environment should be created where the
LGBTI members could come out freely to access programmes targeted at the
prevention and control of HIV/AIDS.

DOI: 10.1080/17290376.2018.1492960 
PMCID: PMC6060376
PMID: 30025496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

