
1. J Clin Neurosci. 2018 Sep;55:57-61. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2018.06.044. Epub 2018
Jul 2.

The prognostic factors of HIV-negative adult cryptococcal meningitis with a focus
on cranial MRI-based neuroimaging findings.

Tsai WC(1), Lien CY(1), Lee JJ(1), Lin WC(2), Hsu CW(1), Huang CR(1), Tsai NW(1),
Chang CC(1), Lu CH(1), Chang WN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Kaohsiung Medical
Center, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Radiology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Kaohsiung Medical
Center, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Kaohsiung Medical
Center, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. Electronic 
address: cwenneng@ms19.hinet.net.

The prognostic significance of clinical characteristics and neuroimaging
features, especially cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-based neuroimaging 
features, in patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-negative
cryptococcal meningitis (CM) has rarely been examined in the literature. We
analyzed the clinical characteristics and MRI findings of 65 HIV-negative
patients (43 men, 22 women, age 19-86 years) collected during a study period of
15 years (January 2001-December 2015). Their underlying conditions included
diabetes mellitus, liver cirrhosis, hematologic disorders, autoimmune disorders, 
malignancy, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, adrenal insufficiency and
organ transplantation, and their clinical presentations included headache,
altered consciousness, fever, seizure, visual disturbance and hearing impairment.
The main cranial MRI findings were basal meningeal enhancement (44.6%, 29/65),
dilated Virchow-Robin space/pseudocyst (43.1%, 28/65), "dirty" cerebrospinal
fluid sign (38.5%, 25/65), hydrocephalus (36.9%, 21/65), acute/subacute cerebral 
infarct (ASCI, 21.5%, 14/65), cryptococcoma (9.2%, 6/65), and hazy brain base
(1.5%, 1/65). The therapeutic results of the 65 patients were evaluated using the
Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS). A comparison of the good outcome group (GOS
score = 4-5, n = 37) and poor outcome group (GOS score = 1-3, n = 28) revealed
that both the presence of seizures and ASCI were significantly associated with
the prognosis. A comparison of the groups with ASCI (n = 14) and without ASCI
(n = 51) revealed that the presence of basal meningeal enhancement was a
significant factor for the development of ASCI, and that this correlation may be 
associated with intense basal meningeal inflammation in adjacent small vessels.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2018.06.044 
PMID: 30042070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

