
1. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2018 Oct;96(10):1030-1039. doi: 10.1139/cjpp-2018-0111. 
Epub 2018 Aug 1.

Inhibition of DNA methyltransferase-1 instigates the expression of DNA
methyltransferase-3a in angioplasty-induced restenosis.

Boosani CS(1)(1), Gunasekar P(1)(1), Block M(1)(1), Jiang W(1)(1), Zhang Z(1)(1),
Radwan MM(1)(1), Agrawal DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical & Translational Science, Creighton University School of
Medicine, 2500 California Plaza, Omaha, NE 68178, USA.

Increased expression of DNA methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1) associates with the
progression of many human diseases. Because DNMT1 induces cell proliferation,
drugs that inhibit DNMT1 have been used to treat proliferative diseases. Because 
these drugs are nonspecific inhibitors of DNMT1, subsidiary events or the
compensatory mechanisms that are activated in the absence of DNMT1 limit their
therapeutic application. Here, we studied the molecular mechanisms that occur
during angioplasty-induced restenosis and found that DNMT1 inhibition in both in 
vitro and in vivo approaches resulted in the induction of DNA
methyltransferase-3a (DNMT3a) expression. In vascular smooth muscle cells
(VSMCs), the microRNA hsa-miR-1264 mimic, specifically inhibiting DNMT1, induced 
nuclear expression of DNMT3a. On the contrary, there was no induced expression of
DNMT3a in VSMCs that were transfected with hsa-miR-1264 inhibitor. Further,
ectopic expression of suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) through
adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated gene delivery in the coronary arteries of
Yucatan microswine showed inhibition of both DNMT1 and DNMT3a in vivo. These
findings show the existence of an inter-regulatory mechanism between DNMT1 and
DNMT3a where, in the absence of DNMT1, induction of DNMT3a compensates for the
loss of DNMT1 functions, suggesting that the inhibition of both DNMT1 and DNMT3a 
are required to prevent restenosis.

DOI: 10.1139/cjpp-2018-0111 
PMID: 30067080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

