
1. Med Oncol. 2018 Aug 3;35(9):119. doi: 10.1007/s12032-018-1187-3.

Classical Philadelphia-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms: focus on mutations 
and JAK2 inhibitors.

Helbig G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, School of Medicine
in Katowice, Medical University of Silesia, DÄ…browski street 25, 40-032,
Katowice, Poland. ghelbig@o2.pl.

Comment in
    Med Oncol. 2018 Aug 29;35(10):137.

Classical Philadelphia- negative myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) encompass
three main myeloid malignancies: polycythemia vera (PV), essential
thrombocythemia (ET), and myelofibrosis (MF). Phenotype-driver mutations in Janus
kinase 2 (JAK2), calreticulin (CALR), and myeloproliferative leukemia virus
oncogene (MPL) genes are mutually exclusive and occur with a variable frequency. 
Driver mutations influence disease phenotype and prognosis. PV patients with JAK2
exon 14 mutation do not differ in number of thrombotic events, risk of leukemic
and fibrotic transformation, and overall survival to those with JAK2 exon 12
mutation. Type 2-like CALR-mutated ET patients have lower risk of thrombosis if
compared with those carrying JAK2 or type 1-like CALR mutation. For ET, overall
survival is comparable between patients with JAK2 and either type 1-like and type
2-like CALR mutations. For MF, better OS is demonstrated for patients harboring a
type 1-like CALR mutation than those with type 2-like CALR or JAK2. The discovery
of driver mutations in MPNs has prompted the development of molecularly targeted 
therapy. Among JAK2 inhibitors, ruxolitinib (RUX) has been approved for (1)
treatment of intermediate-2 and high-risk MF and (2) PV patients who are
resistant to or intolerant to hydroxyurea. RUX reduces spleen size and alleviates
disease symptoms in a proportion of MF patients. RUX in MF leads to prolonged
survival and reduces risk of death. RUX controls hematocrit, reduces spleen size 
and alleviates symptoms in PV. Adverse events of RUX are moderate, however, its
long-term use may be associated with opportunistic infections. Trials with other 
JAK2 inhibitors are ongoing.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-018-1187-3 
PMCID: PMC6096973
PMID: 30074114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

