
1. Vaccine. 2018 Sep 5;36(37):5591-5599. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.07.054. Epub
2018 Aug 1.

Enhanced immune responses to E2 protein and DNA formulated with ISA 61 VG
administered as a DNA prime-protein boost regimen against bovine viral diarrhea
virus.

Cai D(1), Song Q(2), Duan C(1), Wang S(1), Wang J(1), Zhu Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193,
China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Zhe Jiang A&F University, Hangzhou
31130, China.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193,
China. Electronic address: zhu_yaohong@hotmail.com.

The aim of this study was to develop and test an optimal vaccination strategy
against bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) based on the E2 glycoprotein of the
BJ1305 strain. To achieve higher E2-specific antibody titers and to broaden the
cellular immune response, a plasmid encoding the E2 protein (pcDNA3.1-E2) was
constructed and a purified recombinant E2 protein was generated. The E2 protein
was emulsified in the adjuvant ISA 61 VG prior to administration. We immunized
mice three times with pcDNA3.1-E2 or the recombinant E2 protein or primed twice
with pcDNA3.1-E2 and boosted once with the E2 protein. To evaluate the protection
against BVDV conferred by the vaccines, the mice were challenged with BVDV strain
Oregon C24V after the third immunization. Although all immunized mice developed
humoral and cellular immune responses, the E2-specific antibody titers in the DNA
prime-protein boost group were significantly higher than those elicited by either
the DNA or the protein vaccine. In addition, vaccination with the E2 DNA vaccine 
induced higher percentages of CD4+IFN-γ+ T cells and CD8+IFN-γ+ T cells among
total CD3+ T cells than the other regimens. The predominant antibody subclass in 
the vaccinated mice was IgG1. Serum tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) levels in
the DNA prime-protein boost group were significantly higher after the third
immunization than in the other groups. Moreover, the mice treated with the DNA
prime-protein boost vaccination regimen acquired protection against BVDV
challenge, as shown by a significant reduction of viremia, only minor
pathological changes, and a lower viral antigen burden than in the control and
solo vaccinated mice. These results demonstrate the potential advantage of a DNA 
prime-protein boost vaccination approach over a solo vaccination for the
prevention of BVDV. The ability of this vaccine strategy to control and eradicate
BVD in herds warrants further investigation.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.07.054 
PMID: 30077483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

