
1. Virus Res. 2018 Oct 15;258:9-18. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2018.09.015. Epub 2018
Sep 26.

Genetic fusion of peste des petits ruminants virus haemagglutinin and fusion
protein domains to the amino terminal subunit of glycoprotein B of bovine
herpesvirus 1 interferes with transport and function of gB for BHV-1 infectious
replication.

Osman NA(1), Röder A(2), Giesow K(2), Keil GM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology,
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institute, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health,
Südufer 10, 17493 Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany; Department of Pathology,
Parasitology and Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Sudan University
of Science and Technology, P.O. Box 204 Kuku, Khartoum-North, Sudan. Electronic
address: nussieba@yahoo.com.
(2)Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology,
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institute, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health,
Südufer 10, 17493 Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.

Peste des petits ruminants is an emerging, often fatal viral disease of domestic 
and wild small ruminants caused by peste des petits ruminants virus. The
haemagglutinin and the fusion protein are viral envelope glycoproteins and
essential for the infection process and both induce a protective immune response 
in infected or vaccinated animals. Attempts to generate pseudotyped bovine
herpesvirus 1 recombinants firstly by integration of expression cassettes for
PPRV-H and PPRV-F into the herpesviral genome or secondly to generate pseudotyped
BHV-1 by genetically fusing relevant parts of both PPRV glycoproteins to the
amino-terminal subunit of glycoprotein B, approaches that had been successful for
heterologous viral membrane glycoproteins in the past, failed repeatedly. We
therefore analyzed at which intracellular stage generation of viable
BHV-1 hybrid-gB recombinants might be inhibited. Results obtained from transient 
protein expression experiments revealed that, dependent on the fusion protein,
transport of the hybrid glycoproteins beyond the endoplasmic reticulum is
impeded. Thus, expression of heterologous glycoproteins using BHV-1 interferes
more than expected from published experience with BHV-1 gB transport and
consequently with virus replication.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2018.09.015 
PMID: 30266631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

