
1. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2019 May;302(5):818-824. doi: 10.1002/ar.23974. Epub 2018 Nov
22.

Experimentally Induced Biliary Atresia by Means of Rotavirus-Infection Is
Directly Linked to Severe Damage of the Microvasculature in the Extrahepatic Bile
Duct.

Oetzmann von Sochaczewski C(1)(2), Pintelon I(3), Brouns I(3), Thys S(3),
Deigendesch N(4), Kübler JF(2), Timmermans JP(3), Petersen C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, Mainz, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover,
Germany.
(3)Laboratory of Cell Biology & Histology, Department of Veterinary Sciences,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)Department of Cellular Microbiology, Max-Planck Institute for Infection
Biology, Berlin, Germany.

Vascular damage has been reported to contribute to atresia formation in several
diseases including biliary atresia. This study focused on the extrahepatic
biliary plexus in experimental biliary atresia. Newborn BALB/cAnNCrl-pups were
infected with rhesus rotavirus within 24 hr after birth to induce experimental
biliary atresia. The extrahepatic biliary plexus was examined by confocal
microscopy on whole-mount preparations, scored by three independent researchers, 
and further evaluated at the subcellular level with transmission electron
microscopy. Imaging results revealed a progressive destruction of the
extrahepatic biliary vascular plexus in the course of experimental biliary
atresia induced by rotavirus infection. Endothelial cell damage was already
visible as cell swelling and necrosis in the first days after infection and a
damaged microcirculation that rapidly deteriorated with progression of
obliterative cholangiopathy, was observed in the infected mice as early as 72 hr 
after birth. In experimental biliary atresia, the destruction of the extrahepatic
biliary vascular plexus starts already in the first days postinfection and
clearly precedes the morphological symptoms of atresia. The deterioration of the 
vascular bed architecture continues with disease progression. Therefore, we
conclude that the (ultra)structural changes in the extrahepatic biliary
microvasculature occurring before the visible onset of atresia has a predictive
diagnostic value and this impairment in blood supply to the extrahepatic bile
duct may be an important contributing factor to the pathogenesis of acquired
biliary atresia. Anat Rec, 2018. © 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Anat Rec,
302:818-824, 2019. © 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ar.23974 
PMID: 30312024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

