
1. Sci Total Environ. 2019 Jan 15;648:1297-1304. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.08.275. Epub 2018 Aug 22.

Survival of E. coli O157:H7, Salmonella Typhimurium, HAdV2 and MNV-1 in river
water under dark conditions and varying storage temperatures.

Ibrahim EME(1), El-Liethy MA(2), Abia ALK(3), Hemdan BA(4), Shaheen MN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Virology Laboratory, Water Pollution Research Department,
National Research Centre, Dokki, Giza 12622, Egypt.
(2)Environmental Microbiology Laboratory, Water Pollution Research Department,
National Research Centre, Dokki, Giza 12622, Egypt. Electronic address:
mohamedazabr@yahoo.com.
(3)Antimicrobial Research Unit, College of Health Sciences, University of
KwaZulu-Natal, X54001, Durban, South Africa. Electronic address:
lutherkinga@yahoo.fr.
(4)Environmental Microbiology Laboratory, Water Pollution Research Department,
National Research Centre, Dokki, Giza 12622, Egypt.

The ability of Escherichia coli O157:H7, Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium,
Human adenovirus serotype 2 (HAdV2) and Murine Norovirus 1 (MNV-1) to survive in 
river water at -20, 4, room temperature (~24 °C) and 37 °C, were evaluated under 
dark conditions. The tested surface water was obtained from the main Nile River
in the Dokki area, Giza and sterilized by autoclaving. The pathogens were
inoculated separately in the autoclaved river water. Each microcosm was sampled
and the test microorganisms counted after zero (immediately following
inoculation), 1, 7, 15, 30, 60, 90 and 120 days. Physicochemical parameters
including pH, turbidity, electrical conductivity, dissolved oxygen, total
dissolved solids, total alkalinity, biological oxygen demand, chemical oxygen
demand, nitrates and nitrites, and sulphate, were also measured. For HAdV2, the
highest decay rates were observed at 37 °C and room temperature compared to 4 and
-20 °C. A similar trend was found for the MNV-1, although unlike the HAdV2, the
decay rate was higher at -20 than at 4 °C. Also, 4 °C was the best temperature
for the survival of MNV-1 (T90 = 76.9 days), E. coli O157:H7 (T90 = 103 days) and
Salmonella Typhimurium (T90 = 105 days). The least survival of the pathogens,
except MNV-1, was recorded at 37 °C. These results indicate that under dark
conditions and low temperatures, enteric pathogens could be stable for extended
periods. No significant statistical correlation was observed between the
experimental temperatures and the infectivity of the viral particles. This study 
provided useful information about the stability of these pathogens in the Nile
River water and could serve as an early warning when considering the water of the
river for agricultural irrigation or household use in areas with limited or no
access to potable water.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.08.275 
PMID: 30340275  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

