
1. Virology. 2019 Jan 2;526:173-179. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2018.10.021. Epub 2018 Nov
2.

Vascular permeability in the brain is a late pathogenic event during Rift Valley 
fever virus encephalitis in rats.

Walters AW(1), Kujawa MR(1), Albe JR(1), Reed DS(2), Klimstra WB(2), Hartman
AL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vaccine Research, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA;
University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Center for Vaccine Research, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA;
Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Center for Vaccine Research, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA;
University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
Electronic address: hartman2@pitt.edu.

Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) is a zoonotic disease of livestock that causes
several clinical outcomes in people including febrile disease, hemorrhagic fever,
and/or encephalitis. After aerosol infection with RVFV, Lewis rats develop lethal
encephalitic disease, and we use this as a model for studying disease mechanisms 
of RVFV infection in the brain. Permeability of the brain vasculature in relation
to virus invasion and replication is not known. Here, we found that vascular
permeability in the brain occurred late in the course of infection and
corresponded temporally to expression of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9).
Virus replication was ongoing within the central nervous system for several days 
prior to detectable vascular leakage. Based on this study, vascular permeability 
was not required for entry of RVFV into the brain of rats. Prevention of vascular
leakage late in infection may be an important component for prevention of lethal 
neurological disease in the rat model.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2018.10.021 
PMCID: PMC6286220
PMID: 30396029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

