
1. Environ Sci Technol. 2018 Nov 20;52(22):13068-13076. doi:
10.1021/acs.est.8b02191. Epub 2018 Nov 12.

Biological Weighting Functions for Evaluating the Role of Sunlight-Induced
Inactivation of Coliphages at Selected Beaches and Nearby Tributaries.

Zepp RG(1), Cyterski M(1), Wong K(1), Georgacopoulos O(1), Acrey B(1), Whelan
G(1), Parmar R(1), Molina M(1).

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, National Exposure Research Laboratory , 
960 College Station Road , Athens , Georgia 30605 , United States.

Coliphages can indicate contamination of recreational waters and previous studies
show that sunlight is important in altering densities of coliphages, other
indicator microorganisms, and pathogens in aquatic environments. Here, we report 
on laboratory studies of light-induced inactivation of two coliphage
groups-male-specific (F+) and somatic coliphage-under various conditions in
phosphate-buffered water (PBW). Strains isolated from wastewater treatment
facilities and laboratory strains (MS2 and phiX174 coliphages) were evaluated.
Inactivation rates were determined in a series of irradiations using simulated
solar radiation passed through light filters that blocked different parts of the 
ultraviolet spectral region. Inactivation rates and spectral irradiance from
these experiments were then analyzed to develop biological weighting functions
(BWFs) for the light-induced inactivation. BWFs were used to model the
inactivation of coliphages over a range of conditions in aquatic environments
that included two beach sites in Lake Michigan and one in Lake Erie. For example,
modeled effects of sunlight attenuation, using UV absorption data from the three 
Great Lakes beach sites, inferred that direct photoinactivation rate constants,
averaged over a one-meter water column in swimmable areas, were reduced 2- to
5-fold, compared to near-surface rate constants.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.est.8b02191 
PMCID: PMC7086407
PMID: 30395707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

