
1. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2019 Jun 1;277:30-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2018.10.023. Epub
2018 Nov 3.

Identification, characterization, expression profiles of OlHavcr2 in medaka
(Oryzias latipes).

Nibona E(1), Xu G(1), Wu K(1), Shen H(1), Zhang R(1), Ke X(1), Al Hafiz A(1),
Wang Z(1), Qi C(1), Zhao H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, School of 
Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, Hubei, China.
(2)Hubei Key Laboratory of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, School of 
Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, Hubei, China.
Electronic address: zhaohb@mail.ccnu.edu.cn.

Hepatitis A virus cellular receptor2 (Havcr2) also named T-cell immunoglobulin
and mucin domain containing-3 (Tim-3) was initially described as a T helper
1-specific cell surface protein, a member of Tim family implicated in the
regulating process of adaptive and innate immune responses. Here, medaka (Oryzias
latipes) Havcr2 (OlHavcr2) was isolated and characterized. Unlike other Havcr2
proteins, OlHavcr2 possesses two Ig-like domains but lacks cytoplasmic and
transmembrane domains. RT-PCR results revealed that OlHavcr2 mRNA was expressed
strongly in the liver, moderately in the intestine, heart and ovary, and weakly
in the muscle, gill, brain, eye, spleen, and testis. OlHavcr2 expression begun
from gastrula stage and was maintained until hatching. The signal of OlHavcr2 was
mainly identified in the blood system in the yolk sac by in situ hybridization.
These results indicated that OlHavcr2 is expressed ubiquitously in adult tissues,
and is a zygotic gene expressed from gastrula onwards in embryogenesis. OlHavcr2 
may play a significant role in the blood system of medaka. In the immune organs, 
OlHavcr2 expression was affected by the immune stimulants, lipopolysaccharide and
poly I:C, suggesting that OlHavcr2 was involved in innate immunity and adaptive
immunity in medaka.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2018.10.023 
PMID: 30395804  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

