
1. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz). 2019 Apr;67(2):79-88. doi:
10.1007/s00005-018-0532-8. Epub 2018 Nov 15.

Modulation of the Immune System in Chronic Hepatitis C and During Antiviral
Interferon-Free Therapy.

Urbanowicz A(1), Zagożdżon R(1)(2)(3), Ciszek M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Transplant Medicine and Internal Diseases, Medical
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Clinical Immunology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw,
Poland.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(4)Department of Immunology, Transplant Medicine and Internal Diseases, Medical
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. mciszek@onet.pl.

The treatment of patients with chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection has
changed tremendously over the past 2 years, with an increasing variety of
all-oral direct-acting antiviral (DAA) treatment regimens available for different
HCV genotypes and distinct clinical settings. These treatments have significantly
improved safety in patients with advanced liver disease compared with interferon 
(IFN)-based regimens. HCV modifies the human immune system to escape
immunosurveillance via several mechanisms. One of the basic mechanisms of HCV is 
the ability to "switch" the immune response by reducing the activity of cells
responsible for the elimination of virus-infected cells. IFN-free DAA treatment
regimens provide a unique opportunity to assess the effect of HCV elimination on 
the immune system. Abrupt changes in the immune system can in some cases be
responsible for two alarming processes: viral reactivation in patients with
chronic hepatitis B and recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with
previous successful cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s00005-018-0532-8 
PMCID: PMC6420452
PMID: 30443787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

