
1. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol. 2019 Feb;100(2):e21522. doi: 10.1002/arch.21522.
Epub 2018 Nov 28.

Potential of RNA interference in the study and management of the whitefly,
Bemisia tabaci.

Grover S(1), Jindal V(2), Banta G(2), Taning CNT(3), Smagghe G(3), Christiaens
O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska.
(2)Department of Entomology, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, India.
(3)Department of Plants and Crops, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium.

Whiteflies cause considerable losses to crops, directly by feeding, and
indirectly by transmission of viruses. The current control methods consist of a
combination of different control tactics, mainly still relying on unsafe and
non-ecofriendly chemical control. RNA interference (RNAi) is a
post-transcriptional gene-silencing strategy in which double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA), corresponding specifically to a target gene, is introduced in a target
organism. Research on RNAi in the previous decade has shown its success as a
potential insect control strategy, which can be highly species-specific and
environment friendly. In whiteflies, the success of dsRNA delivery through the
oral route opened possibilities for its management through plant-mediated RNAi.
To date, several genes have been targeted in whiteflies through RNAi and these
assays demonstrated its potential to manage whiteflies at lab level. However,
further research and investments are needed to move toward an application at
field level. In this review, for the first time, we collected the literature on
genes targeted for silencing via RNAi in whiteflies and discuss the potential of 
RNAi in whitefly pest control. We also discuss likely delivery methods, including
transgenic in planta delivery and symbiont-mediated delivery, and its potential
for studying and interfering with insecticide resistance mechanisms and virus
transmission by whiteflies.

Â© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/arch.21522 
PMID: 30484903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

