
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Nov 30;8(1):17505. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-35010-5.

High density Huh7.5 cell hollow fiber bioreactor culture for high-yield
production of hepatitis C virus and studies of antivirals.

Pihl AF(1), Offersgaard AF(1), Mathiesen CK(1), Prentoe J(1), Fahn√∏e U(1), Krarup
H(2), Bukh J(1), Gottwein JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Copenhagen Hepatitis C Program (CO-HEP), Department of Infectious Diseases,
Hvidovre Hospital and Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Section of Molecular Diagnostics, Clinical Biochemistry, Aalborg University
Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark.
(3)Copenhagen Hepatitis C Program (CO-HEP), Department of Infectious Diseases,
Hvidovre Hospital and Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
jgottwein@sund.ku.dk.

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection poses a serious global public health
burden. Despite the recent development of effective treatments there is a large
unmet need for a prophylactic vaccine. Further, antiviral resistance might
compromise treatment efficiency in the future. HCV cell culture systems are
typically based on Huh7 and derived hepatoma cell lines cultured in monolayers.
However, efficient high cell density culture systems for high-yield HCV
production and studies of antivirals are lacking. We established a system based
on Huh7.5 cells cultured in a hollow fiber bioreactor in the presence or absence 
of bovine serum. Using an adapted chimeric genotype 5a virus, we achieved peak
HCV infectivity and RNA titers of 7.6 log10 FFU/mL and 10.4 log10 IU/mL,
respectively. Bioreactor derived HCV showed high genetic stability, as well as
buoyant density, sensitivity to neutralizing antibodies AR3A and AR4A, and
dependency on HCV co-receptors CD81 and SR-BI comparable to that of HCV produced 
in monolayer cell cultures. Using the bioreactor platform, treatment with the
NS5A inhibitor daclatasvir resulted in HCV escape mediated by the NS5A resistance
substitution Y93H. In conclusion, we established an efficient high cell density
HCV culture system with implications for studies of antivirals and vaccine
development.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-35010-5 
PMCID: PMC6269495
PMID: 30504788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

