
1. Biochemistry. 2019 Feb 12;58(6):818-832. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b01175. Epub
2019 Jan 15.

The HIV gp41 Fusion Protein Inhibits T-Cell Activation through the Lentiviral
Lytic Peptide 2 Motif.

Klug YA(1), Schwarzer R(2), Rotem E(1), Charni M(3), Nudelman A(1), Gramatica
A(2), Zarmi B(1), Rotter V(3), Shai Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences , Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot 
7610001 , Israel.
(2)Gladstone Institute for Virology and Immunology , University of California,
San Francisco , San Francisco , California 94158 , United States.
(3)Department of Molecular Cell Biology , Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot
7610001 , Israel.

The human immunodeficiency virus enters its host cells by membrane fusion,
initiated by the gp41 subunit of its envelope protein. gp41 has also been shown
to bind T-cell receptor (TCR) complex components, interfering with TCR signaling 
leading to reduced T-cell activation. This immunoinhibitory activity is suggested
to occur during the membrane fusion process and is attributed to various
membranotropic regions of the gp41 ectodomain and to the transmembrane domain.
Although extensively studied, the cytosolic region of gp41, termed the
cytoplasmic tail (CT), has not been examined in the context of immune
suppression. Here we investigated whether the CT inhibits T-cell activation in
different T-cell models by utilizing gp41-derived peptides and expressed full
gp41 proteins. We found that a conserved region of the CT, termed lentiviral
lytic peptide 2 (LLP2), specifically inhibits the activation of mouse, Jurkat,
and human primary T-cells. This inhibition resulted in reduced T-cell
proliferation, gene expression, cytokine secretion, and cell surface expression
of CD69. Differential activation of the TCR signaling cascade revealed that
CT-based immune suppression occurs downstream of the TCR complex. Moreover, LLP2 
peptide treatment of Jurkat and primary human T-cells impaired Akt but not NFÎºB
and ERK1/2 activation, suggesting that immune suppression occurs through the Akt 
pathway. These findings identify a novel gp41 T-cell suppressive element with a
unique inhibitory mechanism that can take place post-membrane fusion.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b01175 
PMID: 30602116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

