
1. J Virol. 2019 Mar 5;93(6). pii: e02063-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02063-18. Print 2019 
Mar 15.

The Glucocorticoid Receptor (GR) Stimulates Herpes Simplex Virus 1 Productive
Infection, in Part Because the Infected Cell Protein 0 (ICP0) Promoter Is
Cooperatively Transactivated by the GR and Krüppel-Like Transcription Factor 15.

Ostler JB(1), Harrison KS(1), Schroeder K(1), Thunuguntla P(1), Jones C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma State University Center for Veterinary Health Sciences, Department of
Veterinary Pathobiology, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA.
(2)Oklahoma State University Center for Veterinary Health Sciences, Department of
Veterinary Pathobiology, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA clint.jones10@okstate.edu.

Following acute infection, herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) establishes lifelong
latency in neurons. Physical, emotional, and chemical stresses are linked to
increasing the incidence of reactivation from latency, but the mechanism of
action is not well understood. In general, stress increases corticosteroid
levels, leading to activation of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), a pioneer
transcription factor. Consequently, we hypothesized that stress-mediated
activation of the GR can stimulate productive infection and viral gene
expression. New studies demonstrated that the GR-specific antagonist
(CORT-108297) significantly reduced HSV-1 productive infection in mouse
neuroblastoma cells (Neuro-2A). Additional studies demonstrated that the
activated GR and Krüppel-like transcription factor 15 (KLF15) cooperatively
transactivated the infected cell protein 0 (ICP0) promoter, a crucial viral
regulatory protein. Interestingly, the synthetic corticosteroid dexamethasone and
GR or KLF15 alone had little effect on ICP0 promoter activity in transfected
Neuro-2A or Vero cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) studies revealed
that the GR and KLF15 occupied ICP0 promoter sequences important for
transactivation at 2 and 4 h after infection; however, binding was not readily
detected at 6 h after infection. Similar results were obtained for cells
transfected with the full-length ICP0 promoter. ICP0 promoter sequences lack a
consensus "whole" GR response element (GRE) but contain putative half-GREs that
were important for dexamethasone induced promoter activity. The activated GR
stimulates expression of, and interacts with, KLF15; consequently, these data
suggest KLF15 and the GR form a feed-forward loop that activates viral gene
expression and productive infection following stressful stimuli.IMPORTANCE The
ability of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) to periodically reactivate from latency
results in virus transmission and recurrent disease. The incidence of
reactivation from latency is increased by chronic or acute stress. Stress
increases the levels of corticosteroids, which bind and activate the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Since GR activation is an immediate early response 
to stress, we tested whether the GR influences productive infection and the
promoter that drives infected cell protein 0 (ICP0) expression. Pretreatment of
cells with a GR-specific antagonist (CORT-108297) significantly reduced virus
replication. Although the GR had little effect on ICP0 promoter activity alone,
the Krüppel-like transcription factor 15 (KLF15) cooperated with the GR to
stimulate promoter activity in transfected cells. In transfected or infected
cells, the GR and KLF15 occupied ICP0 sequences important for transactivation.
Collectively, these studies provide insight into how stress can directly
stimulate productive infection and viral gene expression.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02063-18 
PMCID: PMC6401466
PMID: 30602606  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

