
1. Surg Today. 2019 Jun;49(6):521-528. doi: 10.1007/s00595-019-1764-x. Epub 2019 Jan
14.

Validated nomogram for the prediction of disease-free survival after hepatectomy 
for hepatocellular carcinoma within the Milan criteria: individualizing a
surveillance strategy.

Ma KW(1), She WH(1), Cheung TT(1), Chan ACY(1), Dai WC(1), Fung JYY(2), Lo CM(1),
Chok KSH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery and Liver Transplantation,
Department of Surgery, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, 102
Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 102 Pokfulam Road, Hong
Kong, China.
(3)Divisions of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery and Liver Transplantation,
Department of Surgery, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, 102
Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China. kennethchok@yahoo.com.hk.

OBJECTIVE: We sought to develop a nomogram for the prediction of tumor recurrence
after resection of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) within the Milan criteria.
METHOD: Consecutive HCC patients admitted for hepatectomy between 1994 and 2014
were enrolled in this study. Patients were excluded if they had recurrent HCC or 
tumors beyond the Milan criteria. Patients were randomized and assigned to the
derivation and validation sets in a 1:1 ratio. Independent factors for
disease-free survival were identified using the Cox regression model. A nomogram 
was derived and validated with the receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) and
calibration curves.
RESULTS: There were 617 eligible patients included in the analysis. The median
age was 59 years, 481 were male, and 87.8% of the patients were hepatitis B virus
carriers. The median follow-up was 68.7Â months. The 5-year overall survival rate 
was 73.3% and HCC recurrence was detected in 55% of the patients. In the
derivation set, a nomogram was constructed based on the seven independent factors
for disease-free survival: age, alpha-fetoprotein, preoperative prothrombin time,
magnitude of hepatectomy, postoperative complication, number of tumor nodules,
and presence of microvascular invasion. A satisfactory discrimination ability was
observed in both the derivation and validation sets (c-stat 0.672 and 0.665,
respectively). The calibration plot yielded agreement between the predicted and
observed outcomes, using the derived nomogram.
CONCLUSION: A validated nomogram quantifies the risk of recurrence after
hepatectomy for HCC within the Milan criteria, and assists with the planning of
individual postoperative surveillance protocols.

DOI: 10.1007/s00595-019-1764-x 
PMID: 30637484  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

