
1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2019 Jan 10;40(1):93-98. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0254-6450.2019.01.019.

[Systematic review on the characteristics of acute gastroenteritis outbreaks
caused by sapovirus].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Yu Y(1), Guo XH(2), Yan HQ(1), Gao ZY(1), Li WH(1), Liu BW(1), Wang QY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Infectious Disease and Endemic Disease Control, Beijing
Municipal Center for Diseases Control and Prevention, Beijing Research Center for
Preventive Medicine, Beijing 100013, China.
(2)Fangshan District Center for Diseases Control and Prevention, Beijing 102446, 
China.

Objective: To understand the epidemiological and etiological characteristics of
outbreaks on acute gastroenteritis caused by sapovirus (SaV) worldwide. Methods: 
Literature about the outbreaks on acute gastroenteritis caused by SaV were
retrieved from the databases including WanFang, CNKI, PubMed and Web of Science
after evaluation. Time, geography, setting and population distributions of
outbreaks, transmission mode, SaV genotype and clinical characteristics of the
patients were analyzed. Results: A total of 34 papers about SaV were included,
involving 146 outbreaks occurred between October 1976 and April 2016. In these
papers, 138 outbreaks were reported on the related months. All these outbreaks
occurred in northern hemisphere. SaV outbreaks occurred all year around, but
mainly in cold season, the incidence was highest in December (25 outbreaks) and
lowest in in August (2 outbreaks). Most outbreaks were reported by Japan,
followed by Canada, the United States of America and the Netherlands. There were 
141 outbreaks for which the occurring settings were reported, child-care settings
were most commonly reported setting (48/141, 34.04%), followed by long-term care 
facility (41/141, 29.08%) and hospital (16/141, 11.35%). Clinical symptoms of 1
704 cases in 31 outbreaks were reported, with the most common symptom was
diarrhea (1 331/1 704, 78.12%), followed by nausea (829/1 198, 69.20%), abdominal
pain (840/1 328, 63.25%), vomiting (824/1 704, 48.36%) and fever (529/1 531,
34.53%). Genotypes of SaV were determined for 119 outbreaks. GⅠ(51/119, 42.86%)
and GⅣ (45/119, 37.82%) were predominant. The outbreaks of GⅣ SaV increased
suddenly in 2007, and the outbreaks of GⅠ SaV mainly occurred in 2008 and during 
2011-2013. Conclusions: SaV outbreaks were reported mainly by developed
countries, with most outbreaks occurred in cold season, in child-care settings
and long term care facility. GⅠ and GⅣ were the most common genotypes of SaV.
Prevention and control of SaV outbreak in China seemed relatively weak, and it is
necessary to conduct related training and to strengthen the SaV outbreak
surveillance in areas where service is in need.

Publisher: 目的： 了解全球札如病毒（SaV）急性胃肠炎暴发的流行病学及病原学特征。 方法： 通过万方、中国知网、PubMed、Web of
Science等数据库，检索2018年1月以前发表的SaV急性胃肠炎暴发文献，对文献进行评价和筛选，分析暴发的时间分布、地区分布、场所分布、人群分布、传播途径、病
原学特征、患者临床症状等。 结果：
共收集到34篇SaV暴发文献，涉及146起暴发，发生时间范围为1976年10月至2016年4月。138起暴发报告了发生月份，均来自北半球，全年均有发生，8月发生最
少，12月发生最多，主要发生于温度较低月份。报告暴发较多国家为日本、加拿大、美国和荷兰。共141起暴发提供了发生场所，常见的为托幼机构（48/141，34.04%
）、长期看护机构（41/141，29.08%）和医院（16/141，11.35%）。31起暴发共1 704例病例具有临床症状信息，腹泻最常见（1 331/1
704，78.12%），然后分别为恶心（829/1 198，69.20%）、腹痛（840/1 328，63.25%）、呕吐（824/1
704，48.36%）和发热（529/1
531，34.53%）。119起暴发确定了病毒型别，其中GⅠ组（51/119，42.86%）和GⅣ组（45/119，37.82%）SaV较为常见，GⅣ组SaV引起
的暴发在2007年突然增加，GⅠ组导致的暴发则在2008、2011－2013年报告较多。 结论：
SaV暴发主要为发达国家报告，寒冷月份高发，常发生于托幼机构和长期看护机构，主要流行株为GⅠ组和GⅣ组。我国SaV暴发防控工作较为落后，需开展相应的培训工作，在有
条件的地区开展SaV暴发监测工作。.
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0254-6450.2019.01.019 
PMID: 30669739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

