
1. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 1988 Dec 16;100(24):811-3.

[Differential diagnosis and prognosis of primary and post-myocarditis
cardiomyopathy in childhood].

[Article in German]

Schmaltz AA(1), Sieverding L, Apitz J, Maisch B, Hort W.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung f체r p채diatrische Kardiologie, Universit채ts-Kinderklinik T체bingen,
Bundesrepublik Deutschland.

It is still difficult to differentiate between the various stages of myocarditis 
and primary dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Hence, we analyzed the history, as well
as the laboratory and virological data of 22 children with a dilated, poorly
functioning left ventricle, aged 2 months to 16.7 years (m = 4.2 y), on whom we
had performed endomyocardial biopsies about 4 months after the beginning of the
illness. Specimens were investigated by light and electron microscopy and, in
addition immunoserological (n = 15) and immunohistological investigations (n = 7)
were performed. On the basis of cellular infiltration in the histological
examination we diagnosed resolving/resolved myocarditis in 6 patients and DCM in 
15 patients. Previous respiratory infection or sudden onset were found in 40-50% 
of patients in both groups. Antimyolemmal and antisarcolemmal antibodies showed
no preference. Follow-up (3.1 +/- 2.8 years) of the patients showed equal
mortality (33% vs. 38%) in the post-myocarditis and DCM group. Complete
normalization of all findings in 3 patients of the DCM group makes the
classification among the post-myocarditis group probable, which would, then give 
a lower mortality rate (22% vs. 46%) and a chance of restitution in 55% of cases.
In any one specific case all the diagnostic methods do not allow undoubted
distinction between both entities. The prognosis of myocarditis seems to be
better than that of DCM in childhood.


PMID: 3070966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

