
1. Sci Adv. 2019 Feb 6;5(2):eaav0163. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aav0163. eCollection 2019 
Feb.

NDR2 promotes the antiviral immune response via facilitating TRIM25-mediated
RIG-I activation in macrophages.

Liu Z(1), Wu C(1), Pan Y(1), Liu H(1), Wang X(1), Yang Y(1), Gu M(1), Zhang Y(2),
Wang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310058, Zhejiang, China.
(2)The Children's Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310058, China.

Retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I), a pivotal cytosolic sensor, recognizes
viral RNAs to initiate antiviral innate immunity. However, posttranslational
regulation of RIG-I signaling is not well understood. We report here that nuclear
Dbf2-related kinase 2 (NDR2) functions as a crucial positive regulator of the
RIG-I-mediated antiviral immune response. Overexpression of NDR2 or its
kinase-inactive mutants potentiates RNA virus-induced production of type I
interferons and proinflammatory cytokines and dampens viral replication. NDR2
conditional knockout mice (Lysm+NDR2f/f) show an impaired antiviral immune
response. Mechanistically, NDR2 directly associates with RIG-I and TRIM25, thus
facilitating the RIG-I/TRIM25 complex and enhancing the TRIM25-mediated
K63-linked polyubiquitination of RIG-I, which is required for the RIG-I-mediated 
antiviral immune response. Furthermore, NDR2 expression is notably down-regulated
in peripheral blood from respiratory syncytial virus-infected patients and in
virus-infected macrophages. Collectively, these findings provide insights into
the function of NDR2 in antiviral immunity and its related clinical significance.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aav0163 
PMCID: PMC6365120
PMID: 30775439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

