
1. Plant Dis. 2006 Jun;90(6):834. doi: 10.1094/PD-90-0834C.

Occurrence of Arabis mosaic virus in Hostas in the United States.

Lockhart BEL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Minnesota, St. Paul 55108-6030.

Hostas (Hosta spp.) are one of the most widely grown and economically important
landscape perennials in the nursery industry in North America. Several viruses
including Hosta virus X (HVX), Tobacco rattle virus (TRV), Tobacco ringspot virus
(ToRSV), Tomato ringspot virus (TomRSV), Impatiens necrotic spot virus (INSV),
and Tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV) are known to occur in hostas (4). This
report confirms the occurrence of an additional virus, Arabis mosaic virus
(ArMV), in hostas in North America. This virus was first identified during the
summer of 2004 in Hosta fortunei 'Sharmon' in several garden centers in
Minneapolis and St. Paul, MN. Entire lots of this variety, numbering several
dozen plants, showed symptoms consisting of blanching of the foliage similar to
those caused by ToRSV and TomRSV infection (4). Symptoms persisted throughout the
growing season. Virus-like particles, 28 to 30 nm in diameter, were observed by
electron microscopy in partially purified extracts of symptomatic leaf tissue
following fixation with 5% glutaraldehyde and negative staining with 2% sodium
phosphotungstate, pH 7.0. Particles had an angular outline and some were
penetrated by stain. No other virus-like particles were observed in these
extracts. The particles were identified as those of ArMV. Identification was made
using double antibody sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (DAS-ELISA) and 
immunosorbent electron microscopy (ISEM) with antiserum to ArMV (PVAS-587)
obtained from the American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, VA. In the spring
and summer of 2005, ArMV was again identified as described above in 'Sharmon', H.
undulata 'Albomarginata' samples from Minnesota, Michigan, and Nebraska, and H.
'Marion Bachman' and H. 'Touch of Class' from two wholesale nurseries in
Minnesota. Symptoms in these hosta cultivars were similar to those observed in
'Sharmon' and were accompanied by stunting and leaf deformation. A portion of the
coat protein (CP) gene of the ArMV isolate from 'Sharmon', designated ArMV-H, was
amplified using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) with
ArMV-specific CP primers (3) and total RNA extracted with a RNeasy Plant Mini Kit
(Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA). Amplicons of the expected size (220 bp) were cloned 
and five clones were sequenced. Nucleotide sequence identities of the ArMV-H CP
sequence to corresponding ArMV databank entries varied from 94 to 88% (Genbank
Accession Nos. AY017339 and D10086 and X55460 and X81815, respectively).
Interestingly, the hosta ArMV isolate was not transmitted by mechanical
inoculation to diagnostically susceptible indicator plants (cucumber, tobacco,
and petunia) (2) or to hosta (H. undulata 'Albormarginata', H. 'Honeybells', and 
H. 'Royal Standard'). Testing by using ELISA and ISEM showed that 'Sharmon'
source plants contained high levels of ArMV antigen and virions, and a high
percentage of virions were not penetrated by negative stain, indicating that they
were not empty (i.e., devoid of RNA). It appears that ArMV-H may be transmitted
only vertically, (i.e., clonal propagation) and this raises some interesting
questions about the molecular basis of this anomaly. An isolate of ArMV from hops
was similarly reported to have a very restricted host range (1) suggesting a
possibility of a common mechanism of host range restriction. References: (1) K.
R. Bock. Ann. Appl. Biol. 57:431, 1966. (2) A. A. Brunt et al. Viruses of Plants.
CAB Internacional Mycological Institute, Wallingford, UK, 1995. (3) P. Kominek et
al. Acta Virol. 47:199, 2003. (4) B. E. L. Lockhart and S. Currier. Acta Hortic. 
432:62, 1996.

DOI: 10.1094/PD-90-0834C 
PMID: 30781273 

