
1. Plant Dis. 2002 Jun;86(6):697. doi: 10.1094/PDIS.2002.86.6.697B.

First Record of Turnip mosaic virus Infecting Watercress in Venezuela.

Marys E(1), Carballo O(1).

Author information: 
(1)IVIC, Centro de Microbiologia y Biologia Celular, Laboratorio de Virus de
Plantas, Apartado Postal 21827, Caracas 1020-A, Venezuela.

During 2001, watercress (Rorippa nasturtium-aquaticum) plants displayed in
vegetable markets located in the district capital, Caracas, showed severe leaf
distortion, chlorosis, and mosaic. Viral etiology was suspected, and several
plants were brought to the lab for further analyses. Electron microscopic studies
of leaf-dip preparations from symptomatic samples revealed flexuous viral
particles 750 nm long. Infected cells contained pinwheel inclusions and scrolls
typical of those associated with infection by a potyvirus. The virus was
sap-transmitted back to watercress, which developed symptoms identical to those
first observed. Disease symptoms were also reproduced on Nicotiana benthamiana
using mechanical inoculation with watercress-infected sap. All samples were
tested by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, using polyclonal antibodies (Agdia, 
Elkhart, IN) to Turnip mosaic virus (TuMV), the only potyvirus that has been
found infecting watercress plants (1). TuMV was detected in 88% of 100 samples
taken from 18 markets on a single day. Symptoms were noted in every market when
visited once a month during a 6-month period. The high percentage of
TuMV-infected watercress in the 18 local markets (all 10 to 11 km from watercress
fields) makes further epidemiological studies desirable. To our knowledge, this
is the first report of TuMV infection of watercress in Venezuela. References: (1)
A. Brunt et al. Viruses of Plants. CAB International, Wallingford, Oxon, UK.
1996.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS.2002.86.6.697B 
PMID: 30823264 

