
1. Plant Dis. 2001 Apr;85(4):417-422. doi: 10.1094/PDIS.2001.85.4.417.

A New Badnavirus in Ribes Species, its Detection by PCR, and its Close
Association with Gooseberry Vein Banding Disease.

Jones AT(1), McGavin WJ(1), Geering ADW(2), Lockhart BEL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Crop Research Institute, Invergowrie, Dundee DD2 5DA, Scotland, UK.
(2)Queensland Horticulture Institute, Department of Primary Industries, 80 Meiers
Road, In-dooroopilly, Queensland 4068, Australia.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Minnesota, 495 Borlaug Hall, 1991
Upper Buford Circle, St. Paul 55108.

Gooseberry vein banding disease (GVBD) affects Ribes species and cultivars
worldwide. It is the second most important virus-like disease in these crops
after black currant reversion disease. In this paper, we describe a bacilliform
virus, Gooseberry vein banding associated virus (GVBAV), which is associated
closely with GVBD, and provide evidence that GVBAV is a distinct species within
the genus Badnavirus. Purified GVBAV particles were ca. 120 Ã— 30 nm in size and
contained dsDNA. The sequence of a 1.5-kb DNA fragment amplified from viral
genomic DNA was similar to those of a wide range of badnaviruses and contained
motifs characteristic of the RNase H domain of the badnavirus open reading frame 
(ORF) III polyprotein. Phylogenetic analyses suggest that GVBAV is most closely
related to Spiraea yellow leaf spot virus. Using sequence derived from the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified DNA fragment, virus-specific primers
were designed. These primers were used in PCR to assay for GVBAV in a range of
Ribes germplasm affected with GVBD, with other unrelated virus-like diseases and 
viruses found in Ribes, and in healthy plants. GVBAV was detected in all of 58
GVBD-affected plants from diverse sources, but not from healthy Ribes plants nor 
from plants infected with other viruses.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS.2001.85.4.417 
PMID: 30831975 

