
1. J Anim Sci. 2019 Apr 29;97(5):2015-2024. doi: 10.1093/jas/skz102.

Oral hydration therapy with water and bovine respiratory disease incidence
affects rumination behavior, rumen pH, and rumen temperature in high-risk, newly 
received beef calves.

Tomczak DJ(1), Samuelson KL(1), Jennings JS(2), Richeson JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Sciences, West Texas A&M University, Canyon, TX.
(2)Texas A&M AgriLife Research, Amarillo, TX.

The study objectives were to determine the effect of oral hydration therapy and
bovine respiratory disease (BRD) on rumination behavior, rumen pH, and rumen
temperature. A random subset of high-risk, auction-sourced bulls from 3 truckload
blocks (initial BW = 188.9 ± 19.1 kg) were fitted with a collar containing a
3-axis accelerometer to quantify rumination time and activity (n = 58) and
administered a rumen pH and temperature data logging bolus (n = 33). At arrival, 
subset calves (n = 2 per pen) were balanced across treatment pens (n = 15 per
treatment; n = 10 animals per pen) and randomized to receive 0.57 L water/45.4 kg
BW from a modified oral drenching apparatus (H2O) or no water administration
(CON). Standard arrival processing procedures were implemented including surgical
castration. Modified-live virus respiratory vaccination was delayed until day 28.
Technicians assigned a clinical illness score (CIS) daily; calves with CIS ≥ 2
and rectal temperature ≥ 40 °C were considered a BRD case (RCASE) and treated
with an antimicrobial. The fixed effect of BRD cases vs. nontreated cohorts
(RCON) was determined retrospectively using data from the accelerometer collar (n
= 19 and 29) and rumen bolus (n = 12 and 21, for RCASE and RCON, respectively).
Daily means and hourly means across days throughout the 56-d observation period
were generated. Fixed effects were analyzed using the mixed model procedure with 
repeated measures. Daily rumen temperature was altered (P = 0.04) such that peak 
rumen temperature occurred earlier for H2O, whereas CON had increased (P ≤ 0.01) 
rumen temperature following delayed vaccination on day 28. Calves diagnosed with 
BRD had a transiently decreased (P = 0.04) active minutes between days 9 and 32, 
decreased (P < 0.01) active minutes between 0800 and 2000 h, decreased (P < 0.01)
rumination time between 2000 and 0400 h, greater (P < 0.01) rumen temperature
until delayed vaccination on day 28, and greater (P < 0.01) hourly rumen
temperature between 0900 and 0300, and altered (P < 0.01) rumen pH. Earlier peak 
rumen temperature observed in H2O may indicate physiological modification
enabling a more pronounced inflammatory response. Differences in rumination
behavior and activity may be useful for early BRD detection.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
American Society of Animal Science. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jas/skz102 
PMCID: PMC6488335
PMID: 30911760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

