
1. Am J Case Rep. 2019 Mar 30;20:412-418. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.913856.

Angiocentric Centrofacial Lymphoma as a Challenging Diagnosis in an Elderly Man.

V치zquez-Armenta G(1), G칩mez-Garnica MF(1), Mondrag칩n-Cervantes MI(1),
Gonz치lez-Lucano LR(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Guadalajara,
Jalisco, Mexico.

BACKGROUND Angiocentric centrofacial lymphomas, now known as nasal-type
extranodal natural killer T-cell lymphomas, are neoplasms of highly destructive
characteristics that mainly affect the nasal cavity and palate. The most frequent
clinical presentation includes fever, weight loss, nasal obstruction, epistaxis, 
nasal or facial edema, as well as necrotic ulcers in the nasal cavity, gums, and 
palate. It has been found to have an important association with the Epstein-Barr 
virus. Diagnostic pathology could be difficult due to the typical widespread
tissue necrosis. CASE REPORT A 72-year-old Caucasian male sought medical
attention with a chief complaint of nasal obstruction for the past 3 years, which
only responded partially to unspecific treatment. He also presented with
intermittent fever and nocturnal hyperhidrosis. Physical examination with
rhinoscopy demonstrated a deviated septum, congestive turbines, and fragile and
pale mucous membrane with yellowish, thick mucus. The pathology report described 
an angiocentric centrofacial lymphoma and a positive serology for Epstein-Barr
virus. CONCLUSIONS The objective of this case report was to show that this
illness represents a diagnostic challenge for the treating physician. It may be
concluded that despite the poor prognosis of the disease, this particular case
showed slower evolution and the patient remained stable despite multiple
consecutive complications.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.913856 
PMCID: PMC6454582
PMID: 30926768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

