
1. Cureus. 2019 Feb 5;11(2):e4015. doi: 10.7759/cureus.4015.

Clinical Profile and Visual Outcomes of Ocular Syphilis: A Five-year Review in
Hospital Universiti Sains, Malaysia.

Ghanimi Zamli AK(1), Irma Ngah NS(1), Chew-Ean T(1), Muhammed J(1), Wan Hitam
WH(1), Hussein A(1), Zunaina E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kota Bharu, MYS.

Introduction Ocular syphilis is a sight-threatening condition. It can occur at
any stage of syphilis infection, which present either with acute inflammation
during the primary, secondary, and early latent stages or with chronic
inflammation during tertiary infection, affecting virtually every ocular
structure. This study was to report on the clinical presentation of ocular
syphilis that presented to eye clinic Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia.
Methodology This was a retrospective study where medical records of ocular
syphilis patients who attended eye clinic in Hospital Universiti Sains Malaysia
from January 2013 to June 2017 were reviewed. Results A total of 10 patients (13 
eyes) with ocular syphilis were identified out of 106 cases that presented with
ocular inflammation. The mean age of presentation was 69.8 ± 6.4 years and seven 
of them (70%) were female. All patients were Malay and human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) was negative. The ocular manifestations included panuveitis (four
eyes, 30.8%), anterior uveitis (two eyes, 15.4%), posterior uveitis (seven eyes, 
53.8%) and optic neuritis (two eyes, 15.4%). Seven (53.8%) eyes presented with
visual acuity of worse than 6/60, five (38.5%) eyes had visual acuity between
6/15 to 6/60, and one (7.7%) eye had visual acuity of 6/12 or better. Nine
patients received an intravenous benzylpenicillin regime and one patient received
an intramuscular penicillin injection. Out of 13 eyes affected,
11 (84.6%) eyes had improved visual acuity of at least one Snellen line after
treatment. Visual acuity of 6/12 or better increased to four (30.8%) eyes.
Conclusions Posterior uveitis was the commonest presentation of ocular syphilis
in HIV-negative patients. Early detection and treatment of ocular syphilis can
result in resolution of inflammation and improvement of vision.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.4015 
PMCID: PMC6453624
PMID: 31007973 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

