
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2019 Apr 26;13(4):e0007316. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0007316. eCollection 2019 Apr.

Vaccination with a chikungunya virus-like particle vaccine exacerbates disease in
aged mice.

Arévalo MT(1)(2), Huang Y(1), Jones CA(1), Ross TM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vaccines and Immunology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United 
States of America.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United
States of America.

INTRODUCTION: Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is a re-emerging pathogen responsible for
causing outbreaks of febrile disease accompanied with debilitating joint pain.
Symptoms typically persist for two weeks, but more severe and chronic chikungunya
illnesses have been reported, especially in the elderly. Currently, there are no 
licensed vaccines or antivirals against CHIKV available. In this study, we
combined a CHIK virus-like particle (VLP) vaccine with different adjuvants to
enhance immunogenicity and protection in both, adult and aged mice.
METHODS: CHIK VLP-based vaccines were tested in 6-8-week-old (adult) and
18-24-month-old (aged) female C57BL/6J mice. Formulations contained CHIK VLP
alone or adjuvants: QuilA, R848, or Imject Alum. Mice were vaccinated three times
via intramuscular injections. CHIKV-specific antibody responses were
characterized by IgG subclass using ELISA, and by microneutralization assays. In 
addition, CHIKV infections were characterized in vaccinated and non-vaccinated
adult mice and compared to aged mice.
RESULTS: In adult mice, CHIKV infection of the right hind foot induced
significant swelling, which peaked by day 7 post-infection at approximately 170% 
of initial size. Viral titers peaked at 2.53 × 1010 CCID50/ml on day 2
post-infection. Mice vaccinated with CHIK VLP-based vaccines developed robust
anti-CHIKV-specific IgG antibody responses that were capable of neutralizing
CHIKV in vitro. CHIK VLP alone or CHIK plus QuilA administered by IM injections
protected 100% of mice against CHIKV. In contrast, the antibody responses
elicited by the VLP-based vaccines were attenuated in aged mice, with negligible 
neutralizing antibody titers detected. Unvaccinated, aged mice were resistant to 
CHIKV infection, while vaccination with CHIKV VLPs exacerbated disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Unadjuvanted CHIK VLP vaccination elicits immune responses that
protect 100% of adult mice against CHIKV infection. However, an improved
vaccine/adjuvant combination is still necessary to enhance the protective
immunity against CHIKV in the aged.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0007316 
PMCID: PMC6485612
PMID: 31026260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

