
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Jun 4;116(23):11460-11469. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1813909116. Epub 2019 May 21.

A glycan shield on chimpanzee CD4 protects against infection by primate
lentiviruses (HIV/SIV).

Warren CJ(1), Meyerson NR(1), Stabell AC(1), Fattor WT(1), Wilkerson GK(2),
Sawyer SL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, BioFrontiers
Institute, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80303.
(2)Department of Comparative Medicine, Michale E. Keeling Center for Comparative 
Medicine and Research, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Bastrop, TX 78602.
(3)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, BioFrontiers
Institute, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80303;
ssawyer@colorado.EDU.

Pandemic HIV-1 (group M) emerged following the cross-species transmission of a
simian immunodeficiency virus from chimpanzees (SIVcpz) to humans. Primate
lentiviruses (HIV/SIV) require the T cell receptor CD4 to enter into target
cells. By surveying the sequence and function of CD4 in 50 chimpanzee
individuals, we find that all chimpanzee CD4 alleles encode a fixed,
chimpanzee-specific substitution (34T) that creates a glycosylation site on the
virus binding surface of the CD4 receptor. Additionally, a single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) has arisen in chimpanzee CD4 (68T) that creates a second
glycosylation site on the same virus-binding interface. This substitution is not 
yet fixed, but instead alleles containing this SNP are still circulating within
chimpanzee populations. Thus, all allelic versions of chimpanzee CD4 are singly
glycosylated at the virus binding surface, and some allelic versions are doubly
glycosylated. Doubly glycosylated forms of chimpanzee CD4 reduce HIV-1 and SIVcpz
infection by as much as two orders of magnitude. Full restoration of virus
infection in cells bearing chimpanzee CD4 requires reversion of both threonines
at sites 34 and 68, destroying both of the glycosylation sites, suggesting that
the effects of the glycans are additive. Differentially glycosylated CD4
receptors were biochemically purified and used in neutralization assays and
microscale thermophoresis to show that the glycans on chimpanzee CD4 reduce
binding affinity with the lentiviral surface glycoprotein, Env. These glycans
create a shield that protects CD4 from being engaged by viruses, demonstrating a 
powerful form of host resistance against deadly primate lentiviruses.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1813909116 
PMCID: PMC6561292
PMID: 31113887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

