
1. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2019 Jul/Aug;25(4):390-397. doi:
10.1097/PHH.0000000000001003.

Developing Safe Syringe Exchange Programs: Role of the North Carolina Division of
Public Health.

Novick LF(1), Staley D, Novick CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, East Carolina School of Medicine, Greenville,
North Carolina (Dr Novick); Caribbean Operations, Association of State and
Territorial Health Officials (ASTHO), Arlington, Virginia (Mr Staley); and
Formerly, Medical & Health Sciences Foundation, East Carolina University,
Greenville, North Carolina (Ms Novick).

Syringe exchange programs became legal in North Carolina on July 11, 2016. A
combination of forces led to this progressive public health measure, including
advocacy of the State Health Official, in a state characterized by a conservative
political climate. Data collected by the division of public health were a key
contributor to the initiative. Nearly 5 North Carolinians died each day from
unintentional medication or drug overdose. High rates of coinfection including
hepatitis B and C, human immunodeficiency virus, and endocarditis were shown to
have substantial economic consequences. The North Carolina Harm Reduction
Coalition and use of Moral Foundations Theory in crafting messages were important
in influencing legislation. North Carolina now has 30 active syringe exchange
programs serving 40 counties. Individuals using intravenous drugs who take
advantage of these syringe exchange programs are provided with clean needles to
not only help prevent the spread of illness but also learn more about safe health
practices.

DOI: 10.1097/PHH.0000000000001003 
PMID: 31136513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

