
1. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc. 2019 Nov 5;222:117181. doi:
10.1016/j.saa.2019.117181. Epub 2019 May 28.

Identification of new spectral signatures from hepatitis C virus infected human
sera.

Naseer K(1), Saleem M(2), Ali S(3), Mirza B(1), Qazi J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biological Sciences, Qauid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(2)Agri. & Biophotonics Division, National Institute of Laser and Optronics
(NILOP), Lehtrar Road, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(3)Directorate General National Repository, P.O. Box 1175, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(4)Faculty of Biological Sciences, Qauid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan. 
Electronic address: javariaq@yahoo.com.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is one of the leading causes of morbidity and
mortality worldwide. Mortality linked with HCV infection can be lowered with
effective and prompt diagnosis in early stages of infection. In this study
potential of Raman spectroscopy to differentiate between healthy and HCV infected
serum samples was investigated. Clear differences were observed in the Raman
spectra of HCV infected and healthy sera samples. Using the analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) and t-test (p < 0.001) on Raman spectra of diseased and healthy samples, 
we observed eleven unique Raman bands at 676, 825, 853, 936, 1029, 1105, 1155,
1305, 1620, 1654 and 1757 cm-1 associated with only HCV infected sera and have
not been reported in earlier studies. In addition, six Raman bands at 556, 585,
716, 815, 1273 and 1142 cm-1were observed in healthy sera only. Three Raman bands
at 1330, 1526 and 1572 cm-1 were observed in both type of samples but their
intensity was drastically reduced in diseased samples. Various multivariate
analysis techniques were employed to demonstrate the robustness of the results.
We employed multivariate and unsupervised principal component analysis (PCA) in
conjunction with supervised classification linear discriminant analysis (LDA),
using ten-fold jackknife cross-validation, in order to develop effective
diagnostic algorithm technique (PCA-LDA). Our PCA-LDA model yielded sufficient
sensitivity and specificity i.e. correctly identified all infected samples
included in this study. Ours results indicate that these unique Raman bands have 
the potential to be used as biomarkers for optical diagnosis of HCV infection.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.saa.2019.117181 
PMID: 31202032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

