
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2019 Jun 29;7(3). pii: E57. doi: 10.3390/vaccines7030057.

Induction of Broad and Polyfunctional HIV-1-Specific T Cell Responses by the
Multiepitopic Protein TMEP-B Vectored by MVA Virus.

Perdiguero B(1), Sánchez-Corzo C(1), S Sorzano CO(2), Mediavilla P(1), Saiz L(1),
Esteban M(3), Gómez CE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CNB-CSIC), Campus
de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Biocomputing Unit, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas (CNB-CSIC), Campus de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid,
Spain.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CNB-CSIC), Campus
de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain. mesteban@cnb.csic.es.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CNB-CSIC), Campus
de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain. cegomez@cnb.csic.es.

A human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)
vaccine able to induce long-lasting immunity remains a major challenge. We
previously designed a T cell multiepitopic immunogen including protective
conserved epitopes from HIV-1 Gag, Pol and Nef proteins (TMEP-B), that induced
potent HIV-1-specific CD8 T cells when vectored by DNA and combined with the
vaccine candidate modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA)-B. Here, we described the 
vectorization of TMEP-B in MVA (MVA-TMEP) and evaluated the T cell immunogenicity
profile elicited in mice when administered in homologous (MVA/MVA) or
heterologous (DNA/MVA) prime/boost vector regimens or using homologous or
heterologous inserts. The heterologous vector regimen was superior to the
homologous protocol in inducing T cell responses. DNA-TMEP-primed animals boosted
with MVA-TMEP or MVA-B exhibited the highest magnitudes of HIV-1-specific CD8,
CD4 and T follicular helper (Tfh) cells, with MVA-TMEP significantly expanding
Gag-specific CD8 T cell responses. In the homologous vector regimen, all groups
exhibited similar HIV-1-specific CD8 and CD4 T cell responses, but both
MVA-B/MVA-B and MVA-TMEP/MVA-TMEP combinations elicited higher Gag-Pol-Nef
(GPN)-specific CD8 T cell responses compared to MVA-TMEP/MVA-B. Our results
revealed an enhanced induction of HIV-1-specific T cell responses by TMEP-B when 
vectored in both DNA and MVA, and supported their use in combined prime/boost
strategies for HIV-1 prevention and/or therapy.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines7030057 
PMCID: PMC6789790
PMID: 31261918 

