
1. Clin Liver Dis. 2019 Aug;23(3):557-572. doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2019.04.005. Epub 2019
May 24.

HBV/HDV Coinfection: A Challenge for Therapeutics.

Koh C(1), Da BL(2), Glenn JS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive, Building 10, Room
9B-16, MSC 1800, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address:
christopher.koh@nih.gov.
(2)Digestive Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive, CRC, Room
4-5722, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, CCSR Building, Room 3115A, 269 Campus Drive,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Department of Medicine Microbiology & Immunology,
Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, CCSR Building, Rm. 3115A, 269 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Chronic hepatitis D (CHD) results from an infection with the hepatitis B virus
and hepatitis D virus (HDV). CHD is the most severe form of human viral
hepatitis. Current treatment options consist of interferon alfa, which is
effective only in a minority of patients. Study of HDV molecular virology has
resulted in new approaches entering clinical trials, with phase-3 studies the
most advanced. These include the entry inhibitor bulevirtide, the nucleic acid
polymer REP 2139-Ca, the farnesyltransferase inhibitor lonafarnib, and pegylated 
interferon lambda. This article summarizes the available data on these emerging
therapeutics.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cld.2019.04.005 
PMCID: PMC6659751
PMID: 31266627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

