
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2019 Aug 2;13(8):e0007601. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0007601.
eCollection 2019 Aug.

Partial cross-protection between Japanese encephalitis virus genotype I and III
in mice.

Wei J(1), Wang X(1), Zhang J(1), Guo S(1), Pang L(1), Shi K(1), Liu K(1), Shao
D(1), Qiu Y(1), Liu L(2), Wid√©n F(2), Li B(1), Ma Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Swine Infectious Diseases, Shanghai Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science, Shanghai, PR China.
(2)Department of Virology, Immunobiology and Parasitology (VIP), The National
Veterinary Institute (SVA), Uppsala, Sweden.

Genotype III (GIII) Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) predominance has gradually 
been replaced by genotype I (GI) over the last 20 years in many Asian countries. 
This genotype shift raises concerns about the protective efficacy of Japanese
encephalitis (JE) vaccines, as all of the currently licensed JE vaccines are
derived from GIII strains. In this study, we conducted vaccination-challenge
protection assays to evaluate the cross-protective efficacy of GI- or
GIII-derived vaccines against the challenge of a heterologous genotype using a
mouse challenge model. Titration of the neutralizing antibodies elicited by
SA14-14-2 live-attenuated JE vaccine (SA14-14-2 vaccine), a GIII-derived vaccine,
indicated that the titer of neutralizing antibodies specific to heterologous
genotype GI stain was significantly lower than that specific to homologous
genotype GIII strain in both pigs and mice immunized with the SA14-14-2 vaccine. 
Vaccination of mice with SA14-14-2 vaccine or a GIII-inactivated vaccine at high 
and medium doses completely protected vaccinated mice against challenge with the 
homologous genotype GIII strains, but failed to provide the vaccinated mice
complete protection against the challenge of heterologous genotype GI strains.
The protection rates against GI strain challenge were 60%-80%, showing that these
vaccines were partially protective against GI strain challenge. Additionally,
vaccination of mice with a GI-inactivated vaccine conferred 100% protection
against the challenge of homologous genotype GI strains, but 50%-90% protection
against the challenge of heterologous genotype GIII strains, showing a reduced
protective efficacy of a GI-derived vaccine against GIII strain challenge.
Overall, these observations demonstrated a partial cross-protection between GI
and GIII strains and suggested a potential need for new JE vaccine strategies,
including options like a bivalent vaccine, to control both genotype infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0007601 
PMCID: PMC6693775
PMID: 31374086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

