
1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2019 Dec;76(24):4869-4886. doi: 10.1007/s00018-019-03255-6.
Epub 2019 Aug 3.

Dual CCR5/CCR2 targeting: opportunities for the cure of complex disorders.

Fantuzzi L(1), Tagliamonte M(2), Gauzzi MC(3), Lopalco L(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Global Health, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. 
laura.fantuzzi@iss.it.
(2)Cancer Immunoregulation Unit, Istituto Nazionale Tumori- IRCCS-"Fond G.
Pascale", Naples, Italy.
(3)National Center for Global Health, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(4)Immunobiology of HIV Unit, Division Immunology, Transplantation and Infectious
Diseases, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. lopalco.lucia@hsr.it.

The chemokine system mediates acute inflammation by driving leukocyte migration
to damaged or infected tissues. However, elevated expression of chemokines and
their receptors can contribute to chronic inflammation and malignancy. Thus,
great effort has been taken to target these molecules. The first hint of the
druggability of the chemokine system was derived from the role of chemokine
receptors in HIV infection. CCR5 and CXCR4 function as essential co-receptors for
HIV entry, with the former accounting for most new HIV infections worldwide. Not 
by chance, an anti-CCR5 compound, maraviroc, was the first FDA-approved chemokine
receptor-targeting drug. CCR5, by directing leukocytes to sites of inflammation
and regulating their activation, also represents an important player in the
inflammatory response. This function is shared with CCR2 and its selective ligand
CCL2, which constitute the primary chemokine axis driving the recruitment of
monocytes/macrophages to inflammatory sites. Both receptors are indeed involved
in the pathogenesis of several immune-mediated diseases, and dual CCR5/CCR2
targeting is emerging as a more efficacious strategy than targeting either
receptor alone in the treatment of complex human disorders. In this review, we
focus on the distinctive and complementary contributions of CCR5 and CCR2/CCL2 in
HIV infection, multiple sclerosis, liver fibrosis and associated hepatocellular
carcinoma. The emerging therapeutic approaches based on the inhibition of these
chemokine axes are highlighted.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-019-03255-6 
PMCID: PMC6892368
PMID: 31377844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

