
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Aug 6;9(1):11402. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-47767-4.

Distribution of zoonotic variegated squirrel bornavirus 1 in naturally infected
variegated and Prevost's squirrels.

Petzold J(1), van den Brand JMA(2)(3), Nobach D(4), Hoffmann B(5), Hoffmann D(5),
Fast C(5), Reusken CBEM(2)(6), van Run PRWA(2), Schlottau K(5), Beer M(5), Herden
C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Pathology, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, Germany.
jana.petzold@vetmed.uni-giessen.de.
(2)Department of Viroscience, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathobiology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Institute of Veterinary Pathology, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, Germany.
(5)Institute of Diagnostic Virology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Greifswald,
Germany.
(6)National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, The
Netherlands.

Recently, the zoonotic capacity of the newly discovered variegated squirrel
bornavirus 1 (VSBV-1) was confirmed in humans with a lethal encephalitis.
Transmission to humans occurred by variegated and Prevost's squirrels as presumed
reservoir hosts but possible ways of virus shedding and the route of infection
still need to be elucidated. Thus, the tissue distribution of VSBV-1 antigen and 
RNA was investigated in detail via immunohistochemistry (IHC) in six variegated
and eight Prevost's squirrels and by in situ hybridisation (ISH) in one Prevost's
squirrel, respectively. VSBV-1 antigen and RNA positive cells were most numerous 
in the nervous system and were also found in nearly all tissues and different
cell types indicating a broad organ and cell tropism of VSBV-1. Presence of
VSBV-1 in several organs might indicate potential virus shedding via various
routes and implies the risk of intra- and interspecies transmission,
respectively.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-47767-4 
PMCID: PMC6684602
PMID: 31388038 

