
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2019 Dec;76:104003. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.104003. Epub
2019 Aug 16.

Fas and FasL promoter polymorphisms and susceptibility to HBV infection: A
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Mohammadi A(1), Salehi M(2), Khanbabaei H(3), Sheikhesmaeili F(4), Tajik N(5),
Alavian SM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Research Institute for Health
Development, Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran. Electronic
address: Asadollah.Mohammadi@muk.ac.ir.
(2)Research Center for Patient Safety, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences,
Mashhad, Iran; Clinical Research Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad University of
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. Electronic address: Salehim@mums.ac.ir.
(3)Medical Physics Department, Faculty of Medicine, Ahvaz Jundishapur University 
of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran. Electronic address: khanbabaei.h@ajums.ac.ir.
(4)Liver and Digestive Research Center, Research Institute for Health
Development, Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran. Electronic
address: f.shikhesmaeli@muk.ac.ir.
(5)Immunology Research Center (IRC), Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran; Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: tajik.n@iums.ac.ir.
(6)Baqiyatallah Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases (BRCGL), 
Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
alavian@thc.ir.

Apoptosis is a universal cellular defense mechanism against senescent, damaged,
genetically mutated, or virally-infected cells. It also is critical for the
maintenance of liver health. Fas and FasL system act as a major death pathway
that triggers apoptosis cascade in the liver. In this systematic review and
meta-analysis, we aimed to investigate the relationship between four major
polymorphisms of Fas and FasL genes with susceptibility to or clearance of HBV
infection. All the eligible studies were extracted from PubMed and Scopus with no
date and language restriction. ORs with 95% CIs were used to evaluate the
strength of the association based on the following genetic models: (1) the
allelic, (2) the homozygote, (3) the dominant, and (4) the recessive models.
Totally 7 related articles were included in this meta-analysis; 5 studies of 7
related articles investigated FasL -844C/T (rs763110) polymorphism, 4 studies
investigated FasL IVS2nt-124, 6 studies investigated Fas -670 A/G (rs1800682),
and 4 studies investigated Fas -1377 A/G (rs2234767) polymorphism. This
meta-analysis showed that there is no statistically significant association
between the risk or clearance of HBV infection and four studied Fas and FasL
polymorphisms in their allelic comparison or genetic models. Fas -670, Fas -1377,
FasL -124, and FasL -844 polymorphisms did not show any significant association
with the clearance or risk of HBV infection. Therefore, it seems that
susceptibility to HBV infection or clearance of it is not affected by Fas and
FasL genetic polymorphisms. But, to reach a definitive conclusion, further
studies with a larger sample size of different ethnicity are still needed.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.104003 
PMID: 31425784  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

