
1. Virus Res. 2019 Oct 15;272:197726. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2019.197726. Epub 2019
Aug 17.

Successful establishment of a reverse genetic system for QX-type infectious
bronchitis virus and technical improvement of the rescue procedure.

Zhao Y(1), Cheng J(1), Xu G(1), Thiel V(2), Zhang G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology of the Ministry of Agriculture, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, China.
(2)Institute for Virology and Immunology, 3012, Bern, Switzerland; Department of 
Infectious Diseases and Pathobiology, Vetsuisse Faculty Bern, University of Bern,
Switzerland. Electronic address: Volker.thiel@vetsuisse.unibe.ch.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology of the Ministry of Agriculture, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, China.
Electronic address: zhanggz@cau.edu.cn.

In this study, a pathogenic avian infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) QX-type
strain YN was successfully rescued by vaccinia virus based reverse genetic
technology. Ten fragments contiguously spanning the complete IBV genome were
amplified and cloned into the vaccinia virus genome by homologous recombination. 
The full-length genomic cDNA was transcribed in vitro, and its transcript was
transfected into BHK-21/N cells that could stably express IBV N protein. At 48 h 
post transfection, the culture medium was harvested and inoculated into
10-day-old specific-pathogen-free embryonated chicken eggs to replicate the
rescued virus. This strategy was chosen to facilitate the rescue procedure and to
ensure that the recombinant rYN virus will not require any cell culture
adaptations. After only one in ovo passage, the recombinant YN virus (rYN) was
successfully recovered and confirmed to possess the introduced silent marker
mutation in its genome. Biological characteristics of rYN such as the EID50,
TCID50, replication in ovo, and replication kinetcs in vitro were tested and all 
were similar to its parental strain YN. Our findings demonstrate the successful
construction of highly-pathogenic QX-type IBV using a modified rescue procedure, 
allowing for future studies of the molecular biology and pathogenicity of IBV
field strains.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2019.197726 
PMCID: PMC7114641
PMID: 31430502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

