
1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2019 Aug 29;12:202. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2019.00202.
eCollection 2019.

EK7 Regulates NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation and Neuroinflammation Post-traumatic 
Brain Injury.

Chen Y(1)(2), Meng J(1)(3), Bi F(1)(3), Li H(3), Chang C(1), Ji C(1), Liu W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Central Laboratory, Xi'an Peihua University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Medical
University, Xi'an, China.
(3)Department of Basic Medical Science Research Center, Shaanxi Fourth People's
Hospital, Xi'an, China.

Erratum in
    Front Mol Neurosci. 2019 Oct 15;12:247.

As one of the most common causes of mortality and disability, traumatic brain
injury (TBI) is a huge psychological and economic burden to patients, families,
and societies worldwide. Neuroinflammation reduction may be a favorable option to
alleviate secondary brain injuries and ameliorate the outcome of TBI. The
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain, leucine-rich repeat and pyrin
domain-containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome, has been shown to be involved in TBI.
NIMA-related kinase 7 (NEK7) has been verified as an essential mediator of NLRP3 
inflammasome activation that is recruited upstream of the formation of
inflammasomes in response to NLRP3 activators. However, the underlying mechanism 
by which NEK7 operates post-TBI remains undefined. In this study, we performed
both in vivo and in vitro experiments. Using an in vivo mouse TBI model, mice
were administered an intracerebroventricular injection of NEK7-shRNA virus. For
the in vitro analysis, primary cortical neurons with NEK7-shRNA were stimulated
with lipopolysaccharide (LPS)/ATP or potassium (K+). We evaluated the effects of 
NEK7 knock-down on neurological deficits, NLRP3 inflammasomes, caspase-1
activation, and neuronal injury. During the 0-168 h post-TBI period in vivo, NEK7
and NLRP3 inflammasome activation increased in what appeared to be a
time-dependent manner. As well as pyroptosis-related markers, caspase-1
activation (p20) and interleukin-1β (IL-1β) activation (p17) were up-regulated.
NEK7 down-regulation attenuated neurological deficits, NLRP3 inflammasomes,
caspase-1 activation, and neuronal injury. The same phenomena were observed
during the in vitro experiments. Furthermore, NEK7 knock-down suppressed NLRP3
inflammasome activation and pyroptosis, which were triggered by K+ efflux, and
the LPS + ATP-triggered NEK7-NLRP3 complex was reversed in primary cortical
neurons placed in 50 mM K+ medium. Collectively, the data demonstrated that NEK7,
as a modulator, regulates NLRP3 inflammasomes and downstream neuroinflammation in
response to K+ efflux, through NEK7-NLRP3 assembly, pro-caspase-1 recruitment,
caspase-1 activation, and pyroptosis in nerve injuries, post-TBI. NEK7 may be a
potential therapeutic target for attenuating neuroinflammation and nerve injury
post-TBI.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2019.00202 
PMCID: PMC6727020
PMID: 31555089 

