
1. Biochemistry. 1987 Jun 16;26(12):3619-26.

Backbone dynamics of a model membrane protein: assignment of the carbonyl carbon 
13C NMR resonances in detergent-solubilized M13 coat protein.

Henry GD(1), Weiner JH, Sykes BD.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Group in Protein Structure and Function, University
of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

The major coat protein of the filamentous bacteriophage M13 is a 50-residue
amphiphilic polypeptide which is inserted, as an integral membrane-spanning
protein, in the inner membrane of the Escherichia coli host during infection. 13C
was incorporated biosynthetically into a total of 23 of the peptide carbonyls
using labeled amino acids (alanine, glycine, lysine, phenylalanine, and proline).
The structure and dynamics of carbonyl-labeled M13 coat protein were monitored by
13C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. Assignment of many resonances 
was achieved by using protease digestion, pH titration, or labeling of the
peptide bond with both 13C and 15N. The carbonyl region of the natural-abundance 
13C NMR spectrum of M13 coat protein in sodium dodecyl sulfate solution shows
approximately eight backbone carbonyl resonances with line widths much narrower
than the rest. Three of these more mobile residues correspond to assigned peaks
(glycine-3, lysine-48, and alanine-49) in the individual amino acid spectra, and 
another almost certainly arises from glutamic acid-2. A ninth residue, alanine-1,
also gives rise to a very narrow carbonyl resonance if the pH is well above or
below the pKa of the terminal amino group. These data suggest that only about
four residues at either end of the protein experience large-amplitude spatial
fluctuations; the rest of the molecule is essentially rigid on the time scale of 
the overall rotational tumbling of the protein-detergent complex. The relative
exposure of different regions of detergent-bound protein was monitored by limited
digestion with proteinase K.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00386a055 
PMID: 3307912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

