
1. Am J Vet Res. 1987 Nov;48(11):1555-8.

Early embryonic death in heifers after inoculation with bovine herpesvirus-1 and 
reactivation of latent virus in reproductive tissues.

Miller JM(1), Van der Maaten MJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Animal Disease Center, Agricultural Research Service, USDA, Ames, IA 
50010.

Thirteen crossbred heifers seronegative for bovine herpesvirus-1 (BHV-1) were
bred naturally to a seronegative bull. Eight heifers were inoculated with BHV-1, 
IV, on postbreeding day (PBD) 7 or 14. Viremia was detected in heifers 1 through 
7, and virus also was isolated from nasal and vaginal secretions of heifers 2, 3,
4, 6, and 7. The pregnancy status of all heifers was monitored from PBD 14 to PBD
35 by determining plasma progesterone concentrations at 1- to 3-day intervals.
Decreased progesterone values indicated that pregnancy was not maintained in
BHV-1-inoculated heifers 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, and 8. The postbreeding interestrual
period of these 6 heifers was normal or only slightly longer than would be
expected in the absence of conception. All 5 noninoculated heifers were pregnant 
on PBD 35. Three to 4 months after acute infection, all BHV-1 inoculated heifers 
were treated with dexamethasone for 5 days and were euthanatized. Nasal and
vaginal swab specimens were tested daily during dexamethasone treatment for
excreted BHV-1, and reproductive tissues and adrenal glands were collected at
necropsy for virologic tests and histopathologic examination. Virus reactivation 
was demonstrated in heifers 2 through 8. The BHV-1 isolations were made from
adrenal glands of heifers 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, and 8, vaginal swab specimens of heifers
2, 3, 4, 6, and 7, and nasal swab specimens of heifers 2, 3, and 6. Only heifer 3
had virus in reproductive tissues; these isolations were made from ovary,
infundibulum, and uterine tube, but not from endometrium.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT
250 WORDS)


PMID: 3434897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

