
1. J Bacteriol. 1978 Mar;133(3):1181-9.

Outer membrane proteins of Escherichia coli. VII. Evidence that
bacteriophage-directed protein 2 functions as a pore.

Pugsley AP, Schnaitman CA.

Protein 1, a major protein of the outer membrane of Escherichia coli, has been
shown to be the pore allowing the passage of small hydrophilic solutes across the
outer membrane. In E. coli K-12 protein 1 consists of two subspecies, 1a and 1b, 
whereas in E. coli B it consists of a single species which has an electrophoretic
mobility similar to that of 1a. K-12 strains mutant at the ompB locus lack both
proteins 1a and 1b and exhibit multiple transport defects, resistance to toxic
metal ions, and tolerance to a number of colicins. Mutation at the tolF locus
results in the loss of 1a, in less severe transport defects, and more limited
colicin tolerance. Mutation at the par locus causes the loss of protein 1b, but
no transport defects or colicin tolerance. Lysogeny of E. coli by phage PA-2
results in the production of a new major protein, protein 2. Lysogeny of K-12
ompB mutants resulted in dramatic reversal of the transport defects and
restoration of the sensitivity to colicins E2 and E3 but not to other colicins.
This was shown to be due to the production of protein 2, since lysogeny by phage 
mutants lacking the ability to elicit protein 2 production did not show this
effect. Thus, protein 2 can function as an effective pore. ompB mutations in E.
coli B also resulted in loss of protein 1 and similar multiple transport defects,
but these were only partially reversed by phage lysogeny and the resulting
production of protein 2. When the ompB region from E. coli B was moved by
transduction into an E. coli K-12 background, only small amounts of proteins 1a
and 1b were found in the outer membrane. These results indicate that genes
governing the synthesis of outer membrane proteins may not function
interchangeably between K-12 and B strains, indicating differences in regulation 
or biosynthesis of these proteins between these strains.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.133.3.1181-1189.1978 
PMCID: PMC222150
PMID: 346560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

