
1. J Clin Microbiol. 1987 Sep;25(9):1605-10.

Detection of early antibodies in human immunodeficiency virus infection by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, Western blot, and radioimmunoprecipitation.

Saah AJ(1), Farzadegan H, Fox R, Nishanian P, Rinaldo CR Jr, Phair JP, Fahey JL, 
Lee TH, Polk BF.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland
20892.

A current concept of the serological response to human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) infection in humans is that antibodies to core antigens (p55, p24, and p15)
are detectable earlier during initial stages of antibody production than
antibodies against envelope antigens (gp160, gp120, and gp41). Comparative
studies of Western blot (immunoblot), radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA), and 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) during initial antibody production are 
limited to case reports and have not resolved the issue. Thirty of the 37
participants who are part of a prospective study had at least one specimen that
was negative for anti-gp41 but had one or more other bands on Western blot.
Twenty-seven of these 30 specimens were reactive for anti-gp120/160 in the RIPA. 
Of the same 30 specimens, kits from Bionetics identified 2 (7%),
ElectroNucleonics 4 (13%), Abbott 13 (43%), Du Pont 25 (83%), and Genetic Systems
25 (83%). All participants had evidence of serological progression by Western
blot, including a gp41 band, on subsequent visits; the ELISA kits of all
manufacturers identified these later specimens with greater accuracy. These data 
show that the RIPA detects anti-envelope antibodies that may be not detectable by
Western blot and that the production of anti-envelope antibodies approximately
parallels the production of anti-core antibodies. The false-negative results by
ELISA would permit transmission of HIV by blood transfusion from donors in early 
stages of infection. The sensitivity of licensed ELISA kits should be improved to
identify antibody as soon as possible after infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.25.9.1605-1610.1987 
PMCID: PMC269292
PMID: 3477569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

