
1. J Clin Microbiol. 1979 Jun;9(6):657-64.

Antigen requirements, sensitivity, and specificity of enzyme immunoassays for
measles and rubella viral antibodies.

Forghani B, Schmidt NJ.

Enzyme immunoassay (EIA) systems for measles virus and rubella virus were studied
from the standpoints of requirements for suitable viral antigens and control
antigens, and the sensitivity and specificity of the tests for detecting antibody
elicited by past infection (determination of immunity status), and for
serodiagnosis of currenet infections. Crude or semipurified measles virus
antigens were satisfactory for EIA, but antigens derived by pelleting virus from 
infected cell culture fluids were slightly more specific in their reactivity than
were antigens produced from lysates of infected cells. However, reliable rubella 
EIA antigens could be produced only from infected cell culture fluids, and they
required density gradient purification to render them suitably specific. Even
with gradient-purified rubella antigens, it was necessary to use antigen prepared
in an identical fashion from uninfected cell culture fluids as a control on the
specificity of reactions obtained with test sera. With appropriate viral antigens
and control antigens, both measles and rubella EIA systems were highly sensitive 
and specific for determination of immunity status and for serodiagnosis of
current infections. Antibody was detectable earlier in the course of infection by
EIA than by hemagglutination inhibition or complement fixation, but this did not 
limit the diagnostic value of the test, since titer increases demonstrable by EIA
were usually greater than those detectable by hemagglutination inhibition or
complement fixation tests.


PMCID: PMC275375
PMID: 387813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

