
1. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1985 Feb;131(2):267-72.

Role of serum in stimulation of polymorphonuclear leukocyte, luminol-dependent
chemiluminescence by influenza A.

Shult PA, Dick EC, Joiner KA, Busse WW.

Granulocyte membrane perturbation activates oxidative metabolism with the release
of highly reactive species (O2-, H2O2, OH., and 'O2) and emission of light
(chemiluminescence (CL)). Using the CL response as a measure of oxidative
metabolism, we assayed the effects of influenza A on the granulocyte respiratory 
burst. Human polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) were isolated by Ficoll-Hypaque 
cushioning and dextran sedimentation. The isolated PMNs were incubated with
egg-grown influenza A (H3N2) virus, or a medium control, in the presence of 1
microM luminol and fresh autologous serum (10%). No light emission occurred
during the incubation of PMNs with the medium control. Influenza A (33 to 50%
egg-infective-doses (EID50):1 PMN) stimulated PMN light emission with a maximal
response (48,386 +/- 10,764 cpm/10(6) PMN) occurring at 37 degrees CL was
dependent on the virus dose with a diminished response (6,041 +/- 3,200 cpm/10(6)
PMN) occurring at a lower infectivity of 10 EID50:1 PMN. Chemiluminescence
responses were similar with infective and with noninfective virus particles (heat
inactivated, 56 degrees C X 2 h). Fresh serum was necessary for the influenza
virus to cause a CL response. A significant correlation (p less than 0.01)
existed between the level of light emission and the hemagglutination-inhibiting
(HI) antibody titer to influenza A of the autologous serum. Virus in the absence 
of detectable antibody did not stimulate CL. The virus-associated CL was
completely inhibited if autologous serum was heated (56 degrees C X 30 min) or if
the PMNs were pretreated with cytochalasin B (5 mcg/ml X 5 min). These findings
suggest that influenza A-associated PMN CL requires antibody, complement, and
phagocytosis.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1164/arrd.1985.131.2.267 
PMID: 3970456  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

