
1. Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health. 1985 Jun;16(2):337-42.

Correlation of population indices of female Culex tritaeniorhynchus with Japanese
encephalitis viral activity in Kapuk, Indonesia.

Olson JG, Ksiazek TG, Tan R, Atmosoedjono S, Lee VH, Converse JD.

Nineteen consecutive monthly light trap collections of mosquitoes were made
between October 1978 and April 1980 in Kapuk, Indonesia. Kapuk is a small suburb 
of Jakarta where pigs are raised in close proximity to rice paddies which are
breeding sites for Culex tritaeniorhynchus. Japanese encephalitis (JE) virus is
believed to be endemic and has been recovered from mosquitoes and pigs in the
area on several occasions. A total of 18,435 female Cx. tritaeniorhynchus were
allocated to 359 pools of approximately 50 per pool. Virus isolations were
attempted in both Vero and BHK-21 cells and agents producing cytopathic effect
were identified in a micro-neutralization test. Nineteen strains of JE were
recovered from the 359 pools of Cx. tritaeniorhynchus tested. The light trap
index of female Cx. tritaeniorhynchus (X) and the relative frequency of pools
positive for JE (Y) for each month of the study were plotted and correlation
coefficients (r) calculated after transforming the mosquito population data
logarithmically and the relative frequencies of isolation by arcsine square root.
The close fit of the data (p less than 0.001) to an inverse linear model (1/y = a
+ b log10X) suggests a close dependence of JE viral activity on the population
dynamics of Cx. tritaeniorhynchus. Three additional strains of JE were recovered 
from other Culex spp. at the same study site. One strain each was isolated from
individual pools of Cx. gelidus, Cx. vishnui and Cx. fuscocephala. Cx.
tritaeniorhynchus was more frequently infected with JE than the other species
tested.


PMID: 4071204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

