
1. Lancet. 1983 Nov 12;2(8359):1115-9.

Role of aberrant HLA-DR expression and antigen presentation in induction of
endocrine autoimmunity.

Bottazzo GF, Pujol-Borrell R, Hanafusa T, Feldmann M.

Immune responses are initiated by HLA-DR+ cells, which present antigen to T
cells. Observations that HLA-DR may be experimentally induced on thyroid
epithelium and that HLA-DR occurs on thyrocytes in autoimmune thyroid diseases
suggest a mechanism of autoimmunity with special relevance to organ-specific
diseases. This involves the local aberrant expression of HLA-DR antigens by
epithelial cells and their subsequent capacity to present autoantigens occurring 
on their surfaces to T lymphocytes. For autoantigens which T cells recognise
infrequently because of their restricted tissue location and low concentration in
the circulation, T-cell tolerance is unlikely, and so induction of autoreactive T
cells would occur. Because interferon is the best known inducer of DR antigen
expression and viral infections may predate endocrine autoimmunity, the following
sequence seems likely: local viral infection which causes interferon production, 
or other local environmental factors which would induce DR expression,
presentation of autoantigens, and subsequent autoimmune T-cell induction. These T
cells would activate effector B and T cells. Whether the initial induction of
autoimmune T cells leads to autoimmune disease would depend on factors such as
abnormalities of the suppressor T-cell pathway, reported to coexist with
autoimmunity and necessary to induce autoimmune disease in mice. This mechanism
of autoimmune disease induction explains vague associations with viral infections
and long latency periods before disease becomes manifest and gives a simple
explanation for the well-documented association between HLA-DR and autoimmune
diseases in man.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(83)90629-3 
PMID: 6138647  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

