
1. J Gen Virol. 1981 Dec;57(Pt 2):343-55.

Restricted HEL-12 virus infections in de novo infected human and canine cells.

Black RJ, Yang JW, Panem S.

Model systems to study restricted primate retrovirus expression were established 
by de novo infection of canine foetal thymus cells (CF-2Th) and superinfection of
HEL-12 cells with HEL-12 virus. In the resulting CF-2Th/HEL-12V cells and
HEL-12/HEL-12V cells, four sequential stages of virus infection were defined by
the production of reverse transcriptase (RT)-containing particles and expression 
of virus antigens as detected by radioimmunoassays. Stage 1 cells did not
synthesize virus antigens or produce RT-containing particles. Stage 2 cells
synthesized virus antigen but not RT-containing particles. Stage 3 cells
synthesized antigen and produced RT-containing particles, and stage 4 cells
synthesized virus antigens but no longer produced RT-containing particles. The
duration of the four stage infection is 2 to 3 weeks in both cell types.
Monospecific competition radioimmunoassays to detect HEL-12V p30 or gp70 antigen 
showed high levels of virus antigen throughout stages 2 to 4 of infection.
Analysis of immunoprecipitates formed under conditions to detect either p30- or
or gp70-containing proteins in cells pulsed and pulsed--chased with [3H]leucine
showed the same spectrum of virus precursor polyproteins, intermediates and
mature virion components in stage 2 to 4 cells in canine and human infections.
Spent culture fluids collected from stage 3 and stage 4 CF-2Th/HEL-12V cells
failed to reveal inhibitors of RT activity. Stage 4 CF-2Th/HEL-12V or
HEL-12/HEL-12V cells labelled with [3H]uridine produced virions which
incorporated [3H]uridine but did not have RT activity, suggesting that restricted
infection is characterized by production of HEL-12V defective in RT activity.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-57-2-343 
PMID: 6172557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

