
1. J Bacteriol. 1984 Dec;160(3):1137-45.

Cloning of the major protein of the Caulobacter crescentus periodic surface
layer: detection and characterization of the cloned peptide by protein expression
assays.

Smit J, Agabian N.

A precisely ordered crystalline array is found on the surface of the bacterium
Caulobacter crescentus CB15. Using an immunological assay, we identified
recombinant bacteriophage clones expressing the predominant protein of this
structure from a lambda 1059 library of C. crescentus CB15 DNA. A single
4.4-kilobase HindIII fragment encoded a polypeptide whose antigenic determinants,
molecular weight, and peculiar solubilization properties were identical with
those of the authentic predominant polypeptide (130K) of the surface array. The
130K protein was produced as a discrete product as a result of gene transcription
initiated from a lambda promoter; several experiments suggested that the
Caulobacter promoter for this gene is not efficiently recognized by the
Escherichia coli transcription machinery. Genomic Southern analysis revealed a
single copy of the 130K protein gene per genome. The 130K protein gene was
hybridized with DNA of two closely related laboratory strains of C. crescentus
which have lost their ability to produce a surface array. One of these strains,
CB2, possesses an homologous copy of the 130K gene, whereas DNA from the other
strain, CB13B1a, showed a lesser degree of hybridization to the 130K gene probe; 
genomic fragments which did hybridize were of different sizes in CB13 as compared
with those of CB15. These findings are discussed in relation to studies of the
surface array function and its role in cellular morphogenesis in this
stalk-forming bacterium.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.160.3.1137-1145.1984 
PMCID: PMC215831
PMID: 6209263  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

