
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1981 Jul;78(7):4036-40.

Recombinant bacteriophages containing the integrated transforming provirus of
Gardner--Arnstein feline sarcoma virus.

Fedele LA, Even J, Garon CF, Donner L, Sherr CJ.

The integrated DNA provirus of the Gardner-Arnstein (GA) strain of feline sarcoma
virus (FeSV) was molecularly cloned in a bacteriophage lambda vector. The cloned 
DNA fragment is 14.4 kilobase pairs long and contains a 6.7-kilobase provirus
flanked by cellular sequences derived from nonproductively transformed mink
cells. Transfection of mouse NIH/3T3 cells with the cloned DNA fragment induced
foci of transformation at efficiencies of 10(4) focus-forming units/pmol of
sarcoma virus DNA. Restriction endonuclease mapping and heteroduplex analyses
were used to compare the GA-FeSV provirus with that of Snyder-Theilen (ST)-FeSV, 
a second strain that contains homologous transformation-specific sequences
(v-fes). Both viruses have the general structure 5'-gag-fes-env-c region-3', each
having retained portions of the feline leukemia virus (FeLV) gag and env genes.
In addition to segments shared by the two sarcoma viruses, GA-FeSV contains 1.7
kilobases of extra sequences not found in ST-FeSV. Of these, at least 400-500
base pairs located near the 5' end of v-fes encode a portion of the GA-FeSV
polyprotein; the remaining 1.2 kilobases are derived from the FeLV env gene but
do not appear to encode any detectable product related to the FeLV envelope
glycoprotein. The close homology of the v-fes sequences shows that GA- and
ST-FeSV were formed by recombination of FeLV with similar portions of a cat
cellular gene (c-fes).

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.78.7.4036 
PMCID: PMC319720
PMID: 6270655  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

