
1. Vet Pathol. 1982 Jul;19(4):413-23.

Vesicular exanthema of swine and San Miguel sea lion virus: experimental and
field studies in otarid seals, feeding trials in swine.

Gelberg HB, Dieterich RA, Lewis RM.

The naturally occurring disease caused by San Miguel sea lion virus in fur seals 
was characterized by small fluid-filled vesicles 1 to 25 mm in diameter on the
nonhaired portions of the flippers. Early epithelial lesions contained multifocal
sites of cell lysis. The resultant microvesicles enlarged and coalesced, forming 
grossly visible macrovesicles. Mature vesicles progressed to involve all layers
of the epithelium but did not involve the underlying dermis. Intradermal
inoculation of vesicular exanthema of swine virus type A48 or San Miguel sea lion
virus type 2 into otarid (fur) seal pups caused plaque-like lesions around
inoculated coronary bands. These swellings regressed without rupture by 96 hours 
postinoculation. One seal inoculated with San Miguel sea lion virus had a linear 
lingual erosion at ten days postinoculation. Virus was isolated from this site
and from two uninoculated sites, the tonsil and testicle. Contact controls showed
no evidence of infection. Virus was isolated in low titers from some sites of
inoculation and draining lymph nodes from seals infected with vesicular exanthema
of swine virus. Virus was recovered more easily, in higher titers, and from more 
tissues, from seals infected with San Miguel sea lion virus. Inoculated seals
tested after four to ten days seroconverted. Feeding swine seal tissues from the 
inoculation experiments resulted in seroconversion in swine which were fed
tissues from seals infected with vesicular exanthema of swine virus but not in
those which were fed tissues from seals infected with San Miguel sea lion virus.

DOI: 10.1177/030098588201900407 
PMID: 6283713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

