
1. Mol Pharmacol. 1982 Mar;21(2):432-7.

Differential phosphorylation of (E)-5-(2-bromovinyl)-2'-deoxyuridine
monophosphate by thymidylate kinases from herpes simplex viruses types 1 and 2
and varicella zoster virus.

Fyfe JA.

5-(2-Bromovinyl)-2'-deoxyuridine (BrVdUrd) is a potent and selective inhibitor of
herpes simplex virus Type I (HS-I) and varicella zoster (VZ) virus replication
but is much less potent against herpes simplex virus Type II (HS-II) replication.
A possible enzymatic basis for this difference is reported here to involve the
virus-coded dThd-dTMP kinases (EC 2.7.1.75) from the three virus strains. The
thymidine kinases from the three virus strains were purified by affinity
chromatography. In addition to catalyzing the phosphorylation of nucleosides,
each of the three purified enzymes catalyzed the phosphorylation of thymidylate
to its diphosphate but at strikingly different rates. The relative amounts of
extractable virus-coded thymidylate kinases were estimated to be 100/2/40 for
cells infected with HS-I, HS-II, and VZ viruses, respectively. Extracts of cells 
infected with HS-I virus catalyzed the phosphorylation of the monophosphate of
BrVdUrd to its diphosphate. In contrast, the product was not detected with
extracts from cells infected with HS-II virus. THe ratios of rates with 0.5 mM
BrVdUrd monophosphate versus 0.1 mM dTMP as substrates for each of the purified
dThd-dTMP kinases from HS-I, HS-II, and VZ viruses and the dTMP kinase from host 
cells were, respectively, 0.09, less than 0.002, 0.03, and less than 0.0002.
These observations correlate with the relative sensitivities of these viruses to 
BrVdUrd in cell culture and suggest that, if BrVdUrd exerts its effect as a
triphosphate, the inefficient phosphorylation of the monophosphate contributes to
the insensitivity of HS-II virus to this agent.


PMID: 6285172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

