
1. J Biol Chem. 1983 Jan 10;258(1):529-37.

Studies on the phi X174 gene A protein-mediated termination of leading strand DNA
synthesis.

Reinberg D, Zipursky SL, Weisbeek P, Brown D, Hurwitz J.

Recombinant RF (replicate form) I DNAs containing the bacteriophage phi X174 gene
A protein-recognition sequence are cleaved by the phi X A protein yielding a phi 
X RF II X A protein complex (Zipursky, S.L., Reinberg, D., and Hurwitz, J. (1980)
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 77, 5182-5186). Such complexes support DNA
synthesis in both RF I leads to SS(c) and RF I leads to RF I phi X DNA
replication reactions in vitro. Two phi X A protein-recognition sequences were
inserted into plasmid pBR322. Both sequences were contiguous with the same strand
of the vector DNA and separated by 667 and 4275 base pairs. This recombinant
plasmid (G27-4) was cleaved by the phi X A protein at either insert and both
inserts support the initiation of RF leads to SS(c) DNA synthesis. This was
verified by the finding that replication products were circular molecules of 667 
and 4275 nucleotides. This finding is in keeping with the multifunctional
activities associated with the phi X A protein; these include the site-specific
nicking of RF I DNA which initiates DNA synthesis and site-specific termination
resulting in the circularization of the displaced DNA strand. The phi X A protein
and the Escherichia coli rep and SSb proteins catalyze the unwinding of phi X RF 
I DNA in vitro (Scott, J.F., Eisenberg, S., Bertsch, L.L., and Kornberg, A.
(1977) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 74, 193-197). Recombinant plasmid G27-4 RF I
DNA was also unwound in vitro by this enzyme system; in this case, both circular 
and linear single-stranded DNA molecules of 667 and 4275 nucleotides, as well as 
full length circular single-stranded DNA were formed. Full length linear DNA was 
not detected. The two single-stranded circular DNA products formed as leading
strands in RF leads to SS(c) reaction mixtures containing G27-4 RF I DNA differed
in their ability to support lagging strand DNA synthesis. It was shown that the
large single-stranded circular product included DNA sequences homologous to a
replication factor Y effector sequence required for RF leads to RF and SS(c)
leads to RF replication (Zipursky, S.L., and Marians, K.J. (1980) Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 77, 6521-6525). The 4275-nucleotide, but not the
667-nucleotide, single-stranded circular DNA product was converted to a duplex
structure.


PMID: 6294111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

