
1. Carcinogenesis. 1983 Aug;4(8):1001-6.

Quantification of adducts formed in DNA treated with
N-acetoxy-2-acetylaminofluorene or N-hydroxy-2-aminofluorene: comparison of
trifluoroacetic acid and enzymatic degradation.

Tang M, Lieberman MW.

We have examined two methods of preparation of DNA adducts from phi X174 RF DNA
modified by [3H]N-acetoxy-2-acetylaminofluorene ([3H]NA-AAF) or
N-hydroxy-2-aminofluorene ([3H]N-OH-AF). Hydrolysis by enzymes (DNase I, snake
venom phosphodiesterase and alkaline or acid phosphatase) and subsequent reverse 
phase h.p.l.c. of phi X174 RF DNA treated with [3H]NA-AAF yielded 73%
N-(deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-2-acetylaminofluorene (dG-C8-AAF), 7%
3-(deoxyguanosin-N2-yl)-2-acetylaminofluorene (dG-N2-AAF), and a peak of
unidentified radioactivity (13%). When [3H]N-OH-AF modified phi X174 DNA was
analyzed, both N-(deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-2-aminofluorene (dG-C8-AF) and a large
percentage of the imidazole ring-opened derivative and unidentified products were
found. In contrast, when anhydrous trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was used to degrade
these DNAs, we found for the [3H]NA-AAF modified DNA 86%
N-(guanin-8-yl)-2-acetylaminofluorene (G-C8-AAF) and 6%
3-(guanin-N2-yl)-2-acetylaminofluorene (G-N2-AAF), while for [3H]N-OH-AF modified
DNA only the N-(guanin-8-yl)-2-aminofluorene (G-C8-AF) was found. When DNA was
prepared from human fibroblasts treated with [3H]NA-AAF, only the G-C8-AF product
was obtained. Thus, anhydrous TFA solvolysis followed by reverse phase h.p.l.c.
is a rapid and convenient method to obtain quantitative yields of DNA adducts
formed with acetylaminofluorene and related compounds: quantification by this
method prevents loss of G-N2-AAF adducts, the conversion of AAF adducts to AF
adducts, and the production of ring opened products in guanine residue.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/4.8.1001 
PMID: 6307542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

