
1. JAMA. 1984 Apr 27;251(16):2103-7.

Treatment of recurrent genital herpes simplex infections with oral acyclovir. A
controlled trial.

Reichman RC, Badger GJ, Mertz GJ, Corey L, Richman DD, Connor JD, Redfield D,
Savoia MC, Oxman MN, Bryson Y, et al.

Two hundred fifty patients were entered into a multicenter trial to evaluate the 
efficacy and toxicity of orally administered acyclovir for treatment of recurrent
genital herpes. The study consisted of part A, in which patients entered the
study within 48 hours of the onset of lesions, and part B, in which patients
self-initiated therapy as soon as possible after the onset of a recurrent
episode. In both parts, patients received either acyclovir (200 mg) or placebo,
five times daily for five days. In both parts, the duration of virus shedding and
the time to crusting and healing of lesions were shorter among acyclovir
recipients than among placebo recipients. In part B, fewer acyclovir recipients
formed new lesions during the study medication period than did placebo
recipients. When parts A and B were compared directly, the duration of virus
shedding and the times required for crusting and healing of lesions were
significantly shorter among acyclovir recipients in part B than among acyclovir
recipients in part A. No significant differences in the duration of itching and
pain or in the times of subsequent recurrence were noted between acyclovir and
placebo groups in either part A or part B. No significant toxic or adverse
reactions were seen in acyclovir recipients. Oral acyclovir shortens the duration
of virus shedding and the duration of lesions in patients with recurrent genital 
herpes. These effects are more pronounced when therapy is self-initiated by
patients early in the course of a recurrent episode.


PMID: 6368877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

