
1. Virology. 1983 Jul 30;128(2):271-84.

Genetic variation among dengue 2 viruses of different geographic origin.

Trent DW, Grant JA, Rosen L, Monath TP.

Genetic variation in dengue 2 isolates from various geographic areas was examined
by oligonucleotide fingerprinting of the 40 S genome RNA. Oligonucleotide maps of
geographically isolated and epidemiologically unrelated viruses were very
distinct. Direct comparison of the oligonucleotide map of the dengue 2 prototype 
New Guinea 2 virus, isolated in 1944, with the fingerprints of more recent
isolates from the South Pacific indicated that the genome of dengue 2 virus had
undergone extensive change although the viruses are serologically
indistinguishable. The oligonucleotide map of an isolate from a recent case in
Jamaica and a mosquito isolate from Upper Volta, Africa, were recognized to be
almost identical, suggesting that virus may have been introduced into the
Caribbean from West Africa. Likewise, the fingerprints of isolates from Puerto
Rico and the South Pacific shared 80 to 95% of their large oligonucleotides,
suggesting that the virus involved in these epidemics may have spread throughout 
Tahiti, American Samoa, Fiji, and to Puerto Rico in the Caribbean or vice versa. 
On the basis of these studies, five genetic variants or topotypes of dengue 2
virus have been established: (1) Puerto Rico-South Pacific, (2) Burma-Thailand,
(3) the Seychelles, (4) the Philippines, and (5) Jamaica-West Africa.
Oligonucleotide fingerprinting offers a highly sensitive and reproducible
technical approach to the investigation of dengue 2 virus intratypic variation
and possibly to the understanding of the biological variation associated with
dengue fever and hemorrhagic disease.

DOI: 10.1016/0042-6822(83)90255-6 
PMID: 6612990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

