
1. In Vitro. 1980 Nov;16(11):941-8.

Characterization of a 7,12-dimethylbenz(alpha)anthracene-induced BALB/c mouse
mammary tumor epithelial cell line.

Dudley JP, Medina D, Butel JS.

Characterization of numerous independently derived cell lines is necessary in
order to establish reliable biological criteria applicable to transformed mammary
epithelial cells. A mammary tumor cell line (DMBA-2/BALB) and clonal derivatives 
have been established from an adenocarcinoma induced in vivo in a BALB/c mouse by
the administration of the chemical, 7,12-dimethylbenz(alpha)anthracene. The
parental and clonal lines in vitro, as well as tumors derived from them in vivo, 
maintained an epithelial morphology at the light microscope level. Electron
microscopic observations demonstrated the presence of desmosomes and numerous
microtubules and microfilaments, but low levels of rough endoplasmic reticulum
and Golgi apparatus. Growth characteristics were examined, including saturation
density levels and colony-forming ability on plastic and in suspension. None of
the in vitro growth parameters was found to correlate with the tumorigenicity of 
the lines in syngeneic mice or with their ability to produce C- or B-type virions
by reverse transcriptase assay. Peroxidase/antiperoxidase (PAP) immunological
staining failed to detect virus-specified antigens, MuMTV gp52, Rauscher MuLV
gp69/71, or BALB virus-2 gp70, in the cells. Although epithelial in appearance,
the parental cell line did not appear to be functionally differentiated in
culture as evidenced by a very low level of casein messenger RNA. Passage of the 
parental cell line in vivo in a lactating mouse failed to activate virus
expression, but a few cells in scattered focal areas in the tumor did synthesize 
casein detectable by PAP staining.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02619332 
PMID: 6778814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

