
1. J Virol. 1982 Sep;43(3):1006-14.

Avian reovirus polypeptides: analysis of intracellular virus-specified products, 
virions, top component, and cores.

Schnitzer TJ, Ramos T, Gouvea V.

Avian reovirus-specified polypeptides can be separated into three size classes:
large (lambda), medium (mu), and small (sigma), similar to those of the mammalian
reoviruses. A nomenclature has been proposed to indicate the individual
polypeptides within each size class by progressive alphabetical subscripts. Three
lambda polypeptides (lambda(A), lambda(B), and lambda(C)) are found in infectious
viral particles and have molecular weights of 145,000, 130,000, and 115,000,
respectively. All are present in core preparations, and two (lambda(A) and
lambda(B)) appear to be exposed at the surface of the virion. Two mu polypeptides
can be distinguished in purified virus (mu(A), 72,000 daltons; mu(B), 70,000
daltons), and another is occasionally evident by immunoprecipitation from
infected-cell extracts (mu(NS)). mu(B) represents the major outer capsid protein 
and is structurally homologous to mu(1C) of the mammalian reoviruses. No
additional mu proteins can be detected, and there is no evidence for a
product-precursor relationship among these proteins. Three major sigma proteins
are evident in viral particles. sigma(C) has the lowest molecular weight, is part
of the outer capsid of the virion, and appears homologous to the mammalian
sigma(1) protein. Interestingly, it demonstrates the greatest polymorphism of all
the polypeptides among the different avian reoviruses examined. sigma(B) (36,000 
daltons) is a major constituent of the outer capsid and, like sigma(C), is
exposed to the surface of the virion. sigma(A) (39,000 daltons) appears to be an 
internal protein. An additional polypeptide band in the sigma class having an
apparent molecular weight of 34,000 to 35,000 can be seen under three different
conditions: (i) in some S1133 reovirus preparations, particularly after prolonged
storage, a new band (sigma(B')) appears with a reduction in intensity of
sigma(B), suggesting that sigma(B') is a degradation product of sigma(B); (ii) in
polypeptides immunoprecipitated from infected-cell extracts, a major band
(sigma(NS)) is apparent migrating just ahead of sigma(B); (iii) in top component 
preparations from all avian reoviruses examined, a band (sigma(TC)) with mobility
identical to that of sigma(NS) represents a major constitutent and appears to be 
incorporated within the particle itself. The relationship among these three bands
is not currently known. Avian reovirus polypeptides are thus in general similar
to those found in mammalian reoviruses, but differences do exist which may be
important for understanding viral structure and assembly.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.43.3.1006-1014.1982 
PMCID: PMC256211
PMID: 7143561  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

