
1. Am J Vet Res. 1980 Aug;41(8):1214-20.

Secretory immune response in intestinal mucosa and salivary gland after
experimental infection of pigs with transmissible gastroenteritis virus.

DeBuysscher EV, Berman DT.

Pigs 8 to 10 weeks of age were orally infected with transmissible gastroenteritis
(TGE) virus or infected by inoculation of the virus into Thirty-Vella loops of
jejunum. Concentrations of immunoglobulin (Ig) A, IgM, and IgG in serum, saliva, 
jejunal secretions, loop secretions, and bile were determined by solid-phase
radioimmunoassay for TGE virus-infected and control pigs. A multiple-staining
fluorescent antibody technique was used to determine the relative numbers of
IgA-, IgM-, and IgG-producing plasma cells in intestinal mucosa, mesenteric lymph
node, spleen, iliac lymph node, and submandibular salivary gland. The numbers of 
IgA- and IgM-producing plasma cells were greater in the jejunal mucosa of pigs
infected and reinfected orally with TGE virus than in that of the control pigs.
There was also an increase of IgA- and probably of IgM-cells in the submandibular
salivary glands. Similar numerical increases of IgA- and IgM-cells were observed 
in jejunal mucosa and salivary glands of all pigs with intestinal loops whether
exposed to TGE virus or not. Increases in plasma cells in mucosa or salivary
gland were not associated with increases in concentrations of IgA or IgM in the
respective secretions or serum. The data support the hypothesis that after
stimulation, IgA- and IgM-producing cells leave the intestinal mucosa and are
trapped by distant secretory epithelial. The absence of a simultaneous increased 
concentration of IgA and IgM in saliva and intestinal secretions indicates that
in an intact epithelium, the transport of IgA and IgM mediated by secretory
component is probably saturable.


PMID: 7192522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

