
1. J Virol. 1981 Jan;37(1):383-94.

Genetic interactions among viruses of the Bunyamwera complex.

Iroegbu CU, Pringle CR.

Seventy-seven temperature-sensitive (ts) mutants belonging to three antigenically
distinct and geographically isolated members of the Bunyamwera complex--Batai
virus, Bunyamwera virus, and Maguari virus--have been isolated after
5-fluorouracil treatment. High-frequency recombination was observed, and the
mutants of each virus were classified into two groups, which were shown to be
equivalent by heterologous recombination experiments. In most combinations
heterologous recombination was less efficient than homologous recombination, but 
all crosses of group I and II mutants yielded viable recombinants. Recombination 
was an early event. Analysis by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of the
proteins of the wild-type viruses and recombinant clones obtained from the six
possible heterologous combinations of group I and II mutants indicated that
recombination occurred by reassortment of genome subunits. Group I appeared to
correspond to the genome subunit coding for the N protein, and group II
corresponded to the G1/G2 determinant. The G1 (or G2 or both) protein was
associated with neutralization specificity and plaque diameter, and the N protein
was associated with plaque opacity. Complementation was observed between two
nonrecombining mutants of Maguari virus belonging to group I, which may indicate 
that the N genome subunit codes for an additional protein. There appeared to be
no genetic barrier to exchange of genetic material between Batai, Bunyamwera, and
Maguari viruses in vitro, and it is concluded that the Bunyamwera complex is
potentially a single gene pool if geographical and ecological constraints are
discounted.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.37.1.383-394.1981 
PMCID: PMC171016
PMID: 7218427  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

