
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1980 Mar;39(3):576-83.

Enumeration of bacteriophages and host bacteria in sewage and the
activated-sludge treatment process.

Ewert DL, Paynter MJ.

Bacteriophage populations in an activated-sludge sewage treatment plant were
enumerated. A newly developed assay for quantitation of total phages, employing
direct electron microscopic counts, was used in conjunction with the plaque
assay. The total concentration of phages was significantly higher in reactor
mixed liquor and effluent than in influent sewage, indicating a net production of
phages within the reactor. Maximum total phage concentrations in the fluid phase 
of sewage, activated-sludge mixed liquor, and reactor effluent were 2.2 x 10(7), 
9.5 x 10(7), and 8.4 x 10(7)/ml, respectively. Conditions were optimized for
isolation of predominant heterotrophic aerobic bacteria from sewage and mixed
liquor. Blending at ice water temperatures was superior to ultrasound or enzyme
treatments for maximum release of viable bacteria from microbial floc. A
solidified extract of mixed liquor was superior to standard media for cultivating
maximum numbers of heterotrophic bacteria. The highest culture counts for sewage 
and mixed liquor were 1.4 x 10(7) and 1.3 x 10(9)/ml, respectively, which
represented only 3 and 6.8% of the total microscopic cell counts. Only 3 out of
48 dominant bacterial isolates from either mixed liquor or sewage were hosts for 
phages present in the system. The sum of phage populations infecting these three 
hosts accounted for, at best, 3.8% (sewage) and 0.2% (mixed liquor) of the total 
number of phages present. Generally, specific phage titers were lower in mixed
liquor than in sewage, indicating that these hosts were not responsible for the
net production of phages in the reactor. This study emphasizes the limitations of
the plaque assay for ecological studies of phages, and it suggests that bacteria 
responsible for phage production in activated-sludge mixed liquor are either
minor components of the heterotrophic population, floc-producing strains, or
members of other physiological groups.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.39.3.576-583.1980 
PMCID: PMC291381
PMID: 7387157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

