
1. Virology. 1994 May 1;200(2):494-503.

Characterization of the feline host range and a specific epitope of feline
panleukopenia virus.

Truyen U(1), Agbandje M, Parrish CR.

Author information: 
(1)James A. Baker Institute for Animal Health, New York State College of
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca 14853.

The feline parvovirus subgroup is comprised of viruses isolated from various
carnivores, including the dog, cat, mink, raccoon, Arctic fox, and raccoon dog.
Those viruses are > 98% identical in their DNA sequences and are very similar
antigenically. We have shown that although canine parvovirus (CPV) replicates in 
numerous feline cell lines in vitro it does not infect cats after parenteral
inoculation (U. Truyen and C. R. Parrish, (1992) J. Virol. 66, 5399-5408). Here
we use recombination mapping to locate some viral determinants required for
feline host range, and show that the ability to replicate in cats was determined 
by the right-hand 45% of the genome, most likely a function of the capsid protein
gene. Efficient replication in the cat appeared to require feline panleukopenia
virus sequences from both ends of the VP2 molecule, which contained differences
of VP2 amino acid residues 80, 564, and 568. The difference at amino acid 80 was 
also associated with expression of an FPV-specific antigenic epitope. The
differences which affected the feline host range were located in a region of the 
capsid structure where three VP2 molecules interact, and the mutations gave rise 
to changes in the conformation of loops of the three adjoining VP2 monomers. The 
mechanism(s) of the in vivo feline host range restriction were not defined, and
we were unable to show in vitro inhibition of virus infectivity by feline serum
components or erythrocytes.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1994.1212 
PMID: 7513918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

