
1. J Virol. 1994 Jun;68(6):3505-11.

Primary pulmonary cytotoxic T lymphocytes induced by immunization with a vaccinia
virus recombinant expressing influenza A virus nucleoprotein peptide do not
protect mice against challenge.

Lawson CM(1), Bennink JR, Restifo NP, Yewdell JW, Murphy BR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The nucleoprotein (NP) of influenza A virus is the dominant antigen recognized by
influenza virus-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), and adoptive transfer of
NP-specific CTLs protects mice from influenza A virus infection. BALB/c mouse
cells (H-2d) recognize a single Kd-restricted CTL epitope of NP consisting of
amino acids 147 to 155. In the present study, mice were immunized with various
vaccinia virus recombinant viruses to examine the effect of the induction of
primary pulmonary CTLs on resistance to challenge with influenza A/Puerto
Rico/8/34 virus. The minigene ESNP(147-155)-VAC construct, composed of a signal
sequence from the adenovirus E3/19K glycoprotein (designated ES) and expressing
the 9-amino-acid NP natural determinant (amino acids 147 to 155) preceded by an
alanine residue, a similar minigene NP(Met 147-155)-VAC lacking ES, and a
full-length NP-VAC recombinant of influenza virus were analyzed. The two minigene
NP-VAC recombinants induced a greater primary pulmonary CTL response than the
full-length NP-VAC recombinant. However, NP-specific CTLs induced by immunization
with ESNP(147-155)-VAC did not decrease peak virus titer or accelerate clearance 
of virus in the lungs of mice challenged intranasally with A/PR/8/34.
Furthermore, NP-specific CTLs induced by immunization did not protect mice
challenged intranasally with a lethal dose of A/PR/8/34. Sequence analysis of the
NP CTL epitope of A/PR/8/34 challenge virus obtained from lungs after 8 days of
replication in ESNP(147-155)-VAC-immunized mice showed identity with that of the 
input virus, demonstrating that an escape mutant had not emerged during
replication in vivo. Thus, in contrast to adoptively transferred CTLs, pulmonary 
NP-specific CTLs induced by recombinant vaccinia virus immunization do not have
protective in vivo antiviral activity against influenza virus infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.68.6.3505-3511.1994 
PMCID: PMC236854
PMID: 7514677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

