
1. Biochemistry. 1994 Oct 11;33(40):12222-8.

Interaction of the reverse transcriptase of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
with DNA.

Bakhanashvili M(1), Hizi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Israel.

During DNA synthesis, the binding of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) reverse
transcriptase (RT) to the template-primer precedes its binding to nucleotide
triphosphates. The interaction of oligonucleotide DNA with HIV-1 RT was
investigated by using a gel retardation assay. Both homodimeric (p66/p66) and
heterodimeric (p66/p51) isoforms of HIV-1 RT were capable of binding the DNA
oligomers. Thus, all further studies on the interaction of HIV-1 RT with DNA were
done with heterodimeric RT. We have studied the conditions for optimal binding.
The formation of the RT-DNA complex was primer-independent, and the extent of DNA
binding was indistinguishable for both single-stranded and double-stranded DNA
(either blunt-ended or recessed). The DNA binding activity of the RT was found to
be dependent on oligonucleotide length. HIV-1 RT binds DNA with no apparent
sequence specificity. Hence, this enzyme belongs to the sequence nonspecific DNA 
binding proteins. The interaction was found to be independent of DNA synthesis.
The formation of the RT-DNA complex was not influenced by the presence of either 
template-complementary or noncomplementary dNTPs, indicating that neither DNA
polymerization nor binding of the RT to the dNTP affects the stability of the
complex. The gel retardation assay was utilized to examine also the effect of
various HIV-1 RT inhibitors (i.e., AZT-TP, ddTTP, TIBO, and
3,5,8-trihydroxy-4-quinolone) on the enzyme-DNA interaction. The results indicate
differences in the modes of action of these compounds.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00206a027 
PMID: 7522556  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

