
1. J Neurosci Res. 1994 Jul 1;38(4):376-85.

Astrogliosis in culture: III. Effect of recombinant retrovirus expressing
antisense glial fibrillary acidic protein RNA.

Ghirnikar RS(1), Yu AC, Eng LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, California.

Injury to the central nervous system (CNS) either from trauma or due to
demyelinating/degenerating diseases results in a typical response of astrocytes, 
termed astrogliosis. This reaction is characterized by astrocyte proliferation,
extensive hypertrophy of nuclei, cell body, and cytoplasmic processes and an
increase in immunodetectable glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). GFAP
accumulation may cause a physical barrier preventing the reestablishment of a
functional environment. Our studies have aimed at modulating astrogliosis by
inhibiting or delaying GFAP synthesis in damaged and reactive astrocytes. The
present study investigates the use of a recombinant retrovirus expressing
antisense GFAP RNA in controlling the response of mechanically injured
astrocytes. A 650 bp fragment from the coding region of mouse GFAP cDNA was
cloned in the antisense orientation under the control of long terminal repeat
(LTR) promoter of Moloney murine leukemia virus. Increase in GFAP as detected by 
immunocytochemical staining in injured astrocytes was inhibited by treatment with
retrovirus expressing antisense GFAP RNA. Also, astrocytes at the site of injury 
in these scratched cultures did not show cell body hypertrophy compared to
control cultures. These observations demonstrate that the increase in GFAP at the
site of injury can be inhibited using retroviral treatment and indicate the
potential of retrovirus-mediated gene transfer in modulating scar formation in
the CNS in vivo. These studies also shed light on the role of GFAP in maintaining
the morphology of astrocytes.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.490380403 
PMID: 7523690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

