
1. J Immunol. 1995 Apr 1;154(7):3162-72.

Derivation of vaccines from mimotopes. Immunologic properties of human hepatitis 
B virus surface antigen mimotopes displayed on filamentous phage.

Meola A(1), Delmastro P, Monaci P, Luzzago A, Nicosia A, Felici F, Cortese R,
Galfr√® G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research on Molecular Biology P Angeletti, Rome, Italy.

We have previously reported the identification, using human immune sera, of
mimotopes of human hepatitis B virus surface Ag (HBsAg) displayed on filamentous 
phage. To test if these mimotopes could be useful in developing a vaccine against
the human hepatitis B virus (HBV), we have compared the humoral immune response
of animals immunized either with a recombinant HBsAg vaccine, or with mimotopes. 
Immunogens were prepared by fusing the mimotopes on different carrier molecules
(phage coat protein pIII and pVIII, recombinant human H ferritin, HBV core
peptide) and by synthesizing multiple antigenic peptides carrying the mimotopes' 
amino acid sequences. These immunogens were injected into mice and rabbits and
sera were collected and tested for the presence of HBsAg-specific Abs. Our data
confirm that mimotopes can induce a humoral immune response resembling that
induced by the original Ag, and HBsAg mimotopes displayed on phage prove to be
the best immunogens, inducing the most reproducible and potent immunization.
Mimotopes that react as HBV subtype-specific Ags do not show this specificity as 
immunogen and induce a nonsubtype-restricted response. Furthermore, mimotopes
displayed on phage elicit a strong response to HBsAg in a strain of mouse
reported to show a low response to it. These results indicate that mimotopes
identified from random peptide libraries through utilizing human immune sera
could be important leads for the derivation of new vaccines.


PMID: 7534789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

