
1. Diabet Med. 1995 Mar;12(3):244-9.

High prevalence of hepatitis C infection in Afro-Caribbean patients with type 2
diabetes and abnormal liver function tests.

Gray H(1), Wreghitt T, Stratton IM, Alexander GJ, Turner RC, O'Rahilly S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, UK.

Moderate elevations of serum transaminases are frequently found in patients with 
diabetes mellitus and are often attributed to fatty infiltration of the liver
without further investigation. Recent studies of patients with end-stage liver
disease have suggested a possible association between Hepatitis C virus (HCV)
antibody positivity and the development of diabetes (mostly Type 2). As a first
step in the examination of any potential association between HCV and Type 2
diabetes in subjects without overt liver disease, we examined 200 British
patients with Type 2 diabetes (100 White Caucasians, 50 Asians, and 50
Afro-Caribbeans), recruited from the United Kingdom Prospective Study of
Diabetes, half of whom had a significant elevation of alanine aminotransferase
(ALT) on at least two occasions and half of whom had consistently normal ALT
levels. In Afro-Caribbean Type 2 diabetic subjects 7/25 (28%) patients with
abnormal ALT and 1/25 (4%) with normal ALT were HCV antibody positive. Among
White Caucasian subjects 6/50 (12%) patients with abnormal LFTs and 0/50 with
normal LFTs were HCV antibody positive and in Asians the prevalence was 2/25 (8%)
and 0/25, respectively. This study suggests that persistent mild to moderate
elevation of serum transaminases in a patient with Type 2 diabetes should not
automatically be attributed to the metabolic disturbances of diabetes.
Particularly in Afro-Caribbean subjects, HCV infection is a major diagnostic
consideration. The question of whether HCV infection itself may have a
diabetogenic action is worthy of further investigation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.1995.tb00466.x 
PMID: 7538925  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

