
1. Eur J Endocrinol. 1995 Oct;133(4):418-24.

Changes in systemic gonadal and adrenal steroids in asymptomatic human
immunodeficiency virus-infected men: relationship with the CD4 cell counts.

Laudat A(1), Blum L, Guéchot J, Picard O, Cabane J, Imbert JC, Giboudeau J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie-Hormonologie, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France.

Serum sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), testosterone, non-SHBG-bound
testosterone, androstenedione, dihydrotestosterone (DHT), dehydroepiandrosterone 
(DHEA), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH) and cortisol
were measured in 58 homosexual men seropositive for human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV), all clinically asymptomatic (Centers for Disease Control 1993
classification stage A). The HIV patients were divided into four groups according
to the CD4 lymphocyte count--group 1 (more than 500/microliters, N = 14), group 2
(between 350 and 500/microliters, N = 16), group 3 (between 200 and
349/microliters, N = 22) and group 4 (less than 200/microliters, N = 6)--and
compared with 11 antibody-negative men as controls. The SHBG levels were
significantly increased in groups 1, 2, 3 (p < 0.01) and 4 (p < 0.05) compared
with controls, with no differences between groups of patients. Compared with
controls, testosterone concentrations were significantly lower in group 4 (p <
0.05) and non-SHBG-bound testosterone levels were significantly lower in groups 1
(p < 0.05), 2 (p < 0.01), 3 (p < 0.001) and group 4 (p < 0.001); DHT and
androstenedione levels were significantly lower in group 4 (p < 0.05) and DHEA
levels were significantly lower in group 2, group 3 (p < 0.01) and group 4 (p <
0.05) than in controls. Cortisol levels were significantly increased in groups 1 
and 4 (p < 0.05) and FSH and LH concentrations were not significantly higher in
HIV-infected men than in controls. Also, the DHEA, androstenedione,
non-SHBG-bound testosterone and DHT levels were correlated with CD4 cell counts, 
showing that hypogonadism occurs as the CD4 lymphocytes decrease.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1530/eje.0.1330418 
PMID: 7581964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

