
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 1995 Jun;14(6):498-503.

Role of antigenemia assay in the early diagnosis and prediction of human
cytomegalovirus organ involvement in AIDS patients.

Francisci D(1), Tosti A, Preziosi R, Baldelli F, Stagni G, Pauluzzi S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Diseases, University of Perugia, Policlinico
Monteluce, Italy.

The role of an antigenemia assay in the diagnosis and prediction of human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) disease in AIDS patients was evaluated. The clinical
history of 62 patients with advanced HIV infection from whom a total of 248 blood
samples were drawn and tested by the HCMV antigenemia assay was examined
retrospectively. Between December 1992 and January 1994, 28 episodes of HCMV
disease with organ involvement were recorded; the antigenemia assay was positive 
in 23 of them (82.1%). In particular, this test was positive in 11 of 12 (91.6%) 
first episodes and in 3 of 3 (100%) recurrent episodes occurring in patients not 
receiving maintenance therapy. The same test was positive in 9 of 13 (69.2%)
recurrent episodes occurring in patients receiving maintenance therapy. The first
occurrence of HCMV disease was always preceded by a positive antigenemia assay 2 
and 4 months before diagnosis (in all 7 patients of the 7 for whom a blood sample
was available before HCMV disease). A positive antigenemia test result was not
always followed by organ involvement, but a high positive cell count (>
100/200,000 polymorphonuclear leukocytes) strongly correlated with the appearance
of HCMV disease in the following 1 to 3 months (100% of cases). The antigenemia
assay is a useful and reliable indirect method for the diagnosis and prediction
of HCMV end-organ disease in severely and persistently immunocompromised AIDS
patients.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02113427 
PMID: 7588822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

