
1. J Virol. 1995 Aug;69(8):4957-62.

Cross-protection of mice against a global spectrum of rabies virus variants.

Lodmell DL(1), Smith JS, Esposito JJ, Ewalt LC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Persistent Viral Diseases, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Hamilton, Montana 59840, USA.

Rabies, a continuing worldwide problem, kills tens of thousands of people and
millions of animals each year. The problem is most severe in developing
countries, where cell culture-derived vaccines are unaffordable and the available
nervous tissue-derived vaccines are often of questionable immunogenicity and may 
produce neurological complications. To determine the feasibility of developing a 
vaccine with worldwide applicability, we investigated whether recombinant
vaccinia viruses expressing either the glycoprotein (G), the nucleoprotein (N),
or both the G and N (GN) of the challenge virus strain (CVS) of rabies virus
would cross-protect mice against 17 rabies virus isolates representing the
spectrum of rabies virus variants found worldwide. The results were compared with
the commercially available human diploid cell vaccine (HDCV). Among mice injected
with any of the 17 viruses, > or = 95% were protected by vaccination with
recombinant viruses expressing G or GN, and > or = 85% of the mice were protected
by the HDCV. The recombinant virus expressing N was less protective, protecting
against only 11 of the 17 viruses. Antibody prepared against the G of the strains
used in the vaccines neutralized all 17 viruses, and sera from mice infected with
any one virus variant cross-neutralized all of the other viruses. Thus, no
antigenic differences that would potentiate vaccine failures were identified.
These studies suggest that a single rabies virus strain or its G would protect
globally against wild-type rabies viruses.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.69.8.4957-4962.1995 
PMCID: PMC189311
PMID: 7609065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

