
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1995 Aug;53(2):134-40.

Temporal dynamics of Puumala virus antibody prevalence in voles and of
nephropathia epidemica incidence in humans.

Niklasson B(1), Hornfeldt B, Lundkvist A, Bjorsten S, Leduc J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Defense Microbiology, Swedish Institute for Infectious Disease
Control, Stockholm.

Puumala (PUU) virus is the etiologic agent of nephropathia epidemica (NE) in
humans. This disease is highly endemic in Vasterbotten county, Sweden, with an
annual incidence of 19.2 (range 3.7-37.4) per 100,000 inhabitants. Voles are
considered to be both the main reservoir and the vector of PUU virus. A total of 
3,591 rodents (mainly Clethrionomys glareolus, C. rufocanus, and Microtus
agrestis) trapped in Vasterbotten between 1979 and 1987 were tested for the
presence of PUU virus antibodies by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The
predominant species, C. glareolus (71% [2,544 of 3,591]), also had the highest
antibody prevalence (19% [483 of 2,544]). In C. glareolus, the antibody
prevalence rate increased with weight (age), reaching more than 50% in the
heaviest weight group, and suggesting that horizontal infection may be important.
The highest frequency (25%) of antibody-positive C. rufocanus was also found in
the highest weight groups. Microtus agrestis showed low absolute numbers and a
low antibody prevalence rate (5%). In C. glareolus, both antibody prevalence and 
weight were recurrently higher in the spring than in the previous fall. The
antibody prevalence rate in spring was positively correlated with the vole
density in the previous fall and spring. The fall antibody prevalence rate was
directly dependent on C. glareolus density. The incidence of human NE in the fall
was dependent on the concurrent density of C. glareolus, whereas the incidence of
NE in the spring was dependent on vole density the previous fall.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.1995.53.134 
PMID: 7677213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

