
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 1993 Mar;91(3):489-94.

Antigenic regions within the hepatitis C virus envelope 1 and non-structural
proteins: identification of an IgG3-restricted recognition site with the envelope
1 protein.

Sällberg M(1), Rudén U, Wahren B, Magnius LO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Bacteriological Laboratory, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Antibody binding to antigenic regions of hepatitis C virus (HCV) envelope 1 (E1; 
residues 183-380, E2/non-structural (NS) 1 (residues 380-437), NS1 (residues
643-690), and NS4 (1684-1751) proteins were assayed for 50 sera with antibodies
to HCV (anti-HCV) and for 46 sera without anti-HCV. Thirty-four peptides, 18
residues long with an eight-amino acid overlap within each HCV region, were
synthesized and tested with all 96 sera. Within the E region 183-380, the major
binding site was located to residues 203-220, and was recognized by eight sera.
Within the E2/NS1 region 380-437, the peptide covering residues 410-427 was
recognized by two sera, and within the NS1 region 643-690, peptides covering
residues 663-690 were recognized by four sera. Within the NS4 region 1684-1751,
27 sera were reactive to one or more of the NS4 peptides, and 21 out of these
were reactive with peptide 1694-1711. One part of the major binding site could be
located to residues 1701-1704, with the sequence Leu-Tyr-Arg-Glu. The IgG1, IgG3 
and IgG4 subclasses were reactive with the five antigenic regions of HCV core,
residues 1-18, 11-28, 21-38, 51-68 and 101-118. Reactivity to the major envelope 
site consisted almost exclusively of IgG3, and reactivity to the major site of
NS4 consisted only of IgG1. Thus, a non-restricted IgG response to linear
HCV-encoded binding sites was found to the core protein, whereas IgG
subclass-restricted linear binding sites were found within the E1 protein, and
within the NS4 protein.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.1993.tb05929.x 
PMCID: PMC1554722
PMID: 7680297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

