
1. Gastroenterology. 1993 Sep;105(3):845-50.

Hepatitis B virus unable to secrete e antigen and response to interferon in
chronic hepatitis B.

Brunetto MR(1), Giarin M, Saracco G, Oliveri F, Calvo P, Capra G, Randone A,
Abate ML, Manzini P, Capalbo M, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Molinette Hospital, Turin, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Anti-hepatitis e antigen-positive chronic hepatitis B is a
progressive liver disease associated with precore mutant hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
and poor response to interferon. Therefore, precore mutant HBV may behave as an
interferon-resistant virus. The relations between the prevalences of wild-type
and precore mutant HBVs in baseline viremias and response to interferon were
analyzed.
METHODS: Sera from 115 patients (59 treated and 56 untreated, followed up for 30 
months) were tested using a quantitative oligonucleotide hybridization assay.
RESULTS: Spontaneous or interferon-induced recoveries were observed in 28.5% (6
of 21) and 47.3% (18 of 38) or in 0% (0 of 35) and 19% (4 of 21) of the patients 
with wild-type prevalent or mutant prevalent HBVs, respectively. Relapses
occurred in 85.7% (12 of 14) and 19.4% (4 of 21) of treated patients with
prevalent precore mutant and prevalent wild-type HBV, respectively (P = 0.0001). 
High precore mutant HBV levels (> 20% of total viremia) were associated with the 
lack of permanent response to interferon (P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Precore mutant HBV can influence the response to interferon when it 
reaches significant serum levels (> 20% of total viremia). Therefore, chronic
hepatitis B should be treated as early as possible in its natural history before 
precore mutant HBV is selected as a prevalent virus.

DOI: 10.1016/0016-5085(93)90903-p 
PMID: 7689519  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

