
1. J Exp Med. 1995 Apr 1;181(4):1575-80.

Human T lymphocyte virus 1 from a leukemogenic cell line mediates in vivo and in 
vitro lymphocyte apoptosis.

Leno M(1), Simpson RM, Bowers FS, Kindt TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA.

HTLV-1 is implicated in the development of diverse diseases. However, most
HTLV-1-infected individuals remain asymptomatic. How HTLV-1 infection leads to
disparate consequences remains a mystery, despite extensive investigation of
HTLV-1 isolates from infected individuals. As in human infection, experimental
HTLV-1 infection in rabbits is generally benign, although HTLV-1-infected rabbit 
T cell lines that mediate lethal leukemia-like disease have been reported. We
report here that thymuses from mature outbred rabbits inoculated with a lethal
leukemia-like disease have been reported. We report here that thymuses from
mature outbred rabbits inoculated with a lethal HTLV-1 T cell line (RH/K34)
showed morphological and biochemical evidence of apoptosis, whereas thymuses from
rabbits inoculated with nonlethal HTLV-1 T cell lines showed no signs of
apoptosis. Exposure of rabbit or human lymphocytes to purified virus from RH/K34 
caused rapid induction of apoptosis, providing an in vitro correlate to the
pathogenic effects. By contrast, virus isolated from a nonlethal cell line
mediated dose-dependent lymphocyte proliferation. These data implicate lymphocyte
apoptosis as a potential mechanism by which the lethal HTLV-1 cell line causes
fulminant disease and provide a means to identify factors contributing to HTLV-1 
disease. Results from this HTLV-1 infection model can provide insight into
variations in HTLV-1 pathogenicity in human infection.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.181.4.1575 
PMCID: PMC2191945
PMID: 7699338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

