
1. Scand J Immunol. 1995 Jun;41(6):593-602.

Molecular analyses of anti-DNA antibodies induced by polyomavirus BK in BALB/c
mice.

Rekvig OP(1), Fredriksen K, Hokland K, Moens U, Traavik T, Krishnan MR, Marion T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, University Hospital of
TromsÃ¸, Norway.

Erratum in
    Scand J Immunol 1995 Aug;42(2):286.

In the present experiments, two groups of BALB/c mice (five individuals in each
group) were hyperimmunized through four consecutive immunizations with either BK 
virus (Group 1) or BK dsDNA complexed with methylated BSA (Group 2). All immune
sera taken after the fourth immunization from both groups reacted strongly with
polyomavirus BK dsDNA as well as with calf thymus dsDNA, and all sera contained
antibodies that bound in the Crithidia luciliae assay. This indicates that
polyomavirus BK was able to induce antibodies with binding characteristics
similar to SLE anti-DNA antibodies. To further characterize these induced
anti-DNA responses, 10 monoclonal anti-DNA antibodies (four from Group 1, and six
from Group 2) were generated and selected for reactivity with S1-nuclease
digested CT dsDNA. Their specificity for BK and CT dsDNA molecules, as well as
their light and heavy chain variable region cDNA nucleotide sequences were
analysed to compare them with known SLE derived anti-DNA antibodies. All of the
10 antibodies bound strongly to BK dsDNA, while seven also bound to CT dsDNA in
competitive ELISA experiments. V-region analysis revealed that the induced
antibodies resembled anti-DNA antibodies characteristic for murine SLE, and all
but one contained arginine in the VH CDR3 region. The arginines present in the
monoclonal antibodies originated either from an RF shift from RF1-->RF3 of the
D-genes or from N-sequence additions. Taken together, the data demonstrate that
anti-DNA antibodies in response to hyperimmunization with polyomavirus BK have
the same characteristics as of those occurring spontaneously in SLE. As virus
infection/replication in vivo implies expression of immunogenic (non-self)
DNA-binding proteins that may render DNA immunogenic, the present results may
therefore suggest one physiological mechanism for production of SLE-related
anti-DNA antibodies.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.1995.tb03612.x 
PMID: 7770729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

