
1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jun 16;270(24):14305-12.

Multiple transcripts for the human cardiac form of the cGMP-inhibited cAMP
phosphodiesterase.

Kasuya J(1), Goko H, Fujita-Yamaguchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Beckman Research Institute of the City of
Hope, Duarte, California 91010, USA.

cDNAs for two distinct Type III cGMP-inhibited (cGI) cyclic nucleotide
phosphodiesterases (PDE), designated cGIP1 and cGIP2, were previously cloned from
rat adipose and human cardiac cDNA libraries, respectively. In this study,
another cDNA (approximately 4.0 kilobase (kb)) encoding a cGI-PDE of 74 kDa (658 
amino acids) was isolated from a human placental cDNA library. The nucleotide
sequence of its open reading frame was virtually identical to a corresponding
region in the 3' portion of the cardiac cGIP2 cDNA (approximately 7.6 kb) which
encoded a approximately 125-kDa cGI-PDE (1141 amino acid). Northern blots and
RNase protection assays revealed a prominent 4.4-kb transcript and a 7.6-kb
transcript in human placenta. The transcription start site of the 4.4-kb
transcript was assigned to cardiac cDNA nucleotide 1292, the putative beginning
of exon 3 of the human cGIP2 gene, with a potential translation initiation site
183 bases downstream, as determined by RNase protection assay. The 5'-flanking
region of the 4.4-kb transcript exhibited promoter activity in HeLa cells which
expressed the 4.4-kb transcript, and contained a TATAA sequence 35 base pairs
upstream from the tentative transcription start site. Recombinant cGI-PDEs,
expressed in Sf9 cells from the 7.6- and 4.0-kb cDNA, exhibited differences in
their subcellular localization and Km for cGMP. Thus, in human tissues,
alternative transcription may contribute to generating at least two cGIP2
isoforms, cytosolic and membrane-associated cGI-PDEs with different Km values for
cGMP.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.24.14305 
PMID: 7782288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

