
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Dec 20;91(26):12634-8.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type I Tax-protein-mediated activation of NF-kappa B 
from p100 (NF-kappa B2)-inhibited cytoplasmic reservoirs.

Kanno T(1), Franzoso G, Siebenlist U.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

The human T-cell leukemia virus type I Tax protein transforms T cells through
induced expression of many cellular genes, including those encoding the
growth-related proteins interleukin 2 and the alpha chain of its receptor.
Induction of these genes is mediated, at least in part, through Tax-dependent
posttranslational activation of NF-kappa B, typically heterodimers of p50
(NF-kappa B1) and p65 (RelA). The preexisting NF-kappa B proteins are retained in
the cytoplasm of cells by association with inhibitory ankyrin-motif-containing I 
kappa B proteins, primarily I kappa B-alpha but also including the precursor
proteins p105 (NF-kappa B1) and p100 (NF-kappa B2). Here we demonstrate the
existence of a previously undescribed multimeric cytoplasmic complex in which
NF-kappa B dimers are associated with the p100 inhibitor in a manner dependent on
the precursor protein's ankyrin domain. We also demonstrate an antagonistic
effect of the Tax protein on the cytoplasmic sequestration function of p100; this
in turn leads to nuclear translocation of NF-kappa B dimers liberated from
multimeric complexes. Tax may exert these effects through the physical
association with p100. Tax also relieves the p100-mediated inhibition of DNA
binding by p50-p65 heterodimers in vitro. The results demonstrate a mechanism by 
which Tax may activate NF-kappa B in T cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.91.26.12634 
PMCID: PMC45493
PMID: 7809091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

