
1. J Virol. 1995 Apr;69(4):2159-67.

Restriction of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 production in a human
astrocytoma cell line is associated with a cellular block in Rev function.

Neumann M(1), Felber BK, Kleinschmidt A, Froese B, Erfle V, Pavlakis GN,
Brack-Werner R.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-Institute of Molecular Virology, Oberschleissheim, Germany.

Chronically human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) strain IIIB-infected
human TH4-7-5 astrocytoma cells show low-level virus production. Cocultivation of
TH4-7-5 cells with myelomonocytic cells led to active virus production in these
target cells after a lag period, indicating cell-determined restriction of virus 
replication in the glial cells. HIV-1 transcript patterns of TH4-7-5 cells
contained only a small proportion of Rev-dependent mRNA species, mimicking a
Rev-negative phenotype despite the presence of rev mRNAs and protein. Sequencing 
of the single provirus integrated in TH4-7-5 cells demonstrated that the rev gene
and the Rev-responsive element are intact. These results suggested inhibited
function of the Rev-regulatory unit in these astrocytoma cells. Transfection of
TH4-7-5 cells with a Rev expression plasmid resulted in weak or no induction of
proviral p24gag antigen levels compared with the dramatic increase observed in
Rev-permissive HeLa cells. Immunofluorescence analysis of TH4-7-5 cells
transfected with a rev-expressing plasmid revealed prominent cytoplasmic and
nuclear-nucleolar localization of Rev, in contrast to the predominant
nuclear-nucleolar localization pattern of Rev in HeLa cells. We conclude that
restriction of virus production in TH4-7-5 cells is at least partially due to a
block in Rev-dependent posttranscriptional regulation of HIV expression.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.69.4.2159-2167.1995 
PMCID: PMC188884
PMID: 7884864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

