
1. Lancet. 1978 Aug 5;2(8084):277-9.

Comparison of sucrose with glucose in oral therapy of infant diarrhoea.

Nalin DR, Levine MM, Mata L, de Cespedes C, Vargas W, Lizano C, Loria AR, Simhon 
A, Mohs E.

In a randomised double-blind trial, 51 5--10% dehydrated infants were rehydrated 
with oral electrolyte solutions containing sucrose or glucose. Most infants in
both groups were successfully rehydrated, but the sucrose solution produced a
slower correction of electrolyte abnormalities and a higher percentage of
patients who needed more than 24 h of therapy. Where there is adequate knowledge 
of the oral therapy method sucrose can substitute for glucose in many cases;
where there is a choice glucose is recommended.

PIP: 51 infants aged 3 to 12 months with dehydration due to acute watery diarrhea
were randomly assigned to either the glucose or sucrose oral therapy group on
admission to the hospital. Oral rehydration and maintenance without any
intravenous fluids was successful in 100% and 92% of patients in the glucose and 
sucrose groups respectively, as evidenced by the subjects' weight gain, fall in
plasma proteins and hematocrit, and disappearance of clinical signs of
dehydration. There was a greater improvement in mean HC03 in the glucose group
than in the sucrose group. Both groups exhibited decline in mean serum
osmolarity. The 2 oral treatment failures in the sucrose group occurred in
patients who could not absorb the solutions adequately. This study shows that
oral therapy with sucrose is less efficient than oral therapy with glucose.
However, in areas where only sucrose is available and where knowledge and means
of using oral therapy exist, the oral sucrose solution can be used to treat most 
infants with diarrhea and 5 to 10% dehydration.
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(78)91686-0 
PMID: 79080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

