
1. Transfusion. 1994 Oct;34(10):865-9.

The effectiveness of the confidential unit exclusion option.

Petersen LR(1), Lackritz E, Lewis WF, Smith DS, Herrera G, Raimondi V,
Aberle-Grasse J, Dodd RY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of HIV/AIDS, National Center for Infectious Diseases, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.

Comment in
    Transfusion. 1994 Oct;34(10):840-1.

BACKGROUND: The confidential unit exclusion (CUE) option is intended to reduce
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) transmission by excluding donors newly
infected with HIV who have not yet developed HIV antibody (window-period donors);
however, its efficacy in excluding window-period donors has not been evaluated.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: The use of the CUE option was studied among the donors 
of 3.7 million units at 18 American Red Cross blood services regions during 1991 
and 1992 and among 322 previously HIV-1-seronegative donors who subsequently
donated a seropositive unit between 1987 and 1990 at 40 United States blood
centers. These seroconverting donors had previously been shown to be highly
likely to donate during their window period.
RESULTS: On the basis of data from these two populations, it was estimated that
only 3 to 5 percent of units donated by window-period donors were not transfused 
because of the CUE option, that 0.4 percent of all donations were from donors who
confidentially excluded their blood from transfusion, and that donors who
confidentially excluded their blood were 21 times more likely to be HIV
antibody-positive than donors who did not use the CUE option. It is estimated
that, if all US blood centers used the CUE option, a total of 2 to 17 otherwise
acceptable units donated by window-period donors would not be transfused
annually.
CONCLUSION: Although donors who confidentially exclude their blood from
transfusion are 21 times more likely to have HIV antibody, the rarity of
window-period donors and the infrequency of confidential exclusion by
window-period donors cause the CUE option to have minimal impact on transfusion
safety.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1537-2995.1994.341095026971.x 
PMID: 7940657  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

