
1. Clin Immunol Immunopathol. 1994 Jul;72(1):98-104.

Gamma delta T-cell fraction of peripheral blood is increased in recurrent
aphthous ulceration.

Pedersen A(1), Ryder LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Dentistry, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

Recurrent aphthous ulceration (RAU) is the most common oral mucosal disease. The 
etiology is unresolved but several studies have suggested a systemic
immunoregulatory imbalance in the patients. The purpose of the present study was 
to assess possible signs of immunologic deficiency or activation of peripheral
blood mononuclear cells in patients with RAU by flow cytometry using three-color 
immunofluorescent staining which has not previously been employed in this patient
category. The population consisted of 13 and 14 otherwise healthy patients with
active and inactive RAU, respectively, and 18 healthy volunteers with a negative 
RAU history served as controls. The most striking observation was an increased
fraction of T-cell receptor (TCR)-gamma delta+ cells in patients with active RAU 
(median percentage 8.5) compared with controls (median percentage 2.8; P < 0.001)
and patients with inactive RAU (median percentage 5.0; P < 0.01). The fraction of
peripheral TCR-gamma delta cells has not previously been determined in patients
with RAU but the increased figures during active disease might reflect an
immunologic stimulation during exacerbation. The nature of the stimulus remains
to be established, but recent studies suggest that varicella zoster virus and/or 
cytomegalovirus may be involved. The potential role of TCR-gamma delta cells in
RAU lesions has not yet been investigated but appears to be an obvious issue for 
future studies.

DOI: 10.1006/clin.1994.1112 
PMID: 8020200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

