
1. Dev Biol Stand. 1993;81:191-7.

Affinity chromatography to remove viruses during preparation of plasma
derivatives.

Lawrence JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Group, Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Duarte, CA 91010.

The use of affinity chromatography methods to purify proteins from complex
solutions is well established. The specific use of immuno-affinity
chromatography, wherein antibody directed toward a target protein is utilized,
has proven to be a particularly effective purification method. Application of
immuno-affinity chromatography methods for the isolation of plasma derivatives
has now been established and the purity of such products has been truly
remarkable. Studies conducted by Baxter have compared the effect of
immuno-affinity chromatography on the separation of plasma protein contaminants
and model viruses from Factor VIII:C. The results of these studies have indicated
that plasma protein contaminant (eg. fibrinogen) reduction during the process of 
Factor VIII:C immuno-affinity chromatography occurs more gradually than does
virus reduction. By using residual plasma protein contamination in Factor VIII:C 
preparations, the general effectiveness of the immuno-affinity chromatography
step in removing virus can be routinely evaluated. Determinations made by Baxter 
have indicated that greater than 4 logs of reduction in protein contamination is 
routinely achieved during Factor VIII:C immuno-affinity chromatography at
manufacturing scale. Bench scale studies have confirmed this result as well as
showing the reduction of model viruses. While the viral safety of plasma
derivatives is dependent on the overall manufacturing process, it is clear that
immuno-affinity chromatography offers a powerful means of reducing product
contamination and enhancing safety.


PMID: 8174803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

