
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1976 Jul;73(7):2443-7.

Enveloped virus acquires membrane defect when passaged in fibroblasts from I-cell
disease patients.

Sly WS, Lagwinska E, Schlesinger S.

Sindbis virus obtained after passage on human fibroblasts from patients with
I-cell disease (mucolipidosis II) and called I-cell virus differed from Sindbis
virus obtained from chick fibroblasts or from normal human fibroblasts in two
ways: (1) The I-cell virus was extremely unstable to freezing and thawing, (2)
The I-cell virus showed greatly exaggerated sensitivity to inactivation by Triton
X-100. Sindbis virus from fibroblasts from two patients with mucolipidosis III, a
milder form of I-cell disease, showed similar, though milder, freeze-sensitivity.
When freeze-sensitive I-cell virus was passaged once in mouse L-cells or normal
human fibroblasts, the virus was no longer abnormal. The viral glycoproteins of
I-cell virus were not distinguishable from viral glycoproteins of controls by
sodium dodecyl sulfate gel electrophoresis. Gel filtration of the glycopeptides
suggested small differences in two of the four glycopeptides. These findings
indicate that Sindbis virus is phenotypically altered when grown on I-cell
fibroblasts. These alterations must be attributed to viral envelope components
derived from the host plasma membrane (membrane lipids) or to alterations in
viral envelope glycoproteins. In either case, the alterations appear related to
the genetic defect in I-cell fibroblasts. From these results it is clear that
enveloped viruses can be useful to demonstrate and to analyze membrane defects in
certain human diseases. The phenotypically altered viruses may, in turn, provide 
probes for studying the functional relationships of virus membrane components.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.73.7.2443 
PMCID: PMC430601
PMID: 821054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

