
1. J Virol. 1994 Jan;68(1):148-57.

Attenuated hepatitis A virus: genetic determinants of adaptation to growth in
MRC-5 cells.

Funkhouser AW(1), Purcell RH, D'Hondt E, Emerson SU.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

A live candidate hepatitis A virus vaccine, developed from the HM-175 strain and 
adapted to growth in primary African green monkey kidney (AGMK) cells, was
adapted to growth in MRC-5 cells. The nucleotide sequence of the MRC-5
cell-adapted virus was determined and compared with the known sequence of the
AGMK cell-adapted virus. Thirteen unique mutations, which occurred during passage
in MRC-5 cells, were identified. Four of the unique mutations were located in a
cluster in the 5' noncoding region (NC), and three of the remaining nine
mutations encoded amino acid changes. Infectious chimeric cDNAs were constructed 
from infectious cDNA clones of the AGMK cell-adapted and wild-type HM-175 viruses
and PCR-amplified cDNA segments of the MRC-5 cell-adapted virus. The viruses
encoded by these plasmids were recovered after transfection of cultured cells
with in vitro transcripts, and their growth phenotypes in fetal rhesus kidney 4
(FRhK-4) and MRC-5 cells were determined. The important growth-enhancing
mutations could be divided into three sets. Two of these were located in the 5'
NC region, and the third was located in the 2C nonstructural gene. The mutations 
in the 5' NC region that developed during passage in MRC-5 cells were
indispensable for efficient growth in MRC-5 cells, but a combination of the two
groups in the 5' NC region and one in the 2C gene were required to increase
growth dramatically in MRC-5 cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.68.1.148-157.1994 
PMCID: PMC236273
PMID: 8254724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

