
1. J Med Virol. 1993 Jun;40(2):170-3.

Hepatitis B and hepatitis C among institutionalized psychiatric patients in
Taiwan.

Chang TT(1), Lin H, Yen YS, Wu HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital,
Tainan, Taiwan, Republic of China.

To investigate the seroprevalence of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and
antibodies to hepatitis C virus (anti-HCV) in a psychiatric institution in
Taiwan, where hepatitis B virus (HBV) is hyperendemic, a total of 780 patients
with psychiatric disorders were studied. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays
(ELISA) were used for testing HBsAg and anti-HCV. The prevalence of HBsAg was
higher than that of anti-HCV among these patients (18.1% vs. 6.8%, P < 0.0001).
The HBsAg carrier rate in these patients was consistent with that of the general 
population, with a trend for HBsAg carrier rate to be lower in the aged and in
females. In contrast, the prevalence of anti-HCV was higher in these patients
than in general population. Anti-HCV positivity was found more frequently in
patients who had received blood transfusion previously (24% vs. 6.4%, P < 0.05). 
The majority (92%) of patients with positive anti-HCV did not have a history of
apparent parenteral exposure. The prevalence of anti-HCV increased significantly 
with duration of the psychiatric disorder. The prevalence of anti-HCV also tended
to increase with duration of hospitalization but without reaching statistical
significance. These findings suggest that these institutionalized psychiatric
patients contract hepatitis B, as does the general population in Taiwan, and they
should be considered as a specific risk group for hepatitis C infection.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.1890400216 
PMID: 8360635  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

