
1. J Virol. 1993 Oct;67(10):6087-95.

Transactivation of the P2 promoter of parathyroid hormone-related protein by
human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I Tax1: evidence for the involvement of
transcription factor Ets1.

Dittmer J(1), Gitlin SD, Reid RL, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892.

Expression of the parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP), a protein that
plays a primary role in the development of the humoral hypercalcemia of
malignancy, is regulated by two distinct promoters, P1 and P2. PTHrP is
overexpressed in lymphocytes from adult T-cell leukemia patients. We now
demonstrate that in the human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I-transformed cell
line MT-2, RNA synthesis is initiated primarily at the P2 promoter. Furthermore, 
in cotransfection experiments, Tax1 transactivates the P2 promoter 10- to
12-fold. By using deletion and site-specific point mutations, we have identified 
a promoter-proximal sequence (positions -72 to -40) which is important for Tax1
transactivation. The PTHrP promoter-proximal element contains two potential
overlapping Ets1 binding sites, EBS I and EBS II. Gel shift analysis demonstrated
that Ets1 binds specifically to both EBS I and EBS II. Mutation of the consensus 
GGAA core motif in EBS I abolished binding and Tax1 transactivation in Jurkat T
lymphocytes. In Ets1-deficient cells, cotransfection of Tax1 and Ets1 expression 
plasmids stimulates PTHrP promoter activity. In the absence of Ets1, minimal
transactivation of the PTHrP promoter is observed. These data suggest that Ets1
binds to EBS I and cooperates with Tax1 to transactivate the PTHrP P2 promoter.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.67.10.6087-6095.1993 
PMCID: PMC238030
PMID: 8371355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

