
1. Acta Cytol. 1993 Jan-Feb;37(1):93-6.

Cytologic diagnosis of cytomegaloviral esophagitis. A report of three acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome-related cases.

Teot LA(1), Ducatman BS, Geisinger KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wake Forest University, Bowman Gray School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is recognized as a common cause of infectious esophagitis
in patients with the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). The radiographic 
and endoscopic findings are variable, and although some features are suggestive
of CMV esophagitis, none is specific. The mainstay of the diagnosis of this
disease has been histologic demonstration of the characteristic intranuclear and 
intracytoplasmic inclusions. We report three patients with AIDS-related CMV
esophagitis in whom cytologic smears from esophageal brushings contained
diagnostic cells characterized by nuclear and cytoplasmic enlargement; marginated
chromatin; large, basophilic intranuclear inclusions surrounded by a clear halo; 
and granular, eosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusions. In one case the initial
diagnosis was made from the biopsies, and only after careful review were cells
diagnostic of CMV infection identified in the cytologic smears. In that patient, 
numerous cells with herpes simplex virus-related changes were present and
probably masked the presence of the CMV-infected cells. In contrast, the biopsies
from another patient showed only necrotic debris and inflammatory cells, whereas 
the cytologic preparations revealed cells with the characteristic CMV inclusions.
With improved therapy for this often-debilitating opportunistic infection, rapid 
and accurate diagnosis is imperative. Cytology complements histology, and
concurrent use of these diagnostic modalities will detect CMV esophagitis more
frequently than will either technique alone.


PMID: 8382003  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

