
1. J Exp Med. 1993 May 1;177(5):1451-9.

The selective ablation of interleukin 2-producing cells isolated from transgenic 
mice.

Minasi LE(1), Kamogawa Y, Carding S, Bottomly K, Flavell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Immunobiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06510.

To better understand the requirement for interleukin 2 (IL-2) in specific immune 
responses, we have established the use of cell ablation to selectively eliminate 
T cells that produce IL-2. To accomplish this we have generated transgenic mice
that express the herpes simplex virus 1-thymidine kinase (HSV-TK) gene under the 
transcriptional control of the murine IL-2 promoter that renders IL-2-producing
cells sensitive to the cytotoxic effects of the antiviral drug ganciclovir
(GANC). HSV-TK activity was specifically expressed in activated T cells from
transgenic mice. When CD4 T cells from transgenic mice were stimulated with the
superantigen staphylococcal enterotoxin A (SEA) in the presence of GANC,
proliferation and IL-2 production were almost completely inhibited and the
activated CD4+V beta 3+ T cell population, eliminated. Proliferation was not
restored by adding IL-2, showing that most proliferating cells are not bystander 
cells. In contrast, the proliferative response to concanavalin A (Con A) was only
partially inhibited by treatment of CD4 T cells with GANC, although the
efficiency of eliminating IL-2-producing cells was shown to be comparable with
that achieved using SEA. This suggests that a portion of the proliferative
response to Con A occurs via an alternative pathway not requiring IL-2 synthesis 
and release.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.177.5.1451 
PMCID: PMC2191023
PMID: 8386745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

