
1. Virology. 1993 Jun;194(2):654-64.

Glycoproteins gIII and gp50 play dominant roles in the biphasic attachment of
pseudorabies virus.

Karger A(1), Mettenleiter TC.

Author information: 
(1)Federal Research Centre for Virus Diseases of Animals, TÃ¼bingen, Germany.

Virus infections are initiated by adsorption of virions to target cells. This
step is mediated by viral attachment proteins that interact with specific
cellular receptors. It has previously been shown that the alphaherpesvirus
pseudorabies virus (PrV) attaches to cells by way of a process that involves the 
viral envelope glycoprotein gIII (gC) and a heparin-like cellular surface moiety 
(T. C. Mettenleiter, L. Zsak, F. Zuckermann, N. Sugg, H. Kern, and T. Ben-Porat
(1990) J. Virol. 64, 278-286). To gain further insight into adsorption of PrV
different incubation protocols and an isogenic set of glycoprotein deletion
mutants were analyzed. Here we show that attachment of wildtype PrV to target
cells can be divided into three distinct stages: After primary adsorption, virus 
cannot be removed by a thorough wash with PBS but can be displaced by exogenous
heparin defining a heparin-sensitive adsorption step. This primary adsorption at 
0 degrees converts with a half-time of approximately 20 min into a
heparin-resistant binding where attached virus is no longer sensitive to
exogenous heparin. The presence of heparin during the adsorption process leads to
a heparin-independent basal virus binding to cells. Analysis of null mutants in
six PrV glycoproteins confirmed that the nonessential glycoprotein gIII (gC) is a
major determinant of primary adsorption. The presence of both gIII and the
essential glycoprotein gp50 (gD) was shown to be critical for heparin-resistant
binding. The importance of gp50 for this process was demonstrated in two isogenic
wildtype PrV and gp50- mutant pairs. Similar results were obtained with a mutant 
bovine herpesvirus 1 lacking the gD-homologous glycoprotein gIV, indicating a
general role for the gD-homologous proteins in stable attachment of
alphaherpesviruses. Since the gD-homologs are also involved in penetration they
might link the processes of viral attachment and entry.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1993.1305 
PMID: 8389078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

