
1. J Gen Virol. 1993 Jun;74 ( Pt 6):1063-71.

Enhancement of phospholipase activity during poliovirus infection.

Irurzun A(1), PÃ©rez L, Carrasco L.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biologia Molecular, UAM-CSIC, Madrid, Spain.

Infection of human cells with poliovirus leads to modification of phospholipase
activity. Phospholipase C, which generates inositol triphosphate, is stimulated, 
whereas the activation of phospholipase A2 by the calcium ionophore A23187 is
inhibited. Analysis of phospholipid moieties in media of HeLa cells infected with
poliovirus indicates that the release of fatty acids is not enhanced during
infection, suggesting that phospholipase A1 and A2 activities are not stimulated.
The release of choline into the medium is significantly higher 3 h after
infection, indicating that a phospholipase that has phosphatidylcholine as its
substrate becomes activated. This activation requires viral gene expression
because inhibitors of poliovirus gene expression added at the beginning of
infection block choline release, but continuous viral protein synthesis is not
required. Choline and phosphorylcholine are released into the medium, but the
pools of both are gradually depleted in poliovirus-infected cells, perhaps as a
consequence of their release into the medium and the increased synthesis of
phospholipids that takes place in poliovirus-infected cells. Inhibitors of
phospholipase activity such as mepacrine, zinc or cadmium ions significantly
reduce this increased release of choline from poliovirus-infected cells.
Labelling of cells with [3H]phosphatidylcholine suggests that the choline
released from infected cells comes, at least in part, from the hydrolysis of this
compound. These results indicate that, in addition to the activation of the
phospholipase C which hydrolyses phosphatidylinositol in poliovirus-infected
cells, a phospholipase C that acts on a phosphatidylcholine is also activated.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-74-6-1063 
PMID: 8389798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

