
1. J Biol Chem. 1993 Jun 15;268(17):12736-43.

Phage and Escherichia coli expression of the human high affinity immunoglobulin E
receptor alpha-subunit ectodomain. Domain localization of the IgE-binding site.

Robertson MW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Protein Engineering, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

The high affinity IgE receptor is a multisubunit complex that participates in
IgE-dependent activation of mast cells and basophils. The IgE-binding portion of 
the receptor resides exclusively in the alpha-subunit and specifically within the
180 residues of the mature extracytoplasmic portion. In this study the contiguous
two-domain human alpha-subunit has been displayed on the surface of a filamentous
bacteriophage in a form that specifically binds both human and murine IgE but not
other isotypes. Phage display of the individual immunoglobulin-like domains
reveals that the IgE-binding portion resides exclusively in the COOH-terminal
domain and that this domain appears to bind IgE with lower affinity than the
comparably displayed two-domain fragment. Phage display results using a chimeric 
rat-human alpha-subunit fragment suggest that structural elements within the
NH2-terminal domain are necessary to impart high affinity IgE binding activity to
the alpha-chain ectodomain. The two-domain human receptor fragment was also
expressed in a soluble form from Escherichia coli and purified in one step by
affinity chromatography. The solution binding of the purified receptor fragment
to IgE was measured by fluorescence quench which afforded an approximate
equilibrium affinity constant of 2 x 10(9) M-1 together with a stoichiometry of 1
receptor molecule/molecule of IgE. The complementary approach of phage display
and E. coli expression used in this study represents a useful strategy for
further analysis of discrete receptor epitope(s) that contribute to IgE binding
activity.


PMID: 8509408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

