
1. Biochemistry. 1996 Apr 30;35(17):5359-65.

On the dynamics and conformation of the HA2 domain of the influenza virus
hemagglutinin.

Kim CH(1), Macosko JC, Yu YG, Shin YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley 94720, USA.

To investigate the dynamics and conformation of the membrane-interacting HA2
domain of the hemagglutinin protein of influenza virus, the peripheral part of
the HA2 domain (aa 1-127) was expressed in Escherichia coli. Four consecutive
single-cysteine mutants, F63C, H64C, Q65C, and I66C, were generated using
site-directed mutagenesis. This region is proposed to undergo a conformational
change from a loop to a helical coiled-coil when going from the native to the
fusion-active state [Bullough et al. (1994) Nature (London) 371, 37-43]. In the
trimeric coiled-coil geometry positions 63 and 66 belong to the core so that
cysteines from individual monomers are spatially close. On the other hand,
positions 64 and 65 face the aqueous phase so that cyteines from monomers are
spatially remote. The mutants were studied with cysteine-cysteine cross-linking
and the spin-labeling electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) in both the
membrane-bound state and in the detergent-solubilized state. Extensive
intramolecular cysteine-cysteine cross-linking was observed not only for F63C and
I66C but also for H64C. Rates of cross-linking were comparable for these three
mutants at physiological temperatures. These results are inconsistent with what
is expected for a well-defined coiled-coil and suggest that the region containing
the mutation sites is flexible. However, a characteristic cross-linking pattern
consistent with a well-defined coiled-coil developed at very low temperatures.
Line shapes of EPR spectra also indicate that this region is dynamic at ambient
temperatures. Such flexibility perhaps arises from an equilibrium between a
coiled-coil and a random coil conformation. No significant changes of the EPR
spectra were observed upon lowering the pH to fusogenic conditions, suggesting
that this flexible structure is the stable conformation at both neutral and low
pH. The dynamic flexibility of this region may have important implications for
the mechanism of HA-induced membrane fusion; for example it may be required for
the apposition of the viral and endosomal membranes.

DOI: 10.1021/bi960332+ 
PMID: 8611525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

