
1. Clin Infect Dis. 1995 Oct;21(4):930-7.

Factors associated with changes in the use of antiretroviral therapy by a cohort 
of homosexual men infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1.

Park LP(1), Graham NM, Jacobson LP, Murphy R, Besley D, Zucconi S, Mu√±oz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Changes in the use of antiretroviral drugs and factors associated with changes
from monotherapy with zidovudine (ZDV) to other regimens were quantified in the
Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study. Participants who had been receiving monotherapy
with ZDV were categorized as (1) discontinuing ZDV monotherapy; (2) switching to 
disanosine (ddI), zalcitabine (ddC), or stavudine (d4T) monotherapy; (3)
switching to combination therapy (ZDV with ddI, ddC, or d4T); or (4) continuing
ZDV monotherapy. From 1990 to 1994, the percentage of participants using ZDV
monotherapy decreased from 27% to 17% (among participants without AIDS) and from 
60% to 17% (among those with AIDS). At the same time, the proportion of
participants using combination therapy increased from zero to 8% (no AIDS) and
from 8% to 26% (AIDS). Polychotomous logistic regression methods were used to
identify the factors predicting changes from ZDV monotherapy. Among participants 
without AIDS, indicators of drug failure (such as a lower CD4 lymphocyte count or
symptoms of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection) were predictive of the
initiation of combination therapy, while among patients with AIDS they were
predictive of a switch to an alternative monotherapy. A decrease in hemoglobin
levels, a marker of ZDV toxicity, was predictive for all patients of a switch to 
other monotherapy. These data show that clinicians and patients are opting for
more aggressive antiretroviral regiments and that changes in CD4 lymphocyte count
and in the status of symptoms remain the primary guides for changes in therapy.

DOI: 10.1093/clinids/21.4.930 
PMID: 8645842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

