
1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 1996 Feb;11(2):159-65.

Long-term administration of natural interferon-alpha in patients with chronic
hepatitis C: relationship to serum RNA concentration, HCV-RNA genotypes,
histological changes and hepatitis C virus.

Kumada T(1), Nakano S, Takeda I, Sugiyama K, Osada T, Kiriyama S, Toyoda H, Sasa 
T, Shibata M, Morishima T, Nakano I, Fukuda Y, Kosaka Y, Tameda Y, Nakashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Ogaki Municipal Hospital, Gifu, Japan.

To virologically assess the efficacy of interferon therapy in chronic hepatitis
C, either 5 or 10 MU/day natural interferon-alpha (IFN alpha) was administered to
57 patients with chronic hepatitis C for 38 weeks. A complete and sustained
response (CR-SR), as evidenced by the absence of serum hepatitis C virus
(HCV)-RNA during the administration period and at 6 months after the final
administration of IFN alpha and normal GPT level at 6 months after final
administration, occurred in 42.6% (23/54) of subjects. Liver tissue was
histologically evaluated using the histological activity index (HAI) score before
and after the administration period. In CR-SR cases, significant improvements (P 
< 0.01) occurred in periportal necrosis, intralobular necrosis, portal
inflammation and total score. A comparison, by HCV genotypes, revealed that CR-SR
occurred in 60% (9/15) of subjects with type 2a and 30.3% (10/33) of subjects
with type 1b. A comparison by virus concentration revealed that CR-SR occurred in
71.4% (15/21) of those subjects having a virus concentration of < 10(5)
copies/mL, but in only 24.2% (8/33) of those having a virus concentration of >
10(5) copies/mL. Analysis by a multiple logistic model revealed a strong
correlation between the therapeutic effect of interferon therapy and the
pre-administration virus concentration (P = 0.0061) and genotype (P = 0.0015).
These results suggest that the pre-administration virus concentration and
genotype are both key factors affecting the therapeutic effect of interferon
therapy in chronic hepatitis C and that the therapeutic effect of interferon is
satisfactorily high, irrespective of virus concentration, in subjects with type
2a HCV, but varies depending on virus concentration in subjects with type 1b.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.1996.tb00054.x 
PMID: 8672762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

