
1. J Virol. 1996 Sep;70(9):6378-83.

The 126- and 183-kilodalton proteins of tobacco mosaic virus, and not their
common nucleotide sequence, control mosaic symptom formation in tobacco.

Bao Y(1), Carter SA, Nelson RS.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation, Ardmore, Oklahoma 73402, USA.

Nucleotide substitutions at two positions within the open reading frame encoding 
the 126-kDa protein in the attenuated masked (M) strain of tobacco mosaic
tobamovirus (TMV) to those found in the virulent U1-TMV genome led to the
induction of near U1-TMV-like symptoms on leaves of Nicotiana tabacum L. cv.
Xanthi nn by progeny virus (M. H. Shintaku, S. A. Carter, Y. Bao, and R. S.
Nelson, Virology 221:218-225, 1996). In this study, further site-directed
mutations were made at these positions within the M strain cDNA to determine
whether the protein or nucleotide sequence directly controlled the symptom
phenotype. The protein and not the nucleotide sequence directly controlled the
symptom phenotype when amino acid 360 within the 126-kDa protein sequence was
altered and likely controlled the symptom phenotype when amino acid 601 was
altered. The effects of the substitutions at amino acid position 360 on viral
protein accumulation were studied by pulse-labeling proteins in infected
protoplasts. Accumulation of the 126- and 183-kDa proteins was less for an
attenuated mutant than for two virulent mutants, but the viral movement protein
and coat protein accumulated to levels reported to be sufficient for normal
systemic symptom development. The size of necrotic local lesions on N. tabacum L.
cv. Xanthi NN was negatively correlated with symptom development and accumulation
of the 126-kDa protein for these mutants. With reference to this last finding, an
explanation of the cause of the differing symptoms induced by these viruses is
presented.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.70.9.6378-6383.1996 
PMCID: PMC190664
PMID: 8709266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

