
1. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1996 Mar-Apr;90(2):199-203.

Cytokine secretion in vivo and ex vivo following chemotherapy of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infection.

Friedland JS(1), Hartley JC, Hartley CG, Shattock RJ, Griffin GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Bacteriology, Royal Postgraduate Medical
School, London, UK.

The human immune response to tuberculosis is partly mediated by the
proinflammatory cytokines tumour necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin (IL)-6, and
IL-8. We investigated plasma concentrations of these cytokines before and after
maximal lipopolysaccharide stimulation ex vivo of whole blood leucocytes from
Zambian patients. 32 patients with non-fatal tuberculosis, 25 of whom were
seropositive for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), were followed for 9 months. 
Patients were assessed at presentation to hospital (visit A), after 2 months'
antimycobacterial therapy (visit B), and when chemotherapy was completed (visit
C). Between visits A and B, patients regained weight (P = 0.03) and became less
anaemic (P = 0.0001). At visit B, haemoglobin concentration remained lower in HIV
seropositive patients (P = 0.001) and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR),
initially elevated in all patients, was higher in HIV seropositive patients (100 
+/- 6 mm vs. 43 +/- 11 mm in 1 h in seronegative patients; P = 0.002). Plasma
IL-8 concentrations were increased at visit C as was IL-8 secretion ex vivo (P < 
0.0001 at all time points). Otherwise plasma cytokine levels and secretion ex
vivo remained similar throughout the study. Concurrent HIV infection resulted in 
persistently decreased IL-6 secretions ex vivo although ESR remained high. In
summary, after antibiotic therapy in vivo IL-8 secretion ex vivo increased, which
supports other data suggesting that IL-8 has a role in immunity to tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1016/s0035-9203(96)90141-8 
PMID: 8761591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

