
1. Intern Med. 1996 Mar;35(3):195-9.

Spontaneous proliferation of and cytokine production by T cells adherent to human
endothelial cells in patients with human T-lymphotropic virus type I-associated
myelopathy.

Nakamura T(1), Nishiura Y, Ichinose K, Shirabe S, Tsujino A, Goto H, Furuya T,
Nagataki S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki University School of Medicine.

We previously reported increased adherence of T cells to human endothelial cells 
(EC) in patients with HTLV-I-associated myelopathy (HAM). To define the
immunological function of EC-adherent T cells from HAM patients, we investigated 
the degree of spontaneous proliferation and the production of inflammatory
cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) and granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Both
the degree of spontaneous proliferation and the production of TNF-alpha,
IFN-gamma, and GM-CSF by EC-adherent T cells of HAM patients were significantly
increased, compared to anti-HTLV-I seronegative controls. Furthermore, in HAM
patients, spontaneous proliferation and production of inflammatory cytokines by
EC-adherent T cells were significantly higher than that of EC-non-adherent T
cells. Conversely, those functions of EC-non-adherent T cells were significantly 
lower than that of unseparated cells, which were T cells before application to
EC. We demonstrated that EC-adherent T cells were qualitatively and
quantitatively more hyperactive than those of anti-HTLV-I seronegative controls
and the population of activated T cells of HAM patients was concentrated in
EC-adherent T cells rather than in EC-non-adherent T cells. Our results suggest
that EC-adherent T cells in the peripheral blood of HAM are intimately involved
in the immunopathogenesis of HAM.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.35.195 
PMID: 8785452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

