
1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1996 Feb;7(2):325-30.

Impact of high-dose oral acyclovir prophylaxis on cytomegalovirus (CMV) disease
in CMV high-risk renal transplant recipients.

Kletzmayr J(1), Kotzmann H, Popow-Kraupp T, Kovarik J, Klauser R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Dialysis, University of Vienna, Austria.

Recent studies showed contradictory results concerning the efficacy of oral
acyclovir in the prevention or amelioration of cytomegalovirus (CMV) disease
after renal transplantation (TX). This study evaluated the incidence and severity
of CMV disease within the first year after TX in high-risk renal transplant
recipients (CMV-seropositive donor, seronegative recipient) treated
prophylactically with oral acyclovir (800 to 3200 mg/day) over a period of 12 wk 
(ACY, N = 22), compared with high-risk patients randomly assigned as controls
(CO, N = 10). Follow-up for CMV infection included serological determination of
CMV-specific immunoglobulin G and immunoglobulin M antibodies, antigen detection 
in peripheral blood leukocytes (PP 65), shell vial culture (blood), and virus
isolation/early antigen detection (urine). Severity of CMV disease was quantified
by a scoring system for CMV-related symptoms. Nine patients (40.1%) in the
acyclovir group and four patients (40%) in the control group developed CMV
disease. Neither severity (ACY, 11.4 versus CO; 12.5 points score), nor duration 
of disease (ACY, 21 days; CO, 22 days), nor transplant function at the end of the
observation period differed significantly. The onst of CMV disease was not
delayed significantly in acyclovir-treated patients compared with controls (ACY, 
47 +/- 34 days versus CO, 27 +/- 14 days after TX, not significant). Our results 
show no beneficial effect of oral acyclovir prophylaxis in CMV high-risk renal
transplant recipients.


PMID: 8785404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

