
1. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 1996 Jul;3(4):480-2.

A field test for the detection of antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus
types 1 and 2 in serum or plasma.

Burgess-Cassler A(1), Barriga Angulo G, Wade SE, Castillo Torres P, Schramm W.

Author information: 
(1)Saliva Diagnostic Systems, Inc., Vancouver, Washington 98682-2444, USA.

In response to the need for simple and rapid tests for infectious diseases, we
have devised a test for antibodies to human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
and HIV-2 which resembles many contemporary strip-style pregnancy tests in format
and ease of use. The test was evaluated with 2,928 serum specimens (1,541
reactive and 1,387 nonreactive) collected and tested at a Mexico City hospital
clinic and was compared with a laboratory assay (Abbott) performed
simultaneously. The sensitivity and specificity of the test using these serum
specimens were 99.68 and 99.71%, respectively (before the code of the blinded
study was broken). This compares with 100% sensitivity and 97.55% specificity
with the laboratory assay (specificity upon reassay after the code was broken,
99.21%). In a survey of HIV-2 specimens, reactive (positive) specimens were
detected in 51 of 51 cases. The test was examined with 21 commercially available 
(HIV-1) seroconversion panels. The performance of the test was comparable to that
of a group of Food and Drug Administration-approved (antibody-based) HIV tests.

PIP: Simple and rapid methods of detecting infectious disease are needed. The
authors therefore developed a test for antibodies to HIV-1 and HIV-2 which
resembles many contemporary strip-style pregnancy tests in both format and ease
of use. The test was evaluated with 1541 reactive and 1387 nonreactive serum
specimens collected and tested at a Mexico City hospital clinic. A laboratory
assay was performed simultaneously. The sensitivity and specificity of the test
using these serum specimens were 99.68% and 99.71%, respectively. The laboratory 
assay was 100% sensitive and 97.55% specific. All reactive HIV-2 specimens were
detected. The test was examined with 21 commercially available HIV-1
seroconversion panels. The performance of the authors' test was comparable to
that of a group of Food and Drug Administration approved HIV tests.

PMCID: PMC170375
PMID: 8807218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

