
1. J Gen Virol. 1996 Sep;77 ( Pt 9):2193-200.

Promoter activity of sequences located upstream of the human papillomavirus types
of 16 and 18 late regions.

Geisen C(1), Kahn T.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Angewandte Tumorvirologie (ATV 0640),
Heidelberg, Germany.

The regulation of human papillomavirus (HPV) late gene expression is difficult to
analyse because the late proteins L1 and L2 are only produced in the upper layers
of terminally differentiated keratinocytes. However, for the minor capsid protein
L2 of HPV types 1, 6, 11 and 16, rare mRNAs or cDNAs starting 3' of the E5 open
reading frame (ORF) were previously described. In order to analyse whether the
DNA region preceding the late ORFs (late upstream region, LUR) of HPV-16 and
HPV-18 has promoter activity, transient transfection assays employing luciferase 
reporter constructs were performed. The results show that the LUR of HPV-16 and
HPV-18 exhibits an orientation-dependent promoter activity in different cells. By
analysing 3'-deletion mutants of the HPV-16 LUR, we identified 78 bp within the
sequence between the E5 and L2 ORFs to be critical for the promoter activity.
Furthermore, the analysis of a 5'-deletion mutant revealed a negative
cis-regulatory element located within the E2 ORF. The HPV-16 early poly(A) signal
is located downstream of the critical promoter region. Inactivation of this
element by site-directed mutagenesis strongly enhanced luciferase activity.
However, mutation of two potential TATA-binding protein (TBP) sites located
within the critical promoter region did not abolish the activity. Altogether,
these data indicate the possibility of a TATA-less promoter in the HPV-16 and
HPV-18 LURs. Together with the early poly(A) signal, this potential promoter
might be involved in the differentiation-dependent regulation of late gene
expression.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-77-9-2193 
PMID: 8811019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

