
1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1996 Feb;15(2):106-11.

Acquired protein S deficiency in children infected with human immunodeficiency
virus.

Sugerman RW(1), Church JA, Goldsmith JC, Ens GE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, University of Southern California School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the prevalence of an acquired deficiency of protein S, a
coagulation inhibitor, in children infected with the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) and to identify clinical and laboratory features associated with this
coagulation abnormality.
METHODS: A convenience sample of HIV-infected children, ages 2 to 18 years, was
evaluated for total, free and functional protein S; total and functional protein 
C; prothrombin and activated partial thromboplastin times; fibrinogen;
antithrombin III activity; dilute Russell viper venom time; IgG anticardiolipin
antibodies; von Willebrand factor antigen; C4b-binding protein; CD4+ T lymphocyte
counts; HIV p24 antigen concentration; and serum beta 2-microglobulin
concentrations.
RESULTS: Thirty-four subjects were evaluated. Twenty-four subjects were infected 
perinatally and 10 by transfusion. Nine of the subjects were CDC Class N
(asymptomatic), 13 were Class A/B (symptomatic without AIDS-defining condition)
and 12 were Class C (AIDS). None had previously documented thrombosis, nephrosis 
or significant hepatic dysfunction. Twenty-six subjects (76.5%) had decreased
free protein S, and 19 (55.9%) had functional protein S < 2 SD below the mean of 
laboratory controls. Decreased functional protein S was seen in 33.3% of Class N,
53.8% of Class A/B and 75.0% of Class C subjects. The prevalence of decreased
total and functional protein S was greater in those with absolute CD4+ T
lymphocyte counts < 200/mm3 compared to those with CD4+ counts > or = 200/mm3
(75.0% vs. 38.9%; chi square, 4.48, P = 0.034). A trend toward negative
correlation was observed between protein S and duration of HIV infection only for
Class N subjects. No linear correlation was seen between protein S and CD4+ T
lymphocyte counts; and no significant relationships were observed between protein
S values and CMV status, HIV p24 antigen, C4b-binding protein, von Willebrand
factor antigen, IgG anti-cardiolipin antibodies or serum beta 2-microglobulin
values.
CONCLUSIONS: Acquired protein S deficiency is common in HIV-infected children.
The high prevalence of this anticoagulant abnormality suggests an increased risk 
for thrombotic complications in this population.

DOI: 10.1097/00006454-199602000-00003 
PMID: 8822281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

