
1. J Cell Sci. 1996 Aug;109 ( Pt 8):2089-99.

The intracompartmental sorting of myosin alkali light chain isoproteins reflects 
the sequence of developmental expression as determined by double epitope-tagging 
competition.

Komiyama M(1), Soldati T, von Arx P, Perriard JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cell Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, ZÃ¼rich,
Switzerland.

In order to compare within the same cell the various degrees of specificity of
myosin alkali light chain (MLC) isoproteins sorting to sarcomeres, a competition 
assay was established using double epitope tagging. Various combinations of two
different MLC isoform cDNAs tagged with either a vesicular stomatitis virus VSV-G
(VSV) or a medium T (mT) protein epitope were co-expressed in cultured
cardiomyocytes from adult and neonatal rat ventricles. Expressed isoproteins were
detected by means of anti-VSV and anti-mT antibodies and their sorting patterns
were analyzed by confocal microscopy. The sorting specificity of MLC isoforms to 
sarcomeric sites was shown to increase in the order MLC3nm, to ML1sa, to MLC1sb, 
to MLC1f and MLC3f following the sequence of developmental expression. Expressed 
fast skeletal muscle isoforms (MLC1f and MLC3f) were always localized at the
A-bands of myofibrils, while nonmuscle type (MLC3nm) was distributed throughout
the cytoplasm. The slow skeletal muscle type (MLC1sa) showed a weak sarcomeric
pattern if it was co-expressed with MLC3nm, but it was distributed throughout the
cytoplasm when expressed in combination with MLC1f, MLC3f or the slow
skeletal/ventricular muscle isoform (MLC1sb). The MLC1sb was localized at the
A-bands when it was co-expressed with MLC3nm or MLC1sa, while it was also
distributed to the cytoplasm if co-expressed with MLC1f or MLC3f. Further,
expression of chimeric cDNAs revealed that the N-terminal lobe of each isoprotein
is responsible for the isoform-specific sorting pattern.


PMID: 8856505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

