
1. Virus Res. 1996 Aug;43(2):111-24.

Equine herpesvirus-1 strain KyA, a candidate vaccine strain, reduces viral titers
in mice challenged with a pathogenic strain, RacL.

Colle CF 3rd(1), Tarbet EB, Grafton WD, Jennings SR, O'Callaghan DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Louisiana State University Medical 
Center, Shreveport 71130-3932, USA.

The equine herpesvirus type-1 (EHV-1) strain Kentucky A (KyA) has a long history 
of repeated passage either in vivo in the Syrian hamster or in vitro in mouse L-M
fibroblast tissue culture. This repeated passage in cells other than those of the
natural host has caused genomic alterations of the KyA chromosome resulting in
deletion of several genes or portions of open reading frames (ORFs). This report 
presents in vivo data from a mouse model of EHV-1 infection demonstrating the
attenuated nature of EHV-1 strain KyA and that intranasal infection with KyA
protects animals from subsequent challenge with a pathogenic strain, RacL, by
reducing RacL viral titers in the lungs of the challenged animals. Mice infected 
with KyA exhibit no clinical manifestations of EHV-1 disease and do not
experience the wasting that occurs with RacL infection. KyA-infected mice clear
virus from the lung by day 5 post-infection (p.i.), whereas RacL infected mice
have substantial virus titers (5 x 10(5) pfu/lung) at this time point. Intranasal
infection with KyA followed by a challenge with RacL 4 weeks post-KyA infection
resulted in a significant (P = 0.0079) reduction in the lung titers of the RacL
virus. RacL was identified as the virus present in the lungs of the challenged
mice by a PCR assay employing primers to amplify the EUS4 gene which differs in
size by 1.2 kilobase pairs (kbp) in the two strains. Importantly, the protection 
afforded by KyA is long lasting in that challenge with RacL 15 months after KyA
infection, results in reduced virus titers and viral clearance by day 5
post-challenge. These results support the further consideration of EHV-1 KyA as a
live virus vaccine.

DOI: 10.1016/0168-1702(96)01324-x 
PMID: 8864201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

