
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 1996 Jul;15(7):588-94.

Serologic responses to Rhodococcus equi in individuals with and without human
immunodeficiency virus infection.

Vullo V(1), Mastroianni CM, Lichtner M, Mengoni F, Chiappini E, D'Agostino C,
Delia S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, La Sapienza University,
Policlinico Umberto I, Rome, Italy.

Thirty healthy blood donors, 15 workers from horse-breeding farms, 69 human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-negative persons at risk for HIV infection, 125
HIV-infected subjects without Rhodococcus equi infection, and nine HIV-infected
patients with Rhodococcus equi pneumonia were evaluated in order to detect serum 
antibodies to Rhodococcus equi precipitate-soluble antigen by an enzyme
immunoassay (EIA). Whereas EIA values for healthy donors, horse farm workers,
individuals at risk for HIV infection, and HIV-positive subjects without
Rhodococcus equi infection were comparable, HIV-infected patients with
rhodococcal disease had significantly higher Rhodococcus equi antibody levels (p 
< 0.0001). The clinical outcome of Rhodococcus equi pneumonia was more severe in 
subjects who had low levels of specific antibodies, whereas patients who
recovered had elevated Rhodococcus equi antibody levels over time. Immunoblot
studies showed that both Rhodococcus equi-infected patients and foals recognized 
a protein band of approximately 60 kDa in the Rhodococcus equi
precipitate-soluble antigen. On the other hand, the Rhodococcus equi-infected
patients did not react with the diffuse 15 to 17 kDa virulence-associated
proteins that represent important virulence factors both in mice and horses.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01709368 
PMID: 8874077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

