
1. Gastroenterology. 1996 Nov;111(5):1307-12.

Long-term efficacy of ribavirin plus interferon alfa in the treatment of chronic 
hepatitis C.

Lai MY(1), Kao JH, Yang PM, Wang JT, Chen PJ, Chan KW, Chu JS, Chen DS.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine and Hospital, Taipei.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Sustained response to interferon treatment for chronic
hepatitis C is unsatisfactory. This study examined whether combining interferon
alfa with ribavirin induces a better sustained efficacy than interferon alone in 
the treatment of chronic hepatitis C.
METHODS: Sixty noncirrhotic patients with chronic hepatitis C were randomly
assigned to three groups. Group 1 received 1200 mg oral ribavirin daily plus 3
million units of recombinant interferon alfa 2a thrice weekly for 24 weeks, group
2 received the same dose of interferon alfa 2a alone for 24 weeks, and group 3
received no treatment. The patients were then followed up for an additional 96
weeks.
RESULTS: At the end of treatment, a complete response (normal serum alanine
aminotransferase level and undetectable serum hepatitis C virus RNA) was achieved
in 16 of the 21 patients in group 1 (76%), as compared with 6 of 19 in group 2
(32%) and none in group 3. At 96 weeks after the end of treatment, patients in
group 1 sustained a higher complete response rate than patients in group 2 (43%
vs. 6%).
CONCLUSIONS: Combined treatment with ribavirin and interferon alfa 2a for 24
weeks is more effective than interferon alfa 2a alone for the treatment of
chronic hepatitis C. The biochemical and virological responses were sustained in 
about one half of the treated patients for at least 2 years after cessation of
the therapy.

DOI: 10.1053/gast.1996.v111.pm8898645 
PMID: 8898645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

