
1. J Virol Methods. 1996 Oct;62(1):11-9.

Analysis of upregulated cellular genes in pseudorabies virus infection: use of
mRNA differential display.

Hsiang CY(1), Ho TY, Lin CH, Wu K, Chang TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, 
Taiwan, ROC.

Virus infection usually alters the host cell and shuts off the synthesis of
cellular macromolecules. In order to screen the upregulated cellular transcripts 
during pseudorabies virus (PRV) infection, we employed the mRNA differential
display technique. The screen is based on positive selection at the mRNA level
for genes expressed in normal cells but increased in corresponding PRV-infected
cells. Over 14000 species of mRNA, isolated from mock-infected and PRV-infected
Madin-Darby bovine kidney cell at 1 h post infection, were screened, and 40
candidate clones were recovered. Southern blot analysis revealed that 17 out of
40 candidate clones, were enhanced in PRV-infected cells. Partial DNA sequences
demonstrated that 17 clones were distinct cellular genes, including those
encoding the modulators of signal transduction (saposin, 14-3-3, adenylate
kinase, adenylyl cyclase, protein kinase C-alpha), those encoding the components 
of translation (fau, ribosomal proteins S11, L31, L36), other cellular genes
(peptidase, cyclin E, rch1, oligo-C-rich single-stranded nucleic acid binding
protein, rap, arginyl-tRNA synthetase), and two unknown genes. Thus, this study
identifies successfully the transcriptionally regulated cellular genes which are 
associated with PRV infection. Furthermore, this study provides support for the
use of mRNA differential display as a method to rapidly isolate differentially
expressed genes in virus infection.

DOI: 10.1016/0166-0934(96)02083-6 
PMID: 8910644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

