
1. FEBS Lett. 1996 Nov 11;397(1):97-100.

Role of the terminal repeat GAGC trimer, the major Rep78 binding site, in
adeno-associated virus DNA replication.

Bishop BM(1), Santin AD, Quirk JG, Hermonat PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock 72205, USA.

The adeno-associated virus (AAV) terminal repeats (TR) are cis required, and the 
AAV encoded Rep78 protein is trans required, for AAV DNA replication. The Rep78
protein recognizes and interacts with at least three regions within the TR DNA.
The major binding site, with the highest affinity for Rep78 binding, is within
the TR stem (nt 36-16) and includes the 'core' GAGC trimer (GAGC3, nt 33-22; Fig.
2) sequence. In this study mutations were made within the GAGC trimer and these
mutants assayed for their ability to allow for AAV double stranded (ds DNA,
prepackaging DNA replication), and single stranded DNA (ss DNA, due to virion
packaging) replication. Here, it is shown that when the two inside GAGC motifs
are mutated, with only motif no. 1 left intact (see Fig. 2), the resulting AAV
(mutA) genome was significantly defective for both ds DNA (17% of wild type) and 
ss DNA (9%). If the TRs contained only the two outside motifs intact (mutB),
motifs no. 1 and 2, the AAV genome had a significant but reduced level of both ds
(50%) and ss (34%) DNA replication. Finally, if only the middle motif no. 2 was
mutated, with motifs no. 1 and 3 left intact (mutC), the resulting DNA
replication for both ds and ss forms was essentially wild type (80% that of wild 
type). These data suggest that the GAGC trimer plays a role in AAV DNA
replication, and that GAGC motif no. 3 is the most important of the three motifs 
for both ds and ss DNA replication.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(96)01149-0 
PMID: 8941722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

