
1. J Gen Virol. 1996 Dec;77 ( Pt 12):3135-43.

The genes encoding the P39 and CG30 proteins of Bombyx mori nuclear polyhedrosis 
virus.

Lu M(1), Iatrou K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, The University of Calgary, Alberta,
Canada.

We have cloned and analysed the transcriptional properties of two closely linked 
genes, p39 and cg30, of Bombyx mori nuclear polyhedrosis virus (BmNPV). These
genes encode a structural polypeptide and a putative transcriptional regulator of
the virus, respectively. The cg30 gene is transcribed prior to and after DNA
replication from a site located within the ORF of the adjacent p39 gene. Its
transcription product, a 1.3 kb mRNA, is polyadenylated at a site containing
consensus eukaryotic polyadenylation signals and mapping 87 bp downstream of the 
translation termination codon for CG30. During the later stages of infection, two
additional RNAs, 2.2 and 6.5 kb, are also transcribed through the cg30 gene. The 
2.2 kb RNA, representing the mRNA that encodes P39, is initiated from three
relatively closely spaced sites located upstream of the P39 ORF. The 6.5 kb RNA
is apparently transcribed from the promoter sequences of another gene located
further upstream of the p39 gene. The 2.2 and 6.5 kb transcripts have two
polyadenylation sites. The first site is the same as the one used to generate the
cg30 gene-specific transcripts. The second is located 4 bp downstream of the CG30
translation termination codon. Transient expression assays show that the p39 gene
sequences immediately upstream of the CG30 ORF can direct expression of a
reporter gene when the latter is co-transfected with the gene encoding the early 
baculovirus trans-activator IE1. Thus, these sequences behave as a delayed-early 
baculovirus gene promoter.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-77-12-3135 
PMID: 9000108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

