
1. Clin Immunol Immunopathol. 1997 Feb;82(2):133-40.

Membrane tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) expressed on HTLV-I-infected T
cells mediates a costimulatory signal for B cell activation--characterization of 
membrane TNF-alpha.

Higuchi M(1), Nagasawa K, Horiuchi T, Oike M, Ito Y, Yasukawa M, Niho Y.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 812-82, Japan.

The 26-kDa membrane tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) expressed on
activated CD4(+) T cells is a novel candidate for the functional membrane
molecule in T-B cell interactions. We found that normal human T cells, when
infected with human T cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) in vitro, were
induced to express the 26-kDa membrane TNF-alpha. The infected T cells, through
this molecule, activated autologous B cells to produce immunoglobulin (Ig)M in a 
contact-dependent manner, which was partially inhibited by anti-TNF-alpha
antibody (Ab). IgG synthesis was not stimulated, however, probably because of
lack of CD40 ligand expression on the infected T cells. Anti-TNF-alpha Ab
treatment stimulated the secretion of interleukin (IL)-2 and interferon gamma
(IFN-gamma) in the infected T cells. These effects were not induced by anti-TNF
receptor Ab treatment. Anti-TNF-alpha Ab also induced the elevation of
intracellular calcium concentration in the infected T cells. These results
suggest that T cells expressing membrane TNF-alpha can be directly stimulated
through this molecule. Thus, it is suggested that the 26-kDa membrane TNF-alpha
on HTLV-I-infected T cells plays a role in polyclonal B cell activation and may
be involved in the pathogenesis of some HTLV-I-associated diseases. Additionally,
our results suggest a novel mechanism by which cytokine production can be
modulated in these T cells through membrane TNF-alpha on their surface.

DOI: 10.1006/clin.1996.4291 
PMID: 9000481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

