
1. Drug Metab Dispos. 1997 Feb;25(2):228-42.

Metabolism of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptase
inhibitor delavirdine in rats.

Chang M(1), Sood VK, Wilson GJ, Kloosterman DA, Sanders PE, Hauer MJ, Fagerness
PE.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Metabolism Research, Pharmacia & Upjohn, Inc., Kalamazoo, MI 49007, USA.

Delavirdine mesylate (U-90152T) is a highly specific nonnucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitor currently under development for the treatment of AIDS.
The excretion, disposition, and metabolism of delavirdine were investigated in
Sprague-Dawley rats after oral administration of [14C]delavirdine mesylate at
single doses ranging from 10 to 250 mg/kg and multiple doses ranging from 20 to
250 mg/kg/day. Excretion studies showed that feces was the major route of
elimination, delavirdine was well absorbed (>80%) after a 10 mg/kg single dose,
and excretion was dose-dependent. The metabolism of delavirdine in the rat was
extensive. The following metabolites were identified (% of dose in rats given 10 
and 100 mg/kg, respectively): 6'-hydroxy delavirdine (7.1% and 15.6%) and its
glucuronide (12.2% and 6.2%) and sulfate (5.5% and 3.2%) conjugates, despyridinyl
delavirdine (12.1% and 11.7%) and its conjugate (13.0% and 11.7%), desalkyl
delavirdine (16.5% and 13.4%), and its N-sulfamate, 6'- and 4'-sulfate conjugates
(2.9% and 3.9%). Cleavage of the amide bond in delavirdine to give
N-isopropylpyridinepiperazine and indole carboxylic acid constituted a minor
pathway. Degradation of 6'-hydroxy delavirdine generated despyridinyl delavirdine
and the pyridine-ring opened MET-14. The metabolic pathway of delavirdine
involved N-desalkylation, pyridine ring hydroxylation, pyridine ring cleavage,
and amide bond cleavage.


PMID: 9029054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

