
1. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Jan 15;243(1-2):344-9.

Characterization of two vaccinia CD36 recombinant-virus-generated monoclonal
antibodies (10/5, 13/10): effects on malarial cytoadherence and platelet
functions.

Daviet L(1), Craig AG, McGregor L, Pinches R, Wild TF, Berendt AR, Newbold CI,
McGregor JL.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 331, Faculty of Medicine RTH LaÃ«nnec, Lyon, France.

Extensive evidence is now available to show that the human CD36 antigen is a
cellular receptor for thrombospondin, collagen, modified low-density
lipoproteins, and long-chain fatty acids. Moreover, CD36 functions as one of the 
receptors that mediates the adhesion of Plasmodium-falciparum-infected
erythrocytes to microvascular endothelium. In an attempt to identify new
functional sites of this surface glycoprotein, anti-CD36 monoclonal antibodies
were prepared using a vaccinia CD36 recombinant virus as a highly efficient
immunization vector. In functional studies, one of these antibodies (clone 10/5) 
strongly inhibited the adhesion of P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes to
purified CD36. This antibody also potentiated ADP-induced platelet activation. In
contrast, a second antibody (clone 13/10) did not affect the cytoadherence of
infected erythrocytes or platelet functions. Previous structural work performed
on these antibodies has shown that clone 10/5 is directed against an epitope
within the CD36 domain 155-183, whereas clone 13/10 interacts with another
antigenic determinant defined by amino acids 30-76 [Daviet, L., Buckland, R.,
Puente Navazo, M. D. & McGregor, J. L. (1995) Biochem. J. 305, 221-224]. Taken
together, these current studies show that: (a) the methodology of immunization
using recombinant vaccinia virus is a powerful tool in the generation of
monoclonal antibodies directed against polyimmunogenic membrane glycoproteins
such as CD36; (b) the CD36 domain, recognized by clone 10/5 but not by 13/10, is 
functionnally important regarding the adhesion of P. falciparum-infected
erythrocyte and CD36-dependent platelet activation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1997.0344a.x 
PMID: 9030758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

