
1. Virus Res. 1997 Apr;48(1):71-9.

Interspecies transmission of influenza C virus between humans and pigs.

Kimura H(1), Abiko C, Peng G, Muraki Y, Sugawara K, Hongo S, Kitame F, Mizuta K, 
Numazaki Y, Suzuki H, Nakamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Yamagata University, School of Medicine, Japan.

The antigenic and genetic characteristics of the 18 human strains of influenza C 
virus isolated in Yamagata and Sendai Cities, Japan between January 1991 and
February 1993 were investigated. Antigenic analysis with monoclonal antibodies to
the hemagglutinin-esterase glycoprotein showed that the isolates could be divided
into three distinct groups closely related to C/Yamagata/26/81, C/Aichi/1/81 and 
C/Mississippi/80, respectively. T1-oligonucleotide fingerprinting of total vRNA
revealed that the six isolates belonging to the C/Yamagata/26/81 virus group had 
the genomes greatly similar to one another but considerably different from those 
of the 1988/1990 isolates (except C/Yamagata/10/89) of the same antigenic group. 
Comparison of total or partial nucleotide sequences of the seven RNA segments of 
the three strains (C/Miyagi/3/91, C/Miyagi/9/91 and C/Miyagi/2/92) representative
of the 1991/1993 strains of the C/Yamagata/26/81 virus group with those of the
previous influenza C isolates obtained from humans and pigs during 1980/1989
showed that the 1991/1993 strains, like C/Yamagata/10/89, are more closely
related to viruses isolated from pigs in Beijing, China in 1981/1982 than to any 
of the isolates from humans. This observation suggests strongly that interspecies
transmission of influenza C virus between humans and pigs has occurred in nature,
although it is not known whether the virus has been transmitted from pigs to
humans or from humans to pigs.

DOI: 10.1016/s0168-1702(96)01427-x 
PMID: 9140195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

