
1. Am J Gastroenterol. 1997 Nov;92(11):1981-5.

Response to interferon of GB virus C and hepatitis C virus in patients with
chronic hepatitis.

Inoue T(1), Sakamoto M, Akahane Y, Okamoto H, Miyakawa Y, Mayumi M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Yamanashi Medical University,
Yamanashi-Ken, Japan.

Comment in
    Am J Gastroenterol. 1997 Nov;92(11):1957-9.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the response to interferon and capacity to induce liver
disease of a putative non-A to E hepatitis virus designated GB virus C (GBV-C).
METHODS: RNA of GBV-C was detected by reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction with nested primers deduced from the 5'-noncoding region. It was
titrated, along with RNA of hepatitis C virus (HCV), in 16 co-infected patients
(11%) out of 140 patients who received interferon.
RESULTS: At the completion of a 6-month course of interferon (total dose: 516-774
million units), GBV-C RNA disappeared from serum in seven (44%) and HCV RNA from 
serum in 11 (69%) patients. At 6 months after interferon treatment ended, GBV-C
RNA remained cleared in three patients (19%), and HCV RNA was persistently
undetectable in four (25%). One patient lost both GBV-C and HCV RNAs. The three
patients whose serum was cleared of GBV-C RNA had pretreatment titers of the
virus (two with 10[1]/ml and one with 10[2]/ml) that were considerably lower than
the titers of 13 patients (one with 10[2]/ml, eight with 10[3]/ml, and four with 
> or = 10[4]/ml) without such clearance. The decrease in alanine aminotransferase
levels paralleled the response of HCV RNA but not that of GBV-C RNA to
interferon. The response of HCV at 6 months after interferon in the co-infected
patients (4/16 or 25%) did not differ significantly from that in patients without
GBV-C infection (44/124 or 35%).
CONCLUSIONS: The sensitivity of GBV-C to interferon is comparable to but
independent of HCV. Co-infection with GBV-C does not influence the response to
interferon of patients with chronic hepatitis C.


PMID: 9362176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

