
1. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 1997 Nov;17(11):655-64.

Transforming growth factor-beta1 in adult human microglia and its stimulated
production by interleukin-1.

da Cunha A(1), Jefferson JJ, Tyor WR, Glass JD, Jannotta FS, Cottrell JR, Resau
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Institute of Mental Health, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Ameboid microglia express human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) more frequently 
than do ramified microglia. These two microglial subtypes might also differ in
the frequency with which they express transforming growth factor-beta1
(TGF-beta1), a cytokine that regulates HIV-1 expression in monocytes. Results
described here show that ameboid and ramified microglia express TGF-beta1. In
brain tissues from HIV-1-infected individuals as compared with seronegative
controls, ameboid rather than ramified microglia more frequently expressed
TGF-beta1. Ameboid microglia, isolated and cultured from postmortem adult human
brain more frequently expressed TGF-beta1 in presence of interleukin-1(IL-1), a
cytokine that is elevated in brains of HIV-1-infected individuals when compared
with seronegative controls. The stimulation of TGF-beta1 by IL-1 was dose and
time dependent, occurring with ameboid microglia isolated from either frontal
cortex or globus pallidus but not midbrain pons. Ameboid microglia are similar to
the RCA-1-positive cells that form clusters, called microglial nodules, in the
brain of HIV-1-infected individuals. Pathologic conditions, such as disseminated 
microglial nodules, are associated with HIV-1 encephalitis, direct infection of
the brain, and moderate to severe neurologic impairment. TGF-beta1 expression in 
ameboid microglia may play a role in HIV-1 neuropathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1089/jir.1997.17.655 
PMID: 9402103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

