
1. J Med Virol. 1998 Jan;54(1):60-8.

Longitudinal study of plasma HIV-1 RNA concentrations during the asymptomatic
stage of HIV infection measured using AMPLICOR HIV monitor and NASBA HIV-1 RNA QT
tests. ACCTES Association.

Delamare C(1), Burgard M, Deveau C, Chaix ML, Ivanoff S, Ramirez D, Tachet A,
Bary M, Rouzioux C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie, HÃ´pital Necker-Enfants malades, Paris, France.

The predictive value of two methods for measuring HIV RNA concentration in plasma
was assessed in relation to CD4 lymphocyte counts during the asymptomatic period 
of infection. The design was a retrospective longitudinal case-control study for 
a mean period of 60 months involving 20 asymptomatic patients included in the
French National prospective survey. The CD4 counts in these patients during the
last 36 months of the study were stable (non-progressors) or declined
(progressors). Plasma RNA concentrations were determined in each subject annually
using the AMPLICOR and NASBA techniques. Only AMPLICOR gave RNA titers above the 
cut-off value for all the patients. The techniques agreed satisfactorily,
although there was a difference, median 0.4 log10, between the AMPLICOR and NASBA
values. The non-progressors had low and stable RNA concentrations. The
concentration was higher in the progressors, according to the AMPLICOR technique,
from their inclusion in the study, and according to the NASBA technique, from 1
year after inclusion. However, only four of ten individual progressors had stable
plasma HIV RNA concentrations significantly above those of the non-progressors
before the decline in their CD4 counts. These were all and only the patients with
a decline in lymphocyte counts more than 100 CD4/mm3/year. In each of the other
progressors, the RNA concentration was not significantly different from those of 
the non-progressors. Thus, when making decisions about therapy, plasma HIV RNA
determinations cannot be used in place of CD4 counts and may provide valuable
additional information.


PMID: 9443110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

