
1. World Health Stat Q. 1997;50(3-4):188-94.

Current status of the global eradication of poliomyelitis.

Tangermann RH(1), Aylward B, Birmingham M, Horner R, Oliv√© JM, Nkowane BM, Hull
HF, Burton A.

Author information: 
(1)Expanded Programme on Immunization, Global Programme for Vaccines and
Immunization, World Health Organization, Geneva.

Substantial progress towards the global eradication of poliomyelitis by the year 
2000 has been achieved since May 1988 when WHO Member States adopted this goal at
the Forty-first World Health Assembly. Virtually all polio-endemic countries have
begun to implement the WHO-recommended strategies to eradicate polio and it is
expected that, by the end of 1997, all endemic countries in the world will have
conducted full National Immunization Days (NID), providing supplemental oral
polio vaccine (OPV) to nearly two-thirds of all children < 5 years. In contrast, 
although globally acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) surveillance was being conducted 
in 126 (86%) of 146 countries where polio is or recently was endemic,
surveillance remains incomplete and untimely. A global network of polio
laboratories, capable of detecting wild poliovirus when and where it occurs, has 
been developed. Furthermore, in countries where polio virus circulation has been 
limited to focal areas, and surveillance is adequate, mopping-up campaigns are
being conducted to eliminate the final chains of transmission. The process for
certification of polio eradication has been established in each WHO region as
well as at the global level. The impact of the eradication initiative is evident,
with an 88% decrease in the number of reported cases globally since 1988. In
order to achieve the goal of eradication, the rapid development of complete and
timely AFP surveillance and the continuation of effective NIDs constitute an
urgent priority. This is of particular relevance in the remaining polio-endemic
countries, especially in those that are affected by war or politically isolated
and are important remaining reservoirs from where wild poliovirus continues to
spread into bordering or even distant polio-free countries. External support will
continue to be required by those countries and regions where the incidence of
polio has reached low levels to ensure that final chains of poliovirus
transmission are interrupted and to permit the eventual certification of
eradication. The year 2000 objective for achieving poliomyelitis eradication
remains a feasible target.


PMID: 9477548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

