
1. J Virol Methods. 1998 Jan;70(1):107-11.

Genetic subtyping and epidemiological study of feline immunodeficiency virus by
nested polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism
analysis of the gag gene.

Hohdatsu T(1), Motokawa K, Usami M, Amioka M, Okada S, Koyama H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Infectious Diseases, School of Veterinary Medicine
and Animal Sciences, Kitasato University, Towada, Aomori, Japan.
hohdatsu@vmas.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Genetic subtyping of feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) was carried out by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment length polymorphism
(RFLP) analysis. A 329-base pair fragment in the FIV gag gene was amplified by
nested PCR, then digested with restriction enzymes, HindIII, PvuII and BamHI.
Using these restriction enzymes, FIV isolates belonging to subtypes A, B and D,
which had been classified on the basis of the env gene V3-V5 sequence, could be
discriminated. Genetic subtypes of FIV prevalent in Japan were investigated using
the gag-nested PCR-RFLP analysis. Of 88 FIV-infected cats, PCR products of 70
cats showed a subtype B RFLP pattern (digestion only with PvuII), those of nine
cats had a subtype D RFLP pattern (digestion only with BamHI), and those of seven
cats had a subtype A RFLP pattern (digestion only with HindIII). The PCR products
of the remaining two cats had subtype A and B RFLP patterns (digestion with both 
HindIII and PvuII). The digestion pattern of the gag-nested PCR-RFLP analysis was
unchanged after in vivo passages of the virus. These results suggest that the
gag-nested PCR-RFLP analysis is useful as a simple method for FIV genetic
subtyping.

DOI: 10.1016/s0166-0934(97)00167-5 
PMID: 9506819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

