
1. J Virol. 1998 May;72(5):3851-8.

Involvement of endoplasmic reticulum chaperones in the folding of hepatitis C
virus glycoproteins.

Choukhi A(1), Ung S, Wychowski C, Dubuisson J.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe HÃ©patite C, CNRS-UMR 319, Institut de Biologie de Lille et Institut
Pasteur de Lille, France.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) genome encodes two envelope glycoproteins (E1 and E2)
which interact noncovalently to form a heterodimer (E1-E2). During the folding
and assembly of HCV glycoproteins, a large portion of these proteins are trapped 
in aggregates, reducing the efficiency of native E1-E2 complex assembly. To
better understand this phenomenon and to try to increase the efficiency of HCV
glycoprotein folding, endoplasmic reticulum chaperones potentially interacting
with these proteins were studied. Calnexin, calreticulin, and BiP were shown to
interact with E1 and E2, whereas no interaction was detected between GRP94 and
HCV glycoproteins. The association of HCV glycoproteins with calnexin and
calreticulin was faster than with BiP, and the kinetics of interaction with
calnexin and calreticulin were very similar. However, calreticulin and BiP
interacted preferentially with aggregates whereas calnexin preferentially
associated with monomeric forms of HCV glycoproteins or noncovalent complexes.
Tunicamycin treatment inhibited the binding of HCV glycoproteins to calnexin and 
calreticulin, indicating the importance of N-linked oligosaccharides for these
interactions. The effect of the co-overexpression of each chaperone on the
folding of HCV glycoproteins was also analyzed. However, the levels of native
E1-E2 complexes were not increased. Together, our data suggest that calnexin
plays a role in the productive folding of HCV glycoproteins whereas calreticulin 
and BiP are probably involved in a nonproductive pathway of folding.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.5.3851-3858.1998 
PMCID: PMC109609
PMID: 9557669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

