
1. J Virol. 1998 May;72(5):4434-41.

Different patterns of neuronal infection after intracerebral injection of two
strains of pseudorabies virus.

Card JP(1), Levitt P, Enquist LW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260, USA.
Card@bns.pitt.edu

Pseudorabies virus (PRV), a swine neurotropic alphaherpesvirus, is known to
invade the central nervous system (CNS) of a variety of animal species through
peripherally projecting axons, replicate in the parent neurons, and then pass
transsynaptically to infect other neurons of a circuit. Studies of the human
pathogen herpes simplex virus type 1 have reported differences in the direction
of transport of two strains of this virus after direct injection into the primate
motor cortex. In the present study we examined the direction of transport of
virulent and attenuated strains of PRV, utilizing injections into the rat
prefrontal cortex to evaluate specific movement of virus through CNS circuitry.
The data demonstrate strain-dependent patterns of infection consistent with
bidirectional (anterograde and retrograde) transport of virulent virus and
unidirectional (retrograde) transport of attenuated PRV from the site of
injection. The distribution of infected neurons and the extent of transsynaptic
passage also suggest that a release defect in the attenuated strain reduces the
apparent rate of viral transport through neuronal circuitry. Finally, injection
of different concentrations of virus influenced the onset of replication within a
neural circuit. Taken together, these data suggest that viral envelope
glycoproteins and virus concentration at the site of injection are important
determinants of the rate and direction of viral transport through a multisynaptic
circuit in the CNS.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.5.4434-4441.1998 
PMCID: PMC109677
PMID: 9557737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

