
1. J Biol Chem. 1976 Sep 10;251(17):5219-24.

Control of mutation frequency by bacteriophage T4 DNA polymerase. I. The CB120
antimutator DNA polymerase is defective in strand displacement.

Gillin FD, Nossal NG.

The ts CB1200 (antimutator) mutation in bacteriophage T4 DNA polymerase increases
the accuracy of DNA replication since it results in a decrease in the frequency
of mutations in other phage genes. The CB120 polymerases differs from the wild
type enzyme in the slow rate at which it copies templates where primer extension 
requries displacement of polynucleotides base-paired to the template strand, even
in the presence of the T4 DNA unwinding protein (gene 32-protein). The ratio of
nucleotides turned over (DNA-dependent conversion of deoxynucleoside triphosphate
to deoxynucleoside monophosphate) to nucleotides stably incorporated into product
is 10 to 100 times higher with the mutant than wild type enzyme, depending on the
DNA used as the template. This high turnover rate may increase the efficiency of 
removal of noncomplementary nucleotides by the antimutator enzyme and is in
agreement with the findings of Muzyczka et al, (Muzyczka, N., Poland, R. L., and 
Bessman, M. J. (1972) J. Biol, Cehm. 247, 7116-7122) with the L141 and L42
antimutator T4 DNA polymerases. Since the 3'- to 5'-exonuclease activity of the
CB120 mutant polymerase is not higher than that of the wild type enzyme, it is
suggested that the high turnover rate may result from increased opportunity to
remove newly incorporated nucleotides due to the slow rate at which the mutant
enzyme moves to the next template nucleotide. In the accompanying paper we show
that the CB120 antimutator polymerase also initially selects incorrect
nucleotides for incorporation less frequently than the wild type enzyme. Thus
this antimutator polymerase appears to have both greater accuracy in nucleotide
selection and an enhanced ability to remove incorrect nucleotides.


PMID: 956182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

