
1. Genes Cells. 1998 Jan;3(1):29-37.

Type I interferons are essential mediators of apoptotic death in virally infected
cells.

Tanaka N(1), Sato M, Lamphier MS, Nozawa H, Oda E, Noguchi S, Schreiber RD,
Tsujimoto Y, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The interferons (IFNs) have been extensively studied in the context
of host defence against viral infection. In the established model of IFN action, 
virally infected cells secrete type I IFNs (IFN-alpha/beta) which induce an
antiviral state in uninfected cells. However, it is not clear how IFNs function
on the infected cells. It has been reported that cells infected by some viruses
die by apoptosis.
RESULTS: In the present study, we found that three types of viruses commonly
induce apoptosis in primary cell cultures. Importantly, we observed that
virus-induced apoptosis was inhibited by anti-IFN-alpha/beta antibodies, and in
cells lacking either the type I IFN receptor 1 (IFNAR1) or its downstream
mediator, Stat1 (Signal transducer and activator of transcription 1). IFN-alpha
treatment by itself did not induce apoptosis unless it was combined with
transfection by double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), which is normally generated during
the course of viral infection.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate a novel antiviral function of the type I IFNs,
i.e. the selective induction of apoptosis in virally infected cells. In effect,
these IFNs have a bifunctional role in limiting the spread of virus; eliciting an
antiviral state in uninfected cells while promoting apoptosis in infected cells. 
Our results may help explain why IFNs are sometimes useful in the treatment of
viral diseases and will provide further insight into the mechanisms of
virus-induced pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2443.1998.00164.x 
PMID: 9581980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

