
1. Am J Pathol. 1998 Jun;152(6):1509-20.

Studies on the pathology, especially brain lesions, induced by R7, a spontaneous 
mutant of Moloney murine sarcoma virus 124.

Yuen PH(1), Kwak YT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Smithville 78957, USA.

We have recently isolated R7, a spontaneous Moloney murine sarcoma virus (MoMuSV)
124 variant. Molecular cloning and sequence analysis showed that, relative to
MoMuSV 124, R7 has an extra repeat in each enhancer and a truncated mos gene in
frame with the truncated gag coding sequence. This report presents a detailed
study on the pathology induced by R7. R7 induced not only sarcomas with well
developed angiomatous components but also brain lesions. Brain lesions were
observed in all less-than-48-hour-old BALB/c mice inoculated with greater than 2 
x 10(5) R7 focus-forming units (FFUs). R7 was detected in all brains examined by 
day 9 after inoculation, and brain lesions were observed in two of four mice
examined by day 14 after inoculation. Light microscopy of brains revealed that
approximately 15% of the lesions were unenclosed blood pools of varying sizes
containing red blood cells and inflammatory cells spreading into surrounding
brain tissues. The remainder of the brain lesions had tumor cells. These lesions 
ranged from a few enlarged vascular endothelial cells intermixed with blood cells
to large circumscribed lesions consisting of well developed tangled masses of
vessels surrounded by blood pools. Activated astrocytes surrounded and
infiltrated the tumors. In addition, the thymus of R7-infected mice regressed
significantly and precipitously due to apoptosis (especially of cortical
thymocytes) at the end stage of the disease.


PMCID: PMC1858456
PMID: 9626055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

