
1. APMIS. 1998 Apr;106(4):500-4.

Evaluation of infectious etiology in subacute thyroiditis--lack of association
with coxsackievirus infection.

Luotola K(1), Hy√∂ty H, Salmi J, Miettinen A, Helin H, Pasternack A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Tampere University Hospital, Finland.

The etiology of subacute granulomatous thyroiditis (SAT) is obscure, although it 
is postulated to be associated with viral infections and genetic factors. In the 
present study, the possibility of an infectious etiology was prospectively
studied in 27 consecutive patients with SAT. Special emphasis was put on the role
of enteroviruses. Coupled sera (interval one month) were taken from all patients 
and single sera from 29 control subjects for virus antibody determinations. Stool
samples were collected for virus isolation and fine-needle aspiration samples
from thyroid gland for the detection of enterovirus RNA using RT-PCR were taken
from SAT patients. Enteroviral antibodies were tested using three different
methods: indirect EIA, heavy chain capture RIA, and standard complement fixation 
(CF) test. Antibodies against other common viral pathogens, including
enteroviruses, were screened using the CF test and those against Mycoplasma
pneumoniae and Chlamydia pneumoniae using EIA and microimmunofluorescence
techniques, respectively. Common respiratory viruses were also screened from
nasopharyngeal suction samples by antigen detection EIA. Based on serological
findings, one patient had acute Cytomegalovirus infection. All other patients
were negative in antibody tests, virus isolation, RT-PCR, and antigen detection. 
Enterovirus RNA was not detected by PCR in the thyroid tissue in any of the
fine-needle aspiration samples. There was no evidence of recent enteroviral
infections in SAT patients. The results suggest that SAT is not usually
associated with acute infections. No evidence was obtained to support the
proposed role of enteroviruses as an important etiologic agent of SAT.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1699-0463.1998.tb01378.x 
PMID: 9637274  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

