
1. Mol Cells. 1998 Apr 30;8(2):181-8.

Genome characterization of a Korean isolate of cymbidium mosaic virus.

Kim JD(1), Koo YB, Chang MU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Natural Sciences, Inje University,
Kimhae, Korea.

The complete nucleotide sequence of the genomic RNA of a Korean isolate of
cymbidium mosaic virus (CymMV-K2) was determined. The genomic RNA is 6227
nucleotides in length, excluding the poly(A) tail. It contains a 5'-noncoding
region (NCR) of 73 nucleotides, five open reading frames (ORFs 1 to 5) which
encode proteins with M(r) 160 kDa RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (ORF1), 26 kDa
movement protein 1 (ORF2), 13 kDa movement protein 2 (ORF3), 10 kDa movement
protein 3 (ORF4), 24 kDa coat protein (OFR5), and a 3' NCR of 76 nucleotides. The
5'-end of the CymMV-K2 genome initiates with GGAAAA which contrasts to GAAAA at
the 5'-ends of other potexviruses, including a Singapore isolate of CymMV
(CymMV-S2). When compared with CymMV-S2, 171 base substitutions were observed in 
the CymMV-K2 genome. Substitutions in the overlapping ORFs (ORFs 2 to 4) occurred
more frequently than those in 5' NCR, ORF1, and 3' NCR. In addition to
substitutions, two single-base deletions, one in the intercistronic region
between ORF1 and ORF2 and the other in the ORF2, were found on the CymMV-K2
genome. The deletion in the ORF2 induced a frameshift which altered the
C-terminal domain of movement protein 1. ORF3 and ORF4 of the CymMV-K2 genome are
partially different from those of another Singapore CymMV genome (CymMV-S1) which
has four frameshifts due to nucleotide deletions within these ORFs.
Interestingly, the frameshifts resulted in no change in the conserved sequences
of the movement proteins but reconstructed their transmembrane domains.


PMID: 9638650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

