
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jul 7;95(14):8005-10.

gp120 envelope glycoproteins of human immunodeficiency viruses competitively
antagonize signaling by coreceptors CXCR4 and CCR5.

Madani N(1), Kozak SL, Kavanaugh MP, Kabat D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland, OR 97201-3098, USA.

Signal transductions by the dual-function CXCR4 and CCR5 chemokine receptors/HIV 
type 1 (HIV-1) coreceptors were electrophysiologically monitored in Xenopus
laevis oocytes that also coexpressed the viral receptor CD4 and a G
protein-coupled inward-rectifying K+ channel (Kir 3.1). Large Kir 3.1-dependent
currents generated in response to the corresponding chemokines (SDF-1alpha for
CXCR4 and MIP-1alpha; MIP-1beta and RANTES for CCR5) were blocked by pertussis
toxin, suggesting involvement of inhibitory guanine nucleotide-binding proteins. 
Prolonged exposures to chemokines caused substantial but incomplete
desensitization of responses with time constants of 5-7 min and recovery time
constants of 12-19 min. CXCR4 and CCR5 exhibited heterologous desensitization in 
this oocyte system, suggesting possible inhibition of a common downstream step in
their signaling pathways. In contrast to chemokines, perfusion with monomeric or 
oligomeric preparations of the glycoprotein of Mr 120, 000 (gp120) derived from
several isolates of HIV-1 did not activate signaling by CXCR4 or CCR5 regardless 
of CD4 coexpression. However, adsorption of the gp120 from a T-cell-tropic virus 
resulted in CD4-dependent antagonism of CXCR4 response to SDF-1alpha, whereas
gp120 from macrophage-tropic viruses caused CD4-dependent antagonism of CCR5
response to MIP-1alpha. These antagonisms could be partially overcome by high
concentrations of chemokines and were specific for coreceptors of the
corresponding HIV-1 isolates, suggesting that they resulted from direct
interactions of gp120-CD4 complexes with coreceptors and that they did not
involve the desensitization pathway. These results indicate that monomeric or
oligomeric gp120s specifically antagonize CXCR4 and CCR5 signaling in response to
chemokines, but they do not exclude the possibility that gp120s might also
function as weak agonists in some cells. The gp120-mediated disruption of CXCR4
and CCR5 signaling may contribute to AIDS pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.14.8005 
PMCID: PMC20919
PMID: 9653130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

