
1. Plant Mol Biol. 1998 Aug;37(6):1055-67.

Functional organization of the cassava vein mosaic virus (CsVMV) promoter.

Verdaguer B(1), de Kochko A, Fux CI, Beachy RN, Fauquet C.

Author information: 
(1)International Laboratory for Tropical Agricultural Biotechnology
(ILTAB/ORSTOM-TSRI), Division of Plant Biology, The Scripps Research Institute,
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Cassava vein mosaic virus (CsVMV) is a pararetrovirus that infects cassava plants
in Brazil. A promoter fragment isolated from CsVMV, comprising nucleotides -443
to +72, was previously shown to direct strong constitutive gene expression in
transgenic plants. Here we report the functional architecture of the CsVMV
promoter fragment. A series of promoter deletion mutants were fused to the coding
sequence of uidA reporter gene and the chimeric genes were introduced into
transgenic tobacco plants. Promoter activity was monitored by histochemical and
quantitative assays of beta-glucuronidase activity (GUS). We found that the
promoter fragment is made up of different regions that confer distinct
tissue-specific expression of the gene. The region encompassing nucleotides -222 
to -173 contains cis elements that control promoter expression in green tissues
and root tips. Our results indicate that a consensus as1 element and a GATA motif
located within this region are essential for promoter expression in those
tissues. Expression from the CsVMV promoter in vascular elements is directed by
the region encompassing nucleotides -178 to -63. Elements located between
nucleotides -149 and -63 are also required to activate promoter expression in
green tissues suggesting a combinatorial mode of regulation. Within the latter
region, a 43 bp fragment extending from nucleotide -141 to -99 was shown to
interact with a protein factor extracted from nuclei of tobacco seedlings. This
fragment showed no sequence homology with other pararetrovirus promoters and
hence may contain CsVMV-specific regulatory cis elements.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1006004819398 
PMID: 9700077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

