
1. J Adolesc Health. 1998 Aug;23(2 Suppl):71-82.

Health Initiatives for Youth: a model of youth/adult partnership approach to
HIV/AIDS services.

Bourdon B(1), Tierney S, Huba GJ, Lothrop J, Melchior LA, Betru R, Compoc K.

Author information: 
(1)Health Initiatives for Youth, San Francisco, California 94102, USA.

Health Initiatives for Youth (HIFY) in San Francisco, California, is an
innovative organization providing health-related services for and by young people
funded in part by the Special Projects of National Significance (SPNS) Program.
The HIFY Youth Health Initiative (YHI) is composed of eight youth staff and aims 
to bring about individual and systemic change, enhance the quality of life for
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-positive and at-risk young people, and
increase the responsiveness and youth sensitivity of organizational and community
systems. Comprehensive services have been delivered to 136 young men under 25
years, 33.1% of whom are HIV positive, and 164 young women, of whom 12.2% are HIV
positive. In addition, thousands of youth and young adults have received
lower-intensity services through dozens of educational workshops and
presentations. YHI services are implemented through a comprehensive collection of
education, training, and support activities that benefit the youth staff who
produce them, along with the participants who benefit from the services provided.
These activities include a speaker's bureau, health and advocacy trainings,
internships, return-to-work and life skills training, publications, and
conferences. Regional and national findings suggest that many youth do not yet
comprehend their risk for HIV infection or understand the impact of HIV on their 
community. In direct response to these needs, HIFY programs inform and encourage 
access to counseling and testing, and provide meaningful access to adolescent
care, treatment, and services.

DOI: 10.1016/s1054-139x(98)00055-x 
PMID: 9712255  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

