
1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 20;273(47):31574-80.

Proprotein convertase PC1/3-related peptides are potent slow tight-binding
inhibitors of murine PC1/3 and Hfurin.

Boudreault A(1), Gauthier D, Lazure C.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Engineering Network of Centre of Excellence and the Laboratory of
Neuropeptides Structure and Metabolism, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal (affiliated with the University of Montréal), Montréal, Québec H2W 1R7, 
Canada.

The proprotein convertase PC1/3 belongs to the subtilisin/kexin-like endoprotease
family and is synthesized as a preproenzyme. To investigate the function of its
propeptide, murine proPC1/3 and preproPC1/3 were isolated from the inclusion
bodies of recombinant preproPC1/3 baculovirus-infected insect cells, rendered
soluble with 6 M guanidine HCl and 20 mM dithiothreitol, and purified by gel
filtration and metal-binding affinity chromatography. Two NH2-terminal fragments 
containing the complete propeptide 1-84 region were obtained after CNBr cleavage,
purified, and chemically characterized. Progress curve kinetic analysis with
enzymatically active murine 71-kDa PC1/3 or 50-kDa human furin demonstrated that 
both fragments were potent slow tight-binding inhibitors of either enzyme with Ki
in the low nanomolar range. Additional cleavages at Trp residues yielded
fragment9-71, which no longer represents a potent inhibitor. Upon incubation at
pH 5.5 in the presence of excess 71-kDa murine PC1/3, NH2-terminal fragment1-98
is cleaved at two sites, as revealed through Western blotting using
NH2-terminal-directed PC1/3 antibodies. Finally, murine PC2 is inhibited by the
proPC1/31-98 peptide, albeit at a much lesser extent with a micromolar Ki and in 
a strictly competitive manner. These results suggest that the proregion of PC1/3 
is an important feature in regulating its activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.47.31574 
PMID: 9813073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

