
1. Pathology. 1998 Nov;30(4):348-54.

The role of the human papilloma virus in esophageal cancer.

Sur M(1), Cooper K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Pathology, School of Pathology, University of the
Witwatersrand, South African Institute for Medical Research, Johannesburg, South 
Africa.

Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) demonstrates wide regional variation in
incidence and causal associations. Human papillomavirus (HPV) has been implicated
in ESCC, particularly the sub-types 16 and 18. Transforming proteins E6 and E7
from these high risk sub-types, interact with p53 protein and Rb protein
respectively, leading to loss of function of these tumor suppressor gene
products. These interactions further lead to inactivation of the growth
suppressive effects of the p53 and Rb proteins, resulting in abnormal
proliferative states. p53 protein expression has been found in both HPV-positive 
and -negative tumors, indicating that HPV and p53 protein expression are not
mutually exclusive and can occur together in the same tumor. It has been observed
that HPV plays a more significant role in esophageal carcinogenesis in geographic
areas with a high prevalence of the disease. A variation in the association
between HPV and ESCC worldwide may be due to environmental and geographic
factors, or to genetic susceptibility to esophageal HPV infections. Variations in
the sensitivity of techniques used in the detection of the virus and in the
methodology for processing the tumor tissues, may also be responsible for global 
differences. Esophageal carcinogenesis is a complex multistep process with a
multifactorial etiology. Infection with oncogenic HPV types may be an integral
part in a multistep process that leads to ESCC.

DOI: 10.1080/00313029800169616 
PMID: 9839308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

