
1. J Physiol. 1999 Jan 15;514 ( Pt 2):413-23.

Isoprenaline can activate the acetylcholine-induced K+ current in canine atrial
myocytes via Gs-derived betagamma subunits.

Sorota S(1), Rybina I, Yamamoto A, Du XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA. ss47@columbia.edu

1. G protein betagamma subunits activate the acetylcholine-induced potassium
current IK,ACh. There is no evidence of specificity at the level of the betagamma
subunits. Therefore all G protein-coupled receptors in atrial myocytes should be 
able to activate IK,ACh. Paradoxically, it is often stated that isoprenaline does
not activate IK,ACh. Rationales to explain this negative result include
insufficient concentrations of Gs in the atrium or restricted access of
Gs-derived betagamma subunits to the IK,ACh channel. We took advantage of a
non-specific increase in Gs that results after infection with adenovirus. 2.
Adenoviral infection unmasked a 1 microM isoprenaline-induced IK,ACh which was
prevented by propranolol. Isoprenaline occasionally activated IK,ACh in
uninfected and freshly dissociated atrial myocytes but the effect was larger and 
more consistent in infected myocytes. 3. Pertussis toxin pretreatment (100 ng
ml-1 overnight) did not block the effect of isoprenaline. The effect of
isoprenaline became persistent if cells were pretreated with cholera toxin (200
ng nl-1). 4. Signal transduction events distal to adenylyl cyclase were not
involved in isoprenaline-induced IK,ACh. Forskolin (10 microM) did not activate
IK,ACh. Inhibition of adenylyl cyclase with cytoplasmic application of 300 microM
2'-deoxyadenosine 3'-monophosphate did not prevent the activation of IK,ACh by
isoprenaline. 5. Cytoplasmic application of a betagamma binding peptide derived
from the C terminus of beta-adrenergic receptor kinase 1 (50 microM) prevented
the effect of isoprenaline on IK,ACh. The peptide did not prevent the stimulation
of the L-type calcium current by isoprenaline. 6. The results indicate that
beta-adrenoceptors can activate IK,ACh in atrial myocytes through the release of 
betagamma subunits from Gs.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.1999.413ae.x 
PMCID: PMC2269084
PMID: 9852323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

