
1. Commun Dis Public Health. 1998 Dec;1(4):221-8.

Universal or selective immunisation against hepatitis B virus in the United
Kingdom? A review of recent cost-effectiveness studies.

Edmunds WJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry.
edmunds@oikos.warwick.ac.uk

There is still no consensus on which hepatitis B virus (HBV) immunisation option 
should be adopted in the United Kingdom (UK). This review considers why three
recent UK studies on the subject reached different conclusions, and whether they 
provide sufficient information to base an informed decision on cost-effectiveness
grounds. The studies differed in methodology, particularly in the models used to 
estimate the effectiveness of the competing programmes. This led the authors to
draw very different conclusions as to the relative cost-effectiveness of
universal infant and selective immunisation, probably because the study that
favoured infant immunisation omitted an allowance for the indirect protection
afforded to others by immunisation of a proportion of the population. This would 
lead to the underestimation of the relative effectiveness of a programme targeted
at high-risk individuals. Selective vaccination is probably more cost-effective
than mass immunisation, but universal immunisation may still be considered a
cost-effective option (in addition to selective immunisation) if future health
benefits are not discounted (i.e., given a lower value than present ones). If
future health benefits are discounted then mass infant immunisation is almost
certainly not cost-effective. If selective immunisation is to be adopted, then
the current (selective) strategy should be properly implemented, as it appears to
have had little impact on HBV infection and disease.


PMID: 9854877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

