
1. Biochemistry. 1998 Dec 22;37(51):17704-13.

High-resolution solution NMR structure of the minimal active domain of the human 
immunodeficiency virus type-2 nucleocapsid protein.

Kodera Y(1), Sato K, Tsukahara T, Komatsu H, Maeda T, Kohno T.

Author information: 
(1)Mitsubishi Kasei Institute of Life Sciences, Machida, Tokyo, Japan.

The retroviral nucleocapsid (NC) protein is a multifunctional protein essential
for RNA genome packaging and viral infectivity. The NC protein, NCp8, of the
human immunodeficiency virus type-II (HIV-2) is a 49 amino acid peptide
containing two zinc fingers, of the type C-X2-C-X4-H-X4-C, connected by seven
amino acid residues, called the "basic amino acid cluster." It has been shown
that the N-terminal zinc finger flanked by the basic amino acid cluster is the
minimal active domain for the specific binding to viral RNA and other functions. 
However, the structure-activity relationships of NCp8 have not been investigated 
in detail. In the present study, the three-dimensional structure of a 29 amino
acid peptide, including the minimal active domain (NCp8-fl), was determined by
two-dimensional 1H NMR spectroscopy with simulated annealing calculations. A
total of 15 converged structures of NCp8-fl were obtained on the basis of 355
experimental constraints, including 343 distance constraints obtained from
nuclear Overhauser effect connectivities, 12 torsion angle (phi, chi1)
constraints, and four constraints for zinc binding. The root-mean-square
deviation of the 15 converged structures was 0.29 +/- 0.04 A for the backbone
atoms (N, C(alpha), C) and 1.27 +/- 0.13 A for all heavy atoms. Interestingly,
the basic amino acid cluster itself was defined well, with a loop-like
conformation in which three arginine residues in the cluster and one arginine
residue in the zinc finger are located approximately in the same plane of the
molecule and are exposed to the solvent. The structure-activity relationships are
discussed on the basis of the comparison of this well-defined structure with
those of other NC proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/bi981818o 
PMID: 9922136  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

