
1. J Virol. 1999 Mar;73(3):1818-27.

Genetic analysis of a unique human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) with a
primer binding site complementary to tRNAMet supports a role for U5-PBS stem-loop
RNA structures in initiation of HIV-1 reverse transcription.

Kang SM(1), Morrow CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) exclusively uses tRNA3Lys to initiate
reverse transcription. A novel HIV-1 mutant which stably utilizes tRNAMet rather 
than tRNA3Lys as a primer was previously identified [HXB2(Met-AC] (S.-M. Kang, Z.
Zhang, and C. D. Morrow, J. Virol. 71:207-217, 1997). Comparison of RNA secondary
structures of the unique sequence (U5)-primer binding site (PBS) viral RNA genome
alone or complexed with tRNAMet of HXB2(Met-AC) revealed structural motifs in
common with the U5-PBS of the wild-type virus. In the current study, mutations
were constructed to alter the U5-PBS structure and disrupt the U5-PBS-tRNAMet
interaction of the virus derived from HXB2(Met-AC). All of the mutant viruses
were infectious following transfection and coculture with SupT1 cells. Analysis
of the initiation of reverse transcription revealed that some of the mutants were
impaired compared to HXB2(Met-AC). The genetic stability of the PBS from each
virus was determined following in vitro culture. Two mutant proviral constructs, 
one predicted to completely disrupt the stem-loop structure in U5 and the other
predicted to destabilize contact regions of U5 with tRNAMet, reverted back to
contain a PBS complementary to tRNA3Lys. All other mutants maintained a PBS
complementary to tRNAMet after in vitro culture, although all contained multiple 
nucleotide substitutions within the U5-PBS from the starting proviral clones.
Most interestingly, a viral mutant containing a 32-nucleotide deletion between
nucleotides 142 and 173, encompassing regions in U5 which interact with tRNAMet, 
maintained a PBS complementary to tRNAMet following in vitro culture. All of the 
proviral clones recovered from this mutant, however, contained an additional
19-nucleotide insertion in U5. RNA modeling of the U5-PBS from this mutant
demonstrated that the additional mutations present in U5 following culture
restored RNA structures similar to those modeled from HXB2(Met-AC). These results
provide strong genetic evidence that multiple sequence and structural elements in
U5 in addition to the PBS are involved in the interaction with the tRNA used for 
initiation of reverse transcription.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.3.1818-1827.1999 
PMCID: PMC104421
PMID: 9971759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

