
1. J Virol. 1999 Apr;73(4):3197-209.

Transcriptional repression of human hepatitis B virus genes by a bZIP family
member, E4BP4.

Lai CK(1), Ting LP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Life Science, National
Yang-Ming University, Shih-Pai, Taipei 11221, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Box alpha is an essential element of both the upstream regulatory sequence of the
core promoter and the second enhancer, which positively regulate the
transcription of human hepatitis B virus (HBV) genes. In this paper, we describe 
the cloning and characterization of a box alpha binding protein, E4BP4. E4BP4 is 
a bZIP type of transcription factor. Overexpression of E4BP4 represses the
stimulating activity of box alpha in the upstream regulatory sequence of the core
promoter and the second enhancer in differentiated human hepatoma cell lines.
E4BP4 can also suppress the transcription of HBV genes and the production of HBV 
virions in a transient-transfection system that mimics the viral infection in
vivo. Expression of an E4BP4 antisense transcript can, instead, elevate the
transcription of the core promoter. A low abundance of E4BP4 protein and mRNA in 
differentiated human hepatoma cell lines is detected, and E4BP4 is not a major
component of box alpha binding proteins in untransfected differentiated human
hepatoma cell lines. C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta, in contrast, are major components 
of the box alpha binding activity present in nuclear extracts. E4BP4 has a
stronger binding affinity towards box alpha than the endogenous box alpha binding
activity present in nuclear extracts. Structure and function analysis of E4BP4
reveals that DNA binding activity is sufficient to confer the negative regulatory
function of E4BP4. These results indicate that binding site occlusion is the
mechanism whereby E4BP4 suppresses transcription in HBV.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.4.3197-3209.1999 
PMCID: PMC104083
PMID: 10074173  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

