
1. J Clin Virol. 1999 Jun;13(1-2):61-9.

Identification and characterization of a histone binding site of the
non-structural protein 3 of hepatitis C virus.

Borowski P(1), Kühl R, Laufs R, Schulze zur Wiesch J, Heiland M.

Author information: 
(1)Bernhard-Nocht-Institut für Tropenmedizin, Abt. Virologie, Hamburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Chronic hepatitis resulting from the hepatitis C virus (HCV)
infection leads to cirrhosis in at least half the infected patients and increases
the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma. There are indications that this pathogenic 
effect may result from the disturbance of intracellular signal cascades caused by
the interaction with viral antigens. Although a great amount of data has been
accumulated about functional regions in HCV proteins, relatively little is known 
about their intracellular targets. Previously, we have demonstrated that the
full-length non-structural protein 3 of HCV (NS3) (Borowski P, Heiland M, Feucht 
H, Laufs R. Characterisation of non-structural protein 3 of hepatitis C virus as 
modulator of protein phosphorylation mediated by PKA and PKC. Evidences for
action on the level of substrate and enzyme. Arch Virol 1999a; 144) and its NH2- 
and COOH-terminal truncated form (Borowski P, Heiland M, Oehlmann K, Becker B,
Kornetzky L, Feucht HH, Laufs R. Non-structural protein 3 of hepatitis C virus
inhibits phosphorylation mediated by cAMP-dependent protein kinase. Eur J Biochem
1996;237:611-618) associate to stable complexes with core histones H2B and H4.
The changes of the properties of histones as substrate for cAMP-dependent protein
kinase (PKA) and protein kinase C (PKC) were found as a direct consequence of the
interaction.
OBJECTIVE: In the present study we further these observations, localize the
histone binding domain of NS3 and investigate the mechanisms by which NS3 affects
the functions of the histones in vitro.
STUDY DESIGN: HCV protein exhibiting the mentioned histone binding activity was
produced in a bacterial expression system, purified and binding to histones was
biochemically characterized. The region of NS3 involved in the interaction with
histones was defined by proteolytic fragmentation, microsequencing and a specific
histone binding assay. Furthermore, a functional test to quantify the interaction
of histones with DNA was established and the binding of DNA to histone as a
function of NS3 concentration was analysed by means of graphical methods.
RESULTS: The investigated fragment of HCV polyprotein consisting of amino acid
residues 1189-1525 (HCV-polyprotein-(1189-1525)) displayed significant histone
binding activity. The binding occurred at a molar ratio 1:1 of histone to
HCV-polyprotein-(1189-1525) and was mediated by a linear stretch of amino acids
located between the residues 1343 and 1379 of the HCV polyprotein. To demonstrate
that HCV-polyprotein-(1189-1525) affects the binding of DNA to histones we used
two independent methods: overlay assay and binding assay on Sepharose beads.
Graphic analysis of the binding kinetics revealed an uncompetitive type of
inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide the first evidence that NS3 binds and affects
the functions of core histones. The mechanism by which the NS3 interferes with
the histone functions involves conformational changes of histone molecule.

DOI: 10.1016/s1386-6532(99)00007-4 
PMID: 10405893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

