
1. Vet Microbiol. 2000 May 22;74(1-2):87-100.

The influenza A virus M1 protein interacts with the cellular receptor of
activated C kinase (RACK) 1 and can be phosphorylated by protein kinase C.

Reinhardt J(1), Wolff T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Virologie, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Robert-Koch-Str. 17,
35037, Marburg, Germany.

The M1 protein of influenza A virus has multiple regulatory functions during the 
infectious cycle, which include mediation of nuclear export of viral
ribonucleoproteins, inhibition of viral transcription and a crucial role in virus
assembly and budding. The only known modification of the M1 protein is by
phosphorylation through yet-to-be-identified kinases. We postulated that at least
some of the M1 functions are exerted or regulated through interactions with
cellular components. In a screen for such cellular mediators, the protein
receptor of the activated C-kinase (RACK 1) was identified by its interaction
with the viral M1 protein in the yeast two hybrid system. The physical M1-RACK 1 
interaction was confirmed in glutathione-S-transferase-based coprecipitation
assays for the diverged M1 proteins of avian, swine and human influenza A virus
strains. This conservation suggests that the M1-RACK 1 interaction is of general 
importance during influenza A virus infections. RACK 1 has previously been
identified to specifically bind the activated form of protein kinase C (PKC) and 
is assumed to anchor the kinase at membranes in the vicinity of its substrates.
Since the M1 protein becomes phosphorylated during influenza virus infection, we 
examined if PKC could catalyze the phosphate transfer. We demonstrate that
virion-derived and recombinant M1 protein can indeed be efficiently
phosphorylated by purified PKC. Moreover, in cell extracts, we detected M1
phosphorylation activity that was strongly reduced in the presence of the
PKC-specific inhibitor compound GF109203X. These data suggest that PKC is the
main M1-phosphorylating activity in the cell. Since both, the M1 protein and PKC 
have been shown to interact with RACK 1, we suggest that the M1-RACK 1
interaction is involved in M1 phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1135(00)00169-3 
PMID: 10799781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

