
1. J Virol. 2000 Jun;74(11):5310-9.

Mutation of a conserved residue (D123) required for oligomerization of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 Nef protein abolishes interaction with human
thioesterase and results in impairment of Nef biological functions.

Liu LX(1), Heveker N, Fackler OT, Arold S, Le Gall S, Janvier K, Peterlin BM,
Dumas C, Schwartz O, Benichou S, Benarous R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, INSERM U 529 Université Paris V,
75014 Paris, France.

Nef is a myristoylated protein of 27 to 35 kDa that is conserved in primate
lentiviruses. In vivo, Nef is required for high viral load and full pathological 
effects. In vitro, Nef has at least four activities: induction of CD4 and major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I downregulation, enhancement of viral
infectivity, and alteration of T-cell activation pathways. We previously reported
that the Nef protein from human immunodeficiency virus type 1 interacts with a
novel human thioesterase (hTE). In the present study, by mutational analysis, we 
identified a region of the Nef core, extending from the residues D108 to W124,
that is involved both in Nef-hTE interaction and in Nef-induced CD4
downregulation. This region of Nef is located on the oligomer interface and is in
close proximity to the putative CD4 binding site. One of the mutants carrying a
mutation in this region, targeted to the conserved residue D123, was also found
to be defective in two other functions of Nef, MHC class I downmodulation and
enhancement of viral infectivity. Furthermore, mutation of this residue affected 
the ability of Nef to form dimers, suggesting that the oligomerization of Nef may
be critical for its multiple functions.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.74.11.5310-5319.2000 
PMCID: PMC110886
PMID: 10799608  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

