
1. FASEB J. 2000 Oct;14(13):1917-30.

Thrombospondin-1/HIV-1 tat protein interaction: modulation of the biological
activity of extracellular Tat.

Rusnati M(1), Taraboletti G, Urbinati C, Tulipano G, Giuliani R, Molinari-Tosatti
MP, Sennino B, Giacca M, Tyagi M, Albini A, Noonan D, Giavazzi R, Presta M.

Author information: 
(1)Chair of General Pathology and Immunology, University of Brescia, Brescia,
Italy.

Tat protein, a trans-activating factor of the human immunodeficiency virus type
1, acts also as an extracellular molecule modulating gene expression, cell
survival, growth, transformation, and angiogenesis. Here we demonstrate that
human thrombospondin-1 (TSP), a plasma glycoprotein and constituent of the
extracellular matrix, binds to glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-Tat protein but
not to GST. Scatchard plot analysis of the binding of free GST-Tat to immobilized
TSP reveals a high-affinity interaction (Kd equal to 25 nM). Accordingly, TSP
inhibits cell internalization and HIV-1 LTR trans-activating activity of
extracellular Tat in HL3T1 cells with ID50 equal to 10-30 nM. Also, TSP inhibits 
cell interaction and mitogenic activity of extracellular Tat in T53 Tat-less
cells. TSP is instead ineffective when administered after the interaction of Tat 
with cell surface heparan-sulfate proteoglycans has occurred, in keeping with its
ability to prevent but not disrupt Tat/heparin interaction in vitro. Finally, TSP
inhibits the autocrine loop of stimulation exerted by endogenous Tat in parental 
T53 cells. Accordingly, TSP overexpression inhibits cell proliferation,
angiogenic activity, and tumorigenic capacity of stable T53 transfectants. Our
data demonstrate the ability of TSP to bind to Tat protein and to affect its LTR 
trans-activating, mitogenic, angiogenic, and tumorigenic activity. These findings
suggest that TSP may be implicated in the progression of AIDS and in
AIDS-associated pathologies by modulating the bioavailability and biological
activity of extracellular Tat.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.99-0902com 
PMID: 11023976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

