
1. J Virol. 2001 Feb;75(3):1265-73.

Hepatitis C virus envelope protein E2 does not inhibit PKR by simple competition 
with autophosphorylation sites in the RNA-binding domain.

Taylor DR(1), Tian B, Romano PR, Hinnebusch AG, Lai MM, Mathews MB.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA.

Double-stranded-RNA (dsRNA)-dependent protein kinase PKR is induced by interferon
and activated upon autophosphorylation. We previously identified four
autophosphorylated amino acids and elucidated their participation in PKR
activation. Three of these sites are in the central region of the protein, and
one is in the kinase domain. Here we describe the identification of four
additional autophosphorylated amino acids in the spacer region that separates the
two dsRNA-binding motifs in the RNA-binding domain. Eight amino acids, including 
these autophosphorylation sites, are duplicated in hepatitis C virus (HCV)
envelope protein E2. This region of E2 is required for its inhibition of PKR
although the mechanism of inhibition is not known. Replacement of all four of
these residues in PKR with alanines did not dramatically affect kinase activity
in vitro or in yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. However, when coupled with
mutations of serine 242 and threonines 255 and 258 in the central region, these
mutations increased PKR protein expression in mammalian cells, consistent with
diminished kinase activity. A synthetic peptide corresponding to this region of
PKR was phosphorylated in vitro by PKR, but phosphorylation was strongly
inhibited after PKR was preincubated with HCV E2. Another synthetic peptide,
corresponding to the central region of PKR and containing serine 242, was also
phosphorylated by active PKR, but E2 did not inhibit this peptide as efficiently.
Neither of the PKR peptides was able to disrupt the HCV E2-PKR interaction. Taken
together, these results show that PKR is autophosphorylated on serine 83 and
threonines 88, 89, and 90, that this autophosphorylation may enhance kinase
activation, and that the inhibition of PKR by HCV E2 is not solely due to
duplication of and competition with these autophosphorylation sites.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.3.1265-1273.2001 
PMCID: PMC114032
PMID: 11152499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

