
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Oct 21;1592(2):193-204.

Hepatitis C virus NS5A protein binds TBP and p53, inhibiting their DNA binding
and p53 interactions with TBP and ERCC3.

Qadri I(1), Iwahashi M, Simon F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,
Hepatobiliary Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, B-145, 4200 
E., 9th Avenue, Denver 80262, USA. Ishtiaq.qadri@uchsc.edu

Among the hepatotropic viruses, hepatitis C virus (HCV) is considered to be the
leading cause of liver disease in humans, affecting approximately 2% of the world
population. HCV-encoded nonstructural protein 5A (NS5A) is a 56-58-kDa
phosphoprotein, which is produced from the processing of viral polyprotein. The
potential mechanism(s) by which NS5A is able to influence key cellular processes 
are largely unknown. In this study, we investigated the functional properties of 
NS5A. In vivo co-immunoprecipitation and pull-down assays demonstrated that NS5A 
forms a heteromeric complex with TATA box binding protein (TBP) and tumor
suppressor protein p53. Mutants of TBP and p53 showed reduced binding to NS5A. To
determine the functional relevance of these associations, we found that NS5A
inhibits the binding of both p53 and TBP to their DNA consensus binding sequences
in vitro. NS5A also inhibited the p53-TBP and p53-excision repair cross
complementing factor 3 (ERCC3) protein-protein complex formation. Furthermore,
NS5A repressed the p53 regulated p21 (WAF1) promoter and a synthetic promoter
containing multiple p53 responsive DNA elements binding sites in HCT116 p53(+/+) 
cell line. p53-mediated transcriptional activation from both promoters was
reduced approximately 3-5-fold following expression of NS5A. Taken together,
these results suggest that NS5A may exert its influence on key cellular processes
by functional associations with p53 and TBP. This could explain one of the
possible mechanism(s) by which NS5A is able to exert its effect on cellular gene 
expression and cell growth regulation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4889(02)00315-4 
PMID: 12379483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

