
1. J Cell Sci. 2003 Feb 15;116(Pt 4):605-16.

hRUL138, a novel human RNA-binding RING-H2 ubiquitin-protein ligase.

Kreft SG(1), Nassal M.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Freiburg, Department of Internal Medicine II, Molecular
Biology, Hugstetter Str 55, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany.

Cellular as well as viral RNAs are usually found complexed with proteins. In an
attempt to identify proteins that interact with transcripts of hepatitis B virus 
(HBV), a DNA virus that replicates through reverse transcription, a partial cDNA 
was isolated from a human cDNA expression library whose gene product bound to an 
HBV-derived RNA. Using an overlapping clone from a molecular hybridization screen
a full-length cDNA was assembled. It contained a large open reading frame for a
1208 amino-acid protein of 138 kDa identical to the hypothetical product of the
KIAA0675 clone. Closely related sequences are present in mouse cDNA libraries but
not in the genomes of lower organisms. The protein sequence contained no known
RNA-binding domain and, apart from a probable coiled-coil domain, the only
significant homology involved a complete RING-H2 motif. This suggested that the
protein might be a novel RNA-binding RING-dependent ubiquitin-protein ligase or
E3 enzyme. A motif critical for RNA binding was experimentally mapped to a
central Lys-rich region. Binding specificity is either broad or the protein has
as yet unknown physiological targets; hence, at present, a potential importance
for HBV biology remains open. The RING-H2 domain was functional in and essential 
for self- and trans-ubiquitylation in vitro and for proteasome-mediated turnover 
of the protein in vivo. We therefore termed it hRUL138 for human RNA-binding
ubiquitin ligase of 138 kDa. hRUL138 mRNAs are expressed at low levels in most
tissues. GFP-tagged hRUL138 derivatives were found associated with cytoplasmic
structures, possibly the ER, but excluded from the nucleus. The combined presence
of RNA binding and E3 activity in hRUL138 raises the possibility that both are
mechanistically linked.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.00261 
PMID: 12538761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

