
1. J Gen Virol. 2003 Feb;84(Pt 2):319-327. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.18615-0.

Physical interaction of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigen leader protein
(EBNA-LP) with human oestrogen-related receptor 1 (hERR1): hERR1 interacts with a
conserved domain of EBNA-LP that is critical for EBV-induced B-cell
immortalization.

Igarashi M(1)(2), Kawaguchi Y(2), Hirai K(2), Mizuno F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tokyo Medical University, 6-1-1, Shinjuku,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8402, Japan.
(2)Department of Tumor Virology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigen leader protein (EBNA-LP) consists of
W1W2 repeats and a unique C-terminal Y1Y2 domain and plays a critical role in
EBV-induced transformation. To identify the cellular proteins associating with
EBNA-LP, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen using EBNA-LP cDNA containing a
single W1W2 domain as bait and an EBV-transformed human peripheral blood
lymphocyte cDNA library as the source of cellular genes. Our results were as
follows. (i) A cDNA in the positive yeast colony was found to encode a cellular
protein, human oestrogen-related receptor 1 (hERR1), which is a constitutive
transcriptional activator of the various types of oestrogen response elements.
(ii) A purified chimeric protein consisting of glutathione S-transferase (GST)
fused to hERR1 specifically formed complexes with EBNA-LPs containing one
(EBNA-LPR1), two (EBNA-LPR2) or four W1W2 repeats (EBNA-LPR4) transiently
expressed in COS-7 cells. Reciprocally, GST fused to EBNA-LPR1 or EBNA-LPR2
pulled down hERR1 transiently expressed in COS-7 cells. (iii) Mutational analyses
of EBNA-LP revealed that the Y2 domain of EBNA-LP is responsible for the
interaction with hERR1 and two leucines in the Y2 domain (Leu-78 and -82), which 
are conserved among a subset of primate gammaherpesviruses, are interactive sites
for hERR1. So far, it has been reported that the only domain of EBNA-LP critical 
for EBV-induced transformation is the Y1Y2 domain. Potential roles of hERR1 in
EBV-induced transformation are discussed.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.18615-0 
PMID: 12560563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

