
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 30;278(22):20358-66. Epub 2003 Feb 27.

DC-SIGN and L-SIGN are high affinity binding receptors for hepatitis C virus
glycoprotein E2.

Lozach PY(1), Lortat-Jacob H, de Lacroix de Lavalette A, Staropoli I, Foung S,
Amara A, Houles C, Fieschi F, Schwartz O, Virelizier JL, Arenzana-Seisdedos F,
Altmeyer R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit√© d'Immunologie Virale, Institut Pasteur, 28, rue du Dr. Roux, 75015
Paris, France.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) genome codes for highly mannosylated envelope
proteins, which are naturally retained in the endoplasmic reticulum. We found
that the HCV envelope glycoprotein E2 binds the dendritic cell-specific
intercellular adhesion molecule 3-grabbing nonintegrin (DC-SIGN) and the related 
liver endothelial cell lectin L-SIGN through high-mannose N-glycans. Competing
ligands such as mannan and an antibody directed against the carbohydrate
recognition domains (CRD) abrogated binding. While no E2 interaction with distant
monomeric CRDs on biosensor chips could be detected, binding is observed if CRDs 
are closely seeded (Kd = 48 nm) and if the CRD is part of the oligomeric-soluble 
extracellular domain of DC-SIGN (Kd = 30 nm). The highest affinity is seen for
plasma membrane-expressed DC-SIGN and L-SIGN (Kd = 3 and 6 nm, respectively).
These results indicate that several high-mannose N-glycans in a structurally
defined cluster on E2 bind to several subunits of the oligomeric lectin CRD. High
affinity interaction of viral glycoproteins with oligomeric lectins might
represent a strategy by which HCV targets to and concentrates in the liver and
infects dendritic cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M301284200 
PMID: 12609975  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

