
1. Virology. 2003 Feb 1;306(1):51-9.

Modulation of interferon expression by hepatitis C virus NS5A protein and human
homeodomain protein PTX1.

Ghosh AK(1), Majumder M, Steele R, Ray R, Ray RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Saint Louis Unoversity, St. Louis, MO 63104, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS5A protein transcriptionally modulates a number of
cellular genes. Since there is no evidence of binding of NS5A protein to DNA, it 
is likely to exert its activity in concert with cellular factor(s). In this
study, we have identified a specific interaction of HCV NS5A with homeodomain
protein PTX1 of human origin by a yeast two-hybrid interacting cloning system.
The authenticity of this interaction was verified by mammalian two-hybrid assay, 
in vivo co-immunoprecipitation analysis, and from a colocalization study.
Recently, murine PTX1 (mPTX1) has been shown to repress virus-induced murine
interferonA4 promoter activity. Interferon-à alone or together with ribavirin is 
the only available therapy for HCV-infected patients. Therefore, we examined
whether coexpression of NS5A and human PTX1 (hPTX1) proteins modulate human IFN-à
promoter activity. An in vitro reporter assay by transfection of HepG2 cells with
NS5A suggested an activation of IFN-à promoter to approximately 20-fold upon
Newcastle disease virus (NDV) infection. Under similar experimental conditions,
hPTX1-activated IFN-à prompter to approximately sevenfold, unlike mPTX1. However,
cotransfection of NS5A and hPTX1 displayed a lower interferon promoter activity, 
probably for physical association between these two proteins. Subsequent study
demonstrated that activation of IFN promoter by NS5A is associated with an
increased expression of IRF-3. Further analysis revealed that ectopic expression 
of NS5A in HepG2 cells enhances endogenous IFN-à secretion and MxA expression
upon induction with NDV. However, exogenous expression of hPTX1 did not
significantly alter NS5A-mediated function in the stable transfectants. Taken
together, these results suggested that the level of endogenous hPTX1 is not
sufficient to block the function of NS5A for augmentation of virus-mediated IFN
activity in HepG2 cells.

DOI: 10.1016/s0042-6822(02)00029-6 
PMID: 12620797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

