
1. RNA. 2003 Jul;9(7):858-70.

Inhibition of the protein kinase PKR by the internal ribosome entry site of
hepatitis C virus genomic RNA.

Vyas J(1), Elia A, Clemens MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Control Group, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, St.
George's Hospital Medical School, London SW17 0RE, UK.

Translation of the hepatitis C genome is mediated by internal ribosome entry on
the structurally complex 5' untranslated region of the large viral RNA.
Initiation of protein synthesis by this mechanism is independent of the
cap-binding factor eIF4E, but activity of the initiator Met-tRNA(f)-binding
factor eIF2 is still required. HCV protein synthesis is thus potentially
sensitive to the inhibition of eIF2 activity that can result from the
phosphorylation of the latter by the interferon-inducible, double-stranded
RNA-activated protein kinase PKR. Two virally encoded proteins, NS5A and E2, have
been shown to reduce this inhibitory effect of PKR by impairing the activation of
the kinase. Here we present evidence for a third viral strategy for PKR
inhibition. A region of the viral RNA comprising part of the internal ribosome
entry site (IRES) is able to bind to PKR in competition with double-stranded RNA 
and can prevent autophosphorylation and activation of the kinase in vitro. The
HCV IRES itself has no PKR-activating ability. Consistent with these findings,
cotransfection experiments employing a bicistronic reporter construct and
wild-type PKR indicate that expression of the protein kinase is less inhibitory
towards HCV IRES-driven protein synthesis than towards cap-dependent protein
synthesis. These data suggest a dual function for the viral IRES, with both a
structural role in promoting initiation complex formation and a regulatory role
in preventing inhibition of initiation by PKR.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.5330503 
PMCID: PMC1370452
PMID: 12810919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

