
1. J Virol. 2003 Sep;77(17):9192-203.

Association of the herpes simplex virus type 1 Us11 gene product with the
cellular kinesin light-chain-related protein PAT1 results in the redistribution
of both polypeptides.

Benboudjema L(1), Mulvey M, Gao Y, Pimplikar SW, Mohr I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and NYU Cancer Institute, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

The herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) Us11 gene encodes a multifunctional
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-binding protein that is expressed late in infection
and packaged into the tegument layer of the virus particle. As a tegument
component, Us11 associates with nascent capsids after its synthesis late in the
infectious cycle and is delivered into newly infected cells at times prior to the
expression of viral genes. Us11 is also an abundant late protein that regulates
translation through its association with host components and contains overlapping
nucleolar retention and nuclear export signals, allowing its accumulation in both
nucleoli and the cytosol. Thus, at various times during the viral life cycle and 
in different intracellular compartments, Us11 has the potential to execute
discrete tasks. The analysis of these functions, however, is complicated by the
fact that Us11 is not essential for viral replication in cultured cells. To
discover new host targets for the Us11 protein, we searched for cellular proteins
that interact with Us11 and have identified PAT1 as a Us11-binding protein
according to multiple, independent experimental criteria. PAT1 binds
microtubules, participates in amyloid precursor protein trafficking, and has
homology to the kinesin light chain (KLC) in its carboxyl terminus. The
carboxyl-terminal dsRNA-binding domain of Us11, which also contains the nucleolar
retention and nuclear export signals, binds PAT1, whereas 149 residues derived
from the KLC homology region of PAT1 are important for binding to Us11. Both PAT1
and Us11 colocalize within a perinuclear area in transiently transfected and
HSV-1-infected cells. The 149 amino acids derived from the KLC homology region
are required for colocalization of the two polypeptides. Furthermore, although
PAT1 normally accumulates in the nuclear compartment, Us11 expression results in 
the exclusion of PAT1 from the nucleus and its accumulation in the perinuclear
space. Similarly, Us11 does not accumulate in the nucleoli of infected cells that
overexpress PAT1. These results establish that Us11 and PAT1 can associate,
resulting in an altered subcellular distribution of both polypeptides. The
association between PAT1, a cellular trafficking protein with homology to KLC,
and Us11, along with a recent report demonstrating an interaction between Us11
and the ubiquitous kinesin heavy chain (R. J. Diefenbach et al., J. Virol.
76:3282-3291, 2002), suggests that these associations may be important for the
intracellular movement of viral components.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.17.9192-9203.2003 
PMCID: PMC187382
PMID: 12915535  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

