
1. J Biol. 2003;3(1):4. Epub 2003 Dec 4.

Endophilins interact with Moloney murine leukemia virus Gag and modulate virion
production.

Wang MQ(1), Kim W, Gao G, Torrey TA, Morse HC 3rd, De Camilli P, Goff SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University, College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.

BACKGROUND: The retroviral Gag protein is the central player in the process of
virion assembly at the plasma membrane, and is sufficient to induce the formation
and release of virus-like particles. Recent evidence suggests that Gag may co-opt
the host cell's endocytic machinery to facilitate retroviral assembly and
release.
RESULTS: A search for novel partners interacting with the Gag protein of the
Moloney murine leukemia virus (Mo-MuLV) via the yeast two-hybrid protein-protein 
interaction assay resulted in the identification of endophilin 2, a component of 
the machinery involved in clathrin-mediated endocytosis. We demonstrate that
endophilin interacts with the matrix or MA domain of the Gag protein of Mo-MuLV, 
but not of human immunodeficiency virus, HIV. Both exogenously expressed and
endogenous endophilin are incorporated into Mo-MuLV viral particles. Titration
experiments suggest that the binding sites for inclusion of endophilin into viral
particles are limited and saturable. Knock-down of endophilin with small
interfering RNA (siRNA) had no effect on virion production, but overexpression of
endophilin and, to a lesser extent, of several fragments of the protein, result
in inhibition of Mo-MuLV virion production, but not of HIV virion production.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that endophilins interact with Mo-MuLV Gag and
affect virion production. The findings imply that endophilin is another component
of the large complex that is hijacked by retroviruses to promote virion
production.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-4924-3-4 
PMCID: PMC442166
PMID: 14659004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

