
1. J Virol. 2004 Jul;78(13):6744-57.

Functional interaction between class II histone deacetylases and ICP0 of herpes
simplex virus type 1.

Lomonte P(1), Thomas J, Texier P, Caron C, Khochbin S, Epstein AL.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Silencing Viral et Remodelage de la Chromatine, Centre de Génétique
Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR5534-CNRS, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, 69622 
Villeurbanne Cedex, France. lomonte@cgmc.univ-lyon1.fr

This study describes the physical and functional interactions between ICP0 of
herpes simplex virus type 1 and class II histone deacetylases (HDACs) 4, 5, and
7. Class II HDACs are mainly known for their participation in the control of cell
differentiation through the regulation of the activity of the transcription
factor MEF2 (myocyte enhancer factor 2), implicated in muscle development and
neuronal survival. Immunofluorescence experiments performed on transfected cells 
showed that ICP0 colocalizes with and reorganizes the nuclear distribution of
ectopically expressed class I and II HDACs. In addition, endogenous HDAC4 and at 
least one of its binding partners, the corepressor protein SMRT (for silencing
mediator of retinoid and thyroid receptor), undergo changes in their nuclear
distribution in ICP0-transfected cells. As a result, during infection endogenous 
HDAC4 colocalizes with ICP0. Coimmunoprecipitation and glutathione S-transferase 
pull-down assays confirmed that class II but not class I HDACs specifically
interacted with ICP0 through their amino-terminal regions. This region, which is 
not conserved in class I HDACs but homologous to the MITR (MEF2-interacting
transcription repressor) protein, is responsible for the repression, in a
deacetylase-independent manner, of MEF2 by sequestering it under an inactive form
in the nucleus. Consequently, we show that ICP0 is able to overcome the HDAC5
amino-terminal- and MITR-induced MEF2A repression in gene reporter assays. This
is the first report of a viral protein interacting with and controlling the
repressor activity of class II HDACs. We discuss the putative consequences of
such an interaction for the biology of the virus both during lytic infection and 
reactivation from latency.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.13.6744-6757.2004 
PMCID: PMC421675
PMID: 15194749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

