
1. J Cell Sci. 2004 Sep 1;117(Pt 19):4401-9. Epub 2004 Aug 10.

A role for the PDZ-binding domain of the coxsackie B virus and adenovirus
receptor (CAR) in cell adhesion and growth.

Excoffon KJ(1), Hruska-Hageman A, Klotz M, Traver GL, Zabner J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine,
University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Drive, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

The coxsackie and adenovirus receptor (CAR) plays a role in viral infection,
maintenance of the junction adhesion complex in polarized epithelia, and
modulation of cellular growth properties. As a viral receptor, the C-terminus
appears to play no role indicating that the major function of CAR is to tether
the virus to the cell. By contrast, the C-terminus is known to play a role in
cellular localization and probably has a significant function in CAR-mediated
adhesion and cell growth properties. We hypothesized that the CAR PDZ
(PSD-95/Disc-large/ZO-1) binding motif interacts with PDZ-domain-containing
proteins to modulate the cellular phenotype. CAR was modified by deleting the
last four amino acids (CARDeltaGSIV) and evaluated for cell-cell adhesion in
polarized primary human airway epithelia and growth characteristics in stably
transfected L-cells. Although ablation of the CAR PDZ-binding motif did not
affect adenoviral infection, it did have a significant effect both on cell-cell
adhesion and on cell growth. Expression of CARDeltaGSIV failed to increase the
transepithelial resistance in polarized epithelia to the same degree as wild-type
CAR and failed to act as a growth modulator in L-cells. Furthermore, we provide
evidence for three new CAR interacting partners, including MAGI-1b, PICK1 and
PSD-95. CAR appears to interact with several distinct PDZ-domain-containing
proteins and may exert its biological function through these interactions.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.01300 
PMID: 15304526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

