
1. J Virol. 2004 Sep;78(18):10045-53.

Rotavirus enterotoxin NSP4 binds to the extracellular matrix proteins
laminin-beta3 and fibronectin.

Boshuizen JA(1), Rossen JW, Sitaram CK, Kimenai FF, Simons-Oosterhuis Y, Laffeber
C, BÃ¼ller HA, Einerhand AW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pediatrics, Pediatric Gastroenterology & Nutrition, Erasmus MC, 
Rm. Ee1571A, Dr. Molewaterplein 50, 3015 GE Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Rotavirus is the most important cause of viral gastroenteritis and dehydrating
diarrhea in young children. Rotavirus nonstructural protein 4 (NSP4) is an
enterotoxin that was identified as an important agent in symptomatic rotavirus
infection. To identify cellular proteins that interact with NSP4, a two-hybrid
technique with Saccharomyces cerevisiae was used. NSP4 cDNA, derived from the
human rotavirus strain Wa, was cloned into the yeast shuttle vector pGBKT7. An
intestinal cDNA library derived from Caco-2 cells cloned into the yeast shuttle
vector pGAD10 was screened for proteins that interact with NSP4. Protein
interactions were confirmed in vivo by coimmunoprecipitation and
immunohistochemical colocalization. After two-hybrid library screening, we
repeatedly isolated cDNAs encoding the extracellular matrix (ECM) protein
laminin-beta3 (amino acids [aa] 274 to 878) and a cDNA encoding the ECM protein
fibronectin (aa 1755 to 1884). Using deletion mutants of NSP4, we mapped the
region of interaction with the ECM proteins between aa 87 and 145. Deletion
analysis of laminin-beta3 indicated that the region comprising aa 726 to 875 of
laminin-beta3 interacts with NSP4. Interaction of NSP4 with either laminin-beta3 
or fibronectin was confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation. NSP4 was present in
infected enterocytes and in the basement membrane (BM) of infected neonatal mice 
and colocalized with laminin-beta3, indicating a physiological interaction. In
conclusion, two-hybrid screening with NSP4 yielded two potential target proteins,
laminin-beta3 and fibronectin, interacting with the enterotoxin NSP4. The release
of NSP4 from the basal side of infected epithelial cells and the subsequent
binding to ECM proteins localized at the BM may signify a new mechanism by which 
rotavirus disease is established.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Microbiology

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.78.18.10045-10053.2004 
PMCID: PMC514988
PMID: 15331737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

