
1. Oncogene. 2005 Sep 15;24(41):6222-30.

The hScrib/Dlg apico-basal control complex is differentially targeted by HPV-16
and HPV-18 E6 proteins.

Thomas M(1), Massimi P, Navarro C, Borg JP, Banks L.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Padriciano 99,
34012 Trieste, Italy.

The E6 proteins of the high-risk Human papillomaviruses (HPV) types have a
well-documented ability to target certain cellular proteins for
ubiquitin-mediated degradation via the proteasome. Previous studies have shown
that E6 proteins interact differently with different target proteins, and that
the viral proteins, depending upon the target, may recruit diverse cellular
ubiquitin-protein ligases. In this study, we have examined the abilities of E6
proteins from HPV-16 and HPV-18 to interact with and induce the degradation of
two PDZ domain-containing targets, Dlg and hScrib. We have also mapped the
binding site of E6 on hScrib and shown that the interaction of E6 with hScrib is 
distinct from its interactions with other PDZ domain-containing targets. This is 
reflected in the efficiency with which the two viral E6 proteins can inhibit
hScrib's suppression of cell transformation.Dlg and hScrib have complementary
activities in the control of epithelial cell polarity and the fact that both are 
targeted by high-risk HPV E6 proteins underlines their importance. Our finding
that they are each targeted differently by HPV-16 and HPV-18 E 6 s suggests that 
the two viruses are subjected to somewhat different constraints and provides a
possible explanation for the apparent redundancy in targeting both parts of this 
important control mechanism.

Oncogene (2005) 24, 6222-6230.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208757 
PMID: 16103886  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

