
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 31;281(13):8806-14. Epub 2006 Jan 23.

Syk tyrosine kinase mediates Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein
2A-induced cell migration in epithelial cells.

Lu J(1), Lin WH, Chen SY, Longnecker R, Tsai SC, Chen CL, Tsai CH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei 10063, Taiwan.

Although spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) is known to be important in hematopoietic
cell development, the roles of Syk in epithelial cells have not been well
studied. Limited data suggest that Syk plays alternate roles in carcinogenesis
under different circumstances. In breast cancer, Syk has been suggested to be a
tumor suppressor. In contrast, Syk is essential for murine mammary tumor
virus-mediated transformation. However, the roles of Syk in tumor migration are
still largely unknown. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, an unusually highly metastatic
tumor, expresses Epstein-Barr virus LMP2A (latent membrane protein 2A) in most
clinical specimens. Previously, we demonstrated LMP2A triggers epithelial cell
migration. LMP2A contains an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif,
which is important for Syk kinase activation in B cells. In this study, we
explored whether Syk is important for LMP2A-mediated epithelial cell migration.
We demonstrate that LMP2A expression can activate endogenous Syk activity. The
activation requires the tyrosine residues in LMP2A ITAM but not YEEA motif, which
is important for Syk activation by Lyn in B cells. LMP2A interacts with Syk as
demonstrated by coimmunoprecipitation and confocal microscopy. Furthermore,
LMP2A-induced cell migration is inhibited by a Syk inhibitor and short
interfering RNA. Tyrosines 74 and 85 in the LMP2A immunoreceptor tyrosine-based
activation motif are essential for both Syk activation and LMP2A-mediated cell
migration, indicating the involvement of Syk in LMP2A-triggered cell migration.
The LMP2A-Syk pathway may provide suitable drug targets for treatment of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M507305200 
PMID: 16431925  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

