
1. J Virol. 2006 Apr;80(8):3853-62.

Adaptive evolution and antiviral activity of the conserved mammalian cytidine
deaminase APOBEC3H.

OhAinle M(1), Kerns JA, Malik HS, Emerman M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Washington, Seattle
98109, USA.

The APOBEC3 genes encode cytidine deaminases that act as components of an
intrinsic immune defense that have potent activity against a variety of
retroelements. This family of genes has undergone a rapid expansion from one or
two genes in nonprimate mammals to at least seven members in primates. Here we
describe the evolution and function of an uncharacterized antiviral effector,
APOBEC3H, which represents the most evolutionarily divergent APOBEC3 gene found
in primates. We found that APOBEC3H has undergone significant adaptive evolution 
in primates. Consistent with our previous findings implicating adaptively
evolving APOBEC3 genes as antiviral effectors, APOBEC3H from Old World monkeys
(OWMs) has efficient antiviral activity against primate lentiviruses, is
sensitive to inactivation by the simian immunodeficiency virus Vif protein, and
is capable of hypermutating retroviral genomes. In contrast, human APOBEC3H is
inherently poorly expressed in primate cells and is ineffective at inhibiting
retroviral replication. Both OWM and human APOBEC3H proteins can be expressed in 
bacteria, where they display significant DNA mutator activity. Thus, humans have 
retained an APOBEC3H gene that encodes a functional, but poorly expressed,
cytidine deaminase with no apparent antiviral activity. The consequences of the
lack of antiviral activity of human APOBEC3H are likely to be relevant to the
current-day abilities of humans to combat retroviral challenges.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.80.8.3853-3862.2006 
PMCID: PMC1440450
PMID: 16571802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

