
1. J Virol. 2006 May;80(10):4890-900.

Cottontail rabbit papillomavirus E8 protein is essential for wart formation and
provides new insights into viral pathogenesis.

Nonnenmacher M(1), Salmon J, Jacob Y, Orth G, Breitburd F.

Author information: 
(1)Unite des Papillomavirus, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris, Cedex 15, France.

The cottontail rabbit papillomavirus (CRPV) a and b subtypes display a conserved 
E8 open reading frame encoding a 50-amino-acid hydrophobic protein, with
structural similarities to the E5 transmembrane oncoprotein of genital human PVs 
(HPVs). CRPV E8 has been reported to play a role in papilloma growth but not to
be essential in papilloma formation. Here we report that the knockout of E8 start
codon almost prevented wart induction upon biobalistic inoculation of viral DNA
onto rabbit skin. The scarce warts induced showed very slow growth, despite
sustained expression of E6 and E7 oncogenes. This points to an essential role of 
E8 in disturbing epidermal homeostasis. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, we found
that E8 interacted with the zinc transporter ZnT1, protocadherin 1 (PCDH1), and
AHNAK/desmoyokin, three proteins as yet unrelated to viral pathogenesis or cell
transformation. HPV16 E5 also interacted with these proteins in two-hybrid assay.
CRPV E8 mainly localized to the Golgi apparatus and the early endosomes of
transfected keratinocytes and colocalized with ZnT1, PCDH1, and AHNAK. We showed 
that ZnT1 and PCDH1 formed a complex and that E8 disrupted this complex. CRPV E8,
like HPV16 E5, increased epidermal growth factor (EGF)-dependent extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) phosphorylation and both the EGF-dependent
and the EGF-independent activity of activating protein-1 (AP-1). Competition
experiments with a nonfunctional truncated ZnT1 protein showed that E8-ZnT1
interaction was required for AP-1 activation. Our data identify CRPV E8 as a key 
player in papilloma induction and unravel novel cellular targets for inducing the
proliferation of keratinocytes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.80.10.4890-4900.2006 
PMCID: PMC1472083
PMID: 16641280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

