
1. J Virol. 2006 Aug;80(16):8211-24.

Eclipse phase of herpes simplex virus type 1 infection: Efficient dynein-mediated
capsid transport without the small capsid protein VP26.

Döhner K(1), Radtke K, Schmidt S, Sodeik B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Virologie, OE5230, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, D-30623 Hannover, Germany.

Cytoplasmic dynein,together with its cofactor dynactin, transports incoming
herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) capsids along microtubules (MT) to the
MT-organizing center (MTOC). From the MTOC, capsids move further to the nuclear
pore, where the viral genome is released into the nucleoplasm. The small capsid
protein VP26 can interact with the dynein light chains Tctex1 (DYNLT1) and rp3
(DYNLT3) and may recruit dynein to the capsid. Therefore, we analyzed nuclear
targeting of incoming HSV1-DeltaVP26 capsids devoid of VP26 and of HSV1-GFPVP26
capsids expressing a GFPVP26 fusion instead of VP26. To compare the cell entry of
different strains, we characterized the inocula with respect to infectivity,
viral genome content, protein composition, and particle composition. Preparations
with a low particle-to-PFU ratio showed efficient nuclear targeting and were
considered to be of higher quality than those containing many defective
particles, which were unable to induce plaque formation. When cells were infected
with HSV-1 wild type, HSV1-DeltaVP26, or HSV1-GFPVP26, viral capsids were
transported along MT to the nucleus. Moreover, when dynein function was inhibited
by overexpression of the dynactin subunit dynamitin, fewer capsids of HSV-1 wild 
type, HSV1-DeltaVP26, and HSV1-GFPVP26 arrived at the nucleus. Thus, even in the 
absence of the potential viral dynein receptor VP26, HSV-1 used MT and dynein for
efficient nuclear targeting. These data suggest that besides VP26, HSV-1 encodes 
other receptors for dynein or dynactin.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02528-05 
PMCID: PMC1563788
PMID: 16873277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

