
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Dec 19;103(51):19278-83. Epub 2006 Dec 11.

Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen leader protein coactivates transcription through
interaction with histone deacetylase 4.

Portal D(1), Rosendorff A, Kieff E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Channing Laboratory,
Harvard University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen (EBNA) leader protein (EBNALP) coactivates promoters
with EBNA2 and is important for Epstein-Barr virus immortalization of B cells.
Investigation of the role of histone deacetylases (HDACs) in EBNALP and EBNA2
promoter regulation has now identified EBNALP and EBNA2 to be associated with
HDAC4 in a lymphoblastoid cell line. Furthermore, a transcription-deficient
EBNALP point mutant did not associate with HDAC4. HDAC4 and 5 overexpression
repressed EBNA2 activation and EBNALP coactivation, whereas other HDACs had
little effect. Moreover, EBNALP expression decreased nuclear HDAC4. Expression of
14-3-3 anchors HDAC4 in the cytoplasm, increased EBNALP effects, and reversed
HDAC4 or 5 repression. HDAC4 reversal depended on the HDAC4 nuclear export
sequence. Consistent with EBNALP coactivation being mediated by nuclear HDAC4
depletion, HDAC4 overexpression increased nuclear HDAC4 and specifically
repressed EBNA2-dependent activation as well as EBNALP-dependent coactivation.
Also, EBNALP, HDAC4, and 14-3-3 could be immunoprecipitated in a single complex. 
Thus, these data strongly support a model in which EBNALP coactivates
transcription by relocalizing HDAC4 and 5 from EBNA2 activated promoters to the
cytoplasm. The observed EBNALP effects are likely also in part through HDAC5,
which is highly homologous to HDAC4.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0609320103 
PMCID: PMC1748217
PMID: 17159145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

