
1. J Virol. 2007 Mar;81(6):2899-908. Epub 2006 Dec 27.

Nuclear import of bovine papillomavirus type 1 E1 protein is mediated by multiple
alpha importins and is negatively regulated by phosphorylation near a nuclear
localization signal.

Bian XL(1), Rosas-Acosta G, Wu YC, Wilson VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial and Molecular Pathogenesis, College of Medicine, Texas
A&M Health Science Center, College Station, TX 77843-1114, USA.

Papillomavirus DNA replication occurs in the nucleus of infected cells and
requires the viral E1 protein, which enters the nuclei of host epithelial cells
and carries out enzymatic functions required for the initiation of viral DNA
replication. In this study, we investigated the pathway and regulation of the
nuclear import of the E1 protein from bovine papillomavirus type 1 (BPV1). Using 
an in vitro binding assay, we determined that the E1 protein interacted with
importins alpha3, alpha4, and alpha5 via its nuclear localization signal (NLS)
sequence. In agreement with this result, purified E1 protein was effectively
imported into the nucleus of digitonin-permeabilized HeLa cells after incubation 
with importin alpha3, alpha4, or alpha5 and other necessary import factors. We
also observed that in vitro binding of E1 protein to all three alpha importins
was significantly decreased by the introduction of pseudophosphorylation
mutations in the NLS region. Consistent with the binding defect,
pseudophosphorylated E1 protein failed to enter the nucleus of
digitonin-permeabilized HeLa cells in vitro. Likewise, the pseudophosphorylation 
mutant showed aberrant intracellular localization in vivo and accumulated
primarily on the nuclear envelope in transfected HeLa cells, while the
corresponding alanine replacement mutant displayed the same cellular location
pattern as wild-type E1 protein. Collectively, our data demonstrate that BPV1 E1 
protein can be transported into the nucleus by more than one importin alpha and
suggest that E1 phosphorylation by host cell kinases plays a regulatory role in
modulating E1 nucleocytoplasmic localization. This phosphoregulation of nuclear
E1 protein uptake may contribute to the coordination of viral replication with
keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01850-06 
PMCID: PMC1865984
PMID: 17192311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

