
1. Traffic. 2007 Mar;8(3):195-211.

Host ABCE1 is at plasma membrane HIV assembly sites and its dissociation from Gag
is linked to subsequent events of virus production.

Dooher JE(1), Schneider BL, Reed JC, Lingappa JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Washington, 1959 NE Pacific Street, 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

In primate cells, assembly of a single HIV-1 capsid involves multimerization of
thousands of Gag polypeptides, typically at the plasma membrane. Although studies
support a model in which HIV-1 assembly proceeds through complexes containing Gag
and the cellular adenosine triphosphatase ABCE1 (also termed HP68 or ribonuclease
L inhibitor), whether these complexes constitute true assembly intermediates
remains controversial. Here we demonstrate by pulse labeling in primate cells
that a population of Gag associates with endogenous ABCE1 within minutes of
translation. In the next approximately 2 h, Gag-ABCE1 complexes increase in size 
to approximately that of immature capsids. Dissociation of ABCE1 from Gag
correlates closely with Gag processing during virion maturation and occurs much
less efficiently when the HIV-1 protease is inactivated. Finally, quantitative
double-label immunogold electron microscopy reveals that ABCE1 is recruited to
sites of assembling wild-type Gag at the plasma membrane but not to sites of an
assembly-defective Gag mutant at the plasma membrane. Together these findings
demonstrate that a population of Gag present at plasma membrane sites of assembly
associates with ABCE1 throughout capsid formation until the onset of virus
maturation, which is then followed by virus release. Moreover, the data suggest a
linkage between Gag-ABCE1 dissociation and subsequent events of virion
production.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2006.00524.x 
PMCID: PMC1865004
PMID: 17233757  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

