
1. J Virol. 2007 Jun;81(11):5437-48. Epub 2007 Mar 14.

The E1circumflexE4 protein of human papillomavirus interacts with the
serine-arginine-specific protein kinase SRPK1.

Bell I(1), Martin A, Roberts S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Institute for Cancer Studies, University of Birmingham,
Vincent Drive, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infections of the squamous epithelium are associated
with high-level expression of the E1circumflexE4 protein during the productive
phase of infection. However, the precise mechanisms of how E1circumflexE4
contributes to the replication cycle of the virus are poorly understood. Here, we
show that the serine-arginine (SR)-specific protein kinase SRPK1 is a novel
binding partner of HPV type 1 (HPV1) E1circumflexE4. We map critical residues
within an arginine-rich domain of HPV1 E1circumflexE4, and in a region known to
facilitate E1circumflexE4 oligomerization, that are requisite for SRPK1 binding. 
In vitro kinase assays show that SRPK1 binding is associated with phosphorylation
of an HPV1 E1circumflexE4 polypeptide and modulates autophosphorylation of the
kinase. We show that SRPK1 is sequestered into E4 inclusion bodies in terminally 
differentiated cells within HPV1 warts and that colocalization between
E1circumflexE4 and SRPK1 is not dependent on additional HPV1 factors. Moreover,
we also identify SRPK1 binding of E1circumflexE4 proteins of HPV16 and HPV18. Our
findings indicate that SRPK1 binding is a conserved function of E1circumflexE4
proteins of diverse virus types. SRPK1 influences important biochemical processes
within the cell, including nuclear organization and RNA metabolism. While
phosphorylation of HPV1 E4 by SRPK1 may directly influence HPV1 E4 function
during the infectious cycle, the modulation and sequestration of SRPK1 by
E1circumflexE4 may affect the ability of SRPK1 to phosphorylate its cellular
targets, thereby facilitating the productive phase of the HPV replication cycle.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02609-06 
PMCID: PMC1900295
PMID: 17360743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

