
1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jul 20;282(29):20854-67. Epub 2007 May 25.

Transcriptional regulation of the bovine leukemia virus promoter by the cyclic
AMP-response element modulator tau isoform.

Nguyên TL(1), de Walque S, Veithen E, Dekoninck A, Martinelli V, de Launoit Y,
Burny A, Harrod R, Van Lint C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie et de Médecine Moléculaires, Laboratoire de Virologie
Moléculaire, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Rue des Profs Jeener et Brachet 12,
6041 Gosselies, Belgium.

Bovine leukemia virus (BLV) expression is controlled at the transcriptional level
through three Tax(BLV)-responsive elements (TxREs) responsive to the viral
transactivator Tax(BLV). The cAMP-responsive element (CRE)-binding protein (CREB)
has been shown to interact with CRE-like sequences present in the middle of each 
of these TxREs and to play critical transcriptional roles in both basal and
Tax(BLV)-transactivated BLV promoter activity. In this study, we have
investigated the potential involvement of the cAMP-response element modulator
(CREM) in BLV transcriptional regulation, and we have demonstrated that CREM
proteins were expressed in BLV-infected cells and bound to the three BLV TxREs in
vitro. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays using BLV-infected cell lines
demonstrated in the context of chromatin that CREM proteins were recruited to the
BLV promoter TxRE region in vivo. Functional studies, in the absence of Tax(BLV),
indicated that ectopic CREMtau protein had a CRE-dependent stimulatory effect on 
BLV promoter transcriptional activity. Cross-link of the B-cell receptor
potentiated CREMtau transactivation of the viral promoter. Further experiments
supported the notion that this potentiation involved CREMtau Ser-117
phosphorylation and recruitment of CBP/p300 to the BLV promoter. Although CREB
and Tax(BLV) synergistically transactivated the BLV promoter, CREMtau repressed
this Tax(BLV)/CREB synergism, suggesting that a modulation of the level of
Tax(BLV) transactivation through opposite actions of CREB and CREMtau could
facilitate immune escape and allow tumor development.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M703060200 
PMID: 17526487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

