
1. J Virol. 2008 Mar;82(6):2867-82. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01319-07. Epub 2008 Jan 16.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus ori-Lyt-dependent DNA replication:
involvement of host cellular factors.

Wang Y(1), Li H, Tang Q, Maul GG, Yuan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 240 S. 40th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
yuan2@pobox.upenn.edu

Herpesvirus lytic DNA replication requires both the cis-acting element, the
origin, and trans-acting factors, including virally encoded origin-binding
protein, DNA replication enzymes, and auxiliary factors. Two lytic DNA
replication origins (ori-Lyt) of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV)
have been identified, and two virally encoded proteins, namely, RTA and K8, have 
been shown to bind to the origins. In this study, we sought to identify cellular 
factors that associate with ori-Lyt by using DNA affinity purification and mass
spectrometry. This approach led to identification of several cellular proteins
that bind to KSHV ori-Lyt. They include topoisomerases (Topo) I and II, MSH2/6,
RecQL, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase I (PARP-1), DNA-PK, Ku86/70 autoantigens, and 
scaffold attachment factor A (SAF-A). RecQL appears to associate with
prereplication complexes and be recruited to ori-Lyt through RTA and K8.
Topoisomerases, MSH2, PARP-1, DNA-PK, and Ku86 were not detected in
prereplication complexes but were present in replication initiation complexes on 
ori-Lyt. All these cellular proteins accumulate in viral replication compartments
in the nucleus, indicating that these proteins may have a role in viral
replication. Topo I and II appear to be essential for viral DNA replication as
inhibition of their activities with specific inhibitors (camptothecin and
ellipticine) blocked ori-Lyt-dependent DNA replication. Furthermore, inhibition
of PARP-1 with chemical inhibitors (3-aminobenzamide and niacinamide) resulted in
decreased ori-Lyt-dependent DNA replication, whereas hydroxyurea, which raises
PARP-1 activity, caused an increase in the DNA replication, suggesting a positive
role for PARP-1 in KSHV lytic DNA replication.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01319-07 
PMCID: PMC2259006
PMID: 18199640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

