
1. J Proteome Res. 2008 Jun;7(6):2309-19. doi: 10.1021/pr700769e. Epub 2008 May 6.

Identification of intracellular proteins associated with the EBV-encoded nuclear 
antigen 5 using an efficient TAP procedure and FT-ICR mass spectrometry.

Forsman A(1), RÃ¼etschi U, Ekholm J, Rymo L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Institute of
Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, University of 
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 5 (EBNA5) is one of the first viral proteins
detected after primary EBV infection and has been shown to be required for
efficient transformation of B lymphocytes. EBNA5 is a protein that has many
suggested functions but the underlying biology remains to be clarified. To gain
further insight into the biological roles of the proposed multifunctional EBNA5, 
we isolated EBNA5 containing protein complexes using a modified tandem affinity
purification (TAP) method and identified the protein components by LC-MS/MS
analysis of tryptic digests on a LTQ-FT-ICR mass spectrometer. The modified TAP
tag contained a Protein A domain and a StrepTagII sequence separated by two
Tobacco Etch Virus protease cleavage sites and was fused to the C-terminus of
EBNA5. Our results confirmed the wide applicability of this two-step affinity
purification strategy for purification of protein complexes in mammalian cells. A
total of 147 novel putative EBNA5 interaction partners were identified, 37 of
which were validated with LC-MS/MS in split-tag experiments or in co-immuno
precipitates from HEK293 cell extracts. This subgroup included the
Bcl2-associated Athanogene 2 (BAG2) co-chaperone involved in protein folding and 
renaturation, the 26S proteasome subunit 2 involved in regulation of
ubiquitin/proteasome protein degradation, and the heterogeneous ribonucleoprotein
M (hnRNP M) involved in pre-mRNA processing. These EBNA5 interactors were further
verified by co-immunoprecipitations from cell extracts of three EBV-positive
lymphoblastoid lines. The combination of the Hsp70, Hsc70, BAG2 and 26S
proteasome subunit 2 interactors suggests that EBNA5 might have a functional
relationship with protein quality control systems that recognize proteins with
abnormal structures and either refold them to normal conformation or target them 
for degradation. Our study also confirms previously identified interactors
including HA95, Hsp70, Hsc70, Hsp27, HAX-1, Prolyl 4-hydroxylase, S3a, and alpha-
and beta-tubulin.

DOI: 10.1021/pr700769e 
PMID: 18457437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

