
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jul 22;105(29):9953-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0804797105. Epub 2008 Jul 16.

Host cell recognition by the henipaviruses: crystal structures of the Nipah G
attachment glycoprotein and its complex with ephrin-B3.

Xu K(1), Rajashankar KR, Chan YP, Himanen JP, Broder CC, Nikolov DB.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York 
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Nipah virus (NiV) and Hendra virus are the type species of the highly pathogenic 
paramyxovirus genus Henipavirus, which can cause severe respiratory disease and
fatal encephalitis infections in humans, with case fatality rates approaching
75%. NiV contains two envelope glycoproteins, the receptor-binding G glycoprotein
(NiV-G) that facilitates attachment to host cells and the fusion (F) glycoprotein
that mediates membrane merger. The henipavirus G glycoproteins lack both
hemagglutinating and neuraminidase activities and, instead, engage the highly
conserved ephrin-B2 and ephrin-B3 cell surface proteins as their entry receptors.
Here, we report the crystal structures of the NiV-G both in its receptor-unbound 
state and in complex with ephrin-B3, providing, to our knowledge, the first view 
of a paramyxovirus attachment complex in which a cellular protein is used as the 
virus receptor. Complex formation generates an extensive protein-protein
interface around a protruding ephrin loop, which is inserted in the central
cavity of the NiV-G beta-propeller. Analysis of the structural data reveals the
molecular basis for the highly specific interactions of the henipavirus G
glycoproteins with only two members (ephrin-B2 and ephrin-B3) of the very large
ephrin family and suggests how they mediate in a unique fashion both cell
attachment and the initiation of membrane fusion during the virus infection
processes. The structures further suggest that the NiV-G/ephrin interactions can 
be effectively targeted to disrupt viral entry and provide the foundation for
structure-based antiviral drug design.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0804797105 
PMCID: PMC2474567
PMID: 18632560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

