
1. J Virol. 2009 Jan;83(1):117-27. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01515-08. Epub 2008 Oct 15.

Simian virus 40 large T antigen disrupts genome integrity and activates a DNA
damage response via Bub1 binding.

Hein J(1), Boichuk S, Wu J, Cheng Y, Freire R, Jat PS, Roberts TM, Gjoerup OV.

Author information: 
(1)Hillman Cancer Center, Research Pavilion Suite 1.8, 5117 Centre Avenue,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. ovg27@pitt.edu

Simian virus 40 (SV40) large T antigen (LT) is a multifunctional protein that is 
important for viral replication and oncogenic transformation. Previously,
infection of monkey or human cells with SV40 was shown to lead to the induction
of DNA damage response signaling, which is required for efficient viral
replication. However, it was not clear if LT is sufficient to induce the damage
response and, if so, what the genetic requirements and functional consequences
might be. Here, we show that the expression of LT alone, without a replication
origin, can induce key DNA damage response markers including the accumulation of 
gamma-H2AX and 53BP1 in nuclear foci. Other DNA damage-signaling components
downstream of ATM/ATR kinases were induced, including chk1 and chk2. LT also
bound the Claspin mediator protein, which normally facilitates the ATR activation
of chk1 and monitors cellular replication origins. Stimulation of the damage
response by LT depends mainly on binding to Bub1 rather than to the
retinoblastoma protein. LT has long been known to stabilize p53 despite
functionally inactivating it. We show that the activation of a DNA damage
response by LT via Bub1 appears to play a major role in p53 stabilization by
promoting the phosphorylation of p53 at Ser15. Accompanying the DNA damage
response, LT induces tetraploidy, which is also dependent on Bub1 binding. Taken 
together, our data suggest that LT, via Bub1 binding, breaches genome integrity
mechanisms, leading to DNA damage responses, p53 stabilization, and tetraploidy.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01515-08 
PMCID: PMC2612341
PMID: 18922873  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

