
1. J Virol. 2009 Jan;83(2):612-21. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00832-08. Epub 2008 Oct 29.

Ubiquitin-independent degradation of hepatitis C virus F protein.

Yuksek K(1), Chen WL, Chien D, Ou JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) F protein is encoded by the +1 reading frame of the viral
genome. It overlaps with the core protein coding sequence, and multiple
mechanisms for its expression have been proposed. The full-length F protein that 
is synthesized by translational ribosomal frameshift at codons 9 to 11 of the
core protein sequence is a labile protein. By using a combination of genetic,
biochemical, and cell biological approaches, we demonstrate that this HCV F
protein can bind to the proteasome subunit protein alpha3, which reduces the
F-protein level in cells in a dose-dependent manner. Deletion-mapping analysis
identified amino acids 40 to 60 of the F protein as the alpha3-binding domain.
This alpha3-binding domain of the F protein together with its upstream sequence
could significantly destabilize the green fluorescent protein, an otherwise
stable protein. Further analyses using an F-protein mutant lacking lysine and a
cell line that contained a temperature-sensitive E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme
indicated that the degradation of the F protein was ubiquitin independent. Based 
on these observations as well as the observation that the F protein could be
degraded directly by the 20S proteasome in vitro, we propose that the full-length
HCV F protein as well as the F protein initiating from codon 26 is degraded by an
ubiquitin-independent pathway that is mediated by the proteasome subunit alpha3. 
The ability of the F protein to bind to alpha3 raises the possibility that the
HCV F protein may regulate protein degradation in cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00832-08 
PMCID: PMC2612388
PMID: 18971267  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

