
1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Mar;5(3):e1000324. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000324. Epub 2009
Mar 6.

KSHV reactivation from latency requires Pim-1 and Pim-3 kinases to inactivate the
latency-associated nuclear antigen LANA.

Cheng F(1), Weidner-Glunde M, Varjosalo M, Rainio EM, Lehtonen A, Schulz TF,
Koskinen PJ, Taipale J, Ojala PM.

Author information: 
(1)Genome-Scale Biology Program, Institute of Biomedicine, Biomedicum Helsinki,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Host signal-transduction pathways are intimately involved in the switch between
latency and productive infection of herpes viruses. As with other herpes viruses,
infection by Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV) displays these two phases.
During latency only few viral genes are expressed, while in the productive
infection the virus is reactivated with initiation of extensive viral DNA
replication and gene expression, resulting in production of new viral particles. 
Viral reactivation is crucial for KSHV pathogenesis and contributes to the
progression of KS. We have recently identified Pim-1 as a kinase reactivating
KSHV upon over-expression. Here we show that another Pim family kinase, Pim-3,
also induces viral reactivation. We demonstrate that expression of both Pim-1 and
Pim-3 is induced in response to physiological and chemical reactivation in
naturally KSHV-infected cells, and we show that they are required for KSHV
reactivation under these conditions. Furthermore, our data indicate that Pim-1
and Pim-3 contribute to viral reactivation by phosphorylating the KSHV
latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA) on serine residues 205 and 206. This
counteracts the LANA-mediated repression of the KSHV lytic gene transcription.
The identification of Pim family kinases as novel cellular regulators of the
gammaherpesvirus life cycle facilitates a deeper understanding of virus-host
interactions during reactivation and may represent potential novel targets for
therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000324 
PMCID: PMC2648312
PMID: 19266083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

