
1. Biochemistry. 2010 Mar 9;49(9):1985-97. doi: 10.1021/bi902065k.

Identification of bZIP interaction partners of viral proteins HBZ, MEQ, BZLF1,
and K-bZIP using coiled-coil arrays.

Reinke AW(1), Grigoryan G, Keating AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Basic-region leucine-zipper transcription factors (bZIPs) contain a segment rich 
in basic amino acids that can bind DNA, followed by a leucine zipper that can
interact with other leucine zippers to form coiled-coil homo- or heterodimers.
Several viruses encode proteins containing bZIP domains, including four that
encode bZIPs lacking significant homology to any human protein. We investigated
the interaction specificity of these four viral bZIPs by using coiled-coil arrays
to assess self-associations as well as heterointeractions with 33 representative 
human bZIPs. The arrays recapitulated reported viral-human interactions and also 
uncovered new associations. MEQ and HBZ interacted with multiple human partners
and had unique interaction profiles compared to any human bZIPs, whereas K-bZIP
and BZLF1 displayed homospecificity. New interactions detected included HBZ with 
MAFB, MAFG, ATF2, CEBPG, and CREBZF and MEQ with NFIL3. These were confirmed in
solution using circular dichroism. HBZ can heteroassociate with MAFB and MAFG in 
the presence of MARE-site DNA, and this interaction is dependent on the basic
region of HBZ. NFIL3 and MEQ have different yet overlapping DNA-binding
specificities and can form a heterocomplex with DNA. Computational design
considering both affinity for MEQ and specificity with respect to other undesired
bZIP-type interactions was used to generate a MEQ dimerization inhibitor. This
peptide, anti-MEQ, bound MEQ both stably and specifically, as assayed using
coiled-coil arrays and circular dichroism in solution. Anti-MEQ also inhibited
MEQ binding to DNA. These studies can guide further investigation of the function
of viral and human bZIP complexes.

DOI: 10.1021/bi902065k 
PMCID: PMC2841013
PMID: 20102225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

