
1. Virology. 2010 Dec 5;408(1):39-48. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2010.08.023. Epub 2010
Sep 27.

Association of HTLV Tax proteins with TAK1-binding protein 2 and RelA in
calreticulin-containing cytoplasmic structures participates in Tax-mediated NF-κB
activation.

Avesani F(1), Romanelli MG, Turci M, Di Gennaro G, Sampaio C, Bidoia C,
Bertazzoni U, Bex F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Reproduction Sciences, Section of Biology and Genetics,
University of Verona, Strada Le Grazie 8, Verona, Italy.
francesca.avesani_01@univr.it

HTLV-1 is more pathogenic than HTLV-2 despite having a similar genome and closely
related transactivating oncoproteins. Both Tax-1 protein from HTLV-1 and Tax-2
from HTLV-2 activate the NF-κB pathway. The mechanisms involved in Tax-1
deregulation of this signalling pathway have been thoroughly investigated, but
little is known about regulation by Tax-2. We have compared the interaction of
Tax-1 and Tax-2 with two key NF-κB signalling factors: TAK1-binding protein 2
(TAB2), an adaptor involved in the activation of TAK1 kinase, and RelA, the
active subunit of the canonical RelA/p50 NF-κB transcription factor. Tax-2 formed
stable complexes with both RelA and TAB2. These two NF-κB factors colocalized
with Tax proteins in dotted cytoplasmic structures targeted by calreticulin, a
multi-process calcium-buffering chaperone. Co-expression of RelA and/or TAB2
markedly increased Tax-mediated NF-κB activation. These findings provide new
insights into the role of RelA, TAB2 and Tax in the deregulation of the NF-κB
pathway.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2010.08.023 
PMID: 20875659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

