
1. J Virol. 2011 May;85(10):4783-91. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02352-10. Epub 2011 Mar 16.

Interaction of calpactin light chain (S100A10/p11) and a viral NS protein is
essential for intracellular trafficking of nonenveloped bluetongue virus.

Celma CC(1), Roy P.

Author information: 
(1)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Keppel St., London WC1E 7HT,
United Kingdom.

Bluetongue virus (BTV), a member of the Reoviridae family, is an insect-borne
animal pathogen. Virus release from infected cells is predominantly by cell
lysis, but some BTV particles are also released from the plasma membrane. The
nonstructural protein NS3 has been implicated in this process. Using alternate
initiator methionine residues, NS3 is expressed as a full-length protein and as a
truncated variant that lacks the initial 13 residues, which, by yeast-two hybrid 
analyses, have been shown to interact with a cellular trafficking protein
S100A10/p11. To understand the physiological significance of this interaction in 
virus-infected cells, we have used reverse genetics to investigate the roles of
NS3 and NS3A in virus replication and localization in both mammalian and insect
vector-derived cells. A virus expressing NS3 but not NS3A was able to propagate
in and release from mammalian cells efficiently. However, growth of a mutant
virus expressing only NS3A was severely attenuated, although protein expression, 
replication, double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) synthesis, and particle assembly in the 
cytoplasm were observed. Two of three single-amino-acid substitutions in the
N-terminal 13 residues of NS3 showed phenotypically similar effects. Pulldown
assay and confocal microscopy demonstrated a lack of interaction between NS3 and 
S100A10/p11 in mutants with poor replication. The role of NS3/NS3A was also
assessed in insect cells where virus grew, albeit with a reduced titer. Notably, 
however, while wild-type particles were found within cytoplasmic vesicles in
insect cells, mutant viruses were scattered throughout the cytoplasm and not
confined to vesicles. These results provide support for a role for the extreme
amino terminus of NS3 in the late stages of virus growth in mammalian cells,
plausibly in egress. However, both NS3 and NS3A were required for efficient BTV
growth in insect cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02352-10 
PMCID: PMC3126219
PMID: 21411520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

