
1. J Virol. 2011 Jul;85(13):6117-26. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00378-11. Epub 2011 Apr 27.

RAB11A is essential for transport of the influenza virus genome to the plasma
membrane.

Eisfeld AJ(1), Kawakami E, Watanabe T, Neumann G, Kawaoka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Influenza Research Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 575 Science
Drive, Madison, WI 53711, USA.

Influenza A virus assembly is a complex process that requires the intersection of
pathways involved in transporting viral glycoproteins, the matrix protein, and
viral genomes, incorporated in the viral ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complex, to
plasma membrane sites of virion formation. Among these virion components, the
mechanism of vRNP delivery is the most incompletely understood. Here, we reveal a
functional relationship between the cellular Rab11 GTPase isoform, RAB11A, and
vRNPs and show that RAB11A is indispensable for proper vRNP transport to the
plasma membrane. Using an immunofluorescence-based assay with a monoclonal
antibody that recognizes nucleoprotein in the form of vRNP, we demonstrate
association between RAB11A and vRNPs at all stages of vRNP cytoplasmic transport.
Abrogation of RAB11A expression through small interfering RNA (siRNA) treatment
or disruption of RAB11A function by overexpression of dominant negative or
constitutively active proteins caused aberrant vRNP intracellular accumulation,
retention in the perinuclear region, and lack of accumulation at the plasma
membrane. Complex formation between RAB11A and vRNPs was further established
biochemically. Our results uncover a critical host factor with an essential
contribution to influenza virus genome delivery and reveal a potential role for
RAB11A in the transport of ribonucleoprotein cargo.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00378-11 
PMCID: PMC3126513
PMID: 21525351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

