
1. Proteins. 2011 Jul;79(7):2233-46. doi: 10.1002/prot.23048. Epub 2011 May 10.

Tat peptide-calmodulin binding studies and bioinformatics of HIV-1
protein-calmodulin interactions.

McQueen P(1), Donald LJ, Vo TN, Nguyen DH, Griffiths H, Shojania S, Standing KG, 
O'Neil JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
R3T 2N2.

The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) genome encodes 18 proteins and 2 
peptides. Four of these proteins encode high-affinity calmodulin-binding sites
for which direct interactions with calmodulin have already been described. In
this study, the HIV-1 proteome is queried using an algorithm that predicts
calmodulin-binding sites revealing seven new putative calmodulin-binding sites
including residues 34-56 of the transactivator of transcription (Tat). Tat is a
101-residue intrinsically disordered RNA-binding protein that plays a central
role in the regulation of HIV-1 replication. Interactions between a Tat peptide
(residues 34-56), melittin, a well-characterized calmodulin-binding peptide, and 
calmodulin were examined by direct binding studies, mass spectrometry, and
fluorescence. The Tat peptide binds to both calcium-saturated and apo-calmodulin 
with a low micromolar affinity. Conformational changes induced in the Tat peptide
were determined by circular dichroism, and residues in calmodulin that interact
with the peptide were identified by HSQC NMR spectroscopy. Multiple interactions 
between HIV-1 proteins and calmodulin, a highly promiscuous signal transduction
hub protein, may be an important mechanism by which the virus controls cell
physiology.

Copyright Â© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.23048 
PMID: 21560167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

