
1. Retrovirology. 2011 Jun 14;8:45. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-8-45.

Human defensins 5 and 6 enhance HIV-1 infectivity through promoting HIV
attachment.

Rapista A(1), Ding J, Benito B, Lo YT, Neiditch MB, Lu W, Chang TL.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Research Institute, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New 
Jersey-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

BACKGROUND: Concurrent sexually transmitted infections (STIs) increase the
likelihood of HIV transmission. The levels of defensins are frequently elevated
in genital fluids from individuals with STIs. We have previously shown that human
defensins 5 and 6 (HD5 and HD6) promote HIV entry and contribute to Neisseria
gonorrhoeae-mediated enhancement of HIV infectivity in vitro. In this study, we
dissect the molecular mechanism of the HIV enhancing effect of defensins.
RESULTS: HD5 and HD6 primarily acted on the virion to promote HIV infection. Both
HD5 and HD6 antagonized the anti-HIV activities of inhibitors of HIV entry (TAK
779) and fusion (T-20) when the inhibitors were present only during viral
attachment; however, when these inhibitors were added back during viral infection
they overrode the HIV enhancing effect of defensins. HD5 and HD6 enhanced HIV
infectivity by promoting HIV attachment to target cells. Studies using
fluorescent HIV containing Vpr-GFP indicated that these defensins enhanced HIV
attachment by concentrating virus particles on the target cells. HD5 and HD6
blocked anti-HIV activities of soluble glycosaminoglycans including heparin,
chondroitin sulfate, and dextran sulfate. However, heparin, at a high
concentration, diminished the HIV enhancing effect of HD5, but not HD6.
Additionally, the degree of the HIV enhancing effect of HD5, but not HD6, was
increased in heparinase-treated cells. These results suggest that HD5 and
haparin/heparan sulfate compete for binding to HIV.
CONCLUSIONS: HD5 and HD6 increased HIV infectivity by concentrating virus on the 
target cells. These defensins may have a negative effect on the efficacy of
microbicides, especially in the setting of STIs.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-8-45 
PMCID: PMC3146398
PMID: 21672195  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

