
1. J Virol. 2011 Sep;85(17):9078-89. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00836-11. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Epigenetic silencing of HIV-1 by the histone H3 lysine 27 methyltransferase
enhancer of Zeste 2.

Friedman J(1), Cho WK, Chu CK, Keedy KS, Archin NM, Margolis DM, Karn J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4960,
USA.

Latent HIV proviruses are silenced as the result of deacetylation and methylation
of histones located at the viral long terminal repeat (LTR). Inhibition of
histone deacetylases (HDACs) leads to the reemergence of HIV-1 from latency, but 
the contribution of histone lysine methyltransferases (HKMTs) to maintaining HIV 
latency remains uncertain. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments using
latently infected Jurkat T-cell lines demonstrated that the HKMT enhancer of
Zeste 2 (EZH2) was present at high levels at the LTR of silenced HIV proviruses
and was rapidly displaced following proviral reactivation. Knockdown of EZH2, a
key component of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) silencing machinery,
and the enzyme which is required for trimethyl histone lysine 27 (H3K27me3)
synthesis induced up to 40% of the latent HIV proviruses. In contrast, there was 
less than 5% induction of latent proviruses following knockdown of SUV39H1, which
is required for H3K9me3 synthesis. Knockdown of EZH2 also sensitized latent
proviruses to external stimuli, such as T-cell receptor stimulation, and slowed
the reversion of reactivated proviruses to latency. Similarly, cell populations
that responded poorly to external stimuli carried HIV proviruses that were
enriched in H3K27me3 and relatively depleted in H3K9me3. Treating latently
infected cells with the HKMT inhibitor 3-deazaneplanocin A, which targets EZH2,
led to the reactivation of silenced proviruses, whereas chaetocin and BIX01294
showed only minimal reactivation activities. These findings suggest that
PRC2-mediated silencing is an important feature of HIV latency and that
inhibitors of histone methylation may play a useful role in induction strategies 
designed to eradicate latent HIV pools.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00836-11 
PMCID: PMC3165831
PMID: 21715480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

