
1. J Virol. 2011 Sep;85(17):8841-51. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00539-11. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Adenovirus E1A directly targets the E2F/DP-1 complex.

Pelka P(1), Miller MS, Cecchini M, Yousef AF, Bowdish DM, Dick F, Whyte P, Mymryk
JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, MG DeGroote Institute for
Infectious Disease Research, McMaster University, MDCL 4077, 1280 Main Street
West, Hamilton, ON, Canada L8S 4K1. peter.pelka@gmail.com

Deregulation of the cell cycle is of paramount importance during adenovirus
infection. Adenovirus normally infects quiescent cells and must initiate the cell
cycle in order to propagate itself. The pRb family of proteins controls entry
into the cell cycle by interacting with and repressing transcriptional activation
by the E2F transcription factors. The viral E1A proteins indirectly activate
E2F-dependent transcription and cell cycle entry, in part, by interacting with
pRb and family members to free the E2Fs. We report here that an E1A 13S isoform
can unexpectedly activate E2F-responsive gene expression independently of binding
to the pRb family of proteins. We demonstrate that E1A binds to E2F/DP-1
complexes through a direct interaction with DP-1. E1A appears to utilize this
binding to recruit itself to E2F-regulated promoters, and this allows the E1A 13S
protein, but not the E1A 12S protein, to activate transcription independently of 
interaction with pRb. Importantly, expression of E1A 13S, but not E1A 12S, led to
significant enhancement of E2F4 occupancy of E2F sites of two E2F-regulated
promoters. These observations identify a novel mechanism by which adenovirus
deregulates the cell cycle and suggest that E1A 13S may selectively activate a
subset of E2F-regulated cellular genes during infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00539-11 
PMCID: PMC3165805
PMID: 21715488  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

