
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20735. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020735. Epub 2011 Jun 28.

Sequence- and interactome-based prediction of viral protein hotspots targeting
host proteins: a case study for HIV Nef.

Sarmady M(1), Dampier W, Tozeren A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrated Bioinformatics, School of Biomedical Engineering,
Science, and Health Systems, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America.

Virus proteins alter protein pathways of the host toward the synthesis of viral
particles by breaking and making edges via binding to host proteins. In this
study, we developed a computational approach to predict viral sequence hotspots
for binding to host proteins based on sequences of viral and host proteins and
literature-curated virus-host protein interactome data. We use a motif discovery 
algorithm repeatedly on collections of sequences of viral proteins and immediate 
binding partners of their host targets and choose only those motifs that are
conserved on viral sequences and highly statistically enriched among binding
partners of virus protein targeted host proteins. Our results match experimental 
data on binding sites of Nef to host proteins such as MAPK1, VAV1, LCK, HCK,
HLA-A, CD4, FYN, and GNB2L1 with high statistical significance but is a poor
predictor of Nef binding sites on highly flexible, hoop-like regions. Predicted
hotspots recapture CD8 cell epitopes of HIV Nef highlighting their importance in 
modulating virus-host interactions. Host proteins potentially targeted or
outcompeted by Nef appear crowding the T cell receptor, natural killer cell
mediated cytotoxicity, and neurotrophin signaling pathways. Scanning of HIV Nef
motifs on multiple alignments of hepatitis C protein NS5A produces results
consistent with literature, indicating the potential value of the hotspot
discovery in advancing our understanding of virus-host crosstalk.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020735 
PMCID: PMC3125164
PMID: 21738584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

