
1. J Virol. 2011 Nov;85(21):11457-67. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00879-11. Epub 2011 Aug 24.

Inhibition of hepatitis B virus replication by cIAP2 involves accelerating the
ubiquitin-proteasome-mediated destruction of polymerase.

Wang Z(1), Ni J, Li J, Shi B, Xu Y, Yuan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan 
University, 138 Yixueyuan Road, Shanghai 200032, China.

Cellular inhibitor of apoptosis protein 2 (cIAP2) is a potent suppressor of
apoptotic cell death. We have shown previously that cIAP2 is involved in the
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-Î±)-induced anti-hepatitis B virus (HBV)
response; however, the mechanism for this antiviral effect remains unclear. In
the present study, we demonstrate that cIAP2 can significantly reduce the levels 
of HBV DNA replication intermediates but not the total viral RNA or core protein 
levels. Domain-mapping analysis revealed that the carboxy-terminal domains of
cIAP2 were indispensable for this anti-HBV ability and that an E3
ligase-deficient mutant of cIAP2 (termed cIAP2*) completely lost its antiviral
activity. We further identified HBV polymerase as the target of cIAP2.
Overexpression of cIAP2 but not cIAP2* reduced polymerase protein levels, while
cIAP2 knockdown increased polymerase expression. In addition, we observed that
cIAP2 promoted the degradation of the viral polymerase through a
proteasome-dependent pathway. Further experiments demonstrated that cIAP2 can
bind to polymerase and promote its polyubiquitylation. Finally, we found that
cIAP2 downregulated the encapsidation of HBV pregenomic RNA. Taken together,
these data reveal a novel mechanism for the inhibition of HBV replication by
cIAP2 via acceleration of the ubiquitin-proteasome-mediated decay of polymerase
and reduction of the encapsidation of HBV pregenomic RNA, making this mechanism a
novel strategy for HBV therapy.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00879-11 
PMCID: PMC3194940
PMID: 21865390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

