
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002187. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002187. Epub 2011
Sep 1.

Influenza virus ribonucleoprotein complexes gain preferential access to cellular 
export machinery through chromatin targeting.

Chase GP(1), Rameix-Welti MA, Zvirbliene A, Zvirblis G, GÃ¶tz V, Wolff T, Naffakh 
N, Schwemmle M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

In contrast to most RNA viruses, influenza viruses replicate their genome in the 
nucleus of infected cells. As a result, newly-synthesized vRNA genomes, in the
form of viral ribonucleoprotein complexes (vRNPs), must be exported to the
cytoplasm for productive infection. To characterize the composition of vRNP
export complexes and their interplay with the nucleus of infected cells, we
affinity-purified tagged vRNPs from biochemically fractionated infected nuclei.
After treatment of infected cells with leptomycin B, a potent inhibitor of
Crm1-mediated export, we isolated vRNP export complexes which, unexpectedly, were
tethered to the host-cell chromatin with very high affinity. At late time points 
of infection, the cellular export receptor Crm1 also accumulated at the same
regions of the chromatin as vRNPs, which led to a decrease in the export of other
nuclear Crm1 substrates from the nucleus. Interestingly, chromatin targeting of
vRNP export complexes brought them into association with Rcc1, the Ran guanine
exchange factor responsible for generating RanGTP and driving Crm1-dependent
nuclear export. Thus, influenza viruses gain preferential access to
newly-generated host cell export machinery by targeting vRNP export complexes at 
the sites of Ran regeneration.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002187 
PMCID: PMC3164630
PMID: 21909257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

