
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002362. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002362. Epub
2011 Nov 10.

The human herpesvirus-7 (HHV-7) U21 immunoevasin subverts NK-mediated cytoxicity 
through modulation of MICA and MICB.

Schneider CL(1), Hudson AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Herpesviruses have evolved numerous immune evasion strategies to facilitate
establishment of lifelong persistent infections. Many herpesviruses encode gene
products devoted to preventing viral antigen presentation as a means of escaping 
detection by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. The human herpesvirus-7 (HHV-7) U21 gene
product, for example, is an immunoevasin that binds to class I major
histocompatibility complex molecules and redirects them to the lysosomal
compartment. Virus infection can also induce the upregulation of surface ligands 
that activate NK cells. Accordingly, the herpesviruses have evolved a diverse
array of mechanisms to prevent NK cell engagement of NK-activating ligands on
virus-infected cells. Here we demonstrate that the HHV-7 U21 gene product
interferes with NK recognition. U21 can bind to the NK activating ligand ULBP1
and reroute it to the lysosomal compartment. In addition, U21 downregulates the
surface expression of the NK activating ligands MICA and MICB, resulting in a
reduction in NK-mediated cytotoxicity. These results suggest that this single
viral protein may interfere both with CTL-mediated recognition through the
downregulation of class I MHC molecules as well as NK-mediated recognition
through downregulation of NK activating ligands.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002362 
PMCID: PMC3213103
PMID: 22102813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

