
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Dec;7(12):e1002422. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002422. Epub
2011 Dec 8.

IRGM is a common target of RNA viruses that subvert the autophagy network.

Grégoire IP(1), Richetta C, Meyniel-Schicklin L, Borel S, Pradezynski F, Diaz O, 
Deloire A, Azocar O, Baguet J, Le Breton M, Mangeot PE, Navratil V, Joubert PE,
Flacher M, Vidalain PO, André P, Lotteau V, Biard-Piechaczyk M, Rabourdin-Combe
C, Faure M.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, Lyon, France.

Comment in
    Autophagy. 2012 Jul 1;8(7):1136-7.

Autophagy is a conserved degradative pathway used as a host defense mechanism
against intracellular pathogens. However, several viruses can evade or subvert
autophagy to insure their own replication. Nevertheless, the molecular details of
viral interaction with autophagy remain largely unknown. We have determined the
ability of 83 proteins of several families of RNA viruses (Paramyxoviridae,
Flaviviridae, Orthomyxoviridae, Retroviridae and Togaviridae), to interact with
44 human autophagy-associated proteins using yeast two-hybrid and bioinformatic
analysis. We found that the autophagy network is highly targeted by RNA viruses. 
Although central to autophagy, targeted proteins have also a high number of
connections with proteins of other cellular functions. Interestingly,
immunity-associated GTPase family M (IRGM), the most targeted protein, was found 
to interact with the autophagy-associated proteins ATG5, ATG10, MAP1CL3C and
SH3GLB1. Strikingly, reduction of IRGM expression using small interfering RNA
impairs both Measles virus (MeV), Hepatitis C virus (HCV) and human
immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1)-induced autophagy and viral particle production.
Moreover we found that the expression of IRGM-interacting MeV-C, HCV-NS3 or
HIV-NEF proteins per se is sufficient to induce autophagy, through an IRGM
dependent pathway. Our work reveals an unexpected role of IRGM in virus-induced
autophagy and suggests that several different families of RNA viruses may use
common strategies to manipulate autophagy to improve viral infectivity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002422 
PMCID: PMC3234227
PMID: 22174682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

