
1. J Virol. 2012 May;86(9):5179-91. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00169-12. Epub 2012 Feb 29.

A protein array screen for Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus LANA
interactors links LANA to TIP60, PP2A activity, and telomere shortening.

Shamay M(1), Liu J, Li R, Liao G, Shen L, Greenway M, Hu S, Zhu J, Xie Z,
Ambinder RF, Qian J, Zhu H, Hayward SD.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Oncology Program, Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

The Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) LANA protein functions in
latently infected cells as an essential participant in KSHV genome replication
and as a driver of dysregulated cell growth. To identify novel LANA protein-cell 
protein interactions that could contribute to these activities, we performed a
proteomic screen in which purified, adenovirus-expressed Flag-LANA protein was
incubated with an array displaying 4,192 nonredundant human proteins. Sixty-one
interacting cell proteins were consistently detected. LANA interactions with
high-mobility group AT-hook 1 (HMGA1), HMGB1, telomeric repeat binding factor 1
(TRF1), xeroderma pigmentosum complementation group A (XPA), pygopus homolog 2
(PYGO2), protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A)B subunit, Tat-interactive protein 60
(TIP60), replication protein A1 (RPA1), and RPA2 proteins were confirmed in
coimmunoprecipitation assays. LANA-associated TIP60 retained acetyltransferase
activity and, unlike human papillomavirus E6 and HIV-1 TAT proteins, LANA did not
reduce TIP60 stability. The LANA-bound PP2A B subunit was associated with the
PP2A A subunit but not the catalytic C subunit, suggesting a disruption of PP2A
phosphatase activity. This is reminiscent of the role of simian virus 40 (SV40)
small t antigen. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays showed binding of
RPA1 and RPA2 to the KSHV terminal repeats. Interestingly, LANA expression
ablated RPA1 and RPA2 binding to the cell telomeric repeats. In U2OS cells that
rely on the alternative mechanism for telomere maintenance, LANA expression had
minimal effect on telomere length. However, LANA expression in telomerase
immortalized endothelial cells resulted in telomere shortening. In KSHV-infected 
cells, telomere shortening may be one more mechanism by which LANA contributes to
the development of malignancy.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00169-12 
PMCID: PMC3347335
PMID: 22379092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

