
1. J Virol. 2012 Jun;86(11):6146-58. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00013-12. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

Functions of the Epstein-Barr virus EBNA1 protein in viral reactivation and lytic
infection.

Sivachandran N(1), Wang X, Frappier L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

EBNA1 is the only nuclear Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) protein expressed in both
latent and lytic modes of infection. While EBNA1 is known to play several
important roles in latent infection, the reason for its continued expression in
lytic infection is unknown. Here we identified two roles for EBNA1 in the
reactivation of latent EBV to the lytic cycle in epithelial cells. First, EBNA1
depletion in latently infected cells was shown to positively contribute to
spontaneous EBV reactivation, showing that EBNA1 has a role in suppressing
reactivation. Second, when the lytic cycle was induced, EBNA1 depletion decreased
lytic gene expression and DNA amplification, showing that it positively
contributed to lytic infection. Since we have previously shown that EBNA1
disrupts promyelocytic leukemia (PML) nuclear bodies, we investigated whether
this function could account for the effects of EBNA1 on lytic infection by
repeating the experiments with cells lacking PML proteins. In the absence of PML,
EBNA1 did not promote lytic infection, indicating that the EBNA1-mediated PML
disruption is responsible for promoting lytic infection. In keeping with this
conclusion, PML silencing was found to be sufficient to induce the EBV lytic
cycle. Finally, by generating cells with single PML isoforms, we showed that
individual PML isoforms were sufficient to suppress EBV lytic reactivation,
although PML isoform IV (PML IV) was ineffective because it was most efficiently 
degraded by EBNA1. Our results provide the first function for EBNA1 in lytic
infection and show that EBNA1 interactions with PML IV lead to a loss of PML
nuclear bodies (NBs) that promotes lytic infection.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00013-12 
PMCID: PMC3372196
PMID: 22491455  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

