
1. Blood. 2012 May 31;119(22):5173-81. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-09-377705. Epub 2012 
Apr 9.

HHV-8-encoded viral IL-6 collaborates with mouse IL-6 in the development of
multicentric Castleman disease in mice.

Suthaus J(1), Stuhlmann-Laeisz C, Tompkins VS, Rosean TR, Klapper W, Tosato G,
Janz S, Scheller J, Rose-John S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany.

Human herpes virus 8 (HHV-8) or Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpes virus is the
etiologic agent of Kaposi sarcoma, primary effusion lymphoma, and plasma
cell-type multicentric Castleman disease (MCD). HHV-8 encodes a viral homolog of 
human IL-6, called viral IL-6 (vIL-6), which does not require the cellular IL-6
receptor for binding to the ubiquitously expressed gp130 receptor subunit and
subsequent JAK-STAT signaling. Thus, in contrast to IL-6, vIL-6 can stimulate
virtually all cells in the body. To elucidate the mechanism by which vIL-6 drives
human diseases, we generated transgenic mice that constitutively express vIL-6
under control of the MHC class I promoter. The mice were found to exhibit vIL-6
serum levels comparable with those observed in HHV-8-infected patients, to
contain elevated amounts of phosphorylated STAT3 in spleen and lymph nodes, where
vIL-6 was produced, and to spontaneously develop key features of human plasma
cell-type MCD, including splenomegaly, multifocal lymphadenopathy,
hypergammaglobulinemia, and plasmacytosis. Transfer of the vIL-6 transgene onto
an IL-6-deficient genetic background abrogated MCD-like phenotypes, indicating
that endogenous mouse IL-6 is a crucial cofactor in the natural history of the
disease. Our results in mice suggest that human IL-6 plays an important role in
the pathogenesis of HHV-8-associated MCD.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-09-377705 
PMCID: PMC3370672
PMID: 22490805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

