
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(6):e1002748. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002748. Epub 2012 Jun
7.

Human herpesvirus 8 interferon regulatory factor-mediated BH3-only protein
inhibition via Bid BH3-B mimicry.

Choi YB(1), Sandford G, Nicholas J.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Oncology, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of
America.

Viral replication efficiency is in large part governed by the ability of viruses 
to counteract pro-apoptotic signals induced by infection of host cells. For
HHV-8, viral interferon regulatory factor-1 (vIRF-1) contributes to this process 
in part via inhibitory interactions with BH3-only protein (BOP) Bim, recently
identified as an interaction partner of vIRF-1. Here we recognize that the
Bim-binding domain (BBD) of vIRF-1 resembles a region (BH3-B) of Bid, another
BOP, which interacts intramolecularly with the functional BH3 domain of Bid to
inhibit it pro-apoptotic activity. Indeed, vIRF-1 was found to target Bid in
addition to Bim and to interact, via its BBD region, with the BH3 domain of each.
In functional assays, BBD could substitute for BH3-B in the context of Bid, to
suppress Bid-induced apoptosis in a BH3-binding-dependent manner, and vIRF-1 was 
able to protect transfected cells from apoptosis induced by Bid. While vIRF-1 can
mediate nuclear sequestration of Bim, this was not the case for Bid, and
inhibition of Bid and Bim by vIRF-1 could occur independently of nuclear
localization of the viral protein. Consistent with this finding, direct
BBD-dependent inactivation by vIRF-1 of Bid-induced mitochondrial
permeabilization was demonstrable in vitro and isolated BBD sequences were also
active in this assay. In addition to Bim and Bid BH3 domains, BH3s of BOPs Bik,
Bmf, Hrk, and Noxa also were found to bind BBD, while those of both pro- and
anti-apoptotic multi-BH domain Bcl-2 proteins were not. Finally, the significance
of Bid to virus replication was demonstrated via Bid-depletion in HHV-8 infected 
cells, which enhanced virus production. Together, our data demonstrate and
characterize BH3 targeting and associated inhibition of BOP pro-apoptotic
activity by vIRF-1 via Bid BH3-B mimicry, identifying a novel mechanism of viral 
evasion from host cell defenses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002748 
PMCID: PMC3369933
PMID: 22685405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

