
1. J Immunol. 2012 Sep 1;189(5):2478-87. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103786. Epub 2012
Jul 30.

Human H-ficolin inhibits replication of seasonal and pandemic influenza A
viruses.

Verma A(1), White M, Vathipadiekal V, Tripathi S, Mbianda J, Ieong M, Qi L,
Taubenberger JK, Takahashi K, Jensenius JC, Thiel S, Hartshorn KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02118, USA.

The collectins have been shown to have a role in host defense against influenza A
virus (IAV) and other significant viral pathogens (e.g., HIV). The ficolins are a
related group of innate immune proteins that are present at relatively high
concentrations in serum, but also in respiratory secretions; however, there has
been little study of the role of ficolins in viral infection. In this study, we
demonstrate that purified recombinant human H-ficolin and H-ficolin in human
serum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid bind to IAV and inhibit viral infectivity 
and hemagglutination activity in vitro. Removal of ficolins from human serum or
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid reduces their antiviral activity. Inhibition of IAV 
did not involve the calcium-dependent lectin activity of H-ficolin. We
demonstrate that H-ficolin is sialylated and that removal of sialic acid
abrogates IAV inhibition, while addition of the neuraminidase inhibitor
oseltamivir potentiates neutralization, hemagglutinin inhibition, and viral
aggregation caused by H-ficolin. Pandemic and mouse-adapted strains of IAV are
generally not inhibited by the collectins surfactant protein D or mannose binding
lectin because of a paucity of glycan attachments on the hemagglutinin of these
strains. In contrast, H-ficolin inhibited both the mouse-adapted PR-8 H1N1 strain
and a pandemic H1N1 strain from 2009. H-ficolin also fixed complement to a
surface coated with IAV. These findings suggest that H-ficolin contributes to
host defense against IAV.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103786 
PMCID: PMC3650843
PMID: 22851708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

