
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 5;287(41):34044-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.384669. Epub 2012
Aug 7.

Interaction of the HIV-1 intasome with transportin 3 protein (TNPO3 or TRN-SR2).

Larue R(1), Gupta K, Wuensch C, Shkriabai N, Kessl JJ, Danhart E, Feng L,
Taltynov O, Christ F, Van Duyne GD, Debyser Z, Foster MP, Kvaratskhelia M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Retrovirus Research and Comprehensive Cancer Center, College of
Pharmacy, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Transportin 3 (TNPO3 or TRN-SR2) has been shown to be an important cellular
factor for early steps of lentiviral replication. However, separate studies have 
implicated distinct mechanisms for TNPO3 either through its interaction with
HIV-1 integrase or capsid. Here we have carried out a detailed biophysical
characterization of TNPO3 and investigated its interactions with viral proteins. 
Biophysical analyses including circular dichroism, analytical
ultracentrifugation, small-angle x-ray scattering, and homology modeling provide 
insight into TNPO3 architecture and indicate that it is highly structured and
exists in a monomer-dimer equilibrium in solution. In vitro biochemical binding
assays argued against meaningful direct interaction between TNPO3 and the capsid 
cores. Instead, TNPO3 effectively bound to the functional intasome but not to
naked viral DNA, suggesting that TNPO3 can directly engage the HIV-1 IN tetramer 
prebound to the cognate DNA. Mass spectrometry-based protein footprinting and
site-directed mutagenesis studies have enabled us to map several interacting
amino acids in the HIV-1 IN C-terminal domain and the cargo binding domain of
TNPO3. Our findings provide important information for future genetic analysis to 
better understand the role of TNPO3 and its interacting partners for HIV-1
replication.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.384669 
PMCID: PMC3464514
PMID: 22872640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

