
1. J Virol. 2012 Nov;86(22):12176-86. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01918-12. Epub 2012 Aug 29.

Epstein-Barr virus BGLF4 kinase downregulates NF-κB transactivation through
phosphorylation of coactivator UXT.

Chang LS(1), Wang JT, Doong SL, Lee CP, Chang CW, Tsai CH, Yeh SW, Hsieh CY, Chen
MR.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute and Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) BGLF4 is a member of the conserved herpesvirus kinases
that regulate multiple cellular and viral substrates and play an important role
in the viral lytic cycles. BGLF4 has been found to phosphorylate several cellular
and viral transcription factors, modulate their activities, and regulate
downstream events. In this study, we identify an NF-κB coactivator, UXT, as a
substrate of BGLF4. BGLF4 downregulates not only NF-κB transactivation in
reporter assays in response to tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and poly(I·C) 
stimulation, but also NF-κB-regulated cellular gene expression. Furthermore,
BGLF4 attenuates NF-κB-mediated repression of the EBV lytic transactivators, Zta 
and Rta. In EBV-positive NA cells, knockdown of BGLF4 during lytic progression
elevates NF-κB activity and downregulates the activity of the EBV oriLyt BHLF1
promoter, which is the first promoter activated upon lytic switch. We show that
BGLF4 phosphorylates UXT at the Thr3 residue. This modification interferes with
the interaction between UXT and NF-κB. The data also indicate that BGLF4 reduces 
the interaction between UXT and NF-κB and attenuates NF-κB enhanceosome activity.
Upon infection with short hairpin RNA (shRNA) lentivirus to knock down UXT, a
spontaneous lytic cycle was observed in NA cells, suggesting UXT is required for 
maintenance of EBV latency. Overexpression of wild-type, but not
phosphorylation-deficient, UXT enhances the expression of lytic proteins both in 
control and UXT knockdown cells. Taking the data together, transcription
involving UXT may also be important for EBV lytic protein expression, whereas
BGLF4-mediated phosphorylation of UXT at Thr3 plays a critical role in promoting 
the lytic cycle.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01918-12 
PMCID: PMC3486492
PMID: 22933289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

