
1. Viral Immunol. 2012 Dec;25(6):461-70. doi: 10.1089/vim.2012.0034. Epub 2012 Oct
12.

Epstein-Barr virus-encoded BARF1 protein is a decoy receptor for macrophage
colony stimulating factor and interferes with macrophage differentiation and
activation.

Hoebe EK(1), Le Large TY, Tarbouriech N, Oosterhoff D, De Gruijl TD, Middeldorp
JM, Greijer AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), like many other persistent herpes viruses, has acquired
numerous mechanisms for subverting or evading immune surveillance. This study
investigates the role of secreted EBV-encoded BARF1 protein (sBARF1) in creating 
an immune evasive microenvironment. Wild-type consensus BARF1 was expressed in
the human 293 cell line and purified. This native hexameric sBARF1 had inhibitory
capacity on macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF)-stimulated, and not on
granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-stimulated growth and
differentiation of myeloid cells. Antibodies specific to hexameric sBARF1 were
able to block this effect. M-CSF was shown to interact with sBARF1 via the
protruding N-terminal loops involving Val38 and Ala84. Each BARF1 hexamer was
capable of binding three M-CSF dimers. Mutations in the BARF1 loops greatly
affected M-CSF interaction, and showed loss of growth inhibition. Analysis of the
activation state of the M-CSF receptor c-fms and its downstream kinase pathways
showed that sBARF1 prevented M-CSF-induced downstream phosphorylation. Since
M-CSF is an important factor in macrophage differentiation, the effect of sBARF1 
on the function of monocyte-derived macrophages was evaluated. sBARF1 affected
overall survival and morphology and significantly reduced expression of
macrophage differentiation surface markers such as CD14, CD11b, CD16, and CD169. 
Macrophages differentiating in the presence of sBARF1 showed impaired responses
to lipopolysaccharide and decreased oxygen radical formation as well as reduced
phagocytosis of apoptotic cells. In conclusion, EBV sBARF1 protein is a potent
decoy receptor for M-CSF, hampering the function and differentiation of
macrophages. These results suggest that sBARF1 contributes to the modulation of
immune responses in the microenvironment of EBV-positive carcinomas.

DOI: 10.1089/vim.2012.0034 
PMID: 23061794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

