
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(11):e1002968. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002968. Epub 2012
Nov 1.

A Hsp40 chaperone protein interacts with and modulates the cellular distribution 
of the primase protein of human cytomegalovirus.

Pei Y(1), Fu W, Yang E, Shen A, Chen YC, Gong H, Chen J, Huang J, Xiao G, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, Hubei, China.

Genomic DNA replication is a universal and essential process for all herpesvirus 
including human cytomegalovirus (HCMV). HCMV UL70 protein, which is believed to
encode the primase activity of the viral DNA replication machinery and is highly 
conserved among herpesviruses, needs to be localized in the nucleus, the site of 
viral DNA synthesis. No host factors that facilitate the nuclear import of UL70
have been reported. In this study, we provided the first direct evidence that
UL70 specifically interacts with a highly conserved and ubiquitously expressed
member of the heat shock protein Hsp40/DNAJ family, DNAJB6, which is expressed as
two isoforms, a and b, as a result of alternative splicing. The interaction of
UL70 with a common region of DNAJB6a and b was identified by both a two hybrid
screen in yeast and coimmunoprecipitation in human cells. In transfected cells,
UL70 was primarily co-localized with DNAJB6a in the nuclei and with DNAJB6b in
the cytoplasm, respectively. The nuclear import of UL70 was increased in cells in
which DNAJB6a was up-regulated or DNAJB6b was down-regulated, and was reduced in 
cells in which DNAJB6a was down-regulated or DNAJB6b was up-regulated.
Furthermore, the level of viral DNA synthesis and progeny production was
increased in cells in which DNAJB6a was up-regulated or DNAJB6b was
down-regulated, and was reduced in cells in which DNAJB6a was down-regulated or
DNAJB6b was up-regulated. Thus, DNAJB6a and b appear to enhance the nuclear
import and cytoplasmic accumulation of UL70, respectively. Our results also
suggest that the relative expression levels of DNAJB6 isoforms may play a key
role in regulating the cellular localization of UL70, leading to modulation of
HCMV DNA synthesis and lytic infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002968 
PMCID: PMC3486897
PMID: 23133382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

