
1. J Virol. 2013 Mar;87(5):2857-67. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02676-12. Epub 2012 Dec 26.

Herpesvirus tegument protein pUL37 interacts with dystonin/BPAG1 to promote
capsid transport on microtubules during egress.

Pasdeloup D(1), McElwee M, Beilstein F, Labetoulle M, Rixon FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie Mol√©culaire et Structurale, CNRS, Gif-Sur-Yvette,
France. pasdeloup@vms.cnrs-gif.fr

Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) is a neurotropic virus that travels long distances
through cells using the microtubule network. Its 125-nm-diameter capsid is a
large cargo which efficiently recruits molecular motors for movement. Upon entry,
capsids reach the centrosome by minus-end-directed transport. From there, they
are believed to reach the nucleus by plus-end-directed transport.
Plus-end-directed transport is also important during egress, when capsids leave
the nucleus to reach the site of envelopment in the cytoplasm. Although capsid
interactions with dynein and kinesins have been described in vitro, the actual
composition of the cellular machinery recruited by herpesviruses for capsid
transport in infected cells remains unknown. Here, we identify the spectraplakin 
protein, dystonin/BPAG1, an important cytoskeleton cross-linker involved in
microtubule-based transport, as a binding partner of the HSV-1 protein pUL37,
which has been implicated in capsid transport. Viral replication is delayed in
dystonin-depleted cells, and, using video microscopy of living infected cells, we
show that dystonin depletion strongly inhibits capsid movement in the cytoplasm
during egress. This study provides new insights into the cellular requirements
for HSV-1 capsid transport and identifies dystonin as a nonmotor protein part of 
the transport machinery.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02676-12 
PMCID: PMC3571392
PMID: 23269794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

