
1. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2013 Jan;78(1):53-9. doi: 10.1134/S0006297913010069.

Proteins of the human 40S ribosomal subunit involved in hepatitis C IRES binding 
as revealed from fluorescent labeling.

Malygin AA(1), Shatsky IN, Karpova GG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Siberian Branch of the
Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, 630090, Russia.

Initiation of translation of genomic RNA (gRNA) of hepatitis C virus (HCV) is
provided by a highly structured fragment in its 5'-untranslated region, the
so-called Internal Ribosome Entry Site (IRES). In this work, the exposed
NH2-groups of proteins in the 40S subunit of the human ribosome and in its binary
complexes with RNA transcripts corresponding to the full-size HCV IRES or its
fragments were probed using the N-hydroxysuccinimide derivative of the
fluorescent dye Cy3. Comparison of efficiencies of modification of ribosomal
proteins in free subunits and in their binary complexes with the RNA transcripts 
revealed ribosomal proteins involved in the HCV IRES binding. It was found that
binding of the 40S subunits with the RNA transcript corresponding to full-size
HCV IRES results in a decrease in modification levels of ribosomal protein (rp)
S27 and, to a lesser extent of rpS10; also, a noticeable decrease in the
efficiency of labeling of proteins RACK1/S2/S3a was observed. When a fragment of 
HCV IRES containing the initial part of the open reading frame (ORF) of the viral
gRNA was deleted, the level of rpS10 modification became the same as in free
subunits, whereas the levels of modification of rpS27 and the RACK1/S2/S3a group 
remained virtually unchanged compared to those observed in the complex of 40S
subunit with the full-size HCV IRES. Binding of 40S subunits to a fragment of the
HCV IRES lacking an ORF and domain II increased the modification level of the
RACK1/S2/S3a proteins, while the efficiencies of labeling of rpS10 and rpS27
remained the same as upon the deletion of the ORF fragment. Comparison of these
results with known structural and biochemical data on the organization of 40S
subunit and the location of the HCV IRES on it revealed structural elements of
the IRES contacting exposed lysine residues of the above-mentioned ribosomal
proteins. Thus, it was found that the majority of exposed lysine residues of
rpS27 are involved in the binding of the HCV IRES region formed by the junction
of subdomains IIIa, IIIb, and IIIc with the central stalk of domain III, and that
several lysine residues of rpS10 participate in the binding of the HCV IRES
region corresponding to the initial part of the ORF of the viral gRNA. In
addition, we concluded that lysine residues of rpS3a are involved in the binding 
of domains II and III of HCV IRES.

DOI: 10.1134/S0006297913010069 
PMID: 23379559  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

