
1. J Virol. 2013 Jun;87(12):6625-34. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01006-12. Epub 2013 Apr 3.

EWSR1 binds the hepatitis C virus cis-acting replication element and is required 
for efficient viral replication.

Oakland TE(1), Haselton KJ, Randall G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) genome contains numerous RNA elements that are
required for its replication. Most of the identified RNA structures are located
within the 5' and 3' untranslated regions (UTRs). One prominent RNA structure,
termed the cis-acting replication element (CRE), is located within the NS5B
coding region. Mutation of part of the CRE, the 5BSL3.2 stem-loop, impairs HCV
RNA replication. This loop has been implicated in a kissing interaction with a
complementary stem-loop structure in the 3' UTR. Although it is clear that this
interaction is required for viral replication, the function of the interaction,
and its regulation are unknown. In order to gain insight into the CRE function,
we isolated cellular proteins that preferentially bind the CRE and identified
them using mass spectrometry. This approach identified EWSR1 as a CRE-binding
protein. Silencing EWSR1 expression impairs HCV replication and infectious virus 
production but not translation. While EWRS1 is a shuttling protein that is
extensively nuclear in hepatocytes, substantial amounts of EWSR1 localize to the 
cytosol in HCV-infected cells and colocalize with sites of HCV replication. A
subset of EWRS1 translocates into detergent-resistant membrane fractions, which
contain the viral replicase proteins, in cells with replicating HCV. EWSR1
directly binds the CRE, and this is dependent on the intact CRE structure.
Finally, EWSR1 preferentially interacts with the CRE in the absence of the
kissing interaction. This study implicates EWSR1 as a novel modulator of CRE
function in HCV replication.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01006-12 
PMCID: PMC3676111
PMID: 23552423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

