
1. Virol J. 2013 Jul 25;10:243. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-243.

Influenza A/Hong Kong/156/1997(H5N1) virus NS1 gene mutations F103L and M106I
both increase IFN antagonism, virulence and cytoplasmic localization but differ
in binding to RIG-I and CPSF30.

Dankar SK(1), Miranda E, Forbes NE, Pelchat M, Tavassoli A, Selman M, Ping J, Jia
J, Brown EG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Rd, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The genetic basis for avian to mammalian host switching in influenza 
A virus is largely unknown. The human A/HK/156/1997 (H5N1) virus that transmitted
from poultry possesses NS1 gene mutations F103L + M106I that are virulence
determinants in the mouse model of pneumonia; however their individual roles have
not been determined. The emergent A/Shanghai/patient1/2013(H7N9)-like viruses
also possess these mutations which may contribute to their virulence and ability 
to switch species.
METHODS: NS1 mutant viruses were constructed by reverse genetics and site
directed mutagenesis on human and mouse-adapted backbones. Mouse infections
assessed virulence, virus yield, tissue infection, and IFN induction. NS1 protein
properties were assessed for subcellular distribution, IFN antagonism (mouse and 
human), CPSF30 and RIG-I domain binding, host transcription (microarray); and the
natural prevalence of 103L and 106I mutants was assessed.
RESULTS: Each of the F103L and M106I mutations contributes additively to
virulence to reduce the lethal dose by >800 and >3,200 fold respectively by
mediating alveolar tissue infection with >100 fold increased infectious yields.
The 106I NS1 mutant lost CPSF binding but the 103L mutant maintained binding that
correlated with an increased general decrease in host gene expression in human
but not mouse cells. Each mutation positively modulated the inhibition of IFN
induction in mouse cells and activation of the IFN-Î² promoter in human cells but 
not in combination in human cells indicating negative epistasis. Each of the
F103L and M106I mutations restored a defect in cytoplasmic localization of H5N1
NS1 in mouse cells. Human H1N1 and H3N2 NS1 proteins bound to the CARD, helicase 
and RD RIG-I domains, whereas the H5N1 NS1 with the same consensus 103F and 106M 
mutations did not bind these domains, which was totally or partially restored by 
the M106I or F103L mutations respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The F103L and M106I mutations in the H5N1 NS1 protein each increased
IFN antagonism and mediated interstitial pneumonia in mice that was associated
with increased cytoplasmic localization and altered host factor binding. These
mutations may contribute to the ability of previous HPAI H5N1 and recent LPAI
H7N9 and H6N1 (NS1-103L+106M) viruses to switch hosts and cause disease in
humans.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-10-243 
PMCID: PMC3733596
PMID: 23886034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

