
1. Hepatology. 2014 Feb;59(2):423-33. doi: 10.1002/hep.26671. Epub 2013 Dec 18.

Quantitative proteomics identifies the membrane-associated peroxidase GPx8 as a
cellular substrate of the hepatitis C virus NS3-4A protease.

Morikawa K(1), Gouttenoire J, Hernandez C, Dao Thi VL, Tran HT, Lange CM, Dill
MT, Heim MH, Donzé O, Penin F, Quadroni M, Moradpour D.

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS3-4A protease is not only an essential component of
the viral replication complex and a prime target for antiviral intervention but
also a key player in the persistence and pathogenesis of HCV. It cleaves and
thereby inactivates two crucial adaptor proteins in viral RNA sensing and innate 
immunity, mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) and TRIF, a
phosphatase involved in growth factor signaling, T-cell protein tyrosine
phosphatase (TC-PTP), and the E3 ubiquitin ligase component UV-damaged
DNA-binding protein 1 (DDB1). Here we explored quantitative proteomics to
identify novel cellular substrates of the NS3-4A protease. Cell lines inducibly
expressing the NS3-4A protease were analyzed by stable isotopic labeling using
amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) coupled with protein separation and mass
spectrometry. This approach identified the membrane-associated peroxidase GPx8 as
a bona fide cellular substrate of the HCV NS3-4A protease. Cleavage by NS3-4A
occurs at Cys 11, removing the cytosolic tip of GPx8, and was observed in
different experimental systems as well as in liver biopsies from patients with
chronic HCV. Overexpression and RNA silencing studies revealed that GPx8 is
involved in viral particle production but not in HCV entry or RNA
replication.CONCLUSION: We provide proof-of-concept for the use of quantitative
proteomics to identify cellular substrates of a viral protease and describe GPx8 
as a novel proviral host factor targeted by the HCV NS3-4A protease.

© 2013 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.26671 
PMID: 23929719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

