
1. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 15;191(8):4246-58. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301482. Epub 2013
Sep 16.

HIV-1 gp120 induces TLR2- and TLR4-mediated innate immune activation in human
female genital epithelium.

Nazli A(1), Kafka JK, Ferreira VH, Anipindi V, Mueller K, Osborne BJ, Dizzell S, 
Chauvin S, Mian MF, Ouellet M, Tremblay MJ, Mossman KL, Ashkar AA, Kovacs C,
Bowdish DM, Snider DP, Kaul R, Kaushic C.

Author information: 
(1)McMaster Immunology Research Centre, Michael G. DeGroote Centre for Learning
and Discovery, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4K1, Canada;

Although women constitute half of all HIV-1-infected people worldwide (UNAIDS
World AIDS Day Report, 2011), the earliest events in the female reproductive
tract (FRT) during heterosexual HIV-1 transmission are poorly understood.
Recently, we demonstrated that HIV-1 could directly impair the mucosal epithelial
barrier in the FRT. This suggested that the HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein gp120 was
being recognized by a membrane receptor on genital epithelial cells, leading to
innate immune activation. In this study, we report that pattern-recognition
receptors TLR2 and -4 bind to HIV-1 gp120 and trigger proinflammatory cytokine
production via activation of NF-ÎºB. The gp120-TLR interaction also required the
presence of heparan sulfate (HS). Bead-binding assays showed that gp120 can bind 
to HS, TLR2, and TLR4, and studies in transfected HEK293 cells demonstrated that 
HS and TLR2 and -4 were necessary to mediate downstream signaling. Exposure to
seminal plasma from HIV-1-infected and uninfected men with gp120 added to it
induced a significant proinflammatory cytokine response from genital epithelial
cells and disruption of tight junctions, indicating a role for gp120 in mucosal
barrier disruption during HIV-1 heterosexual transmission. These studies provide,
for the first time to our knowledge, a possible mechanism by which HIV-1 gp120
could directly initiate innate immune activation in the FRT during heterosexual
transmission.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301482 
PMID: 24043886  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

