
1. FEBS J. 2014 Jul;281(13):2899-914. doi: 10.1111/febs.12828. Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Influenza A viral nucleoprotein interacts with cytoskeleton scaffolding protein
α-actinin-4 for viral replication.

Sharma S(1), Mayank AK, Nailwal H, Tripathi S, Patel JR, Bowzard JB, Gaur P,
Donis RO, Katz JM, Cox NJ, Lal RB, Farooqi H, Sambhara S, Lal SK.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, 
New Delhi, India.

Influenza A virus (IAV), similar to other viruses, exploits the machinery of
human host cells for its survival and replication. We identified α-actinin-4, a
host cytoskeletal protein, as an interacting partner of IAV nucleoprotein (NP).
We confirmed this interaction using co-immunoprecipitation studies, first in a
coupled in vitro transcription-translation assay and then in cells either
transiently co-expressing the two proteins or infected with whole IAV.
Importantly, the NP-actinin-4 interaction was observed in several IAV subtypes,
including the 2009 H1N1 pandemic virus. Moreover, immunofluorescence studies
revealed that both NP and actinin-4 co-localized largely around the nucleus and
also in the cytoplasmic region of virus-infected A549 cells. Silencing of
actinin-4 expression resulted in not only a significant decrease in NP, M2 and
NS1 viral protein expression, but also a reduction of both NP mRNA and viral RNA 
levels, as well as viral titers, 24 h post-infection with IAV, suggesting that
actinin-4 was critical for viral replication. Furthermore, actinin-4 depletion
reduced the amount of NP localized in the nucleus. Treatment of infected cells
with wortmannin, a known inhibitor of actinin-4, led to a decrease in NP mRNA
levels and also caused the nuclear retention of NP, further strengthening our
previous observations. Taken together, the results of the present study indicate 
that actinin-4, a novel interacting partner of IAV NP, plays a crucial role in
viral replication and this interaction may participate in nuclear localization of
NP and/or viral ribonucleoproteins.

© 2014 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.12828 
PMCID: PMC7164065
PMID: 24802111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

