
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2014 Jul 1;14:354. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-14-354.

CKR-L3, a deletion version CCR6-isoform shows coreceptor-activity for limited
human and simian immunodeficiency viruses.

Islam S(1), Kanbe K, Shimizu N, Ohtsuki T, Jinno-Oue A, Tanaka A, Hoshino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Preventive Medicine, Gunma University Graduate
School of Medicine, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan. salequl@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The chemokine receptors (CKRs), mainly CCR5 and CXCR4 function as
major coreceptors in infections caused by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and 
simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV). Approximately 20 G protein-coupled receptors
(GPCRs) have been identified as minor coreceptors, alike CCR6 that we reported
recently. Since CKR-L3 is indentified as a natural isoform of CCR6, we attempted 
in this study to explore the coreceptor function of CKR-L3.
METHODS: NP-2 cells transduced with CD4-receptor (NP-2/CD4) normally remain
resistant to HIV or SIV infection. However, the introduction of functional
coreceptors can make these cells susceptible to these viruses. NP-2/CD4/CKR-L3
cells were produced to examine the coreceptor activity of CKR-L3. Likely,
CCR6-isoform and the major coreceptors, CCR5 and CXCR4 were also examined in
parallel. Presence of viral antigen in infected NP-2/CD4/coreceptor cells was
detected by indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA). The results were validated
by detection of syncytia, proviral DNA and by measuring reverse transcriptase
(RT) activities.
RESULTS: HIV-2MIR and SIVsmE660 were found to infect NP-2/CD4/CKR-L3 cells,
indicative of the coreceptor function of CKR-L3. Viral antigens appeared faster
in NP-2/CD4/CKR-L3 cells than in NP-2/CD4/CCR6, indicating that CKR-L3 is a more 
efficient coreceptor. Moreover, syncytia formation was more rapid and RT release 
evidenced earlier and at higher levels with CKR-L3 than with CCR6. Sequence
analysis in the C2-V3 envelope region of HIV-2MIR replicated through CKR-L3 and
CCR6 coreceptor showed two and three amino acid substitutions respectively, in
the C2 region compared to the CCR5-variant. The SIVsmE660-CKRL3 variant showed
three amino acid substitutions in the V1 region, one change in the V2 and two
changes in the C2 region. The SIVsmE660-CCR6 variant produced two changes in the 
V1 region, and three in the C2 region.
CONCLUSIONS: Isoform CKR-L3 exhibited coreceptor activity for limited primary HIV
and SIV isolates with better efficiency than the parent CCR6-isoform. Amino acid 
substitutions in the envelope region of these viruses may confer selective
pressure towards CKR-L3-use. CKR-L3 with other minor coreceptors may contribute
to HIV and SIV pathogenesis including dissemination, trafficking and latency
especially when major coreceptors become compromised. However, further works will
be required to determine its clinical significance in HIV and SIV infection.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2334-14-354 
PMCID: PMC4089560
PMID: 24980635  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

