
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 19;289(38):26368-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.561662. Epub
2014 Aug 8.

Identification of RFPL3 protein as a novel E3 ubiquitin ligase modulating the
integration activity of human immunodeficiency virus, type 1 preintegration
complex using a microtiter plate-based assay.

Tan BH(1), Suzuki Y(1), Takahashi H(1), Ying PH(2), Takahashi C(1), Han Q(1),
Chin WX(1), Chao SH(3), Sawasaki T(4), Yamamoto N(5), Suzuki Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 14 Medical Drive, #15-02, Singapore 117599, Singapore.
(2)Veterinary Bioscience, Life Sciences and Chemical Technology, Ngee Ann
Polytechnic, 535 Clementi Road, Singapore 599489, Singapore.
(3)the Expression Engineering Group, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency
for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 20 Biopolis Way, #06-01 Centros,
Singapore 138668, Singapore.
(4)the Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University, 3 Bunkyo-cho, Matsuyama, Ehime
790-8577, Japan, and.
(5)From the Department of Microbiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 14 Medical Drive, #15-02, Singapore 117599, Singapore,
micny@nus.edu.sg.
(6)From the Department of Microbiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 14 Medical Drive, #15-02, Singapore 117599, Singapore,
the Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, 8 
College Road, Singapore 169857, Singapore californiacircle@gmail.com.

Integration, one of the hallmarks of retrovirus replication, is mediated by a
nucleoprotein complex called the preintegration complex (PIC), in which viral DNA
is associated with many protein components that are required for completion of
the early phase of infection. A striking feature of the PIC is its powerful
integration activity in vitro. The PICs from a freshly isolated cytoplasmic
extract of infected cells are able to insert viral DNA into exogenously added
target DNA in vitro. Therefore, a PIC-based in vitro assay is a reliable system
for assessing protein factors influencing retroviral integration. In this study, 
we applied a microtiter plate-based in vitro assay to a screening study using a
protein library that was produced by the wheat germ cell-free protein synthesis
system. Using a library of human E3 ubiquitin ligases, we identified RFPL3 as a
potential stimulator of human immunodeficiency virus, type 1 (HIV-1) PIC
integration activity in vitro. This enhancement of PIC activity by RFPL3 was
likely to be attributed to its N-terminal RING domain. To further understand the 
functional role of RFPL3 in HIV infection, we created a human cell line
overexpressing RFPL3. Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that RFPL3 was
associated with the human immunodeficiency virus, type 1 PICs in infected cells. 
More importantly, single-round HIV-1 infection was enhanced significantly by
RFPL3 expression. Our proteomic approach displays an advantage in the
identification of new cellular proteins affecting the integration activity of the
PIC and, therefore, contributes to the understanding of functional interaction
between retroviral integration complexes and host factors.

Â© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.561662 
PMCID: PMC4176237
PMID: 25107902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

