
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Nov 10;42(20):12455-68. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku925. Epub
2014 Oct 9.

Requirement of CRTC1 coactivator for hepatitis B virus transcription.

Tang HM(1), Gao WW(1), Chan CP(1), Cheng Y(1), Chaudhary V(1), Deng JJ(1), Yuen
KS(1), Wong CM(2), Ng IO(2), Kok KH(3), Zhou J(4), Jin DY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong
State Key Laboratory for Liver Research, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam,
Hong Kong.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Liver Research, The University of Hong Kong,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong
State Key Laboratory for Liver Research, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam,
Hong Kong Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong
Kong.
(4)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong
State Key Laboratory for Liver Research, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam,
Hong Kong dyjin@hku.hk.

Transcription of hepatitis B virus (HBV) from the covalently closed circular DNA 
(cccDNA) template is essential for its replication. Suppressing the level and
transcriptional activity of cccDNA might have anti-HBV effect. Although cellular 
transcription factors, such as CREB, which mediate HBV transcription, have been
well described, transcriptional coactivators that facilitate this process are
incompletely understood. In this study we showed that CREB-regulated
transcriptional coactivator 1 (CRTC1) is required for HBV transcription and
replication. The steady-state levels of CRTC1 protein were elevated in
HBV-positive hepatoma cells and liver tissues. Ectopic expression of CRTC1 or its
homolog CRTC2 or CRTC3 in hepatoma cells stimulated the activity of the preS2/S
promoter of HBV, whereas overexpression of a dominant inactive form of CRTC1
inhibited HBV transcription. CRTC1 interacts with CREB and they are mutually
required for the recruitment to the preS2/S promoter on cccDNA and for the
activation of HBV transcription. Accumulation of pregenomic RNA (pgRNA) and
cccDNA was observed when CRTC1 or its homologs were overexpressed, whereas the
levels of pgRNA, cccDNA and secreted HBsAg were diminished when CRTC1 was
compromised. In addition, HBV transactivator protein HBx stabilized CRTC1 and
promoted its activity on HBV transcription. Our work reveals an essential role of
CRTC1 coactivator in facilitating and supporting HBV transcription and
replication.

Â© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku925 
PMCID: PMC4227773
PMID: 25300488  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

