
1. J Virol. 2015 Oct 14;90(1):206-21. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01447-15. Print 2016 Jan 1.

The C-type Lectin Langerin Functions as a Receptor for Attachment and Infectious 
Entry of Influenza A Virus.

Ng WC(1), Londrigan SL(1), Nasr N(2), Cunningham AL(2), Turville S(3), Brooks
AG(1), Reading PC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, at the
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.
(2)Westmead Millennium Institute for Medical Research, The University of Sydney, 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)The Kirby Institute, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, at the
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza,
Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory, at the Peter Doherty
Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
preading@unimelb.edu.au.

It is well established that influenza A virus (IAV) attachment to and infection
of epithelial cells is dependent on sialic acid (SIA) at the cell surface,
although the specific receptors that mediate IAV entry have not been defined and 
multiple receptors may exist. Lec2 Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells are SIA
deficient and resistant to IAV infection. Here we demonstrate that the expression
of the C-type lectin receptor langerin in Lec2 cells (Lec2-Lg) rendered them
permissive to IAV infection, as measured by replication of the viral genome,
transcription of viral mRNA, and synthesis of viral proteins. Unlike
SIA-dependent infection of parental CHO cells, IAV attachment and infection of
Lec2-Lg cells was mediated via lectin-mediated recognition of mannose-rich
glycans expressed by the viral hemagglutinin glycoprotein. Lec2 cells expressing 
endocytosis-defective langerin bound IAV efficiently but remained resistant to
IAV infection, confirming that internalization via langerin was essential for
infectious entry. Langerin-mediated infection of Lec2-Lg cells was pH and dynamin
dependent, occurred via clathrin- and caveolin-mediated endocytic pathways, and
utilized early (Rab5(+)) but not late (Rab7(+)) endosomes. This study is the
first to demonstrate that langerin represents an authentic receptor that binds
and internalizes IAV to facilitate infection. Moreover, it describes a unique
experimental system to probe specific pathways and compartments involved in
infectious entry following recognition of IAV by a single cell surface
receptor.IMPORTANCE: On the surface of host cells, sialic acid (SIA) functions as
the major attachment factor for influenza A viruses (IAV). However, few studies
have identified specific transmembrane receptors that bind and internalize IAV to
facilitate infection. Here we identify human langerin as a transmembrane
glycoprotein that can act as an attachment factor and a bone fide endocytic
receptor for IAV infection. Expression of langerin by an SIA-deficient cell line 
resistant to IAV rendered cells permissive to infection. As langerin represented 
the sole receptor for IAV infection in this system, we have defined the pathways 
and compartments involved in infectious entry of IAV into cells following
recognition by langerin.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01447-15 
PMCID: PMC4702526
PMID: 26468543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

