
1. Nature. 1993 Apr 29;362(6423):860-2.

Yeast DNA repair and recombination proteins Rad1 and Rad10 constitute a
single-stranded-DNA endonuclease.

Tomkinson AE(1), Bardwell AJ, Bardwell L, Tappe NJ, Friedberg EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235-9072.

Damage-specific recognition and incision of DNA during nucleotide excision repair
in yeast and mammalian cells requires multiple gene products. Amino-acid sequence
homology between several yeast and mammalian genes suggests that the mechanism of
nucleotide excision repair is conserved in eukaryotes, but very little is known
about its biochemistry. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae at least 6 genes
are needed for this process, including RAD1 and RAD10 (ref. 1). Mutations in the 
two genes inactivate nucleotide excision repair and result in a reduced
efficiency of mitotic recombinational events between repeated sequences. The
Rad10 protein has a stable and specific interaction with Rad1 protein and also
binds to single-stranded DNA and promotes annealing of homologous single-stranded
DNA. The amino-acid sequence of the yeast Rad10 protein is homologous with that
of the human excision repair gene ERCC1 (ref. 3). Here we demonstrate that a
complex of purified Rad1 and Rad10 proteins specifically degrades single-stranded
DNA by an endonucleolytic mechanism. This endonuclease activity is presumably
required to remove non-homologous regions of single-stranded DNA during mitotic
recombination between repeated sequences as previously suggested, and may also be
responsible for the specific incision of damaged DNA during nucleotide excision
repair.

DOI: 10.1038/362860a0 
PMID: 8479526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

