
1. Antiviral Res. 1995 Jun;27(3):237-53.

Evidence for antiviral activity of glutathione: in vitro inhibition of herpes
simplex virus type 1 replication.

Palamara AT(1), Perno CF, Ciriolo MR, Dini L, Balestra E, D'Agostini C, Di
Francesco P, Favalli C, Rotilio G, Garaci E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Sciences, University of
Rome Tor Vergata, Italy.

The role of glutathione (GSH) in the in vitro infection and replication of human 
herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) was investigated. Intracellular endogenous
GSH levels dramatically decreased in the first 24 h after virus adsorption,
starting immediately after virus challenge. The addition of exogenous GSH was not
only able to restore its intracellular levels almost up to those found in
uninfected cells, but also to inhibit > 99% the replication of HSV-1. This
inhibition was concentration-dependent, not related to toxic effects on host
cells and also maintained if the exogenous GSH was added as late as 24 h after
virus challenge, i.e. when virus infection was fully established. Electron
microscopic examination of HSV-1-infected cells showed that GSH dramatically
reduced the number of extracellular and intracytoplasmic virus particles, whereas
some complete nucleocapsids were still detected within the nuclei of GSH-treated 
cells. Consistent with this observation, immunoblot analysis showed that the
expression of HSV-1-glycoprotein B, crucial for the release and the infectivity
of virus particles, was significantly decreased. Data suggest that exogenous GSH 
inhibits the replication of HSV-1 by interfering with very late stages of the
virus life cycle, without affecting cellular metabolism.

DOI: 10.1016/0166-3542(95)00008-a 
PMID: 8540746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

