
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Dec 25;23(24):4978-85.

Transcription factors interacting with herpes simplex virus alpha gene promoters 
in sensory neurons.

Hagmann M(1), Georgiev O, Schaffner W, Douville P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie II der Universität Zürich, Switzerland.

Interference with VP16-mediated activation of herpes virus immediate-early (or
alpha) genes is thought to be the major cause of establishing viral latency in
sensory neurons. This could be brought about by lack of a key activating
transcription factor(s) or active repression. In this study we find that sensory 
neurons express all important components for VP16-mediated alpha gene induction, 
such as the POU transcription factor Oct-1, host cell factor (HCF) and GABP
alpha/beta. However, Oct-1 and GABP alpha/beta are only present at low levels and
the VP16-induced complex (VIC) appears different. We do not find protein
expression of the transcription factor Oct-2, implicated by others as an alpha
gene repressor. The POU factor N-Oct3 (Brn 2 or POU3F2) is also present in
sensory neurons and binds viral TAATGARAT motifs with higher affinity than Oct-1,
indicating that it may be a candidate repressor for competitive binding to
TAATGARAT motifs. When transfected into HeLa cells, where Oct-1 and GABP
alpha/beta are highly abundant, N-Oct3 represses model promoters with
multimerized TAATGARAT motifs, but fails to repress complete alpha gene
promoters. Taken together our findings suggest that modulation of alpha gene
promoters could contribute to viral latency when low concentrations of the
activating transcription factors Oct-1 and GABP alpha/beta prevail. Our data,
however, refute the notion that competing Oct factors are able to block alpha
gene transcription to achieve viral latency.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/23.24.4978 
PMCID: PMC307502
PMID: 8559654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

