
1. Blood. 1996 Mar 15;87(6):2329-36.

Identification of complement activation sites in human immunodeficiency virus
type-1 glycoprotein gp120.

Süsal C(1), Kirschfink M, Kröpelin M, Daniel V, Opelz G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transplantation Immunology, Institute of Immunology, University 
of Heidelberg, Germany.

Recombinant glycoprotein 120 (rgp120) of human immunodeficiency virus type-1
(HIV-1) activates the human complement system in the absence of anti-gp120
antibodies. HIV-1 glycoprotein gp120 can dissociate from the viral envelope
either spontaneously or after binding of HIV-1 to the CD4 molecule. As a
consequence, gp120 can circulate in the patient's serum and attach to the surface
of uninfected CD4+ T cells. Complement activation by cell-bound HIV-1
glycoprotein gp120 with subsequent opsonization may represent a mechanism for the
elimination of uninfected CD4+ cells by the reticuloendothelial system, thereby
enhancing the progression of HIV disease. In the current study, the complement
proteins C4,C3,C5,C9, and properdin were found to bind to a synthetic peptide
covering positions 233-251 of the gp120BRU sequence on incubation with normal
human serum. Complement activation by the peptide was comparable with that
induced by aggregated IgG, complete rgp120, and the previously described
complement-activating gp41-peptide 609-623. Activation occurred via the classical
pathway and was abrogated in the presence of EDTA, Mg2+/EGTA, or C4-deficient
human serum. Peptides partly overlapping the sequence 233-251 activated
complement to a lesser extent. The complement-activating capacity of the gp120
sequence 233-251 was not restricted to the HIV-1BRU isolate, because a peptide
from the corresponding sequence of the HIV-1MN strain was also capable of
activating complement. An additional strong complement-activating site was
identified in the gp120 sequence 321-360 of the HIV-1MN strain. These data
indicate that distinct sites in gp120 are able to activate human serum complement
via the classical pathway in the absence of anti-gp120 and independent of
glycosylation.


PMID: 8630395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

