
1. J Virol. 1996 Apr;70(4):2260-8.

Raf-1 kinase targets GA-binding protein in transcriptional regulation of the
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 promoter.

Flory E(1), Hoffmeyer A, Smola U, Rapp UR, Bruder JT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Radiobiology and Cell Research, University of WÃ¼rzburg, Germany.

The serine/threonine protein kinase Raf-1 is a component of a conserved
intracellular signaling cascade that controls responses to various extracellular 
stimuli. Transcription from several promoters, including the oncogene-responsive 
element in the polyomavirus enhancer, the c-fos promoter, as well as other AP-1- 
and Ets-dependent promoters, can be induced by Raf-1 kinase. Previously, we have 
shown that activated Raf-1 kinase transactivates the human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) long terminal repeat and have identified the NF-kappaB binding
motif as a Raf-1-responsive element (RafRE). We now report that Raf-1
kinase-induced transactivation from the HIV RafRE involves the
purine-rich-repeat-binding protein (GABP), which is composed of two distinct
subunits (alpha and beta). GABP alpha is an Ets oncogene-related DNA-binding
protein, and GABP beta contains four ankyrin-like repeats that have been shown to
be essential in protein-protein interactions. In electrophoretic mobility shift
assays using nuclear extracts from human Jurkat T cells, a protein-DNA complex
which was supershifted with antiserum against GABP alpha and GABP beta was
observed. Purified recombinant GABP alpha and beta interact with the HIV RafRE as
judged from DNA binding assays. Cotransfection experiments with GABP alpha and
beta and Raf-1 kinase demonstrate synergistic transactivation of the HIV-1
promoter. Point mutations in the HIV RafRE abolished the Raf-1 kinase as well as 
GABP alpha- and beta-induced transactivation. The observed Raf-1-GABP synergism
presumably involves phosphorylation of GABP subunits, as treatment of cells with 
Raf-1 kinase activators serum and 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate increases 
phosphorylation of GABP in vivo. However, GABP is not a target of Raf-1 kinase;
instead, it is a substrate of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK/ERK), since 
in vitro phosphorylation of GABP alpha and beta was achieved by the reconstituted
protein kinase cascade but not with purified Raf-1 or MEK. These results suggest 
that Raf-1 kinase- induced activation of the HIV-1 promoter is mediated by the
classical cytoplasmic cascade resulting in MAPK/ERK-mediated phosphorylation of
GABP alpha and beta. Because the HIV RafRE corresponds to a region within the
promoter which is essential for regulation of HIV-1 expression, the data indicate
that in addition to NK-kappaB, GABP transcription factors are important for
induced expression of HIV.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.70.4.2260-2268.1996 
PMCID: PMC190067
PMID: 8642652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

