
1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Feb 21;272(8):4953-8.

Interaction of human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I Tax, Ets1, and Sp1 in
transactivation of the PTHrP P2 promoter.

Dittmer J(1), Pise-Masison CA, Clemens KE, Choi KS, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Tumor Biology Section, Laboratory of Molecular Virology, NCI, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-5005, USA.

We have previously shown that the parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP)
promoter contains binding sites for transcription factors Ets1 and Sp1 and that
human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) Tax cooperates with Ets1 to
transactivate the PTHrP P2 promoter. Using the yeast two-hybrid interaction
system, we now provide evidence that Tax interacts with Ets1. Moreover, a double 
mutation (D22A,C23S) in the Tax protein that abrogated the Tax/Ets1 interaction
also inhibited the Tax/Ets1 cooperative effect, suggesting that the interaction
between Tax and Ets1 is important for transactivation of the PTHrP promoter. In
coimmunoprecipitation assays, we find that Tax facilitates the interaction
between Ets1 and Sp1, forming a ternary complex. When the Sp1 site in the PTHrP
promoter was mutated, the Tax/Ets1 cooperative effect was dramatically decreased.
This suggests that Sp1 plays an important role in the Ets1-dependent Tax
transactivation of the PTHrP P2 promoter. Finally, we demonstrate that Gal4-Tax
is a strong activator of the Gal PTHrP promoter, implying that Tax contributes
directly to the transcriptional activation of the promoter. We propose a model in
which the Tax/Ets1 cooperative effect on the PTHrP P2 promoter is based on the
ability of Tax, Ets1, and Sp1 to form a ternary complex on the template DNA. Tax 
facilitates the interaction of Ets1/Sp1 and participates directly in the
transcription initiation process.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.8.4953 
PMID: 9030555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

