
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Jul 1;25(13):2589-94.

The POU-domain factor Brn-3.0 recognizes characteristic sites in the herpes
simplex virus genome.

Turner EE(1), Rhee JM, Feldman LT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0603, USA. eturner@ucsd.edu

The restriction of herpes virus latency to mammalian sensory ganglia has led to a
search for tissue-specific regulatory molecules in these neurons which alter
viral gene expression. We have recently shown that the POU-domain transcriptional
regulator Brn-3.0 is abundantly expressed in the adult trigeminal ganglion. To
begin to examine the hypothesis that Brn-3.0 might participate in the regulation 
of the HSV life-cycle, we used Brn-3.0 POU-domain protein as an affinity matrix, 
and biochemically screened the entire HSV genome for sites of Brn-3.0 binding.
This screen identified several sites of the form TA/TA A T N A N TA/T, which
significantly do not include the previously identified HSV octamer sequences. All
of the selected sites occur in the <25% of the HSV genome which has not been
assigned to open reading frames, suggesting that these sites may be
transcriptional regulatory elements recognized by Brn-3.0 or another homeobox
factor with similar DNA binding properties. However, these sites do not interact 
with Brn-3.0 with sufficiently high affinity to directly mediate transcriptional 
activation by Brn-3.0 alone in transfection assays. The experiments described
also provide an effective general method for exhaustive screening of large viral 
genomes or sub-genomic fragments of eukaryotic DNA for sites of interaction with 
specific transcription factors.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/25.13.2589 
PMCID: PMC146794
PMID: 9185568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

