
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):5117-26.

Luman, a new member of the CREB/ATF family, binds to herpes simplex virus
VP16-associated host cellular factor.

Lu R(1), Yang P, O'Hare P, Misra V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

The human host cell factor (HCF) is expressed in a variety of adult and fetal
tissues, and its gene is conserved in animals as diverse as mammals and insects. 
However, its only known function is to stabilize the herpes simplex virus virion 
transactivator VP16 in a complex with the cellular POU domain protein Oct-1 and
cis-acting regulatory elements in promoters of immediate-early viral genes. To
identify a cellular function for HCF, we used the yeast two-hybrid system to
identify a cellular ligand for HCF. This protein, Luman, appears to be a cyclic
AMP response element (CRE)-binding protein/activating transcription factor 1
protein of the basic leucine zipper superfamily. It binds CREs in vitro and
activates CRE-containing promoters when transfected into COS7 cells. This
activation of transcription was synergistically enhanced by the presence of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein elements and inhibited by AP-1 elements in the
promoter. In addition to a basic DNA binding domain, Luman possesses an unusually
long leucine zipper and an acidic amino-terminal activation domain. These
features in Luman are also present in what appear to be homologs in the mouse,
Drosophila melanogaster, and Caenorhabditis elegans. Luman and VP16 appear to
have similar mechanisms for binding HCF, as in vitro each competitively inhibited
the binding of the other to HCF. In transfected cells, however, while VP16
strongly inhibited the ability of GAL-Luman to activate transcription from a GAL4
upstream activation sequence-containing promoter, Luman was unable to inhibit the
activity of GAL-VP16. Luman appears to be a ubiquitous transcription factor, and 
its mRNA was detected in all human adult and fetal tissues examined. The possible
role of HCF in regulating the function of this ubiquitous transcription factor is
discussed.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.17.9.5117 
PMCID: PMC232362
PMID: 9271389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

