
1. J Virol. 1998 Mar;72(3):1737-43.

Cloning and characterization of a novel hepatitis B virus x binding protein that 
inhibits viral replication.

Melegari M(1), Scaglioni PP, Wands JR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Hepatology Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center,
and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown 02129, USA.

The hepatitis B virus and the mammalian hepadnavirus genomes encode for a short
open reading frame called x. Expression of the protein product (HBx) appears
necessary for establishment of natural infection. However, in vitro studies have 
suggested a multifunctional role for HBx as an indirect transcriptional
transactivator of a variety of different viral and cellular promoters. Indeed,
HBx has no known direct DNA binding properties but may interact with
transcription factors as well as activate intracellular signaling pathways
associated with cell growth. To further address the possible functional role of
HBx in the life cycle of hepatitis B virus, we performed an analysis using the
yeast two-hybrid system to screen a cDNA library derived from a hepatocellular
carcinoma cell line with a HBx fusion bait in an attempt to identify cellular
partners that may bind to and alter the biologic properties of HBx. A
HBx-interacting protein that specifically complexes with the carboxy terminus of 
wild-type HBx was identified and designated XIP. This 9.6-kDa protein is capable 
of binding to HBx in vitro, and transient and stable expression in hepatocellular
carcinoma cells abolishes the transactivation properties of HBx on luciferase
constructs driven by AP-1 and endogenous hepatitis B virus enhancer/promoter
elements. Investigation of the role of XIP in hepatitis B virus replication in
differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma cells revealed that XIP expression
reduces wild-type hepatitis B virus replication to levels observed following
transfection with an HBx-minus virus. In contrast, the replication levels of the 
duck hepatitis B virus, a hepadnavirus that lacks the x open reading frame, were 
unchanged in the context of XIP expression. We propose that one of the
physiologic functions of the cellular protein XIP is to negatively regulate HBx
activity and thus to alter the replication life cycle of the virus.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.72.3.1737-1743.1998 
PMCID: PMC109461
PMID: 9499022  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

