
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jul 7;95(14):8058-63.

Basal and human papillomavirus E6 oncoprotein-induced degradation of Myc proteins
by the ubiquitin pathway.

Gross-Mesilaty S(1), Reinstein E, Bercovich B, Tobias KE, Schwartz AL, Kahana C, 
Ciechanover A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and the Rappaport Family Institute for Research in 
the Medical Sciences, The Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Haifa 31096,
Israel.

We have previously shown that the degradation of c-myc and N-myc in vitro is
mediated by the ubiquitin system. However, the role of the system in targeting
the myc proteins in vivo and the identity of the conjugating enzymes and possible
ancillary proteins involved has remained obscure. Here we report that the
degradation of the myc proteins in cells is inhibited by lactacystin and MG132,
two inhibitors of the 20S proteasome. Inhibition is accompanied by accumulation
of myc-ubiquitin conjugates. Dissection of the ancillary proteins involved
revealed that the high-risk human papillomavirus oncoprotein E6-16 stimulates
conjugation and subsequent degradation of the myc proteins in vitro. Expression
of E6-16 in cells results in significant shortening of the t1/2 of the myc
proteins with subsequent decrease in their cellular level. Analysis of the
conjugating enzymes revealed that under basal conditions the proteins can be
conjugated by two pairs of E2s and E3s-E2-14 kDa and E3alpha involved in the
"N-end rule" pathway, and E2-F1 (UbcH7) and E3-Fos involved also in conjugation
of c-Fos. In the presence of E6-16, a third pair, E2-F1 and E6-AP mediate
conjugation of myc by means of a mechanism that appears to be similar to that
involved in the targeting of p53, formation of a myc. E6.E6-AP targeting complex.
It is possible that in certain cells E6-mediated targeting of myc prevents
myc-induced apoptosis and thus ensures maintenance of viral infection.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.14.8058 
PMCID: PMC20928
PMID: 9653139  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

