
1. Infect Immun. 2001 Mar;69(3):1298-305.

Implication of mitogen-activated protein kinases in T84 cell responses to
enteropathogenic Escherichia coli infection.

Czerucka D(1), Dahan S, Mograbi B, Rossi B, Rampal P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Gastroenterologie et Nutrition, IFR50, Faculté de Médecine,
Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, 06107 Nice Cedex 2, France.
czerucka@unice.fr

Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) infection of T84 cells induces a
decrease in transepithelial resistance, the formation of attaching and effacing
(A/E) lesions, and cytokine production. The purpose of this study was to
investigate the ability of EPEC to activate mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinases in T84 cells and to correlate these signaling pathways with EPEC-induced 
cell responses. T84 cells were infected with either the wild-type (WT) EPEC
strain E2348/69 or two mutants, intimin deletion strain CVD206 (deltaeaeA) and
type III secretion apparatus mutant strain CVD452 (deltaescN::aphA). Infection of
T84 cells with WT but not mutant EPEC strains induced tyrosine phosphorylation of
several proteins in T84 cells, including the p46 and p52 Shc isoforms. Kinetics
studies revealed that ERK1/2, p38, and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) MAP kinases 
were activated in cells infected with strain E2348/69 but not with the mutant
strains. Inhibition of MAP kinases with PD98059 or SB203580 did not affect the
EPEC-induced decrease in transepithelial resistance or actin accumulation beneath
the WT bacteria, but these two inhibitors significantly decreased interleukin-8
(IL-8) synthesis. We demonstrate that EPEC induces activation of ERK1/2, p38, and
JNK cascades, which all depend on bacterial adhesion and expression of the
bacterial type III secretion system. ERK1/2 and p38 MAP kinases were equally
implicated in IL-8 expression but did not participate in A/E lesion formation or 
transepithelial resistance modification, indicating that the signaling pathways
involved in these events are distinct.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.3.1298-1305.2001 
PMCID: PMC98020
PMID: 11179291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

