
1. Infect Immun. 2001 Apr;69(4):2017-24.

Chemokine-dependent neutrophil recruitment in a murine model of Legionella
pneumonia: potential role of neutrophils as immunoregulatory cells.

Tateda K(1), Moore TA, Newstead MW, Tsai WC, Zeng X, Deng JC, Chen G, Reddy R,
Yamaguchi K, Standiford TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0360, USA.

The roles of CXC chemokine-mediated host responses were examined with an A/J
mouse model of Legionella pneumophila pneumonia. After intratracheal inoculation 
of 10(6) CFU of L. pneumophila, the bacterial numbers in the lungs increased
10-fold by day 2; this increase was accompanied by the massive accumulation of
neutrophils. Reverse transcription-PCR data demonstrated the up-regulation of CXC
chemokines, such as keratinocyte-derived chemokine, macrophage inflammatory
protein 2 (MIP-2), and lipopolysaccharide-induced CXC chemokine (LIX). Consistent
with these data, increased levels of KC, MIP-2, and LIX proteins were observed in
the lungs and peaked at days 1, 2, and 2, respectively. Although the
administration of anti-KC or anti-MIP-2 antibody resulted in an approximately 20%
decrease in neutrophil recruitment on day 2, no increase in mortality was
observed. In contrast, the blockade of CXC chemokine receptor 2 (CXCR2), a
receptor for CXC chemokines, including KC and MIP-2, strikingly enhanced
mortality; this effect coincided with a 67% decrease in neutrophil recruitment.
Interestingly, anti-CXCR2 antibody did not affect bacterial burden by day 2, even
in the presence of a lethal challenge of bacteria. Moreover, a significant
decrease in interleukin-12 (IL-12) levels, in contrast to the increases in KC,
MIP-2, and LIX levels, was demonstrated for CXCR2-blocked mice. These data
indicated that CXCR2-mediated neutrophil accumulation may play a crucial role in 
host defense against L. pneumophila pneumonia in mice. The increase in lethality 
without a change in early bacterial clearance suggested that neutrophils may
exert their protective effect not through direct killing but through more
immunomodulatory actions in L. pneumophila pneumonia. We speculate that a
decrease in the levels of the protective cytokine IL-12 may explain, at least in 
part, the high mortality in the setting of reduced neutrophil recruitment.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.4.2017-2024.2001 
PMCID: PMC98125
PMID: 11254553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

