
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 10;276(32):30521-6. Epub 2001 May 31.

Salmonella enteritidis FliC (flagella filament protein) induces human
beta-defensin-2 mRNA production by Caco-2 cells.

Ogushi K(1), Wada A, Niidome T, Mori N, Oishi K, Nagatake T, Takahashi A, Asakura
H, Makino S, Hojo H, Nakahara Y, Ohsaki M, Hatakeyama T, Aoyagi H, Kurazono H,
Moss J, Hirayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Nagasaki University, Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, 
Japan.

Antimicrobial peptides are crucial for host defense at mucosal surfaces.
Bacterial factors responsible for induction of human beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2) mRNA
expression in Caco-2 human carcinoma cells were determined. Salmonella
enteritidis, Salmonella typhimurium, Salmonella typhi, Salmonella dublin, and
culture supernatants of these strains induced hBD-2 mRNA expression in Caco-2
human carcinoma cells. Using luciferase as a reporter gene for a approximately
2.1-kilobase pair hBD-2 promoter, the hBD-2-inducing factor in culture
supernatant of S. enteritidis was isolated. The supernatant factor was
heat-stable and proteinase-sensitive. After purification by anion exchange and
gel filtration chromatography, the hBD-2-inducing factor was identified as a
53-kDa monomeric protein with the amino-terminal sequence AQVINTNSLSLLTQNNLNK,
which is identical to that of the flagella filament structural protein (FliC) of 
S. enteritidis. Consistent with this finding, the 53-kDa protein reacted with
anti-FliC antibody, which prevented its induction of hBD-2 mRNA in Caco-2 cells. 
In agreement, the hBD-2-inducing activity in culture supernatant was completely
neutralized by anti-FliC antibody. In gel retardation analyses, FliC increased
binding of NF-kappaB (p65 homodimer) to hBD-2 gene promoter sequences. We
conclude that S. enteritidis FliC induces hBD-2 expression in Caco-2 cells via
NF-kappaB activation and thus plays an important role in up-regulation of the
innate immune response.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M011618200 
PMID: 11387317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

