
1. J Immunol. 2001 Aug 1;167(3):1230-7.

Il-4 influences apoptosis of mycobacterium-reactive lymphocytes in the presence
of TNF-alpha.

Seah GT(1), Rook GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Windeyer Institute of Medical Sciences,
Royal Free and University College Medical School, 46 Cleveland Street, London W1T
4JF, United Kingdom.

T cell apoptosis is associated with defective cell-mediated effector functions in
several infectious diseases. In tuberculosis, there is evidence that T cell
apoptosis may be cytokine mediated, but the mechanisms are not clearly
understood. Type 2 cytokines have recently been associated with disease extent in
human tuberculosis, but they have not previously been linked to apoptosis in
mycobacterium-reactive T cells. This study presents evidence that PBLs from
healthy donors respond to sonicated Mycobacterium tuberculosis Ags with increased
IL-4 gene activation, CD30 expression, and apoptosis. The changes were
significantly greater than those observed when cells were stimulated with Ags
from nonpathogenic Mycobacterium vaccae. A hypothesis linking these observations 
was tested. CD30 expression and TNF-alpha-mediated lymphocyte apoptosis were both
down-regulated by inhibiting IL-4 in this model. TNFR-associated factor 2 (TRAF2)
expression was down-regulated in CD30(+) cells, and addition of anti-TNF-alpha Ab
significantly reduced apoptosis in the CD30(+) but not the CD30(-) population.
These observations support the hypothesis that increased IL-4 expression in M.
tuberculosis-activated lymphocytes promotes CD30 expression, which sensitizes the
lymphocytes to TNF-alpha-mediated apoptosis via TRAF2 depletion. This may be one 
mechanism by which IL-4 is associated with immunopathological consequences in
human tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.3.1230 
PMID: 11466338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

