
1. Cell Immunol. 2001 Aug 25;212(1):35-43.

Roles of I-E molecule and CD28 costimulation in induction of suppression by
staphylococcal enterotoxin B in vivo.

Hsu LJ(1), Lin YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, National Cheng Kung University
Medical College, Tainan, Taiwan, Republic of China

Exposure to bacterial superantigens leads to the induction of a subsequent state 
of immune hyporesponsiveness. Using a transwell coculture system, a previous
report demonstrated that splenocytes from staphylococcal enterotoxin B
(SEB)-injected BALB/c mice secreted soluble mediators to suppress the
proliferative response of naive syngeneic splenocytes to SEB stimulation. We show
in the present study that, in contrast to the suppressive effect induced by SEB
in BALB/c (H-2(d) haplotype), MRL(+/+), and MRL-lpr/lpr (H-2(k)) mice, SEB-primed
splenocytes from I-E(-) strains such as B6, B10, A. BY (H-2(b)), and A.SW
(H-2(s)) mice failed to inhibit the CD25 expression and the proliferative
activity of their syngeneic naive responder splenocytes. Further results revealed
that the SEB-primed cells from BALB/c, but not B6, mice inhibited the CD25
expression and proliferation of naive responder cells from either BALB/c or B6
mice, indicating the critical regulatory role of the effector cells. Unlike SEB, 
staphylococcal enterotoxin A induced profound suppression in both BALB/c and B6
mice. Moreover, the suppressive competence of SEB-primed splenocytes was
diminished in CD28-deficient BALB/c mice. Taken together, our results indicate
that when SEB is used as a stimulator in vivo, both the I-E molecule and CD28
costimulation are required for the induction of regulatory cells bearing
suppressive activity.

(c) 2001 Elsevier Science.

DOI: 10.1006/cimm.2001.1841 
PMID: 11716527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

