
1. J Clin Pathol. 2003 May;56(5):352-7.

Defensin pattern in chronic gastritis: HBD-2 is differentially expressed with
respect to Helicobacter pylori status.

Wehkamp J(1), Schmidt K, Herrlinger KR, Baxmann S, Behling S, Wohlschläger C,
Feller AC, Stange EF, Fellermann K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Gastroenterology, University of
Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538 Lübeck, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Recent reports have suggested that Helicobacter pylori infection
induces the mucosal antibiotic peptide human beta defensin 2 (HBD-2). Therefore, 
the present study investigated mRNA and peptide expression of four different
defensins in the upper gastrointestinal tract in patients with H pylori positive 
and negative chronic gastritis.
MATERIALS/METHODS: Biopsies from the oesophagus to the duodenum were taken during
routine gastroscopy in 71 individuals. Total RNA was extracted and the reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction was performed with primers for human
defensins 5 and 6 (HD-5/6) or HBD-1 and HBD-2. Paraffin wax embedded tissue from 
gastric resections was tested for HD-5, HBD-1, and HBD-2 by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Helicobacter pylori colonisation was associated with an increased
percentage of positive biopsies with respect to HBD-2 in the corpus (p < 0.05).
Helicobacter pylori had no impact on the gastric expression of HD-5 and HBD-1,
whereas HD-6 was increased in the fundus. The abundant expression of alpha
defensins in the duodenum and beta defensins in the oesophagus served as a
positive control in each individual. Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed the
presence of the HD-5, HBD-1, and HBD-2 peptides in gastric resection specimens.
CONCLUSIONS: The recently described induction of HBD-2 upon H pylori infection
was confirmed in a clinical setting of chronic gastritis. This phenomenon may be 
mediated by components of the pathogen itself or may occur secondary to immune
events in chronic inflammation.

DOI: 10.1136/jcp.56.5.352 
PMCID: PMC1769951
PMID: 12719455  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

