
1. Infect Immun. 2005 Sep;73(9):5504-13.

Mannheimia haemolytica leukotoxin induces apoptosis of bovine lymphoblastoid
cells (BL-3) via a caspase-9-dependent mitochondrial pathway.

Atapattu DN(1), Czuprynski CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin, School of
Veterinary Medicine, 2015 Linden Dr. West, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Mannheimia haemolytica is a key pathogen in the bovine respiratory disease
complex. It produces a leukotoxin (LKT) that is an important virulence factor,
causing cell death in bovine leukocytes. The LKT binds to the beta(2) integrin
CD11a/CD18, which usually activates signaling pathways that facilitate cell
survival. In this study, we investigated mechanisms by which LKT induces death in
bovine lymphoblastoid cells (BL-3). Incubation of BL-3 cells with a low
concentration of LKT results in the activation of caspase-3 and caspase-9 but not
caspase-8. Similarly, the proapoptotic proteins Bax and BAD were significantly
elevated, while the antiapoptotic proteins Bcl-2, Bcl(XL) and Akt-1 were
downregulated. Following exposure to LKT, we also observed a reduction in
mitochondrial cytochrome c and corresponding elevation of cytosolic cytochrome c,
suggesting translocation from the mitochondrial compartment to the cytosol.
Consistent with this observation, tetramethylrhodamine ethyl ester perchlorate
staining revealed that mitochondrial membrane potential was significantly
reduced. These data suggest that LKT induces apoptosis of BL-3 cells via a
caspase-9-dependent mitochondrial pathway. Furthermore, scanning electron
micrographs of mitochondria from LKT-treated BL-3 cells revealed lesions in the
outer mitochondrial membrane, which are larger than previous reports of the
permeability transition pore through which cytochrome c is usually released.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.73.9.5504-5513.2005 
PMCID: PMC1231077
PMID: 16113266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

