
1. J Biomed Sci. 2006 Mar;13(2):251-60. Epub 2005 Dec 21.

Role of calcineurin in Porphyromonas gingivalis-induced myocardial cell
hypertrophy and apoptosis.

Lee SD(1), Kuo WW, Lin DY, Chen TH, Kuo WH, Hsu HH, Chen JZ, Liu JY, Yeh YL,
Huang CY.

Author information: 
(1)School of Physical Therapy, Chung-Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Periodontal pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis (P.
gingivalis) increased cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and apoptosis whereas
Actinobaeillus actinomycetemcomitans and Prevotella intermedia had no effects.
The purpose of this study is to clarify the role of calcineurin signaling pathway
in P. gingivalis-induced H9c2 myocardial cell hypertrophy and apoptosis.
METHODS: DNA fragmentation, nuclear condensation, cellular morphology,
calcineurin protein, Bcl2-associated death promoter (Bad) and nuclear factor of
activated T cell (NFAT)-3 protein products in cultured H9c2 myocardial cell were 
measured by agarose gel electrophoresis, DAPI, immunofluorescence, and Western
blotting following P. gingivalis and/or pre-administration of CsA (calcineurin
inhibitors cyclosporin A).
RESULTS: P. gingivalis not only increased calcineurin protein, NFAT-3 protein
products and cellular hypertrophy, but also increased DNA fragmentation, nuclear 
condensation and Bad protein products in H9c2 cells. The increased cellular
sizes, DNA fragmentation, nuclear condensation, and Bad of H9c2 cells treated
with P. gingivalis were all significantly reduced after pre-administration of
CsA.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that the activity of calcineurin signal pathway 
may be initiated by P. gingivalis and further lead to cell hypertrophy and death 
in culture H9c2 myocardial cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s11373-005-9048-4 
PMID: 16369686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

