
1. J Pathol. 2006 Jun;209(2):174-81.

Peptidoglycan and peptidoglycan-specific Th1 cells in psoriatic skin lesions.

Baker BS(1), Laman JD, Powles A, van der Fits L, Voerman JS, Melief MJ, Fry L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, St Mary's campus, Imperial
College, London, UK.

We have previously demonstrated, in psoriatic skin lesions, the presence of a
subset of dermal CD4+ T cells that produce interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) in
response to a mixture of cell wall proteins extracted from group A streptococci. 
However, the identity of the antigen(s) involved is unknown. To investigate the
hypothesis that peptidoglycan (PG), the major constituent of the streptococcal
cell wall, acts as a T cell activator in psoriasis, we performed in situ analysis
to detect antigen-presenting cells containing PG in lesional versus non-lesional 
skin, and determined proliferation and IFN-gamma responses of lesional skin T
cells. Increased numbers of PG-containing cells were detected in the dermal
papillae and cellular infiltrates of guttate and chronic plaque skin lesions
compared with normal and non-lesional psoriatic skin. A varying proportion of
these were CD68+ macrophages, but the remaining cells did not double stain for
either Langerhans' or dendritic cell markers. Psoriatic dermal
streptococcal-specific CD4+ T cell lines proliferated and produced IFN-gamma in a
self HLA-DR allele-restricted manner in response to streptococcal PG, excluding
mitogenic or superantigenic stimulation, but were unresponsive to staphylococcal 
PG. Similarly, psoriatic staphylococcus-specific T cell lines recognized
staphylococcal, but not streptococcal, PG by IFN-gamma production. The presence
of PG-containing macrophages in close association with PG-specific CD4+ T cells
in lesional skin suggests that PG may be responsible, at least in part, for T
cell activation in psoriasis.

Copyright (c) 2006 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1002/path.1954 
PMID: 16493599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

