
1. Cell Biochem Funct. 2008 Mar-Apr;26(2):246-55.

P38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways are involved in the hypertrophy and
apoptosis of cardiomyocytes induced by Porphyromonas gingivalis conditioned
medium.

Wu HC(1), Yeh YL, Kuo WW, Huang SK, Kuo WH, Hsieh DJ, Wu CL, Tsai CH, Lee SD,
Huang CY.

Author information: 
(1)School of medicine, China Medical University and Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.

The surrounding medium of periodontal pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis (P.
gingivalis) increased cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and apoptosis whereas
Actinobaeillus actinomycetemcomitans and Prevotella intermedia had no effects.
The purpose of this study is to clarify the role of p38 pathway in P. gingivalis 
conditioned medium-induced H9c2 myocardial cell hypertrophy and apoptosis. DNA
fragmentation, cellular morphology, nuclear condensation, p38 protein products,
and mitochondrial-dependent apoptotic related proteins in cultured H9c2
myocardial cell were measured by agarose gel electrophoresis, immunofluorescence,
DAPI, and western blotting following P. gingivalis conditioned medium and/or
pre-administration of SB203580 (p38 inhibitor). The p38 protein products and
associated activities in H9c2 cells were both upregulated by P. gingivalis
conditioned medium. P. gingivalis conditioned medium increased cellular sizes,
DNA fragmentation, nuclear condensation, mitochondrial Bcl2-associated death
promoter (Bad), cytosolic cytochrome c (cyt c), and the activated form of
caspase-9 proteins in H9c2 cells. The increased cellular sizes, DNA
fragmentation, nuclear condensation, Bad, cyt c, and caspase-9 activities of H9c2
cells treated with P. gingivalis conditioned medium were all significantly
reduced after pre-administration of SB203580. Our findings suggest that the
activity of p38 signal pathway may be initiated by P. gingivalis conditioned
medium and further activate mitochondrial-dependent apoptotic pathways leading to
cell death in cultured H9c2 myocardial cells.

Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cbf.1443 
PMID: 17894423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

