
1. Lung. 2007 Dec;185(6):355-65. Epub 2007 Oct 10.

Bacterial induction of early response genes and activation of proapoptotic
factors in pleural mesothelial cells.

Mohammed KA(1), Nasreen N, Antony VB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Florida, JHMHC,
P.O. Box 100225, Gainesville, Florida, 32610-0225, USA. mkamal@medicine.ufl.edu

In bacterial empyema the pleural mesothelium is constantly exposed to
microorganisms. Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) is one of the most frequent
pathogens associated with empyema. In an earlier study we demonstrated that S.
aureus induced barrier dysfunction in pleural mesothelial cell monolayers. In the
present study we report that S. aureus activates the early response genes c-fos
and c-jun and activator protein-1 (AP-1), and induces proapoptosis genes Bad and 
Bak in primary mouse pleural mesothelial cells (PMCs). Our data indicate that in 
PMCs S. aureus induces apoptosis in a time- and multiplicity of infection
(MOI)-dependent manner. Staphylococcus aureus induced Bcl (2), Bcl-X (L), c-fos, 
c-jun, and AP-1 expression in PMCs during the initial phase of infection. In S.
aureus-infected PMCs, Bad and Bak gene expression was increased and correlated
with DNA fragmentation and cytochrome-c release. Bcl (2) and Bcl-X (L) gene
expression was significantly lower in S. aureus-infected PMCs than in uninfected 
PMCs 12 h postinfection. We conclude that at the initial stage of infection S.
aureus modulates expression of early response genes c-fos and c-jun, and in the
late phase of infection S. aureus induces expression of proapoptotic genes Bak
and Bad in PMCs. Silencing AP-1 significantly inhibited S. aureus-induced Bak and
Bad expression in PMCs. The upregulation of early response genes during the early
phase of infection may contribute to the activation of proapoptotic genes Bak and
Bad and release of cytochrome-c, caspase-3 thereby resulting in apoptosis in
PMCs.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-007-9046-6 
PMID: 17929089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

