
1. Infect Immun. 2008 Feb;76(2):671-7. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Modulation of pulmonary dendritic cell function during mycobacterial infection.

Anis MM(1), Fulton SA, Reba SM, Liu Y, Harding CV, Boom WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology,Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
44106-4984, USA.

We have previously reported that during mycobacterial infection, naïve CD4(+)
T-cell activation is enhanced in the lungs. We investigated the role of chemokine
receptor CCR7 and its ligands in the ability of CD11c(+) lung dendritic cells
(DCs) to activate naïve CD4(+) T cells during pulmonary infection with
Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG). BCG infection resulted in the
accumulation and maturation in the lungs of DCs that persisted as the
mycobacterial burden declined. Lung DCs from infected mice expressed more major
histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) than those from uninfected mice.
CCR7 expression levels on lung DCs were comparable among uninfected and infected 
mice. The gene expression of the CCR7 ligand CCL19 progressively increased
throughout BCG infection, and its expression was MyD88 dependent. CD11c(+) lung
cells from BCG-infected mice activated ovalbumin (OVA)-specific naïve CD4(+) T
cells more than CD11c(+) lung cells from uninfected mice. Interestingly, during
peak mycobacterial infection, CD11c(hi) MHC(hi) lung DCs had slightly decreased
chemotaxis toward the CCR7 ligand CCL21 and less efficiency in activating naive
CD4(+) T cells than DCs from mice during late-stage infection, when few bacilli
are found in the lung. These findings suggest that during BCG infection, the
inflammation and sustained expression of CCL19 result in the recruitment,
activation, and retention in the lung of DCs that can activate naïve CD4(+) T
cells in situ.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01079-07 
PMCID: PMC2223454
PMID: 18039834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

