
1. J Bacteriol. 1991 Apr;173(8):2506-13.

Purification and properties of an intracellular calmodulinlike protein from
Bacillus subtilis cells.

Fry IJ(1), Becker-Hapak M, Hageman JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces 88003.

Although calcium ions are crucial in a variety of bacterial processes, including 
spore development, reports of calmodulin in procaryotes have been few. We have
purified to homogeneity a calmodulinlike protein (CaLP) from sporulating cells of
Bacillus subtilis grown in a chemically defined sporulation medium; purification 
involved heat treatment, fractionation with ammonium sulfate, affinity
chromatography, and gel filtration on high-performance columns. The protein was
eluted from a phenothiazine affinity column in a calcium ion-dependent manner,
stained poorly with Coomassie blue and silver stain dyes, bound poorly to
nitrocellulose filters, and was not an inhibitor of the major intracellular
serine proteinase. It stimulated bovine brain phosphodiesterase in a dose- and
Ca2(+)-dependent manner and stimulated NAD kinase from peas in a dose-dependent
manner. The B. subtilis calmodulin reacted with anti-bovine brain calmodulin
antibodies in enzyme-linked immunoabsorbance assays. The amino acid composition
data showed it to be distinctly different from eucaryotic calmodulins, having
particularly high levels of serine and glycine. The pI of the protein was
estimated to be 4.9 to 5.0. The molecular weight was estimated to be 23,000 or
25,000, based on amino acid composition and detergent gel electrophoresis,
respectively. The protein reacted with rhodamine isothiocyanate, which blocked
its enzyme-activating capacity and greatly increased its electrophoretic mobility
and Coomassie dye-binding ability.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.173.8.2506-2513.1991 
PMCID: PMC207814
PMID: 1849508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

