
1. J Clin Microbiol. 1991 May;29(5):883-8.

Comparison of Gen-Probe DNA probe test and culture for the detection of Neisseria
gonorrhoeae in endocervical specimens.

Panke ES(1), Yang LI, Leist PA, Magevney P, Fry RJ, Lee RF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Diagnostics Center, Good Samaritan Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio
45220-2489.

A 2-h nonisotopic DNA probe assay for the direct detection of Neisseria
gonorrhoeae in urogenital specimens has recently been modified (PACE 2;
Gen-Probe, San Diego, Calif.). The new assay format was developed to increase the
sensitivity of the assay and simplify procedural steps. In this study, the new
DNA probe test was compared with a culture reference method for the detection of 
N. gonorrhoeae in endocervical specimens. The results of the DNA probe test were 
expressed as a ratio of relative light units (RLU) of the specimen/RLU of the
cutoff recommended by the manufacturer. All patient samples with sample
RLU/cutoff RLU ratios less than 0.7 were interpreted as negative, and ratios
greater than 2.0 were interpreted as positive for gonorrhea. Samples with sample 
RLU/cutoff RLU ratios between 0.7 and 2.0 were repeated until two or more
consistent negative or positive ratios were obtained. A total of 469 specimens
were tested with an overall disease prevalence of 6.1%. Of the 469 patients
tested, 5 specimens (1.0%) fell in this borderline region and were retested. If
the manufacturer's recommended cutoff value had been used, the original DNA probe
results would have resulted in two false-positives. Our data were analyzed for
both symptomatic (prevalence, 11.7%) and asymptomatic (prevalence, 2%) women. The
study indicated that with our modification of the manufacturer's endpoint
interpretation, the DNA probe test was essentially equivalent to the culture
method in terms of sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive
values in both symptomatic and asymptomatic patient populations. The new DNA
probe test can serve as a suitable screening and diagnostic test for the
diagnosis of gonorrheal genital infections in women. Additionally, it offers the 
advantages of rapid turnaround time and ease of use and allows simultaneous
testing for Chlamydia trachomatis on the same specimen.

DOI: 10.1128/jcm.29.5.883-888.1991 
PMCID: PMC269901
PMID: 1905320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

