
1. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4903. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004903. Epub 2009 Mar 20.

Oral probiotic control skin inflammation by acting on both effector and
regulatory T cells.

Hacini-Rachinel F(1), Gheit H, Le Luduec JB, Dif F, Nancey S, Kaiserlian D.

Author information: 
(1)Universit√© de Lyon, Lyon, France.

Probiotics are believed to alleviate allergic and inflammatory skin disorders,
but their impact on pathogenic effector T cells remains poorly documented. Here
we show that oral treatment with the probiotic bacteria L. casei (DN-114 001)
alone alleviates antigen-specific skin inflammation mediated by either
protein-specific CD4(+) T cells or hapten-specific CD8(+) T cells. In the model
of CD8(+) T cell-mediated skin inflammation, which reproduces allergic contact
dermatitis in human, inhibition of skin inflammation by L. casei is not due to
impaired priming of hapten-specific IFNgamma-producing cytolytic CD8(+) effector 
T cells. Alternatively, L. casei treatment reduces the recruitment of CD8(+)
effector T cells into the skin during the elicitation (i.e. symptomatic) phase of
CHS. Inhibition of skin inflammation by L. casei requires MHC class II-restricted
CD4(+) T cells but not CD1d-restricted NK-T cells. L casei treatment enhanced the
frequency of FoxP3(+) Treg in the skin and increased the production of IL-10 by
CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells in skin draining lymph nodes of
hapten-sensitized mice. These data demonstrate that orally administered L. casei 
(DN-114 001) efficiently alleviate T cell-mediated skin inflammation without
causing immune suppression, via mechanisms that include control of CD8(+)
effector T cells and involve regulatory CD4(+) T cells. L. casei (DN-114 001) may
thus represent a probiotic of potential interest for immunomodulation of T
cell-mediated allergic skin diseases in human.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004903 
PMCID: PMC2654141
PMID: 19300508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

