
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Aug;79(8):3141-8. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00177-11. Epub 2011 May 31.

CD1d-independent activation of invariant natural killer T cells by staphylococcal
enterotoxin B through major histocompatibility complex class II/T cell receptor
interaction results in acute lung injury.

Rieder SA(1), Nagarkatti P, Nagarkatti M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29209, USA.

There are two important mechanisms of activation of invariant natural killer T
cells (iNKT cells) by microbes: direct activation of the invariant T-cell
receptor (TCR) by microbial glycolipids presented by CD1d and indirect
activation, mediated by the responses of antigen-presenting cells to microbes. In
this study, we provide evidence for a novel CD1d-independent direct activation of
iNKT cells involving a microbial protein superantigen presented in the context of
major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II), which plays a critical role
in pathogenesis, thereby redefining the role of iNKT cells. Intranasal exposure
to staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) in C57BL/6 wild-type mice caused acute lung
injury (ALI) characterized by vascular leak, cytokine storm, and infiltration of 
mononuclear cells in the lungs. In contrast, the vascular leak and inflammation
were decreased by ~50% in NKT cell-deficient Jα18(-/-) and CD1d(-/-) mice
following SEB exposure, which was reversed following adoptive transfer of iNKT
cells into CD1d(-/-) mice. In vitro, SEB could directly stimulate iNKT cells in a
CD1d-independent manner via MHC-II/TCR interaction, specifically involving Vβ8.
These studies not only demonstrate that iNKT cells can be activated directly by a
bacterial protein superantigen independent of CD1d but also indicate that in
addition to the conventional T cells, iNKT cells play a critical role in
SEB-mediated ALI.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00177-11 
PMCID: PMC3147567
PMID: 21628519  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

