
1. J Exp Med. 1990 Oct 1;172(4):1091-100.

In vivo induction of anergy in peripheral V beta 8+ T cells by staphylococcal
enterotoxin B.

Rellahan BL(1), Jones LA, Kruisbeek AM, Fry AM, Matis LA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Food and Drug Administration, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

We have developed a model of peripheral in vivo T cell tolerance that is induced 
by administration of the protein superantigen staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB).
Rather than activating V beta 8+ T cells, in vivo administration of SEB induced
in them a profound state of anergy. This was shown by their failure to
proliferate to subsequent in vitro restimulation with SEB or to anti-V beta 8
antibodies. This unresponsiveness was V beta 8 specific since T cells from
SEB-immunized mice responded normally to other antigens. 8 d after SEB
administration, there was no reduction in the number of V beta 8+ T cells or in
the intensity of V beta 8 T cell receptor (TCR) expression. Although a portion of
the V beta 8+ T cells from SEB-primed mice were able to express interleukin 2
receptors (IL-2Rs), they failed to proliferate in response to exogenous IL-2,
indicating they were defective in their IL-2 responsiveness. 2-4 wk after SEB
administration, there was a reduction of approximately 50% in the number of V
beta 8+ cells in immunized compared with control animals. There was, however, no 
reduction in the level of TCR expression on the remaining V beta 8+ cells. These 
data demonstrate that proteins that activate T cells in vitro in a V
beta-specific manner can induce a state of anergy in peripheral T cells in vivo
and may possibly further mediate clonal deletion in a portion of the tolerized
cells.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.172.4.1091 
PMCID: PMC2188615
PMID: 2212944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

