
1. Cell Mol Immunol. 2012 Jul;9(4):361-6. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2012.19. Epub 2012 Jun
25.

The glycolipid exoantigen derived from Chlamydia muridarum activates invariant
natural killer T cells.

Peng Y(1), Zhao L, Shekhar S, Liu L, Wang H, Chen Q, Gao X, Yang X, Zhao W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Shandong University School of Medicine,44 
Wenhua Western Road, Jinan, China.

The chlamydial glycolipid exoantigen (GLXA), a glycolipid antigen derived from
Chlamydia muridarum, has been implicated in chlamydial-host cell interaction.
Although glycolipid antigens from Sphingomonas and related bacteria have been
shown to activate invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells, it is not yet known
whether GLXA can activate these cells. In this study, we have for the first time 
investigated the role of GLXA in iNKT cell activation using in vitro as well as
in vivo settings. First, we examined the effect of GLXA on iNKT cell activation
in a cell-free antigen-presentation assay, and found that GLXA specifically
stimulated iNKT1.4 hybridoma cell produce enhanced amounts of IL-2. Next, we
analyzed the effect of pharmacological activation of iNKT cells by GLXA using
iNKT cell-deficient (iNKT knockout (KO)) mice and bone marrow-derived dendritic
cell (BMDC)-liver mononuclear cell (LMC) coculture system. On stimulation with
GLXA, iNKT cells produced higher quantities of cytokines in a CD1d-dependent
fashion. More importantly, iNKT cells from GLXA-treated, but not from cell
mock-treated, mice showed higher expression of activation marker, CD69, and
enhanced production of interferon (IFN)-Î³ and IL-4 in vivo. Cumulatively, these
data provide evidence on the pharmacological ability of GLXA in specifically
activating iNKT cells.

DOI: 10.1038/cmi.2012.19 
PMCID: PMC4012869
PMID: 22728762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

