
1. Infect Immun. 2013 Jun;81(6):1940-51. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01366-12. Epub 2013 Mar
18.

Brucella abortus invasion of synoviocytes inhibits apoptosis and induces bone
resorption through RANKL expression.

Scian R(1), Barrionuevo P, Rodriguez AM, Arriola Benitez PC, García Samartino C, 
Fossati CA, Giambartolomei GH, Delpino MV.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Inmunología, Genética y Metabolismo (INIGEM), Hospital de
Clínicas "José de San Martín," Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Arthritis is one of the most common complications of human active brucellosis,
but its pathogenic mechanisms have not been completely elucidated. In this paper,
we describe the role of synoviocytes in the pathogenesis of brucellar arthritis. 
Our results indicate that Brucella abortus infection inhibited synoviocyte
apoptosis through the upregulation of antiapoptotic factors (cIAP-2, clusterin,
livin, and P21/CIP/CDNK1A). In contrast, infection did not change the expression 
of proteins that have been involved in apoptosis induction such as Bad, Bax,
cleaved procaspase 3, CytC, and TRAIL, among others; or their expression was
reduced, as occurs in the case of P-p53(S15). In addition, B. abortus infection
induced upregulation of adhesion molecules (CD54 and CD106), and the adhesion of 
monocytes and neutrophils to infected synoviocytes was significantly higher than 
to uninfected cells. Despite this increased adhesion, B. abortus-infected
synoviocytes were able to inhibit apoptosis induced by supernatants from B.
abortus-infected monocytes and neutrophils. Moreover, B. abortus infection
increased soluble and membrane RANKL expression in synoviocytes that further
induced monocytes to undergo osteoclastogenesis. The results presented here shed 
light on how the interactions of B. abortus with synovial fibroblasts may have an
important role in the pathogenesis of brucellar arthritis.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01366-12 
PMCID: PMC3676039
PMID: 23509146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

