
1. J Gen Microbiol. 1989 Feb;135(Pt 2):409-24.

Factors affecting conjugal transfer of plasmids encoding mercury resistance from 
pure cultures and mixed natural suspensions of epilithic bacteria.

Rochelle PA(1), Fry JC, Day MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biology, University of Wales Institute of Science and
Technology, Cardiff, UK.

Sixty-five pure cultures of epilithic bacteria were examined for their ability to
transfer mercury resistance to Pseudomonas aeruginosa; five isolates transferred 
plasmids encoding mercury resistance with frequencies ranging from 8.4 x 10(-8)
to 2.8 x 10(-3) per recipient. Two of the plasmids, pQM3 and pQM4, encoded
narrow-spectrum mercury resistance, pQM3 also encoded streptomycin resistance,
and both plasmids were broad host range. Maximum transfer frequencies of
epilithic plasmids from pure cultures occurred over the range 10-25 degrees C at 
3.5 g C l-1 and with donor to recipient ratios of 0.4-30. Transfer occurred over 
a range of pH values (pH 5.0-8.0) but the effect of pH was most significant at
non-optimal temperature. Anaerobiosis inhibited transfer of one epilithic
plasmid, pQM1, but not that of pQM3. Plasmids encoding mercury resistance were
also transferred from mixed natural suspensions of epilithic bacteria (MNS) to
Pseudomonas spp. on agar in the laboratory. Transfer from MNS occurred over a
wide range of environmentally relevant conditions with maximum frequencies (2 x
10(-5) per recipient) after 24 h, at 25 degrees C, pH 5.5-8.0 and on a medium
containing 10 g C l-1. The optimal initial cell density of MNS and recipient was 
1.7 x 10(5) c.f.u. cm-2 and highest frequencies were obtained with donor to
recipient ratios ranging from 1.2 x 10(-1) to 1.7 x 10(-3). Most of the plasmids 
(54%) from MNS transferred from their original P. aeruginosa transconjugants to a
Pseudomonas putida strain, with frequencies ranging from 1.1 x 10(-6) to greater 
than 1.0 x 10(-1) per recipient. The majority (80%) of the plasmids were larger
than 300 kb and all of these large plasmids encoded UV resistance in addition to 
mercury resistance. Twenty-one plasmids greater than 300 kb were analysed by
restriction digests and were shown to be similar, with only minor structural
alterations. One of these alterations was associated with the acquisition of
streptomycin resistance. Overall, these results suggest that the epilithic
bacteria examined possess the potential to transfer mercury resistance within the
epilithon under a wide range of environmentally relevant conditions.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-135-2-409 
PMID: 2515247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

