
1. Physiol Genomics. 2017 Nov 1;49(11):682-689. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00066.2017. Epub 2017 Sep 22.

Role of G protein-coupled receptor kinase-6 in Escherichia coli lung infection
model in mice.

Lee T(1), Packiriswamy N(1), Lee E(1), Lucas PC(2), McCabe LR(1), Parameswaran
N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan;
and.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(3)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan;
and narap@msu.edu.

G protein-coupled receptor kinase-6 (GRK6) is a serine/threonine kinase that is
important in inflammatory processes. In this study, we examined the role of GRK6 
in Escherichia coli-induced lung infection and inflammation using GRK6 knockout
(KO) and wild-type (WT) mice. Intratracheal instillation of E. coli significantly
enhanced bacterial load in the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) of KO compared with
WT mice. Reduced bacterial clearance in the KO mice was not due to an intrinsic
defect in neutrophil phagocytosis or killing but as a result of reduced
neutrophil numbers in the KO BAL. Interestingly, neutrophil numbers in the lung
were increased in the KO compared with WT mice, suggesting a potential
dysfunction in transepithelial migration of neutrophils from the lungs to the
bronchoalveolar space. This effect was selective for lung tissue because
peritoneal neutrophil numbers were similar between the two genotypes following
peritoneal infection. Although neutrophil expression of CXCR2/CXCR3 was similar
between WT and KO, IL-17A expression was higher in the KO compared with WT mice. 
These results suggest that enhanced neutrophil count in the KO lungs but reduced 
numbers in BAL are likely due to transepithelial migration defect and/or altered 
chemokines/cytokines. Together, our studies suggest a previously unrecognized and
novel role for GRK6 in neutrophil migration specific to pulmonary tissue during
bacterial infection.

Copyright Â© 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00066.2017 
PMCID: PMC5792138
PMID: 28939643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

