
1. Autophagy. 2021 Aug;17(8):1918-1933. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2020.1801270. Epub
2020 Aug 11.

Burkholderia pseudomallei interferes with host lipid metabolism via
NR1D2-mediated PNPLA2/ATGL suppression to block autophagy-dependent inhibition of
infection.

Tang M(1)(2), Hu Z(1), Rao C(1), Chen J(1)(3), Yuan S(1)(2), Zhang J(4), Mao
C(1), Yan J(1), Xia Y(1), Zhang M(1), Yue J(1), Xiang Y(1), Xie J(2), Mao X(1),
Li Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, College of Pharmacy and
Medical Laboratory, Army Medical University (Third Military Medical University), 
Chongqing, China.
(2)Institute of Modern Biopharmaceuticals, State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of 
Eco-Environment and Bio-Resource of the Three Gorges Area, Key Laboratory of
Eco-environments in Three Gorges Reservoir Region, Ministry of Education, School 
of Life Sciences, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Department of General Medicine, Southwest Hospital, Army Medical University
(Third Military Medical University), Chongqing, China.
(4)Clinical Medicine Research Center, Xinqiao Hospital, Army Medical University
(Third Military Medical University), Chongqing, China.

Burkholderia pseudomallei: which causes melioidosis with high mortality in
humans, has become a global public health concern. Recently, infection-driven
lipid droplet accumulation has been related to the progression of host-pathogen
interactions, and its contribution to the pathogenesis of infectious disease has 
been investigated. Here, we demonstrated that B. pseudomallei infection actively 
induced a time-dependent increase in the number and size of lipid droplets in
human lung epithelial cells and macrophages. We also found that lipid droplet
accumulation following B. pseudomallei infection was associated with
downregulation of PNPLA2/ATGL (patatin like phospholipase domain containing 2)
and lipophagy inhibition. Functionally, lipid droplet accumulation, facilitated
via PNPLA2 downregulation, inhibited macroautophagic/autophagic flux and, thus,
hindered autophagy-dependent inhibition of B. pseudomallei infection in lung
epithelial cells. Mechanistically, we further revealed that nuclear receptor
NR1D2 might be involved in the suppression of PNPLA2 after cell exposure to B.
pseudomallei. Taken together, our findings unraveled an evolutionary strategy, by
which B. pseudomallei interferes with the host lipid metabolism, to block
autophagy-dependent suppression of infection. This study proposes potential
targets for clinical therapy of melioidosis.Abbreviations: 3-MA: 3-methyladenine;
ACTB: actin beta; ATG7: autophagy related 7; B. pseudomallei: Burkholderia
pseudomallei; CFU: colony-forming unit; DG: diglyceride; FASN: fatty acid
synthase; GFP: green fluorescent protein; LAMP1: lysosomal associated membrane
protein 1; LC-MS/MS: liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry; LD: lipid
droplet; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MG: 
monoglyceride; MOI: multiplicity of infection; mRFP: monomeric red fluorescent
protein; NR1D2: nuclear receptor subfamily 1 group D member 2; p.i.,
post-infection; PLIN2/ADRP: perilipin 2; PNPLA2/ATGL: patatin like phospholipase 
domain containing 2; Rapa: rapamycin; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; shRNA: short
hairpin RNA; TEM: transmission electron microscopy; TG: triglyceride.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2020.1801270 
PMCID: PMC8386627
PMID: 32777979 

