
1. J Immunol. 2003 Feb 1;170(3):1174-82.

IFN-alpha beta released by Mycobacterium tuberculosis-infected human dendritic
cells induces the expression of CXCL10: selective recruitment of NK and activated
T cells.

Lande R(1), Giacomini E, Grassi T, Remoli ME, Iona E, Miettinen M, Julkunen I,
Coccia EM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Istituto Superiore di Sanit√†, Rome, Italy.

We recently reported that dendritic cells (DC) infected with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (Mtb) produce Th1/IFN-gamma-inducing cytokines, IFN-alpha beta and
IL-12. In the present article, we show that maturing Mtb-infected DC express high
levels of CCR7 and they become responsive to its ligand CCL21. Conversely, CCR5
expression was rapidly lost from the cell surface following Mtb infection. High
levels of CCL3 and CCL4 were produced within 8 h after infection, which is likely
to account for the observed CCR5 down-modulation on Mtb-infected DC. In addition,
Mtb infection stimulated the secretion of CXCL9 and CXCL10. Interestingly, the
synthesis of CXCL10 was mainly dependent on the Mtb-induced production of
IFN-alpha beta. Indeed, IFN-alpha beta neutralization down-regulated CXCL10
expression, whereas the expression of CXCL9 appeared to be unaffected. The
chemotactic activity of the Mtb-infected DC supernatants was evaluated by
migration assays using activated NK, CD4(+), and CD8(+) cells that expressed both
CCR5 and CXCR3. Mtb-induced expression of CCL3, CCL4, CXCL9, and CXCL10 was
involved in the stimulation of NK and T cell migration. In accordance with the
data on the IFN-alpha beta-induced expression of CXCL10, neutralization of
IFN-alpha beta significantly reduced the chemotactic activity of the supernatant 
from Mtb-infected DC. This indicates that IFN-alpha beta may modulate the immune 
response through the expression of CXCL10, which along with CXCL9, CCL3, and CCL4
participates in the recruitment and selective homing of activated/effector cells,
which are known to accumulate at the site of Mtb infection and take part in the
formation of the granulomas.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.3.1174 
PMID: 12538673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

