
1. Cancer Lett. 2003 Aug 20;198(2):161-8.

Enhancement by interleukin-1 beta of gastric carcinogenesis induced by
N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine in Wistar rats: a possible mechanism for
Helicobacter pylori-associated gastric carcinogenesis.

Uedo N(1), Tatsuta M, Iishi H, Baba M, Yano H, Ishihara R, Higashino K, Ishiguro 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Oncology, Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and
Cardiovascular Diseases, 3-3, Nakamichi 1-chome, Higashinari-ku, Osaka 537-8511, 
Japan. uedo-no@mc.pref.osaka.jp

The effect of prolonged administration of the cytokine interleukin (IL)-1beta on 
gastric carcinogenesis induced by N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG) was
examined in Wistar rats. In addition, we examined the effects on the
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) labeling index and the hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF) immunoreactivity of the gastric mucosa. The rats received
intraperitoneal injections of 0.1 or 0.3 microg/kg body weight of IL-1beta every 
other day after oral treatment with MNNG for 25 weeks. Long-term administration
of IL-1beta at high dose, but not at low dose, significantly increased the
incidence of gastric cancer in week 52. Administration of IL-1beta at high dose
also significantly increased the labeling index and the HGF immunoreactivity of
the gastric antral mucosa, and induced inflammatory cell infiltration and
glandular atrophy of the gastric mucosa. Because IL-1beta production in the
gastric mucosa is increased in patients with Helicobacter pylori-associated
gastritis and eradiation of the organism significantly decreases the IL-1beta
production, these findings suggest that Helicobacter pylori-associated gastric
carcinogenesis may be in part mediated through IL-1beta.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3835(03)00342-2 
PMID: 12957354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

