
1. Eur J Immunol. 2003 Dec;33(12):3322-30.

Critical role of Valpha14+ natural killer T cells in the innate phase of host
protection against Streptococcus pneumoniae infection.

Kawakami K(1), Yamamoto N, Kinjo Y, Miyagi K, Nakasone C, Uezu K, Kinjo T,
Nakayama T, Taniguchi M, Saito A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Graduate
School and Faculty of Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan.
kawakami@med.u-ryukyu.ac.jp

The present study was designed to elucidate the role of Valpha14(+) NKT cells in 
the host defense against pulmonary infection with Streptococcus pneumoniae using 
Jalpha281 gene-disrupted mice (Jalpha281KO mice) that lacked this lymphocyte
subset. In these mice, pneumococcal infection was severely exacerbated, as shown 
by the shorter survival time and marked increase of live bacteria in the lung
compared to wild-type (WT) mice. The proportion of Valpha14(+) NKT cells,
detected by an alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer)-loaded CD1d tetramer,
increased in thelung after S. pneumoniae infection. This increase was
significantly reduced in mice with a genetic disruption of monocyte chemotactic
protein (MCP)-1, which was produced in the early phaseof infection in WT mice. In
the lungs of Jalpha281KO mice, the number of neutrophils was significantly lower 
at 12 h than that in WT mice. In support of this finding, macrophage inflammatory
protein (MIP)-2 and TNF-alpha synthesis in infected lungs was significantly
reduced at 3 h and at both 3 and 6 h, respectively, in Jalpha281KO mice, compared
to WT mice. In addition, treatment of mice with alpha-GalCer significantly
improved the outcome of this infection. Our results demonstrated MCP-1-dependent 
recruitment of Valpha14(+) NKT cells and their critical role in early host
protection against S. pneumoniae by promoting the trafficking of neutrophils to
the site of infection.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200324254 
PMID: 14635040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

