
1. J Exp Med. 2004 Oct 4;200(7):905-16. Epub 2004 Sep 27.

Chlamydia inhibit host cell apoptosis by degradation of proapoptotic BH3-only
proteins.

Fischer SF(1), Vier J, Kirschnek S, Klos A, Hess S, Ying S, Häcker G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Technische Universität München, D-81675
Munich, Germany.

Chlamydia are obligate intracellular bacteria that replicate in a vacuole inside 
a host cell. Chlamydial infection has been shown to protect the host cell against
apoptotic stimuli. This is likely important for the ability of Chlamydia to
reproduce in human cells. Here we show that resistance to apoptosis is conveyed
by the destruction of the proapoptotic BH3-only proteins Bim/Bod, Puma, and Bad
during infection. Apoptotic stimuli were blocked upstream of the mitochondrial
activation of Bax/Bak. During infection with both species, Chlamydia trachomatis 
and Chlamydia pneumoniae, Bim protein gradually disappeared without noticeable
changes in Bim mRNA. The disappearance was blocked by inhibitors of the
proteasome. Infected cells retained sensitivity to Bim expressed by transfection,
indicating functional relevance of the Bim disappearance. Fusion to Bim targeted 
the green fluorescent protein for destruction during infection. Analysis of
truncation mutants showed that a short region of Bim containing the BH3 domain
was sufficient for destruction during chlamydial infection. Like Bim, Puma and
Bad proteins disappeared during infection. These results reveal a novel way by
which microbes can interfere with the host cell's apoptotic machinery, and
provide a molecular explanation of the cellular resistance to apoptosis during
infection with Chlamydia.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20040402 
PMCID: PMC2213288
PMID: 15452181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

