
1. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Jun;35(6):1886-95.

New mechanisms of skin innate immunity: ASK1-mediated keratinocyte
differentiation regulates the expression of beta-defensins, LL37, and TLR2.

Sayama K(1), Komatsuzawa H, Yamasaki K, Shirakata Y, Hanakawa Y, Ouhara K,
Tokumaru S, Dai X, Tohyama M, Ten Dijke P, Sugai M, Ichijo H, Hashimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Ehime University School of Medicine, Ehime, Japan. 
sayama@m.ehime-u.ac.jp

Epidermal keratinocytes differentiate and form a multilayered epidermis, which is
the primary barrier between the body and the outer environment. As the epidermis 
is constantly exposed to a variety of microbial pathogens, its function of
resisting microbial pathogens is vital. This characteristic feature is formed
during differentiation. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the upper
epidermis of normal human skin expresses beta-defensins 1-3 and LL37. We
hypothesized that epidermal keratinocytes develop an innate immune barrier based 
on human beta-defensins (hBD) and LL37 during differentiation. To prove this, we 
introduced an active form of the apoptosis signal-regulating kinase-1 (ASK1), an 
intracellular regulator of keratinocyte differentiation, into cultured normal
human keratinocytes. Transfection of this active form, ASK1-DeltaN, significantly
enhanced the expression of hBD1-3 and LL37. In addition, a p38 inhibitor
abolished this induction, indicating that the ASK1-p38 cascade regulates the
expression of hBD1-3 and LL37. Furthermore, the ASK1-p38 pathway also regulated
the expression of Toll-like receptor (TLR)2 in keratinocytes. Contact between S. 
aureus and keratinocytes resulted in the phosphorylation of p38 and induced the
expression of hBD2 and hBD3. Moreover, the p38 inhibitor reduced this induction. 
In conclusion, the ASK1-p38 cascade regulates the innate immunity of the skin by 
forming an immune barrier consisting of hBD, LL37, and TLR2 during epidermal
differentiation.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200425827 
PMID: 15864780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

