
1. J Immunol. 2006 May 1;176(9):5306-13.

Induction of CTLA-4-mediated anergy contributes to persistent colonization in the
murine model of gastric Helicobacter pylori infection.

Anderson KM(1), Czinn SJ, Redline RW, Blanchard TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, 
11100 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Helicobacter pylori infection induces gastric inflammation but the host fails to 
generate protective immunity. Therefore, we evaluated the immunologic mechanisms 
that contribute to the failure of the T cells to promote active immunity to H.
pylori in the mouse model of H. pylori infection. Spleen cells from infected
C57BL/6 mice underwent significantly less proliferation and cytokine production
than cells from immune mice upon in vitro stimulation with H. pylori lysate.
Similar results were observed when stimulating with Ag-pulsed macrophages
demonstrating that hyporesponsiveness was not due to a direct effect of H. pylori
virulence factors on the T cells. Ag-specific hyporesponsiveness could be
reversed by the addition of high-dose IL-2 but not by removal of CD4(+)CD25(+) T 
cells, indicating that hyporesponsiveness was due to anergy and not due to active
suppression. Cells from infected mice lacked significant suppressor activity as
shown by the failure to reduce the recall response of cells from immune mice in
coculture at physiologic ratios. Direct blockade of CTLA-4 using anti-CTLA-4 Fabs
or indirect blockade using CTLA-4 Ig plus anti-CD28 Ab resulted in significantly 
increased T cell activation in vitro. The importance of CTLA-4 in establishing
anergy was confirmed in an in vivo model of H. pylori infection in which mice
that received anti-CTLA-4 Fabs responded to H. pylori challenge with
significantly greater inflammation and significantly reduced bacterial load.
These results suggest that CTLA-4 engagement induces and maintains functional
inactivation of H. pylori-specific T cells during H. pylori infection resulting
in a reduced immune response.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.9.5306 
PMID: 16621997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

