
1. PLoS Pathog. 2006 May;2(5):e45. Epub 2006 May 19.

Recruitment of BAD by the Chlamydia trachomatis vacuole correlates with host-cell
survival.

Verbeke P(1), Welter-Stahl L, Ying S, Hansen J, Häcker G, Darville T, Ojcius DM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, Université Paris-Denis Diderot, Paris, France.

Chlamydiae replicate intracellularly in a vacuole called an inclusion.
Chlamydial-infected host cells are protected from mitochondrion-dependent
apoptosis, partly due to degradation of BH3-only proteins. The host-cell adapter 
protein 14-3-3beta can interact with host-cell apoptotic signaling pathways in a 
phosphorylation-dependent manner. In Chlamydia trachomatis-infected cells,
14-3-3beta co-localizes to the inclusion via direct interaction with a C.
trachomatis-encoded inclusion membrane protein. We therefore explored the
possibility that the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K) pathway may contribute 
to resistance of infected cells to apoptosis. We found that inhibition of PI3K
renders C. trachomatis-infected cells sensitive to staurosporine-induced
apoptosis, which is accompanied by mitochondrial cytochrome c release. 14-3-3beta
does not associate with the Chlamydia pneumoniae inclusion, and inhibition of
PI3K does not affect protection against apoptosis of C. pneumoniae-infected
cells. In C. trachomatis-infected cells, the PI3K pathway activates AKT/protein
kinase B, which leads to maintenance of the pro-apoptotic protein BAD in a
phosphorylated state. Phosphorylated BAD is sequestered via 14-3-3beta to the
inclusion, but it is released when PI3K is inhibited. Depletion of AKT through
short-interfering RNA reverses the resistance to apoptosis of C.
trachomatis-infected cells. BAD phosphorylation is not maintained and it is not
recruited to the inclusion of Chlamydia muridarum, which protects poorly against 
apoptosis. Thus, sequestration of BAD away from mitochondria provides C.
trachomatis with a mechanism to protect the host cell from apoptosis via the
interaction of a C. trachomatis-encoded inclusion protein with a host-cell
phosphoserine-binding protein.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0020045 
PMCID: PMC1463014
PMID: 16710454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

