
1. Br J Dermatol. 2009 May;160(5):929-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2009.09102.x.

Psoriasis and streptococci: the natural selection of psoriasis revisited.

McFadden JP(1), Baker BS, Powles AV, Fry L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cutaneous Allergy, St John's Institute of Dermatology, St
Thomas' Hospital, London SE1 7EH, UK. john.mcfadden@kcl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2009 Sep;161(3):706-7.

We have previously postulated that surviving invasive streptococcal infections
may have been a factor in psoriasis becoming a common skin disease in some parts 
of the world. Many of the candidate genes linked to psoriasis are associated with
the acquired or innate immune system, which are also important in host defence to
invasive streptococcal infections. High rates of positive streptococcal throat
swabs among patients with chronic plaque psoriasis suggest that they are
efficient at internalizing/carrying beta-haemolytic streptococci. Internalization
of streptococci in the throat is dependent upon the transforming growth factor
(TGF)-beta/fibronectin/alpha 5 beta 1 integrin pathway. The immune cell Th17 and 
its related cytokine network are important in mucosal defence, being very
effective against extracellular microbes but having little effect on
intracellular organisms. The TGF-beta/fibronectin/alpha 5 beta 1 integrin pathway
and the Th17 cell network also appear to be operative in psoriasis, animal models
of both TGF-beta and alpha 5 beta 1 cutaneous overexpression being associated
with characteristic psoriasis lesions. We postulate that some of the
genotypic/phenotypic changes in different immunological pathways in psoriasis,
including the acquired T-cell response, the innate immune response, the
TGF-beta/fibronectin/alpha 5 beta 1 integrin pathway and the Th17 cell system,
confer protection against mortality during epidemics of invasive streptococcal
infections, heightened efficiency in internalizing and allowing carriage of
streptococci as well as predisposition to the development of psoriasis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2009.09102.x 
PMID: 19309365  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

