
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e47487. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047487. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

Interruption of CXCL13-CXCR5 axis increases upper genital tract pathology and
activation of NKT cells following chlamydial genital infection.

Jiang J(1), Karimi O, Ouburg S, Champion CI, Khurana A, Liu G, Freed A, Pleijster
J, Rozengurt N, Land JA, Surcel HM, Tiitinen A, Paavonen J, Kronenberg M, Morré
SA, Kelly KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United
States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(5). doi:10.1371/annotation/2b6aab70-3c92-490e-86f0-ae15787dfa6e.

BACKGROUND: Regulation of immune responses is critical for controlling
inflammation and disruption of this process can lead to tissue damage. We
reported that CXCL13 was induced in fallopian tube tissue following C.
trachomatis infection. Here, we examined the influence of the CXCL13-CXCR5 axis
in chlamydial genital infection.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Disruption of the CXCL13-CXCR5 axis by
injecting anti-CXCL13 Ab to BALB/c mice or using Cxcr5-/- mice increased chronic 
inflammation in the upper genital tract (UGT; uterine horns and oviducts) after
Chlamydia muridarum genital infection (GT). Further studies in Cxcr5-/- mice
showed an elevation in bacterial burden in the GT and increased numbers of
neutrophils, activated DCs and activated NKT cells early after infection. After
resolution, we noted increased fibrosis and the accumulation of a variety of T
cells subsets (CD4-IFNγ, CD4-IL-17, CD4-IL-10 & CD8-TNFα) in the oviducts. NKT
cell depletion in vitro reduced IL-17α and various cytokines and chemokines,
suggesting that activated NKT cells modulate neutrophils and DCs through
cytokine/chemokine secretion. Further, chlamydial glycolipids directly activated 
two distinct types of NKT cell hybridomas in a cell-free CD1d presentation assay 
and genital infection of Cd1d-/- mice showed reduced oviduct inflammation
compared to WT mice. CXCR5 involvement in pathology was also noted using
single-nucleotide polymorphism analysis in C. trachomatis infected women
attending a sub-fertility clinic. Women who developed tubal pathology after a C. 
trachomatis infection had a decrease in the frequency of CXCR5 SNP +10950 T>C
(rs3922).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These experiments indicate that disruption of the
CXCL13-CXCR5 axis permits increased activation of NKT cells by type I and type II
glycolipids of Chlamydia muridarum and results in UGT pathology potentially
through increased numbers of neutrophils and T cell subsets associated with UGT
pathology. In addition, CXCR5 appears to contribute to inter-individual
differences in human tubal pathology following C. trachomatis infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047487 
PMCID: PMC3506621
PMID: 23189125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

