
1. J Infect Dis. 2016 Aug 1;214(3):464-74. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiw152. Epub 2016 Apr
18.

Role of Interleukin 36γ in Host Defense Against Tuberculosis.

Ahsan F(1), Moura-Alves P(2), Guhlich-Bornhof U(2), Klemm M(2), Kaufmann SH(2),
Maertzdorf J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, and ZIBI
Graduate School Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Immunology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, and.

Tuberculosis remains a major killer worldwide, not the least because of our
incomplete knowledge of protective and pathogenic immune mechanism. The roles of 
the interleukin 1 (IL-1) and interleukin 18 pathways in host defense are well
established, as are their regulation through the inflammasome complex. In
contrast, the regulation of interleukin 36γ (IL-36γ), a recently described member
of the IL-1 family, and its immunological relevance in host defense remain
largely unknown. Here we show that Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection of
macrophages induces IL-36γ production in a 2-stage-regulated fashion. In the
first stage, microbial ligands trigger host Toll-like receptor and
MyD88-dependent pathways, leading to IL-36γ secretion. In the second stage,
endogenous IL-1β and interleukin 18 further amplify IL-36γ synthesis. The
relevance of this cytokine in the control of M. tuberculosis is demonstrated by
IL-36γ-induced antimicrobial peptides and IL-36 receptor-dependent restriction of
M. tuberculosis growth. Thus, we provide first insight into the induction and
regulation of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-36γ during tuberculosis.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiw152 
PMID: 27389350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

