
1. Scand J Immunol. 2018 Feb;87(2):80-87. doi: 10.1111/sji.12636. Epub 2017 Dec 19.

The Regulatory Role of the Oral Commensal Streptococcus mitis on Human Monocytes.

Engen SA(1), Schreurs O(1), Petersen F(1), Blix IJS(1)(2), Baekkevold ES(1)(3),
Schenck K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, Faculty of Dentistry, University of Oslo, Oslo,
Norway.
(2)Department of Periodontology, Faculty of Dentistry, University of Oslo, Oslo, 
Norway.
(3)Department of Pathology, Centre for Immune Regulation, University of Oslo and 
Oslo University Hospital - Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway.

Streptococcus mitis colonizes all niches of the human oral cavity from early
infancy and throughout life. Monocytes patrol blood vessels, lymphoid and
non-lymphoid tissues and migrate into infected tissue where they participate in
the inflammatory cascade and immune regulation. Here, we studied the effect of S.
mitis on monocytes. Transcriptome analysis of monocytes exposed to S. mitis
(SmMo) revealed increased transcription of chemotactic factors (CCL2, CCL3,
CCL20, CXCL1, CXCL2) and cytokines (IL1A, IL1B, IL6, IL23, IL36G, TNF),
indicating that S. mitis may trigger recruitment of leucocytes and initiate
inflammation. Increased transcription in SmMo of IL1B, IL6 and IL23 indicated
that S. mitis may participate in the induction of Th17 responses and agreed with 
our earlier findings of S. mitis-mediated memory Th17 reactivity. Furthermore, S.
mitis inhibited tetanus toxoid-specific CD4 T cell proliferation. This can be due
to the increased secretion of IL-10 and expression of PD-L1 that was observed in 
SmMo. PGE2 can modulate IL-10 and PD-L1 expression, concomitant with that of
CCR7, IL-12 and IL-23 that also were changed. This, along with increased SmMo
transcription of PTGS2 (COX2) and PTGER4 (EP4), pointed to a role of PGE2.
Measurement of PGE2 secretion by SmMo showed indeed a marked increase, and
chemical inhibition of PGE2 production lowered the PD-L1 expression on SmMo. In
conclusion, our findings show that S. mitis may trigger immune modulation by
recruiting immune cells to the site of infection, while at the same time
dampening the severity of the response through expression of IL-10, PGE2 and
PD-L1.

Â© 2017 The Foundation for the Scandinavian Journal of Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/sji.12636 
PMID: 29194752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

