
1. J Immunol. 2019 Jun 1;202(11):3246-3255. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1801688. Epub 2019
Apr 22.

A Requirement for Neutrophil Glycosaminoglycans in Chemokine:Receptor
Interactions Is Revealed by the Streptococcal Protease SpyCEP.

Goldblatt J(1)(2), Lawrenson RA(2), Muir L(1), Dattani S(1), Hoffland A(1)(3),
Tsuchiya T(4), Kanegasaki S(4), Sriskandan S(5), Pease JE(6)(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ,
United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, United
Kingdom.
(3)Asthma U.K. Centre in Allergic Mechanisms of Asthma, London, United Kingdom;
and.
(4)Research Institute, National Center for Global Health and Medicine,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8655, Japan.
(5)Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, United
Kingdom; j.pease@imperial.ac.uk s.sriskandan@imperial.ac.uk.
(6)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ,
United Kingdom; j.pease@imperial.ac.uk s.sriskandan@imperial.ac.uk.

To evade the immune system, the lethal human pathogen Streptococcus pyogenes
produces SpyCEP, an enzyme that cleaves the C-terminal α-helix of CXCL8,
resulting in markedly impaired recruitment of neutrophils to sites of invasive
infection. The basis for chemokine inactivation by SpyCEP is, however, poorly
understood, as the core domain of CXCL8 known to interact with CXCL8 receptors is
unaffected by enzymatic cleavage. We examined the in vitro migration of human
neutrophils and observed that their ability to efficiently navigate a CXCL8
gradient was compromised following CXCL8 cleavage by SpyCEP. SpyCEP-mediated
cleavage of CXCL8 also impaired CXCL8-induced migration of transfectants
expressing the human chemokine receptors CXCR1 or CXCR2. Despite possessing an
intact N terminus and preserved disulfide bonds, SpyCEP-cleaved CXCL8 had
impaired binding to both CXCR1 and CXCR2, pointing to a requirement for the
C-terminal α-helix. SpyCEP-cleaved CXCL8 had similarly impaired binding to the
glycosaminoglycan heparin. Enzymatic removal of neutrophil glycosaminoglycans was
observed to ablate neutrophil navigation of a CXCL8 gradient, whereas navigation 
of an fMLF gradient remained largely intact. We conclude, therefore, that SpyCEP 
cleavage of CXCL8 results in chemokine inactivation because of a requirement for 
glycosaminoglycan binding in productive chemokine:receptor interactions. This may
inform strategies to inhibit the activity of SpyCEP, but may also influence
future approaches to inhibit unwanted chemokine-induced inflammation.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1801688 
PMCID: PMC6526389
PMID: 31010851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

