
1. Immunol Lett. 1996 Jan;49(1-2):111-6.

The superantigen exfoliative toxin induces cutaneous lymphocyte-associated
antigen expression in peripheral human T lymphocytes.

Zollner TM(1), Munk ME, Keller T, Nuber V, Boehncke WH, Kaufmann SH, Duijvestijn 
AM, Sterry W, Kaufmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Frankfurt, Germany.

Several immune-mediated dermatoses including psoriasis and atopic dermatitis can 
be exacerbated by bacterial infections. Superantigen producing bacteria can be
isolated from skin lesions of these dermatoses. Consistent with superantigen
effects, skewed T cell receptor variable gene usage has been demonstrated within 
these lesions. Therefore, the question arises whether superantigen induce a
skin-seeking phenotype within peripheral T cells. In this study, we investigated 
the in vitro influence of the V beta 2-selective superantigen exfoliative toxin
from Staphylococcus aureus on the expression of the cutaneous
lymphocyte-associated antigen on peripheral T lymphocytes of healthy donors. We
demonstrate that exfoliative toxin dramatically upregulates cutaneous
lymphocyte-associated antigen expression on T cell receptor V beta 2+
lymphocytes. Up to 69% of V beta 2+ lymphocytes expressed cutaneous
lymphocyte-associated antigen after 5 days of in vitro culture. Additionally,
exfoliative toxin also increased cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen
expression in CD3+ T cell receptor V beta 2- lymphocytes indicating a different
effect as caused by the superantigen-T cell receptor V beta 2 interaction. Our
findings suggest influence of bacterial superantigens on T lymphocyte skin homing
in vivo.

DOI: 10.1016/0165-2478(95)02491-3 
PMID: 8964597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

