
1. Biodegradation. 1998;9(3-4):301-10.

Biotechnological possibilities for waste tyre-rubber treatment.

Holst O(1), Stenberg B, Christiansson M.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biotechnology, Lund University, Sweden.

Every year large amounts of spent rubber material, mainly from rubber tyres, are 
discarded. Of the annual total global production of rubber material, which
amounts to 16-17 million tonnes, approximately 65% is used for the production of 
tyres. About 250 millions spent car tyres are generated yearly in USA only. This 
huge amount of waste rubber material is an environmental problem of great
concern. Various ways to remediate the problem have been proposed. Among these
are road fillings and combustion in kilns. Spent tyres, however, comprise
valuable material that could be recycled if a proper technique can be developed. 
One way of recycling old tyres is to blend ground spent rubber with virgin
material followed by vulcanization. The main obstacle to this recycling is bad
adhesion between the crumb and matrix of virgin rubber material due to little
formation of interfacial sulphur crosslinks. Micro-organisms able to break
sulphur-sulphur and sulphur-carbon bonds can be used to devulcanize waste rubber 
in order to make polymer chains on the surface more flexible and facilitate
increased binding upon vulcanization. Several species belonging to both Bacteria 
and Archaea have this ability. Mainly sulphur oxidizing species, such as
different species of the genus Thiobacillus and thermoacidophiles of the order of
Sulfolobales, have been studied in this context. The present paper will give a
background to the problem and an overview of the biotechnological possibilities
for solutions of waste rubber as an environmental problem, focusing on microbial 
desulphurization.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1008337708006 
PMID: 10022073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

