
1. Cell Immunol. 1999 Feb 25;192(1):63-71.

Differential expression and costimulatory effect of 4-1BB (CD137) and CD28
molecules on cytokine-induced murine CD8(+) Tc1 and Tc2 cells.

Vinay DS(1), Kwon BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, 635 Barnhill Drive, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202,
USA.

In this study we report that the relative expression of 4-1BB (CD137) and CD28
molecules can differentially be modulated on CD8(+) T cells by combinations of
various cytokines and anti-cytokine antibodies. During allostimulation of naive
CD8(+) T cells in the presence of IL-2, IFN-gamma, IL-12, and anti-IL-4, they
evolved into IL-2, IFN-gamma-producing Tc1 cells and showed inability to
upregulate 4-1BB expression but not CD28. On the other hand, the Tc2 cells,
generated in the presence of allogeneic APCs, IL-2, IL-10, IL-4, and
anti-IFN-gamma, demonstrated intact and elevated 4-1BB and CD28 molecules.
Activation of Tc1 and Tc2 cells with anti-CD3 and plate-bound anti-4-1BB and
anti-CD28 mAbs revealed differential proliferative and cytokine secretory
patterns. The 4-1BB signaling in the context of anti-CD3 as first signal led to
the increased secretion of IL-4 by the Tc2 cells and not by Tc1 cells, while CD28
triggering produced IL-4 from Tc2 and IL-2 and IFN-gamma from Tc1 cells. Flow
cytometric analysis of cell surface expression on Tc1 and Tc2 cells strengthened 
our observation that 4-1BB expression but not CD28 is poorly expressed on Tc1
cells. Both of the polarized CD8(+) T cell subsets exhibited comparable cytotoxic
abilities and perforin and granzyme expression. The regeneration of 4-1BB
expression is possible on Tc1 cells when back cultured in a Tc2 cytokine
environment, but its expression could not be significantly altered on the Tc2
population unless IL-12 was included in the system.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/cimm.1998.1433 
PMID: 10066348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

