
1. Nature. 1999 Mar 4;398(6722):84-90.

Structure of the amino-terminal domain of Cbl complexed to its binding site on
ZAP-70 kinase.

Meng W(1), Sawasdikosol S, Burakoff SJ, Eck MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1999 Mar 4;398(6722):22-3, 25.

Cbl is an adaptor protein that functions as a negative regulator of many
signalling pathways that start from receptors at the cell surface. The
evolutionarily conserved amino-terminal region of Cbl (Cbl-N) binds to
phosphorylated tyrosine residues and has cell-transforming activity. Point
mutations in Cbl that disrupt its recognition of phosphotyrosine also interfere
with its negative regulatory function and, in the case of v-cbl, with its
oncogenic potential. In T cells, Cbl-N binds to the tyrosine-phosphorylated
inhibitory site of the protein tyrosine kinase ZAP-70. Here we describe the
crystal structure of Cbl-N, both alone and in complex with a phosphopeptide that 
represents its binding site in ZAP-70. The structures show that Cbl-N is composed
of three interacting domains: a four-helix bundle (4H), an EF-hand
calcium-binding domain, and a divergent SH2 domain that was not recognizable from
the amino-acid sequence of the protein. The calcium-bound EF hand wedges between 
the 4H and SH2 domains and roughly determines their relative orientation. In the 
ligand-occupied structure, the 4H domain packs against the SH2 domain and
completes its phosphotyrosine-recognition pocket. Disruption of this binding to
ZAP-70 as a result of structure-based mutations in the 4H, EF-hand and SH2
domains confirms that the three domains together form an integrated
phosphoprotein-recognition module.

DOI: 10.1038/18050 
PMID: 10078535  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

