
1. J Clin Microbiol. 1999 Apr;37(4):1035-44.

Development and characterization of complex DNA fingerprinting probes for the
infectious yeast Candida dubliniensis.

Joly S(1), Pujol C, Rysz M, Vargas K, Soll DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, 
USA.

Using a strategy to clone large genomic sequences containing repetitive elements 
from the infectious yeast Candida dubliniensis, the three unrelated sequences
Cd1, Cd24, and Cd25, with respective molecular sizes of 15,500, 10,000, and
16,000 bp, were cloned and analyzed for their efficacy as DNA fingerprinting
probes. Each generated a complex Southern blot hybridization pattern with
endonuclease-digested genomic DNA. Cd1 generated an extremely variable pattern
that contained all of the bands of the pattern generated by the repeat element
RPS of Candida albicans. We demonstrated that Cd1 does not contain RPS but does
contain a repeat element associated with RPS throughout the C. dubliniensis
genome. The Cd1 pattern was the least stable over time both in vitro and in vivo 
and for that reason proved most effective in assessing microevolution. Cd24,
which did not exhibit microevolution in vitro, was highly variable in vivo,
suggesting in vivo-dependent microevolution. Cd25 was deemed the best probe for
broad epidemiological studies, since it was the most stable over time, was the
only truly C. dubliniensis-specific probe of the three, generated the most
complex pattern, was distributed throughout all C. dubliniensis chromosomes, and 
separated a worldwide collection of 57 C. dubliniensis isolates into two distinct
groups. The presence of a species-specific repetitive element in Cd25 adds weight
to the already substantial evidence that C. dubliniensis represents a bona fide
species.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.37.4.1035-1044.1999 
PMCID: PMC88646
PMID: 10074523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

