
1. J Med Entomol. 1999 Mar;36(2):182-5.

Comparative vector competence of Dermacentor variabilis and Ixodes scapularis
(Acari: Ixodidae) for the agent of human granulocytic ehrlichiosis.

Des Vignes F(1), Levin ML, Fish D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06520-8034, USA.

Vector competence of Ixodes scapularis Say and Dermacentor variabilis Say for the
agent of human granulocytic ehrlichiosis (HGE) was compared. Five white-footed
mice, Peromyscus leucopus Rafinesque, were inoculated intra-peritoneally with
blood from a mouse infected with the agent of HGE. Approximately 100 I.
scapularis and D. variabilis larvae were placed on each mouse and allowed to feed
to repletion. Fed larvae were collected, separated according to species and
allowed to molt to nymphs. Twenty-six per cent of I. scapularis (34/131) and 11% 
of D. variabilis (11/96) tested positive for the agent of HGE by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) after molting to nymphs. Positive I. scapularis nymphs transmitted
the agent of HGE to P. leucopus mice in 5 of 5 trials. In contrast, the positive 
D. variabilis nymphs did not transmit the agent of agent of HGE in any of 6
trials. In a 2nd experiment, 3 P. leucopus mice were infested with I. scapularis 
nymphs that were infected with the agent of HGE. All 3 mice became infected with 
the agent of HGE and approximately 300 D. variabilis larvae were placed on each
mouse and allowed to feed to repletion. Larvae were collected and allowed to molt
to nymphs as before. Approximately 8% (5/60) of the nymphs became positive for
the agent of HGE as determined by PCR. Twenty-five of these nymphs were then
placed on each of 9 P. leucopus mice and allowed to feed to repletion. Evidence
of transmission was not observed in any of 9 mice exposed to D. variabilis
nymphs. These results demonstrate that although I. scapularis is a competent
vector of the agent of the HGF, D. variabilis is not.

DOI: 10.1093/jmedent/36.2.182 
PMID: 10083755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

