
1. Infect Immun. 1999 Apr;67(4):1623-32.

Lipoteichoic acid acts as an antagonist and an agonist of lipopolysaccharide on
human gingival fibroblasts and monocytes in a CD14-dependent manner.

Sugawara S(1), Arakaki R, Rikiishi H, Takada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University School of
Dentistry, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. sugawars@mail.cc.tohoku.ac.jp

CD14 has been implicated as a receptor of lipoteichoic acid (LTA) and other
bacterial components as well as lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Since the structures of
LTAs from various gram-positive bacteria are heterogeneous, we analyzed the
effects of LTAs on the secretion of interleukin-8 (IL-8) by high- and
low-CD14-expressing (CD14(high) and CD14(low)) human gingival fibroblasts (HGF). 
While Bacillus subtilis LTA had an IL-8-inducing effect on CD14(high) HGF which
was considerably weaker than that of LPS, Streptococcus sanguis and Streptococcus
mutans LTAs had practically no effect on the cells. B. subtilis LTA had only a
weak effect on CD14(low) HGF, as did LPS. S. sanguis and S. mutans LTAs at a
1,000-fold excess each completely inhibited the IL-8-inducing activities of both 
LPS and a synthetic lipid A on CD14(high) HGF. The effect of LPS was also
inhibited by the presence of an LPS antagonist, synthetic lipid A precursor IVA
(LA-14-PP), with a 100-fold higher potency than S. sanguis and S. mutans LTAs and
by anti-CD14 monoclonal antibody (MAb). S. sanguis and S. mutans LTAs, LA-14-PP, 
and anti-CD14 MAb had no significant effect on phorbol myristate
acetate-stimulated IL-8 secretion by HGF. These LTAs also inhibited the
IL-8-inducing activity of B. subtilis LTA on CD14(high) HGF, as did LA-14-PP and 
anti-CD14 MAb. The antagonistic and agonistic functions of LTAs were also
observed with human monocytes. Binding of fluorolabeled LPS to human monocytes
was inhibited by S. sanguis LTA, although the inhibition was 100 times weaker
than that of LPS itself, and anti-CD14 MAb inhibited fluorolabeled LPS and S.
sanguis LTA binding. Binding of LTAs to CD14 was also observed with nondenaturing
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. These results indicate that LTAs act as
antagonists or agonists via a CD14-dependent mechanism, probably due to the
heterogeneous structure of LTAs, and that an antagonistic LTA might be a useful
agent for suppressing the periodontal disease caused by gram-negative bacteria.


PMCID: PMC96505
PMID: 10084995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

