
1. J Leukoc Biol. 1999 Mar;65(3):372-80.

Flt3 signaling involves tyrosyl-phosphorylation of SHP-2 and SHIP and their
association with Grb2 and Shc in Baf3/Flt3 cells.

Zhang S(1), Mantel C, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, and the Walther Oncology Center,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis 46202-5254, USA.

Flt3 ligand (FL) is an early-acting potent co-stimulatory cytokine that regulates
proliferation and differentiation of a number of blood cell lineages. Its
receptor Flt3/Flk2 belongs to class III receptor tyrosine kinases that also
include the receptors for colony-stimulating factor 1, Steel factor, and
platelet-derived growth factor. Using CSF-1 receptor/Flt3 chimeras, two groups
have characterized some of the post-receptor signaling events and substrate
specificity of murine Flt3 receptor. However, there are few studies on the
signaling pathway through human Flt3. We examined human Flt3 signaling pathways
in a murine IL-3-dependent hematopoietic cell line Baf3, which stably expresses
full-length human Flt3 receptor. This subline proliferates in response to human
FL. Like the chimeric murine Flt3, human Flt3 undergoes autophosphorylation,
associates with Grb2, and leads to tyrosine phosphorylation of Shc on ligand
binding. We found that SHP-2, but not SHP-1, is tyrosine-phosphorylated by FL
stimulation. SHP-2 does not associate with Flt3, but binds directly to Grb2. SHIP
is also tyrosine-phosphorylated and associates with Shc after FL simulation. We
further examined the downstream signaling pathway. FL transiently activates MAP
kinase. This activation could be blocked by PD98059, a specific MEK inhibitor.
PD98059 also blocked cell proliferation in response to FL. These results
demonstrate that SHP-2 and SHIP are important components in the human Flt3
signaling pathway and suggest that SHP-2 and SHIP, by forming complexes with
adapter proteins Grb2 and Shc, may modulate MAP kinase activation, which may be
necessary for the mitogenic signaling of Flt3.

DOI: 10.1002/jlb.65.3.372 
PMID: 10080542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

