
1. Thorax. 1999 Apr;54(4):339-46.

Phenotypic analysis of lymphocytes and monocytes/macrophages in peripheral blood 
and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis.

Wahlström J(1), Berlin M, Sköld CM, Wigzell H, Eklund A, Grunewald J.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumour Biology Centre, Karolinska Institutet, S-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The granulomatous inflammation in sarcoidosis is driven by the
interplay between T cells and macrophages. To gain a better understanding of this
process the expression by these cells of cell surface activation markers,
co-stimulatory molecules, and adhesion molecules was analysed.
METHODS: CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes from peripheral blood (PBL) or
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid, as well as paired peripheral blood monocytes 
and alveolar macrophages from 27 patients with sarcoidosis were analysed by flow 
cytometry.
RESULTS: CD26, CD54, CD69, CD95, and gp240 were all overexpressed in T cells from
BAL fluid compared with those from PBL in both the CD4+ and CD8+ subsets, while
CD57 was overexpressed only in BAL CD4+ cells. In contrast, CD28 tended to be
underexpressed in the BAL T cells. Monocyte/macrophage markers included CD11a,
CD11b, CD11c, CD14, CD16, CD54, CD71, CD80 and CD86 and HLA class II. CD11a
expression in alveolar macrophages (and peripheral blood monocytes) was increased
in patients with active disease and correlated positively with the percentage of 
BAL lymphocytes. Expression of CD80 in macrophages correlated with the BAL
CD4/CD8 ratio.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate substantial activation of both CD4+ and CD8+ lung 
T cells in sarcoidosis. There were also increased numbers of BAL lymphocytes
whose phenotypic characteristics have earlier been associated with clonally
expanded, replicatively senescent cells of the Th1 type.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.54.4.339 
PMCID: PMC1745457
PMID: 10092696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

