
1. J Bacteriol. 1999 Apr;181(8):2477-84.

Isolation of Helicobacter pylori genes that modulate urease activity.

McGee DJ(1), May CA, Garner RM, Himpsl JM, Mobley HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Helicobacter pylori urease, a nickel-requiring metalloenzyme, hydrolyzes urea to 
NH3 and CO2. We sought to identify H. pylori genes that modulate urease activity 
by constructing pHP8080, a plasmid which encodes both H. pylori urease and the
NixA nickel transporter. Escherichia coli SE5000 and DH5alpha transformed with
pHP8080 resulted in a high-level urease producer and a low-level urease producer,
respectively. An H. pylori DNA library was cotransformed into SE5000 (pHP8080)
and DH5alpha (pHP8080) and was screened for cotransformants expressing either
lowered or heightened urease activity, respectively. Among the clones carrying
urease-enhancing factors, 21 of 23 contained hp0548, a gene that potentially
encodes a DNA helicase found within the cag pathogenicity island, and hp0511, a
gene that potentially encodes a lipoprotein. Each of these genes, when subcloned,
conferred a urease-enhancing activity in E. coli (pHP8080) compared with the
vector control. Among clones carrying urease-decreasing factors, 11 of 13 clones 
contained the flbA (also known as flhA) flagellar biosynthesis/regulatory gene
(hp1041), an lcrD homolog. The LcrD protein family is involved in type III
secretion and flagellar secretion in pathogenic bacteria. Almost no urease
activity was detected in E. coli (pHP8080) containing the subcloned flbA gene.
Furthermore, there was significantly reduced synthesis of the urease structural
subunits in E. coli (pHP8080) containing the flbA gene, as determined by Western 
blot analysis with UreA and UreB antiserum. Thus, flagellar biosynthesis and
urease activity may be linked in H. pylori. These results suggest that H. pylori 
genes may modulate urease activity.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.181.8.2477-2484.1999 
PMCID: PMC93674
PMID: 10198012  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

