
1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1999 May;159(5 Pt 1):1464-8.

HLA class II polymorphism in cystic fibrosis. A possible modifier of pulmonary
phenotype.

Aron Y(1), Polla BS, Bienvenu T, Dall'ava J, Dusser D, Hubert D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie Respiratoire, Service de Pneumologie, Laboratoire
de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, Universitaire Cochin Port-Royal, Cedex,
France.

Evolution of lung damage is highly variable in cystic fibrosis (CF) even in
patients with the same cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR)
mutations. The analysis of genetic factors other than CFTR may help our
understanding of genotype-phenotype relationships in CF. As human leukocyte
antigen (HLA) class II polymorphism has been associated with a number of diseases
including autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, asthma, and allergy, we
investigated the possibility that HLA polymorphism contributes to CF-associated
pulmonary inflammation. Among the 98 adult CF patients tested, the genotypic
frequencies of DR4 and DR7 alleles (serologic group DR53) and DR7/ DQA*0201
haplotype were higher than in 39 selected control subjects without atopy (p </=
10(-)6, relative risk [RR] = 22, and p </= 5.10(-)4, RR = 27, respectively) and
in a random population. No significant difference of these allelic distributions 
was found according to the CFTR genotype. In the CF patients, the DR7 allele was 
significantly associated with an increase in total IgE and with chronic
Pseudomonas aeruginosa colonization (100% of DR7 versus 83% of non-DR7 patients
being colonized, p < 0.05). Our results suggest that genetic factors known to
modulate the immune response might contribute to chronic infection with
Pseudomonas, increased total IgE, and pulmonary outcome in CF.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.159.5.9807046 
PMID: 10228112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

