
1. J Immunol. 1999 May 15;162(10):5910-6.

Triggering of murine NK cells by CD40 and CD86 (B7-2).

Martín-Fontecha A(1), Assarsson E, Carbone E, Kärre K, Ljunggren HG.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. Alfonso.Martin-Fontecha@mtc.ki.se

NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity is regulated by both triggering and inhibitory
signals. The interaction between MHC class I molecules expressed on target cells 
and specific MHC class I-binding receptors expressed by NK cells generally leads 
to inhibition of lysis. We have shown recently that CD80 (B7-1) in mice and CD40 
in humans trigger NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity in vitro. In the present study,
we show that murine CD40 and CD86 (B7-2) trigger murine NK cell-mediated
cytotoxicity in vitro when expressed on tumor cells. Preincubation of the
transfected cell lines with anti-CD40 F(ab')2 fragments or cytolytic T
lymphocyte-associated Ag-4-Ig (CTLA-4-Ig) before the cytotoxic assay abolished
the triggering effect. Furthermore, radiolabeled CD40- and B7-2-expressing cells 
were rapidly eliminated in vivo in an NK cell-dependent manner. NK cells from
CD40 ligand (CD40L)-/- or CD28-/- mice were triggered by tumor cells transfected 
with CD40 and B7-2, respectively, and these transfectants were rapidly eliminated
in vivo when inoculated into CD40L-/- and CD28-/- mice. This suggests that the
CD40 and B7-2 molecules can interact with receptors on NK cells other than CD40L 
and CD28, respectively, and that these may account for some of the reactivities
observed in the present study. Collectively, these data demonstrate that 1)
costimulatory molecules, other than B7-1, can modulate NK cell responses in
vitro, 2) they can also affect NK cell-dependent responses in vivo, and 3) parts 
of these reactions are independent of CD28 and CD40L.


PMID: 10229827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

