
1. Immunology. 1999 Apr;96(4):600-5.

A role for CD45RBlow CD38+ T cells and costimulatory pathways of T-cell
activation in protection of non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice from diabetes.

Martins TC(1), Aguas AP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, Department of Anatomy, Abel Salazar 
Institute for the Biomedical Sciences, University of Porto, Portugal.

Non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice spontaneously develop autoimmune insulin-dependent 
diabetes mellitus (IDDM). Infection of the animals with mycobacteria, or
immunization with mycobacteria-containing adjuvant, results in permanent
protection of NOD mice from diabetes and we have recently reported that the
phenomenon is associated with increased numbers of interferon-gamma-producing T
cells, possessing increased cytotoxic activity, and also with augmented numbers
of activated immunoglobulin M-positive (IgM+) B cells. Here, we have investigated
whether protection of NOD mice from IDDM was associated with changes on
costimulatory pathways of T and B cells, namely CD28/CTLA-4-B7 and CD40-CD40
ligand (CD40L) and we also further characterized protective T helper (Th) cells
with regards to the expression of the differentiation markers CD45RB and CD38. We
report that Th cells involved in diabetes vaccination of NOD mice by
mycobacterial infection seem to belong to CD45RBlo CD38+ phenotype. The
protective effect of Mycobacterium avium infection is also associated with
increased CD40L and CTLA-4- expressing Th cells and with the generation of a
CD40- IgG+ B cells. Our data are consistent with induction by mycobacterial
infection of regulatory CD45RBlo CD38+ Th cells with the ability to trigger
deletion or anergy of peripheral self-reactive lymphocytes, with shutting down of
IgG+ B-cell response. They also implicate a role for IgG+ B cells in the
autoimmune aggression of the endocrine pancreas of NOD mice.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2567.1999.00725.x 
PMCID: PMC2326776
PMID: 10233747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

