
1. Int Immunol. 1999 May;11(5):667-75.

Phenotypic analysis of CTLA-4 and CD28 expression during transient
peptide-induced T cell activation in vivo.

Metzler B(1), Burkhart C, Wraith DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Bristol School of
Medical Sciences, University Walk, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.

The T cell co-stimulatory receptors CD28 and CTLA-4 appear to have opposite
effects on T cell activation, mediating augmentation and inhibition of T cell
responses respectively. Since these two receptors use the same ligands, CD80
(B7-1) and CD86 (B7-2), the co-ordinate timing of CD28 and CTLA-4 expression has 
a major impact on the regulation of immune responses. While the kinetics of
co-stimulatory molecules have been established for T cell stimulation in vitro,
little is known about CD28 and CTLA-4 expression in response to T cell activation
in vivo. In this study we have investigated the kinetics of CD28 and CTLA-4
expression upon CD4(+) T cell activation in response to soluble peptide in vivo. 
Using mice transgenic for a T cell receptor specific for the I-Au-restricted
N-terminal peptide of myelin basic protein MBP Ac1-9, we show maximal
up-regulation of both CD28 and CTLA-4 2 days after peptide administration. CTLA-4
expression correlated positively with early activation markers on the same cells 
and was high on blast cells. Administration of peptide analogs with higher
affinity for I-Au MHC class II revealed a higher increase in CTLA-4 than in CD28 
expression in response to improved TCR ligation. Further, a small population of
CD4(+) T cells expressing CTLA-4, CD25 and CD45RBlow was identified in mice that 
had not been treated with specific peptide. The implications of these
observations for immune regulation are discussed.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/11.5.667 
PMID: 10330272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

