
1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 1999 May;43(1):83-90.

Effects of organic pollutants on soil microbial activity: the influence of
sorption, solubility, and speciation.

Welp G(1), Br√ºmmer GW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Soil Science, University of Bonn, Nussallee 13, Bonn, D-53115,
Germany.

The Fe(III) reduction test was used to measure the toxicity of 12 organic
chemicals [dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D), trichlorophenoxyacetic acid
(2,4,5-T), atrazine, picloram, 4-chlorobenzeneamine, pentachlorophenol (PCP),
hexachlorobenzene (HCB), 1,1-bis-4-chlorophenyl-2,2,2-trichloroethane (DDT),
trichloroethene, benzene, phenol, linear alkylbenzenesulfonate (LAS)]. The
different inherent toxicity of the pollutants is strongly modified by
interactions with the soils. The total amounts that cause 10, 50, and 90%
inhibitions (effective doses, ED10, ED50, ED90) can be statistically related to
soil parameters that control the sorption and solubility of the chemicals.
Sorption experiments with 2,4-D, 2,4,5-T, PCP, and LAS confirm that the degree of
sorption and the concentration in the soil solution are important for potential
toxic effects. However, toxic solution concentrations of a chemical (effective
concentrations, EC10, EC50, EC90) also vary considerably. For some chemicals the 
influence of soil pH on their speciation in the soil solution is mainly
responsible for this, e.g., the transformation from anionic to nonionic species
with decreasing pH. The nonionic species of 2,4-D, 2,4,5-T, and PCP formed under 
acidic conditions are more toxic than the anionic species. Thus, depending on the
chemical parameters of the soils that determine the degree of sorption and the
speciation of toxicants in the liquid phase, soils either can "buffer" high loads
of toxicants or can be very sensitive toward contamination.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/eesa.1999.1770 
PMID: 10330325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

