
1. Hepatology. 1999 Jun;29(6):1799-808.

The roles of intrahepatic Valpha14(+) NK1.1(+) T cells for liver injury induced
by Salmonella infection in mice.

Ishigami M(1), Nishimura H, Naiki Y, Yoshioka K, Kawano T, Tanaka Y, Taniguchi M,
Kakumu S, Yoshikai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host Defense and Germfree Life, Research Institute for Disease
Mechanism and Control, Nagoya, Japan.

To investigate the roles of intrahepatic T cells in liver injury after Salmonella
infection, we examined serum alanine transaminase (ALT), histopathology, and
bacterial numbers in liver after infection with Salmonella choleraesuis strain
31N-1 in mice genetically lacking TCRalpha beta+, CD4(+), CD8(+), or NK1.1(+)T
cells with C57BL/6 background. In control (+/+) mice, serum ALT reached a peak
level by day 7 after an intraperitoneal inoculation of 2 x 10(6) CFU Salmonella
choleraesuis 31N-1. In TCR-beta-/- mice, liver injury, as assessed by serum ALT
level and histological examination, was significantly suppressed on day 7 after
Salmonella infection but the numbers of bacteria in liver did not differ from
those in normal mice, suggesting that alpha beta T cells are responsible for
liver injury induced by Salmonella infection. To further determine which subsets 
in alpha beta T cells are important for the liver injury, we compared serum ALT
level in mice genetically lacking CD4, CD8, beta2-microglobulin (beta2m, IAbeta, 
or Jalpha281 after Salmonella infection. In CD4(-/-) mice, serum ALT was
significantly lower in comparison with control mice, but there was no difference 
in serum ALT levels in CD8(-/-) and IAbeta-/- mice from that in control mice.
Notably, serum ALT levels and pathological lesions in liver were significantly
decreased in beta2m-/- or Jalpha281(-/-) mice, which lacked in NK1.1(+) T cells
bearing TCR Valpha14-Jalpha281 specific for beta2m-associated CD1d, following
Salmonella infection. Taken together, it is suggested that alpha beta T cells
bearing NK1.1 and CD4 may be main effector cells for liver injury after
Salmonella infection.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.510290605 
PMID: 10347123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

