
1. Rev Med Chil. 1998 Nov;126(11):1323-9.

[Prognostic factors in acute bacterial meningitis in children. A case control
study].

[Article in Spanish]

Skarmeta M(1), Herrera P.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad de Chile, Facultad de Medicina, Departamento de Pediatría Norte,
Hospital Roberto del Río, Santiago de Chile.

BACKGROUND: The prognosis of acute bacterial meningitis continues to be poor in
our country. Previous studies suggest that the delay in diagnosis has an
important prognostic value.
AIM: To study the influence of diagnosis timing and the clinical conditions of
children with acute bacterial meningitis on admission on death and incidence of
gross sequelae.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Charts of children deceased or discharged with gross
sequelae as consequence of an acute bacterial meningitis were selected. To each
of these cases, 4 children with the same diagnosis but discharged in good
conditions were selected as controls. Variables recorded were time and number of 
visits previous to the diagnosis, etiology of meningitis, neurological,
respiratory, digestive and hemodynamic involvement on admission.
RESULTS: Fifty seven cases and 224 controls were studied. Most cases were 12
months old or less (OR 4.1, 95% CI = 1.97-8.7). Diagnosis made on the first visit
or within the first 24 hours of disease, improved prognosis (OR 0.25, 95% CI =
0.07-0.78). An age of less than 12 months and a diagnosis made after more than 12
hours of disease or after more than one consultation interacted multiplying their
effect on a dismal prognosis. Coma on admission (OR 7.95% CI = 3-14.3) and S
Pneumoniae etiology (OR 7, CI 95% = 3.4, 14.3) were also associated with a bad
prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Early diagnosis of acute bacterial meningitis is protective for
death or gross sequelae at discharge. Age, coma and S Pneumoniae etiology are the
main factors associated with a poor prognosis.


PMID: 10349175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

