
1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 18;274(25):17941-5.

Cytochrome c and dATP-mediated oligomerization of Apaf-1 is a prerequisite for
procaspase-9 activation.

Saleh A(1), Srinivasula SM, Acharya S, Fishel R, Alnemri ES.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Apoptosis Research and the Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

To elucidate the mechanism of activation of procaspase-9 by Apaf-1, we produced
recombinant full-length Apaf-1 and purified it to complete homogeneity. Here we
show using gel filtration that full-length Apaf-1 exists as a monomer that can be
transformed to an oligomeric complex made of at least eight subunits after
binding to cytochrome c and dATP. Apaf-1 binds to cytochrome c in the absence of 
dATP but does not form the oligomeric complex. However, when dATP is added to the
cytochrome c-bound Apaf-1 complex, complete oligomerization occurs, suggesting
that oligomerization is driven by hydrolysis of dATP. This was supported by the
observation that ATP, but not the nonhydrolyzable adenosine
5'-O-(thiotriphosphate), can induce oligomerization of the Apaf-1-cytochrome c
complex. Like the spontaneously oligomerizing Apaf-530, which lacks its WD-40
domain, the oligomeric full-length Apaf-1-cytochrome c complex can bind and
process procaspase-9 in the absence of additional dATP or cytochrome c. However, 
unlike the truncated Apaf-530 complex, the full-length Apaf-1 complex can release
the mature caspase-9 after processing. Once released, mature caspase-9 can
process procaspase-3, setting into motion the caspase cascade. These observations
indicate that cytochrome c and dATP are required for oligomerization of Apaf-1
and suggest that the WD-40 domain plays an important role in oligomerization of
full-length Apaf-1 and the release of mature caspase-9 from the Apaf-1 oligomeric
complex.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.25.17941 
PMID: 10364241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

