
1. Infect Immun. 1999 Jul;67(7):3542-7.

Mouse beta-defensin 3 is an inducible antimicrobial peptide expressed in the
epithelia of multiple organs.

Bals R(1), Wang X, Meegalla RL, Wattler S, Weiner DJ, Nehls MC, Wilson JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Human Gene Therapy, Department of Medicine and Molecular and
Cellular Engineering, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104,
USA.

One component of host defense at mucosal surfaces is epithelium-derived peptides 
with antimicrobial activity called defensins. We describe in this report the
isolation and characterization of a murine homologue of human beta-defensin 2
(hBD-2) called mouse beta-defensin 3 (mBD-3). The predicted amino acid sequence
shows the hallmark features of other known epithelial defensins, including the
ordered array of six cysteine residues. Analysis of a genomic clone of mBD-3
revealed two exons separated by a 1.7-kb intron. The mBD-3 gene is localized at
the proximal portion of chromosome 8, the site where genes for mouse alpha- and
beta-defensins are found. Under basal condition, mBD-3 transcripts were detected 
at low levels in epithelial cells of surface organs, such as the intestine and
lung. After instillation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 into mouse airways,
mBD-3-specific mRNA was upregulated significantly not only in large airways but
also in the small bowel and liver. Recombinant mBD-3 peptide, produced from a
baculovirus expression system, showed antimicrobial activity against P.
aeruginosa PAO1 (MIC of 8 micrograms/ml) and Escherichia coli D31 (MIC of 16
micrograms/ml) in a salt-dependent manner. This study demonstrates that a murine 
homologue of hBD-2 is present in the respiratory system and other mucosal
surfaces. These similarities between murine and human host defense apparatus
provide further impetus to evaluate the mouse as a model for studying the human
innate host defense system.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.67.7.3542-3547.1999 
PMCID: PMC116542
PMID: 10377137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

