
1. Infect Immun. 1999 Jul;67(7):3410-5.

A localized adherence-like pattern as a second pattern of adherence of classic
enteropathogenic Escherichia coli to HEp-2 cells that is associated with
infantile diarrhea.

Scaletsky IC(1), Pedroso MZ, Oliva CA, Carvalho RL, Morais MB, Fagundes-Neto U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Parasitology, Universidade Federal
de São Paulo, Escola Paulista de Medicina, São Paulo, Brazil.
scaletsky.dmip@epm.br

Escherichia coli strains that cause nonbloody diarrhea in infants are known to
present three distinct patterns of adherence to epithelial cells, namely,
localized (LA), diffuse (DA), and aggregative (AA) adherence. Strains with LA
(typical Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli [EPEC]) are well recognized as a cause
of secretory diarrhea, but the role of strains with DA (DAEC) is controversial,
and strains with AA (EAEC) have been more frequently related to persistent
diarrhea whereas its relationship with acute diarrhea is not well defined. To
determine the relationship of the different types of E. coli adherence patterns
with acute diarrhea (lasting less than 14 days) and persistent diarrhea (lasting 
more than 14 days) in São Paulo, Brazil, we studied stool specimens from 40
infants under 1 year of age with diarrhea and 40 age-matched control infants
without any gastrointestinal symptoms. Twenty-eight (35.0%) of eighty cases
yielded adherent E. coli (HEp-2 cells). Strains with localized and aggregative
adherence were associated with acute and persistent diarrhea. A total of 11.2% of
the adherent strains were typical EPEC serotypes and hybridized with the
enteroadherence factor probe; 5.0% were EAEC and hybridized with the EAEC probe. 
DAEC strains were isolated from 10.0% of patients and 7.5% of controls and did
not hybridize with the two probes used (daaC and AIDA-I). Strains with a
localized adherence-like pattern (atypical EPEC) were found significantly more
frequently (P = 0.028) in cultures from children with diarrhea (17.5%) than in
controls (2.5%).

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.67.7.3410-3415.1999 
PMCID: PMC116525
PMID: 10377120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

