
1. J Exp Med. 1999 Jun 21;189(12):1973-80.

Susceptibility of mice deficient in CD1D or TAP1 to infection with Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis.

Behar SM(1), Dascher CC, Grusby MJ, Wang CR, Brenner MB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
sbehar@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Cellular immunity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis controls infection in the
majority of infected humans. Studies in mice have delineated an important role
for CD4(+) T cells and cytokines including interferon gamma and tumor necrosis
factor alpha in the response to infection with mycobacteria. Recently, the
identification of CD8(+) CD1-restricted T cells that kill M. tuberculosis
organisms via granulysin and the rapid death after infection of beta2
microglobulin deficient mice in humans has drawn attention to a critical role for
CD8(+) T cells. The nature of mycobacterial-specific CD8(+) T cells has been an
enigma because few have been identified in any species. Here, we delineate the
contribution of class I MHC-restricted T cells in the defense against
tuberculosis as transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP)1-deficient
mice died rapidly, bore a greater bacterial burden, and had more severe tissue
pathology than control mice. In contrast, CD1D-/- mice were not significantly
different in their susceptibility to infection than control mice. This data
demonstrates a critical role for TAP-dependent peptide antigen presentation and
provides further evidence that class I MHC-restricted CD8(+) T cells, the major T
cell subset activated by this antigen processing pathway, play an essential role 
in immunity to tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.189.12.1973 
PMCID: PMC2192974
PMID: 10377193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

