
1. J Neuroimmunol. 1999 Jan 1;93(1-2):26-36.

Pathogenesis of acute passive murine encephalomyelitis II. Th1 phenotype of the
inducing population is not sufficient to cause disease.

Lyons JA(1), Zhao ML, Fritz RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee 53226,
USA. lyonsj@neuro.wustl.edu

The present study was designed to assess the pattern of cytokine expression over 
the course of disease in the central nervous system (CNS) of recipients of an
encephalitogenic T-cell clone specific for proteolipid protein (PLP) peptide
139-151. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analyses of CNS
mRNA from samples taken during the onset of acute disease demonstrated
upregulation of message for cytokines involved in the recruitment and activation 
of macrophages (GM-CSF, interleukin (IL)-3, IL-9) and the inflammatory cytokines 
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and iNOS as well as message for IL-10 and
transforming growth factor (TGF)beta. During the recovery stage message for most 
cytokines was absent, but during relapse inflammatory cytokine messages were
again detectable. Message for the accessory molecules B7-2 and CTLA-4 was
observed only on the day of onset of acute experimental allergic
encephalomyelitis (EAE) and at relapse. The messages for these molecules were
downregulated at the onset of recovery. These results illustrate the dynamic
nature of the immune response during the course of EAE, and support a model of
disease in which T-cells are involved in the regulation of disease while a
nonspecific inflammatory reaction is responsible for the CNS damage observed
during EAE.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-5728(98)00185-4 
PMID: 10378866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

