
1. Nat Med. 1999 Jun;5(6):677-85.

Characterization of circulating T cells specific for tumor-associated antigens in
melanoma patients.

Lee PP(1), Yee C, Savage PA, Fong L, Brockstedt D, Weber JS, Johnson D, Swetter
S, Thompson J, Greenberg PD, Roederer M, Davis MM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute/Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Stanford University, California 94305, USA.

We identified circulating CD8+ T-cell populations specific for the
tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) MART-1 (27-35) or tyrosinase (368-376) in six of
eleven patients with metastatic melanoma using peptide/HLA-A*0201 tetramers.
These TAA-specific populations were of two phenotypically distinct types: one,
typical for memory/effector T cells; the other, a previously undescribed
phenotype expressing both naive and effector cell markers. This latter type
represented more than 2% of the total CD8+ T cells in one patient, permitting
detailed phenotypic and functional analysis. Although these cells have many of
the hallmarks of effector T cells, they were functionally unresponsive, unable to
directly lyse melanoma target cells or produce cytokines in response to mitogens.
In contrast, CD8+ T cells from the same patient were able to lyse EBV-pulsed
target cells and showed robust allogeneic responses. Thus, the clonally expanded 
TAA-specific population seems to have been selectively rendered anergic in vivo. 
Peptide stimulation of the TAA-specific T-cell populations in other patients
failed to induce substantial upregulation of CD69 expression, indicating that
these cells may also have functional defects, leading to blunted activation
responses. These data demonstrate that systemic TAA-specific T-cell responses can
develop de novo in cancer patients, but that antigen-specific unresponsiveness
may explain why such cells are unable to control tumor growth.

DOI: 10.1038/9525 
PMID: 10371507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

