
1. Biophys J. 1999 Jul;77(1):568-76.

Atomic force microscopy imaging of DNA covalently immobilized on a functionalized
mica substrate.

Shlyakhtenko LS(1), Gall AA, Weimer JJ, Hawn DD, Lyubchenko YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona
85287-2701, USA.

A procedure for covalent binding of DNA to a functionalized mica substrate is
described. The approach is based on photochemical cross-linking of DNA to
immobilized psoralen derivatives. A tetrafluorphenyl (TFP) ester of trimethyl
psoralen (trioxalen) was synthesized, and the procedure to immobilize it onto a
functionalized aminopropyl mica surface (AP-mica) was developed. DNA molecules
were cross-linked to trioxalen moieties by UV irradiation of complexes. The steps
of the sample preparation procedure were analyzed with x-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS). Results from XPS show that an AP-mica surface can be formed
by vapor phase deposition of silane and that this surface can be derivatized with
trioxalen. The derivatized surface is capable of binding of DNA molecules such
that, after UV cross-linking, they withstand a thorough rinsing with SDS.
Observations with atomic force microscopy showed that derivatized surfaces remain
smooth, so DNA molecules are easily visualized. Linear and circular DNA molecules
were photochemically immobilized on the surface. The molecules are distributed
over the surface uniformly, indicating rather even modification of AP-mica with
trioxalen. Generally, the shapes of supercoiled molecules electrostatically
immobilized on AP-mica and those photocross-linked on trioxalen-functionalized
surfaces remain quite similar. This suggests that UV cross-linking does not
induce formation of a noticeable number of single-stranded breaks in DNA
molecules.

DOI: 10.1016/S0006-3495(99)76913-4 
PMCID: PMC1300353
PMID: 10388781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

