
1. Int Immunol. 1999 Jul;11(7):1169-79.

Differential expression of B7 co-stimulatory molecules by astrocytes correlates
with T cell activation and cytokine production.

Soos JM(1), Ashley TA, Morrow J, Patarroyo JC, Szente BE, Zamvil SS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Whether astrocytes utilize B7:CD28 co-stimulation to activate T cells mediating
CNS inflammatory disease is controversial. In this report, primary astrocytes and
murine astrocyte lines, generated by immortalization at two different times, day 
7 or 45 of culture, were examined for their capability to express B7
co-stimulatory molecules and to participate in B7:CD28 co-stimulation. Following 
exposure to IFN-gamma, primary astrocytes and astrocyte lines up-regulated MHC
class II and B7-2 (CD86) molecules. However, B7-1 (CD80) expression was not
inducible on primary astrocytes examined after IFN-gamma stimulation beginning on
day 7 or on astrocyte lines immortalized on day 7. B7-1 expression was inducible 
on primary astrocytes examined later and could be up-regulated on astrocyte lines
immortalized later. Unlike B7-1, temporal discordant expression of other
co-stimulatory/adhesion molecules was not observed. Both B7-1(-)/B7-2(+) and
B7-1(+)/B7-2(+) astrocyte lines were capable of stimulating proliferation of
encephalitogenic Th1 cells, utilizing B7-2 for B7:CD28 co-stimulation. However,
lines derived from immortalization later (B7-1(+)/B7-2(+)) were more effective in
stimulating proliferation of naive myelin basic protein-specific CD4(+) T cells. 
Astrocyte lines that expressed both B7-1 and B7-2 also stimulated Thp cells to
secrete proinflammatory Th1 cytokines, whereas lines that expressed B7-2 only
stimulated Thp cells to produce a Th2 cytokine pattern. Thus, we demonstrate for 
the first time that individual astrocytes can differentially express B7-1
molecules, which may correlate with their ability to stimulate proinflammatory
and regulatory patterns of cytokine production. These results suggest that
astrocytes have potential for both promoting and down-regulating T cell
responses, and that temporal differences in expression of B7 molecules should be 
considered when evaluating immune regulation by astrocytes.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/11.7.1169 
PMID: 10383950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

