
1. Am J Physiol. 1999 Jul;277(1):L183-90. doi: 10.1152/ajplung.1999.277.1.L183.

Efficient killing of inhaled bacteria in DeltaF508 mice: role of airway surface
liquid composition.

McCray PB Jr(1), Zabner J, Jia HP, Welsh MJ, Thorne PS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Internal Medicine, and Occupational and
Environmental Health, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Iowa College
of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA. paul-mccray@uiowa.edu

Cystic fibrosis mice have been generated by gene targeting but show little lung
disease without repeated exposure to bacteria. We asked if murine mucosal
defenses and airway surface liquid (ASL) Cl(-) were altered by the DeltaF508
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator mutation. Naive DeltaF508 -/-
and +/- mice showed no pulmonary inflammation and after inhaled Pseudomonas
aeruginosa had similar inflammatory responses and bacterial clearance rates. We
therefore investigated components of the innate immune system. Bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid from mice killed Escherichia coli, and the microbicidal activity was
inhibited by NaCl. Because beta-defensins are salt-sensitive epithelial products,
we looked for pulmonary beta-defensin expression. A mouse homolog of human
beta-defensin-1 (termed "MBD-1") was identified; the mRNA was expressed in the
lung. Using a radiotracer technique, ASL volume and Cl(-) concentration ([Cl(-)])
were measured in cultured tracheal epithelia from normal and DeltaF508 -/- mice. 
The estimated ASL volume was similar for both groups. There were no differences
in ASL [Cl(-)] in DeltaF508 -/- and normal mice (13.8 +/- 2.6 vs. 17.8 +/- 5.6
meq/l). Because ASL [Cl(-)] is low in normal and mutant mice, salt-sensitive
antimicrobial factors, including MBD-1, may be normally active.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.1999.277.1.L183 
PMID: 10409246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

