
1. Mol Immunol. 1999 Feb;36(3):197-203.

CD28-mediated regulation of the c-jun promoter involves the MEF2 transcription
factor in Jurkat T cells.

Shin HM(1), Han TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, Suwon, South Korea.

Within a few minutes of T-cell activation, transcription of a set of genes
including c-fos and c-jun is activated. For maximal induction of c-jun, at least 
two major signal pathways are required. One can be triggered by T-cell receptor
engagement or phorbol esters and the other by anti-CD28 engagement. The c-jun
promoter region between -117 and -50 contains binding sites for the transcription
factors Spl, CTF, ATF/CREB, and MEF2. In this study, we sought to map the
sequences in the c-jun promoter responsible for CD28-mediated induction in
activated Jurkat T cell by point mutational analysis. We found that mutation of
the c-jun MEF2 site strongly reduces CD28 induction of the promoter in Jurkat T
cells and that MEF2D is the major binding molecule to the c-jun MEF2 site in
Jurkat T cells. Mutation of the c-jun ATF site also partially reduced CD28
induction of the promoter. In addition, pretreatment with an endolysomotropic
agent NH4Cl, an acidic sphingomyelinase inhibitor, completely inhibited the
activation of the c-jun promoter by anti-CD28 antibody treatment, whereas
pretreatment with wortmannin, a PI3-kinase inhibitor, did not affect the
induction of the c-jun promoter. These results suggest that CD28 signaling
leading to the c-jun promoter involves acidic sphingomyelinase, but not
PI3-kinase, to activate factors binding to the MEF2 and ATF sites.

DOI: 10.1016/s0161-5890(99)00030-9 
PMID: 10403485  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

