
1. Int J Cancer. 1999 Aug 27;82(5):669-77.

Mass-spectrometric evaluation of HLA-A*0201-associated peptides identifies
dominant naturally processed forms of CTL epitopes from MART-1 and gp100.

Skipper JC(1), Gulden PH, Hendrickson RC, Harthun N, Caldwell JA, Shabanowitz J, 
Engelhard VH, Hunt DF, Slingluff CL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center and 
Cancer Center, Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Melanoma-reactive human cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) mediate tumor regression
in vivo through specific recognition of MHC-associated peptide epitopes, many of 
which are encoded by the melanocytic tissue differentiation proteins gp100/Pme117
and MART-1/Melan-A. Vaccines using these peptides may induce protective or
therapeutic immunity against melanoma. Rational design of such approaches is
aided by a clear understanding of the identity of these antigenic peptides;
however, most CTL epitopes described to date were identified indirectly.
Especially where these peptides may be used in human clinical trials for the
treatment or prevention of cancer, there is substantial need for direct
evaluation of HLA-A*0201-associated peptides from MART-1 and gp100 that are
naturally processed and presented. To that end, we have isolated peptides
directly from HLA-A*0201 molecules of human melanoma cells and have determined
that naturally processed epitopes for HLA-A*0201-restricted, melanoma-reactive
CTLs include the nonamers MART-1(27-35) (AAGIGILTV), gp100(154-162) (KTWGQYWQV), 
gp100(209-217) (ITDQVPFSV) and gp100(280-288) (YLEPGPVTA) and the decamer
gp100(476-485) (VLYRYGSFSV). Among these, the one that appears to be most
abundant at the cell surface is gp100(154-162) (KTWGQYWQV). The others are among 
the less abundant peptides. HLA-A*0201-restricted CTLs from one melanoma patient 
who has survived metastatic disease recognized MART-1(27-35) (AAGIGILTV),
gp100(280-288) (YLEPGPVTA) and gp100(154-162) (KTWGQYWQV) and were cross-reactive
on longer peptides that contained these nonamer sequences. These peptides,
identified by both an indirect genetic approach and by a direct peptide approach,
can be used for tumor vaccine strategies with confidence that they are identical 
to the naturally processed peptide epitopes presented at the surface of melanoma 
cells in association with HLA-A*0201 molecules.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1097-0215(19990827)82:5<669::aid-ijc9>3.0.co;2-# 
PMID: 10417764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

