
1. Infect Immun. 1999 Aug;67(8):4084-91.

Identification of a glycoprotein produced by enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli.

Lindenthal C(1), Elsinghorst EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas
66045-2106, USA.

Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) strain H10407 is capable of invading
epithelial cell lines derived from the human ileocecum and colon in vitro. Two
separate chromosomally encoded invasion loci (tia and tib) have been cloned from 
this strain. These loci direct nonadherent and noninvasive laboratory strains of 
E. coli to adhere to and invade cultured human intestinal epithelial cells. The
tib locus directs the synthesis of TibA, a 104-kDa outer membrane protein that is
directly correlated with the adherence and invasion phenotypes. TibA is
synthesized as a 100-kDa precursor (preTibA) that must be modified for biological
activity. Outer membranes of recombinant E. coli expressing TibA or preTibA were 
separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and
blotted to nitrocellulose. The presence of glycoproteins was detected by
oxidization of carbohydrates with periodate and labeling with
hydrazide-conjugated digoxigenin. Only TibA could be detected as a glycoprotein. 
Complementation experiments with tib deletion mutants of ETEC strain H10407
demonstrate that the TibA glycoprotein is expressed in H10407, that the entire
tib locus is required for TibA synthesis, and that TibA is the only glycoprotein 
produced by H10407. Protease treatment of intact H10407 cells removes the
carbohydrates on TibA, suggesting that they are surface exposed. TibA shows
homology with AIDA-I from diffuse-adhering E. coli and with pertactin precursor
from Bordetella pertussis. Both pertactin and AIDA-I are members of the
autotransporter family of outer membrane proteins and are afimbrial adhesins that
play an important role in the virulence of these organisms. Analysis of the
predicted TibA amino acid sequence indicates that TibA is also an
autotransporter. Analysis of the tib locus DNA sequence revealed an open reading 
frame with similarity to RfaQ, a glycosyltransferase. The product of this tib
locus open reading frame is proposed to be responsible for TibA modification.
These results suggest that TibA glycoprotein acts as an adhesin that may
participate in the disease process.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.67.8.4084-4091.1999 
PMCID: PMC96707
PMID: 10417177  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

