
1. J Clin Microbiol. 1999 Sep;37(9):2987-91.

Evaluation of reference dilution test methods for antimicrobial susceptibility
testing of Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains isolated from patients with cystic
fibrosis.

Saiman L(1), Burns JL, Whittier S, Krzewinski J, Marshall SA, Jones RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Clinical Microbiology, Columbia University, New
York, New York 10032, USA. LS5@columbia.edu

The development of multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa in patients with
cystic fibrosis (CF) is most likely a consequence of increasing life expectancy
and more prolonged exposure to antibiotics. The optimal method for antibiotic
susceptibility testing of CF strains, particularly mucoid P. aeruginosa strains, 
is unknown. Antimicrobial susceptibilities of 48 CF strains (25 mucoid) and 50
non-CF strains to 12 anti-Pseudomonas agents were tested by both agar dilution
and commercially custom-prepared broth microdilution plates (PML
Microbiologicals, Portland, Oreg.) in three laboratories simultaneously to
determine if broth microdilution could substitute for agar dilution as the
reference method in subsequent studies. Comparison of MICs generated by agar
dilution and broth microdilution demonstrated correlation coefficients (r)
exceeding 0.85 for all agents tested; correlation was excellent for
aminoglycosides (r >/= 0.92) and very good for beta-lactam agents including
agents paired with a beta-lactamase inhibitor (r >/= 0.87) and for ciprofloxacin 
(r = 0.86). Correlation was not improved by 48-h readings, but correlation
between 24- and 48-h readings ranged between 0.91 and 0.98 for both methods.
Interlaboratory variations were minimal, as the percentage of acceptable
variations was 94% for both methods, and serious discords were infrequent (<2% of
comparisons). However, CF strains were more likely to have serious discords than 
were non-CF strains (P < 0. 0001), although mucoid strains were not more likely
to have serious discords than were nonmucoid strains. In this study, MICs
determined by custom-prepared broth microdilution compared favorably with MICs
determined by agar dilution. Thus, this broth microdilution assay can serve as a 
reference method and facilitate future studies to determine the optimal method
for antibiotic susceptibility testing of CF strains.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.37.9.2987-2991.1999 
PMCID: PMC85429
PMID: 10449487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

