
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Aug 17;96(17):9775-80.

SLAP, a dimeric adapter protein, plays a functional role in T cell receptor
signaling.

Tang J(1), Sawasdikosol S, Chang JH, Burakoff SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department 
of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, 44 Binney Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Engagement of the T cell antigen receptor (TCR) leads to rapid activation of
protein tyrosine kinases, which in turn phosphorylate downstream enzymes and
adapter proteins. Some adapter proteins, such as SLP-76, Vav, and LAT, positively
regulate TCR-mediated signal transduction, whereas others, such as Cbl, play an
inhibitory role. SLAP (Src-like adapter protein), an adapter protein containing a
Src homology 3 and a Src homology 2 domain, was isolated from a yeast interacting
screen by using N-terminal Cbl as bait. N-terminal Cbl interacts with SLAP in
vivo and in vitro in a tyrosine phosphorylation-independent manner. We observed
that SLAP is expressed in T cells, and upon TCR activation, SLAP interacts with
ZAP-70, Syk, LAT, and TCRzeta chain in Jurkat T cells. In transiently transfected
COS-7 cells, SLAP forms separate complexes with ZAP-70, Syk, and LAT through its 
Src homology 2 domain. Overexpression of a C-terminal-truncated SLAP mutant
down-regulates nuclear factor of activated T cells-AP1 activity. We have evidence
that SLAP forms homodimers through its C-terminal region. Serial truncations and 
mutations in the C terminus of SLAP demonstrate that there is a correlation
between the loss of dimerization and the inhibition of nuclear factor of
activated T cells-AP1 activity. The in vivo association of SLAP with key
signaling molecules and its inhibition of T cell activation suggests that SLAP
plays an important role in TCR-mediated signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.17.9775 
PMCID: PMC22286
PMID: 10449770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

