
1. Pediatr Res. 1999 Aug;46(2):163-9.

Analysis and characterization of hematopoietic progenitor cells from fetal bone
marrow, adult bone marrow, peripheral blood, and cord blood.

Wu AG(1), Michejda M, Mazumder A, Meehan KR, Menendez FA, Tchabo JG, Slack R,
Johnson MP, Bellanti JA.

Author information: 
(1)International Center for Interdisciplinary Studies of Immunology, Department
of Pediatrics and Microbiology/Immunology, Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown
University School of Medicine, Washington, D.C. 20007, USA.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation has been increasingly used to replace a
defective hematopoietic system and to treat various genetic defects as well as
malignant diseases. However, the limitations of conventional bone marrow
transplantation have stimulated an intense interest in exploring the use of
alternative sources of hematopoietic stem cells, including peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) and cord blood (CB). A major investigative effort of our
laboratory has been focused on evaluating fetal bone marrow (FBM) for
transplantation. The current study compares and characterizes the functional and 
phenotypic characteristics of FBM, CB, adult bone marrow (ABM), and PBMC by
clonogenicity assays, immunogenicity, and the quantification of progenitor cells.
There was a striking difference in the proportion of CD34+ cells in FBM, ABM,
PBMC, and CB (24.6%, 2.1%, 0.5%, and 2.0%, respectively). The clonogenic
potential, as measured by colony forming unit in culture (CFU-C) assay, was
significantly higher in FBM when compared with ABM, PBMC, and CB (202.5, 73.5,
40.8, and 65.5 colonies/10(5) cells, respectively). There was a significant
decrease in proliferative responsiveness in mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) assay
of FBM and CB compared with ABM and PBMC. These observations indicate that each
source of hematopoietic stem cells has different intrinsic properties closely
correlated with ontogenetic age that is a vital determinant for phenotypic
characteristics, lineage commitments, immunogenicity, and proliferative
potentials.

DOI: 10.1203/00006450-199908000-00006 
PMID: 10447109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

