
1. Immunol Rev. 1999 Jun;169:31-44.

Lipid antigen presentation in the immune system: lessons learned from CD1d
knockout mice.

Hong S(1), Scherer DC, Singh N, Mendiratta SK, Serizawa I, Koezuka Y, Van Kaer L.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

CD1 molecules represent a distinct lineage of antigen-presenting molecules that
are evolutionarily related to the classical major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class I and class II molecules. Unlike the classical MHC products that bind
peptides, CD1 molecules have evolved to bind lipids and glycolipids. Murine and
human CD1d molecules can present glycolipid antigens such as
alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer) to CD1d-restricted natural killer (NK) T 
cells. Using CD1d knockout mice we demonstrated that CD1d expression is required 
for the development of NK T cells. These animals were also deficient in the rapid
production of interleukin-4 and interferon-gamma in response to stimulation by
anti-CD3 antibodies. Despite these defects, CD1d knockout animals were able to
generate strong T-helper type 1 (TH1) and TH2 responses. Spleen cells from these 
animals neither proliferated nor produced cytokines in response to stimulation by
alpha-GalCer. Repeated injection of alpha-GalCer into wild-type but not CD1d
mutant mice was able to clear metastatic tumors. We further showed that
alpha-GalCer can inhibit disease in diabetes-prone non-obese diabetic mice.
Collectively, these findings with CD1d knockout animals indicate a critical role 
for CD1d-dependent T cells in various disease conditions, and suggest that
alpha-GalCer may be useful for therapeutic intervention in these diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-065x.1999.tb01304.x 
PMID: 10450506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

