
1. Infect Immun. 1999 Sep;67(9):4418-26.

Down-regulation of Th2 responses by Brucella abortus, a strong Th1 stimulus,
correlates with alterations in the B7.2-CD28 pathway.

Agranovich I(1), Scott DE, Terle D, Lee K, Golding B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plasma Derivatives, Division of Hematology, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland
20852, USA.

Down-regulation of the Th2-like response induced by ovalbumin-alum (OVA/alum)
immunization by heat-killed Brucella abortus was not reversed by anti-IL-12
antibody treatment or in gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) knockout mice, suggesting
that induction of Th1 cytokines was not the only mechanism involved in the B.
abortus-mediated inhibition of the Th2 response to OVA/alum. The focus of this
study was to determine whether an alternative pathway involves alteration in
expression of costimulatory molecules. First we show that the Th2-like response
to OVA/alum is dependent on B7.2 interaction with ligand since it can be
abrogated by anti-B7.2 treatment. Expression of costimulatory molecules was then 
studied in mice immunized with OVA/alum in the absence or presence of B. abortus.
B7.2, but not B7.1, was up-regulated on mouse non-T and T cells following
immunization with B. abortus. Surprisingly, B. abortus induced down-regulation of
CD28 and up-regulation of B7.2 on murine CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells. These effects
on T cells were maximal for CD28 and B7.2 at 40 to 48 h and were not dependent on
interleukin-12 (IL-12) or IFN-gamma. On the basis of these results, we propose
that the IL-12/IFN-gamma-independent inhibition of Th2 responses to OVA/alum is
secondary to the effects of B. abortus on expression of costimulatory molecules
on T cells. We suggest that down-regulation of CD28 following activation inhibits
subsequent differentiation of Th0 into Th2 cells. In addition, decreased
expression of CD28 and increased expression of B7.2 on T cells would favor B7.2
interaction with CTLA-4 on T cells, and this could provide a negative signal to
developing Th2 cells.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.67.9.4418-4426.1999 
PMCID: PMC96760
PMID: 10456882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

