
1. Immunol Res. 1999;20(1):55-65.

The development of CD4+ T effector cells during the type 2 immune response.

Gause WC(1), Ekkens M, Nguyen D, Mitro V, Liu Q, Finkelman FD, Greenwald RJ,
Urban JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA. wgause@usuhs.mil

Multiple pathways may be involved in the development of interleukin 4 (IL-4)
producing T helper (Th) cells and the associated type 2 immune response.
Increasing evidence suggests that the strength of signals delivered to the T cell
may favor the development of the type 2 response. In contrast, antigen-presenting
cell- (APC) derived stimuli produced following pattern recognition receptor
binding during the innate response promotes the development of interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) producing cells and the associated type 1 immune response. In many
cases, the balance between increased signaling strength and the innate response
may determine whether the type 2 response develops. T cell receptor (TCR), CD4,
and costimulatory molecule interactions may all contribute to signal strength,
but the type 2 immune response may be particularly dependent on the availability 
of coreceptor and costimulatory molecule interactions. B7 ligand interactions are
required for the development of the type 2 immune response and interaction of
CD28 with either B7-1 or B7-2 can provide sufficient signals for its initiation. 
In B7-2-deficient mice, the initial type 2 immune response is intact, but the
response is not sustained, suggesting that B7-2 is important at later stages of
the type 2 immune response. The roles of CD28 and CTLA-4 during the type 2
response remain unclear. The type 2 response to infectious pathogens is
pronounced in CD28-/- mice, suggesting that other costimulatory molecule
interactions can substitute for CD28 for the development of IL-4 producing T
cells and the associated type 2 immune response.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02786507 
PMID: 10467983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

