
1. Microbiology (Reading). 1999 Aug;145 ( Pt 8):2145-2151. doi:
10.1099/13500872-145-8-2145.

A novel approach for the construction of a Campylobacter mutant library.

Bleumink-Pluym NMC, Verschoor F, Gaastra W, van der Zeijst BAM, Fry BN.

Given the lack of functional transposons for use in Campylobacter spp., an
alternative method of insertional mutagenesis using natural transformation was
developed. High efficiencies of transformation were only obtained with
species-specific DNA. This feature was a key element in the construction of
mutant libraries of this bacterium. A chromosomal library of Campylobacter jejuni
81116 DNA was made in shuttle vector pUOA18. Next, a kanamycin-resistance (KmR)
cassette was ligated into the inserts of the plasmids. C. jejuni 81116 was then
transformed with the resulting products to allow homologous recombination between
genomic fragments present in the shuttle vector and the chromosome. Transformants
were pooled and chromosomal DNA from these transformants was used to retransform 
C. jejuni 81116. This resulted in transformants containing the KmR cassette in
the chromosome but lacking the vector. In order to evaluate this approach for the
construction of a mutant bank, the KmR insertional mutants were screened for loss
of motility. Partial characterization of 11 non-motile mutants indicated that the
inserted genes are involved in motility. Four mutants had the KmR cassette
inserted in genes involved in flagella biosynthesis, namely flaA/B, neuB and
flgK, and produced incomplete or no flagella. Four mutants had the KmR cassette
inserted in genes possibly involved in flagella motor function: pflA, fliM and
orf1 downstream of the fliN gene. Three mutants had the KmR cassette inserted in 
genes that are homologous to genes encoding hypothetical proteins of Helicobacter
pylori.

DOI: 10.1099/13500872-145-8-2145 
PMID: 10463181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

