
1. J Exp Med. 1999 Sep 6;190(5):681-90.

Abnormal chemokine-induced responses of immature and mature hematopoietic cells
from motheaten mice implicate the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 in chemokine
responses.

Kim CH(1), Qu CK, Hangoc G, Cooper S, Anzai N, Feng GS, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Chemokines regulate a number of biological processes, including trafficking of
diverse leukocytes and proliferation of myeloid progenitor cells. SHP-1 (Src
homology 2 domain tyrosine phosphatase 1), a phosphotyrosine phosphatase, is
considered an important regulator of signaling for a number of cytokine
receptors. Since specific tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins is important for
biological activities induced by chemokines, we examined the role of SHP-1 in
functions of chemokines using viable motheaten (me(v)/me(v)) mice that were
deficient in SHP-1. Chemotactic responses to stromal call-derived factor 1
(SDF-1), a CXC chemokine, were enhanced with bone marrow myeloid progenitor cells
as well as macrophages, T cells, and B cells from me(v)/me(v) versus wild-type
(+/+) mice. SDF-1-dependent actin polymerization and activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases were also greater in me(v)/me(v) versus +/+
cells. In contrast, immature subsets of me(v)/me(v) bone marrow myeloid
progenitors were resistant to effects of a number of chemokines that suppressed
proliferation of +/+ progenitors. These altered chemokine responses did not
appear to be due to enhanced expression of CXCR4 or lack of chemokine receptor
expression. However, expression of some chemokine receptors (CCR1, CCR2, CCR3,
and CXCR2) was significantly enhanced in me(v)/me(v) T cells. Our results
implicate SHP-1 involvement in a number of different chemokine-induced biological
activities.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.190.5.681 
PMCID: PMC2195618
PMID: 10477552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

