
1. Blood. 1999 Sep 15;94(6):2135-41.

Stealth cells: prevention of major histocompatibility complex class II-mediated
T-cell activation by cell surface modification.

Murad KL(1), Gosselin EJ, Eaton JW, Scott MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Albany Medical College, Albany, NY, USA.

Transfusion or transplantation of T lymphocytes into an allogeneic recipient can 
evoke potent immune responses including, in immunocompromised patients,
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). As our previous studies demonstrated attenuated
immunorecognition of red blood cells covalently modified with
methoxy(polyethylene glycol) (mPEG), we hypothesized that T-cell activation by
foreign antigens might similarly be prevented by mPEG modification. Mixed
lymphocyte reactions (MLR) using peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from
HLA class II disparate donors demonstrate that mPEG modification of PBMC
effectively inhibits T-cell proliferation (measured by (3)H-thymidine
incorporation) in a dose-dependent manner. Even slight derivatization (0.4 mmol/L
mPEG per 4 x 10(6) cells) resulted in a >/=75% decrease, while higher
concentrations caused >/=96% decrease in proliferation. Loss of PBMC
proliferation was not due to either mPEG-induced cytotoxicity, as viability was
normal, or cellular anergy, as phytohemagglutinin (PHA)-stimulated mPEG-PBMC
demonstrated normal proliferative responses. Addition of exogenous interleukin
(IL)-2 also had no proliferative effect, suggesting that the mPEG-modified T
cells were not antigen primed. Flow cytometric analysis demonstrates that
mPEG-modification dramatically decreases antibody recognition of multiple
molecules involved in essential cell:cell interactions, including both T-cell
molecules (CD2, CD3, CD4, CD8, CD28, CD11a, CD62L) and antigen-presenting cell
(APC) molecules (CD80, CD58, CD62L) likely preventing the initial adhesion and
costimulatory events necessary for immune recognition and response.


PMID: 10477744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

