
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1999 Aug 2;69(2-4):145-64.

An immunophenotypic study of canine leukemias and preliminary assessment of
clonality by polymerase chain reaction.

Vernau W(1), Moore PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California, Davis 95616, USA.

There is a relative lack of information in the veterinary literature regarding
the immunophenotypes present in canine leukemias. Utilizing a panel of thirty
monoclonal antibodies, canine leukemias were assessed by flow cytometry alone or 
by flow cytometry in combination with immunocytochemical staining of smears.
Canine chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) occurred in older dogs (mean age 9.75
years; range 1.5-15 years; n = 73 cases). Blood lymphocyte counts ranged from
15,000 to 1,600,000/microl. Surprisingly, 73% of CLL cases involved proliferation
of T lymphocytes (CD3+), and 54% of CLL cases had large granular lymphocyte (LGL)
morphology. LGL CLL's were almost exclusively proliferation's of T cells that
expressed CD8 and the leukointegrin alphaDbeta2 and more frequently expressed T
cell receptor (TCR) alphabeta (69%) than TCRgammadelta (31%). The non-LGL T cell 
CLL cases (19% of CLL) involved proliferation of TCRalphabeta T cells in which no
consistent pattern of CD4 or CD8 expression was found. B cell CLL, based on
expression of CD2 or CD79a, comprised 26% of canine CLL cases. These results are 
in marked contrast to people where greater than 95% of CLL cases involve
proliferation of B lymphocytes. Thirty eight (38) acute leukemias were also
immunophenotyped. The majority (55%) of these leukemias had a phenotype most
consistent with a myeloid origin. Acute LGL leukemias were also observed (7/38), 
although less commonly than the CLL counterpart. CD34 expression was common in
acute, non-LGL leukemias of dogs, both myeloid and lymphoid. In some
circumstances, it can be difficult to differentiate a reactive (polyclonal)
lymphoid proliferation from a neoplastic (monoclonal) one. Therefore, as an
adjunct to phenotypic studies, we have developed a polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) based test for assessment of clonality in T cell proliferations. The test
amplifies the junction of the variable gamma (Vgamma) and joining gamma (Jgamma) 
gene segments region of the TCR gamma genes. Preliminary data indicates that our 
test is effective and is capable of differentiating a neoplastic from a reactive 
lymphoproliferative process.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-2427(99)00051-3 
PMID: 10507302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

