
1. Biophys J. 1999 Oct;77(4):2284-94.

Direct observation of one-dimensional diffusion and transcription by Escherichia 
coli RNA polymerase.

Guthold M(1), Zhu X, Rivetti C, Yang G, Thomson NH, Kasas S, Hansma HG, Smith B, 
Hansma PK, Bustamante C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403,
USA.

The dynamics of nonspecific and specific Escherichia coli RNA polymerase
(RNAP)-DNA complexes have been directly observed using scanning force microscopy 
operating in buffer. To this end, imaging conditions had to be found in which DNA
molecules were adsorbed onto mica strongly enough to be imaged, but loosely
enough to be able to diffuse on the surface. In sequential images of nonspecific 
complexes, RNAP was seen to slide along DNA, performing a one-dimensional random 
walk. Heparin, a substance known to disrupt nonspecific RNAP-DNA interactions,
prevented sliding. These observations suggest that diffusion of RNAP along DNA
constitutes a mechanism for accelerated promoter location. Sequential images of
single, transcribing RNAP molecules were also investigated. Upon addition of 5
microM nucleoside triphosphates to stalled elongation complexes in the liquid
chamber, RNAP molecules were seen to processively thread their template at rates 
of 1.5 nucleotide/s in a direction consistent with the promoter orientation.
Transcription assays, performed with radiolabeled, mica-bound transcription
complexes, confirmed this rate, which was about three times smaller than the rate
of complexes in solution. This assay also showed that the pattern of pause sites 
and the termination site were affected by the surface. By using the
Einstein-Sutherland friction-diffusion relation the loading force experienced by 
RNAP due to DNA-surface friction is estimated and discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/S0006-3495(99)77067-0 
PMCID: PMC1300507
PMID: 10512846  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

