
1. J Immunol. 1999 Oct 15;163(8):4207-12.

NK cell triggering by the human costimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86.

Wilson JL(1), Charo J, Mart√≠n-Fontecha A, Dellabona P, Casorati G, Chambers BJ,
Kiessling R, Bejarano MT, Ljunggren HG.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.

NK cell-mediated effector functions are regulated by a delicate balance between
positive and negative signals. Receptors transmitting negative signals upon
engagement with target cell MHC class I molecules have been characterized in
detail in recent years. In contrast, less information is available about
receptor-ligand interactions involved in the transmission of positive or
"triggering" signals to NK cells. Recently, it has been described that murine NK 
cells are triggered by the costimulatory molecules CD80, CD86, and CD40. Using NK
cell lines derived from PBMC as effectors, we demonstrate that the human CD80 and
CD86 gene products can function as triggering molecules for NK cell-mediated
cytotoxicity. Expression of human CD80 or CD86 molecules in murine B16.F1
melanoma cells rendered these significantly more susceptible to lysis by human NK
cell lines. Blocking of the transfected gene products with specific mAb reduced
lysis levels to that of nontransfected control cell lines. Triggering of human NK
cells by CD80 and CD86 appeared to be independent of CD28 and CTLA-4, at least as
determined by the reagents used in the present study, because the expression of
these molecules could not be detected on the NK cell lines by either flow
cytometry or in redirected lysis assays. Thus, human NK cells may use receptors
other than CD28 and CTLA-4 in their interactions with CD80 and CD86 molecules.
Alternatively, interactions may involve variants of CD28 (and possibly CTLA-4)
that are not recognized by certain anti-CD28 mAb.


PMID: 10510357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

