
1. Br J Haematol. 1999 Oct;107(1):176-85.

Distinct patterns of apoptosis in association with modulation of CD44 induced by 
thrombopoietin and granulocyte-colony stimulating factor during ex vivo expansion
of human cord blood CD34+ cells.

Seoh JY(1), Woo SY, Im SA, Kim YJ, Park HY, Lee S, Lee MA, Yoo ES, Huh JW, Ryu
KH, Lee SN, Chung WS, Seong CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Ewha Woman's University,
Seoul, Korea.

The insufficient number of haemopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in cord blood (CB) is
the major potential limitation to widespread use of CB for marrow replacement.
Cytokine-mediated ex vivo expansion has been proposed as a means of increasing
the number of CB HSCs for transplantation. However, the biology of CB HSCs during
cytokine-mediated ex vivo expansion, such as apoptosis or expression of adhesion 
molecules, has not yet been elucidated. We have investigated the patterns of
apoptosis and CD44 expression on human CB CD34+ cells during ex vivo expansion.
CD34+ cells isolated from human CB were cultured in a stroma-free liquid culture 
system with thrombopoietin (TPO), flt3-ligand (FL), stem cell factor (SCF),
and/or granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF). During the culture, for up 
to 5 weeks, apoptosis was measured by staining with 7-amino-actinomycin D (7-AAD)
along with concurrent immunophenotyping of CD34 and CD44 with three-colour flow
cytometry. In the cultures with TPO, an apoptotic fraction with down-regulated
CD44 appeared from the fourth day up to the second week. G-CSF also induced
apoptosis but in a different manner; the apoptotic fraction without
down-regulation of CD44 appeared unremittingly for up to 5 weeks. FL did not
induce apoptosis or down-regulation of CD44. These findings show that apoptosis
is indeed involved in the regulation of CB CD34+ cells in ex vivo expansion and
the patterns of apoptosis are dependent on the type of cytokines used. The
distinct patterns of apoptosis suggest different mechanisms of TPO and G-CSF in
inducing apoptosis, which still remains to be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2141.1999.01677.x 
PMID: 10520039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

