
1. J Neurol Sci. 1999 Aug 15;167(2):79-89.

CD80 (B7-1) and CD86 (B7-2) expression in multiple sclerosis patients: clinical
subtype specific variation in peripheral monocytes and B cells and lack of
modulation by high dose methylprednisolone.

Boylan MT(1), Crockard AD, McDonnell GV, Armstrong MA, Hawkins SA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Microbiology and Immunobiology, Queen's University of Belfast, Belfast, 
UK. m.boylan@qub.ac.uk

Autoimmune activation of T cells by central nervous system (CNS)-derived antigens
is hypothesised to underlie neural damage in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients.
The role of coreceptor mediated signalling is currently under investigation in
order to further elucidate the immunopathogenic mechanisms implicated and to
determine possible targets for immune modulation. We have investigated whether
differential coreceptor (B7-1/CD80; B7-2/CD86; CD28) expression on circulating
lymphocytes and monocytes is (i) a feature of distinctive clinical subtypes of MS
(relapsing-remitting in remission/stable-RRMS; relapsing-remitting in
relapse/relapsing-RRMS; primary progressive/PPMS), (ii) related to disease
activity, and (iii) altered by high dose corticocosteroid treatment. CD80(+) B
cells were significantly reduced (P<0.05) in PPMS (4.0+/-0.8%) compared with
normal subjects (CON) (9.1+/-1.1%), stable-RRMS (6.7+/-0.7%) and relapsing-RRMS
(7.8+/-0.9%) patients. Comparatively fewer monocytes from relapsing-RRMS patients
expressed CD86 (relapsing-RRMS 50+/-4.9% vs. stable-RRMS 75.1+/-3.4%, PPMS 77.
7+/-3.2%, CON 72.1+/-3.6%/P<0.05). Otherwise expression of coreceptors did not
vary significantly between the groups. A 3-day course of methylprednisolone
therapy did not alter coreceptor expression, but did suppress monocyte and B cell
HLA-DR expression. There is evidence for differential coreceptor expression on
circulating B cells and monocytes in MS disease subtypes. The biological
significance of these findings is discussed in relation to alternative theories
regarding coreceptor functioning.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-510x(99)00132-x 
PMID: 10521545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

