
1. Immunology. 1999 Oct;98(2):289-95.

Lipopolysaccharide-dependent down-regulation of CD27 expression on T cells
activated with superantigen.

Kai K(1), Rikiishi H, Sugawara S, Takahashi M, Takada H, Kumagai K.

Author information: 
(1)T-Cell Research Institute Ltd, Sendai, Japan.

To investigate the mechanisms underlying T-cell responses during superantigen
(SAg) stimulation, we analysed the effects of SAg on CD27 expression with or
without lipopolysaccharide (LPS) as a novel regulator of T-cell function. CD27 is
expressed on the majority of resting peripheral blood T cells (CD27low).
Activation of T cells by SAg induces high levels of CD27 surface expression
(CD27high) accompanied with simultaneous CD30 receptor expression. After
prolonged activation in vitro, the level of CD27 expression became intermediate. 
The effects of LPS on down-regulation of CD27high expression on CD30+ T cells
were dose-dependent. Separating LPS-stimulated monocytes from T cells by
mechanical dispersion abolished its inhibitory effect, indicating the requirement
for direct interactions between monocytes and T cells. We also found that SAg
up-regulated CD80 expression on CD14+ monocytes and LPS inhibited SAg-induced
CD80 expression after 24 hr of stimulation. Up-regulation of CD152 (CTLA-4) was
selective, since it was found to be preferentially expressed on the CD30+
population. Competitive experiments using soluble blocking peptides showed that
addition of CD28 or CD80 peptide recovered LPS-induced down-regulation of
CD27high expression on CD30+ T cells. These observations suggested that the
presence of low levels of CD80 on monocytes may partially inhibit CD27 expression
due to inefficient delivery of positive signals via CD28/CD80 interaction, and
that the increased levels of CD80 enhance the inhibition through interactions
with CD152 which is expressed at the highest levels after 48 hr of activation.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2567.1999.00857.x 
PMCID: PMC2326921
PMID: 10540229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

