
1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 1999 Sep;13(1):47-51.

Anionic antimicrobial peptide-lysozyme interactions in innate pulmonary immunity.

Kalfa VC(1), Brogden KA.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Neurologic Disease Research Unit, National Animal Disease
Center, Agricultural Research Service, US Department of Agriculture, Ames, IA
50010, USA.

The respiratory tract contains numerous antimicrobial factors necessary for
normal innate pulmonary defense. Although many of these molecules reside in
airway surface liquid (ASL) simultaneously, little information exists concerning 
antagonistic, additive, or synergistic interactions. Since both cationic lysozyme
and anionic antimicrobial peptides (AP) are found in high concentrations in ASL, 
the purpose of this study was to assess any interaction that might affect
antimicrobial activity. For this, Pasteurella haemolytica, Micrococcus
lysodeikticus, or Pseudomonas aeruginosa were added to egg white lysozyme
(3.9-250.0 microg/ml) or human neutrophil lysozyme (0.8-50.0 microg/ml) and
H-GADDDDD-OH (from 0.01 to 0.50 mM) mixtures in 50, 100, or 150 mM NaCl;
incubated for 2 h; and then plated. In this assay, the MICs of AP for P.
haemolytica, M. lysodeikticus, and P. aeruginosa varied slightly depending upon
the concentration of NaCl and MICs generally increased slightly with increasing
NaCl concentrations. The MIC of lysozyme for P. haemolytica and M. lysodeikticus 
also increased slightly with increasing NaCl concentrations. The MIC of lysozyme 
for P. aeruginosa was greater than 50 microg/ml and did not vary with increasing 
NaCl concentrations. When AP was combined with lysozyme in 50, 100, or 150 mM
NaCl concentrations, there was no significant interaction that affected
antimicrobial activity. In conclusion, the MICs of AP generally increased with
increasing NaCl concentrations but lysozyme and AP appeared not to interact
significantly at physiologically relevant concentrations.

DOI: 10.1016/s0924-8579(99)00095-3 
PMID: 10563404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

