
1. J Periodontal Res. 1999 Jul;34(5):251-60.

Enhancement of LPS-stimulated plasminogen activator production in aged gingival
fibroblasts.

Mochizuki K(1), Yamaguchi M, Abiko Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba, Japan.

Plasminogen activator (PA) converts plasminogen to plasmin, and plasmin activates
the kinin cascade and latent methalloproteases. It is known that the alteration
of the PA-plasmin system affects the progression of periodontal disease. We have 
reported previously that LPS from Campylobacter rectus, which is associated with 
adult periodontitis, increased PA production in human gingival fibroblasts (hGF).
The effects of in vitro- and in vivo-cellular ageing on PA production from human 
and rat gingival fibroblasts (rGF) were studied. In vitro cellular aged hGF were 
prepared by subcultivations of hGF, and in vivo aged rGF was cultured primarily
from the gingival tissue of aged rats. The cells were challenged with LPS and PA 
released into the cultured medium was measured as PA activity. Both in vitro and 
in vivo cellular aged GFs produced a significantly higher PA activity by LPS
compared with young GFs cell. In RT-PCR experiments, tissue type PA (tPA) mRNA
levels in both aged hGF and rGF were higher than in young cells, whereas
plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1) mRNA remained unchanged and urotype PA 
(uPA) mRNA was not detected. Since LPS-stimulated PA activity from gingival
fibroblasts was stimulated in aged cells using both in vitro- and in
vivo-experimental models, the ageing of gingival fibroblasts may have an effect
on the severity of inflammation and degradation of the extracellular matrix of
gingival tissues by producing a large amount of PA in response to LPS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0765.1999.tb02251.x 
PMID: 10567948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

