
1. J Leukoc Biol. 1999 Nov;66(5):792-802.

Differential effects of B7-1 and B7-2 on the costimulation of mouse nonspecific
cytotoxic T lymphocyte development in response to anti-CD3 antibody.

Makrigiannis AP(1), Musgrave BL, Hoskin DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

Despite extensive study, the relative contribution of B7-1 and B7-2 molecules to 
the costimulation of cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) activation remains
controversial. We used blocking mAbs to B7-1 and B7-2 molecules to determine the 
role of these B7 family members in the in vitro induction of mouse nonspecific
CTL in response to soluble anti-CD3 mAb. Optimal induction of anti-CD3-activated 
killer-T (AK-T) cells was found to require interactions with B7-2 on residual
accessory cells in nylon wool-nonadherent spleen cell preparations during the
first 12 h of culture in the presence of anti-CD3 mAb. Because B7-1 is not
expressed at high enough levels on residual accessory cells in primary T cell
cultures to be an effective ligand for CD28, we used LPS-stimulated B cells,
which express substantial B7-1, in addition to B7-2, to determine the
contribution of B7-1 to AK-T cell development. Compared with B7-2, the
contribution of B7-1 to the costimulation of AK-T cells in this system was modest
because anti-B7-1 mAb had only a minimal inhibitory effect on the generation of
cytotoxicity, whereas anti-B7-2 mAb strongly inhibited AK-T cell development.
Anti-CD3-induced cytotoxicity of T cells from CD4 knockout mice and CD4-depleted 
nylon wool-nonadherent spleen cells from wild-type mice was inhibited by
anti-B7-2 mAb, implying that B7-2 is able to bind directly to CD28 on CD8+ T
cells and costimulate their activation. B7-1 blockade, on the other hand, did not
affect the costimulation of CD8+ T cells. Blockade of B7-2/ CD28 interactions
with anti-B7-2 mAb strongly inhibited granzyme B, but not perforin or Fas ligand 
gene expression, suggesting an explanation for the inhibitory effect of anti-B7-2
mAb on AK-T cell development. These data indicate that B7-2 is superior to B7-1
as a costimulator of mouse AK-T cell induction.

DOI: 10.1002/jlb.66.5.792 
PMID: 10577511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

