
1. J Immunol. 1999 Dec 1;163(11):5891-5.

Tyrosine phosphorylation of shc in response to B cell antigen receptor engagement
depends on the SHIP inositol phosphatase.

Ingham RJ(1), Okada H, Dang-Lawson M, Dinglasan J, van Der Geer P, Kurosaki T,
Gold MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Tyrosine phosphorylation of Shc in response to B cell Ag receptor (BCR)
engagement creates binding sites for the Src homology 2 (SH2) domain of Grb2.
This facilitates the recruitment of both Grb2. Sos complexes and Grb2. SHIP
complexes to the plasma membrane where Sos can activate Ras and SH2
domain-containing inositol phosphatase (SHIP) can dephosphorylate
phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate. Given the importance of Shc
phosphorylation, we investigated the mechanism by which the BCR stimulates this
response. We found that both the SH2 domain and phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB)
domain of Shc are important for BCR-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Shc and
the subsequent binding of Grb2 to Shc. The unexpected finding that the PTB domain
of Shc is required for Shc phosphorylation was investigated further. Because the 
major ligand for the Shc PTB domain is SHIP, we asked whether the interaction of 
Shc with SHIP was required for BCR-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Shc. Using
SHIP-deficient DT40 cells, we show that SHIP is necessary for the BCR to induce
significant levels of Shc tyrosine phosphorylation. BCR-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of Shc could be restored in the these cells by expressing
wild-type SHIP but not by expressing a mutant form of SHIP that cannot bind to
Shc. This suggests that BCR-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Shc may depend on
the binding of SHIP to the Shc PTB domain. Thus, we have described a novel role
for SHIP in BCR signaling, promoting the tyrosine phosphorylation of Shc.


PMID: 10570274  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

