
1. Blood. 1999 Dec 1;94(11):3644-52.

Thymic repopulation by CD34(+) human cord blood cells after expansion in
stroma-free culture.

Verhasselt B(1), Kerre T, Naessens E, Vanhecke D, De Smedt M, Vandekerckhove B,
Plum J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Ghent, University Hospital of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium. Bruno.Verhasselt@rug.ac.be

Thymic repopulation by transplanted hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPC) is
likely to be important for long-term immune reconstitution and for successful
gene therapy of diseases affecting the T-cell lineage. However, the T-cell
progenitor potential of HPC, cultured in vitro for cell number expansion and gene
transfer remains largely unknown. Here, we cultured highly purified human
umbilical cord blood (CB) CD34(+)CD38(-) or CD34(+)CD38(+) cells for up to 5
weeks in stroma-free cultures supplemented with various combinations of the
cytokines thrombopoietin (TPO), stem cell factor (SCF), flt3/flk-2 ligand (FL),
interleukin-3 (IL-3), and IL-6 and investigated thymus-repopulating ability of
expanded cells in vitro and in vivo. After up to 5 weeks of culture in IL-3 + SCF
+ IL-6 or TPO + FL + SCF supplemented medium, the progeny of CD34(+)CD38(-) CB
cells generated T cells and natural killer cells in the thymus. Limiting dilution
experiments demonstrated increase in the number of T-cell progenitors during
culture. After 3 weeks of culture, gene marked CD34(+)CD38(-) CB cells injected
in the human thymus fragment transplanted in severe combined immunodeficient
(SCID) mice (SCID-hu) generated thymocytes expressing the retroviral encoded
marker gene GFP in vivo. Thus, our results show that the progeny of
CD34(+)CD38(-) CB cells cultured for extensive periods, harbor
thymus-repopulating cells that retain T-cell progenitor potential after expansion
and gene transfer.


PMID: 10572075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

