
1. J Immunol. 1999 Dec 15;163(12):6622-30.

Analysis of the defect in IFN-gamma induction of MHC class II genes in G1B cells:
identification of a novel and functionally critical leucine-rich motif
(62-LYLYLQL-68) in the regulatory factor X 5 transcription factor.

Brickey WJ(1), Wright KL, Zhu XS, Ting JP.

Author information: 
(1)UNC Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Immunology and
Microbiology, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
27599, USA.

MHC class II deficiency found in bare lymphocyte syndrome patients results from
the absence or dysfunction of MHC class II transcriptional regulators, such as
regulatory factor X (RFX) and class II transactivator (CIITA). Understanding the 
roles of these factors has been greatly facilitated by the study of genetic
defects in cell lines of bare lymphocyte syndrome patients, as well as in cell
lines that have been generated by chemical mutagenesis in vitro. The latter group
includes MHC class II-deficient lines that are no longer responsive to induction 
by IFN-gamma. Here, we show that the defect in G1B, one such cell line, is
attributed to the lack of functional RFX5, the largest subunit of RFX. The RFX5
gene isolated from G1B cells contains two separate single-base pair mutations.
One alteration does not exhibit a phenotype, whereas a leucine-to-histidine
mutation eliminates DNA-binding and transactivating functions. This mutation lies
outside of previously defined functional domains of RFX5 but within an unusual,
leucine-rich region (62-LYLYLQL-68). To further investigate the significance of
the leucine-rich region, we targeted all neighboring leucine residues for
mutagenesis. These mutants were also unable to transactivate a MHC class II
reporter gene, confirming that these leucine residues play an essential role in
RFX activity and characterize a novel leucine-rich motif.


PMID: 10586057  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

