
1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 10;274(50):35415-24.

Further biochemical and kinetic characterization of human eukaryotic initiation
factor 4H.

Richter NJ(1), Rogers GW Jr, Hensold JO, Merrick WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
44106-4935, USA.

A cDNA encoding human eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) 4H was subcloned into a 
bacterial expression plasmid for purification of recombinant protein. Recombinant
human eIF4H (heIF4H) was purified to greater than 95% homogeneity and shown to
have similar physical characteristics to eIF4H purified from rabbit reticulocyte 
lysate as described previously. Functional studies have revealed that recombinant
heIF4H functions identically to rabbit eIF4H in stimulating protein synthesis,
and the ATP hydrolysis and helicase activities of eIF4A. More detailed enzymatic 
studies revealed that eIF4H increases the affinity of eIF4A for RNA by 2-fold,
but has no effect on the binding of ATP by eIF4A. eIF4H stimulates the helicase
activity of eIF4A at least 4-fold, and it is postulated that this stimulation
occurs through increasing the processivity of eIF4A. Northern blot analysis shows
that eIF4H is expressed ubiquitously in human tissues, and displays different
levels of expression in given tissues relative to eIF4B. Secondary structure
analysis of heIF4H by circular dichroism suggest that eIF4H has a mostly
beta-sheet structure, which appears similar to other RNA recognition
motif-containing proteins. Finally, it is suggested that eIF4H functions in
translation initiation through protein-protein interactions that possibly
stabilize conformational changes that occur in eIF4A during RNA binding, ATP
hydrolysis, and RNA duplex unwinding.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.50.35415 
PMID: 10585411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

