
1. J Immunol. 2000 Jan 1;164(1):136-43.

A critical role for B7/CD28 costimulation in experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis: a comparative study using costimulatory molecule-deficient
mice and monoclonal antibody blockade.

Girvin AM(1), Dal Canto MC, Rhee L, Salomon B, Sharpe A, Bluestone JA, Miller SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Medical School,
Northwestern University Institute for Neuroscience, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

The B7/CD28 pathway provides critical costimulatory signals required for complete
T cell activation and has served as a potential target for immunotherapeutic
strategies designed to regulate autoimmune diseases. This study was designed to
examine the roles of CD28 and its individual ligands, B7-1 and B7-2, in
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a Th1-mediated inflammatory
disease of the CNS. EAE induction in CD28- or B7-deficient nonobese diabetic
(NOD) mice was compared with the effects of B7/CD28 blockade using Abs in
wild-type NOD mice. Disease severity was significantly reduced in CD28-deficient 
as well as anti-B7-1/B7-2-treated NOD mice. B7-2 appeared to play the more
dominant role as there was a moderate decrease in disease incidence and severity 
in B7-2-deficient animals. EAE resistance was not due to the lack of effective
priming of the myelin peptide-specific T cells in vivo. T cells isolated from
CD28-deficient animals produced equivalent amounts of IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha in 
response to the immunogen, proteolipid protein 56-70. In fact, IFN-gamma and
TNF-alpha production by Ag-specific T cells was enhanced in both the B7-1 and
B7-2-deficient NOD mice. In contrast, peptide-specific delayed-type
hypersensitivity responses in these animals were significantly decreased,
suggesting a critical role for CD28 costimulation in in vivo trafficking and
systemic immunity. Collectively, these results support a critical role for CD28
costimulation in EAE induction.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.1.136 
PMID: 10605004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

