
1. Scand J Immunol. 1999 Dec;50(6):580-7.

Ribosomal protein L7 included in tuberculin purified protein derivative (PPD) is 
a major heat-resistant protein inducing strong delayed-type hypersensitivity.

Kitaura H(1), Kinomoto M, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, Nagasaki University, 1-7-1 Sakamoto, Nagasaki City
852-8588, Japan.

The tuberculin purified protein derivative (PPD) is a widely used diagnostic
antigen for tuberculosis. It consists of more than 100 denatured proteins in a
culture filtrate of a heated culture of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. In
two-dimensional electrophoretic analysis of PPDs from M. tuberculosis and M.
bovis BCG, most proteins were diffusely separated and could not be seen as spots 
because of denaturation, whereas a few proteins showed relatively clear spots,
indicating heat resistance. Two such proteins corresponded to ribosomal proteins 
L7 and L12. The mixture of these proteins L7/L2 induced a strong delayed-type
hypersensitivity reaction. Another protein showing a clear spot was a GroES
analogue, but this did not induce delayed-type hypersensitivity. There were a few
other unidentified proteins. It is well known that L7 and L12 are encoded by the 
same gene and that they differ from each other only by an acetylic
post-translational modification that occurs at the N-terminus of L12 converting
it to L7 in Escherichia coli. L12, but not L7, was found in two-dimensional
electrophoresis of BCG ribosomes, although we found two proteins corresponding to
L7 and L12 in PPDs and a native culture filtrate of BCG. We compared the
delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction elicited by L7/L12 derived from a culture 
filtrate of BCG and L12 derived from BCG ribosomes. L7/L12 from the culture
filtrate could induce delayed-type hypersensitivity, but L12 from ribosomes could
not, indicating that L7 was attributable to the induction of delayed-type
hypersensitivity. The activity of L7/L12 was heat resistant. Neither
glycosylation nor phosphorylation of L7/L12 from a culture filtrate could be
detected. The acetylation at N-terminal of L12 was essential for the delayed-type
hypersensitivity activity.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3083.1999.00630.x 
PMID: 10607306  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

