
1. Blood. 2000 Jan 15;95(2):437-44.

Glass needle-mediated microinjection of macromolecules and transgenes into
primary human blood stem/progenitor cells.

Davis BR(1), Yannariello-Brown J, Prokopishyn NL, Luo Z, Smith MR, Wang J,
Carsrud ND, Brown DB.

Author information: 
(1)Sealy Center for Oncology and Hematology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Department of Human Biological Chemistry and Genetics, University of 
Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555-0645, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2000 May 15;95(10):3270-1.

A novel glass needle-mediated microinjection method for delivery of
macromolecules, including proteins and larger transgene DNAs, into the nuclei of 
blood stem/progenitor cells was developed. Temporary immobilization of cells to
extracellular matrix-coated dishes has enabled rapid and consistent injection of 
macromolecules into nuclei of CD34(+), CD34(+)/CD38(-), and
CD34(+)/CD38(-)/Thy-1(lo) human cord blood cells. Immobilization and detachment
protocols were identified, which had no adverse effect on cell survival,
progenitor cell function (colony forming ability), or stem cell function
(NOD/SCID reconstituting ability). Delivery of fluorescent dextrans to
stem/progenitor cells was achieved with 52% +/- 8.4% of CD34(+) cells and 42% +/-
14% of CD34(+)/CD38(-)cells still fluorescent 48 hours after injection.
Single-cell transfer and culture of injected cells has demonstrated long-term
survival and proliferation of CD34(+) and CD34(+)/CD38(-) cells, and retention of
the ability of CD34(+)/CD38(-) cells to generate progenitor cells. Delivery of
DNA constructs (currently </= 19.6 kb) and fluorescently labeled proteins into
CD34(+) and CD34(+)/CD38(-) cells was achieved with transient expression of green
fluorescent protein observed in up to 75% of injected cells. These data indicate 
that glass needle-mediated delivery of macromolecules into primitive
hematopoietic cells is a valuable method for studies of stem cell biology and a
promising method for human blood stem cell gene therapy. (Blood. 2000;95:437-444)


PMID: 10627447  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

