
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2000 Feb;119(2):280-6.

Elevated CTLA-4 expression on CD4 T cells from periodontitis patients stimulated 
with Porphyromonas gingivalis outer membrane antigen.

Aoyagi T(1), Yamazaki K, Kabasawa-Katoh Y, Nakajima T, Yamashita N, Yoshie H,
Hara K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Niigata University, Faculty of Dentistry,
Niigata, Japan.

To characterize the T cell response to Porphyromonas gingivalis, we examined the 
expression of costimulatory molecules on T cells derived from adult periodontitis
patients with high serum antibody titre to P. gingivalis. The expression of CD28,
CTLA-4, CD40 ligand (CD40L) on CD4+ T cells was analysed by flow cytometry. IL-10
and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) mRNA expression were determined by
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and subsequent image
analysis. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) derived from periodontitis
patients showed higher proliferative responses to P. gingivalis outer membrane
(OM) than those from healthy controls (P < 0.05). The percentage of CTLA-4+ cells
within CD4+ T cells of patients was significantly higher than that of healthy
controls after P. gingivalis OM stimulation (33.0% versus 11.9%, P < 0.01). There
was no significant difference in the percentages of CD28+ cells and CD40L+ cells,
and the percentage of CD40L+ cells was low in both groups even after stimulation.
Stimulation of PBMC with P. gingivalis OM induced significantly higher IL-10 mRNA
expression in periodontitis patients than in healthy controls (P < 0.05). The
level of TGF-beta mRNA expression of patients tended to be higher than that of
healthy controls, but there was no significant difference. To elucidate the
functional role of CTLA-4, we further investigated the secondary proliferative
response to P. gingivalis OM. Interestingly, P. gingivalis OM stimulation did not
enhance antigen-specific secondary response. Anti-CTLA-4 MoAb had no effect on
proliferation in the presence of P. gingivalis OM. CTLA-4Ig suppressed the
proliferative response significantly (P < 0.01). These results suggest that T
cell responses to P. gingivalis OM may be regulated by CTLA-4 that is expressed
at the late phase of T cell activation, and, in part, immunosuppressive
cytokines. Taken together, CTLA-4 may play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of 
chronic inflammatory periodontal disease.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.2000.01126.x 
PMCID: PMC1905507
PMID: 10632663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

