
1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2000 Jan;25(1):59-65.

Fever and neutropenia in pediatric hematopoietic stem cell transplant patients.

Mullen CA(1), Nair J, Sandesh S, Chan KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The objective of this study was to identify patterns of fever and neutropenia in 
pediatric patients undergoing initial hospitalization for hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation. A retrospective review of 75 HSCTs over a 4-year period at a
single institution was performed, of which 68% were allogeneic and 32% were
autologous. Stem cell sources included bone marrow (29%), PBSC (52%) and
umbilical cord blood (16%). Fever occurred in 74 (98%) of the episodes.
Unexplained fever (FUO) occurred in 43%. Bacteremia without an anatomic focus
occurred in 29%, while CVC associated infections occurred in 17%. In 49% of
transplants at least one blood culture was positive. The incidence of bacteremia 
was higher in allogeneic HSCTs (58%) than in autologous transplants (29%).
Gram-positive bacteria accounted for 71% of the isolates. Lower rates of
bacteremia were observed in patients receiving oral fluoroquinolone prophylaxis. 
The median duration of fever was 12.5 days and time to engraftment 14 days.
Regression analysis demonstrated that duration of fever was strongly associated
with time to engraftment, and that time to engraftment was associated with source
of cells and number of CD34+ cells/kg administered. Recipients of autologous PBSC
had the shortest durations of fever and time to engraftment, while recipients of 
allogeneic umbilical cord blood had the longest. Bone Marrow Transplantation
(2000) 25, 59-65.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1702109 
PMID: 10654016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

