
1. J Immunol. 2000 Mar 1;164(5):2550-6.

An upstream Oct-1- and Oct-2-binding silencer governs B29 (Ig beta) gene
expression.

Malone CS(1), Patrone L, Buchanan KL, Webb CF, Wall R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and Molecular Biology Institute,
University of California, School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The B cell-specific B29 (Igbeta) gene is activated in the earliest B cell
precursors and is expressed throughout B cell development. Tissue-specific
expression of the murine B29 gene is controlled by a B cell-specific promoter
whose activity is governed by a cassette of upstream transcriptional silencers.
This study describes a potent new silencer that is located 5' of the previously
identified B29 silencer elements, FROG and TOAD. Like these known elements, the
new B29 silencer is not restricted to the B29 promoter. Nuclear proteins from all
cell lines tested interacted with this A+T-rich sequence, which closely resembled
a noncanonical octamer binding motif and also conformed to the consensus sequence
for nuclear matrix attachment regions. Interaction of Oct-1 and Oct-2 with the
B29 A+T-rich sequence was confirmed using octamer-specific Abs. Oct-1/Oct-2
binding was required for the inhibitory activity of this sequence because
mutations that blocked Oct-1/Oct-2 binding also eliminated inhibition of the B29 
promoter. This B29 A+T-rich sequence specifically interacted with isolated
nuclear matrix proteins in vitro, suggesting that it may also function as a
matrix attachment region element. Maintenance of the level of B29 gene expression
through the interaction of the minimal promoter and the upstream silencer
elements FROG, TOAD, and the A+T-rich Oct-1/Oct-2 binding motif may be essential 
for normal B cell development and/or function.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.5.2550 
PMID: 10679093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

