
1. J Invest Dermatol. 2000 Mar;114(3):576-80.

Skin CD4+ T cells produce interferon-gamma in vitro in response to streptococcal 
antigens in chronic plaque psoriasis.

Brown DW(1), Baker BS, Ovigne JM, Hardman C, Powles AV, Fry L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Imperial College School of Medicine at St. Mary's, 
London, UK.

Recently, we have demonstrated that group A streptococcal antigen reactive T
cells are present in the skin lesions of chronic plaque psoriasis. To determine
the cytokine profile (interferon-gamma, interleukin-4 and interleukin-10) of
these T cells in response to streptococcal antigens, T cell lines were cultured
from untreated lesional skin of 13 patients with chronic plaque psoriasis and 12 
patients with other inflammatory skin diseases. T cell lines were incubated with 
or without a sonicated heat-killed mixture of group A streptococcal isolates for 
18 h in the presence of a transport inhibitor, stained for surface CD4 or CD8 and
intracellular cytokine expression, and analyzed by flow cytometry. Psoriatic T
cell lines were grown from 10 of 13 patients and were predominately CD4+
(64%-85%) with 10%-32% CD8+ T cells. Variable numbers of CD4+ T cells produced
interferon-gamma (0.8%-35%, median 13.9) in eight of 10 T cell lines (p < 0.02). 
In contrast, CD4+ T cells in five of 12 T cell lines obtained from disease
controls did not produce or produced minimal interferon-gamma in response to
group A streptococcal isolates; this was significantly different from the
psoriatic T cell lines (p < 0.05). Small numbers of interleukin-10 positive
(0.8%-1.3%) and interleukin-4 positive (2.1%-2.5%) CD4+ T cells induced by group 
A streptococcal isolates were also present in two out of five and three out of
five psoriatic T cell lines, respectively. This was significantly less in each
case than the numbers of CD4+/interferon-gamma+ T cells (p < 0.05).
Cytokine-positive CD8+ T cells were rarely observed. These findings demonstrate
that a subpopulation of CD4+ T cells in chronic plaque psoriasis skin lesions
produces interferon-gamma in response to streptococcal antigens and may be
relevant to the pathogenesis of psoriasis.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2000.00919.x 
PMID: 10692120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

