
1. Mol Immunol. 1999 Oct-Nov;36(15-16):979-92.

Regulation of Src-family protein tyrosine kinase transcription during lymphocyte 
ontogeny.

Longo NS(1), Wang X, Wildin RS, Abraham KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore 21201-1559, USA.

The distribution and quantity of cellular signaling elements influence response
patterns to a variety of stimuli. As protein tyrosine phosphorylation is a
requisite event induced by a majority of surface receptors, and protein tyrosine 
kinases of the src-family (src-PTKs) act as proximal transducers for many
hematopoietic receptors, we have designed a quantitative RT-PCR assay to measure 
src-family PTK expression during critical stages of lymphocyte ontogeny. With
this assay we demonstrate that the distal promoter element regulating expression 
of lck, a src-PTK essential for T-cell development and activation, is similarly
regulated during ontogeny of T and B cells. However, lck transcript abundance is 
drastically reduced in B lineage cells, suggesting that transcriptional elements 
influencing lck promoter activity are modulated in these cells. Moreover,
although transcripts encoding the src-PTK fyn accumulate at 0.1% of lck mRNA
levels in thymocytes, diminished activity of the lck distal promoter in the
B-cell background brings lck and fyn transcript levels to near equivalence in
this population. Importantly, transcripts arising from the lck distal promoter
element and the fyn locus are similarly upregulated during developmental
transitions associated with antigen-receptor expression in both B and T cells.
These findings suggest that although the magnitude of lck and fyn expression is
differentially regulated in B and T cells, expression at these loci is similarly 
developmentally programmed during ontogeny of both lymphocyte lineages.

DOI: 10.1016/s0161-5890(99)00134-0 
PMID: 10698302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

