
1. Hum Immunol. 2000 Feb;61(2):120-30.

Endogenous and exogenous factors contributing to the surface expression of HLA
B27 on mutant APC.

Purcell AW(1), Kelly AJ, Peh CA, Dudek NL, McCluskey J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia. a.purcell@microbiology.unimelb.edu.au

We have examined the expression of HLA B*2705 in the mutant cell line 721.220,
which lacks endogenous HLA A and B alleles and expresses a defective tapasin
molecule. Several peptide sensitive mAbs distinguish between HLA B*2705 expressed
on the surface of 721.220 cells (B27.220) and 721.220 cells co-transfected with
human tapasin (B27.220.hTsn). This differential staining defines subtle
differences in the conformation of HLA B27, which most likely reflect changes in 
the repertoire of antigenic peptides bound to B27 in the presence and absence of 
wild type tapasin. HLA B27 molecules expressed on the surface of 721.220 display 
increased levels of "free" B27 heavy chain (HC-10 staining), an epitope that is
dependent on TAP-translocated peptides. The conformation and stability of B27
molecules was examined by investigating the integrity of mAb epitopes and the
half-lives of these complexes on cells cultured with and without serum. The decay
of surface B27 epitopes occurred more rapidly in B27.220 and this effect was
exaggerated in serum free media. Importantly, the decay of surface B27 molecules 
in B27.220.hTsn cells was characterized by an early increase in HC-10 staining
when the cells were grown in serum free media. This decay of B27 molecules via
HC-10 reactive intermediates was not observed in B27.220 cells, implying
molecules on these cells may already have passed through this stage prior to
surface expression. Taken together these observations indicate that tapasin has a
significant contribution to the composition and stability of the B27-bound
peptide repertoire.

DOI: 10.1016/s0198-8859(99)00139-1 
PMID: 10717804  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

