
1. Pathobiology. 1999;67(5-6):314-7.

Induction of tolerance in macrophages by cholera toxin B chain.

Burkart V(1), Kim Y, Kauer M, Kolb H.

Author information: 
(1)German Diabetes Research Institute at the University of DÃ¼sseldorf, Germany.
burkart@dfi.uni-duesseldorf.de

Model systems of human type 1 diabetes have revealed an important role of
cellular immune reactions involving macrophages and T cells in the destruction of
autologous insulin-producing pancreatic beta cells. Recently, the cholera toxin B
chain (CTB) was found to suppress T cell-dependent autoimmune diseases including 
autoimmune diabetes of nonobese diabetic mice. Therefore, we tested the
hypothesis that CTB exerts much of its immunomodulatory activity by targeting
macrophages. These studies are reviewed here. Cells of the human monocyte line
Mono Mac 6 were exposed to CTB and subsequently tested for proinflammatory
immunoreactivity in response to challenge with endotoxin (LPS from Escherichia
coli, 10 ng/ml for 5 h). Incubation of monocytes with CTB (10 microgram/ml)
suppressed a later proinflammatory response to LPS as demonstrated by suppression
of TNFalpha release from 6.7 +/- 0.7 ng/ml in cultures without CTB preexposure to
1.8 +/- 1.1 ng/ml in CTB-pretreated cells (p < 0.001). In contrast, the release
of IL-10 remained inducible after CTB pretreatment. RT-PCR analysis showed that
the suppression of TNFalpha production occurred at the level of mRNA formation.
Control experiments excluded a role of possible contamination of CTB by endotoxin
or the intact cholera toxin. Tolerance induction was maximal after 5 h of CTB
exposure and persisted for 24 h. The suppressive effect of CTB was dose-dependent
and no more recognizable at </=1 microgram/ml. Incubation with IL-10- and
TGFbeta-neutralizing antibodies during CTB pretreatment prevented tolerization of
macrophages. IFNgamma (1,200 U/ml) was found to antagonize actions of CTB. In
contrast to desensitization by low doses of LPS, tolerance induction by CTB
occurred 'silently', i.e. in the absence of a measurable proinflammatory
response. In view of the potent instructive role of the innate immune system on T
cell responses these findings are important in understanding how CTB prevents the
development of autoimmune diabetes and improves tolerance to islet autoantigens.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000028088 
PMID: 10725811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

