
1. Scand J Immunol. 2000 Mar;51(3):224-30.

Blockade of the B7-CD28 pathway by CTLA4-Ig counteracts rejection and prolongs
survival in small bowel transplantation.

Kurlberg G(1), Haglind E, Schön K, Törnqvist H, Lycke N.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery and Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of 
Göteborg, S-413 45 Göteborg, Sweden.

Allograft rejection involves T-cell activation, requiring T-cell receptor
interactions with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules and
costimulatory signals delivered through the B7-CD28 pathway. We evaluated the
effect of blocking this pathway on graft rejection and survival, in a rat
experimental model of small bowel transplantation. Heterotopic small bowel
transplantation was performed between PVG donor rats and DA recipient rats. The
recipient animals were treated with CTLA4-Ig or irrelevant immunoglobulin (Ig)G
as control and followed for 18, 30 or 90 days. The survival rate and degree of
inflammation and accumulation of CD4+ T cells and macrophages were determined in 
the transplanted bowels. We found that administration of CTLA4-Ig significantly
improved the survival rate compared to control rats: after 30 days 73% of the
treated rats had survived and at 90 days 5/8 rats were still living, whereas in
the control group only 2/8 rats had survived. The grafts showed preserved mucosal
structure with only a mild degree of subacute inflammation and the accumulation
of CD4+ T cells and macrophages was noticeably reduced in treated animals as
compared to control rats. Necrosis was extensive in control rats, whereas
CTLA4-Ig treated animals had grafts with at least some preserved villus
morphology and no necrotic tissue. Although small bowel transplantation has
proven exceptionally difficult, in this study we have shown that CTLA4-Ig
treatment may provide a promising strategy to prevent rejection and induce long
term tolerance and graft survival.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3083.2000.00725.x 
PMID: 10736090  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

