
1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Apr 7;275(14):10175-81.

Tyrosine kinase activation in response to fungal spores is primarily dependent on
endogenous reactive oxygen production in macrophages.

Shahan TA(1), Sorenson WG, Simpson J, Kefalides NA, Lewis DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-2614, USA. shahan@mail.med.upenn.edu

Studies from our laboratory (Shahan, T. A., Sorenson, W. G., and Lewis, D. M.
(1994) Environ. Res. 67, 98-104) demonstrated that spores from different fungal
species differentially activate rat alveolar macrophages as detected by the
measurement of superoxide anion and cytokine production (Shahan, T. A., Siegel,
P. D., Sorenson, W. G., Kuschner, W. G., and Lewis, D. M. (1998) Am. J. Respir.
Cell Mol. Biol. 18, 435-441). Spores from Aspergillus candidus stimulated
production of the highest levels of superoxide anion (5.2 nmol/1.0 x 10(6)
alveolar macrophages (AMs)/30 min), followed by those from Aspergillus niger (2.4
nmol/1.0 x 10(6) AMs/30 min) and Eurotium amstelodami (0.4 nmol/1.0 x 10(6)
AMs/30 min). The mechanism of this differential activation was studied. Our data 
demonstrate that the tyrosine kinases p56(Hck), p72(Syk), p77(Btk), p62(Yes),
p56(Lck), and p59(Fyn) were specifically activated in response to spores from A. 
candidus, whereas spores from either A. niger or E. amstelodami activated
p56(Hck), p72(Syk), and p77(Btk). Kinetic analysis of specific tyrosine kinases
demonstrated that p56(Hck), p72(Syk), and p77(Btk) were activated faster and to a
greater extent by spores from A. candidus as compared with spores from E.
amstelodami. These data suggest a relationship between reactive oxygen species
and tyrosine kinase activation. Treatment of AMs with H(2)O(2) (1 mM) caused the 
activation of p72(Syk) only, whereas treatment with superoxide dismutase and
catalase before treatment with the spores had no effect on tyrosine kinase
activation. Incubation with NADPH oxidase inhibitors inhibited both superoxide
anion production and the activation of p56(Hck), p72(Syk), and p77(Btk) in
response to fungal spores. These data indicate that endogenous reactive oxygen
species are necessary for the activation of p56(Hck), p72(Syk), and p77(Btk) by
spores; they also indicate that some species of spores are capable of activating 
tyrosine kinases independent of superoxide anion.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.14.10175 
PMID: 10744701  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

