
1. Haematologica. 2000 Apr;85(4):396-402.

Relationships between total CD34+ cells reinfused, CD34+ subsets and engraftment 
kinetics in breast cancer patients.

Dazzi C(1), Cariello A, Rosti G, Monti G, Baioni M, Zornetta L, Ferrari E, Scarpi
E, Fiorentini G, Marangolo M.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology and Hematology Department, Ospedale Santa Maria delle Croci, viale
Randi 5, 48100 Ravenna, Italy. c.dazzi@ra.nettuno.it.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to evaluate the
correlation between the number of CD34+ cells transfused and the duration of
hypoplasia, and the relationship between various CD34+ subsets (CD34+/33-;
CD34+/38-; CD34+/ HLA-DR-; CD34+/Thy-1+) and engraftment kinetics in a series of 
patients with breast cancer treated with high doses of thiotepa and melphalan.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We treated 42 consecutive patients: 19 in an adjuvant context
(>= 4 positive axillary nodes) and 23 for metastatic disease. A combination of
thiotepa 600 mg/m(2) and melphalan 140-160 mg/m(2) was administered as the
conditioning regimen. All patients received peripheral blood progenitor cells
(PBPC) and growth factors for hematopoietic rescue.
RESULTS: In univariate analysis, we found a significant relationship between the 
number of CD34+ cells reinfused and the time to hematologic recovery and the
duration of hospital stay. We observed an inverse correlation between the number 
of CD34+ cells reinfused and the units of platelets transfused. Cox multivariate 
analysis confirmed that the number of CD34+ cells reinfused is the most effective
predictor of time to hematologic recovery. CFU-GM resulted to be a better
predictor of the duration of hospitalization.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: We found a significant relationship between the
number of PBPC reinfused and the time to hematologic recovery after high doses of
thiotepa and melphalan. In our experience, the numbers of subsets of CD34+ cells 
infused did not give compared additional information to that provided by the
total number of CD34+ cells infused.


PMID: 10756366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

