
1. J Med Microbiol. 2000 Apr;49(4):319-325. doi: 10.1099/0022-1317-49-4-319.

Enhancement of hepatocyte growth factor (scatter factor) production by human
gingival fibroblasts in culture stimulated with Porphyromonas gingivalis
fimbriae.

Sugiyama A(1), Ogawa T(1), Daikuhara Y(1), Takada H(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University School of
Dentistry, Sendai 980-8575, †Department of Oral Microbiology, Asahi University
School of Dentistry, Gifu 501-0296 and ‡Department of Biochemistry, Kagoshima
University Dental School, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), also known as scatter factor (SF), is a motogen, 
mitogen and morphogen produced by mesenchymal cells that mainly acts on
epithelial cells and is involved in osteoclast stimulation. This study examined
the possible enhanced production of HGF/SF by human gingival fibroblasts upon
stimulation with killed cells of Porphyromonas gingivalis strain 381 and its
representative bioactive cellular components, fimbriae and lipopolysaccharide
(LPS). P. gingivalis whole cells enhanced the production of HGF/SF detected by
ELISA in culture supernates of the fibroblasts. Fimbriae prepared from P.
gingivalis exhibited powerful HGF/SF-inducing activity in a
concentration-dependent manner, with peak activity observed at 100-200 microg/ml.
The fimbriae-induced HGF/SF mRNA expression by the cells was also detected by
reverse transcription-PCR. P. gingivalis LPS exhibited weak HGF/SF-inducing
activity. The study also examined the HGF/SF-inducing activity of seven synthetic
peptides corresponding to the segments of P. gingivalis fimbrial subunit protein.
The peptides of residues 282-301 and 302-321, which exhibited antagonistic
effects against P. gingivalis fimbriae-binding to human gingival fibroblasts in a
previous study, showed weak activity, whereas other non-antagonistic peptides
showed no significant activity. These findings indicated that P. gingivalis
fimbriae enhanced production of HGF/SF by human gingival fibroblasts, whereas
synthetic peptide segments of fimbrial subunit protein were not sufficient to
exert the activity.

DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-49-4-319 
PMID: 10755625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

