
1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2000 Apr;161(4 Pt 1):1368-71.

Analysis of HLA antigens in Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare pulmonary
infection.

Kubo K(1), Yamazaki Y, Hanaoka M, Nomura H, Fujimoto K, Honda T, Ota M, Kamijou
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto,
Japan. keishik@hsp.md.shinshu-u.ac.jp

Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare (MAI) pulmonary infection may occur in
subjects with no preexisting lung disease and no known immunodeficiency, showing 
radiologically nodular bronchiectasis. There have remained some unresolved
problems in the pathogenesis of the disorder, including the predominance in
elderly women and the presence of not deteriorated or deteriorated disease. In
the present study, we examined whether immunogenetic susceptibility is present in
the disorder. We evaluated 64 cases of MAI disease and analyzed their short-term 
natural history by assessing symptoms, sputum bacteriology, and chest computed
tomographic findings. The frequencies of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles in
patients were compared with those in 100 healthy Japanese control subjects. We
assayed the HLA-A, -B, -C, -DR, and -DQ antigens serologically. Among 64
patients, 37 (35 females) did not show deterioration, whereas 27 (24 females)
showed deterioration after an interval of 30 +/- 15 mo. There was no significant 
frequency of HLA-B and -C alleles in either group. In 37 not deteriorated
patients, DR-6 was positive in 14 (37.8%) patients but in only 16 (16%) control
subjects (p = 0.0061, odds ratio [OR] = 3.20). DQ-4 was positive in 10 (27.0%)
patients but in only 10 (10%) control subjects (p = 0. 0122, OR = 3.33). In 27
deteriorated patients, HLA-A26 was positive in 14 (51.9%) patients but in only 21
(21.0%) control subjects (p = 0.0015, OR = 4.05). MAI pulmonary infection with
nodular bronchiectasis shows two types of outcome, deteriorated and not
deteriorated. The subjects with A-26 antigen might indicate the deterioration of 
MAI infection.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.161.4.9906094 
PMID: 10764335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

