
1. J Immunol. 2000 May 1;164(9):4689-96.

Characterization of human inducible costimulator ligand expression and function.

Aicher A(1), Hayden-Ledbetter M, Brady WA, Pezzutto A, Richter G, Magaletti D,
Buckwalter S, Ledbetter JA, Clark EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

The inducible costimulator (ICOS) is the newest member of the CD28/CD152 receptor
family involved in regulating T cell activation. We constructed a soluble-Ig
fusion protein of the extracellular domain of human ICOS and used it as a probe
to characterize expression patterns of the ICOS ligand (ICOSL). ICOSIg did not
bind to CD80- or CD86-transfected Chinese hamster ovary cell lines, demonstrating
that ICOSL is distinct from those ligands identified for CD28/CD152. ICOSIg
showed selective binding to monocytic and B cell lines, whereas binding was
undetectable on unstimulated monocytes and peripheral blood T and B cells.
Expression of ICOSL was induced on monocytes after integrin-dependent plastic
adhesion. Pretreatment of monocytes with mAb to the beta2-integrin subunit CD18
decreased adhesion and abolished ICOSL up-regulation but had no effect on CD80/86
(CD152 ligand (CD152L)) expression. Both ICOSL and CD152L were up-regulated on
monocytes by IFN-gamma but by distinct signaling pathways. Unlike CD152L
expression, ICOSL expression did not change when monocytes were differentiated
into dendritic cells (DCs) or after DCs were induced to mature by LPS, TNF-alpha,
or CD40 ligation. Addition of ICOSIg to allogeneic MLRs between DCs and T cells
reduced T cell proliferative responses but did so less efficiently than CTLA4Ig
(CD152Ig) did. Similarly, ICOSIg also blocked Ag-specific T cell proliferation to
tetanus toxoid. Thus, ICOSL, like CD80/86, is expressed on activated monocytes
and dendritic cells but is regulated differently and delivers distinct signals to
T cells that can be specifically inhibited by ICOSIg.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.9.4689 
PMID: 10779774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

