
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2000 May;66(5):1826-33.

The chromosomal arsenic resistance genes of Thiobacillus ferrooxidans have an
unusual arrangement and confer increased arsenic and antimony resistance to
Escherichia coli.

Butcher BG(1), Deane SM, Rawlings DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Stellenbosch, Matieland, South
Africa 7602.

The chromosomal arsenic resistance genes of the acidophilic,
chemolithoautotrophic, biomining bacterium Thiobacillus ferrooxidans were cloned 
and sequenced. Homologues of four arsenic resistance genes, arsB, arsC, arsH, and
a putative arsR gene, were identified. The T. ferrooxidans arsB (arsenite export)
and arsC (arsenate reductase) gene products were functional when they were cloned
in an Escherichia coli ars deletion mutant and conferred increased resistance to 
arsenite, arsenate, and antimony. Therefore, despite the fact that the ars genes 
originated from an obligately acidophilic bacterium, they were functional in E.
coli. Although T. ferrooxidans is gram negative, its ArsC was more closely
related to the ArsC molecules of gram-positive bacteria. Furthermore, a
functional trxA (thioredoxin) gene was required for ArsC-mediated arsenate
resistance in E. coli; this finding confirmed the gram-positive ArsC-like status 
of this resistance and indicated that the division of ArsC molecules based on
Gram staining results is artificial. Although arsH was expressed in an E.
coli-derived in vitro transcription-translation system, ArsH was not required for
and did not enhance arsenic resistance in E. coli. The T. ferrooxidans ars genes 
were arranged in an unusual manner, and the putative arsR and arsC genes and the 
arsBH genes were translated in opposite directions. This divergent orientation
was conserved in the four T. ferrooxidans strains investigated.

DOI: 10.1128/aem.66.5.1826-1833.2000 
PMCID: PMC101419
PMID: 10788346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

