
1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jul 28;275(30):23387-97.

Modulation of the activity of multiple transcriptional activation domains by the 
DNA binding domains mediates the synergistic action of Sox2 and Oct-3 on the
fibroblast growth factor-4 enhancer.

Ambrosetti DC(1), Sch√∂ler HR, Dailey L, Basilico C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York 10016, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-4 gene expression in the inner cell mass of the
blastocyst and in EC cells requires the combined activity of two transcriptional 
regulators, Sox2 and Oct-3, which bind to adjacent sites on the FGF-4 enhancer
DNA and synergistically activate transcription. Sox2 and Oct-3 bind cooperatively
to the enhancer DNA through their DNA-binding, high mobility group and POU
domains, respectively. These two domains, however, are not sufficient to activate
transcription. We have analyzed a number of Sox2 and Oct-3 deletion mutants to
identify the domains within each protein that contribute to the activity of the
Sox2 x Oct-3 complex. Within Oct-3, we have identified two activation domains,
the N-terminal AD1 and the C-terminal AD2, that play a role in the activity of
the Sox2 x Oct-3 complex. AD1 also displays transcriptional activation functions 
in the absence of Sox2 while AD2 function was only detected within the Sox2 x
Oct-3 complex. In Sox2, we have identified three activation domains within its C 
terminus: R1, R2, and R3. R1 and R2 can potentiate weak activation by Sox2 in the
absence of Oct-3 but their deletion has no effect on the Sox2 x Oct-3 complex. In
contrast, R3 function is only observed when Sox2 is complexed with Oct-3. In
addition, analysis of Oct-1/Oct-3 chimeras indicates that the Oct-3 homeodomain
also plays a critical role in the formation of a functional Sox2 x Oct-3 complex.
Our results are consistent with a model in which the synergistic action of Sox2
and Oct-3 results from two major processes. Cooperative binding of the factors to
the enhancer DNA, mediated by their binding domains, stably tethers each factor
to DNA and increases the activity of intrinsic activation domains within each
protein. Protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions then may lead to reciprocal
conformational changes that expose latent activation domains within each protein.
These findings define a mechanism that may also be utilized by other Sox x POU
protein complexes in gene activation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M000932200 
PMID: 10801796  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

