
1. Med Mycol. 2000 Apr;38(2):127-32.

Flow cytometric assessment of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells in
response to a coccidioidal antigen.

Ampel NM(1), Christian L.

Author information: 
(1)University of Arizona and the Medical and Research Services of the Tucson
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 85723, USA. nampel@u.arizona.edu

The in vitro responses of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from healthy 
immune and non-immune donors were assessed by flow cytometry after incubation
with the coccidioidal antigen toluene spherule lysate (TSL). After 120 h of
incubation with 100 microg ml(-1) of TSL, expression of the activation markers
CD69, CD25 and human leukocyte antigen-DR were all significantly increased in
CD3+ lymphocytes from immune donors compared to non-immune donors (P < 0.03 for
all). No differences in the surface expression of the costimulatory molecules
CD28, CD152 or CD154 was seen between immune and non-immune donors after either
24 or 120 h of TSL incubation, nor were differences detected in the expression of
the B7 ligands CD80 or CD86 on CD14+ monocytes. The percent of CD3+ lymphocytes
expressing intracellular interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) was significantly increased
in immune compared to non-immune donors and was further increased by the addition
of 10 ng ml(-1) of human recombinant interleukin (IL)-12 (P < 0.05 for both).
Both CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes contributed to IFN-gamma production. These data
indicate that coccidioidal antigen stimulation of lymphocytes from healthy immune
donors leads to specific expression of activation molecules and production of
intracellular IFN-gamma. Addition of IL-12 leads to a significant recruitment of 
cells producing IFN-gamma among immune donors.

DOI: 10.1080/mmy.38.2.127.132 
PMID: 10817229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

