
1. Oncogene. 2000 May 11;19(20):2386-97.

Dominant negative Met reduces tumorigenicity-metastasis and increases tubule
formation in mammary cells.

Firon M(1), Shaharabany M, Altstock RT, Horev J, Abramovici A, Resau JH, Vande
Woude GF, Tsarfaty I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Microbiology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Activation of the Met tyrosine kinase growth factor receptor by its ligand HGF/SF
has been shown to increase in vitro invasiveness in epithelial cell lines. To
study the effect of Met-HGF/SF signaling in breast cancer cells, we transfected
met, hgf/sf and dominant negative (DN) forms of met into the poorly
differentiated metastatic murine mammary adenocarcinoma cell line DA3. These
cells express moderate levels of endogenous Met, which is rapidly phosphorylated 
in response to HGF/SF treatment. Met+hgf/sf transfection results in significantly
increased tumorigenic and metastatic activity in vivo accompanied by reduced
tubule formation. DA3 cells transfected with DN forms of Met (DN-DA3) exhibit
reduced Met phosphorylation following exposure to HGF/SF. Furthermore, as
compared to the parental cells, the DN-DA3 cells exhibit diminished in vitro
scattering and invasiveness, while in vivo they display greatly reduced
tumorigenicity and spontaneous metastasis. Tumors emanating from DN-DA3 cells
injected to BALB/C mice are highly differentiated and display extensive tubule
formation. These results suggest that Met-HGF/SF signaling is a determining
factor in the delicate balance between differentiation/tubule formation and
tumorigenicity-metastasis. Oncogene (2000) 19, 2386 - 2397

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203557 
PMID: 10828880  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

