
1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2000 Jun;22(6):714-21.

Mucoid Pseudomonas aeruginosa, TNF-alpha, and IL-1beta, but not IL-6, induce
human beta-defensin-2 in respiratory epithelia.

Harder J(1), Meyer-Hoffert U, Teran LM, Schwichtenberg L, Bartels J, Maune S,
SchrÃ¶der JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Otolaryngology, University of Kiel, Kiel,
Germany.

Cultured lung epithelial cells release antibacterial activity upon contact with
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA), which is impaired in cystic fibrosis (CF). In order 
to identify the factors responsible for killing PA by a biochemical approach, we 
purified antimicrobial activity from supernatants of the A549 lung epithelial
cell line, previously stimulated with PA bacteria, by subsequent high performance
liquid chromatography. NH(2)-terminal sequencing of a major bactericidal compound
revealed it to be identical with human beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2). A mucoid
phenotype of PA, but not two nonmucoid PA strains, high concentrations (> 10
microg/ml) of PA lipopolysaccharide, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and interleukin
(IL)-1beta, but not IL-6, dose-dependently induced hBD-2 messenger RNA in
cultured normal bronchial, tracheal, as well as normal and CF-derived nasal
epithelial cells. Genomic analysis of hBD-2 revealed a promoter region containing
several putative transcription factor binding sites, including nuclear factor
(NF) kappaB, activator protein (AP)-1, AP-2, and NF-IL-6, known to be involved in
the regulation of inflammatory responses. Thus, hBD-2 represents a major
inducible antimicrobial factor released by airway epithelial cells either on
contact with mucoid PA or by endogenously produced primary cytokines. Therefore, 
it might be important in lung infections caused by mucoid PA, including those
seen in patients with CF.

DOI: 10.1165/ajrcmb.22.6.4023 
PMID: 10837369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

