
1. Gene Ther. 2000 May;7(10):830-6.

Efficiency of transgenic T cell generation from gene-marked cultured human CD34+ 
cord blood cells is determined by their maturity and the cytokines present in the
culture medium.

Verhasselt B(1), Naessens E, De Smedt M, Plum J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Ghent, University Hospital of Ghent, Belgium.

Success of gene therapy for diseases affecting the T cell lineage depends on the 
thymic repopulation by genetically engineered hematopoietic progenitor cells
(HPC). Although it has been shown that retrovirally transduced HPC can repopulate
the thymus, little information is available on the effect of the culture
protocol. Moreover, for expansion of the number of HPC, cytokine supplemented
culture is needed. Here, we transduced purified human umbilical cord blood (CB)
CD34+ cells in cultures supplemented with various combinations of the cytokines
thrombopoietin (TPO), stem cell factor (SCF), flt3/flk-2 ligand (FL),
interleukin-3 (IL-3) and IL-6, and investigated thymus-repopulating ability of
gene-marked HPC in vitro. Irrespective of the cytokine cocktail used, transduced 
CD34+CD38- CB cells, expressing the marker green fluorescent protein (GFP)
encoded by the MFG-GFP retrovirus, have both superior proliferative and
thymus-repopulating potential compared with transduced CD34+CD38+ CB cells.
Effectively transduced GFP+CD34+CD38- HPC, cultured for 3 or 17 days, more
readily generated T cells than GFP- HPC from the same culture. The reverse was
true in the case of CD34+CD38+ HPC cultures. Finally, our results indicate that
the number of GFP+ T cell progenitors actually increased during culture of
CD34+CD38- HPC, in a magnitude that is determined by the cytokine cocktail used
during culture.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.gt.3301176 
PMID: 10845720  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

