
1. J Bacteriol. 2000 Jul;182(13):3726-33.

Autodisplay: functional display of active beta-lactamase on the surface of
Escherichia coli by the AIDA-I autotransporter.

Lattemann CT(1), Maurer J, Gerland E, Meyer TF.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Infektionsbiologie, Max-Planck-Institut für Biologie, D-72076
Tübingen, Germany.

Members of the protein family of immunoglobulin A1 protease-like autotransporters
comprise multidomain precursors consisting of a C-terminal autotransporter domain
that promotes the translocation of N-terminally attached passenger domains across
the cell envelopes of gram-negative bacteria. Several autotransporter domains
have recently been shown to efficiently promote the export of heterologous
passenger domains, opening up an effective tool for surface display of
heterologous proteins. Here we report on the autotransporter domain of the
Escherichia coli adhesin involved in diffuse adherence (AIDA-I), which was
genetically fused to the C terminus of the periplasmic enzyme beta-lactamase,
leading to efficient expression of the fusion protein in E. coli. The
beta-lactamase moiety of the fusion protein was presented on the bacterial
surface in a stable manner, and the surface-located beta-lactamase was shown to
be enzymatically active. Enzymatic activity was completely removed by protease
treatment, indicating that surface display of beta-lactamase was almost
quantitative. The periplasmic domain of the outer membrane protein OmpA was not
affected by externally added proteases, demonstrating that the outer membranes of
E. coli cells expressing the beta-lactamase AIDA-I fusion protein remained
physiologically intact.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.182.13.3726-3733.2000 
PMCID: PMC94543
PMID: 10850987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

