
1. Mech Ageing Dev. 2000 May 18;115(1-2):1-20.

Distinct categories of immunologic changes in frail elderly.

Fahey JL(1), Schnelle JF, Boscardin J, Thomas JK, Gorre ME, Aziz N, Sadeghi H,
Nishanian P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Immunology and Disease (CIRID) and
the UCLA AIDS Institute and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, UCLA
School of Medicine, 90095-1747, Los Angeles, CA, USA. jlfahey@mednet.ucla.edu

Immune changes and their relationships in a frail elderly population (N=116, age 
70-103, median 86 years) were defined in comparison to a healthy younger group.
Previous immune studies in the elderly have generally focused on one or few
parameters without correlation analyses. Furthermore, the study populations have 
been active elderly in relatively small numbers. A total of 33 immune parameters 
representing many aspects of the immune system were quantified. Most changes in
the frail elderly were parallel to those reported in active elderly. A
classification tree analysis revealed that increased plasma activation markers
(neopterin and sTNF-R) and increased CD28 expression on CD8 T cells and
proliferative response separated the aged and control populations. Statistical
procedures utilizing principal components analyses, partial correlations and
exploratory factor analyses all indicated that immunologic parameters in frail
elderly are grouped in three major clusters of immunologic results. These
involved (a) increased plasma levels of neopterin and sTNF receptor indicating
elevated IFNgamma and TNF cytokine activity; (b) increased proportion of mature
(CD45RO) versus na√Øve (CD45RA) T cells; and (c) a diverse group of related
changes including impaired proliferative response, reduced T cells, CD28 and CD25
expression, B cell percentage and lower CD4:CD8 ratios and increased HLA-DR
expression. These findings emphasize that several different groups of immune
parameters but not 33 independent immune changes, occurred in the aged
population.

DOI: 10.1016/s0047-6374(00)00094-4 
PMID: 10854626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

