
1. Infect Immun. 2000 Jul;68(7):3888-93.

The CXC chemokines gamma interferon (IFN-gamma)-inducible protein 10 and monokine
induced by IFN-gamma are released during severe melioidosis.

Lauw FN(1), Simpson AJ, Prins JM, van Deventer SJ, Chaowagul W, White NJ, van der
Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Internal Medicine, Tropical Medicine and AIDS,
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Gamma interferon (IFN-gamma)-inducible protein 10 (IP-10) and monokine induced by
IFN-gamma (Mig) are related CXC chemokines which bind to the CXCR3 receptor and
specifically target activated T lymphocytes and natural killer (NK) cells. The
production of IP-10 and Mig by various cell types in vitro is strongly dependent 
on IFN-gamma. To determine whether IP-10 and Mig are released during bacterial
infection in humans, we measured plasma levels of IP-10 and Mig in patients with 
melioidosis, a severe gram-negative infection caused by Burkholderia
pseudomallei. IP-10 and Mig were markedly elevated in patients with melioidosis
on admission, particularly in blood culture-positive patients, and remained
elevated during the 72-h study period. Levels of IP-10 and Mig showed a positive 
correlation with IFN-gamma concentrations and also correlated with clinical
outcome. In whole blood stimulated with heat-killed B. pseudomallei,
neutralization of IFN-gamma and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) partly
attenuated IP-10 and Mig release, while anti-interleukin-12 (IL-12) and
anti-IL-18 had a synergistic effect. Stimulation with other bacteria or endotoxin
also induced strong secretion of IP-10 and Mig. These data suggest that IP-10 and
Mig are part of the innate immune response to bacterial infection. IP-10 and Mig 
may contribute to host defense in Th1-mediated host defense during infections by 
attracting CXCR3(+) Th1 cells to the site of inflammation.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.68.7.3888-3893.2000 
PMCID: PMC101663
PMID: 10858199  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

