
1. J Immunol. 2000 Jul 1;165(1):411-8.

Proteolysis of human monocyte CD14 by cysteine proteinases (gingipains) from
Porphyromonas gingivalis leading to lipopolysaccharide hyporesponsiveness.

Sugawara S(1), Nemoto E, Tada H, Miyake K, Imamura T, Takada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University School of
Dentistry, Sendai, Japan. sugawars@mail.cc.tohoku.ac.jp

Cysteine proteinases (gingipains) elaborated from Porphyromonas gingivalis
exhibit enzymatic activities against a broad range of host proteins and are
considered key virulence factors in the onset and development of adult
periodontitis and host defense evasion. In this study, we examined the ability of
arginine-specific gingipains (high molecular mass Arg-specific gingipain (HRGP)
and Arg-specific gingipain 2) and lysine-specific gingipain (KGP) to cleave
monocyte CD14, the main receptor for bacterial cell surface components such as
LPS. Binding of anti-CD14 mAb MY4 to human monocytes was almost completely
abolished by 0.3 microM HRGP and KGP treatments for 15 min, and 1 microM RGP2 for
30 min. In contrast, the expressions of Toll-like receptor 4, and CD18, CD54,
CD59, and HLA-A, -B, -C on monocytes were slightly increased and decreased,
respectively, by 0. 3 microM HRGP and KGP. This down-regulation resulted from
direct proteolysis, because 1) gingipains eliminated MY4 binding even to fixed
monocytes, and 2) CD14 fragments were detected in the extracellular medium by
immunoblot analysis. Human rCD14 was degraded by all three gingipains, which
confirmed that CD14 was a substrate for gingipains. TNF-alpha production by
monocytes after HRGP and KGP treatments was decreased at 1 ng/ml, but not at 20
microg/ml LPS, indicating that gingipains inhibited a CD14-dependent cell
activation. These results suggest that gingipains preferentially cleave monocyte 
CD14, resulting in attenuation of the cellular recognition of bacteria, and as a 
consequence sustain chronic inflammation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.165.1.411 
PMID: 10861079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

