
1. Crit Rev Immunol. 2000;20(2):89-102.

Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs on activating molecules.

Sinclair NR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario, Canada.

Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs (ITIMs) have the restricted
consensus sequence V/I/xYxxL/V, but may be more broadly defined by the sequence
V/I/L/SxYxxL/V/I/S. If one includes the ITIM of CTLA-4, then the sequence becomes
psixYxxpsi, where psi represents amino acids with nonpolar side chains. Aside
from their presence in various inhibitory molecules, ITIMs are also found on many
activating receptors and pathways. ITIMs with the restricted consensus sequence
occur on IL-4Ralpha, IL-3Rbeta type II, gp130 cytokineR, OB-R (leptinR),
LIF-Rbeta TNF-RI, G-CSF-R, PDGF-R, Blk, Ctk/Ntk, Lsk, Zap-70, PKB/RACalpha,
PKC-alpha, PKC-beta, PKC-gamma, PKC-delta, PKC-zeta, PKC-epsilon, PKC-eta,
PKC-phi, PKC-mu, calmodulin-dependent kinase IIdelta, SLP-76-associated protein, 
FYN-binding protein, Shc binding protein, RasGRF2, CDC25 homologue, Jak2, Jak3,
PLCbeta1, and PLCbeta3. If ITIMs are defined by a broader consensus sequence, the
list of ITIMs on activating molecules becomes even larger. In some instances,
these ITIMs have been shown to associate with inhibitory phosphatases. Whether
these ITIMs on activating receptors/pathways are necessary and sufficient for
negative control of activating events and for immunologic tolerance is not yet
known. In some instances, ITIMs on coinhibitory receptors are also required for
appropriate negative regulation. By studying events leading to negative control
during activation and to immunologic tolerance, it should be possible to discern 
the balance between antigen receptor-based negative events and coinhibition.


PMID: 10872892  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

