
1. J Immunol. 2000 Jul 15;165(2):925-30.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis-reactive CD8+ T lymphocytes: the relative contribution
of classical versus nonclassical HLA restriction.

Lewinsohn DM(1), Briden AL, Reed SG, Grabstein KH, Alderson MR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Oregon Health Sciences,
University/Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Portland, OR 97201, USA.
lewinsod@OHSU.edu

Previous studies in mice and humans models have suggested an important role for
CD8+ T cells in host defense to Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). In humans, CD8+
Mtb-reactive T cells have been described that are HLA-A2-, B52-, as well as
CD1-restricted. Recently, we have described Mtb-specific CD8+ T cells that are
neither HLA-A-, B-, or C- nor group 1 CD1-restricted. At present, little is known
about the relative contribution of each of these restriction specificities to the
overall CD8+ response to Mtb. An IFN-gamma enzyme-linked immunospot assay was
used to determine the frequency of Mtb-reactive CD8+ T cells directly from PBMC. 
The effector cell frequency among five healthy purified protein
derivative-positive subjects was 1/7,600 +/- 4,300 compared with 1/16,000 +/-
7,000 in six purified protein derivative-negative controls. To determine the
frequencies of classically, CD1-, and nonclassically restricted cells, a limiting
dilution analysis was performed. In one purified protein derivative-positive
subject, 192 clones were generated using Mtb-infected dendritic cells (DC).
Clones were assessed for reactivity against control autologous DC, Mtb-infected
autologous DC, and HLA-mismatched CD1+ targets (DC), as well as HLA-mismatched
CD1- targets (macrophages). Of the 96 Mtb-reactive CD8+ T cell clones, four (4%) 
were classically restricted and 92 (96%) were nonclassically restricted.
CD1-restricted cells were not detected. Of the classically restricted cells, two 
were HLA-B44 restricted and one was HLA-B14 restricted. These results suggest
that while classically restricted CD8+ lymphocytes can be detected, they comprise
a relatively small component of the overall CD8+ T cell response to Mtb. Further 
definition of the nonclassical response may aid development of an effective
vaccine against tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.165.2.925 
PMID: 10878367  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

