
1. Blood. 2000 Jul 15;96(2):676-84.

Versatility of BCR/ABL-expressing leukemic cells in circumventing proapoptotic
BAD effects.

Salomoni P(1), Condorelli F, Sweeney SM, Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

BAD, the proapoptotic member of the "BH3-only" subfamily of BCL-2 proteins, is
inactivated by phosphorylation at serines 112 and 136 and by sequestration in the
cytoplasm where it interacts with members of the 14-3-3 family. In
BCR/ABL-expressing cells, BAD is constitutively phosphorylated and mainly
cytoplasmic, whereas in cells expressing BCR/ABL mutants unable to protect from
apoptosis, BAD is nonphosphorylated. We show here that both the wild-type (WT)
and the S112A/ S136A double mutant (DM) BAD are more potent inducers of apoptosis
in parental than in BCR/ABL-expressing 32D myeloid precursor cells. Stable lines 
of parental cells expressing DM BAD could not be established and most clones from
WT BAD retrovirus-infected parental cells lost BAD expression. On IL-3 withdrawal
from parental 32D cells, BAD was rapidly dephosphorylated by the serine-threonine
phosphatase 1 alpha, and localized in the mitochondria, whereas it remained
phosphorylated and did not localize to the mitochondria in the cohort of
BCR/ABL-expressing cells escaping apoptosis induced by WT BAD. Moreover, these
cells showed high levels of BCL-2 and BCL-X(L) expression. The cohort of
BCR/ABL-expressing cells resistant to apoptosis induced by DM BAD showed only
high levels of BCL-2 and BCL-X(L). These findings suggest that BCR/ABL-expressing
cells are more versatile than normal hematopoietic progenitors in counteracting
the apoptotic potential of BAD, and raise the possibility that tumor cells
activate multiple antiapoptotic pathways for survival in the face of
death-inducing stimuli. (Blood. 2000;96:676-684)


PMID: 10887134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

