
1. Eur J Immunol. 2000 Jun;30(6):1785-93.

Two YxxL segments of a single immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif in
the CD3zeta molecule differentially activate calcium mobilization and
mitogen-activated protein kinase family pathways.

Tsuchihashi N(1), Matsuda S, Reinherz EL, Koyasu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keo University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.

Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAM), consisting of two YxxL
segments, transmit signals leading to IL-2 gene activation in T cells. We
investigated here the functional difference in signal transduction between these 
two YxxL segments in the CD3zeta membrane-proximal ITAM. N-terminal YxxL mutants 
failed to induce ZAP-70 phosphorylation, elevation of intracellular Ca2+
concentration ([Ca2+]i) or extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activation
even in the presence of CD28 co-stimulation, whereas a mutant of the leucine
residue at the C-terminal YxxL segment retained the ability to induce these
events although this mutation abrogated the ability to induce IL-2 gene
activation. In marked contrast to ERK activation, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)
activation was observed in all mutants when co-stimulated with CD28. The mutant
of the leucine residue at the C-terminal YxxL segment had a defect in the
transcriptional activation at the NF-AT cis-element, which was restored to
wild-type level by addition of a Ca2+ ionophore, suggesting that the intensity
and/or duration of [Ca2+]i elevation defines the threshold of T cell activation
in this mutant. Our data collectively indicate that the activation pathways of
ERK, JNK and Ca2+ mobilization are differentially regulated through YxxL segments
of an ITAM.

DOI: 10.1002/1521-4141(200006)30:6<1785::AID-IMMU1785>3.0.CO;2-T 
PMID: 10898517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

