
1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2000 Jul;279(1):C62-71.

CFTR induces the expression of DRA along with Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchange activity
in tracheal epithelial cells.

Wheat VJ(1), Shumaker H, Burnham C, Shull GE, Yankaskas JR, Soleimani M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University of
Cincinnati School of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267, USA.

Thickening of airway mucus and lung dysfunction in cystic fibrosis (CF) results, 
at least in part, from abnormal secretion of Cl(-) and HCO(3)(-) across the
tracheal epithelium. The mechanism of the defect in HCO(3)(-) secretion is ill
defined; however, a lack of apical Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchange may exist in CF. To
test this hypothesis, we examined the expression of Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchangers in
tracheal epithelial cells exhibiting physiological features prototypical of
cystic fibrosis [CFT-1 cells, lacking a functional cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator (CFTR)] or normal trachea (CFT-1 cells transfected with
functional wild-type CFTR, termed CFT-WT). Cells were grown on coverslips and
were loaded with the pH-sensitive dye 2',
7'-bis(2-carboxyethyl)-5(6)-carboxyfluorescein, and intracellular pH was
monitored. Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchange activity increased by approximately 300% in
cells transfected with functional CFTR, with activities increasing from 0.034
pH/min in CFT-1 cells to 0.11 in CFT-WT cells (P < 0.001, n = 8). This activity
was significantly inhibited by DIDS. The mRNA expression of the ubiquitous
basolateral AE-2 Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchanger remained unchanged. However, mRNA
encoding DRA, recently shown to be a Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchanger (Melvin JE, Park
K, Richardson L, Schultheis PJ, and Shull GE. J Biol Chem 274: 22855-22861,
1999.) was abundantly expressed in cells expressing functional CFTR but not in
cells that lacked CFTR or that expressed mutant CFTR. In conclusion, CFTR induces
the mRNA expression of "downregulated in adenoma" (DRA) and, as a result,
upregulates the apical Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchanger activity in tracheal cells. We
propose that the tracheal HCO(3)(-) secretion defect in patients with CF is
partly due to the downregulation of the apical Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchange activity 
mediated by DRA.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.2000.279.1.C62 
PMID: 10898717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

