
1. Mol Cells. 2000 Jun 30;10(3):247-52.

Activation of c-jun N-terminal kinase by 4-1BB (CD137), a T cell co-stimulatory
molecule.

Kim HH(1), Kwack K, Lee ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Dentistry, Chosun
University, Kwangju, Korea.

It has been widely accepted that T cell activation requires two signals; one from
the binding of the antigen/major histocompatibility complex to the T-cell
receptor (TCR)/CD3 complex and the other from the interaction between a surface
molecule on antigen presenting cells and its receptor on T cells. The second
signal is considered as co-stimulatory and the B7/CD28 pair has been well studied
as a prototype. Recently 4-1BB (CD137) has been characterized as another
co-stimulatory molecule for T cell activation. However, unlike the CD28/B7 pair, 
4-1BB and its ligand 4-1BBL constitute a member of the tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) receptor/TNF pair superfamily. The signaling mechanism of 4-1BB has not
been revealed in detail. To investigate whether 4-1BB takes the signaling
pathways analogous to those for TNF receptors, we generated polyclonal antibodies
against human 4-1BB and 4-1BBL and established stable transfectants of the
receptor and the ligand with a high level of cell surface expression.
Over-expression of h4-1BB was found to result in the activation of c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK) in the human embryonic kidney cell line 293. In T cells, 
it has been previously demonstrated that JNK activation requires dual signals
such as the ligation of TCR/CD3 complex plus CD28 co-stimulation or PMA plus
ionomycin. The JNK activation by 4-1BB in Jurkat T cells was also found to
require stimulation of the TCR/CD3 complex, consistent with the notion that 4-1BB
functions as a co-stimulatory molecule for T cell activation.


PMID: 10901161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

