
1. Biochemistry. 2000 Aug 1;39(30):9030-8.

Class I MHC is stabilized against thermal denaturation by physiological
concentrations of NaCl.

Batalia MA(1), Kirksey TJ, Sharma A, Jiang L, Abastado JP, Yan S, Zhao R, Collins
EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7290, USA.

Class I MHC molecules are ternary complexes composed of an allotype specific
heavy chain, a noncovalently associated protein beta(2)-microglobulin (beta(2)m),
and a peptide. The complexes are assembled in the endoplasmic reticulum by a
complex series of chaperones and peptide-loading mechanisms. In the absence of
beta(2)m or peptide, very little class I heavy chain is transported to the
surface of the cell. Complexes that do not contain all three parts of the protein
are not made productively in vivo and not at all in vitro. The ability of the
complex to withstand thermal denaturation in vitro has been shown to be related
to the binding affinity of the peptide. Paradoxically, some low-affinity peptide 
complexes denature at or below human basal body temperatures in vitro but are
effective biological agents in vivo. Here we show that these complexes are
stabilized against thermal denaturation by physiological cosolvents and maximally
stabilized by 150 mM NaCl. While the degree of stabilization by 150 mM NaCl is
greatest for low-affinity peptide/MHC complexes, the mechanism of stabilization
is independent of peptide sequence. This effect is hypothesized to occur by
multiple mechanisms including increasing the affinity of beta(2)m for the complex
and charge screening.

DOI: 10.1021/bi000442n 
PMID: 10913316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

