
1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 27;275(43):33314-20.

A novel murine beta -defensin expressed in tongue, esophagus, and trachea.

Jia HP(1), Wowk SA, Schutte BC, Lee SK, Vivado A, Tack BF, Bevins CL, McCray PB
Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Genetics Ph.D. Program, and Microbiology,
University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

beta-Defensins are broad spectrum antimicrobial peptides expressed at epithelial 
surfaces. Two human beta-defensins, HBD-1 and HBD-2, have been identified. In the
lung, HBD-2 is an inducible product of airway epithelia and may play a role in
innate mucosal defenses. We recently characterized rat homologs (RBD-1, RBD-2) of
the human genes and used these sequences to identify novel mouse genes. Mouse
beta-defensin-4 (MBD-4) was amplified from lung cDNA using polymerase chain
reaction primers designed from conserved sequences of RBD-2 and HBD-2. A
full-length cDNA was cloned which encodes a putative peptide with the sequence
MRIHYLLFTFLLVLLSPLAAFTQIINNPITCMTNGAICWGPCPTAFRQIGNCGHFKVRCCKIR. The peptide
shares approximately 40% identity with HBD-2. MBD-4 mRNA was expressed in the
esophagus, tongue, and trachea but not in any of 20 other tissues surveyed.
Cloning of the genomic sequence of MBD-4 revealed two nearly (>99%) identical
sequences encoding MBD-4 and the presence of numerous additional highly similar
genomic sequences. Radiation hybrid mapping localized this gene to a region of
chromosome 8 near several other defensins, MBD-2, MBD-3, and alpha-defensins
(cryptdins)-3 and -17, consistent with a gene cluster. Our genomic cloning and
mapping data suggest that there is a large beta-defensin gene family in mice.
Identification of murine beta-defensins provides an opportunity to understand
further the role of these peptides in host defense through animal model studies
and the generation of beta-defensin-deficient animals by gene targeting.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M006603200 
PMID: 10922379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

