
1. Protein Sci. 2000 Aug;9(8):1503-18.

Chemical cross-linking with thiol-cleavable reagents combined with differential
mass spectrometric peptide mapping--a novel approach to assess intermolecular
protein contacts.

Bennett KL(1), Kussmann M, Björk P, Godzwon M, Mikkelsen M, Sørensen P,
Roepstorff P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense.
bennett@pr-group.sdu.dk

The intermolecular contact regions between monomers of the homodimeric DNA
binding protein ParR and the interaction between the glycoproteins CD28 and CD80 
were investigated using a strategy that combined chemical cross-linking with
differential MALDI-MS analyses. ParR dimers were modified in vitro with the
thiol-cleavable cross-linker 3,3'-dithio-bis(succinimidylproprionate) (DTSSP),
proteolytically digested with trypsin and analyzed by MALDI-MS peptide mapping.
Comparison of the peptide maps obtained from digested cross-linked ParR dimers in
the presence and absence of a thiol reagent strongly supported a "head-to-tail"
arrangement of the monomers in the dimeric complex. Glycoprotein fusion
constructs CD28-IgG and CD80-Fab were cross-linked in vitro by DTSSP,
characterized by nonreducing SDS-PAGE, digested in situ with trypsin and analyzed
by MALDI-MS peptide mapping (+/- thiol reagent). The data revealed the presence
of an intermolecular cross-link between the receptor regions of the glycoprotein 
constructs, as well as a number of unexpected but nonetheless specific
interactions between the fusion domains of CD28-IgG and the receptor domain of
CD80-Fab. The strategy of chemical cross-linking combined with differential
MALDI-MS peptide mapping (+ thiol reagent) enabled localization of the interface 
region(s) of the complexes studied and clearly demonstrates the utility of such
an approach to obtain structural information on interacting noncovalent
complexes.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.9.8.1503 
PMCID: PMC2144725
PMID: 10975572  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

