
1. Immunogenetics. 2000 Aug;51(10):794-804.

H2-M, a facilitator of MHC class II peptide loading, and its negative modulator
H2-O are differentially expressed in response to proinflammatory cytokines.

Walter W(1), Scheuer C, Lingnau K, Reichert TE, Schmitt E, Loos M, Maeurer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz,
Germany.

H2-M is a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II-like molecule that
catalyzes peptide binding to MHC class II molecules. Recently, the H2-O
heterodimer, encoded by H2-Oa and H2-Ob in the MHC class II region, has been
shown to be physically associated with H2-M in B cells and to downregulate H2-M
function. Examination of H2-O expression in freshly isolated mouse organs
revealed that H2-Oa- and H2-Ob-specific transcripts are present in both lymphoid 
and nonlymphoid tissues. To evaluate the gene regulation and functional impact of
H2-O on antigen presentation, we examined the effects on MHCII, invariant chain
(Ii), H2-M, and H2-O gene expression of interleukin (IL)-4, IL-10, and interferon
(IFN)-gamma in different antigen-presenting cells (APCs). In nonprofessional
APCs, e.g., L929 fibroblasts, IFN-gamma-inducible expression of the MHC class
II-specific transcription factor CIITA is associated with coordinate expression
of MHCII, Ii, H2-M, and H2-Oa genes but without concomitant H2-Ob induction. In
contrast, professional APCs, e.g., the macrophage cell line P388D1, exhibit
constitutive H2-Oa and H2-Ob expression, which is not inducible by IFN-gamma in
contrast to CIITA, MHCII, Ii, and H2-M expression. In B cells, CIITA, MHCII, Ii, 
and H2-M genes are differentially expressed relative to H2-Oa and H2-Ob genes
upon stimulation with IL-4, IL-10, or IFN-gamma. A differential ratio of H2-M to 
H2-O may represent one mechanism by which professional and nonprofessional APCs
bypass H2-O inhibitory activity.

DOI: 10.1007/s002510000210 
PMID: 10970094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

