
1. Exp Hematol. 2000 Aug;28(8):907-15.

Expression and activation of caspase-3/CPP32 in CD34(+) cord blood cells is
linked to apoptosis after growth factor withdrawal.

Wang LS(1), Liu HJ, Xia ZB, Broxmeyer HE, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN 46202-5254, USA.

Caspase-3/CPP32, a member of the interleukin-1 converting enzyme (ICE) family, is
considered an executioner protease in mammalian cells during apoptosis. Although 
expression and activation of caspase-3/CPP32 protein have been studied in many
tissues and leukemia cell lines, this has not been explored in primitive
hematopoietic CD34(+) cells. In this study, we evaluated expression and
activation of caspase-3/CPP32 protein in CD34(+) cells from cord blood (CB)
during apoptosis induced by growth factor deprivation. Reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), Western blot, and flow
cytometry analysis were used in this study to determine the expression of
caspase-3/CPP32 in CD34(+) CB cells during apoptosis. Our results demonstrated
that caspase-3/CPP32 mRNA was constitutively expressed at a very low level in
freshly isolated CD34(+) cells. Expression of caspase-3/CPP32 mRNA and protein
was upregulated when these cells were first expanded in suspension culture with
growth factors for 3 days. However, only the 32 kDa inactive caspase-3/CPP32
proenzyme was detected in the freshly isolated CD34(+) cells and after 3 days
expansion with cytokines. Within 12 hours after growth factor withdrawal from
expanded cells caspase-3/CPP32 was activated and a cleavage 20 kDa protein was
detected; a poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) was cleaved by activated
caspase-3/CPP32. Activation of caspase-3/CPP32 and apoptosis upon growth factor
withdrawal were inhibited/reduced by the caspase inhibitors, z-VAD-fmk and
DEVD-CHO. These results demonstrate that caspase-3/CPP32 is involved in apoptosis
of primitive CB CD34(+) cells but may not be the only mechanism involved.

DOI: 10.1016/s0301-472x(00)00485-9 
PMID: 10989191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

