
1. Biopolymers. 2000 Dec;54(7):515-23.

Construction of protein binding sites in scaffold structures.

Liang S(1), Liu Z, Li W, Ni L, Lai L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physical Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Molecular
Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, the People's Republic of China.

We have developed a strategy for grafting a protein-protein interface based on
the known crystal structure of a native ligand and receptor proteins in a
complex. The key interaction residues at the ligand protein binding interface are
transferred onto a scaffold protein so that the mutated scaffold protein will
bind the receptor protein in the same manner as the ligand protein. First, our
method identifies key residues and atoms in the ligand protein, which strongly
interact with the receptor protein. Second, this method searches the scaffold
protein for combinations of candidate residues, among which the distance between 
any two candidate residues is similar to that between relevant key interaction
residues in the ligand protein. These candidate residues are mutated to key
interaction residues in the ligand protein respectively. The scaffold protein is 
superposed onto the ligand protein based upon the coordinates of corresponding
atoms, which are assumed to strongly interact with the receptor protein.
Complementarity between scaffold and receptor proteins is evaluated. Scaffold
proteins with a low superposing rms difference and high complementary score are
accepted for further analysis. Then, the relative position of the scaffold
protein is adjusted so that the interfaces between the scaffold and receptor
proteins have a reasonable packing density. Other mutations are also considered
to reduce the desolvation energy or bad steric contacts. Finally, the scaffold
protein is cominimized with the receptor protein and evaluated. To test the
method, the binding interface of barstar, the inhibitor of barnase, was grafted
onto small proteins. Four scaffold proteins with high complementary scores are
accepted.

Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1097-0282(200012)54:7<515::AID-BIP40>3.0.CO;2-0 
PMID: 10984403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

