
1. J Hematother Stem Cell Res. 2000 Aug;9(4):507-15.

Growth factor mobilization and modulation of progenitor cell adhesion to stromal 
cells: role of VLA-4.

Dave B(1), Watanabe T, Singh RK, Ageitos A, Heimann DG, Talmadge JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha 68198, USA.

Cellular interactions between hematopoietic progenitor cells and bone marrow (BM)
stromal cells are mediated by cell adhesion molecules (CAM). In agreement with
previous studies, our flow cytometric analysis of isolated CD34+ cells showed
that VLA-4 expression was significantly (p < 0.001) higher on steady-state BM
than on CD34+ cells from growth factor-mobilized peripheral stem cell (PSC)
products. To determine whether the expression of VLA-4 on progenitor cells plays 
a role in their adhesion to stromal cells, we examined the binding of isolated
CD34+ progenitor cells from BM (n = 14) and PSC (n = 10) products to BM stromal
cells in the presence or absence of a neutralizing antibody to VLA-4. In these
studies, similar kinetics of BM and PSC CD34+ cell adhesion to BM stromal cells
were observed. However, neutralizing antibody to VLA-4 significantly inhibited BM
CD34+ but not PSC CD34+ cell adherence to stromal cells, suggesting a role for
alternative CAM in cell binding. Further, in long-term co-cultures of BM CD34+
cells with BM stroma, we observed a significantly higher number of colony-forming
units granulocyte-macrophage (CFU-GM) released into the media following treatment
with neutralizing antibody to VLA-4 than in untreated control cultures. In
contrast, no difference in the frequency of nonadherent CFU-GM between
antibody-treated and control long-term co-cultures of PSC CD34+ cells with BM
stromal cells was observed. This suggests that VLA-4 expression on mobilized PSC 
versus BM CD34+ cells has biologic relevance for at least 2 weeks based on the
long-term BM culture results. In summary, these data suggest that the decreased
expression of VLA-4 may have a role in the mobilization of progenitor cells, in
part, by regulating their adherence to stromal cells, although additional
mediators of adhesion are also involved.

DOI: 10.1089/152581600419189 
PMID: 10982250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

