
1. Eur J Immunol. 2000 Sep;30(9):2713-21.

High frequencies of circulating IFN-gamma-secreting CD8 cytotoxic T cells
specific for a novel MHC class I-restricted Mycobacterium tuberculosis epitope in
M. tuberculosis-infected subjects without disease.

Pathan AA(1), Wilkinson KA, Wilkinson RJ, Latif M, McShane H, Pasvol G, Hill AV, 
Lalvani A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine,
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, GB.

MHC class I-restricted CD8 cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) are essential for
protective immunity to Mycobacterium tuberculosis in animal models but their role
in humans remains unclear. We therefore studied subjects who had successfully
contained M. tuberculosis infection in vivo, i.e. exposed healthy household
contacts and individuals with inactive self-healed pulmonary tuberculosis. Using 
the ELISPOT assay for IFN-gamma, we screened peptides from ESAT-6, a secreted
antigen that is highly specific for M. tuberculosis. We identified a novel
nonamer epitope: unstimulated peripheral blood-derived CD8 T cells displayed
peptide-specific IFN-gamma release ex vivo while CD8 T cell lines and clones
exhibited HLA-A68.02-restricted cytolytic activity and recognized endogenously
processed antigen. The frequency of CD8 CTL specific for this single M.
tuberculosis epitope, 1/2500 peripheral blood lymphocytes, was equivalent to the 
combined frequency of all IFN-gamma-secreting purified protein
derivative-reactive T cells ex vivo. This highly focused CTL response was
maintained in an asymptomatic contact over 2 years and is the most potent
antigen-specific antimycobacterial CD8 CTL response hitherto described. Thus,
human M. tuberculosis-specific CD8 CTL are not necessarily associated with active
disease per se. Rather, our results are consistent with a protective role for
these ESAT-6-specific CD8 T cells in the long-term control of M. tuberculosis in 
vivo in humans.

DOI: 10.1002/1521-4141(200009)30:9<2713::AID-IMMU2713>3.0.CO;2-4 
PMID: 11009107  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

