
1. J Exp Med. 2000 Oct 2;192(7):1059-68.

DAP10 and DAP12 form distinct, but functionally cooperative, receptor complexes
in natural killer cells.

Wu J(1), Cherwinski H, Spies T, Phillips JH, Lanier LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the Cancer Research Institute,
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Many of the activating receptors on natural killer (NK) cells are multisubunit
complexes composed of ligand-binding receptors that are noncovalently associated 
with membrane-bound signaling adaptor proteins, including CD3zeta,
FcstraightepsilonRIgamma, DAP12, and DAP10. Because the DAP10 and DAP12 genes are
closely linked, expressed in NK cells, and have remarkably similar transmembrane 
segments, it was of interest to determine the specificity of their interactions
with ligand-binding receptors and to examine their signaling properties. Despite 
their similarities, DAP10, DAP12, FcstraightepsilonRIgamma, and CD3zeta form
specific receptor complexes with their ligand-binding partners in NK cells and
transfectants. The transmembrane regions of DAP10 and DAP12 are sufficient to
confer specific association with their partners. Although cross-linking of either
DAP10- or DAP12-associated receptors has been shown to be sufficient to trigger
NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity against Fc receptor-bearing cells, substantial
synergy was observed in the induction of cytokine production when both receptors 
were engaged. Activation of the Syk/ZAP70 tyrosine kinases by the immunoreceptor 
tyrosine-based activation motif-containing DAP12 adaptor and of the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway by the YxNM-containing DAP10 adaptor may
play an important role in the stimulation of NK cells and T cells.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.192.7.1059 
PMCID: PMC2193316
PMID: 11015446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

