
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Oct 24;97(22):12210-5.

Antimicrobial activity of MHC class I-restricted CD8+ T cells in human
tuberculosis.

Cho S(1), Mehra V, Thoma-Uszynski S, Stenger S, Serbina N, Mazzaccaro RJ, Flynn
JL, Barnes PF, Southwood S, Celis E, Bloom BR, Modlin RL, Sette A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, University of California School of Medicine, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Studies of mouse models of tuberculosis (TB) infection have indicated a central
role for MHC class I-restricted CD8+ T cells in protective immunity. To define
antigens and epitopes of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) proteins that are
presented by infected cells to CD8+ T cells, we screened 40 MTB proteins for HLA 
class I A*0201-binding motifs. Peptides that bound with high affinity to purified
HLA molecules were subsequently analyzed for recognition by CD8+ cytotoxic T
lymphocytes. We identified three epitopes recognized by CD8+ T cells from
patients recovering from TB infection. Those three epitopes were derived from
three different antigens: thymidylate synthase (ThyA(30-38)), RNA polymerase
beta-subunit (RpoB(127-135)), and a putative phosphate transport system permease 
protein A-1 (PstA1(75-83)). In addition, CD8+ T cell lines specific for three
peptides (ThyA(30-38), PstA1(75-83), and 85B(15-23)) were generated from
peripheral blood mononuclear cells of normal HLA-A*0201 donors. These CD8+ T cell
lines specifically recognized MTB-infected macrophages, as demonstrated by
production of IFN-gamma and lysis of the infected target cells. Finally, CD8+
cytotoxic T lymphocytes reduced the viability of the intracellular MTB, providing
evidence that CD8+ T cell recognition of MHC class I-restricted epitopes of these
MTB antigens can contribute to effective immunity against the pathogen.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.210391497 
PMCID: PMC17320
PMID: 11035787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

