
1. J Immunol. 2000 Nov 1;165(9):5287-94.

Transepithelial neutrophil migration is CXCR1 dependent in vitro and is defective
in IL-8 receptor knockout mice.

Godaly G(1), Hang L, Frend√©us B, Svanborg C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Microbiology, Immunology and
Glycobiology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Neutrophil migration across infected mucosal surfaces is chemokine dependent, but
the role of chemokine receptors has not been investigated. In this study,
chemokine receptors were shown to be expressed by epithelial cells lining the
urinary tract, and to play an essential role for neutrophil migration across the 
mucosal barrier. Uroepithelial CXCR1 and CXCR2 expression was detected in human
urinary tract biopsies, and in vitro infection of human uroepithelial cell lines 
caused a dramatic increase in both receptors. As a consequence, there was higher 
binding of IL-8 to the cells and the IL-8-dependent neutrophil migration across
the infected epithelial cell layers was enhanced. Abs to IL-8 or to the CXCR1
receptor inhibited this increase by 60% (p<0.004), but anti-CXCR2 Abs had no
effect, suggesting that CXCR1 was the more essential receptor in this process.
Similar observations were made in the mouse urinary tract, where experimental
infection stimulated epithelial expression of the murine IL-8 receptor, followed 
by a rapid flux of neutrophils into the lumen. IL-8 receptor knockout mice, in
contrast, failed to express the receptor, their neutrophils were unable to cross 
the epithelial barrier, and accumulated in massive numbers in the tissues. These 
results demonstrate that epithelial cells express CXC receptors and that
infection increases receptor expression. Furthermore, we show that CXCR1 is
required for neutrophil migration across infected epithelial cell layers in
vitro, and that the murine IL-8 receptor is needed for neutrophils to cross the
infected mucosa of the urinary tract in vivo.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.165.9.5287 
PMID: 11046063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

