
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 12;276(2):1204-10.

Subunit interactions of yeast NAD+-specific isocitrate dehydrogenase.

Panisko EA(1), McAlister-Henn L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, Texas 78229-3900, USA.

Yeast mitochondrial NAD(+)-specific isocitrate dehydrogenase is an octamer
composed of four each of two nonidentical but related subunits designated IDH1
and IDH2. IDH2 was previously shown to contain the catalytic site, whereas IDH1
contributes regulatory properties including cooperativity with respect to
isocitrate and allosteric activation by AMP. In this study, interactions between 
IDH1 and IDH2 were detected using the yeast two-hybrid system, but interactions
between identical subunit polypeptides were not detected with this or other
methods. A model for heterodimeric interactions between the subunits is therefore
proposed for this enzyme. A corollary of this model, based on the
three-dimensional structure of the homologous enzyme from Escherichia coli, is
that some interactions between subunits occur at isocitrate binding sites. Based 
on this model, two residues (Lys-183 and Asp-217) in the regulatory IDH1 subunit 
were predicted to be important in the catalytic site of IDH2. We found that
individually replacing these residues with alanine results in mutant enzymes that
exhibit a drastic reduction in catalysis both in vitro and in vivo. Also based on
this model, the two analogous residues (Lys-189 and Asp-222) of the catalytic
IDH2 subunit were predicted to contribute to the regulatory site of IDH1. A K189A
substitution in IDH2 was found to produce a decrease in activation of the enzyme 
by AMP and a loss of cooperativity with respect to isocitrate. A D222A
substitution in IDH2 produces similar regulatory defects and a substantial
reduction in V(max) in the absence of AMP. Collectively, these results suggest
that the basic structural/functional unit of yeast isocitrate dehydrogenase is a 
heterodimer of IDH1 and IDH2 subunits and that each subunit contributes to the
isocitrate binding site of the other.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M005056200 
PMID: 11042198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

