
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 19;276(3):1850-6. Epub 2000 Oct 24.

Alkaline response genes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and their relationship to the
RIM101 pathway.

Lamb TM(1), Xu W, Diamond A, Mitchell AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, the Institute of Cancer Research, Columbia
University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 2001 Apr 13;276(15):12476.

Environmental pH exerts broad control over growth and differentiation, but the
molecular responses to external pH changes are poorly understood. Here we have
used open reading frame macroarray hybridization to identify alkaline response
genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Northern or lacZ fusion assays confirmed the
alkaline induction of two ion pump genes (ENA1 and VMA4), several ion limitation 
genes (CTR3, FRE1, PHO11/12, and PHO84), a siderophore-iron transporter gene
(ARN4/ENB1), two transcription factor genes (NRG2 and TIS11), and two predicted
membrane protein genes (YAR068W/YHR214W and YOL154W). Unlike ENA1 and SHC1, these
new alkaline response genes are not induced by high salinity. The known
pH-responsive genes in other fungi depend on the conserved PacC/Rim101p
transcription factor, but induction of several of these new genes relied upon
Rim101p-independent pH signaling mechanisms. Rim101p-dependent genes were also
dependent on Rim13p, a protease required for Rim101p processing. The
Rim101p-dependent gene VMA4 is required for growth in alkaline conditions,
illustrating how Rim101p may control adaptation. Because Rim101p activates ion
pump genes, we tested the role of RIM101 in ion homeostasis and found that RIM101
promotes resistance to elevated cation concentrations. Thus, gene expression
surveys can reveal new functions for characterized transcription factors in
addition to uncovering physiological responses to environmental conditions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M008381200 
PMID: 11050096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

