
1. Infect Immun. 2000 Dec;68(12):6650-5.

Bacterial pathogens induce abscess formation by CD4(+) T-cell activation via the 
CD28-B7-2 costimulatory pathway.

Tzianabos AO(1), Chandraker A, Kalka-Moll W, Stingele F, Dong VM, Finberg RW,
Peach R, Sayegh MH.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
atzianabos@channing.harvard.edu

Abscesses are a classic host response to infection by many pathogenic bacteria.
The immunopathogenesis of this tissue response to infection has not been fully
elucidated. Previous studies have suggested that T cells are involved in the
pathologic process, but the role of these cells remains unclear. To delineate the
mechanism by which T cells mediate abscess formation associated with
intra-abdominal sepsis, the role of T-cell activation and the contribution of
antigen-presenting cells via CD28-B7 costimulation were investigated. T cells
activated in vitro by zwitterionic bacterial polysaccharides (Zps) known to
induce abscess formation required CD28-B7 costimulation and, when adoptively
transferred to the peritoneal cavity of na√Øve rats, promoted abscess formation.
Blockade of T-cell activation via the CD28-B7 pathway in animals with CTLA4Ig
prevented abscess formation following challenge with different bacterial
pathogens, including Staphylococcus aureus, Bacteroides fragilis, and a
combination of Enterococcus faecium and Bacteroides distasonis. In contrast,
these animals had an increased abscess rate following in vivo T-cell activation
via CD28 signaling. Abscess formation in vivo and T-cell activation in vitro
required costimulation by B7-2 but not B7-1. These results demonstrate that
abscess formation by pathogenic bacteria is under the control of a common
effector mechanism that requires T-cell activation via the CD28-B7-2 pathway.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.68.12.6650-6655.2000 
PMCID: PMC97762
PMID: 11083777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

