
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 23;276(8):5707-13. Epub 2000 Nov 20.

Isolation and characterization of human beta -defensin-3, a novel human inducible
peptide antibiotic.

Harder J(1), Bartels J, Christophers E, Schroder JM.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Unit, Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Kiel,
Schittenhelmstrasse 7, 24105 Kiel, Germany.

The growing public health problem of infections caused by multiresistant
Gram-positive bacteria, in particular Staphylococcus aureus, prompted us to
screen human epithelia for endogenous S. aureus-killing factors. A novel 5-kDa,
nonhemolytic antimicrobial peptide (human beta-defensin-3, hBD-3) was isolated
from human lesional psoriatic scales and cloned from keratinocytes. hBD-3
demonstrated a salt-insensitive broad spectrum of potent antimicrobial activity
against many potentially pathogenic microbes including multiresistant S. aureus
and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium. Ultrastructural analyses of
hBD-3-treated S. aureus revealed signs of cell wall perforation. Recombinant
hBD-3 (expressed as a His-Tag-fusion protein in Escherichia coli) and chemically 
synthesized hBD-3 were indistinguishable from naturally occurring peptide with
respect to their antimicrobial activity and biochemical properties. Investigation
of different tissues revealed skin and tonsils to be major hBD-3 mRNA-expressing 
tissues. Molecular cloning and biochemical analyses of antimicrobial peptides in 
cell culture supernatants revealed keratinocytes and airway epithelial cells as
cellular sources of hBD-3. Tumor necrosis factor alpha and contact with bacteria 
were found to induce hBD-3 mRNA expression. hBD-3 therefore might be important in
the innate epithelial defense of infections by various microorganisms seen in
skin and lung, such as cystic fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M008557200 
PMID: 11085990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

