
1. J Immunol. 2000 Dec 1;165(11):6463-71.

Identification of major epitopes of Mycobacterium tuberculosis AG85B that are
recognized by HLA-A*0201-restricted CD8+ T cells in HLA-transgenic mice and
humans.

Geluk A(1), van Meijgaarden KE, Franken KL, Drijfhout JW, D'Souza S, Necker A,
Huygen K, Ottenhoff TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. ageluk@lumc.nl

CD8(+) T cells are thought to play an important role in protective immunity to
tuberculosis. Although several nonprotein ligands have been identified for
CD1-restricted CD8(+) CTLs, epitopes for classical MHC class I-restricted CD8(+) 
T cells, which most likely represent a majority among CD8(+) T cells, have
remained ill defined. HLA-A*0201 is one of the most prevalent class I alleles,
with a frequency of over 30% in most populations. HLA-A2/K(b) transgenic mice
were shown to provide a powerful model for studying induction of
HLA-A*0201-restricted immune responses in vivo. The Ag85 complex, a major
component of secreted Mycobacterium tuberculosis proteins, induces strong CD4(+) 
T cell responses in M. tuberculosis-infected individuals, and protection against 
tuberculosis in Ag85-DNA-immunized animals. In this study, we demonstrate the
presence of HLA class I-restricted, CD8(+) T cells against Ag85B of M.
tuberculosis in HLA-A2/K(b) transgenic mice and HLA-A*0201(+) humans. Moreover,
two immunodominant Ag85 peptide epitopes for HLA-A*0201-restricted, M.
tuberculosis-reactive CD8(+) CTLs were identified. These CD8(+) T cells produced 
IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha and recognized Ag-pulsed or bacillus
Calmette-Guérin-infected, HLA-A*0201-positive, but not HLA-A*0201-negative or
uninfected human macrophages. This CTL-mediated killing was blocked by anti-CD8
or anti-HLA class I mAb. Using fluorescent peptide/HLA-A*0201 tetramers,
Ag85-specific CD8(+) T cells could be visualized in bacillus
Calmette-Guérin-responsive, HLA-A*0201(+) individuals. Collectively, our results 
demonstrate the presence of HLA class I-restricted CD8(+) CTL against a major Ag 
of M. tuberculosis and identify Ag85B epitopes that are strongly recognized by
HLA-A*0201-restricted CD8(+) T cells in humans and mice. These epitopes thus
represent potential subunit components for the design of vaccines against
tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.165.11.6463 
PMID: 11086086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

