
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 16;276(11):8225-30. Epub 2000 Nov 16.

Identification of the human mitochondrial oxodicarboxylate carrier. Bacterial
expression, reconstitution, functional characterization, tissue distribution, and
chromosomal location.

Fiermonte G(1), Dolce V, Palmieri L, Ventura M, Runswick MJ, Palmieri F, Walker
JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaco-Biology, Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Bari, Via E. Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy.

In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the genes ODC1 and ODC2 encode isoforms of the
oxodicarboxylate carrier. They both transport C5-C7 oxodicarboxylates across the 
inner membranes of mitochondria and are members of the family of mitochondrial
carrier proteins. Orthologs are encoded in the genomes of Caenorhabditis elegans 
and Drosophila melanogaster, and a human expressed sequence tag (EST) encodes
part of a closely related protein. Information from the EST has been used to
complete the human cDNA sequence. This sequence has been used to map the gene to 
chromosome 14q11.2 and to show that the gene is expressed in all tissues that
were examined. The human protein was produced by overexpression in Escherichia
coli, purified, and reconstituted into phospholipid vesicles. It has similar
transport characteristics to the yeast oxodicarboxylate carrier proteins (ODCs). 
Both the human and yeast ODCs catalyzed the transport of the oxodicarboxylates
2-oxoadipate and 2-oxoglutarate by a counter-exchange mechanism. Adipate,
glutarate, and to a lesser extent, pimelate, 2-oxopimelate, 2-aminoadipate,
oxaloacetate, and citrate were also transported by the human ODC. The main
differences between the human and yeast ODCs are that 2-aminoadipate is
transported by the former but not by the latter, whereas malate is transported by
the yeast ODCs but not by the human ortholog. In mammals, 2-oxoadipate is a
common intermediate in the catabolism of lysine, tryptophan, and hydroxylysine.
It is transported from the cytoplasm into mitochondria where it is converted into
acetyl-CoA. Defects in human ODC are likely to be a cause of 2-oxoadipate
acidemia, an inborn error of metabolism of lysine, tryptophan, and hydroxylysine.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M009607200 
PMID: 11083877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

