
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Dec;20(24):9212-24.

Vav3 mediates receptor protein tyrosine kinase signaling, regulates GTPase
activity, modulates cell morphology, and induces cell transformation.

Zeng L(1), Sachdev P, Yan L, Chan JL, Trenkle T, McClelland M, Welsh J, Wang LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

A recently reported new member of the Vav family proteins, Vav3 has been
identified as a Ros receptor protein tyrosine kinase (RPTK) interacting protein
by yeast two-hybrid screening. Northern analysis shows that Vav3 has a broad
tissue expression profile that is distinct from those of Vav and Vav2. Two
species of Vav3 transcripts, 3.4 and 5.4 kb, were detected with a differential
expression pattern in various tissues. Transient expression of Vav in 293T and
NIH 3T3 cells demonstrated that ligand stimulation of several RPTKs (epidermal
growth factor receptor [EGFR], Ros, insulin receptor [IR], and insulin-like
growth factor I receptor [IGFR]) led to tyrosine phosphorylation of Vav3 and its 
association with the receptors as well as their downstream signaling molecules,
including Shc, Grb2, phospholipase C (PLC-gamma), and phosphatidylinositol 3
kinase. In vitro binding assays using glutathione S-transferase-fusion
polypeptides containing the GTPase-binding domains of Rok-alpha, Pak, or Ack
revealed that overexpression of Vav3 in NIH 3T3 cells resulted in the activation 
of Rac-1 and Cdc42 whereas a deletion mutant lacking the N-terminal calponin
homology and acidic region domains activated RhoA and Rac-1 but lost the ability 
to activate Cdc42. Vav3 induced marked membrane ruffles and microspikes in NIH
3T3 cells, while the N-terminal truncation mutants of Vav3 significantly enhanced
membrane ruffle formation but had a reduced ability to induce microspikes.
Activation of IR further enhanced the ability of Vav3 to induce membrane ruffles,
but IGFR activation specifically promoted Vav3-mediated microspike formation.
N-terminal truncation of Vav3 activated its transforming potential, as measured
by focus-formation assays. We conclude that Vav3 mediates RPTK signaling and
regulates GTPase activity, its native and mutant forms are able to modulate cell 
morphology, and it has the potential to induce cell transformation.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.20.24.9212-9224.2000 
PMCID: PMC102179
PMID: 11094073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

