
1. Tissue Antigens. 2000 Oct;56(4):291-302.

Diversity is demonstrated in class I HLA-A and HLA-B alleles in Cameroon, Africa:
description of HLA-A*03012, *2612, *3006 and HLA-B*1403, *4016, *4703.

Ellis JM(1), Mack SJ, Leke RF, Quakyi I, Johnson AH, Hurley CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

To examine the genetic diversity in west Africa, class I HLA-A and HLA-B alleles 
of 92 unrelated individuals from two areas in the Cameroon, the capital Yaoundé
and the village of Etoa, were identified by direct automated DNA sequencing of
exons 2 and 3 of the HLA-B locus alleles and sequence-specific oligonucleotide
probe (SSOP) and/or sequencing of the HLA-A locus alleles. HLA-A*2301 (18.7%),
A*2902 (10.4%), B*5301 (10.9%), and B*5802 (10.9%) were the most frequently
detected alleles, present in at least 10% of the population. A total of 30 HLA-A 
locus and 33 HLA-B locus alleles, including six novel alleles, were detected. The
novel alleles were HLA-A*03012, A*2612, A*3006 and HLA-B*1403, B*4016, and
B*4703. HLA-B*4703 contains a novel amino acid sequence that is a combination of 
the first 5 amino acids of the Bw6 epitope and the last 2 residues of the Bw4
epitope. The addition of 6 alleles to the ever-expanding number of known class I 
HLA alleles supports our hypothesis that extensive genetic diversity, including
previously undescribed alleles, would be observed in this African population. In 
the Yaoundé population, the allele frequency distribution at the HLA-A locus is
consistent with distributions indicative of balancing selection. Extensive
HLA-A-B haplotypes were observed in this population suggesting that only a
fraction of the Cameroon HLA-A-B haplotype diversity has been observed.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-0039.2000.560401.x 
PMID: 11098929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

