
1. Blood. 2000 Dec 1;96(12):3915-21.

Bcl-2 expression restores the leukemogenic potential of a BCR/ABL mutant
defective in transformation.

Cirinn√† M(1), Trotta R, Salomoni P, Kossev P, Wasik M, Perrotti D, Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Growth factor-dependent hematopoietic cell lines expressing the BCR/ABL
oncoprotein of the Ph chromosome show growth factor-independent proliferation and
resistance to apoptosis. Apoptosis resistance of BCR/ABL-expressing cells may
depend on enhanced expression of anti-apoptotic proteins as well as reduced
expression and/or inactivation of pro-apoptotic proteins. Compared to myeloid
precursor 32Dcl3 cells expressing wild type BCR/ABL, cells expressing a BCR/ABL
mutant lacking amino acids 176-426 in the BCR domain (p185 delta BCR) are
susceptible to apoptosis induced by interleukin-3 (IL-3) deprivation. These cells
exhibited the hypophosphorylated apoptotic BAD and markedly reduced levels of
Bcl-2. Upon ectopic expression of Bcl-2, these cells showed no changes in BAD
phosphorylation, but they became apoptosis-resistant and proliferated in the
absence of IL-3, albeit more slowly than cells expressing wild type BCR/ABL.
Moreover, the p185 delta BCR/Bcl-2 double transfectants were leukemogenic when
injected into immunodeficient mice, but Bcl-2 expression did not restore the
leukemia-inducing effects of p185 delta BCR to the levels of wild type BCR/ABL.
Leukemic cells recovered from the spleen of mice injected with p185 delta
BCR/Bcl-2 cells did not show rearrangements in the Bcl-2 genomic locus, but they 
exhibited enhanced proliferation in culture and induced a rapidly fatal disease
process when inoculated in secondary recipient mice. Together, these data support
the importance of anti-apoptotic pathways for BCR/ABL-dependent leukemogenesis
and suggest that Bcl-2 expression promotes secondary changes leading to a more
aggressive tumor phenotype. (Blood. 2000;96:3915-3921)


PMID: 11090078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

