
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2000 Sep 28;42(3):191-7.

Standardization of experimental infection with Flavobacterium psychrophilum, the 
agent of rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss fry syndrome.

Garcia C(1), Pozet F, Michel C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire DÃ©partemental d'Analyses du Jura, Lons-le-Saunier, France.

Rainbow trout fry syndrome (RTFS) is a septicaemic infection of young rainbow
trout Oncorhynchus mykiss occurring at low temperatures and responsible for
severe economic losses in European fish farming. The causative agent,
Flavobacterium psychrophilum, is a gliding bacterium, and difficulties in
culturing it have long been an impediment to investigations on pathogenesis and
immunity. Successful attempts at experimentally inducing the disease have been
reported, but no experimental model resulting in well-controlled and
quantitatively reproducible effects has been described. Recent improvements in F.
psychrophilum cultivation made it possible to produce bacterial suspensions with 
nearly constant viability and to complete challenge injections in rainbow trout
fingerlings, using accurately adjusted infective doses. Parenteral injection
resulted in significant mortality, which was higher when administered
intramuscularly (IM) than intraperitoneally (IP). Lethal doses 50 % lower than
10(3) colony forming units were consistently obtained in trout weighing 3 to 5 g,
and the regular shape of the cumulative mortality curves appeared to lend itself 
to quantitative analyses. Bath experiments produced milder effects, although
mortality ranging between 45 and 60 % was obtained in 6 g trout when skin lesions
or stressors were induced along with bacterial exposure. Temperature, salinity
and the process of preserving isolates (at least over short periods of time) did 
not seem to be associated with the severity of infection. Nevertheless, infection
trials performed at 2 different locations differing both in water quality and in 
the system of fish maintenance resulted in different mortalities. These findings 
notwithstanding, the proposed IM model appears easy to apply under standardized
experimental conditions and should contribute to effective advances in the study 
of the disease.

DOI: 10.3354/dao042191 
PMID: 11104070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

