
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2000 Oct;19(10):773-80.

Assessment of intercentre reproducibility and epidemiological concordance of
Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1 genotyping by amplified fragment length
polymorphism analysis.

Fry NK(1), Bangsborg JM, Bernander S, Etienne J, Forsblom B, Gaia V, Hasenberger 
P, Lindsay D, Papoutsi A, Pelaz C, Struelens M, Uldum SA, Visca P, Harrison TG.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Systemic Infection Laboratory, London, UK. nfry@phls.nhs.uk

The aims of this work were to assess (i) the intercentre reproducibility and
epidemiological concordance of amplified fragment length polymorphism analysis
for epidemiological typing of Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1, and (ii) the
suitability of the method for standardisation and implementation by members of
the European Working Group on Legionella Infections. Fifty coded isolates
comprising two panels of well-characterised strains, a "reproducibility" panel
(n=20) and an "epidemiologically related" panel (n=30), were sent to 13 centres
in 12 European countries. Analysis was undertaken in each centre following a
previously determined standard protocol. Results were analysed by the
participants, using gel analysis software where available, and submitted to the
coordinating centre. The coordinating centre reanalysed all results visually and 
selected data-sets with gel analysis software. Data analysis by participants
yielded reproducibility (R) values of 0.20-1.00 and epidemiological concordance
(E) values of 0.11-1.00, with 6 to 34 types. Following visual analysis by the
coordinating centre, R=0.78-1.00, and E=0.67-1.00, with 10-20 types. Analysis of 
three data-sets by the coordinating centre using gel analysis software yielded
R=1.00 and E=1.00, with 12, 13 or 14 types. This method can be used as a simple, 
rapid screening tool for epidemiological typing of isolates of Legionella
pneumophila serogroup 1. Results demonstrate that the method can be highly
reproducible (R=1.00) and epidemiologically concordant (E=1.00), with good
discrimination. The electropherograms generated are amenable to computer-aided
analysis, but strict adherence to a previously defined laboratory protocol is
required. Following designation of representative type strains and patterns, this
method will be adopted by the European Working Group on Legionella Infections as 
the first internationally standardised typing method for use in the investigation
of travel-associated Legionella infections.

DOI: 10.1007/s100960000359 
PMID: 11117642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

