
1. Infect Immun. 2001 Jan;69(1):252-61.

Recombinant antigen-enterotoxin A2/B chimeric mucosal immunogens differentially
enhance antibody responses and B7-dependent costimulation of CD4(+) T cells.

Martin M(1), Hajishengallis G, Metzger DJ, Michalek SM, Connell TD, Russell MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

The ADP-ribosylating enterotoxins, cholera toxin (CT) and the Escherichia coli
heat-labile toxin (LT-IIa), have been shown to enhance mucosal and systemic
antibody (Ab) responses to coadministered antigens. The purpose of the present
study was to compare the ability of the nontoxic A2/B subunits of these toxins,
which have distinct targeting properties, to augment the immunogenicity of a
genetically coupled protein antigen. Structurally similar chimeric proteins were 
generated by genetically replacing the toxic A1 subunit of CT or LT-IIa with the 
saliva-binding region (SBR) from the streptococcal adhesin AgI/II. Intranasal
immunization of BALB/c mice with either chimeric protein induced significantly
higher plasma and mucosal anti-SBR immunoglobulin A (IgA) and IgG Ab responses
than SBR alone. Moreover, compared to SBR-LT-IIaA2/B, SBR-CTA2/B elicited
significantly higher levels of plasma IgG1 and salivary IgA anti-SBR Ab
responses. Ex vivo and in vitro experiments revealed that SBR-CTA2/B selectively 
up-regulated B7-2 expression on murine B cells isolated from both the nasal
associated lymphoid tissue, cervical lymph nodes, and spleen. In contrast,
SBR-LT-IIaA2/B had little effect on B7-1 or B7-2 expression on B220(+), CD11b(+),
or CD11c(+) cells. Analysis of the functional costimulatory activity of
SBR-CTA2/B-treated B cells revealed a significant enhancement in
anti-CD3-stimulated CD4(+) T-cell proliferative responses, and this proliferation
was significantly reduced by treatment with anti-B7-2 but not with anti-B7-1 or
isotype control Abs. Thus, SBR-CTA2/B and SBR-LT-IIaA2/B exhibit distinct
patterns of antibody responses associated with differential effects on B7-2
expression and subsequent costimulatory effects on CD4(+) T cells.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.1.252-261.2001 
PMCID: PMC97879
PMID: 11119513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

