
1. Br J Haematol. 2000 Nov;111(2):432-40.

Stroma-derived factor 1alpha induces a selective inhibition of human erythroid
development via the functional upregulation of Fas/CD95 ligand.

Gibellini D(1), Bassini A, Re MC, Ponti C, Miscia S, Gonelli A, La Placa M, Zauli
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Microbiology Section,
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4), the high-affinity receptor for stroma-derived
factor 1alpha (SDF-1alpha), shows distinct patterns of expression in human CD34+ 
haematopoietic progenitor cells induced to differentiate in vitro along the
granulocytic and erythroid lineages. In serum-free liquid cultures supplemented
with stem cell factor (SCF), interleukin 3 (IL-3) and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor, the expression of surface CXCR4 progressively
increased in cells differentiating along the granulocytic lineage. The addition
in culture of 200 ng/ml of SDF-1alpha, a concentration which maximally activated 
intracellular Ca2+ flux, only modestly affected the expression levels of CD15 and
CD11b granulocytic antigens, as well as the total number of viable cells. On the 
other hand, in liquid cultures supplemented with SCF, IL-3 and erythropoietin,
SDF-1alpha induced the downregulation of glycophorin A erythroid antigen,
accompanied by a progressive decline in the number of viable erythroblasts.
Moreover, in semisolid assays, SDF-1alpha significantly reduced the number of
plurifocal erythroid colonies (erythroid blast-forming units; BFU-E), whereas it 
did not affect granulocyte-macrophage colony-forming units (CFU-GM). We also
demonstrated that the inhibitory effect of SDF-1alpha on glycophorin A+ erythroid
cell development was mediated by the functional upregulation of CD95L in
erythroid cultures. These data indicate that SDF-1alpha plays a role as a
negative regulator of erythropoiesis.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2141.2000.02386.x 
PMID: 11122082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

