
1. J Immunol. 2001 Jan 1;166(1):162-9.

RANTES potentiates antigen-specific mucosal immune responses.

Lillard JW Jr(1), Boyaka PN, Taub DD, McGhee JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Morehouse School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA 30310, USA.

RANTES is produced by lymphoid and epithelial cells of the mucosa in response to 
various external stimuli and is chemotactic for lymphocytes. The role of RANTES
in adaptive mucosal immunity has not been studied. To better elucidate the role
of this chemokine, we have characterized the effects of RANTES on mucosal and
systemic immune responses to nasally coadministered OVA. RANTES enhanced
Ag-specific serum Ab responses, inducing predominately anti-OVA IgG2a and IgG3
followed by IgG1 and IgG2b subclass Ab responses. RANTES also increased
Ag-specific Ab titers in mucosal secretions and these Ab responses were
associated with increased numbers of Ab-forming cells, derived from mucosal and
systemic compartments. Splenic and mucosally derived CD4(+) T cells of
RANTES-treated mice displayed higher Ag-specific proliferative responses and
IFN-gamma, IL-2, IL-5, and IL-6 production than control groups receiving OVA
alone. In vitro, RANTES up-regulated the expression of CD28, CD40 ligand, and
IL-12R by Ag-activated primary T cells from DO11.10 (OVA-specific TCR-transgenic)
mice and by resting T cells in a dose-dependent fashion. These studies suggest
that RANTES can enhance mucosal and systemic humoral Ab responses through help
provided by Th1- and select Th2-type cytokines as well as through the induction
of costimulatory molecule and cytokine receptor expression on T lymphocytes.
These effects could serve as a link between the initial innate signals of the
host and the adaptive immune system.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.1.162 
PMID: 11123289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

