
1. J Immunol. 2000 Dec 15;165(12):6840-8.

B7 requirements for primary and secondary protein- and polysaccharide-specific Ig
isotype responses to Streptococcus pneumoniae.

Wu ZQ(1), Khan AQ, Shen Y, Schartman J, Peach R, Lees A, Mond JJ, Gause WC,
Snapper CM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of. Pathology and Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

The requirements for B7 costimulation during an in vivo humoral response to an
intact extracellular bacteria have not been reported. In this study we immunized 
mice with Streptococcus pneumoniae (R36A) to determine the B7 requirements for
induction of Ig, specific for two determinants on R36A, the phosphorylcholine
(PC) determinant of C-polysaccharide and pneumococcal surface protein A (PspA).
We show that the primary anti-PspA response, the development of PspA-specific
memory, and the induction of the secondary anti-PspA response in primed mice were
completely dependent upon B7 costimulation. Of note, costimulation was required
only briefly after the secondary immunization compared with after the primary
immunization for optimal induction of Ig. Blockade of B7 costimulation at the
time of secondary immunization also completely abrogated the established state of
memory, but did not induce tolerance. In contrast to the anti-PspA response, the 
primary anti-PC response involved only a very short period of B7 costimulation.
Whereas B7-2 alone was required for induction of the primary anti-PspA and
anti-PC responses, a redundant role for B7-1 and B7-2 was noted for the
PspA-specific secondary response. CTLA4Ig blocked both the anti-PC and anti-PspA 
responses equally well over a wide range of bacterial doses. These studies
demonstrate a critical, but variable, role for B7-dependent costimulation during 
an Ig response to an extracellular bacteria.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.165.12.6840 
PMID: 11120807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

