
1. J Immunol. 2000 Dec 15;165(12):7316-22.

CD40 signaling replaces CD4+ lymphocytes and its blocking prevents chronic
rejection of heart transplants.

Fischbein MP(1), Ardehali A, Yun J, Schoenberger S, Laks H, Irie Y, Dempsey P,
Cheng G, Fishbein MC, Bonavida B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, Division of
Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of California Los Angeles School of Medicine, 
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Chronic rejection remains the major obstacle to long term survival in heart
transplant recipients. The cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie
chronic rejection are not known, and their discovery can form the basis of
clinical intervention. Several investigators have suggested that the development 
of chronic rejection in solid organ transplants is dependent on help mediated by 
CD4(+) lymphocytes. Importantly, the mechanism through which help is provided has
not been fully delineated in transplant rejection. Using a murine heterotopic
heart transplant model without immunosuppression, this study defines the
functional role of CD4(+) lymphocytes in chronic rejection. In an MHC class
II-mismatched model, we demonstrate that chronic rejection was absolutely
contingent on the presence of CD4(+) lymphocytes. Importantly, here we report
that signaling through CD40 can replace the requirement of CD4(+) lymphocytes,
demonstrated by the development of chronic rejection in CD4 knockout recipients
treated with a CD40-activating mAb (FGK45). The return of rejection appears to be
a CD8(+) lymphocyte-dependent process, noted by the absence of rejection in
FGK45-treated recombinase-activated gene knockout (CD4(+) and CD8(+)
lymphocyte-deficient) recipients. The CD40 signaling pathway works independently 
of B7-CD28 costimulation, as indicated by the development of severe chronic
rejection in CD28 knockout recipients. Importantly, this study provides evidence 
that CD40 ligand-targeted therapies may prevent chronic rejection only in strain 
combinations where CD4(+) lymphocyte help is absolutely required.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.165.12.7316 
PMID: 11120867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

