
1. J Immunol. 2001 Jan 1;166(1):232-40.

IFN-gamma production by Th1 cells generated from naive CD4+ T cells exposed to
norepinephrine.

Swanson MA(1), Lee WT, Sanders VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Loyola University Medical Center,
Maywood, IL 60153, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol 2001 Jun 1;166(11):6992.

During activation in vivo, naive CD4(+) T cells are exposed to various endogenous
ligands, such as cytokines and the neurotransmitter norepinephrine (NE). To
determine whether NE affects naive T cell differentiation, we used naive CD4(+) T
cells sort-purified from either BALB/c or DO11.10 TCR-transgenic mouse spleens
and activated these cells with either anti-CD3/anti-CD28 mAbs or APC and
OVA(323-329) peptide, respectively, under Th1-promoting conditions. RT-PCR and
functional assays using selective adrenergic receptor (AR) subtype antagonists
showed that naive CD4(+) T cells expressed only the beta 2AR subtype to bind NE
and that stimulation of this receptor generated Th1 cells that produced 2- to
4-fold more IFN-gamma. This increase was due to more IFN-gamma produced per cell 
upon restimulation instead of more IFN-gamma-secreting cells, as determined by
IFN-gamma-specific immunofluorescence and enzyme-linked immunospot. In contrast, 
Th1 cell differentiation was unaffected when naive T cells were exposed to NE and
activated either in the presence of a neutralizing anti-IL-12 mAb or by APC from 
IL-12-deficient mice. Moreover, the addition of IL-12 to the IL-12-deficient APC 
cultures restored the ability of NE to increase Th1 differentiation. Taken
together, these results indicate that a possible link may exist between the
signaling pathways used by NE and IL-12 to increase naive CD4(+) T cell
differentiation to a Th1 cell.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.1.232 
PMID: 11123297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

