
1. Int Rev Immunol. 2000;19(6):573-85.

New revelations in susceptibility to autoimmune thyroiditis by the use of H2 and 
HLA class II transgenic models.

Kong YC(1), David CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit MI 48201, USA. ykong@med.wayne.edu

H2 and HLA transgenes were utilized to clarify the role of class II genes in
susceptibility to experimental autoimmune thyroiditis (EAT), a model for
Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT). Susceptibility was transferred by H2 class II
transgenes to a resistant haplotype and by HLA-DRA/DRB1*0301 (DR3) transgene into
class II-negative Ab0 mice. Mice with a HLA-DRB1*1502 (DR2) transgene remain
resistant to mouse thyroglobulin (mTg)-induced EAT, illustrating the role of
HLA-DRB1 polymorphism. A role for HLA-DQ polymorphism was shown with hTg-induced 
EAT in HLA-DQ*0301/DQB1*0302 (DQ8), but not HLA-DQ*0103/DQB1*0601 (DQ6),
transgenic mice. Yet, both DQ8+ and DQ6+ mice were unresponsive to mTg. Single
transgenes obviate the problems from DR/DQ linkage disequilibrium and may
distinguish the degree of susceptibility and the response to shared or specific
epitopes. The introduction of conserved Eak transgene into Ab0 mice reveals a new
role for H2E molecules in EAT. Without H2A molecules, EalphaEbetab molecules and 
T cells respond to hTg or pTg with severe thyroiditis, but not to mTg, thus
distinguishing self from nonself. However, IAb genes in resistant mice ameliorate
Eak transgene-mediated thyroiditis, similar to the effect of Eak transgene on
IAs-mediated EAT. Studies in HLA DQ/DR double transgenic mice simulating human
haplotypes could reveal HLA class II gene interactions in HT.

DOI: 10.3109/08830180009088513 
PMID: 11129116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

