
1. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 2001 Jan;8(1):143-9.

The AIDA autotransporter system is associated with F18 and stx2e in Escherichia
coli isolates from pigs diagnosed with edema disease and postweaning diarrhea.

Niewerth U(1), Frey A, Voss T, Le Bouguénec C, Baljer G, Franke S, Schmidt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Infektiologie, Zentrum für Molekularbiologie der Entzündung,
Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, Germany.

Pathogenic Escherichia coli strains are known to cause edema disease (ED) and
postweaning diarrhea (PWD) in piglets. Although the exact mechanisms of
pathogenicity that lead to ED-PWD remain to be elucidated, E. coli-borne
Shiga-like toxin and adhesion-mediating virulence factors such as F18 adhesin or 
F4 fimbriae are believed to play a central role in ED-PWD. In light of these
observations we investigated whether another E. coli adhesin, the plasmid-encoded
AIDA (adhesin involved in diffuse adherence) might also be present in
ED-PWD-causing E. coli isolates. For rapid screening for the AIDA system in large
numbers of isolates, a multiplex PCR method along with a duplex Western blot
procedure was developed. When screening 104 strains obtained from pigs with or
without ED-PWD, we observed a high prevalence of the AIDA operon in porcine E.
coli isolates, with over 25% of all strains being AIDA positive, and we could
demonstrate a significant association of the intact AIDA gene (orfB) with ED-PWD,
while defects in orfB were associated with the absence of disease. Although our
data hint toward a contribution of AIDA to ED-PWD, further studies will be
necessary since the presence of the AIDA genes was also associated with the
presence of the Shiga-like toxin and F18 adhesin genes, two reported virulence
factors for ED-PWD.

DOI: 10.1128/CDLI.8.1.143-149.2001 
PMCID: PMC96024
PMID: 11139209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

