
1. J Exp Med. 2001 Jan 15;193(2):195-206.

The immunogenicity of a new human minor histocompatibility antigen results from
differential antigen processing.

Brickner AG(1), Warren EH, Caldwell JA, Akatsuka Y, Golovina TN, Zarling AL,
Shabanowitz J, Eisenlohr LC, Hunt DF, Engelhard VH, Riddell SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Beirne B. Carter Center for Immunology Research,
University of Virginia Health Sciences Center, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Minor histocompatibility antigens (mHAgs) present a significant impediment to
organ and bone marrow transplantation between HLA-identical donor and recipient
pairs. Here we report the identification of a new HLA-A*0201-restricted mHAg,
HA-8. Designation of this mHAg as HA-8 is based on the nomenclature of Goulmy
(Goulmy, E. 1996. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 8:75-81). This peptide, RTLDKVLEV, is
derived from KIAA0020, a gene of unknown function located on chromosome 9.
Polymorphic alleles of KIAA0020 encode the alternative sequences PTLDKVLEV and
PTLDKVLEL. Genotypic analysis demonstrated that the HA-8-specific cytotoxic T
lymphocyte (CTL) clone SKH-13 recognized only cells that expressed the allele
encoding R at P1. However, when PTLDKVLEV was pulsed onto cells, or when a
minigene encoding this sequence was used to artificially translocate this peptide
into the endoplasmic reticulum, it was recognized by CTLs nearly as well as
RTLDKVLEV. This indicates that the failure of CTLs to recognize cells expressing 
the PTLDKVLEV-encoding allele of KIAA0020 is due to a failure of this peptide to 
be appropriately proteolyzed or transported. Consistent with the latter
possibility, PTLDKVLEV and its longer precursors were transported poorly compared
with RTLDKVLEV by transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP). These
studies identify a new human mHAg and provide the first evidence that minor
histocompatibility differences can result from the altered processing of
potential antigens rather than differences in interaction with the relevant major
histocompatibility complex molecule or T cell receptor.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.193.2.195 
PMCID: PMC2193344
PMID: 11148223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

