
1. Arthritis Rheum. 2000 Dec;43(12):2834-42.

Analysis of the antigen-specific T cell response in reactive arthritis by flow
cytometry.

Thiel A(1), Wu P, Lauster R, Braun J, Radbruch A, Sieper J.

Author information: 
(1)Benjamin Franklin University Hospital, and German Rheumatology Research
Center, Berlin.

OBJECTIVE: In reactive arthritis (ReA) a bacteria-specific T cell response to the
triggering microbe is detected in synovial fluid (SF), and an impaired Th1
cytokine response has been described. The recent identification of immunodominant
bacterial proteins/peptides and new technologies make a more detailed analysis of
the immune response possible. The aim of the present study was to use these new
techniques to determine the antigen-specific T cell frequency and the cytokine
secretion pattern on stimulation with bacteria-derived recombinant proteins in
the peripheral blood (PB) and SF from patients with ReA.
METHODS: In 3 patients with Chlamydia-induced ReA and 2 patients with
Yersinia-induced ReA, the SF T cell response was investigated after stimulation
with the Chlamydia-derived proteins major outer membrane protein (MOMP) and
heat-shock protein 60 (Hsp60) and the Yersinia-derived proteins 19-kd protein and
Hsp60. In 3 of these patients, the PB T cell response was investigated in
parallel. T cells were stimulated in whole blood or whole SF with antigen plus
anti-CD28 for 6 hours, brefeldin A was added after 2 hours, and cells were fixed 
and stained with antibodies against the surface markers CD4 and CD69 and against 
the cytokines interferon-gamma (IFNgamma), tumor necrosis factor alpha,
interleukin-10 (IL-10), and IL-4. Positive cells were quantified by flow
cytometry.
RESULTS: In the 3 patients with Chlamydia-induced ReA, the antigen-specific T
cell frequency (percentage of IFNgamma CD69 double-positive CD4+ T cells) in
response to MOMP (mean +/- SD 1.2 +/- 1.38%) and to Hsp60 (1.21 +/- 1.45%) in SF 
was about the same. In the 2 patients with Yersinia-induced ReA, the mean +/- SD 
frequency was 0.66 +/- 0.36% in response to the Hsp60 and 03% +/- 0.22 in
response to the 19-kd protein. In the 3 patients whose PB was evaluated, the
corresponding T cell response was > or =10 times lower. In 2 patients with
Chlamydia-induced ReA, antigen-specific IL-10-positive CD4+ T cells were detected
in 0.10-0.23% of the CD4+ T cell subpopulation.
CONCLUSION: The frequency of antigen-specific T cells to Chlamydia- and
Yersinia-derived antigens in the SF of ReA patients is between 1:200 and 1:50.
Both the chlamydial Hsp60 and MOMP are dominant T cell antigens in
Chlamydia-induced ReA. In patients with Chlamydia-induced ReA, we detected
antigen-specific IL-10 secretion, which might mediate an inhibition of effective 
bacterial clearance.

DOI: 10.1002/1529-0131(200012)43:12<2834::AID-ANR25>3.0.CO;2-7 
PMID: 11145043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

