
1. J Immunol. 2001 Jan 15;166(2):754-64.

A molecular framework for two-step T cell signaling: Lck Src homology 3 mutations
discriminate distinctly regulated lipid raft reorganization events.

Patel VP(1), Moran M, Low TA, Miceli MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics and The
Molecular Biology Institute, University of California School of Medicine, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Costimulation by CD28 or lipid-raft-associated CD48 potentiate TCR-induced
signals, cytoskeletal reorganization, and IL-2 production. We and others have
proposed that costimulators function to construct a raft-based platform(s)
especially suited for TCR engagement and sustained and processive signal
transduction. Here, we characterize TCR/CD48 and TCR/CD28 costimulation in T
cells expressing Lck Src homology 3 (SH3) mutants. We demonstrate that Lck SH3
functions after initiation of TCR-induced tyrosine phosphorylation and
concentration of transducers within rafts, to regulate the
costimulation-dependent migration of rafts to the TCR contact site. Expression of
kinase-active/SH3-impaired Lck mutants disrupts costimulation-dependent raft
recruitment, sustained TCR protein tyrosine phosphorylation, and IL-2 production.
However, TCR-induced apoptosis, shown only to require "partial" TCR signals, is
unaffected by expression of kinase-active/SH3-impaired Lck mutants. Therefore,
two distinctly regulated raft reorganization events are required for processive
and sustained "complete" TCR signal transduction and T cell activation. Together 
with recent characterization of CD28 and CD48 costimulatory activities, these
findings provide a molecular framework for two signal models of T cell
activation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.2.754 
PMID: 11145647  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

