
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2001 Feb;67(2):750-9.

Antigenic characterization of the fish pathogen Flavobacterium psychrophilum.

Crump EM(1), Perry MB, Clouthier SC, Kay WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria,
British Columbia V8W 3P6, Canada.

Flavobacteria are a poorly understood and speciated group of commensal bacteria
and opportunistic pathogens. The psychrotroph Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the
etiological agent of rainbow trout fry syndrome and bacterial cold water disease,
septicemic diseases that heavily impact salmonids. Consequently, two verified but
geographically diverse isolates were characterized phenotypically and
biochemically. A facile typing system was devised which readily discriminated
between closely related species and was verified against a pool of recent
prospective isolates. F. psychrophilum was found to be enveloped in a loosely
attached, strongly antigenic outer layer comprised of a predominant, highly
immunogenic, low-molecular-mass carbohydrate antigen as well as several protein
antigens. Surface-exposed antigens were visualized by a combination of
immunoflourescence microscopy, immunogold transmission, and thin-section electron
microscopy and were discriminated by Western blotting using rabbit antisera, by
selective extraction with EDTA-polymyxin B agarose beads, and by extrinsic
labeling of amines with sulfo-N-hydoxysuccinimide-biotin and glycosyl groups with
biotin hydrazide. The predominant approximately 16 kDa antigen was identified as 
low-molecular-mass lipopolysaccharide (LPS), whereas high-molecular-mass LPS
containing O antigen was not as prevalent on whole cells but was abundant in
culture supernatants. Rainbow trout convalescent antisera recognized both
molecular mass classes of LPS as well as a predominant approximately 20-kDa
protein. This study represents the first description at the molecular level of
the surface characteristics and potential vaccine targets of confirmed F.
psychrophilum strains.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.67.2.750-759.2001 
PMCID: PMC92644
PMID: 11157240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

