
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jan 30;98(3):1012-7. Epub 2001 Jan 23.

Proteins associated with the promyelocytic leukemia gene product (PML)-containing
nuclear body move to the nucleolus upon inhibition of proteasome-dependent
protein degradation.

Mattsson K(1), Pokrovskaja K, Kiss C, Klein G, Szekely L.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, S-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.

Several recent findings have indicated that the promyelocytic leukemia gene
product (PML) oncogenic domains (PODs) are involved in proteasome-mediated
degradation of ubiquitinated proteins. We wanted to examine the intracellular
distribution of PML protein in the presence of a proteasome inhibitor. We used
high-resolution microscopy to study the distribution of PML protein and other
POD-associated proteins along with the proteasomes themselves under normal
conditions and in cells treated with the proteasome inhibitor, MG132. Inhibition 
of the proteasomes in MCF-7, HeLa, and IB-4 cell lines resulted in a radical
redistribution of the POD-associated proteins PML, Sp100, and SUMO-1. After 6-10 
h of MG132 treatment, PML, Sp100, and SUMO-1 were no longer detectable in the
PODs and accumulated mainly in the nucleolus. Moreover, MG132 treatment changed
the cellular distribution of the proteasomes. Interestingly, this included the
accumulation in euchromatin areas of the nucleus and within the nucleoli. Several
non-POD-associated proteins did not change their cellular distribution under the 
same conditions. The accumulation of POD-associated proteins and proteasomes in
the nucleoli of MG132-treated cells indicates that these proteins may target the 
nucleoli under normal conditions and that the nucleolus may have a function in
the regulation of proteasomal protein degradation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.031566998 
PMCID: PMC14700
PMID: 11158586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

