
1. Lung Cancer. 2001 Feb-Mar;31(2-3):101-10.

Fatal infection in patients treated for small cell lung cancer in the Institute
of Tuberculosis and Chest Diseases in the years 1980-1994.

Remiszewski P(1), Słodkowska J, Wiatr E, Zych J, Radomski P, Rowińska-Zakrzewska 
E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tuberculosis and Chest Diseases, Płocka 26, 01-138, Warsaw,
Poland.

The study was performed to explore the frequency of infections present at death
and infection as the main cause of death (fatal infection - FI) in 845
consecutive patients (pts) treated for small cell lung cancer (SCLC) at the
Institute of Tuberculosis and Chest Diseases in Warsaw, in the period 1980-1994. 
Diagnosis of infection was based on clinical signs and symptoms, the presence of 
new lesions on the chest X-ray, microbiological tests and/or autopsy examination.
All cases of fungal infection, Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP) and
tuberculosis were proved by autopsy and microscopic examination (including
special staining). FI was diagnosed if no progression of cancer was noted and no 
other complications occurred. Infection was present at the time of death in 116
patients (13.7%) and FI was the cause of death in 39 of them (4.6%). Nine
patients died from fungal infection, eight from bacterial infection, seven from
PCP and two from tuberculosis. In 13 cases the aetiology of infection found at
autopsy was not determined. All FI patients received chemotherapy and
corticosteroids, 16 of them also had radiotherapy on the tumour and mediastinum. 
Thirty-two out of 35 patients had leucopenia. The risk of death from infection
was greater in patients above 60 years of age. Patients in bad performance status
died of infection significantly earlier than others (P<0.05).

DOI: 10.1016/s0169-5002(00)00185-9 
PMID: 11165389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

