
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2001 Feb 20;72(4):408-15.

Metabolic engineering of the nonmevalonate isopentenyl diphosphate synthesis
pathway in Escherichia coli enhances lycopene production.

Kim SW(1), Keasling JD.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Bioproducts Engineering Center, Department of Chemical Engineering,
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-1462, USA.

Isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) is the common, five-carbon building block in the
biosynthesis of all carotenoids. IPP in Escherichia coli is synthesized through
the nonmevalonate pathway, which has not been completely elucidated. The first
reaction of IPP biosynthesis in E. coli is the formation of
1-deoxy-D-xylulose-5-phosphate (DXP), catalyzed by DXP synthase and encoded by
dxs. The second reaction in the pathway is the reduction of DXP to
2-C-methyl-D-erythritol-4-phos- phate, catalyzed by DXP reductoisomerase and
encoded by dxr. To determine if one or more of the reactions in the nonmevalonate
pathway controlled flux to IPP, dxs and dxr were placed on several expression
vectors under the control of three different promoters and transformed into three
E. coli strains (DH5alpha, XL1-Blue, and JM101) that had been engineered to
produce lycopene. Lycopene production was improved significantly in strains
transformed with the dxs expression vectors. When the dxs gene was expressed from
the arabinose-inducible araBAD promoter (P(BAD)) on a medium-copy plasmid,
lycopene production was twofold higher than when dxs was expressed from the
IPTG-inducible trc and lac promoters (P(trc) and P(lac), respectively) on
medium-copy and high-copy plasmids. Given the low final densities of cells
expressing dxs from IPTG-inducible promoters, the low lycopene production was
probably due to the metabolic burden of plasmid maintenance and an excessive
drain of central metabolic intermediates. At arabinose concentrations between 0
and 1.33 mM, cells expressing both dxs and dxr from P(BAD) on a medium-copy
plasmid produced 1.4-2.0 times more lycopene than cells expressing dxs only.
However, at higher arabinose concentrations lycopene production in cells
expressing both dxs and dxr was lower than in cells expressing dxs only. A
comparison of the three E. coli strains transformed with the arabinose-inducible 
dxs on a medium-copy plasmid revealed that lycopene production was highest in
XL1-Blue.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1097-0290(20000220)72:4<408::aid-bit1003>3.0.co;2-h 
PMID: 11180061  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

