
1. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2000 Aug 29;355(1400):1071-6.

Thirty-six views of T-cell recognition.

Krummel M(1), WÃ¼lfing C, Sumen C, Davis MM.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and The Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA 94305, USA.

While much is known about the signalling pathways within lymphocytes that are
triggered during activation, much less is known about how the various cell
surface molecules on T cells initiate these events. To address this, we have
focused on the primary interaction that drives T-cell activation, namely the
binding of a particular T-cell receptor (TCR) to peptide-MHC ligands, and find a 
close correlation between biological activity and off-rate; that is, the most
stimulatory TCR ligands have the slowest dissociation rates. In general, TCRs
from multiple histocompatibility complex (MHC) class-II-restricted T cells have
half-lives of 1-11s at 25 degrees C, a much narrower range than found with
antibodies and suggesting a strong selection for an optimum dissociation rate.
TCR ligands with even faster dissociation rates tend to be antagonists. To
observe the effects of these different ligands in their physiological setting, we
made gene fusions of various molecules with green fluorescent protein (GFP),
transfected them into the relevant lymphocytes, and observed their movements
during T-cell recognition using multicolour video microscopy. We find that
clustering of CD3zeta-GFP and CD4-GFP on the Tcell occurs concomitantly or
slightly before the first rise in calcium by the T cell, and that various
GFP-labelled molecules on the B-cell side cluster shortly thereafter (ICAM-1,
class II MHC, CD48), apparently driven byT-cell molecules. Most of this movement 
towards the interface is mediated by signals through the co-stimulatory
receptors, CD28 and LFA-1, and involves myosin motors and the cortical actin
cytoskeleton. Thus, we have proposed that the principal mechanism by which
co-stimulation enhances T-cell responsiveness is by increasing the local density 
of T-cell activation molecules, their ligands and their attendant signalling
apparatus. In collaboration with Michael Dustin and colleagues, we have also
found that the formation and stability of the TCR-peptide-MHC cluster at the
centre of the interaction cap between T and B cells is highly dependent on the
dissociation rate of the TCR and its ligand. Thus, we are able to link this
kinetic parameter to the formation of a cell surface structure that is linked to 
and probably causal with respect to T-cell activation.

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2000.0644 
PMCID: PMC1692810
PMID: 11186308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

