
1. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2001 Jan;13(1):11-8.

Overexpression of co-stimulatory molecules in peripheral mononuclear cells of
Helicobacter pylori-positive peptic ulcer patients: possible difference in host
responsiveness compared with non-ulcer patients.

Ohara T(1), Arakawa T, Higuchi K, Kaneda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, School of Medicine, Kitasato University,
Sagamihara City, Kanagawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Helicobacter pylori is the principal cause of gastritis and
peptic ulcer disease. However, H. pylori-positive patients do not always have
peptic ulcer. This study was carried out in order to determine the difference in 
host immune reaction to H. pylori between patients with peptic ulcer and those
without.
METHODS: Ten H. pylori-positive patients with peptic ulcer, 10 H. pylori-positive
non-ulcer patients, and 10 healthy volunteers were examined for expression of
surface molecules in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. The surface molecules
were stained with immunofluorescence-labelled specific antibodies and analysed by
flow cytometry.
RESULTS: More mononuclear cells expressed molecules ICAM-1, VLA-4, Leu-M3 in H.
pylori-positive ulcer patients than in non-ulcer patients and healthy volunteers.
There were also more cells expressing CD28, SLe(x), CD4, HLA-DR, and NU-B2 in H. 
pylori-positive ulcer patients than in non-ulcer patients and healthy volunteers.
There were fewer cells expressing CD8 in H. pylori-positive ulcer patients than
in non-ulcer patients and healthy volunteers.
CONCLUSION: H. pylori infection may cause immunological reactions which are
reflected in peripheral mononuclear cells. However, the activity and
characteristics of peripheral mononuclear cells, in terms of expression of
adhesion molecules, may differ between ulcer and non-ulcer patients who are
infected with H. pylori.

DOI: 10.1097/00042737-200101000-00003 
PMID: 11204803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

