
1. J Immunol. 2001 Mar 1;166(5):3599-605.

IC14, an anti-CD14 antibody, inhibits endotoxin-mediated symptoms and
inflammatory responses in humans.

Verbon A(1), Dekkers PE, ten Hove T, Hack CE, Pribble JP, Turner T, Souza S,
Axtelle T, Hoek FJ, van Deventer SJ, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Tropical Medicine, and AIDS, Academic
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
A.Verbon@amc.uva.nl

CD14 is a receptor for cell wall components of Gram-negative and Gram-positive
bacteria that has been implicated in the initiation of the inflammatory response 
to sepsis. To determine the role of CD14 in LPS-induced effects in humans, 16
healthy subjects received an i.v. injection of LPS (4 ng/kg) preceded (-2 h) by
i.v. IC14, a recombinant chimeric mAb against human CD14, at a dose of 1 mg/kg
over 1 h, or placebo. In subjects receiving IC14, saturation of CD14 on
circulating monocytes and granulocytes was >90% at the time of LPS injection.
IC14 attenuated LPS-induced clinical symptoms and strongly inhibited LPS-induced 
proinflammatory cytokine release, while only delaying the release of the
anti-inflammatory cytokines soluble TNF receptor type I and IL-1 receptor
antagonist. IC14 also inhibited leukocyte activation, but more modestly reduced
endothelial cell activation and the acute phase protein response. The capacity of
circulating monocytes and granulocytes to phagocytose Escherichia coli was only
marginally reduced after infusion of IC14. These data provide the first proof of 
principle that blockade of CD14 is associated with reduced LPS responsiveness in 
humans in vivo.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.5.3599 
PMID: 11207321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

