
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2001 Jan;69(1):113-22.

Interleukin-12 can replace CD28-dependent T-cell costimulation during nonspecific
cytotoxic T lymphocyte induction by anti-CD3 antibody.

Makrigiannis AP(1), Musgrave BL, Haeryfar SM, Hoskin DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.

Cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) development is regulated closely by an intricate
series of signals provided by the T-cell receptor/CD3 complex, cytokines, and
costimulatory ligand/receptor systems. In this study, we have explored the role
of interleukin (IL)-12 and CD28 in mouse CTL development. Activation of T cells
with anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody (mAb) in the presence of anti-CD86 mAb, which
prevents CD28-CD86 interaction, led to decreased production of type 1 (IL-2,
interferon-gamma) and type 2 (IL-4, IL-6, IL-10) cytokines, as well as diminished
expression of granzyme B (Gzm B) and reduced cytotoxic effector function.
Cytolytic activity in T-cell cultures that were activated in the presence of
anti-CD86-blocking mAb alone or in combination with anti-CD80 mAb could be
restored by the addition of exogenous IL-12 at initiation of culture. The ability
of IL-12 to substitute for CD28-costimulatory signaling during CTL development
was found to be dependent on the presence of IL-2 rather than interferon-gamma.
IL-2 is required for IL-12Rbeta2 expression by T cells activated in the presence 
of anti-CD86 mAb. Moreover, IL-12Rbeta2 expression by T cells activated in the
presence of anti-CD86 mAb is enhanced by IL-12. We, therefore, conclude that the 
ability of IL-12 to substitute for CD28-costimulatory signaling during CTL
development is a result of the interaction of IL-12 with IL-12Rbeta2 induced by
low levels of IL-2 synthesized by T cells activated in a CD28-independent manner.


PMID: 11200055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

