
1. Immunol Rev. 2000 Dec;178:148-65.

Lessons from the bare lymphocyte syndrome: molecular mechanisms regulating MHC
class II expression.

Waldburger JM(1), Masternak K, Muhlethaler-Mottet A, Villard J, Peretti M,
Landmann S, Reith W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University of Geneva Medical School, 
Switzerland.

Major histocompatibility complex class II (MHCII) molecules drive the
development, activation and homeostasis of CD4* T-helper cells. They play a
central role in key processes of the adaptive immune system, such as the
generation of T-cell-mediated immune responses, the regulation of antibody
production and the development and maintenance of tol erance. It is thus not
surprising that the absence of MHCII expression results in a severe primary
immunodeficiency disease (the bare lymphocyte syndrome (BLS)). The genetic
defects responsible for BLS do not lie within the MHCII locus, but in genes
encoding transcription factors required for MHCII expression. A great deal of our
current knowledge about the mechanisms regulating expression of MHCII genes has
been derived from the study of BLS. Four different MHCII regulatory genes have
been identified. These genes encode RFXANK, RFXS, RFXAP and CIITA. The first
three are subunits of RFX, a ubiquitously expressed factor that binds to the
promoters of all MHCII genes. RFX binds co-operatively with other factors to form
a highly stable multiprotein complex referred to as the MHCII enhanceosome. This 
enhanceosome serves as a landing pad for the co-activator CIITA, which is
recruited via protein-protein interactions CIITA is the master control factor for
MHCII expression. The highly regulated expression pattern of CIITA ultimately
dictates the cell type specificity, induction and level of MHCII expression.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-065x.2000.17813.x 
PMID: 11213800  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

