
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2001 Mar;147(Pt 3):717-726. doi:
10.1099/00221287-147-3-717.

Regulation of acp1, encoding a non-aspartyl acid protease expressed during
pathogenesis of Sclerotinia sclerotiorum.

Poussereau N(1), Creton S(1), Billon-Grand G(1), Rascle C(1), Fevre M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire Fongique (bât 405), ERS CNRS 2009,
Microbiologie et Génétique, Université Claude Bernard-Lyon I, 43 Bd du 11
Novembre 1918, 69622 Villeurbanne cedex, France1.

When grown in the presence of sunflower cell walls, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, an 
ubiquitous necrotrophic fungus, secretes several acid proteases including a
non-aspartyl protease. The gene acp1, encoding an acid protease, has been cloned 
and sequenced. The intronless ORF encodes a preproprotein of 252 aa and a mature 
protein of 200 residues. In vitro expression of acp1 is subject to several
transcriptional regulatory mechanisms. Expression induced by plant cell-wall
proteins is controlled by both carbon and nitrogen catabolite repression. Glucose
on its own represses acp1 expression while ammonium repression requires the
simultaneous presence of a carbon source. Ambient pH higher than pH 5 overrides
induction resulting in full repression of acp1. These transcriptional regulatory 
mechanisms and the presence of several motifs in the promoter of acp1 that may
encode binding sites for the regulators CREA, AREA and PacC suggest the
involvement of these regulators in the control of acp1 expression. acp1 is
expressed in planta during sunflower cotyledon infection. Expression is low at
the beginning of infection but increases suddenly at the stage of necrosis
spreading. Comparison of in vitro and in planta acp1 expression suggests that
glucose and nitrogen starvation together with acidification can be considered as 
key factors controlling Scl. sclerotiorum gene expression during pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-147-3-717 
PMID: 11238979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

