
1. J Immunol. 2001 Mar 15;166(6):4059-64.

Mice lacking the multidrug resistance protein 1 are resistant to Streptococcus
pneumoniae-induced pneumonia.

Schultz MJ(1), Wijnholds J, Peppelenbosch MP, Vervoordeldonk MJ, Speelman P, van 
Deventer SJ, Borst P, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. m.j.schultz@amc.uva.nl

Leukotrienes (LTs) are considered important for antibacterial defense in the
lung. Multidrug resistance protein 1 (mrp1) is a transmembrane protein
responsible for the cellular extrusion of LTC(4). To determine the role of mrp1
in host defense against pneumonia, mrp1(-/-) and wild-type mice were intranasally
inoculated with Streptococcus pneumoniae. mrp1(-/-) mice displayed a diminished
outgrowth of pneumococci in lungs and a strongly reduced mortality. These
findings were related to an effect of mrp1 on LT metabolism, because survival was
similar in mrp1(-/-) and wild-type mice treated with the
5-lipoxygenase-activating protein inhibitor MK-886. Although LTC(4) levels
remained low in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of mrp1(-/-) mice, LTB(4)
concentrations were higher than in wild-type mice. These elevated LTB(4)
concentrations were important for the relative protection of mrp1(-/-) mice,
because the LTB(4) antagonist LTB(4)-dimethyl amide abolished their survival
advantage. In vitro experiments suggested that the intracellullar accumulation of
LTC(4) in mrp1(-/-) mice results in product inhibition of LTC(4)-synthase,
diminishing substrate competition between LTA(4)-hydrolase (which yields LTB(4)) 
and LTC(4)-synthase for the available LTA(4). We conclude that mrp1(-/-) mice are
resistant against pneumococcal pneumonia by a mechanism that involves increased
release of LTB(4). These results identify mrp1 as a novel target for adjunctive
therapy in pneumonia.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.6.4059 
PMID: 11238654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

