
1. Nature. 2001 Mar 1;410(6824):112-6.

A conserved XIAP-interaction motif in caspase-9 and Smac/DIABLO regulates caspase
activity and apoptosis.

Srinivasula SM(1), Hegde R, Saleh A, Datta P, Shiozaki E, Chai J, Lee RA, Robbins
PD, Fernandes-Alnemri T, Shi Y, Alnemri ES.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Apoptosis Research and the Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature 2001 Jun 28;411(6841):1081.

Comment in
    Nature. 2001 Mar 1;410(6824):33-4.
    NIH Guide Grants Contracts. 2001 Jun 27;:NOT-OD-01-046.
    NIH Guide Grants Contracts. 2001 May 24;:NOT-OD-01-040.

X-linked inhibitor-of-apoptosis protein (XIAP) interacts with caspase-9 and
inhibits its activity, whereas Smac (also known as DIABLO) relieves this
inhibition through interaction with XIAP. Here we show that XIAP associates with 
the active caspase-9-Apaf-1 holoenzyme complex through binding to the amino
terminus of the linker peptide on the small subunit of caspase-9, which becomes
exposed after proteolytic processing of procaspase-9 at Asp315. Supporting this
observation, point mutations that abrogate the proteolytic processing but not the
catalytic activity of caspase-9, or deletion of the linker peptide, prevented
caspase-9 association with XIAP and its concomitant inhibition. We note that the 
N-terminal four residues of caspase-9 linker peptide share significant homology
with the N-terminal tetra-peptide in mature Smac and in the Drosophila proteins
Hid/Grim/Reaper, defining a conserved class of IAP-binding motifs. Consistent
with this finding, binding of the caspase-9 linker peptide and Smac to the BIR3
domain of XIAP is mutually exclusive, suggesting that Smac potentiates caspase-9 
activity by disrupting the interaction of the linker peptide of caspase-9 with
BIR3. Our studies reveal a mechanism in which binding to the BIR3 domain by two
conserved peptides, one from Smac and the other one from caspase-9, has opposing 
effects on caspase activity and apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1038/35065125 
PMID: 11242052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

