
1. Cell Immunol. 2001 Feb 1;207(2):100-9.

The affinity/avidity and length of exposure to the deleting ligand determine
dependence on CD28 for the efficient deletion of self-specific CD4+CD8+
thymocytes.

Teh HS(1), Teh SJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, V6T 1Z3, Canada.

Whether the CD28/B7 signaling pathway is essential for the negative selection of 
immature CD4+CD8+ (DP) thymocytes expressing self-specific alphabeta TCRs is a
controversial issue. In this study we examined the role of CD28 in the deletion
of thymocytes that express either the H-Y or the 2C transgenic TCR. In H-2(b)
male mice that expressed the H-Y TCR, negative selection of DP H-Y TCR+
thymocytes occurred very efficiently and this deletion was unaffected by the
CD28(-/-) mutation. In H-2(b) 2C mice, where the deletion of DP 2C TCR+
thymocytes occurred less efficiently, the CD28(-/-) mutation led to a higher
recovery of DP thymocytes. Using an in vitro deletion assay, a requirement for
the CD28 signaling pathway in the deletion of DP H-Y TCR+ thymocytes was evident 
at low, but not high, densities of the antigenic ligand. Similar results were
also observed in an in vivo assay for the deletion of these thymocytes.
Intraperitoneal administration of an anti-CD3epsilon mAb led to the intrathymic
deletion of DP H-Y TCR+ thymocytes in a CD28-dependent manner at the 24-h time
point. However, the CD28 dependence was less evident at the 40-h time point.
These results indicate that the dependence on CD28 for the efficient deletion of 
self-specific thymocytes is determined by the concentration, affinity/avidity,
and length of exposure to the deleting ligand.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/cimm.2000.1757 
PMID: 11243699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

