
1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2001 Jan;27(1):27-33.

Feasibility and safety of peripheral blood stem cell transplantation from
unrelated donors: results of a single-center study.

Blau IW(1), Basara N, Lentini G, Guenzelmann S, Kirsten D, Schmetzer B, Bischoff 
M, Roemer E, Kiehl MG, Fauser AA.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Bone Marrow Transplantation, Hematology and Oncology,
Idar-Oberstein, Germany.

We compared the outcomes in patients receiving unrelated peripheral blood stem
cell transplants (PBSCT) with those receiving bone marrow transplants (BMT) in a 
matched pair analysis. Seventy-four patients with hematological malignancies with
HLA-matched (77%) and mismatched (23%) donors were analyzed in this study.
Thirty-four patients (45%) were considered as high risk patients. Sixty-eight
patients received standard conditioning regimens with Bu/Cy or TBI/Cy. Six
patients received an intensified conditioning regimen with the addition of
etoposide, thiotepa or melphalan. GVHD prophylaxis consisted of prednisolone,
cyclosporine and methotrexate. Groups were matched for patient, donor, transplant
characteristics and HLA compatibility. Peripheral blood stem cell collection led 
to the collection of a higher number of CD34+ and CD3+ cells in comparison to
bone marrow collection. Leukocyte engraftment in the PBSCT group occurred in 14
days (median; range 6-26 days) and in the BMT group in 19 days (range 9-29 days; 
P < 0.02). The time of platelet engraftment did not differ significantly. The
incidence of grades II-lV acute GVHD in the group of HLA-identical patients was
35% in the PBSCT group and 25% in the BMT group (P < 0.33, log-rank). However,
there was a significant difference (P < 0.05, log-rank) in incidence and time to 
onset of acute GVHD II-IV comparing all patients, including the 17 mismatched
transplants. Disease-free survival was 51% (19 patients) with a median of 352
days and 59% (21 patients) with a median of 760 days for PBSC and BMT
transplants, respectively. In conclusion, our results indicate that allogeneic
PBSCT led to significantly faster leukocyte engraftment but is associated with a 
higher incidence and more rapid onset of severe acute GVHD comparing all
patients, including the 17 mismatched transplants. However, the incidence of
severe acute GVHD in HLA-identical patients was not different between the PBSCT
and BMT groups.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1702734 
PMCID: PMC7091592
PMID: 11244435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

