
1. Nihon Hansenbyo Gakkai Zasshi. 2001 Feb;70(1):15-24.

Evaluation of B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86) costimulatory molecules and dendritic
cells on the immune response in leprosy.

Santos DO(1), Santos SL, Esquenazi D, Nery JA, Defruyt M, Lorré K, Van Heuverswyn
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institute of Biology, University
Federal Fluminense, Av. Barros-Terra, s/n. Valonguinho, Niterói, RJ. Brasil,
CEP20400.

The cell activation depends on T cell antigen receptor binding to antigen plus
MHC and costimulation. The binding of CD28, expressed on the T cell surface to B7
(B7-1 or CD80/B7-2 or CD86) present on the antigen--presenting cells (APCs),
determines, in several T cell function models, if activation or anergy follows
antigenic stimulation. In leprosy, the role of CD80 and CD86 as costimulatory
signal in M. leprae-specific cellular immunity has not yet been defined. We
investigated the role of B7-CD28 pathway of T cell activation in the in vitro
response to M. leprae, following stimulation in the presence of monocytes or
dendritic cells (DCs) as APCs. Monocytes were purified, by cold aggregation, from
peripheral blood mononuclear leukocytes (PBMC), isolated from leprosy patients.
In order to obtain DCs, the monocytes were cultured in the presence of IL-4 and
GM-CSF. T cells were purified from PBMC by negative selection with mABs and C'.
The phenotype of the cell populations was monitored by FACS. Lymphoproliferative 
assays were performed with T cells, in the presence of monocytes or DCs. The
cells were stimulated by M. leprae in the presence of anti-CD80 antibody (Ab)
and/or anti-CD86 antibody (Ab) (Innogenetics). In some experiments Il-10, Il-12
and anti-Il-12 Ab were also added to the culture. We observed a significantly
more efficient APC function for DCs when compared to monocytes in T cell in vitro
responses to M. leprae. Regardless of the clinical form of Leprosy, the M.
leprae-specific immune response was markedly reduced in the presence of anti-CD86
Ab. Il-12 increase the immune response to M. leprae while IL-10 or anti-IL-12 Ab 
reduce this response when monocytes or DCs were used as APCs.

DOI: 10.5025/hansen.70.15 
PMID: 11244783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

