
1. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 1998 Jan;119(1):379-86.

Comparative lectin-histochemistry on the pre-epithelial mucus layer in the distal
colon of conventional and germ-free rats.

Szentkuti L(1), Enss ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany.
Iszentk@physiology.tiho-hannover.de

The mucin composition of the rat distal colonic pre-epithelial mucus layer (PML) 
was studied by lectin histochemistry in conventional (CV), and germ-free (GF)
rats to define effects exerted by the gut flora. No peanut agglutinin (PNA)
binding was observed in the PML of GF rats, while the PML of their CV
counterparts showed a considerable PNA linkage, indicating terminal
Gal-beta1,3-GalNAc residues. Soybean agglutinin (SBA) and Helix pomatia
agglutinin (HPA) stained the PML mucins in CV and in GF rats, indicating terminal
GalNAc moieties. A quantitative difference in the Limax flavus agglutinin (LFA)
binding capacity was found between CV and GF rats, indicating terminal sialic
acid moieties: the staining intensity of bound LFA/ FiTC was higher in CV rats
than in GF rats. No linkage of Datura stramonium agglutinin (DSA) and of wheat
germ agglutinin (WGA) was found in the PML of GF rats, indicating the absence of 
terminal GlcNAc, while in CV rats, a clearly marked border was visible next to
the luminal content as a "nipple edge" when stained with DSA or WGA. Canavalia
ensiformis agglutinin (ConA), indicative for branched mannose, stained PML mucins
and goblet cell mucins of GF rat distal colon. In CV rats, both locations were
free of ConA binding sites. These results suggest degrading effects, exerted by
the gut flora on the rat colonic pre-epithelial mucus layer.

DOI: 10.1016/s1095-6433(97)00434-0 
PMID: 11253810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

