
1. J Immunol. 2001 Apr 1;166(7):4612-9.

Cancer vaccine design: a novel bacterial adjuvant for peptide-specific CTL
induction.

Miconnet I(1), Coste I, Beermann F, Haeuw JF, Cerottini JC, Bonnefoy JY, Romero
P, Renno T.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne Branch, University of Lausanne,
Switzerland.

The recent identification of tumor Ags as potential vaccines has prompted the
search for efficient adjuvants and delivery systems, especially in the case of
peptide-based vaccination protocols. Here, we investigated the adjuvant potential
of the recombinant 40-kDa outer membrane protein of Klebsiella pneumoniae (P40)
for specific CTL induction. We studied the CTL response induced in
HLA-A*0201/K(b) transgenic mice immunized with peptides derived from two
melanoma-associated differentiation Ags, the HLA-A*0201-restricted decapeptide
Melan-A(26--35) substituted at position 2 and the K(b)-restricted
tyrosinase-related protein 2(181--188) T cell epitope. We found that both
peptides are able to generate a specific CTL response when mixed with the protein
in the absence of conventional adjuvant. This CTL response is a function of the
amount of P40 used for immunization. Moreover, the CTL response generated against
the tyrosinase-related protein 2(181-188) peptide in presence of P40 is
associated with tumor protection in two different experimental models and is
independent of the presence of CD4(+) T lymphocytes. Thus, the recombinant
bacterial protein P40 functions as a potent immunological adjuvant for specific
CTL induction.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.7.4612 
PMID: 11254719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

