
1. Nature. 2001 Mar 29;410(6828):604-8.

Structural basis for co-stimulation by the human CTLA-4/B7-2 complex.

Schwartz JC(1), Zhang X, Fedorov AA, Nathenson SG, Almo SC.

Author information: 
(1)[1] Department of Microbiology and Immunology, [2] These authors contributed
equally to this work.

Regulation of T-cell activity is dependent on antigen-independent co-stimulatory 
signals provided by the disulphide-linked homodimeric T-cell surface receptors,
CD28 and CTLA-4 (ref. 1). Engagement of CD28 with B7-1 and B7-2 ligands on
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) provides a stimulatory signal for T-cell
activation, whereas subsequent engagement of CTLA-4 with these same ligands
results in attenuation of the response. Given their central function in immune
modulation, CTLA-4- and CD28-associated signalling pathways are primary
therapeutic targets for preventing autoimmune disease, graft versus host disease,
graft rejection and promoting tumour immunity. However, little is known about the
cell-surface organization of these receptor/ligand complexes and the structural
basis for signal transduction. Here we report the 3.2-A resolution structure of
the complex between the disulphide-linked homodimer of human CTLA-4 and the
receptor-binding domain of human B7-2. The unusual dimerization properties of
both CTLA-4 and B7-2 place their respective ligand-binding sites distal to the
dimer interface in each molecule and promote the formation of an alternating
arrangement of bivalent CTLA-4 and B7-2 dimers that extends throughout the
crystal. Direct observation of this CTLA-4/B7-2 network provides a model for the 
periodic organization of these molecules within the immunological synapse and
suggests a distinct mechanism for signalling by dimeric cell-surface receptors.

DOI: 10.1038/35069112 
PMID: 11279501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

