
1. Protein Sci. 2001 Apr;10(4):697-706.

Three-dimensional structures of the three human class I alcohol dehydrogenases.

Niederhut MS(1), Gibbons BJ, Perez-Miller S, Hurley TD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5122, USA.

In contrast with other animal species, humans possess three distinct genes for
class I alcohol dehydrogenase and show polymorphic variation in the ADH1B and
ADH1C genes. The three class I alcohol dehydrogenase isoenzymes share
approximately 93% sequence identity but differ in their substrate specificity and
their developmental expression. We report here the first three-dimensional
structures for the ADH1A and ADH1C*2 gene products at 2.5 and 2.0 A,
respectively, and the structure of the ADH1B*1 gene product in a binary complex
with cofactor at 2.2 A. Not surprisingly, the overall structure of each isoenzyme
is highly similar to the others. However, the substitution of Gly for Arg at
position 47 in the ADH1A isoenzyme promotes a greater extent of domain closure in
the ADH1A isoenzyme, whereas substitution at position 271 may account for the
lower turnover rate for the ADH1C*2 isoenzyme relative to its polymorphic
variant, ADH1C*1. The substrate-binding pockets of each isoenzyme possess a
unique topology that dictates each isoenzyme's distinct but overlapping substrate
preferences. ADH1*B1 has the most restrictive substrate-binding site near the
catalytic zinc atom, whereas both ADH1A and ADH1C*2 possess amino acid
substitutions that correlate with their better efficiency for the oxidation of
secondary alcohols. These structures describe the nature of their individual
substrate-binding pockets and will improve our understanding of how the
metabolism of beverage ethanol affects the normal metabolic processes performed
by these isoenzymes.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.45001 
PMCID: PMC2373965
PMID: 11274460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

