
1. Cell Immunol. 2001 Feb 25;208(1):52-61.

IL-12 prevents tolerance induction with mouse thyroglobulin by priming pathogenic
T cells in experimental autoimmune thyroiditis: role of IFN-gamma and the
costimulatory molecules CD40l and CD28.

Zhang W(1), Flynn JC, Kong YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

Deaggregated mouse thyroglobulin (dMTg) induces tolerance to experimental
autoimmune thyroiditis (EAT), a Th1-cell-mediated disease. To test whether IL-12,
a potent activator of Th1 cells, can overcome tolerance induction, different
doses of IL-12 were given to CBA/J mice during the critical interval of 2--3 days
after dMTg administration. After challenge with MTg/LPS, dMTg/IL-12-pretreated
mice showed more extensive thyroiditis than immunized controls, but comparable
levels of anti-MTg and T cell proliferation. Without challenge, few MTg
antibodies were produced. In contrast, pretreatment with dMTg/poly A:U or
dMTg/IL-1, two other T cell activators which also interfere with tolerance
induction, induced antibodies before challenge, but not more severe thyroiditis. 
Mice pretreated with IL-12 without dMTg developed thyroiditis comparable to
immunized controls, but less severe thyroiditis than dMTg/IL-12-pretreated mice. 
Clearly, IL-12 not only blocked tolerance induction, but also primed
antigen-specific T cells during the tolerogenic period of dMTg pretreatment,
resulting in stronger thyroiditis than immunization only. Neither treatment with 
anti-IFN-gamma nor the use of IFN-gamma knockout mice altered the capacity of
IL-12 to prevent tolerance induction. However, both anti-CD28 and anti-CD40L
antibodies diminished the priming effect by dMTg/IL-12. The mechanisms of IL-12
action include priming of MTg-specific T cells and the involvement of T cell
costimulatory molecules.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/cimm.2001.1767 
PMID: 11277619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

