
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 11;276(19):15961-7. Epub 2001 Feb 13.

Isopentenyl pyrophosphate, a mycobacterial non-peptidic antigen, triggers delayed
and highly sustained signaling in human gamma delta T lymphocytes without
inducing eown-modulation of T cell antigen receptor.

Lafont V(1), Liautard J, Sable-Teychene M, Sainte-Marie Y, Favero J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U431, Microbiologie et Pathologie Cellulaire Infectieuse, Université
Montpellier 2, Place Eugène Bataillon, cc 100, Montpellier 34095, cedex 5,
France.

The Vgamma9Vdelta2 T cell subset, which represents up to 90% of the circulating
gammadelta T cells in humans, was shown to be activated, via the T cell receptor 
(TcR), by non-peptidic phosphorylated small organic molecules. These
phosphoantigens, which are not presented by professional antigen-presenting
cells, induce production of high amounts of interferon-gamma and tumor necrosis
factor (TNF-alpha). To date, the specific signals triggered by these antigens
have not been characterized. Here we analyze proximal and later intracellular
signals triggered by isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP), a mycobacterial antigen
that specifically stimulates Vgamma9Vdelta2 T cells, and compare these to signals
induced by the non-physiological model using an anti-CD3 antibody. During
antigenic stimulation we noticed that, except for the proximal p56(lck) signal,
which is triggered early, the signals appear to be delayed and highly sustained. 
This delay, which likely accounts for the delay observed in TNF-alpha production,
is discussed in terms of the ability of the antigen to cross-link and recruit
transducing molecules mostly anchored to lipid rafts. Moreover, we demonstrate
that, in contrast to anti-CD3 antibody, IPP does not induce down-modulation of
the TcR.CD3 complex, which likely results in the highly sustained signaling and
release of high levels of TNF-alpha.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M008684200 
PMID: 11278429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

