
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 May;21(9):3025-36.

Caspase cleavage enhances the apoptosis-inducing effects of BAD.

Condorelli F(1), Salomoni P, Cotteret S, Cesi V, Srinivasula SM, Alnemri ES,
Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The function of BAD, a proapoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family, is regulated
primarily by rapid changes in phosphorylation that modulate its protein-protein
interactions and subcellular localization. We show here that, during
interleukin-3 (IL-3) deprivation-induced apoptosis of 32Dcl3 murine myeloid
precursor cells, BAD is cleaved by a caspase(s) at its N terminus to generate a
15-kDa truncated protein. The 15-kDa truncated BAD is a more potent inducer of
apoptosis than the wild-type protein, whereas a mutant BAD resistant to caspase 3
cleavage is a weak apoptosis inducer. Truncated BAD is detectable only in the
mitochondrial fraction, interacts with BCL-X(L) at least as effectively as the
wild-type protein, and is more potent than wild-type BAD in inducing cytochrome c
release. Human BAD, which is 43 amino acids shorter than its mouse counterpart,
is also cleaved by a caspase(s) upon exposure of Jurkat T cells to anti-FAS
antibody, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), or TRAIL. Moreover, a
truncated form of human BAD lacking the N-terminal 28 amino acids is more potent 
than wild-type BAD in inducing apoptosis. The generation of truncated BAD was
blocked by Bcl-2 in IL-3-deprived 32Dcl3 cells but not in Jurkat T cells exposed 
to anti-FAS antibody, TNF-alpha, or TRAIL. Together, these findings point to a
novel and important role for BAD in maintaining the apoptotic phenotype in
response to various apoptosis inducers.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.21.9.3025-3036.2001 
PMCID: PMC86931
PMID: 11287608  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

