
1. Immunogenetics. 2001 Mar;53(2):105-13.

Two novel genes FIND and LIND differentially expressed in deactivated and
Listeria-infected human macrophages.

Staege H(1), Brauchlin A, Schoedon G, Schaffner A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Clinic B, Research Unit, University Hospital Zurich, Raemistrasse 100,
8091 Zurich, Switzerland.

Deactivation of macrophage functions plays an important role in human infectious 
and inflammatory diseases. In this study, differential-display RT-PCR was used to
analyze the gene expression of human mononuclear phagocytes deactivated with
interleukin (IL)-4, IL-10, and dexamethasone (DEX), in the absence and presence
of infection with Listeria monocytogenes (Listeria). Two novel differentially
expressed mRNA species were discovered: FIND (IL-Four INDuced) was upregulated
with IL-4 but down-regulated with DEX, and is predicted to code for an M(r)
53,000 transmembrane protein. LIND (Listeria INDuced) was induced by Listeria
infection, and is predicted to code for an M(r) 39,000 nuclear or cytoplasmic
protein containing three coiled-coil domains. In addition, we report several
novel effects of deactivators and infection on the expression of known genes: (1)
IL-4 caused pronounced upregulation of ABCG2, coding for an ATP-binding cassette 
transporter highly expressed in the placenta, which mediates multidrug resistance
of cancer cells, but is otherwise of unknown function; (2) both DEX and IL-4
downregulated osteopontin, an important factor of host resistance against
intracellular infections; (3) inhibition of the CC-chemokine I-309 mRNA
expression by all three deactivators in the presence of Listeria infection, and
(4) upregulation by Listeria infection of the interferon-stimulated gene ISG20 of
unknown function, whose product localizes with nuclear dots/PML bodies.

DOI: 10.1007/s002510100306 
PMID: 11345586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

