
1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2001 May;24(5):608-15.

Alveolar macrophages that phagocytose apoptotic neutrophils produce hepatocyte
growth factor during bacterial pneumonia in mice.

Morimoto K(1), Amano H, Sonoda F, Baba M, Senba M, Yoshimine H, Yamamoto H, Ii T,
Oishi K, Nagatake T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nijigaoka Hospital, Nagasaki, Japan.
yamame@terra.dti.ne.jp

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is postulated to play an important role in the
repair of pulmonary epithelium in acute lung injury. To evaluate the role of HGF 
in bacterial pneumonia, the kinetics of HGF production and the cellular sources
of HGF have been examined in the lungs of mice that had been intratracheally
challenged with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Neutrophil accumulation in the airway
occurred immediately, reached a peak at 36 h, and then progressively declined by 
14 d after infection. We found a biphasic pattern of HGF messenger RNA expression
and protein synthesis in the lung after bacterial infection. The first peak for
HGF production was found at 6 h after infection, and the primary source of HGF
was shown to be bronchial epithelial cells. Interestingly, the second peak for
HGF production, which was found around 48 to 72 h after infection, was closely
associated with the increase in the percentage of alveolar macrophages (AMs) that
became positive for myeloperoxidase, indicating phagocytosis of apoptotic
neutrophils. The cellular source of the second peak was found to be AMs. Further,
murine AMs which phagocytosed apoptotic neutrophils induced higher levels of HGF 
production in vitro. These results strongly indicate a novel mechanism of HGF
production by AMs, which are phagocytosing apoptotic neutrophils, and the pivotal
role of AMs in the healing and repair of damaged pulmonary epithelium through the
production of HGF.

DOI: 10.1165/ajrcmb.24.5.4292 
PMID: 11350831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

