
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2001 May;69(5):803-14.

Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitors prevent mouse cytotoxic T-cell
development in vitro.

Phu T(1), Haeryfar SM, Musgrave BL, Hoskin DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4H7, Canada.

To become competent killer cells, CD8(+) T cells require stimulation through
signal transduction pathways associated with the T-cell receptor, costimulatory
molecules such as CD28, and cytokine receptors such as the interleukin (IL)-2
receptor. We used wortmannin and LY294002, two inhibitors of phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3-K), to study the role of PI3-K in mouse cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
(CTL) induction in response to mitogenic anti-CD3 antibody. Anti-CD3-induced
CD8(+) T-cell proliferation and CTL development were inhibited dose dependently
by both PI3-K inhibitors. IL-2 synthesis by anti-CD3-activated CD8(+) T cells was
also diminished by PI3-K inhibition. PI3-K inhibition resulted in a modest
decrease in anti-CD3-induced CD4(+) T-cell proliferation but failed to affect
IL-2 expression by anti-CD3-activated CD4(+) T cells. PI3-K inhibition during CTL
induction resulted in decreased levels of mRNAs coding for granzyme B, perforin, 
and Fas ligand. In addition, CTL induced in the presence of PI3-K inhibitors
failed to conjugate normally with P815 target cells. Exogenous IL-2 did not
reverse the effects of PI3-K inhibition on CD8(+) T-cell proliferation and CTL
induction. These results support the conclusion that PI3-K activation is involved
in T-cell receptor, CD28, and IL-2 receptor signaling of CD8(+) T cells. PI3-K
is, therefore, an important component of multiple signal transduction pathways
involved in CTL generation.


PMID: 11358990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

