
1. Environ Sci Technol. 2001 May 15;35(10):1989-95.

Organochlorine pesticide residues in archived UK soil.

Meijer SN(1), Halsall CJ, Harner T, Peters AJ, Ockenden WA, Johnston AE, Jones
KC.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Science Department, Institute of Environmental and Natural
Sciences, Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YQ, UK. s.meijer@lancaster.ac.uk

Archived background soils ("Broadbalk', 1944-1986) and sludge-amended soils
("Luddington", 1968-1990), collected from long-term agricultural experiments in
the UK, were analyzed for a range of organochlorine (OC) pesticides to establish 
trends over time. Concentrations typically ranged from 0.1 to 10 ng/g of soil
(dry weight), with gamma-hexachlorocyclohexane (gamma-HCH), dieldrin, and
p,p'-DDE consistently having the highest concentrations. The trends in the
Broadbalk background soils are largely consistent with usage patterns, with peak 
concentrations occurring in the 1960s for DDTs and between the 1960s and the
1980s for the other OCs. In the Luddington control and sludge-amended soils,
several of the OCs show a significant decline in concentrations from the late
1960s to 1990, with half-lives ranging from approximately 7 years (alpha-HCH) to 
approximately 25 years (dieldrin). The sludge-amended plot received 125 tonnes of
sludge per ha in 1968, which was mixed in to a depth of 15 cm. It appears that
the sludge treatment had little effect on concentrations in the soil, with no
significant difference between control soil and sludge-amended soil for most
compounds, except for HCB, p,p'-DDE, and dieldrin. Enantiomeric fractions (EFs)
of some chiral pesticides (alpha-HCH, cis- and trans-chlordane, and o,p'-DDT)
were determined in the Luddington soils. Results reveal that enantioselective
degradation of OC pesticides is occurring in these soils for trans-chlordane (TC)
and cis-chlordane (CC). However, the depletion over time is not statistically
significant, and there is no statistically significant difference between EFs in 
the control soil and sludge-amended soil. This indicates that enantioselective
microbial degradation was not consistent over time and that the addition of
sludge to soil did not significantly alter the enantiomeric preference of the
microbial community.

DOI: 10.1021/es0000955 
PMID: 11393978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

