
1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 10;276(32):30374-80. Epub 2001 Jun 7.

Identification and characterization of a new mammalian glutaredoxin
(thioltransferase), Grx2.

Gladyshev VN(1), Liu A, Novoselov SV, Krysan K, Sun QA, Kryukov VM, Kryukov GV,
Lou MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588,
USA. vgladyshev1@unl.edu

A thiol/disulfide oxidoreductase component of the GSH system, glutaredoxin (Grx),
is involved in the reduction of GSH-based mixed disulfides and participates in a 
variety of cellular redox pathways. A single cytosolic Grx (Grx1) was previously 
described in mammals. We now report identification and characterization of a
second mammalian Grx, designated Grx2. Grx2 exhibited 36% identity with Grx1 and 
had a disulfide active center containing the Cys-Ser-Tyr-Cys motif. Grx2 was
encoded in the genomes of mammals and birds and expressed in a variety of cell
types. The gene for human Grx2 consisted of four exons and three introns, spanned
10 kilobase pairs, and localized to chromosome 1q31.2-31.3. The coding sequence
was present in all exons, with the first exon encoding a mitochondrial signal
peptide. The mitochondrial leader sequence was also present in mouse and rat Grx2
sequences and was shown to direct either Grx2 or green fluorescent protein to
mitochondria. Alternative splicing forms of mammalian Grx2 mRNAs were identified 
that differed in sequences upstream of exon 2. To functionally characterize the
new protein, human and mouse Grx2 proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli,
and the purified proteins were shown to reduce mixed disulfides formed between
GSH and S-sulfocysteine, hydroxyethyldisulfide, or cystine. Grx1 and Grx2 were
sensitive to inactivation by iodoacetamide and H(2)O(2) and exhibited similar pH 
dependence of catalytic activity. However, H(2)O(2)-inactivated Grx2 could only
be reactivated with 5 mm GSH, whereas Grx1 could also be reactivated with
dithiothreitol or thioredoxin/thioredoxin reductase. The Grx2 structural model
suggested a common reaction mechanism for this class of proteins. The data
provide the first example of a mitochondrial Grx and also indicate the occurrence
of a second functional Grx in mammals.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M100020200 
PMID: 11397793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

