
1. Infect Immun. 2001 Jul;69(7):4493-501.

Porphyromonas gingivalis gingipain-R enhances interleukin-8 but decreases gamma
interferon-inducible protein 10 production by human gingival fibroblasts in
response to T-cell contact.

Oido-Mori M(1), Rezzonico R, Wang PL, Kowashi Y, Dayer JM, Baehni PC, Chizzolini 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Dentistry, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Geneva, 1211 Geneva 14, Switzerland.

Proteases produced by Porphyromonas gingivalis, an oral pathogen, are considered 
important virulence factors and may affect the responses of cells equipped with
proteinase-activated receptors. The aim of this study was to investigate the
effect of the arginine-specific cysteine protease gingipain-R produced by P.
gingivalis on chemokine production by human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) and the
effect of gingipain-R treatment on the subsequent contact-dependent activation of
HGF by T cells. HGF incubated in the presence of purified 47-kDa gingipain-R
showed increased levels of interleukin-8 (IL-8) mRNA. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
mRNA was also induced. Further exposure of HGF to activated T cells resulted in
the dose- and time-dependent enhancement of IL-8 transcription and release.
T-cell membrane-bound tumor necrosis factor (TNF) was the ligand inducing IL-8
production by HGF, since TNF neutralization abrogated HGF responses to T-cell
contact. The enhanced IL-8 release was due, at least in part, to
prostaglandin-E(2) production, which was mostly blocked by indomethacin.
Gingipain-R proteolytic activity was required since heat inactivation, specific
synthetic protease inhibitors, and the natural substrate competitor histatin 5
abrogated its effects. The enhanced production of IL-8 in response to T-cell
contact was specific since monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) production was 
unaffected while interferon-gamma-inducible protein-10 (IP-10) was inhibited. The
sum of these activities may result in the recruitment of differential cell types 
to sites of inflammation since IL-8 preferentially recruits neutrophils and IP-10
attracts activated T cells and may be relevant to the pathogenesis of
periodontitis.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.7.4493-4501.2001 
PMCID: PMC98524
PMID: 11401991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

