
1. J Environ Sci Health B. 2001 May;36(3):273-88.

Anaerobic biodegradation of DDT residues (DDT, DDD, and DDE) in estuarine
sediment.

Huang HJ(1), Liu SM, Kuo CE.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Environmental Analysis, Environmental Protection
Administration, Taiwan, ROC.

The potential for anaerobic biodegradation of
1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bischlorophenylethane (DDT),
1,1-dichloro-2,2,-bischlorophenylethane (DDD), and dichlorodiphenylchloroethylene
(DDE) in anoxic sediment slurries collected from the Keelung River was
investigated in this study. o,p'- and p,p'-DDT were dechlorinated to o,p'- and
p,p'-DDD, respectively, and then transformed to other compound(s).
1-Chloro-2,2-bis (p-chlorophenyl) ethylene (DDMU) and trace amount of
dichlorobenzophenone (DBP) were detected in sediment slurries amended with
p,p'-DDT or p,p'-DDD. DDMU was also detected in sediment slurries amended with
p,p'-DDE. The relative transformation rates for both o,p'- and p,p'-isomers of
DDT, DDD, and DDE were DDT>DDD>DDE. Re-addition of DDT, DDD, or DDE to the
sediment slurries after initial removal enhanced the respective dechlorination
rates. The transformation rates of the p,p'-isomers of both DDT and DDD were
faster than those of the respective o,p'-isomers. p,p'-DDT dechlorination in the 
p,p'-DDT-adapted sediment slurries were inhibited by the addition of molybdate,
or molybdate plus sulfate, but not inhibited by the addition of sulfate. Addition
of bromoethane-sulfonic acid (BESA) slightly inhibited p,p'-DDT dechlorination.
Non-adapted sediment slurries lost the ability to dechlorinate pentachlorophenol 
during adaptation to p,p'-DDT. p,p'-DDD was the major transformation product of
p, p'-DDT in 3,4,4',5-tetrachlorobiphenyl-adapted sediment slurries, which
suggested that the microbial community in the 3,4,4',5-CB-adapted sediment was
unable to remove chlorine from the aromatic rings of p,p'-DDT.

DOI: 10.1081/PFC-100103569 
PMID: 11411851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

