
1. Mol Microbiol. 2001 Jun;40(6):1403-13.

Glycosylation with heptose residues mediated by the aah gene product is essential
for adherence of the AIDA-I adhesin.

Benz I(1), Schmidt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Infektiologie - Zentrum für Molekularbiologie der Entzündung
(ZMBE), Universitätsklinikum Münster, Germany.

The diffuse adherence of Escherichia coli strain 2787 (O126:H27) is mediated by
the autotransporter adhesin AIDA-I (adhesin-involved-in-diffuse-adherence)
encoded by the plasmid-borne aidA gene. AIDA-I exhibits an aberrant mobility in
denaturing gel electrophoresis. Deletion of the open reading frame (ORF) A
immediately upstream of aidA restores the predicted mobility of AIDA-I, but the
adhesin is no longer functional. This indicates that the mature AIDA-I adhesin is
post-translationally modified and the modification is essential for adherence
function. Labelling with digoxigenin hydrazide shows AIDA-I to be glycosylated.
Using carbohydrate composition analysis, AIDA-I contains exclusively heptose
residues (ratio heptose:AIDA-I approximately 19:1). The deduced amino acid
sequence of the cytoplasmic open reading frame (ORF) A gene product shows
homologies to heptosyltransferases. In addition, the modification was completely 
abolished in an ADP-glycero-manno-heptopyranose mutant. Our results provide
direct evidence for glycosylation of the AIDA-I adhesin by heptoses with the ORF 
A gene product as a specific (mono)heptosyltransferase generating the functional 
mature AIDA-I adhesin. Consequently, the ORF A gene has been denoted 'aah'
(autotransporter-adhesin-heptosyltransferase). Glycosylation by heptoses
represents a novel protein modification in eubacteria.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2001.02487.x 
PMID: 11442838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

