
1. J Immunother (1991). 2001 Mar;24(2):122-129.

A Rapid, Novel Strategy to Induce Tumor Cell-Specific Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte
Responses Using Instant Dendritomas.

Holmes LM(1), Li J, Sticca RP, Wagner TE, Wei Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Oncology Research Institute of the Greenville Hospital System, Greenville,
and The Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Clemson University,
Clemson, South Carolina.

SUMMARY: The generation of fused cells between dendritic cells (DC) and tumor
cells is a very effective approach for tumor antigen presentation in cancer
immunotherapy. However, the application of this approach in clinical studies is
limited by the need for established tumor cell lines and the time-consuming
procedures for selecting and expanding the fused cells. In the current study, the
authors report a rapid, novel approach to produce fused cells between DCs and
primary tumor cells from patients with malignant melanoma. Peripheral blood DCs
and a primary tumor cell culture were generated from the same patients, labeled
with fluorescent green and red dyes, respectively, and fused. The fused cells
were isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Because the fused cells do 
not need to be expanded, these cell hybrids have been named instant dendritomas. 
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis showed that instant dendritomas
express the key molecules for antigen presentation (HLA-A, B, C; HLA-DR; CD80;
and CD86). In vitro studies have shown that instant dendritomas effectively
activated autologous CD8+ T lymphocytes to proliferate and secret
interferon-gamma. More importantly, the activated CD8+ T lymphocytes effectively 
lysed the patients' primary tumor cells. This approach represents a practical
clinical strategy for cancer immunotherapy.


PMID: 11449068 

