
1. Immunology. 2001 Jul;103(3):270-80.

Upregulation of CD4 on CD8+ T cells: CD4dimCD8bright T cells constitute an
activated phenotype of CD8+ T cells.

Sullivan YB(1), Landay AL, Zack JA, Kitchen SG, Al-Harthi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's
Medical Center, Rush University, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Aside from an intermediate stage in thymic T-cell development, the expression of 
CD4 and CD8 is generally thought to be mutually exclusive, associated with helper
or cytotoxic T-cell functions, respectively. Stimulation of CD8+ T cells,
however, induces the de novo expression of CD4. We demonstrate that while
superantigen (staphylococcal enterotoxin B, SEB) and anti-CD3/CD28 costimulation 
of purified CD8+ T cells induced the expression of CD4 on CD8+ T cells by 30 and 
17%, respectively, phytohaemagglutinin (PHA) stimulation did not induce CD4
expression on purified CD8+ T cells but significantly induced the expression of
both CD4 on CD8 (CD4dimCD8bright) and CD8 on CD4 (CD4brightCD8dim) T cells in
unfractionated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). The level of the
PHA-mediated induction of CD4dimCD8bright and CD4brightCD8dim was at 27 and 17%, 
respectively. Depletion of CD4+ T cells from PBMC abrogated this PHA-mediated
effect. Autologous CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell co-cultures in the presence of PHA
induced this CD4dimCD8bright T-cell expression by 33%, demonstrating a role for
CD4 cells in the PHA-mediated induction of the double positive cells. The
induction of CD4dimCD8bright was independent of a soluble factor(s). Phenotypic
analysis of CD4dimCD8bright T cells indicated significantly higher levels of
CD95, CD25, CD38, CD69, CD28, and CD45RO expression than their CD8+CD4-
counterparts. CD4dimCD8bright T cells were also negative for CD1a expression and 
were predominantly T-cell receptor (TCR) alphabeta cells. Our data demonstrate
that CD4dimCD8bright T cells are an activated phenotype of CD8+ T cells and
suggest that CD4 upregulation on CD8+ T cells may function as an additional
marker to identify activated CD8+ T cells.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2567.2001.01243.x 
PMCID: PMC1783254
PMID: 11454056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

