
1. J Mol Biol. 2001 Jul 20;310(4):907-18.

Solution structure of Escherichia coli glutaredoxin-2 shows similarity to
mammalian glutathione-S-transferases.

Xia B(1), Vlamis-Gardikas A, Holmgren A, Wright PE, Dyson HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Skaggs Institute of Chemical Biology, The 
Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Glutaredoxin 2 (Grx2) from Escherichia coli is distinguished from other
glutaredoxins by its larger size, low overall sequence identity and lack of
electron donor activity with ribonucleotide reductase. However, catalysis of
glutathione (GSH)-dependent general disulfide reduction by Grx2 is extremely
efficient. The high-resolution solution structure of E. coli Grx2 shows a
two-domain protein, with residues 1 to 72 forming a classical "thioredoxin-fold" 
glutaredoxin domain, connected by an 11 residue linker to the highly helical
C-terminal domain, residues 84 to 215. The active site, Cys9-Pro10-Tyr11-Cys12,
is buried in the interface between the two domains, but Cys9 is
solvent-accessible, consistent with its role in catalysis. The structures reveal 
the hither to unknown fact that Grx2 is structurally similar to
glutathione-S-transferases (GST), although there is no obvious sequence homology.
The similarity of these structures gives important insights into the functional
significance of a new class of mammalian GST-like proteins, the single-cysteine
omega class, which have glutaredoxin oxidoreductase activity rather than
GSH-S-transferase conjugating activity. E. coli Grx 2 is structurally and
functionally a member of this new expanding family of large glutaredoxins. The
primary function of Grx2 as a GST-like glutaredoxin is to catalyze reversible
glutathionylation of proteins with GSH in cellular redox regulation including
stress responses.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4721 
PMID: 11453697  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

