
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2001 Jul;1(7):1285-93.

Effect of Salmonella-infected human monocytes on natural killer cell
cytotoxicity. In vitro studies.

Blanco L(1), Puente J, Carrasco C, Miranda D, Wolf ME, Mosnaim AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Chemical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Chile, Olivos 1007, Santiago, Chile.

Various chemicals, including some bacteria-derived components, modulate natural
killer cell (NKC) activity. We have analyzed the effect of wild-type Ty2 and of
mutant strain TYT1231 Salmonella typhi-infected monocytes (U937 cells and human
autologous monocytes) on NKC cytotoxicity of peripheral blood mononuclear cell
(PBMC) and highly purified NKC (HPNKC; CD16+/56+ > 95%; the rest corresponding to
CD3+ T-cells). PBMC's co-culture with either S. typhi strain infected U937 cells 
(medium or non-infected U937 cells as controls) resulted in the induction of
lymphocyte activated killer (LAK) cell activity showing cytotoxicity against
target human NKC-resistant lymphoblastoid Daudi cell line. Comparable experiments
using autologous monocytes gave similar results. Co-culture of HPNKC preparations
with either S. typhi strain infected U937 cells resulted in increased LAK cell
activity against target Daudi cells in each and everyone of the five samples
tested; paired Student's t-test p < 0.01 for both times (20 and 40 h) tested.
Similar to the results observed in the experiments using PBMC, we did not find
significant differences in the ability between medium and non-infected cells, or 
between wild-type S. typhi Ty2 and mutant strain TYT1231 infected U937 cells, to 
induce LAK activity in HPNKC preparations. PBMC co-incubation with either S.
typhi strain infected U937 cells or autologous monocytes resulted in significant 
increases in IL-12, TNF-alpha, and IFN-gamma secretion. In similar experiments
using HPNKC samples instead, infected U937 cells significantly increased IL-12
and IFN-gamma, but not TNF-alpha secretion. PBMC co-incubation with non-infected 
U937 cells, but not with non-infected monocytes, significantly increased
supernatant IL-12 and TNF-alpha levels (no significant changes in IFN-gamma were 
recorded). Secreted cytokines remained essentially unchanged after co-incubating 
HPNKC preparation with non-infected U-937 cells. Incubation of PBMC or HPNKC
preparations with either S. typhi strain infected U937 cells failed to produce
significant changes in the expression of NKC lineage (CD16+/56+) or activation
(CD28+, CD69+ and CD95+) markers. The ability of infected monocytes to induce LAK
activity, release NKC cytokines and upmodulate NKC's CD95+ marker expression was 
essentially the same for both infecting Salmonella strains used. These results
suggest a role for NKC in the physiological defensive response against
intracellularly infected monocytes representing, perhaps one of the earliest
antimicrobial mechanisms of the innate immune system.

DOI: 10.1016/s1567-5769(01)00060-1 
PMID: 11460309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

