
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jul 31;98(16):9283-8. Epub 2001 Jul 24.

Perforin-low memory CD8+ cells are the predominant T cells in normal humans that 
synthesize the beta -chemokine macrophage inflammatory protein-1beta.

Kamin-Lewis R(1), Abdelwahab SF, Trang C, Baker A, DeVico AL, Gallo RC, Lewis GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. kaminlew@umbi.umd.edu

The synthesis of antiviral beta-chemokines has joined cytolysis as a potential
mechanism for the control of HIV-1 infection by CD8(+) T cells. Recent evidence
suggests that these two effector functions can diverge in some individuals
infected with HIV-1; however, little is known about the CD8(+) T cell subsets in 
normal individuals that synthesize antiviral beta-chemokines. In this report, we 
have used mutliparameter flow cytometry to characterize the T cell subsets that
secrete the antiviral beta-chemokine macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1beta.
These studies have shown: (i) CD8(+) cells are the predominant T cell subset that
synthesizes MIP-1beta; (ii) MIP-1beta and IFN-gamma are synthesized congruently
in most CD8(+) T cells; however, significant numbers of these cells synthesize
only one of these effector molecules; (iii) approximately 60% of the CD8(+) T
cells that synthesize MIP-1beta lack perforin; (iv) MIP-1beta is synthesized with
approximately equal frequency by CD28(+) and CD28(-) subpopulations of CD8(+) T
cells; (v) MIP-1beta is synthesized by three distinct CD8(+) T cell subsets
defined by the expression of CD45R0 and CD62L; and (vi) MIP-1beta is not
synthesized in short-term cultures of naive CD8(+) T cells. These results
demonstrate substantial subset heterogeneity of MIP-1beta synthesis among CD8(+) 
T cells and suggest that these subsets should be evaluated as correlates of
protective immunity against HIV-1.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.161298998 
PMCID: PMC55412
PMID: 11470920  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

