
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Sep;21(17):5846-56.

Role of phosphoinositide 3-kinase in the aggressive tumor growth of HT1080 human 
fibrosarcoma cells.

Gupta S(1), Stuffrein S, Plattner R, Tencati M, Gray C, Whang YE, Stanbridge EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine,
University of California-Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-4025, USA.

We have developed a model system of human fibrosarcoma cell lines that do or do
not possess and express an oncogenic mutant allele of N-ras. HT1080 cells contain
an endogenous mutant allele of N-ras, whereas the derivative MCH603 cell line
contains only wild-type N-ras. In an earlier study (S. Gupta et al., Mol. Cell.
Biol. 20:9294-9306, 2000), we had shown that HT1080 cells produce rapidly
growing, aggressive tumors in athymic nude mice, whereas MCH603 cells produced
more slowly growing tumors and was termed weakly tumorigenic. An extensive
analysis of the Ras signaling pathways (Raf, Rac1, and RhoA) provided evidence
for a potential novel pathway that was critical for the aggressive tumorigenic
phenotype and could be activated by elevated levels of constitutively active MEK.
In this study we examined the role of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) in 
the regulation of the transformed and aggressive tumorigenic phenotypes expressed
in HT1080 cells. Both HT1080 (mutant N-ras) and MCH603 (wild-type N-ras) have
similar levels of constitutively active Akt, a downstream target of activated PI 
3-kinase. We find that both cell lines constitutively express platelet-derived
growth factor (PDGF) and PDGF receptors. Transfection with tumor suppressor PTEN 
cDNA into HT1080 and constitutively active PI 3-kinase-CAAX cDNA into MCH603
cells, respectively, resulted in several interesting and novel observations.
Activation of the PI 3-kinase/Akt pathway, including NF-kappaB, is not required
for the aggressive tumorigenic phenotype in HT1080 cells. Activation of NF-kappaB
is complex: in MCH603 cells it is mediated by Akt, whereas in HT1080 cells
activation also involves other pathway(s) that are activated by mutant Ras. A
threshold level of activation of PI 3-kinase is required in MCH603 cells before
stimulatory cross talk to the RhoA, Rac1, and Raf pathways occurs, without a
corresponding activation of Ras. The increased levels of activation seen were
similar to those observed in HT1080 cells, except for Raf and MEK, which were
more active than HT1080 levels. This cross talk results in conversion to the
aggressive tumorigenic phenotype. This latter observation is consistent with our 
previous observation that overstimulation of the activity of endogenous members
of Ras signaling pathways, activated MEK in particular, is a prerequisite for
aggressive tumorigenic growth.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.21.17.5846-5856.2001 
PMCID: PMC87304
PMID: 11486024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

