
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Sep;21(17):5699-709.

Expression of the three human major histocompatibility complex class II isotypes 
exhibits a differential dependence on the transcription factor RFXAP.

Peretti M(1), Villard J, Barras E, Zufferey M, Reith W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University of Geneva Medical School, 
CMU, 1 rue Michel-Servet, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.

Major histocompatibility complex class II (MHCII) molecules play a pivotal role
in the immune system because they direct the development and activation of CD4(+)
T cells. There are three human MHCII isotypes, HLA-DR, HLA-DQ, and HLA-DP. Key
transcription factors controlling MHCII genes have been identified by virtue of
the fact that they are mutated in a hereditary immunodeficiency resulting from a 
lack of MHCII expression. RFXAP-one of the factors affected in this disease-is a 
subunit of RFX, a DNA-binding complex that recognizes the X box present in all
MHCII promoters. To facilitate identification of conserved regions in RFXAP, we
isolated the mouse gene. We then delimited conserved domains required to restore 
endogenous MHCII expression in cell lines lacking a functional RFXAP gene.
Surprisingly, we found that 80% of RFXAP is dispensable for the reactivation of
DR expression. Only a short C-terminal segment of the protein is essential for
this isotype. In contrast, optimal expression of DQ and DP requires a larger
C-terminal segment. These results define an RFXAP domain with an MHCII
isotype-specific function. Expression of the three MHCII isotypes exhibits a
differential requirement for this domain. We show that this is due to a
differential dependence on this domain for promoter occupation and recruitment of
the coactivator CIITA in vivo.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.21.17.5699-5709.2001 
PMCID: PMC87290
PMID: 11486010  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

