
1. J Autoimmun. 2001 Aug;17(1):7-15.

Flexibility of TCR repertoire and permissiveness of HLA-DR3 molecules in
experimental autoimmune thyroiditis in nonobese diabetic mice.

Flynn JC(1), Fuller BE, Giraldo AA, Panos JC, David CS, Kong YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, 540 E. Canfield Ave., Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Experimental autoimmune thyroiditis (EAT) is inducible in genetically susceptible
mice by immunization with mouse thyroglobulin (mTg). With susceptibility linked
to MHC class II, EAT is useful in studying human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
associations with Hashimoto's thyroiditis. In non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice,
approximately 10% thyroiditis incidence occurs with aging. This potential was
exploited to examine the T cell repertoire and HLA association in EAT. Similar to
B10.K-Vbeta(c)mice with TCRBV genes reduced by approximately 70%, mTg-immunized
NOD-Vbeta(c)mice developed thyroiditis comparable to controls, indicating
plasticity of the TCR repertoire for pathogenic epitopes. HLA association was
evaluated by introducing HLA-DRA/DRB1*0301 (DR3) transgene into class II-negative
NOD mice (Ab(0)/NOD). Previously, this HLA-DR3 transgene rendered EAT-resistant
B10.M and Ab(0)mice susceptible to both mTg- and hTg-induced EAT. These results
are now confirmed. mTg-induced thyroiditis in DR3+ Ab(0)/NOD mice was comparable 
to that in NOD and DR3- NOD mice, and the proliferative response was stronger. By
comparison, NOD mice were only moderately susceptible to hTg-induced EAT.
However, thyroiditis was more severe in DR3+ Ab(0)/NOD than in DR3- NOD mice,
with no difference in proliferative response to hTg harbouring heterologous
epitopes. The confirmed permissiveness of HLA-DR3 molecules on an NOD background 
for EAT induction by both mTg and hTg supports the importance of this class II
gene implicated in some patient studies.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jaut.2001.0528 
PMID: 11488633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

