
1. J Clin Periodontol. 2001 Sep;28(9):813-9.

Association between oral malodor and adult periodontitis: a review.

Morita M(1), Wang HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Dentistry, Hokkaido University Dental School,
Sapporo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Bad breath has a significant impact on our daily social life to those
who suffer from it. The majority of bad breath originates within the oral cavity.
However, it is also possible that it can come from other sources such as
gastric-intestine imbalance. The term "oral malodor" is used to describe a foul
or offensive odor emanating from the oral cavity, in which proteolysis, metabolic
products of the desquamating cell, and bacterial putrefaction are involved.
Recent evidence has demonstrated a link between oral malodor and adult
periodontitis. The process of developing bad breath is similar to that noted in
the progression of gingivitis/periodontitis. Oral malodor is mainly attributed to
volatile sulfur compounds (VSC) such as hydrogen sulfide, methyl mercaptan and
dimethyl sulfide. The primary causative microbes are gram-negative, anaerobic
bacteria that are similar to the bacteria causing periodontitis. These bacteria
produce the VSC by metabolizing different cells/tissues (i.e., epithelial cells, 
leukocytes, etc.) located in saliva, dental plaque, and gingival crevicular
fluid. Tongue surface is composed of blood components, nutrients, large amounts
of desquamated epithelial cells and bacteria, suggesting that it has the
proteolytic and putrefactive capacity to produce VSC. One of the challenges in
dealing with oral malodor is to identify a reliable test for detecting bad
breath.
AIMS: The purposes of this review article were: (1) to correlate the relationship
between oral malodor and adult periodontitis; (2) to analyze current malodor
tests and discuss available treatment regimens.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-051x.2001.028009813.x 
PMID: 11493349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

