
1. J Immunol. 2001 Sep 1;167(5):2991-9.

Critical involvement of OX40 ligand signals in the T cell priming events during
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Ndhlovu LC(1), Ishii N, Murata K, Sato T, Sugamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

OX40 ligand (OX40L) expressed on APCs, and its receptor, OX40 present on
activated T cells, are members of the TNF/TNFR family, respectively, and have
been located at the sites of inflammatory conditions. We have observed in
OX40L-deficient mice (OX40L(-/-)) an impaired APC capacity and in our recently
constructed transgenic mice expressing OX40L (OX40L-Tg), a markedly enhanced T
cell response to protein Ags. Using these mice, we demonstrate here the critical 
involvement of the OX40L-OX40 interaction during the T cell priming events in the
occurrence of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). In OX40L(-/-)
mice, abortive T cell priming greatly reduced the clinical manifestations of
actively induced EAE, coupled with a reduction in IFN-gamma, IL-2, and IL-6
production in vitro. Adoptive transfer experiments however revealed an efficient 
transfer of disease to OX40L(-/-) mice using wild-type donor T cells, indicating 
an intact capacity of OX40L(-/-) mice to initiate effector responses. On the
other hand, OX40L(-/-) donor T cells failed to transfer disease to wild-type
recipient mice. Furthermore, OX40L-Tg mice developed a greater severity of EAE
despite a delayed onset, while both OX40L-Tg/CD28(-/-) and OX40L-Tg/CD40(-/-)
mice failed to develop EAE demonstrating a requisite for these molecules. These
findings indicate a pivotal role played by OX40L in the pathogenesis of EAE.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.5.2991 
PMID: 11509650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

