
1. J Periodontol. 2001 Aug;72(8):1038-44.

Regulation of cytokine production in human gingival fibroblasts following
treatment with nicotine and lipopolysaccharide.

Wendell KJ(1), Stein SH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tennessee Health Science Center, College of Dentistry,
Department of Periodontology, Memphis 38163, USA.

BACKGROUND: Patients who smoke are at increased risk for chronic periodontitis
(CP). Most studies suggest that the microbial flora in these patients is similar 
to that found in non-smoking CP patients. Thus, the increased risk for
development of CP is not dependent on an altered microbial profile, but rather to
some change in the host response to these periopathogens. There is evidence that 
human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) derived from diseased sites produce greater
amounts of interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-8 in vitro than cells derived from healthy
sites. This suggests that HGF subpopulations may be selected based upon the
inflammatory milieu in which they reside. The hypothesis to be tested was that
the combination of nicotine and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) could regulate HGF
inflammatory mediator production.
METHODS: HGF cell cultures were established from explants derived from 10
patients with CP. HGF cell cultures were stimulated with 1 mM, 1 microM, or 1 nM 
nicotine +/- Escherichia coli or Porphyromonas gingivalis LPS. At 12, 24, or
48-hour time points, the cells were counted and the supernatant was collected for
subsequent IL-6 and IL-8 determination in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: At the 24-hour time point, 1 nM nicotine stimulated IL-6 production
compared to control (P=0.02). E. coli LPS alone caused a 3- to 4-fold increase in
IL-6 and IL-8 production, whereas P gingivalis LPS did not augment IL-6 or IL-8. 
A synergistic effect upregulating IL-6 was observed with combined treatment of 1 
mM nicotine and E. coli LPS or P gingivalis LPS at the 24-hour time point
(P<0.0005 and P=0.002, respectively). Similar effects were seen when IL-8
production was evaluated following HGF stimulation with high doses of nicotine
and E. coli LPS or P gingivalis LPS.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that nicotine by itself can stimulate HGF 
IL-6 and IL-8 production. Moreover, the combination of high doses of nicotine and
either E. coli or P gingivalis LPS can synergistically upregulate cytokine
production. These findings support the hypothesis that a proinflammatory
fibroblast phenotype may be elicited in an environment enriched with bacterial
LPS and nicotine.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2001.72.8.1038 
PMID: 11525435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

