
1. Geochim Cosmochim Acta. 1996 Mar;60(5):765-85.

Reflectance spectroscopy and geochemical analyses of Lake Hoare sediments,
Antarctica: implications for remote sensing of the Earth and Mars.

Bishop JL(1), Koeberl C, Kralik C, Fr√∂schl H, Englert PA, Andersen DW, Pieters
CM, Wharton RA Jr.

Collaborators: Wharton RA Jr(2).

Author information: 
(1)DLR, Institute for Planetary Exploration, Rudower Chausee, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Desert Research Inst, Reno, NV

Visible to infrared reflectance spectroscopic analyses (0.3-25 micromoles) have
been performed on sediments from the Dry Valleys region of Antarctica. Sample
characterization for these sediments includes extensive geochemical analyses and 
X-ray diffraction (XRD). The reflectance spectra and XRD indicate major amounts
of quartz, feldspar, and pyroxene in these samples and lesser amounts of
carbonate, mica, chlorite, amphibole, illite, smectite, and organic matter.
Calcite is the primary form of carbonate present in these Lake Hoare sediments
based on the elemental abundances and spectroscopic features. The particle size
distribution of the major and secondary components influences their detection in 
mixtures and this sensitivity to particle size is manifested differently in the
"volume scattering" and "surface scattering" infrared regions. The Christiansen
feature lies between these two spectral regimes and is influenced by the spectral
properties of both regions. For these mixtures the Christiansen feature was found
to be dependent on physical parameters, such as particle size and sample texture,
as well as the mineralogy. Semiquantitative spectroscopic detection of calcite
and organic material has been tested in these quartz- and feldspar-rich
sediments. The relative spectral band depths due to organics and calcite
correlate in general with the wt% C from organic matter and carbonate. The
amounts of organic matter and carbonate present correlate with high Br and U
abundances and high Ca and Sr abundances, respectively. Variation in the
elemental abundances was overall minimal, which is consistent with a common
sedimentary origin for the forty-two samples studied here from Lake Hoare.

DOI: 10.1016/0016-7037(95)00432-7 
PMID: 11539146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

