
1. Water Environ Res. 2001 Jan-Feb;73(1):15-23.

Surfactant-enhanced solubilization and anaerobic biodegradation of
1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-ethane (DDT) in contaminated soil.

Walters GW(1), Aitken MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill 27599-7400, USA.

The hydrophobic pesticide 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-ethane (DDT) is
a persistent contaminant in soils and sediments, although it has long been known 
to be biodegradable under anaerobic conditions. Addition of a nonionic surfactant
was evaluated as a means of enhancing the solubilization, potential
bioavailability, and anaerobic biodegradability of DDT and its
metabolites--1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-ethane (DDD) and
1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-ethylene (DDE)--in an aged contaminated
soil. Approximately 12 mg surfactant/g soil was required before concentrations
greater than the critical micelle concentration were observed in the liquid phase
in soil microcosms. At greater doses, solubilization of each DDT, DDD, and DDE
isomer increased linearly with the surfactant dose. Solubilization data were
consistent with equilibrium models that account for simultaneous partitioning of 
hydrophobic compounds between the aqueous, soil, and pseudomicellar phases.
Significantly greater rates and extents of DDT degradation were observed in
anaerobic microcosms that were regularly fed a cellulose substrate or amended
with surfactant (with or without cellulose) relative to controls. The surfactant 
substantially increased the rate of DDT degradation during the first 9 weeks,
although there were no significant differences between cellulose-fed microcosms
and surfactant-amended microcosms after 31 weeks. In addition, DDD accumulated at
less than stoichiometric amounts in surfactant-amended microcosms, whereas DDD
accumulated nearly stoichiometrically with DDT loss in all other microcosms.
Concentrations of DDE were unchanged throughout the course of the microcosm
experiment.

DOI: 10.2175/106143001x138633 
PMID: 11558297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

