
1. J Immunol. 2001 Oct 1;167(7):3692-8.

Both CD34+38+ and CD34+38- cells home specifically to the bone marrow of NOD/LtSZ
scid/scid mice but show different kinetics in expansion.

Kerre TC(1), De Smet G, De Smedt M, Offner F, De Bosscher J, Plum J,
Vandekerckhove B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, Ghent
University Hospital, 4BlokA, De Pintelaan 185, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium.
Tessa.Kerre@rug.ac.be

Human hemopoietic stem cells (HSC) have been shown to engraft, differentiate, and
proliferate in the hemopoietic tissues of sublethally irradiated NOD/LtSZ
scid/scid (NOD/SCID) mice. We used this model to study homing, survival, and
expansion of human HSC populations from different sources or phenotype. We
observed that CD34+ cells homed specifically to bone marrow (BM) and spleen, but 
by 3 days after injection, survived only in the BM. These BM-homed CD34+ cells
proliferated intensively and gave rise to a 12-fold, 5.5-fold, and 4-fold
expansion in 3 days for umbilical cord blood, adult mobilized peripheral blood,
and adult BM-derived cells, respectively. By injection of purified
subpopulations, it was demonstrated that both CD34+38+ and CD34+38- umbilical
cord blood HSC homed to the BM and expanded. Importantly, kinetics of expansion
were different: CD34+38+ cells started to increase in cell number from day 3
onwards, and by 4 wk after injection, virtually all CD34+ cells had disappeared. 
In contrast, CD34+38- cells remained quiescent during the first week and started 
to expand intensively from the third week on. In this paper, we have shown that
homing, survival, and expansion of stem cells are three independent phenomena
important in the early phase of BM engraftment and that kinetics of engraftment
differ between CD34+38+ and CD34+38- cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.7.3692 
PMID: 11564784  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

