
1. Hum Gene Ther. 2001 Sep 20;12(14):1797-804.

DNA immunization of HLA transgenic mice with a plasmid expressing mycobacterial
heat shock protein 65 results in HLA class I- and II-restricted T cell responses 
that can be augmented by cytokines.

Charo J(1), Sundb√§ck M, Geluk A, Ottenhoff T, Kiessling R.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center Karolinska, Karolinska Hospital, S-17176, Stockholm, Sweden.
Jehad_Charo@nih.gov

Infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) remains a major cause of
morbidity and mortality world-wide. An effective vaccination strategy is the
immunization with plasmid DNA (pDNA), expressing an antigen (Ag) from a pathogen 
in vivo, which results in specific immune response against the encoded protein as
well as the pathogen itself or cells infected with it. To test the ability to
induce HLA-restricted T cell immune response against a mycobacterial antigen in
humans by pDNA vaccination, we have used transgenic mice that express HLA class I
(A*0201/Kb) or HLA class II (DRB1*0301) molecules. pDNA immunization with
mycobacterial heat shock protein 65 (Mhsp65)-expressing plasmid (P3M.65) resulted
in HLA-II-restricted, Ag-specific T cell-mediated immune responses characterized 
by proliferation and cytokine production. These T cell responses could be further
augmented by the coinjection of P3M.65 and plasmid expressing murine GM-CSF.
Furthermore, coimmunizing HLA-I transgenic mice with P3M.65 and a plasmid
expressing murine IFN-gamma induced a specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte response
restricted by HLA-A2. These results represent the first evidence of a concomitant
in vivo induction of HLA class I- as well as class II-restricted T cell responses
by pDNA immunization, which is induced or augmented by the codelivery of
cytokine-expressing plasmids, supporting its potential use in clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1089/104303401750476285 
PMID: 11560772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

