
1. Clin Cancer Res. 2001 Oct;7(10):3298-304.

Expression of interleukin 8 and its receptors in human colon carcinoma cells with
different metastatic potentials.

Li A(1), Varney ML, Singh RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, 987660 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-7660, USA.

PURPOSE: In the present study, we examined the expression of a multifunctional
cytokine, interleukin 8 (IL-8), and its receptors, CXCR1 and CXCR2, in human
colon carcinoma cells with different metastatic potentials and determined their
role in modulating phenotypes associated with metastasis.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: IL-8, CXCR1, and CXCR2 protein and mRNA expression were
examined using ELISA, immunocytochemistry, and reverse transcription-PCR in human
colon carcinoma cells with different metastatic potentials. IL-8-mediated
proliferation, migration, and tumor-endothelial cell interaction were analyzed.
RESULTS: IL-8 mRNA and protein expression was very low in Caco2 cells but
elevated in KM12C cells and very high in KM12L4 cells, suggesting an association 
between the IL-8 production and metastatic potential. Similarly, CXCR1 and CXCR2 
expression was lower in Caco2 cells than in low and high metastatic KM12C and
KM12L4 cells. The recombinant human IL-8 enhanced the proliferation of colon
carcinoma cells. Furthermore, proliferation of low and high metastatic cells
expressing different levels of IL-8 was inhibited by neutralizing antibodies to
IL-8, CXCR1, and CXCR2. We observed significant differences in the invasive
potential of colon carcinoma cells expressing different levels of IL-8. In
addition, we observed that IL-8 modulates adhesion of tumor cells to endothelial 
cells in an autocrine and paracrine manner.
CONCLUSION: Our present data suggest an association between constitutive
expression of IL-8 and aggressiveness in human colon carcinoma cells and the
possible role of IL-8 in modulating different metastatic phenotypes associated
with progression and metastasis.


PMID: 11595728  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

