
1. J Immunol. 2001 Oct 15;167(8):4644-50.

Meningeal and perivascular macrophages of the central nervous system play a
protective role during bacterial meningitis.

Polfliet MM(1), Zwijnenburg PJ, van Furth AM, van der Poll T, DÃ¶pp EA, Renardel
de Lavalette C, van Kesteren-Hendrikx EM, van Rooijen N, Dijkstra CD, van den
Berg TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Pediatrics, Vrije Universiteit
Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. M.Polfliet.cell@med.vu.nl

Meningeal (MM) and perivascular macrophages (PVM) constitute major populations of
resident macrophages in the CNS that can be distinguished from microglial cells. 
So far, there is no direct evidence that demonstrates a possible role of MM and
PVM in the CNS during normal or pathologic conditions. To elucidate the role of
the MM and PVM during CNS inflammation, we have developed a strategy using a
single intraventricular injection of mannosylated clodronate liposomes, which
results in a complete and selective depletion of the PVM and MM from the CNS.
Depletion of the MM and PVM during experimental pneumococcal meningitis resulted 
in increased illness, which correlated with higher bacteria counts in the
cerebrospinal fluid and blood. This was associated with a decreased influx of
leukocytes into the cerebrospinal fluid, which occurred despite an elevated
production of relevant chemokines (e.g., macrophage-inflammatory protein-2) and a
higher expression of vascular adhesion molecules (e.g., VCAM-1). In contrast, the
higher bacterial counts correlated with elevated production of local and systemic
inflammatory mediators (e.g., IL-6) indicating enhanced local leukocyte and
systemic immune activation, and this may explain the worsening of the clinical
signs. These findings show that the PVM and MM play a protective role during
bacterial meningitis and suggest that a primary action of these macrophages is to
facilitate the influx of leukocytes at the blood-brain barrier. More in general, 
we demonstrate for the first time that the PVM and MM play a crucial role during 
inflammation in the CNS.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.8.4644 
PMID: 11591794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

