
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2001 Oct;126(1):143-50.

Increased expression of CTLA-4 (CD152) by T and B lymphocytes in Wegener's
granulomatosis.

Steiner K(1), Moosig F, Csernok E, Selleng K, Gross WL, Fleischer B, Br√∂ker BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Bernhard-Nocht-Institute
for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.

CTLA-4 (CD152) is a surface molecule of activated T cells with sequence homology 
to CD28. Both molecules bind to the same ligands, B7.1 (CD80) and B7.2 (CD86) but
have antagonistic functions. While CD28 is an important costimulator, CTLA-4 has 
an essential inhibitory function in maintaining the homeostasis of the immune
system. Furthermore, CTLA-4 has a role in inducing a Th1 response and suppressing
Th2 cytokines, an effect which is antagonized by CD28. Many autoimmune diseases
are characterized by an overwhelming production of Th1 cytokines. Recently, the
predominance of the Th1 cytokine pattern has been directly observed in the
granulomatous inflammation of patients with Wegener's granulomatosis. The balance
between CD28 and CTLA-4 expression by T lymphocytes could be a factor in the
pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. Down regulation of CD28 predominantly on
CD8+ T cells has been described in Wegner's granulomatosis; however, analysis of 
CTLA-4 is complicated by its low expression levels. Here we have used potent
signal enhancement to study CTLA-4 on PBMC in patients with Wegener's
granulomatosis (n = 25) in comparison with healthy controls (n = 19). Expression 
levels of CTLA-4 were significantly increased selectively on CD4+ and possibly
also on CD4-/CD8- T cells in Wegener's granulomatosis. High CTLA-4 expression by 
T lymphocytes was associated with more severe disease. In contrast, after
stimulation with the mitogen PHA, CTLA-4 levels were strongly increased on T
cells from controls but in T cells from Wegener's granulomatosis patients this
response was severely impaired. Interestingly, while CTLA-4 was seen exclusively 
on T cells in control individuals, about half of the Wegener's patients showed
CTLA-4 expression by a fraction of peripheral B lymphocytes. CTLA-4 positive B
cells in the periphery were associated with less acute disease.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.2001.01575.x 
PMCID: PMC1906160
PMID: 11678911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

