
1. J Clin Periodontol. 2001 Nov;28(11):1074-8.

Effect of an enamel matrix protein derivative (Emdogain) on ex vivo dental plaque
vitality.

Sculean A(1), Auschill TM, Donos N, Brecx M, Arweiler NB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology and Conservative Dentistry, University of
Saarland, Homburg, Germany. anton.sculean@gmx.de

BACKGROUND: A common clinical observation following surgical periodontal therapy 
with an enamel matrix derivative (Emdogain) is the improved healing of the soft
tissues and the limited inflammation of the operated areas. These clinical
observations are empirical and difficult to explain. One of the factors
influencing the early wound healing might be a potential antimicrobial effect of 
Emdogain.
AIM: To investigate the effect of Emdogain on the vitality of ex vivo
supragingival dental plaque and to compare this effect to that of a standard 0.2%
chlorhexidine solution.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 24 patients suffering from adult periodontitis were
included in the study. At the beginning of the experiment, all participants were 
given a professional tooth cleaning. For the following 4 days, they had to
refrain from any kind of oral hygiene measures. At day 5, from each of the
volunteers, a voluminous plaque biofilm sample was taken with a sterile curette
from the vestibular surfaces of the 1st lower molars and divided into 5 equal
parts. Each part was mounted with 5 microl of the following solutions: (1) NaCl, 
(2) enamel matrix derivative dissolved in water (EMD), (3) enamel matrix
derivative dissolved in the vehicle (Emdogain), (4) vehicle (propylene glycol
alginate, PGA), (5) 0.2% chlorhexidine digluconate (CHX). After a reaction time
of 2 min the test solutions were sucked off, and subsequently the biofilm was
stained with a fluorescence dye. The vitality of the plaque flora after the
treatments was evaluated under the fluorescence microscope (VF%).
RESULTS: Plaque samples treated with NaCl showed a mean vitality of 76.8+/-8%.
The EMD, Emdogain, PGA and CHX showed VF values of 54.4+/-9.2, 21.4+/-10.6%,
19.6+/-11.6% and 32.3+/-11.8%, respectively. Emdogain, PGA and CHX showed
statistically highly significant reductions (p<0.0001) in terms of bacteria
vitality when compared to water (negative control) and EMD. Both Emdogain and PGA
were found to be statistically significantly different compared to CHX (p<0.001) 
(positive control).
CONCLUSION: The results of this study indicate that Emdogain might have an
antibacterial effect on the vitality of the ex vivo supragingival dental plaque
flora.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-051X.2001.281113.x 
PMID: 11686830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

