
1. J Immunol. 2001 Nov 15;167(10):5620-7.

Role of CD28 for the generation and expansion of antigen-specific CD8(+) T
lymphocytes during infection with Listeria monocytogenes.

Mittrücker HW(1), Kursar M, Köhler A, Hurwitz R, Kaufmann SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, 
Germany. mittruecker@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de

Infection of mice with the intracellular bacterium Listeria monocytogenes results
in a strong CD8(+) T cell response that is critical for efficient control of
infection. We used CD28-deficient mice to characterize the function of CD28
during Listeria infection, with a main emphasis on Listeria-specific CD8(+) T
cells. Frequencies and effector functions of these T cells were determined using 
MHC class I tetramers, single cell IFN-gamma production and Listeria-specific
cytotoxicity. During primary Listeria infection of CD28(-/-) mice we observed
significantly reduced numbers of Listeria-specific CD8(+) T cells and only
marginal levels of specific IFN-gamma production and cytotoxicity. Although
frequencies were also reduced in CD28(-/-) mice during secondary response, we
detected a considerable population of Listeria-specific CD8(+) T cells in these
mice. In parallel, IFN-gamma production and cytotoxicity were observed, revealing
that Listeria-specific CD8(+) T cells in CD28(-/-) mice expressed normal effector
functions. Consistent with their impaired CD8(+) T cell activation, CD28(-/-)
mice suffered from exacerbated listeriosis both after primary and secondary
infection. These results demonstrate participation of CD28 signaling in the
generation and expansion of Ag-specific CD8(+) T cells in listeriosis. However,
Ag-specific CD8(+) T cells generated in the absence of CD28 differentiated into
normal effector and memory T cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.10.5620 
PMID: 11698433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

