
1. Toxicol In Vitro. 2001 Dec;15(6):691-9.

Improvement of megakaryocytic progenitor culture for toxicological
investigations.

Froquet R(1), Sibiril Y, Parent-Massin D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie et Sécurité Alimentaire, Ecole Supérieure de
Microbiologie et Sécurité Alimentaire de Brest, ISAMOR, Technopôle Brest-Iroise, 
29280, Plouzané, France.

The aim of this work was to obtain an in vitro test for the evaluation of
xenobiotic toxicity on the proliferation and on the differentiation of
megakaryocyte progenitors. The rapid rate of blood cell renewal makes the
hematopoietic system a susceptible target for xenobiotic toxicity. Hematotoxic
molecules can affect one or more hematopoietic lineages leading to blood
disorders. Megakaryocytopoiesis in vitro models applied to toxicological
investigations needs to be accurate, precise, reproducible, sensitive and
specific. Human hematopoietic progenitors from umbilical cord blood were seeded
in a collagen medium. Three solvents have been selected (ethanol, methanol,
acetone), and one (dimethyl sulfoxide; DMSO) has been eliminated due to its
cytotoxicity at tested concentrations. Cryopreservation did not affect the
sensitivity of CFU-MK to xenobiotics. An overnight incubation of cell suspensions
as cell suspension enrichment before plating gave better cloning efficiency than 
CD34(+) cells negative selection. Comparison between different parameters allowed
us to propose a protocol suitable for an in vitro megakaryocytopoiesis model in
toxicological investigations. The effects of three toxins were studied on CFU-MK 
development in order to verify the efficiency of this clonogenic assays for
toxicity testing. The CFU-MK culture conditions defined revealed their usefulness
for investigating drug cytoxicity towards megakaryocytic progenitors and
disturbance of their proliferation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0887-2333(01)00082-0 
PMID: 11698171  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

