
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 22;277(8):6073-9. Epub 2001 Nov 12.

Phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate-interacting domains in PIKfyve. Binding
specificity and role in PIKfyve. Endomenbrane localization.

Sbrissa D(1), Ikonomov OC, Shisheva A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, 
Michigan 48201, USA.

PIKfyve is a phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns) 3-phosphate (P)-metabolizing enzyme,
which, in addition to a C-terminally positioned catalytic domain, harbors several
evolutionarily conserved domains, including a FYVE finger. The FYVE finger
domains are thought to direct the protein localization to intracellular membrane 
PtdIns 3-P. Recent studies with several FYVE domain proteins challenge this
general concept. Here we have examined the binding of PIKfyve's FYVE domain to
PtdIns 3-P in vitro and in vivo and a plausible contribution of this binding
mechanism for the intracellular localization of the full-length protein. We
document now a specific and high affinity interaction of a recombinantly produced
PIKfyve FYVE domain peptide fragment with PtdIns 3-P-containing liposomes that
requires the presence of the conservative core of basic residues within the FYVE 
domain. PIKfyve localization to membranes of the late endocytic pathway was found
to be absolutely dependent on the presence of an intact FYVE finger. Cell
treatment with PI 3-kinase inhibitor wortmannin dissociated endosome-bound
PIKfyve, indicating that the protein targeted the membrane PtdIns 3-P. An
enzymatically inactive peptide fragment of the PIKfyve catalytic domain was found
to also specifically bind to PtdIns 3-P-containing liposomes, with residue
Lys-1999 being critical in the interaction. This binding, however, was of
relatively low affinity and, in the cellular context, was found ineffective in
directing the molecule to PtdIns 3-P-enriched endosomes. Collectively, these
results demonstrate that interaction of the FYVE domain with PtdIns 3-P is
absolutely necessary for PIKfyve targeting to the membranes of the late endocytic
pathway and determine PIKfyve as a downstream effector of PtdIns 3-P.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110194200 
PMID: 11706043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

