
1. Cell Tissue Res. 2001 Nov;306(2):257-64.

Identification of a novel, multifunctional beta-defensin (human beta-defensin 3) 
with specific antimicrobial activity. Its interaction with plasma membranes of
Xenopus oocytes and the induction of macrophage chemoattraction.

García JR(1), Jaumann F, Schulz S, Krause A, Rodríguez-Jiménez J, Forssmann U,
Adermann K, Klüver E, Vogelmeier C, Becker D, Hedrich R, Forssmann WG, Bals R.

Author information: 
(1)IPF Pharmaceuticals GmbH, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 31, 30625 Hanover, Germany.

Previous studies have shown the implication of beta-defensins in host defense of 
the human body. The human beta-defensins 1 and 2 (hBD-1, hBD-2) have been
isolated by biochemical methods. Here we report the identification of a third
human beta-defensin, called human beta-defensin 3 (hBD-3; cDNA sequence, Genbank 
accession no. AF295370), based on bioinformatics and functional genomic analysis.
Expression of hBD-3 is detected throughout epithelia of many organs and in
non-epithelial tissues. In contrast to hBD-2, which is upregulated by
microorganisms or tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), hBD-3 expression is
increased particularly after stimulation by interferon-gamma. Synthetic hBD-3
exhibits a strong antimicrobial activity against gram-negative and gram-positive 
bacteria and fungi, including Burkholderia cepacia. In addition, hBD-3 activates 
monocytes and elicits ion channel activity in biomembranes, specifically in
oocytes of Xenopus laevis. This paper also shows that screening of genomic
sequences is a valuable tool with which to identify novel regulatory peptides.
Human beta-defensins represent a family of antimicrobial peptides differentially 
expressed in most tissues, regulated by specific mechanisms, and exerting
physiological functions not only related to direct host defense.

DOI: 10.1007/s004410100433 
PMID: 11702237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

