
1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2001 Dec;12(12):2543-53.

Hepatocyte growth factor alters renal epithelial cell susceptibility to
uropathogenic Escherichia coli.

Wu JH(1), Billings BJ, Balkovetz DF.

Author information: 
(1)Birmingham Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

The urinary tract is frequently the source of Escherichia coli bacteremia.
Bacteria from the urinary tract must cross an epithelial layer to enter the
bloodstream. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) alters the polarity of Madin-Darby
canine kidney (MDCK) epithelial cells. The role of cell polarity in determining
renal epithelial resistance to Escherichia coli invasion is not well known. A
model of polarized and HGF-treated MDCK epithelial cells grown on filters was
used to study the role of epithelial cell polarity during the interaction of
nonvirulent (XL1-Blue) and uropathogenic (J96) strains of Escherichia coli with
renal epithelium. Basolateral exposure of MDCK cells to J96, but not XL1-Blue,
resulted in loss of transepithelial resistance (TER), which was due to epithelial
cytotoxicity and not degradation of epithelial junctional proteins by bacterial
proteases. Apical exposure to both J96 and XL1-Blue did not alter TER.
Pretreatment of polarized MDCK cell monolayers with HGF renders the cells
sensitive to loss of TER and cytotoxicity by apical exposure to J96. Analysis by 
confocal microscopy demonstrated that HGF treatment of MDCK cell monolayers also 
greatly enhances adherence of J96 to the apical surface of the cell monolayer.
These data demonstrate that the basolateral surface of polarized epithelia is
more susceptible to J96 cytotoxicity. The data also support the hypothesis that
processes that alter epithelial cell polarity increase sensitivity of epithelia
to bacterial injury and adherence from the apical compartment.


PMID: 11729222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

