
1. Immunology. 2001 Nov;104(3):278-88.

Human leucocyte antigen-A2 restricted and Mycobacterium tuberculosis 19-kDa
antigen-specific CD8+ T-cell responses are oligoclonal and exhibit a T-cell
cytotoxic type 2 response cytokine-secretion pattern.

HÃ¶hn H(1), Kortsik C, Nilges K, Necker A, Freitag K, Tully G, Neukirch C, Maeurer
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology, University of Mainz, Hochhaus
Augustusplatz, Mainz, Germany.

CD8+ T cells can be grouped into two different types of secretory T lymphocytes, 
based on the cytokine-secretion pattern upon antigen exposure: those with a
T-cell cytotoxic type 1 response (Tc1), which secrete interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma), or those with a T-cell cytotoxic type 2 response, which secrete
interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-10. We examined the CD8+ T-cell response directed
against an immunodominant human leucocyte antigen (HLA)-A2-presented peptide
derived from a 19-kDa Mycobacterium tuberculosis-associated antigen. T cells were
examined by functional analysis and by T-cell receptor (TCR)
complementarity-determining region 3 (CDR3)-spectratyping, which defines the
complexity of a T-cell response. T-cell stimulation with the immunodominant
VLTDGNPPEV epitope yielded a Tc2 (IL-4) cytokine-secretion pattern and resulted
in oligoclonal expansion of TCR-variable beta chain (VB) families, which differed
from patient to patient. Generation of T-cell clones corroborated the notion that
the CD8+ T-cell response directed against the HLA-A2-presented VLTDGNPPEV epitope
leads to a Tc2 cytokine-secretion pattern in CD8+ T cells, as defined by IL-4 and
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) release.
Characterization of the cytokine-secretion profile in HLA-A2/VLTDGNPPEV-tetramer 
sorted T cells from patients with active tuberculosis supported this observation:
peptide-specific T cells from three of three patients secreted IL-4 and only one 
of three patients produced IFN-gamma in response to the nominal target epitope.
Permutation of this T-cell epitope may aid to elicit a qualitatively different
CD8+ T-cell response in patients with M. tuberculosis infection.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2567.2001.01307.x 
PMCID: PMC1783313
PMID: 11722642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

