
1. Food Chem Toxicol. 2002 Jan;40(1):33-41.

Degradation of organochlorine pesticides by meat starter in liquid media and
fermented sausage.

Abou-Arab AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dairy and Food Technology Department, National Research Center, Dokki, Cairo, 
Egypt. akotbabouarab@hotmail.com

The effect of meat starter on the degradation of DDT and lindane was
investigated. The insignificant role of Lactobacillus plantarum in degrading
p,p'-DDT and lindane presented in tryptone soya broth (TSB) and mineral salt
medium (MSM) with or without 120 ppm nitrite was observed.The degradation of DDT 
and lindane by Micrococcus varians in TSB and MSM with or without nitrite were
studied. The results indicated that DDT or lindane were degraded during the
incubation period. The reduction in DDT at the end of the incubation period (15
days) was about 24.1 and 32.5% in TSB and MSM without nitrite, respectively.
Corresponding values in the same media with nitrite were 37.5 and 46.4%.
Regarding the reduction in lindane, it was recorded as 27.9 and 40.0% in TSB and 
MSM without nitrite, respectively and 38.4 and 48.4% in the same media with
nitrite. The results indicated that culture media M. varians metabolized DDT
mainly to DDD and lindane mainly to 2,4-, 2,5-, 2,6- and 3,4-dichlorophenol;
2,3,4- and 2,3,5-trichlorophenol; hexachlorobenzene; and pentachlorophenol. The
effect of pesticides on the growth rate of meat starter was also investigated.
The addition of DDT or lindane resulted in a slight decrease in counts of the
strains during the initial incubation in TSB or MSM. Then the microorganisms
recovered and began to grow logarithmically, but not as well as in a normal
situation. The effect of fermentation stage by meat starter on DDT and lindane in
fermented sausage was recorded. The results indicated that during the 72 h of
fermentation, the reduction was 10 and 18% of DDT and lindane, respectively.
These results confirmed that the fermentation process in meat products reduced
pesticide residues and these reductions were due to the activity of meat starter.

DOI: 10.1016/s0278-6915(01)00090-4 
PMID: 11731034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

