
1. J Immunol. 2001 Dec 15;167(12):6827-33.

The Src-protein tyrosine kinase Lck is required for IL-1-mediated costimulatory
signaling in Th2 cells.

al-Ramadi BK(1), Welte T, Fernandez-Cabezudo MJ, Galadari S, Dittel B, Fu XY,
Bothwell AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
ramadi.b@uaeu.ac.ae

Src-protein tyrosine kinases are intimately involved in TCR-initiated signaling
in T lymphocytes. One member of this family, Lck, is also involved in
CD28-mediated costimulation in Th1 cells. In Th2 lymphocytes, the costimulatory
signal can also be provided by the interaction of IL-1 with type I IL-1R
(IL-1RI), culminating in the activation of NF-kappaB transcription factors.
Proximal steps in the IL-1R pathway, however, remain poorly understood, and there
is conflicting evidence as to the importance of tyrosine phosphorylation in IL-1R
signaling. We have addressed this issue by examining the ability of IL-1 to
costimulate the activation of Lck-deficient Th2 cells. Our data demonstrate that,
in the absence of Lck, the IL-1 costimulatory pathway is blocked despite the
expression of normal levels of IL-1RI. Moreover, the block is associated with a
defective degradation of IkappaB-alpha and an incomplete activation of NF-kappaB 
heterodimeric complexes. Protein expression of NF-kappaB monomers, including p50,
p65, and c-Rel, is equivalent in both wild-type and Lck-deficient Th2 cell
clones. Finally, we demonstrate that, in normal Th2 cells, stimulation with IL-1 
leads to a rapid induction in tyrosine phosphorylation of several substrates
including Lck itself. These findings strongly suggest that Lck is required for
signaling in the IL-1 costimulatory pathway in Th2 lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.12.6827 
PMID: 11739499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

