
1. Infect Immun. 2002 Jan;70(1):277-85.

Functional differences among FimA variants of Porphyromonas gingivalis and their 
effects on adhesion to and invasion of human epithelial cells.

Nakagawa I(1), Amano A, Kuboniwa M, Nakamura T, Kawabata S, Hamada S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Microbiology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Dentistry, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita-Osaka 565-0871, Japan. ichiro@dent.osaka-u.ac.jp

Fimbriae of Porphyromonas gingivalis, a periodontopathogen, play an important
role in its adhesion to and invasion of host cells. The fimA genes encoding
fimbrillin (FimA), a subunit protein of fimbriae, have been classified into five 
types, types I to V, based on nucleotide sequences. We previously reported that
P. gingivalis with type II fimA was strongly associated with adult periodontitis.
In the present study, we compared the abilities of recombinant FimA (rFimA) types
I to V to adhere to and invade human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) and a human
epithelial cell line (HEp-2 cells) by using rFimA-conjugated microspheres
(rFimA-MS). There were no significant differences in the abilities of the
rFimA-MS to adhere to HGF; however, the adhesion of type II rFimA-MS to HEp-2
cells was significantly greater than those of other types of rFimA-MS. We also
observed that type II rFimA-MS invaded epithelial cells and accumulated around
the nuclei. These adhesion and invasion characteristics were eliminated by the
addition of antibodies to type II rFimA and alpha5beta1-integrin. In contrast,
Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser peptide and a synthetic peptide of proline-rich protein C had
negligible inhibitory effects. Furthermore, P. gingivalis strain HW24D1 with type
II fimA adhered to cells and invaded them more than strains with other fimA
genotypes. These results suggest that type II FimA can bind to epithelial cells
most efficiently through specific host receptors.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.70.1.277-285.2002 
PMCID: PMC127611
PMID: 11748193  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

