
1. Eur J Immunol. 2001 Nov;31(11):3197-206.

Radically altered T cell receptor signaling in glycopeptide-specific T cell
hybridoma induced by antigen with minimal differences in the glycan group.

Jensen T(1), Nielsen M, Gad M, Hansen P, Komba S, Meldal M, Ã˜dum N, Werdelin O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

A T cell hybridoma raised against the synthetic glycopeptide T(72)(Tn) was used
to study whether the initial TCR signaling events are markedly different when the
hybridoma is stimulated with glycopeptides closely related to the cognate
glycopeptide antigen. T(72)(Tn) has an alpha-D-GalNAc group O-linked to the
central threonine in the decapeptide VITAFTEGLK, and the hybridoma is known to be
highly specific for this carbohydrate group. T(72)(Tn)-pulsed APC induced
tyrosine phosphorylation of the TCR-zeta 21- and 23-kDa proteins and the
downstream p42/44 MAP kinase and strong IL-2 secretion. APC pulsed with
T(72)(alpha-D-GlcNAc), which differs from T(72)(Tn) solely by the orientation of 
a hydroxy group in the carbohydrate structure, completely failed to induce
detectable tyrosine phosphorylation and IL-2 secretion. APC pulsed with
S(72)(Tn), which differs from T(72)(Tn) by not having a methyl group in the
serine amino acid side chain to which the glycan is attached, induced partial
tyrosine phosphorylation of the TCR-zeta 21-kDa protein, no tyrosine
phosphorylation of the MAP kinases and no IL-2 production. Molecular modeling of 
the MHC/glycopeptide complex revealed that the dramatic difference between the
stimulatory power of T(72)(Tn) and T(72)(alpha-D-GlcNAc) is mainly due to very
small differences in the TCR exposed carbohydrate structure.

DOI: 10.1002/1521-4141(200111)31:11<3197::aid-immu3197>3.0.co;2-5 
PMID: 11745336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

