
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 8;277(10):8279-89. Epub 2001 Dec 11.

The solution structures of the human beta-defensins lead to a better
understanding of the potent bactericidal activity of HBD3 against Staphylococcus 
aureus.

Schibli DJ(1), Hunter HN, Aseyev V, Starner TD, Wiencek JM, McCray PB Jr, Tack
BF, Vogel HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Research Group, Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, Canada.

The three human beta-defensins, HBD1--3, are 33--47-residue, cationic
antimicrobial proteins expressed by epithelial cells. All three proteins have
broad spectrum antimicrobial activity, with HBD3 consistently being the most
potent. Additionally, HBD3 has significant bactericidal activity against
Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus at physiological salt concentrations. We have
compared the multimeric state of the three beta-defensins using NMR diffusion
spectroscopy, dynamic and static light scattering, and analysis of the migration 
of the three beta-defensins on a native gel. All three techniques are in
agreement, suggesting that HBD-3 is a dimer, while HBD-1 and HBD-2 are monomeric.
Subsequently, the NMR solution structures of HBD1 and HBD3 were determined using 
standard homonuclear techniques and compared with the previously determined
solution structure of HBD2. Both HBD1 and HBD3 form well defined structures with 
backbone root mean square deviations of 0.451 and 0.616 A, respectively. The
tertiary structures of all three beta-defensins are similar, with a short helical
segment preceding a three-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet. The surface charge
density of each of the defensins is markedly different, with the surface of HBD3 
significantly more basic. Analysis of the NMR data and structures led us to
suggest that HBD3 forms a symmetrical dimer through strand beta2 of the
beta-sheet. The increased anti-Staphylococcal activity of HBD3 may be explained
by the capacity of the protein to form dimers in solution at low concentrations, 
an amphipathic dimer structure, and the increased positive surface charge
compared with HBD1 and HBD2.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M108830200 
PMID: 11741980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

