
1. Eur J Immunol. 2001 Dec;31(12):3602-11.

The identification of a common pathogen-specific HLA class I A*0201-restricted
cytotoxic T cell epitope encoded within the heat shock protein 65.

Charo J(1), Geluk A, Sundb√§ck M, Mirzai B, Diehl AD, Malmberg KJ, Achour A,
Huriguchi S, van Meijgaarden KE, Drijfhout JW, Beekman N, van Veelen P, Ossendorp
F, Ottenhoff TH, Kiessling R.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumorbiology Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
jehad.charo@mtc.ki.se

Bacterial antigens recognized by CD8(+) T cells in the context of MHC class I are
thought to play a crucial role in protection against pathogenic intracellular
bacteria. Here, we demonstrate the induction of HLA-A*0201-restricted CD8(+) T
cell responses against six new high-affinity HLA-A*0201-binding CTL epitopes,
encoded within an immunodominant and highly conserved antigen of Mycobacteria,
the heat shock protein 65 (hsp65). One of these epitopes, Mhsp65(9(369)), is
identical in a large number of pathogenic bacteria, and is recognized in a
CD8-independent fashion. Mhsp65(9(369)) could be presented by either
mycobacterial hsp65-pulsed target cells or BCG-infected macrophages.
Interestingly, T cells specific for this epitope did not recognize the
corresponding human hsp65 homologue, probably due to structural differences as
revealed by modeling studies. Furthermore, in vitro proteasome digestion analyses
show that, whereas the mycobacterial hsp65 epitope is efficiently generated, the 
human hsp65 homologue is not, thus avoiding the induction of autoreactivity.
Collectively, these findings describe high-affinity HLA class I-binding epitopes 
that are naturally processed and are recognized efficiently by MHC class
I-restricted CD8(+) T cells, providing a rational basis for the development of
subunit vaccine strategies against tuberculosis and other intracellular
infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/1521-4141(200112)31:12<3602::aid-immu3602>3.0.co;2-l 
PMID: 11745380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

