
1. Ethn Dis. 2001 Fall;11(4):578-84.

HFE mutations in African-American women with non-insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus.

Acton RT(1), Barton JC, Bell DS, Go RC, Roseman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology , University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA.
acton@uab.edu

The aim of this study was to compare the frequencies of HFE mutations in
African-American women with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) to
that of controls and to determine whether these mutations are associated with
NIDDM and iron overload. We studied 167 African-American women with NIDDM. The 71
non-diabetic controls were African-American female controls. HLA-A and -B typing 
and HFE mutation analysis for C282Y and H63D alleles were performed using
standard molecular genetic techniques. The frequencies of C282Y and H63D were not
significantly different in NIDDM patients and controls. C282Y was observed in
0.59% of patients and 1.41% of controls. H63D was observed in 2.99% of patients
and 3.08% of controls. All of the NIDDM patients who possessed either C282Y or
H63D mutations had normal values of serum ferritin, serum iron and transferrin
saturation. A woman who inherited C282Y also possessed HLA-A3, -B7 which is
considered part of the ancestral haplotype containing the gene predisposing to
hemochromatosis in Caucasians. The frequencies of C282Y and H63D vary in African 
Americans from different geographic regions of the United States; this variance
can be explained by Caucasian admixture. Although most iron overload cases in
African Americans bear more resemblance to cases of African iron overload than to
those of Caucasian hemochromatosis, rare cases resembling Caucasian
hemochromatosis have been observed in African Americans.


PMID: 11763282  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

