
1. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2001 Oct;80(1):19-34.

Modular organization of the AIDA autotransporter translocator: the N-terminal
beta1-domain is surface-exposed and stabilizes the transmembrane beta2-domain.

Konieczny MPJ(1), Benz I, Hollinderbäumer B, Beinke C, Niederweis M, Schmidt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Infektiologie, Zentrum für Molekularbiologie der Entzündung,
Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Germany.

The adhesin involved in diffuse adherence (AIDA-I) of the diarrhoeagenic
Escherichia coli strain 2787 (O126:H27) is synthesized as a precursor molecule.
This pre-pro-protein is N- and C-terminally processed to generate three distinct 
domains, which are characteristic for autotransporter secretion systems in
Gram-negative bacteria: the N-terminal pre-peptide, the alpha-domain and the
C-terminal beta-domain. The outer membrane-integrated beta-domain (AIDAC) is
responsible for the surface-presentation of the alpha-domain (AIDA-I) and is thus
termed 'translocator'. Characterization of extracted N-terminally truncated forms
and of in vitro refolded proteins revealed a core structure at the C-terminus of 
the translocator which was found to be very stable even in the presence of SDS.
Denaturation occurs only after additional incubation at temperatures above 80
degrees C. Reporter-epitope insertions were used to analyze the location of
regions of membrane-integrated AIDAC relative to the membrane. The modified
topological model developed for the AIDA translocator suggests the N-terminal
domain (beta1) encompasses approximately 10 kDa to represent a completely
surface-exposed segment while the C-terminal compact core domain (beta2) remains 
integrated in the membrane as a beta-barrel-like structure. Though the beta2-core
structure alone harbours all the information for the outer membrane integration
of AIDAC it is additionally stabilized by the beta1-domain. Access to large
amounts of complete as well as truncated AIDAC proteins facilitated the study of 
protein folding by CD and fluorescence spectroscopy. A potential pore forming
activity of the translocator using the completely refolded AIDAC or the
beta2-core in black-lipid membranes could not be demonstrated.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1012084325728 
PMID: 11761364  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

