
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2002 Jan;68(1):280-8.

Homology of Escherichia coli R773 arsA, arsB, and arsC genes in arsenic-resistant
bacteria isolated from raw sewage and arsenic-enriched creek waters.

Saltikov CW(1), Olson BH.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California 92697, USA.

The occurrence and diversity of the Escherichia coli R773 ars operon were
investigated among arsenic-resistant enteric and nonenteric bacteria isolated
from raw sewage and arsenic-enriched creek waters. Selected isolates from each
creek location were screened for ars genes by colony hybridization and PCR. The
occurrence of arsA, arsB, and arsC determined by low-stringency colony
hybridization (31 to 53% estimated mismatch) was 81, 87, and 86%, respectively,
for 84 bacteria isolated on arsenate- and arsenite-amended media from three
locations. At moderate stringency (21 to 36% estimated mismatch), the occurrence 
decreased to 42, 56, and 63% for arsA, arsB, and arsC, respectively. PCR results 
showed that the ars operon is conserved in some enteric bacteria isolated from
creek waters and raw sewage. The occurrence of the arsBC genotype was about 50%
in raw sewage enteric bacteria, while arsA was detected in only 9.4% of the
isolates (n = 32). The arsABC and arsBC genotypes occurred more frequently in
enteric bacteria isolated from creek samples: 71.4 and 85.7% (n = 7),
respectively. Average sequence divergence within arsB for six creek enteric
bacteria was 20% compared to that of the E. coli R773 ars operon. Only 1 of 11
pseudomonads screened by PCR was positive for arsB. The results from this study
suggest that significant divergence has occurred in the ars operon among
As-resistant E. coli strains and in Pseudomonas spp.

DOI: 10.1128/aem.68.1.280-288.2002 
PMCID: PMC126541
PMID: 11772637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

