
1. J Immunol. 2002 Jan 15;168(2):723-33.

Lipid protein interactions: the assembly of CD1d1 with cellular phospholipids
occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum.

De Silva AD(1), Park JJ, Matsuki N, Stanic AK, Brutkiewicz RR, Medof ME, Joyce S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

CD1d1 is a member of a family of lipid Ag-presenting molecules. The cellular
ligands associated with CD1d1 were isolated and characterized by biochemical
means as an approach to elucidate the mechanism by which CD1 molecules assemble
in vivo. Natural ligands of mouse CD1d1 included cellular phosphatidylinositol
and phosphatidylinositol-glycans that are synthesized in the endoplasmic
reticulum. Further biochemical data revealed that the two CD1d1 mutants, one
defective in recycling from-and-to the plasma membrane and the other in
efficiently negotiating the secretory pathway, associated with
phosphatidylinositol. Thus phosphatidylinositol associated with CD1d1 in the
early secretory pathway. Phosphatidylinositol also associated with CD1d1 in
Pig-A-deficient cells that are defective in the first glycosylation step of
glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis. Moreover, cellular
phosphatidylinositol-glycans are not Valpha14Jalpha15 natural T cell Ags.
Therefore, we predict that cellular lipids occlude the hydrophobic Ag-binding
groove of CD1 during assembly until they are exchanged for a glycolipid Ag(s)
within the recycling compartment for display on the plasma membrane. In this
manner, cellular lipids might play a chaperone-like role in the assembly of CD1d1
in vivo, akin to the function of invariant chain in MHC class II assembly.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.2.723 
PMID: 11777966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

