
1. Exp Gerontol. 2002 Jan-Mar;37(2-3):359-67.

Ubiquitin-proteasome pathway is compromised in CD45RO+ and CD45RA+ T lymphocyte
subsets during aging.

Ponnappan U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences,
CAVHS, GC 143, 151/LRVA, John L. McClellan Memorial VA Hospital, 4300 West 7th
Street, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA. ponnappanusha@uams.edu

Recent reports from our laboratory have demonstrated that CD45RO+ and CD45RA+ T
lymphocytes from the elderly are compromised in their response to
activation-induced IL-2 receptor expression, IkappaB-alpha degradation, as well
as nuclear translocation of NFkB. To understand the basis of this
activation-induced dysfunction in the elderly, we have examined the role of the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Our results demonstrate that both CD45RO+ and
CD45RA+ T lymphocytes from the elderly show significant reduction in the
constitutive 26S proteasome-associated chymotryptic activity, when compared to
those in the young. Additionally, anti-CD3-CD28 treatment induced enhancement of 
proteasome-associated enzymatic activity in cells from the young, but not in
cells from the elderly. Lowered proteasome-associated activity and its effect on 
reduced immune responses in the elderly could be mimicked by experiments which
involved pretreatment of T cells from young donors with a proteasome specific
inhibitor, lactacystin. These data demonstrate that IL-2 receptor induction is
clearly compromised in T cells from the young when proteasomes are inhibited by
pretreatment with lactacystin. An examination of ubiquitin specific hydrolase
activity, demonstrated a decrease in activated CD45RA+ and CD45RO+ T cell subsets
from the elderly when compared to young. These results suggest that lowered
proteasome-associated enzymatic activity in combination with compromised
de-ubiquitinating activity may be responsible for lowered activation-induced NFkB
and NFkB-mediated gene expression in elderly subjects.

DOI: 10.1016/s0531-5565(01)00203-0 
PMID: 11772523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

