
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2002 Jan;68(1):201-10.

New degenerate Cytophaga-Flexibacter-Bacteroides-specific 16S ribosomal
DNA-targeted oligonucleotide probes reveal high bacterial diversity in River Taff
epilithon.

O'Sullivan LA(1), Weightman AJ, Fry JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3TL, United
Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Appl Environ Microbiol 2002 Apr;68(4):2093.

River microbial communities play an important role in global nutrient cycles, and
aggregated bacteria such as those in epilithic biofilms may be major
contributors. In this study the bacterial diversity of River Taff epilithon in
South Wales was investigated. A 16S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) clone library was
constructed and analyzed by partial sequencing of 76 of 347 clones and
hybridization with taxon-specific probes. The epilithon was found to be very
diverse, with an estimated 59.6% of the bacterial populations not accounted for
by these clones. Members of the Cytophaga-Flexibacter-Bacteroides division (CFBs)
were most abundant in the library, representing 25% of clones, followed by
members of the alpha subdivision of the division Proteobacteria
(alpha-Proteobacteria), gamma-Proteobacteria, gram-positive bacteria,
Cyanobacteria, beta-Proteobacteria, delta-Proteobacteria, and the Prosthecobacter
group. This study concentrated on the epilithic CFB populations, and a new set of
degenerate 16S rDNA probes was developed to enhance their detection, namely,
CFB560, CFB562, and CFB376. The commonly used probe CF319a/b may frequently lead 
to the underestimation of CFB populations in environmental studies, because it
does not fully detect members of the division. CFB560 had exact matches to 95.6% 
of CFBs listed in the Ribosomal Database Project (release 8.0) small-subunit
phylogenetic trees, compared to 60% for CF319a/b. The CFB probes detected 66 of
347 epilithon TAF clones, and 60 of these were partially sequenced. They
affiliated with the RDP-designated groups Cytophaga, Sphingobacterium, Lewinella,
and Cytophaga aurantiaca. CFB560 and CF319a/b detected 94% (62 of 66) and 48.5%
(32 of 66) of clones, respectively, and therefore CFB560 is recommended for
future use. Probe design in this study illustrated that multiple degenerate
positions can greatly increase target range without adversely effecting
specificity or experimental performance.

DOI: 10.1128/aem.68.1.201-210.2002 
PMCID: PMC126579
PMID: 11772628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

