
1. Exp Gerontol. 2002 Jan-Mar;37(2-3):271-83.

Age associated decline in CD25 and CD28 expression correlate with an increased
susceptibility to CD95 mediated apoptosis in T cells.

Dennett NS(1), Barcia RN, McLeod JD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Applied Sciences, Centre for Research in Biomedicine, University of
the West of England, Coldharbour Lane, Bristol BS16 1QY, UK.

Immunosenescence is believed to contribute to increase susceptibility to
infectious diseases and cancer in the elderly, and is caused mainly by changes in
the T cell compartment. Longitudinal studies were undertaken to examine T cell
surface receptor expression and apoptotic susceptibility using Staphylococcal
enterotoxin B (SEB) activated human T cells as an in vitro model of an ageing T
cell culture. An intracellular stain Carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl
ester (CFSE) was used to assess the number of population divisions (PD) occurring
in the ageing T cell culture. One major biomarker of aged T cells is a decrease
in expression of CD28 and since this is an essential co-stimulatory molecule, its
decreasing expression with age could compromise their activation and apoptotic
capacity. Activation of T cells resulted in initial up-regulation of CD25, CD95
and CD28, although expression of CD25 and CD28 subsequently decreased with
increasing PD. CD4 and CD8 T cells expressed similar CD25 profiles although CD28 
expression was unique in each subset. CD4+ cells expressed the highest CD28
levels, and showed a gradual decline in expression with increasing PD, whereas
CD8+ cells were low CD28 expressers, but did not appear to lose their expression 
as they aged. To determine T cell susceptibility to apoptosis via CD95/CD95-L
interactions with increasing age, cells were challenged with CD95-L transfected
CHO cells at various PD. Increased death was observed as they aged, which
correlated with the decreased expression of activation markers CD25 and CD28.

DOI: 10.1016/s0531-5565(01)00193-0 
PMID: 11772513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

