
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Dec 30;1522(3):230-7.

Nucleotide sequence and cell cycle-associated differential expression of ZF5128, 
a novel Kruppel type zinc finger protein gene.

Rue SW(1), Kim BW, Jun DY, Kim YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Natural Sciences, Kyungpook National
University, 702-701, Taegu, South Korea.

The nucleotide sequence of the ZF5128 gene, encoding a novel Kruppel type zinc
finger protein, has been determined. The ZF5128 gene has a predicted 553-amino
acid open reading frame, encoding a putative 61 kDa zinc finger protein. The
N-terminus of the ZF5128 coding region has a well-conserved Kruppel-associated
box (KRAB) domain that consists of KRAB box A and B, whereas the C-terminus
contains a Kruppel type C2H2 zinc finger domain possessing nine C2H2 zinc finger 
motifs in tandem arrays with the highly conserved space region of the H/C-link.
Each C2H2 zinc finger motif has a typical consensus sequence of CX2CX3FX5LX2HX3H.
A 3.2 kb transcript specific for ZF5128 was expressed at high levels in the
spleen, thymus, and peripheral blood leukocyte, and weakly expressed in the
prostate, ovary, small intestine, colon (mucosal lining), placenta, lung, and
pancreas. Although there was no detectable ZF5128 mRNA in unstimulated human
peripheral T cells, it was first detectable 1.5 h after activation by anti-CD3
plus anti-CD28, and reached a maximum in 25-30 h. During the cell cycle
progression of Jurkat T cells, the expression of ZF5128 mRNA appeared to be
induced in G1 and reached a maximum in the S phase, but declined as the cells
entered the G2/M phase. The 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate-induced
monocytic differentiation of U937, which also resulted in growth arrest,
down-regulated the expression of ZF5128 mRNA. Taken together, these results
indicate that ZF5128 is a novel gene encoding a Kruppel type C2H2 zinc finger
protein and is regulated at the transcriptional level depending on tissue type
and the cell cycle status to support cell proliferation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4781(01)00337-2 
PMID: 11779640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

