
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2002 Jan;148(Pt 1):289-295. doi:
10.1099/00221287-148-1-289.

The metabolism of 2-methyladenosine in Mycobacterium smegmatis.

Chen CK(1), Barrow EW(1), Allan PW(1), Bansal N(1), Maddry JA(1), Suling WJ(1),
Barrow WW(1), Parker WB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department, Southern Research Institute, 2000 Ninth Avenue South,
Birmingham, AL 35205, USA1.

2-Methyladenosine (methyl-ado) has demonstrated selective activity against
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which indicates that differences in the substrate
preferences between mycobacterial and human purine metabolic enzymes can be
exploited to develop novel drugs for the treatment of mycobacterial diseases.
Therefore, in an effort to better understand the reasons for the
anti-mycobacterial activity of methyl-ado, its metabolism has been characterized 
in Mycobacterium smegmatis. In a wild-type strain, methyl-ado was phosphorylated 
by adenosine kinase to methyl-AMP, which was further converted to methyl-ATP and 
incorporated into RNA. In contrast, a mutant strain of M. smegmatis was isolated 
that was resistant to methyl-ado, deficient in adenosine kinase activity and was 
not able to generate methyl-ado metabolites in cells treated with methyl-ado.
These results indicated that phosphorylated metabolites of methyl-ado were
responsible for the cytotoxic activity of this compound. Methyl-ado was not a
substrate for either adenosine deaminase or purine-nucleoside phosphorylase from 
M. smegmatis. Treatment of M. smegmatis with methyl-ado resulted in the
inhibition of ATP synthesis, which indicated that a metabolite of methyl-ado
inhibited one of the enzymes involved in de novo purine synthesis. These studies 
demonstrated the importance of adenosine kinase in the activation of methyl-ado
to toxic metabolites in M. smegmatis.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-148-1-289 
PMID: 11782521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

