
1. Clin Immunol. 2002 Jan;102(1):96-105.

Activated human CD4+ T cells induced by dendritic cell stimulation are most
sensitive to transforming growth factor-beta: implications for dendritic cell
immunization against cancer.

Lin CM(1), Wang FH, Lee PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Soochow University, Wai Shuang Hsi, Shih Lin,
Taipei, Taiwan 11102, Republic of China. yclin@mail.scu.edu.tw

The secretion of immunosuppressive factors like transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta) by tumor cells has been recognized as one of the mechanisms involved
in tumor immunological escape. This study aimed to examine whether dendritic cell
(DC) immunization could reverse TGF-beta-induced immunosuppression by simulating 
the in vivo interaction among infused DCs, host T cells, and tumor-secreted
TGF-beta in an in vitro study. We found that both immature and mature DCs were
relatively resistant to TGF-beta. The addition of TGF-beta to naive human CD4+ T 
cells, which are required by genetically modified DC to elicit antitumor
immunity, resulted in their hyporesponsiveness to DC stimulation in a
dose-dependent manner. When activated by allogeneic DCs in the presence of
TGF-beta, CD4+ T cells displayed a reduced capacity to proliferate. More
importantly, activated CD4+ T cells induced by DC stimulation were very sensitive
to TGF-beta, and this susceptibility was enhanced by their previous exposure to
TGF-beta. The underlying mechanism was linked to TGF-beta-induced apoptosis of
activated T cells. However, the presence of stimulation from DC or antibodies to 
CD3 plus CD28 could partly reverse the immunosuppressive effect of TGF-beta on
activated CD4+ T cells. Taken together, our results indicate that the efficacy of
DC immunization may be impaired by tumor-derived TGF-beta.

(c)2001 Elsevier Science.

DOI: 10.1006/clim.2001.5151 
PMID: 11781072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

