
1. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2001 Dec;21(12):1089-96.

Dysregulated response to mycobacterial cord factor trehalose-6,6'-dimycolate in
CD1D-/- mice.

Actor JK(1), Olsen M, Hunter RL Jr, Geng YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Houston Medical School, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA. Jeffrey.K.Actor@uth.tmc.edu

The biologic effects of the mycobacterial glycolipid trehalose-6,6'-dimycolate
(TDM) include granuloma formation and macrophage activation and are dependent on 
physical conformation. In mice, the group II CD1 surface molecule CD1d has been
implicated in glycolipid presentation. The importance of CD1d interactions in
pathology has yet to be established. We hypothesized that mice lacking CD1d
(CD1D(-/-)) would demonstrate dysregulated granulomatous response to TDM,
compared with CD1D(+/-) heterozygous controls. Mice were intravenously injected
with TDM-coated polystyrene-divinylbenzene beads and examined for histologic
response and for changes in inflammatory cytokine and chemokine mRNA. Control
CD1D heterozygous mice demonstrated a granulomatous response, which peaked at day
5. Increased mRNA for tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and macrophage
inflammatory protein-1alpha (MIP-1alpha) correlated with development of
granulomas, with very little change in interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) and monocyte 
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1). In contrast, the CD1D(-/-) mice revealed
markedly different responses. Five days after administration, severe pulmonary
hemorrhage was induced. The relative size of inflammation surrounding coated bead
in the CD1D(-/-) mice was nearly double that induced in the CD1D(+/-) mice.
CD1D(-/-) mice also demonstrated elevated mRNA for both inflammatory cytokines
and chemokines by day 1 after administration, significantly earlier than
responses seen in the heterozygous controls.

DOI: 10.1089/107999001317205222 
PMID: 11798467  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

