
1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2002 Feb;282(2):L285-90.

Role of interleukin-1 in the pulmonary immune response during Pseudomonas
aeruginosa pneumonia.

Schultz MJ(1), Rijneveld AW, Florquin S, Edwards CK, Dinarello CA, van der Poll
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Internal Medicine, Tropical Medicine, and AIDS,
Academic Medical Center of Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
m.j.schultz@amc.uva.nl

Pneumonia is associated with elevated concentrations of the proinflammatory
cytokine interleukin (IL)-1 in the pulmonary compartment. To study the role of
IL-1 in the pathogenesis of Pseudomonas pneumonia, IL-1 receptor type 1
gene-deficient (IL-1R -/-) mice and wild-type mice were intranasally inoculated
with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The absence of the IL-1 signal attenuated the
outgrowth of Pseudomonas in lungs, as reflected by an increasing number of
colony-forming units (cfu) during Pseudomonas pneumonia in wild-type mice and a
concurrently decreasing number of cfu during pulmonary infection in IL-1R -/-
mice (P < 0.05, IL-1R -/- mice vs. wild-type mice). Influx of neutrophils was
decreased in bronchoalveolar lavage fluids in IL-1R -/- mice compared with
wild-type mice. Similarly, lung levels of cytokines (tumor necrosis factor-alpha,
IL-6) and chemokines (macrophage inflammatory protein-2 and KC) were lower in
IL-1R -/- mice 24 h postinoculation. Consistent with results obtained in IL-1R
-/- mice, treatment of wild-type mice with IL-1R antagonist also diminished
outgrowth of Pseudomonas when compared with wild-type mice treated with vehicle
(P < 0.05). These results demonstrate that an absence or reduction in endogenous 
IL-1 activity improves host defense against Pseudomonas pneumonia while
suppressing the inflammatory response.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00461.2000 
PMID: 11792633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

