
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1976 Dec 6;449(3):386-400.

Energy tranduction in photosynthetic bacteria. XI. Further resolution of
cytochromes of b type and the nature of the co-sensitive oxidase present in the
respiratory chain of Rhodopseudomonas capsulata.

Zannoni D, Melandri BA, Baccarini-Melandri A.

1. In membranes prepared from dark grown cells of Rhodopseudomonas capsulata,
five cytochromes of b type (E'0 at pH 7.0 +413+/-5, +270+/-5, +148+/-5, +56+/-5
and -32+/-5 mV) can be detected by redox titrations at different pH values. The
midpoint potentials of only three of these cytochromes (b148, b56, and b-32) vary
as a function of pH with a slope of 30 mV per pH unit. 2. In the presence of a
CO/N2 mixture, the apparent E'0 of cytochrome b270 shifts markedly towards higher
potentials (+355mV); a similar but less pronounced shift is apparent also for
cytochrome b150. The effect of CO on the midpoint potential of cytochrome b270 is
absent in the respiration deficient mutant M6 which possesses a specific lesion
in the CO-sensitive segment of the branched respiratory chain present in the wild
type strain. 3. Preparations of spheroplasts with lysozyme digestion lead to the 
release of a large amount of cytochrome c2 and of virtually all cytochrome cc'.
These preparations show a respiratory chain impaired in the electron pathway
sensitive to low KCN concentration, in agreement with the proposed role of
cytochrome c2 in this branch; on the contrary, the activity of the CO-sensitive
branch remains unaffected, indicating that neither cytochrome c2 nor the
CO-binding cytochrome cc' are involved in this pathway. 4. Membranes prepared
from spheroplasts still possess a CO-binding pigment characterized by maxima at
420.5, 543 and 574 nm and minima at 431, 560 nm in C0-difference spectra and with
an alpha band at 562.5 nm in reduced minus oxidized difference spectra. This
membrane-bound cytochrome, which is coincident with cytochrome b270, can be
classified as a typical cytochrome "0" and considered the alternative
CO-sensitive oxidase.

DOI: 10.1016/0005-2728(76)90150-x 
PMID: 11815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

