
1. Anal Biochem. 2002 Feb 15;301(2):278-89.

Characterization of tetanus toxin, neat and in culture supernatant, by
electrospray mass spectrometry.

van Baar BL(1), Hulst AG, Roberts B, Wils ER.

Author information: 
(1)TNO Prins Maurits Laboratory, 2280 AA Rijswijk, The Netherlands.
baar@pml.tno.nl

A method was developed for the liquid chromatographic-mass spectrometric (LC-MS) 
identification of extremely neurotoxic toxins. The method combines sample
treatment in a safety containment and analysis of detoxified material in a common
laboratory facility. The method was applied to the characterization of neat
tetanus toxin and subsequent identification of the toxin in cell lysate
supernatants and culture supernatants from different Clostridium tetani bacteria 
strains. Characterization of the neat toxin was accomplished by (1) accurate mass
measurement of enzyme digest fragments of the toxin and (2) tandem mass
spectrometric (MS/MS) amino acid sequencing of selected peptides. Accurate mass
measurement proved no longer feasible for the analysis of supernatants, due to
the overwhelming presence of peptides from proteins other than toxin. Even when
high-molecular-weight proteins were filtered from the lysates and treated, the
retained protein fraction yielded too many peptides. However, MS/MS could
successfully be applied when the findings from the characterization of neat toxin
were employed. Thus, LC-MS/MS of selected precursor ions from trypsin digest
fragments yielded specific sequence data for identification of the toxin. This
procedure provided reliable identification of the toxin at levels above 1
microg/ml and within a day. Investigations with the method developed will be
extended to the botulinum neurotoxins.

Â©2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

DOI: 10.1006/abio.2001.5496 
PMID: 11814298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

