
1. Exp Cell Res. 2002 Feb 15;273(2):147-56.

Growth-related signaling regulates activation of telomerase in regenerating
hepatocytes.

Inui T(1), Shinomiya N, Fukasawa M, Kobayashi M, Kuranaga N, Ohkura S, Seki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, National Defense Medical College, 3-2 Namiki,
Tokorozawa, Saitama 359-8513, Japan.

Although there have been many reports on the relationship between activation of
telomerase and carcinogenesis, the role of telomerase in normal cellular growth
is still unclear. In this study, we analyzed the relationship between
upregulation of telomerase activity and cell cycle progression during the liver
regeneration process by using an in vivo mouse two-thirds partial hepatectomy
(PH) model as well as by using in vitro hepatocyte culture systems. Furthermore, 
we also investigated the effects of growth factors on telomerase activity during 
liver regeneration and the influence of MAPK pathway inhibitors (MEK inhibitors
PD98059 and U0126; p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580) on the telomerase activity of
regenerating hepatocytes in vitro. An upregulation of the telomerase activity was
found at 24 h after PH, and thereafter an increase in the S-phase fraction was
observed at 36-48 h. There was no remarkable change in the telomere length after 
PH. Preoperative treatment with EGF and HGF increased the in vivo telomerase
activity. In a hepatocyte primary culture, the upregulation of the telomerase
activity required the presence of EGF, and this upregulation was accelerated by
the addition of HGF. A remarkable activation of p44/42 MAPK was seen but no such 
activation of p38 MAPK was observed at 48 h after PH. Although SB203580 had no
effect on the telomerase activity of regenerating hepatocytes, treatment with MEK
inhibitors (PD 98059, U0126) significantly repressed the telomerase activity. In 
conclusion, the telomerase activity is upregulated before hepatocytes enter the S
phase, and both EGF and HGF play important roles in this step. In addition, the
activation of the p44/42 MAPK pathway seems to play an essential role in
telomerase upregulation during the liver regeneration process.

Â©2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

DOI: 10.1006/excr.2001.5446 
PMID: 11822870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

