
1. Chemosphere. 2002 Jan;46(2):209-17.

Evaluation of toxicity of pesticides and their biodegradation products using
human cells.

Forman S(1), Novák J, Tykva R, Kás J, Wimmer Z, Ruml T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Institute of Chemical Technology,
Centre for Integrated Genomics, Prague, Czech Republic.

Juvenoids are biologically active compounds, of relatively low toxicity to
humans, that efficiently inhibit the fertility of insects. However, little
attention has been paid to the stability and toxicity of products that may be
generated by their biodegradation in the ecosystem. This study describes a simple
comparison of the toxicity of the active compound and its degradation products
generated by aerobic soil microbial isolates. Surprisingly we have found that
toxicity of a biologically active carbamate juvenoid
N-[2-[4-(2,2-ethylenedioxy-1-cyclohexylmethyl)-phenoxylethyl]carbamate (W328) was
comparable with that of 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDT). The 
toxic effect was evaluated using the determination of the ATP/ADP content and
viability of HeLa S3 cells exposed to various concentrations of the chemicals
tested for various durations. DDT was used as a reference compound. Its toxicity 
was compared with two juvenile hormone analogs. The original compound, W328, was 
found to be the most toxic. The major product (W329) generated both by yeast
isolates and the mixture of moulds lost its activity on reproduction of the
tested insect. Its toxicity towards human cells was also decreased. Another two
W328 degradation HPLC fractions exhibited significantly reduced toxicity compared
to W328.

DOI: 10.1016/s0045-6535(01)00066-2 
PMID: 11827277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

