
1. Dig Dis Sci. 2002 Jan;47(1):114-21.

p53 mutation pattern and expression of c-erbB2 and c-met in gastric cancer:
relation to histological subtypes, Helicobacter pylori infection, and prognosis.

Kubicka S(1), Claas C, Staab S, KÃ¼hnel F, Zender L, Trautwein C, Wagner S,
Rudolph KL, Manns M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medizinische Hochschule
Hannover, Germany.

The molecular mechanisms of Helicobacter pylori associated tumor development are 
poorly understood. The spectra of genetic alterations in neoplasms may provide
clues to the molecular carcinogenesis of a tumor and may be relevant for the
prognosis of the patients. We investigated the p53 mutation pattern and the
protein expression of p53, c-erbB2, and c-met in 42 gastric cancers and
correlated these alterations with H. pylori infection, histological subtypes and 
survival of the patients after curative resection. There were no differences in
the incidences of the expression of p53, c-erbB2, and c-met in the tumor tissues 
according to H. pylori infection. Fifteen p53 mutations in 12 (29%) tumors were
identified. More p53 mutations were found in patients with positive serology for 
H. pylori (43% vs 14%). This difference was not significant, but the small sample
size may be insufficient to detect a potential statistical difference. There was 
neither a H. pylori-associated p53 hot-spot codon mutation nor a H. pylori
characteristic mutational pattern of p53. Positive lymph nodes (P = 0.0061) and
p53 mutations (P = 0.0035) were the only significant bad prognostic markers for
survival after curative resection of the gastric cancers in our study. Our study 
does not indicate a unique molecular mechanism of p53 mutagenesis through H.
pylori infection. The fact that p53 mutations were significantly correlated with 
poor survival of patients after potentially curative resection of gastric cancer 
may have clinical implications for multimodal therapies.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1013275706401 
PMID: 11837710  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

