
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Mar 5;99(5):2977-82. Epub 2002 Feb 5.

Binding of Escherichia coli adhesin AfaE to CD55 triggers cell-surface expression
of the MHC class I-related molecule MICA.

Tieng V(1), Le Bouguénec C, du Merle L, Bertheau P, Desreumaux P, Janin A,
Charron D, Toubert A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie et d'Histocompatibilité, Institut National de la
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unit 396, Hôpital Saint-Louis, AP-HP, 1 Avenue 
Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Mar 5;99(5):2584-6.

MICA are distant homologs of MHC class I molecules expressed in the normal
intestinal epithelium. They are ligands of the NKG2D activating receptor
expressed on most gammadelta T cells, CD8+ alphabeta T cells, and natural killer 
cells and therefore play a critical role in innate immune responses. We
investigated MICA cell-surface expression on infection of epithelial cell lines
by enteric bacteria and show here that MICA expression can be markedly increased 
by bacteria of the diffusely adherent Escherichia coli diarrheagenic group. This 
effect is mediated by the specific interaction between bacterial adhesin AfaE and
its cellular receptor, CD55, or decay-accelerating factor. It is extremely rapid 
after AfaE binding, consistent with a stress-induced signal. MICA induction on
epithelial cells triggered IFN-gamma release by the NKG2D expressing natural
killer cell line NKL. This host-bacteria interaction pathway could play a role in
the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease, a condition that implicates a
bacterial trigger in genetically susceptible individuals. This was supported by
the increased MICA expression at the surface of epithelial cells in colonic
biopsies from Crohn's disease-affected patients compared with controls.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.032668099 
PMCID: PMC122458
PMID: 11830641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

