
1. Leukemia. 2002 Feb;16(2):178-85.

Surface antigen expression in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: clustering analysis, 
interrelationships and effects of chromosomal abnormalities.

Hulkkonen J(1), Vilpo L, Hurme M, Vilpo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Tampere Medical
School and Laboratory Center of Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a phenotypically distinguishable form of
B-lymphoid leukemias. The regularity of surface membrane antigen expression
patterns, their interrelationships as well as the effects of the three frequent
chromosomal aberrations, ie 11q deletion, 13q deletion and trisomy 12, were
investigated in 35 classic CLL cases by flow cytometry. The two-way cluster
analysis of 31 individual antigens revealed three expression patterns: (1) most
cells in most cases positive (CD5, CD19, CD20, CD23, CD27, CD40, CD45, CD45RA);
(2) most cells in most cases negative (CD10, CD14, CD34, CD122, CD154, mIgG); and
(3) a mixed pattern with a variable number of positive cases and a variable
percentage of positive cells in individual cases (CD11c, CD21, CD22, CD25, CD38, 
CD45RO, CD79b, CD80, CD95, CD124, CD126, CD130, FMC7, mIgD, mIgkappa, mIglambda, 
mIgM). The expressions of several antigens were strongly interdependent, even
when antigens belonged to entirely different gene families. Such antigen pairs
were: CD11c/CD21; CD19/CD45; CD19/CD79b; CD22/CD45RA; CD23/Igkappa; CD25/mIgM;
CD27/CD45; CD45/CD79b; CD45RA/Igkappa. In contrast, the expression of some
antigens was mutually exclusive, the best examples being CD45RA/CD45RO, CD38/CD80
and CD45RA/CD80. Deletion of chromosome arm 11q attenuated expression of splicing
variant CD45RA, but enhanced CD45RO expression. In contrast, cases of trisomy 12 
were associated with enhanced CD45RA and attenuated CD45RO expression. Similarly,
trisomy 12 was associated with enhanced CD27 and mIgkappa expression. The
variable levels of signaling surface membrane antigens, their interactions and
interference by genetic aberrations are likely to affect the clinical progression
and drug response of CLL.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.leu.2402363 
PMID: 11840283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

