
1. Biochemistry. 2002 Feb 19;41(7):2217-26.

Three subunits contribute amino acids to the active site of tetrameric
adenylosuccinate lyase: Lys268 and Glu275 are required.

Brosius JL(1), Colman RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark,
Delaware 19716, USA.

Tetrameric adenylosuccinate lyase (ASL) of Bacillus subtilis catalyzes the
cleavage of adenylosuccinate to form AMP and fumarate. We previously reported
that two distinct subunits contribute residues to each active site, including the
His68 and His89 from one and His141 from a second subunit [Brosius, J. L., and
Colman, R. F. (2000) Biochemistry 39, 13336-13343]. Glu(275) is 2.8 A from His141
in the ASL crystal structure, and Lys268 is also in the active site region;
Glu275 and Lys268 come from a third, distinct subunit. Using site-directed
mutagenesis, we have replaced Lys268 by Arg, Gln, Glu, and Ala, with specific
activities of the purified mutant enzymes being 0.055, 0.00069, 0.00028, and 0.0,
respectively, compared to 1.56 units/mg for wild-type (WT) enzyme. Glu275 was
substituted by Gln, Asp, Ala, and Arg; none of these homogeneous mutant enzymes
has detectable activity. Circular dichroism and light scattering reveal that
neither the secondary structure nor the oligomeric state of the Lys268 mutant
enzymes has been perturbed. Native gel electrophoresis and circular dichroism
indicate that the Glu275 mutant enzymes are tetramers, but their conformation is 
altered slightly. For K268R, the K(m)s for all substrates are similar to WT
enzyme. Binding studies using [2-3H]-adenylosuccinate reveal that none of the
Glu275 mutant enzymes, nor inactive K268A, can bind substrate. We propose that
Lys268 participates in binding substrate and that Glu275 is essential for
catalysis because of its interaction with His141. Incubation of H89Q with K268Q
or E275Q leads to restoration of up to 16% WT activity, while incubation of H141Q
with K268Q or E275Q results in 6% WT activity. These complementation studies
provide the first functional evidence that a third subunit contributes residues
to each intersubunit active site of ASL. Thus, adenylosuccinate lyase has four
active sites per enzyme tetramer, each of which is formed from regions of three
subunits.

DOI: 10.1021/bi011998t 
PMID: 11841213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

