
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Feb 15;30(4):931-41.

Archaeal ribosomal protein L7 is a functional homolog of the eukaryotic
15.5kD/Snu13p snoRNP core protein.

Kuhn JF(1), Tran EJ, Maxwell ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, North Carolina State
University, Box 7622, Raleigh, NC 27695-7622, USA.

Recent investigations have identified homologs of eukaryotic box C/D small
nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) in Archaea termed sRNAs. Archaeal homologs of the box
C/D snoRNP core proteins fibrillarin and Nop56/58 have also been identified but a
homolog for the eukaryotic 15.5kD snoRNP protein has not been described. Our
sequence analysis of archaeal genomes reveals that the highly conserved ribosomal
protein L7 exhibits extensive homology with the eukaryotic 15.5kD protein.
Protein binding studies demonstrate that recombinant Methanoccocus jannaschii L7 
protein binds the box C/D snoRNA core motif with the same specificity and
affinity as the eukaryotic 15.5kD protein. Identical to the eukaryotic 15.5kD
core protein, archaeal L7 requires a correctly folded box C/D core motif and
intact boxes C and D. Mutational analysis demonstrates that critical features of 
the box C/D core motif essential for 15.5kD binding are also required for L7
interaction. These include stem I which juxtaposes boxes C and D, as well as the 
sheared G:A pairs and protruded pyrimidine nucleotide of the asymmetric bulge
region. The demonstrated presence of L7Ae in the Haloarcula marismortui 50S
ribosomal subunit, taken with our demonstration of the ability of L7 to bind to
the box C/D snoRNA core motif, indicates that this protein serves a dual role in 
Archaea. L7 functioning as both an sRNP core protein and a ribosomal protein
could potentially regulate and coordinate sRNP assembly with ribosome biogenesis.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/30.4.931 
PMCID: PMC100351
PMID: 11842104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

