
1. J Immunol. 2002 Mar 1;168(5):2307-15.

Allelic polymorphism synergizes with variable gene content to individualize human
KIR genotype.

Shilling HG(1), Guethlein LA, Cheng NW, Gardiner CM, Rodriguez R, Tyan D, Parham 
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology and Microbiology, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Killer Ig-like receptor (KIR) genes are a multigene family on human chromosome
19. KIR genes occur in various combinations on different haplotypes.
Additionally, KIR genes are polymorphic. To examine how allelic polymorphism
diversifies KIR haplotypes with similar or identical combinations of KIR genes,
we devised methods for discriminating alleles of KIR2DL1, -2DL3, -3DL1, and
-3DL2. These methods were applied to 143 individuals from 34 families to define
98 independent KIR haplotypes at the allele level. Three novel 3DL2 alleles and a
chimeric 3DL1/3DL2 sequence were also identified. Among the A group haplotypes
were 22 different combinations of 2DL1, 2DL3, 3DL1, and 3DL2 alleles. Among the B
group haplotypes that were unambiguously determined were 15 distinct haplotypes
involving 9 different combinations of KIR genes. A and B haplotypes both exhibit 
strong linkage disequilibrium (LD) between 2DL1 and 2DL3 alleles, and between
3DL1 and 3DL2 alleles. In contrast, there was little LD between the 2DL1/2DL3 and
3DL1/3DL2 pairs that define the two halves of the KIR gene complex. The
synergistic combination of allelic polymorphism and variable gene content
individualize KIR genotype to an extent where unrelated individuals almost always
have different KIR types. This level of diversity likely reflects strong pressure
from pathogens on the human NK cell response.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.5.2307 
PMID: 11859120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

