
1. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2002;8(1):40-6.

Early antithymocyte globulin therapy improves survival in patients with
steroid-resistant acute graft-versus-host disease.

MacMillan ML(1), Weisdorf DJ, Davies SM, DeFor TE, Burns LJ, Ramsay NK, Wagner
JE, Blazar BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Blood and Marrow Transplant Program, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA. macmi002@umn.edu

Second-line therapies for steroid-resistant acute GVHD have been used with
limited success. We have reviewed the responses of 79 hematopoetic stem cell
transplant (HSCT) patients uniformly treated from 1990-1998 with equine
antithymocyte globulin (ATG) for steroid-resistant acute GVHD, defined as
progression of acute GVHD after 4 days of treatment with prednisone or no
improvement of acute GVHD after 7 days of treatment with prednisone. Patients
received HSCT from 34 related (32 matched sibling/2 partially matched) and 45
unrelated (14 HLA-A, -B, -DRB1 matched/31 partially matched) donors. Prior to ATG
therapy, severe (grade III-IV) GVHD was observed in 34 patients (43%). Organs
involved included skin in 81% of patients, lower GI tract in 52%, upper GI tract 
in 28%, and liver in 11%. Treatment consisted of 1-5 courses (median, 2 courses) 
of ATG (15 mg/kg per dose bid x 5 days) given for a median of 16 days (range, 5
to 44 days) after the onset of GVHD. All patients continued to receive
prednisone, 60 mg/m2 per day (or methylprednisolone IV equivalent), plus CSA
(75%) or tacrolimus (4%). At day 28 of treatment, overall improvement was
observed in 54% of patients; durable (> or = 28 days) complete response was
observed in 20% of patients, and partial response was observed in 34% of
patients. In multivariate analysis, patients with CML or a malignant disease
other than acute leukemia had a greater likelihood of overall response than did
those with nonmalignant diseases. Patients with acute skin GVHD (with or without 
other organ involvement) responded most frequently. Chronic GVHD developed in 51%
of patients by 1 year after HSCT. One patient developed EBV lymphoproliferative
disease. For the entire cohort, the probability of survival at 1 year was 32%
(95% CI, 22%-42%). In multivariate analysis, factors associated with better
survival included earlier onset of acute GVHD, shorter time from initial
treatment for GVHD to treatment with ATG, and the use of non-T-cell-depleted stem
cell grafts. These data suggest that treatment with ATG can be an active therapy,
especially in patients with skin GVHD and early signs of steroid resistance.

DOI: 10.1053/bbmt.2002.v8.pm11858189 
PMID: 11858189  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

