
1. Infect Immun. 2002 Mar;70(3):1272-8.

Human gingival CD14(+) fibroblasts primed with gamma interferon increase
production of interleukin-8 in response to lipopolysaccharide through
up-regulation of membrane CD14 and MyD88 mRNA expression.

Tamai R(1), Sakuta T, Matsushita K, Torii M, Takeuchi O, Akira S, Akashi S,
Espevik T, Sugawara S, Takada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University School of
Dentistry, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Gamma interferon (IFN-gamma)-primed human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) have been
shown to produce higher levels of interleukin-8 (IL-8) upon stimulation with
bacterial products and inflammatory cytokines than nonprimed controls. In this
study, we examined whether priming of HGF with IFN-gamma up-regulates IL-8
production by the cells in response to purified lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The
priming effect of IFN-gamma was clearly observed in the high-CD14-expressing
(CD14(high)) HGF but not in the low-CD14-expressing (CD14(low)) HGF. The
CD14(high) HGF were most effectively primed with IFN-gamma (1,000 IU/ml) for 72
h. To elucidate the mechanism of the priming effects of IFN-gamma for the LPS
response by HGF, we examined whether IFN-gamma regulated expression of CD14,
Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2), TLR4, MD-2, and MyD88, all of which are molecules
suggested to be associated with LPS signaling. In CD14(high) HGF, IFN-gamma
markedly up-regulated CD14 and MyD88 but not TLR4 protein and MD-2 mRNA
expression, while in CD14(low) HGF, IFN-gamma slightly increased MyD88 and
scarcely affected CD14, TLR4 protein, and MD-2 mRNA levels. LPS-induced IL-8
production by IFN-gamma-primed CD14(high) HGF was significantly inhibited by
monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against CD14 and TLR4, but not by an anti-TLR2 MAb. 
These findings suggested that IFN-gamma primed CD14(high) HGF to enhance
production of IL-8 in response to LPS through augmentation of the CD14-TLR
system, where the presence of membrane CD14 was indispensable for the response of
HGF to LPS.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.70.3.1272-1278.2002 
PMCID: PMC127773
PMID: 11854210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

