
1. Gene Ther. 2002 Jan;9(2):118-26.

Targeted beta-globin gene conversion in human hematopoietic CD34(+ )and
Lin(-)CD38(-)cells.

Liu H(1), Agarwal S, Kmiec E, Davis BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, USA.

Chimeric oligonucleotides have been used successfully to correct point and
frameshift mutations in several cell types, as well as in animal and plant
models. However, their application to primitive human blood cells has been
limited. In this investigation, chimeric oligonucleotides designed to direct a
site-specific nucleotide exchange in the human beta-globin gene (an A to T
substitution within codon 6) were introduced into normal human CD34(+) and
Lin(-)CD38(-) cells via microinjection. This A to T nucleotide exchange
introduces the single site mutation responsible for sickle cell anemia. In 23% of
experimental samples, gene conversion was detected in the progeny of
microinjected CD34(+) and Lin(-)CD38(-) cells that were cultured for at least 4
weeks. In addition, gene conversion was detected in the erythroid progeny of
Lin(-)CD38(-) cells at the mRNA level. Conversion rates as high as 10-15% in 11% 
(five of 44) of experimental samples were confirmed by allele-specific PCR and
sequence analysis of genomic DNA from the progeny of microinjected Lin(-)CD38(-) 
cells. Given that as few as 10% normal hematopoietic cells are sufficient to keep
patients free of sickle cell disease, the level of conversion we have achieved in
some samples may well be of therapeutic benefit in patients with sickle cell
disease.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.gt.3301610 
PMID: 11857070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

