
1. Infect Immun. 2002 Mar;70(3):1287-92.

Fibronectin facilitates Mycobacterium tuberculosis attachment to murine alveolar 
macrophages.

Pasula R(1), Wisniowski P, Martin WJ 2nd.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, and Occupational Medicine,
Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana, USA.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis remains a major cause of pulmonary infection
worldwide. Attachment of M. tuberculosis organisms to alveolar macrophages (AMs) 
represents the earliest phase of primary infection in pulmonary tuberculosis. In 
this study fibronectin (Fn), an adhesive protein, is shown to bind M.
tuberculosis organisms and facilitates attachment of M. tuberculosis to murine
AMs. A monoclonal antibody (MAb) specific to the heparin binding domain (HBD) of 
Fn decreases (125)I-Fn binding to M. tuberculosis; whereas MAbs specific to
either the cell binding domain (CBD) or the gelatin binding domain (GBD) have no 
effect on Fn binding to M. tuberculosis. In the presence of exogenous Fn (10
microg/ml) M. tuberculosis attachment to AMs increased significantly from control
levels (means +/- standard errors of the means) of 11.5% +/- 1.1% to 44.2% +/-
4.2% (P < 0.05). Fn-enhanced attachment was significantly decreased from 44.2%
+/- 4.2% to 10.8% +/- 1.2% (P < 0.05) in the presence of anti-Fn polyclonal
antibodies. The attachment is also inhibited in the presence of MAbs specific for
the HBD and CBD, whereas MAbs specific to GBD did not affect the attachment.
Further, an Fn cell binding peptide, Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser (RGDS), decreased the
attachment from 44.2% +/- 4.2% to 15.3% +/- 1.2% (P < 0.05), whereas addition of 
a control peptide, Arg-Gly-Glu-Ser (RGES) did not affect the attachment (40.5%
+/- 1.8%). These results suggest that Fn-mediated attachment of M. tuberculosis
can occur through the binding of Fn to the AM via the CBD and to M. tuberculosis 
organisms via the HBD.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.70.3.1287-1292.2002 
PMCID: PMC127808
PMID: 11854212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

