
1. Cancer Res. 2002 Feb 15;62(4):1014-9.

Exclusion of breast cancer as an integral tumor of hereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer.

MÃ¼ller A(1), Edmonston TB, Corao DA, Rose DG, Palazzo JP, Becker H, Fry RD,
Rueschoff J, Fishel R.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Program, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19107-5541, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Res. 2003 Mar 1;63(5):1148-9.

Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is an autosomal dominant
genetic predisposition syndrome that accounts for 2-7% of all colorectal cancers.
Diagnosis of HNPCC is based on family history (defined by Amsterdam or Bethesda
Criteria), which often includes a history of multiple synchronous or metachronous
cancers. The majority of HNPCC results from germ-line mutations in the DNA
mismatch repair (MMR) genes hMSH2 and hMLH1 with rare alterations in hMSH6 and
hPMS2 in atypical families. Both HNPCC and sporadic MMR-deficient tumors
invariably display high microsatellite instability (MSI-H). Two types of HNPCC
families can be distinguished: type I (Lynch I) with tumors exclusively located
in the colon; and type II (Lynch II) with tumors found in the endometrium,
stomach, ovary, and upper urinary tract in addition to the colon. A proposed
association of breast cancer with type II HNPCC is controversial. To address this
important clinical question, we examined MSI in a series of 27 female patients
who presented with synchronous or metachronous breast plus colorectal cancer.
Although MSI-H was found in 5 of 27 (18.5%) of the colon cancers, in all cases
the matched breast cancer was microsatellite stable. We also examined the breast 
tumors from three women who were carriers of MMR gene mutations from HNPCC
families. None of these three breast tumors displayed MSI nor was the expression 
of MMR proteins altered in these tumors. We conclude that breast cancer largely
arises sporadically in HNPCC patients and is rarely associated with the HNPCC
syndrome.


PMID: 11861375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

