
1. Annu Rev Immunol. 2002;20:761-94.

Protein kinase C(theta) in T cell activation.

Isakov N(1), Altman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Health Sciences, and the
Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva 84105,
Israel. noah@bgumail.bgu.ac.il

The novel protein kinase C (PKC) isoform, PKC theta, is selectively expressed in 
T lymphocytes and is a sine qua non for T cell antigen receptor (TCR)-triggered
activation of mature T cells. Productive engagement of T cells by
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) results in recruitment of PKC theta to the T
cell-APC contact area--the immunological synapse--where it interacts with several
signaling molecules to induce activation signals essential for productive T cell 
activation and IL-2 production. The transcription factors NF-kappa B and AP-1 are
the primary physiological targets of PKC theta, and efficient activation of these
transcription factors by PKC theta requires integration of TCR and CD28
costimulatory signals. PKC theta cooperates with the protein Ser/Thr phosphatase,
calcineurin, in transducing signals leading to activation of JNK, NFAT, and the
IL-2 gene. PKC theta also promotes T cell cycle progression and regulates
programmed T cell death. The exact mode of regulation and immediate downstream
substrates of PKC theta are still largely unknown. Identification of these
molecules and determination of their mode of operation with respect to the
function of PKC theta will provide essential information on the mechanism of T
cell activation. The selective expression of PKC theta in T cells and its
essential role in mature T cell activation establish it as an attractive drug
target for immunosuppression in transplantation and autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.20.100301.064807 
PMID: 11861617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

