
1. Chem Biol Interact. 2002 Mar 20;139(3):317-31.

Modulation of selected cell signaling genes in mouse liver by fumonisin B1.

Bhandari N(1), Raghubir P, Sharma.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, College of Veterinary Medicine, The
University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602-7389, USA.

Fumonisin B1 (FB1) is a naturally occurring mycotoxin produced primarily by
Fusarium verticillioides and related fungi, common contaminants of corn
throughout the world. FB1 is a carcinogen and causative agent of several lethal
animal diseases, including equine leukoencephalomalacia and porcine pulmonary
edema. Liver is the primary target organ in mice. In vivo and vitro, cells
exposed to FB1 undergo a mixture of necrotic and apoptotic cell death. Our
previous studies showed gender differences in hepatotoxicity caused after 5 day
FB1 treatment. Gene alterations in cytokine network and apoptosis signaling
molecules were also observed after an acute single dose of FB1. To further
investigate the gene alterations after a subchronic FB1 exposure and its
correlation to observed gender differences, male and female BALB/c mice (five per
group) were injected subcutaneously with either saline or 2.25 mg/kg per day of
FB1 for 5 days. FB1 caused increased expression of tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNFalpha), interleukin (IL)-1alpha, IL-1beta, IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra),
IL-6, IL-10, IL-12 p40, IL-18 and interferon gamma (IFNgamma) in male liver, with
a similar increase in females except for IL-1beta and IL-18. Control females
showed higher basal levels of IL-1alpha, IL-1Ra, IL-10, IL-12 p40 and IFNgamma
compared with males. Expression of TNF receptor 55 and TNF receptor associated
death domain (TRADD) was increased, with no changes in Fas signaling molecules,
Fas, Fas ligand (FasL), Fas associated death domain (FADD) and Fas-associated
protein factor (FAF). Expression of oncogenic transcription factors, c-Myc,
B-Myc, Max and Mad, and apoptotic genes, namely Bcl-2, Bax and Bad, was increased
after FB1 treatment. FB1 caused an activation of cytokine network in liver,
particularly the TNFalpha signaling pathway, suggesting its involvement in
hepatotoxic mechanisms. Induction of IL-1Ra and oncogenes is a likely mechanism
for the cancer promoting properties of FB1, through a mechanism involving
apoptotic necrosis, oncotic necrosis and consequent regeneration.

DOI: 10.1016/s0009-2797(02)00008-x 
PMID: 11879819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

