
1. Nature. 2002 Mar 7;416(6876):94-9.

Balanced responsiveness to chemoattractants from adjacent zones determines B-cell
position.

Reif K(1), Ekland EH, Ohl L, Nakano H, Lipp M, FÃ¶rster R, Cyster JG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of California San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco,
California 94143-0414, USA.

B lymphocytes re-circulate between B-cell-rich compartments (follicles or B
zones) in secondary lymphoid organs, surveying for antigen. After antigen
binding, B cells move to the boundary of B and T zones to interact with T-helper 
cells. Despite the importance of B--T-cell interactions for the induction of
antibody responses, the mechanism causing B-cell movement to the T zone has not
been defined. Here we show that antigen-engaged B cells have increased expression
of CCR7, the receptor for the T-zone chemokines CCL19 and CCL21, and that they
exhibit increased responsiveness to both chemoattractants. In mice lacking
lymphoid CCL19 and CCL21 chemokines, or with B cells that lack CCR7, antigen
engagement fails to cause movement to the T zone. Using retroviral-mediated gene 
transfer we demonstrate that increased expression of CCR7 is sufficient to direct
B cells to the T zone. Reciprocally, overexpression of CXCR5, the receptor for
the B-zone chemokine CXCL13, is sufficient to overcome antigen-induced B-cell
movement to the T zone. These findings define the mechanism of B-cell
relocalization in response to antigen, and establish that cell position in vivo
can be determined by the balance of responsiveness to chemoattractants made in
separate but adjacent zones.

DOI: 10.1038/416094a 
PMID: 11882900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

