
1. Biochemistry. 2002 Mar 19;41(11):3781-9.

Purification and characterization of the recombinant Na(+)-translocating
NADH:quinone oxidoreductase from Vibrio cholerae.

Barquera B(1), Hellwig P, Zhou W, Morgan JE, HÃ¤se CC, Gosink KK, Nilges M,
Bruesehoff PJ, Roth A, Lancaster CR, Gennis RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 600
South Mathews Street, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA. barquera@scs.uiuc.edu

The nqr operon from Vibrio cholerae, encoding the entire six-subunit,
membrane-associated, Na(+)-translocating NADH:quinone oxidoreductase (Na(+)-NQR),
was cloned under the regulation of the P(BAD) promoter. The enzyme was
successfully expressed in V. cholerae. To facilitate molecular genetics studies
of this sodium-pumping enzyme, a host strain of V. cholerae was constructed in
which the genomic copy of the nqr operon was deleted. By using a vector
containing a six-histidine tag on the carboxy terminus of the NqrF subunit, the
last subunit in the operon, the recombinant enzyme was readily purified by
affinity chromatography in a highly active form from detergent-solubilized
membranes of V. cholerae. The recombinant enzyme has a high specific activity in 
the presence of sodium. NADH consumption was assessed at a turnover number of 720
electrons per second. When purified using dodecyl maltoside (DM), the isolated
enzyme contains approximately one bound ubiquinone, whereas if the detergent LDAO
is used instead, the quinone content of the isolated enzyme is negligible.
Furthermore, the recombinant enzyme, purified with DM, has a relatively low rate 
of reaction with O(2) (10-20 s(-1)). In steady state turnover, the isolated,
recombinant enzyme exhibits up to 5-fold stimulation by sodium and functions as a
primary sodium pump, as reported previously for Na(+)()-NQR from other bacterial 
sources. When reconstituted into liposomes, the recombinant Na(+)-NQR generates a
sodium gradient and a Delta Psi across the membrane. SDS-PAGE resolves all six
subunits, two of which, NqrB and NqrC, contain covalently bound flavin. A redox
titration of the enzyme, monitored by UV-visible spectroscopy, reveals three n = 
2 redox centers and one n = 1 redox center, for which the presence of three
flavins and a 2Fe-2S center can account. The V. cholerae Na(+)-NQR is well-suited
for structural studies and for the use of molecular genetics techniques in
addressing the mechanism by which NADH oxidation is coupled to the pumping of
Na(+) across the membrane.

DOI: 10.1021/bi011873o 
PMID: 11888296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

