
1. Int Rev Immunol. 2001 Oct;20(5):547-73.

Modulation of CD4 T cell function by soluble MHC II-peptide chimeras.

Casares S(1), Bona CA, Brumeanu TD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
10029, USA.

Peptides antigens of 8 to 24 amino acid residues in length that are derived from 
processing of foreign proteins by antigen presenting cells (APC), and then
presented to T cells in the context of major histocompatibility complex molecules
(MHC) expressed by APC, are the only physiological ligands for T cell receptor
(TCR). Co-ligation of TCR and CD4 co-receptor on T cells by MHC II-peptide
complexes (signal 1) leads to various T cell functions depending on the nature of
TCR and CD4 co-ligation, and whether costimulatory receptors (signal 2) such as
CD28, CTLA-4, CD40L are involved in this interaction. Recently, the advance of
genetic engineering led to the generation of a new class of antigen-specific
ligands for TCR, i.e., soluble MHC class I-, and MHC class II-peptide chimeras.
In principle, these chimeric molecules consist of an antigenic peptide which is
covalently linked to the amino terminus of alpha-chain in the case of MHC I, or
beta-chains in the case of MHC II molecules. Conceptually, such TCR/CD4 ligands
shall provide the signal 1 to T cells. Since soluble MHC-peptide chimeras showed 
remarkable regulatory effects on peptide-specific T cells in vitro and in vivo,
they may represent a new generation of immunospecific T cell modulators with
potential therapeutic applicability in autoimmune and infectious diseases. This
review is focused on the immunomodulatory effects of soluble, MHC class
II-peptide chimeras, and discuss these effects in the context of the most
accepted theories on T cell regulation.

DOI: 10.3109/08830180109045578 
PMID: 11890612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

