
1. Int J Med Microbiol. 2002 Feb;291(6-7):501-9.

Resistance to phagocytosis by Yersinia.

Fällman M(1), Deleuil F, McGee K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, Sweden.
Maria.Fällman@cmb.umu.se

Enteropathogenic species of the genus Yersinia penetrate the intestinal
epithelium and then spread to the lymphatic system, where they proliferate
extracellularly. At this location, most other bacteria are effectively ingested
and destroyed by the resident phagocytes. Yersinia, on the other hand binds to
receptors on the external surface of phagocytes, and from this location it blocks
the capacity of these cells to exert their phagocytic function via different
receptors. The mechanism behind the resistance to phagocytosis involves the
essential virulence factor YopH, a protein tyrosine phosphatase that is
translocated into interacting target cells via a type III secretion machinery.
YopH disrupts peripheral focal complexes of host cells, seen as a rounding up of 
infected cells. The focal complex proteins that are dephosphorylated by YopH are 
focal adhesion kinase and Crk-associated substrate, the latter of which is a
common substrate in both professional and non-professional phagocytes. In
macrophages additional substrates have been found, the
Fyn-binding/SLP-76-associated protein and SKAP-HOM. Phagocytosis is a rapid
process that is activated when the bacterium interacts with the phagocyte.
Consequently, the effect exerted by a microbe to block this process has to be
rapid and precise. This review deals with the mechanisms involved in impeding
uptake as well as with the role of the YopH substrates and focal complex
structures in normal cell function.

DOI: 10.1078/1438-4221-00159 
PMID: 11890550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

