
1. J Immunol. 2002 Apr 1;168(7):3369-75.

Bob1 (OCA-B/OBF-1) differential transactivation of the B cell-specific B29 (Ig
beta) and mb-1 (Ig alpha) promoters.

Malone CS(1), Wall R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Molecular Biology Institute,
University of California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The B29 (Igbeta) and mb-1 (Igalpha) gene products are B cell-specific essential
components of the B cell receptor that are coexpressed at all stages of B cell
differentiation, with the exception of plasma cells, which lack mb-1 expression. 
Transcription of both genes is governed by a similar cassette of interactive
transcription factor-binding elements, including octamer motifs, in TATA-less
promoters. In this study, we show the B cell-specific B29 gene promoter is
transactivated in B and non-B cells by cotransfection with the B cell-specific
octamer cofactor gene, Bob1 (OCA-B/OBF-1). The expression of Bob1 is also
sufficient to override the silencing effects of the B29 silencer. This indicates 
that Bob1 plays a critical role in B cell-specific B29 promoter expression. In
contrast, coexpression of Bob1 had no effect on mb-1 promoter activity. Bob1
transactivation only occurs with select octamer sequences that have an adenosine 
at position 5 (ATGCAAAT). The B29 promoter conforms to this consensus octamer
motif, while the mb-1 promoter octamer motif does not. Octamer motif swapping
between B29 and mb-1 promoters renders B29 unresponsive to Bob1 transactivation
and makes mb-1 competent for Bob1 transactivation, thereby indicating that the
B29 octamer motif is solely responsible for Bob1 interaction. Additionally, the
mb-1 construct containing the B29 octamer motif is expressed in a plasmacytoma
cell line, while the wild-type mb-1 promoter is not. Bob1 transactivation of B29 
and the lack of this transactivation of mb-1 account for the differential
expression of B29 and mb-1 in terminally differentiated plasma cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.7.3369 
PMID: 11907094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

