
1. Int J Cancer. 2002 Mar 20;98(3):389-97.

Regulation of CD1d expression by murine tumor cells: escape from
immunosurveillance or alternate target molecules?

Fiedler T(1), Walter W, Reichert TE, Maeurer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz,
Germany.

alpha beta+ TCR T cells recognize peptide fragments displayed by MHC-class I or
-class II molecules. Recently, additional mechanisms of antigen recognition by T 
cells have been identified, including CD1-mediated presentation of nonpeptide
antigens. Only a limited number of CD1 antigens is retained in the mouse, i.e.,
the group II CD1 antigens, which are split into CD1D1 and CD1d2. Several T cell
subsets have been shown to interact with murine CD1 antigens, including NK cells 
or "natural T cells" with the invariant V alpha 14 J alpha 281 TCR chain. Even if
TAP defects may prevent classical endogenous antigen presentation in tumor cell
lines, antigen presentation via CD1 is still functional. Therefore, CD1-mediated 
recognition of transformed cells by NK cells or "natural T cells" may represent
an alternative way for immune surveillance. CD1 cell surface expression in murine
tumor cell lines of different histology, including the B cell lymphoma A20,
macrophage cell lines J774 and P388D1, mastocytoma P815, thymoma EL-4, melanoma
B16, colon adenocarcinoma MC-38 and renal carcinoma Renca is regulated by Th1-
(IFN-gamma), Th2- (IL-4, IL-10 and vIL-10) or GM-CSF (Th1/Th2) cytokines,
depending on the tumor histology. In order to distinguish between CD1D1 and CD1d2
molecules, we examined differential expression of these CD1 isoforms by ratio
RT-PCR: A20, EL-4, P815 and MC-38 cells exclusively express CD1D1 transcripts but
not CD1D2 mRNA independent of cytokine treatment. Decreased CD1d expression leads
to reduced immune recognition of CD1d+ tumor cells by freshly isolated NK1.1(+)
effector cells as defined by cytolysis and IFN-gamma release. Thus, modulation of
CD1 expression on tumor cells by cytokines may be advantageous to drive cellular 
anti-tumor antigen directed immune responses directed against TAP-independent,
non-classical MHC restricting molecules.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.10141 
PMID: 11920590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

