
1. Int Immunol. 2002 Apr;14(4):367-80.

IFN-alpha enhances CD40 ligand-mediated activation of immature monocyte-derived
dendritic cells.

Luft T(1), Luetjens P, Hochrein H, Toy T, Masterman KA, Rizkalla M, Maliszewski
C, Shortman K, Cebon J, Maraskovsky E.

Author information: 
(1)Melbourne Tumour Biology Branch, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Austin 
and Repatriation Medical Centre, Heidelberg, Victoria 3084, Australia.

Type I IFN are immune modulatory cytokines that are secreted during early stages 
of infection. Type I IFN bridge the innate and the adaptive immune system in
humans and mice. We compared the capacity of type I and II IFN to induce the
functional maturation of monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MoDC). Extending our
earlier observation that type I IFN promote DC maturation, we report that these
cytokines also enhance DC differentiation by augmenting CD40 ligand
(CD40L)-induced cytokine secretion by MoDC. Type I IFN alone were poor inducers
of MoDC maturation as compared with other stimuli. They up-regulated the
expression of HLA-DR, CD80, CD86, partially CCR7 but not CD83, partially reduced 
antigen-uptake function, increased the levels of IL-12p35 mRNA, and prolonged
surface expression of peptide-MHC class I complexes for presentation to cytotoxic
T lymphocytes, but did not induce migration towards CCL21 chemokine. However,
type I IFN were potent co-factors for CD40L-mediated function. Here, they
enhanced CD40L-mediated IL-6, IL-10 and IL-12p70 secretion. Furthermore, when
combined with IL-1beta and/or IL-4, IFN-alpha2a type I IFN increased
CD40L-mediated IL-12p70 production by 2- to 3-fold, and biased the IL-12 p40/p70 
ratio towards the IFN-gamma inducing p70 heterodimer, this correlating with
higher levels of IFN-gamma secretion by allogeneic T cell subsets and NK cells.
Our results suggest that the rapid expression of CD40L, IFN and IL-1beta at sites
of infection and inflammation can act in concert on immature DC, thereby linking 
innate and adaptive immune responses. In this way, type I IFN play a dual role as
DC maturation factors and enhancers of CD40L-mediated DC activation.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/14.4.367 
PMID: 11934873  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

