
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 14;277(24):21561-6. Epub 2002 Apr 9.

Association of Fyn and Lyn with the proline-rich domain of glycoprotein VI
regulates intracellular signaling.

Suzuki-Inoue K(1), Tulasne D, Shen Y, Bori-Sanz T, Inoue O, Jung SM, Moroi M,
Andrews RK, Berndt MC, Watson SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Mansfield Road, Oxford OX1
3QT, United Kingdom. katsue.inoue@pharm.ox.ac.uk

The glycoprotein VI (GPVI)-Fc receptor (FcR) gamma-chain complex, a key
activatory receptor for collagen on platelet surface membranes, is constitutively
associated with the Src family kinases Fyn and Lyn. Molecular cloning of GPVI has
revealed the presence of a proline-rich domain in the sequence of GPVI
cytoplasmic tail which has the consensus for interaction with the Src homology 3 
(SH3) domains of Fyn and Lyn. A series of in vitro experiments demonstrated the
ability of the SH3 domains of both Src kinases to bind the proline-rich domain of
GPVI. Furthermore, depletion of the proline-rich domain in GPVI (Pro(-)-GPVI)
prevented binding of Fyn and Lyn and markedly reduced phosphorylation of FcR
gamma-chain in transiently transfected COS-7 cells, but did not affect the
association of the gamma-chain with GPVI. Jurkat cells stably transfected with
wild type GPVI show robust increases in tyrosine phosphorylation and
intracellular Ca2+ in response to the snake venom convulxin that targets GPVI.
Importantly, convulxin is not able to activate cells transfected with
Pro(-)-GPVI, even though the association with the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based
activation motif-containing chains is maintained. These findings demonstrate that
the proline-rich domain of GPVI mediates the association with Fyn/Lyn via their
SH3 domain and that this interaction initiates activation signals through GPVI.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M201012200 
PMID: 11943772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

