
1. Vet Microbiol. 2002 May 24;86(4):303-11.

DNA sequences coding for the F18 fimbriae and AIDA adhesin are localised on the
same plasmid in Escherichia coli isolates from piglets.

Mainil JG(1), Jacquemin E, Pohl P, Kaeckenbeeck A, Benz I.

Author information: 
(1)Chaire de Bactériologie et de Pathologie des Maladies Bactériennes, Faculté de
Médecine Vétérinaire, Université de Liège, Liège, Belgium. jg.mainil@ulg.ac.be

The adhesin-involved-in-diffuse-adherence (AIDA) afimbrial adhesin is produced by
human, but not by animal, Escherichia coli, with the exception of German porcine 
verotoxigenic Escherichia coli (VTEC) [Clin. Diagn. Lab. Immunol. 8 (2001) 143]. 
Presence and localisation of DNA sequences (aidA) coding for and production of an
AIDA adhesin were investigated in a collection of Belgian VTEC and non-VTEC E.
coli isolated from piglets at weaning time. The 174 isolates were also studied by
colony hybridisation for the presence of DNA sequences coding for the Stx2e
verocytotoxin and the F18 fimbrial adhesin (fed): 71 were Stx2+F18+AIDA+, 26 were
F18+AIDA+, 12 were AIDA+, two were Stx2+AIDA+, and one was Stx2+ only. Fifty-four
of the 58 (F18+)AIDA+ isolates tested positive in a western blotting assay with
an immune serum raised against the AIDA protein. Hybridisation with the AIDA gene
probe on plasmid DNA profiles identified a probe-positive plasmid band in the 10 
AIDA+ and in 24 of the 25 F18+AIDA+ isolates studied. Moreover in F18+AIDA+
isolates, only one plasmid band hybridised with both F18 and AIDA probes. These
results confirm the presence of aidA-related genes in not only VTEC, but also
non-VTEC, isolates from piglets and the production of an antigenically
AIDA-related protein by the majority of probe-positive E. coli. Moreover the
plasmid DNA hybridisation results suggest a localisation on the same plasmid of
the aidA- and fed-related DNA sequences.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1135(02)00019-6 
PMID: 11955780  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

