
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 30;99(9):5931-6.

Calreticulin recognizes misfolded HLA-A2 heavy chains.

Mancino L(1), Rizvi SM, Lapinski PE, Raghavan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Immunology Graduate Program,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0620, USA.

Our studies investigated functional interactions between calreticulin, an
endoplasmic reticulum chaperone, and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class
I molecules. Using in vitro thermal aggregation assays, we established that
calreticulin can inhibit heat-induced aggregation of soluble, peptide-deficient
HLA-A2 purified from supernatants of insect cells. The presence of
HLA-A2-specific peptides also inhibits heat-induced aggregation. Inhibition of
heat-induced aggregation of peptide-deficient HLA-A2 by calreticulin correlates
with a rescue of the HLA-A2 heavy chain from precipitation, by forming
high-molecular-weight complexes with calreticulin. Complex formation between
HLA-A2 heavy chains and calreticulin occurs at 50 degrees C but not 37 degrees C,
suggesting polypeptide-based interactions between the HLA-A2 heavy chain and
calreticulin. Once complexes are formed, the addition of peptide is not
sufficient to trigger efficient assembly of heavy chain/beta2m/peptide complexes.
Using a fluorescent peptide-based binding assay, we show that calreticulin does
not enhance peptide binding by HLA-A2 at 37 degrees C. We also show that
calreticulin itself is converted to oligomeric species on exposure to 37 degrees 
C or higher temperatures, and that oligomeric forms of calreticulin are active in
inhibiting thermal aggregation of peptide-deficient HLA-A2. Taken together, these
results suggest that calreticulin functions in the recognition of misfolded MHC
class I heavy chains in the endoplasmic reticulum. However, in the absence of
other endoplasmic reticulum components, calreticulin by itself does not enhance
the assembly of misfolded MHC class I heavy chains with beta2m and peptides.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.092031799 
PMCID: PMC122879
PMID: 11983893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

