
1. J Med Primatol. 2001 Dec;30(6):291-8.

Use of human CD3 monoclonal antibody for accurate CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocyte
determinations in macaques: phenotypic characterization of the CD3- CD8+ cell
subset.

Ibegbu C(1), Brodie-Hill A, Kourtis AP, Carter A, McClure H, Chen ZW, Nahmias AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Yerkes Primate Research Center,
Emory Vaccine Center, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA. chris_Ibegbu@rmy.emory.edu

Macaque monkeys are frequently used in models for studies of infectious diseases,
immunity, transplantation and vaccine development. Such use is largely due to the
conservation of functionally important cell surface molecules and the
phylogenetic proximity of their immune systems to that of humans. Some monoclonal
antibodies (mAb) raised against human leukocyte antigens can be utilized in the
monkey. Until recently, many primate centers have utilized the CD2 monoclonal
antibody to enumerate T lymphocytes. We have evaluated the anti-human CD3 mAb in 
macaques and sooty mangabeys. Using this monoclonal antibody, pigtailed macaques 
were found to have a much higher proportion of CD2+ CD3- CD8+ cells as compared
with rhesus macaques and sooty mangabeys. Such cells comprised approximately
one-half of all CD8+ cells in the pigtailed macaque, but only one-quarter of CD8+
cells in the rhesus, and one-fifth in the sooty mangabey. Use of the CD2
monoclonal antibody as the T-cell marker resulted in underestimating CD4/CD8
ratios compared with using the CD3 mAb in pigtailed macaques. Phenotypic
characterization of this subset of CD3- CD8+ cells indicated that they are CD16+,
CD45RA+, CD11b+, CD69+ and CD28-. This would indicate that these cells represent 
an activated natural killer cell subset.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0684.2001.300601.x 
PMID: 11990527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

