
1. Mol Microbiol. 2002 May;44(3):675-84.

Charting and unzipping the surface layer of Corynebacterium glutamicum with the
atomic force microscope.

Scheuring S(1), Stahlberg H, Chami M, Houssin C, Rigaud JL, Engel A.

Author information: 
(1)M. E. MÃ¼ller Institute for Microscopy at the Biozentrum, University of Basel, 
Klingelbergstrasse 70, CH-4056, Switzerland.

Bacterial surface layers (S-layers) are extracellular protein networks that act
as molecular sieves and protect a large variety of archaea and bacteria from
hostile environments. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to asses the S-layer
of Coryne-bacterium glutamicum formed of PS2 proteins that assemble into
hexameric complexes within a hexagonal lattice. Native and trypsin-treated
S-layers were studied. Using the AFM stylus as a nanodissector, native arrays
that adsorbed to mica as double layers were separated. All surfaces of native and
protease-digested S-layers were imaged at better than 1 nm lateral resolution.
Difference maps of the topographies of native and proteolysed samples revealed
the location of the cleaved C-terminal fragment and the sidedness of the S-layer.
Because the corrugation depths determined from images of both sides span the
total thickness of the S-layer, a three-dimensional reconstruction of the S-layer
could be calculated. Lattice defects visualized at 1 nm resolution revealed the
molecular boundaries of PS2 proteins. The combination of AFM imaging and single
molecule force spectroscopy allowed the mechanical properties of the
Corynebacterium glutamicum S-layer to be examined. The results provide a basis
for understanding the amazing stability of this protective bacterial surface
coat.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.02864.x 
PMID: 11994150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

