
1. Curr Microbiol. 2002 Jun;44(6):385-90.

Susceptibility of Brazilian staphylococcal strains to glycopeptides evaluated by 
different testing methods.

Ferreira Nunes AP(1), Martins Teixeira L, Reis Bastos CC, de Souza Fonseca L,
Netto dos Santos KR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Infecções Hospitalares, Departamento de Microbiologia Médica,
Instituto de Microbiologia Prof. Paulo de Góes, CCS, Bloco I, UFRJ, Cidade
Universitária, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

Reports of staphylococci with reduced susceptibility to glycopeptides are cause
for concern. This study evaluated the susceptibility of 84 staphylococci clinical
isolates to glycopeptides by the disk diffusion, agar dilution, E-test, and BHIA 
screening methods. Vancomycin agar dilution showed all strains presented minimum 
inhibitory concentration (MIC) ranging from 0.5 to 2 microg/ml, and the E-test
showed similar results. Teicoplanin agar dilution test showed MICs ranging from <
or = 0.5 to 2 microg/ml for Staphylococcus aureus and MICs ranging from <0.25 to 
32 microg/ml for coagulase-negative Staphylococcus (CNS). Ten CNS isolates
presented MICs ranging from 8 to 32 microg/ml for agar dilution and/or E-test.
All the staphylococci were susceptible to vancomycin by the disk diffusion test
(DDT), but two CNS isolates presented intermediate resistance to teicoplanin by
the DDT and MICs of susceptibility, with two other CNS strains,
teicoplanin-susceptible by the DDT, presented MICs of intermediate resistance. On
the vancomycin-containing agar, 20 CNS isolates were able to grow, but no S.
aureus strain. All these isolates showed MICs to teicoplanin (4-32 microg/ml)
higher than those isolates that did not grow on the agar screen plate. PFGE of
chromosomal SmaI digests showed a wide diversity of these CNS strains, without
any predominance of a single PFGE pattern.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-001-0027-3 
PMID: 12000986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

