
1. J Biotechnol. 2002 May 23;95(3):257-68.

Cellular surface display of dimeric Adx and whole cell P450-mediated steroid
synthesis on E. coli.

Jose J(1), Bernhardt R, Hannemann F.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmazeutische und Medizinische Chemie, Universität des Saarlandes, Postfach 
151150, 66041, Saarbrücken, Germany. j.jose@mx.uni-saarland.de

Bovine adrenodoxin (Adx) was expressed on the surface of Escherichia coli as a
monomeric fusion protein with the translocation unit of the AIDA-I
autotransporter. The fusion protein remained anchored in the outer membrane by
the beta-barrel of the autotransporter. Dimeric Adx molecules were formed
spontaneously on the bacterial surface with high efficiencies. Adx dimers could
be activated to biological function by chemical incorporation of the [2Fe-2S]
cluster. By adding purified adrenodoxin reductase and P450 CYP11A1, a whole cell 
biocatalyst system was obtained, which effectively synthesized pregnenolone from 
cholesterol. Addition of artificial membrane constituents or detergents, which
was indispensable before to get functional steroidal P450 enzymes, was not
necessary. The whole cell activity (0.21 nmol x h(-1) x nmol(-1) CYP11A1) was in 
the same range as obtained earlier for reconstitution assays. The whole cell
system developed here is an easy to handle, stable tool for the expression of
membrane-associated P450 enzymes without the need of microsome preparation or
reconstitution of artificial membrane vesicles. Moreover, it is the first report 
on functional dimer formation of a protein anchored on the surface of E. coli
after being transported as a monomer. This seems to be a special feature of the
autotransporter translocation unit, containing a beta-barrel, motile in the outer
membrane and opens a new dimension for the surface display of multimeric
proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/s0168-1656(02)00030-5 
PMID: 12007866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

