
1. J Exp Med. 2002 May 20;195(10):1257-66.

Pivotal role of dendritic cell-derived CXCL10 in the retention of T helper cell 1
lymphocytes in secondary lymph nodes.

Yoneyama H(1), Narumi S, Zhang Y, Murai M, Baggiolini M, Lanzavecchia A, Ichida
T, Asakura H, Matsushima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Preventive Medicine, School of Medicine and Core
Research and Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Various immune diseases are considered to be regulated by the balance of T helper
(Th)1 and Th2 subsets. Although Th lymphocytes are believed to be generated in
draining lymph nodes (LNs), in vivo Th cell behaviors during Th1/Th2 polarization
are largely unexplored. Using a murine granulomatous liver disease model induced 
by Propionibacterium acnes, we show that retention of Th1 cells in the LNs is
controlled by a chemokine, CXCL10/interferon (IFN) inducible protein 10 produced 
by mature dendritic cells (DCs). Hepatic LN DCs preferentially produced CXCL10 to
attract 5'-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU)+CD4+ T cells and form clusters with
IFN-gamma-producing CD4+ T cells by day 7 after antigen challenge. Blockade of
CXCL10 dramatically altered the distribution of cluster-forming BrdU+CD4+ T
cells. BrdU+CD4+ T cells in the hepatic LNs were selectively diminished while
those in the circulation were significantly increased by treatment with
anti-CXCL10 monoclonal antibody. This was accompanied by accelerated infiltration
of memory T cells into the periphery of hepatic granuloma sites, most of them
were in cell cycle and further produced higher amount of IFN-gamma leading to
exacerbation of liver injury. Thus, mature DC-derived CXCL10 is pivotal to retain
Th1 lymphocytes within T cell areas of draining LNs and optimize the Th1-mediated
immune responses.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20011983 
PMCID: PMC2193754
PMID: 12021306  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

