
1. Blood. 2002 Jun 15;99(12):4307-17.

Enhancement of intracellular signaling associated with hematopoietic progenitor
cell survival in response to SDF-1/CXCL12 in synergy with other cytokines.

Lee Y(1), Gotoh A, Kwon HJ, You M, Kohli L, Mantel C, Cooper S, Hangoc G,
Miyazawa K, Ohyashiki K, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, 46202, USA.

Stromal cell-derived factor 1 (SDF-1/CXCL12) is a multifunctional cytokine. We
previously reported that myelopoiesis was enhanced in SDF-1 alpha transgenic
mice, probably due in part to SDF-1 alpha enhancement of myeloid progenitor cell 
(MPC) survival. To understand signaling pathways involved in this activity, we
studied the effects on factor-dependent cell line MO7e cells incubated with SDF-1
alpha alone or in combination with other cytokines. SDF-1 alpha induced transient
activation of extracellular stress-regulated kinase (ERK1/2), ribosomal S6 kinase
(p90RSK) and Akt, molecules implicated in cell survival. Moreover, ERK1/2,
p90RSK, and Akt were synergistically activated by SDF-1 alpha in combination with
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), Steel factor (SLF), or
thrombopoietin (TPO). Similar effects were seen after pretreatment of MO7e cells 
with SDF-1 alpha followed by stimulation with the other cytokines, suggesting a
priming effect of SDF-1 alpha. Nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B) did not appear
to be involved in SDF-1 alpha actions, alone or in combination with other
cytokines. These intracellular effects were consistent with enhanced myeloid
progenitor cell survival by SDF-1 alpha after delayed addition of growth factors.
SDF-1 alpha alone supported survival of highly purified human cord blood
CD34(+++) cells, less purified human cord blood, and MO7e cells; this effect was 
synergistically enhanced when SDF-1 alpha was combined with low amounts of other 
survival-promoting cytokines (GM-CSF, SLF, TPO, and FL). SDF-1 may contribute to 
maintenance of MPCs in bone marrow by enhancing cell survival alone and in
combination with other cytokines.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.v99.12.4307 
PMID: 12036856  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

