
1. Int Immunol. 2002 Jun;14(6):555-66.

A co-stimulatory molecule on activated T cells, H4/ICOS, delivers specific
signals in T(h) cells and regulates their responses.

Arimura Y(1), Kato H, Dianzani U, Okamoto T, Kamekura S, Buonfiglio D,
Miyoshi-Akiyama T, Uchiyama T, Yagi J.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, 
8-1 Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.

We examined the co-stimulatory activity of H4/ICOS on murine activated CD4(+) T
cells and found that the cross-linking of H4/ICOS enhanced their proliferation,
in addition to raising IFN-gamma, IL-4 and IL-10 production to levels comparable 
to those induced by CD28. However, IL-2 production was only marginally
co-stimulated by H4/ICOS. This distinct pattern of lymphokine production appears 
to be induced by a specific intracellular signaling event. Compared with CD28,
H4/ICOS dominantly elicited the Akt pathway via phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. In
addition, mitogen-activated protein kinase family kinases were activated in
different ways by CD28 and H4/ICOS. The strong phosphorylation of p46 c-Jun
N-terminal kinase was observed upon CD28 co-stimulation, but was less potently
induced by H4/ICOS. The strain diversity in the induction of H4/ICOS was
recognized. The expression of H4/ICOS on BALB/c activated CD4(+) T cells was
>6-fold higher compared with C57BL/6 activated CD4(+) T cells. Furthermore,
BALB/c activated CD4(+) T cells exhibited more T(h)2-deviated lymphokine
production as compared with C57BL/6 activated CD4(+) T cells and signaling
through H4/ICOS during the primary stimulation of naive CD4(+) T cells promoted
the generation of T(h)2 cells. Thus, the difference in H4/ICOS expression on
activated CD4(+) T cells, which is regulated among the mouse strains, may also
regulate the polarization of T(h) cells.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxf022 
PMID: 12039907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

