
1. Blood. 2002 Jun 15;99(12):4413-21.

C-kit associated with the transmembrane 4 superfamily proteins constitutes a
functionally distinct subunit in human hematopoietic progenitors.

Anzai N(1), Lee Y, Youn BS, Fukuda S, Kim YJ, Mantel C, Akashi M, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, 46202-5254, USA.

The transmembrane 4 superfamily (TM4SF) has come into prominence for its
association with a wide range of cell surface molecules, especially integrins. We
report that TM4SF molecules CD9, CD63, and CD81 are physically associated with
c-kit receptor tyrosine kinase in the human factor-dependent myeloid cell line,
MO7e. We characterized this complex using coimmunoprecipitation and
colocalization methods. The c-kit coimmunoprecipitated with anti-TM4SF antibodies
showed several distinct phenotypes compared to the total c-kit immunoprecipitated
with anti-c-kit antibody. These included: (1) higher basal level of tyrosine
phosphorylation without elevated kinase activity in the absence of Steel factor
(SLF), (2) deficient enhancement of tyrosine phosphorylation and kinase activity 
in response to SLF, (3) elevated binding rate of SLF shown in chemical
cross-linking studies, and (4) little internalization and degradation after SLF
treatment. Cocapping studies in living cells showed that c-kit colocalized with
TM4SF molecules after SLF stimulation, suggesting confirmation of the biochemical
data obtained by the coimmunoprecipitation studies. Colocalization of c-kit with 
CD81 by SLF was also observed in cord blood CD34(+) cells, suggesting the
existence of functional units of c-kit in TM4SF complexes in primary
hematopoietic cells. This suggests that some TM4SF members may negatively
modulate function of c-kit receptor tyrosine kinase and thus regulate receptor
sensitivity to SLF in hematopoietic progenitors.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.v99.12.4413 
PMID: 12036870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

