
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 May 28;99(11):7373-7.

Long-term and homogeneous regulation of the Escherichia coli araBAD promoter by
use of a lactose transporter of relaxed specificity.

Morgan-Kiss RM(1), Wadler C, Cronan JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

Expression systems based on the Escherichia coli arabinose operon P(BAD) promoter
exhibit the all-or-nothing (autocatalytic) induction of expression that was first
documented in the lac operon. Under conditions of subsaturating levels of
inducer, some of the cells of the population are fully induced, whereas other
cells remain uninduced. Recently, a new AraE transporter system was reported to
have circumvented the problem of autocatalytic expression in the pBAD expression 
vectors and to provide graded and homogeneous cell-to-cell expression in the
presence of variable inducer concentrations [Khlebnikov, A., Risa, O., Skaug, T.,
Carrier, T. A. & Keasling, J. D. (2000) J. Bacteriol. 182, 7029-7034]. However,
we report that nonuniform gene expression in the AraE system was readily
detectable by the use of mutant green fluorescent proteins that are rapidly
degraded in E. coli. We report an approach to avoid all-or-nothing induction of
the pBAD promoter; the use of a mutant LacY transporter in a strain deficient in 
both arabinose transport (araE araFGH) and degradation (araBAD). This mutant LacY
protein performs facilitated diffusion of arabinose resulting in homogeneous
expression of an unstable GFP that is maintained over extended incubation times
at subsaturating levels of inducer. This approach is readily adapted to other
sugar-regulated expression systems.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.122227599 
PMCID: PMC124238
PMID: 12032290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

