
1. J Immunol. 2002 Jun 15;168(12):6344-51.

Memory Th2 effector cells can develop in the absence of B7-1/B7-2, CD28
interactions, and effector Th cells after priming with an intestinal nematode
parasite.

Ekkens MJ(1), Liu Z, Liu Q, Foster A, Whitmire J, Pesce J, Sharpe AH, Urban JF,
Gause WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

B7-1/B7-2 interactions are required for many Th2-cell mediated primary immune
responses including the response that follows infection with the intestinal
nematode parasite, Heligmosomoides polygyrus. However, few studies have examined 
the role of B7-1/B7-2/CD28 interactions in the development of a Th2 memory immune
response. We examined the development of the memory Th2 response to H. polygyrus 
in BALB/c mice deficient in both B7-1 and B7-2 (B7-1/B7-2(-/-)) and in BALB/c
mice deficient in CD28 (CD28(-/-)). Following primary inoculation with H.
polygyrus, adult worms in the gut were cleared with an anti-helminthic drug and
mice were subsequently challenge-inoculated with H. polygyrus larvae. The memory 
Th2 response is readily distinguished by its inhibitory effect on adult worm
maturation, resulting in marked reductions in adult worm egg production that are 
not observed during the primary immune response. Following H. polygyrus challenge
inoculation, comparable decreases in egg production and similar increases in
mesenteric lymph node cell IL-4 production were observed in B7-1/B7-2(-/-) and
B7-1/B7-2(+/+) mice. However, elevations in total serum IgG1 and IgE were
reduced, while increases in serum Ag-specific IgG1 and IgE and germinal center
formation were blocked in H. polygyrus-challenged B7-1/B7-2(-/-) mice. In
contrast, in H. polygyrus-challenged CD28(-/-) mice, marked elevations in
Ag-specific IgG1 and IgE and increased germinal center formation were observed.
The results of these studies demonstrate that effector Th2 memory cells that
produce IL-4 and mediate host defense can develop when B7-1/B7-2 interactions,
and associated effector Th2 cell development, are blocked during priming.
However, humoral immunity is impaired and differentially affected in
B7-1/B7-2(-/-) mice and CD28(-/-) mice following H. polygyrus challenge.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.12.6344 
PMID: 12055251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

