
1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 13;277(37):34264-70. Epub 2002 Jun 19.

FEEL-1, a novel scavenger receptor with in vitro bacteria-binding and
angiogenesis-modulating activities.

Adachi H(1), Tsujimoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, RIKEN (The Institute of Physical and
Chemical Research), 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.
adachih@postman.riken.go.jp

Employing the expression cloning technique, we cloned a novel scavenger receptor 
that is structurally unrelated to other scavenger receptors. The cloned receptor 
contained fasciclin (Fas-1), epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like, laminin-type
EGF-like, and link domains. Based on the domain structures, we temporarily named 
it FEEL-1 (fasciclin, EGF-like, laminin-type EGF-like, and link domain-containing
scavenger receptor-1). A data base search suggested the presence of a paralogous 
gene of FEEL-1, the full-length cDNA of this gene was also cloned, and its
nucleotide sequence was determined. The deduced amino acid sequence of the clone 
indicated that its domain organization is similar to FEEL-1, and we named this
clone FEEL-2. The effect of monoclonal antibodies against FEEL-1 indicated that
FEEL-1 is the major receptor for
1,1'-dioctadecyl-3,3,3',3'-tetramethyl-indocarbo-cyanine perchlorate
(DiI)-labeled acetylated low density lipoprotein (DiI-Ac-LDL) in human umbilical 
vein endothelial cells. Reverse transcription and PCR analysis revealed that both
FEEL-1 and FEEL-2 were expressed in several tissues and expressed highly in the
spleen and lymph node. On the other hand, only FEEL-1 was expressed in
mononuclear cells, particularly resting CD14(+) cells. The transient expression
of FEEL-1 and FEEL-2 in Chinese hamster ovary cells demonstrated that both FEELs 
could bind to DiI-Ac-LDL. Both receptors were also found to bind to Gram-negative
and Gram-positive bacteria. These results suggest that FEELs play important roles
in the defense mechanisms against bacterial infection. Finally, the phenotypic
effect of the inhibition of FEEL-1 on vascular remodeling was tested in vitro
using the Matrigel tube formation assay, and we found a marked reduction in the
degree of cell-cell interaction in anti-FEEL-1 monoclonal antibody-treated cells,
suggesting the role of this receptor in angiogenesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M204277200 
PMID: 12077138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

