
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2002 Jun;25(1):105-13.

Expression, refolding, purification, molecular characterization, crystallization,
and preliminary X-ray analysis of the receptor binding domain of human B7-2.

Zhang X(1), Schwartz JC, Almo SC, Nathenson SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461, USA.

The cell-mediated immune response involves a series of specific molecular
interactions between cell surface molecules on T cells and antigen-presenting
cells. Of particular importance for the regulation of T cell activity is the
interaction of the B7 isoforms, B7-1 and B7-2, with the T cell surface
costimulatory receptors, CD28 and CTLA-4. The binding of CD28 by B7-1/B7-2
results in an enhancement of T cell responses initiated by the interaction
between a clonotypic T cell receptor and its specific, antigenic MHC-peptide
complex, whereas the subsequent engagement of CTLA-4 by B7-1/B7-2 leads to a
down-regulation of the response. Here we report the expression, refolding,
purification, characterization, and crystallization of the receptor-binding
domain of human B7-2. The receptor-binding domain of human B7-2 was overexpressed
in Escherichia coli as inclusion bodies, solubilized in 6 M
guanidine-hydrochloride, and then refolded in vitro by rapid dilution into a
renaturing buffer. Refolded B7-2 was subsequently purified to homogeneity by
anion-exchange chromatography. Gel-filtration chromatography and native PAGE
analysis showed that the receptor-binding domain of B7-2 is exclusively monomeric
in solution. Purified B7-2 binds tightly to bacterially expressed monomeric and
disulfide-linked homodimeric human CTLA-4 as shown by gel-filtration
chromatography and native PAGE. This suggests that glycosylation is not important
for the proper folding of the receptor-binding domain of B7-2 nor for its binding
to CTLA-4. In addition, these results suggest that refolded B7-2 is biologically 
active and may be a useful therapeutic and experimental reagent for regulating T 
cell activity. Refolded and purified B7-2 was crystallized by the hanging-drop
vapor diffusion method, allowing for the initiation of an X-ray crystallographic 
study.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

DOI: 10.1006/prep.2002.1616 
PMID: 12071705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

