
1. Microb Pathog. 2002 May;32(5):207-18.

Migration of Salmonella typhimurium --harboring bone marrow--derived dendritic
cells towards the chemokines CCL19 and CCL21.

Cheminay C(1), Schoen M, Hensel M, Wandersee-Steinhäuser A, Ritter U, Körner H,
Röllinghoff M, Hein J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Mikrobiologie, Immunologie und Hygiene,
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

Macrophages are considered as main cellular target encountered by the facultative
intracellular bacterium Salmonella typhimurium. However, in orally infected mice 
these pathogens are first internalized by dendritic cells (DCs) that are located 
in the subepithelial dome of Peyer's patches. Moreover, DCs can penetrate the
intestinal epithelium to sample bacteria. Here, we examined the interaction of
Salmonella with bone marrow-derived DCs (BM-DCs). In order to study the role of
DCs as vehicles for the dissemination of Salmonella, an in vitro model was
established. In this model, Salmonella -activated BM-DCs enhanced surface
expression of MHC class II and co-stimulatory molecules. We found that, upon
maturation, BM-DCs upregulated chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7) mRNA and surface
molecule expression. Salmonella -exposed DCs as well as mature DCs, but not
immature DCs, were recruited towards the CC chemokines CCL19 and CCL21, two
ligands of CCR7. The maturation process of DCs did neither require bacterial
internalization nor viability. About one third of the migrated BM-DCs harbored
intracellular bacteria, whereas the remaining two third did not contain bacteria.
Salmonella, but not an apathogenic E. coli laboratory strain was capable to
survive within BM-DCs. Taken together, our data implicate that DCs are first
activated and subsequently utilized as carriers by Salmonella.

Copyright 2002 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd.

DOI: 10.1006/mpat.2002.0497 
PMID: 12071677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

