
1. Can J Microbiol. 2002 May;48(5):379-86.

Use of PCR-RFLP for genotyping 16S rRNA and characterizing bacteria cultured from
halibut fry.

Jensen S(1), Bergh O, Enger O, Hjeltnes B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquaculture, Institute of Marine Research, Bergen, Norway.
sigmund.jensen@imr.no

Small subunit ribosomal genes were explored using PCR-RFLP to facilitate the
characterization of bacteria cultured from reared fry of the Atlantic halibut
(Hippoglossus hippoglossus). Concern has been expressed about pathogen invasion
in larvae lacking a counteracting normal flora that may aid the immune system in 
producing robust noninfected individuals. In this study, pure cultured
representatives of normal flora that were previously found to be antagonistic
towards a pathogenic Vibrio sp. were subjected to a whole cell PCR protocol
amplifying approximately 1500 bp of 16S rDNA. Amplified DNA was digested by AluI,
BstUI, CfoI, and RsaI, to generate restriction profiles. Before the isolates were
characterized, a survey was performed to test the discriminative efficiency of
the RFLP. Efficient detection of polymorphism and the resolution of species and
subspecies were achieved. Using the RFLP on 103 isolates generated as many as 22 
genotypes. Based on the restriction profiles, a taxonomic tree incorporating 19
reference strains was constructed. Partial sequencing found this tree to be
dominated by gamma-Proteobacteria in clusters of Vibrio-, Pseudomonas-, and
Alteromonas-affiliated species. Only nine isolates fell outside these genera,
including the three isolates Shewanella alga, Deleya marina, and Marinomonas
protea. These species have not previously been reported as halibut flora. The
most frequently isolated genotype resembled Vibrio salmonicida.

DOI: 10.1139/w02-033 
PMID: 12109877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

