
1. Curr Mol Med. 2002 Jun;2(4):393-406.

Immunity to systemic Salmonella infections.

Mastroeni P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Veterinary Science, Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine,
University of Cambridge, UK. pm274@cam.ac.uk

Salmonella infections are a serious public health problem in developing countries
and represent a constant concern for the food industry. The severity and the
outcome of a systemic Salmonella infection depends on the "virulence" of the
bacteria, on the infectious dose as well as on the genetic makeup and
immunological status of the host. The control of bacterial growth in the
reticuloendothelial system (RES) in the early phases of a Salmonella infection
relies on the NADPH oxidase-dependent anti-microbial functions of resident
phagocytes and is controlled by the innate resistance gene Nramp1. This early
phase is followed by the suppression of Salmonella growth in the RES due to the
onset of an adaptive host response. This response relies on the concerted action 
of a number of cytokines (TNFalpha, IFNgamma, IL12, IL18, and IL15), on the
recruitment of inflammatory phagocytes in the tissues and on the activation of
the recruited cells. Phagocytes control bacterial growth in this phase of the
infection by producing reactive nitrogen intermediates (RNI) generated via the
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). Clearance of the bacteria from the RES at
a later stage of the infection requires the CD28-dependent activation of CD4+
TCR-alphabeta T-cells and is controlled by MHC class II genes. Resistance to
re-infection with virulent Salmonella micro-organisms requires the presence of
Th1 type immunological memory and anti-Salmonella antibodies. Thus, the
development of protective immunity to Salmonella infections relies on the
cross-talk between the humoral and cellular branches of the immune system.

DOI: 10.2174/1566524023362492 
PMID: 12108950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

