
1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2002 Aug;51(6):327-40. Epub 2002 May 4.

Molecular requirements for CD8-mediated rejection of a MUC1-expressing pancreatic
carcinoma: implications for tumor vaccines.

Sivinski CL(1), Kohlgraf KG, VanLith ML, Morikane K, Tempero RM, Hollingsworth
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases and Department of 
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
68198-6805, USA.

Previous studies have indicated that different effector cells are required to
eliminate MUC1-expressing tumors derived from different organ sites and that
different vaccine strategies may be necessary to generate these two different
MUC1-specific immune responses. In this study, we characterized molecular
components that are required to produce immune responses that eliminate
Panc02.MUC1 tumors in vivo by utilizing mice genetically deficient in molecules
related to immunity. A parallel study has been reported for a B16.MUC1 tumor
model. We confirmed that a CD8(+) effector cell was required to eliminate
MUC1-expressing Panc02 tumors, and demonstrated that T cells expressing
TCR-alpha/beta and co-stimulation through CD28 and CD40:CD40L interactions played
critical roles during the initiation of the anti-Panc02.MUC1 immune response.
TCR-alpha/beta(+) cells were required to eliminate Panc02.MUC1 tumors, while
TCR-gamma/delta(+) cells played a suppressive non-MUC1-specific role in
anti-Panc02 tumor immunity. Type 1 cytokine interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), but not
interleukin-12 (IL-12), was essential for eliminating MUC1-expressing tumors,
while neither IL-4 nor IL-10 (type 2 cytokines) were required for tumor
rejection. In vitro studies demonstrated that IFN-gamma upregulated MHC class I, 
but not MHC class II, on Panc02.MUC1 tumor cells. Surprisingly, both perforin and
FasL played unique roles during the effector phase of immunity to Panc02.MUC1,
while lymphotoxin-alpha, but not TNFR-1, was required for immunity against
Panc02.MUC1 tumors. The findings presented here and in parallel studies of
B16.MUC1 immunity clearly demonstrate that different effector cells and cytolytic
mechanisms are required to eliminate MUC1-expressing tumors derived from
different organ sites, and provide insight into the immune components required to
eliminate tumors expressing the same antigen but derived from different tissues.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-002-0277-3 
PMID: 12111121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

