
1. J Autoimmun. 2002 May;18(3):213-20.

Coexpression of susceptible and resistant HLA class II transgenes in murine
experimental autoimmune thyroiditis: DQ8 molecules downregulate DR3-mediated
thyroiditis.

Flynn JC(1), Wan Q, Panos JC, McCormick DJ, Giraldo AA, David CS, Kong YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Experimental autoimmune thyroiditis (EAT) can be induced in genetically
susceptible mice by immunization with the self antigen, thyroglobulin (Tg). Since
susceptibility is linked to H2 class II molecules, we have generated human
leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II transgenic mice to study potential HLA
associations with Hashimoto's thyroiditis. DR3 (HLA-DRA/DRB1*0301) and DQ8
(HLA-DQA1*0301/DQB1*0302) transgenes were introduced into class II-negative
Ab(0)/B10 and Ab(0) nonobese diabetic (Ab(0)/NOD) mice. Previous work had shown
that DR3 transgenic mice were susceptible to both mouse Tg and human Tg-induced
EAT, whereas DQ8 transgenic mice were moderately susceptible only to human Tg
induction. In this report, we examined the effect of DQ8 transgene on mouse Tg-
and human Tg-induced EAT in double transgenic DR3/DQ8 mice. After mouse Tg
induction, thyroiditis in DR3(+)DQ8(+) Ab(0)/B10 mice was significantly less
severe than in DR3(+) mice but more severe than in DQ8(+) mice. No difference in 
thyroiditis was observed between DR3(+) and DR3(+)DQ8(+) mice in another
background strain, Ab(0)/NOD. However, after immunization with human Tg, DQ8
coexpression downregulated thyroiditis severity, compared to DR3(+) mice, whereas
thyroiditis was more extensive than in DQ8(+) mice. Thus, depending on the
background strain and the Tg used to induce disease, the presence of the DQ8
transgene can reduce thyroiditis mediated by DR3 molecules.

DOI: 10.1006/jaut.2002.0587 
PMID: 12126634  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

