
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Aug 2;295(5):1046-51.

Glutaredoxins catalyze the reduction of glutathione by dihydrolipoamide with high
efficiency.

Porras P(1), Pedrajas JR, Martínez-Galisteo E, Padilla CA, Johansson C, Holmgren 
A, Bárcena JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Campus de Rabanales,
Edificio Severo Ochoa, 1(a) planta, University of Córdoba, 14071 Córdoba, Spain.

Glutaredoxins (Grx) are small (approximately 12kDa) proteins which catalyze thiol
disulfide oxidoreductions involving glutathione (GSH) and disulfides in proteins 
or small molecules. Here, we present data which demonstrate the ability of
glutaredoxins to catalyze the reduction of oxidized glutathione (GSSG) by
dihydrolipoamide (DHL), an important biological redox catalyst and synthetic
antioxidant. We have designed a new assay method to quantify the rate of
reduction of GSSG and other disulfides by reduced lipoamide and have tested a set
of eight recombinant Grx from human, rat, yeast, and E. coli. Lipoamide dependent
activity is highest with the large atypical E. coli Grx2 (k(cat)=3.235 min(-1))
and lowest for human mitochondrial Grx2a (k(cat)=96 min(-1)) covering a wider
range than k(cat) for the standard reduction of hydroxyethyldisulfide (HED) by
GSH (290-2.851 min(-1)). The lipoamide/HED activity ratio was highest for yeast
Grx2 (1.25) and E. coli Grx2 and lowest for E. coli Grx1 (0.13). These results
suggest a new role for Grxs as ancillary proteins that could shunt reducing
equivalents from main catabolic pathways to recycling of GSSG via a lipoyl group,
thus serving biochemical functions which involve GSH but without NAD(P)H
consumption.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-291x(02)00771-4 
PMID: 12135599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

