
1. Int Immunol. 2002 Aug;14(8):873-82.

MUC1-specific anti-tumor responses: molecular requirements for CD4-mediated
responses.

VanLith ML(1), Kohlgraf KG, Sivinski CL, Tempero RM, Hollingsworth MA.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, and Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
68198, USA.

MUC1 was first defined as a tumor antigen in the late 1980s, yet little is known 
about the types of immune responses that mediate rejection of MUC1(+) tumors in
vivo. MUC1-specific antibodies, T(h) cells and cytotoxic T cells can be detected 
in patients with different adenocarcinomas, yet these tumors usually progress.
Thus, there is a need to better understand the in vivo mechanisms of
antigen-specific tumor rejection. To characterize the nature of MUC1-specific
immune responses in vivo, rejection of a MUC1-expressing melanoma tumor line
(B16.MUC1) was evaluated in mice lacking specific T cell subsets, cytokines,
co-stimulatory molecules or molecular effectors of cytolytic pathways. Results
demonstrated that rejection of the B16.MUC1 tumor cell line was primarily
mediated by CD4(+) T cells, and required Fas ligand, lymphotoxin-alpha, CD40,
CD40 ligand and CD28, but not perforin, gammadelta T cells, IL-4, IL-10, IL-12 or
tumor necrosis factor receptor-1. Depletion of NK cells demonstrated that NK
cells might also contribute to MUC1 immunity in the B16.MUC1 tumor model. These
results demonstrated that the immune response generated against MUC1 does not fit
the type 1 or 2 model described for many immune responses. Additionally, multiple
cytolytic mechanisms are required for B16.MUC1 rejection.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxf053 
PMID: 12147624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

