
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Aug 1;30(15):3481-9.

PRIMROSE: a computer program for generating and estimating the phylogenetic range
of 16S rRNA oligonucleotide probes and primers in conjunction with the RDP-II
database.

Ashelford KE(1), Weightman AJ, Fry JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, PO Box 915, Cardiff CF10
3TL, UK. ashelford@cardiff.ac.uk

We describe PRIMROSE, a computer program for identifying 16S rRNA probes and PCR 
primers for use as phylogenetic and ecological tools in the identification and
enumeration of bacteria. PRIMROSE is designed to use data from the Ribosomal
Database Project (RDP) to find potentially useful oligonucleotides with up to two
degenerate positions. The taxonomic range of these, and other existing
oligonucleotides, can then be explored, allowing for the rapid identification of 
suitable oligonucleotides. PRIMROSE includes features to allow user-defined
sequence databases to be used. An in silico trial of the program using the RDP
database identified oligonucleotides that described their target taxa with a
degree of accuracy far greater than that of equivalent currently used
oligonucleotides. We identify oligonucleotides for subdivisions of the
Proteobacteria and for the Cytophaga-Flexibacter-Bacteroides (CFB) division.
These oligonucleotides describe up to 94.7% of their target taxon with fewer than
50 non-target hits, and the authors recommend that they be investigated further. 
A comparison with PROBE DESIGN within the ARB software package shows that
PRIMROSE is capable of identifying oligonucleotides with a higher specificity.
PRIMROSE has an intuitive graphical user interface and runs on the Microsoft
Windows 95/NT/2000 operating systems. It is open source and is freely available
from the authors.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkf450 
PMCID: PMC137075
PMID: 12140334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

