
1. DNA Cell Biol. 2002 Jul;21(7):527-34.

Complete nucleotide sequence of the S10-spc operon of phytoplasma: gene
organization and genetic code resemble those of Bacillus subtilis.

Miyata S(1), Furuki K, Oshima K, Sawayanagi T, Nishigawa H, Kakizawa S, Jung HY, 
Ugaki M, Namba S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bioresource Technology, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba Japan.

An 11.4-kbp region of genomic DNA containing the complete S10-spc operon was
constructed by an integrative mapping technique with eight plasmid vectors
carrying ribosomal protein sequences from onion yellows phytoplasma. Southern
hybridization analysis indicated that phytoplasmal S10-spc is a single-copy
operon. This is the first complete S10-spc operon of a phytoplasma to be
reported, although only a part of six serial genes of the S10 operon is reported 
previously. The operon has a context of 5'-rps10, rpl3, rpl4, rpl23, rpl2, rps19,
rpl22, rps3, rpl16, rpl29, rps17, rpl14, rpl24, rpl5, rps14, rps8, rpl6, rpl18,
rps5, rpl30, rpl15, SecY-3', and is composed of 21 ribosomal protein subunit
genes and a SecY protein translocase subunit gene. Resembling Bacillus, this
operon contains an rpl30 gene that other mollicutes (Mycoplasma genitalium, M.
pneumoniae, and M. pulmonis) lack. A phylogenetic tree based on the rps3 sequence
showed that phytoplasmas are phylogenetically closer to acholeplasmas and
bacillus than to mycoplasmas. In the S10-spc operon, translation may start from
either a GTG codon or an ATG codon, and stop at a TGA codon, as has been reported
for acholeplasmas and bacillus. However, in mycoplasmas, GTG was found as a start
codon, and TGA was found not as a stop codon, but instead as a tryptophan codon. 
These data derived from the gene organization, and the genetic code deviation
support the hypothesis that phytoplasmal genes resemble those of acholeplasmas
and Bacillus more than those of other mollicutes.

DOI: 10.1089/104454902320219086 
PMID: 12162807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

