
1. Oncol Rep. 2002 Sep-Oct;9(5):1021-6.

Paradoxical effects by preoperative oral low-dose tegafur administration in human
gastric carcinomas: enhanced apoptosis and increased intratumoral microvessel
density.

Goto E(1), Okamoto E, Adachi H, Fukuda Y, Ito H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Organ Pathology, Department of Microbiology and Pathology, Faculty
of Medicine, Tottori University, 86 Nishi-cho, Yonago 683-8503, Japan.
gotoe@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

This study examined the effect of preoperative low-dose tegafur treatment in
human gastric carcinomas. Among 55 patients with gastric carcinoma, 33 received
an oral administration of tegafur 600 mg/body/day for 7 days before.
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens were immunostained for Ki-67, P53,
P21, CD34, Bax, VEGF, and dThdPase and also examined by the terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-digoxigenin nick end labeling
procedure. The apoptotic index (AI), Ki-67 labeling index (KI) and intratumoral
microvessel density (IMVD) were counted. Mean AI and IMVD were 3.4+/-1.60 and
126.1+/-36.56 in the treated carcinomas, and 2.3+/-0.88 and 98.0+/-44.40 in the
non-treated carcinomas, both values being significantly higher in the former
(P<0.05). The treatment resulted in a significant increase of mean AI in the
intestinal type, in the early, and in the P53-positive carcinomas (P<0.05), while
the treatment brought a significant increase of IMVD in the diffuse type, in the 
early and in the P53-negative carcinomas (P<0.05, respectively). No significant
difference was noted on the frequency of P53, P21, BAX, VEGF and dThdPase
expressions between the two groups. Ki-67 expression did not correlate with any
factors. Preoperative low-dose tegafur treatment resulted in a paradoxical
effect; enhanced apoptosis and increased IMVD in human gastric carcinomas.


PMID: 12168067  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

