
1. J Exp Med. 2002 Aug 19;196(4):417-30.

Accumulation of immature Langerhans cells in human lymph nodes draining
chronically inflamed skin.

Geissmann F(1), Dieu-Nosjean MC, Dezutter C, Valladeau J, Kayal S, Leborgne M,
Brousse N, Saeland S, Davoust J.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie Pathologique, IFR Necker-Enfants Malades, 75015 Paris,
France. geissman@necker.fr

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2002 Aug 19;196(4):413-6.

The coordinated migration and maturation of dendritic cells (DCs) such as
intraepithelial Langerhans cells (LCs) is considered critical for T cell priming 
in response to inflammation in the periphery. However, little is known about the 
role of inflammatory mediators for LC maturation and recruitment to lymph nodes
in vivo. Here we show in human dermatopathic lymphadenitis (DL), which features
an expanded population of LCs in one draining lymph node associated with
inflammatory lesions in its tributary skin area, that the Langerin/CD207(+) LCs
constitute a predominant population of immature DCs, which express CD1a, and
CD68, but not CD83, CD86, and DC-lysosomal-associated membrane protein
(LAMP)/CD208. Using LC-type cells generated in vitro in the presence of
transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1, we further found that tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-alpha, as a prototype proinflammatory factor, and a variety of
inflammatory stimuli and bacterial products, increase Langerin expression and
Langerin dependent Birbeck granules formation in cell which nevertheless lack
costimulatory molecules, DC-LAMP/CD208 and potent T cell stimulatory activity but
express CCR7 and respond to the lymph node homing chemokines CCL19 and CCL21.
This indicates that LC migration and maturation can be independently regulated
events. We suggest that during DL, inflammatory stimuli in the skin increase the 
migration of LCs to the lymph node but without associated maturation. Immature
LCs might regulate immune responses during chronic inflammation.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20020018 
PMCID: PMC2196053
PMID: 12186835  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

