
1. J Immunol. 2002 Sep 1;169(5):2516-23.

Identification of multiple novel epididymis-specific beta-defensin isoforms in
humans and mice.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Nagase T, Makita R, Fukuhara S, Tomita T, Tominaga T, Kurihara H,
Ouchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrative Cell Biology, Department of Embryogenesis, Institute
of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, Japan.

Defensins comprise a family of cationic antimicrobial peptides that are
characterized by the presence of six conserved cysteine residues. We identified
two novel human beta-defensin (hBD) isoforms by mining the public human genomic
sequences. The predicted peptides conserve the six-cysteine motif identical with 
hBD-4, termed hBD-5 and hBD-6. We also evaluated the characteristics of the mouse
homologs of hBD-5, hBD-6, and HE2beta1, termed mouse beta-defensin (mBD)-12,
mBD-11, and mouse EP2e (mEP2e). The mBD-12 synthetic peptide showed
salt-dependent antimicrobial activity. We demonstrate the epididymis-specific
expression pattern of hBD-5, hBD-6, mBD-11, mBD-12, and mEP2e. In situ
hybridization revealed mBD-11, mBD-12, and mEP2e expression in the columnar
epithelium of the caput epididymis, contrasting with the predominant expression
of mBD-3 in the capsule or septum of the whole epididymis. In addition, the
regional specificity of mBD-11, mBD-12, and mEP2e was somewhat overlapping, but
not identical, in the caput epididymis, suggesting that specific regulation may
work for each member of the beta-defensin family. Our findings indicated that
multiple beta-defensin isoforms specifically and cooperatively contribute to the 
innate immunity of the urogenital system.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.169.5.2516 
PMID: 12193721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

