
1. J Immunol. 2002 Sep 15;169(6):3021-9.

Active form of Notch imposes T cell fate in human progenitor cells.

De Smedt M(1), Reynvoet K, Kerre T, Taghon T, Verhasselt B, Vandekerckhove B,
Leclercq G, Plum J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of 
Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

The crucial role of Notch signaling in cell fate decisions in hematopoietic
lineage and T lymphocyte development has been well established in mice.
Overexpression of the intracellular domain of Notch mediates signal transduction 
of the protein. By retroviral transduction of this constitutively active
truncated intracellular domain in human CD34+ umbilical cord blood progenitor
cells, we were able to show that, in coculture with the stromal MS-5 cell line,
depending on the cytokines added, the differentiation toward CD19+ B lymphocytes 
was blocked, the differentiation toward CD14+ monocytes was inhibited, and the
differentiation toward CD56+ NK cells was favored. The number of CD7+cyCD3+
cells, a phenotype similar to T/NK progenitor cells, was also markedly increased.
In fetal thymus organ culture, transduced CD34+ progenitor cells from umbilical
cord blood cells or from thymus consistently generated more TCR-gammadelta T
cells, whereas the other T cell subpopulations were largely unaffected.
Interestingly, when injected in vivo in SCID-nonobese diabetic mice, the
transduced cells generated ectopically human CD4+CD8+ TCR-alphabeta cells in the 
bone marrow, cells that are normally only present in the thymus, and lacked B
cell differentiation potential. Our results show unequivocally that, in human,
Notch signaling inhibits the monocyte and B cell fate, promotes the T cell fate, 
and alters the normal T cell differentiation pathway compatible with a pretumoral
state.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.169.6.3021 
PMID: 12218117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

