
1. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2002;8(8):420-8.

Phase II study of a moderate-intensity preparative regimen with allogeneic
peripheral blood stem cell transplantation for hematologic diseases: the Texas
Transplant Consortium experience.

Shaughnessy PJ(1), Ornstein D, Ririe D, Callander N, Anderson JE, Pollack MS,
Freytes CO, Cruz J, Rodriquez T, Bachier C, LeMaistre CF.

Author information: 
(1)Texas Transplant Institute, San Antonio 78229, USA.
shaughnessy@TexasTransplant.org

Conventional preparative regimens for allogeneic stem cell transplantation are
associated with excessive regimen-related toxicity (RRT) in some patients because
of underlying comorbidities, advanced age, or prior treatment. We studied a
preparative regimen designed to reduce RRT, yet allow for adequate engraftment
and development of a graft-versus-malignancy effect. Thirty patients (median age,
57 years) were entered on study. Twenty-nine patientsreceived stem cells from
HLA-identical siblings and 1 from a sibling mismatched for 1 antigen at the A
locus. Sixteen patients had received previous stem cell transplants (6 allogeneic
and 10 autologous). The preparative regimen consisted of fludarabine 30 mg/M2 per
day IV on day -10 to day -5, busulfan 1 mg/kg per dose PO (n = 6) or 0.8 mg/kg
per dose IV (n = 24) for 8 doses every 6 hours on day -6 to day -5, and
horse-derived antithymocyte globulin 5 mg/kg per day IV (n = 12) or 15 mg/kg per 
day IV (n = 18) on day -4 to day -1. GVHD prophylaxis consisted of cyclosporine
(CYA) 3 mg/kg BID PO starting on day -3 (n = 13) or CYA and methotrexate 15 mg/m2
IV on day +1 and 10 mg/m2 IV on day +3 and day +6 (n = 17). The median number of 
CD34 cells transplanted was 3.19 x 10(6)/kg. All patients demonstrated recovery
of hematopoietic function. Twenty-six (89%) of 29 evaluable patients achieved
greater than 90% donor cell chimerism before day 100. Three patients never
achieved greater than 90% donor chimerism, and another 3 patients subsequently
lost donor chimerism. All 6 of these patients had autologous reconstitution with 
progressive disease. RRT was minimal; 7 patients had greater than grade II
nonhematologic toxicity and there were no toxic deaths attributable to the
conditioning regimen. Transplantation-related mortality was 7% (95% confidence
interval [CI], 6%-8%) at 3 months and 28% (95% CI, 23%-34%) at 12 months after
transplantation. Non-relapse-related mortality was most often due to infection.
Grade II or greater GVHD developed in 56% of evaluable patients, and all patients
with disease response developed GVHD. Actuarial estimates of overall and
disease-free survival at 12 months were 52% (95% CI, 43%-63%) and 30% (95% CI,
24%-37%), respectively. Although this preparative regimen allowed adequate
engraftment with minimal RRT, GVHD and infectious complications caused
significant morbidity and mortality. Further study to define appropriate patient 
populations for this regimen, while limiting GVHD and infection risks, is needed.

DOI: 10.1053/bbmt.2002.v8.pm12234167 
PMID: 12234167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

