
1. Hepatology. 2002 Oct;36(4 Pt 1):918-26.

Analysis of TCR antagonism and molecular mimicry of an HLA-A0201-restricted CTL
epitope in primary biliary cirrhosis.

Kita H(1), Matsumura S, He XS, Ansari AA, Lian ZX, Van de Water J, Coppel RL,
Kaplan MM, Gershwin ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Clinical Immunology, University of
California at Davis, 95616, USA.

Although the etiology and mechanism of primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is
unknown, growing evidence suggests a major role for T cells. We have recently
identified the first CD8 T-cell epitope, amino acid 159-167 of the E2 component
of pyruvate dehydrogenase complexes (PDC-E2). To seek for analogue
peptide-antagonizing effector function of CTLs specific for this autoantigen, we 
examined the effector functions of the PDC-E2-specific CTLs against alanine
substituted peptides. Furthermore, because molecular mimicry has been postulated 
as a possible cause of initiating PBC, we carried out studies aimed at
identifying naturally occurring peptides for the 159-167 peptide of PDC-E2 that
may serve as agonists. An alanine substitution at position 5 of this epitope
significantly reduced peptide-specific effector functions of CTLs. Moreover, this
analogue peptide inhibited effector functions of the CTLs to the prototype
peptide, including cytotoxicity and IFN-gamma production. We also identified a
peptide derived from Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which showed a higher binding
affinity to the HLA-A*0201 than the prototype peptide. This homologous peptide
was recognized by CTLs specific for the prototype epitope on PDC-E2. In
conclusion, a modification of the immunodominant autoepitope can be utilized to
manipulate the CD8 T-cell responses against the autoantigen PDC-E2. Our finding
also supports the thesis that molecular mimicry may be implicated in the
initiation of the autoreactive CD8 T-cell responses and has implications for the 
use of such peptides for immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1053/jhep.2002.35616 
PMID: 12297839  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

