
1. Mutat Res. 2002 Sep 30;506-507:41-8.

The effect of deuterium and fluorine substitution upon the mutagenicity of
N-hydroxy-2,6-dimethylaniline.

Matilde Marques M(1), Gamboa da Costa G, Blankenship LR, Culp SJ, Beland FA.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Qui;mica Estrutural, Instituto Superior TÃ©cnico, Complexo I, Av
Rovisco Pais, 1049-001, Lisboa, Portugal. matilde.marques@ist.utl.pt

2,6-Dimethylaniline (2,6-DMA) is an intermediate in the manufacture of several
products, including pesticides, dyestuffs, and synthetic resins. It is also
present in nanogram amounts in tobacco smoke, and is a major metabolite of the
potent anesthetic and antiarrhythmic drug lidocaine, as well as a nasal
carcinogen in rats. As with other aromatic amines, 2,6-DMA can undergo metabolic 
activation through cytochrome p450-mediated N-hydroxylation, followed by
O-esterification to a reactive derivative capable of forming DNA adducts. We have
recently characterized four DNA adducts resulting from this metabolic pathway.
Three of the adducts arose from reaction of the exocyclic heteroatoms of
deoxyadenosine and deoxyguanosine with the carbon para to the arylamine nitrogen.
The fourth adduct resulted from reaction of the 2,6-DMA nitrogen with the C8 atom
of deoxyguanosine. In order to investigate the relative contribution of the
exocyclic heteroatom adducts as compared to the C8-deoxyguanosine adduct to the
toxicities elicited by 2,6-DMA, we synthesized and compared the mutagenicity of
N-hydroxy-2,6-DMA, N-hydroxy-4-deutero-2,6-DMA, 2,6-dimethylnitrosobenzene,
4-deutero-2,6-dimethylnitrosobenzene, and N-hydroxy-4-fluoro-2,6-DMA. In
Salmonella typhimurium TA100, the two deuterated compounds and their
non-deuterated analogues gave similar mutagenic responses ( approximately 25
revertants/nmol). Likewise in S. typhimurium TA98, a similar mutant frequency (
approximately 0.7 revertants/nmol) was obtained with the four compounds. With
N-hydroxy-4-fluoro-2,6-DMA, the mutant frequency was reduced by approximately 90%
in S. typhimurium TA100 and approximately 50% in S. typhimurium TA98. The results
suggest that multiple adducts contribute to base substitution mutations detected 
by S. typhimurium TA100 while the C8-deoxyguanosine adduct is primarily
responsible for the frameshift mutations detected by S. typhimurium TA98.

DOI: 10.1016/s0027-5107(02)00150-1 
PMID: 12351143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

