
1. Syst Appl Microbiol. 2002 Aug;25(2):259-66.

Detection of the fish pathogen Flavobacterium psychrophilum in water from fish
farms.

Madetoja J(1), Wiklund T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Abo Akademi University, Finland. jmadetoj@abo.fi

Rainbow trout fry syndrome and cold-water disease are serious diseases in farmed 
salmonid fish. In the present study, three methods were compared, for the
detection of the causative pathogen, Flavobacterium psychrophilum in water. The
methods included traditional agar plate cultivation on tryptone yeast extract
salts (TYES) agar, immunofluorescence antibody technique (IFAT) and nested PCR.
The three methods were subsequently used for the detection of F. psychrophilum
from fish farm environments. The nested PCR was the most sensitive method used
for a detection of F. psychrophilum. As low as 3 CFU estimated by agar plate
cultivation or 41 cells estimated by IFAT of F. psychrophilum per ml of
non-sterile well water were needed for a detection using the nested PCR method.
The obtained detection limits for the agar plate cultivation and the IFAT was 32 
CFU/ml and 410 cells/ml, respectively. Using IFAT and nested PCR F. psychrophilum
was detected most frequently in water samples from fish farms, but the pathogen
was isolated from only a few samples using agar plate cultivation. In the present
study IFAT and nested PCR proved to be rapid, specific and sensitive methods
compared to traditional agar plate cultivation for the detection of F.
psychrophilum from environmental samples. It is suggested that IFAT and nested
PCR provide effective tools for the examination of F. psychrophilum in the
environment.

DOI: 10.1078/0723-2020-00105 
PMID: 12353881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

