
1. Hum Immunol. 2002 Oct;63(10):821-33.

Tetramer binding and secretion of interferon-gamma in response to antigenic
stimulation are compatible with a range of affinities of MHC:TCR interaction and 
distinct programs of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte activation.

Wei CH(1), Uhlin M, Masucci MG, Levitsky V.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumorbiology Center, Karolinska Institutet, S-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.

Tetramer staining and detection of IFN-gamma secretion in response to specific
stimulation are widely used to quantify and isolate specific T-cells. However, it
remains unclear how these assays reflect different functional outcomes of T-cell 
triggering with MHC:peptide ligands. An immunogenic EBV-derived A11-restricted
CTL peptide epitope and its partially agonistic analogue trigger different
programs of activation induced cell death (AICD) in specific CTLs. In this study 
we analysed a panel of CTL clones, bulk CTL cultures and PBMCs isolated from HLA 
A11-positive EBV-infected individuals for their ability to bind tetrameric
complexes assembled with either of the two peptides and correlated tetramer
binding with the activity of the peptides in functional assays. This analysis
demonstrates that specific tetramer staining and secretion of IFN-gamma are
compatible with at least two activation programs in CTLs. One of these programs
corresponds to full-scale CTL activation and death of a proportion of activated
T-cells in a Fas-dependent manner. In contrast, the alternative program is
characterized by selective induction of IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha, absence of
proliferative response and Fas-independent cell death. These findings may have
important implications for the evaluation of data obtained with MHC:peptide
tetramers and IFN-gamma secretion assays, especially in experimental systems with
extensive antigenic variability.

DOI: 10.1016/s0198-8859(02)00454-8 
PMID: 12368034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

