
1. Exp Nephrol. 2002;10(5-6):332-7.

Bactericidal activity of renal tubular cells: the putative role of human
beta-defensins.

Nitschke M(1), Wiehl S, Baer PC, Kreft B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine I, Medical University 
of LÃ¼beck, Germany. m_nitschke@hotmail.com

Renal tubular epithelial cells (RTC) form a barrier between the host and
ascending microbes in upper urinary tract infection. Previous studies have shown 
the ability of the kidney to produce defensins--antimicrobial peptides that play 
a pivotal role in unspecific host defense. To further clarify the role of renal
epithelium for direct antibacterial activity we investigated the expression,
regulation and production of antimicrobial peptides by cultured human RTC. Cell
culture supernatants of RTC exert strong bactericidal activity against
Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae, two of the most important pathogens
in urinary tract infections. The antimicrobial effect depends on salt
concentration, a typical feature of human defensins. RT-PCR of RNA from cultured 
proximal and distal RTC showed constitutive expression of human beta-defensin 1
(hbd-1) and human beta-defensin 2 (hbd-2) whereas only hbd-1 expression could be 
detected in RNA preparation from renal biopsy material. Hbd-2 expression of RTC
was induced by inflammatory processes as shown by semiquantitative competitive
RT-PCR. Coincubation of the cultured cells with IL-1alpha or E. coli promote the 
strongest hbd-2 induction whereas TNF-alpha and LPS lead to a weaker or no (IL-6)
hbd-2 induction. This is the first evidence that human RTC are able to produce
antibacterial substances in a biologically relevant amount and that
beta-defensins are candidate proteins responsible for this effect.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000065296 
PMID: 12381917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

