
1. Pathol Res Pract. 2002;198(8):537-42.

Upregulation of human beta-defensin 2 peptide expression in oral lichen planus,
leukoplakia and candidiasis. an immunohistochemical study.

Abiko Y(1), Jinbu Y, Noguchi T, Nishimura M, Kusano K, Amaratunga P, Shibata T,
Kaku T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, School of Dentistry, Health Sciences University 
of Hokkaido, Ishikari-Tobetsu, Japan. yoshi-ab@hoku-iryo-u.ac.jp

Human beta defensin 2 (hBD-2) is a major antimicrobial peptide that is produced
by many types of epithelial cells, and is transcriptionally inducible by various 
proinflammatory agents, such as cytokines and bacteria. Although in vitro studies
of the hBDs in oral epithelial cells have been well documented, only little is
known about the in vivo pathological state of oral epithelium. We investigated
the localization of hBD-2 peptide in tissue sections of oral lichen planus,
leukoplakia, candidal leukoplakia and radicular cysts using immunohistochemistry.
HBD-2 was stained in both the hyperkeratinized and the granular layers in cases
of lichen planus with hyperkeratosis and leukoplakia. Expression in spinous and
suprabasal layers was often strong in lichen planus. There were no significant
differences in the number of S-100 positive dendritic cells between the widely
stained areas and those with limited staining areas in lichen planus. In cases of
candidal leukoplakia, the hyphae of candida were mainly detected on the surface
of keratinization, which showed only negative or faint staining for hBD-2. These 
results suggest that hBD-2 is vigorously induced by lichen planus-related
inflammation and that it plays an important role in protection from Candida
albicans infection; however, it is not a strong chemotactic attractant for
Langerhans cells in pathological conditions of oral epithelium.

DOI: 10.1078/0344-0338-00298 
PMID: 12389997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

