
1. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2002 Sep 28;146(39):1833-7.

[Typhoid fever in Amsterdam, 1991-2000, and the simplification of the national
protocol for source and contact tracing].

[Article in Dutch]

Bov√©e LP(1), van Kessel RP, Peerbooms PG, van den Hoek JA.

Author information: 
(1)Gemeentelijke Geneeskundige en Gezondheidsdienst (GG&GD), cluster
Infectieziekten, Postbus 2200, 1000 CE Amsterdam. lbovee@gggd.amsterdam.nl

OBJECTIVE: To determine the incidence of patients reported with typhoid fever in 
Amsterdam (1991-2000) and to evaluate the contact tracing for those patients with
the specific objective of examining whether contact tracing can be simplified.
DESIGN: Retrospective.
METHOD: From an automated database, data were collected on all reported typhoid
fever patients in Amsterdam during the period 1991-2000 and on their contact
persons.
RESULTS: One hundred and one patients with typhoid fever were reported during the
study period, and Salmonella typhi infection was diagnosed in 12 of the 281
household contacts. For 96 of the 101 index patients, travelling abroad was the
most likely source of infection. In 8 of the 12 contact persons with an S. typhi 
infection, the index person was the most likely source of infection, which is
equivalent to a secondary transmission rate of 2.8% (8/277). Seven of the 8
secondary infected persons had symptoms indicative of typhoid fever infection and
S. typhi was found in all their first stool samples.
CONCLUSION: Supported by these results, the national guidelines for source and
contact tracing in the case of typhoid fever have been amended. In the case of
index patients with bad toilet hygiene or who are responsible for food
preparation, the faeces of all household contacts must be examined once. If the
contact persons have symptoms indicative of an S. typhi infection and/or if their
work involves food preparation, their faeces should also be tested once. The
changes to the national protocol will markedly reduce the labour-intensity of
tracing and testing the contacts of patients with typhoid fever, thereby
maintaining the quality of the process. Tracing the source of infection in the
case of patients with typhoid fever will also remain important in the future in
order to detect potential transmission within the Netherlands at an early stage.


PMID: 12382369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

