
1. Blood. 2002 Nov 1;100(9):3175-82.

NOD/SCID/gamma(c)(null) mouse: an excellent recipient mouse model for engraftment
of human cells.

Ito M(1), Hiramatsu H, Kobayashi K, Suzue K, Kawahata M, Hioki K, Ueyama Y,
Koyanagi Y, Sugamura K, Tsuji K, Heike T, Nakahata T.

Author information: 
(1)Central Institute for Experimental Animals, Department of Pediatrics, Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 1430 Nogawa, Miyamae, Kawasaki, Kanagawa
216-0001, Japan. mito@clea.or.jp

To establish a more appropriate animal recipient for xenotransplantation,
NOD/SCID/gamma(c)(null) mice double homozygous for the severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID) mutation and interleukin-2Rgamma (IL-2Rgamma) allelic
mutation (gamma(c)(null)) were generated by 8 backcross matings of
C57BL/6J-gamma(c)(null) mice and NOD/Shi-scid mice. When human CD34+ cells from
umbilical cord blood were transplanted into this strain, the engraftment rate in 
the peripheral circulation, spleen, and bone marrow were significantly higher
than that in NOD/Shi-scid mice treated with anti-asialo GM1 antibody or in the
beta2-microglobulin-deficient NOD/LtSz-scid (NOD/SCID/beta2m(null)) mice, which
were as completely defective in NK cell activity as NOD/SCID/gamma(c)(null) mice.
The same high engraftment rate of human mature cells was observed in ascites when
peripheral blood mononuclear cells were intraperitoneally transferred. In
addition to the high engraftment rate, multilineage cell differentiation was also
observed. Further, even 1 x 10(2) CD34+ cells could grow and differentiate in
this strain. These results suggest that NOD/SCID/gamma(c)(null) mice were
superior animal recipients for xenotransplantation and were especially valuable
for human stem cell assay. To elucidate the mechanisms involved in the superior
engraftment rate in NOD/SCID/gamma(c)(null) mice, cytokine production of spleen
cells stimulated with Listeria monocytogenes antigens was compared among these 3 
strains of mice. The interferon-gamma production from dendritic cells from the
NOD/SCID/gamma(c)(null) mouse spleen was significantly suppressed in comparison
with findings in 2 other strains of mice. It is suggested that multiple
immunological dysfunctions, including cytokine production capability, in addition
to functional incompetence of T, B, and NK cells, may lead to the high
engraftment levels of xenograft in NOD/SCID/gamma(c)(null) mice.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2001-12-0207 
PMID: 12384415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

