
1. Blood. 2003 Feb 1;101(3):807-14. Epub 2002 Sep 12.

MIP-1alpha and MIP-1beta differentially mediate mucosal and systemic adaptive
immunity.

Lillard JW Jr(1), Singh UP, Boyaka PN, Singh S, Taub DD, McGhee JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Morehouse School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA, USA. lillard@msm.edu

Macrophage inflammatory protein-1alpha (MIP-1alpha) and MIP-1beta are distinct
but highly homologous CC chemokines produced by a variety of host cells in
response to various external stimuli and share affinity for CCR5. To better
elucidate the role of these CC chemokines in adaptive immunity, we have
characterized the affects of MIP-1alpha and MIP-1beta on cellular and humoral
immune responses. MIP-1alpha stimulated strong antigen (Ag)-specific serum
immunoglobulin G (IgG) and IgM responses, while MIP-1beta promoted lower IgG and 
IgM but higher serum IgA and IgE antibody (Ab) responses. MIP-1alpha elevated
Ag-specific IgG1 and IgG2b followed by IgG2a and IgG3 subclass responses, while
MIP-1beta only stimulated IgG1 and IgG2b subclasses. Correspondingly, MIP-1beta
produced higher titers of Ag-specific mucosal secretory IgA Ab levels when
compared with MIP-1alpha. Splenic T cells from MIP-1alpha- or MIP-1beta-treated
mice displayed higher Ag-specific Th1 (interferon-gamma [IFN-gamma]) as well as
selective Th2 (interleukin-5 [IL-5] and IL-6) cytokine responses than did T cells
from control groups. Interestingly, mucosally derived T cells from
MIP-1beta-treated mice displayed higher levels of IL-4 and IL-6 compared with
MIP-1alpha-treated mice. However, MIP-1alpha effectively enhanced Ag-specific
cell-mediated immune responses. In correlation with their selective effects on
humoral and cellular immune responses, these chemokines also differentially
attract CD4(+) versus CD8(+) T cells and modulate CD40, CD80, and CD86 expressed 
by B220(+) cells as well as CD28, 4-1BB, and gp39 expression by CD4(+) and CD8(+)
T cells in a dose-dependent fashion. Taken together, these studies suggest that
these CC chemokines differentially enhance mucosal and serum humoral as well as
cellular immune responses.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2002-07-2305 
PMID: 12393512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

