
1. Shock. 2002 Nov;18(5):461-4.

Murine beta-defensin-3 is an inducible peptide with limited tissue expression and
broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity.

Burd RS(1), Furrer JL, Sullivan J, Smith AL.

Author information: 
(1)Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Department of Surgery, New Brunswick, New 
Jersey 08903, USA.

Beta-defensins are cationic peptides produced by epithelial cells that have been 
proposed to be an important component of immune function at mucosal surfaces.
Similarities between mammalian beta-defensins may permit the use of murine models
to further define the role of these peptides in innate host defense. Murine
beta-defensin-3 (mBD-3) is a peptide that exhibits homology at the gene level to 
human beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2), one of four beta-defensins identified in man. The 
purpose of this study was to determine the antimicrobial activity of mBD-3, the
tissue distribution of mBD-3 expression, and the effect of gram-negative
bacterial infection on mBD-3 expression. Based on the sequence deduced from mBD-3
cDNA, a 40-amino acid peptide was assembled using automated
[n-(9-fluorenyl)methoxycarbonyl] solid-phase synthesis. The antimicrobial
activity of synthetic mBD-3 was evaluated in microdilution broth assays using
bacterial and fungal organisms. mBD-3 mRNA expression was assayed by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) using cDNA derived from a panel of tissues. Expression of
mBD-3 was also evaluated in tissues obtained from mice 24 h after intraperitoneal
infection with Escherichia coli using reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR. Synthetic
mBD-3 inhibited the growth of E. coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus
aureus, and Candida albicans at concentrations from 25 to 50 microg/mL.
Constitutive expression of mBD-3 mRNA was not consistently found in any organ
using RT-PCR. In an E. coli peritonitis model, expression of mBD-3 mRNA was
upregulated only in the esophagus and tongue. We conclude that mBD-3 is an
inducible peptide with limited tissue expression during E. coli peritonitis.
Because it exhibits broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity, this peptide may serve
as an innate defense against microbial invasion at specific mucosal surfaces in
the mouse.

DOI: 10.1097/00024382-200211000-00013 
PMID: 12412627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

