
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2002 Oct;21(10):722-8. Epub 2002 Sep 26.

Designation of the European Working Group on Legionella Infection (EWGLI)
amplified fragment length polymorphism types of Legionella pneumophila serogroup 
1 and results of intercentre proficiency testing Using a standard protocol.

Fry NK(1), Bangsborg JM, Bergmans A, Bernander S, Etienne J, Franzin L, Gaia V,
Hasenberger P, Baladrón Jiménez B, Jonas D, Lindsay D, Mentula S, Papoutsi A,
Struelens M, Uldum SA, Visca P, Wannet W, Harrison TG.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Systemic Infection Laboratory, 61 Colindale Avenue, London NW9
5HT, UK. nfry@phls.org.uk

The utility of amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) analysis as a
genotyping method for the epidemiological typing of Legionella pneumophila
serogroup 1 has been previously demonstrated. This study (i). reports
recommendations for the designation of the European Working Group on Legionella
Infections (EWGLI) AFLP types, (ii). describes the EWGLI AFLP types identified
for the 130 strains in the EWGLI culture collection, and (iii). reports the
results of a newly introduced international programme of proficiency testing.
Following preliminary analysis of 20 epidemiologically unrelated isolates, 16
major AFLP types were identified. A coded proficiency panel, comprising 12
additional isolates representing 9 of these 16 AFLP types, was sent to 17 centres
in 14 European countries where it was analysed following a previously determined 
standard protocol. The identity of each coded strain (recorded as AFLP type
001-016 or untypeable) was determined by participants with reference to these 16 
AFLP types, either visually or using gel analysis software where available, and
reported to the coordinating centre. Nine of the 12 strains, including an
epidemiologically related pair and two pairs of unrelated isolates of the same
type, were correctly identified to the correct AFLP type by all or all but one of
the participants. Seven laboratories correctly identified all 12 isolates, and a 
further seven laboratories correctly identified 11. Type identification scores
ranged from 75% (1 centre), 83% (2 centres), and 92% (7 centres) to 100% (7
centres). The AFLP method as described is robust and rapid and allows the
genotypic comparison of isolates of Legionella pneumophila between different
testing centres without the need for exchange of the strains studied.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-002-0790-5 
PMID: 12415471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

