
1. Environ Health Perspect. 2002 Oct;110 Suppl 5:845-50.

Molecular biology of deregulated gene expression in transformed C3H/10T1/2 mouse 
embryo cell lines induced by specific insoluble carcinogenic nickel compounds.

Landolph JR(1), Verma A, Ramnath J, Clemens F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Cancer Research
Laboratory, USC/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, 1303 N. Mission Road, Los Angeles, CA 90031,
USA. landolph@hsc.usc.edu

In the past, exposure of workers to mixtures of soluble and insoluble nickel
compounds by inhalation during nickel refining correlated with increased
incidences of lung and nasal cancers. Insoluble nickel subsulfide and nickel
oxide (NiO) are carcinogenic in animals by inhalation; soluble nickel sulfate is 
not. Particles of insoluble nickel compounds were phagocytized by C3H/10T1/2
mouse embryo cells and induced morphological transformation in these cells with
the following order of potency: NiO (black) > NiO (green) > nickel subsulfide.
Foci induced by black/green NiO and nickel monosulfide developed into
anchorage-independent transformed cell lines. Random arbitrarily
primed-polymerase chain reaction mRNA differential display showed that nine c-DNA
fragments are differentially expressed between nontransformed and nickel
compound-transformed 10T1/2 cell lines in 6% of total mRNA; 130 genes would be
differentially expressed in 100% of the mRNA. Fragment R3-2 was a sequence in the
mouse calnexin gene, fragment R3-1 a portion of the Wdr1 gene, and fragment R2-4 
a portion of the ect-2 protooncogene. These three genes were overexpressed in
transformed cell lines. Fragment R1-2 was 90% homologous to a fragment of the
DRIP/TRAP-80 (vitamin D receptor interacting protein/thyroid hormone
receptor-activating protein 80) genes and was expressed in nontransformed but not
in nickel-transformed cell lines. Specific insoluble carcinogenic nickel
compounds are phagocytized into 10T1/2 cells and likely generate oxygen radicals,
which would cause mutations in protooncogenes, and chromosome breakage, and
mutations in tumor suppressor genes, inactivating them. These compounds also
induce methylation of promoters of tumor suppressor genes, inactivating them.
This could lead to permanent overexpresssion of the ect-2, calnexin, and Wdr1
genes and suppression of expression of the DRIP/TRAP-80 gene that we observed,
which likely contribute to induction and maintenance of transformed phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.02110s5845 
PMCID: PMC1241258
PMID: 12426144  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

