
1. J Immunol. 2002 Dec 1;169(11):6112-9.

Bacterial-reactive T regulatory cells inhibit pathogenic immune responses to the 
enteric flora.

Cong Y(1), Weaver CT, Lazenby A, Elson CO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Alabama, Birmingham
35294, USA.

We showed previously that cecal bacterial Ag (CBA)-specific CD4(+) T cells induce
colitis when transferred into SCID mice. The purpose of this study was to
generate and characterize CBA-specific regulatory T cells in C3H/HeJBir (Bir)
mice. CD4(+) T cells were stimulated with CBA-pulsed APC in the presence of IL-10
every 10-14 days. After four or more cycles, these T cells produced high levels
of IL-10, low levels of IL-4 and IFN-gamma, and no IL-2, consistent with the
phenotype of T regulatory-1 (Tr1) cells. Bir Tr1 cells proliferated poorly, but
their proliferation was dependent on CD28-B7 interactions and was MHC class
II-restricted. Transfer of Bir Tr1 cells into SCID mice did not result in
colitis, and cotransfer of Bir Tr1 T cells with pathogenic Bir CD4(+) Th1 cells
prevented colitis. Bir Tr1 cells inhibited proliferation and IFN-gamma production
of a CBA-specific Th1 cell line in vitro. Such inhibition was partly due to IL-10
and TGFbeta1, but cognate interactions with either APCs or Th1 cells were also
involved. Normal intestinal lamina propria CD4(+) T cells had Tr1-like activity
when stimulated with CBA-pulsed APCs. We conclude that CD4(+) T cells with the
properties of Tr1 cells are present in the intestinal lamina propria and
hypothesize that these cells maintain intestinal immune homeostasis to the
enteric flora.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.169.11.6112 
PMID: 12444113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

