
1. J Immunol. 2002 Dec 1;169(11):6298-308.

B7/CD28-dependent CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells are essential components of the
memory-protective immunity to Candida albicans.

Montagnoli C(1), Bacci A, Bozza S, Gaziano R, Mosci P, Sharpe AH, Romani L.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Section, Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical
Science, University of Perugia, Italy.

Protective immunity to the fungus Candida albicans is mediated by Ag-specific Th1
cells. Paradoxically, some Th2 cytokines are required for the maintenance of
Th1-mediated immune resistance to the fungus. Therefore, in addition to the
Th1/Th2 balance, other mechanisms seem to be involved in the regulation of Th1
immunity to the fungus. Here we show that CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells, negatively
regulating antifungal Th1 reactivity, are generated in mice with candidiasis.
CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells were not generated in B7-2- or CD28-deficient mice or in
condition of IL-10 signaling deficiency. Accordingly, although capable of
efficiently restricting the fungal growth, these mice experienced inflammatory
pathology and were incapable of resistance to reinfection. CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells 
poorly proliferated in vitro; were highly enriched for cells producing IL-4,
IL-10, and TGF-beta; and required IL-10-producing, Candida hypha-activated
dendritic cells for generation. Adoptive transfer of CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells or
IL-10-producing dendritic cells restored resistance to reinfection and decreased 
inflammation in B7-2-deficient mice. These results show that oral tolerance
induced by Candida hyphae is required for the occurrence of long-lasting
protective immunity after yeast priming. The implication is that preventing
reactivation rather than favoring sterilizing immunity to ubiquitous fungal
pathogens may represent the ultimate expectation of vaccine-based strategies.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.169.11.6298 
PMID: 12444136  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

