
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2002 Dec;68(12):5826-33.

Rhodanobacter sp. strain BPC1 in a benzo[a]pyrene-mineralizing bacterial
consortium.

Kanaly RA(1), Harayama S, Watanabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biotechnology Institute, 3-75-1 Heita, Kamaishi City, Iwate 026-0001,
Japan.

A bacterial consortium which rapidly mineralizes benzo[a]pyrene when it is grown 
on a high-boiling-point diesel fuel distillate (HBD) was recovered from soil and 
maintained for approximately 3 years. Previous studies have shown that
mobilization of benzo[a]pyrene into the supernatant liquid precedes
mineralization of this compound (R. Kanaly, R. Bartha, K. Watanabe, and S.
Harayama, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66:4205-4211, 2000). In the present study, we
found that sterilized supernatant liquid filtrate (SSLF) obtained from the
growing consortium stimulated mineralization of benzo[a]pyrene when it was
readministered to a consortium inoculum without HBD. Following this observation, 
eight bacterial strains were isolated from the consortium, and SSLF of each of
them was assayed for the ability to stimulate benzo[a]pyrene mineralization by
the original consortium. The SSLF obtained from one strain, designated BPC1, most
vigorously stimulated benzo[a]pyrene mineralization by the original consortium;
its effect was more than twofold greater than the effect of the SSLF obtained
from the original consortium. A 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis and biochemical
tests identified strain BPC1 as a member of the genus Rhodanobacter, whose type
strain, Rhodanobacter lindaniclasticus RP5557, which was isolated for its ability
to grow on the pesticide lindane, is not extant. Strain BPC1 could not grow on
lindane, benzo[a]pyrene, simple hydrocarbons, and HBD in pure culture. In
contrast, a competitive PCR assay indicated that strain BPC1 grew in the
consortium fed only HBD and benzo[a]pyrene. This growth of BPC1 was concomitant
with growth of the total bacterial consortium and preceded the initiation of
benzo[a]pyrene mineralization. These results suggest that strain BPC1 has a
specialized niche in the benzo[a]pyrene-mineralizing consortium; namely, it grows
on metabolites produced by fellow members and contributes to benzo[a]pyrene
mineralization by increasing the bioavailability of this compound.

DOI: 10.1128/aem.68.12.5826-5833.2002 
PMCID: PMC134403
PMID: 12450801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

