
1. Pharmacogenetics. 2002 Dec;12(9):677-89.

Differential activation of promutagens by alloenzymes of human sulfotransferase
1A2 expressed in Salmonella typhimurium.

Meinl W(1), Meerman JH, Glatt H.

Author information: 
(1)German Institute of Human Nutrition, Department of Toxicology,
Arthur-Scheunert-Allee 114-116, 14558 Potsdam-Rehbr√ºcke, Germany.

Various enzymatically formed sulfuric acid esters are chemically reactive and
mutagenic. This metabolic activation pathway is not detected in standard in-vitro
mutagenicity test systems. We describe the construction of Salmonella typhimurium
TA1538-derived strains expressing alloenzymes *1, *2, *3, *5, *6 of human
sulfotransferase 1A2 (SULT1A2). The reference compounds, 1-hydroxymethylpyrene
(1-HMP), N-hydroxy-2-acetylaminofluorene (OH-AAF) and
2-hydroxylamino-5-phenylpyridine (OH-APP), were activated to mutagens in these
strains. Their activity differed 7- to 16-fold between strains expressing various
alloenzymes. It was strongest and weakest in the strains expressing the common
alloenzymes, *1 and *2, respectively. The SULT1A2 protein expression levels, and 
the V(max) and K(m) values with the reference substrate 4-nitrophenol, varied
2.5-, 4-, and 110-fold, respectively, in cytosolic preparations from strains
TA1538-SULT1A2*1 and *2. Strains with varying protein levels were constructed via
insertion of silent mutations in the 5'-part of the cDNA. TA1538-SULT1A2*1Z and
TA1538-SULT1A2*2Y showed equal expression levels of alloenzymes *1 and *2,
respectively, which were 3 times above those of TA1538-SULT1A2*1. The
mutagenicity of OH-AAF and OH-APP was unchanged in strain TA1538-SULT1A2*1Z
versus *1, and moderately increased in TA1538-SULT1A2*2Y versus *2. The influence
of the protein level was stronger with 1-HMP. Nevertheless, mutagenic activity of
1-HMP was still 11 times higher in TA1538-SULT1A2*1Z than in TA1538-SULT1A2*2Y.
Thus, differences in the properties between alloenzymes can lead to differences
in the activation of promutagens. The model compounds were also tested in strains
expressing the other ten human SULTs identified. Whereas OH-AAF and OH-APP showed
the highest mutagenic activities in strains expressing SULT1A2, 1-HMP was more
potent in strains expressing other SULT forms. With the limitation that little is
known about the tissue distribution and regulation of SULT1A2, the findings
suggest that its polymorphism may affect the individual susceptibility towards
procarcinogens, in particular certain aromatic amines and amides.

Copyright 2002 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

DOI: 10.1097/00008571-200212000-00002 
PMID: 12464797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

