
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Dec 24;99(26):16707-12. Epub 2002 Dec 10.

Orthologs of a novel archaeal and of the bacterial peptidyl-tRNA hydrolase are
nonessential in yeast.

Rosas-Sandoval G(1), Ambrogelly A, Rinehart J, Wei D, Cruz-Vera LR, Graham DE,
Stetter KO, Guarneros G, SÃ¶ll D.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry and Chemistry, Yale
University, New Haven, CT 06520-8114, USA.

Peptidyl-tRNA hydrolase (encoded by pth) is an essential enzyme in all bacteria, 
where it releases tRNA from the premature translation termination product
peptidyl-tRNA. Archaeal genomes lack a recognizable peptidyl-tRNA hydrolase (Pth)
ortholog, although it is present in most eukaryotes. However, we detected
Pth-like activity in extracts of the archaeon Methanocaldococcus jannaschii. The 
uncharacterized MJ0051 ORF was shown to correspond to a protein with Pth
activity. Heterologously expressed MJ0051 enzyme catalyzed in vitro the cleavage 
of the Pth substrates diacetyl-[14C]lysyl-tRNA and acetyl-[14C]phenylalanyl-tRNA.
On transformation of an Escherichia coli pth(ts) mutant, the MJ0051 gene (named
pth2) rescued the temperature-sensitive phenotype of the strain. Analysis of
known genomes revealed the presence of highly conserved orthologs of the archaeal
pth2 gene in all archaea and eukaryotes but not in bacteria. The phylogeny of
pth2 homologs suggests that the gene has been vertically inherited throughout the
archaeal and eukaryal domains. Deletions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae of the pth2 
(YBL057c) or pth (YHR189w) orthologs were viable, as was the double deletion
strain, implying that the canonical Pth and Pth2 enzymes are not essential for
yeast viability.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.222659199 
PMCID: PMC139208
PMID: 12475929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

