
1. J Immunol. 2002 Dec 15;169(12):7000-8.

Cell surface peptidase CD26/dipeptidylpeptidase IV regulates CXCL12/stromal
cell-derived factor-1 alpha-mediated chemotaxis of human cord blood CD34+
progenitor cells.

Christopherson KW 2nd(1), Hangoc G, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology and The Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5254, USA.

CD26/dipeptidylpeptidase IV (DPPIV) is a membrane-bound extracellular peptidase
that cleaves dipeptides from the N terminus of polypeptide chains. The N terminus
of chemokines is known to interact with the extracellular portion of chemokine
receptors, and removal of these amino acids in many instances results in
significant changes in functional activity. CD26/DPPIV has the ability to cleave 
the chemokine CXCL12/stromal cell-derived factor 1alpha (SDF-1alpha) at its
position two proline. CXCL12/SDF-1alpha induces migration of hemopoietic stem and
progenitor cells, and it is thought that CXCL12 plays a crucial role in
homing/mobilization of these cells to/from the bone marrow. We found that
CD26/DPPIV is expressed by a subpopulation of CD34(+) hemopoietic cells isolated 
from cord blood and that these cells have DPPIV activity. The involvement of
CD26/DPPIV in CD34(+) hemopoietic stem and progenitor cell migration has not been
previously examined. Functional studies show that the N-terminal-truncated
CXCL12/SDF-1alpha lacks the ability to induce the migration of CD34(+) cord blood
cells and acts to inhibit normal CXCL12/SDF-1alpha-induced migration. Finally,
inhibiting the endogenous CD26/DPPIV activity on CD34(+) cells enhances the
migratory response of these cells to CXCL12/SDF-1alpha. This process of
CXCL12/SDF-1alpha cleavage by CD26/DPPIV on a subpopulation of CD34(+) cells may 
represent a novel regulatory mechanism in hemopoietic stem and progenitor cells
for the migration, homing, and mobilization of these cells. Inhibition of the
CD26/DPPIV peptidase activity may therefore represent an innovative approach to
increasing homing and engraftment during cord blood transplantation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.169.12.7000 
PMID: 12471135  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

