
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 21;278(8):5894-901. Epub 2002 Dec 16.

The proline-rich domain of dynamin-2 is responsible for dynamin-dependent in
vitro potentiation of endothelial nitric-oxide synthase activity via selective
effects on reductase domain function.

Cao S(1), Yao J, Shah V.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Research Unit and Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The GTPase dynamin-2 (dyn-2) binds and positively regulates the nitric
oxide-generating enzyme, endothelial nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS) (Cao, S., Yao, 
Y., McCabe, T., Yao, Q., Katusic, Z., Sessa, W., and Shah, V. (2001) J. Biol.
Chem. 276, 14249-14256). Here we demonstrate, using purified proteins, that this 
occurs through a selective influence of the dyn-2 proline-rich domain (dyn-2 PRD)
on the eNOS reductase domain. In vitro studies demonstrate that dyn-2 PRD fused
with glutathione S-transferase (GST) binds recombinant eNOS protein specifically 
and with binding kinetics comparable with that observed between dyn-2 full-length
and eNOS. Additionally, GST-dyn-2 PRD binds the in vitro transcribed (35)S-eNOS
reductase domain but not the (35)S-eNOS oxygenase domain. Furthermore GST-dyn-2
PRD binds a (35)S-labeled eNOS reductase domain fragment (amino acids 645-850)
that partially overlaps with the FAD binding domain of eNOS. A recombinant form
of the SH3-containing protein Fyn competes the binding of recombinant eNOS
protein with dyn-2 PRD, thereby implicating the SH3-like region contained within 
this reductase domain fragment as the dyn-2 binding region. Mammalian two-hybrid 
screen corroborates these interactions in cells as well. Functional studies
demonstrate that dyn-2 PRD selectively potentiates eNOS activity in a
concentration-dependent manner in an order of magnitude similar to that observed 
with dyn-2 full-length and in a manner that requires calmodulin. Although dyn-2
PRD does not influence eNOS oxygenase domain function or ferricyanide reduction, 
it does potentiate the ability of recombinant eNOS to reduce cytochrome c,
supporting an influence of dyn-2 PRD on electron transfer between FAD and FMN.
(These data indicate that the binding domains of dyn-2 and eNOS reside within the
dyn-2 PRD domain and the FAD binding region of the eNOS reductase domains,
respectively, and that dyn-2 PRD is sufficient to mediate dyn-2-dependent
potentiation of eNOS activity, at least in part, by potentiating electron
transfer.)

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M212546200 
PMID: 12488320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

