
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Dec 15;30(24):5529-38.

Genome-wide analysis of mRNA decay in resting and activated primary human T
lymphocytes.

Raghavan A(1), Ogilvie RL, Reilly C, Abelson ML, Raghavan S, Vasdewani J,
Krathwohl M, Bohjanen PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
USA.

We used microarray technology to measure mRNA decay rates in resting and
activated T lymphocytes in order to better understand the role of mRNA decay in
regulating gene expression. Purified human T lymphocytes were stimulated for 3 h 
with medium alone, with an anti-CD3 antibody, or with a combination of anti-CD3
and anti-CD28 antibodies. Actinomycin D was added to arrest transcription, and
total cellular RNA was collected at discrete time points over a 2 h period. RNA
from each point was analyzed using Affymetrix oligonucleotide arrays and a first 
order decay model was used to determine the half-lives of approximately 6000
expressed transcripts. We identified hundreds of short-lived transcripts encoding
important regulatory proteins including cytokines, cell surface receptors, signal
transduction regulators, transcription factors, cell cycle regulators and
regulators of apoptosis. Approximately 100 of these short-lived transcripts
contained ARE-like sequences. We also identified numerous transcripts that
exhibited stimulus-dependent changes in mRNA decay. In particular, we identified 
hundreds of transcripts whose steady-state levels were repressed following T cell
activation and were either unstable in the resting state or destabilized
following cellular activation. Thus, rapid mRNA degradation appears to be an
important mechanism for turning gene expression off in an activation-dependent
manner.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkf682 
PMCID: PMC140061
PMID: 12490721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

