
1. Infect Immun. 2003 Jan;71(1):196-204.

4-1BB (CD137) differentially regulates murine in vivo protein- and
polysaccharide-specific immunoglobulin isotype responses to Streptococcus
pneumoniae.

Wu ZQ(1), Khan AQ, Shen Y, Wolcott KM, Dawicki W, Watts TH, Mittler RS, Snapper
CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology. Biomedical Instrumentation Center, Uniformed Services
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 20814, USA.

4-1BB (CD137) is induced on activated CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells and delivers a
costimulatory signal upon binding the 4-1BB ligand (4-1BBL) expressed on
antigen-presenting cells. Induction of 4-1BB is dependent on activation via the
T-cell receptor (TCR) and possibly CD28. It was previously demonstrated that both
an in vivo protein (pneumococcal surface protein A [PspA])- and polysaccharide
(phosphorylcholine [PC] determinant of teichoic acid)-specific immunoglobulin
(Ig) isotype response to Streptococcus pneumoniae was dependent on CD4(+)
TCRalphabeta(+) T cells and B7-dependent costimulation through CD28. We thus
postulated that 4-1BB costimulation would also play a role in regulating the in
vivo anti-PspA and anti-PC response to S. pneumoniae. We demonstrate that mice
genetically deficient in 4-1BBL elicit a markedly reduced IgM and IgG anti-PC but
normal primary and secondary IgG anti-PspA responses to S. pneumoniae relative to
those for wild-type mice. However, injection of an agonistic anti-4-1BB
monoclonal antibody (MAb), while having no significant effect on the anti-PC
response, strongly inhibits the primary anti-PspA response, the generation of
PspA-specific memory, and germinal center formation but does not induce a lasting
state of tolerance. In contrast, anti-4-1BB MAb has no effect on the anti-PspA
response when injected only at the time of secondary immunization. Delay of the
addition of anti-4-1BB leads to progressively less inhibition of the primary
response up to day 8. This inhibition is independent of CD8(+) T cells and is
associated with the expansion of CD4(+) T cells with an activated phenotype,
which is partly dependent on B7-dependent costimulation. These data are the first
to suggest a stimulatory role for endogenous 4-1BB-4-1BBL interactions during a
humoral immune response to a pathogen and further underscore significant
differences in costimulation requirements for an in vivo protein- versus
polysaccharide-specific Ig isotype response to an extracellular bacterium.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.71.1.196-204.2003 
PMCID: PMC143421
PMID: 12496166  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

