
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jan 21;100(2):645-50. Epub 2003 Jan 7.

High-efficiency recovery of functional hematopoietic progenitor and stem cells
from human cord blood cryopreserved for 15 years.

Broxmeyer HE(1), Srour EF, Hangoc G, Cooper S, Anderson SA, Bodine DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, 1044 West Walnut Street, R4-302, Indianapolis, IN 
46202, USA. hbroxmey@iupui.edu

Transplanted cord blood (CB) hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and progenitor cells 
(HPC) can treat malignant and nonmalignant disorders. Because long-term
cryopreservation is critical for CB banking and transplantation, we assessed the 
efficiency of recovery of viable HSCHPC from individual CBs stored frozen for 15 
yr. Average recoveries (+/- 1 SD) of defrosted nucleated cells, colony-forming
unit-granulocyte, -macrophage (CFU-GM), burst-forming unit-erythroid (BFU-E), and
colony-forming unit-granulocyte, -erythrocyte, -monocyte, and -megakaryocyte
(CFU-GEMM) were, respectively, 83 +/- 12, 95 +/- 16, 84 +/- 25, and 85 +/- 25
using the same culture conditions as for prefreeze samples. Proliferative
capacities of CFU-GM, BFU-E, and CFU-GEMM were intact as colonies generated
respectively contained up to 22,500, 182,500, and 292,500 cells. Self-renewal of 
CFU-GEMM was also retained as replating efficiency of single CFU-GEMM colonies
into 2 degrees dishes was >96% and yielded 2 degrees colonies of CFU-GM, BFU-E,
and CFU-GEMM. Moreover, CD34(+)CD38(-) cells isolated by FACS after thawing
yielded >250-fold ex vivo expansion of HPC. To assess HSC capability, defrosts
from single collections were bead-separated into CD34(+) cells and infused into
sublethally irradiated nonobese diabetic (NOD)severe combined immunodeficient
(SCID) mice. CD45(+) human cell engraftment with multilineage phenotypes was
detected in mice after 11-13 wk; engrafting levels were comparable to that
reported with fresh CB. Thus, immature human CB cells with high proliferative,
replating, ex vivo expansion and mouse NODSCID engrafting ability can be stored
frozen for >15 yr, can be efficiently retrieved, and most likely remain effective
for clinical transplantation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0237086100 
PMCID: PMC141050
PMID: 12518050  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

