
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2003 Jan;131(1):90-101.

Increased expression of antimicrobial peptides and lysozyme in colonic epithelial
cells of patients with ulcerative colitis.

Fahlgren A(1), Hammarström S, Danielsson A, Hammarström ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Umeå University, 901 85 Umeå, Sweden.

The impact of chronic inflammation on the expression of human alpha-defensins 5
and 6 (HD-5, HD-6), beta-defensins 1 and 2 (hBD-1, hBD-2) and lysozyme in
epithelial cells of small and large intestine was investigated. Intestinal
specimens from 16 patients with ulcerative colitis (UC), 14 patients with Crohn's
disease (CD) and 40 controls with no history of inflammatory bowel disease were
studied. mRNA expression levels of the five defence molecules were determined in 
freshly isolated epithelial cells by real-time quantitative RT-PCR. Specific copy
standards were used allowing comparison between the expression levels of the
different defensins. HD-5 and lysozyme protein expression was also studied by
immunohistochemistry. Colonic epithelial cells from patients with UC displayed a 
significant increase of hBD-2, HD-5, HD-6 and lysozyme mRNA as compared to
epithelial cells in controls. Lysozyme mRNA was expressed at very high average
copy numbers followed by HD-5, HD-6, hBD-1 and hBD-2 mRNA. HD-5 and lysozyme
protein was demonstrated in metaplastic Paneth-like cells in UC colon. There was 
no correlation between hBD-2 mRNA levels and HD-5 or HD-6 mRNA levels in colon
epithelial cells of UC patients. Colonic epithelial cells of Crohn's colitis
patients showed increased mRNA levels of HD-5 and lysozyme mRNA whereas ileal
epithelial cells of Crohn's patients with ileo-caecal inflammation did not.
Chronic inflammation in colon results in induction of hBD-2 and alpha-defensins
and increased lysozyme expression. hBD-1 expression levels in colon remain
unchanged in colitis. The high antimicrobial activity of epithelial cells in
chronic colitis may be a consequence of changes in the epithelial lining,
permitting adherence of both pathogenic bacteria and commensals directly to the
epithelial cell surface.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.2003.02035.x 
PMCID: PMC1808590
PMID: 12519391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

