
1. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2003 May;94(5):2085-94. Epub 2003 Jan 3.

Genetic models in applied physiology: selected contribution: effects of
spaceflight on immunity in the C57BL/6 mouse. I. Immune population distributions.

Pecaut MJ(1), Nelson GA, Peters LL, Kostenuik PJ, Bateman TA, Morony S, Stodieck 
LS, Lacey DL, Simske SJ, Gridley DS.

Collaborators: Nelson GA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Radiobiology Program, Division of
Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Loma Linda University and Medical Center,
Loma Linda, California 92354, USA. mpecaut@dominion.llumc.edu
(2)Loma Linda U, CA

There are several aspects of the spaceflight environment that may lead to changes
in immunity: mission-related psychological stress, radiation, and changes in
gravity. On December 5, 2001, the space shuttle Endeavor launched for a 12-day
mission to examine these effects on C57BL/6 mice for the first time. On their
return, assays were performed on the spleen, blood, and bone marrow. In response 
to flight, there were no significant differences in the general circulating
leukocyte proportions. In contrast, there was an increase in splenic lymphocyte
percentages, with a corresponding decrease in granulocytes. There was an overall 
shift in splenic lymphocytes away from T cells toward B cells, and a decrease in 
the CD4-to-CD8 ratios due to a decrease in T helpers. In contrast, there were
proportional increases in bone marrow T cells, with decreases in B cells.
Although the blast percentage and count were decreased in flight mice, the
CD34(+) population was increased. The data were more consistent with a shift in
bone marrow populations rather than a response to changes in the periphery. Many 
of the results are similar to those using other models. Clearly, spaceflight can 
influence immune parameters ranging from hematopoiesis to mature leukocyte
mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01052.2002 
PMID: 12514166  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

