
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 21;278(12):10752-62. Epub 2003 Jan 8.

The role of transcriptional corepressor Nif3l1 in early stage of neural
differentiation via cooperation with Trip15/CSN2.

Akiyama H(1), Fujisawa N, Tashiro Y, Takanabe N, Sugiyama A, Tashiro F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Faculty of Industrial Science
and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, Yamazaki, Noda-shi, Chiba 278-8510, 
Japan.

Mouse Nif3l1 gene is highly conserved from bacteria to human. Even though this
gene is expressed throughout embryonic development, its biological function is
still obscure. Here, we show that Nif3l1 participates in retinoic acid-primed
neural differentiation of P19 embryonic carcinoma cells through cooperation with 
Trip15/CSN2, a transcriptional corepressor/component of COP9 signalosome. We
isolated Nif3l1 cDNA from P19 cell cDNA library by a yeast two-hybrid screening
using Trip15/CSN2 as a bait. This interaction was confirmed by a pull-down assay 
and an epitope-tagged coimmunoprecipitation. Although Nif3l1 was mainly detected 
in the cytoplasm, the translocation of Nif3l1 into the nuclei was observed in
retinoic acid-primed neural differentiation of P19 cells and enhanced by the
enforced expression of Trip15/CSN2. Furthermore, enforced expression of sense
Nif3l1 RNA, but not antisense RNA, enhanced the neural differentiation of P19
cells accompanying the intense down-regulation of Oct-3/4 mRNA expression and the
rapid induction of Mash-1 mRNA expression. Luciferase reporter assay showed that 
Nif3l1 could act as a transcriptional repressor and synergized the
transcriptional repression by Trip15/CSN2. These results indicate that Nif3l1
implicates in neural differentiation through the cooperation with Trip15/CSN2.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M209856200 
PMID: 12522100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

