
1. Toxicol Lett. 2003 Feb 3;137(3):175-83.

Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane suppresses neurite outgrowth and induces
apoptosis in PC12 pheochromocytoma cells.

Shinomiya N(1), Shinomiya M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, National Defense Medical College, 3-2 Namiki,
Tokorozawa, Saitama 359-8513, Japan. shino@vai.org

It is well known that dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) is used as an
insecticide and prevents many people in the tropical zone from devastating
malaria. On the other hand, a number of reports have indicated that it may act as
an endocrine disruptor and also has possible carcinogenic effects. However, the
effects of DDT on the neural cells remain to be investigated. In this study,
therefore, we observed the effects of p,p'-DDT, o,p'-DDT and its major metabolite
p,p'-DDE on the differentiation and survival of PC12 pheochromocytoma cells.
After stimulation with nerve growth factor, PC12 cells exhibited remarkable
neurite outgrowth, suggesting that neuronal differentiation was induced by this
growth factor. p,p'-DDT and o,p'-DDT suppressed this neurite outgrowth dose
dependently, and p,p'-DDE also revealed a similar effect but to a lesser extent. 
Apoptotic cell death was induced within 3-6 h after treatment with p,p'-DDT and
o,p'-DDT. Again p,p'-DDE showed a weaker apoptosis-inducing effect. In the
organochlorine-treated PC12 cells phosphorylation of p44/42 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) was upregulated, whereas phosphorylation bands were not
detected in any kinases of other MAPK groups such as p38 MAPK and SAPK/JNK. A
kinase assay on p44/42 MAPK revealed that the extent of phosphorylation of Elk-1 
substrates well correlated with the suppressive effect on neuronal
differentiation and apoptosis-inducing activity. These results suggest that
p,p'-DDT and o,p'-DDT exerted their effects on neuronal cells by the stimulation 
of p44/42 MAPK, and p,p'-DDE had less effects than the other two organochlorines.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-4274(02)00401-0 
PMID: 12523960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

