
1. J Extra Corpor Technol. 2002 Dec;34(4):276-80.

The heater-cooler unit--a conceivable source of infection.

Weitkemper HH(1), Spilker A, Knobl HJ, KÃ¶rfer R.

Author information: 
(1)Heartcenter of North Rhine-Westphalia, Bad Oeynhausen, FR Germany.
hweitkemper@t-online.de

Even drinking water is contaminated with pathogenic microorganisms. This does not
necessarily pose a risk for healthy individuals, but it may result in serious
consequences in people with impaired immune systems. This is particularly valid
if drinking water is used for medical purposes. The heater-cooler unit (HCU)
connected to heat exchangers or blankets by tubing, the connection is closed
water circuit that contains microorganisms and algae. While connecting the tubing
to the heat exchanger, spilling of water cannot be avoided. Microbiological
examinations showed that germs and particles pollute the units. Exposure to the
patient and the OR equipment has the potential to increase the risk of infection 
should the HCU water come in contact with the patient. As a result of the high
incidence of particle and algae in the HCU, malfunction occurs. Sampling shows
>1000/mL CFU (colony forming units) at 36 degrees C and 55/mL CFU at 20 degrees C
on average. The specific findings include Pseudomonas and Legionella.
Disinfecting HCU is very difficult. Often HCUs do not provide any technology to
reduce bacterial or other contamination. The instructions for use of oxygenators 
often exclude the use of disinfectants. Maintenance instructions for the HCU
advocate the use of disinfectants that carry the risk of oxygenator damage and of
heat exchanger leakage. The effect of chemical disinfectants and heat exchanger
membranes have not been examined, they may impair heat exchanger permeability and
function. As an alternative to chemical and thermal disinfection, we used the
alternative method of filtration. Using a membrane filter element, we noticed a
decreasing number of CFUs from 55 to sterile conditions at 20 degrees C and from 
>1000 CFUs to 100 CFUs at 36 degrees C (Figure 1). In addition, we noticed a
removal of other particles and algae. In conclusion, we have demonstrated a
technique that is simple to implement and effectively reduces the microbiological
load of the water in the heater-cooler unit.


PMID: 12533065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

