
1. J Environ Qual. 2003 Jan-Feb;32(1):368-73.

Enumeration of waterborne Escherichia coli with petrifilm plates: comparison to
standard methods.

Vail JH(1), Morgan R, Merino CR, Gonzales F, Miller R, Ram JL.

Author information: 
(1)Robert B. Annis Water Resources Institute, Grand Valley State University,
Muskegon, MI 49441, USA.

Escherichia coli is often monitored in environmental waters as an indicator of
the possible presence of human pathogens associated with feces. Petrifilm E.
coli/coliform count plates (3M, Minneapolis, MN), previously validated for
enumerating E. coli in food, were tested for monitoring E. coli in environmental 
water. Escherichia coli counts in environmental water samples enumerated with
Petrifilm were significantly correlated (R > 0.9; slope = 0.9-1.0; p < 0.001)
with counts obtained with three commonly used methods, mTEC (Becton Dickinson,
Sparks, MD), m-ColiBlue (Hach, Loveland, CO), and Colilert-18/IDEXX Quanti-Tray
2000 (IDEXX, Westbrook, ME). Blue colonies on Petrifilm plates were most reliably
identified as E. coli when accompanied by gas formation, as determined by
characterization of the colonies on MacConkey agar plates (PML Microbiologicals, 
Mississauga, ON, Canada) and by polymerase chair reaction (PCR) with E.
coli-specific primers. The main disadvantage of Petrifilm plates for
environmental water testing is the small volume (1 mL per sample) that can be
tested; however, the plates appear to be suitable for screening and locating
sites that exceed criteria for total body and partial body contact. Simplicity of
use and storage, reliability, and relatively low cost make Petrifilm plates
suitable for volunteer-based and educational water quality monitoring
applications, particularly when used as a preliminary screening method to
identify problem sites.

DOI: 10.2134/jeq2003.3680 
PMID: 12549577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

