
1. Cytotherapy. 2002;4(6):539-49.

Catastrophic failures of freezing bags for cellular therapy products:
description, cause, and consequences.

Khuu HM(1), Cowley H, David-Ocampo V, Carter CS, Kasten-Sportes C, Wayne AS,
Solomon SR, Bishop MR, Childs RM, Read EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transfusion Medicine, Warren G. Magnuson Clinical Center,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND: Container integrity is critical for maintaining sterility of
cryopreserved cellular therapy products. We investigated a series of catastrophic
bag failures, first noticed in early 2001.
METHODS: Process records were reviewed for all PBPC and lymphocyte products
cryopreserved in bags from January 2000 through April 2002. Patient charts were
also reviewed.
RESULTS: One thousand two hundred and four bags were removed from storage for
infusion to 261 patients. All products had been cryopreserved in Cryocyte
poly(ethylene co-vinyl acetate) (EVA) bags in either 10% DMSO or 5% DMSO and 6%
pentastarch. Product volumes were 25-75 mL, and bags were stored with overwrap
bags in a liquid nitrogen tank. From January 2000 to April 2001, failure occurred
in 10 of 599 (1.7%) bags. From May 2001 to April 2002, 58 of 605 (9.6%) bags
failed, typically with extensive fractures that were visible before thaw. Of the 
58 that failed, 24 were salvaged by aseptic methods and infused to patients under
antibiotic coverage; 10 of those 24 (42%) had positive bacterial cultures. Bag
failures were not related to product type, cryoprotectant solution, liquid versus
vapor storage, or freezer location. Failures were linked to use of four Cryocyte 
bag lots manufactured in 2000 and 2001. After replacing these lots with a 1999
Cryocyte lot and with KryoSafe polyfluoroethylene polyfluoropropylene (FEP) bags,
no more failures occurred in 75 and 102 bags, respectively, thawed through April 
2002.
DISCUSSION: High rates of bag failure were associated with four Cryocyte bag
lots. No serious adverse patient effects occurred, but bag failures led to
microbial contamination, increased product preparation time, increased antibiotic
use, and increased resource expenditure to replace products.

DOI: 10.1080/146532402761624700 
PMID: 12568990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

