
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 11;278(15):12864-72. Epub 2003 Jan 31.

Homologous binding sites in yeast isocitrate dehydrogenase for cofactor (NAD+)
and allosteric activator (AMP).

Lin AP(1), McAlister-Henn L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, Texas 78229-7760, USA.

Yeast NAD(+)-specific isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) is an allosterically
regulated octameric enzyme composed of two types of homologous subunits
designated IDH1 and IDH2. Based on sequence comparisons and structural models,
both subunits are predicted to have adenine nucleotide binding sites. This was
tested by alanine replacement of residues in putative sites in each subunit.
Targets included adjacent aspartate/isoleucine residues implicated as important
for determining cofactor specificity in related dehydrogenases and a residue in
each IDH subunit in a position occupied by histidine in other cofactor binding
sites. The primary kinetic effects of D286A/I287A and of H281A replacements in
IDH2 were found to be a dramatic reduction in apparent affinity of the holoenzyme
for NAD(+) and a concomitant reduction in V(max). Ligand binding assays also
showed that the H281A mutant enzyme fails to bind NAD(+) under conditions that
are saturating for the wild-type enzyme. In contrast, the primary effect of
corresponding D279A/D280A and of R274A replacements in IDH1 is a reduction in
holoenzyme binding of AMP, with concomitant alterations in kinetic and isocitrate
binding properties normally associated with activation by this allosteric
effector. These results suggest that the nucleotide cofactor binding site is
primarily contributed by the IDH2 subunit, whereas the homologous nucleotide
binding site in IDH1 has evolved for regulatory binding of AMP. These results are
consistent with previous studies demonstrating that the catalytic isocitrate
binding sites are comprised of residues primarily contributed by IDH2, whereas
sites for regulatory binding of isocitrate are contributed by analogous residues 
of IDH1. In this study, we also demonstrate that a prerequisite for holoenzyme
binding of NAD(+) is binding of isocitrate/Mg(2+) at the IDH2 catalytic site.
This is comparable to the dependence of AMP binding upon binding of isocitrate at
the IDH1 regulatory site.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M300154200 
PMID: 12562755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

