
1. J Immunol. 2003 Feb 15;170(4):1659-66.

A unique population of extrathymically derived alpha beta TCR+CD4-CD8- T cells
with regulatory functions dominates the mouse female genital tract.

Johansson M(1), Lycke N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, University of Göteborg, S-413 46 Göteborg, 
Sweden. tina.johansson@microbio.gu.se

A better understanding of the regulatory role of genital tract T cells is much
needed. In this study, we have analyzed the phenotype, distribution, and function
of T lymphocytes in the female genital tract of naive, pregnant, or Chlamydia
trachomatis-infected C57BL/6 mice. Unexpectedly, we found that the dominant
lymphocyte population (70-90%) in the genital tract was that of
CD3(+)alphabetaTCR(int)CD4(-)CD8(-) T cells. Moreover, these cells were CD90(low)
but negative for the classical T cell markers CD2 and CD5. The CD3(+)B220(low)
cells were NK1.1 negative and found in nude mice as well as in mice deficient for
MHC class II, beta(2)-microglobulin, and CD1, indicating extrathymic origin. They
dominated the KJ126(+)Vbeta8.2(+) population in the genital tract of DO11.10 OVA 
TCR-transgenic mice, further supporting the idea that the CD3(+)B220(low) cells
are truly T cells. The function of these T cells appeared not to be associated
with immune protection, because only CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells increased in the
genital tract following chlamydial infection. Notwithstanding this, the infected,
as well as the uninfected and the pregnant, uterus was dominated by a high level 
of the CD3(+)CD4(-)CD8(-)B220(low) cells. Following in vitro Ag or polyclonal
stimulation of the CD3(+)CD4(-)CD8(-)B220(low) cells, poor proliferative
responses were observed. However, these cells strongly impaired splenic T cell
proliferation in a cell density-dependent manner. A large fraction of the cells
expressed CD25 and produced IFN-gamma upon anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 stimulation,
arguing for a strong regulatory role of this novel T cell population in the mouse
female genital tract.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.4.1659 
PMID: 12574328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

