
1. J Immunol. 2003 Feb 15;170(4):2053-63.

Role of CD4 T cell help and costimulation in CD8 T cell responses during Listeria
monocytogenes infection.

Shedlock DJ(1), Whitmire JK, Tan J, MacDonald AS, Ahmed R, Shen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
3610 Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6076, USA.

CD4 T cells are known to assist the CD8 T cell response by activating APC via
CD40-CD40 ligand (L) interactions. However, recent data have shown that bacterial
products can directly activate APC through Toll-like receptors, resulting in
up-regulation of costimulatory molecules necessary for the efficient priming of
naive T cells. It remains unclear what role CD4 T cell help and various
costimulation pathways play in the development of CD8 T cell responses during
bacterial infection. In this study, we examined these questions using an
intracellular bacterium, Listeria monocytogenes, as a model of infection. In CD4 
T cell-depleted, CD4(-/-), and MHC class II(-/-) mice, L. monocytogenes infection
induced CD8 T cell activation and primed epitope-specific CD8 T cells to levels
commensurate with those in normal C57BL/6 mice. Furthermore, these
epitope-specific CD8 T cells established long-term memory in CD4(-/-) mice that
was capable of mounting a protective recall response. In vitro analysis showed
that L. monocytogenes directly stimulated the activation and maturation of murine
dendritic cells. The CD8 T cell response to L. monocytogenes was normal in
CD40L(-/-) mice but defective in CD28(-/-) and CD137L(-/-) mice. These data show 
that in situations where infectious agents or immunogens can directly activate
APC, CD8 T cell responses are less dependent on CD4 T cell help via the
CD40-CD40L pathway but involve costimulation through CD137-CD137L and B7-CD28
interactions.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.4.2053 
PMID: 12574376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

