
1. J Immunol. 2003 Feb 15;170(4):1958-63.

CD4+ T cells mediate abscess formation in intra-abdominal sepsis by an
IL-17-dependent mechanism.

Chung DR(1), Kasper DL, Panzo RJ, Chitnis T, Grusby MJ, Sayegh MH, Tzianabos AO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2003 Apr 15;170(8):4411. Chtinis, T [corrected to Chitnis, T].

Abscess formation associated with intra-abdominal sepsis causes severe morbidity 
and can be fatal. Previous studies have implicated T cells in the pathogenesis of
abscess formation, and we have recently shown that CD4(+) T cells activated in
vitro by zwitterionic capsular polysaccharides from abscess-inducing bacteria
such as Staphylococcus aureus and Bacteroides fragilis initiate this host
response when transferred to naive rats. In this study, we show that mice
deficient in alphabetaTCR-bearing T cells or CD4(+) T cells fail to develop
abscesses following challenge with B. fragilis or abscess-inducing zwitterionic
polysaccharides, compared with CD8(-/-) or wild-type animals. Transfer of CD4(+) 
T cells from wild-type mice to alphabetaTCR(-/-) animals reconstituted this
ability. The induction of abscesses required T cell costimulation via the CD28-B7
pathway, and T cell transfer experiments with STAT4(-/-) and STAT6(-/-) mice
demonstrated that this host response is dependent on STAT4 signaling.
Significantly higher levels of IL-17, a proinflammatory cytokine produced almost 
exclusively by activated CD4(+) T cells, were associated with abscess formation
in Th2-impaired (STAT6(-/-)) mice, while STAT4(-/-) mice had significantly lower 
levels of this cytokine than control animals. The formation of abscesses was
preceded by an increase in the number of activated CD4(+) T cells in the
peritoneal cavity 24 h following bacterial challenge. Confocal laser-scanning
microscopy analysis revealed that CD4(+) T cells comprise the abscess wall in
these animals and produce IL-17 at this site. Administration of a neutralizing Ab
specific for IL-17 prevented abscess formation following bacterial challenge in
mice. These data delineate the specific T cell response necessary for the
development of intra-abdominal abscesses and underscore the role of IL-17 in this
disease process.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.4.1958 
PMID: 12574364  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

