
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 18;278(16):13819-28. Epub 2003 Feb 6.

PNUTS, a protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) nuclear targeting subunit. Characterization 
of its PP1- and RNA-binding domains and regulation by phosphorylation.

Kim YM(1), Watanabe T, Allen PB, Kim YM, Lee SJ, Greengard P, Nairn AC, Kwon YG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Natural Sciences, Kangwon National
University, Chunchon, Kangwon-Do 200-701, Korea.

PNUTS, Phosphatase 1 NUclear Targeting Subunit, is a recently described protein
that targets protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) to the nucleus. In the present study, we
characterized the biochemical properties of PNUTS. A variety of truncation and
site-directed mutants of PNUTS was prepared and expressed either as glutathione
S-transferase fusion proteins in Escherichia coli or as FLAG-tagged proteins in
293T cells. A 50-amino acid domain in the center of PNUTS mediated both high
affinity PP1 binding and inhibition of PP1 activity. The PP1-binding domain is
related to a motif found in several other PP1-binding proteins but is distinct in
that Trp replaces Phe. Mutation of the Trp residue essentially abolished the
ability of PNUTS to bind to and inhibit PP1. The central PP1-binding domain of
PNUTS was an effective substrate for protein kinase A in vitro, and
phosphorylation substantially reduced the ability of PNUTS to bind to PP1 in
vitro and following stimulation of protein kinase A in intact cells. In vitro RNA
binding experiments showed that a C-terminal region including several RGG motifs 
and a novel repeat domain rich in His and Gly interacted with mRNA and
single-stranded DNA. PNUTS exhibited selective binding for poly(A) and poly(G)
compared with poly(U) or poly(C) ribonucleotide homopolymers, with specificity
being mediated by distinct regions within the domain rich in His and Gly and the 
domain containing the RGG motifs. Finally, a PNUTS-PP1 complex was isolated from 
mammalian cell lysates using RNA-conjugated beads. Together, these studies
support a role for PNUTS in protein kinase A-regulated targeting of PP1 to
specific RNA-associated complexes in the nucleus.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M209621200 
PMID: 12574161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

