
1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2003 Jan 28;218(2):385-93.

Regulation of the flavorubredoxin nitric oxide reductase gene in Escherichia
coli: nitrate repression, nitrite induction, and possible post-transcription
control.

da Costa PN(1), Teixeira M, Saraiva LM.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Tecnologia Qui;mica e Biol√≥gica, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Rua
da Quinta Grande 6, 2780-156, Oeiras, Portugal.

Escherichia coli flavorubredoxin is a new type of cytoplasmic nitric oxide (NO)
reductase, which shows NO reductase activity within the range of the canonical
membrane-bound heme b(3)-iron NO reductases. Using reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction we show that although the flavorubredoxin gene (flrd)
is transcribed in both aerobic and anaerobic conditions, anaerobiosis induced
transcription up to 12-fold, under fermentative conditions; a 28-fold stimulation
was observed in an E. coli fnr mutant strain, showing that the flavorubredoxin
gene is negatively regulated by FNR. The level of anaerobic transcription was
repressed three-fold by nitrate, but induced 47-fold by nitrite. The
transcription factors NarL and NarP are not essential for flrd expression.
Furthermore, the addition of NO within the physiological range of concentrations 
does not induce anaerobic transcription of flrd. Since two other E. coli proteins
are known to exhibit NO reductase activity, flavohemoglobin and the pentaheme
cytochrome c nitrite reductase, we have also compared the concentrations of their
mRNAs with those of flavorubredoxin, under the same growth conditions.
Transcription of the putative transcriptional activator of flavorubredoxin, ygaA,
is also regulated by the absence of oxygen and the presence of nitrite. Levels of
FlRd protein did not correlate with mRNA levels. The results reveal that a
complex regulation of flavorubredoxin expression is operative, possibly by both
transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1016/S0378-1097(02)01186-2 
PMID: 12586421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

