
1. Scand J Immunol. 2003 Feb;57(2):99-106.

Pharmacological disintegration of lipid rafts decreases specific tetramer binding
and disrupts the CD3 complex and CD8 heterodimer in human cytotoxic T
lymphocytes.

Uhlin M(1), Masucci MG, Levitsky V.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumorbiology Center, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Accumulating evidence strongly supports the role of lipid rafts in the regulation
of T-lymphocyte activation, but the organization and molecular composition of
these cholesterol- and sphingolipid-rich membrane microdomains in different
subsets of T cells remain poorly investigated. Here, we show that pharmacological
disruption of lipid rafts in human CD8+ cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) clones
disturbs the integrity of CD3 complex and CD8 heterodimer, without affecting the 
reactivity with T-cell receptor (TCR)-specific antibodies. This demonstrates that
interaction with completely assembled CD3 complex is not required for the stable 
expression of TCR at the cell surface. The effect of raft disruption on CD3 and
CD8 expression correlates with failure to bind specific tetrameric complexes by a
proportion of surface TCR molecules. However, the interaction of specific
tetramer with the rest of surface TCR pools appears to be unaffected,
demonstrating that TCR-signalling complexes may differ in their requirement for
cholesterol to stably maintain their composition and to rearrange for efficient
tetramer binding. Together with previously published data, our results support
the existence of molecular and/or structural heterogeneity of lipid rafts that
may play an important role in controlling distinct functional properties of
T-cell subsets.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3083.2003.01188.x 
PMID: 12588655  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

