
1. Hum Immunol. 2003 Mar;64(3):378-84.

Distribution of MICA alleles and haplotypes associated with HLA in the Korean
population.

Pyo CW(1), Hur SS, Kim YK, Choi HB, Kim TY, Kim TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, South Korea.

The MICA (MHC class I chain-related gene A) is a polymorphic gene located 46 kb
centromeric of the HLA-B gene, and is preferentially expressed in epithelial
cells and intestinal mucosa. The MICA gene, similar to human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) class I, displays a high degree of genetic polymorphism in exons 2, 3, 4,
and 5, amounting to 54 alleles. In this study, we investigated the polymorphisms 
at exons coding for extracellular domains (exons 2, 3, and 4), and the GCT repeat
polymorphism at the transmembrane (exon 5) of MICA in 199 unrelated healthy
Koreans. Eight alleles were observed in the Korean population, with allele
frequencies for MICA*010, MICA*00201, MICA*027, MICA*004, MICA*012, MICA*00801,
MICA*00901, and MICA*00701 being 18.3%, 17.8%, 13.6%, 12.3%, 11.1%, 10.8%, 10.6%,
and 3.3%, respectively. Strong linkage disequilibria were also observed between
the MICA and HLA-B gene-MICA*00201-B58, MICA*004-B44, MICA*00701-B27,
MICA*00801-B60, MICA*00901-B51, MICA*010-B62, MICA*012-B54, and MICA*027-B61. In 
the analysis of the haplotypes of HLA class I genes (HLA-A, B, and C) and the
MICA, the most common haplotype was MICA*004-A33-B44-Cw*07, followed by
MICA*00201-A2-B58-Cw*0302 and MICA*012-A2-B54-Cw*0102. The MICA null haplotype
might be identified in the HLA-B48 homozygous individual. These results will
provide an understanding of the role of MICA in transplantation, disease
association, and population analyses in Koreans.

DOI: 10.1016/s0198-8859(02)00826-1 
PMID: 12590984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

