
1. Digestion. 2002;66(4):246-56.

Inhibition of intestinal bacterial translocation with rifaximin modulates lamina 
propria monocytic cells reactivity and protects against inflammation in a rodent 
model of colitis.

Fiorucci S(1), Distrutti E, Mencarelli A, Barbanti M, Palazzini E, Morelli A.

Author information: 
(1)Clinica di Gastroenterologia ed Epatologia, Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica, 
Sperimentale e Farmacologia, Universit√† di Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
fiorucci@unipg.it

BACKGROUND: A modification of the intestinal flora and an increased bacterial
translocation is a common finding in patients with inflammatory bowel disease as 
well as in animal model of colitis. Rifaximin, a non-absorbable derivative of
rifamycin, is an effective antibiotic that acts by inhibiting bacterial
ribonucleic acid synthesis.
AIMS: In the present study, we investigated the effect of the administration of
rifaximin (10, 30 and 50 mg/kg/day) or prednisolone (10 mg/kg/day) in
2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS)-induced colitis in mice.
METHODS: Colitis was induced in mice by intrarectal administration of TNBS (1.5
mg/mouse in 50% ethanol) and disease severity assessed clinically and by
histologic scoring of colon damage, determination of interleukin (IL)-2, IL-12,
interferon (IFN)-gamma and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha (protein and mRNA
and myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity in the colon. Cytokines production by the
lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMC) and luminal bacteria were also measured.
RESULTS: Rifaximin administration (30 or 50 mg/kg/day) increased survival rates
of colitic mice and reduced colitis severity as demonstrated by improvement of
wasting syndrome, histologic scores, decrease in colon IL-2, IL-12, IFN-gamma and
TNF-alpha (protein and mRNA) levels, and diminished colon MPO activity. Rifaximin
administration caused a significant reduction of colon bacterial translocation
towards mesenteric lymph nodes. LPMC obtained from rifaximin-treated mice
released significantly lower amount of IFN-gamma in response to ex vivo
stimulation with agonistic anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies. Rifaximin (50
mg/kg/day) significantly accelerates recovery in mice with established colitis.
CONCLUSIONS: Luminal bacterial microflora plays a role in the pathogenesis of
TNBS-induced colitis in mice. Rifaximin administration reduces the development of
colitis and accelerates healing of established disease by preventing bacterial
translocation.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000068362 
PMID: 12592101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

