
1. Surg Infect (Larchmt). 2000;1(1):49-56.

The consequences of suppression of anaerobic bacteria.

Fry DE(1), Schermer CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of New Mexico School of Medicine,
Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA. dfry@salud.umn.edu

Anaerobic bacteria such as Bacteroides fragilis, Peptostreptococcus species, and 
Fusobacterium species, when accompanied by aerobic bacteria or in the presence of
dead tissue, can cause severe infections. This article discusses the most common 
type of anaerobic infection, i.e., infection after colonic contamination of the
abdominal cavity and soft tissues. Colonic anaerobes rarely cause infections as
solitary pathogens. Mixed infections of aerobes and anaerobes are treated by
source control, surgical drainage and debridement, and combination antibiotic
therapy. Antimicrobial treatment should cover both anaerobes and aerobes;
treatment of mixed infections with anti-anaerobic agents alone is likely to
result in abscess formation. Recent trends toward cost cutting and the advent of 
antibiotics with good coverage of both aerobes and relevant pathogenic anaerobes 
have led to increased single-agent therapy with cefoxitin, cefotetan,
ampicillin/sulbactam, imipenem/cilastatin, ticarcillin/clavulanate,
trovafloxacin/alatrofloxacin, and piperacillin/tazobactam. In the past 15 years, 
research has begun to focus on the gut barrier, particularly on the beneficial
effects of anaerobic microflora. Directing antibiotic therapy against the
anaerobe when it is involved in clinical infection is important; however, the
negative consequences of anti-anaerobic antibiotic therapy on the beneficial
effects of normal distal gut colonization must also be considered.

DOI: 10.1089/109629600321290 
PMID: 12594909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

