
1. J Periodontal Res. 2003 Apr;38(2):191-7.

Capsular polysaccharide from Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans inhibits IL-6
and IL-8 production in human gingival fibroblast.

Ohguchi Y(1), Ishihara Y, Ohguchi M, Koide M, Shirozu N, Naganawa T, Nishihara T,
Noguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, Aichi-Gakuin University,
Nagoya, Japan.

We previously reported that a capsular polysaccharide (CP) from Actinobacillus
actinomycetemcomitans Y4 induces bone resorption in a mouse organ culture system 
and osteoclast formation in mouse bone marrow cultures. However, the effects of
A. actinomycetemcomitans Y4 CP on human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) are still
unclear. The present study was undertaken to test the hypothesis that A.
actinomycetemcomitans Y4 CP alters the production of inflammatory cytokines, such
as interleukin-6 (IL-6) and IL-8 by HGF. When HGF were cultured with various
concentrations of Y4 CP for 24 h, IL-6 and IL-8 production decreased in a
concentration-dependent manner. Y4 CP (100 microg/ml) suppressed the release of
IL-6 from 9.09 +/- 0.08 ng/ml to 0.34 +/- 0.21 ng/ml (P < 0.01) and IL-8
production decreased from 3.76 +/- 0.03 ng/ml to 0.09 +/- 0.01 ng/ml (P < 0.01). 
Y4 CP suppressed 70-80% of the release of IL-6 and IL-8 from HGF stimulated with 
Y4 lipopolysaccharide (LPS), too. Interestingly, anti-A. actinomycetemcomitans Y4
CP completely inhibited the effect of A. actinomycetemcomitans Y4 CP on IL-6 and 
IL-8 production from HGF. These results indicate that Y4 CP inhibits the release 
of IL-6 and IL-8 from HGF, suggesting that A. actinomycetemcomitans Y4 modulates 
the inflammatory response in periodontitis. Remarkably, this inhibitory effect
was reversed by specific anti-A. actinomycetemcomitans Y4 CP suggesting an
important relationship between the organism and the humoral host response.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0765.2003.00656.x 
PMID: 12608914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

