
1. Blood. 2003 Jun 15;101(12):4823-7. Epub 2003 Feb 27.

Aggravation of endotoxin-induced disseminated intravascular coagulation and
cytokine activation in heterozygous protein-C-deficient mice.

Levi M(1), DÃ¶rffler-Melly J, Reitsma P, Buller H, Florquin S, van der Poll T,
Carmeliet P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine/Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. m.m.levi@amc.uva.nl

In the pathogenesis of sepsis and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC),
dysfunctional anticoagulant pathways are important. The function of the protein C
system in DIC is impaired because of low levels of protein C and down-regulation 
of thrombomodulin. The administration of (activated) protein C results in an
improved outcome in experimental and clinical studies of DIC. It is unknown
whether congenital deficiencies in the protein C system are associated with more 
severe DIC. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of a
heterozygous deficiency of protein C on experimental DIC in mice. Mice with
single-allele targeted disruption of the protein C gene (PC+/-) mice and
wild-type littermates (PC+/+) were injected with Escherichia coli endotoxin (50
mg/kg) intraperitoneally. PC+/-mice had more severe DIC, as evidenced by a
greater decrease in fibrinogen level and a larger drop in platelet count.
Histologic examination showed more fibrin deposition in lungs, kidneys, and liver
in mice with a heterozygous deficiency of protein C. Interestingly, PC+/- mice
had significantly higher levels of proinflammatory cytokines, tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and IL-1beta, indicating an
interaction between the protein C system and the inflammatory response. Survival 
was lower at 12 and 24 hours after endotoxin in the PC+/- mice. These results
confirm the important role of the protein C system in the
coagulative-inflammatory response on endotoxemia and may suggest that congenital 
deficiencies in the protein C system are associated with more severe DIC and
adverse outcome in sepsis.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2002-10-3254 
PMID: 12609841  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

