
1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Nov 25;82(22):1541-5.

[Construction, bioactivity identification and structural characteristics analysis
of a novel recombinant immunosuppression protein B7-2-L-PE40KDEL].

[Article in Chinese]

Yuan Z(1), Xi Y, Zhang H, Kong F, Guan H, Guo S, Liu N, Liang F, Sun Y, Cui J.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Hospital of Academy of Military Medical Science, National Center of
Biomedical Analysis Laboratory of Immunoassay, Beijing 100039, China.

OBJECTIVE: To construct a novel recombinant B7-2-L- PE40KDEL fusion protein used 
to selectively kill T cells expressing high levels of CD28 so as to induce immune
tolerance and prevent graft versus host disease (GVHD) and host versus graft
disease (HVGD).
METHODS: The cDNA encoding human B7-2 was ligated with cDNA encoding PE40KDEL by 
using sequence overlapping extension (SOE) techniques. The gene of interest was
subcloned into a high output expression vector pRSETA and transformed into E.
coli cells. Its molecular structural characteristics, such as flexibility,
antigenicity, hydrophilicity, and epitope were analyzed. The purification
protocol of expressed protein was established and its cytotoxicity to selectively
kill T cells expressing high levels of CD28 was measured by MTT method.
RESULTS: B7-2-L-PE40KDEL fusion protein was expressed at high levels in E. coli
cells and the purified product attained over 95% of purity. The structural
characteristics of B7-2-L-PE40KDEL were not significantly changed in comparison
with B7-2 and PE40KDEL. In cytotoxicity assay, B7-2-L-PE40KDEL fusion protein
specifically killed Jurkat cells which express high level CD28 receptor and was
non-cytotoxic to CD28 receptor-negative cell line Raji.
CONCLUSION: B7-2-L-PE40KDEL novel fusion protein can selectively kill the T cells
which express CD28 receptor and may become a kind of new effective drug for
inducing T cell immune tolerance and preventing GVHD and HVGD.


PMID: 12609063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

