
1. Eur Respir J. 2003 Feb;21(2):294-302.

Community-acquired pneumonia in the elderly: Spanish multicentre study.

Zalacain R(1), Torres A, Celis R, Blanquer J, Aspa J, Esteban L, Menéndez R,
Blanquer R, Borderías L; Pneumonia in the elderly working group, Area de
Tuberculosis e Infecciones Respiratorias.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital de Cruces, Bilbao, Spain. ssepar@separ.es

Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) in the elderly has increased as a consequence 
of an overall increase of the elderly population. A controversy about the
aetiology and outcome of CAP in this population still exists and more
epidemiological studies are needed. A prospective, 12-month, multicentre study
was carried out to assess the clinical characteristics, aetiology, evolution and 
prognostic factors of elderly patients (> or = 65 yrs) admitted to hospital for
CAP. The study included 503 patients (age 76 +/- 7 yrs). The clinical picture
lasted < or = 5 days in 318 (63%) and the main clinical features were cough (n = 
407, 81%) and fever (n = 380, 76%). Aetiological diagnosis was achieved in 199
(40%) cases, with a definite diagnosis obtained in 164 (33%). Of the 223
microorganisms isolated the main agents found were Streptococcus pneumoniae in 98
(49%) and Haemophilus influenzae in 27 (14%). A total of 53 patients died (11%)
and the multivariate analysis showed the following factors of bad prognosis:
previous bed confinement, alteration in mental status, absence of chills, plasma 
creatinine > or = 1.4 mg x dL(-1), oxygen tension in arterial blood/inspiratorv
oxygen fraction ratio < 200 at the time of admission, and shock and renal failure
during the evolution. The results of this study may aid in the management of
empiric antibiotic treatment in elderly patients with community-acquired
pneumonia and the patients who have a greater probability of bad evolution may be
identified based on the risk factors.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.03.00064102 
PMID: 12608444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

