
1. Atherosclerosis. 2003 Mar;167(1):25-32.

CCR5 deficiency is not protective in the early stages of atherogenesis in apoE
knockout mice.

Kuziel WA(1), Dawson TC, Quinones M, Garavito E, Chenaux G, Ahuja SS, Reddick RL,
Maeda N.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and Institute of Cellular and
Molecular Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Station A5000,
Austin 78712, USA. wakuziel@mail.utexas.edu

The accumulation of macrophages and T lymphocytes in vessel walls is a hallmark
of atherogenesis. It has recently been demonstrated in mouse models of
atherosclerosis that full disease potential is dependent on several regulators of
leukocyte trafficking, including the chemokine monocyte chemotactic protein 1
(MCP-1) and the chemokine receptors CCR2 and CXCR2. A possible role for the
chemokine receptor CCR5 in atherogenesis has been suggested by CCR5 expression on
macrophages, T cells, coronary endothelial cells and aortic smooth muscle cells
and by the presence of CCR5 ligands in atherosclerotic plaques. Moreover,
individuals who are naturally deficient in CCR5 were reported to be at reduced
risk for severe coronary artery disease (CAD) and early myocardial infarction
(MI). To investigate whether CCR5 is pro-atherogenic in mice, we generated
CCR5-deficient mice and crossed them with atherosclerosis-prone apoE-deficient
mice. Although CCR5-deficient mice exhibit defects in induced macrophage
trafficking, mean atherosclerotic lesion area did not differ significantly
between apoE-deficient mice and apoE/CCR5-deficient mice after 16 weeks on a diet
of normal chow. Ribonuclease protection assays (RPA) on RNA isolated from plaques
from both apoE-deficient and apoE/CCR5-deficient animals showed strong signals
for the macrophage marker F4/80 but no evidence for expression of prominent
markers of T and B lymphocytes. These results indicate that the early stages of
plaque formation in this model of lipid-mediated atherogenesis do not depend on
CCR5.

DOI: 10.1016/s0021-9150(02)00382-9 
PMID: 12618265  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

