
1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2003 Feb;31(4):253-61.

Low-intensity conditioning and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in
patients with renal and colon carcinoma.

Hentschke P(1), Barkholt L, Uzunel M, Mattsson J, Wersäll P, Pisa P, Martola J,
Albiin N, Wernerson A, Söderberg M, Remberger M, Thörne A, Ringdén O.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Allogenic Stem Cell Transplantation and Division of Immunology,
Microbiology and Pathology, Huddinge University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Comment in
    Bone Marrow Transplant. 2004 Jan;33(2):255-6; author reply 257-8.

We have evaluated whether allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
(HSCT) could induce an antitumor effect in patients with metastatic solid tumors.
A total of 12 HLA-identical siblings and 6 HLA-A-, -B- and -DR beta 1-compatible 
unrelated grafts were used. Diagnoses were adenocarcinoma of kidney (n=10), colon
(n=6), breast (n=1) and cholangiocarcinoma (n=1). Conditioning was fludarabine 30
mg/m(2)/day for 3 days and 2 Gy of total body irradiation. Recipients of
unrelated HSCT were also given thymoglobuline and two additional days of
fludarabine. The median CD34+ cell dose was 7.5 x 10(6)/kg. Immunosuppression was
mycophenolate mofetil and cyclosporin. Among all, 12 patients became complete
donor chimeras within a median of 28, 29 and 65 days for B, myeloid and T cells, 
respectively. Two patients rejected the grafts, one developed marrow aplasia and 
three were mixed chimeras. The probability of grades II-IV acute
graft-versus-host-disease (GVHD) was 57%. Regression of all tumor metastases was 
seen in one patient with colon carcinoma. Another patient with colon and two with
renal carcinoma had regression of lung metastases, but progression of metastases 
in the liver and/or bone. Necrosis of lung metastasis was found in one further
patient with renal carcinoma who died of graft-versus-host-disease (GVHD). In
all, 10 patients died; four of transplant-related complications, one of trauma
and five of progressive disease. Thus, progression was common after allogeneic
HSCT in unselected patients with advanced solid tumors. However, the regression
of some metastases associated with GVHD provides suggestive evidence that the
GVHD effect may occur in renal and colon adenocarcinoma using reduced intensity
conditioning.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1703811 
PMID: 12621459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

