
1. J Immunol. 2003 Apr 1;170(7):3645-52.

TGF beta 1 inhibits Ca2+-calcineurin-mediated activation in thymocytes.

Bommireddy R(1), Ormsby I, Yin M, Boivin GP, Babcock GF, Doetschman T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0524, USA.

TGFbeta1 is a polypeptide growth modulatory and differentiation factor involved
in many biological processes including immune homeostasis and self-tolerance.
Tgfb1 knockout mice die around weaning age due to severe inflammation in most
major organ systems, but the mechanism underlying this disease is not understood.
In this study we demonstrate that Tgfb1(-/-) CD4(+)CD8(+) and CD4(+)CD8(-)
thymocytes are hyperresponsive to receptor-mediated and receptor-independent
mitogenic stimulation. A suboptimal concentration of ionomycin in the presence of
PMA fully activates Tgfb1(-/-) thymocytes, whereas the inhibitors of Ca(2+)
influx and calcineurin, EGTA and FK506, eliminate the hyperresponsiveness. Hence,
the hypersensitivity of Tgfb1(-/-) thymocytes is due to a lowered threshold for
Ca(2+)-dependent activation. Further, we demonstrate that the hypersensitivity of
thymocytes results from the absence of TGFbeta1 and not from the inflammatory
environment because the thymocytes are hyperresponsive in preinflammatory-stage
Tgfb1(-/-) mice. Our results suggest for the first time that TGFbeta1 functions
to inhibit aberrant T cell expansion by maintaining intracellular calcium
concentration levels low enough to prevent a mitogenic response by
Ca(2+)-independent stimulatory pathways alone. Consequently, TGFbeta1 prevents
autoimmune disease through a Ca(2+) regulatory pathway that maintains the
activation threshold above that inducible by self-MHC-TCR interactions.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.7.3645 
PMCID: PMC2804068
PMID: 12646629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

