
1. Infect Immun. 2003 Apr;71(4):1944-52.

Autodisplay: development of an efficacious system for surface display of
antigenic determinants in Salmonella vaccine strains.

Kramer U(1), Rizos K, Apfel H, Autenrieth IB, Lattemann CT.

Author information: 
(1)Institut f체r Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Krankenhaushygiene, Universit채t
T체bingen, D-72076 T체bingen, Germany.

To optimize antigen delivery by Salmonella vaccine strains, a system for surface 
display of antigenic determinants was established by using the autotransporter
secretion pathway of gram-negative bacteria. A modular system for surface display
allowed effective targeting of heterologous antigens or fragments thereof to the 
bacterial surface by the autotransporter domain of AIDA-I, the Escherichia coli
adhesin involved in diffuse adherence. A major histocompatibility complex class
II-restricted epitope, comprising amino acids 74 to 86 of the Yersinia
enterocolitica heat shock protein Hsp60 (Hsp60(74-86)), was fused to the AIDA-I
autotransporter domain, and the resulting fusion protein was expressed at high
levels on the cell surface of E. coli and Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium. Colonization studies in mice vaccinated with Salmonella strains
expressing AIDA-I fusion proteins demonstrated high genetic stability of the
generated vaccine strain in vivo. Furthermore, a pronounced T-cell response
against Yersinia Hsp60(74-86) was induced in mice vaccinated with a Salmonella
vaccine strain expressing the Hsp60(74-86)-AIDA-I fusion protein. This was shown 
by monitoring Yersinia Hsp60-stimulated IFN-gamma secretion and proliferation of 
splenic T cells isolated from vaccinated mice. These results demonstrate that the
surface display of antigenic determinants by the autotransporter pathway deserves
special attention regarding the application in live attenuated Salmonella vaccine
strains.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.71.4.1944-1952.2003 
PMCID: PMC152032
PMID: 12654812  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

