
1. Infect Immun. 2003 Apr;71(4):2087-94.

Pneumolysin-dependent and -independent gene expression identified by cDNA
microarray analysis of THP-1 human mononuclear cells stimulated by Streptococcus 
pneumoniae.

Rogers PD(1), Thornton J, Barker KS, McDaniel DO, Sacks GS, Swiatlo E, McDaniel
LS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.

Pneumolysin is an important virulence factor of Streptococcus pneumoniae,
interacting with the membranes of host cells to elicit a multitude of
inflammatory responses. We used cDNA microarrays to identify genes which are
responsive to S. pneumoniae in a pneumolysin-dependent and -independent fashion. 
The THP-1 human monocytic cell line was coincubated for 3 h with medium alone,
with the virulent type 2 S. pneumoniae strain D39, or with the isogenic strain
PLN, which does not express pneumolysin. RNA was isolated from the monocytes and 
hybridized on cDNA microarrays. Of 4,133 genes evaluated, 142 were found to be
responsive in a pneumolysin-dependent fashion, whereas 40 were found to be
responsive independent of pneumolysin. Genes that were up-regulated in cells
exposed to D39 relative to those exposed to PLN included genes encoding proteins 
such as mannose binding lectin 1, lysozyme, alpha-1 catenin, cadherin 17,
caspases 4 and 6, macrophage inflammatory protein 1beta (MIP-1beta), interleukin 
8 (IL-8), monocyte chemotactic protein 3 (MCP-3), IL-2 receptor beta (IL-2Rbeta),
IL-15 receptor alpha (IL-15Ralpha), interferon receptor 2, and prostaglandin E
synthase. Down-regulated genes included those encoding complement component
receptor 2/CD21, platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase, and oxidized
low-density lipoprotein receptor 1 (OLR1). Pneumolysin-independent responses
included down-regulation of the genes encoding CD68, CD53, CD24, transforming
growth factor beta2, and signal transducers and activators of transcription 1.
These results demonstrate the striking effects of pneumolysin on the host cell
upon exposure to S. pneumoniae.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.71.4.2087-2094.2003 
PMCID: PMC152049
PMID: 12654830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

