
1. Plant Cell Physiol. 2003 Mar;44(3):269-76.

Molecular characterization and redox regulation of phosphoribulokinase from the
cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC 7942.

Kobayashi D(1), Tamoi M, Iwaki T, Shigeoka S, Wadano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biochemistry, Graduate School of Agriculture and
Bioscience, Osaka Prefecture University, Gakuen-cho 1-1 Sakai, Osaka, 599-8531
Japan.

We isolated and characterized a gene encoding phosphoribulokinase (PRK) from
Synechococcus sp. PCC 7942. The isolated sequence consisted of a 999 bp open
reading frame encoding 333 amino acid residues of PRK. The PRK contained a pair
of cysteinyl residues corresponding to Cys16 and Cys55 of spinach PRK regulated
by a ferredoxin-thioredoxin system. However, there were seventeen amino acid
residues lacking between the two cysteinyl residues compared with those of the
chloroplastic enzyme in higher plants. The recombinant PRK of Synechococcus sp.
PCC 7942 accounted for about 6-13% of the total soluble protein in the
Escherichia coli. The specific activity of the enzyme was 230 micro mol min(-1)
(mg protein)(-1). The enzyme activity was completely inactivated by treatment
with 5,5'-dithiobis (2-nitrobenzoic acid) (cysteinyl residue-specific oxidant) or
was decreased by treatment with H(2)O(2), but was more tolerant to oxidation than
that of chloroplast. The oxidized PRK was fully activated by treatment with
excessive dithiothreitol. Furthermore, incubation with 3 mM ATP protected the
oxidation of the enzyme by either 5,5'-dithiobis (2-nitrobenzoic acid) or
H(2)O(2). These results suggest Synechococcus sp. PCC 7942 PRK can be regulated
by reversible oxidation/reduction in vitro, but might be resistant to oxidative
inactivation in vivo.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcg048 
PMID: 12668773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

