
1. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2003 Feb;38(2):153-8.

Helicobacter pylori infection influences tumor growth of human gastric
carcinomas.

Sasaki A(1), Kitadai Y, Ito M, Sumii M, Tanaka S, Yoshihara M, Haruma K, Chayama 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. asasaki@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Helicobacter pylori infection is considered a risk factor for gastric
carcinoma. However, the effect of eradication therapy in gastric carcinoma
patients is not well known. The aim of this study was to investigate the
relationship between H. pylori infection and tumor growth of gastric carcinoma.
METHODS: Fifty-one patients with gastric carcinoma participated in the study.
Thirty-three were H. pylori-positive, 6 were H. pylori-negative, and 12 were
diagnosed with gastric carcinoma after eradication of H. pylori. To investigate
tumor growth of gastric carcinoma, cell proliferation and angiogenesis of the
tumors were evaluated by immunohistochemical techniques using Ki-67 and CD34.
RESULTS: The Ki-67 labeling index was 47.9 +/- 2.6 (mean +/- s) in the H.
pylori-positive group, 38.1 +/- 3.6 in the H. pylori-eradicated group, and 22.2
+/- 5.5 in the H. pylori-negative group. It was significantly lower in the H.
pylori-eradicated and H. pylori-negative groups than in the H. pylori-positive
one, and a significant difference was also found between the H. pylori-positive
and H. pylori-eradicated groups. The microvessel counts were 62.5 +/- 3.0, 50.2
+/- 4.0, and 66.0 +/- 9.8 in the positive, eradicated, and negative groups,
respectively. A significant difference was found between the H. pylori-positive
and H. pylori-eradicated groups.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that H. pylori infection is associated with cell 
proliferation, and its eradication may influence tumor vascularity of gastric
carcinoma. Therefore, H. pylori eradication therapy may contribute to the
suppression of tumor growth.

DOI: 10.1080/00365520310000636 
PMID: 12678331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

