
1. Br J Haematol. 2003 Apr;121(1):148-56.

In vitro differentiation of natural killer T cells from human cord blood CD34+
cells.

Woo SY(1), Jung YJ, Ryu KH, Park HY, Kie JH, Im SA, Chung WS, Han HS, Seoh JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Ewha Womans University,
Mok-6-Dong 911-1, Yangchon-Gu, Seoul 158-710, Korea.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are involved in innate immune defence and also in
the regulation of adaptive immune responses. However, the development of NKT
cells in vitro has not been fully characterized and culture conditions have not
been fully optimized. In the present study, we found that an NKT cell fraction
developed during the in vitro culture of cord blood (CB) CD34+ cells, and this
was subsequently characterized both phenotypically and morphologically. CD34+
cells purified from 10 human CB were cultured in the presence of several
cytokines and analysed by flow cytometry, light microscopy and electron
microscopy. The NKT cell fraction, defined phenotypically (CD3+CD16+CD56+CD94+)
as expressing the invariant T-cell receptor Valpha24 and Vbeta11, appeared in the
CD56hi fractions. Intracytoplasmic staining demonstrated that interferon-gamma
and interleukin 4 (IL-4) were detected in the CD56hi fractions. IL-15 was
essential and, in combination with either flt3-ligand (FL) or stem cell factor
(SCF), was sufficient to induce the development of NKT cells. The phenotype of
the NKT cell fraction was CD45RO+CD45RA- and CD4+CD8alpha+. Morphologically, they
were very large, with either round or oval nuclei, moderately condensed
chromatins, voluminous weakly basophilic cytoplasm and various cytoplasmic
granules such as dense core granules, multivesicular bodies, and intermediate
form granules. When CD34+ cells purified from bone marrow (BM) were compared with
those from CB, the latter were consistently more efficient at generating CD56hi
NKT cell fractions. In conclusion, IL-15 in combination with FL and/or SCF can
induce the differentiation of NKT cells from human CB CD34+ cells.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2141.2003.04230.x 
PMID: 12670346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

