
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2003 May;73(5):630-8.

Stromal cell-derived factor-1/CXCL12 directly enhances survival/antiapoptosis of 
myeloid progenitor cells through CXCR4 and G(alpha)i proteins and enhances
engraftment of competitive, repopulating stem cells.

Broxmeyer HE(1), Kohli L, Kim CH, Lee Y, Mantel C, Cooper S, Hangoc G, Shaheen M,
Li X, Clapp DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis 46202, USA. hbroxmey@iupui.edu

Stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1/CXCL12) enhances survival of myeloid
progenitor cells. The two main questions addressed by us were whether these
effects on the progenitors were direct-acting and if SDF-1/CXCL12 enhanced
engrafting capability of competitive, repopulating mouse stem cells subjected to 
short-term ex vivo culture with other growth factors. SDF-1/CXCL12 had
survival-enhancing/antiapoptosis effects on human bone marrow (BM) and cord blood
(CB) and mouse BM colony-forming units (CFU)-granulocyte macrophage,
burst-forming units-erythroid, and
CFU-granulocyte-erythroid-macrophage-megakaryocyte with similar dose responses.
The survival effects were direct-acting, as assessed on colony formation by
single isolated human BM and CB CD34(+++) cells. Effects were mediated through
CXCR4 and G(alpha)i proteins. Moreover, SDF-1/CXCL12 greatly enhanced the
engrafting capability of mouse long-term, marrow-competitive, repopulating stem
cells cultured ex vivo with interleukin-6 and steel factor for 48 h. These
results extend information on the survival effects mediated through the
SDF-1/CXCL12-CXCR4 axis and may be of relevance for ex vivo expansion and
gene-transduction procedures.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.1002495 
PMID: 12714578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

