
1. Curr Genet. 2003 Jul;43(4):263-72. Epub 2003 May 7.

Rsf1p, a protein required for respiratory growth of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Lu L(1), Roberts G, Simon K, Yu J, Hudson AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Gordon H. Scott Hall, 540 East Canfield Avenue, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

A central problem in our understanding of mitochondrial (mt) function remains the
question of how coordinate transcriptional control is accomplished between
nucleus and mitochondria. Here, we report the initial characterization of a
protein of previously unknown function, the product of the YMR030 W gene, that
appears to mediate such coordinate gene expression. Expression of YMR030 W is
glucose-repressible; a deletion mutant for this gene shows a severe growth defect
on glycerol-, but not glucose- or ethanol-based medium. In that mutant,
transcript levels from GUT1 and GUT2 are highly attenuated compared with those of
the wild-type parent when both are grown on glycerol-based medium. Under the same
growth conditions, transcripts from the mt OLI1 gene, which has one copy of a mt 
upstream activating sequence (UAS) in its 5'-flanking region, are attenuated in
the DeltaYMR030 W mutant, but mRNA from the mt COX3 ( OXI2) gene, which lacks the
mt UAS, are not. Some nuclear genes encoding mt-related proteins also show low
transcript levels in the DeltaYMR030 W mutant in comparison with those of the
wild-type parent strain during glycerol-based growth. Localization of the
protein, via its expression fused to green fluorescent protein, indicates that it
is present in both nucleus and mitochondria, supporting a respiration-related
transcriptional role for this gene product in both cellular genetic compartments.
Because of its role in both respiratory growth and mt function, we designate the 
YMR030 W coding sequence RSF1 (respiration factor 1).

DOI: 10.1007/s00294-003-0398-z 
PMID: 12734673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

