
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 8;278(32):29487-95. Epub 2003 May 14.

Deficient regulation of DNA double-strand break repair in Fanconi anemia
fibroblasts.

Donahue SL(1), Lundberg R, Saplis R, Campbell C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Fibroblasts from patients with Fanconi anemia (FA) display genomic instability,
hypersensitivity to DNA cross-linking agents, and deficient DNA end joining.
Fibroblasts from two FA patients of unidentified complementation group also had
significantly increased cellular homologous recombination (HR) activity. Results 
described herein show that HR activity levels in patient-derived FA fibroblasts
of groups A, C, and G were 10-fold greater than those seen in normal fibroblasts.
In contrast, HR activity in group D2 fibroblasts was identical to that in normal 
cells. Western blot analysis revealed that the RAD51 protein was elevated 10-fold
above normal levels in group A, C, and G fibroblasts, but was not altered in
group D2 fibroblasts. HR activity levels in these former cells could be restored 
to near-normal levels by electroporation with anti-RAD51 antibody, whereas
similar treatment of normal and complementation group D2 fibroblasts had no
effect. These findings are consistent with a model in which FA proteins function 
to coordinate DNA double-strand break repair activity by regulating both
recombinational and non-recombinational DNA repair. Interestingly, whereas
positive regulation of DNA end joining requires the combined presence of all FA
proteins thus far tested, suppression of HR, which is minimally dependent on the 
FANCA, FANCC, and FANCG proteins, does not require FANCD2.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M213251200 
PMID: 12748186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

