
1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2003 Nov;29(5):627-33. Epub 2003 May 14.

CCL20 is an inducible product of human airway epithelia with innate immune
properties.

Starner TD(1), Barker CK, Jia HP, Kang Y, McCray PB Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, 200
Hawkins Drive, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Chemokine ligand 20 (CCL20) and human beta-defensins (HBDs) share structural and 
functional properties, including antiparallel beta-pleated sheet core structures,
charge distribution, and signaling to adaptive immune cells via the highly
selective CCR6 receptor. Because of their similarities, we hypothesized that in
addition to its known adaptive immune signaling functions, CCL20 has
antimicrobial properties and participates in pulmonary innate immunity. We found 
that primary cultures of human airway epithelial and cultured fetal lung explants
expressed CCL20 mRNA. Expression of CCL20 transcripts were significantly induced 
by interleukin (IL)-1beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and inhibited by
dexamethasone. Primary cultures of airway epithelia secreted CCL20 both apically 
and basolaterally, and CCL20 abundance was increased over 30-fold with IL-1beta
stimulation, achieving an estimated concentration of 167 ng/ml in airway surface 
liquid. CCL20 abundance in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from patients with cystic
fibrosis was nearly 90-fold higher compared with bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
from healthy volunteers. Interestingly, CCL20 exhibited salt-sensitive
antimicrobial activity, mainly against Gram-negative bacteria in low mug/ml
concentrations. Additionally, apical washings from IL-1beta-stimulated primary
cultures of human airway epithelia had significantly more antimicrobial activity 
than unstimulated controls. CCL20 rapidly permeabilized bacterial membranes with 
a time course intermediate to HBD-2 and HBD-3. Thus, CCL20 is a bi-functional
peptide with both innate and adaptive immune properties that is regulated by
inflammatory mediators, expressed by airway epithelia, and increased in cystic
fibrosis airway secretions.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2002-0272OC 
PMID: 12748059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

