
1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2003 Jun 11;2(6):751-8.

Molecular cloning of the Drosophila Fanconi anaemia gene FANCD2 cDNA.

Castillo V(1), Cabré O, Marcos R, Surrallés J.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Mutagenesis, Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Campus de
Bellaterra s/n, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Barcelona,
Spain.

Fanconi anaemia (FA) is a rare disease characterized by chromosome instability
and cancer susceptibility. With the exception of FANCD2, none of the Fanconi
anaemia genes are conserved in evolution, limiting the study of the Fanconi
anaemia pathway in genetically tractable models. Here we report the cloning and
sequencing of a Drosophila full length cDNA homologous to human FANCD2 (dmFANCD2)
as a first step in using Drosophila in Fanconi anaemia research. dmFANCD2 is
composed of 14 exons coding for a protein of 1478 aminoacids. Southern blot and
in situ hybridization analysis indicated that dmFANCD2 is present at single copy 
in the Drosophila genome and maps at the chromosomal band 92-F3. Sequence and
structural biocomputational analysis indicated that, although the aminoacidic
sequence, and specially the N-terminus region, is not highly conserved between
humans and flies (23% identity and 43% similarity), both proteins are of the same
size, globular and compact, with several transmembrane helixes and related to
nuclear membrane proteins. Interestingly, the human ATM phosphorylation site at
S222 and the complex-dependent monoubiquitination site at K561 are highly
conserved in Drosophila at positions S267 and K595, respectively. The same is
true for other putative ATM sites and their aminoacidic environment and for two
out of three aminoacid mutations associated with human pathology. These results
suggest that the key FANCD2 features have been conserved during over 500 million 
years of divergent evolution, highlighting their biological importance.

DOI: 10.1016/s1568-7864(03)00046-6 
PMID: 12767353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

