
1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2003 Jul;55(3):344-51.

Changes in microbial properties associated with long-term arsenic and DDT
contaminated soils at disused cattle dip sites.

Edvantoro BB(1), Naidu R, Megharaj M, Singleton I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soil and Water, Waite Campus, The University of Adelaide, Glen
Osmond, SA 5064, Australia.

This work examined the effect of long-term arsenic (As) and DDT contamination on 
soil microbial properties at 11 cattle dip sites in northern New South Wales,
Australia. Total As in the surface (0-10 cm) soils from these sites ranged from
34 to 2941 mg As kg(-1) soil and hexane-extractable DDT concentrations ranged
between 2.9 and 7673 mg DDT kg(-1) soil. The concentrations of water and
oxalate-extractable As were positively correlated with total As.
Oxalate-extractable As was more strongly correlated (r(2)=0.87) with total As
than water-extractable As (r(2)=0.34). A weak positive relationship was observed 
between the level of nutrient (organic carbon and nitrogen) and microbial biomass
C (r(2)=0.61 and 0.45, respectively). There was a highly significant difference
between the microbial properties of polluted and unpolluted sites (P<0.001). In
comparison to unpolluted soils, fungal counts, microbial biomass C, and
respiration were dramatically reduced (P<0.05) in polluted soils. However, the
bacterial population between polluted and unpolluted soils were not different
(P<0.05). The results of this study suggested that (a) long-term contamination of
soils adjacent to former cattle dipping sites by As and DDT adversely affected
soil microbial properties with the fungal populations being the most sensitive
and (b) there was little regeneration of microbiota despite 25 years of field
ageing of the soils.

DOI: 10.1016/s0147-6513(02)00092-1 
PMID: 12798769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

