
1. J Immunol. 2003 Jun 15;170(12):5981-92.

A model for antigen-specific T-cell anergy: displacement of CD4-p56(lck)
signalosome from the lipid rafts by a soluble, dimeric peptide-MHC class II
chimera.

Thomas S(1), Kumar R, Preda-Pais A, Casares S, Brumeanu TD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
10029, USA.

Soluble, dimeric peptide-MHC chimeras were shown to induce Ag-specific T cell
anergy in vitro and in vivo. In this study, we describe a mechanism by which a
soluble, dimeric peptide MHC class II chimera (DEF) induces Ag-specific T cell
anergy. The anergic cells showed a displacement of the CD4-p56(lck) signaling
module from the GM1-rich plasma membrane microdomains (lipid rafts), and
subsequently an increase in p59(fyn) kinase activity, a dominant expression of
p21 inhibitory TCR zeta-chain, and a poor phosphorylation and recruitment of
zeta-associated protein of 70 kDa kinase to the TCR's immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motifs. The Th1 and Th2 transcription was suppressed
and the cells were arrested in the Th0 stage of differentiation. Recovery from
DEF anergy occurred late and spontaneously at the expense of low thresholds for
activation-induced cell death. In contrast to DEF, a combination of TCR and CD4
mAbs did not induce such alterations or anergy, indicating that the
ligand-mediated topology of TCR and CD4 coengagement can differentially affect
the T cell function. Our results argue for a model of anergy in which the
defective partitioning of signaling molecules in lipid rafts is an early,
negative signaling event in T cells. Physiological ligands like DEF chimeras may 
provide new tools for silencing the autoimmune processes, and may also help in
deciphering new mechanisms of negative regulation in T cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.170.12.5981 
PMID: 12794125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

