
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2002 Jul;1(4):297-301.

Phylogenetic analysis of the genus Plasmodium based on the gene encoding
adenylosuccinate lyase.

Kedzierski L(1), Escalante AA, Isea R, Black CG, Barnwell JW, Coppel RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, PO Box 53, Monash University, 3800 Vic, Australia.

Phylogenetic studies of the genus Plasmodium have been performed using sequences 
of the nuclear, mitochondrial and plastid genes. Here we have analyzed the
adenylosuccinate lyase (ASL) gene, which encodes an enzyme involved in the
salvage of host purines needed by malaria parasites for DNA synthesis. The ASL
gene is present in several eukaryotic as well as prokaryotic organisms and does
not have repeat regions, which facilitates the accuracy of the alignment.
Furthermore, it has been shown that ASL is not subject to positive natural
selection. We have sequenced the ASL gene of several different Plasmodium species
infecting humans, rodents, monkeys and birds and used the obtained sequences
along with the previously known P. falciparum ASL sequence, for structural and
phylogenetic analysis of the genus Plasmodium. The genetic divergence of ASL is
comparable with that observed in other nuclear genes such as cysteine proteinase,
although ASL cannot be considered conserved when compared to aldolase or
superoxide dismutase, which exhibit a slower rate of evolution. Nevertheless, a
protein like ASL has a rate of evolution that provides enough information for
elucidating evolutionary relationships. We modeled 3D structures of the ASL
protein based on sequences used in the phylogenetic analysis and obtained a
consistent structure for four different species despite the divergence observed. 
Such models would facilitate alignment in further studies with a greater number
of plasmodial species or other Apicomplexa.

DOI: 10.1016/s1567-1348(02)00031-x 
PMID: 12798008  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

