
1. Ultramicroscopy. 2003 Oct-Nov;97(1-4):209-16.

AFM imaging of bacteria in liquid media immobilized on gelatin coated mica
surfaces.

Doktycz MJ(1), Sullivan CJ, Hoyt PR, Pelletier DA, Wu S, Allison DP.

Author information: 
(1)Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Life Sciences Division, Oak Ridge, TN
37831-6123, USA. doktyczmj@ornl.gov

Immobilization of particulates, especially biomolecules and cells, onto surfaces 
is critical for imaging with the atomic force microscope (AFM). In this paper,
gelatin coated mica surfaces are shown to be suitable for immobilizing and
imaging both gram positive, Staphylococcus aureus, and gram negative, Escherichia
coli, bacteria in both air and liquid environments. Gelatin coated surfaces are
shown to be superior to poly-L-lysine coated surfaces that are commonly used for 
the immobilization of cells. This cell immobilization technique is being
developed primarily for live cell imaging of Rhodopseudomonas palustris. The
genome of R. palustris has been sequenced and the organism is the target of
intensive studies aimed at understanding genome function. Images of R. palustris 
grown both aerobically and anaerobically in liquid media are presented. Images in
liquid media show the bacteria is rod shaped and smooth while images in air show 
marked irregularity and folding of the surface. Significant differences in the
vertical dimension are also apparent with the height of the bacteria in liquid
being substantially greater than images taken in air. In air immobilized
bacterial flagella are clearly seen while in liquid this structure is not
visible. Additionally, significant morphological differences are observed that
depend on the method of bacterial growth.

DOI: 10.1016/S0304-3991(03)00045-7 
PMID: 12801673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

