
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 19;278(38):36341-9. Epub 2003 Jun 18.

Tissue expression, protease specificity, and Kunitz domain functions of
hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor-1B (HAI-1B), a new splice variant of
HAI-1.

Kirchhofer D(1), Peek M, Li W, Stamos J, Eigenbrot C, Kadkhodayan S, Elliott JM, 
Corpuz RT, Lazarus RA, Moran P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, California
94080, USA. dak@gene.com

Hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor-1 (HAI-1) is an integral membrane
protein expressed on epithelial cells and contains two extracellular Kunitz
domains (N-terminal KD1 and C-terminal KD2) known to inhibit trypsin-like serine 
proteases. In tumorigenesis and tissue regeneration, HAI-1 regulates the
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/c-Met pathway by inhibiting the activity of HGF
activator (HGFA) and matriptase, two serine proteases that convert pro-HGF into
its biologically active form. By screening a placental cDNA library, we
discovered a new splice variant of HAI-1 designated HAI-1B that contains an extra
16 amino acids adjacent to the C terminus of KD1. To investigate possible
consequences on Kunitz domain function, a soluble form of HAI-1B (sHAI-1B)
comprising the entire extracellular domain was produced. First, we found that
sHAI-1B displayed remarkable enzyme specificity by potently inhibiting only HGFA 
(IC50 = 30.5 nm), matriptase (IC50 = 16.5 nm), and trypsin (IC50 = 2.4 nm) among 
16 serine proteases examined, including plasminogen activators (urokinase- and
tissue-type plasminogen activators), coagulation enzymes thrombin, factors VIIa, 
Xa, XIa, and XIIa, and activated protein C. Relatively weak inhibition was found 
for plasmin (IC50 = 399 nm) and plasma kallikrein (IC50 = 686 nm). Second, the
functions of the KD1 and KD2 domains in sHAI-1B were investigated using P1
residue-directed mutagenesis to show that inhibition of HGFA, matriptase,
trypsin, and plasmin was due to KD1 and not KD2. Furthermore, analysis by reverse
transcription-PCR demonstrated that HAI-1B and HAI-1 were co-expressed in normal 
tissues and various epithelial-derived cancer cell lines. Both isoforms were
up-regulated in eight examined ovarian carcinoma specimens, three of which had
higher levels of HAI-1B RNA than of HAI-1 RNA. Therefore, previously demonstrated
roles of HAI-1 in various physiological and pathological processes likely involve
both HAI-1B and HAI-1.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M304643200 
PMID: 12815039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

