
1. J Immunol. 2003 Jul 15;171(2):683-90.

IL-15-mediated induction of LFA-1 is a late step required for cytotoxic
differentiation of human NK cells from CD34+Lin- bone marrow cells.

Barao I(1), Hudig D, Ascensao JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, School of
Medicine, University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89509, USA.

Optimal differentiation of cytotoxic NK cells is important to provide protective 
innate immunity to patients after bone marrow transplantation. In vitro
differentiation of CD56(+)CD3(-) NK cells takes weeks and is supported by several
cytokines, including IL-2, IL-7, and IL-15, and thus can be useful for
immunotherapy. However, IL-2 therapy is problematic in vivo, and NK cells
differentiated in vitro with only IL-7 lack cytotoxicity. We assessed whether
human NK cells initially differentiated in vitro from CD34(+)Lin(-) bone marrow
cells with IL-7 could acquire cytotoxicity after exposure to additional cytokines
and what changes promoted cytotoxicity. The cells cultured with IL-7 already had 
granzyme B as well as perforin, as previously reported, the proteins of cytotoxic
granules. The cells also lacked LFA-1. After 1 wk of secondary culture with
either IL-2 or IL-15, but not with IL-12 or IL-18, the IL-7-cultured cells
acquired cytotoxicity. IL-2 or IL-15 also induced LFA-1. Ab to the LFA-1 subunits
CD11a and CD18 blocked lysis by the NK cells, indicating that the new LFA-1
correlated with, and was essential for, the cytotoxic function of the in vitro
generated cells. The LFA-1 also participated in target cell binding by the in
vitro differentiated cells. In this study, we demonstrated a new function for
IL-15, the induction of LFA-1 in NK progenitor cells, and that IL-15 does more
than merely support NK progenitor cell proliferation. The efficacy after only 1
wk of IL-15 administration is a positive practical feature that may apply to
human therapy.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.171.2.683 
PMID: 12847234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

