
1. J Immunol. 2003 Jul 15;171(2):931-7.

Inactivation of human beta-defensins 2 and 3 by elastolytic cathepsins.

Taggart CC(1), Greene CM, Smith SG, Levine RL, McCray PB Jr, O'Neill S, McElvaney
NG.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Research Division, Department of Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons
in Ireland, Education and Research Center, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
ctaggart@rcsi.i.e

beta-Defensins are antimicrobial peptides that contribute to the innate immune
responses of eukaryotes. At least three defensins, human beta-defensins 1, 2, and
3 (HBD-1, -2, and -3), are produced by epithelial cells lining the respiratory
tract and are active toward Gram-positive (HBD-3) and Gram-negative (HBD-1, -2,
and -3) bacteria. It has been postulated that the antimicrobial activity of
defensins is compromised by changes in airway surface liquid composition in lungs
of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), therefore contributing to the bacterial
colonization of the lung by Pseudomonas and other bacteria in CF. In this report 
we demonstrate that HBD-2 and HBD-3 are susceptible to degradation and
inactivation by the cysteine proteases cathepsins B, L, and S. In addition, we
show that all three cathepsins are present and active in CF bronchoalveolar
lavage. Incubation of HBD-2 and -3 with CF bronchoalveolar lavage leads to their 
degradation, which can be completely (HBD-2) or partially (HBD-3) inhibited by a 
cathepsin inhibitor. These results suggest that beta-defensins are susceptible to
degradation and inactivation by host proteases, which may be important in the
regulation of beta-defensin activity. In chronic lung diseases associated with
infection, overexpression of cathepsins may lead to increased degradation of
HBD-2 and -3, thereby favoring bacterial infection and colonization.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.171.2.931 
PMID: 12847264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

