
1. J Cell Biochem. 2003 Aug 1;89(5):975-91.

Adenosine inhibits activation-induced T cell expression of CD2 and CD28
co-stimulatory molecules: role of interleukin-2 and cyclic AMP signaling
pathways.

Butler JJ(1), Mader JS, Watson CL, Zhang H, Blay J, Hoskin DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Sir Charles
Tupper Medical Building, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 1X5,
Canada.

Adenosine is an immunosuppressive molecule that is associated with the
microenvironment of solid tumors. Mouse T cells activated with anti-CD3 antibody 
in the presence of adenosine with or without coformycin (to prevent adenosine
breakdown by adenosine deaminase) exhibited decreased tyrosine phosphorylation of
some intracellular proteins and were inhibited in their ability to proliferate
and synthesize interleukin (IL)-2. In addition, adenosine interfered with
activation-induced expression of the co-stimulatory molecules CD2 and CD28.
Activation-induced CD2 and CD28 expression was also diminished when T cells were 
activated in the presence of anti-IL-2 and anti-CD25 antibodies to neutralize
IL-2 bioactivity. Collectively, these data suggest that CD2 and CD28
up-regulation following T cell activation is IL-2-dependent; and that adenosine
inhibits activation-induced T cell expression of CD2 and CD28 by interfering with
IL-2-dependent signaling. The inhibitory effect of adenosine on
activation-induced CD2 and CD28 expression could not be attributed to cyclic AMP 
(cAMP) accumulation resulting from the stimulation of adenylyl cyclase-coupled
adenosine receptors, even though cAMP at concentrations much higher than those
generated following adenosine stimulation was inhibitory for both CD2 and CD28
expression. We conclude that adenosine interferes with IL-2-dependent T cell
expression of co-stimulatory molecules via a mechanism that does not involve the 
accumulation of intracellular cAMP.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.10562 
PMID: 12874832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

