
1. Toxicon. 2003 Jun;41(8):1033-8.

Structural, enzymatic and biological properties of new PLA(2) isoform from
Crotalus durissus terrificus venom.

Toyama MH(1), de Oliveira DG, Beriam LO, Novello JC, Rodrigues-Simioni L,
Marangoni S.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioqui;mica, Instituto de Biologia, Universidade Estadual de
Campinas (UNICAMP), Caixa Postal 6109, CEP 13083-970, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
mhtjpn@yahoo.com

We isolated a new PLA(2) from the Crotalus durissus terrificus venom that
designated F15, which showed allosteric behavior with a V(max) of 8.5nmol/min/mg 
and a K(m) of 38.5 mM. The incubated heparin salt of this isolated F15 act a
positive allosteric effector by increasing the V(max) to 10.2 nmol/min/mg, with
decreasing the V(max) value to 20.5 mM. The crotapotin, on the other hand acts as
a negative allosteric effector by increasing the V(max) values to 58.4 mM. F15
also showed high calcium dependence for its catalysis similar to that found for
other PLA(2) enzymes isolated from these snake venoms. The replacement of calcium
by other divalent ions such Mg(2+), Mn(2+), Cd(2+), Sn(2+) and Cu(2+) resulted in
lower enzymatic activity. The optimum pH and temperature for the enzyme was 8.5
and 18 degrees C, respectively. F15 alone showed moderate neurotoxic activity in 
isolated mouse phrenic nerve diaphragm in comparison to other strong myotoxic
PLA(2) such as bothropstoxin-I (BThtx-I), but this activity was highly neurotoxic
in a chick biventrer cervis preparation, whereas BthTx-I did not reveal this high
neurotoxicity. This new protein showed a high bactericidal effect against both
Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacterial strains. F15 contained 122 amino acid
residues, with a primary structure of:
HLLQFNKMIKFETRKNAVPFYAFYGCYCGWGGQRRPKDATDRCCFVHDCCYGKLTKCNTKWDIYRYSLKSGYITCGKGTWC
KEQICECDRVAAECLRRSLSTYKNEYMFYPKSRCRRPSETC. Its molecular mass and isoeletric
point were 14.5 kDa and 8.85, both estimated by two dimensional electrophoresis. 
The amino acid sequence of the F15 revealed high sequence homology with F16 and
F17. F15 and the other PLA(2)s revealed highly conserved amino acid sequences
principally for calcium binding loop and active site helix. F15 also showed a
high homology with the lysine-rich region of myotoxic PLA(2).

DOI: 10.1016/s0041-0101(03)00085-0 
PMID: 12875878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

