
1. Eur J Immunol. 2003 Jul;33(7):1934-40.

Differential acquired immune responsiveness to bacterial lipoproteins in Lyme
disease-resistant and -susceptible mouse strains.

Ganapamo F(1), Dennis VA, Philipp MT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bacteriology and Parasitology, Tulane National Primate Research
Center, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, 18703 Three Rivers Road,
Covington, LA 70433, USA.

We investigated the effect of Borrelia burgdorferi lipoproteins (outer surface
protein A) and the synthetic lipohexapeptide
tripalmitoyl-S-glyceryl-Cys-Ser-4(Lys) (Pam3-Cys) on isolated lymph node (LN)
cells from Lyme disease-susceptible (C3H/HeJ) and -resistant (C57BL/6J) mice.
Mice were either infected with B. burgdorferi for 1 week or left uninfected.
Lipoprotein-stimulated LN cells from infected C3H/HeJ mice produced significantly
higher levels of the inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and IFN-gamma than did cells
from C57BL/6J mice. Cells from uninfected mice did not respond. No TNF-alpha or
IL-1beta were produced by LN cells from infected mice of either strain in
response to lipoprotein or B. burgdorferi spirochetes. Unlike with IL-6 or
IFN-gamma, LN cells from either strain failed to produce IL-10 in response to
lipoproteins. However, the LN cells were able to produce this cytokine in
response to B. burgdorferi spirochetes or after incubation with
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate/ionomycin, anti-CD3 antibody alone or anti-CD3
combined with anti-CD28 antibodies. Addition of exogenous IL-10 to
lipopeptide-stimulated cultures significantly reduced IFN-gamma and IL-6
production in a dose-dependent fashion. This inhibition was more effective with
cells from disease-resistant C57BL/6J mice than with cells from
disease-susceptible C3H/HeJ mice. The proclivity to disease of the C3H/HeJ mouse 
could be simultaneously based on the phenomena of enhanced inflammatory
responsiveness to lipoproteins and diminished ability to respond to IL-10. An
investigation of the determinants of these two phenomena could be used as a
blueprint to elucidate the pathogenesis of Lyme disease in humans.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200323655 
PMID: 12884859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

