
1. Zhonghua Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2003 May;38(3):206-9.

[Effect of spirochetes and porphyromonus gingivalis on oral malodor].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu WD(1), Sha YQ, Chen ZB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Peking University School of Stomatology, Beijing
100081, China.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the effect of Spirochetes and Porphyromonus gingivalis (Pg) 
on the production of volatile sulfur compounds (VSCs) and oral malodor,
respectively.
METHODS: 117 systemically healthy periodontitis patients were divided into two
groups according to organoleptic rating (OR) by organoleptic method: 85 subjects 
with oral malodor (halitosis group, HG) and 32 cases without oral malodor
(no-halitosis group, NHG). VSCs measurements were made with halimeter.
Subgingival plaques and tongue coating were taken to calculate the proportion of 
Spirochetes (with 2% Congo Red Smears, S%) and the amounts of Pg (with indirect
immunofluorescence method). The examination will be repeated in 46 HG cases after
periodontal therapy.
RESULTS: S% in PD < 4 mm sites of HG was significantly higher than that in NHG (P
< 0.01). S% in PD >or= 4 mm sites and tongue coating, Pg in all three sites were 
not different between two groups. In HG, OR and VSCs levels were correlated with 
S% in tongue coating (P < 0.01, P < 0.05) and PD < 4 mm sites (P < 0.05), and not
correlated with S% in PD >or= 4 mm sites. OR was related to Pg in PD >or= 4 mm
sites (P < 0.05) and there was no relationship between OR and Pg in tongue
coating and PD < 4 mm sites. VSCs levels was not correlated with Pg in all three 
sites. S% in tongue coating and subgingival plaque, Pg in subgingival plaque, OR 
and VSCs levels were significantly reduced after periodontal therapy (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The direct relationship of Spirochetes and Pg respectively to bad
breath was not found obviously. But Spirochetes is one of the microorganism on
oral malodor. Periodontal therapy can improve oral malodor.


PMID: 12887800  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

