
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Aug 15;308(1):73-8.

Kinetic behavior of Desulfovibrio gigas aldehyde oxidoreductase encapsulated in
reverse micelles.

Andrade SL(1), Brondino CD, Kamenskaya EO, Levashov AV, Moura JJ.

Author information: 
(1)REQUIMTE/CQFB, Departamento de Qui;mica, Faculdade de CiÃªncias e Tecnologia,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica 2829-516, Portugal.

We report the kinetic behavior of the enzyme aldehyde oxidoreductase (AOR) from
the sulfate reducing bacterium Desulfovibrio gigas (Dg) encapsulated in reverse
micelles of sodium bis-(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate in isooctane using
benzaldehyde, octaldehyde, and decylaldehyde as substrates. Dg AOR is a 200-kDa
homodimeric protein that catalyzes the conversion of aldehydes to carboxylic
acids. Ultrasedimentation analysis of Dg AOR-containing micelles showed the
presence of 100-kDa molecular weight species, confirming that the Dg AOR subunits
can be dissociated. UV-visible spectra of encapsulated Dg AOR are
indistinguishable from the enzyme spectrum in solution, suggesting that both
protein fold and metal cofactor are kept intact upon encapsulation. The catalytic
constant (k(cat)) profile as a function of the micelle size W(0)
(W(0)=[H(2)O]/[AOT]) using benzaldehyde as substrate showed two bell-shaped
activity peaks at W(0)=20 and 26. Furthermore, enzymatic activity for octaldehyde
and decylaldehyde was detected only in reverse micelles. Like for the
benzaldehyde kinetics, two peaks with both similar k(cat) values and W(0)
positions were obtained. EPR studies using spin-labeled reverse micelles
indicated that octaldehyde and benzaldehyde are intercalated in the micelle
membrane. This suggests that, though Dg AOR is found in the cytoplasm of
bacterial cells, the enzyme may catalyze the reaction of substrates incorporated 
into a cell membrane.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-291x(03)01337-8 
PMID: 12890482  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

