
1. J Immunol. 2003 Aug 15;171(4):1969-77.

T cell costimulatory molecule function determines susceptibility to infection
with Pneumocystis carinii in mice.

Beck JM(1), Blackmon MB, Rose CM, Kimzey SL, Preston AM, Green JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Loss of T cell number and function during HIV infection or secondary to
pharmacologic immunosuppression renders individuals susceptible to opportunistic 
infections, including Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. Because costimulatory
receptors are critical for optimal T cell function, we hypothesized that these
proteins would regulate susceptibility to opportunistic infections. We found that
despite normal T cell numbers, mice deficient in the costimulatory molecules CD2 
and CD28 spontaneously developed P. carinii pneumonia. In experiments using
intratracheal injection of P. carinii organisms to induce infection, the loss of 
CD28 alone was sufficient to render mice susceptible to acute infection; however,
the organism was eventually cleared. Examination of inflammatory responses to P. 
carinii revealed that mice deficient in both CD2 and CD28 accumulated CD8(+) T
cells in their lungs in response to infection and demonstrated markedly reduced
specific Ab titers. Analysis of cytokine profiles suggested that regulation of
IL-10 and IL-15 may be important elements of the response to this pathogen. Thus,
costimulatory molecule function is critical in determining the initial
susceptibility to infection with P. carinii. Analysis of immunologic responses in
these mice may provide important insights into the defects that render
individuals susceptible to opportunistic infection, and provide opportunities for
novel immunologically based therapies.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.171.4.1969 
PMID: 12902500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

