
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Aug 18;1605(1-3):67-82.

A novel membrane-bound respiratory complex from Desulfovibrio desulfuricans ATCC 
27774.

Pires RH(1), Lourenço AI, Morais F, Teixeira M, Xavier AV, Saraiva LM, Pereira
IA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Tecnologia Qui;mica e Biológica, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, R. 
da Quinta Grande 6, Oeiras 2780-156, Portugal.

In the anaerobic respiration of sulfate, performed by sulfate-reducing
prokaryotes, reduction of the terminal electron acceptor takes place in the
cytoplasm. The membrane-associated electron transport chain that feeds electrons 
to the cytoplasmic reductases is still very poorly characterized. In this study
we report the isolation and characterization of a novel membrane-bound redox
complex from Desulfovibrio desulfuricans ATCC 27774. This complex is formed by
three subunits, and contains two hemes b, two FAD groups and several iron-sulfur 
centers. The two hemes b are low-spin, with macroscopic redox potentials of +75
and -20 mV at pH 7.6. Both hemes are reduced by menadiol, a menaquinone analogue,
indicating a function for this complex in the respiratory electron-transport
chain. EPR studies of the as-isolated and dithionite-reduced complex support the 
presence of a [3Fe-4S](1+/0) center and at least four [4Fe-4S](2+/1+) centers.
Cloning of the genes coding for the complex subunits revealed that they form a
putative transcription unit and have homology to subunits of heterodisulfide
reductases (Hdr). The first and second genes code for soluble proteins that have 
homology to HdrA, whereas the third gene codes for a novel type of
membrane-associated protein that contains both a hydrophobic domain with homology
to the heme b protein HdrE and a hydrophilic domain with homology to the
iron-sulfur protein HdrC. Homologous operons are found in the genomes of other
sulfate-reducing organisms and in the genome of the green-sulfur bacterium
Chlorobium tepidum TLS. The isolated complex is the first example of a new family
of respiratory complexes present in anaerobic prokaryotes.

DOI: 10.1016/s0005-2728(03)00065-3 
PMID: 12907302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

