
1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2003 Jul;9(4):215-23.

Inducible and constitutive beta-defensins are differentially expressed in Crohn's
disease and ulcerative colitis.

Wehkamp J(1), Harder J, Weichenthal M, Mueller O, Herrlinger KR, Fellermann K,
Schroeder JM, Stange EF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Robert Bosch Hospital, Stuttgart, Germany.

Antimicrobial peptides such as defensins provide nonspecific mucosal defense
against a multitude of microorganisms. Recently, it has been shown that luminal
bacteria may invade the mucosa in inflammatory bowel diseases, suggesting a
defect in innate mucosal immunity. The aim of this study was to investigate the
expression of human beta-defensins (HBD) in controls, Crohn's disease (CD),
ulcerative colitis (UC), and unspecific inflammation. Up to 4 biopsies were taken
from 103 patients (33 controls, 24 with Crohn's disease, 36 with ulcerative
colitis, 10 with unspecific colitis). Mucosal mRNA was measured using real-time
fluorescence temperature cycler reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction
with primers for HBD-1, HBD-2, HBD-3, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and
interleukin 8. Mucosal HBD-1 expression was marginally decreased in both CD and
UC. HBD-2 was increased exclusively in UC but not in CD. The expression of the
novel defensin HBD-3 was strongly correlated with HBD-2 and also raised
predominantly in UC. The expression of both inducible beta-defensins was enhanced
in the state of inflammation. Expression of HBD-2 showed a weak correlation with 
interleukin 8 only in inflamed CD biopsies but not with tumor necrosis factor
alpha. The missing induction of both inducible beta-defensins in CD as compared
with UC may cause a defect in barrier function that predisposes to bacterial
invasion.

DOI: 10.1097/00054725-200307000-00001 
PMID: 12902844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

