
1. Pflugers Arch. 2004 Feb;447(5):594-602. Epub 2003 Aug 12.

The SLC13 gene family of sodium sulphate/carboxylate cotransporters.

Markovich D(1), Murer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, School of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Queensland, QLD 4072, St. Lucia, Australia. d.markovich@uq.edu.au

Erratum in
    Pflugers Arch. 2004 Feb;447(5):816-7.

The SLC13 gene family consist of five sequence-related members that have been
identified in a variety of animals, plants, yeast and bacteria. Proteins encoded 
by these genes are divided into two functionally unrelated groups: the
Na(+)-sulphate (NaS) cotransporters and the Na(+)-carboxylate (NaC)
cotransporters. Members of this family include the renal Na(+)-dependent
inorganic sulphate transporter-1 (NaSi-1, SLC13A1), the Na(+)-dependent
dicarboxylate transporters NaDC-1/SDCT1 (SLC13A2), NaDC-3/SDCT2 (SLC13A3), the
sulphate transporter-1 (SUT-1, SLC13A4) and the Na(+)-coupled citrate transporter
(NaCT, SLC13A5). The general characteristics of the SLC13 proteins are that they 
encode multi-spanning proteins with 8-13 transmembrane domains, have a wide
tissue distribution with most being expressed in the epithelial cells of the
kidney and the gastrointestinal tract. They are Na(+)-coupled symporters,
DIDS-insensitive, with strong cation preference for Na(+), with a Na(+):anion
coupling ratio of around 3:1 and have a substrate preference for divalent anions,
which include tetraoxyanions (for the NaS cotransporters) or Krebs cycle
intermediates, including mono-, di-, and tri-carboxylates (for the NaC
cotransporters). The purpose of this review is to provide an update on the most
recent advances and to summarize the biochemical, physiological and structural
aspects of the vertebrate SLC13 gene family.

DOI: 10.1007/s00424-003-1128-6 
PMID: 12915942  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

