
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2003 Jul 8;55(2):93-9.

Nanoinjection as a tool to mimic vertical transmission of Flavobacterium
psychrophilum in rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss.

Ekman E(1), Akerman G, Balk L, Norrgren L.

Author information: 
(1)Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences (SLU), Department of Pathology, PO
Box 7028, 750 07 Uppsala, Sweden. elisabet.ekman@pat.slu.se

Newly fertilised eggs of rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss were nanoinjected with
Flavobacterium psychrophilum in order to mimic vertical transmission. Two
bacterial isolates with different elastin-degrading capacity were used. All
infected groups (10, 100 and 1000 colony forming units egg(-1)) showed
significantly higher cumulative mortalities than the control groups at the end of
the experiment, 70 d post-hatching. The total mortalities in the control groups
were below 2.5%. In the high-dose groups, 95 to 100% of the eggs died during the 
eyed stage. In the intermediate group infected with the elastin-negative isolate,
the major mortality occurred during the eyed stage of the egg, with a total
cumulative mortality of 83% at the end of the experiment. In the intermediate
group infected with the elastin-positive isolate, a total mortality of 63% was
recorded. In this group, diseased fry showed clinical signs of disease and
morphological changes similar to those described in connection with rainbow trout
fry syndrome (RTFS) shortly after the beginning of feeding. In the low dose
groups, the mortality in the elastin-negative group was 14% and in the
elastin-positive group 11%. The bacterium was isolated from dead eggs and fry in 
infected groups and demonstrated in internal organs of dead and moribund fry by
immunohistochemistry. The nanoinjection method used in this study may be a useful
method to study pathogens, like F. psychrophilum, that can be vertically
transmitted.

DOI: 10.3354/dao055093 
PMID: 12911056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

