
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 3;278(40):38121-4. Epub 2003 Aug 13.

Mutator phenotype of MUTYH-null mouse embryonic stem cells.

Hirano S(1), Tominaga Y, Ichinoe A, Ushijima Y, Tsuchimoto D, Honda-Ohnishi Y,
Ohtsubo T, Sakumi K, Nakabeppu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurofunctional Genomics, Medical Institute of Bioregulation,
Kyushu University, and Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology
(CREST), Japan Science and Technology Corporation, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan.

To evaluate the antimutagenic role of a mammalian mutY homolog, namely the Mutyh 
gene, which encodes adenine DNA glycosylase excising adenine misincorporated
opposite 8-oxoguanine in the template DNA, we generated MUTYH-null mouse
embryonic stem (ES) cells. In the MUTYH-null cells carrying no adenine DNA
glycosylase activity, the spontaneous mutation rate increased 2-fold in
comparison with wild type cells. The expression of wild type mMUTYH or mutant
mMUTYH protein with amino acid substitutions at the proliferating cell nuclear
antigen binding motif restored the increased spontaneous mutation rates of the
MUTYH-null ES cells to the wild type level. The expression of a mutant mMUTYH
protein with an amino acid substitution (G365D) that corresponds to a germ-line
mutation (G382D) found in patients with multiple colorectal adenomas could not
suppress the elevated spontaneous mutation rate of the MUTYH-null ES cells.
Although the recombinant mMUTYH(G365D) purified from Escherichia coli cells had a
substantial level of adenine DNA glycosylase activity as did wild type MUTYH, no 
adenine DNA glycosylase activity was detected in the MUTYH-null ES cells
expressing the mMUTYH(G365D) mutant protein. The germ-line mutation (G382D) of
the human MUTYH gene is therefore likely to be responsible for the occurrence of 
a mutator phenotype in these patients.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C300316200 
PMID: 12917422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

