
1. RNA. 2003 Sep;9(9):1084-97.

Regulation of the vitamin B12 metabolism and transport in bacteria by a conserved
RNA structural element.

Vitreschak AG(1), Rodionov DA, Mironov AA, Gelfand MS.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Genomics-Moscow, 117333, Russia.

Cobalamin in the form of adenosylcobalamin (Ado-CBL) is known to repress
expression of genes for vitamin B(12) biosynthesis and be transported by a
posttranscriptional regulatory mechanism, which involves direct binding of
Ado-CBL to 5'untranslated gene regions (5'UTR). Using comparative analysis of
genes and regulatory regions, we identified a highly conserved RNA structure, the
B12-element, which is widely distributed in 5'UTRs of vitamin B(12)-related genes
in eubacteria. Multiple alignment of approximately 200 B12-elements from 66
bacterial genomes reveals their common secondary structure and several extended
regions of sequence conservation, including the previously known B12-box motif.
In analogy to the model of regulation of the riboflavin and thiamin biosynthesis,
we suggest Ado-CBL-mediated regulation based on formation of alternative RNA
structures including the B12-element. In Gram-negative proteobacteria, as well as
in cyanobacteria, actinobacteria, and the CFB group, the cobalamin biosynthesis
and vitamin B(12) transport genes are predicted to be regulated by inhibition of 
translation initiation, whereas in the Bacillus/Clostridium group of
Gram-positive bacteria, these genes seem to be regulated by transcriptional
antitermination. Phylogenetic analysis of the B12-elements reveals a large number
of likely duplications of B12-elements in several bacterial genomes. These
lineage-specific duplications of RNA regulatory elements seem to be a major
evolutionary mechanism for expansion of the vitamin B(12) regulon.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.5710303 
PMCID: PMC1370473
PMID: 12923257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

