
1. Planta. 2003 Nov;218(1):58-64. Epub 2003 Aug 23.

Cloning of two contrasting high-affinity sulfate transporters from tomato induced
by low sulfate and infection by the vascular pathogen Verticillium dahliae.

Howarth JR(1), Fourcroy P, Davidian JC, Smith FW, Hawkesford MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Rothamsted Research, West Common, Harpenden, Hertfordshire, AL5 2JQ, UK.

Two cDNAs, LeST1-1 (AF347613) and LeST1-2 (AF347614), encoding sulfate
transporters have been cloned from tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) by
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and their expression
characterised. Sharing 76% identity at the amino acid level, the transporters are
phylogenetically associated with the Group-1, high-affinity plant sulfate
transporters. Both were shown to have high affinity for sulfate by uptake kinetic
analysis using a yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) sulfate-transporter mutant. Km 
values of 11.5 microM and 9.8 microM were calculated for LeST1-1 and LeST1-2,
respectively, the same order of magnitude as those previously reported for
several other Group-1 high-affinity sulfate transporters. In situ hybridisation
to S-deficient tomato roots showed LeST1-1 to be expressed in the epidermis and
pericycle, whereas LeST1-2 expression was located to the epidermis only. Northern
analysis shows that the mRNA abundances of both LeST1-1 and LeST1-2 are
upregulated in the root in response to sulfate deprivation. LeST1-1 is
specifically expressed in root tissue, a characteristic of Group-1 sulfate
transporters. LeST1-2, however, was also detected in tomato leaves and stems and 
is upregulated and expressed to a similar extent in these tissues under
conditions of sulfate deprivation. Induction of LeST1-2 expression was also
observed in the vascular tissues of a resistant line of tomato infected with the 
vascular wilt pathogen Verticillium dahliae.

DOI: 10.1007/s00425-003-1085-5 
PMID: 12937983  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

