
1. Clin Oral Investig. 2003 Dec;7(4):212-6. Epub 2003 Aug 22.

Effects of low-concentrated chlorhexidine on growth of Streptococcus sobrinus and
primary human gingival fibroblasts.

Dogan S(1), GÃ¼nay H, Leyhausen G, Geurtsen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Conservative Dentistry & Periodontology, Medical University
Hannover, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625, Hannover, Germany.
dogan.sami@mh-hannover.de

The aim of this study was to investigate the in vitro effects of low
concentrations of chlorhexidine (CHX) on the proliferation of Streptococcus
sobrinus (ATCC 33478) and primary human gingival fibroblasts (HGF). Liquid
cultures of bacteria or human gingival fibroblasts were exposed to CHX
concentrations ranging from 0.07 to 40 microM in microtiter plates at 37 degrees 
C for 24 h. Bacteria or cells grown without CHX served as controls. The effects
of CHX were determined either by measurements of the optical density (OD) of
bacterial cultures or by evaluation of cell growth with the DNA-intercalating
fluorescent stain H33342 in comparison to untreated controls. Results were
evaluated calculating means and standard deviations. Data were statistically
analyzed by an ANOVA using Post Hoc tests ( p<0.005). No growth inhibition of S. 
sobrinus was found at concentrations between 0.07 and 0.15 microM CHX, whereas
0.3 microM CHX led to an elongated (2 h more) lag phase and 0.6 microM CHX
induced a lag phase of 4 h more and a minor inclination of the curve in the log
phase. Concentrations of CHX>/=1.25 microM completely inhibited growth of S.
sobrinus. On the contrary, CHX showed no significant effect on growth of HGF at
concentrations </=5 microM. A slight growth inhibition was only observed at a
concentration of 5 microM. CHX-concentrations of 10 and 20 microM reduced cell
growth to 88 or 75% of control assays. Data analysis showed that overall
treatment effects were highly significant ( p<0.005). Our data reveal that
chlorhexidine inhibits proliferation of S. sobrinus even at very low
concentrations while concentrations of CHX</=5 microM are not cytotoxic to human 
gingival fibroblasts.

DOI: 10.1007/s00784-003-0226-3 
PMID: 12938021  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

