
1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2003 Aug 31;130(2):75-81.

2-Cys peroxiredoxin PfTrx-Px1 is involved in the antioxidant defence of
Plasmodium falciparum.

Akerman SE(1), MÃ¼ller S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Microbiology, School of Life
Sciences, MSI/WTB Complex, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK.

Peroxiredoxins (Trx-Px) are ubiquitous antioxidant enzymes that catalyse the
thioredoxin-dependent reduction of hydroperoxides. The number of characteristic
active site (VCP/T) motifs defines these proteins as 1-Cys and 2-Cys Trx-Px.
Steady-state kinetic parameters of Plasmodium falciparum 2-Cys Trx-Px (PfTrx-Px1)
were determined using stopped flow rapid kinetics. The bi-substrate reaction
displays ping-pong kinetics and the K(m) values for H2O2 and thioredoxin were
determined to be 0.78+/-0.14 microM and 18.94+/-3.01 microM, respectively. The
Vmax(app) and kcat(app) for H2O2 were found to be 4+/-0.6 U mg(-1) and
1.67+/-0.25 s(-1), respectively and those for thioredoxin are 23.0+/-0.2 U mg(-1)
and 9.65+/-0.1 s(-1), emphasising the specificity of the enzyme for the substrate
H2O2. After subjection to exogenous and endogenous oxidative stress, P.
falciparum blood stage forms showed a marked elevation of PfTrx-Px1 mRNA and
protein levels consistent with the hypothesis that it is an important component
of the parasite's antioxidant machinery. Gel filtration, cross-linking and
electron microscopy (EM) revealed that the protein forms decamers consisting of
pentamers of homodimers that have a doughnut-like shape consistent with the
structures of related proteins. No dimeric forms of the protein were detectable
after gel filtration suggesting that PfTrx-Px1 predominantly exists as an
oligomer.

DOI: 10.1016/s0166-6851(03)00161-0 
PMID: 12946843  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

