
1. J Bacteriol. 2003 Sep;185(18):5363-71.

Arsenic sensing and resistance system in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp.
strain PCC 6803.

López-Maury L(1), Florencio FJ, Reyes JC.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Bioquímica Vegetal y Fotosíntesis, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, Universidad de Sevilla, E-41092 Seville, Spain.

Arsenic is one of the most important global environmental pollutants. Here we
show that the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. strain PCC 6803 contains an
arsenic and antimony resistance operon consisting of three genes: arsB, encoding 
a putative arsenite and antimonite carrier, arsH, encoding a protein of unknown
function, and arsC, encoding a putative arsenate reductase. While arsB mutant
strains were sensitive to arsenite, arsenate, and antimonite, arsC mutants were
sensitive only to arsenate. The arsH mutant strain showed no obvious phenotype
under the conditions tested. In vivo the arsBHC operon was derepressed by
oxyanions of arsenic and antimony (oxidation state, +3) and, to a lesser extent, 
by bismuth (oxidation state, +3) and arsenate (oxidation state, +5). In the
absence of these effectors, the operon was repressed by a transcription repressor
of the ArsR/SmtB family, encoded by an unlinked gene termed arsR. Thus, arsR null
mutants showed constitutive derepression of the arsBHC operon. Expression of the 
arsR gene was not altered by the presence of arsenic or antimony compounds.
Purified recombinant ArsR protein binds to the arsBHC promoter-operator region in
the absence of metals and dissociates from the DNA in the presence of Sb(III) or 
As(III) but not in the presence of As(V), suggesting that trivalent metalloids
are the true inducers of the system. DNase I footprinting experiments indicate
that ArsR binds to two 17-bp direct repeats, with each one consisting of two
inverted repeats, in the region from nucleotides -34 to + 17 of the arsBHC
promoter-operator.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.185.18.5363-5371.2003 
PMCID: PMC193754
PMID: 12949088  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

