
1. J Fish Dis. 2003 Jul;26(7):371-84.

Passive immunization of rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum), against
Flavobacterium psychrophilum, the causative agent of bacterial coldwater disease 
and rainbow trout fry syndrome.

LaFrentz BR(1), LaPatra SE, Jones GR, Cain KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources and the Aquaculture Research
Institute, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844-1136, USA.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum, the causative agent of bacterial coldwater disease 
(CWD) and rainbow trout fry syndrome (RTFS), causes high mortality in cultured
salmonids. The present study was designed to determine the role antibody plays in
conferring protection to rainbow trout fry, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum), by
passive immunization with convalescent serum or serum from adult rainbow trout
immunized with F. psychrophilum, and goat anti-F. psychrophilum serum. In each
experiment, rainbow trout fry were injected intraperitoneally with antiserum and 
challenged by subcutaneous injection with a virulent strain (CSF-259-93) of F.
psychrophilum 24-h post-immunization. Relative percentage survival (RPS) ranged
from 9-42% when rainbow trout fry (mean weight 1.3 g) were injected with a 1:2
dilution of 25 microL of convalescent serum ranging in enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay antibody titres from 1600-102400. Rainbow trout fry (mean
weight 1.0 g) passively immunized with 25 microL of serum from immunized adult
fish exhibited RPS values of up to 57%. In each of these experiments, RPS
increased with increasing antibody titres against F. psychrophilum. Passive
immunization with 25 or 50 microL goat anti-F. psychrophilum serum, however, did 
not confer protection to fry (mean weight 1.3 g). These results suggest that
trout antibody plays a role in conferring protection to F. psychrophilum, but
antibody alone is unable to provide complete protection.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2761.2003.00468.x 
PMID: 12946006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

