
1. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2003 Sep;24(9):907-12.

Mycobacterium bovis bacille Calmette-Gu√©rin (BCG) enhances human beta-defensin-1 
gene transcription in human pulmonary gland epithelial cells.

Zhu BD(1), Feng Y, Huang N, Wu Q, Wang BY.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Infection and Immunity, West China Medical Center, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041, China.

AIM: To examine the stimulatory effect of bacille Calmette-Gu rin (BCG) cell wall
components on human beta-defensin-1 (hBD-1) gene expression and analyze the
response element in the 5'-flanking region of the gene.
METHODS: BCG cell wall proteins were fractionated by Sephadex G-150
chromatography. Using reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
and Northern hybridization analysis, hBD-1 mRNA expression was detected in a
human pulmonary gland epithelial cell line SPC-A-1 cells. Progressive deletions
of 5'-flanking region of hBD-1 gene were produced by PCR and ligated into
promoterless chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) expression plasmid to
construct pCAT reporter plasmids. Reporter gene expression was determined by
ELISA.
RESULTS: There was an obvious enhancement of hBD-1 mRNA expression after
stimulation with heat-inactivated BCG whole cells (50 mg/L), or the cell wall
components with a molecular weight of 18-30 kDa (3 mg/L) for 8 h. The upstream
sequence between -314 bp and +54 bp had the inducible activity by BCG, which
contained CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-beta (C/EBP beta), activator protein-1
(AP-1), and CP2 cis element.
CONCLUSION: BCG cell wall components (18-30 kDa) can stimulate hBD-1 mRNA
expression in pulmonary gland epithelial cells. The sequence (-314/+54)
containing C/EBP beta, AP-1, and CP2 binding sites in the upstream of hBD-1 is
involved in this induction.


PMID: 12956940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

