
1. Mol Vis. 2003 Sep 2;9:420-4.

MICA association with presumed ocular histoplasmosis syndrome (POHS).

Reinders J(1), Rozemuller EH, Ongkosuwito JV, Jager MJ, Tilanus MG,
Suttorp-Schulten MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

PURPOSE: MHC class I chain related gene A (MICA), a polymorphic and
stress-inducible cell surface molecule, is located centromeric to human leukocyte
antigen locus B (HLA-B) in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region on chromosome
6. MICA is thought to be involved in the innate immune response. An alanine
repeat polymorphism is present in the MICA transmembrane region, for which
several disease associations have been reported. Previous research indicated an
association with the HLA-B7-DR2 haplotype. In this study we investigated the
association of the polymorphic MICA alanine repeat and the ocular disease
presumed ocular histoplasmosis syndrome (POHS).
METHODS: Twenty-four patients and 106 controls were evaluated for the alanine
repeat. A PCR reaction was performed to amplify the polymorphic MICA alanine
repeat. Allele lengths of the MICA alanine repeat in patients and controls were
determined with GeneScan analysis.
RESULTS: No significant associations were observed. Phenotype frequencies of the 
polymorphic MICA alanine repeat were not significantly different between POHS
patients and controls. Neither in the complete patient group compared with the
control group nor in one of the subdivided patient groups compared with the
control group.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the MICA alanine repeat is not a disease-associated
factor in POHS. Further analysis of other genes in the B-DR region might
elucidate the association of POHS with B7-DR2.


PMID: 12963865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

