
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2003 Sep;31(1):115-22.

Production of the active antifungal Pisum sativum defensin 1 (Psd1) in Pichia
pastoris: overcoming the inefficiency of the STE13 protease.

Cabral KM(1), Almeida MS, Valente AP, Almeida FC, Kurtenbach E.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioqui;mica MÃ©dica, CCS/ICB/UFRJ, CEP: 21941-590, Rio de
Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

Plant defensins are small cysteine-rich proteins that present high activity
against fungi and bacteria and inhibition of insect proteases and alpha-amylases.
Here, we present the expression in Pichia pastoris, purification and
characterization of the recombinant Pisum sativum defensin 1(rPsd1); a pea
defensin which presents four disulfide bridges and high antifungal activity. For 
this, we had to overcome the inefficiency of the STE13 protease. Our strategy was
to clone the corresponding cDNA directly in-frame with a variant of the widely
used secretion signal from the Saccharomyces cerevisiae alpha-mating factor,
devoid of the STE13 proteolytic signal cleavage sequence. Using an optimized
expression protocol, which included a buffered basal salt media formulation, it
was possible to obtain about 63.0mg/L of 15N-labeled and unlabeled rPsd1. The
recombinants were purified to homogeneity by gel filtration chromatography,
followed by reversed-phase HPLC. Mass spectrometry of native and recombinant Psd1
revealed that the protein expressed heterologously was post-translationally
processed to the same mature protein as the native one. Circular dichroism and
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy analysis indicated that the recombinant
protein had the same folding when compared to native Psd1. In addition, the rPsd1
was fully active against Aspergillus niger, if compared with native Psd1. To our 
knowledge, this is the first heterologous expression of a fully active plant
defensin in a high-yield flask.

DOI: 10.1016/s1046-5928(03)00136-0 
PMID: 12963348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

