
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 28;278(48):47610-21. Epub 2003 Sep 16.

Identification of PSD-93 as a substrate for the Src family tyrosine kinase Fyn.

Nada S(1), Shima T, Yanai H, Husi H, Grant SG, Okada M, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncogene Research, Research Institute for Microbial Disease,
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. nada@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp

In order to study the role of tyrosine kinase signaling in the post-synaptic
density (PSD), tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins associated with the PSD-95/NMDA
receptor complex were analyzed. The NMDA receptor complex from the mouse brain
was successfully solubilized with deoxycholate and immunopurified with
anti-PSD-95 or anti-phosphotyrosine antibody. Immunoblot analyses revealed that
the predominantly tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins in the NMDA receptor complex
are the NR2A/B subunits and a novel 120 kDa protein. Purification and
microsequencing analysis showed that the 120 kDa protein is mouse
PSD-93/Chapsyn-110. Recombinant PSD-93 was phosphorylated by Fyn in vitro, and
Tyr-384 was identified as a major phosphorylation site. Tyrosine phosphorylation 
of PSD-93 was greatly reduced in brain tissue from Fyn-deficient mice compared
with wild-type mice. Furthermore, an N-terminal palmitoylation signal of PSD-93
was found to be essential for its anchoring to the membrane, where Fyn is also
localized. In COS7 cells, exogenously expressed PSD-93 was phosphorylated,
dependent on its membrane localization. In addition, tyrosine-phosphorylated
PSD-93 was able to bind to Csk, a negative regulator of Src family kinases, in
vitro as well as in a brain lysate. These results suggest that PSD-93 serves as a
membrane-anchored substrate of Fyn and plays a role in the regulation of
Fyn-mediated modification of NMDA receptor function.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M303873200 
PMID: 13129934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

