
1. J Mol Biol. 1992 Apr 5;224(3):559-74.

Strand-specific LINE-1 transcription in mouse F9 cells originates from the
youngest phylogenetic subgroup of LINE-1 elements.

Schichman SA(1), Severynse DM, Edgell MH, Hutchison CA 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill 27599.

LINE-1 (L1) is a mammalian family of highly repeated DNA sequences that are
members of a class of transposable elements whose movement involves an RNA
intermediate. Both structural and evolutionary data indicate that the L1 family
consists of a small number of active transposable elements interspersed with a
large number of L1 pseudogenes. In the mouse, the longest, characterized L1
sequences span about 7000 base-pairs and contain two long open reading frames.
Two subfamilies of mouse L1 elements, A and F, have been defined on the basis of 
the type of putative transcriptional regulatory sequence found at the 5' end. In 
order to identify a transcribed subset of L1 elements in mouse F9 teratocarcinoma
cells, we have examined the strand-specificity of L1 transcription by Northern
analysis and compared the open reading frame-1 sequences of ten A-type cDNAs with
fifteen genomic A-type L1 elements. Transcripts containing A-type sequence are
far more abundant than those containing F-type sequence. Although the majority of
L1 RNA in F9 cells appears to be transcribed non-specifically from both strands, 
our results provide evidence for a subpopulation of variable length,
strand-specific transcripts arising from A-type transcriptional regulatory
sequences. F9 cell cDNA sequences, which share greater than 99.5% sequence
identity with one another, represent a homogeneous subset of the genomic L1
population. Examination of genomic mouse L1 sequences reveals three types of
length polymorphism in a defined segment of the first open reading frame.
Phylogenetic analysis shows a correlation between the type of length polymorphism
in the first open reading frame and the relative age of an individual A-type
genomic L1 element. Comparison of the cDNA and genomic sequences indicates that
the youngest subgroup of A-type L1 elements is preferentially transcribed in F9
cells. This subgroup may be currently dominating the L1 dispersal process in
mice.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(92)90544-t 
PMID: 1314898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

