
1. J Immunol. 1992 Jun 1;148(11):3588-95.

In vitro, Candida albicans releases the immune modulator adenosine and a second, 
high-molecular weight agent that blocks neutrophil killing.

Smail EH(1), Cronstein BN, Meshulam T, Esposito AL, Ruggeri RW, Diamond RD.

Author information: 
(1)Evans Memorial Department of Clinical Research, University Hospital, Boston
University Medical Center, MA 02118.

We previously described a lyophilized supernatant from germinated Candida
albicans that blocks human neutrophil (PMN) O2- production and degranulation
stimulated by several PMN agonists but does not block stimulation by PMA. In
studies to further characterize this Candida hyphal inhibitory product (CHIP), we
noted several physicochemical parallels with the purine nucleoside adenosine
(Ado). A Sephadex G-10 semipurified fraction of CHIP had an absorption peak near 
260 nm, an apparent m.w. of less than 400, and was resistant to boiling and
proteases. Maximally effective doses of CHIP (100 micrograms/ml) and Ado (100
microM) blocked 0.1 microM FMLP-stimulated O2- production by 76.8 +/- 4.1 and
81.7 +/- 4.8%, respectively. Ado deaminase, known to inactivate Ado, reversed
inhibition by both Ado and CHIP. Results were comparable for the effect of CHIP
and Ado on FMLP-stimulated beta-glucuronidase and lactoferrin release. Activation
of the respiratory burst by opsonized C. albicans yeast was also inhibited by
CHIP and Ado, but the extent of inhibition was less than for FMLP. At yeast:PMN
ratios of 4:1, 10:1, and 40:1, CHIP inhibited O2- by -3.8%, 14.3%, and 12.8%,
respectively; Ado blocked production by 32.9%, 24.2%, and 11.5%, respectively.
The effect of CHIP and Ado on Candida killing by PMN was compared using two
viability assays in each of four experiments. Ado (100 microM) had no effect on
killing, although CHIP (100 micrograms/ml) inhibited killing in the MTT assay at 
15 and 45 min by 81.6 +/- 6.3 and 24.7 +/- 6.2%, respectively; as assayed by CFU,
CHIP inhibited killing by 34.1 +/- 6.2 and 10.3 +/- 2.5%, respectively. The
ability of CHIP to inhibit killing was not affected by adding Ado deaminase,
providing additional evidence that an Ado-like effect by CHIP is not essential
for killing inhibition. Killing of opsonized Streptococcus pneumoniae was also
inhibited in a concentration-dependent manner. Reverse-phase HPLC of the
semipurified fraction revealed a peak, eluting identically to authentic Ado,
which was eliminated by adding Ado deaminase. Ado content of the G-10 fraction
was sufficient to account fully for the FMLP-inhibitory activity. The antikilling
activity was resistant to boiling and proteases but was eliminated by mild
periodation. Fractions eluting from a Sephadex CL6B column between 0.8 and 2.0 x 
10(6) m.w. had increased sp. act. for killing inhibition. Sp. act. increased as
carbohydrate content increased, but killing inhibition by various Candida cell
wall constituents was absent to modest compared to inhibition induced by
CHIP.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)


PMID: 1316920  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

