
1. Int Immunol. 1992 Mar;4(3):367-75.

Role of endogenous peptide in human alloreactive cytotoxic T cell responses.

Man S(1), Salter RD, Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville 22908.

The T x B hybrid 174 x CEM.T2 (T2) has been shown to be defective in the
processing of proteins for presentation by MHC class I molecules. It continues,
however, to express significant quantities of HLA-A2.1, suggesting that this
class I molecule is expressed either in a largely peptide-free form or in
association with a small subset of peptides. In this paper T2 was used in
conjunction with limiting dilution analysis to provide a direct estimate of the
fraction of alloreactive cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) that were dependent upon 
the presence of peptides for their recognition of HLA-A2.1. Alloreactive
cytotoxic T cell lines generated by stimulation with HLA-A2.1 expressing
peripheral blood lymphocytes recognized T2 poorly. Split-well analysis of 240
clonal limiting dilution cultures demonstrated that this reflected the existence 
of two subpopulations. An average 85% of HLA-A2.1 specific CTLs recognized
HLA-A2.1 on normal cells but not on T2. The remainder recognized HLA-A2.1 on both
T2 and normal targets. CTL lines with the latter specificity could be generated
by using T2 as a stimulator cell. Using target cells that either expressed a
lower density of HLA-A2.1 or that expressed HLA-A2 molecules that had been
mutated to affect CD8 binding, no significant differences in avidity between
T2-reactive and T2-unreactive CTLs were seen. Thus the failure of the majority of
alloreactive CTLs to recognize T2 is not a consequence of the lower level of
HLA-A2.1 surface expression on this cell, but is instead due to the absence of
appropriate epitopes.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/4.3.367 
PMID: 1373643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

