
1. Exp Hematol. 1992 Jun;20(5):590-9.

Differential sensitivity of CD34 epitopes to cleavage by Pasteurella haemolytica 
glycoprotease: implications for purification of CD34-positive progenitor cells.

Sutherland DR(1), Marsh JC, Davidson J, Baker MA, Keating A, Mellors A.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Laboratory, Toronto Hospital, Ontario, Canada.

Our previous studies have shown that a unique glycoprotease from Pasteurella
haemolytica specifically cleaves only proteins containing sialylated O-linked
glycans. The hematopoietic progenitor cell antigen, CD34, which is heavily
glycosylated with both N- and O-linked glycans, is readily cleaved by this
protease. In this study, we demonstrate that the epitopes detected by five of the
seven CD34 monoclonal antibodies are removed by the glycoprotease. The
differential sensitivity of the CD34 epitopes to cleavage with either
neuraminidase and/or glycoprotease establishes three classes of epitopes: 1)
(class I) those identified by MY10, B1.3C5, 12.8, and ICH3 that are
differentially affected by neuraminidase and removed by the glycoprotease; 2)
(class II) the epitope detected by QBEND 10 that is removed only by the
glycoprotease; and 3) (class III) those identified by TUK3 and 115.2 that are not
removed by either enzyme. Cleavage of the 110-kd CD34 structure by the
glycoprotease generates a major cell-bound fragment of about 75 kd, identified by
the class III antibodies. We have also used the enzyme to improve the rapid
recovery of CD34+ cells selected by immunomagnetic affinity techniques. In a
preclinical model, we separated CD34+ KG1 cells with high yield (90%-95%) and
high purity (94%-98%) from sham mixtures containing 50% CD34- cells. We also
separated CD34+ blast cells from a patient in megakaryoblastic crisis of chronic 
myelogenous leukemia. In this case, the purity and yield were 93% and 94%,
respectively. Enzyme treatment had no detrimental effect on cell viability, and
the treated cells showed a normal quantitative expression and distribution of
CD34 antigen as assessed with class III antibodies. We conclude that the P.
haemolytica glycoprotease has potential to improve the isolation, from human bone
marrow, of primitive hematopoietic cells that carry the CD34 antigen.


PMID: 1375160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

