
1. Hum Immunol. 1992 Mar;33(3):185-92.

Localization and characterization of serologic epitopes on HLA-A2.

Hogan KT(1), Brown SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee 53226.

A panel of cells expressing 68 different mutant HLA-A2 genes was generated by
site-directed mutagenesis and DNA-mediated gene transfer in order to define the
regions of class I MHC molecules that contribute to the epitopes recognized by
mAb. Each of the variant HLA-A2 molecules differed from HLA-A2.1 by a single
amino acid substitution. The substitutions were located in both the alpha-helices
and beta-strands of the alpha 1 and alpha 2 domains, and included residues that
are highly polymorphic and that are conserved. All but five of the variant HLA-A2
molecules were expressed at levels that ranged from approximately 25%-100% the
levels found for HLA-A2.1. The remaining five variants had no detectable
expression and all involved substitutions at highly conserved residues. Eleven
mAbs with specificities that ranged from highly HLA-A2 specific to monomorphic
were analyzed for their ability to bind the variant HLA-A2 molecules. The results
demonstrate that the binding of five of 11 mAbs could be mapped to the alpha 1
and alpha 2 domains. MA2.1 was the only antibody mapped to the alpha 1 domain.
CR11-351 and A2,A28M1 recognized an overlapping epitope at the amino terminal end
of the alpha 2-helix, and PA2.1 and BB7.2 recognized an overlapping epitope that 
includes the carboxy terminus of the alpha 2-helix and a turn on one of the
underlying beta-strands. These results demonstrate that positions located on the 
surface of the molecule, but not within the peptide-binding cleft of the
molecule, are important in serological specificities.

DOI: 10.1016/0198-8859(92)90070-4 
PMID: 1377666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

