
1. Blood. 1992 Aug 15;80(4):1026-32.

OMA-AML-1: a leukemic myeloid cell line with CD34+ progenitor and CD15+
spontaneously differentiating cell compartments.

Pirruccello SJ(1), Jackson JD, Lang MS, DeBoer J, Mann S, Crouse D, Vaughan WP,
Dicke KA, Sharp JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha 68198.

OMA-AML-1 was established from a patient with acute myelomonocytic (M4) leukemia 
at fifth relapse when blasts were greater than 85% CD34+, CD15-. Leukemic cells
were established in suspension culture and independently grown as subcutaneous
tumors in SCID mice. Cells growing in suspension culture underwent
differentiation by phenotypic and morphologic criteria. In contrast, cells grown 
as subcutaneous solid tumors in SCID mice maintained progenitor cell
characteristics with high-density CD34 expression and lack of morphologic
differentiation. A tendency toward differentiation to CD15+, CD34- cells in vitro
and self-renewal of CD34+, CD15- cells in vivo was consistently demonstrated
regardless of whether cells were initially grown in vitro or in vivo. The cell
line maintains both a CD34+, CD15- progentitor cell pool and a non-overlapping,
CD15+, CD34- differentiating cell compartment after more than 1 year in
continuous culture. Cell cycle analysis and cloning experiments were consistent
with terminal differentiation occurring in the CD15+, CD34- population. The cell 
line shows concentration-dependent proliferative responses to interleukin (IL)-3,
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and IL-6, but not to
granulocyte CSF (G-CSF). OMA-AML-1 appears to mimic several features of normal
myeloid hematopoiesis and should prove useful for the study of normal and
malignant myeloid differentiation.


PMID: 1379848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

