
1. Eur J Immunol. 1992 Aug;22(8):2093-9.

Characterization of molecular components associated with surface immunoglobulin M
in human B lymphocytes: presence of tyrosine and serine/threonine protein
kinases.

Leprince C(1), Draves KE, Ledbetter JA, Torres RM, Clark EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle 98195.

To characterize the signal transduction through the antigen receptor (AgR) on
human B lymphocytes, we analyzed its association with other molecular components.
The surface IgM (sIgM) complex isolated in digitonin contains two surface
expressed polypeptides--the previously described Ig alpha and Ig beta
proteins--covalently linked to each other in a 48/39-kDa heterodimer. We show
herein that the human sIgM complex isolated from the Burkitt's lymphoma cell
line, Ramos, or from dense tonsillar B cells contains additional molecules--160
kDa and 75 kDa in size--and enzymatic activities able to phosphorylate on
tyrosine as well as serine/threonine residues the 39-, 48-, 75- and 160-kDa
polypeptides. By specific immunoprecipitation with antibodies to src-family
kinases, we consistently detected p56lyn in the sIgM complex. In the Ramos cell
line, both p56lck and p59fyn activity were also observed, although to a much
lesser extent than p56lyn. These kinases are associated with sIgM before cell
stimulation. As shown by two-dimensional electrophoresis, they interact in a
tight complex with multimeric forms of the Ig alpha and Ig beta components. The
kinases are active in vitro but must be highly regulated in vivo: Western
blotting with anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies revealed that stimulation of the
AgR on viable B cells increased detectable phosphotyrosine residues on the
components present in the sIgM complex. Based on these phosphorylation changes,
the 39-, 48-, 75- and 160-kDa molecules are likely to be functionally active
elements in an IgM complex crucial for the transduction of the antigenic signal.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830220820 
PMID: 1386314  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

