
1. J Cell Biochem. 1992 Aug;49(4):366-77.

Altered DNA/protein complexes specific for the beta-interferon regulatory region 
observed in murine embryonal carcinoma F9 cells.

Francis MK(1), Lehman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, Albany Medical
College, New York 12208.

Murine embryonal carcinoma (EC) F9 cells do not produce interferon (IFN) at the
protein or RNA level in response to inducing agents, while retinoic acid
differentiated F9 cells do produce IFN. A probe was constructed spanning
positions -104 to -39 of the human beta-IFN upstream regulatory region to examine
this developmental control at the level of a transcriptional regulatory
mechanism. Gel mobility shift analyses were used to examine this molecular
mechanism to determine whether the differential expression of positive or
negative trans-acting factors may act to control beta-IFN expression in
undifferentiated EC cells. These analyses showed that while nuclear extracts from
poly-I,C induced L929 cells, in the IFN producing cell line, showed two shifted
bands, nuclear extracts from both induced and uninduced F9 cells showed only one 
shifted band using the -104/-39 probe. While this single shifted band co-migrated
with the faster migrating species of L929 cell extracts, competition analysis
revealed differences between the two complexes. An oligonucleotide representing
the positive regulatory domain PRDII competed efficiently for the probe when
induced F9 cell extracts were examined, but failed to compete when induced L929
cell extracts were examined. In contrast, an oligonucleotide representing the
positive regulatory domain PRDI competed very well when induced L929 cell
extracts were examined but had only a minimal effect when induced F9 cell
extracts were examined. These data suggest the involvement of developmentally
regulated transcriptional factor(s) which have yet to be characterized.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.240490407 
PMID: 1429865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

