
1. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Oct 1;289(2):211-21.

Yeast two-hybrid screens imply involvement of Fanconi anemia proteins in
transcription regulation, cell signaling, oxidative metabolism, and cellular
transport.

Reuter TY(1), Medhurst AL, Waisfisz Q, Zhi Y, Herterich S, Hoehn H, Gross HJ,
Joenje H, Hoatlin ME, Mathew CG, Huber PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wuerzburg, D-97074 Wuerzburg,
Germany.

Mutations in one of at least eight different genes cause bone marrow failure,
chromosome instability, and predisposition to cancer associated with the rare
genetic syndrome Fanconi anemia (FA). The cloning of seven genes has provided the
tools to study the molecular pathway disrupted in Fanconi anemia patients. The
structure of the genes and their gene products provided few clues to their
functional role. We report here the use of 3 FA proteins, FANCA, FANCC, and
FANCG, as "baits" in the hunt for interactors to obtain clues for FA protein
functions. Using five different human cDNA libraries we screened 36.5x10(6)
clones with the technique of the yeast two-hybrid system. We identified 69
proteins which have not previously been linked to the FA pathway as direct
interactors of FANCA, FANCC, or FANCG. Most of these proteins are associated with
four functional classes including transcription regulation (21 proteins),
signaling (13 proteins), oxidative metabolism (10 proteins), and intracellular
transport (11 proteins). Interaction with 6 proteins, DAXX, Ran, IkappaBgamma,
USP14, and the previously reported SNX5 and FAZF, was additionally confirmed by
coimmunoprecipitation and/or colocalization studies. Taken together, our data
strongly support the hypothesis that FA proteins are functionally involved in
several complex cellular pathways including transcription regulation, cell
signaling, oxidative metabolism, and cellular transport.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-4827(03)00261-1 
PMID: 14499622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

