
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 28;278(48):47466-76. Epub 2003 Sep 24.

Development of a yeast bioassay to characterize G protein-coupled receptor
kinases. Identification of an NH2-terminal region essential for receptor
phosphorylation.

Noble B(1), Kallal LA, Pausch MH, Benovic JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

G protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) specifically bind and phosphorylate the
agonist-occupied form of G protein-coupled receptors. To further characterize the
mechanism of GRK/receptor interaction, we developed a yeast-based bioassay using 
strains engineered to functionally express the somatostatin receptor subtype 2
and exhibit agonist-dependent growth. Here, we demonstrate that agonist-promoted 
growth was effectively inhibited by co-expression with either wild type GRK2 or
GRK5, whereas catalytically inactive forms of these kinases were without effect. 
In an effort to identify residues involved in receptor interaction, we generated 
a pool of GRK5 mutants and then utilized the bioassay to identify mutants
selectively deficient in inhibiting agonist-promoted growth. This resulted in the
identification of a large number of mutants, several of which were expressed,
purified, and characterized in more detail. Two of the mutants, GRK5-L3Q/K113R
and GRK5-T10P, were defective in receptor phosphorylation and also exhibited a
partial defect in phospholipid binding and phospholipid-stimulated
autophosphorylation of the kinase. In contrast, these mutants had wild type
activity in phosphorylating the non-receptor substrate tubulin. To further
characterize the function of the NH2-terminal region of GRK5, we generated a
deletion mutant lacking residues 2-14 and found that this mutant was also
severely impaired in receptor phosphorylation and phospholipid-promoted
autophosphorylation. In addition, an NH2-terminal 14-amino acid peptide from GRK5
selectively inhibited receptor phosphorylation by GRK5 but had minimal effect on 
GRK2 activity. Based on these findings, we propose a model whereby the extreme
NH2 terminus of GRK5 mediates phospholipid binding and is required for optimal
receptor phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M308257200 
PMID: 14507916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

