
1. Hum Immunol. 2003 Oct;64(10):960-4.

Association of the HLA-DR15/HLA-DQ6 haplotype with development of choroidal
neovascular lesions in presumed ocular histoplasmosis syndrome.

Dabil H(1), Kaplan HJ, Duffy BF, Phelan DL, Mohanakumar T, Jaramillo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Associations of human leukocyte antigen DR2 (HLA-DR2) and HLA-B7 with presumed
ocular histoplasmosis syndrome (POHS) in the United States has been previously
described. However, these associations were determined by means of
low-resolution, complement-dependent cytotoxicity assays for HLA-A, HLA-B, and
HLA-DR molecules. To determine whether POHS is associated with other HLA alleles 
within the HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-DR, and HLA-DQ loci, we performed a case control
study of 34 patients diagnosed with macular choroidal neovascular membrane
secondary to POHS and 45 healthy control individuals. Peripheral blood-derived
DNA from the study patients was typed for HLA genes by means of sequence-specific
primers that gave low-medium allele resolution. Significant associations were
observed between HLA-B7 (X2 = 14.30, pc = 0.004, relative risk = 8.23), HLA-DR15 
(X2 = 29.08, pc = 0.000001, relative risk = 27.50), and HLA-DQ6 (X2 = 23.09, pc =
0.00001, relative risk = 27.43) and POHS. Because there are strong linkage
disequilibria between HLA-DR15 (a subtype of HLA-DR2) and HLA-B7 as well as
HLA-DQ6, the significantly higher association of HLA-DR15 and HLA-DQ6 with POHS
as compared to HLA-B7 suggests that the former alleles mediate susceptibility to 
the disease. In conclusion, there is a significant association between the
HLA-DR15/HLA-DQ6 haplotype and development of choroidal neovascular lesions in
POHS.

DOI: 10.1016/s0198-8859(03)00175-7 
PMID: 14522093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

