
1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 19;278(51):50908-14. Epub 2003 Oct 13.

G protein-coupled receptor kinase interaction with Hsp90 mediates kinase
maturation.

Luo J(1), Benovic JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (GRK2) is a serine/threonine-specific protein
kinase that mediates agonist-dependent phosphorylation of numerous G
protein-coupled receptors. In an effort to identify proteins that regulate GRK2
function, we searched for interacting proteins by immunoprecipitation of
endogenous GRK2 from HL60 cells. Subsequent analysis by gel electrophoresis and
mass spectrometry revealed that GRK2 associates with heat shock protein 90
(Hsp90). GRK2 interaction with Hsp90 was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation and 
was effectively disrupted by geldanamycin, an Hsp90-specific inhibitor.
Interestingly, geldanamycin treatment of HL60 cells decreased the expression of
endogenous GRK2 in a dose- and time-dependent manner, and metabolic labeling
demonstrated that geldanamycin rapidly accelerated the degradation of newly
synthesized GRK2. The use of various protease inhibitors suggested that GRK2
degradation induced by geldanamycin was predominantly through the proteasome
pathway. To test whether Hsp90 plays a general role in regulating GRK maturation,
additional GRKs were studied by transient expression in COS-1 cells and
subsequent treatment with geldanamycin. These studies demonstrate that GRK3,
GRK5, and GRK6 are also stabilized by interaction with Hsp90. Taken together, our
work revealed that GRK interaction with heat shock proteins plays an important
role in regulating GRK maturation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M307637200 
PMID: 14557268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

