
1. J Dent Res. 2003 Nov;82(11):877-82.

Intracellular calcium in signaling human beta-defensin-2 expression in oral
epithelial cells.

Krisanaprakornkit S(1), Jotikasthira D, Dale BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Odontology-Oral Pathology, Faculty of Dentistry, Chiang Mai
University, Thailand. sutichai@chiangmai.ac.th

Expression of human beta-defensins is correlated with differentiation in the oral
epithelium, consistent with their function as part of the epithelial
antimicrobial barrier. Because calcium is a known regulator of epithelial
differentiation, we tested the hypothesis that calcium concentration mediates
beta-defensin expression. Gingival epithelial cells were cultured in medium
containing low calcium concentration (0.03 mM), then either changed to high
extracellular calcium concentrations or stimulated with thapsigargin to release
intracellular calcium stores in the presence or absence of BAPTA-AM, a calcium
chelator. Human beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2) mRNA expression was rapidly induced by
thapsigargin, and more slowly induced by high extracellular calcium. Induction of
hBD-2 peptide was confirmed by immunofluorescence. BAPTA-AM inhibited hBD-2
induction by both thapsigargin and calcium in a dose-dependent fashion. In
addition, BAPTA-AM inhibited hBD-2 induction by a bacterial stimulant.
Collectively, these findings demonstrate that intracellular calcium is a critical
mediator of hBD-2 expression. Abbreviations used in this study are: BAPTA-AM,
1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy)-ethane-N,N,N',N'-tetra-acetic acid tetrakis
(acetoxymethyl ester); DMSO, dimethylsulfoxide; F. nucleatum, Fusobacterium
nucleatum; GAPDH, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; HBDs, human
beta-defensins; HGECs, human gingival epithelial cells; MAP, mitogen-activated
protein; and RT-PCR, reverse-transcriptase/polymerase chain-reaction.

DOI: 10.1177/154405910308201106 
PMID: 14578498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

