
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2003 Sep 24;56(2):115-26.

Starvation of Flavobacterium psychrophilum in broth, stream water and distilled
water.

Vatsos IN(1), Thompson KD, Adams A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Aquaculture, Stirling University, Stirling FK9 4LA, UK.

Physical changes in Flavobacterium psychrophilum, the causative agent of rainbow 
trout fry syndrome (RTFS), were examined over a 19 wk period of starvation.
Bacteria were maintained in either Cytophaga broth, filtered stream water, or
filtered distilled water, or were maintained in broth after disinfection as a
negative control for dead bacteria. Culturability and viability of the bacterium 
were assessed using colony-forming units (CFUs) and a commercially available
live/dead kit. Antigenic profiles and general morphology of the bacterium were
also examined using Western blot analysis and electron microscopy, respectively. 
The bacterium appeared to stop multiplying and became smaller and rounded when
maintained in stream water. Its culturability declined until it was no longer
possible to obtain colonies on agar plates at the end of the trial at 19 wk, and 
results from the live/dead kit did not correspond with the viability obtained as 
CFUs in culture. However, it was still possible to obtain growth of the bacterium
after 36 wk with a resuscitation step in Cytophaga broth. Bacteria maintained in 
distilled water or treated with a disinfectant appeared non-viable using the
live/dead kit and were unable to grow on agar 1 h after setting up the
experiment; no morphological changes were observed in the bacteria maintained
under these conditions. Bacteria maintained in broth were present as long, slim
rods, some of which developed into 'ring' formations. Small differences were
observed in the antigen profiles of the bacteria maintained under the different
treatments, possibly due to a reduction in the size and metabolism of the
bacteria. There was also a marked decline in the sensitivity of the PCR with
bacteria maintained under the different treatments 14 wk from the onset of the
study.

DOI: 10.3354/dao056115 
PMID: 14598987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

