
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2003 Dec;48(12):815-24.

A 100 kDa vanadate and lanzoprazole-sensitive ATPase from Streptococcus mutans
membrane.

Magalhães PP(1), Paulino TP, Thedei G Jr, Larson RE, Ciancaglini P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Qui;mica, Faculdade de Filosofia Ciências e Letras de Ribeirão
Preto (FFCLRP), Universidade de São Paulo (USP), 14040-901, SP, Ribeirão Preto,
Brazil

The cariogenic potential of Streptococcus mutans is due to the production of
organic acids derived from energy metabolism, which implies the need of
mechanisms for the organism to tolerate this acidic environment. The
F(1)F(o)-ATPase is generally considered as the main enzyme responsible for
cytoplasmic proton extrusion, but mutations that resulted in a 50% reduction in
F(1)F(o)-ATPase activity in S. mutans still allowed the micro-organism to grow
and extrude acid, keeping the intracellular pH one pH unit above the
extracellular ambient. This finding suggests the existence of other enzymatic (or
cellular) mechanisms that keep the cytosolic pH neutral during micro-organism
growth. This paper describes a membrane protein in S. mutans, with a molecular
weight of 100 kDa, which exhibits ATPase activity inhibited by classic inhibitors
of P-type ATPases (orthovanadate) and H(+),K(+)-ATPase (lanzoprazole), has an
optimum pH comparable to other H(+)-ATPases and undergoes phosphorylation during 
the catalytic reaction, like that of H(+)-ATPases described in yeast and plant
plasma membrane. Together, these results strongly suggest that the enzyme we
describe here is a P-type H(+)-ATPase or H(+),ion-ATPase that can act in
association with F(1)F(o)-ATPase during the growth of the S. mutans.

DOI: 10.1016/s0003-9969(03)00177-8 
PMID: 14596871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

