
1. J Bacteriol. 2003 Nov;185(22):6548-55.

Identification and characterization of a unique adenosine kinase from
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Long MC(1), Escuyer V, Parker WB.

Author information: 
(1)Southern Research Institute, Birmingham, Alabama 35205, USA.

Adenosine kinase (AK) is a purine salvage enzyme that catalyzes the
phosphorylation of adenosine to AMP. In Mycobacterium tuberculosis, AK can also
catalyze the phosphorylation of the adenosine analog 2-methyladenosine
(methyl-Ado), the first step in the metabolism of this compound to an active
form. Purification of AK from M. tuberculosis yielded a 35-kDa protein that
existed as a dimer in its native form. Adenosine (Ado) was preferred as a
substrate at least 30-fold (Km = 0.8 +/- 0.08 microM) over other natural
nucleosides, and substrate inhibition was observed when Ado concentrations
exceeded 5 micro M. M. tuberculosis and human AKs exhibited different affinities 
for methyl-Ado, with Km values of 79 and 960 microM, respectively, indicating
that differences exist between the substrate binding sites of these enzymes. ATP 
was a good phosphate donor (Km = 1100 +/- 140 microM); however, the activity
levels observed with dGTP and GTP were 4.7 and 2.5 times the levels observed with
ATP, respectively. M. tuberculosis AK activity was dependent on Mg2+, and
activity was stimulated by potassium, as reflected by a decrease in the Km and an
increase in Vmax for both Ado and methyl-Ado. The N-terminal amino acid sequence 
of the purified enzyme revealed complete identity with Rv2202c, a protein
currently classified as a hypothetical sugar kinase. When an AK-deficient strain 
of M. tuberculosis (SRICK1) was transformed with this gene, it exhibited a
5,000-fold increase in AK activity compared to extracts from the original
mutants. These results verified that the protein that we identified as AK was
coded for by Rv2202c. AK is not commonly found in bacteria, and to the best of
our knowledge, M. tuberculosis AK is the first bacterial AK to be characterized. 
The enzyme shows greater sequence homology with ribokinase and fructokinase than 
it does with other AKs. The multiple differences that exist between M.
tuberculosis and human AKs may provide the molecular basis for the development of
nucleoside analog compounds with selective activity against M. tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.185.22.6548-6555.2003 
PMCID: PMC262096
PMID: 14594827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

