
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2003 Dec;48(12):797-804.

Hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor in development, inflammation and
carcinogenesis: its expression and role in oral tissues.

Ohnishi T(1), Daikuhara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kagoshima University Dental School, 35-1
Sakuragaoka-8, 890, Kagoshima, Japan.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) was discovered as a potent mitogen for adult
hepatocytes from the plasma of patients with fulminant hepatic failure. It is now
known to be a broad-spectrum, multi-functional mitogen, motogen and morphogen.
The activities of HGF are mediated through the signalling pathway of its
receptor, c-Met. During tooth development, HGF is expressed in the dental papilla
and c-Met is expressed in the inner enamel epithelium. The expression of HGF and 
c-Met indicates that HGF is involved in morphogenesis of the tooth by mediating
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. In the mature tooth, HGF expression by
fibroblasts is enhanced in pulpitis and mediated through the induction of
prostaglandin (PG) E(2); it is induced not only by inflammatory cytokines, but
also by components of oral bacteria. Consequently, concentrations of HGF in
gingival crevicular fluid (GCF) increase in periodontitis. The mitogenic and
other biological activities, such as angiogenesis, of HGF contribute towards
wound healing. Both HGF and c-Met are expressed in the developing tongue, and the
signalling pathway of the latter is shown to be essential for myogenesis.
Dysregulation of c-Met signalling is observed in carcinogenesis, but HGF also has
cytotoxic activity to certain tumour cells. The reason for the discrepancy
between these observations is not clear at present.

DOI: 10.1016/s0003-9969(03)00180-8 
PMID: 14596869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

