
1. Blood. 2004 Mar 1;103(5):1702-9. Epub 2003 Oct 30.

Thrombomodulin mutant mice with a strongly reduced capacity to generate activated
protein C have an unaltered pulmonary immune response to respiratory pathogens
and lipopolysaccharide.

Rijneveld AW(1), Weijer S, Florquin S, Esmon CT, Meijers JC, Speelman P, Reitsma 
PH, Ten Cate H, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
a.w.rijneveld@amc.uva.nl

The thrombomodulin-protein C-protein S (TM-PC-PS) pathway exerts anticoagulant
and anti-inflammatory effects. We investigated the role of TM in the pulmonary
immune response in vivo by the use of mice with a mutation in the TM gene
(TM(pro/pro)) that was earlier found to result in a minimal capacity for
activated PC (APC) generation in the circulation. We here demonstrate that
TM(pro/pro) mice also display a strongly reduced capacity to produce APC in the
alveolar compartment upon intrapulmonary delivery of PC and thrombin. We
monitored procoagulant and inflammatory changes in the lung during Gram-positive 
(Streptococcus pneumoniae) and Gram-negative (Klebsiella pneumoniae) pneumonia
and after local administration of lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Bacterial pneumonia
was associated with fibrin(ogen) depositions in the lung that colocalized with
inflammatory infiltrates. LPS also induced a rise in thrombin-antithrombin
complexes in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. These pulmonary procoagulant responses
were unaltered in TM(pro/pro) mice, except for enhanced fibrin(ogen) deposition
during pneumococcal pneumonia. In addition, TM(pro/pro) mice displayed unchanged 
antibacterial defense, neutrophil recruitment, and cytokine/chemokine levels.
These data suggest that the capacity of TM to generate APC does not play a role
of importance in the pulmonary response to respiratory pathogens or LPS.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2002-05-1380 
PMID: 14592828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

