
1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2004 Apr;53(4):307-14. Epub 2003 Nov 5.

Her-2/ neu altered peptide ligand-induced CTL responses: implications for
peptides with increased HLA affinity and T-cell-receptor interaction.

Dionne SO(1), Myers CE, Smith MH, Lake DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Arizona Cancer Center, University
of Arizona, 1515 North Campbell Avenue, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

In this study, we developed two Her-2/ neu-derived E75 altered peptide ligands
(APLs) that demonstrate increased affinities for the HLA-A*0201 allele compared
with wild-type E75 peptide. The APLs contain amino acids from E75(369-377), an
immunodominant Her-2/ neu-derived peptide, and preferred primary and auxiliary
HLA-A*0201 molecule anchor residues previously identified from combinatorial
peptide library screening with the recombinant molecule. CTL lines were generated
against wild-type E75 peptide (KIFGSLAFL) and APLs by multiple rounds of peptide 
stimulation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from HLA-A2+ antigen
normal individuals. CTL lines raised on wild-type E75 peptide cross-reacted with 
APLs and similarly, CTL lines raised on APLs cross-reacted with wild-type E75
peptide, as measured by IFN-gamma ELISpot and target cell lysis assays. One of
five individuals demonstrated specificity for APL 2 (FLFGSLAFL), whereas APL 5
(FLFESLAFL)-specific responses were observed from all five individuals tested.
Molecular models of the E75, APL 2, and APL 5/HLA-A2 complexes indicated that the
substitution of glycine with glutamic acid at position four of APL 5 resulted in 
the presentation of a large, negatively charged side chain that interacts with
the outer edge of the HLA-A2 antigen alpha helix and is freely available to
interact with cognate T-cell receptors. The results of this study further
substantiate the concept that rational design of T-cell epitopes may lead to
stronger peptide immunogens than natural, wild-type peptides.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-003-0439-y 
PMID: 14605764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

