
1. J Immunol. 2003 Nov 15;171(10):5287-95.

Tapasin is a facilitator, not an editor, of class I MHC peptide binding.

Zarling AL(1), Luckey CJ, Marto JA, White FM, Brame CJ, Evans AM, Lehner PJ,
Cresswell P, Shabanowitz J, Hunt DF, Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Carter Immunology Center and Department of Microbiology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Tapasin has been proposed to function as a peptide editor to displace lower
affinity peptides and/or to favor the binding of high affinity peptides.
Consistent with this, cell surface HLA-B8 molecules in tapasin-deficient cells
were less stable and the peptide repertoire was substantially altered. However,
the binding affinities of peptides expressed in the absence of tapasin were
unexpectedly higher, not lower. The peptide repertoire from cells expressing
soluble tapasin was similar in both appearance and affinity to that presented in 
the presence of full-length tapasin, but the HLA-B8 molecules showed altered cell
surface stability characteristics. Similarly, the binding affinities of
HLA-A*0201-associated peptides from tapasin(+) and tapasin(-) cells were
equivalent, although steady state HLA-A*0201 cell surface expression was
decreased and the molecules demonstrated reduced cell surface stability on
tapasin(-) cells. These data are inconsistent with a role for tapasin as a
peptide editor. Instead, we propose that tapasin acts as a peptide facilitator.
In this role, it stabilizes the peptide-free conformation of class I MHC
molecules in the endoplasmic reticulum and thus increases the number and variety 
of peptides bound to class I MHC. Full-length tapasin then confers additional
stability on class I MHC molecules that are already associated with peptides.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.171.10.5287 
PMID: 14607930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

