
1. Tissue Antigens. 2003 Nov;62(5):378-84.

Sensitive quantitative predictions of peptide-MHC binding by a 'Query by
Committee' artificial neural network approach.

Buus S(1), Lauem√∏ller SL, Worning P, Kesmir C, Frimurer T, Corbet S, Fomsgaard A,
Hilden J, Holm A, Brunak S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Immunology, Institute of Medical Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. S.Buus@immi.ku.dk

We have generated Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) capable of performing
sensitive, quantitative predictions of peptide binding to the MHC class I
molecule, HLA-A*0204. We have shown that such quantitative ANN are superior to
conventional classification ANN, that have been trained to predict binding vs
non-binding peptides. Furthermore, quantitative ANN allowed a straightforward
application of a 'Query by Committee' (QBC) principle whereby particularly
information-rich peptides could be identified and subsequently tested
experimentally. Iterative training based on QBC-selected peptides considerably
increased the sensitivity without compromising the efficiency of the prediction. 
This suggests a general, rational and unbiased approach to the development of
high quality predictions of epitopes restricted to this and other HLA molecules. 
Due to their quantitative nature, such predictions will cover a wide range of
MHC-binding affinities of immunological interest, and they can be readily
integrated with predictions of other events involved in generating immunogenic
epitopes. These predictions have the capacity to perform rapid proteome-wide
searches for epitopes. Finally, it is an example of an iterative feedback loop
whereby advanced, computational bioinformatics optimize experimental strategy,
and vice versa.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-0039.2003.00112.x 
PMID: 14617044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

