
1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2004 May;53(5):383-90. Epub 2003 Nov 18.

In vivo priming of natural killer T cells by dendritic cells pulsed with
hepatoma-derived acid-eluted substances.

Ishii R(1), Shimizu M, Nakagawa Y, Shimizu K, Tanaka S, Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5
Sendagi, Bunkyo-ku, 113-8602, Tokyo, Japan.

Many murine tumor cells express not only individual haplotype-matched class I MHC
molecules, but also species-specific CD1d molecules. The former class I MHC
molecules generally present internally synthesized tumor-derived peptide antigens
to highly specific CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) in acquired immunity. In
contrast, the latter CD1d molecules may present tumor-associated glycolipid
antigens to broadly crossreactive natural killer T (NKT) cells, which might
correlate with controlling tumor metastasis. Here, we showed that murine hepatoma
cell line Hepa1-6-derived acid-eluted substances might contain both D(b) class I 
MHC-restricted antigens and CD1d-restricted substances, which could sensitize not
only syngeneic bone marrow-derived DCs (BM-DCs), but also allogeneic BM-DCs
expressing haplotype-mismatched class I MHC and species-specific CD1d molecules. 
To our surprise, intravenous (i.v.) immunization of C57BL/6 mice with the former 
syngeneic BM-DCs carrying acid-eluted materials primed both CD4(-)CD8(-) and
CD8(+) NKT cells in the spleen, whereas immunization with the latter allogeneic
BM-DCs loaded the tumor-derived substances primed CD4(-)CD8(-), but not CD8(+)
NKT cells. The findings shown in the present study will open a new area for
cancer immunotherapy using allogeneic DCs and tumor-derived acid-eluted
substances.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-003-0453-0 
PMID: 14624311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

