
1. Water Res. 2004 Jan;38(1):225-35.

Distribution of bacteria in a domestic hot water system in a Danish apartment
building.

Bagh LK(1), Albrechtsen HJ, Arvin E, Ovesen K.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental & Resources DTU, Technical University of Denmark, Building 115, 
DK-2800, Lyngby, Denmark. lkb@rovesta.dk

Bacterial growth in hot water systems seems to cause problems such as bad odor of
the water, skin allergies and increased heat transfer resistance in heating
coils. In order to establish a basis for long-term suppression of bacterial
growth, we studied the distribution of bacteria in a Danish domestic hot water
system. Heterotrophic plate counts (HPC) were measured in both water and biofilm 
samples from various sampling sites in the system. In hot water samples, where
the temperature was 55-60 degrees C, the HPC were 10(3)-10(4)CFU/mL at incubation
temperatures of 25 degrees C or 37 degrees C and 10(5)CFU/mL at 55 degrees C or
65 degrees C. In the cold water (10 degrees C) supplying the hot water system,
the HPC at 25 degrees C or 37 degrees C was lower than in the hot water, and no
bacteria were found after incubation at 55 degrees C or 65 degrees C. HPC
constituted from 38% to 84% of the AODC results in hot water but only 2% in cold 
water, which showed a high ratio of culturable bacteria in hot water. Biofilm
samples from the hot water tank and the inner surface of the pipes in the cold
and hot water distribution system were collected by specially designed sampling
devices, which were exposed in the system for 42 days. The quasi-steady-state
number of bacteria in the biofilm, measured as the geometric mean of the HPC
obtained between 21 and 42 days, was five-fold higher in the hot water pipe
(13x10(5)CFU/cm(2) at 55 degrees C) than in the cold water pipe
(2.8x10(5)CFU/cm(2) at 25 degrees C). There was no significant difference between
the number of bacteria in the biofilm samples from the top, middle and bottom of 
the hot water tank, and the number of bacteria in the biofilm counted at 55
degrees C ranged from 0.6x10(4) to 1.7x10(4)CFU/cm(2). The surfaces of the
sacrificial aluminum anodes and the heating coils in the hot water tank also
contained high bacterial numbers. The measured number of bacteria in water and
biofilm samples was related to the dimensions of the hot water system, and
calculations showed that the majority of bacteria (72%) were located in the
biofilm especially in the distribution system, which accounts for the greatest
surface area. Free-living bacteria accounted for 26% and only a minor part of the
bacteria were in the sludge in the hot water tank (2%).

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2003.08.026 
PMID: 14630121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

