
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2003 Nov;3(4):281-5.

Pneumocystis jiroveci in Portuguese immunocompromised patients: association of
specific ITS genotypes with treatment failure, bad clinical outcome and
childhood.

Matos O(1), Lee CH, Jin S, Li B, Costa MC, Gonçalves L, Antunes F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Unidade de Protozoários
Oportunistas/VIH e outras Protozooses, Unidade de Parasitologia e Microbiologia
Médicas (UPMM), Rua da Junqueira 96, 1349-008, Lisboa, Portugal.
omatos@ihmt.unl.pt

We analyzed the genetic variation among isolates of Pneumocystis jiroveci from
Portuguese immunocompromised patients with PCP at the internal transcribed spacer
(ITS) regions of the nuclear rRNA operon and at the dihydropteroate synthase
(DHPS) gene. Pulmonary secretions from 42 patients with PCP corresponding to 43
episodes were studied. Demographic, immunological, and clinical data were
obtained from all patients. By combining the two regions ITS1 and ITS2, we found 
17 different ITS types of P. jiroveci, two of them were new types (Pb and Pe).
The four most prevalent ITS types were Eg (23.3%), Eb and Ne (11.6% each), and Bi
(9.3%). A single type was detected in 95.3% of the samples and 4.7% had mixed
infections with three different ITS types. DHPS mutants were present in 17 (46%),
and the wildtype was present in 20 (54%) of 37 isolates. No association was found
between ITS and DHPS types and between DHPS types and therapy or response to
anti-PCP treatment. Type Ne presented an association with negative response to
anti-PCP treatment (P<0.001) and with death before 120 days after PCP diagnosis
(P=0.025). Type Eb was significantly more common in children than in adults
(P=0.001). Our data suggest an association of specific ITS genotypes with
treatment failure, bad clinical outcome and childhood.

DOI: 10.1016/s1567-1348(03)00092-3 
PMID: 14636689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

