
1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2004 Feb;33(3):279-89.

Allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplantation from two- or
three-loci-mismatched related donors in adult Japanese patients with high-risk
hematologic malignancies.

Yamasaki S(1), Ohno Y, Taniguchi S, Yoshida T, Hayashi S, Ogawa H, Shimazaki C,
Takahashi S, Kasai M, Wake A, Nishimura M, Tokunaga K, Gondo H, Takaue Y, Harada 
M, Mineishi S; Japanese group for blood and marrow transplantation.

Author information: 
(1)Medicine and Biosystemic Science, Kyushu University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Fukuoka, Japan. yamasaki@1nai.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

With the increasing frequency of haploidentical transplantation, it is becoming
more important to establish the degree of HLA mismatch that can be accepted. We
retrospectively analyzed clinical data of 50 adult Japanese patients with
high-risk hematologic malignancies who underwent allogeneic peripheral blood stem
cell transplantation (PBSCT) from two- or three-loci-mismatched related donors
with HLA class I and II gene disparities in the graft-versus-host direction. They
were treated at 20 transplant centers between 1996 and 2002. In all, 18 patients 
received unmanipulated PBSC, while 32 received purified CD34+ blood cells.
Conventional (n=31) or reduced-intensity (n=19) conditioning regimens were used. 
Of the 39 patients (78%) who survived for > or =28 days after transplant, 37
(95%) achieved neutrophil engraftment, while graft failure and rejection occurred
in two of 39 (5%) and three of 37 (8%) patients, respectively. Stepwise Cox
regression analysis revealed a significantly lower incidence of grades II-IV
acute GVHD in patients receiving purified CD34+ cells (hazard ratio 0.32; 95% CI 
0.12-0.84; P=0.022). By 1 year post transplant, 28 patients (56%) had died of
transplant-related problems, including infectious complications (30%). Although
the number of patients is small, our data suggest that transplant-related
problems, particularly infectious complications, are major obstacles to the
success of this therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1704342 
PMID: 14647250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

