
1. Eur J Pediatr. 2004 Feb;163(2):105-7. Epub 2003 Dec 4.

The aetiology of paediatric inflammatory vulvovaginitis.

Cuadros J(1), Mazón A, Martinez R, González P, Gil-Setas A, Flores U, Orden B,
Gómez-Herruz P, Millan R; Spanish Study Group for Primary Care Infection.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Microbiología y Parasitología, Cra. de Meco s/n, Alcalá de
Henares, 28805 Madrid, Spain. jcuadros@efd.net

Erratum in
    Eur J Pediatr. 2004 Apr;163(4):283.

Vulvovaginitis is the most common gynaecological problem in prepubertal girls and
clear-cut data on the microbial aetiology of moderate to severe infections are
lacking. Many microorganisms have been reported in several studies, but
frequently the paediatrician does not know the pathogenic significance of an
isolate reported in vaginal specimens of girls with vulvovaginitis. A multicentre
study was performed, selecting 74 girls aged 2 to 12 years old with a clinical
picture of vulvovaginitis and inflammatory cells on Gram stain. All the specimens
were cultured following standard microbiological techniques and the
paediatricians completed a questionnaire to highlight risk factors after
interviewing the parents or tutors. The data were compared with those obtained in
a control group of 11 girls without vulvovaginitis attending a clinic.
Streptococcus pyogenesand Haemophilus spp.were isolated in 47 and 12 cases,
respectively. Upper respiratory infection in the previous month ( P<0.001) and
vulvovaginitis in the previous year ( P<0.05) were identified as significant risk
factors. Foreign bodies, sexual abuse, poor hygiene and bad socioeconomic
situation were not identified as risk factors for the infection.CONCLUSION:
Paediatric inflammatory vulvovaginitis is mainly caused by pathogens of the upper
respiratory tract and the most common risk factor for this infection is to have
suffered an upper respiratory tract infection in the previous month.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-003-1373-x 
PMID: 14655013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

