
1. J Mol Biol. 2004 Jan 9;335(2):619-29.

The tryptophan switch: changing ligand-binding specificity from type I to type II
in SH3 domains.

Fernandez-Ballester G(1), Blanes-Mira C, Serrano L.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular, Universidad Miguel Hernández, Edif.
Torregaitán, Avda. del Ferrocarril s/n, 03202 Elche Alicante, Spain.

The ability of certain Src homology 3 (SH3) domains to bind specifically both
type I and type II polyproline ligands is perhaps the best characterized, but
also the worst understood, example in the family of protein-interaction modules. 
A detailed analysis of the structural variations in SH3 domains, with respect to 
ligand-binding specificity, together with mutagenesis of SH3 Fyn tyrosine kinase,
reveal the structural basis for types I and II binding specificity by SH3
domains. The conserved Trp in the SH3 binding pocket can adopt two different
orientations that, in turn, determine the type of ligand (I or II) able to bind
to the domain. The only exceptions are ligands with Leu at positions P(-1) and
P(2), that deviate from standard poly-Pro angles. The motion of the conserved Trp
depends on the presence of certain residues located in a key position (132 for
Fyn), near the binding pocket. SH3 domains placing aromatic residues in this key 
position are promiscuous. By contrast, those presenting beta-branched or long
aliphatic residues block the conserved Trp in one of the two possible
orientations, preventing binding in a type I orientation. This is experimentally 
demonstrated by a single mutation in Fyn SH3 (Y132I) that abolishes type I ligand
binding, while preserving binding to type II ligands. Thus, simple conformational
changes, governed by simple rules, can have profound effects on protein-protein
interactions, highlighting the importance of structural details to predict
protein-protein interactions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2003.10.060 
PMID: 14672668  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

