
1. BMC Genomics. 2003 Dec 15;4(1):51.

Metabolic reconstruction of sulfur assimilation in the extremophile
Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans based on genome analysis.

Vald√©s J(1), Veloso F, Jedlicki E, Holmes D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Genome Biology, University of Santiago
(USACH), Santiago, Chile. joorge77@yahoo.com.mx

BACKGROUND: Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans is a gamma-proteobacterium that lives 
at pH2 and obtains energy by the oxidation of sulfur and iron. It is used in the 
biomining industry for the recovery of metals and is one of the causative agents 
of acid mine drainage. Effective tools for the study of its genetics and
physiology are not in widespread use and, despite considerable effort, an
understanding of its unusual physiology remains at a rudimentary level. Nearly
complete genome sequences of A. ferrooxidans are available from two public
sources and we have exploited this information to reconstruct aspects of its
sulfur metabolism.
RESULTS: Two candidate mechanisms for sulfate uptake from the environment were
detected but both belong to large paralogous families of membrane transporters
and their identification remains tentative. Prospective genes, pathways and
regulatory mechanisms were identified that are likely to be involved in the
assimilation of sulfate into cysteine and in the formation of Fe-S centers. Genes
and regulatory networks were also uncovered that may link sulfur assimilation
with nitrogen fixation, hydrogen utilization and sulfur reduction. Potential
pathways were identified for sulfation of extracellular metabolites that may
possibly be involved in cellular attachment to pyrite, sulfur and other solid
substrates.
CONCLUSIONS: A bioinformatic analysis of the genome sequence of A. ferrooxidans
has revealed candidate genes, metabolic process and control mechanisms
potentially involved in aspects of sulfur metabolism. Metabolic modeling provides
an important preliminary step in understanding the unusual physiology of this
extremophile especially given the severe difficulties involved in its genetic
manipulation and biochemical analysis.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-4-51 
PMCID: PMC324559
PMID: 14675496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

