
1. Kekkaku. 2003 Nov;78(11):717-22.

[Tuberculosis in compromised hosts].

[Article in Japanese]

[No authors listed]

Recent development of tuberculosis in Japan tends to converge on a specific high 
risk group. The proportion of tuberculosis developing particularly from the
compromised hosts in the high risk group is especially high. At this symposium,
therefore, we took up diabetes mellitus, gastrectomy, dialysis, AIDS and the
elderly for discussion. Many new findings and useful reports for practical
medical treatment are submitted; why these compromised hosts are predisposed to
tuberculosis, tuberculosis diagnostic and remedial notes of those compromised
hosts etc. It is an important question for the future to study how to prevent
tuberculosis from these compromised hosts. 1. Tuberculosis in diabetes mellitus: 
aggravation and its immunological mechanism: Kazuyoshi KAWAKAMI (Department of
Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Graduate School and Faculty
of Medicine, University of the Ryukyus). It has been well documented that
diabetes mellitus (DM) is a major aggravating factor in tuberculosis. The onset
of this disease is more frequent in DM patients than in individuals with any
underlying diseases. However, the precise mechanism of this finding remains to be
fully understood. Earlier studies reported that the migration, phagocytosis and
bactericidal activity of neutrophils are all impaired in DM patients, which is
related to their reduced host defense to infection with extracellular bacteria,
such as S. aureus and E. colli. Host defense to mycobacterial infection is
largely mediated by cellular immunity, and Th1-related cytokines, such as
IFN-gamma and IL-12, play a central role in this response. It is reported that
serum level of these cytokines and their production by peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) are reduced in tuberculosis patients with DM, and this
is supposed to be involved in the high incidence of tuberculosis in DM. Our study
observed similar findings and furthermore indicated that IFN-gamma and IL-12
production by BCG-stimulated PBMC was lower in poorly-controlled DM patients than
that in well-controlled DM patients and healthy subjects. Thus, these clinical
data suggest that the high incidence of tuberculosis in DM patients is due to the
impaired production of Th1-related cytokines. However, direct evidences to prove 
this possibility remain to be obtained. In 1980, Saiki and co-workers reported
that host defense and delayed-type hypersensitivity response to M. tuberculosis
was hampered in a mouse DM model established by injecting streptozotocin (Infect 
Immun. 1980; 28: 127-131). We followed their investigation with the similar
observations. Interestingly, levels of IFN-gamma and IL-12 in serum, lung, liver 
and spleen after infection were significantly reduced in DM mice when compared
with those in control mice. Considered collectively, these results strongly
suggest that the reduced production of Th1-related cytokines leads to the
susceptibility of DM to mycobacterial infection. However, it remains to be
understood how DM hampers the synthesis of Th1-related cytokines. In our
preliminary study, the production of these cytokines by PBMC from DM patients and
healthy subjects was not affected under a high glucose condition. Thus, it is not
likely that the increased level of glucose directly suppresses the cell-mediated 
immune responses. Further investigations are needed to make these points clear.
2. A study of gastrectomy cases in pulmonary tuberculosis patients: Takenori YAGI
(Division of Thoracic Disease, National Chiba-Higashi Hospital). Patients who
have undergone gastric resection are considered at increased risk of developing
pulmonary tuberculosis. I have investigated the role played by gastrectomy in
giving rise to pulmonary tuberculosis. Of 654 pulmonary tuberculosis patients
admitted to National Chiba-Higashi Hospital from January 1999 to December 2001,
55 patients (31-84 years old, mean 63.5 +/- 12.5 years, 48 males and 7 females)
had the history of gastric resection. The incidence of gastrectomy among patients
with pulmonary tuberculosis was 8.4 percent. The mean age of gastric resection
was 50.2 +/- 16.6 years, and the mean interval from gastrectomy to pulmonary
tuberculosis was 13.6 +/- 11.0 years. On admission to our hospital, 34 out of 55 
cases were smear positive by sputum examination for acid-fast bacilli and 39
cases had cavitary lesions on chest X-ray. Gastrectomy was done due to carcinoma 
of the stomach in 31 cases, gastric and/or duodenal ulcer in 21 cases,
adenomatous polyp in two cases, and accidental injury in one case. 52 patients
improved, but three cases died due to pulmonary tuberculosis. No one had
recurrence of carcinoma of the stomach. Body weight, Body Mass Index, Prognostic 
Nutritional Index (PNI; 10x serum albumin concentration +0.005 x peripheral
lymphocyte count) which was proposed by Onodera, serum albumin level and serum
total cholesterol level were lower in the gastrectomy group than in the
non-gastrectomy group. I calculated the odds of tuberculosis among gastrectomy
patients to be 3.8 times that of appropriate controls. This study confirms that
gastrectomy is one of the risk factor(s) of tuberculosis. However, whether
gastrectomy in itself is a risk factor or whether it is secondarily associated
with another risk factor such as underweight status and/or inadequate nutrition
following surgery remains unclear. 3. Immunodefficiency and tuberculosis in
dialysis patients: Hajime INAMOTO (Division of Dialysis, Keio University School
of Medicine). The patients who have renal insufficiency is fatal, but they can
live much longer by dialysis. The number of lymphocytes of the patients whose
serum creatinine was 10 mg/dl or more has decreased to about 50% of the people
who have normal kidney. When the lymphocyte was cultured after it was stimulated 
with PHA, the DNA synthesis of the patients' lymphocyte was much lower than that 
of the modest people's. In the dialysis food, the nutrient such as vitamins,
minerals, etc. were lacked. The density of the serum albumin of the dialysis
patient has decreased. Many of them were thin when their BMI was examined. The
size of the patients' erythema by the tuberculin test has become small. There
were many patients receiving dialysis with erythema but no induration. It means
that the delayed skin reaction specific to Mycobacterium tuberculosis has
decreased among the dialysis patients. The morbidity rate, the mortality rate and
the prevalence of tuberculosis was much higher than the general population. The
anamnesis of tuberculosis was also high. Most of those tuberculosis patients
appear the disease from the period immediately before the beginning of dialysis
to one year after that. That is also the period that patients' number of
peripheral blood lymphocyte decreased and the tuberculin reaction positivity rate
fell sharply. During the dialysis patients, pulmonary tuberculosis with cavities 
was minority and extrapulmonary tuberculosis and miliary tuberculosis were
remarkably many. People with large reaction against the tuberculin test were
better prognosis than those with smaller reaction. It was thought that anorexia, 
weakening, and a weight decrease were seen when the immunity decreased. At the
end stage of renal failure, kidney shrink, vitamin D activation becomes
difficult, and the low calcium blood syndrome appears. The calcification of
tuberculoma is absorbed, soft tuberculoma becomes baring, the caseation abscess
melts, and the endogenous infection occurs. The cell immunity has decreased, and 
tuberculosis attacks. It might be such circumstances that tuberculosis happen
frequently at the dialysis introduction period. There are a lot of cases that the
caseation necrosis is a little, and the formation of tuberculoma is bad in the
pathology opinion. Due to the decrease in the cell immunity, cavities are not
formed easily. It is easy to stay in the leaching lesion so that
anti-tuberculosis drugs are much effective, and the patients recover easily.
However, if the treatment is delayed, it is fatally because hematogenous
metastasis are easy to occur and become miliary tuberculosis. 4. AIDS and
tuberculosis: Hideaki NAGAI (Department of Respiratory Diseases, National Tokyo
Hospital). With AIDS patients with tuberculosis, there are the following problems
on the treatment. (1) The adverse reactions by antituberculosis drugs tend to
occur in AIDS patients. Eleven of 33 AIDS patients with tuberculosis had the
adverse reactions (skin rash, fever, liver dysfunction) considered to be due to
antituberculosis drugs. It is a very large burden for the HIV infected persons to
take simultaneously antituberculosis drugs, medicines for opportunistic
infections, and anti-HIV medicines. Since many medicines are taken, it is
difficult to determine which drug is the cause once an adverse reaction occurs
and all medicines should be often stopped. (2) The combined use with rifampicin
(RFP) is difficult for the protease inhibitors and nonnuclear acid reverse
transcriptase inhibitors. RFP induces cytochrome P-450 in liver, accelerates the 
metabolism of some concomitant drug agents, and reduces blood concentration them 
remarkably. When starting the two above-mentioned medicines during tuberculosis
treatment, RFP should be changed to rifabutin (RFB) which has less induction of
P-450 than RFP. However, some procedures are required for acquisition of RFB and 
it is a little complicated in Japan. CDC mentioned the combined use with RFP and 
efavirenz (EFV) is possible. So, the treatment with EFV and RFP is recently
chosen. However, the monitor of the blood concentration of EFV is required, and
the dose of EFV should be increased if it is a low value. (3) When a highly
active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) is given to AIDS patients with
tuberculosis, transient worsening of tuberculosis may develop after about two
weeks. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED)


PMID: 14672050  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

