
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(1):164-71.

CD3/CD28 costimulation-induced NF-kappaB activation is mediated by recruitment of
protein kinase C-theta, Bcl10, and IkappaB kinase beta to the immunological
synapse through CARMA1.

Wang D(1), Matsumoto R, You Y, Che T, Lin XY, Gaffen SL, Lin X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, University at Buffalo, SUNY, Buffalo, New York 14214, USA.

CARMA1 (also known as CARD11) is a scaffold molecule and contains a
caspase-recruitment domain (CARD) and a membrane-associated guanylate kinase-like
(MAGUK) domain. It plays an essential role in mediating CD3/CD28
costimulation-induced NF-kappaB activation. However, the molecular mechanism by
which CARMA1 mediates costimulatory signals remains to be determined. Here, we
show that CARMA1 is constitutively associated with the cytoplasmic membrane. This
membrane association is essential for the function of CARMA1, since a mutant of
CARMA1, CARMA1(L808P), that is defective in the membrane association cannot
rescue CD3/CD28 costimulation-induced NF-kappaB activation in JPM50.6
CARMA1-deficient T cells. Although CD3/CD28 costimulation effectively induces the
formation of the immunological synapse in CARMA1-deficient T cells, the
recruitment of protein kinase C-theta (PKC-theta), Bcl10, and IkappaB kinase beta
(IKKbeta) into lipid rafts of the immunological synapse is defective. Moreover,
expression of wild-type CARMA1, but not CARMA1(L808P), restores the recruitment
of PKC-theta, Bcl10, and IKKbeta into lipid rafts in CARMA1-deficient T cells.
Consistently, expression of a mutant CARMA1, CARMA1(DeltaCD), that cannot
associate with Bcl10 failed to restore CD3/CD28 costimulation-induced NF-kappaB
activation in JPM50.6 cells, whereas expression of Bcl10-CARMA(DeltaCD) fusion
protein effectively restored this NF-kappaB activation. Together, these results
indicate that CARMA1 mediates CD3/CD28 costimulation-induced NF-kappaB activation
by recruiting downstream signaling components into the immunological synapse.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.24.1.164-171.2003 
PMCID: PMC303359
PMID: 14673152  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

