
1. J Periodontal Res. 2004 Feb;39(1):10-9.

Expression of CD73/ecto-5'-nucleotidase on human gingival fibroblasts and
contribution to the inhibition of interleukin-1alpha-induced
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor production.

Nemoto E(1), Kunii R, Tada H, Tsubahara T, Ishihata H, Shimauchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Periodontology and Endodontology, Tohoku University Graduate
School of Dentistry, 4-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.
eiji@mail.cc.tohoku.ac.jp

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: CD73/5'-nucleotidase (5'-NT) is an ectoenzyme that
participates in immune/inflammatory reactions. We examined the possible
expression of CD73/5'-NT on human gingival fibroblasts (hGF), which are important
to the immune/inflammatory system in periodontal tissue.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We demonstrated that CD73/5'-NT was expressed on hGF by flow
cytometry. We found that pre-treatment of hGF with 5'-AMP induced marked
inhibition of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)
production from hGF upon stimulation with interleukin-1alpha (IL-1alpha) by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). A specific inhibitor of 5'-NT,
adenosine 5'-[alpha,beta-methylene] diphosphate blocked the inhibition of GM-CSF 
production, suggesting that adenosine converted from 5'-AMP acts on the
inhibitory effects. The GM-CSF inhibition suggested that A3 receptor might be
involved. The rank order of agonists was found to be
(N6-benzyl-5'-N-ethylcarboxamidoadenosine) A3 receptor agonist > or =
(2-chloroadenosine) non-selective agonist > (CGS-21680) A2A receptor agonist >
adenosine > or = (N6-cyclohexyladenosine) A1 agonist. Further support for the
main role of A3 receptor was the binding A3 antagonist
[9-chloro-2-(2-furanyl)-5-([phenylacetyl]amino)[1,2,4]-triazolo[1,5-c]quinazdine]
reversed the effect of adenosine, but no significant reverse was observed by A1
(1,3-dipropyl-8-cyclopentylxanthine), A2 [3,7-dimethyl-1-(2-propargyl)xanthine], 
A2A[8-(3-chlorostyryl)caffeine], and A2B (alloxazine) antagonists. The CD73/5'-NT
expression was increased upon stimulation with gamma-interferon, but not other
stimulants such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha, IL-4, lipopolysaccharide from
Porphyromonas gingivalis and Escherichia coli, and fimbriae from P. gingivalis,
and this increase was correlated with the enhanced GM-CSF inhibition by 5'-AMP
but not adenosine.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggested that CD73/5'-NT on hGF exerts an
anti-inflammatory effects in periodontal disease by conversion from 5'-AMP to
adenosine.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0765.2004.00698.x 
PMID: 14687222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

