
1. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2004 Jan;60(Pt 1):97-104. Epub 2003 Dec 18.

Structure and implications for the thermal stability of phosphopantetheine
adenylyltransferase from Thermus thermophilus.

Takahashi H(1), Inagaki E, Fujimoto Y, Kuroishi C, Nodake Y, Nakamura Y, Arisaka 
F, Yutani K, Kuramitsu S, Yokoyama S, Yamamoto M, Miyano M, Tahirov TH.

Author information: 
(1)Highthroughput Factory, RIKEN Harima Institute, 1-1-1 Kouto, Mikazuki-cho,
Sayo-gun, Hyogo 679-5148, Japan.

Phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT) is an essential enzyme in bacteria 
that catalyzes the rate-limiting step in coenzyme A (CoA) biosynthesis by
transferring an adenylyl group from ATP to 4'-phosphopantetheine (Ppant),
yielding 3'-dephospho-CoA (dPCoA). The crystal structure of PPAT from Thermus
thermophilus HB8 (Tt PPAT) complexed with Ppant has been determined by the
molecular-replacement method at 1.5 A resolution. The overall fold of the enzyme 
is almost the same as that of Escherichia coli PPAT, a hexamer having point group
32. The asymmetric unit of Tt PPAT contains a monomer and the crystallographic
triad and dyad coincide with the threefold and twofold axes of the hexamer,
respectively. Most of the important atoms surrounding the active site in E. coli 
PPAT are conserved in Tt PPAT, indicating similarities in their substrate binding
and enzymatic reaction. The notable difference between E. coli PPAT and Tt PPAT
is the simultaneous substrate recognition by all six subunits of Tt PPAT compared
with substrate recognition by only three subunits in E. coli PPAT. Comparative
analysis also revealed that the higher stability of Tt PPAT arises from
stabilization of each subunit by hydrophobic effects, hydrogen bonds and entropic
effects.

DOI: 10.1107/s0907444903025319 
PMID: 14684898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

