
1. J Immunol. 2004 Jan 15;172(2):1125-31.

The epidermal growth factor-seven transmembrane (EGF-TM7) receptor CD97 is
required for neutrophil migration and host defense.

Leemans JC(1), te Velde AA, Florquin S, Bennink RJ, de Bruin K, van Lier RA, van 
der Poll T, Hamann J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Experimental Internal Medicine, Department of Pathology,
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 1100 DE Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

The epidermal growth factor-seven transmembrane (EGF-TM7) family is a group of
seven-span transmembrane receptors predominantly expressed by cells of the immune
system. Family members CD97, EGF module-containing mucin-like receptor (EMR) 1,
EMR2, EMR3, EMR4, and EGF-TM7-latrophilin-related protein are characterized by an
extended extracellular region with a variable number of N-terminal EGF-like
domains. EGF-TM7 receptors bind cellular ligands as demonstrated by the
interaction of CD97 with decay accelerating factor (CD55) and dermatan sulfate.
Investigating the effect of newly generated mAb on the migration of neutrophilic 
granulocytes, we here report for the first time in vivo data on the function of
CD97. In dextran sulfate sodium-induced experimental colitis, we show that homing
of adoptively transferred neutrophils to the colon was significantly delayed when
cells were preincubated with CD97 mAb. The consequences of this defect in
neutrophil migration for host defense are demonstrated in a murine model of
Streptococcus pneumoniae-induced pneumonia. Mice treated with CD97 mAb to EGF
domain 1 (1B2) and EGF domain 3 (1C5) displayed a reduced granulocytic
inflammatory infiltrate at 20 h after inoculation. This was associated with a
significantly enhanced outgrowth of bacteria in the lungs at 44 h and a strongly 
diminished survival. Together, these findings indicate an essential role for CD97
in the migration of neutrophils.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.172.2.1125 
PMID: 14707087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

