
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 26;279(13):12213-9. Epub 2004 Jan 5.

Gangliosides act as co-receptors for Salmonella enteritidis FliC and promote FliC
induction of human beta-defensin-2 expression in Caco-2 cells.

Ogushi K(1), Wada A, Niidome T, Okuda T, Llanes R, Nakayama M, Nishi Y, Kurazono 
H, Smith KD, Aderem A, Moss J, Hirayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki
University, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

Antimicrobial peptides such as defensins are crucial for host defense at mucosal 
surfaces. We reported previously that Salmonella enteritidis flagellin (FliC)
induced human beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2) mRNA expression in Caco-2 cells via
NF-kappaB activation (Ogushi, K., Wada, A., Niidome, T., Mori, N., Oishi, K.,
Nagatake, T., Takahashi, A., Asakura, H., Makino, S., Hojo, H., Nakahara, Y.,
Ohsaki, M., Hatakeyama, T., Aoyagi, H., Kurazono, H., Moss, J., and Hirayama, T. 
(2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 30521-30526). In this study, we examined the role of
ganglioside as co-receptors with Toll-like receptor 5 (TLR5) on FliC induction of
hBD-2 expression in Caco-2 cells. Exogenous gangliosides suppressed FliC
induction of hBD-2 promoter activity and binding of FliC to Caco-2 cells.
Incorporation of exogenous ganglioside GD1a into Caco-2 cell membranes increased 
the effect of FliC on hBD-2 promoter activity. In support of a role for
endogenous gangliosides, incubation of Caco-2 cells with
dl-threo-2-hexadecanoylamino-3-morpholino-1-phenylpropanol, a glucosylceramide
synthase inhibitor, reduced FliC induction of hBD-2 promoter activity.
GD1a-loaded CHO-K1-expressing TLR5 cells had a higher potential for hBD-2
induction following FliC stimulation than GD1a-loaded CHO-K1 cells not expressing
TLR5. FliC increased phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinase, p38,
and ERK1/2. Exogenous gangliosides GD1a, GD1b, and GT1b each suppressed FliC
induction of p38 and ERK1/2 phosphorylation. Furthermore, FliC did not enhance
luciferase activity in Caco-2 cells transfected with a plasmid containing a
mutated activator protein 1-binding site. These results suggest that gangliosides
act as co-receptors with TLR5 for FliC and promote hBD-2 expression via
mitogen-activated protein kinase.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M307944200 
PMID: 14707135  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

