
1. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2003 Sep;24(5):1-10.

[Kinetics and mechanism of removing Microcystis aeruginosa using clay
flocculation].

[Article in Chinese]

Pan G(1), Zhang M, Yan H, Zou H, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Aquatic Chemistry, Research Center for
Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China.
gpan@mail.rcees.ac.cn

Twenty-six natural clays were studied for their kinetics of flocculating and
removing algal cells of Microcystis aeruginosa. According to the 8 h equilibrium 
removal efficiencies and removal rates at a clay-loading of 0.7 g.L-1, all the 26
clays were classified into three categories. Type-I clay, which includes talc,
ferric oxide, sepiolite, ferroferric oxide, and kaolinite, has an equilibrium
removal efficiency greater than 90%, a t50 (time needed to remove 50% of the
algae) of less than 30 min, and a t80 (time needed to remove 80% of the algae) of
less than 2.5 h. Type-II clay, which includes argillanceous rocks, attapulgite,
rectorite, illite, and argil, etc., has an equilibrium removal efficiency of
50%-80%, a t50 of less than 2.5 h, and a t80 of more than 5 h. Type-III clay
consists of 14 minerals, including laterite, zeolite, mica, clinoptilolite,
pumice, tripoli, feldspar and quartz, etc. with the removal efficiency less than 
50%, and t50 > > 8 h. When the clay loading was decreased to 0.1-0.2 g.L-1, the 8
h equilibrium removal efficiencies for 25 clays declined to below 60%, except for
sepiolite, a Type-I clay, which maintained around 90%. After the sepiolite was
modified with Fe3+ to increase its surface charge (Zeta potential from -24.0 mV
to +0.43 mV at pH 7.4), the initial removal rate was increased remarkably
although its 8 h equilibrium removal efficiency was not improved substantially.
As a comparison, the 8 h equilibrium removal efficiency of PAC was no greater
than 40% at loadings of 0.02-0.2 g.L-1. Following the analysis of the
flocculation mechanism it was concluded that the effect of bridging and netting
may play a key role in the clay-algae flocculation processes, which may be
important for selecting and modifying clays to improve significantly the removal 
efficiency.


PMID: 14719252  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

