
1. Carcinogenesis. 2004 May;25(5):801-7. Epub 2004 Jan 16.

Bioactivation of the heterocyclic aromatic amine 2-amino-3-methyl-9H-pyrido
[2,3-b]indole (MeAalphaC) in recombinant test systems expressing human
xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes.

Glatt H(1), Pabel U, Meinl W, Frederiksen H, Frandsen H, Muckel E.

Author information: 
(1)German Institute of Human Nutrition (DIfE) Potsdam-Rehbr√ºcke, Department of
Toxicology, Arthur-Scheunert-Allee 114-116, D-14558 Nuthetal, Germany.
glatt@mail.dife.de

2-Amino-3-methyl-9H-pyrido[2,3-b]indole (MeAalphaC) and some metabolites were
investigated for mutagenicity in mammalian cell lines and bacterial strains
engineered for the expression of human enzymes. MeAalphaC induced gene mutations 
(studied at the hprt locus) in Chinese hamster V79-derived cells co-expressing
cytochrome (CYP) 1A2 and sulphotransferase (SULT) 1A1 even at a concentration of 
30 nM, but was inactive in cells co-expressing CYP1A2 and N-acetyltransferase
(NAT) 1 or 2. MeAalphaC, tested in the presence of rat liver post-mitochondrial
fraction, showed strongly enhanced mutagenicity in a Salmonella typhimurium
strain expressing human SULT1A1 compared with the control (recipient) strain
TA1538/1,8-DNP (deficient in endogenous acetyltransferase). Mutagenicity was also
enhanced, although to a lesser extent, when NAT2 was expressed in the latter
strain. The metabolite, 2-hydroxylamino-3-methyl-9H-pyrido[2,3-b]indole
(N-OH-MeAalphaC) was a direct mutagen to strains TA1538 and TA1538/ 1,8-DNP. This
mutagenicity was strongly enhanced in corresponding strains expressing SULT1A1. A
moderate enhancement was observed when SULT1A2, SULT1B1, SULT1C2 or NAT2 were
expressed in strain TA1538. The remaining enzymes studied (SULT1A3, 1C1, 1E1,
2A1, 2B1a, 2B1b, 4A1 and NAT1) did not indicate any activation of N-OH-MeAalphaC.
Preliminary mutagenicity experiments in SULT-expressing S.typhimurium strains
were conducted with other hydroxylated metabolites of MeAalphaC. The phenols, 6- 
and 7-hydroxy-MeAalphaC, were inactive under the conditions studied. The benzylic
alcohol, 2-amino-3-hydroxymethyl-9H-pyrido[2,3-b]indole, was mutagenic in a
strain expressing SULT1A1, but its activity was much weaker than that of
N-OH-MeAalphaC. Thus, N-hydroxylation (e.g. mediated by CYP1A2) and sulpho
conjugation (primarily mediated by SULT1A1) was the dominating activation pathway
of MeAalphaC in model systems engineered for human enzymes. Some other SULT forms
as well as NAT2 were also capable of activating N-OH-MeAalphaC, although with
much lower efficiency than SULT1A1. Another minor activation pathway involved
benzylic hydroxylation followed by sulpho conjugation by SULT1A1.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgh077 
PMID: 14729582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

