
1. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2004 Jan 15;40(1):63-70.

Disruption of CD40/CD40L interaction influences the course of Cryptococcus
neoformans infection.

Pietrella D(1), Lupo P, Perito S, Mosci P, Bistoni F, Vecchiarelli A.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Section, Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical
Sciences, University of Perugia, Via del Giochetto, 06122 Perugia, Italy.

CD40 signaling has been implicated in various pathogenic processes such as
chronic inflammatory disease, graft-versus-host disease, autoimmune disease and
cancer. We previously demonstrated in an in vitro system that the CD40/CD40L
pathway mediates late interleukin (IL) 12 production in response to Cryptococcus 
neoformans. The purpose of this study was to examine the course of C. neoformans 
infection in the absence of CD40/CD40L costimulation. We compared infection in
mice genetically lacking CD40L (CD40L(-/-)) and in the wild-type counterpart. The
animals were injected intratracheally with C. neoformans and monitored for
clearance of the organism and the development of cellular immune response.
CD40L(-/-) mice exhibited an exacerbation of infection, evaluated as scarce
inflammatory response in the lung, that mirrored an increase of fungal burden.
This correlated with impairment of nitrite production and antimicrobial activity 
by macrophages against C. neoformans and unrelated microorganisms such as Candida
albicans. Moreover, IL-12 production by splenic macrophages was diminished in
CD40L(-/-) mice and interferon-gamma production by CD4 and CD8 T cells was
decreased. CD4 T cells retained the ability to express a costimulatory molecule, 
CTLA-4, but showed a decrease in CD28 expression. This latter molecule is
implicated in a positive effect on proliferation, cytokine production and
survival of T cells. Collectively these data demonstrate that absence of CD40L
correlates with (i) reduced antimicrobial activity of natural effector cells;
(ii) reduction of the magnitude of T cell response; and (iii) increase of fungal 
growth in the brain. These findings suggest that disruption of CD40/CD40L may be 
deleterious for development of an efficient immune response to C. neoformans and 
may identify potential molecular targets for novel immunotherapeutic approaches

DOI: 10.1016/S0928-8244(03)00297-9 
PMID: 14734188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

