
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 16;279(16):15870-6. Epub 2004 Jan 30.

MALT1/paracaspase is a signaling component downstream of CARMA1 and mediates T
cell receptor-induced NF-kappaB activation.

Che T(1), You Y, Wang D, Tanner MJ, Dixit VM, Lin X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, New York 
14214, USA.

T cell receptor (TCR) induces a series of signaling cascades and leads to
activation of multiple transcription factors, including NF-kappaB. Although the
mechanism of TCR-induced NF-kappaB activation is not fully understood, recent
studies indicate that Bcl10 and CARMA1, two adaptor/scaffold proteins, play
essential roles in mediating TCR-induced NF-kappaB activation. MALT1/paracaspase 
is a caspase-like protein that contains an N-terminal death domain, two Ig-like
domains, and a C-terminal caspase-like domain. It binds to Bcl10 through its
Ig-like domains and cooperates with Bcl10 to activate NF-kappaB. Recently, it has
been shown that MALT1 is involved in mediating TCR signal transduction, leading
to activation of NF-kappaB. In this study, we show that MALT1 is recruited into
the lipid rafts of the immunological synapse following activation of the TCR and 
the CD28 coreceptor (CD3/CD28 costimulation). This recruitment of MALT1 is
dependent on CARMA1 because CD3/CD28 costimulation failed to recruit MALT1 into
lipid rafts in CARMA1-deficient T cells. In addition, we also found that MALT1
not only binds to Bcl10 directly, but also associates with CARMA1 in a
Bcl10-independent manner. Therefore, MALT1, Bcl10, and CARMA1 form a trimolecular
complex. Expression of a MALT1 deletion mutant containing only the N-terminal
death domain and the two Ig-like domains completely blocked CD3/CD28
costimulation-induced, but not tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced, NF-kappaB
activation. Together, these results indicate that MALT1 is a crucial signaling
component in the TCR signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M310599200 
PMID: 14754896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

