
1. Environ Microbiol. 2004 Mar;6(3):274-87.

Diversity of prokaryotes and methanogenesis in deep subsurface sediments from the
Nankai Trough, Ocean Drilling Program Leg 190.

Newberry CJ(1), Webster G, Cragg BA, Parkes RJ, Weightman AJ, Fry JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Main Building, Park Place, 
PO Box 915, Cardiff CF10 3TL, Wales, UK.

Diversity of Bacteria and Archaea was studied in deep marine sediments by PCR
amplification and sequence analysis of 16S rRNA and methyl co-enzyme M reductase 
(mcrA) genes. Samples analysed were from Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) Leg 190
deep subsurface sediments at three sites spanning the Nankai Trough in the
Pacific Ocean off Shikoku Island, Japan. DNA was amplified, from three depths at 
site 1173 (4.15, 98.29 and 193.29 mbsf; metres below the sea floor), and
phylogenetic analysis of clone libraries showed a wide variety of uncultured
Bacteria and Archaea. Sequences of Bacteria were dominated by an uncultured and
deeply branching 'deep sediment group' (53% of sequences). Archaeal 16S rRNA gene
sequences were mainly within the uncultured clades of the Crenarchaeota. There
was good agreement between sequences obtained independently by cloning and by
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. These sequences were similar to others
retrieved from marine sediment and other anoxic habitats, and so probably
represent important indigenous bacteria. The mcrA gene analysis suggested limited
methanogen diversity with only three gene clusters identified within the
Methanosarcinales and Methanobacteriales. The cultivated members of the
Methanobacteriales and some of the Methanosarcinales can use CO2 and H2 for
methanogenesis. These substrates also gave the highest rates in 14C-radiotracer
estimates of methanogenic activity, with rates comparable to those from other
deep marine sediments. Thus, this research demonstrates the importance of the
'deep sediment group' of uncultured Bacteria and links limited diversity of
methanogens to the dominance of CO2/H2 based methanogenesis in deep sub-seafloor 
sediments.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2004.00568.x 
PMID: 14871211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

