
1. J Infect Dis. 2004 Mar 1;189(5):805-11. Epub 2004 Feb 16.

Human leukocyte antigen class I supertypes influence susceptibility and severity 
of tuberculosis.

Balamurugan A(1), Sharma SK, Mehra NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transplant Immunology and Immunogenetics, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.

Although both differential susceptibility to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection
and disease pathogenesis depend on a multitude of factors, elucidation of
specific host genetic markers, particularly those in the human major
histocompatibility complex, is important. The present study is an attempt to
delineate human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I association in tuberculosis (TB) 
on the basis of a shared sequence motif in peptide-binding pockets of HLA
molecules. In patients with pulmonary TB and miliary/disseminated TB, we observed
significantly increased frequencies of A3-like supertypes and decreased
frequencies of A1-like supertypes. These 2 positively and negatively associated
supertypes (allele groups) share a similar peptide-binding motif, except for
residues in pocket F of the HLA class I molecules. In addition, the HLA-Cw
specificities that are major ligands for killer cell immunoglobulin-like
(inhibitory) receptors (KIRs), particularly KIR2DL1 (Cw2, Cw4, and CW5) and
KIR2DL2 (Cw1, Cw3, and Cw7), were found more frequently among patients with TB,
which suggests a possible inhibition of natural killer cell activity against the 
infected target cells. The results of the present study suggest that the frequent
occurrence of HLA class I specificities comprising an A3-like peptide-binding
motif and the increased occurrence of ligands for KIR2DL in TB together may
influence the outcome of TB.

DOI: 10.1086/381689 
PMID: 14976596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

