
1. Blood. 2004 Jun 15;103(12):4449-56. Epub 2004 Feb 19.

Hemangiopoietin, a novel human growth factor for the primitive cells of both
hematopoietic and endothelial cell lineages.

Liu YJ(1), Lu SH, Xu B, Yang RC, Ren Q, Liu B, Li B, Lu M, Yan FY, Han ZB, Han
ZC.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences & Peking Union of Medical College, 288 Nanjing Road, Tianjin 300020, P R
China.

The cells of hematopoietic and vascular endothelial cell lineages are believed to
share a common precursor, termed hemangioblast. However, the existence of a
growth factor acting relatively specifically on hemangioblasts remains unclear.
Here we report the identification of hemangiopoietin (HAPO), a novel growth
factor acting on both hematopoietic and endothelial cell lineages. In vitro in
the human system, recombinant human HAPO (rhHAPO) significantly stimulated the
proliferation and hematopoietic and/or endothelial differentiation of human bone 
marrow mononuclear cells and of purified CD34+, CD133+, kinase domain
receptor-positive (KDR+), or CD34+/KDR+ cell populations. In the murine system,
rhHAPO stimulated the proliferation of long-term culture-initiating cells
(LTC-ICs) as well as CD34+ and stem cell antigen-1 (Sca-1+) cell subsets. In
vivo, subcutaneous injection of rhHAPO into normal mice resulted in a significant
increase in bone marrow hematopoietic cells. Furthermore, irradiated mice
injected with rhHAPO had an enhanced survival rate and accelerated hematopoiesis.
Our data suggest that HAPO is a novel growth factor acting on the primitive cells
of both hematopoietic and endothelial cell lineages and that HAPO may have a
clinical potential in the treatment of various cytopenias and radiation injury
and in the expansion of hematopoietic and endothelial stem/progenitor cells.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2003-06-1825 
PMID: 14976050  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

