
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2004 Jan;4(1):25-36.

Environmental contaminant and disinfection by-product trichloroacetaldehyde
stimulates T cells in vitro.

Gilbert KM(1), Whitlow AB, Pumford NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences/Arkansas Children's Hospital Research Institute, 1120 Marshall Street,
Little Rock, AR 72205, USA. gilbertkathleenm@uams.edu

It had been shown previously that MRL+/+ mice exposed to occupationally relevant 
doses of the environmental contaminant trichloroethylene in their drinking water 
developed lupus-like symptoms and autoimmune hepatitis in association with
activation of Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)-producing CD4+ T cells. Since
trichloroethylene must be metabolized in order to promote the T-cell activation
associated with autoimmunity, the present study was initiated to determine
whether the immunoregulatory effects of trichloroethylene could be mimicked by
one of its major metabolites, trichloroacetaldehyde (TCAA). At concentrations
ranging from 0.04 to 1 mM TCAA co-stimulated proliferation of murine T-helper
type 1 (Th1) cells treated with anti-CD3 antibody or antigen in vitro. TCAA at
similar concentrations also induced phenotypic alterations commensurate with
activation (upregulation of CD28 and downregulation of CD62L) in both cloned
memory Th1 cells, as well as na√Øve CD4+ T cells from MRL+/+ mice. TCAA-induced
Th1 cell activation was accompanied by phoshorylation of activating transcription
factor 2 (ATF-2) and c-Jun, two components of the activator protein-1 (AP-1)
transcription factor. TCAA at higher concentrations was also shown to form a
Schiff base on T cells, and inhibition of Schiff base formation suppressed the
ability of TCAA to phosphorylate ATF-2. Taken together, these results suggest
that TCAA promotes T-cell activation via stimulation of the mitogen-activated
protein (MAP) kinase pathway in association with Schiff base formation on T-cell 
surface proteins. By demonstrating that TCAA can stimulate T-cell function
directly, these results may explain how the environmental toxicant
trichloroethylene promotes T-cell activation and related autoimmunity in vivo.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2003.10.001 
PMID: 14975357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

