
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 23;279(17):17989-95. Epub 2004 Feb 19.

A predicted amphipathic helix mediates plasma membrane localization of GRK5.

Thiyagarajan MM(1), Stracquatanio RP, Pronin AN, Evanko DS, Benovic JL,
Wedegaertner PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

G protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) specifically phosphorylate
agonist-occupied G protein-coupled receptors at the inner surface of the plasma
membrane (PM), leading to receptor desensitization. GRKs utilize a variety of
mechanisms to bind tightly, and sometimes reversibly, to cellular membranes.
Previous studies demonstrated the presence of a membrane binding domain in the C 
terminus of GRK5. Here we define a mechanism by which this short C-terminal
stretch of amino acids of GRK5 mediates PM localization. Secondary structure
predictions suggest that a region contained within amino acids 546-565 of GRK5
forms an amphipathic helix, with the key features of the predicted helix being a 
hydrophobic patch of amino acids on one face of the helix, hydrophilic amino
acids on the opposite face, and a number of basic amino acids surrounding the
hydrophobic patch. We show that amino acids 546-565 of GRK5 are sufficient to
target the cytoplasmic green fluorescent protein (GFP) to the PM, and the
hydrophobic amino acids are necessary for PM targeting of GFP-546-565. Moreover, 
full-length GRK5-GFP is localized to the PM, but mutation of the hydrophobic
patch or the surrounding basic amino acids prevents PM localization of GRK5-GFP. 
Last, we show that mutation of the hydrophobic residues severely diminishes
phospholipid-dependent autophosphorylation of GRK5 and phosphorylation of
membrane-bound rhodopsin by GRK5. The findings in this report thus suggest the
presence of a membrane binding motif in GRK5 and define the importance of a group
of hydrophobic amino acids within this motif in mediating its PM localization.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M310738200 
PMID: 14976207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

