
1. Mol Cell Biochem. 2004 Jan;255(1-2):203-16.

Molecular biology of nickel carcinogenesis: identification of differentially
expressed genes in morphologically transformed C3H10T1/2 Cl 8 mouse embryo
fibroblast cell lines induced by specific insoluble nickel compounds.

Verma R(1), Ramnath J, Clemens F, Kaspin LC, Landolph JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, USC/Norris Comprehensive 
Cancer Center Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90031, USA.

Inhalation of mixtures of insoluble and soluble nickel compounds by humans during
nickel refining has been associated with excess lung and nasal sinus cancers.
Insoluble nickel subsulfide (Ni3S2) and nickel oxide (NiO) are carcinogenic to
rodents by inhalation. We previously showed that insoluble Ni3S2, crystalline
nickel monosulfide (NiS), and green (high temperature, HT) and black (low
temperature, LT) NiO, induced morphological transformation in cultured C3H/10T1/2
Cl 8 (10T1/2) mouse embryo cells. To understand molecular mechanisms of
carcinogenesis by insoluble nickel compounds, we used random, arbitrarily
primed-polymerase chain reaction (RAP-PCR) mRNA differential display and
identified nine cDNA fragments that were differentially expressed between
nontransformed and nickel-transformed cell lines in approximately 10.0% of the
total mRNA. Expression of the calnexin gene (encoding a type I membrane
protein/molecular chaperone), the ect-2 proto-oncogene, and the stress-inducible 
gene, Wdr1, was upregulated. Expression of six genes--the vitamin D interacting
protein/thyroid hormone activating protein 80 (DRIP/TRAP-80) gene, the
insulin-like growth factor receptor 1 (IGFR1) gene, the small nuclear activating 
protein (SNAP C3) gene, and three unknown genes, was down-regulated, in
nickel-transformed cell lines. We hypothesize that these resulting aberrations in
gene expression could contribute to the induction and/or maintenance of
morphological transformation induced by specific insoluble nickel compounds.

DOI: 10.1023/b:mcbi.0000007276.94488.3d 
PMID: 14971661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

