
1. Ital Heart J Suppl. 2003 Dec;4(12):935-57.

[Infective endocarditis: clinical echocardiography].

[Article in Italian]

Barretta G(1), Sisani S, Maragoni G.

Author information: 
(1)U.O. di Cardiologia, Ospedale Civile, ASL 3-Regione Umbria, Spoleto, PG.
g.barretta@asl3.umbria.it

Infective endocarditis is a rare but serious disease. The incidence in western
countries is 1.7-6.2 cases/100,000 per year. The mortality rate today is 20-40%. 
The Duke University incorporates echocardiographic findings as one of the major
criteria in the diagnosis of infective endocarditis. In case of suspected
infective endocarditis, echocardiography is used to: 1) detect and characterize
endocarditic vegetations; 2) detect complications; 3) conduct follow-up after
treatment. Sensitivity for detection of vegetations in native-valve endocarditis 
is < 65% by transthoracic echocardiography, whereas it is 82-100% by
transesophageal echocardiography; in infective endocarditis on prosthetic valves,
sensitivity is 16-36 and 82-96%, respectively. Echocardiographic studies have
demonstrated that highly mobile vegetations with a diameter of > 10 mm are more
likely to cause complications (embolism, heart failure, need for surgery, and
death). Another important advantage offered by echocardiography is the ability to
accurately detect cardiac complications of infective endocarditis: valvular
regurgitation, valve rupture, periannular abscess, prosthetic dehiscence, rupture
of cardiac fibrosa, septal abscess, hemopericardium, and myocardial infarction.
The sensitivity of transthoracic echocardiography for the detection of
periannular abscess is 28% whereas that of transesophageal echocardiography is
87%. Finally, echocardiography has an invaluable role in indicating if surgery is
required in cases of infective endocarditis with severe complications.


PMID: 14976860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

