
1. Immunology. 2004 Mar;111(3):273-81.

Human beta-defensin-2 functions as a chemotactic agent for tumour necrosis
factor-alpha-treated human neutrophils.

Niyonsaba F(1), Ogawa H, Nagaoka I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Host Defense and Biochemical Research, Juntendo University
School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.

Neutrophils are the effector cells in both innate and adaptive immunity, where
they perform the functions of phagocytosis and killing of bacteria. They respond 
to a large number of chemoattractants, but their response to epithelial
cell-derived human beta-defensins (hBD) has not been investigated. Here we report
that hBD-2, but not hBD-1, is a specific chemoattractant for tumour necrosis
factor (TNF)-alpha-treated human neutrophils. The optimal concentration required 
for maximal chemotactic activity was 5 micro g/ml. The effect of hBD-2 on
neutrophils was dependent on the G-protein-phospholipase C pathway, as
demonstrated by inhibition by pertussis toxin and U-73122. In addition,
ligand-receptor analysis indicated that the binding of hBD-2 was markedly
inhibited by macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-3alpha, a specific and unique 
ligand for CCR6. Furthermore, anti-CCR6 antibody could almost completely suppress
the cell migration induced by hBD-2, suggesting that hBD-2 mainly utilizes CCR6
as a functional receptor. Thus, our finding that hBD-2 is a potent
chemoattractant for human neutrophils through specific receptors provides a novel
mechanism by which this peptide contributes to the host defence system by
recruiting neutrophils to inflammation/infection sites. This also suggests an
important link between epithelial cell-derived antibacterial peptides and
neutrophils during infection or inflammation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0019-2805.2004.01816.x 
PMCID: PMC1782421
PMID: 15009427  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

