
1. J Immunol. 2004 Mar 15;172(6):3758-65.

The human cationic peptide LL-37 induces activation of the extracellular
signal-regulated kinase and p38 kinase pathways in primary human monocytes.

Bowdish DM(1), Davidson DJ, Speert DP, Hancock RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

LL-37 is a cationic peptide that is found in the granules of neutrophils and is
secreted by epithelial cells from a variety of tissues. Levels of LL-37 in vivo
increase upon infection, and its production and secretion are increased upon
stimulation with proinflammatory mediators. It has been postulated that LL-37
modulates the immune response by interacting with the effector cells of innate
immunity; however, the mechanism of this interaction is unknown. LL-37 induced
phosphorylation and activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinases,
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and p38, in human peripheral
blood-derived monocytes and a human bronchial epithelial cell line, but not in B 
or T lymphocytes. Phosphorylation was not dependent on the G protein-coupled
formyl peptide-like receptor 1, which was previously proposed to be the receptor 
for LL-37-induced chemotaxis on human monocytes and T cells. Activation of ERK1/2
and p38 was markedly increased by the presence of GM-CSF, but not M-CSF. Exposure
to LL-37 also led to the activation of Elk-1, a transcription factor that is
downstream of and activated by phosphorylated ERK1/2, the up-regulation of
various Elk-1-controlled genes, and the transcription and secretion of IL-8.
Inhibition of either p38 or ERK1/2 kinases led to a reduction in LL-37-induced
IL-8 secretion and inhibition of the transcription of various chemokine genes.
The ability of LL-37 to signal through these pathways has broad implications in
immunity, monocyte activation, proliferation, and differentiation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.172.6.3758 
PMID: 15004180  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

