
1. J Immunol. 2004 Mar 15;172(6):3580-9.

Distinct roles for the OX40-OX40 ligand interaction in regulatory and
nonregulatory T cells.

Takeda I(1), Ine S, Killeen N, Ndhlovu LC, Murata K, Satomi S, Sugamura K, Ishii 
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

The OX40 (CD134) molecule is induced primarily during T cell activation and, as
we show in this study, is also expressed on CD25+CD4+ regulatory T (Treg) cells. 
A necessary role for OX40 in the development and homeostasis of Treg cells can be
inferred from the reduced numbers of the cells present in the spleens of
OX40-deficient mice, and their elevated numbers in the spleens of mice that
overexpress the OX40 ligand (OX40L). The homeostatic proliferation of Treg cells 
following transfer into lymphopenic mice was also found to be potentiated by the 
OX40-OX40L interaction. Suppression of T cell responses by Treg cells was
significantly impaired in the absence of OX40, indicating that, in addition to
its homeostatic functions, OX40 contributes to efficient Treg-mediated
suppression. However, despite this, we found that CD25-CD4+ T cells became
insensitive to Treg-mediated suppression when they were exposed to
OX40L-expressing cells, or when they were treated with an agonistic OX40-specific
mAb. OX40 signaling could also abrogate the disease-preventing activity of Treg
cells in an experimental model of inflammatory bowel disease. Thus, although the 
data reveal important roles for OX40 signaling in Treg cell development,
homeostasis, and suppressive activity, they also show that OX40 signals can
oppose Treg-mediated suppression when they are delivered directly to Ag-engaged
naive T cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.172.6.3580 
PMID: 15004159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

