
1. J Fish Dis. 2004 Feb;27(2):99-104.

Effects of formalin treatment on epithelial structure and mucous cell densities
in rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum), skin.

Buchmann K(1), Bresciani J, Jappe C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Section of Fish Diseases, Royal
Veterinary and Agricultural University, Frederiksberg C., Denmark. kub@kvl.dk

Formalin bath treatments of rainbow trout are widely used for control of
ectoparasitic infections in fish farms and the effects of this chemical on
parasite infections have been studied. In addition, tolerance of the host to
various concentrations of formalin are also known. However, effects of
formaldehyde on the skin epithelium integrity and mucous cell density still need 
elucidation. The present study revealed that exposure of rainbow trout fry 2
months post-hatching to various concentrations of formalin affected the mucous
cell dynamics of the fish. Limited exposure (50 ppm, 1 h) stimulated mucous cell 
proliferation as indicated by the slight increase in densities of Alcian blue
positive cells in tail fin epidermis. In contrast, high concentrations (200-300
ppm, 1 h) or lengthy exposure (24 h) at lower concentrations caused a decrease in
mucous cell density. Scanning electron microscopy revealed effects on the
epithelial structure of fish fins. Blebbing of epithelial cell membranes was the 
first sign of injury. The dilated openings of mucous cells indicated increased
release of mucus. Highly irregular organization of the cells followed, with
regional differences occurring in different parts of fins. The implications of
formalin bathing for susceptibility or resistance of fish to subsequent pathogen 
exposure are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2003.00519.x 
PMID: 15009251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

