
1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2004 Feb;6(1):67-78.

The intracellular localization of amyloid beta protein precursor (AbetaPP)
intracellular domain associated protein-1 (AIDA-1) is regulated by AbetaPP and
alternative splicing.

Ghersi E(1), Vito P, Lopez P, Abdallah M, D'Adamio L.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The Amyloid-beta Protein Precursor (AbetaPP) is a widely expressed transmembrane 
protein that is extensively processed in intracellular vesicular compartments and
on the cell membrane. As a result of two sequential proteolytic cleavages,
AbetaPP releases the Amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptide, which accumulates in insoluble
plaques in the brain of patients affected by Alzheimer's Disease (AD). Another
peptide, a C-terminal fragment named AbetaPP Intracellular Domain (AID), is
generated by AbetaPP processing and is released intracellularly. Several
functions for AID have been proposed: pro-apoptotic peptide, regulator of calcium
homeostasis, molecule involved in transcriptional regulation. Many intracellular 
proteins, such as Fe65, Jip-1, Shc, Numb and X11alpha, interact with AID and
modulate its function by different mechanisms. Here we report the cloning and
initial characterization of two isoforms of a novel protein that we named AID
Associated protein-1a (AIDA-1a), AIDA-1b and AIDA-1bDeltaAnk. We show that
AbetaPP and the AIDA-1 proteins interact in vitro, in living cells and,
endogenously, in leukemia cell lines. Transfected AIDA-1a, AIDA-1b and
AIDA-1bDeltaAnk localize in different compartments and the intracellular
distribution of AIDA-1a can be modified by over-expression of AbetaPP. AIDA-1
proteins are expressed at high levels in the brain; thus, studying their
involvement in AbetaPP processing and AID function might give new insights
regarding a possible role for these molecules in normal brain development and in 
the pathogenesis of AD.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2004-6108 
PMID: 15004329  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

