
1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2004 Apr 1;36(7):858-71.

Overexpression of heme oxygenase (HO)-1 renders Jurkat T cells resistant to
fas-mediated apoptosis: involvement of iron released by HO-1.

Choi BM(1), Pae HO, Jeong YR, Oh GS, Jun CD, Kim BR, Kim YM, Chung HT.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Research Center for Immune Disorders and Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, Wonkwang University School of Medicine, Iksan, Chonbuk, Republic 
of Korea.

We recently demonstrated that heme oxygenase (HO)-1 is constitutively expressed
in human CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells and induced by anti-CD28 or
anti-CD28/anti-CD3 stimulation, even in CD4+CD25- responder T cells. To study the
effects of HO-1 expression on lymphocyte survival, we transfected the HO-1 gene
or induced the gene to express HO-1 protein with cobalt protoporphyrin (CoPP) in 
Jurkat T cells. Consistently, anti-Fas antibody triggered apoptotic cell death in
wild-type Jurkat T cells. Surprisingly, however, HO-1-overexpressing Jurkat T
cells showed strong resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis. In contrast, abrogation
of HO-1 expression by antisense oligomer against HO-1 gene from CoPP-treated
cells or depletion of iron by desferrioxamine from HO-1-transfected cells
abolished the resistance. In addition, exogenously added iron rendered wild-type 
Jurkat T cells resistant. The resistance involved IkappaB kinase (IKK) activation
via iron-induced reactive oxygen species formation, NF-kappaB activation by
activated IKK, and c-FLIP expression by activated NF-kappaB. Primary CD4+ T cells
induced by CoPP to express HO-1 also showed more resistance to Fas-mediated
apoptosis than untreated cells. Our findings suggest that HO-1 plays a critical
and nonredundant role in Fas-mediated activation-induced cell death of T
lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2004.01.004 
PMID: 15019971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

