
1. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Apr;271(7):1250-7.

Point mutations associated with insecticide resistance in the Drosophila
cytochrome P450 Cyp6a2 enable DDT metabolism.

Amichot M(1), Tarès S, Brun-Barale A, Arthaud L, Bride JM, Bergé JB.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Mixte de Recherche 1112, Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, 
Sophia Antipolis, France. amichot@antibes.inra.fr

Three point mutations R335S, L336V and V476L, distinguish the sequence of a
cytochrome P450 CYP6A2 variant assumed to be responsible for
1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis-(4'-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDT) resistance in the RDDT(R)
strain of Drosophila melanogaster. To determine the impact of each mutation on
the function of CYP6A2, the wild-type enzyme (CYP6A2wt) of Cyp6a2 was expressed
in Escherichia coli as well as three variants carrying a single mutation, the
double mutant CYP6A2vSV and the triple mutant CYP6A2vSVL. All CYP6A2 variants
were less stable than the CYP6A2wt protein. Two activities enhanced in the
RDDT(R) strain were measured with all recombinant proteins, namely testosterone
hydroxylation and DDT metabolism. Testosterone was hydroxylated at the 2beta
position with little quantitative variation among the variants. In contrast,
metabolism of DDT was strongly affected by the mutations. The CYP6A2vSVL enzyme
had an enhanced metabolism of DDT, producing dicofol,
dichlorodiphenyldichloroethane and dichlorodiphenyl acetic acid. The apparent
affinity of the enzymes CYP6A2wt and CYP6A2vSVL for DDT and testosterone was not 
significantly different as revealed by the type I difference spectra. Sequence
alignments with CYP102A1 provided clues to the positions of the amino acids
mutated in CYP6A2. These mutations were found spatially clustered in the vicinity
of the distal end of helix I relative to the substrate recognition valley. Thus
this area, including helix J, is important for the structure and activity of
CYP6A2. Furthermore, we show here that point mutations in a cytochrome P450 can
have a prominent role in insecticide resistance.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.2004.04025.x 
PMID: 15030474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

