
1. Mol Microbiol. 2004 Apr;52(1):257-71.

GW domains of the Listeria monocytogenes invasion protein InlB are required for
potentiation of Met activation.

Banerjee M(1), Copp J, Vuga D, Marino M, Chapman T, van der Geer P, Ghosh P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego,
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0314, USA.

The Listeria monocytogenes protein InlB promotes intracellular invasion by
activating the receptor tyrosine kinase Met. Earlier studies have indicated that 
the LRR fragment of InlB is sufficient for Met activation, but we show that this 
is not the case unless the LRR fragment is artificially dimerized through a
disulphide bond. In contrast, activation of Met proceeds through monomers of
intact InlB and, at physiologically relevant concentrations, requires coordinated
action in cis of both InlB N-terminal LRR region and C-terminal GW domains. The
GW domains are shown to be crucial for potentiating Met activation and inducing
intracellular invasion, with these effects depending on association between GW
domains and glycosaminoglycans. Glycosaminoglycans do not alter the monomeric
state of InlB, and are likely to enhance Met activation through a
receptor-mediated mode, as opposed to the ligand-mediated mode observed for the
LRR fragment. Surprisingly, we find that gC1q-R, a host protein implicated in
InlB-mediated invasion, specifically antagonizes rather than enhances InlB
signalling, and that interaction between InlB and gC1q-R is unnecessary for
bacterial invasion. Lastly, we demonstrate that HGF, the endogenous ligand of
Met, substitutes for InlB in promoting intracellular invasion, suggesting that no
special properties are required of InlB in invasion besides its hormone-like
mimicry of HGF.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2003.03968.x 
PMID: 15049825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

