
1. Immunology. 2004 Apr;111(4):444-52.

The interaction of streptococcal inhibitor of complement (SIC) and its
proteolytic fragments with the human beta defensins.

Fernie-King BA(1), Seilly DJ, Lachmann PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Immunology Group, Centre for Veterinary Science, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. baf22@cam.ac.uk

Streptococcal inhibitor of complement (SIC) is a 31 kDa extracellular protein
produced by a few highly virulent strains of Streptococcus pyogenes (in
particular the M1 strain). It has been shown additionally to inhibit four further
components of the mucosal innate response-lysozyme, secretory leucocyte
proteinase inhibitor, human alpha-defensin 1 and the cathelicidin LL-37 which are
all bactericidal against Group A Streptococci (GAS). We now show that SIC also
inhibits variably the antibacterial action of hBD-1, -2 and -3. By enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), SIC binds strongly to hBD-2 and hBD-3, but not at
all to hBD-1. Investigation of the antimicrobial action of beta-defensins hBD-1, 
-2 and -3 against GAS in two different buffer systems shows that both the killing
efficiencies of all three defensins, and the binding of SIC to them, occurs more 
efficiently in 10 mm Tris buffer than in 10 mm phosphate. The lower ionic
strength of the Tris buffer may underlie this effect. hBD-1 kills the M1 strain
of GAS only in 10 mm Tris, but is able to kill an M6 (SIC negative) strain in 10 
mm phosphate. The inhibition of hBD-3 by SIC is clearly of physiological
relevance, that of hBD-2 is likely to be so, but the inhibition of hBD-1 occurs
only at lower ionic strength than is likely to be encountered in vivo. Elastase
digestion of SIC yields three major fragments of MW 3.843 kDa comprising residues
1-33 (fragment A); 10.369 kDa comprising residues 34-126 (fragment B); and MW
16.487 kDa, comprising residues 127-273 (fragment C). By ELISA, only fragment B
binds to hBD-2 and hBD-3 and this may indicate the inhibitory portion of the SIC 
molecule.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0019-2805.2004.01837.x 
PMCID: PMC1782441
PMID: 15056382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

