
1. Epidemiol Prev. 2003 Nov-Dec;27(6):333-9.

[Impact of guidelines in investigating foodborne disease outbreaks services in
Lazio region, Italy].

[Article in Italian]

Faustini A(1), Giorgi Rossi P, Perucci CA; Gruppo regionale sorveglianza
tossinfezioni.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di epidemiologia, ASL RME, Roma. faustini@asplazio.it

Epidemiological investigation of foodborne disease outbreaks helps us to better
define the risks, hazards and vehicles involved. In 1997 guidelines on
epidemiological methods for investigating these outbreaks were implemented in the
Lazio Region. Methods used in investigating the 410 foodborne disease outbreaks
reported in the 1996-2000 period were analysed to evaluate the impact of the
guide lines on health services. Specific food attack-rates (epidemiological
methods) were calculated more frequently in outbreaks with setting of mass
catering with many exposed people (46% of these outbreaks) than in outbreaks in
home setting with few exposed people (13% of these cases). Inversely, in smaller 
outbreaks the proportion of cases with detected aetiology (microbiological
method) was higher (66%) than in larger ones (43%). For foodborne disease
outbreaks with at least 30 people exposed epidemiological methods of
investigating showed temporal trend in the period 1996-2000: the epidemics in
which attack rates were calculated increased from 50% to 83%, those in which
epidemic curve was drawn increased from 17% to 79%, and those in which food
specific attack rates were calculated increased from 33% to 58%. The hazard
analysis of critical control points (HACCP) was performed only in 18.3% of the
cases. In conclusion, the guide lines resulted in a wider application of
epidemiological methods in large outbreaks with a well defined exposure resulting
in an improved detection of vehicles of foodborne diseases. Epidemiological
methods possibly are not adequate to investigate smaller foodborne outbreaks.


PMID: 15058361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

