
1. J Vet Diagn Invest. 2004 Mar;16(2):108-15.

In vivo and in vitro colonization patterns of AIDA-I-positive Escherichia coli
isolates from piglets with diarrhea.

Pritchard J(1), Ngeleka M, Middleton DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, 52 Campus Drive, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada S7N 
5B4.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to characterize the colonization 
patterns of 3 pathogenic Escherichia coli strains: PD58 and PD149 of the
AIDA-I/STb/EAST1 pathotype, serogroup O: ND (not determined), and PD31 of the
LT/STb/EAST1 pathotype, serogroup O149. These strains were isolated from diseased
piglets and caused diarrhea in experimentally inoculated, newborn,
colostrum-deprived pigs. In this study, intestinal tissues from newborn pigs
experimentally infected with a high inoculum (20 ml containing 10(10) cfu) were
harvested and examined for bacterial colonization using light microscopy. A
nonaqueous perfluorocarbon fixation method was used to preserve the glycocalyx of
the microvillus border in tissues collected for TEM. Transmission electron
micrographs revealed that E. coli strain PD149 displayed long flexible
fimbria-like structures that intimately attached the bacteria both to the
microvillus border of the upper colon and to adjacent bacteria. In vitro, this
strain demonstrated the localized adherence pattern to HEp-2 cells characteristic
of enteroaggregative E. coli (EAggEC). Both PD58 and PD31 strains colonized the
upper colon through the formation of a biofilm, also characteristic of EAggEC.
Strains PD58 and PD31 adhered poorly to HEp-2 cells in vitro, although these
demonstrated a colonization pattern suggestive of diffuse and aggregative
adherence, respectively. These findings suggest that strains PD58 and PD149,
expressing the AIDA-I, factor and strain PD31 represents hybrid pathotypes of
diarrheagenic E. coli and that they probably cause diarrhea in piglets through
differing mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1177/104063870401600203 
PMID: 15053360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

