
1. Chemotherapy. 2004 Apr;50(1):51-4.

Streptococcal-A tonsillopharyngitis: a 5-day course of cefuroxime axetil versus a
10-day course of penicillin V. results depending on the children's age.

Scholz H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Infectious Diseases, Microbiology and Hygienics, Municipal
Hospital of Berlin-Buch, Berlin, Germany. horstscholz1@compuserve.de

BACKGROUND: The recommended duration of antibiotic treatment of
tonsillopharyngitis caused by group A beta-hemolytic streptococci (GABHS) with
penicillin V (PenV) is mostly 10 days. However, compliance with 10-day courses is
bad. Shorter therapeutic courses are necessary, especially in young children.
METHODS: In a prospective, randomized, multi-center study, children aged 1-17
years with acute tonsillopharyngitis and a positive culture for GABHS were
treated with cefuroxime axetil (CAE) 20 mg/kg/day (max. 500 mg) b.i.d. for 5 days
or with PenV 50,000 IU/kg (30 mg/kg) t.i.d. for 10 days. Patients were evaluated 
for clinical efficacy 2-4 and 7-9 days after the end of therapy. Throat swabs
were taken 2-4 days after the end of therapy and at the first follow-up visit.
Follow-up visits were carried out 7-8 weeks, 6 months and 12 months after study
inclusion.
RESULTS: 1,952 patients (CAE for 5 days, 496 patients/PenV for 10 days, 1,456
patients) could be included in the intent-to-treat analysis. Two to 4 days after 
completion of the treatment course, the bacteriological eradication in group A
(1-5 years) and group B (6-17 years) was 90.52 and 89.53% (CAE) vs. 84.13 and
84.20% (PenV), respectively; p = 0.0172; 0.0382; clinical success was 98.30%
(CAE) versus 93.25% (PenV), p = 0.0017. Recurrent infections were significantly
higher in younger children (group A) under both treatment regimens.
Poststreptococcal sequelae (glomerulonephritis) were observed in only 1 case, in 
the PenV group.
CONCLUSIONS: CAE b.i.d. for 5 days was at least as effective as PenV t.i.d. for
10 days. Incountries with a low incidence of rheumatic fever, CAE for 5 days can 
be recommended for the therapy of tonsillopharyngitis due to GABHS - also in
young children.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000077286 
PMID: 15084807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

