
1. J Med Microbiol. 2004 May;53(Pt 5):355-365. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.05515-0.

Sequence variation and conservation in virulence-related genes of Bordetella
pertussis isolates from the UK.

Packard ER(1), Parton R(1), Coote JG(1), Fry NK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, Scotland, UK 2Health Protection Agency,
Respiratory and Systemic Infection Laboratory, Specialist and Reference
Microbiology Division, 61 Colindale Avenue, London NW9 5HT, UK.

To determine the value of gene markers for surveillance and to assess the genetic
stability of potential acellular pertussis vaccine components, the sequence
variation in ten virulence-related genes of Bordetella pertussis was investigated
in strains isolated in the UK between 1920 and 2002. These genes encode:
pertactin (prnA); pertussis toxin subunits S1 (ptxA) and S3 (ptxC); tracheal
colonization factor (tcfA); bordetella autotransporter protein C (bapC);
bordetella resistance to killing protein (brkA); fimbrial antigen 2 (fim2);
outer-membrane protein Q (ompQ); virulence-activated gene 8 (vag8) and adenylate 
cyclase toxin (cyaA). The encoded proteins are either components of current
acellular vaccines (ACVs), or potential virulence markers for B. pertussis. Three
strains used in the pertussis UK whole-cell vaccine (WCV), strain Tohama-I used
for production of ACV components and the type strain of B. pertussis (18323(T))
were also analysed. Several novel alleles were found. The UK isolates were
assigned multi-locus sequence types (MLSTs) according to a previously described
scheme for B. pertussis based on three of these genes (ptxA, ptxC and tcfA).
Compared with isolates from other countries, the UK clinical strains showed a
distinct distribution of MLSTs. Apart from one strain that was MLST-3, all other 
recent isolates (2000-2002) were identified as MLST-5. These isolates differed
from the three WCV strains, which were MLST-2 or MLST-3, the Tohama-I strain
(MLST-2) and the type strain of B. pertussis (MLST-9). MLST-3 and MLST-5 differ
only by a single synonymous mutation, but this method does indicate that
currently circulating strains of B. pertussis are not identical to the vaccine
types, and they may differ in other important characteristics. Two new MLSTs were
identified amongst historical UK isolates. Sequence-based typing offers a
convenient method of analysing and comparing populations of B. pertussis from
different time periods and from different countries. The variation exhibited by
prnA and fim2 suggests that they could be useful, additional epidemiological
markers in such a typing scheme.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.05515-0 
PMID: 15096543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

