
1. Poult Sci. 2004 Apr;83(4):544-9.

Analysis of chicken TLR4, CD28, MIF, MD-2, and LITAF genes in a Salmonella
enteritidis resource population.

Malek M(1), Hasenstein JR, Lamont SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA.

Salmonella enteritidis is a foodborne pathogen that negatively affects both
animal and human health. Genetic variations in response to pathogenic SE
colonization or to SE vaccination were measured in a chicken resource population.
Outbred broiler sires and 3 diverse, highly inbred dam lines produced 508 F1
progeny that were evaluated for either bacterial colonization after pathogenic SE
inoculation or circulating antibody level after SE vaccination. Five candidate
genes were selected for study, based on their biological function as possibly
affecting response to SE: toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), T-cell specific surface
protein (CD28), macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), MD-2, and
lipopolysaccharide-induced tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha factor (LITAF). Gene
fragments were sequenced from the founder lines of the resource population. The
LITAF and MIF genes were homozygous for all sires. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) were identified in 3 genes (TLR4, CD28, and MD-2) and were
used to test for associations of sire SNP with SE response. Linear mixed models
were used for statistical analyses. The CD28 broiler sire SNP was associated with
both bacterial load in the cecum (P < 0.003) and vaccine antibody response (P <
0.05). The MD-2 SNP was associated (P < 0.04) with the bacterial load in the
spleen. The use of these SNP in these genes in marker-assisted selection may
result in enhancement of disease resistance.

DOI: 10.1093/ps/83.4.544 
PMID: 15109052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

