
1. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Apr 15;10(8):2879-90.

NY-ESO-1 protein formulated in ISCOMATRIX adjuvant is a potent anticancer vaccine
inducing both humoral and CD8+ t-cell-mediated immunity and protection against
NY-ESO-1+ tumors.

Maraskovsky E(1), Sjölander S, Drane DP, Schnurr M, Le TT, Mateo L, Luft T,
Masterman KA, Tai TY, Chen Q, Green S, Sjölander A, Pearse MJ, Lemonnier FA, Chen
W, Cebon J, Suhrbier A.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Austin and Repatriation Medical Centre, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. Eugene_Marakovsky@csl.com.au

NY-ESO-1 is a 180 amino-acid human tumor antigen expressed by many different
tumor types and belongs to the family of "cancer-testis" antigens. In humans,
NY-ESO-1 is one of the most immunogenic tumor antigens and NY-ESO-1 peptides have
been shown to induce NY-ESO-1-specific CD8(+) CTLs capable of altering the
natural course of NY-ESO-1-expressing tumors in cancer patients. Here we describe
the preclinical immunogenicity and efficacy of NY-ESO-1 protein formulated with
the ISCOMATRIX adjuvant (NY-ESO-1 vaccine). In vitro, the NY-ESO-1 vaccine was
readily taken up by human monocyte-derived dendritic cells, and on maturation,
these human monocyte-derived dendritic cells efficiently cross-presented
HLA-A2-restricted epitopes to NY-ESO-1-specific CD8(+) T cells. In addition,
epitopes of NY-ESO-1 protein were also presented on MHC class II molecules to
NY-ESO-1-specific CD4(+) T cells. The NY-ESO-1 vaccine induced strong
NY-ESO-1-specific IFN-gamma and IgG2a responses in C57BL/6 mice. Furthermore, the
NY-ESO-1 vaccine induced NY-ESO-1-specific CD8(+) CTLs in HLA-A2 transgenic mice 
that were capable of lysing human HLA-A2(+) NY-ESO-1(+) tumor cells. Finally,
C57BL/6 mice, immunized with the NY-ESO-1 vaccine, were protected against
challenge with a B16 melanoma cell line expressing NY-ESO-1. These data
illustrate that the NY-ESO-1 vaccine represents a potent therapeutic anticancer
vaccine.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.ccr-03-0245 
PMID: 15102697  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

