
1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2004 May 15;425(2):133-46.

Rat cytochrome P450C24 (CYP24A1) and the role of F249 in substrate binding and
catalytic activity.

Annalora A(1), Bobrovnikova-Marjon E, Serda R, Lansing L, Chiu ML, Pastuszyn A,
Iyer S, Marcus CB, Omdahl JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of New Mexico
School of Medicine, Albuquerque, NM 87131-5221, USA.

A high level of functional recombinant rat cytochrome P450C24 enzyme (CYP24A1)
was obtained (40-50mg/L) using an Escherichia coli expression system. Purified
enzyme was stable with retention of spectral and catalytic activity. The rate of 
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) [1,25(OH)(2)D(3)] side-chain oxidation and cleavage to
the end-product calcitroic acid was directly related to the rate of electron
transfer from the ferredoxin redox partner. It was determined from
substrate-induced spectral shifts that the 1 alpha- and 25-hydroxyl groups on
vitamin D(3) metabolites and analogs were the major determinants for
high-affinity binding to CYP24A1. Lowest K(d) values were obtained for 1
alpha-vitamin D(3) (0.06 microM) and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) (0.05 microM)
whereas unmodified parental vitamin D(3) and the non-secosteroid
25-hydroxycholesterol had lower affinities with K(d) values of 1.3 and 1.9
microM, respectively. The lowest binding affinity for natural vitamin D
metabolites was observed for 24,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) [24,25(OH)(2)D(3)] (0.43
microM). Kinetic analyses of the two natural substrates 25-hydroxyvitamin D(3)
[25(OH)D(3)] and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) [1,25(OH)(2)D(3)] revealed similar
K(m) values (0.35 and 0.38 microM, respectively), however, the turnover number
was higher for 25(OH)D(3) compared to 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) (4.2 and 1 min(-1),
respectively). Mutagenesis of F249 within the F-helix of CYP24A1 altered
substrate binding and metabolism. Most notable, the hydrophobic to polar mutant
F249T had a strong impact on lowering substrate-binding affinity and catalysis of
the final C(23) oxidation sequence from
24,25,26,27-tetranor-1,23-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) to calcitroic acid. Two other
hydrophobic 249 mutants (F249A and F249Y) also lowered substrate binding and
expressed metabolic abnormalities that included the C(23)-oxidation defect
observed with mutant F249T plus a similar defect involving an earlier pathway
action for the C(24) oxidation of 1,24,25-trihydroxyvitamin D(3). Therefore,
Phe-249 within the F-helix was demonstrated to have an important role in properly
binding and aligning substrate in the CYP24A1 active site for C(23) and C(24)
oxidation reactions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2004.01.025 
PMID: 15111121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

