
1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2004 Sep;53(9):825-34. Epub 2004 Apr 30.

Heat shock protein 70 / MAGE-1 tumor vaccine can enhance the potency of
MAGE-1-specific cellular immune responses in vivo.

Ye J(1), Chen GS, Song HP, Li ZS, Huang YY, Qu P, Sun YJ, Zhang XM, Sui YF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Immunology and Immunotherapy, Department of Pathology,
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, Shaanxi Province, China.

The cancer-testis antigen encoded by the MAGE-1 gene is an attractive antigen in 
tumor immunotherapy because it can be processed as a foreign antigen by the
immune system and generate tumor-specific cellular immune response in vivo.
However, increase of the potency of MAGE-1 DNA vaccines is still needed. The high
degree of sequence homology and intrinsic immunogenicity of heat shock protein 70
(HSP70) have prompted the suggestion that HSP70 might have immunotherapeutic
potential, as HSP70 purified from malignant and virally infected cells can
transfer and deliver antigenic peptides to antigen-presenting cells to elicit
peptide-specific immunity. In this research, we evaluated the enhancement of
linkage of Mycobacterium tuberculosis HSP70 to MAGE-1 gene of the potency of
antigen-specific immunity elicited by naked DNA vaccines. We found that vaccines 
containing MAGE-1-HSP70 fusion genes enhanced the frequency of MAGE-1-specific
cytotoxic T cells in contract to vaccines containing the MAGE-1 gene alone. More 
importantly, the fusion converted a less effective DNA vaccine into one with
significant potency against established MAGE-1-expressing tumors. These results
indicate that linkage of HSP70 to MAGE-1 gene may greatly enhance the potency of 
DNA vaccines, and generate specific antitumor immunity against MAGE-1-expressing 
tumors.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-004-0536-6 
PMID: 15127237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

