
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2004 Aug;76(2):307-13. Epub 2004 May 3.

CD1d-restricted "NKT" cells and myeloid IL-12 production: an immunological
crossroads leading to promotion or suppression of effective anti-tumor immune
responses?

Gumperz JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Service Memorial Institutes, Room 405, 1300 University Ave., Madison, WI 
53706, USA. jegumperz@wisc.edu

CD1d-restricted T cells are remarkable for their unusual ability to respond to
self-antigens and to contribute to both immunostimulatory and immunosuppressive
responses. Their effects in different cancer models have appeared contradictory; 
in some cases, they are linked to the generation of effective tumor clearance,
and in others, they seem to contribute to suppression of anti-tumor responses.
Recent results suggest CD1d-restricted T cells are involved in critical
interactions with myeloid dendritic cells (DCs) that can affect the subsequent
course of the immune response, and that factors such as the strength of the
antigenic signal and the presence or absence of proinflammatory cytokines may
determine the outcome of these interactions. In the presence of a strong
antigenic signal, CD1d-restricted T cells induced myeloid DCs to secrete
interleukin (IL)-12, and these DCs in turn activated naive T cells to secrete Th1
cytokines. When exposed to the weak antigenic stimulus of self-antigens,
CD1d-restricted T cells induced DCs to secrete IL-10 but not IL-12, and these DCs
failed to stimulate Th1 cytokine production by naive T cells. In contrast,
CD1d-restricted T cells that were stimulated by self-antigens in the presence of 
IL-12 potently secreted interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and were among the first
lymphocytes to become activated in vivo. Hence, CD1d-restricted T cells may
promote or prevent effective anti-tumor responses that are mediated by other
lymphocytic effector cells by influencing IL-12 production by myeloid DCs and by 
their own production of early IFN-gamma in response to IL-12.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0104038 
PMID: 15123775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

