
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 May 18;101(20):7727-32. Epub 2004 May 5.

Inhibition of primary human T cell proliferation by Helicobacter pylori
vacuolating toxin (VacA) is independent of VacA effects on IL-2 secretion.

Sundrud MS(1), Torres VJ, Unutmaz D, Cover TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232-2605, USA.

Recent evidence indicates that the secreted Helicobacter pylori vacuolating toxin
(VacA) inhibits the activation of T cells. VacA blocks IL-2 secretion in
transformed T cell lines by suppressing the activation of nuclear factor of
activated T cells (NFAT). In this study, we investigated the effects of VacA on
primary human CD4(+) T cells. VacA inhibited the proliferation of primary human T
cells activated through the T cell receptor (TCR) and CD28. VacA-treated Jurkat T
cells secreted markedly diminished levels of IL-2 compared with untreated cells, 
whereas VacA-treated primary human T cells continued to secrete high levels of
IL-2. Further experiments indicated that the VacA-induced inhibition of primary
human T cell proliferation was not attributable to VacA effects on NFAT
activation or IL-2 secretion. We show here that VacA suppresses IL-2-induced
cell-cycle progression and proliferation of primary human T cells without
affecting IL-2-dependent survival. Through the analysis of a panel of mutant VacA
proteins, we demonstrate that VacA-mediated inhibition of T cell proliferation
requires an intact N-terminal hydrophobic region necessary for the formation of
anion-selective membrane channels. Remarkably, we demonstrate that one of these
mutant VacA proteins [VacA-Delta(6-27)] abrogates the immunosuppressive actions
of wild-type VacA in a dominant-negative fashion. We suggest that VacA may
inhibit the clonal expansion of T cells that have already been activated by H.
pylori antigens, thereby allowing H. pylori to evade the adaptive immune response
and establish chronic infection.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0401528101 
PMCID: PMC419674
PMID: 15128946  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

