
1. Immunol Lett. 2004 Apr 30;93(1):71-8.

Microparticulate beta-glucan upregulates the expression of B7.1, B7.2, B7-H1, but
not B7-DC on cultured murine peritoneal macrophages.

Hunter KW Jr(1), DuPre' S, Redelman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Nevada School of
Medicine, Reno, NV 89557, USA. khunter@unr.edu

Beta-1,3-(D)-glucan from a variety of biological sources has been shown to
enhance both humoral and cellular immune responses to a variety of antigens,
infectious agents, and tumors. Nevertheless, its mode of action has not been
fully defined. We sought to determine whether a 1-2 microm diameter
microparticulate form of beta-glucan (MG) from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
could regulate expression of B7 family glycoproteins on resident peritoneal
macrophages from BALB/c mice. We discovered that MG uregulated B7.2 mRNA
expression and enhanced the surface membrane expression of B7.2 glycoprotein.
Although B7.1 mRNA was not upregulated above constitutive levels, MG treatment
enhanced B7.1 glycoprotein expression on the macrophages, albeit to a lesser
extent than B7.2. At the same time, the gene and cell surface expression of
B7-H1, a putative negative regulator of T cell activity, was also upregulated by 
MG. The expression of B7-DC, another B7 family molecule with negative regulatory 
activity, was not affected by incubation with MG. This study has demonstrated
that a microparticulate form of beta-glucan can enhance B7 co-stimulatory
molecule expression on macrophages, thereby enabling these antigen-presenting
cells to deliver the second signal to T-lymphocytes that express CD28. In
addition, because MG also induces the expression of B7-H1, it may enable
macrophages to provide a concomitant downregulatory signal to T-lymphocytes
expressing PD-1 or related receptors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2004.02.006 
PMID: 15134902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

