
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2004 Jun;35(2):210-7.

Cloning, expression, and purification of HLA-A2-BSP and beta-2m in Escherichia
coli.

Piao WH(1), Song XG, Liu MC, He Y, Zhang HH, Xu WX, Li ZL, Zhang HQ, Ling SG,
Wang GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Academy of Military Medical Sciences,
Beijing, 100850, PR China.

Tetramer analysis is a novel technique in immunological research that has
dramatically changed our knowledge of the immune response to pathogens, tumors
and autoimmune disease. Through the formation of major histocompatibility complex
(MHC)-peptide tetrameric complexes, it can provide accurate counts of
antigen-specific T-cells and it allows their phenotypical and functional
analysis. The tetramer is composed of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) heavy
chain, beta-2 microglobulin (beta-2m), the nominal peptide, and streptavidin. The
HLA heavy chain and the beta-2m are expressed in Escherichia coli. But up to now,
all laboratories have been expressing these two proteins by using isopropyl
beta-d-thiogalactopyranoside IPTG. IPTG is very expensive, and it is tedious and 
laborious to induce expression protein. So it is difficult to scale up to express
the objective protein. To address this problem, extracellular fractions of
HLA-A0201 and beta-2m (absent signal peptide) genes were cloned from peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) by RT-PCR. DNA coding for a Gly-Ser linker and a 
BSP (15-amino acid substrate peptide for BirA-dependent biotinylation) was added 
to the COOH-terminus of the extracellular fraction of HLA-A0201 by PCR, using an 
HLA-A0201 as the template. Then the HLA-A0201-BSP and beta-2m genes were cloned
into pBV220 vector and expressed, respectively. The expressed proteins were
purified and detected by ELISA and Western blot analyses. High-efficient
expressions of HLA-A0201-BSP and beta-2m proteins lay a good foundation for
further expression and purification in prokaryotic system and constructing MHC
class I-peptide tetramer complexes to study the function of CTLs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2004.01.002 
PMID: 15135395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

