
1. J Med Microbiol. 2004 Jun;53(Pt 6):483-493. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.45554-0.

Characterization of a haemolytic phospholipase A(2) activity in clinical isolates
of Campylobacter concisus.

Istivan TS(1), Coloe PJ(1), Fry BN(1), Ward P(1), Smith SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Environmental Biology, RMIT University, PO Box
71, Bundoora, Victoria 3083, Australia 2Microbiology Department, Royal Children's
Hospital, Melbourne, Australia 3School of Health Sciences, Deakin University,
Melbourne, Australia.

A membrane-bound, haemolytic phospholipase A(2) (PLA(2)) activity was detected in
clinical strains of Campylobacter concisus isolated from children with
gastroenteritis. The clinical strains were assigned into two molecular groups
(genomospecies) based on PCR amplification of their 23S rDNA. This
calcium-dependent, heat-stable, haemolytic PLA(2) activity was detected in
strains from both genomospecies. A crude haemolysin extract (CHE) was initially
prepared from cellular outer-membrane proteins of these isolates and was further 
fractionated by ultrafiltration. The haemolytic activity of the extracted
fraction (R30) was retained by ultrafiltration using a 30 kDa molecular mass
cut-off filter, and was designated haemolysin extract (HE). Both CHE and HE had
PLA(2) activity and caused stable vacuolating and cytolytic effects on Chinese
hamster ovary cells in tissue culture. Primers for the conserved region of pldA
gene (phospholipase A gene) from Campylobacter coli amplified a gene region of
460 bp in all tested isolates, confirming the presence of a homologous PLA gene
sequence in C. concisus. The detection of haemolytic PLA(2) activity in C.
concisus indicates the presence of a potential virulence factor in this species
and supports the hypothesis that C. concisus is a possible opportunistic
pathogen.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.45554-0 
PMID: 15150326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

