
1. Cancer Gene Ther. 2004 Jul;11(7):487-96.

Transgenic TCR expression: comparison of single chain with full-length receptor
constructs for T-cell function.

Zhang T(1), He X, Tsang TC, Harris DT.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Therapy Group, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA.

Genetic modification of T lymphocytes with T-cell receptor (TCR) genes provides a
novel tool for adoptive immunotherapy. However, the efficiency of full-length TCR
(flTCR)-transduced T cells could be limited by factors such as incorrect pairing 
between exogenous and endogenous TCR chains and downregulation of the CD3
complex. To overcome these hurdles, one promising strategy is to use three-domain
single-chain TCRs (3D-scTCR), in which TCR Valpha and Vbeta chains are joined by 
a linker with signal transduction domains fused at the carboxyl termini as signal
transducers and amplifiers. Our results showed that surface expression of scTCRs 
on T cells after retroviral transduction was affected by the origin of the
transmembrane (TM) region and placement of signaling domains. scTCR-modified T
cells were functional as shown by cytokine (IL-2 and IFN-gamma) release in
response to antigen stimulation and cytolytic activity against specific target
cells. CD8 and CD28, but not the complete CD3 complex, could enhance the
scTCR-induced T cell activation. Compared with flTCR-modified T cells and native 
CTLs, scTCR-modified T cells require higher thresholds of antigen stimulation
(approximately 10(-8) M peptide) to be functional. Despite the low efficiency of 
scTCRs, our data provide insight into further improvements in generating
efficient scTCRs for in vivo applications.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cgt.7700703 
PMID: 15153936  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

