
1. Genetics. 2004 May;167(1):65-75.

MrpL36p, a highly diverged L31 ribosomal protein homolog with additional
functional domains in Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondria.

Williams EH(1), Perez-Martinez X, Fox TD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York 14853-2703, USA.

Translation in mitochondria utilizes a large complement of ribosomal proteins.
Many mitochondrial ribosomal components are clearly homologous to eubacterial
ribosomal proteins, but others appear unique to the mitochondrial system. A
handful of mitochondrial ribosomal proteins appear to be eubacterial in origin
but to have evolved additional functional domains. MrpL36p is an essential
mitochondrial ribosomal large-subunit component in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Increased dosage of MRPL36 also has been shown to suppress certain types of
translation defects encoded within the mitochondrial COX2 mRNA. A central domain 
of MrpL36p that is similar to eubacterial ribosomal large-subunit protein L31 is 
sufficient for general mitochondrial translation but not suppression, and
proteins bearing this domain sediment with the ribosomal large subunit in sucrose
gradients. In contrast, proteins lacking the L31 domain, but retaining a novel
N-terminal sequence and a C-terminal sequence with weak similarity to the
Escherichia coli signal recognition particle component Ffh, are sufficient for
dosage suppression and do not sediment with the large subunit of the ribosome.
Interestingly, the activity of MrpL36p as a dosage suppressor exhibits gene and
allele specificity. We propose that MrpL36p represents a highly diverged L31
homolog with derived domains functioning in mRNA selection in yeast mitochondria.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.167.1.65 
PMCID: PMC1470847
PMID: 15166137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

