
1. J Immunol. 2004 Jun 15;172(12):7804-12.

Down-regulation of IL-2 production in T lymphocytes by phosphorylated protein
kinase A-RIIbeta.

Elliott MR(1), Shanks RA, Khan IU, Brooks JW, Burkett PJ, Nelson BJ, Kyttaris V, 
Juang YT, Tsokos GC, Kammer GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Wake Forest University School of
Medicine, Medical Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

The beta isoform of the type II regulatory subunit (RIIbeta) of protein kinase A 
suppresses CREB transcriptional activity and c-Fos production in T cells
following activation via the TCR. Because CREB is an integral nuclear
transcription factor for IL-2 production by T cells, we tested the hypothesis
that RIIbeta down-regulates IL-2 expression and IL-2 production in T cells.
Stable transfection of RIIbeta in Jurkat T cells led to an approximately 90%
reduction in IL-2 mRNA and IL-2 protein following T cell activation. The
inhibition of IL-2 production was associated with phosphorylation of the RIIbeta 
subunit at serine 114 (pRIIbeta) and localization of pRIIbeta in intranuclear
clusters. A serine 114 phosphorylation-defective mutant, RIIbeta(S114A), did not 
form these intranuclear clusters as well as wild-type RIIbeta, and did not
inhibit IL-2 mRNA and protein synthesis, indicating that serine 114
phosphorylation is required for both nuclear localization and down-regulation of 
IL-2 production by RIIbeta. In contrast to its effect on IL-2, RIIbeta induced
constitutive up-regulation of CD154 mRNA and cell surface expression. Thus,
pRIIbeta differentially regulates gene expression following T cell activation.
Unexpectedly, we also found that stable overexpression of another protein kinase 
A regulatory subunit, RIalpha, had the opposite effect on IL-2 expression,
causing a 3- to 4-fold increase in IL-2 production following stimulation. In
summary, our data demonstrate a novel mechanism by which serine 114
phosphorylation and nuclear localization of RIIbeta controls the regulation of
gene expression in T cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.172.12.7804 
PMID: 15187164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

