
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2004 Apr 21;59(1):17-26.

Protective immunity in rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss following immunization
with distinct molecular mass fractions isolated from Flavobacterium
psychrophilum.

LaFrentz BR(1), LaPatra SE, Jones GR, Cain KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources, Aquaculture Research Institute,
University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho 83844-1136, USA.

Vaccine development for coldwater disease (CWD), also known as rainbow trout fry 
syndrome (RTFS), has been based primarily on whole-cell bacterins or outer
membrane fractions of Flavobacterium psychrophilum. In the present study,
immunogenic regions of the bacterium corresponding to 18-28, 41-49, and 70-100
kDa were identified by western blot analysis using rainbow trout Oncorhynchus
mykiss immune sera. Following sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), antigens within these regions were isolated by
electro-elution and used in immunization trials. Groups of rainbow trout fry were
immunized with these regions emulsified with Freund's complete adjuvant (FCA) and
a formalin-killed bacterin emulsified with FCA. It was demonstrated that the
70-100 and 41-49 kDa regions and F. psychrophilum treatments elicited significant
protection when compared to the saline control following subcutaneous challenge
with 2 doses of a virulent strain of F. psychrophilum. Immunization with the
70-100 kDa region resulted in near complete protection in fish with mean
cumulative percent mortality (CPM) of 6% and mean relative percent survival (RPS)
of 94% at the lower challenge dose (6.25 x 10(6) colony forming units fish(-1)). 
This preparation also stimulated a high level of specific antibody to F.
psychrophilum, as detected by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Western blot analysis using sera from fish immunized with the 70-100 kDa region
demonstrated that high molecular weight proteins and the O-polysaccharide
component of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) are recognized by serum antibodies. This
suggests that these antigens may be involved in eliciting a highly protective
immune response, and could serve as vaccine candidates.

DOI: 10.3354/dao059017 
PMID: 15212288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

