
1. Infect Immun. 2004 Jul;72(7):3706-15.

Simultaneous deficiency in CD28 and STAT6 results in chronic ectoparasite-induced
inflammatory skin disease.

Liu Q(1), Arseculeratne C, Liu Z, Whitmire J, Grusby MJ, Finkelman FD, Darling
TN, Cheever AW, Swearengen J, Urban JF, Gause WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Rd., Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

A mouse lacking CD28, a T-cell costimulatory molecule, and STAT6, a transcription
factor that mediates interleukin-4 (IL-4) signaling, was developed from parental 
CD28- and STAT6-deficient mice. STAT6/CD28(-/-) BALB/c mice that were 8 weeks old
had a normal phenotype, and IL-4 production was induced following infection with 
nematode parasites. Unexpectedly, when they were between 4 and 8 months old, all 
mice examined spontaneously developed severe chronic dermatitis associated with
pronounced numbers of Demodex ectoparasites. In addition, pronounced CD4 and CD8 
T-cell infiltrates in the dermis and subcutaneous fat, increased serum
immunoglobulin G2a levels, and lymphadenopathy associated with increased gamma
interferon and IL-12 expression were observed. Single-knockout siblings lacking
either CD28 or STAT6 had a phenotype similar to that of BALB/c wild-type
controls. To distinguish whether the ectoparasite Demodex or the Th1 immunity was
the proximal cause of the inflammatory skin disease, STAT6/CD28(-/-) mice were
treated with a miticide that eliminated the ectoparasites. This treatment
markedly reduced the severity of the dermatitis and the associated lymphoid
infiltrates. These findings suggest that ubiquitous ectoparasites, which are
generally considered to be commensal, may contribute to disease when specific
molecules required for an effective Th2 response are blocked.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.72.7.3706-3715.2004 
PMCID: PMC427407
PMID: 15213110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

