
1. Nat Cell Biol. 2004 Jul;6(7):618-25. Epub 2004 Jun 27.

Phosphorylation of the enteropathogenic E. coli receptor by the Src-family kinase
c-Fyn triggers actin pedestal formation.

Phillips N(1), Hayward RD, Koronakis V.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Pathology, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge
CB2 1QP, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2004 Sep;6(9):795; author reply 795-6.

Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) causes diarrhoeal disease worldwide.
Pathogen adherence to host cells induces reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton
into 'pedestal-like' pseudopods beneath the extracellular bacteria. This requires
two bacterial virulence factors that mimic a ligand-receptor interaction. EPEC
delivers its own receptor, the translocated intimin receptor (Tir), into the
target cell plasma membrane, which is phosphorylated on interaction with the
bacterial surface protein intimin. Tir phosphorylated on Tyr 474 (ref. 4) binds
the cellular adaptor Nck, triggering actin polymerization. Nevertheless, despite 
its critical role, the mechanism of Tir Tyr 474 phosphorylation remains unknown. 
Here, by artificially uncoupling Tir delivery and activity, we show that Tir
phosphorylation and Nck-dependent pedestal formation require the Src-family
kinase (SFK) c-Fyn. SFK inhibitors prevent Tyr 474 phosphorylation, and cells
lacking c-fyn are resistant to pedestal formation. c-Fyn exclusively
phosphorylates clustered Tir in vitro, and kinase knockdown suppresses Tir
phosphorylation and pedestal formation in cultured cells. These results identify 
the transient interaction with host c-Fyn as a pivotal link between bacterial Tir
and the cellular Nck-WASP-Arp2/3 cascade, illuminating a tractable experimental
system in which to dissect tyrosine kinase signalling.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb1148 
PMID: 15220932  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

