
1. Vet Pathol. 2004 Jul;41(4):437-41.

A peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor with generalized bone metastases in 
a puppy.

De Cock HE(1), Busch MD, Fry MM, Mehl M, Bollen AW, Higgins RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, One Shields Avenue,
Davis, CA 95616, USA. hedecock@ucdavis.edu

A peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (pPNET), most consistent with a
human Ewing's sarcoma, is described in a 5-month-old male Australian Shepherd
puppy. The first tumor site detected was in the left frontal bone of the skull
with apparent subsequent rapid metastases to multiple sites in the axial and
appendicular skeleton and bone marrow, kidneys, and perihyphophyseal meninges.
Radiographically, all bone lesions were lytic and there was also a humeral bone
fracture. Histologically, the tumor was diagnosed as a small round blue cell
tumor. At this stage, the differential diagnosis included a lymphoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma, and a PNET of the peripheral nervous system. However, the cells
had positive expression of triple neurofilament antigens as detected
immunocytochemically. The cells were negative for a broad panel of
canine-specific leucocyte cell marker antigens for desmin, smooth muscle actin,
synaptophysin, and CD99. Ultrastructurally, the cells contained occasional dense 
core neurosecretory granules and intermediate filaments with intercellular
desmosomal-like junctions and abundant glycogen clusters. Based on the age of the
dog, the clinical history, the distribution of gross lesions, histologic
characteristics of a small round blue cell tumor, and immunocytochemical and
ultrastructural evidence of neuroectodermal differentiation, a diagnosis of a
pPNET similar to a human Ewing's sarcoma was made.

DOI: 10.1354/vp.41-4-437 
PMID: 15232149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

