
1. Int Immunol. 2004 Aug;16(8):1215-23. Epub 2004 Jul 5.

Evidence for a dual pathway of activation in CD43-stimulated Th2 cells:
differential requirement for the Lck tyrosine kinase.

Fernandez-Cabezudo MJ(1), Vijayasarathy C, Pflugh DL, Bothwell AL, al-Ramadi BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
UAE University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.

CD43 is the most abundant cell surface-expressed sialoglycoprotein on T
lymphocytes. Despite evidence demonstrating the activation of some signaling
components by CD43, the exact function of CD43 in T cell biology remains
controversial. In this study, we demonstrate that the sole ligation of CD43 in
cloned Th2 cells resulted in cytokine production, cellular proliferation, and
upregulation of CD25 and CD69 activation markers. Similarly, cross-linking of
CD43 on naive splenic T cells led to a significant proliferative response and an 
enhancement of the expression of CD25 and CD69 markers. These responses required 
no additional signals from other T cell molecules, including TCR. In
Lck-deficient Th2 cells, however, CD43 ligation led to IL-4 production and an
increase in the expression of CD25 and CD69 antigens but, surprisingly, no
proliferation. Analysis of signaling pathway components revealed that CD43
associates with the adaptor protein SLP-76 within 30 s of activation. This
induces the tyrosine phosphorylation of SLP-76 and promotes the recruitment and
phosphorylation of another adaptor, Shc. The formation of this multi-component
complex was strictly dependent on Lck. In contrast, comparison of tyrosine
phosphorylated proteins in whole extracts of normal and Lck-deficient cells
revealed a strikingly similar pattern of phosphorylation involving two major
protein bands at 26 and 78 kDa. This suggests that tyrosine kinases other than
Lck are activated by CD43 ligation. Taken together, the data support the notion
that CD43 ligation may induce a dual pathway leading to the activation of
different effector functions in Th2 lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxh124 
PMID: 15237112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

