
1. Cell Biochem Funct. 2004 Jul-Aug;22(4):207-11.

Tumour necrosis factor alpha production by polymorphonuclear neutrophils treated 
with mouse anti-human CD19 monoclonal antibody.

Nishimura M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Section, Tokyo Metropolitan Red Cross Blood Center, Tokyo, Japan.
mo-nishimura@tokyo.bc.jrc.or.jp

Polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) play pivotal roles as phagocytic cells in
immune defence against bacteria and parasites, exerting their effects by
production of reactive oxygen species, several cytokines, chemokines and by
phagocytotic reaction. In our investigation of properties of activated PMNs, we
discovered that one of the two kinds of mouse anti-human CD19 monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) clone SJ25-C1, weakly binds to freshly prepared PMNs. Moreover,
the treatment of freshly prepared PMNs with anti-CD19 mAb (clone SJ25-C1) at 37
degrees C for 6 h induces the production and the secretion of tumour necrosis
factor alpha (TNF alpha) by PMNs in vitro which was detectable in culture
supernatants by bioassay using mouse cell line L929 cells. The concentration of
TNF alpha secreted into the culture supernatant of PMNs cultured in the presence 
of anti-CD19 mAb (clone SJ25-C1) was higher than those of PMNs treated at 37
degrees C for 6 h with various PMN activators, such as anti-CD24 mAb,
granulocytes-macrophage colony stimulation factor (GM-CSF) or interferon gamma
(IFN gamma). In contrast, another clone of anti-CD19 mAb, HD37, did not bind to
freshly prepared PMNs and failed to produce TNF alpha. To confirm that anti-CD19 
mAb (clone SJ25-C1)-treated PMNs definitely produce TNF alpha, we measured the
levels of intracellular expression of TNF alpha in PMNs permeabilized by saponin.
These cells were treated with fluorescence-conjugated mouse anti-human TNF alpha 
mAb for detection of intracellular TNF alpha expression. Consequently, large
amounts of intracellular TNF alpha were detected in PMNs treated with anti-CD19
mAb (clone SJ25-C1) but not in those treated with anti-CD19 mAb (clone HD37).

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cbf.1088 
PMID: 15248179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

