
1. Shock. 2004 Aug;22(2):137-44.

Polymicrobial sepsis induces divergent effects on splenic and peritoneal
dendritic cell function in mice.

Ding Y(1), Chung CS, Newton S, Chen Y, Carlton S, Albina JE, Ayala A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Research, Department of Surgery, Rhode Island Hospital,
Brown University School of Medicine, Providence, Rhode Island 02903, USA.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are professional antigen-presenting cells that act as
sentinels in the cell-mediated response against invading pathogens associated
with septic challenge. The purpose of the present study was to determine whether 
there is a loss of dendritic cells and/or changes in function of these cells in
septic mice. Here we report that the number of DCs, in both spleen and
peritoneum, decreased over 24 h postsepsis [cecal ligation and puncture (CLP)]
when compared with sham. The most dramatic change was seen in the peritoneal
cavity. This decrease appeared to be caused mainly by the depletion of immature
DCs rather than mature DCs. This change was LPS independent and minimally
affected by FasL; however, overexpression of human Bcl-2 gene provides protection
of the septic peritoneal DCs. Moreover, although the level of IL-12 release
decreased significantly in splenic DCs obtained from CLP mice, IL-12 secretion
was markedly elevated by peritoneal DCs as well as in both plasma and peritoneal 
fluid at 24 h post-CLP. In peritoneal cells, the expression of CD40, CD80, and
CD86 was unchanged, but their respective ligands CD40L, CD28, and CD152 all
increased in mice 24 h after CLP, although no such change was observed in
splenocytes. Regardless of the presence or absence of antigen, peritoneal DCs
from CLP mice showed higher capacity to stimulate T-cell proliferation than those
cells from the sham control. However, splenic DCs from CLP mice only showed
augmented capacity to induce antigen-dependent stimulation of T-cell
proliferation. Together, these data indicate that sepsis produces divergent
functional changes in splenic and peritoneal DC populations.

DOI: 10.1097/01.shk.0000131194.80038.3f 
PMCID: PMC2253681
PMID: 15257086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

