
1. J Chem Ecol. 2004 Apr;30(4):719-29.

Differences among antimicrobial properties of carrion beetle secretions reflect
phylogeny and ecology.

Hoback WW(1), Bishop AA, Kroemer J, Scalzitti J, Shaffer JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Nebraska at Kearney, 905 W. 25th Street, 
Kearney, Nebraska 68849, USA. hobackww@unk.edu

Carrion beetles (Coleoptera: Silphidae) consist of two subfamilies in North
America. Members of the Silphinae arrive at carcasses during the mid-stage of
decay and their larvae feed on developing maggots, while members of the
Nicrophorinae bury and tend carcasses upon which their developing larvae feed.
The Nicrophorinae maintain the condition of the carcass by applying oral and anal
secretions that reduce carcass decay apparently through bacterial inhibition,
although quantification has not been made. We hypothesized that enzymes in the
oral and anal secretions of the subfamily Nicrophorinae would inhibit bacterial
growth, while secretions from the subfamily Silphinae would not. The secretions
were assayed for inhibitory effects with a Microtox Analyzer that monitors the
decrease in bioluminescence from the bacterium Vibrio fischerii. We found a
significant difference of bioluminescence in the control compared to secretions
of 8 out of 10 tested Nicrophorinae (with oral secretions being most active),
while only anal secretions from Necrodes surinimensis of the Siphinae
significantly reduced bacterial survival. These data follow the known phylogenic 
relationship in which Necrodes is the closest genus to the Nicrophorinae. The two
species of Nicrophorinae, which did not show significant reductions in bacterial 
growth, differ ecologically from the others. Thus, the presence of antimicrobial 
compounds in most Nicrophorinae secretions, but not in most other Silphinae,
represents an adaptation to preserve the buried carcass.

DOI: 10.1023/b:joec.0000028427.53141.41 
PMID: 15260219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

