
1. Mol Immunol. 2004 Jul;41(9):929-38.

Characterization of porcine CD19 and anti-CD19 monoclonal antibodies.

Sun J(1), Sinkora J, Wertz N, Moravkova A, Butler JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242-1109, 
USA.

CD19 is an important pan B cell marker and co-stimulatory protein in humans and
mice. Efforts to further characterize B cell ontogeny in swine have been hampered
by the lack of monoclonal antibodies (mAb) to valuable surface markers like
Vpre-B, CD19, CD34 and CD43. We report here on the complete nucleotide and
deduced amino acid sequence of porcine CD19, the cross-reactivity of anti-human
CD19 monoclonals and efforts to prepare anti-porcine CD19 mAb to
bacterially-expressed products. Porcine CD19 is highly homologous to those in the
few other species studied, i.e. human, mouse and guinea pig, but only in certain 
domains. Among the 14 CD19 exons, homology approaches 90% to human CD19 in exons 
6, 9, 11 and 12 and is approximately 80% with other species in this region. The
highly homologous C-terminal cytoplasmic region contains nine tyrosines including
the YEND/E motif that binds the SH2 domain of Fyn. Two different porcine CD19
isoforms that differ in their 3' UTRs were identified just as in human CD19.
Thus, the signaling properties of CD19 may be similar to those in humans. On the 
other hand, only 60% sequence similarity was seen in exons 1-5 that encode the
N-terminal extracellullar region that is involved in ligand binding and is the
target of CD19-specific mAb. This probably explains why only 1 of the 17
anti-human CD19 mAb tested recognized swine B cells. Furthermore, when the
extracellular domains of CD19 were expressed in E. coli, mAbs to the
bacterially-expressed product did not recognize CD19 on porcine B cells
suggesting that carbohydrate-dependent conformation may determine antigenicity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2004.03.021 
PMID: 15261465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

