
1. Stem Cells. 2004;22(4):556-69.

Analysis of primitive CD34- and CD34+ hematopoietic cells from adults: gain and
loss of CD34 antigen by undifferentiated cells are closely linked to
proliferative status in culture.

Dooley DC(1), Oppenlander BK, Xiao M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health and
Sciences University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, L220, Portland 97201-3098,
USA. dooleyd@ohsu.edu

There is limited understanding of CD34- hematopoietic cells and the linkage
between CD34 antigen expression and cell proliferation. In this study, early
CD34- CD38- LIN- (CD34-) cells were purified from mobilized adult peripheral
blood and carefully analyzed in vitro for growth and modulation of CD34.
Mobilized CD34+CD38- LIN- (CD34+) cells were used for comparison. Expression of
CD34, CD38, and LIN antigens was determined, and proliferative responses were
assessed with PKH tracking dye, expression of Ki67 antigen, and uptake of pyronin
Y. Suspension cultures of adult CD34- cells generated CD34+ cells and progenitors
for >8 weeks. Stromal cultures demonstrated the presence of long-term
culture-initiating cells within the CD34- fraction. While CD34- cells were slower
to initiate growth than the CD34+ cells were, no significant difference in
hematopoietic cell output was found. Upon cultivation of CD34- cells, CD34
antigen appeared within 48 hours but was restricted to those cells that had
initiated growth. Surprisingly, CD34+ precursors lost CD34 expression in culture 
if they remained in G0 for more than 2 days. Those cells later regained
expression of CD34 antigen upon initiation of growth. Comparison of cells that
did or did not rapidly modulate CD34 antigen revealed no differences in long-term
growth potential. In conclusion, in vitro expression of CD34 by CD34- and CD34+
populations is tightly linked to cellular proliferation. In this culture system, 
expression of CD34 antigen by LIN- cells constitutes an early hallmark of growth.
Measurement of CD34 expression by LIN- cells in expansion culture underestimates 
the total content of hematopoietic cells.

DOI: 10.1634/stemcells.22-4-556 
PMID: 15277701  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

