
1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2004 Sep;34(5):391-7.

Reduced-intensity conditioning prior to allogeneic transplantation of
hematopoietic stem cells: the need for T cells early after transplantation to
induce a graft-versus-lymphoma effect.

Glass B(1), Nickelsen M, Dreger P, Claviez A, Hasenkamp J, Wulf G, Trümper L,
Schmitz N.

Author information: 
(1)Universtitätsklinikum Göttingen, Robert Koch Strasse 40, Göttingen, Germany.
b.glass@med.uni-goettingen.de

In patients with poor-risk relapse of aggressive lymphoma, reduced-intensity
conditioning followed by allogeneic PBSCT may have its limitations because of
rapid regrowth of the tumor. We tried to address this problem by
intermediate-intensity conditioning followed by allogeneic SCT. A total of 21
patients received fludarabine, busulfan and cyclophosphamide prior to allogeneic 
SCT. In the first 10 patients, GVHD prophylaxis by CD34+ selection of the grafts 
was employed (group I). The next 11 patients received nonmanipulated grafts and
mycophenolat mofetil plus cyclosporinA (group II). In group I, no GVHD was
observed. In contrast, patients in group II had a significant risk of acute GVHD 
(aGVHD) (six patients with grade II-IV acute GVHD). However, in group I, all
surviving patients progressed within 9 months. In contrast, eight of nine
surviving patients of group II remain in remission after a median observation
time of 10.5 months (range 4-22 months). Survival differed significantly between 
the groups (P=0.004). Multivariate analysis identified intensive GVHD prophylaxis
as important risk factor for survival. These results support the existence of a
clinically relevant GVL effect in aggressive lymphoma. T-cell depletion (or CD34 
selection) of grafts is not recommended in patients with poor-risk aggressive
NHL.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1704600 
PMID: 15273707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

