
1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Sep 25;267(27):19698-704.

High levels of "complexed" interleukin-6 in human blood.

May LT(1), Viguet H, Kenney JS, Ida N, Allison AC, Sehgal PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York Medical College, Valhalla 
10595.

The biochemical nature of endogenous interleukin-6 (IL-6) as it exists in human
serum or plasma was investigated. Serum from a patient following bone marrow (BM)
transplantation and fresh plasma samples from patients with epidermolysis bullosa
or psoriasis, as well as from normal volunteers, were fractionated through G-200 
columns and each of the eluted fractions assayed for IL (interleukin)-6 content
using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) based on the monoclonal
antibody (mAb) pairs IG61/5IL6 or 4IL6/5IL6 and in the B9 hybridoma growth factor
bioassay. The IG61/5IL6 ELISA and the B9 assay detected IL-6 in BM serum almost
exclusively of molecular mass approximately 20 kDa. In contrast, the 4IL6/5IL6
ELISA detected strong IL-6 immunoreactivity in complexes of size 100-150 and
400-500 kDa. IL-6 present in the 100-150- and 400-500-kDa complexes was purified 
by immunoaffinity chromatography through a 5IL6 mAb column. The 5IL6 mAb
immunoaffinity column eluate of the respective pools from BM serum contained IL-6
at concentrations approaching 1 microgram/ml as characterized by Western
blotting. Sufficient IL-6 and associated proteins were purified by 5IL6 mAb
immunoaffinity column chromatography of the 100-150-kDa complex from 0.8 ml of BM
serum to allow (i) verification of three of the polypeptides as IL-6 by
amino-terminal sequencing (estimate of IL-6 in original serum sample: 5-10
micrograms/ml), (ii) identification by amino acid sequencing of the "associated" 
proteins as complement factor C3b (carboxyl-terminal of the alpha-chain),
complement factor C4b (gamma-chain), C-reactive protein, and albumin, and (iii)
detection of an "associated" polypeptide consistent with the soluble IL-6
receptor. Taken together, these data establish that IL-6 is present at
unexpectedly high concentrations in human blood in novel biochemical complexes
that include other plasma proteins, which in turn, can camouflage IL-6
immunoreactivity and bioactivity as measured in conventional assays.


PMID: 1527089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

