
1. Minerva Cardioangiol. 2004 Aug;52(4):273-86.

New aspects of infective endocarditis.

Horstkotte D(1), Piper C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Heart Center North Rhine-Westphalia, Ruhr University
Bochum, Bad Oeynhausen, Germany. akohlstaedt@hdz-nrw.de

The current incidence of infective endocarditis (IE) is estimated as 7 cases per 
100,000 population per year and continues to increase. The prognosis is
significantly influenced by proper diagnosis and adequate therapy. In cases with 
unconfirmed IE, transesophageal echocardiography is the imaging technique of
choice. Culture-negative endocarditis requires either termination of
antimicrobial treatment initiated without mircobiological test results and
reevaluation of blood samples or serological/molecular biological techniques to
identify the causative organism. Antimicrobial therapy should be established only
after quantitative sensitivity tests of antibiotics (minimal inhibitory
concentrations, MIC) and guided by drug monitoring. In the first 3 weeks after
primary manifestation, an index embolism is frequently followed by recurrencies. 
If vegetations can still be demonstrated by echocardiography after an embolic
event, a surgical intervention should seriously be considered. Cerebral embolic
events are no contraindication for cardiac surgery, as long as a cerebral
bleeding has been excluded by cranial computed tomography immediately
preoperatively and the operation is performed before a significant disturbance of
the blood-brain barrier (<72 hours) has manifested. A significant prognostic
improvement has also been demonstrated for patients with early surgical
intervention suffering from myocardial failure due to acute valve incompetence,
acute renal failure, mitral kissing vegetations in primary aortic valve IE, and
in patients with sepsis persisting for more than 48 hours despite adequate
antimicrobial therapy.


PMID: 15284678  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

