
1. Immunogenetics. 2004 Sep;56(6):391-8. Epub 2004 Aug 12.

Identification of HLA-Cw6.02 and HLA-Cw7.01 allele-specific binding motifs by
screening synthetic peptide libraries.

Dionne SO(1), Lake DF, Grimes WJ, Smith MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Arizona Cancer Center, University
of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

Unlike HLA-A and HLA-B, few peptide epitope motifs have been reported for HLA-C
molecules. However, a number of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte epitopes derived from
tumor antigens that bind to HLA-C molecules have been described. Here we report
peptide-binding motifs for both HLA-Cw6.02 and HLA-Cw7.01 molecules. Recombinant 
human HLA molecules were generated and used to screen combinatorial 9mer peptide 
libraries. Complexes of HLA molecules properly folded and associated with
beta2-microglobulin and peptides were identified using a conformation-specific
HLA class I antibody conjugated to alkaline phosphatase. In the presence of
substrate, peptide beads can be readily isolated and microsequenced to determine 
peptide identity. Of the peptides that bound to HLA-Cw6.02 and HLA-Cw7.01, 19 and
18 peptides, respectively, were sequenced, allowing motif identification for each
C allele. This is the first report of an HLA-Cw7.01 peptide motif and extends the
findings of Falk et al. [(1993) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:12005] for an
HLA-Cw6.02 motif. Anchoring amino acids for the HLA-Cw6.02 motif were
phenylalanine or tyrosine in position (P)1, arginine in P2, and an
aliphatic/aromatic residue at P9. Anchoring residues for HLA-Cw7.01 were
positively charged amino acids in P1 and P2. Unlike most other HLA molecules, we 
were unable to assign P9 an anchoring residue, and we suspect that HLA-Cw7.01
binds peptides in an unconventional manner. Additionally, preferred amino acids
were identified for both molecules. Identification of HLA-Cw6.02 and HLA-Cw7.01
peptide-binding motifs makes a significant contribution to the C allele
peptide-binding motifs and will allow investigators to predict, design, and test 
HLA-Cw6.02 and HLA-Cw7.01 engineered peptides for immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-004-0710-1 
PMID: 15309347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

