
1. J Vasc Surg. 1992 Jan;15(1):187-93.

Prevention of graft infection by bonding of gentamycin to Dacron prostheses.

Haverich A(1), Hirt S, Karck M, Siclari F, Wahlig H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Hannover Medical School,
Federal Republic of Germany.

To increase the efficacy of perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis in vascular
surgery an experimental study including topical application of the gentamicin
derivative EMD 46/217 and fibrin sealant as antibiotic carrier to Dacron
prostheses was initiated. In vitro treatment of Dacron with gentamicin and fibrin
was followed by constant antibiotic release for 3 weeks. In a subsequent animal
study Dacron grafts were implanted in the aorta of 10 pigs after direct
contamination with Staphylococcus aureus solution. One graft was pretreated with 
the antibiotic/fibrin compound, a second with the antibiotic alone. Grafts 3 (no 
pretreatment) and 4 (fibrin alone) served as controls. After 1 week the grafts
and their corresponding implantation sites were excised for measurement of
antibiotic content and for culture. The antibiotic content of grafts with the
antibiotic/fibrin compound was 25.0 +/- 7.2 micrograms/gm wet weight, whereas
Dacron pretreated with the antibiotic alone contained no measurable drug amounts 
except for one specimen (0.5 microgram/gm) (antibiotic/fibrin vs antibiotic, p
less than .0005). The corresponding implantation sites to antibiotic/fibrin
grafts contained 1.07 +/- 0.54 microgram/gm antibiotic, whereas in only 2/10
implantation sites of antibiotic grafts low antibiotic levels were found (0.05
and 0.2 microgram/gm) (antibiotic/fibrin vs antibiotic, p less than 0.005). All
control grafts and 9/10 antibiotic grafts were infected. By contrast, only five
were contaminated, and 5 of 10 remained sterile after culture (antibiotic/fibrin 
vs antibiotic, p less than 0.05). This finding correlates with the antibiotic
content in the Dacron. It is concluded that pretreatment of prosthetic Dacron
grafts with the antibiotic/fibrin compound results in binding of sufficient
amounts of antibiotic for at least 1 week.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1067/mva.1992.30301 
PMID: 1530824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

