
1. J Invest Dermatol. 2004 Sep;123(3):522-9.

Differential gene induction of human beta-defensins (hBD-1, -2, -3, and -4) in
keratinocytes is inhibited by retinoic acid.

Harder J(1), Meyer-Hoffert U, Wehkamp K, Schwichtenberg L, Schr√∂der JM.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Unit, Department of Dermatology, University Hospital
Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Schittenhelmstrasse7, D-24105 Kiel, Germany.
jharder@dermatology.uni-kiel.de

Human skin is able to mount a fast response against invading harmful bacteria
through the rapid production of inducible peptide antibiotics such as the human
beta-defensins (hBD). To gain more insight into the role and regulation of
inducible beta-defensins in the innate immunity of human skin, we investigated
whether gene induction of the human beta-defensins hBD-1, -2, -3, and -4 in
keratinocytes is regulated in a similar manner. Therefore, we performed a
comparative study of gene expression of these four hBD in primary cultured
keratinocytes using real-time PCR. A basal mRNA expression was observed for all
four hBD in primary keratinocytes, which strongly increased for hBD-2, -3, and -4
during Ca(2+)-induced differentiation of the keratinocytes. This effect was
completely abolished when the keratinocytes were pre-treated with
all-trans-retinoic acid (RA). Furthermore, the differential induction of hBD-2,
-3, and -4 gene expression in keratinocytes by proinflammatory cytokines,
phorbol-myristate-acetate (PMA), and bacteria was inhibited by more than 90% when
the keratinocytes were pre-incubated with RA. Inhibition of IL-1beta-mediated
hBD-2 induction through RA was further confirmed by gene reporter assays and
western-blot analysis. We conclude that RA is a potent inhibitor of beta-defensin
induction in keratinocytes and might downregulate the inducible innate chemical
defense system of human skin.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0022-202X.2004.23234.x 
PMID: 15304092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

