
1. J Immunother. 2004 Sep-Oct;27(5):368-79.

Characterization of long-term effector-memory T-cell responses in patients with
resected high-risk melanoma receiving a melanoma Peptide vaccine.

Chiong B(1), Wong R, Lee P, Delto J, Scotland R, Lau R, Weber J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Molecular Microbiology/Immunology, Keck-University 
of Southern California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA.

The authors determined whether long-term memory T cells could be detected in
patients who received a multipeptide vaccine for high-risk resected melanoma.
Five HLA-A*0201 patients received a vaccine that included the gp100(209-217)
(210M) peptide with Montanide ISA 51. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were
obtained before therapy, after 6 months of vaccinations, and from 18 months to 36
months later. The presence of gp100 antigen-specific cytolytic T cells was
measured by ELISPOT, tetramer and chromium release assays. Tetramer-positive CD8 
cells were phenotyped by flow cytometry for markers including CD44, CD45RA, and
CCR7. T-cell avidity and its evolution over time were examined in selected
patients. Epitope spreading was analyzed by assessment of gp100(280-288) (288V) T
cells. All patients exhibited a significant increase in tetramer-positive
gp100-specific CD8 T cells that decayed at different rates over 18 to 36 months
after vaccinations. Cells from all patients exhibited an effector-memory
phenotype and were generally CD45 RA low/CCR7 negative and CD44 positive.
Tetramer-positive cells declined over time in four of the five patients, but the 
proportion of tetramer-positive CD8 cells that secreted gamma-interferon rose,
suggesting enrichment for effector cells. Epitope spreading for the
gp100(280-288) (288V) epitope was detected. One patient maintained a population
of 2.5% circulating gp100 tetramer-positive cells over 36 months. Avidity
analysis showed no changes over time after induction of antigen-specific T cells.
Vaccination with a heteroclitic melanoma antigen peptide with Montanide ISA 51
generated populations of circulating functional effector-memory T cells that were
specific for gp100 and long-lived in the circulation for periods of 18 to 36
months after vaccination.

Copyright 2004 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

DOI: 10.1097/00002371-200409000-00005 
PMID: 15314545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

