
1. Immunology. 2004 Sep;113(1):35-43.

Enhancement of the synthetic ligand-mediated function of liver NK1.1Ag+ T cells
in mice by interleukin-12 pretreatment.

Habu Y(1), Uchida T, Inui T, Nakashima H, Fukasawa M, Seki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, National Defence Medical College, Tokorozawa,
Saitama, Japan.

We previously reported that mouse NK1.1 Ag+ T (NKT) cells activated by
interleukin-12 (IL-12) act as anti-tumour/anti-metastatic effectors. However,
IL-12 reportedly induces a rapid disappearance of liver NKT cells by
activation-induced apoptosis. In the present study, however, we show that
injection of IL-12 into mice merely down-regulates the NK1.1 expression of liver 
NKT cells and Vbeta8+ intermediate T-cell receptor cells and
CD1d/alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer)-tetramer reactive cells in the liver
remained and did not decrease. Furthermore, when IL-12-pretreated (24 hr before) 
mice were injected with alpha-GalCer, not only serum interferon-gamma but also
serum IL-4 concentrations increased several-fold in comparison to the control
alpha-GalCer-injected mice. However, IL-12 pretreatment markedly up-regulated
serum ALT levels and Fas-ligand expression on NKT cells after alpha-GalCer
injection in middle-aged mice only. Consistently, the liver mononuclear cells
(MNC) from IL-12-pretreated mice stimulated with alpha-GalCer in vitro produced
much greater amounts of interferon-gamma and IL-4, and also showed a more potent 
cytotoxicity against tumour targets than those from mice pretreated with
phosphate-buffered saline. Liver MNC from middle-aged mice, but not from young
mice pretreated with IL-12, also showed increased cytotoxicity following in vitro
alpha-GalCer stimulation against cultured hepatocytes. Furthermore, IL-12
treatment of middle-aged mice enhanced tumour necrosis factor receptor 1 mRNA
expression in liver Vbeta8+ T cells, and in vitro experiments also revealed that 
IL-12 pretreatment of liver MNC from middle-aged mice enhanced their tumour
necrosis factor-alpha production after alpha-GalCer stimulation. Synthetic
ligand-mediated functions of NKT cells, including IL-4 production, are thus
enhanced by IL-12 pretreatment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2004.01932.x 
PMCID: PMC1782545
PMID: 15312134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

