
1. Infect Immun. 2004 Sep;72(9):4956-65.

Treatment of mice with the neutrophil-depleting antibody RB6-8C5 results in early
development of experimental lyme arthritis via the recruitment of Gr-1-
polymorphonuclear leukocyte-like cells.

Brown CR(1), Blaho VA, Loiacono CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO 65211, USA. BrownChar@missouri.edu

Recently, we demonstrated that blocking the entry of neutrophils into Borrelia
burgdorferi-infected joints in mice deficient in the chemokine receptor CXCR2
prevented the development of experimental Lyme arthritis. Neutrophils were
marginalized in blood vessels at the site of infection but could not enter the
joint tissue. In the present study, we treated both genetically
arthritis-resistant DBA/2J (DBA) and arthritis-susceptible C3H/HeJ (C3H) mice
with the neutrophil-depleting monoclonal antibody RB6-8C5 (RB6) to determine the 
effect on arthritis development. Surprisingly, both DBA and C3H mice treated with
RB6 developed arthritis at 1 week postinfection, approximately 1 week earlier
than the control-treated C3H mice. The early development of arthritis in the
RB6-treated mice was accompanied by an influx into the joints of cells with
ring-shaped polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PMN) cell morphology that were negative 
for the Gr-1 neutrophil maturation marker. RB6 treatment of mice also resulted in
increased numbers of B. burgdorferi cells in the joints at 7 days postinfection
and earlier expression of the chemokines KC and monocyte chemoattractant protein 
1 in the joints compared to control-treated animals. Together, these results
suggest that recruitment of neutrophils or PMN-like cells into an infected joint 
is a key requirement for Lyme arthritis development and that altered recruitment 
of these cells into the joints of arthritis-resistant mice can exacerbate the
development of pathology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.72.9.4956-4965.2004 
PMCID: PMC517421
PMID: 15321987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

