
1. Blood. 2004 Dec 15;104(13):3894-900. Epub 2004 Aug 24.

The ETS family transcription factor PU.1 is necessary for the maintenance of
fetal liver hematopoietic stem cells.

Kim HG(1), de Guzman CG, Swindle CS, Cotta CV, Gartland L, Scott EW, Klug CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Division of Developmental and Clinical
Immunology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, WTI Room 387, 1824 Sixth Ave
South, Birmingham AL 35294-3300, USA.

PU.1 is a member of the ETS family of transcription factors and is required for
the development of multiple hematopoietic lineages. PU.1(-/-) mice die from
hematopoietic failure at about embryonic day 18.5 (e18.5) and show a complete
absence of B cells, mature T cells, and macrophages. This phenotype suggests that
PU.1 may function at the level of the hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) or a
multilineage progenitor. To investigate the role of PU.1 in the regulation of
HSCs, PU.1(-/-) embryos were analyzed at various stages of embryonic development.
The absolute number and frequency of HSCs were determined by flow cytometric
analysis of c-Kit(+)Thy-1.1(lo)Lin(-)Sca-1(+) (KTLS) cells. We found that KTLS
cells were absent or severely reduced in PU.1(-/-) fetal liver from e12.5 to
e15.5. Progenitor cells with a c-Kit(+)Lin(-)AA4.1(+) and c-Kit(+)Lin(-)CD34(+)
phenotype were also severely reduced. In addition, PU.1(-/-) fetal liver at e14.5
lacked common myeloid progenitors (CMPs) and granulocyte-macrophage progenitors
(GMPs) but retained megakaryocyteerythroid progenitors (MEPs). Consistent with
the loss of HSC activity, a 10-fold reduction in erythroid progenitors (mature
erythroid burst-forming units [BFUEs]) was observed between e14.5 and e16.5.
These data suggest that PU.1 plays an important role in the maintenance or
expansion of HSC number in murine fetal liver.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2002-08-2425 
PMID: 15328162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

