
1. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2004 May-Jun;37(3):199-203.

[Alcoholic hepatitis: bad prognosis due to concomitant bacterial infections].

[Article in Portuguese]

Strauss E(1), Aerosa JP.

Author information: 
(1)Clínica de Gastroenterologia do Hospital Heliópolis, São Paulo, SP.
edna.strauss@hcnet.usp.br

Bacterial infections increase morbidity and mortality in cirrhosis. Our aim was
to investigate whether in alcoholic hepatitis the development of bacterial
infections was also a poor prognostic factor. In the retrospective evaluation of 
681 hospitalized patients with liver disease, from a single center during a
six-year period, 52 (7.5%) cases of alcoholic hepatitis were well documented,
73.1% by liver biopsy with histopathological analysis and the others by well
characterized clinical-biochemical data. Males were predominant (ratio 3.3:1.0), 
mean age of 40 years and mean alcohol intake of 193 g/day. Major complications
were: Hepatic encephalopathy (n=5), renal insufficiency (n=4) and digestive
bleeding (n=3). Bacterial infections were found in 11 (21%) patients, distributed
into: pulmonary (n=5), spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (n=2), urinary (n=3) and
dermatological (n=1). Early hospital death occurred in eight (15.4%) patients and
comparative analysis between these and those who survived showed that poor
prognostic factors were: presence of hepatic encephalopathy (p=0.012), total
bilirubin > 20 mg% (p=0.012) and the presence of severe infections (pulmonary and
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis) with statistical significance (p=0.004). In
conclusion we have demonstrated that severe bacterial infections are poor
prognostic factors for alcoholic hepatitis. Our recommendation, based on
prophylaxis with antibiotics during digestive bleeding in cirrhosis and in acute 
hepatic insufficiency, is to extend this prophylaxis to alcoholic hepatitis, in
its severe form, in order to prevent bacterial infections and early death.

DOI: 10.1590/s0037-86822004000300001 
PMID: 15330056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

