
1. J Bacteriol. 1992 Jun;174(11):3684-94.

Regulation and expression of the arsenic resistance operon from Staphylococcus
aureus plasmid pI258.

Ji G(1), Silver S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois College of
Medicine, Chicago 60680.

The arsenic resistance operon from Staphylococcus aureus plasmid pI258 was cloned
and sequenced. The DNA sequence contains three genes in the order arsR, arsB, and
arsC. The predicted amino acid sequences of the gene products are homologous with
those of the products of the ars operons of plasmids pSX267 from Staphylococcus
xylosus and R773 from Escherichia coli. The cloned staphylococcal ars operon
confers resistances to arsenate, arsenite, and antimonite in S. aureus and
Bacillus subtilis. The same operon was also expressed in E. coli and conferred
resistance to arsenite but less resistance to arsenate and antimonite. Regulation
of the pI258 ars operon was studied by using a translational arsB-blaZ fusion in 
S. aureus and a transcriptional arsB-luxAB fusion in E. coli. The ars operon was 
induced by arsenate [As(V)], arsenite [As(III)], and antimonite [Sb(III)], to
which the strains were resistant, plus Bi(III) in S. aureus. Only arsenate and
arsenite induced the operon in E. coli. Northern (RNA) blot DNA-RNA hybridization
analysis showed inducible synthesis of a full-length ars mRNA, about 2.1 kb in
size, both in S. aureus and in E. coli. S. aureus ars proteins were expressed in 
E. coli from the T7 phage promoter under the control of the T7 RNA polymerase.
Primer extension (reverse transcriptase) analysis showed that the ars mRNA
started at the same position (nucleotides 17 and 18 upstream from the arsR ATG)
both in S. aureus and in E. coli. An internal deletion mutation in arsB resulted 
in decreased resistance to arsenate and total loss of arsenite and antimonite
resistances. Partial deletion of 56 bp from the 3' end of the arsC gene resulted 
in loss of resistance to arsenate; the determinant retained arsenite and
antimonite resistances.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.174.11.3684-3694.1992 
PMCID: PMC206058
PMID: 1534328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

