
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 19;279(47):49105-12. Epub 2004 Sep 3.

Amyloid-beta protein precursor (AbetaPP) intracellular domain-associated
protein-1 proteins bind to AbetaPP and modulate its processing in an
isoform-specific manner.

Ghersi E(1), Noviello C, D'Adamio L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

The amyloid-beta protein precursor (AbetaPP) is a type I transmembrane molecule
that undergoes several finely regulated cleavage events. The physiopathological
relevance of AbetaPP derives from the fact that its aberrant processing strongly 
correlates with the onset of Alzheimer's disease (AD). AD is a neurodegenerative 
disorder characterized by neuronal cell death, loss of synapses, and deposition
of misfolded protein plaques in the brain; the main constituent of these plaques 
is the amyloid-beta peptide, a 40-42 amino-acid-long protein fragment derived by 
AbetaPP upon two sequential processing events. Mutations in the genes encoding
for AbetaPP and some of the enzymes responsible for its processing are strongly
associated with familial forms of early onset AD. Therefore, the elucidation of
the mechanisms underlying AbetaPP metabolism appears crucial to understanding the
basis for the onset of AD. Apart from Abeta, upon processing of AbetaPP other
fragments are generated. The long extracellular domain is released in the
extracellular space, whereas the short cytoplasmic tail, named AbetaPP
intracellular domain (AID) is released intracellularly. AID appears be involved
in several cellular processes, apoptosis, calcium homeostasis, and
transcriptional regulation. We have recently reported the cloning and
characterization of different isoforms of AID associated protein-1 (AIDA-1), a
novel AID-binding protein. Here we further analyzed the interaction between
several AIDA-1 isoforms and the cytoplasmic tail of AbetaPP. Our data
demonstrated that the interaction between the two molecules is regulated by
alternative splicing of the AIDA-1 proteins. Furthermore, we provide data
supporting a possible function for AIDA-1a as a modulator of AbetaPP processing.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M405329200 
PMID: 15347684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

