
1. Blood. 2005 Jan 1;105(1):274-81. Epub 2004 Sep 7.

Modulation of cord blood CD8+ T-cell effector differentiation by TGF-beta1 and
4-1BB costimulation.

Kim YJ(1), Stringfield TM, Chen Y, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis 46202-5181, USA.

Transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1), an immunosuppressive cytokine,
inhibits cytotoxic T cell (CTL) immune responses. In contrast, 4-1BB (CD137), a
costimulatory molecule in the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor family,
amplifies CTL-mediated antitumor immune responses. We investigated whether
TGF-beta1 responses could be reversed by 4-1BB costimulation during in vitro
differentiation of naive CD8+ T cells into effector CTL cells. TGF-beta1 potently
suppressed CTL differentiation of human cord blood naive CD8+ T cells as
determined by reduced induction of characteristic phenotypes of effector cells
and cytotoxic activity. TGF-beta1-mediated suppression of CTL differentiation was
abrogated by 4-1BB costimulation but not by CD28 or another member in the TNF
receptor family, CD30. 4-1BB costimulation suppressed Smad2 phosphorylation
induced by TGF-beta1, suggesting that 4-1BB effects were at the level of
TGF-beta1 signaling. 4-1BB effects on the TGF-beta1-mediated suppression were
enhanced by interleukin 12 (IL-12) but counteracted by IL-4; 4-1BB expression was
up- or down-regulated, respectively, by IL-12 and IL-4. IL-4 was more dominant
than IL-12 when both cytokines were present during 4-1BB costimulation in the
presence of TGF-beta1. This indicates critical roles for IL-4 and IL-12 in
regulating 4-1BB effects on TGF-beta1-mediated suppression.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2003-12-4343 
PMID: 15353478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

