
1. J Immunol. 2004 Sep 15;173(6):3668-75.

CC chemokine ligands 25 and 28 play essential roles in intestinal extravasation
of IgA antibody-secreting cells.

Hieshima K(1), Kawasaki Y, Hanamoto H, Nakayama T, Nagakubo D, Kanamaru A, Yoshie
O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kinki University School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

CCL25 (also known as thymus-expressed chemokine) and CCL28 (also known as
mucosae-associated epithelial chemokine) play important roles in mucosal immunity
by recruiting IgA Ab-secreting cells (ASCs) into mucosal lamina propria. However,
their exact roles in vivo still remain to be defined. In this study, we first
demonstrated in mice that IgA ASCs in small intestine expressed CCR9, CCR10, and 
CXCR4 on the cell surface and migrated to their respective ligands CCL25, CCL28, 
and CXCL12 (also known as stromal cell-derived factor 1), whereas IgA ASCs in
colon mainly expressed CCR10 and CXCR4 and migrated to CCL28 and CXCL12.
Reciprocally, the epithelial cells of small intestine were immunologically
positive for CCL25 and CCL28, whereas those of colon were positive for CCL28 and 
CXCL12. Furthermore, the venular endothelial cells in small intestine were
positive for CCL25 and CCL28, whereas those in colon were positive for CCL28,
suggesting their direct roles in extravasation of IgA ASCs. Consistently, in mice
orally immunized with cholera toxin (CT), anti-CCL25 suppressed homing of
CT-specific IgA ASCs into small intestine, whereas anti-CCL28 suppressed homing
of CT-specific IgA ASCs into both small intestine and colon. Reciprocally,
CT-specific ASCs and IgA titers in the blood were increased in mice treated with 
anti-CCL25 or anti-CCL28. Anti-CXCL12 had no such effects. Finally, both CCL25
and CCL28 were capable of enhancing alpha4 integrin-dependent adhesion of IgA
ASCs to mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1 and VCAM-1. Collectively,
CCL25 and CCL28 play essential roles in intestinal homing of IgA ASCs primarily
by mediating their extravasation into intestinal lamina propria.

Copyright 2004 The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.173.6.3668 
PMID: 15356112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

