
1. Folia Parasitol (Praha). 2004 Jun;51(2-3):263-7.

Homing of Gyrodactylus salaris and G. derjavini (Monogenea) on different hosts
and response post-attachment.

Buchmann K(1), Madsen KK, Dalgaard MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Section of Fish Diseases, Royal
Veterinary and Agricultural University, Stigb√∏jlen 4, DK-1870 Frederiksberg C.,
Denmark. kub@kvl.dk

In natural European waters, the congeneric monogeneans Gyrodactylus derjavini
Mikailov, 1975 and G. salaris Malmberg, 1957 are primarily found on brown trout
Salmo trutta L. and Atlantic salmon Salmo salar L., respectively. Interestingly, 
rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum), originating from North America, is 
as susceptible as brown trout to G. derjavini. However, the mechanisms involved
in this host specificity are poorly understood but may include behavioural,
mechanical and chemical factors affecting parasite attraction, attachment,
feeding, reproduction and host responses. In the present laboratory work, this
question has been studied. Detached parasites (either G. derjavini or G. salaris)
were offered a choice in small aquaria between fry of rainbow trout, Atlantic
salmon and carp Cyprinus carpio L. Within 48 hours more than 90% of G. derjavini 
colonised rainbow trout and left salmon almost uninfected. Some parasites were
found on carp. During the same time span, more than 60% of G. salaris attached to
salmon, the rest infected rainbow trout and none were found on carp. Following
attachment, the parasites need appropriate stimuli to initiate feeding and
reproduction but even such a successful specific colonisation can be followed by 
a host response. Both humoral and cellular elements have been suggested to
participate in these reactions but in the present work it was demonstrated by
immunoblotting and immunocytochemistry that no antibodies in host mucus and host 
plasma bound to any parasite structures or epitopes.

DOI: 10.14411/fp.2004.031 
PMID: 15357405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

