
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2004 Dec;76(6):1240-7. Epub 2004 Sep 8.

Granulocyte chemotactic protein-2 mediates adaptive immunity in part through
IL-8Rbeta interactions.

Singh UP(1), Singh S, Boyaka PN, McGhee JR, Lillard JW Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, and Immunology, Morehouse School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA 30310-1495, USA.

Chemokines constitute a large family of structurally related proteins that play a
role in leukocyte migration and differentiation. Indeed, the early expression of 
human CXC chemokine receptor 1 (hCXCR1) and hCXCR2 [homologous to mouse
interleukin (IL)-8Rbeta] ligands by the epithelium is a hallmark of the mucosal
host defense. Mice lack IL-8; however, granulocyte chemotactic protein-2
(GCP-2)/lipopolysaccharide-induced CXC chemokine, a murine homologue of human
GCP-2, has 32% and 61% sequence identity to human IL-8 and GCP-2, respectively,
and binds hCXCR1, hCXCR2, and mouse IL-8Rbeta. To better understand the role of
GCP-2 in adaptive immunity and as a nasal adjuvant, we characterized the
exogenous effects of this CXC chemokine on cellular and humoral mucosal immune
responses. GCP-2 significantly enhanced serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) and mucosal 
IgA antibodies through increased cytokine secretion by CD4+ T cells. These
alterations in humoral and cellular responses were preceded by an increase in the
number of B cells in the nasal tract, a decrease in the number of CD4+ T cells in
the nasal tract as well as cervical lymph nodes, and an increase in the number of
neutrophils in the nasal tract 12 h after GCP-2 immunization. This chemokine also
modulated CD28 expression by CD4+ T cells during CD3epsilon stimulation of
wild-type mice. GCP-2 increased CD80 and CD86 expression on B cells during in
vitro stimulation in a dose-dependent manner. In contrast, cytokine and
costimulatory molecule enhancement by GCP-2 was not induced by lymphocytes from
IL-8Rbeta-/- mice, suggesting that GCP-2 modulates cellular immunity in part
through IL-8Rbeta interactions.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0903444 
PMID: 15356099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

