
1. Cancer Gene Ther. 2005 Feb;12(2):175-84.

Systemic administration of attenuated Salmonella choleraesuis carrying
thrombospondin-1 gene leads to tumor-specific transgene expression, delayed tumor
growth and prolonged survival in the murine melanoma model.

Lee CH(1), Wu CL, Shiau AL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung University Medical
College, Tainan, Taiwan.

Some anaerobic and facultative anaerobic bacteria have been used experimentally
as anticancer agents because of their selective growth in the hypoxia regions of 
solid tumors after systemic administration. We have previously shown the
feasibility of using attenuated Salmonella choleraesuis as a gene delivery
vector. In this study, we exploited S. choleraesuis carrying thrombospondin-1
(TSP-1) gene for treating primary melanoma and experimental pulmonary metastasis 
in the syngeneic murine B16F10 melanoma model. Systemic administration of S.
choleraesuis allowed targeted gene delivery to tumors. The bacteria accumulated
preferentially in tumors over livers and spleens at ratios ranging from 1000:1 to
10,000:1. The level of transgene expression via S. choleraesuis-mediated gene
transfer in tumors could reach more than 1800-fold higher than in livers and
spleens. Notably, bacterial accumulation was also observed in the lungs with
metastatic nodules, but not in healthy lungs. When administered into mice bearing
subcutaneous or pulmonary metastatic melanomas, S. choleraesuis carrying TSP-1
gene significantly inhibited tumor growth and enhanced survival of the mice.
Immunohistochemical studies in the tumors from these mice displayed decreased
intratumoral microvessel density. Taken together, these findings suggest that
TSP-1 gene therapy delivered by S. choleraesuis may be effective for the
treatment of primary as well as metastatic melanomas.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cgt.7700777 
PMID: 15375381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

