
1. Int J Mol Med. 2004 Oct;14(4):565-70.

Cyclooxygenase-2 in human malignant fibrous histiocytoma: correlations with
intratumoral microvessel density, expression of vascular endothelial growth
factor and thymidine phosphorylase.

Yamashita H(1), Osaki M, Ardyanto TD, Osaki M, Yoshida H, Ito H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Organ Pathology, Department of Microbiology and Pathology, Faculty
of Medicine, Tottori University, 86 Nishi-cho, Yonago, Tottori 683-8503, Japan.

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) has been found to be up-regulated in several types of
human malignant tumors and proposed to have a role in the angiogenic process.
This study examined the expression of COX-2 in two human malignant fibrous
histiocytoma (MFH) cell lines by Western blotting, which showed a specific single
band at 72 kDa. Immunohistochemistry was conducted in 35 MFHs and 30 benign
fibrohistiocytic tumors (BFHTs), comparing the expression of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) and thymidine phosphorylase (TP), as well as intratumoral
microvessel density (IMVD). COX-2 expression was noted in 22 (62.9%) MFHs, but in
no BFHT. IMVD values were significantly higher in the MFHs (90.6+/-8.0) than
BFHTs (27.9+/-3.1), and also in the COX-2 positive (104.5+/-11.3) than negative
(67.2+/-5.8) MFHs. VEGF and TP expression was also associated with a
significantly higher level of COX-2, as well as greater IMVD. The highest IMVD
values were noted in the 17 MFHs (120.8+/-11.5) expressing all three factors.
Clinical analysis demonstrated poorer survival in the 18 COX-2 positive MFHs than
in the 10 negative ones, although the small number of cases did not reveal a
significant difference. The results overall indicated that COX-2 expression is
associated with intratumoral angiogenesis, which might provide favorable
conditions for tumor progression in human MFHs.


PMID: 15375582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

