
1. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 15;64(18):6756-65.

Bryostatin-1 enhances the maturation and antigen-presenting ability of murine and
human dendritic cells.

Do Y(1), Hegde VL, Nagarkatti PS, Nagarkatti M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Medical College of Virginia Campus, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA.

In this study, we investigated the effect of bryostatin-1 (Bryo-1), an
antineoplastic agent, on dendritic cell (DC) maturation, activation, and
functions. Murine bone marrow-derived DCs on culture with Bryo-1 alone, Bryo-1 + 
calcium ionophore (CI), but not CI alone exhibited morphologic changes
characteristic of mature DCs and expressed increased levels of CD40, CD80, and
CD86. Moreover, Bryo-1 + CI-treated DCs exhibited enhanced antigen-presenting
ability to naive and antigen-specific T cells and alloreactive T cells. Bryo-1 + 
CI-mediated activation of DCs involved protein kinase C (PKC), especially
PKC-alpha, -delta, and -iota, and addition of PKC inhibitors impaired their
ability to activate T cells. Bryo-1 + CI treatment of DCs did not activate
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase,
p38 MAPK, or stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase pathways. 
Finally, treatment of DCs with Bryo-1 alone and Bryo-1 + CI, but not CI alone,
induced nuclear translocation of nuclear factor kappaB as studied by confocal
microscopy. DCs generated from human peripheral blood monocytes or from human
cord blood CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells, when cultured with Bryo-1 + CI, also
showed maturation and increased T-cell stimulatory activity. Bryo-1 + CI was more
potent in inducing maturation and activation of DCs when compared with other
agents such as tumor necrosis factor alpha, lipopolysaccharide, or phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate + CI. Collectively, the current study shows for the first
time that Bryo-1 alone or in combination with CI may promote the maturation of
DCs and therefore may be useful in development of DC-based cancer immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-03-4002 
PMID: 15374994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

