
1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Jul 17;84(14):1152-6.

[Development of oral vaccine carrying GCPII gene and its role in reducing the
dosage of pentobarbital in rat: a primitive research].

[Article in Chinese]

Tian SQ(1), Wang RZ, Li GL, Wang X, Zhang B, Yao Y, Dou WC, Kong YG, Zhang ZX, Li
SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital 1, Beijing
100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To develop an oral vaccine carrying glutamate carboxypeptidase II (GCP
II) and to explore whether it can affect the dosage of pentobarbiturate.
METHODS: Polymerase chain reaction, digestion of endonuclease and ligation,
blue-white selection were used to construct an expression vector pcDNA3.1-GCP II.
HEK293 cells were cultured. The vector pcDNA3.1-GCP II was transfected into the
HEK293 cells by Ca(3)(PO(4))(2) coprecipitation method. The transfected HEK293
cells were cultured in HEM liquid culture prepared with G418. Three weeks after, 
positive clones, HEK293-GCP II, were identified. Reverse-transcription PCR and
immunofluorescence cell staining were used to testify positive cell line; Method 
of CaCl(2) was used to prepare oral vaccine of attenuated Salmonella typhimurium 
carrying GCP II (SL-GCP II). Expression of SL-GCP II in vitro was observed by
adding SL-GCP II into the primarily cultured macrophage. Fifty male SD rats were 
randomly divided into 2 groups of 25 rats: group A, undergoing intragastrical
infusion of SL-GCP II, 600 micro l/time, in total 4 times in 4 days; and group B,
as control group, undergoing intragastrical infusion of SL3261. Fifteen days
after, 5 g/L pentobarbital sodium was injected intraperitoneally with the first
dosage of 1.0 ml and the response was observed in 10 minutes, then 0.1 ml was
added every time. The specific dosage of pentobarbital sodium was recorded when
anesthesia meeting the requirement of operation was reached. Phenobarbital sodium
of this dosage was used to anesthetize the rats to observe the response of the
rats. Immunofluorescence method was used to detect the titer of antibody in rat
circulation with HEK293 GCP II cells as target cells.
RESULTS: An expression vector containing GCP II, pCMV-GCP II, pCDNA3.1-GCP II was
constructed. The cell line, HEK 293-GCP II was established. In vitro experiment
proved that primarily cultured macrophage phagocytized SL-GCP II and effectively 
expressed GCP II gene. After infusion of the oral vaccine 22 of the 25 SD rats of
the group A produce GCP II antibodies. The dosage of pentobarbiturate used in
experimental group was 36.9 mg/kg +/- 1.6 mg/kg; significantly lower than that in
the control group (40.8 mg/kg +/- 1.4 mg/kg, P = 0.00).
CONCLUSION: An oral vaccine carrying GCP II gene has been developed that
activates the immune response of rat to produce GCP II antibodies and lower the
dosage of pentobarbiturate needed.


PMID: 15387974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

