
1. Infect Immun. 2004 Oct;72(10):5750-8.

NF-kappaB- and AP-1-mediated induction of human beta defensin-2 in intestinal
epithelial cells by Escherichia coli Nissle 1917: a novel effect of a probiotic
bacterium.

Wehkamp J(1), Harder J, Wehkamp K, Wehkamp-von Meissner B, Schlee M, Enders C,
Sonnenborn U, Nuding S, Bengmark S, Fellermann K, Schr√∂der JM, Stange EF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Robert Bosch Hospital, Stuttgart, Germany. 
jwehkamp@ucdavis.edu

Little is known about the defensive mechanisms induced in epithelial cells by
pathogenic versus probiotic bacteria. The aim of our study was to compare
probiotic bacterial strains such as Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 with
nonprobiotic, pathogenic and nonpathogenic bacteria with respect to innate
defense mechanisms in the intestinal mucosal cell. Here we report that E. coli
strain Nissle 1917 and a variety of other probiotic bacteria, including
lactobacilli--in contrast to more than 40 different E. coli strains
tested--strongly induce the expression of the antimicrobial peptide human
beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2) in Caco-2 intestinal epithelial cells in a time- and
dose-dependent manner. Induction of hBD-2 through E. coli Nissle 1917 was further
confirmed by activation of the hBD-2 promoter and detection of the hBD-2 peptide 
in the culture supernatants of E. coli Nissle 1917-treated Caco-2 cells.
Luciferase gene reporter analyses and site-directed mutagenesis experiments
demonstrated that functional binding sites for NF-kappaB and AP-1 in the hBD-2
promoter are required for induction of hBD-2 through E. coli Nissle 1917.
Treatment with the NF-kappaB inhibitor Helenalin, as well as with SP600125, a
selective inhibitor of c-Jun N-terminal kinase, blocked hBD-2 induction by E.
coli Nissle 1917 in Caco-2 cells. SB 202190, a specific p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase inhibitor, and PD 98059, a selective inhibitor of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2, were ineffective. This report demonstrates that
probiotic bacteria may stimulate the intestinal innate defense through the
upregulation of inducible antimicrobial peptides such as hBD-2. The induction of 
hBD-2 may contribute to an enhanced mucosal barrier to the luminal bacteria.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.72.10.5750-5758.2004 
PMCID: PMC517557
PMID: 15385474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

