
1. J Immunol. 2004 Oct 1;173(7):4500-9.

Critical role of TNF receptor type-2 (p75) as a costimulator for IL-2 induction
and T cell survival: a functional link to CD28.

Kim EY(1), Teh HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

CD28 provides important signals that lower the threshold of T cell activation,
augment the production of IL-2, and promote T cell survival. The recent
identification of a second family of costimulatory molecules within the TNFR
family has reshaped the "two-signal" model of T cell activation. In this study
the role of p75 as a T cell costimulatory molecule in controlling cell fate
during TCR/CD28-mediated stimulation was examined. We found that p75-deficient T 
cells possess a profound defect in IL-2 production in response to
TCR/CD28-mediated stimulation. Examination of key signaling intermediates
revealed that TCR proximal events such as global tyrosine phosphorylation and
ZAP70 phosphorylation, as well as downstream MAPK cascades are unperturbed in
p75-deficient T cells. In contrast, p75 is nonredundantly coupled to sustained
AKT activity and NF-kappaB activation in response to TCR/CD28-mediated
stimulation. Moreover, p75-deficient T cells possess a defect in survival during 
the early phase of T cell activation that is correlated with a striking defect in
Bcl-x(L) expression. These data indicate discrete effects of p75 on the
intracellular signaling milieu during T cell activation, and reveal the
synergistic requirement of TCR, CD28, and p75 toward optimal IL-2 induction and T
cell survival. We propose that p75 acts as one of the earliest of the identified 
costimulatory members of the TNFR family, and is functionally linked to CD28 for 
initiating and determining T cell fate during activation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.173.7.4500 
PMID: 15383581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

