
1. Arch Microbiol. 2004 Dec;182(6):436-49. Epub 2004 Sep 24.

Complementation studies of the DnaK-DnaJ-GrpE chaperone machineries from Vibrio
harveyi and Escherichia coli, both in vivo and in vitro.

Zmijewski MA(1), Kwiatkowska JM, Lipi≈Ñska B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Gdansk, Kladki 24, 80-822 Gdansk,
Poland.

The marine bacterium Vibrio harveyi is a potential indicator organism for
evaluating marine environmental pollution. The DnaK-DnaJ-GrpE chaperone machinery
of V. harveyi has been studied as a model of response to stress conditions and
compared to the Escherichia coli DnaK system. The genes encoding DnaK, DnaJ and
GrpE of V. harveyi were cloned into expression vectors and grpE was sequenced. It
was found that V. harveyi possesses a unique organization of the hsp gene cluster
(grpE-gltP-dnaK-dnaJ), which is present exclusively in marine Vibrio species. In 
vivo experiments showed that suppression of the E. coli dnaK mutation by V.
harveyi DnaK protein was weak or absent, while suppression of the dnaJ and grpE
mutations by V. harveyi DnaJ and GrpE proteins was efficient. These results
suggest higher species-specificity of the DnaK chaperone than the GrpE and DnaJ
cochaperones. Proteins of the DnaK chaperone machinery of V. harveyi were
purified to homogeneity and their efficient cooperation with the E. coli
chaperones in the luciferase refolding reaction and in stimulation of DnaK ATPase
activity was demonstrated. Compared to the E. coli system, the purified
DnaK-DnaJ-GrpE system of V. harveyi exhibited about 20% lower chaperoning
activity in the luciferase reactivation assay. ATPase activity of V. harveyi DnaK
protein was at least twofold higher than that of the E. coli model DnaK but its
stimulation by the cochaperones DnaJ and GrpE was significantly (10 times)
weaker. These results indicate that, despite their high structural identity
(approximately 80%) and similar mechanisms of action, the DnaK chaperones of
closely related V. harveyi and E.coli bacteria differ functionally.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-004-0727-8 
PMID: 15448982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

