
1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Dec 15;170(12):1367-74. Epub 2004 Sep 24.

Non-mannose-capped lipoarabinomannan induces lung inflammation via toll-like
receptor 2.

Wieland CW(1), Knapp S, Florquin S, de Vos AF, Takeda K, Akira S, Golenbock DT,
Verbon A, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Internal Medicine, Department of Pathology,
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. c.wieland@amc.uva.nl

Non-mannose-capped lipoarabinomannan (AraLAM) is part of the cell membrane of
atypical mycobacteria. To determine the capacity of AraLAM to induce lung
inflammation in vivo and to determine the signaling receptors involved herein,
wild-type (WT) mice, lipopolysaccharide binding protein knockout mice,
CD14-deficient (CD14 KO) mice, Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 mutant mice, or TLR2 KO
mice were intranasally inoculated with purified AraLAM. AraLAM induced high lung 
levels of tumor necrosis factor, interleukin-1beta, interleukin-6, and
cytokine-induced neutrophil chemoattractant (KC) and an influx of neutrophils
into the pulmonary compartment of WT mice. Lipopolysaccharide binding protein
knockout, CD14 KO, and TLR4 mutant mice displayed similar inflammatory responses 
as WT mice, whereas in TLR2 KO mice, AraLAM-induced lung inflammation was
strongly diminished. In addition, TLR2 KO mice, but not CD14 KO or TLR4 mutant
mice, displayed a delayed clearance of pulmonary infection with the atypical
AraLAM expressing Mycobacterium smegmatis. These data indicate that TLR2 is the
signaling receptor for purified AraLAM in the lung in vivo and that this receptor
contributes to an effective clearance of M. smegmatis from the pulmonary
compartment.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200404-525OC 
PMID: 15447943  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

