
1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Mar 15;267(8):5025-8.

p21rasGAP association with Fyn, Lyn, and Yes in thrombin-activated platelets.

Cichowski K(1), McCormick F, Brugge JS.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Microbiology, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia 19104-6148.

Activation of platelets by thrombin and other physiological agonists leads to a
dramatic increase in tyrosine phosphorylation of multiple cellular proteins
(Ferrell, J. E., and Martin, G. S. (1988) Mol. Cell. Biol. 8, 3606-3610; Golden, 
A., and Brugge, J. S. (1989) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 86, 901-905; Nakamura,
S., and Yamamura, H. (1989) J. Biol. Chem. 264, 7089-7091). To date, none of the 
tyrosine kinases that are involved in platelet activation, nor the substrates
that are phosphorylated in response to agonists, have been identified. A "kinase 
trapping" strategy, designed to take advantage of the stability of known tyrosine
kinase-substrate interactions, was employed to address both issues. p21rasGAP
antibodies were used to examine the phosphorylated state of GAP in
agonist-treated platelets and to isolate potential GAP-kinase complexes. We show 
that GAP and two proteins of 59 and 68 kDa are phosphorylated on tyrosine after
thrombin stimulation and that three Src-related protein tyrosine kinases, Fyn,
Lyn and Yes, are associated with GAP in complexes, detectable only after agonist 
stimulation. The thrombin-dependent detection of these kinases in GAP
immunoprecipitates suggests that thrombin may either induce the formation of
these complexes or activate kinases that are associated with GAP prior to, or
following, agonist stimulation. This approach of "trapping" kinases bound to
their substrates will be useful in identifying non-receptor tyrosine kinases
involved in signaling pathways. Furthermore, although GAP phosphorylation has
been previously implicated in growth factor signaling pathways, this is the first
example of its involvement downstream from a G-protein-coupled receptor.


PMID: 1544885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

