
1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 17;279(51):53789-97. Epub 2004 Oct 7.

Two novel mutant human adenylosuccinate lyases (ASLs) associated with autism and 
characterization of the equivalent mutant Bacillus subtilis ASL.

Sivendran S(1), Patterson D, Spiegel E, McGown I, Cowley D, Colman RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark, DE
19716, USA.

An Australian patient with autism was found to be heterozygous for two mutations 
in the gene encoding adenylosuccinate lyase (ASL), resulting in the protein
mutations E80D and D87E. The patient's mother carried only the E80D mutation. The
equivalent positions are 62 and 69 in Bacillus subtilis ASL. Although both human 
and B. subtilis enzymes normally have Asp at position 87 (or 69), the B. subtilis
ASL has Ile and Asp at 62 and 65, respectively, whereas human ASL has Glu and Arg
at the equivalent positions. We have constructed, expressed, and purified the
double mutant I62E/D65R as a "humanized" normal B. subtilis enzyme to compare
with enzymes with a single mutation at position 62 (I62D/D65R), at position 69
(I62E/D65R/D69E), or at both positions (I62D/D65R/D69E). V(max) for conversion of
adenylosuccinate to AMP and fumarate is 0.57 micromol/min/mg for I62E/D65R, 0.064
micromol/min/mg for I62D/D65R, 0.27 micromol/min/mg for I62E/D65R/D69E, and 0.069
micromol/min/mg for I62D/D65R/D69E. The K(m) for adenylosuccinate is elevated in 
the X62D mutants, and I62D/D65R is the least stable of these ASLs at 37 degrees
C. The CD spectra of mutant and wild type enzymes are similar; thus, there are no
appreciable structural changes. Clearly the Asp(62) causes the most drastic
effect on ASL function, whereas the Glu(69) mutation produces only modest change.
These results emphasize the importance of expanding tests for ASL deficiency to
individuals with developmental delay of any severity, including individuals with 
autistic spectrum disorder. This study further demonstrates the usefulness of the
B. subtilis ASL as a model to mimic the defective enzyme in ASL deficiency.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M409974200 
PMID: 15471876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

