
1. J Dairy Sci. 2004 Nov;87(11):3989-99.

Management practices from questionnaire surveys in herds with very low somatic
cell score through a national mastitis program in France.

Barnouin J(1), Chassagne M, Bazin S, Boichard D.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Epidemiology Research Unit, INRA, 63122 Saint Gen√®s Champanelle,
France. barnouin@clermont.inra.fr <barnouin@clermont.inra.fr>

French dairy herds (n = 534) were enrolled in the National 'Zero Mastitis
Objective' Program to highlight management practices characterizing very low
somatic cell score (SCS) herds. The herds studied were stratified into 2 groups. 
The first group (LOW) included herds within the first 5 percentiles and the
second group (MED) herds within the 50 to 55 percentiles of herds on the basis of
mean SCS for the 36 mo preceding the program. Potential explanatory variables,
collected through questionnaire surveys, were analyzed using multistep logistic
regression models. Twenty-six variables were significant factors in the final
models, in which 18 were considered as primary factors for very low SCS. The
probability for a herd belonging to the LOW group was associated with: (1)
regular use of teat spraying; (2) herdsman precise in his techniques; (3) less
than 1 person-year used at activities other than dairy herd; (4) teat dipping
after mammary infusion at dry off; (5) heifers kept in a calving pen around
parturition; (6) cows locked in feed-line lockups after milking; (7) dry cows
with prepartum Ca restriction; (8) heifers on a nondamp pasture; (9) cows culled 
when at least one damaged teat; (10) heifers at pasture not drinking water from a
river; and (11) disinfecting teat ends with alcohol before intramammary infusion 
at dry off. The probability for a herd belonging to the MED group was associated 
with: (1) milking cows housed in a straw yard; (2) checking heifers for mastitis 
only beginning at 2-wk prepartum; (3) no mastitis treatment when at least one
clot was observed in milk at successive milkings; (4) distance of herdsman's
house to cowshed >300 m; (5) only dirty teats washed before milking; (6) free
access of cows from pasture to cowshed during bad weather; and (7) more than 18% 
of spring calvings. The variables associated with very low SCS should be applied 
as part of a thorough mastitis-control program adapted to each herd.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(04)73539-0 
PMID: 15483184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

