
1. Immunobiology. 2004;209(3):225-33.

A synthetic, non-peptide CXCR2 antagonist blocks MIP-2-induced neutrophil
migration in mice.

Matzer SP(1), Zombou J, Sarau HM, RÃ¶llinghoff M, Beuscher HU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University of
Erlangen, Wasserturmstrasse 3, Erlangen 91054, Germany.

Non-peptide antagonists of chemokine receptors are considered an intriguing
alternative for the treatment of acute and chronic diseases. Particularly the
recruitment of neutrophils to inflammatory sites often causes harmful side
effects and is mediated by chemokine ligands of the CXC chemokine receptor 2
(CXCR2). Hence, this receptor has been proposed as an important target for novel 
drugs. This study investigates the potential of the non-peptide CXCR2 antagonist 
SB 455821 to block neutrophil migration in mice. By using bone marrow derived
neutrophils we established a migration assay which revealed SB 455821 as a potent
inhibitor of macrophage inflammatory protein 2 (MIP-2)-induced neutrophil
migration in vitro (IC50-20 nM). In vivo, injection of MIP-2 into the peritoneal 
cavities of mice markedly increased neutrophil numbers in peritoneal lavages
which were reduced to control levels by co-administration of SB 455821 indicating
that the compound effectively binds to the receptor under physiological
conditions and exhibits biological activity in vivo. Nevertheless, using
intraperitoneal injection of zymosan as a complex inflammatory stimulus, SB
455821 was unable to block neutrophil recruitment to the peritoneal cavity of
mice possibly due to other chemotactic mediators overruling signals derived from 
CXCR2 ligands. Our data show that SB 455821 blocks MIP-2-induced neutrophil
migration in vitro and after injection in mice suggesting that selective CXCR2
antagonists may be useful drugs in diseases where neutrophil accumulation plays a
major role and leads to exacerbation of acute or chronic inflammations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2004.02.009 
PMID: 15518334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

