
1. Anal Chem. 2004 Nov 1;76(21):6207-13.

Magnetic cell separation using antibody binding with protein a expressed on
bacterial magnetic particles.

Kuhara M(1), Takeyama H, Tanaka T, Matsunaga T.

Author information: 
(1)Technical and Development, Medical & Biological Laboratories Company Ltd.,
1063-103, Ohara, Terasawaoka, Ina, Nagano, 396-0002, Japan.

Bacterial magnetic particles (BacMPs) are efficient platforms of proteins for
surface display systems. In this study, mononuclear cells from peripheral blood
were separated using BacMPs expressing protein A on the BacMP membrane surface
(protein A-BacMPs), which were complexed with the Fc fragment of anti-mouse IgG
antibody. The procedure of positive selection involves incubation of mononuclear 
cells and mouse monoclonal antibodies against different cell surface antigens
(CD8, CD14, CD19, CD20) prior to treatment with protein A-BacMP binding with
rabbit anti-mouse IgG secondary antibodies. Flow cytometric analysis showed that 
approximately 97.5 +/- 1.7% of CD19(+) and CD20(+) cells were involved in the
positive fraction after magnetic separation. The ratio of the negative cells in
the negative fraction was approximately 97.6 +/-1.4%. This indicates that CD19(+)
and CD20(+) cells can be efficiently separated from mononuclear cells. Stem cell 
marker (CD34) positive cells were also separated using protein A-BacMP binding
with antibody. May-Grunwald Giemsa stain showed a high nuclear/cytoplasm ratio,
which indicates a typical staining pattern of stem cells. The separated cells had
the capability of colony formation as hematopoietic stem cells. Furthermore, the 
inhibitory effect of magnetic cell separation on CD14(+) cells was evaluated by
measurement of cytokine in the culture supernatant by ELISA when the cells were
cultured with or without lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The induction of IL1-beta,
TNFalpha, and IL6 was observed in the presence of 1 ng/mL LPS in all fractions.
On the other hand, in the absence of LPS, BacMPs had little immunopotentiation to
CD14(+) cells as well as that of artificial magnetic particles, although TNFalpha
and IL6 were slightly induced in the absence of LPS in the positive fraction.

DOI: 10.1021/ac0493727 
PMID: 15516111  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

