
1. Toxicol Pathol. 2004 Nov-Dec;32(6):678-93.

Hepatic temporal gene expression profiling in Helicobacter hepaticus-infected
A/JCr mice.

Boutin SR(1), Rogers AB, Shen Z, Fry RC, Love JA, Nambiar PR, Suerbaum S, Fox JG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Comparative Medicine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77
Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Helicobacter hepaticus infection of A/JCr mice is a model of infectious liver
cancer. We monitored hepatic global gene expression profiles in H. hepaticus
infected and control male A/JCr mice at 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year of age
using an Affymetrix-based oligonucleotide microarray platform on the premise that
a specific genetic expression signature at isolated time points would be
indicative of disease status. Model based expression index comparisons generated 
by dChip yielded consistent profiles of differential gene expression for H.
hepaticus infected male mice with progressive liver disease versus uninfected
control mice within each age group. Linear discriminant analysis and principal
component analysis allowed segregation of mice based on combined age and lesion
status, or age alone. Up-regulation of putative tumor markers correlated with
advancing hepatocellular dysplasia. Transcriptionally down-regulated genes in
mice with liver lesions included those related to peroxisome proliferator, fatty 
acid, and steroid metabolism pathways. In conclusion, transcriptional profiling
of hepatic genes documented gene expression signatures in the livers of H.
hepaticus infected male A/JCr mice with chronic progressive hepatitis and
preneoplastic liver lesions, complemented the histopathological diagnosis, and
suggested molecular targets for the monitoring and intervention of disease
progression prior to the onset of hepatocellular neoplasia.

DOI: 10.1080/01926230490524058 
PMID: 15513911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

