
1. Stem Cells. 2004;22(6):1003-14.

Comparative proteomic analysis of human CD34+ stem/progenitor cells and mature
CD15+ myeloid cells.

Tao W(1), Wang M, Voss ED, Cocklin RR, Smith JA, Cooper SH, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, 950 West Walnut Street, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.
wetao@iupui.edu

Human CD34(+) cells, highly enriched for hematopoietic stem and progenitors, and 
CD15(+) cells, more terminally differentiated myeloid cells in blood, represent
distinct maturation/differentiation stages. A proteomic approach was used to
identify proteins differentially present in these two populations from human cord
blood. Cytosolic proteins were extracted and subjected to two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis followed by mass spectrometry. On average, 460 protein spots on
each gel were detected; 112 and 15 proteins, respectively, were found to be
differentially expressed or post-translationally modified in CD34(+) and CD15(+) 
cells. This suggests that CD34(+) cells have a relatively larger proteome than
mature CD15(+) myeloid cells and production of many stem/progenitor
cell-associated proteins ceases or is dramatically down-regulated as the CD34(+) 
cells undergo differentiation. Of approximately 140 protein spots, 47 different
proteins were positively identified by mass spectrometry and database search;
these proteins belong to several functional categories, including cell signaling,
transcription factors, cytoskeletal proteins, metabolism, protein folding, and
vesicle trafficking. Multiple heat shock proteins and chaperones, as well as
proteins important for intracellular trafficking, were predominantly present in
CD34(+) cells. Most of the identified proteins in CD34(+) cells are expressed in 
germ cell tumors, as well as in embryonal carcinoma and neuroblastoma.
Approximately eight novel proteins, whose functions are unknown, were identified.
This study presents, for the first time, global cellular protein expression
patterns in human CD34(+) and CD15(+) cells, which should help to better
understand intracellular processes involved in myeloid differentiation and add
insight into the functional capabilities of these distinct cell types.

DOI: 10.1634/stemcells.22-6-1003 
PMID: 15536191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

