
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 21;280(3):2197-204. Epub 2004 Nov 12.

Bimodal regulation of the human H1 histamine receptor by G protein-coupled
receptor kinase 2.

Iwata K(1), Luo J, Penn RB, Benovic JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The H1 histamine receptor (H1HR) is a member of the G protein-coupled receptor
superfamily and regulates numerous cellular functions through its activation of
the G(q/11) subfamily of heterotrimeric G proteins. Although the H1HR has been
shown to undergo desensitization in multiple cell types, the mechanisms
underlying the regulation of H1HR signaling are poorly defined. To address this
issue, we examined the effects of wild type and mutant G protein-coupled receptor
kinases (GRKs) on the phosphorylation and signaling of human H1HR in HEK293
cells. Overexpression of GRK2 promoted H1HR phosphorylation in intact HEK293
cells and completely inhibited inositol phosphate production stimulated by H1HR, 
whereas GRK5 and GRK6 had lesser effects on H1HR phosphorylation and signaling.
Interestingly, catalytically inactive GRK2 (GRK2-K220R) also significantly
attenuated H1HR-mediated inositol phosphate production, as did an N-terminal
fragment of GRK2 previously characterized as a regulator of G protein signaling
(RGS) protein for Galpha(q/11). Disruption of this RGS function in holo-GRK2 by
mutation (GRK2-D110A) partially reversed the quenching effect of GRK2, whereas
deletion of both the kinase activity and RGS function (GRK2-D110A/K220R)
effectively relieved the inhibition of inositol phosphate generation. To evaluate
the role of endogenous GRKs on H1HR regulation, we used small interfering RNAs to
selectively target GRK2 and GRK5, two of the primary GRKs expressed in HEK293
cells. A GRK2-specific small interfering RNA effectively reduced GRK2 expression 
and resulted in a significant increase in histamine-promoted calcium flux. In
contrast, knockdown of GRK5 expression was without effect on H1HR signaling.
These findings demonstrate that GRK2 is the principal kinase mediating H1
histamine receptor desensitization in HEK293 cells and suggest that rapid
termination of H1HR signaling is mediated by both the kinase activity and RGS
function of GRK2.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M408834200 
PMID: 15542600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

