
1. Gene. 2004 Sep 29;340(1):11-8.

Bacterial expression system with tightly regulated gene expression and plasmid
copy number.

Bowers LM(1), Lapoint K, Anthony L, Pluciennik A, Filutowicz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 420 Henry Mall
Room 151, 1550 Linden Drive, Madison, WI 53706-1567, USA.

A new Escherichia coli host/vector system has been engineered to allow tight and 
uniform modulation of gene expression and gamma origin (ori) plasmid copy number.
Regulation of gamma ori plasmid copy number is achieved through
arabinose-inducible expression of the necessary Rep protein, pi, whose gene was
integrated into the chromosome of the host strain under control of the P(BAD)
promoter. gamma ori replication can be uniformly modulated over 100-fold by
changing the concentration of l-arabinose in the growth medium. This strain
avoids the problem of all-or-nothing induction of P(BAD) because it is deficient 
in both arabinose uptake and degradation genes. Arabinose enters the cell by a
mutant LacY transporter, LacYA177C, which is expressed from the host chromosome. 
Although this strain could be compatible with any gamma ori plasmid, we describe 
the utility of a gamma ori expression vector that allows especially tight
regulation of gene expression. With this host/vector system, it is possible to
independently modulate gene expression and gene dosage, facilitating the cloning 
and overproduction of toxic gene products. We describe the successful use of this
system for cloning a highly potent toxin, Colicin E3, in the absence of its
cognate immunity protein. This system could be useful for cloning genes encoding 
other potent toxins, screening libraries for potential toxins, and maintaining
any gamma ori vector at precise copy levels in a cell.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2004.06.012 
PMID: 15556290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

