
1. J Immunol. 2004 Dec 1;173(11):6905-13.

Human CD8+ T cells recognize the 60-kDa cysteine-rich outer membrane protein from
Chlamydia trachomatis.

Gervassi AL(1), Grabstein KH, Probst P, Hess B, Alderson MR, Fling SP.

Author information: 
(1)Corixa, Seattle, WA 98101, USA.

The intracellular bacterial pathogen Chlamydia is sequestered from the host cell 
cytoplasm by remaining within an inclusion body during its replication cycle.
Nevertheless, CD8(+) T cells recognizing Chlamydia Ags in the context of MHC
class I molecules are primed during infection. We have recently described
derivation of Chlamydia-specific human CD8(+) T cells by using infected dendritic
cells as a surrogate system to reflect Chlamydia-specific CD8(+) T cell responses
in vivo. These CD8(+) T cell clones recognize chlamydial Ags processed via the
conventional class Ia processing pathway, as assessed by treatment of infected
APC with lactacystin and brefeldin A, suggesting that the Ags are translocated
from the chlamydial inclusion into the host cell cytosol. In this study, outer
membrane protein 2 (OmcB) was identified as the Ag recognized by one of these
Chlamydia-specific human CD8(+) T cells, and we defined the HLA*A0101-restricted 
epitope from this Ag. CD8(+) T cell responses to this epitope were present at
high frequencies in the peripheral blood of both of two HLA*A0101 donors tested. 
In vitro chlamydial growth was completely inhibited by the OmcB-specific CD8(+) T
cell clone independently of lytic mechanisms. OmcB is a 60-kDa protein that has
been postulated to be associated with the Chlamydia outer membrane complex. The
subcellular localization of OmcB to the cytosol of infected cells, as determined 
by conventional MHC class I Ag processing and presentation, suggests the
possibility of an additional, cytosolic-associated function for this protein.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.173.11.6905 
PMID: 15557186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

