
1. Arch Esp Urol. 2004 Oct;57(8):784-804.

[Asymptomatic bacteriuria in women. Epidemiological, pathologic and therapeutic
study].

[Article in Spanish]

Hermida Pérez JA(1), Loro Ferrer JF.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad de Camagüey, Cuba.

OBJECTIVES: To perform an epidemiological, pathologic and therapeutic study of
asymptomatic bacteriuria (AB) in a population of outpatient women.
METHODS: Transversal study for detection of AB in 1718 outpatient women
14-year-old or older. All patients complied with the inclusion/exclusion criteria
for the study. Two groups of patients, with AB (n = 113) and controls without AB 
(n = 200), underwent: 1) urine analysis: urine sediment, biochemical analysis,
and culture; 2) blood tests: hemoglobin, red blood cell count, urea, creatinine, 
sedimentation rate velocity, C reactive protein, immunoglobulins (IgA, IgM, and
IgG), HLA-A3, blood group and Rh. The therapeutic management for AB was analyzed.
Comparative statistical analyses of data were performed.
RESULTS: AB prevalence was 6.34%. The most frequently isolated germ was E. coli
(77.87%). Diabetes mellitus was detected in 27.43% of patients with AB and 7.01% 
without AB (27.43% vs. 7.01%); coronary arterial disease and other heart
disorders (9.73% vs. 4%, p = 0.0206); general cardiovascular disorders excluding 
hypertension (46.9% vs. 31%, p = 0.0025). Urine analysis showed leukocyturia in
81.41% of the patients with AB and 17.5% without AB (p = 0.0002); positive
nitrites (77.87% vs. 0%, p < 0.001); urine sediment showed bacteriuria in 86.72% 
of patients with AB and 0% of non-AB patients (p < 0.0001), leukocytes (93.80%
vs. 6%, p < 0.0001), and pyuria (19.46% vs. 2.5%). Low water intake (50.44% vs.
9.5%, p < 0.0001) was the most significant urinary tract infection
hygienic-dietetic predisposing factor. Higher levels of IgA (15% vs. 2%, p =
0.004). Positive HLA-A 3 (5% vs. 0%, p = 0.039), Rh negative (16.66% vs. 13.33%),
and increased C reactive protein (15% vs. 10%). Renal abnormalities detected by
radiological tests (10.29% vs. 1.47%, p = 0.014). AB disappeared after treatment 
with cefuroxime, ceftibuten, trimetropin/sulfametoxazole and amoxicillin in 100% 
of the patients receiving treatment. Topical vaginal estrogen therapy was
effective in 38.09% of the patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of AB increases with age. The most frequent germ is
Escherichia coli. A statistically significant greater number of coronary artery
disease, other heart diseases, and cardiovascular disorders were found among
patients with AB in comparison with non-AB controls. Immunoglobulins levels
disturbances, and HLA-A3 positivity suggest an immune systemic imbalance in
certain patients with recurrent AB. Other therapeutic alternatives such as
vaginal topical estrogens, fruit juices intake, vaccinations, etc. should be
pursued in addition to antimicrobial therapy.


PMID: 15560268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

