
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2004 Nov;71(5):561-7.

Elevated plasma levels of interferon (IFN)-gamma, IFN-gamma inducing cytokines,
and IFN-gamma inducible CXC chemokines in visceral leishmaniasis.

Hailu A(1), van der Poll T, Berhe N, Kager PA.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, 
and Institute of Pathobiology, Addis Ababa University, PO Box 9086, Addis Ababa, 
Ethiopia. a_hailu@hotmail.com

Interferon (IFN)- gamma plays an important role during immune responses against
leishmaniasis. Production of IFN-gamma is regulated by interleukin (IL)-12,
IL-18, and IL-15. Interferon-gamma-inducible protein (IP)-10 and monokine induced
by IFN-gamma (Mig) are CXC chemokines, the production of which, at least in part,
is IFN-gamma dependent. A follow-up study of individuals infected with Leishmania
donovani was undertaken in an area of Ethiopia endemic for visceral leishmaniasis
(VL). Plasma levels of IFN-gamma, IL-12p40, IL-18, IL-15, IP-10, and Mig were
markedly elevated in symptomatic VL patients (n = 70) compared with individuals
with asymptomatic Leishmania infections (n = 39), malaria patients (n = 13), and 
healthy controls from the endemic area (n = 12). A significant decrease of
IFN-gamma and all mediators was observed after treatment of VL patients (n = 33).
These data show that increased plasma levels of IFN-gamma, as well as the
mediators involved in the production and the activity of this cytokine, are
characteristic of active VL in humans, and may play an important immunopathogenic
role. The data also suggest that in patients with VL, the production of type 1
cytokines is not depressed, but there appears to be an unresponsiveness to the
stimuli of type 1 cytokines. The underlying causes of immunologic
unresponsiveness remain a subject of further investigation.


PMID: 15569785  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

