
1. Nature. 1992 Apr 2;356(6368):443-6.

HLA-A2 molecules in an antigen-processing mutant cell contain signal
sequence-derived peptides.

Wei ML(1), Cresswell P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710.

Comment in
    Nature. 1992 Jul 16;358(6383):198.
    Nature. 1992 Apr 2;356(6368):386-7.

The mutant human cell line T2 is defective in antigen presentation in the context
of class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, and also in that
transfected T2 cells show poor surface expression of exogenous human class I
(HLA) alleles. Both defects are thought to lie in the transport of antigenic
peptides derived from cytosolic proteins into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), as 
peptide-deficient class I molecules might be expected to be either unstable or
retained in the ER. The products of several mouse class I (H-2) genes, and the
endogenous gene HLA-A2 do, however, reach the surface of T2 cells at reasonable
levels although they are non-functional. We report here that, as expected, poorly
surface-expressed HLA molecules do not significantly bind endogenous peptides.
Surprisingly, H-2 molecules expressed in T2 also lack associated peptides,
arguing that 'empty' complexes of mouse class I glycoproteins with human beta
2-microglobulin are neither retained in the ER nor unstable. HLA-A2 molecules,
however, do bind high levels of a limited set of endogenous peptides. We have
sequenced three of these peptides and find that two, a 9-mer and an 11-mer, are
derived from a putative signal sequence (of IP-30, an interferon-gamma-inducible 
protein), whereas a third, a 13-mer, is of unknown origin. The unusual length of 
two of the peptides argues that the 9-mers normally associated with HLA-A2
molecules may be generated before their transport from the cytosol rather than in
a pre-Golgi compartment. To our knowledge, this is the first report of the
isolation of a fragment of a eukaryotic signal peptide generated in vivo.

DOI: 10.1038/356443a0 
PMID: 1557127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

