
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 18;280(7):5486-90. Epub 2004 Dec 13.

Regulation of aldoxime dehydratase activity by redox-dependent change in the
coordination structure of the aldoxime-heme complex.

Kobayashi K(1), Yoshioka S, Kato Y, Asano Y, Aono S.

Author information: 
(1)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institutes of Natural
Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki 444-8787, Japan.

Phenylacetaldoxime dehydratase from Bacillus sp. strain OxB-1 (OxdB) catalyzes
the dehydration of Z-phenylacetaldoxime (PAOx) to produce phenylacetonitrile.
OxdB contains a protoheme that works as the active center of the dehydration
reaction. The enzymatic activity of ferrous OxdB was 1150-fold higher than that
of ferric OxdB, indicating that the ferrous heme was the active state in OxdB
catalysis. Although ferric OxdB was inactive, the substrate was bound to the
ferric heme iron. Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy revealed that the 
oxygen atom of PAOx was bound to the ferric heme, whereas PAOx was bound to the
ferrous heme in OxdB via the nitrogen atom of PAOx. These results show a novel
mechanism by which the activity of a heme enzyme is regulated; that is, the
oxidation state of the heme controls the coordination structure of a
substrate-heme complex, which regulates enzymatic activity. Rapid scanning
spectroscopy using stopped-flow apparatus revealed that a reaction intermediate
(the PAOx-ferrous OxdB complex) showed Soret, alpha, and beta bands at 415, 555, 
and 524 nM, respectively. The formation of this intermediate complex was very
fast, finishing within the dead time of the stopped-flow mixer (approximately 3
ms). Site-directed mutagenesis revealed that His-306 was the catalytic residue
responsible for assisting the elimination of the hydrogen atom of PAOx. The pH
dependence of OxdB activity suggested that another amino acid residue that
assists the elimination of the OH group of PAOx would work as a catalytic residue
along with His-306.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M410474200 
PMID: 15596434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

