
1. J Immunol. 1992 Apr 15;148(8):2591-9.

Single base pair substitutions within the HLA-DRA gene promoter separate the
functions of the X1 and X2 boxes.

Sloan JH(1), Hasegawa SL, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322.

The class II MHC genes are expressed on the surfaces of B cells, activated T
cells, and macrophages and may be induced in other cell types by IFN-gamma. The
control of class II gene expression has been shown to be mediated by a series of 
conserved cis-acting sequences (W, X1, X2, and Y boxes) located immediately 5' to
the genes. Although these sequences are conserved, the bp that are important for 
transcriptional regulation have yet to be identified. To address this issue with 
regard to the MHC gene HLA-DRA, a series of single bp substitutions spanning the 
conserved upstream sequences was created and analyzed for their effects on
transcription in both B cells and IFN-gamma-treated fibroblasts. In addition, the
effects of X1 and X2 box mutations on DNA/protein interactions were examined and 
compared to the transcriptional data. The results of these studies show that each
of the conserved elements participate in maximal expression in B cells and that
W, X1, and X2 boxes are important for IFN-gamma induction and expression in
fibroblasts. Interestingly, some of the bp changes that altered B cell expression
did not alter expression and IFN-gamma induction in fibroblasts, suggesting that 
different or altered factors control the expression of these genes in the
different cell types. Mutant templates designed to eliminate the binding of X1-
and X2-specific DNA binding proteins in vivo suggest that these elements and
their factors may interact to promote transcription.


PMID: 1560213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

