
1. Blood. 2005 Apr 15;105(8):3117-26. Epub 2004 Dec 23.

Flt3 ligand and the Flt3 receptor regulate hematopoietic cell migration by
modulating the SDF-1alpha(CXCL12)/CXCR4 axis.

Fukuda S(1), Broxmeyer HE, Pelus LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology and the Walther Oncology Center,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
sfukuda@iupui.edu

Flt3 ligand (FL) enhances hematopoietic cell proliferation and facilitates
hematopoietic stem cell mobilization in vivo, while the stromal-derived factor
1alpha (SDF-1alpha, CXC ligand 12 [CXCL12])/CXC receptor 4 (CXCR4) axis is
critical for their homing and trafficking. We investigated if FL and its
receptor, Flt3, functionally interact with CXCL12/CXCR4 to regulate hematopoietic
cell migration. FL stimulated chemokinetic activity when used alone, but
synergistically enhanced short-term migration of CD34+ cells, Ba/F3 cells
expressing human Flt3 (Ba/F3-Flt3), and human RS4;11 acute leukemia cells,
induced by CXCL12. Moreover, overexpression of constitutively activated internal 
tandem duplication (ITD)-Flt3 mutants in Ba/F3 cells dramatically enhanced
migration toward CXCL12. In Ba/F3-Flt3 cells, synergistic cell migration to FL
plus CXCL12 was associated with enhanced phosphorylation of mitogen-activated
protein kinase p42/p44 (MAPK(p42/p44)), cyclic adenosine monophosphate response
element binding protein (CREB), and Akt, and was partially inhibited by
pretreatment of cells with selective inhibitors for MAPK(p42/p44), protein kinase
A (PKA), or phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase), implicating these
pathways in migration to FL plus CXCL12. In contrast, prolonged exposure of CD34+
or Ba/F3-Flt3 cells to FL down-regulated CXCR4 expression, inhibited
CXCL12-mediated phosphorylation of MAPK(p42/p44), CREB, and Akt, and impaired
migration toward CXCL12. These findings suggest that FL/Flt3 may facilitate
hematopoietic cell migration/homing and mobilization by enhancing or inhibiting
CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling pathways and that the FL/Flt3 axis participates in
trafficking of normal and transformed hematopoietic cells.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2004-04-1440 
PMID: 15618475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

