
1. Biopolymers. 2005;80(1):34-49.

Engineering disulfide bonds of the novel human beta-defensins hBD-27 and hBD-28: 
differences in disulfide formation and biological activity among human
beta-defensins.

Schulz A(1), Kl√ºver E, Schulz-Maronde S, Adermann K.

Author information: 
(1)IPF PharmaCeuticals GmbH, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 31, D-30625 Hannover, Germany. 
a.schulz@ipf-pharmaceuticals.de

Human beta-defensins comprise a large number of peptides that play a functional
role in the innate and adaptive immune system. Recently, clusters of new
beta-defensin genes with predominant expression in testicular tissue have been
discovered on different chromosomes by bioinformatics. beta-Defensins share a
common pattern of three disulfides that are essential for their biological
effects. Here we report for the first time the chemical synthesis of the new
fully disulfide-bonded beta-defensins hBD-27 and hBD-28, and compare the results 
with synthetic procedures to obtain the known hBD-2 and hBD-3. While hBD-27 was
readily converted into a product with the desired disulfide pattern by oxidative 
folding, hBD-28 required a selective protective group strategy to introduce the
three disulfide bonds. The established synthetic processes were applied to the
synthesis of hBD-2, which, like hBD-27, was accessible by oxidative folding,
whereas hBD-3 required a selective strategy comparable to hBD-28. Experimental
work demonstrated that trityl, acetamidomethyl, and t-butyl are superior to other
protection strategies. However, the suitable pairwise arrangement of the
protective groups can be different, as shown here for hBD-3 and hBD-28.
Determination of the minimum inhibitory concentration against different bacteria 
revealed that hBD-27, in contrast to other beta-defensins tested, has virtually
no antimicrobial activity. Compared to the other peptides tested, hBD-27 showed
almost no cytotoxic activity, measured by hemoglobin release of erythrocytes.
This might be due to the low positive net charge, which is significantly higher
for hBD-2, hBD-3, and hBD-28.

2004 Wiley Periodicals, Inc

DOI: 10.1002/bip.20193 
PMID: 15625724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

