
1. Mech Ageing Dev. 2005 Feb;126(2):249-54.

p66ShcA and ageing: modulation by longevity-promoting agent aurintricarboxylic
acid.

Sagi O(1), Wolfson M, Utko N, Muradian K, Fraifeld V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Center 
for Multidisciplinary Research in Aging, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P.O.
Box 653, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel.

Many mutations that extend the lifespan of the lower organisms such as C. elegans
and Drosophila, are associated with signaling or apoptotic pathways. Recently,
such a possibility was shown in mammals: p66ShcA-deficient mice were more
resistant to oxidative stress and lived longer than the wild-type animals
[Migliaccio, E., Giorgio, M., Mele, S., Pelicci, G., Reboldi, P., Randolfi, P.P.,
Lanfrancone, L., Pelicci, P.G., 1999. The p66Shc adaptor protein controls
oxidative stress response and life span in mammals. Nature 402, 309-313]. There
is evidence to implicate p66ShcA in age-related degenerative pathology, including
atherosclerosis, sarcopenia, and Alzheimer's disease. We hypothesized that a low 
level expression of p66ShcA could be associated with longevity. Also, we
suggested that the level of p66ShcA could be modulated by a putative
longevity-promoting agent aurintricarboxylic acid [aurintricarboxylic acid (ATA);
Fraifeld, V., Wolfson, M., Sagi, O., Seidman, R., Asraf, H., Utko, N., Muradian, 
K., 2002. Effects of anti-apoptotic agent aurintricarboxylic acid on longevity
and longevity-associated processes. Biogerontology 3, 48]. We have found that:
(i) the level of p66ShcA decreases with advanced age. Thirty-six-month-old mice
have the lowest, whereas newborns have the highest p66ShcA levels; (ii) ATA
significantly decreases the p66ShcA level in mouse lungs. In addition, the
lifespan-prolongation effect of ATA in a Drosophila model was further validated. 
The results support the suggested role for the p66ShcA as one of the lifespan
determinants in mammals; p66ShcA therefore represents a potential target for
pharmacological longevity-promoting intervention.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mad.2004.08.017 
PMID: 15621204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

