
1. J Immunol. 2005 Jan 15;174(2):953-61.

Tristetraprolin down-regulates IL-2 gene expression through AU-rich
element-mediated mRNA decay.

Ogilvie RL(1), Abelson M, Hau HH, Vlasova I, Blackshear PJ, Bohjanen PR.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology Graduate Program, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

Posttranscriptional regulation of IL-2 gene expression at the level of mRNA decay
is mediated by an AU-rich element (ARE) found in the 3'-untranslated region. We
hypothesized that the ARE-binding protein tristetraprolin (TTP) regulates T
lymphocyte IL-2 mRNA decay by interacting with the IL-2 ARE and targeting the
transcript for decay. rTTP protein expressed in HeLa cells bound specifically to 
the IL-2 ARE with high affinity in a gel shift assay. In primary human T
lymphocytes, TTP mRNA and protein expression were induced by TCR and CD28
coreceptor stimulation. Using a gel shift assay, we identified a cytoplasmic
RNA-binding activity that was induced by TCR and CD28 coreceptor stimulation and 
bound specifically to the IL-2 ARE sequence. Using anti-TTP Abs, we showed by
supershift that this inducible activity contained TTP. We also showed that
insertion of the IL-2 ARE sequence into the 3'-untranslated region of a
beta-globin reporter construct conferred TTP-dependent mRNA destabilization on
the beta-globin reporter. To determine whether TTP also regulates IL-2 gene
expression in vivo, we examined IL-2 expression in primary cells from wild-type
and TTP knockout mice. Compared with their wild-type counterparts, TCR- and
CD28-activated splenocytes and T cells from TTP knockout mice overexpressed IL-2 
mRNA and protein. Also, IL-2 mRNA was more stable in activated splenocytes from
TTP knockout mice compared with wild-type mice. Taken together, these data
suggest that TTP functions to down-regulate IL-2 gene expression through
ARE-mediated mRNA decay.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.174.2.953 
PMID: 15634918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

