
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 4;280(9):7875-82. Epub 2005 Jan 6.

Expression of neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin regulates epithelial
morphogenesis in vitro.

Gwira JA(1), Wei F, Ishibe S, Ueland JM, Barasch J, Cantley LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Growth factors such as hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) are highly up-regulated
during development and following renal injury and are known to induce marked
morphogenic actions in cultured tubular epithelial cells, including scattering,
migration, single cell branching morphogenesis, and multicellular branching
tubulogenesis. In the present study, we demonstrate that HGF stimulates
epithelial cells to express neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (Ngal), a 
member of the lipocalin family of secreted proteins that has recently been shown 
to participate in mesenchymal-epithelial transformation via its ability to
augment cellular iron uptake. At concentrations below those found to mediate iron
transport, purified Ngal can induce a promigratory and probranching effect that
is dependent on ERK activation. The suppression of Ngal expression using short
hairpin RNA results in increased cyst formation by tubular cells. However, the
simultaneous addition of Ngal and HGF leads to direct association of the two
proteins, and results in a partial inhibition of HGF-mediated activation of c-Met
and the downstream MAPK and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signaling pathways.
This inhibitory effect down-regulates HGF-stimulated single cell migration, and
limits branching morphogenesis at both the single cell and multicellular level.
These experiments demonstrate that the local expression of Ngal can play a
regulatory role in epithelial morphogenesis by promoting the organization of
cells into tubular structures while simultaneously negatively modulating the
branching effects of HGF.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413192200 
PMID: 15637066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

