
1. J Sep Sci. 2004 Dec;27(17-18):1491-7.

Chromatographic separation of nucleosides using a cross-linked xylose isomerase
crystal stationary phase.

Jokela J(1), Leisola M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bioprocess Engineering, Helsinki University of Technology,
FIN-02015 HUT, Finland. jouni.jokela@helsinki.fi

Cross-linked xylose isomerase (EC 5.3.1.5., from Streptomyces rubiginosus)
crystals (CLXIC) packed into a 7.8 x 300 mm steel column showed specific affinity
towards uridine (Urd), cytidine (Cyd), adenosine (Ado), guanosine (Guo), and
thymidine. These nucleosides eluted out of the CLXIC column in the same order as 
the corresponding nucleoside bases, indicating that the retention depends mainly 
on the base component of the molecule. The interaction of nucleosides with the
CLXIC material was not based merely on ion exchange or hydrophobic interactions
but also on the unique properties of the CLXIC column. Decrease in temperature
increased the retention but not the resolution factors of the adjacent
nucleosides. The CLXIC column maintained its separation capacity even when 100 mg
of ribonucleosides in equimass amounts were injected into the column in a volume 
of 1 mL corresponding to 10% of the total column volume. Analysis of sugar beet
molasses, a side stream from sucrose production, showed it to contain 1-2.5 mg
mL(-1) of Urd, Cyd, Ado, and Guo. The CLXIC column was able to separate and
enrich these nucleosides also from highly viscous sugar beet molasses. The CLXIC 
column was especially efficient in the purification of guanosine. Other
commercially interesting sugar beet molasses components such as the acidic
compounds betaine, gamma-amino butyric acid, and D- and L-pyroglutamic acids or
neutral sucrose did not interact with the CLXIC material.

DOI: 10.1002/jssc.200401786 
PMID: 15638157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

