
1. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2005 Jan;120(1):1-13.

Expression of human beta-defensin-2 with multiple joined genes in Escherichia
coli.

Xu Z(1), Wang F, Peng L, Fang X, Cen P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioengineering, Department of Chemical and Biochemical
Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, The People's Republic of
China. znxu@zju.edu.cn

Human beta-defensin (HBD)-2 is a small cationic peptide with a broad range of
antimicrobial activity. In this study, multiple copies of the hBD2 gene were
linked in tandem, and a number of different Escherichia coli expression vectors
were evaluated, including pQE-30, pBV220, pET-28a(+), and pGEX-4T-2. No
expression of multiple joined genes was detectable in the pQE-30 expression
system, whereas in pBV220 with one or two joined hBD2 genes and in pET-28a(+)
with one, two, or four copies, target proteins were expressed at a low level.
Only when pGEX-4T-2 was applied as expression plasmid with one or two joined hBD2
genes were target proteins expressed in high level, and the expressed fusion
proteins account for 26 and 16% of the total insoluble proteins, respectively. In
the pGEX-4T-2 and pET-28a(+) expression systems, the effects of multiple joined
genes on the growth of host strains and plasmid stability were examined. Host
cells containing plasmid carrying fewer copies of hBD2 genes were faster in cell 
growth. Plasmid stability decreased with an increase in multiple joined genes,
which was especially noticeable in the pET-28a(+) system. Furthermore, the
presence of glucose in culture medium brought about a positive effect on plasmid 
stability when using pET28-nhBD2 as expression vectors.

DOI: 10.1385/abab:120:1:01 
PMID: 15640553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

