
1. Environ Microbiol. 2005 Feb;7(2):229-40.

Disruption of quorum sensing in seawater abolishes attraction of zoospores of the
green alga Ulva to bacterial biofilms.

Tait K(1), Joint I, Daykin M, Milton DL, Williams P, CÃ¡mara M.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, Plymouth, PL1 3DH, UK.
ktait@pml.ac.uk

Zoospores of the eukaryotic green seaweed Ulva respond to bacterial
N-acylhomoserine lactone (AHL) quorum sensing signal molecules for the selection 
of surface sites for permanent attachment. In this study we have investigated the
production and destruction of AHLs in biofilms of the AHL-producing marine
bacterium, Vibrio anguillarum and their stability in seawater. While wild type V.
anguillarum NB10 was a strong attractor of zoospores, inactivation of AHL
production in this strain by either expressing the recombinant Bacillus lactonase
coding gene aiiA, or by mutating the AHL biosynthetic genes, resulted in the
abolition of zoospore attraction. In seawater, with a pH of 8.2, the degradation 
of AHL molecules was temperature-dependent, indicating that the AHLs produced by 
marine bacterial biofilms have short half-lives. The Ulva zoospores sensed a
range of different AHL molecules and in particular more zoospores settled on
surfaces releasing AHLs with longer (>six carbons) N-linked acyl chains. However,
this finding is likely to be influenced by the differential diffusion rates of
AHLs from the experimental surface matrix. Molecules with longer N-acyl chains,
such as N-(3-oxodecanoyl)- L-homoserine lactone, diffused more slowly than those 
with shorter N-acyl chains such as N-(3-hydroxy-hexanoyl)- L-homoserine lactone. 
Image analysis using GFP-tagged V. anguillarum biofilms revealed that spores
settle directly on bacterial cells and in particular on microcolonies which we
show are sites of concentrated AHL production.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2004.00706.x 
PMID: 15658990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

