
1. J Fish Dis. 2005 Jan;28(1):39-47.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum in rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum),
hatcheries: studies on broodstock, eggs, fry and environment.

Madsen L(1), MÃ¸ller JD, Dalsgaard I.

Author information: 
(1)Fish Disease Laboratory, Danish Institute for Fisheries Research,
Frederiksberg, Denmark. lm@dfu.min.dk

The occurrence of Flavobacterium psychrophilum at four rainbow trout hatcheries
was investigated to provide more knowledge about the reservoirs and transmission 
of this bacterium. Broodstock were sampled at stripping (including both
unfertilized and fertilized eggs), and the offspring were then sampled at the
eyed egg and fry stages. Water and surface samples (e.g. hatchery trays) were
also sampled. Flavobacterium psychrophilum was found in ovarian fluid and milt,
indicating that broodstock may serve as a reservoir and are latent carriers of
the pathogen. Flavobacterium psychrophilum was not found on or inside eggs, but
further egg studies will be necessary to elucidate the possibility of vertical
transmission of the pathogen. Flavobacterium psychrophilum was isolated from
water samples, but only from water that had been in close contact with farmed
rainbow trout or eggs. Flavobacterium psychrophilum isolates were characterized
and compared with well-characterized strains, using degradation of elastin,
serotype and ribotype profiles. Different ribotypes of F. psychrophilum were
found between hatcheries, but a common ribotype A was found at all four
hatcheries. Different ribotypes were found in broodstock without clinical
disease, whereas only a few ribotypes (mostly ribotype A) were found in diseased 
fry. The same ribotype A was found in broodstock, in water samples from hatchery 
trays and in fry, which suggests the possibility of transmission of F.
psychrophilum between broodstock and offspring.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2004.00598.x 
PMID: 15660792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

