
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2005 Jun;67(5):600-18. Epub 2005 Jan 26.

Biodegradation of xenobiotics by anaerobic bacteria.

Zhang C(1), Bennett GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, University of Houston-Clear Lake,
Houston, TX 77058, USA.

Xenobiotic biodegradation under anaerobic conditions such as in groundwater,
sediment, landfill, sludge digesters and bioreactors has gained increasing
attention over the last two decades. This review gives a broad overview of our
current understanding of and recent advances in anaerobic biodegradation of five 
selected groups of xenobiotic compounds (petroleum hydrocarbons and fuel
additives, nitroaromatic compounds and explosives, chlorinated aliphatic and
aromatic compounds, pesticides, and surfactants). Significant advances have been 
made toward the isolation of bacterial cultures, elucidation of biochemical
mechanisms, and laboratory and field scale applications for xenobiotic removal.
For certain highly chlorinated hydrocarbons (e.g., tetrachlorethylene), anaerobic
processes cannot be easily substituted with current aerobic processes. For
petroleum hydrocarbons, although aerobic processes are generally used, anaerobic 
biodegradation is significant under certain circumstances (e.g., O(2)-depleted
aquifers, oil spilled in marshes). For persistent compounds including
polychlorinated biphenyls, dioxins, and DDT, anaerobic processes are slow for
remedial application, but can be a significant long-term avenue for natural
attenuation. In some cases, a sequential anaerobic-aerobic strategy is needed for
total destruction of xenobiotic compounds. Several points for future research are
also presented in this review.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-004-1864-3 
PMID: 15672270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

