
1. Ann Ital Med Int. 2004 Oct-Dec;19(4):249-61.

The role of the infectious agents in the pathogenesis and evolution of
atherosclerosis.

Blasi C(1).

Author information: 
(1)UO Centro Prevenzione e Cura del Diabete ASL RMB, 1(o) Distretto di Roma.
clblasi@tin.it

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory process due to the endothelial reaction
to stress risk factors, only some of which are known. Clinical and experimental
observations have suggested that several infectious agents are involved in this
process. These agents, particularly the germ Chlamydia pneumoniae, and their
relationship to the atheromata are described. Two hypotheses concerning how these
infectious agents act are suggested. Both hypotheses are based on the capacity of
these agents to induce the production, by endothelial cells, of the so-called
heat shock protein (HSP), one of whose characteristics is to provoke an immune
system reaction: 1) induction of a cross immune reaction, due to "molecular
mimicry", between the HSP of infectious origin and the one that is produced by
the endothelium as a consequence of stress due to the risk factors; 2) infection 
of the endothelial cells, followed by the synthesis and exposure on their surface
of the HSP and activation of innate immune surveillance. Numerous experimental
studies have been performed and are still being performed with the aim of
verifying the efficacy of antibiotic treatment in preventing or reducing the rate
of acute cardiovascular events. The results are still inconclusive. Probably, to 
be effective, treatment should be started at an earlier age. Prevention through
vaccination against the involved microorganisms and the consequent induction of
immune tolerance toward the HSP is also being investigated. As the mechanisms of 
action of infectious agents are further clarified, effective therapeutic and
preventive measures could be taken with important clinical spin-offs.


PMID: 15678705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

