
1. J Biochem. 2004 Dec;136(6):769-76.

Soluble expression of recombinant human secondary lymphoid chemokine (SLC) in E. 
coli and research on its in vitro and in vivo bioactivity.

Chun L(1), Yin CC, Song JZ, Liu MX, Piao JH, Lin Q, Wang XB, Huang HL.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 100101, Beijing, China.

Secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC) is a CC chemokine that plays an
important role in leukocytes homing to lymphoid tissues. The ability of SLC to
co-localize both T cells and dendritic cells formed the rationale to evaluate its
utility in cancer immunotherapy. The in vivo antitumor effect of murine SLC
(mSLC) has been well documented, but little is known about that of human SLC
(hSLC). To investigate the antitumor efficiency in vivo of hSLC, the hSLC gene
was artificially synthesized and induced to express as a soluble form in
Escherichia coli. After purification, the purity of the recombinant human SLC
(rhSLC) protein was above 95% by SDS-PAGE analysis. The K(d) of rhSLC binding to 
peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) was 0.2186 +/- 0.02675 microM as assessed by 
FACS, and the maximal chemotactic index of rhSLC was 9.49 at 100 nM as assessed
by in vitro chemotaxis assay. Then genomic sequences of hSLC and mSLC, and of
human CCR7 (hCCR7) and murine CCR7 (mCCR7), the receptor for SLC, were aligned.
It was found that hSLC and mSLC share 70.72% identity and hCCR7 and mCCR7share
86.77% identity. Furthermore, we found that rhSLC could chemoattract murine
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in vitro. On the basis of these facts,
immune competent mice inoculated with S180 sarcoma cells were chosen as an in
vivo model. Intratumoral injections of rhSLC inhibited tumor growth and increased
survival. These findings suggest that, despite its incapability to bind to either
human or murine CXCR3, which is related to angiostasis, rhSLC can induce an
antitumor response in vivo by another route. This report proves that rhSLC has a 
potent tumor-inhibition ability that makes it a promising candidate agent in
cancer immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvh186 
PMID: 15671487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

