
1. J Immunol. 2005 Feb 15;174(4):2174-84.

Highly focused T cell responses in latent human pulmonary Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infection.

Tully G(1), Kortsik C, HÃ¶hn H, Zehbe I, Hitzler WE, Neukirch C, Freitag K, Kayser
K, Maeurer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

The elucidation of the molecular and immunological mechanisms mediating
maintenance of latency in human tuberculosis aids to develop more effective
vaccines and to define biologically meaningful markers for immune protection. We 
analyzed granuloma-associated lymphocytes (GALs) from human lung biopsies of five
patients with latent Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) infection. MTB CD4+ and
CD8+ T cell response was highly focused in the lung, distinct from PBL, as
assessed by TCR-CDR3 spectratyping coupled with a quantitative analysis of TCR VB
frequencies. GALs produced IFN-gamma in response to autologous macrophages
infected with MTB and to defined MTB-derived HLA-A2-presented peptides
Ag85a242-250, Ag85b199-207, early secreted antigenic target 6 (ESAT-6)28-36,
19-kDa Ag88-97, or the HLA-DR-presented ESAT-6(1-20) epitope. Immune recognition 
of naturally processed and presented MTB epitopes or the peptide ESAT-6(1-20)
could be linked to specific TCR VB families, and in two patients to unique T cell
clones that constituted 19 and 27%, respectively, of the CD4+ and 17% of the CD8+
GAL population. In situ examination of MTB-reactive GALs by tetramer in situ
staining and confocal laser-scanning microscopy consolidates the presence of MHC 
class I-restricted CD8+ T cells in MTB granuloma lesions and supports the notion 
that clonally expanded T cells are crucial in immune surveillance against MTB.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.174.4.2174 
PMID: 15699149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

