
1. Int Immunol. 2005 Mar;17(3):315-23. Epub 2005 Feb 7.

LFA-1 co-stimulation inhibits T(h)2 differentiation by down-modulating IL-4
responsiveness.

Jenks SA(1), Eisfelder BJ, Miller J.

Author information: 
(1)David H. Smith Center for Vaccine Biology and Immunology, Aab Institute,
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester, Box 609, 601 
Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Initial T cell activation in the context of different co-stimulatory receptors
can influence subsequent lineage commitment into T(h) effector cell subtypes.
Specifically, CD28 co-stimulation promotes T(h)2 differentiation, whereas
leukocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1) co-stimulation promotes T(h)1
differentiation and inhibits T(h)2 differentiation. In this report, we have
addressed the mechanism of LFA-1-mediated inhibition of T(h)2 responses. We show 
that co-stimulation through LFA-1 does not decrease early IL-4 secretion, but
rather induces a loss in IL-4 responsiveness. T cells primed in the context of
LFA-1 co-stimulation require a 5-fold increase in the concentration of IL-4
required to drive T(h)2 differentiation, which is not mediated by a loss in IL-4R
expression. To determine whether LFA-1 co-stimulation impacts on proximal
signaling from the IL-4R, we first identified a kinetic window where we could
separate IL-4-driven T(h)2 differentiation from initial T cell priming. T cells
were primed for 2 days under different co-stimulation conditions and re-cultured 
in the presence of IL-4. Subsequent T(h)2 differentiation was absolutely
dependent on addition of IL-4. Proximal IL-4R signaling, as evidenced by tyrosine
phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription-6 (STAT6),
was not inhibited by initial co-stimulation through LFA-1, yet these T cells
still required higher amounts of IL-4 and corresponding higher levels of STAT6
activation to up-regulate GATA-3 and induce T(h)2 differentiation. Thus, LFA-1
co-stimulation appears to interfere with GATA-3 expression downstream of STAT6.
These results suggest that LFA-1 co-stimulation functions as a threshold
modulator of T(h)2 differentiation, increasing the effective concentration of
IL-4 required to drive T(h)2 responses.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxh211 
PMID: 15699483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

