
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 6;280(18):18375-85. Epub 2005 Feb 10.

CATERPILLER 16.2 (CLR16.2), a novel NBD/LRR family member that negatively
regulates T cell function.

Conti BJ(1), Davis BK, Zhang J, O'connor W Jr, Williams KL, Ting JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics and Microbiology and Immunology,
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

The newly discovered mammalian CATERPILLER (NOD, NALP, PAN) family of proteins
share similarities with the NBD-LRR superfamily of plant disease resistance (R)
proteins and are predicted to mediate important immune regulatory function. This 
report describes the first cloning and characterization of a novel CATERPILLER
gene, CLR16.2 that is located on human chromosome 16. The protein encoded by this
gene has a typical NBD-LRR configuration. Analysis of CLR16.2 suggests the
highest expression among T lymphocytes. Cellular localization studies of CLR16.2 
revealed that it is a cytoplasmic protein. Querying microarray studies in the
public data base showed that CLR16.2 was significantly (>90%) down-regulated 6 h 
after anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 stimulation of primary T lymphocytes. Its reduction 
upon T cell stimulation is consistent with a potential negative regulatory role. 
Indeed CLR16.2 decreased NF-kappaB, NFAT, and AP-1 induction of reporter gene
constructs in response to T cell activation by anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies 
or PMA and ionomycin. Following T cell stimulation, the presence of CLR16.2
reduced the levels of the endogenous transcripts for the IL-2 and CD25 proteins
that are central in maintaining T cell activation and preventing T cell anergy.
This reduction was accompanied by a delay of IkappaBalpha degradation. We propose
that CLR16.2 serves to attenuate T cell activation via TCR and co-stimulatory
molecules, and its reduction during T cell stimulation allows the ensuing
cellular activation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413169200 
PMID: 15705585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

