
1. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2004 Dec;42(12):932-5.

[Inoculation of bacille calmette guerin combined with intraperitoneal adenosine
injection enhances antibacterial effect of macrophage against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis in mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Pan JH(1), Lou WL, Zhou HQ, Shen HY, Chen LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Anhui Provincial Hospital, Hefei, 230001 China.

OBJECTIVE: The protection rate of inoculation with BCG vaccine is only 50
percent, and most of patients with tuberculosis had a history of BCG vaccine
inoculation. Adenosine (ADO) has an immunomodulating effect; it promotes immune
reaction by increasing number of macrophage and enhancing phagocytosis. The
present study was designed to investigate if combined use of adenosine with BCG
enhances the anti-Mycobacterium tuberculosis effect of macrophage in mice.
METHODS: Fifty BALB/C mice were divided randomly into 3 groups: BCG group (n =
21), BCG plus ADO group (n = 21) and control group (n = 8). The mice in BCG and
BCG plus ADO groups were inoculated with 0.1 ml BCG intradermally and the mice in
BCG plus ADO group were injected intraperitoneally with ADO 30 mg/(kg.d) for 5
days. The mice in BCG group and control group were injected with NS 0.1 ml/d for 
5 days. Six weeks after the last injection, all mice were challenged with
intravenous 1 x 10(6) CFU human Mycobacterium tuberculosis virulent strain. After
challenging, lung and spleen specimens were taken at the 10th, 20th and 30th days
from the mice of BCG and BCG plus ADO groups and at the 30th day from mice in
control group. The pathological examinations of lung and spleen sections were
performed after HE staining and acid-fast staining, and detection of cell
apoptosis was also performed.
RESULTS: Consolidation with neutrophil infiltration was found in most of the lung
tissue taken at the day 30; there were a lot of tuberculous granulomas and
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in the lungs of control group. The alveolar septum in 
BCG gradually became wide and in interstitium lymphocyte infiltration dominated, 
and there were less tuberculous granulomas but there were large number of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in the lungs from 10th to 30th days after challenging.
The widening of alveolar septum and consolidation of lung tissue in BCG plus ADO 
group became milder with monocytes infiltration, and there were few tuberculosis 
granulomas and Mycobacterium tuberculosis in the lungs from 10th to 30th days
after challenging.
CONCLUSION: ADO could increase the number of monocyte-macrophages and promoted
anti-bacterial effects of these cells.


PMID: 15733366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

