
1. Microb Pathog. 2005 Feb-Mar;38(2-3):85-96.

Binding of Porphyromonas gingivalis gingipains to human CD4(+) T cells
preferentially down-regulates surface CD2 and CD4 with little affect on
co-stimulatory molecule expression.

Yun PL(1), Decarlo AA, Chapple CC, Collyer CA, Hunter N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Dental Research, Westmead Millennium Institute and Centre for
Oral Health, P. O. Box 533 Wentworthville, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
plwyun@yahoo.com

The role of Porphyromonas gingivalis cysteine proteinases (gingipains) in the
evasion of host cell-mediated immunity has not been fully determined. In this
study, modulation by gingipains of accessory and co-stimulatory molecule
expression on human CD4(+) T cells was evaluated. Arg-gingipain rather than
Lys-gingipain binds to resting CD4(+) T cells in the presence of serum. The
constitutive expression of CD28 on T cells was slightly up-regulated following
challenge with gingipains, whereas CD45 and CD3 were not affected. Binding of
anti-CD2 and anti-CD4 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) was reduced after challenge of
T cells with gingipains, but restored to 50 and 100%, respectively, of control
levels, after 48h of incubation in medium depleted of gingipains. The induced
expression, by anti-CD3 mAb, of CTLA-4, CD25, and CD40 ligand (CD40L) was
decreased following incubation of T cells with gingipains which also led to
decreased response to anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 mAbs as shown by reduction of
interleukin-2 (IL-2) production. Cumulatively, these results indicate that
activated gingipains attach to T cells and preferentially cleave CD2 and CD4
molecules, with potential to impair T cell responses at periodontal sites.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2005.01.001 
PMID: 15748810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

