
1. Vaccine. 2005 Mar 18;23(17-18):2121-31.

Developing an epitope-driven tuberculosis (TB) vaccine.

De Groot AS(1), McMurry J, Marcon L, Franco J, Rivera D, Kutzler M, Weiner D,
Martin B.

Author information: 
(1)EpiVax, Inc., Providence, RI 02903, USA. AnneD@Epivax.com

Epitope-driven vaccines are created from selected sub-sequences of proteins, or
epitopes, derived by scanning the protein sequences of pathogens for patterns of 
amino acids that permit binding to human MHC molecules. We developed a prototype 
tuberculosis (TB) vaccine that contains epitopes derived by (1) EpiMer mapping of
previously published secreted proteins derived from Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(Mtb), and (2) EpiMatrix mapping of selected Mtb genome open reading frames
(ORFs). Each of the epitopes contains at least three distinct class II MHC
binding motif matches. These Mtb epitope selections were validated by measuring T
cell responses from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) obtained from
healthy, asymptomatic tuberculin skin test-positive donors. Twenty-four validated
Mtb epitopes were selected for inclusion in a DNA plasmid vector. We immunized
HLA-DR B*0101 transgenic mice with this vaccine prototype augmented by
co-administration of rIL-15. Following administration of three immunizations at
14-day intervals in conjunction with rIL-15, epitope-specific T cell responses
were observed to eight of the 24 epitopes contained in the DNA construct, one
week following the last injection. The systematic application of bioinformatics
tools to whole genomes, in combination with in vitro methods for screening and
confirming epitopes, may lead to the development of novel vaccines for infectious
diseases like TB.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2005.01.059 
PMID: 15755582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

