
1. Mol Microbiol. 2005 Mar;55(6):1829-40.

The Mycobacterium tuberculosis iniA gene is essential for activity of an efflux
pump that confers drug tolerance to both isoniazid and ethambutol.

Colangeli R(1), Helb D, Sridharan S, Sun J, Varma-Basil M, Hazb√≥n MH,
Harbacheuski R, Megjugorac NJ, Jacobs WR Jr, Holzenburg A, Sacchettini JC, Alland
D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Disease and the Center for Emerging Pathogens,
Department of Medicine, New Jersey Medical School, University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

Little is known about the intracellular events that occur following the initial
inhibition of Mycobacterium tuberculosis by the first-line antituberculosis drugs
isoniazid (INH) and ethambutol (EMB). Understanding these pathways should provide
significant insights into the adaptive strategies M. tuberculosis undertakes to
survive antibiotics. We have discovered that the M. tuberculosis iniA gene (Rv
0342) participates in the development of tolerance to both INH and EMB. This gene
is strongly induced along with iniB and iniC (Rv 0341 and Rv 0343) by treatment
of Mycobacterium bovis BCG or M. tuberculosis with INH or EMB. BCG strains
overexpressing M. tuberculosis iniA grew and survived longer than control strains
upon exposure to inhibitory concentrations of either INH or EMB. An M.
tuberculosis strain containing an iniA deletion showed increased susceptibility
to INH. Additional studies showed that overexpression of M. tuberculosis iniA in 
BCG conferred resistance to ethidium bromide, and the deletion of iniA in M.
tuberculosis resulted in increased accumulation of intracellular ethidium
bromide. The pump inhibitor reserpine reversed both tolerance to INH and
resistance to ethidium bromide in BCG. These results suggest that iniA functions 
through an MDR-pump like mechanism, although IniA does not appear to directly
transport INH from the cell. Analysis of two-dimensional crystals of the IniA
protein revealed that this predicted transmembrane protein forms multimeric
structures containing a central pore, providing further evidence that iniA is a
pump component. Our studies elucidate a potentially unique adaptive pathway in
mycobacteria. Drugs designed to inhibit the iniA gene product may shorten the
time required to treat tuberculosis and may help prevent the clinical emergence
of drug resistance.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04510.x 
PMID: 15752203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

