
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2005 Aug;19(2):97-114.

p,p'-DDE depresses the immune competence of chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus
tshawytscha) leukocytes.

Misumi I(1), Vella AT, Leong JA, Nakanishi T, Schreck CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.
imisumi@hawaii.edu

p,p'-DDE, the main metabolite of DDT, is still detected in aquatic environments
throughout the world. Here, the effects and mechanisms by which p,p'-DDE exposure
might affect the immune system of chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) was
studied. Isolated salmon splenic and pronephric leukocytes were incubated with
different concentrations of p,p'-DDE, and cell viability, induction of apoptosis,
and mitogenic responses were measured by flow cytometry and Alamar Blue assay.
p,p'-DDE significantly reduced cell viability and proliferation and increased
apoptosis. The effect of p,p'-DDE on pronephric leukocytes was more severe than
on splenic leukocytes, likely because pronephric leukocytes had a higher
proportion of granulocytes, cells that appear more sensitive to p,p'-DDE. The
effect of p,p'-DDE on leukocytes appeared to vary between developmental stages or
seasonal differences. The mitogenic response of leukocytes of chinook salmon
exposed to p,p'-DDE in vivo exhibited a biphasic dose-response relationship. Only
leukocytes isolated from salmon treated with 59 ppm p,p'-DDE had a significantly 
lower percentage of Ig+ blasting cells than controls, although the response was
biphasic. These results support the theory that exposure to chemical contaminants
could lead to an increase in disease susceptibility and mortality of fish due to 
immune suppression.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2004.11.005 
PMID: 15752649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

