
1. Immunol Lett. 2005 Mar 15;97(2):235-43. Epub 2004 Nov 24.

The p95-100 kDa ligand of the T cell-specific adaptor (TSAd) protein
Src-homology-2 (SH2) domain implicated in TSAd nuclear import is p97
Valosin-containing protein (VCP).

Marti F(1), King PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, 6606 Medical Science Building II, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0620, USA.

T cell-specific adapter protein (TSAd) is required for normal T cell antigen
receptor (TCR)-induced transcription of cytokine genes in T cells. How TSAd
controls cytokine transcription is unknown. Previously, we have shown that TSAd
is actively transported to the nucleus of T cells suggesting that this adapter
may in part function within this cellular compartment. Nuclear translocation of
TSAd is dependent upon an intact Src-homology-2 (SH2) domain and a p95-100 kDa
ligand of the SH2 domain has been implicated in nuclear import. Here, using
microchemical techniques, we identify p95-100 as p97 Valosin-containing protein
(VCP) whose homolog in yeast is the cell division control protein, CDC48.
Physical interaction between TSAd and VCP can be demonstrated between endogenous 
proteins in T cells. Interaction is direct and is dependent upon phosphorylation 
of tyrosine residue 805 of VCP that has been previously recognized as a major
target of tyrosine kinase(s) involved in TCR signaling. Significantly, with the
use of CDC48 mutant yeast, we demonstrate that VCP/CDC48 is required for
transport of TSAd into the eukaryotic nucleus. These findings provide important
insights into the mechanism of TSAd nuclear import and the role of TSAd in T cell
signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2004.10.021 
PMID: 15752563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

