
1. Anal Biochem. 2005 Apr 1;339(1):73-82.

Identification and quantitation of species in complex DNA mixtures by real-time
polymerase chain reaction.

López-Andreo M(1), Lugo L, Garrido-Pertierra A, Prieto MI, Puyet A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular IV, Facultad de Veterinaria,
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

Six TaqMan real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) systems using minor groove
binding (MGB) probes have been developed for the detection quantitation of
bovine, porcine, lamb, chicken, turkey, and ostrich DNA in complex samples.
Species-specific amplification was achieved by combining only two fluorogenic
probes and 10 oligonucleotide primers targeting mitochondrial sequences,
decreasing the cost of the assay significantly. The limits of detection ranged
from 0.03 to 0.80 pg of template DNA. Analysis of experimental mixtures
containing two to four different species showed the suitability of the assay for 
detection of more than 1% of pork, chicken, or turkey and of more than 5% of
cattle or lamb. The quantitation accuracy in samples containing 10-100% of beef
or pork DNA was close to 90%. The system is complemented with one additional
TaqMan MGB detector based on consensus sequence segments of the nuclear 18S
ribosomal RNA gene. A method to evaluate the presence of unknown eukaryotic DNA
in a mixture, where data derived from the species-specific detection are compared
with the experimental values obtained from the general 18S detector, is
presented. This method allows the validation of the quantitative measurements,
providing an internal control of the total content of PCR-amplifiable DNA in the 
sample. The system was tested on DNA mixtures containing different shares of up
to four different species and on DNA extracted from processed commercial food
samples.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2004.11.045 
PMID: 15766713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

