
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1992 Apr 17;1120(3):239-47.

Formycins A and B and some analogues: selective inhibitors of bacterial
(Escherichia coli) purine nucleoside phosphorylase.

Bzowska A(1), Kulikowska E, Shugar D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, University of Warsaw, Poland.

Formycin B (FB), a moderate inhibitor (Ki approximately 100 microM) of mammalian 
purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP), and formycin A (FA), which is totally
inactive vs. the mammalian enzyme, are both effective inhibitors of the bacterial
(Escherichia coli) enzyme (Ki approximately 5 microM). Examination of a series of
N-methyl analogues of FA and FB led to the finding that N(6)-methyl-FA, virtually
inactive vs. the mammalian enzyme, is the most potent inhibitor of E. coli purine
nucleoside phosphorylase (Ki approximately 0.3 uM) at neutral pH. Inhibition is
competitive not only with respect to Ino, but also relative to 7-methyl-Guo and
7-methyl-Ado, as substrates. Both oxoformycins A and B are relatively poor
inhibitors. For the most potent inhibitor, N(6)-methyl-FA, it was shown that the 
enzyme preferentially binds the neutral, and not the cationic, form. In
accordance with this the neutral, but not the cationic form, of the structurally 
related N(1)-methyl-Ado was found to be an excellent substrate. Reported data on 
tautomerism of formycins were profited from, and extended, to infer which
tautomeric species and ionic forms are the active inhibitors. A commercially
available (Sigma) bacterial PNP, of unknown origin, was shown to differ from the 
E. coli enzyme by its inability to phosphorylase Ado; this enzyme was also
resistant to FA and FB. These findings have been extended to provide a detailed
comparison of the substrate/inhibitor properties of PNP from various
microorganisms.

DOI: 10.1016/0167-4838(92)90243-7 
PMID: 1576149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

