
1. Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci. 2005 Mar;44(2):49-51.

Use of broad-spectrum antimicrobials in the eradication of unknown aquatic
pathogens in a zebrafish larval rearing system.

Russo R(1), Dillehay D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

A zebrafish larval rearing system experienced a surge in mortality rates soon
after the introduction of new stocks. A comprehensive water analysis of pH,
nitrites, nitrates, ammonia, chlorine, carbonate hardness, general hardness, and 
conductivity identified no anomalies. Observations via light microscopy of
affected fry revealed consistent signs of impaired mobility, blood clotting, and 
eventual heart hemorrhage resulting in the death of 90 to 100% of the fry by the 
age of 2 weeks. Collection of sufficient tissue samples for a histological
investigation proved problematic due to the fry's diminutive size. Because a
causal agent could not be isolated satisfactorily, the use of a broad-spectrum
antibiotic was deemed necessary. After considering many broad-spectrum
antibiotics for treatment, we implemented a two-tiered approach for treatment.
The rearing system was treated with a nitrofurazone derivative, whereas the adult
populations were treated using multi-antibiotic food pellets. The rearing system 
was treated for 3 weeks, and the adult population was treated for 2 weeks. After 
the completion of the antibiotic treatments, the biological filters of all of the
medicated systems were seeded with nitrifying bacterial cultures. Upon the
maturation of the rearing systems' biological filters, mortality rates returned
to pre-outbreak levels. There have been no re-occurrences of the fish mortality
since the completion of treatment. This epidemic provided some valuable lessons, 
lessons that if followed, will ensure faster response to unknown pathogens in the
future.


PMID: 15773777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

