
1. Infect Immun. 2005 Apr;73(4):2184-9.

Effect of B7-2 and CD40 signals from activated antigen-presenting cells on the
ability of zwitterionic polysaccharides to induce T-Cell stimulation.

Stephen TL(1), Niemeyer M, Tzianabos AO, Kroenke M, Kasper DL, Kalka-Moll WM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University of
Cologne, Medical Center, Goldenfelsstr. 19-21, 50935 Cologne, Germany.

Carbohydrates have been thought to stimulate immune responses independently of T 
cells; however, zwitterionic polysaccharides (ZPSs) from the capsules of some
bacteria elicit potent CD4+-T-cell responses in vivo and in vitro. We
demonstrated that HLA-DR on professional antigen-presenting cells (APCs) is
required for ZPS-induced T-cell proliferation in vitro (15). Recently, it was
shown that ZPSs are processed to low-molecular-weight carbohydrates by a nitric
oxide-mediated mechanism in endosomes and locate in the major histocompatibility 
complex class II pathway (5, 15). The effect of the ZPS-mediated expression of
HLA-DR and costimulatory molecules on the APC and T-cell engagement and
subsequent T-cell activation has not been elucidated. Herein, we report that
ZPS-mediated induction of HLA-DR-surface expression and T-cell proliferation are 
maximally enhanced after incubation of APCs for 8 h with ZPS. Treatment of APCs
with bafilomycin A inhibits the up-regulation of ZPS-mediated HLA-DR surface
expression and leads to inhibition of T-cell proliferation. Monoclonal antibodies
(MAbs) to the costimulatory molecules B7-2 and CD40L specifically block
ZPS-mediated T-cell activation, while a MAb to B7-1 does not. Surface expression 
of B7-2 and B7-1 but not of CD40 is maximally enhanced at 8 to 16 h of treatment 
of APCs with ZPS. The results demonstrate that the cellular immune response to
ZPS depends on the translocation of HLA-DR to the cell surface and requires
costimulation via B7-2 and CD40 on activated APCs. The implication is that
activation of ZPS-specific T cells requires an orchestrated arrangement of both
presenting and costimulatory molecules to form an immunological synapse.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.73.4.2184-2189.2005 
PMCID: PMC1087428
PMID: 15784561  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

