
1. Blood. 2005 Jul 15;106(2):485-93. Epub 2005 Mar 29.

Transforming growth factor-{beta}1 modulates responses of CD34+ cord blood cells 
to stromal cell-derived factor-1/CXCL12.

Basu S(1), Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Research Institute No. 2 Bldg, Rm 302, 950 W
Walnut St, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5181, USA. sunbasu@iupui.edu

Disruption of stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1/CXCL12 [CXC chemokine ligand
12]) interaction leads to mobilization of stem/progenitor cells from bone marrow 
to circulation. However, prolonged exposure of CD34+ cells to SDF-1 desensitizes 
them to SDF-1. So how do cells remain responsive to SDF-1 in vivo when they are
continuously exposed to SDF-1? We hypothesized that one or more mechanisms
mediated by cytokines exist that could modulate SDF-1 responsiveness of CD34+
cells and the desensitization process. We considered transforming growth
factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) a possible candidate, since TGF-beta1 has effects on
CD34+ cells and is produced by stromal cells, which provide niches for
maintenance and proliferation of stem/progenitor cells. TGF-beta1 significantly
restored SDF-1-induced chemotaxis and sustained adhesion responses in cord blood 
CD34+ cells preexposed to SDF-1. Effects of TGF-beta1 were dependent on the dose 
and duration of TGF-beta1 pretreatment. Phosphorylation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1 (Erk1)/Erk2 was implicated in TGF-beta1 modulation of
migratory and adhesion responses to SDF-1. Our results indicate that low levels
of TGF-beta1 can modulate SDF-1 responsiveness of CD34+ cells and thus may
facilitate SDF-1-mediated retention and nurturing of stem/progenitor cells in
bone marrow.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2004-10-4145 
PMCID: PMC1895172
PMID: 15797995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

