
1. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2005 Apr;51(4):245-50.

Pyrosequencing as a tool for the identification of common isolates of
Mycobacterium sp.

Tuohy MJ(1), Hall GS, Sholtis M, Procop GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH
44195-5140, USA.

Pyrosequencing technology, sequencing by addition, was evaluated for
categorization of mycobacterial isolates. One hundred and eighty-nine isolates,
including 18 ATCC and Trudeau Mycobacterial Culture Collection (TMC) strains,
were studied. There were 38 Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex, 27 M. kansasii,
27 MAI complex, 21 M. marinum, 14 M. gordonae, 20 M. chelonae-abscessus group, 10
M. fortuitum, 5 M. xenopi, 3 M. celatum, 2 M. terrae complex, 20 M. mucogenicum, 
and 2 M. scrofulaceum. Nucleic acid extracts were prepared from solid media or
MGIT broth. Traditional PCR was performed with one of the primers biotinylated;
the assay targeted a portion of the 16S rRNA gene that contains a hypervariable
region, which has been previously shown to be useful for the identification of
mycobacteria. The PSQ Sample Preparation Kit was used, and the biotinylated PCR
product was processed to a single-stranded DNA template. The sequencing primer
was hybridized to the DNA template in a PSQ96 plate. Incorporation of the
complementary nucleotides resulted in light generation peaks, forming a pyrogram,
which was evaluated by the instrument software. Thirty basepairs were used for
isolate categorization. Manual interpretation of the sequences was performed if
the quality of the 30-bp sequence was in doubt or if more than 4 bp homopolymers 
were recognized. Sequences with more than 5 bp of bad quality were deemed
unacceptable. When blasted against GenBank, 179 of 189 sequences (94.7%) assigned
isolates to the correct molecular genus or group. Ten M. gordonae isolates had
more than 5 bp of bad quality sequence and were not accepted. Pyrosequencing of
this hypervariable region afforded rapid and acceptable characterization of
common, routinely isolated clinical Mycobacterium sp. Algorithms are recommended 
for further differentiation with an additional sequencing primer or additional
biochemicals.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2004.11.012 
PMID: 15808315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

