
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 10;280(23):21720-5. Epub 2005 Apr 6.

PYPAF3, a PYRIN-containing APAF-1-like protein, is a feedback regulator of
caspase-1-dependent interleukin-1beta secretion.

Kinoshita T(1), Wang Y, Hasegawa M, Imamura R, Suda T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Development of Molecular Target Drugs, Cancer Research
Institute, Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takaramachi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0934,
Japan.

PYPAF3 is a member of the PYRIN-containing apoptotic protease-activating
factor-1-like proteins (PYPAFs, also called NALPs). Among the members of this
family, PYPAF1, PYPAF5, PYPAF7, and NALP1 have been shown to induce
caspase-1-dependent interleukin-1beta secretion and NF-kappaB activation in the
presence of the adaptor molecule ASC. On the other hand, we recently discovered
that PYNOD, another member of this family, is a suppressor of these responses.
Here, we show that PYPAF3 is the second member that inhibits caspase-1-dependent 
interleukin-1beta secretion. In contrast, PYPAF2/NALP2 does not inhibit this
response but rather inhibits the NF-kappaB activation that is induced by the
combined expression of PYPAF1 and ASC. Both PYPAF2 and PYPAF3 mRNAs are broadly
expressed in a variety of tissues; however, neither is expressed in skeletal
muscle, and only PYPAF2 mRNA is expressed in heart and brain. They are also
expressed in many cell lines of both hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic
lineages. Stimulation of monocytic THP-1 cells with lipopolysaccharide or
interleukin-1beta induced PYPAF3 mRNA expression. Furthermore, the stable
expression of PYPAF3 in THP-1 cells abrogated the ability of the cells to produce
interleukin-1beta in response to lipopolysaccharide. These results suggest that
PYPAF3 is a feedback regulator of interleukin-1beta secretion. Thus, PYPAF2 and
PYPAF3, together with PYNOD, constitute an anti-inflammatory subgroup of PYPAFs.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M410057200 
PMID: 15817483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

