
1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2005 May;296(11):539-42. Epub 2005 Apr 9.

Detection of human beta defensin-1 and -2 by RT-competitive multiplex PCR.

Kippenberger S(1), Loitsch S, Thaci D, Kaufmann R, Bernd A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venerology, Klinikum der Johann Wolfgang Goethe 
Universit√§t, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.
kippenberger@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Although, the human epithelium is constantly challenged by a broad spectrum of
microorganisms, invasive infections are rather rare. Recent findings suggest the 
expression of antimicrobial peptides by skin cells in order to provide an innate 
defensive barrier. In particular, peptides of the beta-defensin family offer
antimicrobial activity against different pathogens including bacteria and fungi. 
Within this peptide family, hBD-1 is rather constitutively expressed while hBD-2 
and hBD-3 expression depends on environmental conditions. The present paper
introduces RT-competitive multiplex PCR as a precise tool to detect hBD-1 and
hBD-2 expression on the transcriptional level. The method makes use of
co-amplification of synthetic competitors along with referring wildtype targets. 
Competitor- and wildtype-derived products differ in size allowing signal
discrimination using agarose gel electrophoresis. Regulation of gene transcripts 
is evaluated by comparison of competitor and corresponding wildtype signals. It
was found that primary human keratinocytes stimulated with Escherichia coli cells
for 8 h offered an upregulation of hBD-2 to about 2,000 fold, while hBD-1 was
only marginally regulated. RT-competitive multiplex PCR is a simple and accurate 
method that enables new insights into defensin regulation under physiological and
pathophysiological conditions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-005-0553-0 
PMID: 15821924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

