
1. J Exp Med. 2005 Apr 18;201(8):1307-18.

Rapid mobilization of murine and human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells
with AMD3100, a CXCR4 antagonist.

Broxmeyer HE(1), Orschell CM, Clapp DW, Hangoc G, Cooper S, Plett PA, Liles WC,
Li X, Graham-Evans B, Campbell TB, Calandra G, Bridger G, Dale DC, Srour EF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. hbroxmey@iupui.edu

Improving approaches for hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) and hematopoietic
progenitor cell (HPC) mobilization is clinically important because increased
numbers of these cells are needed for enhanced transplantation. Chemokine stromal
cell derived factor-1 (also known as CXCL12) is believed to be involved in
retention of HSCs and HPCs in bone marrow. AMD3100, a selective antagonist of
CXCL12 that binds to its receptor, CXCR4, was evaluated in murine and human
systems for mobilizing capacity, alone and in combination with granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). AMD3100 induced rapid mobilization of mouse
and human HPCs and synergistically augmented G-CSF-induced mobilization of HPCs. 
AMD3100 also mobilized murine long-term repopulating (LTR) cells that engrafted
primary and secondary lethally-irradiated mice, and human CD34(+) cells that can 
repopulate nonobese diabetic-severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice.
AMD3100 synergized with G-CSF to mobilize murine LTR cells and human SCID
repopulating cells (SRCs). Human CD34(+) cells isolated after treatment with
G-CSF plus AMD3100 expressed a phenotype that was characteristic of highly
engrafting mouse HSCs. Synergy of AMD3100 and G-CSF in mobilization was due to
enhanced numbers and perhaps other characteristics of the mobilized cells. These 
results support the hypothesis that the CXCL12-CXCR4 axis is involved in marrow
retention of HSCs and HPCs, and demonstrate the clinical potential of AMD3100 for
HSC mobilization.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20041385 
PMCID: PMC2213145
PMID: 15837815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

