
1. J Immunol. 2005 May 1;174(9):5681-6.

Infection-induced marginal zone B cell production of Borrelia hermsii-specific
antibody is impaired in the absence of CD1d.

Belperron AA(1), Dailey CM, Bockenstedt LK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Ab that arise in the absence of T cell help are a critical host defense against
infection with the spirochetes Borrelia burgdorferi and Borrelia hermsii. We have
previously shown that CD1d-deficient (CD1d(-/-)) mice have impaired resistance to
infection with B. burgdorferi. In mice, CD1d expression is highest on marginal
zone B (MZB) cells, which produce Ab to blood-borne Ag. In this study we examined
MZB cell activation and Ab production in mice infected with B. hermsii, which
achieve high levels of bacteremia. We show by flow cytometry that MZB cells
associate with B. hermsii and up-regulate the activation markers syndecan I and
B7.1 within 16 h of infection. By 24 h, MZB cells secrete B. hermsii-specific
IgM, coinciding with the loss of activation marker expression and the reduction
in spirochete burden. In contrast, MZB cells from CD1d(-/-) mice remain activated
for at least 96 h of infection, but produce only minimal B. hermsii-specific IgM 
in vivo and ex vivo; pathogen burden in the blood also remains elevated.
Wild-type mice depleted of MZB cells using mAb to LFA-1 and alpha(4)beta(1)
integrin have reduced serum levels of B. hermsii-specific IgM and increased
pathogen burden, similar to B. hermsii-infected CD1d(-/-) mice. Passive transfer 
of immune mouse serum, but not naive mouse serum, into infected CD1d(-/-) mice
leads to down-regulation of activation markers and clearance of B. hermsii from
the MZB cells. These results demonstrate that blood-borne spirochetes activate
MZB cells to produce pathogen-specific IgM and reveal a role for CD1d in this
process.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.174.9.5681 
PMID: 15843569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

