
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2005 May 4;53(9):3735-42.

Use of fatty acid profiles to identify food-borne bacterial pathogens and aerobic
endospore-forming bacilli.

Whittaker P(1), Fry FS, Curtis SK, Al-Khaldi SF, Mossoba MM, Yurawecz MP, Dunkel 
VC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Food and Drug Administration,
5100 Paint Branch Parkway, College Park, Maryland 20740-3835, USA.
paul.whittaker@fda.hhs.gov

Capillary gas chromatography (GC) with flame ionization detection was used to
determine the cellular fatty acid profiles of various food-borne microbial
pathogens and to compare the fatty acid profiles of spores and vegetative cells
of the same endospore-forming bacilli. Fifteen bacteria, representing eight
genera (Staphylococcus, Listeria, Bacillus, Yersinia, Salmonella, Shigella,
Escherichia, and Vibrio) and 11 species were used to compare the extracted fatty 
acid methyl esters (FAMEs). Endospore-forming bacilli were processed to obtain
pure spores and whole cell FAMEs for GC analysis. A data set for each bacterial
agent was prepared using fatty acid profiles from five replicates prepared on
different days. The results showed that these fatty acid intensity profiles were 
unique for each of the 11 species and that they could be used as a fingerprint
for the organisms. The cellular fatty acid profiles for Bacillus anthracis and
Bacillus cereus show that there are two branched chain fatty acids, iso 17:1
omega10c and 17:1 anteiso, which are unique in these species. Iso 17:1 omega10c
is present in B. cereus vegetative cells and spores but is not observed in B.
anthracis. The 17:1 anteiso fatty acid is present in B. anthracis cells but not
in B. cereus cells. Fatty acids 16:0 2OH and 17:0 iso 3OH are present in B.
anthracis and B. cereus spores but not in the vegetative cells. In summary,
analysis of FAMEs from bacteria and spores can provide a sensitive procedure for 
the identification of food-borne pathogens.

DOI: 10.1021/jf040458a 
PMID: 15853428  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

