
1. Curr Drug Targets Inflamm Allergy. 2005 Apr;4(2):205-16.

Therapeutic blockade of TCR signal transduction and co-stimulation in autoimmune 
disease.

Howard LM(1), Kohm AP, Castaneda CL, Miller SD.

Author information: 
(1)Departmentof Microbiology-Immunology and the Interdepartmental Immunobiology
Center, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
s-d-miller@northwestern.edu

Autoimmune diseases are initiated and maintained by presentation of self antigen 
through complex interactions between different cells of the immune system. In
most autoimmune disorders, autoantigen-specific responses are induced by the
activation of specific T cells with self peptides displayed on activated antigen 
presenting cells (APCs). These T cells may then activate and drive B cell
responses that either initiate or contribute to chronic disease pathogenesis. In 
order to activate the T cell, two signals are required: T cell receptor (TCR)
engagement by autoantigen presented in the context of self MHC class II and
costimulation (CD28-CD80/CD86 interactions). Feedback must also be provided to
the APC through MHC class II engagement by the TCR and through costimulatory
events controlling T cell differentiation and effector function (CD154-CD40
interactions, among others). With this in mind, numerous strategies have been
developed to block the engagement and activation of self-reactive cells. We
review and discuss recent progress in understanding the efficacy and underlying
molecular mechanisms of three separate immunotherapeutic strategies targeting the
TCR and costimulatory molecules: i) blocking TCR signaling (using non-mitogenic
anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody); ii) blocking CD28 costimulation (anti-B7
monoclonal antibody blockade); and iii) blocking CD40 engagement on APCs
(anti-CD154 monoclonal antibody blockade).

DOI: 10.2174/1568010053586228 
PMID: 15853743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

