
1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 1;280(26):24610-7. Epub 2005 Apr 27.

Solution structure of microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 and
identification of its functional subdomains.

Kouno T(1), Mizuguchi M, Tanida I, Ueno T, Kanematsu T, Mori Y, Shinoda H, Hirata
M, Kominami E, Kawano K.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical
University, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.

Microtubule-associated protein (MAP) light chain 3 (LC3) is a human homologue of 
yeast Apg8/Aut7/Cvt5 (Atg8), which is essential for autophagy. MAP-LC3 is cleaved
by a cysteine protease to produce LC3-I, which is located in cytosolic fraction. 
LC3-I, in turn, is converted to LC3-II through the actions of E1- and E2-like
enzymes. LC3-II is covalently attached to phosphatidylethanolamine on its C
terminus, and it binds tightly to autophagosome membranes. We determined the
solution structure of LC3-I and found that it is divided into N- and C-terminal
subdomains. Additional analysis using a photochemically induced dynamic nuclear
polarization technique also showed that the N-terminal subdomain of LC3-I makes
contact with the surface of the C-terminal subdomain and that LC3-I adopts a
single compact conformation in solution. Moreover, the addition of
dodecylphosphocholine into the LC3-I solution induced chemical shift
perturbations primarily in the C-terminal subdomain, which implies that the two
subdomains have different sensitivities to dodecylphosphocholine micelles. On the
other hand, deletion of the N-terminal subdomain abolished binding of tubulin and
microtubules. Thus, we showed that two subdomains of the LC3-I structure have
distinct functions, suggesting that MAP-LC3 can act as an adaptor protein between
microtubules and autophagosomes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413565200 
PMID: 15857831  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

