
1. Curr Drug Targets Inflamm Allergy. 2005 Apr;4(2):217-29.

TCR peptide vaccination in multiple sclerosis: boosting a deficient natural
regulatory network that may involve TCR-specific CD4+CD25+ Treg cells.

Vandenbark AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Research, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, and Department of
Neurology and Molecular Microbiology, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, OR 97201, USA. avandenbark@comcast.net

Vaccination with self peptides contained within T cell receptor (TCR) chains,
expressed by pathogenic Th1 cells can induce a second set of regulatory T cells
that can reverse paralysis in rodents with experimental encephalomyelitis, and
similarly, may have the potential to regulate myelin-reactive Th1 cells in
patients with multiple sclerosis (MS). In this review, we discuss our recent
discovery that TCR-reactive T cells generally possess classical inhibitory
activity associated with Treg cells. CD4+CD25+ TCR-reactive T cells can inhibit
CD4+CD25- indicator cells stimulated with anti-CD3/anti-CD28 antibody in a
dose-dependent and cell-contact-dependent manner. Additionally, CD4+CD25+ T cells
from blood of healthy control donors have significant responses to a pool of
discriminatory TCR peptides, including BV10S1P, BV19S20, BV13S7, BV12S2A2T,
BV11S1A1T, BV21S3A1T, AV15S1, and BV12S1A1N1. Patients with MS have varying
degrees of deficient responses to TCR peptides, and by association, a defect in
Treg cell function as well. TCR peptide vaccination using a new tripeptide
mixture emulsified in IFA produced strong T cell responses in 100% of MS
recipients, a dramatic improvement over previous vaccines given i.d. in saline
that induced TCR-reactive T cell responses in about 50% of recipients. Responders
to vaccination had a tendency towards reduced MRI lesions, and an early
indication of enhanced Treg activity mediated by TCR-reactive T cells that could 
provide suppression of target as well as bystander T cells. These data provide a 
strong foundation for future TCR vaccination studies that will critically test
the ability of the tripeptide mixture to induce significantly enhanced Treg
activity and possible clinical and MRI benefits in vivo.

DOI: 10.2174/1568010053586327 
PMID: 15853744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

