
1. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2005 Apr;19(2):243-61.

Difficult to diagnose manifestations of vasculitis: does an interdisciplinary
approach help?

Hellmich B(1), Gross WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Poliklinik f체r Rheumatologie,
Universit채tsklinfikum Schleswig-Holstein, Campus L체beck and Rheumaklinik Bad
Bramstedt, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538 L체beck, Germany.
bernhard.hellmich@rheuma.uni-luebeck.de

In the early stages of disease, primary systemic vasculitides often present with 
non-specific symptoms that make early diagnosis a challenge. The variety of
clinical manifestations found in systemic vasculitis is huge, and some
manifestations are frequently not clinically overt at first presentation. A
logical implication of the often non-specific and sometimes subclinical
presentation of vasculitis is that a systematic diagnostic work-up is necessary. 
This requires a multidisciplinary approach involving the expert opinion of
specialists from many disciplines, such as neurology, radiology, respiratory
medicine, pathology and microbiology. There are no generally accepted diagnostic 
criteria for primary systemic vasculitides, and the application of classification
criteria as diagnostic criteria is not feasible and may even be misleading. The
demonstration of vasculitis on biopsy is still the gold standard for the
diagnosis of vasculitis. In cases where biopsies cannot be obtained, surrogate
parameters of vasculitis (e.g. glomerular hematuria or mononeuritis multiplex),
along with serology and imaging, can support a clinical diagnosis of vasculitis. 
This review discusses the approach to the diagnosis of central nervous system and
pulmonary manifestations of primary systemic vasculitis. These two examples of
difficult to diagnose manifestations of vasculitis illustrate the necessity of an
interdisciplinary approach to the diagnostic work-up.

DOI: 10.1016/j.berh.2004.10.004 
PMID: 15857794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

