
1. Mol Microbiol. 2005 May;56(4):971-89.

Biosynthesis of the red antibiotic, prodigiosin, in Serratia: identification of a
novel 2-methyl-3-n-amyl-pyrrole (MAP) assembly pathway, definition of the
terminal condensing enzyme, and implications for undecylprodigiosin biosynthesis 
in Streptomyces.

Williamson NR(1), Simonsen HT, Ahmed RA, Goldet G, Slater H, Woodley L, Leeper
FJ, Salmond GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

The biosynthetic pathway of the red-pigmented antibiotic, prodigiosin, produced
by Serratia sp. is known to involve separate pathways for the production of the
monopyrrole, 2-methyl-3-n-amyl-pyrrole (MAP) and the bipyrrole,
4-methoxy-2,2'-bipyrrole-5-carbaldehyde (MBC) which are then coupled in the final
condensation step. We have previously reported the cloning, sequencing and
heterologous expression of the pig cluster responsible for prodigiosin
biosynthesis in two Serratia sp. In this article we report the creation of
in-frame deletions or insertions in every biosynthetic gene in the cluster from
Serratia sp. ATCC 39006. The biosynthetic intermediates accumulating in each
mutant have been analysed by LC-MS, cross-feeding and genetic complementation
studies. Based on these results we assign specific roles in the biosynthesis of
MBC to the following Pig proteins: PigI, PigG, PigA, PigJ, PigH, PigM, PigF and
PigN. We report a novel pathway for the biosynthesis of MAP, involving PigD, PigE
and PigB. We also report a new chemical synthesis of MAP and one of its
precursors, 3-acetyloctanal. Finally, we identify the condensing enzyme as PigC. 
We reassess the existing literature and discuss the significance of the results
for the biosynthesis of undecylprodigiosin by the Red cluster in Streptomyces
coelicolor A3(2).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04602.x 
PMID: 15853884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

