
1. Sci Total Environ. 2005 Apr 15;342(1-3):223-43.

Modern and historical fluxes of halogenated organic contaminants to a lake in the
Canadian arctic, as determined from annually laminated sediment cores.

Stern GA(1), Braekevelt E, Helm PA, Bidleman TF, Outridge PM, Lockhart WL,
McNeeley R, Rosenberg B, Ikonomou MG, Hamilton P, Tomy GT, Wilkinson P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Freshwater Institute, 501 University
Crescent, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3T 2N6.

Two annually laminated cores collected from Lake DV09 on Devon Island in May 1999
were dated using 210Pb and 137Cs, and analyzed for a variety of halogenated
organic contaminants (HOCs), including polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs),
organochlorine pesticides, short-chain polychlorinated n-alkanes (sPCAs),
polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs), and polybrominated
diphenyl ethers (PBDEs). Dry weight HOC concentrations in Lake DV09 sediments
were generally similar to other remote Arctic lakes. Maximum HOC fluxes often
agreed well with production maxima, although many compound groups exhibited
maxima at or near the sediment surface, much later than peak production. The
lower than expected HOC concentrations in older sediment slices may be due to
anaerobic degradation and possibly to dilution resulting from a temporary
increase in sedimentation rate observed between the mid-1960s and 1970s. Indeed, 
temporal trends were more readily apparent for those compound classes when
anaerobic metabolites were also analyzed, such as for DDT and toxaphene. However,
it is postulated here for the first time that the maximum or increasing HOC
surface fluxes observed for many of the major compound classes in DV09 sediments 
may be influenced by climate variation and the resulting increase in algal
primary productivity which could drive an increasing rate of HOC scavenging from 
the water column. Both the fraction (F(TC)) and enantiomer fraction (EF) of
trans-chlordane (TC) decreased significantly between 1957 and 1997, suggesting
that recent inputs to the lake are from weathered chlordane sources. PCDD/Fs
showed a change in sources from pentachlorophenol (PeCP) in the 1950s and 1960s
to combustion sources into the 1990s. Improvements in combustion technology may
be responsible for the reducing the proportion of TCDF relative to OCDD in the
most recent slice.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2004.12.046 
PMID: 15866277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

