
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2005 May;43(5):2047-52.

Consensus sequence-based scheme for epidemiological typing of clinical and
environmental isolates of Legionella pneumophila.

Gaia V(1), Fry NK, Afshar B, LÃ¼ck PC, Meugnier H, Etienne J, Peduzzi R, Harrison 
TG.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Cantonale di Microbiologia, Bellinzona, Switherland.

A previously described sequence-based epidemiological typing method for clinical 
and environmental isolates of Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1 was extended by 
the investigation of three additional gene targets and modification of one of the
previous targets. Excellent typeability, reproducibility, and epidemiological
concordance were determined for isolates belonging to both serogroup 1 and the
other serogroups investigated. Gene fragments were amplified from genomic DNA,
and PCR amplicons were sequenced by using forward and reverse primers. Consensus 
sequences are entered into an online database, which allows the assignment of
individual allele numbers. The resulting sequence-based type or allelic profile
comprises a string of the individual allele numbers separated by commas, e.g.,
1,4,3,1,1,1, in a predetermined order, i.e., flaA, pilE, asd, mip, mompS, and
proA. The index of discrimination (D) obtained with these six loci was calculated
following analysis of a panel of 79 unrelated clinical isolates. A D value of >
0.94 was obtained, and this value appears to be sufficient for use in the
epidemiological investigation of outbreaks caused by L. pneumophila. The D value 
rose to 0.98 when the results of the analysis were combined with those of
monoclonal antibody subgrouping. Sequence-based typing of L. pneumophila is
epidemiologically concordant and discriminatory, and the data are easily
transportable. This consensus method will assist in the epidemiological
investigation of L. pneumophila infections, especially travel-associated cases,
by which it will allow a rapid comparison of isolates obtained in more than one
country.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.43.5.2047-2052.2005 
PMCID: PMC1153775
PMID: 15872220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

