
1. Proteomics. 2005 Jun;5(9):2453-9.

Art-loving bugs: the resurrection of Spinello Aretino from Pisa's cemetery.

Antonioli P(1), Zapparoli G, Abbruscato P, Sorlini C, Ranalli G, Righetti PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial and Agricultural Biotechnologies, University of
Verona, Verona, Italy.

During 1391-1392, Spinello Aretino painted a cycle of frescoes in Pisa's cemetery
on the theme "Storie dei Santi Martiri Efisio e Potito", highly prized by
contemporaries and by Vasari. Twenty years ago, one of these frescoes,
"Conversione di S. Efisio e Battaglia" (Conversion of S. Efisio and Battle),
because of discolouring and bad damage caused by humidity and atmospheric
pollution, was removed from the walls using the "tear-off" technique, consisting 
in covering the surface with a strong cloth bound to the surface with generous
layers of formaldehyde-treated glue. As luck would have it, this large fresco
(3.50x7.80 m) was abandoned in a storehouse for more than 20 years. When the
curators attempted to remove the cloth, much to their dismay they found that the 
glue resisted any attempt at digestion, even when treated with concoctions of the
most aggressive proteolytic enzymes available on the market. It is likely that
during the long storage the glue became slowly cross-linked by the formaldehyde
to the point of forming an intricate mass of untreatable proteinaceous material. 
Thus, although poor Spinello died presumably as a bona fide Christian, his
painting was condemned to wear the burka, Muslim-fashion, for the rest of its
life. When we recently treated the fresco with a suspension of viable Pseudomonas
stutzeri cells, these bacteria, although agnostic, were able to fully digest the 
hardened glue and restore to life Spinello's glorious painting. We show here how 
proteomics helped us solve the riddle of how these bacteria acted on the
burka-obscured fresco.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200401182 
PMID: 15880826  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

