
1. J Periodontol. 2005 May;76(5):705-12.

The impact of periodontal therapy and the adjunctive effect of antiseptics on
breath odor-related outcome variables: a double-blind randomized study.

Quirynen M(1), Zhao H, Soers C, Dekeyser C, Pauwels M, Coucke W, Steenberghe Dv.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, Oral Pathology and
Maxillo-Facial Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic University of Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium. Marc.Quirynen@med.kuleuven.ac.be

BACKGROUND: Bad breath is often caused by periodontitis and/or tongue coating.
This study followed the impact of initial periodontal therapy on several
halitosis-related outcome variables over a 6-month period. Organoleptic ratings
are often uncomfortable for the patient and have several disadvantages. They are,
for instance, influenced by external parameters (e.g., food intake and cosmetics)
and need to be calibrated among researchers worldwide. A second aim was to
evaluate the reliability of saliva incubation as an in vitro indirect test for
breath recording.
METHODS: In this double-blind, randomized, medium-term, parallel study 45
moderate periodontitis patients without obvious tongue coating were enrolled.
Besides a one-stage, full-mouth disinfection and oral hygiene improvement
(including daily tongue scraping), patients were instructed to rinse daily for 6 
months with one of the following products (randomly allocated): chlorhexidine
(CHX) 0.2% + alcohol, CHX 0.05% + cetyl pyridinium chloride (CPC) 0.05% without
alcohol (a new formulation), or a placebo solution. At baseline and 3 and 6
months, a series of parameters were recorded including: concentration of volatile
sulfide compounds (VSC), tongue coating, and an estimation of the microbial load 
(at anterior and posterior parts of the tongue, saliva, dental plaque). The
intraoral VSC ratings were compared to in vitro VSC recordings and organoleptic
evaluations of the headspace air from 1 and 2 hours incubated saliva (0.5 ml, 37 
degrees C, anaerobic chamber).
RESULTS: Even though the initial VSC values were not high (+/-90 ppb with only 18
patients revealing more than 100 ppb), significant (P <0.05) reductions could be 
achieved in the CHX and CHX + CPC group, and to a lower extent in the placebo
group (P = 0.10). Tongue scraping resulted in a significant reduction (P < or
=0.05) of the tongue coating up to month 6 in the placebo and CHX + CPC group,
but not in the CHX group (confusion due to staining). The CHX and CHX + CPC group
showed, in comparison to baseline, significant (P <0.001) reductions in the
number of anaerobic species in the supragingival plaque, in the saliva, and on
the anterior part of the tongue. For the posterior part of the tongue the
microbial changes remained < or =0.3 log values (P >0.05). For the placebo group,
the microbial changes never reached a level of significance (< or =0.3 log
values). A strong correlation was found between the intraoral VSC ratings and the
1-hour (r = 0.48, P <0.0001; r = 0.54, P = 0.0003 for baseline data only) and
2-hour (r = 0.43, P <0.0001) VSC production of incubated saliva. The latter also 
correlated very strongly (r = 0.71) with the number of anaerobic species in the
saliva. The VSC values and organoleptic ratings of the incubated saliva also
correlated strongly with each other (r = 0.64 for 1-hour and 0.73 for 2-hour
incubation).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study indicate that in patients with moderate
periodontitis, initial periodontal therapy including tongue scraping did not have
a significant effect on the microbial load of the tongue and had only a weak
impact on the VSC level, except when combined with a mouthrinse. Saliva
incubation can be used as an indirect way to score breath odor. It offers
simplicity, objectivity, and is less invasive.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2005.76.5.705 
PMID: 15898930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

