
1. Infect Immun. 2005 Jun;73(6):3521-30.

Immunization of volunteers with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi strain Ty21a
elicits the oligoclonal expansion of CD8+ T cells with predominant Vbeta
repertoires.

Salerno-Gon√ßalves R(1), Wahid R, Sztein MB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vaccine Development, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 685
West Baltimore Street, HSF 480, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
rsalerno@medicine.umaryland.edu

CD8(+) T cells are likely to play an important role in host defense against
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi by several effector mechanisms, including lysis
of infected cells (cytotoxicity) and gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) secretion. In
an effort to better understand these responses, we studied the T-cell receptor
(TCR) repertoire of serovar Typhi-specific CD8(+) T cells in humans. To this end,
we determined the TCR beta chain (Vbeta) usage of CD8(+) T cells from three
volunteers orally immunized with Ty21a typhoid vaccine by flow cytometry using a 
panel of monoclonal antibodies. Although TCR Vbeta usage varied among volunteers,
we identified oligoclonal Vbeta subset expansions in individual volunteers (Vbeta
2, 5.1, 8, 17, and 22 in volunteer 1; Vbeta 1, 2, 5.1, 14, 17, and 22 in
volunteer 2; and Vbeta 3, 8, 14, and 16 in volunteer 3). These subsets were
antigen specific, as shown by cytotoxicity and IFN-gamma secretion assays on
Vbeta sorted cells and on T-cell clones derived from these volunteers. Moreover, 
eight-color flow cytometric analysis showed that these clones exhibited a T
effector memory phenotype (i.e., CCR7(-) CD27(-) CD45RO(+) CD62L(-)) and
coexpressed gut homing molecules (e.g., high levels of integrin alpha4beta7,
intermediate levels of CCR9, and low levels of CD103). In conclusion, our results
show that long-term T-cell responses to serovar Typhi in Ty21a vaccinees are
oligoclonal, involving multiple TCR Vbeta families. Moreover, these serovar
Typhi-specific CD8(+) T cells bearing defined Vbeta specificities are
phenotypically and functionally consistent with T effector memory cells with
preferential gut homing potential.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.73.6.3521-3530.2005 
PMCID: PMC1111837
PMID: 15908381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

