
1. Vaccine. 2005 Jun 10;23(30):3887-95. Epub 2005 Apr 14.

Combined DNA vaccines formulated either in DDA or in saline protect cattle from
Mycobacterium bovis infection.

Cai H(1), Tian X, Hu XD, Li SX, Yu DH, Zhu YX.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Protein Engineering and Plant Genetic Engineering,
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. hcai@pku.edu.cn

We tested the effectiveness of combined DNA vaccines encoding antigens Ag85B,
MPT64 and MPT83 from Mycobacterium tuberculosis on cattle. Our results showed
that calves treated with combined DNA vaccines in the presence of
dimethyldioctyldecyl ammonium bromide (DDA) or saline elicited a strong gamma
interferon (IFN-gamma) response 1 or 2 months after the third vaccination. All
three antigens induced substantial levels of IFN-gamma production 1 month after
the bacterial challenge, when the BCG-driven IFN-gamma levels dropped to less
than one third of their peak values. Animals receiving combined DNA vaccines
produced highest amounts of IgG antibody titer 2 months after the third
vaccination. Steady state low IgG levels were found 2 months after bacterial
challenge. A few small lung and lymph node lesions were detected in 1/5 animals
treated with combined DNA vaccines, whereas 3/5 of BCG-treated and 5/5 of
vector-control calves showed larger and significantly more lesions. About 70- to 
100-fold fewer bacteria were found in the lungs and lymph nodes of combined DNA
vaccine-treated animals compared to those of the control group. Histopathological
analyses showed that vaccinated calves possessed substantially improved
post-infection lung and lymph node pathology relative to the controls. Our data
indicate that combined DNA vaccines may be used in cattle to combat bovine
tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2005.03.025 
PMID: 15917109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

