
1. Stem Cells Dev. 2005 Apr;14(2):105-10.

Identification of a massive reserve of hematopoietic progenitors in mice.

Broxmeyer HE(1), Cooper S, Lasky LA, De Sauvage F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. hbroxmey@iupui.edu

Comment in
    Stem Cells Dev. 2005 Apr;14(2):103-4.

Previous studies have demonstrated that mice null (-/-) for either CD34 or c-mpl 
are viable and have greatly decreased numbers of multipotential (CFU-Mix),
erythroid (BFU-E), and granulocytemacrophage (CFU-GM) progenitor cells in the
bone marrow (BM), spleen (Spl) and peripheral blood (PB), without noticeable
decreases in the nucleated cellularity of these organs. To evaluate the
significance of these two proteins further, mice null for both CD34 and c-mpl
were assessed for hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPC) and nucleated cellularity 
and compared with these cells in CD34-/- and c-mpl-/- mice. The following
progenitors were assessed: CFU-GM, BFU-E, CFU-Mix with an erythroid component,
CFU-Mix with erythroid and megakaryocyte components, nonerythroid CFU with a
megakaryocyte (Meg) component and pure CFU-Meg. Results demonstrated significant 
decreases in progenitors in the BM of dual CD34/c-mpl-/- mice compared to
decreases from CD34-/- or c-mpl-/- mice; progenitor numbers in CD34/c-mpl-/- mice
were decreased by 83-99.3% compared to that in wild-type littermate control mice.
Decreases in progenitors in spleens of c-mpl-/- mice (89-96%) were more drastic
than those of CD34-/- mice (50-78%) whereas those of dual CD34/c-mpl-/- mice were
equal to or lower than that of c-mpl-/- mice (93-98%). Decreases in PB
progenitors were seen in the c-mpl-/- and dual CD34/c-mpl-/- mice (75-90%).
Whereas progenitor cells in BM, Spl and PB were drastically reduced in dual
CD34/c-mpl-/- mice compared to controls, absolute numbers of nucleated cells in
these organs were essentially not reduced. These studies demonstrate that CD34
and c-mpl have non-redundant effects on maintenance of steady-state hematopoiesis
and highlight how few progenitor cells are required in steady-state conditions to
populate and maintain the BM, Spl, and PB with nucleated cells.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.2005.14.105 
PMID: 15910237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

