
1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2005 Jul;61(3):404-12.

Genotoxicity of the Yamuna River water at Okhla (Delhi), India.

Aleem A(1), Malik A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences,
Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh 202 002, India.

Water samples from the Yamuna River at Okhla (Delhi), India, were concentrated
using XAD resins (XAD-4 and XAD-8) and liquid-liquid extraction procedures. Gas
chromatographic analysis of liquid-liquid extracted water samples revealed the
presence of the pesticides DDT, BHC, dieldrin, endosulfan, aldrin, 2,4-D,
dimethoate, methyl parathion, and malathion at concentrations of 14, 25, 2.1,
114, 0.9, 0.6, 0.9, 1.7, and 1.9 ng/L, respectively. The genotoxicity of the
extracted water samples was evaluated with the Ames Salmonella/mammalian
microsome test, DNA repair-defective mutants, and bacteriophage lambda systems.
The results of the Salmonella test demonstrated that the XAD-concentrated water
samples had maximum mutagenicity with the TA98 strain both with and without
metabolic activation. However, the liquid-liquid-extracted water samples were
also found to be mutagenic with one or more of the Ames tester strains, but to a 
lesser extent as compared with XAD extracts. The damage brought about in the DNA 
repair-defective mutants in the presence of XAD-concentrated water samples was
found to be markedly high as compared with that liquid-liquid-extracted water
samples at the dose level of 20 microl/mL culture. All mutants invariably
exhibited significant declines in their colony-forming units as compared with
their isogenic wild-type counterparts. Survival decreased by 86.3 and 75.5% in
the polA- strain after 6 h of treatment with XAD-concentrated and
liquid-liquid-extracted water samples, respectively. A significant decrease was
also observed in the survival of bacteriophage lambda when treated with the test 
samples. Mutagenic responses of the liquid-liquid-extracted water samples may not
necessarily reflect the mutagenicity of existing pesticides in the test water,
because some other organic pollutants might accompany the pesticides in the
extract.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2004.09.001 
PMID: 15922807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

