
1. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2005 May;28(5):301-4.

[Study of the expression profile of immunogenesis associated genes in
tuberculosis by microarray].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao YL(1), Duanmu HJ, Li L, Song CX, Zhao B.

Author information: 
(1)National Tuberculosis Reference Laboratory, Beijing Tuberculosis & Thoracic
Tumor Research Institute, Beijing 101149, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the difference of gene expression profile in tuberculosis
patients.
METHODS: mRNA levels of pleural fluid and peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) in tuberculous pleurisy and lung cancer patients were compared by cDNA
microarray. Paired mRNAs from fluid specimens of tuberculosis and lung cancer
cases were labeled with different fluorochromes during cDNA probe synthesis in a 
reverse-transcription reaction. The signal intensity of each spot was measured by
laser scanner and gene expression was quantified as the tubercle-to-normal
fluorescence ratio (T:N ratio). The gene was defined as over expression when the 
T:N ratio was greater than 2.0 and under expression when the ratio was less than 
0.5.
RESULTS: Among 626 immunogenesis associated genes there were 53 differences, of
which 31 (tnf-alpha, ig-lambda, il-17, il-17r, hla-dp, lcp1, tcralpha, tcrbeta,
hsp75, cxcr4, fyb, hla-g, hla-a, il18bp, il-2r, lt-beta, il-8, ip-10, mcp-1,
il-12, il-12r, il-10, canx, irf2, ifn-gamma, tlr, il-1, il-7, tlr, lsp-1,
il-14)were higher and 22 (il-4, il-18, il-15, ifg-1, scya14, ablim, peci, ppid,
hsf 2, actg2, maoa, ttid, gatm, tgfb3, insr, thbd, trap1, tcrgamma, tcrdelta,
il-13r, il-11, igf1, a2m)were lower in tuberculous pleurisy than those in the
control.
CONCLUSIONS: The immunogenesis of tuberculosis involves multi-genetic expression 
changes, such as tnf-alpha, il-17, il-12, tcralpha, tcrbeta, hsp75, cxcr4, il-4, 
il-18, il-15 etc., the expression profile of which changed dramatically. The
results provide new insight for understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms of
tuberculosis and exploring new therapeutic strategies.


PMID: 15949308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

