
1. J Immunol. 2005 Jun 15;174(12):7807-14.

Differential Src family kinase activity requirements for CD3 zeta
phosphorylation/ZAP70 recruitment and CD3 epsilon phosphorylation.

Lysechko TL(1), Ostergaard HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

The current model of T cell activation is that TCR engagement stimulates Src
family tyrosine kinases (SFK) to phosphorylate CD3zeta. CD3zeta phosphorylation
allows for the recruitment of the tyrosine kinase ZAP70, which is phosphorylated 
and activated by SFK, leading to the phosphorylation of downstream targets. We
stimulated mouse CTLs with plate-bound anti-CD3 and, after cell lysis, recovered 
proteins that associated with the CD3 complex. The protein complexes were not
preformed, and a number of tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins were inducibly and
specifically associated with the TCR/CD3 complex. These results suggest that
complex formation only occurs at the site of TCR engagement. The recruitment and 
tyrosine phosphorylation of most proteins were abolished when T cells were
stimulated in the presence of the SFK inhibitor PP2. Surprisingly, CD3zeta, but
not CD3epsilon, was inducibly tyrosine phosphorylated in the presence of PP2.
Furthermore, ZAP70 was recruited, but not phosphorylated, after TCR stimulation
in the presence of PP2, thus confirming the phosphorylation status of CD3zeta.
These data suggest that there is a differential requirement for SFK activity in
phosphorylation of CD3zeta vs CD3epsilon. Consistent with this possibility, ZAP70
recruitment was also detected with anti-CD3-stimulated, Lck-deficient human
Jurkat T cells. We conclude that TCR/CD3-induced CD3zeta phosphorylation and
ZAP70 recruitment do not absolutely require Lck or other PP2-inhibitable SFK
activity, but that SFK activity is absolutely required for CD3epsilon and ZAP70
phosphorylation. These data reveal the potential for regulation of signaling
through the TCR complex by the differential recruitment or activation of SFK.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.174.12.7807 
PMID: 15944285  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

