
1. Mol Microbiol. 2005 Jul;57(1):41-52.

Characterization of Chlamydia MurC-Ddl, a fusion protein exhibiting
D-alanyl-D-alanine ligase activity involved in peptidoglycan synthesis and
D-cycloserine sensitivity.

McCoy AJ(1), Maurelli AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, F. Edward HÃ©bert School of
Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge
Road Bethesda, MD 20814-4799, USA.

Recent characterization of chlamydial genes encoding functional peptidoglycan
(PG)-synthesis proteins suggests that the Chlamydiaceae possess the ability to
synthesize PG yet biochemical evidence for the synthesis of PG has yet to be
demonstrated. The presence of D-amino acids in PG is a hallmark of bacteria.
Chlamydiaceae do not appear to encode amino acid racemases however, a
D-alanyl-D-alanine (D-Ala-D-Ala) ligase homologue (Ddl) is encoded in the genome.
Thus, we undertook a genetics-based approach to demonstrate and characterize the 
D-Ala-D-Ala ligase activity of chlamydial Ddl, a protein encoded as a fusion with
MurC. The full-length murC-ddl fusion gene from Chlamydia trachomatis serovar L2 
was cloned and placed under the control of the arabinose-inducible ara promoter
and transformed into a D-Ala-D-Ala ligase auxotroph of Escherichia coli
possessing deletions of both the ddlA and ddlB genes. Viability of the E.
coliDeltaddlADeltaddlB mutant in the absence of exogenous D-Ala-D-Ala dipeptide
became dependent on the expression of the chlamydial murC-ddl thus demonstrating 
functional ligase activity. Domain mapping of the full-length fusion protein and 
site-directed mutagenesis of the MurC domain revealed that the structure of the
full fusion protein but not MurC enzymatic activity was required for ligase
activity in vivo. Recombinant MurC-Ddl exhibited substrate specificity for D-Ala.
Chlamydia growth is inhibited by D-cycloserine (DCS) and in vitro analysis
provided evidence for the chlamydial MurC-Ddl as the target for DCS sensitivity. 
In vivo sensitivity to DCS could be reversed by addition of exogenous D-Ala and
D-Ala-D-Ala. Together, these findings further support our hypothesis that PG is
synthesized by members of the Chlamydiaceae family and suggest that D-amino
acids, specifically D-Ala, are present in chlamydial PG.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04661.x 
PMID: 15948948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

