
1. Environ Microbiol. 2005 Jul;7(7):947-60.

Investigation of the methanogen population structure and activity in a brackish
lake sediment.

Banning N(1), Brock F, Fry JC, Parkes RJ, Hornibrook ER, Weightman AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Main Building, Park Place, 
PO Box 915, Cardiff CF10 3TL, Wales, UK.

The methanogen community in sediment from the edge of a small brackish lake
connected to the Beaulieu Estuary (Hampshire, UK) was investigated by analysis of
16S rRNA gene diversity using new methanogen-specific primers plus
Archaea-specific primers. 16S rRNA gene primers previously used for polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) detection of methanogenic Archaea from a variety of
environments were evaluated by in silico testing. The primers displayed variable 
coverage of the four main orders of methanogens, highlighting the importance of
this type of primer evaluation. Three PCR primer sets were designed using novel
reverse primers to facilitate specific amplification of the orders
Methanomicrobiales/Methanosarcinales, Methanobacteriales and Methanococcales.
Diversity of the methanogen functional gene, methyl coenzyme M reductase (mcrA), 
was also studied. All gene libraries constructed from this sediment indicated
that Methanomicrobiales and Methanosarcinales were the only methanogens detected.
There was good agreement between the relative sequence abundances in the
methanogen-specific 16S rRNA gene library and terminal restriction fragment
length polymorphism (T-RFLP) profiling, suggesting that the population was
dominated by putative H2 CO2 utilizing Methanomicrobiales, although
acetate-utilizing methanogens were also present. The methanogen population
analyses were in agreement with methanogenic activity measurements, which
indicated that bicarbonate methanogenesis was higher than acetate methanogenesis 
at all depths measured and overall there was a significant difference (P = 0.001)
between the rates of the two pathways. This study demonstrates the utility of new
16S rRNA gene PCR primers targeting specific methanogenic orders, and the
combined results suggest that the CO2 reduction pathway dominates methanogenesis 
in the brackish sediment investigated.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2004.00766.x 
PMID: 15946291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

