
1. Vet Microbiol. 2005 Aug 10;109(1-2):65-73.

Characterization and immuno-detection of AIDA-I adhesin isolated from porcine
Escherichia coli.

Fang Y(1), Ngeleka M, Middleton DM, Simko E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Western Collage of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, 52 Campus Dr., Saskatoon, Sask., Canada S7N 5B4.

A relatively high percentage of porcine Escherichia coli isolates from cases
associated with neonatal and post-weaning diarrhea are positive for the gene
encoding adhesin involved in diffuse adhesion I (AIDA-I). This gene and its
corresponding protein were first identified and characterized in E. coli strain
2787 isolated from human infantile diarrhea. Little is known about the properties
of the AIDA-I protein and its immuno-detection on surface of AIDA-I positive
porcine E. coli isolates. In this study, we demonstrated that the AIDA-I adhesin 
isolated from porcine AIDA-I positive E. coli is an acidic protein consisting of 
five isoforms. It has a similar molecular weight (100 kDa) and relatively high
amino acid homology (78-87%) with the AIDA-I adhesin expressed by human AIDA-I
positive E. coli strain 2787. Based on limited comparison, it appears that there 
is a very high homology among AIDA-I proteins expressed by porcine AIDA-I
positive E. coli isolates. Sensitivity of detection of surface AIDA-I adhesin of 
PCR-positive AIDA-I E. coli by immuno-dot-blot and coagglutination tests was 76
and 71%, respectively, whereas specificity was 89 and 84%, respectively. These
tests are unlikely to be used for diagnostic detection of AIDA-I positive E. coli
due to the relatively low sensitivity; however, they may be potentially useful
for identification of false positive reactions generated by other diagnostic
tests.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2005.04.018 
PMID: 15950405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

