
1. Int Immunol. 2005 Jul;17(7):899-908. Epub 2005 Jun 20.

BCR targeting of biotin-{alpha}-galactosylceramide leads to enhanced presentation
on CD1d and requires transport of BCR to CD1d-containing endocytic compartments.

Lang GA(1), Illarionov PA, Glatman-Freedman A, Besra GS, Lang ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 632W Borwell Building, Dartmouth
Medical School, One Medical Center Drive, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

CD1d is a non-polymorphic MHC class I-related protein that binds and presents
glycolipid antigens to T cell antigen receptors expressed by NK-like T (NKT)
cells. CD1d-dependent immune responses play critical roles in infectious disease,
autoimmunity, allergy and cancer. We tested the hypothesis that B cell antigen
receptor (BCR) targeting of a biotin-modified version of the CD1d-binding antigen
alpha-galactosylceramide (biotin-alpha-GalCer) results in enhanced murine
CD1d-mediated presentation as compared with presentation of non-targeted
biotin-alpha-GalCer. Presentation of BCR-targeted antigen to NKT cells was
enhanced 100- to 1000-fold compared with non-targeted antigen. CD1d presentation 
of BCR-targeted antigen was observed after 4 h treatment, consistent with a
requirement for endosomal trafficking. Furthermore, unlike non-targeted antigen, 
BCR-targeted antigen was not loaded directly onto cell-surface CD1d. Blocking BCR
signaling with the Syk tyrosine kinase inhibitor piceatannol inhibited
presentation of BCR-targeted antigen but not non-targeted antigen. Piceatannol
blocked transport of the BCR to CD1d-containing endosomes, showing that
intersection of BCR-targeted antigen with endosomes is required for enhanced
mCD1d antigen presentation. Our data suggest that the BCR facilitates capture of 
low quantities of mCD1d antigens to enhance CD1d-dependent immune responses.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxh269 
PMID: 15967785  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

