
1. Mol Microbiol. 2005 Jul;57(2):452-67.

Direct binding of the quorum sensing regulator CepR of Burkholderia cenocepacia
to two target promoters in vitro.

Weingart CL(1), White CE, Liu S, Chai Y, Cho H, Tsai CS, Wei Y, Delay NR,
Gronquist MR, Eberhard A, Winans SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Denison University, Granville, OH 43023, USA.
weingartc@denison.edu

Burkholderia cenocepacia is an opportunistic human pathogen that can aggressively
colonize the cystic fibrosis lung. This organism has a LuxR/LuxI-type quorum
sensing system that enables cell-cell communication via exchange of acyl
homoserine lactones (AHLs). The CepR and CepI proteins constitute a global
regulatory system, controlling expression of at least 40 genes, including those
controlling swarming motility and biofilm formation. In this study, we isolated
seven lacZ fusions in a clinical isolate of B. cenocepacia that are inducible by 
octanoyl-HSL. Induction of all of these genes requires CepR. The cepI promoter
was tested for induction by a set of 33 synthetic autoinducers and analogues, and
was most strongly induced by long-chain AHLs lacking 3-oxo substitutions.
Expression of this promoter was inhibited by high concentrations of three
different autoinducers, each having six-carbon acyl chains. When CepR protein was
overproduced in Escherichia coli, it accumulated in a soluble form in the
presence of octanoyl-HSL, but accumulated only as insoluble inclusion bodies in
its absence. Purified CepR-OHL complexes bound to specific DNA sequences at the
cepI and aidA promoters with high specificity. These binding sites included a
16-nucleotide imperfect dyad symmetry. Both CepR binding sites are centred
approximately 44 nucleotides upstream of the respective transcription start
sites.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04656.x 
PMID: 15978077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

