
1. J Immunol. 2005 Jul 1;175(1):404-12.

Role of IL-17A, IL-17F, and the IL-17 receptor in regulating growth-related
oncogene-alpha and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in bronchial epithelium:
implications for airway inflammation in cystic fibrosis.

McAllister F(1), Henry A, Kreindler JL, Dubin PJ, Ulrich L, Steele C, Finder JD, 
Pilewski JM, Carreno BM, Goldman SJ, Pirhonen J, Kolls JK.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Immunology and Host Defense Laboratory, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

IL-17R signaling is critical for pulmonary neutrophil recruitment and host
defense against Gram-negative bacteria through the coordinated release of G-CSF
and CXC chemokine elaboration. In this study, we show that IL-17R is localized to
basal airway cells in human lung tissue, and functional IL-17R signaling occurs
on the basolateral surface of human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells. IL-17A and 
IL-17F were potent inducers of growth-related oncogene-alpha and G-CSF in HBE
cells, and significant synergism was observed with TNF-alpha largely due to
signaling via TNFRI. The activities of both IL-17A and IL-17F were blocked by a
specific anti-IL-17R Ab, but only IL-17A was blocked with a soluble IL-17R,
suggesting that cell membrane IL-17R is required for signaling by both IL-17A and
IL-17F. Because IL-17A and IL-17F both regulate lung neutrophil recruitment, we
measured these molecules as well as the proximal regulator IL-23p19 in the sputum
of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) undergoing pulmonary exacerbation. We found
significantly elevated levels of these molecules in the sputum of patients with
CF who were colonized with Pseudomonas aeruginosa at the time of pulmonary
exacerbation, and the levels declined with therapy directed against P.
aeruginosa. IL-23 and the downstream cytokines IL-17A and IL-17F are critical
molecules for proinflammatory gene expression in HBE cells and are likely
involved in the proinflammatory cytokine network involved with CF pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.1.404 
PMCID: PMC2849297
PMID: 15972674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

