
1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2005 Jul;46(7):2479-86.

Fas ligand but not complement is critical for control of experimental
Staphylococcus aureus Endophthalmitis.

Engelbert M(1), Gilmore MS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology, and Ophthalmology, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.

PURPOSE: To determine the role of complement and Fas Ligand (FasL) in the host
defense against Staphylococcus aureus endophthalmitis.
METHODS: C3-/-, FasL defective gld, and C57/BL6 (wild-type [WT]) mice were
infected intravitreally with 500 and 5000 CFU S. aureus, and the course of
infection was followed by determining the intraocular bacteria counts, retinal
function by ERG, and morphologic damage and inflammation by histopathology and
flow cytometry.
RESULTS: In WT eyes injected with 500 CFU, S. aureus grew to 1 x 10(7) CFU/mL by 
24 hours, but was cleared by 96 hours. In the WT eyes injected with 5000 CFU, S. 
aureus grew to 2 x 10(9) CFU/mL by 72 hours, resulting in corneal perforation.
C3-/- eyes injected with 500 CFU reached transiently higher levels than their WT 
counterparts (P < 0.001), but eventually followed a similar course. Bacterial
counts in gld eyes infected with 500 CFU were similar to those in WT eyes
infected with 5000 CFU. In WT and C3-/- eyes injected with 500 CFU, retinal
function decreased only transiently and recovered to 66% in 72 hours. In WT eyes 
injected with 5000 CFU and gld eyes infected with 500 CFU, retinal function was
completely lost by 24 hours. By 24 hours, WT and C3-/- eyes injected with 500 CFU
were infiltrated with a similar number of granulocytes, but recruitment was
significantly impaired in gld eyes (P < 0.005). Cell counts in WT and C3-/- eyes 
decreased thereafter without overt retinal disease. In eyes injected with 5000
CFU and gld eyes infected with 500 CFU, inflammatory cells completely filled the 
intraocular space by 48 hours. Retinal and uveal tissue was destroyed by that
time.
CONCLUSIONS: The tipping point for a good versus a bad outcome in this murine
model of endophthalmitis lies between 500 and 5000 CFU S. aureus. This point is
identical in animals deficient in complement activation, suggesting that
complement does not play a significant role in the ocular defense against
intraocular bacteria. In contrast, FasL was found to be critical for clearance,
since animals deficient in FasL signaling were unable to control infection with
500 CFU.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.04-1139 
PMID: 15980239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

