
1. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2005 Jul 1;45(1):37-44. Epub 2005 Feb 10.

Transcriptional regulation of beta-defensin-2 by lipopolysaccharide in cultured
human cervical carcinoma (HeLa) cells.

Mineshiba J(1), Myokai F, Mineshiba F, Matsuura K, Nishimura F, Takashiba S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology - Periodontal Science, Okayama University
Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 700-8525,
Japan.

Human beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2) is an antimicrobial peptide with a broad spectrum
of antimicrobial activity against bacteria, yeast and fungi. Here, we analyzed
the transcriptional regulation of hBD-2 in cultured human cervical carcinoma
(HeLa) cells with or without lipopolysaccharide (LPS). DNA from position -329 to 
-39 in the hBD-2 promoter region contained the consensus binding sites for
transcription factors, one site for nuclear factor for IL-6 expression (NF-IL6)
and two sites for nuclear factor-(kappa)B (NF-(kappa)B). Reporter gene assays for
promoter activity revealed that the region had the highest level of
responsiveness to LPS. Furthermore, mutations in both of the NF-(kappa)B binding 
sites caused a significant reduction of the responsiveness to LPS, whereas
mutation in the NF-IL6 binding site resulted in an elevation of the basal
promoter activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated that LPS
induced the binding of HeLa nuclear factors to 60-bp probe containing the two
NF-(kappa)B binding sites, suggesting that the sites were essential for the
binding. Our results suggest that the two NF-(kappa)B binding sites contribute to
LPS-mediated hBD-2 transcription while the NF-IL6 binding site represses
LPS-independent hBD-2 transcription in the HeLa cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.femsim.2005.01.008 
PMID: 15985221  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

