
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2005 Aug;141(2):279-87.

Differential expression of chemokine receptors on human IgA+ and IgG+ B cells.

Johansson C(1), Ahlstedt I, Furubacka S, Johnsson E, Agace WW, Quiding-Järbrink
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology and GUVAX, Göteborg
University Vaccine Research Centre, SE-405 30 Göteborg, Sweden.

Organ-specific lymphocyte homing is dependent on the expression of
tissue-specific homing receptors and selected chemokine receptors. During the
effector phase of an immune response, IgA and IgG antibody-secreting cells (ASC) 
are differently distributed in the body. Still, B cell expression of L-selectin
and the mucosal homing receptor integrin alpha4beta7 is not related to the
isotype produced, but only to the site of antigen encounter. In this study, we
examined if differences in chemokine responsiveness between IgA+ and IgG+ B cells
could explain their different tissue localization. Circulating CD19+ B cells were
isolated and their expression of IgA, IgG, and selected chemokine receptors was
determined by flow cytometry. Few Ig+ cells expressed CCR2, CCR3, or CCR9, and
there was no difference in the expression of these receptors between IgA+ and
IgG+ cells. In contrast, CCR4, CCR5, and CXCR3 was expressed on significantly
more IgG+ than IgA+ cells. The function of chemokine receptors on memory B cells 
and ASC was then tested in the transwell system. IgG+ memory cells migrated to a 
higher extent than IgA+ cells towards the CXCR3 ligand CXCL11/I-TAC, while there 
was only a small migration towards the CCR4 ligand CCL17/TARC and the CCR9 ligand
CCL25/TECK. ASC migrated poorly to all chemokines tested. In conclusion, this
study shows that IgG+ and IgA+ memory B cells have a differential expression of
the Th1 associated chemokine receptor CXCR3, as well as of CCR4 and CCR5. In
contrast, none of the studied chemokine receptors was preferentially expressed by
IgA+ cells.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2005.02843.x 
PMCID: PMC1809445
PMID: 15996192  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

