
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2005 Aug;141(2):261-9.

Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans Y4 capsular polysaccharide induces IL-1beta 
mRNA expression through the JNK pathway in differentiated THP-1 cells.

Iwata T(1), Mitani A, Ishihara Y, Tanaka S, Yamamoto G, Kikuchi T, Naganawa T,
Matsumura Y, Suga T, Koide M, Sobue T, Suzuki T, Noguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, Aichi-Gakuin University,
Nagoya 464-8651, Japan.

Capsular polysaccharide from Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans Y4 (Y4 CP)
induces bone resorption in a mouse organ culture system and osteoclast formation 
in mouse bone marrow cultures, as reported in previous studies. We also found
that Y4 CP inhibits the release of interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-8 from human
gingival fibroblast (HGF). Thus Y4 CP induces various responses in localized
tissue and leads to the secretion of several cytokines. However, the effects of
Y4 CP on human monocytes/macrophages are still unclear. In this study, THP-1
cells, which are a human monocytic cell line, were stimulated with Y4 CP, and we 
measured gene expression in inflammatory cytokine and signal transduction
pathways. IL-1beta and tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha mRNA were induced from 
Y4 CP-treated THP-1 cells. IL-1beta mRNA expression was increased according to
the dose of Y4 CP, and in a time-dependent manner. IL-1beta mRNA expression
induced by Y4 CP (100 microg/ml) was approximately 7- to 10-fold greater than
that in the control by real-time PCR analysis. Furthermore, neither PD98059, a
specific inhibitor of extracellular signal-regulated kinase nor SB203580, a
specific inhibitor of p38 kinase prevented the IL-1beta expression induced by Y4 
CP. However, JNK Inhibitor II, a specific inhibitor of c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK) prevented the IL-1beta mRNA expression induced by Y4 CP in a
concentration-dependent manner. These results indicate that Y4 CP-mediated JNK
pathways play an important role in the regulation of IL-1beta mRNA. Therefore, Y4
CP-transduced signals for IL-1beta induction in the antibacterial action of
macrophages may provide a therapeutic strategy for periodontitis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2005.02836.x 
PMCID: PMC1809438
PMID: 15996190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

