
1. Biochemistry. 2005 Jul 19;44(28):9804-16.

Structure-activity relation of human beta-defensin 3: influence of disulfide
bonds and cysteine substitution on antimicrobial activity and cytotoxicity.

Kl√ºver E(1), Schulz-Maronde S, Scheid S, Meyer B, Forssmann WG, Adermann K.

Author information: 
(1)IPF PharmaCeuticals GmbH, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 31, D-30625 Hannover, Germany. 
enno.kluever@ipf-pharmaceuticals.de

Human beta-defensins form a group of cysteine-rich antimicrobial peptides which
have been found in epithelial tissue and, more recently, in the male genital
tract. They play a role in the defense against microbial pathogens in innate
immunity and display additional chemotactic functions in the adaptive immune
system. An important characteristic of antimicrobial peptides is that they also
exhibit toxic potential on eukaryotic cells. Very little is known about the
structure dependence of antimicrobial and cytotoxic effects. We investigated
human beta-defensin 3 (hBD-3), a potent broad-spectrum antimicrobial effector
peptide, regarding the influence of structural parameters on the antimicrobial
and cytotoxic activity. We have established a structure-activity relation of the 
hBD-3 using synthetic derivatives differing in length, charge, disulfide
connectivity, and overall hydrophobicity. The antimicrobial activity of the
peptides was compared to the cyctotoxic effects on monocytic THP-1 cells and the 
hemolytic activity on human erythrocytes. We found that it is not important for
antimicrobial and cytotoxic activity whether and how cysteine residues are
arranged to form disulfide bonds. Substitution of half-cystinyl residues by
tryptophan resulted in increased activities, while other substitutions did not
change activity. Correlation of activities with the structural changes
demonstrates that the activity on eukaryotic cells appears to depend strongly on 
the overall hydrophobicity. In contrast, the antimicrobial potency of hBD-3
peptides is determined by the distribution of positively charged amino acid
residues and hydrophobic side chains. The results facilitate the understanding of
beta-defensin interaction with different cell types and guide the design of
antimicrobially active peptides.

DOI: 10.1021/bi050272k 
PMID: 16008365  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

