
1. J Immunol. 2005 Jul 15;175(2):1137-44.

Invariant V alpha 14+ NKT cells participate in the early response to enteric
Listeria monocytogenes infection.

Ranson T(1), Bregenholt S, Lehuen A, Gaillot O, Leite-de-Moraes MC, Herbelin A,
Berche P, Di Santo JP.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Cytokines et Développement Lymphoïde, Institut National de la Santé 
et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 668, Institut Pasteur, 25 Rue du Docteur Roux, 
Cedex 15 Paris, France.

Invariant Valpha14(+) NKT cells are a specialized CD1-reactive T cell subset
implicated in innate and adaptive immunity. We assessed whether Valpha14(+) NKT
cells participated in the immune response against enteric Listeria monocytogenes 
infection in vivo. Using CD1d tetramers loaded with the synthetic lipid
alpha-galactosylceramide (CD1d/alphaGC), we found that splenic and hepatic
Valpha14(+) NKT cells in C57BL/6 mice were early producers of IFN-gamma (but not 
IL-4) after L. monocytogenes infection. Adoptive transfer of Valpha14(+) NKT
cells derived from TCRalpha degrees Valpha14-Jalpha18 transgenic (TCRalpha
degrees Valpha14Tg) mice into alymphoid Rag(null) gamma(c)(null) mice
demonstrated that Valpha14(+) NKT cells were capable of providing early
protection against enteric L. monocytogenes infection with systemic production of
IFN-gamma and reduction of the bacterial burden in the liver and spleen.
Rechallenge experiments demonstrated that previously immunized wild-type and
Jalpha18null mice, but not TCRalpha(null) or TCRalpha(null) Valpha14Tg mice, were
able to mount adaptive responses to L. monocytogenes. These data demonstrate that
Valpha14(+) NKT cells are able to participate in the early response against
enteric L. monocytogenes through amplification of IFN-gamma production, but are
not essential for, nor capable of, mediating memory responses required to
sterilize the host.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.2.1137 
PMID: 16002715  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

