
1. J Immunol. 2005 Jul 15;175(2):763-70.

Expansion and hyperactivity of CD1d-restricted NKT cells during the progression
of systemic lupus erythematosus in (New Zealand Black x New Zealand White)F1
mice.

Forestier C(1), Molano A, Im JS, Dutronc Y, Diamond B, Davidson A, Illarionov PA,
Besra GS, Porcelli SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

CD1d-restricted NKT cells expressing invariant TCR alpha-chain rearrangements
(iNKT cells) have been reported to be deficient in humans with a variety of
autoimmune syndromes and in certain strains of autoimmune mice. In addition,
injection of mice with alpha-galactosylceramide, a specific glycolipid agonist of
iNKT cells, activates these T cells and ameliorates autoimmunity in several
different disease models. Thus, deficiency and reduced function in iNKT cells are
considered to be risk factors for the development of such diseases. In this study
we report that the development of systemic lupus erythematosus in (New Zealand
Black (NZB) x New Zealand White (NZW))F(1) mice was paradoxically associated with
an expansion and activation of iNKT cells. Although young (NZB x NZW)F(1) mice
had normal levels of iNKT cells, these expanded with age and became
phenotypically and functionally hyperactive. Activation of iNKT cells in (NZB x
NZW)F(1) mice in vivo or in vitro with alpha-galactosylceramide indicated that
the immunoregulatory role of iNKT cells varied over time, revealing a marked
increase in their potential to contribute to production of IFN-gamma with
advancing age and disease progression. This evolution of iNKT cell function
during the progression of autoimmunity may have important implications for the
mechanism of disease in this model of systemic lupus erythematosus and for the
development of therapies using iNKT cell agonists.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.2.763 
PMID: 16002672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

