
1. Cell Microbiol. 2005 Aug;7(8):1173-85.

Anthrax toxin receptor 2 mediates Bacillus anthracis killing of macrophages
following spore challenge.

Banks DJ(1), Barnajian M, Maldonado-Arocho FJ, Sanchez AM, Bradley KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Initiation of inhalation anthrax is believed to involve phagocytosis of Bacillus 
anthracis spores by alveolar macrophages, followed by spore germination within
the phagolysosome. In order to establish a systemic infection, it is predicted
that bacilli then escape from the macrophage and replicate extracellularly.
Mechanisms utilized by B. anthracis to escape from the macrophage are not well
characterized, but a role for anthrax toxin has been proposed. Here we report the
isolation of an anthrax toxin-resistant cell line (R3D) following chemical
mutagenesis of toxin-sensitive RAW 264.7 murine macrophage cells. Both R3D and
RAW 264.7 cells phagocytize spores of a B. anthracis Sterne strain. However, RAW 
264.7 cells are killed following spore challenge, whereas R3D cells survive.
Resistance to toxin and spore challenge correlates with loss of expression of
anthrax toxin receptor 2 (ANTXR2/CMG-2). When R3D cells are complemented with
cDNA encoding either murine ANTXR2 or human anthrax toxin receptor 1
(ANTXR1/TEM-8), toxin and spore challenge susceptibility are restored, indicating
that over-expression of either ANTXR can confer susceptibility to anthrax spore
challenge. Taken together, these results indicate that anthrax toxin expression
by the germinated spore enables B. anthracis killing of the macrophage from
within.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2005.00545.x 
PMID: 16008584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

