
1. Blood. 2005 Oct 15;106(8):2761-8. Epub 2005 Jul 12.

A thrombomodulin mutation that impairs activated protein C generation results in 
uncontrolled lung inflammation during murine tuberculosis.

Weijer S(1), Wieland CW, Florquin S, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Medical Center Amsterdam, Laboratory of Experimental Internal
Medicine, Room G2-130, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Thrombomodulin (TM) plays an essential role in the generation of activated
protein C (APC), a mediator with both anticoagulant and anti-inflammatory
properties, and is preferentially expressed in lungs. To investigate the role of 
TM in the coagulant and inflammatory response in the lung during tuberculosis,
mice with a mutation in the TM gene (Thbd), which results in a minimal capacity
for APC generation (TMpro/pro mice), were intranasally infected with live
virulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Whereas pulmonary tuberculosis was not
associated with activation of coagulation in either wild-type or TMpro/pro mice, 
5 weeks after infection TMpro/pro mice displayed an uncontrolled inflammatory
response in their lungs, as reflected by higher lung weights, a diminished
ability to form well-shaped granulomas, elevated levels of proinflammatory
cytokines, and concurrently reduced concentrations of anti-inflammatory
cytokines. During a 36-week follow-up after infection with a lower dose of M
tuberculosis, 35% of TMpro/pro mice died from week 28 onward versus none of the
wild-type mice, and the surviving TMpro/pro mice displayed increased lung
inflammation accompanied by higher mycobacterial loads in liver and spleen. These
data suggest that a TM mutation that impairs APC generation results in
uncontrolled lung inflammation during tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2004-12-4623 
PMID: 16014564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

