
1. Microbes Infect. 2005 Aug-Sep;7(11-12):1263-75. Epub 2005 Jun 8.

A model of immunity to Burkholderia pseudomallei: unique responses following
immunization and acute lethal infection.

Ulett GC(1), Labrooy JT, Currie BJ, Barnes JL, Ketheesan N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 
North Lauderdale Street, Memphis, TN 38105-2794, USA. g.ulette@ug.edu.au

Burkholderia pseudomallei, the etiological agent of melioidosis, causes
significant mortality in endemic regions, but little is known regarding the
immune mechanisms required for successful protective immunity. To establish a
model of immunization that could be used to study this we screened a library of
B. pseudomallei strains for immunogenicity in mice. BALB/c mice were immunized
with test strains, and 2 weeks later were given a lethal challenge (LC) of
virulent B. pseudomallei. Among 49 strains tested, a single strain, CL04,
exhibited strong immunoprotective capacity. Interestingly, CL04 had been cultured
from a patient with chronic colonization of B. pseudomallei, which is a rare
phenomenon. Mice immunized with 0.1 x LD50 (5 x 10(3) CFU) of CL04 had
significantly better survival and lower bacterial loads after LC compared to
naïve controls. Dose-response analysis demonstrated more robust immunity after
higher immunizing doses, and bacterial inactivation by gamma irradiation
diminished the protective effect, indicating a requirement for viable organism
for immunity. CL04-induced immunity was demonstrated both in B.
pseudomallei-susceptible BALB/c and -resistant C57BL/6 mice. We investigated the 
gene profile of CL04-induced immunity by analyzing responses to immunization
using cDNA microarray. Unique responses involving granulocyte macrophage colony
stimulating factor (GM-CSF), the proapoptotic regulator Bad and cyclin-dependent 
kinase (CDK5) were detected in immunized mice, but these responses were absent in
naïve-LC mice. Further, responses differed between mouse strains, indicating
dependence on host genetic background. This model will be useful in identifying
elements of the immune response required for successful adaptive immunity against
B. pseudomallei.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2005.04.013 
PMID: 16027024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

