
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2005 Aug;83(4):352-63.

Antibody blockade of Thy-1 (CD90) impairs mouse cytotoxic T lymphocyte induction 
by anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody.

Haeryfar SM(1), Conrad DM, Musgrave B, Hoskin DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie
University, Halifax, Canada.

Thy-1 (CD90) expressed by mouse T cells is known to have signal transducing
properties, but the ability of Thy-1 to enhance cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL)
development is not well understood. Here we show that stimulation of mouse T
cells with monoclonal antibodies (mAb) to CD3, CD28 and Thy-1 (clone G7), which
were coimmobilized on polystyrene microbeads, resulted in a greater proliferative
response than stimulation with only anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 mAb, indicating that
Thy-1 cross-linking enhanced T cell receptor/CD28-driven T cell activation.
Consistent with this finding, Thy-1 blockade with a soluble nonactivating
anti-Thy-1 mAb (clone 30-H12) inhibited anti-CD3-induced proliferation of CD4+
and CD8+ T cells, and the induction of cytotoxic effector cells in a
dose-dependent fashion. Interleukin-2 synthesis and CD25 expression were also
impaired by Thy-1 blockade. The inhibitory effect involved a defect at or before 
the level of protein kinase C activation because the addition of phorbol ester
ablated the anti-Thy-1-mediated inhibition of anti-CD3-induced T cell activation.
The CTL that were induced in the presence of blocking anti-Thy-1 mAb adhered to
target cells but showed reduced expression of granzyme B and perforin. In
contrast, Fas ligand expression and function was not affected by Thy-1 blockade. 
We conclude that Thy-1 signalling promotes the in vitro generation of CTL that
kill in a granule-dependent fashion.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1711.2005.01342.x 
PMID: 16033530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

