
1. Blood. 2005 Nov 15;106(10):3498-506. Epub 2005 Jul 19.

Different thresholds of Notch signaling bias human precursor cells toward B-,
NK-, monocytic/dendritic-, or T-cell lineage in thymus microenvironment.

De Smedt M(1), Hoebeke I, Reynvoet K, Leclercq G, Plum J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Ghent
University, University Hospital Ghent, Belgium.

Notch receptors are involved in lineage decisions in multiple developmental
scenarios, including hematopoiesis. Here, we treated hybrid human-mouse fetal
thymus organ culture with the gamma-secretase inhibitor 7
(N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenyl)-l-alanyl]-S-phenyl-glycine t-butyl ester) (DAPT) to
establish the role of Notch signaling in human hematopoietic lineage decisions.
The effect of inhibition of Notch signaling was studied starting from cord blood 
CD34(+) or thymic CD34(+)CD1(-), CD34(+)CD1(+), or CD4ISP progenitors. Treatment 
of cord blood CD34(+) cells with low DAPT concentrations results in aberrant
CD4ISP and CD4/CD8 double-positive (DP) thymocytes, which are negative for
intracellular T-cell receptor beta (TCRbeta). On culture with intermediate and
high DAPT concentrations, thymic CD34(+)CD1(-) cells still generate aberrant
intracellular TCRbeta(-) DP cells that have undergone DJ but not VDJ
recombination. Inhibition of Notch signaling shifts differentiation into non-T
cells in a thymic microenvironment, depending on the starting progenitor cells:
thymic CD34(+)CD1(+) cells do not generate non-T cells, thymic CD34(+)CD1(-)
cells generate NK cells and monocytic/dendritic cells, and cord blood
CD34(+)Lin(-) cells generate B, NK, and monocytic/dendritic cells in the presence
of DAPT. Our data indicate that Notch signaling is crucial to direct human
progenitor cells into the T-cell lineage, whereas it has a negative impact on B, 
NK, and monocytic/dendritic cell generation in a dose-dependent fashion.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2005-02-0496 
PMID: 16030192  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

