
1. J Pediatr Surg. 2005 Jul;40(7):1111-7.

Pneumatoceles in postpneumonic empyema: an algorithmic approach.

Imamoğlu M(1), Cay A, Koşucu P, Ozdemir O, Cobanoğlu U, Orhan F, Akyol A, Sarihan
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Karadeniz Technical
University, Trabzon 61080, Turkey. mimamoglu61@yahoo.com

PURPOSE: The aim of the study was to determine the natural course and select
appropriate therapy for pneumatocele (PC) in children with postpneumonic empyema.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Records of 134 children treated for postpneumonic empyema 
between October 1997 and June 2003 were reviewed retrospectively, and 58 (43%) of
them were found to have PC. Their chest x-rays and computed tomography scans as
well as patient profiles were evaluated to assess the size, location, course, and
complications. Clinical course, treatment indications, and results were also
reviewed.
RESULTS: The patients were aged from 14 months to 15 years (mean 3.8 years).
There were 36 boys and 22 girls. The PC was located on the right hemithorax in 34
patients and on the left in 24. Staphylococcus aureus was the most common
isolated infective agent. Of the 58 children, 37 (63.7%) showed complete
resolution with improvement of the infection within 2 months. Thirteen PCs had
evidences of gradual decrease in size without any indication for invasive
approaches, and they resolved completely, with a mean time of 6.1 (ranging from
1-13) months. One tension PC, 3 large PCs (>50% of hemithorax), 1 case with bad
tolerance to follow-up, and 2 persistent PCs had no reduction in size on
follow-up; a total of 7 patients underwent image-guided catheter drainage
procedure, and 5 of them resolved completely. In the last 2 cases, surgical
excision was required because of persistent cystic cavity caused by thickened PC 
wall. One patient whose PC had not been decreasing in size developed findings of 
severe lung abscess with thickened wall and directly underwent surgery. In none
of these patients recurrences or complaints related to PC were noted on their
control visits.
CONCLUSION: Most of these PCs are simple PC and show spontaneous resolution with 
improvement of the infection within the first 2 months. However, some decrease
gradually by time, and close follow-up should be continued in case of complicated
PC. Persistent features of chest infection, more than 50% involvement of
hemithorax and severe atelectasis, development of broncopleural fistulae (tension
PC), and bad tolerance to follow-up remind complicated PC, and they are
indications of image-guided catheter drainage procedure. Its failure occurs in PC
with thickened wall that does not collapse, as was in our cases with persistent
PC and severe infected PC, and thus, this is an indication for surgical excision.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2005.03.048 
PMID: 16034754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

