
1. J Immunol. 2005 Aug 1;175(3):1651-7.

NF kappa B-inducing kinase deficiency results in the development of a subset of
regulatory T cells, which shows a hyperproliferative activity upon
glucocorticoid-induced TNF receptor family-related gene stimulation.

Lu LF(1), Gondek DC, Scott ZA, Noelle RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dartmouth Medical School and Norris
Cotton Cancer Center, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells (T(reg)) play an important role in maintaining
immunologic tolerance. Glucocorticoid-induced TNFR family-related gene (GITR)
expressed preferentially at high levels on T(reg) has been shown to be a key
player of regulating T(reg)-mediated suppression. A recent study reports that
NF-kappaB-inducing kinase (NIK) expression in thymic stroma is important for the 
normal production of T(reg) but not for its suppression capacity. In this report,
we have shown that T(reg) from NIK-deficient mice display hyperproliferative
activities upon GITR stimulation through an IL-2-independent mechanism.
Furthermore, high dose IL-2, anti-CD28 stimulation, or GITR ligand-transduced
bone marrow-derived dendritic cells used as APC (culture conditions which drive
T(reg) proliferation in vitro) could not ablate this difference in proliferative 
activity between NIK-deficient and wild-type T(reg). Additional experiments have 
shown NIK-deficient mice have a higher ratio of CD4+CD25+CD62L(low) T(reg) both
in thymus and periphery than their wild-type littermates. This CD62(low) subset
is responsible for the hyperproliferative activity upon GITR stimulation. These
data suggest a novel role of NIK in controlling the development and expansion of 
CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.3.1651 
PMID: 16034105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

