
1. Infect Immun. 2005 Aug;73(8):4505-11.

Human {beta}-defensin 2 is expressed and associated with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis during infection of human alveolar epithelial cells.

Rivas-Santiago B(1), Schwander SK, Sarabia C, Diamond G, Klein-Patel ME,
Hernandez-Pando R, Ellner JJ, Sada E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias, 
Mexico City, Mexico.

To determine the role of human beta-defensin 2 (HBD-2) in human tuberculosis, we 
studied the in vitro induction of HBD-2 gene expression by Mycobacterium
tuberculosis H37Rv infection in the human lung epithelial cell line A549, in
alveolar macrophages (AM), and in blood monocytes (MN) by reverse
transcription-PCR. We also studied the induction of HBD-2 gene expression by
mannose lipoarabinomannan (manLAM) from M. tuberculosis. Intracellular production
of HBD-2 peptide was detected by immunocytochemistry and electron microscopy. Our
results demonstrated that there was induction of HBD-2 mRNA in A549 cells after
infection with M. tuberculosis at various multiplicities of infection (MOI) and
that there was stimulation with manLAM. AM expressed the HBD-2 gene only at a
high MOI with M. tuberculosis. MN did not express HBD-2 at any of the
experimental M. tuberculosis MOI. Immunostaining revealed the presence of
intracellular HBD-2 peptide in A549 cells following infection with M.
tuberculosis, and the staining was more intense in areas where there were M.
tuberculosis clusters. By using electron microscopy we also demonstrated
production of HBD-2 after M. tuberculosis infection and adherence of HBD-2 to the
membranes of M. tuberculosis. Alveolar epithelial cells are among the first cells
to encounter M. tuberculosis following aerogenic infection. As HBD-2 has been
shown to control growth of M. tuberculosis and has chemotactic activity, our
results suggest that HBD-2 induction by M. tuberculosis may have a role in the
pathogenesis of human tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.73.8.4505-4511.2005 
PMCID: PMC1201238
PMID: 16040961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

