
1. Immunol Rev. 2005 Aug;206:132-48.

Involvement of intestinal dendritic cells in oral tolerance, immunity to
pathogens, and inflammatory bowel disease.

Kelsall BL(1), Leon F.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunobiology Section, Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National
Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. kelsall@nih.gov

Dendritic cells (DCs) are composed of a family of cells, now recognized to be
essential for innate and acquired immunity. DCs at mucosal surfaces have a
particular capacity to induce the differentiation of regulatory T cells producing
interleukin-10 (IL-10) and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) in the
steady state (non-infected, non-immunized), yet they retain the capacity to
induce effector T cells in response to invasive pathogens. This decision between 
the induction of active immunity and tolerance will depend on the subpopulation
of DC involved and the surface receptors engaged during DC activation and T-cell 
priming. The local microenvironment will likely play an important role both in
defining the DC phenotype and in providing direct signals to responding T cells. 
Furthermore, DCs in organized mucosal lymphoid tissues preferentially induce the 
expression of CCR9 and alpha4beta7 on T cells, which results in T-cell homing to 
the intestinal lamina propria. Finally, DCs may play an important role in the
maintenance of abnormal intestinal inflammation either by driving pathogenic
T-cell responses in mesenteric lymph nodes or by acting to expand or maintain
pathogenic T cells locally at sites of inflammation. In this review, a brief
discussion of general issues of DC biology that are pertinent to mucosal immunity
is followed by a more in-depth discussion of the phenotype and function of DC
populations in the intestine.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0105-2896.2005.00292.x 
PMID: 16048546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

