
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2005 Sep;141(3):467-74.

CXCL12 and CXCR4 expression by human gingival fibroblasts in periodontal disease.

Hosokawa Y(1), Hosokawa I, Ozaki K, Nakae H, Murakami K, Miyake Y, Matsuo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Conservative Dentistry, Institute of Health Biosciences, The
University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.
hosokawa@dent.tokushima-u.ac.jp

CXCL12 is a CXC chemokine that is related to lymphocyte infiltration and
angiogenesis in inflammatory sites such as arthritis. However, the expression and
roles of CXCL12 in periodontal disease are uncertain. The aim of this study was
to assess the expression of CXCL12 and its receptor, CXCR4, in periodontal tissue
and to investigate the properties of CXCL12 and CXCR4 expression by human
gingival fibroblasts (HGF). RT-PCR analysis revealed that CXCL12 and CXCR4 mRNA
were expressed in both normal gingival tissues and periodontal diseased tissues. 
Immunohistochemistry disclosed that CXCL12 was expressed and CXCR4 positive cells
were found in both normal and periodontal diseased gingival tissues. Our in vitro
experiments elucidated that HGF constitutively produced CXCL12, and the levels
were enhanced by stimulation with tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha),
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta),
regulated upon activation normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES) and
macrophage inflammatory protein 3(alpha) (MIP-3(alpha)). On the other hand, heat 
killed Porphyromonas gingivalis (P. gingivalis) and P. gingivalis LPS reduced the
CXCL12 production by HGF. Flow cytometry analysis clarified that CXCR4 was highly
expressed on HGF, and CXCR4 expression was abrogated by TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma and 
P. gingivalis LPS. Moreover, CXCL12 induced vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) production by HGF. Our results demonstrated that CXCL12 might be related
to CXCR4+ cells infiltration and angiogenesis both in normal periodontal tissues 
and periodontal diseased tissue. P. gingivalis, a known periodontal pathogen,
inhibits the production of CXCL12 and the expression of CXCR4 by HGF. This fact
means that P. gingivalis may inhibit CXCR4+ cells infiltration and
neovascularization in periodontal tissue and escape from the immune response.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2005.02852.x 
PMCID: PMC1809465
PMID: 16045736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

