
1. Toxicol In Vitro. 2005 Oct;19(7):943-9. Epub 2005 Aug 2.

Comparative study of tributyltin toxicity on two bacteria of the genus Bacillus.

Martins JD(1), Jurado AS, Moreno AJ, Madeira VM.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de NeurociÃªncias, Departamento de Zoologia, Universidade de Coimbra,
3000 Coimbra, Portugal.

Tributyltin is a potent biocide mainly used in marine anti-fouling paints. Owing 
to its widespread distribution in coast areas and its high toxicity to aquatic
organisms, the use of this compound is generally restricted and under government 
regulation. Despite of that, it persists in the aquatic environment. Organotins
used in industry have also been detected in terrestrial environments. The
persistence and high lipophilicity explain bioaccumulation. The role of bacteria 
in recycling organic matter prompted us to study the interaction of tributyltin
with two ubiquitous bacilli, B. stearothermophilus and B. subtilis, proposed as
biological indicators of pollutants with ecological impact. These bacteria have
been used as suitable models for the study of toxicity mechanisms of unselective 
lipophilic compounds (e.g., DDT and endosulfan). Drug effects on growth
parameters, oxygen consumption and membrane organization were assessed. Bacteria 
growth in a liquid complex medium was disturbed by concentrations of TBT as low
as 25 nM (8 microgL(-1)), close to the concentration in polluted environments.
The respiratory activity is affected by TBT in both microorganisms. Membrane
organization, assessed by fluorescence polarization of two fluidity probes,
1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (DPH) and a propionic acid derivative (DPH-PA), was
also perturbed by the xenobiotic. Alterations on growth, oxygen consumption and
physical properties of membrane lipids are stronger in B. stearothermophilus as
compared to B. subtilis. A putative relationship between growth inhibition and
respiratory activity impairment induced by TBT and its effects on the physical
behaviour of bacterial membrane lipids is suggested.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tiv.2005.06.019 
PMID: 16061343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

