
1. Scand J Immunol. 2005 Jul;62(1):63-70.

Phenotypic study of peripheral blood lymphocytes and humoral immune response in
Helicobacter pylori infection according to age.

Soares TF(1), Rocha GA, Rocha AM, CorrÃªa-Oliveira R, Martins-Filho OA, Carvalho
AS, Bittencourt P, Oliveira CA, Faria AM, Queiroz DM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Research in Bacteriology, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerals, 
Belo Horizonte, Brazil.

There are differences between children and adults in certain aspects of the
Helicobacter pylori (HP) infection, among them the lower titre of IgG antibodies 
anti-HP in the former group. Thus, we investigated by means of flow cytometry
CD4+/CD3+ (CD4+T), CD8+/CD3+ (CD8+T) and CD19+/CD3- (B) cells,
activation/co-stimulatory markers (CD4+/HLA-DR+, CD4+/CD28+, CD8+/HLA-DR+ and
CD8+/CD28+) and by means of ELISA IgG anti-HP antibodies in the peripheral blood 
from HP-positive and -negative children and adults. An increased CD4+/CD28+ and
CD8+/CD28+ percentage and number of CD4+/CD3+ cells were seen in infected adults.
Conversely, no difference was observed between infected and noninfected children,
but when they were stratified by age, an increased CD4+/CD28+ cell percentage was
seen in the HP-positive group older than 10 years. The mean level of IgG anti-HP 
was lower in younger infected children, increased with age and correlated with
CD4+ cells. Our data suggest that the immune response to HP infection vary
according to the age. Low percentage of activated CD4+ cell may contribute to the
lower level of serum IgG anti-HP observed in younger infected children. In
addition, the CD4+ cell participation during the infection seems to begin after
10 years old, when the immune response becomes similar to that seen in adults.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2005.01638.x 
PMID: 16091125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

