
1. Scand J Immunol. 2005 Aug;62(2):131-9.

Clearance of Chlamydia pneumoniae infection in H-2 class I human leucocyte
antigen-A2.1 monochain transgenic mice.

Tammiruusu A(1), Haveri A, Pascolo S, Lahesmaa R, Stevanovic S, Rammensee HG,
Sarvas M, Puolakkainen M, Vuola JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vaccines, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland.
anne.tammiruusu@ktl.fi

CD8+ T cells have been suggested to play an important role in protective immunity
against pulmonary Chlamydia pneumoniae infection in mice. Moreover, several
classical major histocompatibility complex class I - restricted cytotoxic CD8+ T 
lymphocytes (CTL) specific for C. pneumoniae- derived peptides have been
identified. Here, we studied the outcome of C. pneumoniae infection in human
leucocyte antigen (HLA)-A2.1 transgenic mice (HHD mice) that are only able to
express a classical human class I molecule (HLA-A2.1). C. pneumoniae infection
was self-restricted in HHD mice which were able to develop specific immune
responses and a protective immunity against a subsequent rechallenge in a manner 
comparable to wildtype mice. Furthermore, accumulation of functional and C.
pneumoniae-specific T cells to the site of infection was detected after
challenge. Antigen processing and HLA-A2.1-dependent presentation was studied by 
immunizing the HHD mice with chlamydial outer protein N (CopN). Isolation of a
peptide-specific CTL line from the CopN-immunized mice suggests that the HLA-A2.1
molecule can support the development of CTL response against a chlamydial protein
in mice. These findings suggest that the transgenic mouse model can be used for
further characterization of the HLA-A2.1-restricted CD8+ T-cell response during
C. pneumoniae infection and for identification of CD8 epitopes from chlamydial
antigens.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2005.01645.x 
PMID: 16101819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

