
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Sep 13;102(37):13278-83. Epub 2005 Sep 1.

Receptor-specific requirements for anthrax toxin delivery into cells.

Rainey GJ(1), Wigelsworth DJ, Ryan PL, Scobie HM, Collier RJ, Young JA.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,
10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The three proteins that constitute anthrax toxin self-assemble into toxic
complexes after one of these proteins, protective antigen (PA), binds to tumor
endothelial marker 8 (TEM8) or capillary morphogenesis protein 2 (CMG2) cellular 
receptors. The toxin receptor complexes are internalized, and acidic endosomal pH
triggers pore formation by PA and translocation of the catalytic subunits into
the cytosol. In this study we show that the pH threshold for conversion of the PA
prepore to the pore and for translocation differs by approximately a pH unit,
depending on whether the TEM8 or CMG2 receptor is used. For TEM8-associated
toxin, these events can occur at close to neutral pH values, and they show
relatively low sensitivity to ammonium chloride treatment in cells. In contrast, 
with CMG2-associated toxin, these events require more acidic conditions and are
highly sensitive to ammonium chloride. We show, furthermore, that PA dissociates 
from TEM8 and CMG2 upon pore formation. Our results are consistent with a model
in which translocation depends on pore formation and pore formation, in turn,
depends on release of PA from its receptor. We propose that because PA binds to
CMG2 with much higher affinity than it does to TEM8, a lower pH is needed to
attenuate CMG2 binding to allow pore formation. Our results suggest that toxin
can form pores at different points in the endocytic pathway, depending on which
receptor is used for entry.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0505865102 
PMCID: PMC1201603
PMID: 16141341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

