
1. Int Immunol. 2005 Nov;17(11):1399-408. Epub 2005 Sep 1.

Pulmonary Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in leptin-deficient ob/ob mice.

Wieland CW(1), Florquin S, Chan ED, Leemans JC, Weijer S, Verbon A, Fantuzzi G,
van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Internal Medicine, and Department of Pathology,
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
c.wieland@amc.uva.nl

The development of active tuberculosis after infection with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis is almost invariably caused by a persistent or transient state of
relative immunodeficiency. Leptin, the product of the obese (ob) gene, is a
pleiotropic protein produced mainly by adipocytes and is down-regulated during
malnutrition and starvation, conditions closely connected with active
tuberculosis. To investigate the role of leptin in tuberculosis, we intranasally 
infected wild-type (Wt) and leptin-deficient ob/ob mice with live virulent M.
tuberculosis. Ob/ob mice displayed higher mycobacterial loads in the lungs after 
5 and 10 weeks of infection, although the difference with Wt mice remained 1 log 
of M. tuberculosis colony forming unit. Nevertheless, ob/ob mice were less able
to form well-shaped granuloma and lung lymphocyte numbers were reduced compared
with Wt mice early during infection. In addition, ob/ob mice had a reduced
capacity to produce the protective cytokine IFNgamma at the site of the infection
early during infection and upon antigen-specific recall stimulation, and showed
reduced delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction to intra-dermal tuberculin
purified protein derivative. Leptin replacement restored the reduced IFNgamma
response observed in ob/ob mice. Mortality did not differ between ob/ob and Wt
mice. These data suggest that leptin plays a role in the early immune response to
pulmonary tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxh317 
PMID: 16141243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

