
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2006 Apr;20(4):519-27. Epub 2005 Sep 12.

Passive transfer of maternal antibodies and their existence in eggs, larvae and
fry of Indian major carp, Labeo rohita (Ham.).

Swain P(1), Dash S, Bal J, Routray P, Sahoo PK, Sahoo SK, Saurabh S, Gupta SD,
Meher PK.

Author information: 
(1)Aquatic Animal Health Division, Central Institute of Freshwater Aquaculture,
Kausalyaganga-751002, Bhubaneswar, Orissa, India. pswainy2k@yahoo.co.in

Lack of immune competence in the early stages of life leads to severe mortality
in larval stages of different fish species including Indian major carp (IMC).
Investigation through indirect enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and
agglutination test revealed a significant increase in specific serum antibody
response in the brood fish of Indian major carp, Labeo rohita (Ham.) following
immunisation with a virulent Aeromonas hydrophila bacterin 1 month prior to
breeding, which was transferred to larvae through the egg. No significant
differences (P > 0.05) in mean antibody levels in larvae at the 1st and 2nd weeks
post-hatch was recorded while a slight rise in antibody level was observed in
3-week-old fry, perhaps due to exposure to A. hydrophila present in the aquatic
environment. Immunised brood fish serum, egg and larval extracts in non-reducing 
sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and
subsequent western blot analysis revealed an antibody molecule of approximate
molecular weight 210 kDa. On challenge with virulent A. hydrophila, a significant
reduction in mortality was recorded in immunised larvae and fry (58.0, 43.75 and 
37.14% in the 1st, 2nd and 3rd week, respectively) relative to control fish
(87.0, 79.0 and 76.4% in 1st, 2nd and 3rd week, respectively). The present study 
indicated the role of maternally derived antibody in protection of hatchlings of 
Indian major carp against specific pathogens.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2005.06.011 
PMID: 16157486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

