
1. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2006 Mar;47(2):95-106.

Genotoxicity of nitrosulfonic acids, nitrobenzoic acids, and nitrobenzylalcohols,
pollutants commonly found in ground water near ammunition facilities.

Grummt T(1), Wunderlich HG, Chakraborty A, Kundi M, Majer B, Ferk F, Nersesyan
AK, Parzefall W, KnasmÃ¼ller S.

Author information: 
(1)Federal Environmental Agency, Bad Elster Branch, Germany.

2-Amino-4,6-dinitrobenzoic acid (2-A-4,6-DNBA), 4-amino-2,6-dinitrobenzoic acid
(4-A-2,6-DNBA), 2,4,6-trinitrobenzoic acid (2,4,6-TNBA), 2-amino-4,
6-dinitrobenzylalcohol (2-A-4,6-DNBAlc), 4-amino-2,6-dinitrobenzylalcohol
(4-A-2,6-DNBAlc), 2,4-dinitrotoluol-5-sulfonic acid (2,4-DNT-5-SA),
2,4-dinitrotoluol-3-sulfonic acid (2,4-DNT-3-SA), and 2, 4-dinitrobenzoic acid
(2,4-DNBA) are derivatives of nitro-explosives that have been detected in
groundwater close to munitions facilities. In the present study, the genotoxicity
of these compounds was evaluated in Salmonella/microsome assays (in strains TA100
and TA98, with and without S9 and in TA98NR without S9), in chromosomal
aberration (CA) tests with Chinese hamster fibroblasts (V79), and in micronucleus
(MN) assays with human hepatoma (HepG2) cells. All compounds except the sulfonic 
acids were positive in the bacterial mutagenicity tests, with 2,4,6-TNBA
producing the strongest response (8023 revertants/micromol in TA98 without S9
activation). 2-A-4,6-DNBA was a direct acting mutagen in TA98, but negative in
TA100. The other positive compounds were approximately 1-3 orders of magnitude
less mutagenic than 2,4,6-TNBA in TA98 and in TA100; relatively strong effects ( 
approximately 50-400 revertants/micromol) were produced by the benzylacohols in
the two indicator strains. With the exception of 2,4-DNBA, the mutagenic
responses were lower in the nitroreductase-deficient strain TA98NR than in the
parental strain. 2,4-DNBA produced a marginally positive response in the V79-cell
CA assay; the other substances were devoid of activity. Only the benzoic acids
were tested for MN induction in HepG2 cells, and all produced positive responses.
As in the bacterial assays, the strongest effect was seen with 2,4,6-TNBA
(significant induction at >or=1.9 microM). 4-A-2,6-DNBA was positive at 432
microM; the weakest effect was observed with 2,4,-DNBA (positive at >or=920
microM). The differences in the sensitivity of the indicator cells to these
agents can be explained by differences in the activities of enzymes involved in
the activation of the compounds. The strong responses produced by some of the
compounds in the human-derived cells suggest that environmental exposure to these
breakdown products of nitro-explosives may pose a cancer risk in man.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/em.20172 
PMID: 16180207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

