
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2006 May;65(2):335-45. Epub 2005 Sep 22.

A flow cytometric assay to monitor antimicrobial activity of defensins and
cationic tissue extracts.

Nuding S(1), Fellermann K, Wehkamp J, Mueller HA, Stange EF.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Robert Bosch
Hospital, Auerbachstr. 110, 73061 Stuttgart, Germany.
Sabine.Nuding@ikp-stuttgart.de

To determine the antibacterial activity of defensins and other antimicrobial
peptides in biopsy extracts, we evaluated a flow cytometric method with the
membrane potential sensitive dye bis-(1,3-dibutylbarbituric acid) trimethine
oxonol [DiBAC4(3)]. This assay enables us to discriminate intact non-fluorescent 
and depolarized fluorescent bacteria after exposure to antimicrobial peptides by 
measurement at the direct target, the cytoplasmic membrane and the membrane
potential. The feasibility of the flow cytometric assay was evaluated with
recombinant human beta-defensin 3 (HBD-3) against 25 bacterial strains
representing 12 species. HBD-3 showed a broad-spectrum dose dependent activity
and the minimal dose to cause depolarization ranged from 1.25 to >15 microg/ml
HBD-3, depending on the species tested. The antibacterial effect was diminished
with sodium chloride or dithiothreitol and could be abrogated with a HBD-3
antibody. Additionally, isolated cationic extracts from human intestinal biopsies
showed a strong bactericidal effect against Escherichia coli K12, E. coli ATCC
25922 and Staphylococcus aureus ATCC 25923, which was diminished towards E. coli 
at 150 mM NaCl, whereas the activity towards S. aureus ATCC 25923 remained
unaffected at physiological salt concentrations. DTT blocked the bactericidal
effect of biopsy extracts completely.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2005.08.004 
PMID: 16182394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

