
1. Protein Sci. 2005 Nov;14(11):2814-27. Epub 2005 Sep 30.

Misfolding of a bacterial autotransporter.

Mogensen JE(1), Kleinschmidt JH, Schmidt MA, Otzen DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49,
DK-9000 Aalborg, Denmark.

The adhesin involved in diffuse adherence (AIDA) is an autotransporter protein
that confers the diffuse adherence phenotype to certain diarrheagenic Escherichia
coli strains. It consists of a 49 amino acid signal peptide, a 797 amino acid
passenger domain, and a 440 amino acid beta-domain integrated into the outer
membrane. The beta-domain consists of two parts: the beta(1)-domain, which is
predicted to form two beta-strands on the bacterial cell surface, and the
beta(2)-domain, which constitutes the transmembrane domain. We have previously
shown that the beta-domain can be folded from the urea-denatured state when bound
to a nickel column during purification. It has not been possible to achieve
proper refolding of the beta-domain in solution; instead, a misfolded state C is 
formed. Here, we characterize this misfolded state in greater detail, showing
that despite being misfolded, C can be analyzed as a conventional conformational 
state, with cooperative unfolding in urea and SDS as well as showing simple
exponential kinetics during its formation in the presence of lipid vesicles and
detergent micelles. The kinetics of formation of C is sensitive to the lipid
composition in vesicles. We have also attempted to identify biological factors
that might aid folding of the beta-domain to the properly folded state. However, 
no purified periplasmic or cytosolic chaperone was found to increase folding
yields, and no factor in a periplasmic extract was identified that could bind to 
C. We conclude that it is the exposure to the unique spatial arrangement of the
bacterial cell that leads to proper refolding of the beta-domain.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.051628705 
PMCID: PMC2253222
PMID: 16199663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

