
1. Environ Sci Technol. 2005 Sep 1;39(17):6395-404.

Macro- and nanoscale observations of adhesive behavior for several E. coli
strains (O157:H7 and environmental isolates) on mineral surfaces.

Morrow JB(1), Stratton R, Yang HH, Smets BF, Grasso D.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Engineering Program and Microbiology Program, University of
Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut 06269, USA.

Subsurface biobarriers can be conceived to attenuate the migration of pathogens
by adhesion to mineral surfaces. Candidate biobarrier materials of varied surface
characteristics (dolomite, alpha-alumina, silica, pyrophyllite, and Pyrax (a
composite form of pyrophyllite, mica, and silica)) were tested for Escherichia
coli adhesive capacity in macroscale continuous-flow columns. Atomic force
microscopy (AFM) was used to determine nanoscale interaction energies. Predicted 
attractive interaction energies correlated well with macroscale adhesive behavior
for tested E. coli strains. AFM measurements confirmed ExDLVO model predictions
of attachment in the primary minima for E. coli O157:H7 and two environmental
isolates E. coli (UCFL339 and UCFL-348) with MOPS conditioned Pyrax. In
macroscale column experiments, pyrophyllite and Pyrax demonstrated significantly 
higher bacterial retention, higher deposition coefficients and lower initial cell
breakthrough values for E. coli O157:H7 than did alpha-alumina, silica, or
dolomite (pyrophyllite, 0.93, 3.56 h(-1), 3.2% ODo; Pyrax, 0.95, 3.73 h(-1), 2.8%
ODo; alpha-alumina, 0.74, 1.60 h(-1), 33% ODo; silica, 0.63, 0.43 h(-1), 73% ODo;
and dolomite, 0.33, 0.17 h(-1), 89% ODo, respectively). Bacterial hydrophilicity 
impacted cell retention in Pyrax columns with the relatively hydrophobic E. coli 
isolate UCFL-339 (0.99, 6.13 h(-1), 0.4% ODo) retained better than the more
hydrophilic E. coli isolate UCFL348 (0.94, 3.70 h(-1), 3.6% ODo). The strong
adhesive behavior of Pyrax was attributed to the hydrophobic (deltaGiwi = -32.4
mJ/m2) pyrophyllite component of the mineral. Vicinal water appears poised
between the bacterial and the mineral surface during initial attachment. Overall,
observed behavior of the various E. coli strains and the selected mineral
surfaces was consistent with surface analyses, conducted at both the macro- and
nanoscale.

DOI: 10.1021/es0500815 
PMID: 16190192  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

