
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2005 Dec;78(6):1265-72. Epub 2005 Oct 4.

The combined CXCR1/CXCR2 antagonist CXCL8(3-74)K11R/G31P blocks neutrophil
infiltration, pyrexia, and pulmonary vascular pathology in endotoxemic animals.

Gordon JR(1), Li F, Zhang X, Wang W, Zhao X, Nayyar A.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Group, Department of Veterinary Microbiology, University
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada S7N 5B4. john.gordon@usask.ca

CXC chemokine receptor 2 (CXCR2) antagonism alone can reduce neutrophil
infiltration of some inflammatory sites, but the CXCR1 and CXCR2 critically
regulate neutrophil responses to Glu-Leu-Arg-CXC chemokines. Herein, we assessed 
a combined CXCR1/CXCR2 antagonist, CXC chemokine ligand 8(3-74)
[CXCL8(3-74)]K11R/G31P, for its ability to blunt neutrophil-influx and ancillary 
pathology in severe endotoxemia. Guinea pigs challenged via the airways with
Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 5 microg/kg) were given
CXCL8(3-74)K11R/G31P (subcutaneously) before or after the onset of symptoms. The 
airways of the LPS-challenged animals contained high levels of endogenous
pyrogens interleukin (IL)-1 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) at 2-4 h, and the
animals developed pyrexia, which peaked at approximately 6 h; strong pulmonary,
neutrophilic inflammation; and marked pleural hemorrhagic consolidation, as
assessed at approximately 15 h. CXCL8(3-74)K11R/G31P treatment before LPS
challenge reduced lung pleural hemorrhagic consolidation and airway neutrophilia 
by >90% and essentially abrogated the IL-1, TNF, and fever responses. When given 
3 or 6 h after LPS, CXCL8(3-74)K11R/G31P reduced pulmonary neutrophilia by up to 
85% and pleural hemorrhagic consolidation by 50-85%. The 3-h treatment reduced
the 6- to 24-h fever response to background. Delays of 6 or 9 h in beginning
treatment had significant effects on the fever decay curve, but only the 6-h
treatment had a significant effect on the 24-h fever. These results indicate that
combined CXCR1/CXCR2 antagonism can have significant therapeutic effects on
pulmonary inflammation and hemorrhage, as well as pyrexia in endotoxemic animals.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0805458 
PMID: 16204619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

