
1. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2005 Oct;138(2):180-8. Epub 2005 Oct 4.

Rheumatoid factors: good or bad for you?

Nowak UM(1), Newkirk MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid factors (RFs) are autoantibodies associated with
rheumatoid arthritis. They can be detected in normal individuals, although
transiently. This dichotomy has led to questions about the origins and types of
RFs. Recently it has been shown that B cells that produce RFs only do so when
activated by two signals, one from engagement of the B-cell receptor and the
other from recognition of a pathogen-associated molecular pattern through a
Toll-like receptor (TLR). These autoantibodies thus link the innate and acquired 
immune responses.
OBJECTIVE: Through a review of the literature, an examination of the current
knowledge of RF induction is presented. The focus is on a discussion of a
beneficial or detrimental role for RFs in normal individuals and in those with
chronic disease.
RESULTS: What makes RF 'good' in some cases and 'bad' in others may reflect the
type of RF produced. Low-affinity polyreactive IgM RFs are probably beneficial as
they aid in the clearance of immune complexes that are more efficiently cleared, 
and the RF B cell can act as an antigen-presenting cell and stimulate host
defense. However, large amounts of high-affinity RFs found in patients with
chronic disease may be harmful by participation in a vicious cycle of
autoantibody production by stimulation of self lymphocytes, and/or deposition in 
blood vessels thus causing vasculitis.
CONCLUSIONS: Whether RFs are beneficial or detrimental depends on the context in 
which they are expressed, the type and amount of RF produced, whether the
response is perpetuated by TLR ligation and whether other cells are stimulated
either directly or indirectly by RF-positive B cells.

(c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000088794 
PMID: 16210858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

