
1. Int J Food Sci Nutr. 2005 Aug;56(5):315-26.

Effect of soybean fortification on Ghanaian fermented maize dough aroma.

Annan NT(1), Plahar WA, Poll L, Jakobsen M.

Author information: 
(1)Food Research Institute, CSIR, P.O. Box M.20, Accra, Ghana.

The effect of soy fortification on the development of aroma compounds, dough
acidity and growth of the predominant microorganisms were investigated in
Ghanaian maize dough fermented spontaneously over a period of 72 h. The fortified
maize dough was prepared from a milled mixture of soaked maize grains and
pre-soaked, blanched and dehulled soybeans added at 20% replacement level.
Extracts of volatiles from the soy-fortified and unfortified dough samples were
obtained by Likens-Nickerson simultaneous distillation and extraction method
analysed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and gas
chromatography-olfactometry (gas chromatography-sniffing). Major aroma compound
groups identified in the fermented dough samples were carbonyls, alcohols, esters
and volatile organic acids. Twenty-nine carbonyls were found in soy-fortified
maize dough compared with 21 in the unfortified dough. Although the same alcohols
were found in both dough samples, the total concentration of alcohols was
slightly different, being less for the soy-fortified sample. Total concentration 
of esters in soy-fortified dough decreased after 72 h while levels in the
unfortified dough increased. Increases in the production of lactic and acetic
acids occurred in soy-fortified samples, but the maximum concentrations of acetic
acid achieved did not differ significantly between the two types of dough.
Twenty-three compounds were perceived to be contributing to the typical aroma of 
soy-fortified maize dough by the method of gas chromatography-sniffing. These
included 12 carbonyls, six alcohols, two esters, two acids and one furan.

DOI: 10.1080/09637480512331390655 
PMID: 16236593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

