
1. Microbes Infect. 2006 Feb;8(2):380-9. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

Toll-like receptor 2-mediated expression of beta-defensin-2 in human corneal
epithelial cells.

Kumar A(1), Zhang J, Yu FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Kresge Eye Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, 4717 St. Antoine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

We previously showed that human corneal epithelial cells (HCECs) express
Toll-like receptors (TLRs), which recognize gram-positive bacteria and respond to
Staphylococcus aureus infection by the expression and secretion of
proinflammatory cytokines and beta-defensin-2 (hBD2). In this study, we further
elucidated the underlying mechanisms regulating hBD-2 expression and its role in 
innate defense in HCECs in response to S. aureus challenge. Exposure of HUCL
cells, a telomerase-immortalized HCEC line, to S. aureus, its exoproducts (1:10
dilution), or synthetic lipopeptide Pam3Cys (10 microg/ml) resulted in the
up-regulation of hBD-2, but not hBD1 and hBD3. Similar to HUCL cells, primary
HCECs responded to S. aureus-exoproducts and Pam3Cys challenge by expressing hBD2
mRNA and secreting hBD2 into the culture media. Furthermore, these stimuli
induced the expression of TLR2 at both mRNA and protein levels. Consistently with
its role as a major pattern-recognizing receptor, TLR2 was located at the cell
surface by cell surface biotinylation. The treatment of HUCL cells with TLR2
neutralizing antibody resulted in a significant decrease in Pam3Cys-induced hBD2 
production as well as IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-alpha secretion. The Pam3Cys-induced
hBD2 expression was completely blocked by NF-kappaB inhibitors and partially
inhibited by p38 MAP kinase and the JNK inhibitors. Conditioned media derived
from HCECs challenged with S. aureus-exoproducts or Pam3Cys exhibited
antibacterial activity against S. aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia 
coli. These findings suggest that S. aureus induces hBD2 production through
TLR2-mediated pathways in HCECs and that pathogen-challenged, TLR-activated HCECs
possess antimicrobial activity. Thus, the epithelium might play a role in innate 
defense against bacterial infection by directly killing bacteria in the cornea.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2005.07.006 
PMCID: PMC2666383
PMID: 16242370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

