
1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2005 Dec;36(12):1089-95.

Protective role of interleukin-10 promoter gene polymorphism in the pathogenesis 
of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis after allogeneic stem cell transplantation.

Seo KW(1), Kim DH, Sohn SK, Lee NY, Chang HH, Kim SW, Jeon SB, Baek JH, Kim JG,
Suh JS, Lee KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Kyungpook National University Hospital,
Daegu, Korea.

The current study attempted to evaluate the association between the IL-10
promoter gene single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and invasive pulmonary
aspergillosis (IPA) after allogeneic stem cell transplantation (SCT) in 105
patients. Three single-nucleotide polymorphisms were investigated in the proximal
region of the IL-10 promoter gene (-1082/-819/-592). Two haplotypes
(1082*A/819*T/592*A [ATA] and 1082*A/819*C/592*C [ACC]) were found in the current
study. The overall incidence of IPA was estimated as 14.1+/-4.5% with a median
onset at 186 days post-transplant (62 approximately 405 days). An increased
occurrence of IPA was noted dependent on the IL-10 haplotype (0% vs 11.5+/-6.4%
vs 19.7+/-7.7% for ACC/ACC vs ATA/ACC vs ATA/ATA haplotype, P=0.0307 when
comparing ACC with non-ACC haplotype). In a multivariate survival analysis using 
Cox's proportional hazard model, the IL-10 promoter gene SNPs were identified as 
an independent predictive factor for the development of IPA (P=0.012, hazard
ratio (HR) 9.3), along with an histocompatibility leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-identical donor (P=0.005, HR 16.3), the CD34+ cell dose transplanted
(P=0.004, HR 26.5), and time-dependent chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD;
P=0.049, HR 16.0). The IL-10 ACC haplotype was found to have an apparent
protective role in the development of IPA after allogeneic transplantation,
regardless of HLA-disparity or chronic GVHD.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bmt.1705181 
PMID: 16247433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

