
1. Yeast. 2005 Oct 30;22(14):1133-42.

Influence of volatile compounds produced by yeasts predominant during processing 
of Coffea arabica in East Africa on growth and ochratoxin A (OTA) production by
Aspergillus ochraceus.

Masoud W(1), Poll L, Jakobsen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, Food Microbiology, The Royal Veterinary and
Agricultural University, Rolighedsvej 30, DK-1958 Frederiksberg C, Denmark.
wm@kvl.dk

The effects of volatile compounds produced during coffee processing by Pichia
anomala, P. kluyveri and Hanseniaspora uvarum on growth of Aspergillus ochraceus 
and production of ochratoxin A (OTA) were studied. On malt extract agar (MEA) and
on coffee agar (CA), exposure of A. ochraceus to the gaseous phase of malt yeast 
glucose peptone (MYGP) plates inoculated with P. anomala, P. kluyveri and H.
uvarum inhibited fungal growth, with the two Pichia spp. showing the strongest
effect. The main esters and alcohols produced by the three yeasts were ethyl
acetate, isobutyl acetate, 2-phenyl ethyl acetate, ethyl propionate and isoamyl
alcohol. The individual esters and alcohols were found to affect fungal growth.
The most effective compound in inhibiting fungal growth was 2-phenyl ethyl
acetate; which at 48 microg/l headspace completely inhibited growth of A.
ochraceus. Exposure of A. ochraceus to the gaseous phase of MYGP plates
inoculated with P. anomala, P. kluyveri and H. uvarum prevented production of
OTA. On CA medium, only the headspace of P. anomala and P. kluyveri prevented OTA
production. Furthermore, when A. ochraceus was exposed to the headspace of the
individual volatile compounds, 2-phenyl ethyl acetate was the most effective in
preventing OTA production. Prevention of OTA seems to be due to reduction of
fungal biomass.

Copyright (c) 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/yea.1304 
PMID: 16240461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

