
1. Protein Sci. 2005 Nov;14(11):2849-61.

Solution structure of Archaeglobus fulgidis peptidyl-tRNA hydrolase (Pth2)
provides evidence for an extensive conserved family of Pth2 enzymes in archea,
bacteria, and eukaryotes.

Powers R(1), Mirkovic N, Goldsmith-Fischman S, Acton TB, Chiang Y, Huang YJ, Ma
L, Rajan PK, Cort JR, Kennedy MA, Liu J, Rost B, Honig B, Murray D, Montelione
GT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68588,
USA. rpowers3@unl.edu

The solution structure of protein AF2095 from the thermophilic archaea
Archaeglobus fulgidis, a 123-residue (13.6-kDa) protein, has been determined by
NMR methods. The structure of AF2095 is comprised of four alpha-helices and a
mixed beta-sheet consisting of four parallel and anti-parallel beta-strands,
where the alpha-helices sandwich the beta-sheet. Sequence and structural
comparison of AF2095 with proteins from Homo sapiens, Methanocaldococcus
jannaschii, and Sulfolobus solfataricus reveals that AF2095 is a peptidyl-tRNA
hydrolase (Pth2). This structural comparison also identifies putative catalytic
residues and a tRNA interaction region for AF2095. The structure of AF2095 is
also similar to the structure of protein TA0108 from archaea Thermoplasma
acidophilum, which is deposited in the Protein Data Bank but not functionally
annotated. The NMR structure of AF2095 has been further leveraged to obtain
good-quality structural models for 55 other proteins. Although earlier studies
have proposed that the Pth2 protein family is restricted to archeal and
eukaryotic organisms, the similarity of the AF2095 structure to human Pth2, the
conservation of key active-site residues, and the good quality of the resulting
homology models demonstrate a large family of homologous Pth2 proteins that are
conserved in eukaryotic, archaeal, and bacterial organisms, providing novel
insights in the evolution of the Pth and Pth2 enzyme families.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.051666705 
PMCID: PMC2253226
PMID: 16251366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

