
1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2006 Mar;290(3):C678-90. Epub 2005 Oct 26.

Innate immune responses of human tracheal epithelium to Pseudomonas aeruginosa
flagellin, TNF-alpha, and IL-1beta.

Tseng J(1), Do J, Widdicombe JH, Machen TE.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Molecular and Cell Biology, 231 LSA, Univ. of California-Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA 94720-3200, USA.

We measured innate immune responses by primary human tracheal epithelial (HTE)
cells grown as confluent, pseudostratified layers during exposure to inflammatory
activators on apical vs. basolateral surfaces. Apical Pseudomonas aeruginosa
strain PAK (but not flagellin mutant PAK.fliC), flagellin, and flagellin +
PAK.fliC activated NF-kappaB and IL-8 expression and secretion. In contrast, HTE 
cells were insensitive to LPS compared to flagellin. Flagellin activated
NF-kappaB in columnar but not basal cells. IL-1beta + TNF-alpha elicited
responses similar to those of flagellin. Basolateral flagellin or IL-1beta +
TNF-alpha caused 1.5- to 4-fold larger responses, consistent with the fact that
NF-kappaB activation occurred in both columnar and basal cells. MyD88 (toll
receptor-associated adapter), IL-1 receptor (IL1R)1, and TNF-alpha receptor
(TNFR)1 were expressed in columnar and basal cells. ZO-1 was localized to tight
junctions of columnar cells but not to basal cells. We infer the following. 1)
Flagellin is necessary and sufficient to trigger inflammatory responses in
columnar cells during accumulation of P. aeruginosa in the airway surface liquid 
(ASL); columnar cells express toll-like receptor 5 and MyD88, often associated
with flagellin-activated cell signaling. 2) IL-1beta + TNF-alpha in the ASL also 
activate columnar cells, and these cells also express IL1R1 and TNFR1. 3) Apical 
flagellin, IL-1beta, and TNF-alpha do not activate basal cells because tight
junctions between columnar cells prevent access from the apical surface to the
basal cells. 4) Exposure of basolateral surfaces to inflammatory activators
elicits larger responses because both columnar and basal cells are activated,
likely because both cell types express receptors for flagellin, IL-1beta, and
TNF-alpha.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00166.2005 
PMID: 16251478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

