
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Nov 8;102(45):16321-6. Epub 2005 Oct 27.

Interplay among coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1, CBP, and
CIITA in IFN-gamma-inducible MHC-II gene expression.

Zika E(1), Fauquier L, Vandel L, Ting JP.

Author information: 
(1)Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Class II major histocompatibility (MHC-II) genes are prototype targets of
IFN-gamma. IFN-gamma activates the expression of the non-DNA-binding master
regulator of MHC-II, class II transactivator (CIITA), which is crucial for
enhanceosome formation and gene activation. This report shows the importance of
the histone methyltransferase, coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 
(CARM1/PRMT4), during IFN-gamma-induced MHC-II gene activation. It also
demonstrates the coordinated regulation of CIITA, CARM1, and the
acetyltransferase cyclic-AMP response element binding (CREB)-binding protein
(CBP) during this process. CARM1 synergizes with CIITA in activating MHC-II
transcription and synergy is abrogated when an arginine
methyltransferase-defective CARM1 mutant is used. Protein-arginine
methyltransferase 1 has much less effect on MHC-II transcription. Specific RNA
interference reduced CARM1 expression as well as MHC-II expression. The
recruitment of CARM1 to the promoter requires endogenous CIITA and results in
methylation of histone H3-R17; hence, CIITA is an upstream regulator of histone
methylation. Previous work has shown that CARM1 can methylate CBP at three
arginine residues. Using wild-type CBP and a mutant of CBP lacking the
CARM1-targeted arginine residues (R3A), we show that arginine methylation of CBP 
is required for IFN-gamma induction of MHC-II. A kinetic analysis shows that
CIITA, CARM1, and H3-R17 methylation all precede CBP loading on the MHC-II
promoter during IFN-gamma treatment. These results suggest functional and
temporal relationships among CIITA, CARM1, and CBP for IFN-gamma induction of
MHC-II.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0505045102 
PMCID: PMC1283426
PMID: 16254053  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

