
1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2006 Jan;297(7):280-8. Epub 2005 Nov 10.

Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) mediates intracellular signalling in human
keratinocytes in response to Malassezia furfur.

Baroni A(1), Orlando M, Donnarumma G, Farro P, Iovene MR, Tufano MA, Buommino E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, Second University 
of Naples, Naples, Italy.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are crucial players in the innate immune response to
microbial invaders. The lipophilic yeast Malassezia furfur has been implicated in
the triggering of scalp lesions in psoriasis. The aim of the present study was to
assess the role of TLRs in the defence against M. furfur infection. The
expression of the myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) gene, which is
involved in the signalling pathway of many TLRs, was also analysed. In addition, 
a possible correlation of antimicrobial peptides of the beta-defensin family to
TLRs was tested. Human keratinocytes infected with M. furfur and a variety of M. 
furfur-positive psoriatic skin biopsies were analysed by RT-PCR, for TLRs, MyD88,
human beta-defensin 2 (HBD-2), HBD-3 and interleukin-8 (IL-8) mRNA expression.
When keratinocytes were infected with M. furfur, an up-regulation for TLR2,
MyD88, HBD-2, HBD-3 and IL-8 mRNA was demonstrated, compared to the untreated
cells. The same results were obtained when psoriatic skin biopsies were analysed.
The M. furfur-induced increase in HBD-2 and IL-8 gene expression is inhibited by 
anti-TLR2 neutralising antibodies, suggesting that TLR2 is involved in the M.
furfur-induced expression of these molecules. These findings suggest the
importance of TLRs in skin protection against fungi and the importance of
keratinocytes as a component of innate immunity.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-005-0594-4 
PMID: 16283346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

