
1. Vet Microbiol. 2005 Dec 20;111(3-4):241-6. Epub 2005 Nov 10.

Identification of Streptococcus spp. causing bovine mastitis by PCR-RFLP of
16S-23S ribosomal DNA.

McDonald WL(1), Fry BN, Deighton MA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Applied Sciences, RMIT University, Bundoora Campus, Bundoora, Vic.
3083, Australia. wendy.mcdonald@maf.govt.nz

Traditional microbiological methods for identification of Streptococcus spp.
causing bovine mastitis have been demonstrated to be less than highly reliable.
PCR-RFLP analysis of 16S-23S ribosomal DNA was used to characterise seven
reference strains of streptococcal mastitis pathogens as well as four reference
strains of other gram-positive, catalase-negative cocci of bovine origin to allow
comparative identification of field isolates. RFLP analysis of PCR products,
using a combination of two restriction endonucleases in single reactions (HaeIII 
and AluI, HaeIII and RsaI or AluI and RsaI) generated unique patterns for species
of Streptococcus, Enterococcus and Lactococcus. One hundred field isolates of
Streptococcus spp. collected from cows with clinical or subclinical mastitis were
tested. Fifty-seven isolates, classified by conventional tests as S. uberis, were
identified as 47 S. uberis and six S. parauberis by their unique RFLP patterns.
The remaining four isolates had RFLP patterns distinct from the reference strains
and two of these were identified as closely related to S. iniae and two to
Aerococcus viridans by 16S rRNA sequencing. Conventional identification of 17 S. 
agalactiae and 26 S. dysgalactiae subsp. dysgalactiae was confirmed by RFLP. Use 
of a combination of restriction enzymes in a single tube enabled the rapid,
accurate, cost effective and easily performed identification of all major
streptococcal mastitis pathogens.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2005.10.012 
PMID: 16289400  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

