
1. J Bacteriol. 2005 Dec;187(23):8088-103.

Identification of Erwinia amylovora genes induced during infection of immature
pear tissue.

Zhao Y(1), Blumer SE, Sundin GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 48824,
USA.

The enterobacterium Erwinia amylovora is a devastating plant pathogen causing
necrotrophic fire blight disease of apple, pear, and other rosaceous plants. In
this study, we used a modified in vivo expression technology system to identify
E. amylovora genes that are activated during infection of immature pear tissue, a
process that requires the major pathogenicity factors of this organism. We
identified 394 unique pear fruit-induced (pfi) genes on the basis of sequence
similarity to known genes and separated them into nine putative function groups
including host-microbe interactions (3.8%), stress response (5.3%), regulation
(11.9%), cell surface (8.9%), transport (13.5%), mobile elements (1.0%),
metabolism (20.3%), nutrient acquisition and synthesis (15.5%), and unknown or
hypothetical proteins (19.8%). Known virulence genes, including hrp/hrc
components of the type III secretion system, the major effector gene dspE, type
II secretion, levansucrase (lsc), and regulators of levansucrase and amylovoran
biosynthesis, were upregulated during pear tissue infection. Known virulence
factors previously identified in E. (Pectobacterium) carotovora and Pseudomonas
syringae were identified for the first time in E. amylovora and included HecA
hemagglutinin family adhesion, Peh polygalacturonase, new effector HopPtoC(EA),
and membrane-bound lytic murein transglycosylase MltE(EA). An insertional
mutation within hopPtoC(EA) did not result in reduced virulence; however, an
mltE(EA) knockout mutant was reduced in virulence and growth in immature pears.
This study suggests that E. amylovora utilizes a variety of strategies during
plant infection and to overcome the stressful and poor nutritional environment of
its plant hosts.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.187.23.8088-8103.2005 
PMCID: PMC1291285
PMID: 16291682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

