
1. Int Immunol. 2006 Jan;18(1):79-87. Epub 2005 Nov 15.

Mutational analysis of the SH2-kinase linker region of Bruton's tyrosine kinase
defines alternative modes of regulation for cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase families.

Guo S(1), Wahl MI, Witte ON.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute and University of California, Los Angeles, 675 Charles E. Young
Drive South, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1662, USA.

Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) plays critical roles in B cell development and
activation. Mutations of Btk cause X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) in humans
and X-linked immunodeficiency in mice. An Src homology domain 2-kinase linker
region exists in all Src, Abl, ZAP70/Syk and Btk/Tec non-receptor tyrosine kinase
families. Missense mutations in the Btk linker region can cause XLA, supporting
an essential role for this protein segment. We investigated the regulatory role
of the linker region in Btk function by mutational analysis. XLA-causing
mutations L369F and R372G abolished Btk-mediated calcium response without
affecting Btk protein stability and kinase activity significantly. Although
mutation of a well-conserved tryptophan (W260A) in the linker region of the Src
family kinase Hck has been shown to cause a hyperactive kinase, an analogous
mutation in Btk (W395A) dramatically decreased Btk kinase activity. Tyrosine
phosphorylation in the linker region was previously shown to regulate the
function of Abl and ZAP70/Syk kinases. Even though tyrosine phosphorylation was
detected on tyrosine 375 in the Btk linker region, no significant alteration was 
observed in Btk-signaling activity and biological function when this tyrosine was
mutated in DT-40 cells or in Y375F knock-in mice. Our data and previous studies
suggest that each cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase family has evolved a unique
strategy to utilize the linker region to regulate the function of the enzyme.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxh351 
PMID: 16291652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

