
1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2006 Mar;34(3):364-74. Epub 2005 Nov 17.

Abnormalities in the pulmonary innate immune system in cystic fibrosis.

Moraes TJ(1), Plumb J, Martin R, Vachon E, Cherepanov V, Koh A, Loeve C,
Jongstra-Bilen J, Zurawska JH, Kus JV, Burrows LL, Grinstein S, Downey GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respirology, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Pulmonary infection is the dominant clinical feature of cystic fibrosis (CF), but
the basis for this susceptibility remains incompletely understood. One hypothesis
is that CF airway surface liquid (ASL) is abnormal and interferes with neutrophil
function. To study this possibility, we developed an in vitro system in which we 
collected ASL from primary cultures of normal and CF airway epithelial cells.
Microbial killing was less efficient when bacteria were incubated with
neutrophils in the presence of ASL from CF epithelia compared with normal ASL.
Antimicrobial functions of human neutrophils were assessed in ASL from CF and
normal epithelia using a combination of quantitative bacterial culture, flow
cytometry, and microfluorescence imaging. The results of these assays of
neutrophil function were indistinguishable in CF and normal ASL. In contrast, the
direct bactericidal activity of ASL to Escherichia coli and to clinical isolates 
of Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa was substantially less in CF 
than in normal ASL, even when highly diluted in media of identical ionic
strength. Together, these observations indicate that the antimicrobial properties
of ASL in CF are compromised in a manner independent of ionic strength of the
ASL, and that this effect is not mediated through a direct effect of the ASL on
phagocyte function.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2005-0146OC 
PMCID: PMC2644201
PMID: 16293782  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

