
1. Infect Immun. 2005 Dec;73(12):8209-18.

Anaplasma phagocytophilum delay of neutrophil apoptosis through the p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase signal pathway.

Choi KS(1), Park JT, Dumler JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Microbiology, Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, 720 Rutland Avenue, Ross 624, Baltimore, MD 21205,
USA. sdumler@jhmi.edu

Human granulocytic anaplasmosis is caused by the obligate intracellular bacterium
Anaplasma phagocytophilum. The bacterium avoids host innate defenses in part by
infecting, surviving in, and propagating in neutrophils, as well as by inhibiting
neutrophil apoptosis. However, the mechanisms of A. phagocytophilum survival in
neutrophils and the inhibition of spontaneous apoptosis are not well understood. 
In this study, we demonstrated that antiapoptotic Mcl-1 protein (Bcl-2 family)
expression is maintained and that inhibition of procaspase-3 processing occurs in
A. phagocytophilum-infected human neutrophils. An evaluation of p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) showed evidence of increased
phosphorylation with infection. Moreover, antagonism of p38 MAPK by the inhibitor
SB203580 reversed apoptosis inhibition in live or heat-killed A.
phagocytophilum-infected neutrophils. A role for the autocrine or paracrine
production of antiapoptotic interleukin 8 (IL-8) expressed with A.
phagocytophilum infection was excluded by the use of IL-8-, IL-8R1 (CXCR1)-, and 
IL-8R2 (CXCR2)-blocking antibodies. As previously demonstrated, the antiapoptotic
effect was initially mediated by exposure to A. phagocytophilum components in
heat-killed bacteria. However, an important role for active infection is
demonstrated by the additional delay in apoptosis with intracellular growth and
the refractory abrogation of this response by the p38 MAPK inhibitor 3 to 6 h
after neutrophil infection. These results suggest that the initial activation of 
the p38 MAPK pathway leading to A. phagocytophilum-delayed neutrophil apoptosis
is bypassed with active intracellular infection. Moreover, active intracellular
infection contributes more to the overall delay in apoptosis than do components
of heat-killed A. phagocytophilum alone.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.73.12.8209-8218.2005 
PMCID: PMC1307085
PMID: 16299317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

