
1. J Immunol. 2005 Dec 1;175(11):7274-80.

Early kinetic window of target T cell susceptibility to CD25+ regulatory T cell
activity.

Sojka DK(1), Hughson A, Sukiennicki TL, Fowell DJ.

Author information: 
(1)David H. Smith Center for Vaccine Biology and Immunology, Aab Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Peripheral tolerance is maintained in part by thymically derived CD25+CD4+ T
cells (regulatory T cells (Tregs)). Their mechanism of action has not been well
characterized. Therefore, to get a better understanding of Treg action, we
investigated the kinetics of murine Treg activity in vitro. Tregs were
suppressive within a surprisingly narrow kinetic window: necessary and sufficient
only in the first 6-10 h of culture. Visualization of this time frame, using a
sensitive single-cell assay for IL-2, revealed the early elaboration of target
cell IL-2 producers in the first 6 h despite the presence of CD25+CD4+ Tregs.
However, after 6 h, a rapid rise in the number of IL-2 producers in the absence
of Tregs was dramatically abrogated by the presence of Tregs. Importantly, the
timing of suppression was dictated by the kinetics of target T cell activation
suggesting that early target T cell signals may alter susceptibility to
suppression. Modulating target T cell activation signals with provision of CD28, 
IL-2, or high Ag dose all abrogated suppression of proliferation late in culture.
However, only CD28 signals enabled target T cells to resist the early
Treg-induced down-regulation of IL-2. Therefore the quality of early target T
cell activation signals, in particular engagement of CD28, represents an
important control point in the balance between vulnerability and resistance to
Treg suppression.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.11.7274 
PMID: 16301632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

