
1. Life Sci. 2006 Apr 25;78(22):2577-83. Epub 2005 Nov 28.

Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans lipopolysaccharide stimulates the
phosphorylation of p44 and p42 MAP kinases through CD14 and TLR-4 receptor
activation in human gingival fibroblasts.

Gutiérrez-Venegas G(1), Kawasaki-Cárdenas P, Cruz-Arroyo SR, Pérez-Garzón M,
Maldonado-Frías S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Bioquímica. División de Estudios de Posgrado Facultad de
Odontología Universidad, Nacional Autónoma de México. México, D.F. 04510.
gloria@fo.odonto.unam.mx

Tyrosine phosphorylation is an early step in lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulated 
monocytes and macrophages that appears to play a key role in signal transduction.
We have demonstrated that LPS purified from Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans 
also increases protein tyrosine phosphorylation in human gingival fibroblasts
(HGF). This effect was elicited rapidly after LPS stimulation at concentrations
that stimulate anti-bacterial responses in human gingival fibroblasts. Two main
proteins, with an apparent molecular weight of 44 and 42 kDa, were phosphorylated
after LPS stimulation of the human gingival fibroblasts. The phosphorylation was 
detected after 5 to 15 min and reached the maximum at 30 min of treatment. The
increase in tyrosine phosphorylation was apparent following stimulation with LPS 
at 10 ng/ml and the response was dose dependent up to 10 microg/ml. Pretreatment 
with the tyrosine kinase inhibitors, herbimycin A and genistein inhibited the
LPS-stimulated phosphorylation of p44 and p42 MAP kinases in a dose dependent
manner. Pretreatment of human gingival fibroblasts with antibodies anti-CD14 or
anti-TLR-4 but not anti-TLR-2 inhibited the LPS-induced tyrosine phosphorylation 
of p44 and p42. Additionally, LPS-induced p44 and p42 phosphorylation was
inhibited by polymyxin treatment. These findings demonstrate that LPS from A.
actinomycetemcomintans increases rapidly p44 and p42 phosphorylation (ERK 1 and
ERK 2, respectively) in human gingival fibroblasts. Our data also suggest that
CD14 and TLR-4 receptors are involved in the LPS effects in human gingival
fibroblasts.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2005.10.033 
PMID: 16318859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

