
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005 Dec;71(12):7724-36.

At least 1 in 20 16S rRNA sequence records currently held in public repositories 
is estimated to contain substantial anomalies.

Ashelford KE(1), Chuzhanova NA, Fry JC, Jones AJ, Weightman AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Main Building, Park Place, 
P.O. Box 915, Cardiff CF10 3TL, United Kingdom. ashelford@cardiff.ac.uk

A new method for detecting chimeras and other anomalies within 16S rRNA sequence 
records is presented. Using this method, we screened 1,399 sequences from 19
phyla, as defined by the Ribosomal Database Project, release 9, update 22, and
found 5.0% to harbor substantial errors. Of these, 64.3% were obvious chimeras,
14.3% were unidentified sequencing errors, and 21.4% were highly degenerate. In
all, 11 phyla contained obvious chimeras, accounting for 0.8 to 11% of the
records for these phyla. Many chimeras (43.1%) were formed from parental
sequences belonging to different phyla. While most comprised two fragments, 13.7%
were composed of at least three fragments, often from three different sources. A 
separate analysis of the Bacteroidetes phylum (2,739 sequences) also revealed
5.8% records to be anomalous, of which 65.4% were apparently chimeric. Overall,
we conclude that, as a conservative estimate, 1 in every 20 public database
records is likely to be corrupt. Our results support concerns recently expressed 
over the quality of the public repositories. With 16S rRNA sequence data
increasingly playing a dominant role in bacterial systematics and environmental
biodiversity studies, it is vital that steps be taken to improve screening of
sequences prior to submission. To this end, we have implemented our method as a
program with a simple-to-use graphic user interface that is capable of running on
a range of computer platforms. The program is called Pintail, is released under
the terms of the GNU General Public License open source license, and is freely
available from our website at http://www.cardiff.ac.uk/biosi/research/biosoft/.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.71.12.7724-7736.2005 
PMCID: PMC1317345
PMID: 16332745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

