
1. J Immunol. 2005 Dec 15;175(12):8123-32.

T cell activation-induced CrkII binding to the Zap70 protein tyrosine kinase is
mediated by Lck-dependent phosphorylation of Zap70 tyrosine 315.

Gelkop S(1), Gish GD, Babichev Y, Pawson T, Isakov N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Health Sciences, and the
Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.

The Zap70 protein tyrosine kinase controls TCR-linked signal transduction
pathways and is critical for T cell development and responsiveness. Following
engagement of TCR, the Zap70 undergoes phosphorylation on multiple tyrosine
residues that are implicated in the regulation of its catalytic activity and
interaction with signaling effector molecules downstream of the TCR. We have
shown previously that the CT10 regulator of kinase II (CrkII) adapter protein
interacts with tyrosine-phosphorylated Zap70 in TCR-engaged T cells, and now
extend these studies to show that Tyr315 in the Zap70 interdomain B region is the
site of interaction with CrkII. A point mutation of Tyr315 (Y315F) eliminated the
CrkII-Zap70 interaction capacity. Phosphorylation of Tyr315 and Zap70 association
with CrkII were both dependent upon the Lck protein tyrosine kinase. Previous
studies demonstrated the Tyr315 is the Vav-Src homology 2 (SH2) binding site, and
that replacement of Tyr315 by Phe impaired the function of Zap70 in TCR
signaling. However, fluorescence polarization-based binding studies revealed that
the CrkII-SH2 and the Vav-SH2 bind a phosphorylated Tyr315-Zap70-derived peptide 
with affinities of a similar order of magnitude (Kd of 2.5 and 1.02 microM,
respectively). The results suggest therefore that the biological functions
attributed to the association of Zap70 with Vav following T cell activation may
equally reflect the association of Zap70 with CrkII, and further support a
regulatory role for CrkII in the TCR-linked signal transduction pathway.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.12.8123 
PMID: 16339550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

