
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1987 Dec;53(12):2761-6.

Clostridium acetobutylicum Mutants That Produce Butyraldehyde and Altered
Quantities of Solvents.

Rogers P(1), Palosaari N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
55455.

Spontaneous mutants of Clostridium acetobutylicum NRRL B643 that were resistant
to allyl alcohol (AA) were selected and characterized. These mutants contained
10- to 100-fold reduced activities of butanol and ethanol alcohol dehydrogenase. 
The AA mutants formed two groups and produced no ethanol. Type 1 AA mutants
produced significant amounts of a new solvent, butyraldehyde, and contained
normal levels of the coenzyme A-dependent butyraldehyde dehydrogenase (BAD). Type
2 AA mutants produced no significant butyraldehyde and lower levels of all
solvents, and they contained 45- to 100-fold lower activity levels of BAD.
Following ethyl methanesulfonate mutagenesis, low-acid-producing (Acid) mutants
were selected and characterized as superinduced solvent producers, yielding more 
than 99% of theoretical glucose carbon as solvents and only small amounts of
acetate and butyrate. Following ethyl methanesulfonate mutagenesis, 13
sporulation-negative (Spo) mutants were characterized; and 3 were found to
produce only butyrate and acetate, a minor amount of acetone, and no alcohols.
These Spo mutants contained reduced butanol dehydrogenase activity and no BAD
enzyme activity. The data support the view that the type 2 AA, the Acid, and the 
Spo mutants somehow alter normal regulated expression of the solvent pathway in
C. acetobutylicum.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.53.12.2761-2766.1987 
PMCID: PMC204194
PMID: 16347493 

