
1. Ying Yong Sheng Tai Xue Bao. 2005 Sep;16(9):1586-90.

[Dynamic changes of soil ecological factors in Ziwuling secondary forest area
under human disturbance].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou Z(1), Shangguan Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Soil Erosion and Dryland Farming on the Loess Plateau,
Instiute of Soil and Water Conservation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Yangling
712100, China. zhouzhengchao@126.com

As a widespread natural phenomenon, disturbance is considered as a discrete event
occurred in natural ecosystems at various spatial and temporal scales. The
occurrence of disturbance directly affects the structure, function and dynamics
of ecosystems. Forest logging and forestland assart, the common human
disturbances in forest area, have caused the dynamic changes of forest soil
ecological factors in a relatively consistent environment. A study on the
dynamics of soil bulk density, soil organic matter, soil microbes and other soil 
ecological factors under different human disturbance (logging and assart, logging
but without assart, control) were conducted in the Ziwuling secondary forest
area. The results indicated that human disturbance had a deep impact on the soil 
ecological factors, with soil physical and chemical properties become bad, soil
organic matter decreased from 2.2% to 0.8%, and soil stable aggregates dropped
more than 30%. The quantity of soil microbes decreased sharply with enhanced
human disturbance. Soil organic matter and soil microbes decreased more than 50% 
and 90%, respectively, and soil bulk density increased from 0.9 to 1.21 g x
cm(-3) with increasing soil depth. Ditch edge level also affected the dynamics of
soil factors under the same disturbance, with a better soil ecological condition 
at low-than at high ditch edge level.


PMID: 16355766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

