
1. Infect Immun. 2006 Jan;74(1):673-81.

CD4+-T-cell effector functions and costimulatory requirements essential for
surviving mucosal infection with Citrobacter rodentium.

Bry L(1), Brigl M, Brenner MB.

Author information: 
(1)4226-EBRC, Department of Pathology, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. lbry@partners.org

Citrobacter rodentium causes an attaching and effacing infection of the mouse
colon. Surprisingly, protective adaptive immunity against this mucosal pathogen
requires a systemic T-cell-dependent antibody response. To define CD4+ T-cell
effector functions promoting this systemic defense of infected epithelial
surfaces, studies were undertaken in weaning-age mice lacking costimulatory
molecules CD28 or CD40L or cytokines gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) or
interleukin-4 (IL-4). Adoptive transfer of CD4+ T cells from wild-type,
CD28(-/-), CD40L(-/-), or IFN-gamma(-/-) donors to CD4(-/-) recipients delineated
functions of these CD4+ T-cell-expressed molecules on the outcome of infection.
Wild-type and IL-4(-/-) mice successfully resolved infection, while 70% of
IFN-gamma(-/-) mice survived. In contrast, all CD28(-/-) mice succumbed during
acute infection. While fewer than half of CD40L(-/-) mice succumbed acutely,
surviving mice failed to clear infection, resulting in progressive mucosal
destruction, polymicrobial sepsis, and death 1 to 2 weeks later than in CD28(-/-)
mice. Downstream of CD28-mediated effects, CD4+ T-cell-expressed CD40L proved
essential for generating acute pathogen-specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) and early
IgG, which reduced pathogen burdens. However, deficiency of CD4+ T-cell-expressed
IFN-gamma did not adversely impact survival or development of protective antibody
in adoptively transferred CD4(-/-) recipients, though it impacted Th1 antibody
responses. These findings demonstrate that CD4+ T-cell-expressed CD40L promotes
the rapid production of protective systemic antibody during acute infection,
while deficiencies of IL-4 or of CD4+ T-cell-expressed IFN-gamma can be overcome.
These findings have important implications for understanding the role of
T-helper-cell responses during infections involving mucosal surfaces.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.74.1.673-681.2006 
PMCID: PMC1346620
PMID: 16369024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

