
1. Biochemistry. 2005 Dec 27;44(51):16886-95.

Synergistic effects on escape of a ligand from the closed tryptophan synthase
bienzyme complex.

Harris RM(1), Ngo H, Dunn MF.

Author information: 
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla,
California 92037-1000, USA.

Substrate channeling in the tryptophan synthase bienzyme complex is regulated by 
allosteric signals between the alpha- and beta-active sites acting over a
distance of 25 A. At the alpha-site, indole is cleaved from 3-indole-D-glycerol
3'-phosphate (IGP) and is channeled to the beta-site via a tunnel. Harris and
Dunn [Harris, R. M., and Dunn, M. F. (2002) Biochemistry 41, 9982-9990] showed
that when the novel amino acid, dihydroiso-L-tryptophan (DIT), reacts with the
beta-site, the alpha-aminoacrylate Schiff base, E(A-A), is formed and the enzyme 
releases indoline. The indoline produced exits the enzyme via the tunnel out the 
open alpha-site. When the alpha-site ligand (ASL) alpha-D,L-glycerol 3-phosphate 
(GP) binds and closes the alpha-site, indoline generated in the DIT reaction is
trapped for a short period of time as the quinonoid intermediate in rapid
equilibrium with bound indoline and the E(A-A) intermediate before leaking out of
the closed enzyme. In this work, we use the DIT reaction and a new,
high-affinity, ASL, N-(4-trifluoromethoxybenzenesulfonyl)-2-amino-1-ethyl
phosphate (F9), to explore the mechanism of ligand leakage from the closed
enzyme. It was found that F9 binding to the alpha-site is significantly more
effective than GP in trapping indoline in the DIT reaction; however, leakage of
indoline from the enzyme into solution still occurs. It was also found that a
combination of benzimidazole (BZI) and GP provided even more effective trapping
than F9. The new experiments with F9 and the combination of BZI and GP provide
evidence that the coincident binding of GP and BZI at the alpha-site exhibits a
strong synergistic effect that greatly slows the leakage of indoline in the DIT
reaction and enhances the trapping effect. This synergism functions to tightly
close the alpha-site and sends an allosteric signal that stabilizes the closed
structure of the beta-site. These studies also support a mechanism for the escape
of indoline through the alpha-site that is limited by ASL dissociation.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0516881 
PMID: 16363802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

