
1. Immunogenetics. 2006 Jan;57(12):893-903. Epub 2005 Dec 17.

LST1 and NCR3 expression in autoimmune inflammation and in response to IFN-gamma,
LPS and microbial infection.

Mulcahy H(1), O'Rourke KP, Adams C, Molloy MG, O'Gara F.

Author information: 
(1)BIOMERIT Research Centre, Department of Microbiology, University College Cork,
Cork, Ireland.

Many genes in the central region of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
encode proteins involved in immune and inflammatory responses. In this study, we 
have further characterized two genes in the MHC class IV region,
leucocyte-specific transcript (LST) 1 and natural cytotoxicity-triggering
receptor 3 (NCR3) (also known as 1C7 and natural killer (NK)p30). The specific
function of LST1 is not known, although expression analysis and functional data
suggest an immunomodulatory role. The LST1 gene undergoes extensive alternative
splicing, giving rise to both membrane-bound (encoded by exon 3) and soluble
isoforms. The NCR3 protein is involved in NK-mediated cytotoxicity and plays a
role in NK/dendritic cell crosstalk. Expression of these genes was examined, by
real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, in autoimmune-induced 
inflammation, specifically rheumatoid-arthritis-affected blood and synovium, and 
in response to stimulation with inflammatory mediators and bacterial agents. The 
expression of LST1, specifically splice variants encoding soluble isoforms and
NCR3, was increased in rheumatoid-arthritis-affected blood and synovium and was
associated with more severe inflammation in the synovium. Furthermore, both genes
were significantly up-regulated in response to lipopolysaccharide, interferon
(IFN)-gamma and bacterial infection. These findings suggest that NCR3 and soluble
isoforms of LST1 may play a role in inflammatory and infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-005-0057-2 
PMID: 16362817  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

