
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2006 May;47(1):329-39. Epub 2005 Dec 5.

Cloning, expression, purification, and properties of a putative plasma membrane
hexokinase from Solanum chacoense.

Claeyssen E(1), Wally O, Matton DP, Morse D, Rivoal J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Biologie Végétale, Université de Montréal, 4101 Rue
Sherbrooke est, Montréal, Que., Canada H1X 2B2.

A full-length hexokinase cDNA was cloned from Solanum chacoense, a wild relative 
of the cultivated potato. Analysis of the predicted primary sequence suggested
that the protein product, ScHK2, may be targeted to the secretory pathway and
inserted in the plant plasma membrane, facing the cytosol. ScHK2 was expressed as
a hexahistidine-tagged protein in Escherichia coli. Expression conditions for
this construct were optimized using a specific anti-hexokinase polyclonal
anti-serum raised against a truncated version of ScHK2. The full-length
recombinant protein was purified to electrophoretic homogeneity using immobilized
metal ion affinity chromatography followed by anion exchange chromatography on
Fractogel EMD DEAE-650 (S). The purified enzyme had a specific activity of 5.3
micromol/min/mg protein. Its apparent Kms for glucose (23 microM), mannose (30
microM), fructose (5.2 mM), and ATP (61 microM) were in good agreement with
values found in the literature for other plant hexokinases. Hexahistidine-tagged 
ScHK2 was highly sensitive to pH variations between 7.7 and 8.7. It was inhibited
by ADP and insensitive to glucose-6-phosphate. These findings constitute the
first kinetic characterization of a homogeneous plant hexokinase preparation. The
relevance of ScHK2 kinetic properties is discussed in relation to the regulation 
of hexose metabolism in plants.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2005.11.003 
PMID: 16376570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

