
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1992 Jul;58(7):2211-8.

Biosorption of dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane and hexachlorobenzene in
groundwater and its implications for facilitated transport.

Lindqvist R(1), Enfield CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, Rice University, Houston,
Texas 77251.

The potential for enhanced mobility of hydrophobic pollutants by cotransport with
bacteria in saturated soils was evaluated from measurements of biosorption of
14C-labeled hexachlorobenzene and dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) to five
strains of soil and sewage bacteria. The sorption process could be described by a
linear partition equation and appeared to be reversible, but desorption kinetics 
were slow and/or partly irreversible. The DDT partition coefficients varied with 
equilibration time, possibly reflecting DDT-induced changes in the physiology of 
the bacteria. The partition coefficients, normalized to the masses of the
bacteria, ranged from 250 to 14,000 for live cells, but the largest coefficients 
were associated with autoclaved cells of a Pseudomonas sp. The sorptive capacity 
of the bacterial biomass was greater for DDT than for hexachlorobenzene but was
not correlated to overall bacterial hydrophobicity, measured by hydrophobic
interaction chromatography. In a column study, 1.2 x 10(9) cells of a Bacillus
sp. strain per ml enhanced DDT transport about 8-fold, whereas an
advective-dispersive-sorptive equilibrium model for two mobile phases, water and 
free-living bacteria, suggested a 14-fold enhancement, based on the DDT partition
coefficient. The disagreement was in part due to a retarded nonequilibrium
movement of the bacteria. Model calculations based on literature data covering a 
wide range of organisms and compounds suggested that 10(6) cells ml-1 would
increase the mobility of very hydrophobic compounds (log octanol-water partition 
coefficient [K(ow) of greater than or equal to 6), whereas higher densities of
bacteria (10(8) cells ml-1) would have a significant impact on compounds with a
log K(ow) of greater than or equal to 4.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.58.7.2211-2218.1992 
PMCID: PMC195757
PMID: 1637158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

