
1. J Immunol. 2006 Jan 15;176(2):848-56.

Dopamine selectively induces migration and homing of naive CD8+ T cells via
dopamine receptor D3.

Watanabe Y(1), Nakayama T, Nagakubo D, Hieshima K, Jin Z, Katou F, Hashimoto K,
Yoshie O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kinki University School of Medicine, Osaka-Sayama,
Osaka, Japan.

The nervous systems affect immune functions by releasing neurohormones and
neurotransmitters. A neurotransmitter dopamine signals via five different
seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptors termed D1 to D5. The secondary
lymphoid tissues are highly innervated by sympathetic nerve fibers that store
dopamine at high contents. Lymphocytes also produce dopamine. In this study, we
examined expression and function of dopamine receptors in lymphocytes. We found
that D3 was the predominant subtype of dopamine receptors in the secondary
lymphoid tissues and selectively expressed by naive CD8+ T cells of both humans
and mice. Dopamine induced calcium flux and chemotaxis in mouse L1.2 cells stably
expressing human D3. These responses were almost completely inhibited by
pertussis toxin, indicating that D3 was coupled with the Galphai class of G
proteins. Consistently, dopamine selectively induced chemotactic responses in
naive CD8+ T cells of both humans and mice in a manner sensitive to pertussis
toxin and D3 antagonists. Dopamine was highly synergistic with CCL19, CCL21, and 
CXCL12 in induction of chemotaxis in naive CD8+ T cells. Dopamine selectively
induced adhesion of naive CD8+ T cells to fibronectin and ICAM-1 through
activation of integrins. Intraperitoneal injection of mice with dopamine
selectively attracted naive CD8+ T cells into the peritoneal cavity. Treatment of
mice with a D3 antagonist U-99194A selectively reduced homing of naive CD8+ T
cells into lymph nodes. Collectively, naive CD8+ T cells selectively express D3
in both humans and mice, and dopamine plays a significant role in migration and
homing of naive CD8+ T cells via D3.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.2.848 
PMID: 16393968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

