
1. J Immunol. 2006 Jan 15;176(2):803-10.

CCR7 is critically important for migration of dendritic cells in intestinal
lamina propria to mesenteric lymph nodes.

Jang MH(1), Sougawa N, Tanaka T, Hirata T, Hiroi T, Tohya K, Guo Z, Umemoto E,
Ebisuno Y, Yang BG, Seoh JY, Lipp M, Kiyono H, Miyasaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunodynamics, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

Comment in
    J Immunol. 2006 Aug 15;177(4):2035; author reply 2035-6.

Although dendritic cells (DCs) located in the small intestinal lamina propria
(LP-DCs) migrate to mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) constitutively, it is unclear
which chemokines regulate their trafficking to MLNs. In this study we report that
LP-DCs in unperturbed mice require CCR7 to migrate to MLNs. In vitro, LP-DCs
expressing CCR7 migrated toward CCL21, although the LP-DCs appeared
morphologically and phenotypically immature. In MLNs, DCs bearing the unique
LP-DC phenotype (CD11chighCD8alphaintCD11blowalphaLlowbeta7high and
CD11chighCD8alpha-CD11bhighalphaLlowbeta7high) were abundant in wild-type mice,
but were markedly fewer in CCL19-, CCL21-Ser-deficient plt/plt mice and were
almost absent in CCR7-deficient mice, indicating the critical importance of CCR7 
in LP-DC trafficking to MLNs. Interestingly, CCR7+ DCs in MLNs with the unique
LP-DC phenotype had numerous vacuoles containing cellular debris in the
cytoplasm, although MLN-DCs themselves were poorly phagocytic, suggesting that
the debris was derived from the LP, where the LP-DCs ingested apoptotic
intestinal epithelial cells (IECs). Consistent with this, LP-DCs ingested IECs
vigorously in vitro. By presenting IEC-associated Ag, the LP-DCs also induce T
cells to produce IL-4 and IL-10. Collectively, these results strongly suggest
that LP-DCs with unique immunomodulatory activities migrate to MLNs in a
CCR7-dependent manner to engage in the presentation of IEC-associated Ags
acquired in the LP.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.2.803 
PMID: 16393963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

