
1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Aug 5;267(22):15334-9.

Characterization and nucleotide binding properties of a mutant dihydropteridine
reductase containing an aspartate 37-isoleucine replacement.

Grimshaw CE(1), Matthews DA, Varughese KI, Skinner M, Xuong NH, Bray T, Hoch J,
Whiteley JM.

Author information: 
(1)Whittier Institute, San Diego, California.

Kinetic constants for the interaction of NADH and NADPH with native rat
dihydropteridine reductase (DHPR) and an Escherichia coli expressed mutant
(D-37-I) have been determined. Comparison of kcat and Km values measured
employing quinonoid 6,7-dimethyldihydropteridine (q-PtH2) as substrate indicate
that the native enzyme has a considerable preference for NADH with an optimum
kcat/Km of 12 microM-1 s-1 compared with a figure of 0.25 microM-1 s-1 for NADPH.
Although the mutant enzyme still displays an apparent preference for NADH
(kcat/Km = 1.2 microM-1 s-1) compared with NADPH (kcat/Km = 0.6 microM-1 s-1),
kinetic analysis indicates that NADH and NADPH have comparable stickiness in the 
D-37-I mutant. The dihydropteridine site is less affected, since the Km for
q-PtH2 and K(is) for aminopterin are unchanged and the 14-26-fold synergy seen
for aminopterin binding to E.NAD(P)H versus free E is decreased by less than
2-fold in the D-37-I mutant. No significant changes in log kcat and log kcat/Km
versus pH profiles for NADH and NADPH were seen for the D-37-I mutant enzyme.
However, the mutant enzyme is less stable to proteolytic degradation, to elevated
temperature, and to increasing concentrations of urea and salt than the wild
type. NADPH provides maximal protection against inactivation in all cases for
both the native and D-37-I mutant enzymes. Examination of the rat DHPR sequence
shows a typical dinucleotide binding fold with Asp-37 located precisely in the
position predicted for the acidic residue that participates in hydrogen bond
formation with the 2'-hydroxyl moiety of all known NAD-dependent dehydrogenases. 
This assignment is consistent with x-ray crystallographic results that localize
the aspartate 37 carboxyl within ideal hydrogen bonding distance of the 2'- and
3'-hydroxyl moieties of adenosine ribose in the binary E.NADH complex.


PMID: 1639779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

