
1. J Rheumatol. 2006 Jan;33(1):110-8.

Effective treatment of adjuvant arthritis with a stimulatory CD28-specific
monoclonal antibody.

Rodríguez-Palmero M(1), Franch A, Castell M, Pelegrí C, Pérez-Cano FJ,
Kleinschnitz C, Stoll G, Hünig T, Castellote C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the immunomodulatory effects of the anti-rat CD28
monoclonal antibody (Mab) JJ316 on the onset of rat adjuvant arthritis (AA).
JJ316 is a superagonistic Mab that induces polyclonal T cell proliferation in the
absence of T cell receptor (TCR) ligation and promotes the expansion of
regulatory T cells.
METHODS: Female Wistar rats in which AA was induced were treated with JJ316 on
Day 0 and Day 9 postinduction. A parallel treatment with JJ319, a "conventional" 
CD28-specific Mab that costimulates anti-TCR triggered proliferation, was
performed. Severity of arthritis was monitored by means of an arthritic score,
and by recording hindpaw volume and body weight increases. Serum antibodies
against the AA-inducing mycobacteria were also determined by ELISA. To ascertain 
the effect of JJ316 on T lymphocytes in vivo, blood CD4+CD45RChigh (Th1-like) and
CD4+CD45RClow (Th2-like) cells were analyzed by flow cytometry, and the relative 
levels of interleukin 2 (IL-2), IL-10, and interferon-g (IFN-g) mRNA in synovial 
tissue were measured by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: JJ316 efficiently prevented the inflammatory process of AA. This effect 
was associated with a specific decrease in the blood CD4+CD45RChigh/CD4+CD45RClow
T cell ratio and high IL-10 mRNA expression in the synovia. In addition,
anti-mycobacteria antibody levels decreased in JJ316 treated animals. In
contrast, administration of the conventional anti-CD28 Mab JJ319 did not improve 
inflammation.
CONCLUSION: JJ316, a stimulatory CD28-specific Mab known to promote Th2 function 
and the expansion of regulatory T cells, provides effective protection from AA.


PMID: 16395758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

