
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2006 Jan;56(Pt 1):169-80.

Culturable phylogenetic diversity of the phylum 'Bacteroidetes' from river
epilithon and coastal water and description of novel members of the family
Flavobacteriaceae: Epilithonimonas tenax gen. nov., sp. nov. and Persicivirga
xylanidelens gen. nov., sp. nov.

O'Sullivan LA(1), Rinna J, Humphreys G, Weightman AJ, Fry JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, PO Box 915, Main Building, 
Park Place, Cardiff CF10 3TL, UK.

Members of the phylum 'Bacteroidetes' are important heterotrophs involved in
cycling organic carbon in aquatic habitats. Their diversity has been studied by
molecular methods in both freshwater and marine habitats and many novel genera
and species within this phylum have been characterized in recent years. In this
study, we examined the diversity of members of the 'Bacteroidetes' that could be 
readily isolated on solid media from river epilithon and coastal sea water. Most 
(93 %) of the 55 isolates confirmed as members of the 'Bacteroidetes' and
examined by phylogenetic analysis of 16S rRNA gene sequences belonged to the
Flavobacteriaceae. Furthermore, most (62 %) of these were almost certainly
members of the genus Flavobacterium and all but one were from river epilithon.
Conversely, the sea-water isolates were more widely distributed in clades
containing other genera. Some of the isolates were deep-branching within
phylogenetic trees and so could not be assigned to putative genera. Two of these 
deep-branching isolates were characterized by polyphasic taxonomy and are
proposed as novel species within two new genera of the family Flavobacteriaceae. 
These are Epilithonimonas tenax gen. nov., sp. nov. (type strain EP105T = NCIMB
14026T = DSM 16811T) and Persicivirga xylanidelens gen. nov., sp. nov. (type
strain SW256T = NCIMB 14027T = DSM 16809T).

DOI: 10.1099/ijs.0.63941-0 
PMID: 16403883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

