
1. Immunol Lett. 2006 Apr 15;104(1-2):70-5. Epub 2005 Dec 13.

B7-1 and B7-2: similar costimulatory ligands with different biochemical,
oligomeric and signaling properties.

Bhatia S(1), Edidin M, Almo SC, Nathenson SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Ave, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

B7-1 and B7-2 are homologous costimulatory ligands expressed on the surface of
antigen presenting cells (APCs). Binding of these molecules to the T cell
costimulatory receptors, CD28 and CTLA-4, is essential for the activation and
regulation of T cell immunity. Despite strong structural similarities, B7-1 and
B7-2 exhibit different biochemical features, and their binding to the
costimulatory receptors results in distinct T cell functional outcomes. Using
photobleaching based fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), our previous 
studies have demonstrated that B7-1 and B7-2 have different cell surface
oligomeric states. While B7-1 is present as a dimer, B7-2 exists as a monomer on 
the cell surface suggesting that the unique cell surface oligomeric states of the
costimulatory ligands may play a key role in the regulation of T cell responses. 
Moreover, signaling via B7-1 and B7-2 in dendritic cells has been reported to be 
dependent on their simultaneous expression, raising the possibility that their
direct interaction or their involvement in synergistic signaling pathways may
play a role in the function of antigen presenting cells. We discuss physiological
relevance of distinct oligomeric states of B7-1 and B7-2 and address whether
these molecules can associate with one another on the cell surface to form
hetero-oligomers. Our findings suggest that B7-1 and B7-2 do not form
hetero-oligomers, underscoring the biological relevance of dimeric and monomeric 
state of B7-1 and B7-2, respectively.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2005.11.019 
PMID: 16413062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

