
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jan 24;103(4):849-54. Epub 2006 Jan 17.

Detachment of affinity-captured bioparticles by elastic deformation of a
macroporous hydrogel.

Dainiak MB(1), Kumar A, Galaev IY, Mattiasson B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Center for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering,
Lund University, P.O. Box 124, SE-221 00 Lund, Sweden.

Adsorption of bioparticles to affinity surfaces involves polyvalent interactions,
complicating greatly the recovery of the adsorbed material. A unique system for
the efficient binding and release of different cells and particles is described. 
Affinity-bound bioparticles and synthetic particles are detached from the
macroporous hydrogel matrix, a so-called cryogel, when the cryogel undergoes
elastic deformation. The particle detachment upon elastic deformation is believed
to be due to breaking of many of the multipoint attachments between the particles
and the affinity matrix and the change in the distance between affinity ligands
when the matrix is deformed. However, no release of affinity-bound protein
occurred upon elastic deformation. The phenomenon of particle detachment upon
elastic deformation is believed to be of a generic nature, because it was
demonstrated for a variety of bioparticles of different sizes and for synthetic
particles, for different ligand-receptor pairs (IgG-protein A, sugar-ConA, metal 
ion-chelating ligand), and when the deformation was caused by either external
forces (mechanical deformation) or internal forces (the shrinkage of
thermosensitive, macroporous hydrogel upon an increase in temperature). The
elasticity of cryogel monoliths ensures high recovery of captured cells under
mild conditions, with highly retained viability. This property, along with their 
continuous porous structure makes cryogel monoliths very attractive for
applications in affinity cell separation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0508432103 
PMCID: PMC1347990
PMID: 16418282  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

