
1. Infect Immun. 2006 Feb;74(2):1243-54.

Polynucleotide phosphorylase negatively controls spv virulence gene expression in
Salmonella enterica.

Ygberg SE(1), Clements MO, Rytkönen A, Thompson A, Holden DW, Hinton JC, Rhen M.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, Nobels väg 16,
171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Mutational inactivation of the cold-shock-associated exoribonuclease
polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase; encoded by the pnp gene) in Salmonella
enterica serovar Typhimurium was previously shown to enable the bacteria to cause
chronic infection and to affect the bacterial replication in BALB/c mice (M. O.
Clements et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99:8784-8789, 2002). Here, we report 
that PNPase deficiency results in increased expression of Salmonella plasmid
virulence (spv) genes under in vitro growth conditions that allow induction of
spv expression. Furthermore, whole-genome microarray-based transcriptome analyses
of bacteria growing inside murine macrophage-like J774.A.1 cells revealed six
genes as being significantly up-regulated in the PNPase-deficient background,
which included spvABC, rtcB, entC, and STM2236. Mutational inactivation of the
spvR regulator diminished the increased expression of spv observed in the pnp
mutant background, implying that PNPase acts upstream of or at the level of SpvR.
Finally, competition experiments revealed that the growth advantage of the pnp
mutant in BALB/c mice was dependent on spvR as well. Combined, our results
support the idea that in S. enterica PNPase, apart from being a regulator of the 
cold shock response, also functions in tuning the expression of virulence genes
and bacterial fitness during infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.74.2.1243-1254.2006 
PMCID: PMC1360324
PMID: 16428774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

