
1. J Immunol. 2006 Feb 1;176(3):1712-23.

Immunity and tolerance to Aspergillus involve functionally distinct regulatory T 
cells and tryptophan catabolism.

Montagnoli C(1), Fallarino F, Gaziano R, Bozza S, Bellocchio S, Zelante T, Kurup 
WP, Pitzurra L, Puccetti P, Romani L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Science, University of
Perugia, Italy.

The inherent resistance to diseases caused by Aspergillus fumigatus suggests the 
occurrence of regulatory mechanisms that provide the host with adequate defense
without necessarily eliminating the fungus or causing unacceptable levels of host
damage. In this study, we show that a division of labor occurs between
functionally distinct regulatory T cells (Treg) that are coordinately activated
by a CD28/B-7-dependent costimulatory pathway after exposure of mice to
Aspergillus conidia. Early in infection, inflammation is controlled by the
expansion, activation and local recruitment of CD4+CD25+ Treg capable of
suppressing neutrophils through the combined actions of IL-10 and CTLA-4 on
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase. The levels of IFN-gamma produced in this early phase
set the subsequent adaptive stage by conditioning the indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase-dependent tolerogenic program of dendritic cells and the
subsequent activation and expansion of tolerogenic Treg, which produce IL-10 and 
TGF-beta, inhibit Th2 cells, and prevent allergy to the fungus. The coordinate
activation of Treg may, however, be subverted by the fungus, as germinating
conidia are capable of interfering with anti-inflammatory and tolerogenic Treg
programs. Thus, regulation is an essential component of the host response in
infection and allergy to the fungus, and its manipulation may allow the pathogen 
to overcome host resistance and promote disease.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.3.1712 
PMID: 16424201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

