
1. J Infect Dis. 2006 Feb 15;193(4):522-30. Epub 2006 Jan 5.

Urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor plays a role in neutrophil
migration during lipopolysaccharide-induced peritoneal inflammation but not
during Escherichia coli-induced peritonitis.

Renckens R(1), Roelofs JJ, Florquin S, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. r.renckens@amc.uva.nl

BACKGROUND: Urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) is expressed on 
many different cells, including leukocytes. uPAR has been implicated to play a
role in neutrophil migration to sites of inflammation.
METHODS: To determine the role that uPAR plays in neutrophil recruitment in
response to bacterial products or intact bacteria, uPAR gene-deficient
(uPAR(-/-)) and wild-type (wt) mice were injected intraperitoneally with either
Escherichia coli or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) derived from this bacterium.
RESULTS: uPAR(-/-) mice demonstrated a decreased LPS-induced neutrophil migration
into peritoneal lavage fluid, whereas the chemokine and cytokine response was
unaltered. In contrast, during E. coli-induced peritonitis, uPAR(-/-) mice had a 
normal neutrophil migration into the primary site of infection. The unaltered
neutrophil trafficking in uPAR(-/-) mice during bacterial infection was
corroborated by histological assessment of liver and lung tissue and
myeloperoxidase levels in tissue homogenates. uPAR(-/-) mice displayed slightly
but significantly lower bacterial loads in the peritoneal cavity, together with a
decreased dissemination to the circulation early during the infection.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that uPAR, in part, mediates neutrophil migration 
into the peritoneal cavity on local instillation of LPS but that this function of
uPAR can be compensated for during peritonitis caused by intact E. coli.

DOI: 10.1086/499601 
PMID: 16425131  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

