
1. Blood. 2006 May 1;107(9):3531-6. Epub 2006 Jan 19.

Hepatocyte growth factor is a lymphangiogenic factor with an indirect mechanism
of action.

Cao R(1), Bj√∂rndahl MA, Gallego MI, Chen S, Religa P, Hansen AJ, Cao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) has previously been reported to act as a
hemangiogenic factor, as well as a mitogenic factor for a variety of tumor cells.
Here, we demonstrate that HGF is a lymphangiogenic factor, which may contribute
to lymphatic metastasis when overexpressed in tumors. In a mouse corneal
lymphangiogenesis model, implantation of HGF induces sprouting and growth of new 
lymphatic vessel expressing the lymphatic vessel endothelial specific marker
hyaluronan receptor-1 (Lyve-1). Unlike blood vessels, the Lyve-1-positive
structures consist of blunt-ended vessels of large diameters that generally lack 
expression of CD31. The growth of HGF-induced lymphatic vessels can be partially 
blocked by a soluble VEGFR-3, suggesting that HGF may stimulate lymphatic vessel 
growth through an indirect mechanism. Consistent with this finding, the HGF
receptor (c-Met) is only localized on corneal blood vessels but is absent on
lymphatic vessels in a mouse corneal assay. In a transgenic mouse model that
expresses HGF under the control of the whey acidic protein (WAP) gene promoter,
transgenic females develop tumors in the mammary glands after several
pregnancies. Interestingly, dilated Lyve-1-positive lymphatic vessels accumulate 
in the peritumoral area and occasionally penetrate into the tumor tissue. Our
findings indicate that HGF may play a critical role in lymphangiogenesis and
potentially contribute to lymphatic metastasis.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2005-06-2538 
PMID: 16424394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

