
1. Traffic. 2006 Jan;7(1):2-13.

The ins and outs of CD1 molecules: bringing lipids under immunological
surveillance.

Gumperz JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
Medical School, Madison, 53706, USA, jegumperz@wisc.edu

An emerging area of investigation is the role of lipids as immunological
antigens. CD1 glycoproteins comprise a family of molecules that are specialized
for presenting lipids, glycolipids and lipopeptides to T lymphocytes. Variations 
in the cytoplasmic tail sequences of CD1 isoforms lead to differential
association with adaptor proteins and consequently divergent routes of
intracellular trafficking, resulting in surveillance of distinct cellular sites
for binding lipid antigens. CD1 molecules efficiently gain access to lipids from 
intracellular microbial pathogens in endosomal compartments, and the trafficking 
and lipid-binding specialization of CD1 isoforms may correlate with the endosomal
segregation of structurally distinct lipids. Endosomal trafficking is also
critical for CD1d molecules to load antigenic self-lipids that are presented to
autoreactive CD1d-restricted natural killer (NK)T cells and is required for the
positive selection of these unique T cells. Recent studies reveal a key role for 
accessory proteins that facilitate the uptake of lipid antigens by CD1 molecules.
These include lysosomal lipid-transfer proteins, such as the saposins, and
apolipoprotein E, the major serum factor that binds and delivers extracellular
lipids to antigen-presenting cells. These advances in understanding the CD1 lipid
antigen presentation system raise new considerations about the role of the immune
response in lipid-related diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2005.00364.x 
PMID: 16445682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

