
1. Epidemiol Prev. 2005 May-Aug;29(3-4):188-94.

[Fatality rates of bacterial meningitis from current health databases suggest a
different case definition. Results of a follow-up study of bacterial meningitis
in Lazio Region, Italy, 1996-2000].

[Article in Italian]

Sangalli M(1), Palange S, Fabrizi E, Faustini A, Perucci CA.

Author information: 
(1)Osservatorio epidemiologico ASL RME, presso il Ministero affari esteri, Roma.

OBJECTIVES: To describe mortality and case fatality rate due to bacterial
meningitis in the Lazio Region from 1996 to 2000, and to compare these estimates 
with those from Cause-of-death Registry (CDR) and Hospital Discharge Registry
(HDR).
METHODS: A follow-up study of mortality was conducted through Registry Offices
for bacterial meningitis cases reported to surveillance in 1996-2000 among
residents in the Lazio Region. Death due to bacterial meningitis was defined as a
patient who died during a hospitalization for meningitis or who died within 30
days after hospitalization and whose underlying cause of death was bacterial
meningitis (ICD-9: 036.0, 036.1, 036.2,320.0, 320.1, 320.2, 320.3, 320.7, 320.8, 
320.9, 027.0). Case fatality rates estimated from follow-up study were compared
with estimates from CDR and HDR of the same period.
RESULTS: 525 bacterial meningitis cases were reported among residents in the
whole period; 98 deaths were detected with a case fatality rate (CFR) of 18.7%
(CI 95% 15.4-22.5); estimates were higher in patients 64+ year old (44.6%; CI 95%
33.7-55.9) and in meningitis due to Streptococcus pneumoniae (27.5%; CI 95%
20.3-35.6) or Listeria (32.0%; CI 95% 14.9-53.5). The CFR was 10.1% according to 
the CDR and 10.9% according to the HDR.
CONCLUSIONS: CFRs differ according to the database used. Differences may be
partially due to a selective lower sensitivity in reporting deceased cases, but
the most important factor seems to be the case definition used in follow-up study
and other sources of data.


PMID: 16454412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

