
1. Yi Chuan Xue Bao. 2006 Jan;33(1):49-55.

Generation of mouse FANCL antibody and analysis of FANCL protein expression
profile in mouse tissues.

Zhao QG(1), Zhou Y, Zhu HQ, Lu BS, Huang PT.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, Beijing 100071, China.

Fanconi anemia complementation group L (FANCL) is a novel Fanconi anemia protein,
which mono-ubiquitinates FANCD2 as a ubiquitin E3 ligase, and plays a crucial
role in DNA damage repair and chromosome stability maintenance. FANCL is involved
in the proliferation of primordial germ cells (PGC) in early embryonic stages,
and may play a role in the development of germ cells by forming a novel
testis-specific network with testis-specific proteins in the adult testis. FancL 
cDNA sequence was cloned by RT-PCR from mouse testis total RNA, and expressed in 
E. coli BL21(DE3). Rabbit FANCL polyclonal antiserum was generated using the
recombinant protein as the antigen. To prepare an antigen column for affinity
purification of FANCL-specific antibody, recombinant His-tagged FANCL was
purified by Ni(2+)-charged HiTrap Chelating HP column and coupled to an
NHS-activated HiTrap column. To confirm the activity and specificity of the FANCL
antibody, we constructed plasmid pCMV-HA/FANCL to transfect HEK 293T cells.
Transiently expressed HA-FANCL fusion protein was analyzed by immunoblotting with
both the FANCL antibody and HA monoclonal antibody. The antibody was used in
Western blotting to check the expression of FANCL protein in mouse tissues. We
found wide expression of FANCL in brain, muscle, heart, lung, liver, spleen,
kidney, testis, ovary and uterus, indicating the functional importance of this
novel protein.

DOI: 10.1016/S0379-4172(06)60008-5 
PMID: 16450587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

