
1. Int J Hyg Environ Health. 2006 May;209(3):257-64. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Survey and significance of filamentous fungi from tap water.

Gonçalves AB(1), Paterson RR, Lima N.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Engenharia Biológica, Micoteca da Universidade do Minho, Campus de
Gualtar, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal.

Fungi in drinking water are involved in the production of tastes and odours in
water. Health problems are possible, originating from mycotoxins, animal
pathogens and allergies. This report concerns the surveillance of mesophilic
fungi in tap water and assessment of their potential for causing problems. The
methods for the determination of the filamentous fungi (ff) were filtering,
swabbing and baiting. Tap water, half-strength corn meal, neopeptone-glucose rose
Bengal aureomycin (NGRBA) and oomycete selective agars for the enumeration of
colony forming units (cfu) were used. Samples were taken consecutively over 16
months. Filtration and NGRBA gave the highest ff counts. A total of 340 taxa were
isolated. There appeared to be a negative correlation between bacterial and yeast
(b/y) and ff counts. Highest counts were found in winter months for ff and in the
warmer months for b/y. Penicillium (40.6%) and Acremonium (38.8%) were the most
frequently isolated ff. There was a difference in the pattern of isolation of the
key taxa with season: penicillia predominated in early summer and Acremonium in
winter. P. expansum was isolated in high numbers in May 2004. This species is
associated with the production of the mycotoxin patulin and the odour secondary
metabolite geosmin. P. brevicompactum was detected throughout the sampling period
and is known to produce the immunosuppressive drug mycophenolic acid. Acremonium 
is associated with ocentol production which is responsible for bad tastes and
flavours. The remaining taxa were Phialophora sp. (4.1%), Cladosporium sp.
(3.5%), Rhizopus stolonifer (2.9%), Chaetomium sp. (0.6%), Alternaria sp. (0.3%),
Aspergillus sp. (0.3%), mycelia sterilia (2.6%) and unidentified (6.2%). It is
emphasised that few Aspergillus and no Fusarium strains were isolated. Rhizopus
stolonifer was obtained. However, none of the fungi isolated at mesophilic
temperature used could be described as being involved with pathogenicity per se.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijheh.2005.12.001 
PMID: 16459143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

