
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 7;281(14):9385-92. Epub 2006 Feb 7.

Two distinct pathways for O-fucosylation of epidermal growth factor-like or
thrombospondin type 1 repeats.

Luo Y(1), Nita-Lazar A, Haltiwanger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Institute for Cell and
Developmental Biology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 11794-5215.

Epidermal growth factor-like (EGF) repeats and thrombospondin type 1 repeats
(TSRs) are both small cysteine-knot motifs known to be O-fucosylated. The enzyme 
responsible for the addition of O-fucose to EGF repeats, protein
O-fucosyltransferase 1 (POFUT1), has been identified and shown to be essential in
Notch signaling. Fringe, an O-fucose beta1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase,
elongates O-fucose on specific EGF repeats from Notch to form a disaccharide that
can be further elongated to a tetrasaccharide. TSRs are found in many
extracellular matrix proteins and are involved in protein-protein interactions.
The O-fucose moiety on TSRs can be further elongated with glucose to form a
disaccharide. The discovery of O-fucose on TSRs raised the question of whether
POFUT1, or a different enzyme, adds O-fucose to TSRs. Here we demonstrate the
existence of a TSR-specific O-fucosyltransferase distinct from POFUT1. Similar to
POFUT1, the novel TSR-specific O-fucosyltransferase is a soluble enzyme that
requires a properly folded TSR as an acceptor substrate. In addition, we found
that a previously identified fucose-specific beta1,3-glucosyltransferase adds
glucose to O-fucose on TSRs, but it does not modify O-fucose on an EGF repeat.
Similarly, Lunatic fringe, Manic fringe, and Radical fringe are all capable of
modifying O-fucose on an EGF repeat, but not on a TSR. Taken together, these
results suggest that two distinct O-fucosylation pathways exist in cells, one
specific for EGF repeat and the other for TSRs.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M511974200 
PMID: 16464858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

