
1. J Biochem Mol Biol. 2006 Jan 31;39(1):26-36.

Differentially expressed genes in hemocytes of Vibrio harveyi-challenged shrimp
Penaeus monodon.

Somboonwiwat K(1), Supungul P, Rimphanitchayakit V, Aoki T, Hirono I,
Tassanakajon A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok 10330, Thailand.

Differential Display PCR technique (DD-PCR) was used for the analysis of altered 
gene expression in hemocytes of Vibrio harveyi-infected Penaeus monodon.
Forty-four combinations of arbitrary and oligo(dT) primers were used to screen
for differentially expressed genes. A total of 79 differentially expressed bands 
could be identified from 33 primer combinations. These included 48 bands (61%)
whose expression level increased and 31 bands (39%) decreased after V. harveyi
challenge. Subsequently, forty-eight differential display fragments were
successfully reamplified and cloned. A total of 267 clones were randomly selected
and sequenced. The sequence analysis showed that 85 (31%) out of 267 clones were 
matched with sequences in the GenBank database which represented 24 different
genes with known functions. Among the known genes, glucose transporter 1,
interferon-related developmental regulator 1, lysozyme, profilin, SERPINB3, were 
selected for further confirmation of their differentially expression patterns by 
real-time PCR. The results showed increasing in expression level of the selected 
genes in shrimp hemocytes after microbial challenge suggesting the involvement of
such genes in bacterial response in shrimp. The anti-lipopolysaccharide factor
type 3 (ALFPm3) gene, previously reported in P. monodon (Supungul et al., 2002)
was found among the up-regulated genes but diversity due to amino acid changes
was observed. Increase in ALFPm3 transcripts upon V. harveyi injection is in
accordance with that found in the previous study.

DOI: 10.5483/bmbrep.2006.39.1.026 
PMID: 16466635  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

