
1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2006 Jun 30;106(2):272-8. Epub 2006 Feb 17.

Isolation and in vitro antibacterial activity of astilbin, the bioactive
flavanone from the leaves of Harungana madagascariensis Lam. ex Poir.
(Hypericaceae).

Moulari B(1), Pellequer Y, Lboutounne H, Girard C, Chaumont JP, Millet J, Muyard 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Galénique et Biopharmacie, EA-3924 Sciences Séparatives et
Biopharmaceutiques, UFR Sciences Médicales et Pharmaceutiques, Université de
Franche-Comté, Place Saint-Jacques, 25030 Besançon Cedex, France.
bricemoulari@msn.com

Harungana madagascariensis is well known for its topical antibacterial properties
used in the elaboration of a lot of skin hygiene products. The aim of this study 
was, on the one hand, to evaluate the in vitro antibacterial activities of
aqueous, ethanolic and ethyl acetate crude extracts of Harungana madagascariensis
leaves against bacterial strains representative of skin microflora and, on the
other hand, to determine the chemical structure of the active compound. Only the 
ethyl acetate leaf extract presented important antibacterial activity. Its
fractionation was carried out by column chromatography using silica gel 60 and it
yielded 11 fractions. A bioautographic method, revealed in these fractions the
presence of a flavanone as the active compound astilbin or
3-O-alpha-L-rhamnoside-5,7,3',4'-tetrahydroxydihydroflavonol which was identified
on the basis of its spectroscopic data. Concerning the antibacterial activity
against the representative skin microflora of the armpit and feet, MIC and MBC
ranged from 25 to 250 and 100 to 750 microg ml-1, respectively. The results
showed that some bacteria considered to be responsible for bad odours at the
armpit and feet levels, were destroyed at 200 microg ml-1 (MBC), a concentration 
sparing most of the useful saprophytic microflora. The minimal inhibitory
quantity (MIQs) of astilbin ranged from 50 to 100 microg.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2006.01.008 
PMID: 16483735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

