
1. Infect Immun. 2006 Mar;74(3):1565-72.

The frequency of Chlamydia trachomatis major outer membrane protein-specific CD8+
T lymphocytes in active trachoma is associated with current ocular infection.

Holland MJ(1), Faal N, Sarr I, Joof H, Laye M, Cameron E, Pemberton-Pigott F,
Dockrell HM, Bailey RL, Mabey DC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratories, Banjul, The Gambia.
Martin.Holland@lshtm.ac.uk

Chlamydia-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes are able to control model infections
but may be implicated in disease pathogenesis. HLA-A2 peptide tetramers to
Chlamydia trachomatis major outer membrane protein 258-266 (MOMP258-266) and
MOMP260-268 were used to characterize HLA class I-restricted CD8+ T cells in
Gambian children aged 4 to 15 years with clinical signs of active trachoma and/or
infection with C. trachomatis. The frequencies of circulating HLA-A2 tetramer
binding cells (TBC) were determined in whole blood samples by flow cytometric
analysis. Initial screening of subjects with an anti-HLA-A2 antibody confirmed
the presence of either HLA-A2 or HLA-A28. These were subsequently further divided
by molecular subtyping. The C. trachomatis-specific HLA-A2 peptide tetramers were
able to bind T cells with receptors from subjects which were restricted by either
the HLA-A2 or the HLA-A28 restriction element. In this population, the median
value of C. trachomatis-specific CD8+ T cells was 0.02%, with frequencies of up
to 3.71% of CD8+ T cells reactive with a single tetramer in a minority of
subjects. TBC were detected more often in subjects who were infected at the
ocular surface, and their presence was associated with infection episodes of
longer duration. Detection of C. trachomatis-specific TBC was not associated with
the presence of disease or with the estimated load of ocular C. trachomatis
infection at the time of sample collection. High frequencies of C.
trachomatis-specific cells did not predict subsequent appearance or resolution of
the clinical disease signs of active trachoma.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.74.3.1565-1572.2006 
PMCID: PMC1418621
PMID: 16495527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

