
1. J Immunol. 2006 Mar 1;176(5):3257-65.

HLA-A*0201-restricted T cells from humanized NOD mice recognize autoantigens of
potential clinical relevance to type 1 diabetes.

Takaki T(1), Marron MP, Mathews CE, Guttmann ST, Bottino R, Trucco M, DiLorenzo
TP, Serreze DV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

In both humans and NOD mice, particular MHC genes are primary contributors to
development of the autoreactive CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses against pancreatic
beta cells that cause type 1 diabetes (T1D). Association studies have suggested, 
but not proved, that the HLA-A*0201 MHC class I variant is an important
contributor to T1D in humans. In this study, we show that transgenic expression
in NOD mice of HLA-A*0201, in the absence of murine class I MHC molecules, is
sufficient to mediate autoreactive CD8+ T cell responses contributing to T1D
development. CD8+ T cells from the transgenic mice are cytotoxic to murine and
human HLA-A*0201-positive islet cells. Hence, the murine and human islets must
present one or more peptides in common. Islet-specific glucose-6-phosphatase
catalytic subunit-related protein (IGRP) is one of several important T1D
autoantigens in standard NOD mice. Three IGRP-derived peptides were identified as
targets of diabetogenic HLA-A*0201-restricted T cells in our NOD transgenic
stock. Collectively, these results indicate the utility of humanized
HLA-A*0201-expressing NOD mice in the identification of T cells and autoantigens 
of potential relevance to human T1D. In particular, the identified antigenic
peptides represent promising tools to explore the potential importance of IGRP in
the development of human T1D.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.5.3257 
PMID: 16493087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

