
1. Microbes Infect. 2006 Mar;8(3):841-50. Epub 2006 Jan 13.

Dendritic cells express CCR7 and migrate in response to CCL19 (MIP-3beta) after
exposure to Helicobacter pylori.

Hansson M(1), Lundgren A, Elgbratt K, Quiding-Järbrink M, Svennerholm AM,
Johansson EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology and Göteborg University
Vaccine Research Institute (GUVAX), Göteborg University, Box 435, 405 30
Göteborg, Sweden.

Helicobacter pylori infection induces chronic inflammation in the gastric mucosa 
with a marked increase in the number of lymphoid follicles consisting of
infiltrating B and T cells, neutrophils, dendritic cells (DC) and macrophages. It
has been suggested that an accumulation of mature DC in the tissue, resulting
from a failure of DC to migrate to lymph nodes, may contribute to this chronic
inflammation. Migration of DC to lymph nodes is regulated by chemokine receptor
CCR7, expressed on mature DC, and the CCR7 ligands CCL19 and CCL21. In this study
we analysed the maturation, in vitro migration and cytokine production of human
DC after stimulation with live H. pylori. For comparison, DC responses to
non-pathogenic Escherichia coli bacteria were also evaluated. Stimulation with H.
pylori induced maturation of DC, i.e. up-regulation of the chemokine receptors
CCR7 and CXCR4 and the maturation markers HLA-DR, CD80 and CD86. The H.
pylori-stimulated DC also induced CD4(+) T-cell proliferation. DC stimulated with
H. pylori secreted significantly more interleukin (IL)-12 compared to DC
stimulated with E. coli, while E. coli-stimulated DC secreted more IL-10. Despite
low surface expression of CCR7 protein following stimulation with H. pylori
compared to E. coli, the DC migrated equally well towards CCL19 after stimulation
with both bacteria. Thus, we could not detect any failure in the migration of H. 
pylori stimulated DC in vitro that may contribute to chronic gastritis in vivo,
and our results suggest that H. pylori induces maturation and migration of DC to 
lymph nodes where they promote T cell responses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2005.10.007 
PMID: 16500130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

