
1. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2006 Mar-Apr;36(2):308-14. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

Stromal-cell-derived factor-1/CXCL12-induced chemotaxis of a T cell line involves
intracellular signaling through Cbl and Cbl-b and their regulation by Src kinases
and CD45.

Okabe S(1), Tauchi T, Ohyashiki K, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology and Medicine, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Stromal-cell-derived factor-1alpha (SDF-1alpha/CXCL12) is a potent
chemoattractant for T cells. We report that Cbl family members, Cbl and Cbl-b,
are tyrosine-phosphorylated after SDF-1alpha/CXCL12 stimulation of Jurkat T
cells. Enhanced phosphorylation of Cbl and Cbl-b was regulated by src family
kinases, and perhaps Fyn. Activated Cbl and Cbl-b interacted with Crk-L, Zap-70, 
Nck, PLC-gamma and Fyb after SDF-1alpha/CXCL12 stimulation, implicating
association of these proteins in SDF-1alpha/CXCL12 actions. SDF-1alpha/CXCL12 did
not induce tyrosine phosphorylation of Cbl or Cbl-b in Lck-deficient T cell line 
J.CaM1.6 or CD45-deficient T cell line J45.01. Thus, Lck Src kinase and tyrosine 
phosphatase CD45 are likely involved in regulating activation of Cbl family
members. A functional role for Cbl and Cbl-b in migration was demonstrated by the
decrease in SDF-1/CXCL12-induced migration in a T cell line in which transfected 
small interfering RNA for Cbl and Cbl-b decreased expression of Cbl and Cbl-b,
but not MAPK activity. SDF-1alpha/CXCL12-induced chemotaxis was greatly reduced
in the CD45-deficient T cell line. Our results implicate CD45, Cbl, Cbl-b, src
kinases and potentially other associated proteins as mediators of
SDF-1alpha/CXCL12-induced cell migration of Jurkat T cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2005.12.035 
PMID: 16503409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

