
1. Vet Dermatol. 2006 Apr;17(2):128-33.

Ciprofloxacin as a representative of disk diffusion in vitro susceptibility of
enrofloxacin for bacterial organisms from the middle-ear tissue of dogs with
end-stage otitis externa.

Cole LK(1), Kwochka KW, Hillier A, Kowalski JJ, Smeak DD, Kelbick NT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. cole.143@osu.edu

The purposes of this study were to determine whether ciprofloxacin disk diffusion
susceptibility test (DDT) results could be used to assess the in vitro
susceptibility of otic bacterial organisms to enrofloxacin and to determine the
effect of concurrent enrofloxacin administration on the DDT results for
enrofloxacin and ciprofloxacin. Thirty dogs with end-stage otitis externa
undergoing unilateral total ear canal ablation were enrolled. The dogs were
randomized to one of four enrofloxacin-treatment groups or to the control group. 
Each dog in the treatment groups received two intravenous doses of enrofloxacin
prior to surgical removal of the middle-ear tissue while the control group did
not receive any enrofloxacin. One dog was excluded from the study as no
middle-ear tissue was removed during surgery. Twenty-four dogs were in the
enrofloxacin-treatment groups and five dogs were in the control group. In 12 of
29 dogs (41.4%), 14 of 82 (17.1%) of bacteria had discrepancies in DDT results
for enrofloxacin and ciprofloxacin. Discrepancies between the control group and
treatment groups were not significantly different even though the percentage of
discrepancies for the combined treatment group was 19.4% compared to 6.7% for the
control group. In this study, ciprofloxacin DDT results were not an accurate
indicator of the in vitro susceptibility of enrofloxacin for bacteria isolated
from the middle-ear tissue of dogs with end-stage otitis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3164.2006.00506.x 
PMID: 16515655  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

