
1. J Immunol. 2006 Mar 15;176(6):3735-41.

Matrix metalloproteinase-9 deficiency impairs host defense against abdominal
sepsis.

Renckens R(1), Roelofs JJ, Florquin S, de Vos AF, Lijnen HR, van't Veer C, van
der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center Rm.
G2-132, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. r.renckens@amc.uva.nl

Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 is involved in extracellular matrix degradation 
and leukocyte migration. To determine the role of MMP-9 in the innate immune
response to peritonitis, MMP-9 gene-deficient (MMP-9(-/-)) and normal wild-type
mice were i.p. infected with Escherichia coli. MMP-9 mRNA and pro-MMP-9 protein
levels increased rapidly upon induction of peritonitis. Although MMP-9(-/-)
neutrophils showed a normal phagocytosis of E. coli in vitro, MMP-9(-/-) mice
displayed a reduced resistance against E. coli peritonitis, as indicated by an
enhanced bacterial outgrowth in the peritoneal cavity and increased dissemination
of the infection. Furthermore, the cytokine response to LPS was not influenced by
MMP-9 deficiency. However, during E. coli peritonitis, MMP-9(-/-) mice showed
much higher peritoneal chemokine and cytokine levels compared with wild-type
mice. Despite the increased local chemokine concentrations, MMP-9(-/-) mice
displayed a diminished recruitment of leukocytes to the site of infection,
indicating that cellular migration was impaired. Moreover, MMP-9(-/-) mice
developed more severe distant organ damage during infection. These data suggest
that MMP-9 is an essential component of an effective host response to E. coli
peritonitis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.6.3735 
PMID: 16517742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

