
1. J Bacteriol. 2006 Mar;188(6):2154-62.

Function of the N-terminal cap of the PAS domain in signaling by the aerotaxis
receptor Aer.

Watts KJ(1), Sommer K, Fry SL, Johnson MS, Taylor BL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Loma Linda University, Loma
Linda, CA 92350, USA.

Erratum in
    J Bacteriol. 2006 May;188(9):3429.

Aer, the Escherichia coli receptor for behavioral responses to oxygen
(aerotaxis), energy, and redox potential, contains a PAS sensory-input domain.
Within the PAS superfamily, the N-terminal segment (N-cap) is poorly conserved
and its role is not well understood. We investigated the role of the N-cap
(residues 1 to 19) in the Aer PAS domain by missense and truncation mutagenesis. 
Aer-PAS N-cap truncations and an Aer-M21P substitution resulted in low cellular
levels of the mutant proteins, suggesting that the N-terminal region was
important for stabilizing the structure of the PAS domain. The junction of the
N-cap and PAS core was critical for signaling in Aer. Mutations and truncations
in the sequence encoding residues 15 to 21 introduced a range of phenotypes,
including defects in FAD binding, constant tumbling motility, and an inverse
response in which E. coli cells migrated away from oxygen concentrations to which
they are normally attracted. The proximity of two N-cap regions in an Aer dimer
was assessed in vivo by oxidatively cross-linking serial cysteine substitutions. 
Cross-linking of several cysteine replacements at 23 degrees C was attenuated at 
10 degrees C, indicating contact was not at a stable dimer interface but required
lateral mobility. We observed large multimers of Aer when we combined
cross-linking of N-cap residues with a cysteine replacement that cross-links
exclusively at the Aer dimer interface. This suggests that the PAS N-cap faces
outwards in a dimer and that PAS-PAS contacts can occur between adjacent dimers.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.188.6.2154-2162.2006 
PMCID: PMC1428145
PMID: 16513745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

