
1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 16;281(24):16207-19. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

Apoptosis induction by activator protein 2alpha involves transcriptional
repression of Bcl-2.

Wajapeyee N(1), Britto R, Ravishankar HM, Somasundaram K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560 012, India.

Activator protein 2alpha (AP-2alpha) induces cytotoxicity by inducing cell cycle 
arrest and apoptosis. In this study we investigated the mechanism of apoptosis
induction by AP-2alpha. We found that AP-2alpha induced apoptosis efficiently in 
cells treated with benzyloxycar-bonyl-IETD-fluoromethyl ketone or FADD-silenced
cells but failed to do so in benzyloxycarbonyl-LEHD-fluoromethyl ketone-treated
or apoptosis protease activation factor-1 (Apaf1)-silenced cells, suggesting the 
central role of mitochondria in AP-2alpha-induced apoptosis. In good correlation,
cells overexpressing AP-2alpha showed a reduction in mitochondrial membrane
potential (Deltapsi(m)), cytochrome c and Smac/DIABLO release into cytosol, and
Bax translocation into mitochondria. We found that the pro-apoptotic protein Bax 
is important for AP-2alpha-induced apoptosis as adenovirus AP2 failed to induce
apoptosis in HCT116 Bax(-/-) cells. However, we found the IAP (inhibitor of
apoptosis) inhibitor Smac/DIABLO may have a limited role in AP-2alpha-induced
apoptosis as we found the IAP member Survivin down-regulated by AP-2alpha.
Although the total Bax level remains unaltered, we found a time-dependent
increase in the activated form of Bax in adenovirus AP2-infected cells. In
addition, we show that AP-2alpha transcriptionally represses Bcl-2 by binding to 
its promoter both in vitro and in vivo and that this is essential for
AP-2alpha-induced apoptosis as ectopic expression of Bcl-2 efficiently inhibited 
apoptosis induced by AP-2alpha. Furthermore, we show that chemotherapy-induced
endogenous AP-2alpha down-regulates Bcl-2 and induces apoptosis in an
AP-2alpha-dependent manner. Moreover, we demonstrate that inhibition of okadaic
acid or staurosporine-sensitive pathways in AP-2alpha overexpressing breast
cancer cells resulted in AP-2alpha-dependent apoptosis induction. These results
suggest that AP-2alpha induces apoptosis by down-regulating Bcl-2 and utilizing a
bax/cytochrome c/Apaf1/caspase 9-dependent mitochondrial pathway.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M600539200 
PMID: 16533807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

