
1. J Neurovirol. 2005;11 Suppl 3:72-82.

Central nervous system opportunistic infections in developed countries in the
highly active antiretroviral therapy era.

Manzardo C(1), Del Mar Ortega M, Sued O, García F, Moreno A, Miró JM.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Service, Hospital Clinic, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

A marked decrease in incidence has been observed for most central nervous system 
(CNS) opportunistic infections (OIs) after the use of highly active
antiretroviral therapy (HAART) in developed countries. However, the spectrum of
these OIs in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients has remained
almost unchanged. CNS toxoplasmosis, cryptococcosis, tuberculosis, and
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) remain the most frequent ones.
Primary CNS lymphoma should be included in the differential diagnosis of all
cases with focal lesions. Final diagnosis is currently made by combining
neuroimaging techniques (single-photon emission computed tomography [SPECT],
positron emission tomography [PET], magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] and/or
computed tomography [CT] scan) and molecular studies of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
and therapeutical response. Stereotactic biopsy should only be performed in the
case of atypical lesions or nonresponse to recommended treatments. After
treatment of the acute phase, lifelong maintenance therapy is necessary to
prevent OI recurrences. Once HAART is initiated, some patients can develop a
clinical worsening of some CNS OIs with or without atypical neuroimaging
manifestations. This paradoxical worsening is known as the immune reconstitution 
inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) and it results from reconstitution of the immune
system's ability to recognize pathogens/antigens in patients with prior OIs and
low CD4+ T-cell counts. In this context, IRIS can be seen in patients with CNS
cryptococcosis, tuberculosis, or PML. On the other hand, HAART-induced immune
reconstitution can improve the prognosis of some untreatable diseases such as
PML, and can allow maintenance therapy of some CNS OI to be safely discontinued
in patients with high and sustained CD4+ T-cell response.

DOI: 10.1080/13550280500513846 
PMID: 16540459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

