
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Feb;1758(2):213-21. Epub 2006 Mar 3.

Thermodynamic and structural study of the main phospholipid components comprising
the mitochondrial inner membrane.

Domènech O(1), Sanz F, Montero MT, Hernández-Borrell J.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Química Física, U.B. 08028-Barcelona, Spain.

Cardiolipin (CL) is a phospholipid found in the energy-transducing membranes of
bacteria and mitochondria and it is thought to be involved in relevant biological
processes as apoptosis. In this work, the mixing properties of CL and
1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocoline (POPC) and
1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (POPE) at the air-water
interface, have been examined using the thermodynamic framework analysis of
compression isotherms. Accordingly, the values of the Gibbs energy of mixing, the
more stable monolayers assayed were: POPC:CL (0.6:0.4, mol:mol) and POPE:CL
(0.8:0.2, mol:mol). The results reflect that attractive forces are the greatest
contributors to the total interaction in these compositions. Supported planar
bilayers (SPBs) with such compositions were examined using atomic force
microscopy (AFM) at different temperatures. With the POPC:CL mixture, rounded and
featureless SPBs were obtained at 4 degrees C and 24 degrees C. In contrast, the 
extension of the POPE:CL mixture revealed the existence of different lipid
domains at 24 degrees C and 37 degrees C. Three lipid domains coexisted which can
be distinguished by measuring the step height difference between the uncovered
mica and the bilayer. While the low and intermediate domains were temperature
dependent, the high domain was composition dependent. When cytochrome c (cyt c)
was injected into the fluid cell, the protein showed a preferential adsorption
onto the high domain of the POPC:CL. These results suggest that the high domain
is mainly formed by CL.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2006.02.008 
PMID: 16556434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

