
1. Immunology. 1991 Aug;73(4):428-32.

Lipopolysaccharide augments HLA-A,B,C molecule expression but inhibits
interferon-gamma-induced HLA-DR molecule expression on cultured human endothelial
cells.

Otsuka A(1), Hanafusa T, Kono N, Tarui S.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Osaka University Medical School,
Japan.

The effect of bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on the expression of class I and
II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules on the surface of cultured
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) was determined by indirect
immunofluorescent staining followed by flow cytometric analysis. LPS at
concentrations higher than 0.01 micrograms/ml augmented class I MHC (HLA-A,B,C)
expression on HUVEC in a concentration-dependent manner. Optimal augmentation,
approximately sixfold compared with control, was seen with 10 micrograms/ml of
LPS. Time-course experiments indicated that the augmentation was maximal on Day
4. In contrast, LPS had no effect on the induction of class II MHC (HLA-DR)
molecules and at concentrations higher than 0.01 micrograms/ml inhibited the
interferon-gamma(IFN-gamma)-induced class II MHC expression. The inhibition was
about 60% at the concentration of 100 micrograms/ml of LPS. Interleukin-1 (IL-1) 
had a similar effect as LPS on class I and II MHC expression. However, LPS
appeared to affect MHC expression directly and not through production of IL-1 or 
cyclo-oxygenase pathway products, since anti-IL-1 antibodies or an inhibitor of
cyclo-oxygenase pathway products, indomethacin, failed to reverse the effects of 
LPS. These data stress the role of LPS as a direct modulatory factor of class I
and II MHC expression on endothelial cells during the development of immune and
inflammatory response against Gram-negative bacteria.


PMCID: PMC1384571
PMID: 1655637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

