
1. Infect Immun. 2006 Apr;74(4):2233-44.

Cloning, expression, and characterization of fimbrial operon F9 from
enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7.

Low AS(1), Dziva F, Torres AG, Martinez JL, Rosser T, Naylor S, Spears K, Holden 
N, Mahajan A, Findlay J, Sales J, Smith DG, Low JC, Stevens MP, Gally DL.

Author information: 
(1)Zoonotic and Animal Pathogens Research Laboratory, Centre for Infectious
Diseases, Chancellor's Building, University of Edinburgh, 49 Little France
Crescent, Edinburgh, EH16 4SB, United Kingdom.

Recent transposon mutagenesis studies with two enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli
(EHEC) strains, a sero- type O26:H- strain and a serotype O157:H7 strain, led to 
identification of a putative fimbrial operon that promotes colonization of young 
calves (1 to 2 weeks old). The distribution of the gene encoding the major
fimbrial subunit present in O-island 61 of EHEC O157:H7 in a characterized set of
78 diarrheagenic E. coli strains was determined, and this gene was found in 87.2%
of the strains and is therefore not an EHEC-specific region. The cluster was
amplified by long-range PCR and cloned into the inducible expression vector
pBAD18. Induced expression in E. coli K-12 led to production of fimbriae, as
demonstrated by transmission electron microscopy and sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis analysis. The fimbriae were purified, 
and sera to the purified major subunit were raised and used to demonstrate
expression from wild-type E. coli O157:H7 strains. Induced expression of the
fimbriae, designated F9 fimbriae, was used to characterize binding to bovine
epithelial cells, bovine gastrointestinal tissue explants, and extracellular
matrix components. The fimbriae promoted increases in the levels of E. coli K-12 
binding only to bovine epithelial cells. In contrast, induced expression of F9
fimbriae in E. coli O157:H7 significantly reduced adherence of the bacteria to
bovine gastrointestinal explant tissue. This may have been due to physical
hindrance of type III secretion-dependent attachment. The main F9 subunit gene
was deleted in E. coli O157:H7, and the resulting mutant was compared with the
wild-type strain for colonization in weaned cattle. While the shedding levels of 
the mutant were reduced, the animals were still colonized at the terminal rectum,
indicating that the adhesin is not responsible for the rectal tropism observed
but may contribute to colonization at other sites, as demonstrated previously
with very young animals.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.74.4.2233-2244.2006 
PMCID: PMC1418889
PMID: 16552054  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

