
1. J Immunol. 2006 Apr 15;176(8):4778-84.

Engagement of CD28 outside of the immunological synapse results in up-regulation 
of IL-2 mRNA stability but not IL-2 transcription.

Sanchez-Lockhart M(1), Miller J.

Author information: 
(1)David H. Smith Center for Vaccine Biology and Immunology, Aab Institute of
Biomedical Sciences and the Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University
of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

During T cell activation by APC, CD28 is colocalized with TCR in the central
supramolecular activation cluster (cSMAC) region of the immunological synapse.
CD28 signaling through PI3K results in the recruitment of protein kinase C
(PKC)theta to the cSMAC, activation of NF-kappaB, and induction of IL-2
transcription. These results suggest that localized engagement of CD28 within the
cSMAC may be required for CD28 activation and/or signal integration with TCR
signals. To test this model we have examined the mechanism of CD28-mediated
induction of IL-2 secretion when CD28 is engaged outside of the immunological
synapse. CD4 T cells were stimulated with Ag presented by B7-negative APC and
CD28 costimulation was provided in trans by anti-CD28-coated beads or by class
II-negative, B7-positive cells. We show that induction of IL-2 secretion under
these conditions did not require expression of PKCtheta and did not induce
NF-kappaB activation or IL-2 transcription. In contrast, CD28 costimulation in
trans did induce IL-2 mRNA stability, accounting for the up-regulation of IL-2
secretion. These data indicate that the ability of CD28 to up-regulate IL-2
transcription requires colocalization of TCR and CD28 at the plasma membrane,
possibly within the cSMAC of the immunological synapse. In contrast, the ability 
of CD28 to promote IL-2 mRNA stability can be transduced from a distal site from 
the TCR, suggesting that signal integration occurs downstream from the plasma
membrane. These data support the potential role of trans costimulation in tumor
and allograft rejection, but limit the potential functional impact that trans
costimulation may have on T cell activation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.8.4778 
PMID: 16585571  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

