
1. Eur J Immunol. 2006 May;36(5):1104-13.

No evidence for dualism in function and receptors: PD-L2/B7-DC is an inhibitory
regulator of human T cell activation.

Pfistershammer K(1), Klauser C, Pickl WF, St√∂ckl J, Leitner J, Zlabinger G,
Majdic O, Steinberger P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Center for Hygiene and Medical Microbiology, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

The B7 family member programmed-death-1-ligand 2 (PD-L2/B7-DC) is a ligand for
programmed-death-receptor 1 (PD-1), a receptor involved in negative regulation of
T cell activation. Several independent studies have reported that PD-L2, however,
can also potently costimulate murine T cells via an additional yet unidentified
receptor. In this study, we evaluated the contribution of PD-L2 to the activation
of human T cells using a novel system of engineered T cell stimulators that
expresses membrane-bound anti-CD3 antibodies. Analyzing early activation markers,
cytokine production and proliferation, we found PD-L2 to consistently inhibit T
cell activation. PD-L2 inhibition affected CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and was not
abrogated by costimulation via CD28. Blocking PD-1 reverted the inhibitory effect
of PD-L2, demonstrating involvement of this pathway. In human T cells, we found
no evidence for any of the costimulatory effects described for PD-L2 in murine
systems. In line with our functional data that do not point to stimulatory
PD-L2-ligands, we show that binding of PD-L2-immunoglobulin to activated human T 
cells is abrogated by PD-1 antibodies. Our results demonstrate that PD-L2
negatively regulates human T cell activation and thus might be a candidate
molecule for immunotherapeutic approaches aimed to attenuate pathological immune 
responses.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200535344 
PMCID: PMC2975063
PMID: 16598819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

