
1. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 May 15;15(10):1667-79. Epub 2006 Apr 6.

Neuropeptide S and G protein-coupled receptor 154 modulate macrophage immune
responses.

Pulkkinen V(1), Majuri ML, Wang G, Holopainen P, Obase Y, Vendelin J, Wolff H,
Rytil√§ P, Laitinen LA, Haahtela T, Laitinen T, Alenius H, Kere J, Rehn M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland.

G protein-coupled receptor 154 (GPR154) is a recently discovered asthma
susceptibility gene upregulated in the airways of asthma patients. We previously 
observed increased pulmonary mRNA expression of the murine ortholog Gpr154 in a
mouse model of ovalbumin (OVA)-induced inflammation. However, the expression
profile of GPR154 in leukocytes and the cellular functions of the receptor and
its endogenous agonist neuropeptide S (NPS) have remained unidentified. Here, we 
characterized the mRNA expression of NPS and GPR154 by using real-time RT-PCR in 
fractionated human blood cells and in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) 
with monocyte or T cell activation. The expression of GPR154 in leukocytes was
further confirmed by immunoblotting experiments and immunohistochemical staining 
of human sputum samples. Additionally, we characterized the expression of GPR154 
in the lung tissue samples and in the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid of OVA
sensitized and challenged BALB/c mice. In human blood and sputum cells,
monocyte/macrophages and eosinophils were identified as GPR154-positive cells. In
PBMCs, monocyte activation with LPS but not T cell activation with anti-CD3/CD28 
antibodies resulted in increased NPS and GPR154 expression. In the lung tissue
samples and in the BAL fluid of OVA-challenged mice, GPR154 expression was
upregulated in alveolar macrophages in comparison to controls. In the mouse
macrophage RAW 264.7 cell line, NPS-stimulated Galphas- and Galphaq-dependent
phagocytosis of Escherichia coli. The results show that GPR154 is upregulated in 
macrophages after antigen challenge and that NPS is capable of inducing
phagocytosis of unopsonized bacteria.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddl090 
PMID: 16600990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

