
1. Int J Cancer. 1991 Dec 2;49(6):911-8.

Tumor-cell killing by MAbs against fucosyl GM1, a ganglioside antigen associated 
with small-cell lung carcinoma.

Brezicka FT(1), Holmgren J, Kalies I, Lindholm L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of GÃ¶teborg,
Sweden.

Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) reactive with the ganglioside fucosyl GM1 (Fuc-GM1),
an antigen associated with small-cell carcinoma of the lung (SCLC), were tested
for their ability to mediate tumor-cell killing in vitro in conjunction with
humoral and cellular effectors and to inhibit tumor engraftment in nude mice in
vivo. MAbs F12 and F15, both IgG3k, induced human complement-mediated cytolysis
of 3 Fuc-GM1-expressing tumor cell lines: one rat hepatoma cell line, H4-II-E,
and 2 human SCLC cell lines, NC1 H69 and NC1 H128. F12 and F15 also induced ADCC 
of these cell lines in the presence of either murine or human effector cells.
Addition of sub-cytolytic amounts of fresh human serum as complement source
resulted in enhanced ADCC induced by MAb F12 (IgG3). Also a Fuc-GM1-reactive MAb 
of IgM isotype, F9, was able to induce such complement-aided ADCC (CADCC). F12
and F15 both proved to effectively inhibit engraftment of H4-II-E tumors in nude 
mice. A single dose of a modest amount (40 micrograms) of MAb conferred 65 to
100% protection against development of tumors. Our results demonstrate that
Fuc-GM1 can act as a target antigen on tumor cells for specific immunotherapy in 
vitro and in a mouse model in vivo. Complement and murine and human mononuclear
effector cells were effective mediators of tumor cytolysis in vitro in the
presence of murine Fuc-GM1-reactive MAbs. Our results also suggest that humoral
and cellular effectors may co-operate in specific tumoricidal reactions and that 
these may be induced by antibodies of both IgG and IgM isotypes.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.2910490619 
PMID: 1660040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

