
1. Infect Immun. 2006 May;74(5):2787-802.

Influence of Slc11a1 on the outcome of Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis
infection in mice is associated with Th polarization.

Caron J(1), Larivi√®re L, Nacache M, Tam M, Stevenson MM, McKerly C, Gros P, Malo 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada H3G 1A4.

Genetic analyses identified Ses1 as a significant quantitative trait locus
influencing the carrier state of 129S6 mice following a sublethal challenge with 
Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis. Previous studies have determined that
Slc11a1 was an excellent candidate gene for Ses1. Kinetics of infection in 129S6 
mice and Slc11a1-deficient (129S6-Slc11a1(tm1Mcg)) mice demonstrated that the
wild-type allele of Slc11a1 contributed to the S. enterica serovar Enteritidis
carrier state as early as 7 days postinfection. Gene expression profiling
demonstrated that 129S6 mice had a significant up-regulation of proinflammatory
genes associated with macrophage activation at day 10 postinfection, followed by 
a gradual increase in immunoglobulin transcripts, whereas 129S6-Slc11a1(tm1Mcg)
mice had higher levels of immunoglobulins earlier in the infection. Quantitative 
reverse transcription-PCR revealed an increase in Th1 cytokine (Ifng and Il12)
and Th1-specific transcription factor Tbx21 expression during infection in both
the 129S6 and 129S6-Slc11a1(tm1Mcg) strains. However, the expression of Gata3, a 
transcription factor involved in Th2 polarization, Cd28, and Il4 was markedly
increased in Slc11a1-deficient mice during infection, suggesting a predominant
Th2 phenotype in 129S6-Slc11a1(tm1Mcg) animals following S. enterica serovar
Enteritidis infection. A strong immunoglobulin G2a response, reflecting Th1
activity, was observed only in 129S6 mice. All together, these results are
consistent with an impact of Slc11a1 on Th cell differentiation during chronic S.
enterica serovar Enteritidis infection. The presence of a Th2 bias in
Slc11a1-deficient mice is associated with improved bacterial clearance.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.74.5.2787-2802.2006 
PMCID: PMC1459719
PMID: 16622216  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

