
1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2006 Jun 14;71(12):1671-82. Epub 2006 Mar 10.

Structure-activity relationship for nucleoside analogs as inhibitors or
substrates of adenosine kinase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis. I. Modifications 
to the adenine moiety.

Long MC(1), Parker WB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, AL, United States.

Adenosine kinase (Ado kinase, EC 2.7.1.20) is a purine salvage enzyme that
phosphorylates adenosine (Ado) to AMP. Ado kinase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis
also catalyzes an essential step in the conversion of 2-methyl-Ado to a compound 
with selective antimycobacterial activity. In order to aid in the design of more 
potent and selective Ado analogs, eighty nucleoside analogs with modifications to
the adenine (Ade) moiety of Ado were evaluated as both substrates and inhibitors 
of Ado kinase from M. tuberculosis, and a subset was further tested with human
Ado kinase for the sake of comparison. The best substrates were 2-aza-Ado,
8-aza-9-deaza-Ado, and 2-fluoro-Ado and the most potent inhibitors were
N1-benzyl-Ado (Ki=0.19 microM), 2-fluoro-Ado (Ki=0.5 microM),
6-cyclopentyloxy-purine riboside (Ki=0.15 microM), and 7-iodo-7-deaza-Ado
(Ki=0.21 microM). These studies revealed the presence of a hydrophobic pocket
near the N6- and N1-positions that can accommodate substitutions at least as
large as a benzyl group. The ability to fit into this pocket increased the
likelihood that a compound would be an inhibitor and not a substrate. The
2-position was able to accommodate exocyclic substitutions as large as a methoxy 
group, although substrate activity was low. Similarly, the 7-position could bind 
an exocyclic group as large as a carboxamido moiety. However, all of the
compounds tested with modifications at the 7-position were much better inhibitors
than substrates. MIC studies performed with selected compounds have yielded
several Ado analogs with promising antitubercular activity. Future studies will
utilize this information for the design of new analogs that may be selective
antitubercular agents.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2006.03.006 
PMID: 16620788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

