
1. Int Microbiol. 2006 Mar;9(1):37-46.

ATP level variations in heterotrophic bacteria during attachment on hydrophilic
and hydrophobic surfaces.

Ivanova EP(1), Alexeeva YV, Pham DK, Wright JP, Nicolau DV.

Author information: 
(1)Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn, Victoria, Australia.
eivanova@swin.edu.au

A survey of the extracellular ATP levels of 86 heterotrophic bacteria showed that
gram-negative bacteria of the genera Sulfitobacter, Staleya, and Marinobacter
secreted elevated amounts of extracellular ATP, ranging from 6.0 to 9.8 pM
ATP/colony forming unit (cfu), and that gram-positive bacteria of the genera
Kocuria and Planococcus secreted up to 4.1 pM ATP/cfu. Variations in the levels
of extracellular and intracellular ATP-dependent luminescence were monitored in
living cells of Sulfitobacter mediterraneus ATCC 700856T and Planococcus
maritimus F 90 during 48 h of attachment on hydrophobic (poly[tert-butyl
methacrylate], PtBMA) and hydrophilic (mica) surfaces. The bacteria responded to 
different polymeric surfaces by producing either intracellular or extracellular
ATP. The level of intracellular ATP in S. mediterraneus ATCC 700856T attached to 
either surface was as high as 50-55 pM ATP/cfu, while in P. maritimus F 90 it was
120 and 250 pM ATP/cfu on PtBMA and mica, respectively. S. mediterraneus ATCC
700856T generated about 20 and 50 pM of extracellular ATP/cfu on PtBMA and mica, 
respectively, while the amount generated by P. maritimus F 90 was about the same 
for both surfaces, 6 pM ATP/cfu. The levels of extracellular ATP generated by S. 
mediterraneus during attachment on PtBMA and mica were two to five times higher
than those detected during the initial screening. High-resolution atomic force
microscopy imaging revealed a potentially interesting correlation between the
porous cell-surface of certain alpha- and gamma-proteobacteria and their ability 
to secrete high amounts of ATP.


PMID: 16636988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

