
1. J Periodontal Res. 2006 Jun;41(3):208-13.

Anti-inflammatory properties of enamel matrix derivative in human blood.

Myhre AE(1), Lyngstadaas SP, Dahle MK, Stuest√∏l JF, Foster SJ, Thiemermann C,
Lilleaasen P, Wang JE, Aasen AO.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty Division Rikshospitalet Institute for Surgical Research, University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway. A.E.Myhre@studmed.uio.no

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Enamel matrix derivative (EMD), extracted from porcine 
tooth buds, has been shown to promote periodontal healing in patients with severe
periodontitis. This involves modulation of the inflammatory response followed by 
the onset of periodontal regeneration. Based on these observations, we examined
the ability of EMD to modulate the release of a pro-inflammatory cytokine [tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha], an anti-inflammatory cytokine (interleukin-10) and 
a chemokine (interleukin- 8) in whole human blood challenged by bacterial cell
wall components.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Whole blood from healthy donors was challenged by
lipopolysaccharide or peptidoglycan and incubated with different concentrations
of EMD or a cAMP analogue 8-(4-chlorophenyl)thio-cAMP (8-CPT-cAMP). TNF-alpha,
interleukin-8 and interleukin-10 were analysed from plasma by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) while cAMP levels of peripheral blood mononuclear
cell lysates were analysed by enzyme immunoassay (EIA).
RESULTS: We found that EMD attenuated the release of TNF-alpha and interleukin-8 
in whole blood from healthy donors challenged by lipopolysaccharide or
peptidoglycan, while the release of interleukin-10 was unchanged. Enamel matrix
derivative also produced a four-fold increase in the cAMP levels of peripheral
blood mononuclear cell lysates. Like EMD, 8-CPT-cAMP attenuated the formation of 
TNF-alpha, but not of interleukin-10, in blood challenged by lipopolysaccharide.
CONCLUSION: Enamel matrix derivative limits the release of pro-inflammatory
cytokines induced by lipopolysaccharide or peptidoglycan in human blood,
suggesting that it has anti-inflammatory properties. We propose that this effect 
of EMD is, at least partly, secondary to an increase in the intracellular levels 
of cAMP in peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0765.2005.00863.x 
PMID: 16677290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

