
1. J Immunol. 2006 May 15;176(10):6186-93.

IL-17 receptor knockout mice have enhanced myelotoxicity and impaired hemopoietic
recovery following gamma irradiation.

Tan W(1), Huang W, Zhong Q, Schwarzenberger P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of South Alabama, 301
University Boulevard, Mobile, AL 36688, USA.

IL-17A is a T cell-derived proinflammatory cytokine required for microbial host
defense. In vivo expression profoundly stimulates granulopoiesis. At baseline,
the hemopoietic system of IL-17R knockout mice (IL-17Ra(-/-)) is, with the
exception of increased splenic progenitor numbers, indistinguishable from normal 
control mice. However, when challenged with gamma irradiation, hemopoietic
toxicity is significantly more pronounced in IL-17Ra(-/-) animals, with the gamma
irradiation-associated LD(50) being reduced by 150 rad. In spleen-derived T
cells, gamma irradiation induces significant murine IL-17A expression in vivo but
not in vitro. After sublethal radiation injury (500 rad), the infusion of
purified CD4(+) T cells enhances hemopoietic recovery. This recovery is
significantly impaired in IL-17Ra(-/-) animals or after in vivo blockade of
IL-17Ra in normal mice, resulting in a reduction of hemopoietic precursors by 50%
and of neutrophils by 43%. Following sublethal radiation-induced
myelosuppression, in vivo overexpression of murine IL-17A in normal mice
substantially enhanced granulopoietic restoration in mice with a 4-fold increase 
in neutrophils and splenic precursors on day 8
(CFU-granulocyte-macrophage/granulocyte-erythrocyte-megakaryocyte-monocyte,
CFU-high proliferative potential), as well as 2- and 3-fold increases of bone
marrow precursors, respectively. This establishes IL-17A as a hemopoietic
response cytokine to radiation injury in mice and an inducible mechanism that is 
required for recovery of granulopoiesis after radiation injury.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.10.6186 
PMID: 16670328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

