
1. Shock. 2006 Apr;25(4):414-9.

Leptin and host defense against Gram-positive and Gram-negative pneumonia in
mice.

Wieland CW(1), Stegenga ME, Florquin S, Fantuzzi G, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center, 
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. c.wieland@amc.uva.nl

Leptin is a pleiotrophic protein mainly produced by adipocytes that has been
implicated as a link between nutritional status and immune function. Severe
bacterial infection is associated with elevated plasma levels of leptin. To
determine the role of leptin in the host response to bacterial pneumonia leptin
deficient ob/ob mice and normal wild-type (WT) mice were intranasally infected
with different doses of the Gram-positive pathogen Streptococcus (S.) pneumoniae 
or the Gram-negative bacterium Klebsiella (K.) pneumoniae. After infection with
lower doses of either pathogen ob/ob mice displayed lower pulmonary levels of
proinflammatory cytokines, in particular tumor necrosis factor-alpha and
chemokines. However, after infection with a higher dose of S. pneumoniae or K.
pneumoniae the lung concentrations of these inflammatory mediators did not differ
between ob/ob and WT mice. In addition, the extent and severity of lung
inflammation, as assessed by semi-quantitative histopathology scores, were
similar in both mouse strains. Finally, leptin deficiency did not impact on the
bacterial outgrowth in the lungs during either Gram-positive or Gram-negative
pneumonia irrespective of the infective dose. These data suggest that although
leptin may play a modest role in the regulation of inflammation during bacterial 
pneumonia, it does not contribute to host defense mechanisms that act to limit
the outgrowth of S. pneumoniae or K. pneumoniae in the lower airways.

DOI: 10.1097/01.shk.0000209524.12873.da 
PMID: 16670645  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

