
1. RNA. 2006 Jul;12(7):1254-61. Epub 2006 Jun 1.

tRNA regulation of gene expression: interactions of an mRNA 5'-UTR with a
regulatory tRNA.

Nelson AR(1), Henkin TM, Agris PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695-7622, USA.

Erratum in
    RNA. 2006 Aug;12(8):1601.

Many genes encoding aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases and other amino acid-related
products in Gram-positive bacteria, including important pathogens, are regulated 
through interaction of unacylated tRNA with the 5'-untranslated region (5'-UTR)
of the mRNA. Each gene regulated by this mechanism responds specifically to the
cognate tRNA, and specificity is determined by pairing of the anticodon of the
tRNA with a codon sequence in the "Specifier Loop" of the 5'-UTR. For the 5'-UTR 
to function in gene regulation, the mRNA folding interactions must be
sufficiently stable to present the codon sequence for productive binding to the
anticodon of the matching tRNA. A model bimolecular system was developed in which
the interaction between two half molecules ("Common" and "Specifier") would
reconstitute the Specifier Loop region of the 5'-UTR of the Bacillus subtilis
glyQS gene, encoding GlyRS mRNA. Gel mobility shift analysis and fluorescence
spectroscopy yielded experimental Kds of 27.6 +/- 1.0 microM and 10.5 +/- 0.7
microM, respectively, for complex formation between Common and Specifier half
molecules. The reconstituted 5'-UTR of the glyQS mRNA bound the anticodon stem
and loop of tRNA(Gly) (ASL(Gly)(GCC)) specifically and with a significant
affinity (Kd = 20.2 +/- 1.4 microM). Thus, the bimolecular 5'-UTR and
ASL(Gly)(GCC) models mimic the RNA-RNA interaction required for T box gene
regulation in vivo.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.29906 
PMCID: PMC1484421
PMID: 16741230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

