
1. Cancer Res. 2006 Jun 1;66(11):5927-33.

Generation of antitumor responses by genetic modification of primary human T
cells with a chimeric NKG2D receptor.

Zhang T(1), Barber A, Sentman CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, 
New Hampshire, USA.

To create more effective T cells against human tumors, we have designed a
strategy to allow T cells to recognize tumor cells using natural killer (NK) cell
receptors but retain the effector responses of T lymphocytes. NKG2D is an
activating cell surface receptor expressed on NK cells and on some T-cell
subsets. Its ligands are primarily expressed on tumor cells. We have shown that
by linking mouse NKG2D to the CD3zeta chain, it was possible to generate a
chimeric NKG2D (chNKG2D) receptor that allowed activation of murine T cells on
engagement with NKG2D ligand-positive tumor cells leading to antitumor responses 
in mice. In this study, a human version of the chNKG2D receptor was expressed on 
primary human T cells, and antitumor responses were determined. Human peripheral 
blood mononuclear cell-derived T cells were retrovirally transduced with a human 
chNKG2D receptor gene. These chNKG2D-bearing human T cells responded to NKG2D
ligand-positive tumor cells by producing T-helper 1 cytokines, proinflammatory
chemokines, and significant cellular cytotoxicity. This response could be blocked
by anti-NKG2D antibodies, and it was dependent on NKG2D ligand expression on the 
target cells but not on expression of MHC molecules. In addition, the activity of
chNKG2D-bearing T cells remained unimpaired after exposure to a soluble NKG2D
ligand, soluble MICA, at concentrations as high as 1.5 mug/mL. These data
indicate the feasibility of using chNKG2D receptors in primary human T cells and 
suggest that this approach may be a promising means for cancer immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-0130 
PMID: 16740733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

