
1. Infect Immun. 2006 Jul;74(7):3930-8.

CPS1, a homolog of the Streptococcus pneumoniae type 3 polysaccharide synthase
gene, is important for the pathobiology of Cryptococcus neoformans.

Chang YC(1), Jong A, Huang S, Zerfas P, Kwon-Chung KJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The polysaccharide capsule is known to be the major factor required for the
virulence of Cryptococcus neoformans. We have cloned and characterized a gene,
designated CPS1, that encodes a protein containing a glycosyltransferase moiety
and shares similarity with the type 3 polysaccharide synthase encoded by the
cap3B gene of Streptococcus pneumoniae. Cps1p also shares similarity with
hyaluronan synthase of higher eukaryotes. Deletion of the CPS1 gene from a
serotype D strain of C. neoformans resulted in a slight reduction of the capsule 
size as observed by using an India ink preparation. The growth at 37 degrees C
was impaired, and the ability to associate with human brain endothelial cells in 
vitro was also significantly reduced by the deletion of CPS1. Using site-specific
mutagenesis, we showed that the conserved glycosyltransferase domains are
critical for the ability of the strain to grow at elevated temperatures. A
hyaluronan enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay method demonstrated that CPS1 is
important for the synthesis of hyaluronan or its related polysaccharides in C.
neoformans. Comparisons between the wild-type and the cps1Delta strains, using
three different transmission electron microscopic methods, indicated that the
CPS1 gene product is involved in the composition or maintenance of an
electron-dense layer between the outer cell wall and the capsule. These and the
virulence studies in a mouse model suggested that the CPS1 gene is important in
the pathobiology of C. neoformans.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00089-06 
PMCID: PMC1489683
PMID: 16790766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

