
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2006 Jul;152(Pt 7):1941-1949. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.28848-0.

Cloning and expression of the gene for periplasmic poly(vinyl alcohol)
dehydrogenase from Sphingomonas sp. strain 113P3, a novel-type quinohaemoprotein 
alcohol dehydrogenase.

Hirota-Mamoto R(1), Nagai R(1), Tachibana S(2), Yasuda M(2), Tani A(3), Kimbara
K(3), Kawai F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Nutrition, Kobe Gakuin University, Kobe, Hyogo, 651-2180, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Agriculture, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-cho, Okinawa
903-0213, Japan.
(3)Research Institute for Bioresources, Okayama University, Kurashiki, Okayama
710-0046, Japan.

A gene for periplasmic poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) dehydrogenase (PVADH) was
cloned, based on the N-terminal amino acid sequence of the purified PVADH from
Sphingomonas sp. 113P3 and the sequence of the gene for PVADH (pvaA, GenBank
accession no. AB190288). The recombinant PVADH tagged with hexahistidine was
expressed in Escherichia coli and purified to homogeneity. The recombinant enzyme
had the same characteristics as the purified enzyme from Sphingomonas sp. strain 
113P. In addition to PVA, the recombinant PVADH could oxidize glycols such as
polypropylene glycols and 1,3-butane/cyclohexanediol and 2,4-pentanediol, but
neither primary nor secondary alcohols. The amino acid sequence of the
recombinant PVADH showed similarity with those of PVADH from Pseudomonas sp.
strain VM15C, putative PVADHs from Azoarcus sp. EbN1, and Xanthomonas species
(54-25 % identity), and the quinohaemoprotein alcohol dehydrogenases (QH-ADHs)
from Comamonas testosteroni, Ralstonia eutropha and Pseudomonas putida (25-29 %
identity). PVADHs from strains 113P3 and VM15C have a conserved superbarrel
domain (SD), probable PQQ-binding amino acids in the SD and a haem-binding domain
(HBD) (they should be designated QH-PVADHs), but the positions of the amino acid 
sequences for the HBD and SD are the reverse of those of QH-ADHs. A protein
structure of QH-PVADHs is proposed. Results of dot-blot hybridization and RT-PCR 
indicated that the three genes encoding oxidized PVA hydrolase, PVADH and
cytochrome c are expressed constitutively and form an operon.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.28848-0 
PMID: 16804170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

