
1. J Clin Immunol. 1991 Jul;11(4):193-204.

Characterization of T-cell subsets and T-cell receptor subgroups in pigtailed
macaques using two- and three-color flow cytometry.

Axberg I(1), Gale MJ Jr, Afar B, Clark EA.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Primate Research Center, University of Washington, Seattle 98195.

In order to characterize macaque T-lymphocyte subsets, we used a chromophore from
a dinoflagellate, peridinin chlorophyll A protein (PerCP), which, like
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) and R-phycoerythrin (PE), can be excited by a
488-nm laser and emits light at 670 nm without spectral overlap with FITC and PE.
Mouse monoclonal antibodies were conjugated with FITC, PE, and PerCP to detect
CD4+ and CD8+ cells in macaque peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) subsets before 
and after activation and in nonactivated thymocytes. Resting and activated
macaque blood CD4+ T-cells could be clearly delineated into discrete subsets with
either CD28, CD45RA, or CD45RO as a second marker and CD26, CD29, CD44, or CD69
as a third marker. CD8+ cells were further subdivided by expression of similar
combinations of markers. A subset of CD8+ CD28- T-cells in blood expressed the
activation marker CD69, suggesting that they were already activated. Virtually
all CD4+CD8+, CD4+CD8-, and CD4-CD8+ macaque thymocytes expressed CD2, CD3, and
CD18 and not CD25, CD44, or CD45O, but macaque thymocyte subpopulations did
differ in their expression of CD28 and CD29. The expression of T-cell receptor
(TCR) subgroups on macaque PBL and thymocytes was analyzed before and after
activation with staphylococcal enterotoxins (superantigens). The pattern of
T-cell variable-region expression in macaques was similar to that seen in humans,
with a high frequency of T cells expressing V beta 8. After superantigen
stimulation, only minor changes in TCR V beta expression were detectable in PBL. 
A dramatic increase in V beta 8 expression was seen after stimulation of macaque 
thymus with staphylococcal enterotoxin D (SE-D), a minor increase after toxic
shock syndrome toxin 1 (TSST-1) stimulation, and a simultaneous decrease in V
beta 6 levels.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00917425 
PMID: 1680874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

