
1. J Immunol. 2006 Jul 15;177(2):1189-96.

Endogenous tissue-type plasminogen activator is protective during Escherichia
coli-induced abdominal sepsis in mice.

Renckens R(1), Roelofs JJ, Florquin S, de Vos AF, Pater JM, Lijnen HR, Carmeliet 
P, van 't Veer C, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
r.renckens@amc.uva.nl

Sepsis is associated with enhanced production of tissue-type plasminogen
activator (tPA). We investigated the function of endogenous tPA in the immune
responses to Escherichia coli-induced abdominal sepsis using tPA gene-deficient
(tPA(-/-)) and normal wild-type (WT) mice. tPA(-/-) mice demonstrated an impaired
defense against E. coli peritonitis as indicated by higher bacterial loads at the
primary site of the infection, enhanced dissemination, and reduced survival. The 
protective function of tPA was independent of plasmin since plasminogen
gene-deficient (Plg(-/-)) mice were indistinguishable from WT mice. Relative to
WT mice, tPA(-/-) mice demonstrated similar neutrophil counts in the peritoneal
cavity despite much higher bacterial loads and higher local concentrations of
neutrophil attracting chemokines, suggesting a reduced migratory response. In
line, tPA(-/-) mice demonstrated a reduced thioglycolate-induced neutrophil
influx into the peritoneal cavity and i.p. injection of WT mice with a
replication-defective adenoviral vector expressing tPA caused an enhanced cell
migration to the peritoneal cavity during E. coli peritonitis. These findings
identify a novel protective function of tPA in abdominal sepsis caused by E. coli
that seems independent of its role in the generation of plasmin.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.2.1189 
PMID: 16818777  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

