
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2006 Jul;72(7):4782-95.

Comparison of virulence gene profiles of Escherichia coli strains isolated from
healthy and diarrheic swine.

Chapman TA(1), Wu XY, Barchia I, Bettelheim KA, Driesen S, Trott D, Wilson M,
Chin JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Molecular Diagnostic Research Unit, Elizabeth Macarthur
Agriculture Institute, PMB 8, Camden, NSW 2570, Australia.

A combination of uni- and multiplex PCR assays targeting 58 virulence genes (VGs)
associated with Escherichia coli strains causing intestinal and extraintestinal
disease in humans and other mammals was used to analyze the VG repertoire of 23
commensal E. coli isolates from healthy pigs and 52 clinical isolates associated 
with porcine neonatal diarrhea (ND) and postweaning diarrhea (PWD). The
relationship between the presence and absence of VGs was interrogated using three
statistical methods. According to the generalized linear model, 17 of 58 VGs were
found to be significant (P < 0.05) in distinguishing between commensal and
clinical isolates. Nine of the 17 genes represented by iha, hlyA, aidA, east1,
aah, fimH, iroN(E. coli), traT, and saa have not been previously identified as
important VGs in clinical porcine isolates in Australia. The remaining eight VGs 
code for fimbriae (F4, F5, F18, and F41) and toxins (STa, STb, LT, and Stx2),
normally associated with porcine enterotoxigenic E. coli. Agglomerative
hierarchical algorithm analysis grouped E. coli strains into subclusters based
primarily on their serogroup. Multivariate analyses of clonal relationships based
on the 17 VGs were collapsed into two-dimensional space by principal coordinate
analysis. PWD clones were distributed in two quadrants, separated from ND and
commensal clones, which tended to cluster within one quadrant. Clonal subclusters
within quadrants were highly correlated with serogroups. These methods of
analysis provide different perspectives in our attempts to understand how
commensal and clinical porcine enterotoxigenic E. coli strains have evolved and
are engaged in the dynamic process of losing or acquiring VGs within the pig
population.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02885-05 
PMCID: PMC1489375
PMID: 16820472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

