
1. Mol Microbiol. 2006 Jul;61(1):46-60.

Peroxisomal carnitine acetyl transferase is required for elaboration of
penetration hyphae during plant infection by Magnaporthe grisea.

Bhambra GK(1), Wang ZY, Soanes DM, Wakley GE, Talbot NJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Exeter, Washington Singer Laboratories,
Perry Road, Exeter, EX4 4QG, UK.

Magnaporthe grisea, the causal agent of rice blast disease, invades plant tissue 
due to the action of specialized infection structures called appressoria, which
are used to breach the leaf cuticle and allow development of intracellular,
infectious hyphae. In this report we demonstrate that peroxisomal carnitine
acetyl transferase (CAT) activity is necessary for appressorium function, and in 
particular, for the elaboration of primary penetration hyphae. The major CAT
activity in M. grisea is encoded by the PTH2 gene, which shows elevated
expression in response to acetate and lipid, and is regulated by the cyclic AMP
response pathway. Furthermore, a Pth2-GFP fusion protein colocalizes with a
peroxisomal marker protein. Targeted deletion of PTH2, generated mutants that
were completely non-pathogenic, lacked CAT activity and were unable to utilize a 
range of lipid substrates. The impairment of appressorium function in Deltapth2
was associated with a delay in lipid reserve mobilization from germ tubes into
developing infection cells, and abnormal chitin distribution in infection
structures. Addition of glucose to Deltapth2 mutants partially restored the
ability to cause rice blast disease and lipid reserve mobilization. Taken
together, our findings provide evidence that Pth2 plays a role in the generation 
of acetyl CoA pools necessary for appressorium function and rapid elaboration of 
penetration hyphae during host infection.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05209.x 
PMID: 16824094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

