
1. J Clin Oncol. 2006 Jul 20;24(21):3483-9.

Association of T-cell regulatory gene polymorphisms with susceptibility to
gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma.

Cheng TY(1), Lin JT, Chen LT, Shun CT, Wang HP, Lin MT, Wang TE, Cheng AL, Wu MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, National
Taiwan University Hospital and National Taiwan University College of Medicine,
Taipei, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: Helicobacter pylori infection and host susceptibility interact to
develop gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma, and activation
of specific T cells might play a crucial role in this process. Recent
investigations show that the CTLA4, CD28, and ICOS genes are located on
chromosome 2q33 and their polymorphisms confer susceptibility to infectious and
immune diseases through deregulation of T-cell stimulation. We aimed to determine
the role of CTLA4, CD28, and ICOS polymorphisms in gastric MALT lymphoma.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Genotyping for CTLA4 (49 A/G, -318 C/T, and CT60 A/G), CD28
(IVS3+ 17T/C), and ICOS (c.602 A/C and c.1624C/T) was performed for 62 patients
with gastric MALT lymphoma and compared with 250 unrelated healthy controls.
RESULTS: H pylori infection was significantly higher in patients with gastric
MALT lymphoma (90.3%) compared with controls (66.4%; P < .001). The CTLA4 -318
C/T genotype was associated with a lower risk of developing gastric MALT lymphoma
(odds ratio [OR] = 0.3; P = .022), whereas CTLA4 49 G/G genotype was linked to a 
higher risk (OR = 4.1; P = .044). In patients with H pylori infection, CTLA4 49
G/G genotype was associated with an even higher risk (OR = 6.4; P = .047).
Carriage of the tightly linked -318C -49G haplotype conferred a four-fold higher 
susceptibility to MALT lymphoma (OR = 4.2; P = .042). Complete remission after H 
pylori eradication was related to tumor stage but not to genotypes or haplotypes.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate a genetic link of CTLA4 gene polymorphisms to 
development of gastric MALT lymphoma and indirectly support the crucial role of
host activated T cells in the MALT lymphomagenesis.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2005.05.5434 
PMID: 16849765  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

