
1. J Immunol. 2006 Aug 1;177(3):1780-5.

Phenotypical and functional analysis of memory and effector human CD8 T cells
specific for mycobacterial antigens.

Caccamo N(1), Meraviglia S, La Mendola C, Guggino G, Dieli F, Salerno A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biopatologia e Metodologie Biomediche, Universit√† di Palermo, 
Palermo, Italy.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis infects one-third of the global population and claims 
two million lives every year. Because memory CD8 T cells exhibit a high
heterogeneity in terms of phenotype and functional characteristic, we
investigated the frequency, phenotype, and functional properties of Ag85A
epitope-specific HLA-A*0201 CD8 T cells in children affected by tuberculosis (TB)
before and 4 mo after chemotherapy and healthy contact children. Using Ag85A
peptide/HLA-A*0201 pentamer, we found a low frequency of blood peptide-specific
CD8 T cells in tuberculous children before therapy, which consistently increased 
after therapy to levels detected in healthy contacts. Ex vivo analysis of the
expression of CD45RA and CCR7 surface markers indicated a skewed representation
of Ag85A epitope-specific CD8 T cells during active TB, with a predominance of T 
central memory cells and a decrease of terminally differentiated T cells, which
was reversed after therapy. Accordingly, pentamer-specific CD8 T cells from
tuberculous patients produced low levels of IFN-gamma and had low expression of
perforin, which recovered after therapy. The finding of an elevated frequency of 
pentamer-specific CD8 T cells with T effector memory and terminally
differentiated phenotypes in the cerebrospinal fluid of a child with tuberculous 
meningitis strongly indicates compartmentalization of such CD8 effectors at the
site of disease. Our study represents the first characterization of Ag-specific
memory and effector CD8 T cells during TB and may help to understand the type of 
immune response that vaccine candidates should stimulate to achieve protection.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.3.1780 
PMID: 16849488  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

