
1. Immunol Lett. 1991 Oct;30(2):165-70.

Staphylococcus aureus enterotoxin mediated specific non-responsiveness of human T
cells.

O'Hehir RE(1), Buelow R, Yssel H, Lamb JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, St. Mary's Hospital Medical School, Imperial College
of Science, Technology and Medicine, London, U.K..

Exotoxins produced by certain strains of Staphylococcus aureus are able to both
stimulate and induce non-responsiveness in T cells expressing specific T cell
antigen receptor V beta gene elements. The exposure of human CD4+ T cells to the 
appropriate enterotoxin rendered them anergic to restimulation with their natural
ligand, although responsiveness to exogenous IL-2 remained intact. The loss of
antigen-dependent proliferation was associated with the down-regulation of the
TCR complex that was paralleled by enhanced cell surface CD2 and CD25. Further
analysis of the phenotypic changes revealed that membrane levels of CD28 were
increased only on activation, suggesting a differential expression of this
protein on activated and anergic T cells. During the induction of anergy it was
observed that the synthesis of the lymphokines IL-2, IL-4 and IFN-gamma was
differentially regulated. IL-4 and IFN-gamma, but not IL-2 were detected in the
supernatants of overnight cultures of T cells exposed to tolerising
concentrations of toxin. Transcription of IL-4, as determined by polymerase chain
reaction at selected intervals, was elevated during the induction of anergy and
accounted for the presence of the protein in the supernatants. In contrast, no
tight coupling was observed between protein and mRNA levels for IL-2, suggesting 
post-translational regulation.

DOI: 10.1016/0165-2478(91)90020-b 
PMID: 1684571  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

