
1. Apoptosis. 2006 Oct;11(10):1837-49.

C/EBPbeta regulates TNF induced MnSOD expression and protection against
apoptosis.

Ranjan P(1), Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, 1510 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

The CCAAT enhancer binding protein-beta (C/EBPbeta) is a critical regulator of
many cellular processes. Exposure of C/EBPbeta-deficient fibroblasts to tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) resulted in their death due to apoptosis. While, the 
expression of Bad, Bcl-2, Bcl-x, CAS, and hILP/XIAP, as well as the nuclear
translocation of NF-kappaB was normal in C/EBPbeta-deficient cells, induction of 
manganous superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) gene did not occur. Ectopic expression of 
C/EBPbeta in C/EBPbeta-deficient fibroblasts prevented TNF-induced apoptosis.
C/EBPbeta complemented cells were able to induce MnSOD in response to TNF, ruling
out the possibilities that C/EBPbeta could render protection by regulating early 
apoptotic gene expression and/or NF-kappaB p65 expression. Moreover,
C/EBPbeta-deficient cells stably transfected with an MnSOD expression vector
bypassed the requirement of C/EBPbeta in protection against TNF-induced cell
death, suggesting that C/EBPbeta protects TNF-induced apoptotic cell death
through its role in activating MnSOD expression. Mechanistically, C/EBPbeta was
required for induced NF-kappaB p65 binding to MnSOD's intronic TNF response
element and indispensable for histone acetylation of the element in response to
TNF. These results suggest a role for C/EBPbeta in MnSOD regulation through
remodeling of local chromatin structure.

DOI: 10.1007/s10495-006-9530-0 
PMID: 16850160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

