
1. Eur Spine J. 2006 Sep;15(9):1380-7. Epub 2006 Jul 26.

Surgical treatment of spondylodiscitis in the cervical spine: a minimum 2-year
follow-up.

Heyde CE(1), Boehm H, El Saghir H, Tsch√∂ke SK, Kayser R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics and Spinal Surgery, Zentralklinik Bad Berka, Bad
Berka, Germany. christoph.heyde@charite.de

Cervical spine spondylodiscitis is a rare, but serious manifestation of spinal
infection. We present a retrospective study of 20 consecutive patients between
01/1994 and 12/1999 treated because of cervical spondylodiscitis. Mean age at the
time of treatment was 59.7 (range 34-81) years, nine of them female. In all
cases, diagnosis had been established with a delay. All patients in this series
underwent surgery such as radical debridement, decompression if necessary,
autologous bone grafting and instrumentation. Surgery was indicated if a
neurological deficit, symptoms of sepsis, epidural abscess formation with
consecutive stenosis, instability or severe deformity were present. Postoperative
antibiotic therapy was carried out for 8-12 weeks. Follow-up examinations were
performed a mean of 37 (range 24-63) months after surgery. Healing of the
inflammation was confirmed in all cases by laboratory, clinical and radiological 
parameters. Spondylodesis was controlled radiologically and could be achieved in 
all cases. One case showed a 15 degrees kyphotic angle in the proximal adjacent
segment. Spontaneous bony bridging of the proximal adjacent segment was observed 
in one patient. In the other cases the adjacent segments radiologically showed
neither fusion nor infection related changes. Preoperative neurological deficits 
improved in all cases. Residual neurological deficits persisted in three of eight
cases. The results indicate that spondylodiscitis in cervical spine should be
treated early and aggressive to avoid local and systemic complications.

DOI: 10.1007/s00586-006-0191-z 
PMCID: PMC2438571
PMID: 16868782  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

