
1. Exp Hematol. 2006 Aug;34(8):1010-20.

Peripheral blood stem cell mobilization: the CXCR2 ligand GRObeta rapidly
mobilizes hematopoietic stem cells with enhanced engraftment properties.

Pelus LM(1), Fukuda S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the Walther Oncology Center,
Indiana University School of Medicine and the Walther Cancer Institute,
Indianapolis, IN 46202 USA. lpelus@iupui.edu

Chemokines direct the movement of leukocytes, including hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells, and can mobilize hematopoietic cells from marrow to peripheral 
blood where they can be used for transplantation. In this review, we will discuss
the stem cell mobilizing activities and mechanisms of action of GRObeta, a CXC
chemokine ligand for the CXCR2 receptor. GRObeta rapidly mobilizes short- and
long-term repopulating cells in mice and/or monkeys and synergistically enhances 
mobilization responses when combined with the widely used clinical mobilizer,
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). The hematopoietic graft mobilized 
by GRObeta contains significantly more CD34(neg), Sca-1+, c-kit+, lineage(neg)
(SKL) cells than the graft mobilized by G-CSF. In mice, stem cells mobilized by
GRObeta demonstrate a competitive advantage upon long-term repopulation analysis 
and restore neutrophil and platelet counts significantly faster than cells
mobilized by G-CSF. Even greater advantage in repopulation and restoration of
hematopoiesis are observed with stem cells mobilized by the combination of
GRObeta and G-CSF. GRObeta-mobilized SKL cells demonstrate enhanced adherence to 
vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 and VCAM(pos) endothelial cells and home more
efficiently to bone marrow in vivo. The marrow homing ability of
GRObeta-mobilized cells is less dependent on the CXCR4/SDF-1 axis than cells
mobilized by G-CSF. The mechanism of mobilization by GRObeta requires active
matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), which results from release of pro-MMP-9 from 
peripheral blood, and marrow neutrophils, which alters the stoichiometry between 
pro-MMP-9 and its inhibitor tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1, resulting in
MMP-9 activation. The efficacy and rapid action of GRObeta and lack of
proinflammatory activity make it an attractive agent to supplement mobilization
by G-CSF. In addition, GRObeta may also have clinical mobilizing efficacy on its 
own, reducing the overall time and costs associated with peripheral blood stem
cell transplantation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exphem.2006.04.004 
PMID: 16863907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

