
1. Int J Hyg Environ Health. 2006 Nov;209(6):567-73. Epub 2006 Jul 26.

Bacterial decontamination of surgical wounds treated with Lavasept.

Fabry W(1), Trampenau C, Bettag C, Handschin AE, Lettgen B, Huber FX, Hillmeier
J, Kock HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie, Virologie und Hygiene, Abteilung für 
Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Krankenhaushygiene, Universität Rostock,
Schillingallee 35, D-18055 Rostock [corrected] Germany.

Erratum in
    Int J Hyg Environ Health. 2008 Oct;211(5-6):699.

In a prospective randomized controlled double-blind study in 50 acutely injured
patients, bacterially contaminated type 2-4 soft tissue wounds were treated with 
moist dressings of 0.2% Lavasept (fractionated polyhexamethylenbiguanide and
macrogolum 4000) solution (n=28) in comparison with Ringer solution (n=22).
Standardized swabs were taken on days 0, 2, 8 and 15 and investigated for
microorganisms. For a quantitative evaluation, the number of colony forming units
(CFU) was determined by a serial dilution technique. The tissue compatibility and
anti-inflammatory effect were rated on a scale of 0 (=bad) to 3 (=very good). The
most frequently found microorganism was Staphylococcus aureus, which was isolated
from 13 wounds. Use of Lavasept led to a faster and significant reduction in
microorganisms on the wound surfaces. The number of CFU per wound remained
constant or decreased, in contrast to the wounds treated with Ringer solution.
This was true for both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. There was no
evidence of impaired wound healing in either group. The anti-inflammatory effect 
and the tissue compatibility of Lavasept were rated significantly better than
that of Ringer solution. It is concluded that Lavasept combines antiseptic action
with good tissue compatibility.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijheh.2006.03.008 
PMID: 16872896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

