
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Aug;26(16):6005-15.

Negative regulation of interleukin-2 and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
during T-cell activation by the adaptor ALX.

Perchonock CE(1), Fernando MC, Quinn WJ 3rd, Nguyen CT, Sun J, Shapiro MJ,
Shapiro VS.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 3620
Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Activation of na√Øve T cells requires synergistic signals produced by the T-cell
receptor (TCR) and by CD28. We previously identified the novel adaptor ALX,
which, upon overexpression in Jurkat T cells, inhibited activation of the
interleukin-2 (IL-2) promoter by TCR/CD28, suggesting that it is a negative
regulator of T-cell activation. To further understand the physiological role of
ALX, ALX-deficient mice were generated. Purified T cells from ALX-deficient mice 
demonstrated increased IL-2 production, CD25 expression, and proliferation in
response to TCR/CD28 stimulation. Enhanced IL-2 production and proliferation were
also observed when ALX-deficient mice were primed in vivo with ovalbumin-complete
Freund's adjuvant and then restimulated ex vivo. Consistent with our initial
overexpression studies, these data demonstrate that ALX is a negative regulator
of T-cell activation. While TCR/CD28-mediated activations of phosphotyrosine
induction, extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2, Jun N-terminal protein
kinase, IkappaB kinase alpha/beta, and Akt were unaltered, constitutive
activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and its upstream regulators
MKK3/6 were observed for ALX-deficient splenocytes. The phenotype of
ALX-deficient mice resembled the phenotype of those deficient in the
transmembrane adaptor LAX, and an association between ALX and LAX proteins was
demonstrated. These results suggest that ALX, in association with LAX, negatively
regulates T-cell activation through inhibition of p38.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.02067-05 
PMCID: PMC1592799
PMID: 16880512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

