
1. Clin Immunol Immunopathol. 1990 Apr;55(1):23-40.

Experimental neonatal syphilis in a susceptible (C4D) and a resistant (Albany)
strain of guinea pig.

Wicher V(1), Wicher K, Rudofsky U, Zabek J, Jakubowski A, Nakeeb S.

Author information: 
(1)Wadsworth Center for Laboratories and Research, New York State Department of
Health, Albany 12201-0509.

Despite similar levels of natural antibodies and treponemicidal activity, 83% of 
fourth complement component-deficient (C4D) mother guinea pigs developed
ulcerative lesions to a challenge of 5 x 10(7) Treponema pallidum, whereas 75% of
offspring 1 to 5 days old were temporarily (2-3 months) resistant to development 
of dermal lesions. In contrast, only 17% of Albany-strain mothers developed small
papular lesions, while 68% of 1- to 5-day-old newborns developed large papular or
ulcerative lesions within 9-15 days postinfection. These findings, together with 
the late development of both dermal lesions and antibodies in C4D neonates,
preclude the concept of an antibody-associated natural resistance. T. pallidum
infection in either C4D or Albany neonates was not associated with depletion of
any particular cell population in lymphoid tissue. However, marked age- and
strain-dependent histologic differences were noted. Histologic examination of
lymph nodes and spleens from 17-day-old and 3- to 4-month-old animals showed that
maturation of lymphoid tissues in C4D animals lagged behind the Albany strain at 
either age. Moreover, 75% of C4D newborns contained significantly higher levels
of immunomodulatory alpha 1 fetoprotein than Albany neonates. The possibility
that differences in susceptibility to T. pallidum infection between C4D and
Albany guinea pigs as neonates and again as adults is the result of genetically
associated changes in immunologic recognition is discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/0090-1229(90)90066-y 
PMID: 1689624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

