
1. Infect Immun. 2006 Dec;74(12):6528-39. Epub 2006 Aug 18.

Early neutrophil recruitment and aggregation in the murine lung inhibit
germination of Aspergillus fumigatus Conidia.

Bonnett CR(1), Cornish EJ, Harmsen AG, Burritt JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717, USA.

Comment in
    Infect Immun. 2006 Dec;74(12):6514-6.

Several types of polymorphonuclear neutrophil (PMN) deficiency are a predisposing
condition for fatal Aspergillus fumigatus infection. In order to study the
defensive role of PMNs in the lungs, with particular reference to PMN recruitment
and antimicrobial oxidant activity, responses to pulmonary instillation of A.
fumigatus conidia were examined. Responses in BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice were
compared with those in CXCR2(-/-) and gp91(phox-/-) mice, which are known to have
delayed recruitment of PMN to the lungs in response to inflammatory stimuli and
inactive NADPH oxidase, respectively. In BALB/c mice, PMNs were recruited to the 
lungs and formed oxidase-active aggregates with conidia, which inhibited
germination. In C57BL/6, gp91(phox-/-), and CXCR2(-/-) mice, PMN recruitment was 
slower and there was increased germination compared to that in BALB/c mice at 6
and 12 h. In gp91(phox-/-) mice, germination was extensive in PMN aggregates but 
negligible in alveolar macrophages (AM). Lung sections taken at 6 and 48 h from
BALB/c mice showed PMN accumulation at peribronchiolar sites but no germinating
conidia. Those from C57BL/6 and CXCR2(-/-) mice showed germinating conidia at 6 h
but not at 48 h and few inflammatory cells. In contrast, those from gp91(phox-/-)
mice showed germination at 6 h with more-extensive hyphal proliferation and
tissue invasion at 48 h. These results indicate that when the lungs are exposed
to large numbers of conidia, in addition to the phagocytic activity of AM, early 
PMN recruitment and formation of oxidative-active aggregates are essential in
preventing germination of A. fumigatus conidia.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00909-06 
PMCID: PMC1698102
PMID: 16920786  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

