
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Oct 13;349(1):229-35. Epub 2006 Aug 14.

Regulation of E-cadherin and TGF-beta3 expression by CD24 in cultured oral
epithelial cells.

Ye P(1), Nadkarni MA, Hunter N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Dental Research, Westmead Centre for Oral Health, Westmead
Hospital Westmead, NSW, Australia. pingy@dental.wsahs.nsw.gov.au

We previously reported evidence that patients with periodontitis have serum
antibodies to oral Gram positive bacteria that are cross-reactive with epithelial
antigens, including CD24. High level expression of CD24 was confined to the
reactive periodontal epithelium and inflamed gingival attachment. As a model for 
the reactive epithelium of chronic periodontitis, H413 epithelial cells derived
from a human oral squamous cell carcinoma were cloned and lines expressing high
levels of CD24 were selected. RNA interference protocols were designed to
determine if CD24 could modulate intercellular interactions and regulate the
biology of these epithelial cells. Knock-down of CD24 protein was demonstrated by
Western blot and flow cytometry. The level of mRNA for CD24 was reduced 90% by
RNAi treatment as assayed by real-time, reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR. Gene
products known to be important in epithelial biology, including E-cadherin and
TGF-beta3 that were demonstrated to undergo altered expression patterns in the
periodontal lesion, were investigated. Down-regulation of CD24 mRNA was
associated with reduced e-cadherin expression and up-regulated expression of
snail, twist, and tgf-beta3. The cells were treated with monoclonal antibodies to
CD24 to mimic the action of auto-reactive antibodies to CD24 detected in affected
patients. Relative to isotype control antibody, stimulation by anti-CD24
antibodies induced up-regulated expression of e-cadherin and down-regulation of
tgf-beta3 as assessed by real-time RT-PCR. No consistent changes for expression
of beta-catenin, connexins, integrins, icam-1, tgf-beta1 or tgf-beta2 were
observed. CD24 could play an important role in modulating expression of genes
that regulate epithelial differentiation in periodontal disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.08.033 
PMID: 16930538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

