
1. Tissue Antigens. 2006 Sep;68(3):210-9.

Humanized transgenic mice expressing HLA DR4-DQ3 haplotype: reconstitution of
phenotype and HLA-restricted T-cell responses.

Chen Z(1), de Kauwe AL, Keech C, Wijburg O, Simpfendorfer K, Alexander WS,
McCluskey J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia.

Many autoimmune conditions have close genetic linkages to particular human
histocompatibility leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II genes. With the aim of
establishing a murine model of autoimmune disease, we have generated an HLA
DR4-DQ3 haplotype transgenic (Tg) mouse that expresses a 440-kb yeast artificial 
chromosome harbouring DRA, DRB1*040101, DRB4*010301, DQA1*030101, DQB1*0302 and
all the internal regulatory segments. This Tg mouse line was crossed to human CD4
(hCD4) Tg mice and endogenous class II knockout mice (I-A(o/o) and I-E(o/o))
lines to generate a DR4-DQ3.hCD4.IAE(o/o) Tg line. The Tg DR and DQ molecules are
expressed on the physiological cell types in these animals, i.e. on most B cells 
(>85%), dendritic cells (DCs) and macrophages but not on T cells, with levels of 
expression comparable with those of human B cells (where DR > DQ expression). The
DR4/DQ3 transgenes fully reconstituted the CD4 T-cell compartment, in both the
thymus and the periphery, and the analysis of the T-cell receptor repertoire in
the Tg mice confirmed that these class II molecules were able to mediate thymic
selection of a broad range of Vbeta families. HLA DR4- and DQ3-restricted T-cell 
responses were elicited following immunization with known T-cell determinants
presented by these molecules. Furthermore, the DR4-DQ3-restricted CD4(+) T cells 
conferred protective antibody-mediated immunity against an otherwise lethal
infection with Salmonella enterica var. typhimurium. These new DR4-DQ3 Tg mice
should prove to be valuable tools for dissecting the importance of this class II 
haplotype in autoimmune disorders like rheumatoid arthritis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2006.00656.x 
PMID: 16948641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

