
1. Infect Immun. 2006 Dec;74(12):6847-54. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Signal transduction and nuclear responses in Staphylococcus aureus-induced
expression of human beta-defensin 3 in skin keratinocytes.

Menzies BE(1), Kenoyer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs S-111-ID, Puget Sound Health Care System, 1660 
S. Columbian Way, Seattle, WA 98108, USA. bmenzies@u.washington.edu

The human beta-defensin 3 (hBD-3) is an inducible epithelial peptide antibiotic
that has potent antistaphylococcal activity. Infection of skin epithelial cells
with viable Staphylococcus aureus, a common skin pathogen, induces increased gene
expression of hBD-3 and other antimicrobial peptides. The aim of this study was
to identify signaling pathways and nuclear responses that contribute to the gene 
expression of hBD-3 in primary human keratinocytes upon contact with S. aureus.
Increased hBD-3 peptide was observed by immunofluorescence microscopy in
keratinocytes exposed to S. aureus and to lipoteichoic acid (LTA). Both are
ligands for the cell surface Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2), and thus the
contribution of TLR2 signaling in hBD-3 expression was examined. Functional
inhibition of TLR2 prior to S. aureus stimulation significantly decreased hBD-3
mRNA levels by 37%, attesting to the involvement of this surface receptor in the 
initial recognition and downstream signaling for hBD-3 expression. Treatment of
keratinocytes with a p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitor prior 
to either S. aureus or LTA stimulation was associated with reduced hBD-3 mRNA
transcripts and peptide. We also propose a role for the MAPK-regulated
transcriptional activating protein 1 in S. aureus-induced hBD-3 gene expression. 
Combined, these studies indicate a role for TLR2 signaling and MAPK activation in
the upregulation of hBD-3 and demonstrate the innate immune capacity of skin
keratinocytes under conditions of S. aureus challenge to enhance the local
expression of this antistaphylococcal peptide antibiotic.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00389-06 
PMCID: PMC1698080
PMID: 16954397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

