
1. Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 1;66(17):8687-97.

Mimp, a mitochondrial carrier homologue, inhibits Met-HGF/SF-induced scattering
and tumorigenicity by altering Met-HGF/SF signaling pathways.

Leibowitz-Amit R(1), Tsarfaty G, Abargil Y, Yerushalmi GM, Horev J, Tsarfaty I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Microbiology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

We have recently shown that Mimp, a mitochondrial carrier protein homologue, is
induced by Met-hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF) signaling and
decreases the mitochondrial membrane potential in DA3 mammary adenocarcinoma
cells. We show here that induction of Mimp leads to growth arrest in response to 
HGF/SF by arresting cells at the S phase of the cell cycle. Induction of Mimp or 
its transient expression does not lead to apoptosis. Mimp also attenuates
HGF/SF-induced cellular scattering in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. The
exogenous induction of Mimp at levels similar to its endogenous induction by
HGF/SF increases the level of the Met protein and its phosphorylation by HGF/SF
but reduces the levels of Shc and prevents the HGF/SF-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of Grb2 and Shc. In contrast, the level of phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K) increases following Mimp induction and the level of
phosphorylated PI3K in response to HGF/SF is unaffected by the exogenous
induction of Mimp. Moreover, exogenous Mimp prevents the HGF/SF-induced
transcription of the serum response element-luciferase reporter gene. Our results
show that Mimp expression reduces Met-HGF/SF-induced proliferation and scattering
by attenuating and altering the downstream signaling of Met. These data show a
new link between a tyrosine kinase growth factor receptor and a mitochondrial
carrier homologue that regulates cellular growth, motility, and tumorigenicity.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-2294 
PMID: 16951184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

