
1. Int Immunol. 2006 Nov;18(11):1531-9. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

CD27 contributes to the early systemic immune response to Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infection but does not affect outcome.

Wieland CW(1), Kerver ME, Florquin S, Nolte MA, Borst J, van Lier R, van Oers MH,
van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
c.wieland@amc.uva.nl

The development of a strong Th1-mediated adaptive immune response is considered
of main importance for host defense against the intracellular pathogen
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The induction of a cellular immune response is not
only dependent on the engagement of the TCR but also requires co-stimulation. In 
order to study the role of the co-stimulatory molecule of the tumor necrosis
factor receptor family member CD27 during murine M. tuberculosis infection, we
intranasally infected wild-type (WT) and CD27 knockout (KO) mice with 10(5)
colony-forming units M. tuberculosis. Whereas there were no differences in
bacterial growth, inflammation and IFNgamma production by CD4+ and CD8+
lymphocytes in the lungs early after infection, the number of splenic CD8+ T
cells producing the key Th1 cytokine IFNgamma was lower in CD27 KO mice than in
WT mice. After 6 weeks, CD27 KO mice had 3.6-fold higher mycobacterial counts in 
their lungs and displayed more pulmonary inflammation and increased numbers of
infiltrated leukocytes. Despite these differences early in infection, an equal
number of WT and CD27 KO mice died during a 43-week observation period and lung
bacterial loads and inflammation were comparable in the surviving animals. Our
data suggest that CD27 does not contribute to the local IFNgamma-mediated
response and long-term protection against M. tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxl086 
PMID: 16966496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

