
1. Microbes Infect. 2006 Oct;8(12-13):2679-85. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

NKT cells play a limited role in the neutrophilic inflammatory responses and host
defense to pulmonary infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Kinjo T(1), Nakamatsu M, Nakasone C, Yamamoto N, Kinjo Y, Miyagi K, Uezu K,
Nakamura K, Higa F, Tateyama M, Takeda K, Nakayama T, Taniguchi M, Kaku M, Fujita
J, Kawakami K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Control and Prevention of Infectious 
Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan.

CD1d-restricted NKT cells are reported to play a critical role in the host
defense to pulmonary infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. However, the
contribution of a major subset expressing a Valpha14-Jalpha18 gene segment
remains unclear. In the present study, we re-evaluated the role of NKT cells in
the neutrophilic inflammatory responses and host defense to this infection using 
mice genetically lacking Jalpha18 or CD1d (Jalpha18KO or CD1dKO mice). These mice
cleared the bacteria in lungs at a comparable level to wild-type (WT) mice. There
was no significant difference in the local neutrophilic responses, as shown by
neutrophil counts and synthesis of MIP-2 and TNF-alpha, in either KO mice from
those in WT mice. Administration of alpha-galactosylceramide, a specific
activator of Valpha14+ NKT cells, failed to promote the bacterial clearance and
neutrophilic responses, although the same treatment increased the synthesis of
IFN-gamma, suggesting the involvement of this cytokine downstream of NKT cells.
In agreement against this notion, these responses were not further enhanced by
administration of recombinant IFN-gamma in the infected Jalpha18KO mice. Our data
indicate that NKT cells play a limited role in the development of neutrophilic
inflammatory responses and host defense to pulmonary infection with P.
aeruginosa.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2006.07.016 
PMID: 16979364  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

