
1. Stem Cells. 2007 Jan;25(1):107-14. Epub 2006 Sep 14.

In vitro expanded cells contributing to rapid severe combined immunodeficient
repopulation activity are CD34+38-33+90+45RA-.

Vanheusden K(1), Van Coppernolle S, De Smedt M, Plum J, Vandekerckhove B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium.

Expansion of hematopoietic stem cells could be used clinically to shorten the
prolonged aplastic phase after umbilical cord blood (UCB) transplantation. In
this report, we investigated rapid severe combined immunodeficient (SCID)
repopulating activity (rSRA) 2 weeks after transplantation of CD34(+) UCB cells
cultured with serum on MS5 stromal cells and in serum- and stroma-free cultures. 
Various subpopulations obtained after culture were studied for rSRA. CD34(+)
expansion cultures resulted in vast expansion of CD45(+) and CD34(+) cells.
Independent of the culture method, only the CD34(+)33(+)38(-) fraction of the
cultured cells contained rSRA. Subsequently, we subfractionated the CD34(+)38(-) 
fraction using stem cell markers CD45RA and CD90. In vitro differentiation
cultures showed CD34(+) expansion in both CD45RA(-) and CD90(+) cultures, whereas
little increase in CD34(+) cells was observed in both CD45RA(+) and CD90(-)
cultures. By four-color flow cytometry, we could demonstrate that
CD34(+)38(-)45RA(-) and CD34(+)38(-)90(+) cell populations were largely
overlapping. Both populations were able to reconstitute SCID/nonobese diabetic
mice at 2 weeks, indicating that these cells contained rSRA activity. In
contrast, CD34(+)38(-)45RA(+) or CD34(+)38(-)90(-) cells contributed only
marginally to rSRA. Similar results were obtained when cells were injected
intrafemorally, suggesting that the lack of reconstitution was not due to homing 
defects. In conclusion, we show that after in vitro expansion, rSRA is mediated
by CD34(+)38(-)90(+)45RA(-) cells. All other cell fractions have limited
reconstitutive potential, mainly because the cells have lost stem cell activity
rather than because of homing defects. These findings can be used clinically to
assess the rSRA of cultured stem cells.

DOI: 10.1634/stemcells.2006-0256 
PMID: 16973833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

