
1. Blood. 2007 Jan 15;109(2):626-31. Epub 2006 Sep 19.

Regulation of dendritic cell migration and adaptive immune response by
leukotriene B4 receptors: a role for LTB4 in up-regulation of CCR7 expression and
function.

Del Prete A(1), Shao WH, Mitola S, Santoro G, Sozzani S, Haribabu B.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Immunobiology Program, James Graham Brown Cancer Center, Departmnet of
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Louisville Health Sciences Center, KY 
40202, USA.

Trafficking of dendritic cells (DCs) to peripheral tissues and to secondary
lymphoid organs depends on chemokines and lipid mediators. Here, we show that
bone marrow-derived DCs (BM-DCs) express functional leukotriene B4 (LTB4)
receptors as observed in dose-dependent chemotaxis and calcium mobilization
responses. LTB4, at low concentrations, promoted the migration of immature and
mature DCs to CCL19 and CCL21, which was associated with a rapid (30-minute)
increase of CCR7 expression at the membrane level. At longer incubation times (6 
hours), gene array analysis revealed a promoting role of LTB4, showing a
significant increase of CCR7 and CCL19 mRNA levels. BM-DCs cultured from BLT1-/- 
or BLT1/2-/- mice showed a normal phenotype, but in vivo BLT1/2-/-DCs showed
dramatic decrease in migration to the draining lymph nodes relative to wild-type 
(WT) DCs. Consistent with these observations, BLT1/2-/- mice showed a reduced
response in a model of 2,4-dinitro-fluorobenzene (DNFB)-induced contact
hypersensitivity. Adoptive transfer of 2,4-dinitrobenzene sulfonic acid
(DNBS)-pulsed DCs directly implicated the defect in DC migration to lymph node
with the defect in contact hypersensitivity. These results provide strong
evidence for a role of LTB4 in regulating DC migration and the induction of
adaptive immune responses.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2006-02-003665 
PMCID: PMC1785104
PMID: 16985179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

