
1. Cell Microbiol. 2006 Oct;8(10):1591-600.

Pore-forming Staphylococcus aureus alpha-toxin triggers epidermal growth factor
receptor-dependent proliferation.

Haugwitz U(1), Bobkiewicz W, Han SR, Beckmann E, Veerachato G, Shaid S, Biehl S, 
Dersch K, Bhakdi S, Husmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Johannes Gutenberg-University, 
Hochhaus am Augustusplatz, Mainz, Germany.

Staphylococcal alpha-toxin is an archetypal killer protein that homo-oligomerizes
in target cells to create small transmembrane pores. The membrane-perforating
beta-barrel motif is a conserved attack element of cytolysins of Gram-positive
and Gram-negative bacteria. Following the recognition that nucleated cells can
survive membrane permeabilization, a profile of abundant transcripts was obtained
in transiently perforated keratinocytes. Several immediate early genes were found
to be upregulated, reminiscent of the cellular response to growth factors. Cell
cycle analyses revealed doubling of S + G2/M phase cells 26 h post toxin
treatment. Determination of cell counts uncovered that after an initial drop,
numbers increased to exceed the controls after 2 days. A non-lytic alpha-toxin
mutant remained without effect. The alpha-toxin pore is too small to allow egress
of cytosolic growth factors, and evidence was instead obtained for growth
signalling via the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Inhibition of the
EGFR or of EGFR-proligand-processing blocked the mitogenic effect of alpha-toxin.
Western blots with phospho-specific antibodies revealed activation of the EGFR,
and of the adapter protein Shc. Immediate early response and proliferation upon
transient plasma membrane pore formation by bacterial toxins may represent a
novel facet of the complex interaction between pathogen and host.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00733.x 
PMID: 16984414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

