
1. Infect Immun. 2006 Oct;74(10):5903-13.

Rapid development of a gamma interferon-secreting glycolipid/CD1d-specific
Valpha14+ NK1.1- T-cell subset after bacterial infection.

Emoto M(1), Yoshizawa I, Emoto Y, Miamoto M, Hurwitz R, Kaufmann SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, 
Germany. memoto@health.gunma-u.ac.jp

The phenotypic and functional changes of glycolipid presented by
CD1d(glycolipid/CD1d) specific Valpha14+ T cells in the liver of mice at early
stages of bacterial infection were investigated. After Listeria monocytogenes
infection or interleukin-12 (IL-12) treatment, alpha-galactosylceramide/CD1d
tetramer-reactive (alpha-GalCer/CD1d+) T cells coexpressing natural killer (NK)
1.1 marker became undetectable and, concomitantly, cells lacking NK1.1 emerged in
both euthymic and thymectomized animals. Depletion of the NK1.1+ subpopulation
prevented the emergence of alpha-GalCer/CD1d+ NK1.1- T cells. Before infection,
NK1.1+, rather than NK1.1-, alpha-GalCer/CD1d+ T cells coexpressing CD4 were
responsible for IL-4 production, whereas gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) was
produced by cells regardless of NK1.1 or CD4 expression. After infection,
IL-4-secreting cells became undetectable among alpha-GalCer/CD1d+ T cells, but
considerable numbers of IFN-gamma-secreting cells were found among NK1.1-, but
not NK1.1+, cells lacking CD4. Thus, NK1.1 surface expression and functional
activities of Valpha14+ T cells underwent dramatic changes at early stages of
listeriosis, and these alterations progressed in a thymus-independent manner. In 
mutant mice lacking all alpha-GalCer/CD1d+ T cells listeriosis was ameliorated,
suggesting that the subtle contribution of the NK1.1- T-cell subset to
antibacterial protection is covered by more profound detrimental effects of the
NK1.1+ T-cell subset.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00311-06 
PMCID: PMC1594920
PMID: 16988270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

