
1. Cell Microbiol. 2006 Oct;8(10):1571-80.

Bacterial flagellin inhibits T cell receptor-mediated activation of T cells by
inducing suppressor of cytokine signalling-1 (SOCS-1).

Okugawa S(1), Yanagimoto S, Tsukada K, Kitazawa T, Koike K, Kimura S, Nagase H,
Hirai K, Ota Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, The University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Flagellin, the structural component of bacterial flagella, is secreted by
pathogenic and commensal bacteria, and is recognized by Toll-like receptor (TLR) 
5. Flagellin is a common bacterial antigen present on most motile bacteria and is
speculated to contribute to the activation of CD4+ T cells in the intestine.
However, molecular mechanisms by which flagellin regulate T cell activation
remains to be determined. Using Jurkat T cells or human primary T cell, we showed
that flagellin stimulation induced tyrosine phosphorylation of TLR5 and
activation of both mitogen-activated protein kinases and nuclear factor kappaB.
In addition, stimulation by flagellin did not induce nuclear factor of activated 
T cells (NFAT) activation, while stimulation via the T cell receptor (TCR) leads 
to activation of NFAT. However, TCR-mediated NFAT activation and tyrosine
phosphorylation of zeta-associated protein 70 (Zap-70) were inhibited in cells
pre-stimulated by flagellin. Furthermore, flagellin stimulation induced
suppressor of cytokine signalling-1 (SOCS-1), which formed a complex with Zap-70 
after stimulation via TCR, and inhibition of SOCS-1 expression by SOCS-1-specific
small interfering RNA reinstated TCR-mediated activation of NFAT in cells
pre-stimulated with flagellin. These results collectively indicate that bacterial
flagellin inhibits TCR-mediated activation of T cells by inducing SOCS-1.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00731.x 
PMID: 16984412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

