
1. J Immunol. 2006 Oct 15;177(8):5226-35.

Expression of CD1d molecules by human schwann cells and potential interactions
with immunoregulatory invariant NK T cells.

Im JS(1), Tapinos N, Chae GT, Illarionov PA, Besra GS, DeVries GH, Modlin RL,
Sieling PA, Rambukkana A, Porcelli SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

CD1d-restricted NKT cells expressing invariant TCR alpha-chains (iNKT cells)
produce both proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines rapidly upon
activation, and are believed to play an important role in both host defense and
immunoregulation. To address the potential implications of iNKT cell responses
for infectious or inflammatory diseases of the nervous system, we investigated
the expression of CD1d in human peripheral nerve. We found that CD1d was
expressed on the surface of Schwann cells in situ and on primary or immortalized 
Schwann cell lines in culture. Schwann cells activated iNKT cells in a
CD1d-dependent manner in the presence of alpha-galactosylceramide. Surprisingly, 
the cytokine production of iNKT cells stimulated by alpha-galactosylceramide
presented by CD1d+ Schwann cells showed a predominance of Th2-associated
cytokines such as IL-5 and IL-13 with a marked deficiency of proinflammatory Th1 
cytokines such as IFN-gamma or TNF-alpha. Our findings suggest a mechanism by
which iNKT cells may restrain inflammatory responses in peripheral nerves, and
raise the possibility that the expression of CD1d by Schwann cells could be
relevant in the pathogenesis of infectious and inflammatory diseases of the
peripheral nervous system.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.8.5226 
PMID: 17015708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

