
1. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2006 Jul-Sep;19(3):551-9.

In vivo effect of an immunostimulating bacterial lysate on human B lymphocytes.

Lanzilli G(1), Falchetti R, Cottarelli A, Macchi A, Ungheri D, Fuggetta MP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine, National Research Council,
Rome, Italy. giulia.lanzilli@artov.inmm.cnr.it

The aim of the present study is to investigate in humans the mechanism by which
the oral vaccine Polyvalent Mechanical Bacterial Lysate (PMBL) can rapidly
mobilize specific immune response and evaluate the efficacy of its
immunostimulating activity in preventing recurrent infections of the upper
respiratory tract (URTIs) in a group of patients with a medical history of URTI
recurrence. Patients received, by sublingual route, PBML, an immunostimulating
lysate obtained by mechanical lysis of the most common bacteria responsible for
upper respiratory tract infections. The treatment was administered for 10
consecutive days/month for 3 consecutive months. After the end of the treatment
period the patients were followed up for an additional 3 months. The frequency of
IgM memory B cells and the expression of the activation marker CD25 in peripheral
blood lymphocytes were measured using the flow cytometric method before the start
and at days 30 and 90 of the treatment cycle. To correlate clinical results to
immunological parameters, the patients were monitored at different time-points
during the treatment and at the end of follow-up period. The results showed that 
PMBL exerts a therapeutic and preventing effect in acute and recurrent infections
of the upper respiratory tract and that this effect correlated with the
activation and enhancement of both IgM memory B lymphocytes (CD24+/CD27+ cells)
and IL2 receptor-expressing lymphocytes (CD25+ cells) involved either in humoral 
or cellular immunity.

DOI: 10.1177/039463200601900311 
PMID: 17026840  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

