
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2006 Nov;146(2):218-25.

Innate immune peptide LL-37 displays distinct expression pattern from
beta-defensins in inflamed gingival tissue.

Hosokawa I(1), Hosokawa Y, Komatsuzawa H, Goncalves RB, Karimbux N, Napimoga MH, 
Seki M, Ouhara K, Sugai M, Taubman MA, Kawai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Forsyth Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Anti-microbial peptides produced from mucosal epithelium appear to play pivotal
roles in the host innate immune defence system in the oral cavity. In particular,
human beta-defensins (hBDs) and the cathelicidin-type anti-microbial peptide,
LL-37, were reported to kill periodontal disease-associated bacteria. In contrast
to well-studied hBDs, little is known about the expression profiles of LL-37 in
gingival tissue. In this study, the anti-microbial peptides expressed in gingival
tissue were analysed using immunohistochemistry and enxyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA). Immunohistochemistry revealed that neutrophils expressed only
LL-37, but not hBD-2 or hBD-3, and that such expression was prominent in the
inflammatory lesions when compared to healthy gingivae which showed very few or
no LL-37 expressing neutrophils. Gingival epithelial cells (GEC), however,
expressed all three examined anti-microbial peptides, irrespective of the
presence or absence of inflammation. Moreover, as determined by ELISA, the
concentration of LL-37 in the gingival tissue homogenates determined was
correlated positively with the depth of the gingival crevice. Stimulation with
periodontal bacteria in vitro induced both hBD-2 and LL-37 expressions by GEC,
whereas peripheral blood neutrophils produced only LL-37 production, but not
hBD-2, in response to the bacterial stimulation. These findings suggest that
LL-37 displays distinct expression patterns from those of hBDs in gingival
tissue.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2006.03200.x 
PMCID: PMC1942065
PMID: 17034573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

