
1. Blood. 2007 Feb 15;109(4):1593-601. Epub 2006 Oct 10.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 is protective during severe Gram-negative 
pneumonia.

Renckens R(1), Roelofs JJ, Bonta PI, Florquin S, de Vries CJ, Levi M, Carmeliet
P, van't Veer C, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Department of Pathology,
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. r.renckens@amc.uva.nl

Plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1) levels are consistently elevated
in patients with severe pneumonia and sepsis and highly predictive for an
unfavorable outcome. In addition, pneumonia is associated with strongly elevated 
PAI-1 levels in the pulmonary compartment. However, whether PAI-1 causally
affects antibacterial host defense in vivo remains unknown. We report here that
pneumonia caused by the common respiratory pathogen Klebsiella pneumoniae is
associated with local production of PAI-1 in the lungs of wild-type mice. PAI-1
deficiency impaired host defense as reflected by enhanced lethality and increased
bacterial growth and dissemination in mice with a targeted deletion of the PAI-1 
gene. Conversely, transgenic overexpression of PAI-1 in the lung using a
replication-defective adenoviral vector markedly improved host defense against
Klebsiella pneumonia and sepsis. PAI-1 deficiency reduced accumulation of
neutrophils in the lungs during pneumonia, whereas PAI-1 overexpression in
healthy lungs resulted in neutrophil influx, suggesting that PAI-1 protects the
host against Klebsiella pneumonia by promoting neutrophil recruitment to the
pulmonary compartment. These data demonstrate for the first time that PAI-1 is
essential for host defense against severe Gram-negative pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2006-05-025197 
PMID: 17032919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

