
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2006 Dec;50(2):171-8. Epub 2006 Aug 11.

Construction of bioactive chimeric MHC class I tetramer by expression and
purification of human-murine chimeric MHC heavy chain and beta(2)m as a fusion
protein in Escherichia coli.

Ren D(1), Wang F, He X, Jiang L, Li D, Ying H, Sun S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, The Second Military Medical University, 200433
Shanghai, China.

Major histocompatibility (MHC) class I tetramers are used in the quantitative
analysis of epitope peptide-specific CD8+ T-cells. An MHC class I tetramer was
composed of 4 MHC class I complexes and a fluorescently labeled streptavidin (SA)
molecule. Each MHC class I complex consists of an MHC heavy chain, a
beta(2)-microglobulin (beta(2)m) molecule and a synthetic epitope peptide. In
most previous studies, an MHC class I complex was formed in the refolding buffer 
with an expressed MHC heavy chain molecule and beta(2)m, respectively. This
procedure inevitably resulted in the disadvantages of forming unwanted multimers 
and self-refolding products, and the purification of each kind of monomer was
time-consuming. In the present study, the genes of a human/murine chimeric MHC
heavy chain (HLA-A2 alpha1, HLA-A2 alpha2 and MHC-H2D alpha3) and beta(2)m were
tandem-cloned into plasmid pET17b and expressed as a fusion protein. The
recombinant fusion protein was refolded with each of the three HLA-A2 restricted 
peptides (HBc18-27 FLPSDFFPSI, HBx52-60 HLSLRGLPV, and HBx92-100 VLHKRTLGL) and
thus three chimeric MHC class I complexes were obtained. Biotinylation was
performed, and its level of efficiency was observed via a band-shift assay in
non-reducing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE). Such chimeric MHC class I
tetramers showed a sensitive binding activity in monitoring HLA/A2 restrictive
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) in immunized HLA/A*0201 transgenic mice.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2006.08.001 
PMID: 17046278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

