
1. Biochemistry. 2006 Oct 24;45(42):12796-805.

Structure and function of prokaryotic glutamate transporters from Escherichia
coli and Pyrococcus horikoshii.

Raunser S(1), Appel M, Ganea C, Geldmacher-Kaufer U, Fendler K, KÃ¼hlbrandt W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Max-Planck-Institute of Biophysics,
Max-von-Laue-Strasse 3, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

The glutamate transporters GltP(Ec) from Escherichia coli and GltP(Ph) from
Pyrococcus horikoshii were overexpressed in E. coli and purified to homogeneity
with a yield of 1-2 mg/L of culture. Single-particle analysis and electron
microscopy indicate that GltP(Ph) is a trimer in detergent solution. Electron
microscopy of negatively stained GltP(Ph) two-dimensional crystals shows that the
transporter is a trimer also in the membrane. Gel filtration of GltP(Ec)
indicates a reversible equilibrium of two oligomeric states in detergent solution
that we identified as a trimer and hexamer by blue-native gel electrophoresis and
cross-linking. The purified transporters were fully active upon reconstitution
into liposomes, as demonstrated by the uptake of radioactively labeled
L-aspartate or L-glutamate. L-aspartate/L-glutamate transport of GltP(Ec)
involves the cotransport of protons and depends only on pH, whereas GltP(Ph)
catalyzes L-glutamate transport with a cotransport of H+ or Na+. L-glutamate
induces a fast transient current in GltP(Ph) proteoliposomes coupled to a solid
supported membrane (SSM). We show that the electric signal depends on the
concentration of Na+ or H+ outside the proteoliposomes and that GltP(Ph) does not
require K+ inside the proteoliposomes. In addition, the electrical currents are
inhibited by TBOA and HIP-B. The half-saturation concentration for activation of 
GltP(Ph) glutamate transport (K0.5(glut)) is 194 microM.

DOI: 10.1021/bi061008+ 
PMID: 17042498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

