
1. J Bacteriol. 2006 Dec;188(24):8504-12. Epub 2006 Oct 13.

Proteolytic processing is not essential for multiple functions of the Escherichia
coli autotransporter adhesin involved in diffuse adherence (AIDA-I).

Charbonneau ME(1), Berthiaume F, Mourez M.

Author information: 
(1)Canada Research Chair on Bacterial Animal Diseases, Université de Montréal,
Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, 3200 Sicotte, St-Hyacinthe, J2S 7C6, Québec,
Canada.

The Escherichia coli adhesin involved in diffuse adherence (AIDA-I), like many
other autotransporter proteins, is released in the periplasm as a proprotein
undergoing proteolytic processing after its translocation across the outer
membrane. The proprotein is cleaved into a membrane-embedded fragment, AIDAc, and
an extracellular fragment, the mature AIDA-I adhesin. The latter remains
noncovalently associated with the outer membrane and can be released by heat
treatment. The mechanism of cleavage of the proprotein and its role in the
functionality of AIDA-I are not understood. Here, we show that cleavage is
independent of the amount of AIDA-I in the outer membrane, suggesting an
intramolecular autoproteolytic mechanism or a cleavage mediated by an unknown
protease. We show that the two fragments, mature AIDA-I and AIDAc, can be
cosolubilized and copurified in a folded and active conformation. We observed
that the release by heat treatment results from the unfolding of AIDA-I and that 
the interaction of AIDA-I with AIDAc seems to be disturbed only by denaturation. 
We constructed an uncleavable point mutant of AIDA-I, where a serine of the
cleavage site was changed into a leucine, and showed that adhesion,
autoaggregation, and biofilm formation mediated by the mutant are
indistinguishable from the wild-type levels. Lastly, we show that both proteins
can mediate the invasion of cultured epithelial cells. Taken together, our
experiments suggest that the proteolytic processing of AIDA-I plays a minor role 
in the functionality of this protein.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00864-06 
PMCID: PMC1698232
PMID: 17041044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

