
1. Environ Sci Technol. 2006 Oct 1;40(19):6170-5.

Genotoxic risk identification of soil contamination at a major industrialized
city in northeast China by a combination of in vitro and in vivo bioassays.

Xiao RY(1), Wang Z, Wang CX, Yu G, Zhu YG.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Aquatic Chemistry, Research Center for
Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's
Republic of China.

The present study evaluated the genotoxicity of field soils in the Tianjin area, 
one of the most industrialized contaminated areas in northeast China. The
genotoxicity of organic extracts of 41 soils was assayed by an in vitro SOS/ umu 
bioassay with Salmonella typhimurium TA 1535/pSK 1002. From the 41 soil samples, 
11 samples were selected to confirm the genotoxic effect by in vivo single-cell
gel electrophoresis (comet assay) using earthworms (Eisenia fetida). The results 
obtained demonstrated that, in the in vitro assay, genotoxicity expressed as
induction ratios (IR) ranged from 1.00 to 4.60, and in the in vivo assay, the
genotoxicity expressed as tail moment (TM) varied from 14.6 to 57.8 microm. All
samples with high genotoxicity assessed by the SOS/umu bioassay possessed
significantly high genotoxic effects in the comet assay, and there was a
correlation (R2 = 0.736, p < 0.05) between IR and TM in both bioassays. It is
concluded that soils in the Tianjin area were seriously contaminated by organic
genotoxicants and higher levels of genotoxic effects existed in soils in the
urban area of Tianjin as well as in areas near the coastal towns in the northeast
part of the city. It can be concluded that a combination of in vivo and in vitro 
bioassays as a powerful and efficient genotoxicity-assessing tool could
facilitate the assessment of genotoxic risk at a regional scale.

DOI: 10.1021/es0607335 
PMID: 17051817  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

