
1. J Immunother. 2006 Nov-Dec;29(6):586-95.

Molecular construction and characterization of a novel exotoxin fusion protein
that selectively blocks the B7:CD28 costimulatory signal system.

Xi Y(1), Yuan Z, Zhang H, Guan H, Kong F, Liu N, Liang F, Cui J, Guo S, Sun Y, Xi
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and National Center for Biomedicine Analysis, Beijing
307 Hospital, Affiliated to Academy of Medical Sciences, No. 8, Dongda Avenue,
Fengtai District, Beijing 100071, PR China. xiyz@yahoo.com

An important strategy for specifically preventing and treating graft-versus-host 
and host-versus-graft diseases is to selectively block the B7:CD28/cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte A4 costimulatory signal system for induced immune tolerance. In this
study, a novel recombinant B7-2-L-PE40KDEL fusion protein was created to target
the B7:CD28 system. We used a flexible linker sequence (Gly4Ser)4 and overlapping
sequence extension to link the cDNAs encoding a human B7-2 extracellular domain
and a mutant truncated form of Pseudomonas exotoxin A (PE), PE40KDEL. This
B7-2-L-PE40KDEL fusion gene was then inserted into the pTYB4 expression vector,
expressed in Escherichia coli, and purified through Ni-NTA mealty
affinity-->MonoQ anion exchange-->Superdex75 gel filtration chromatography 3-step
purification protocols. Western blotting demonstrated that the B7-2-L-PE40KDEL
fusion protein specifically bound antihuman B7-2 monoclonal antibody and
anti-pseudomonas exotoxin A antiserum. We used the Antheprot nucleic acid and
protein analyzing software to predict the characteristics of this fusion protein,
and showed that the fusion did not confer new antigenicities to the fusion
protein. 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide tests
demonstrated that at doses ranging from 0.2 to 2 microg/mL, this fusion protein
specifically killed CD28-overexpressing Jurkat cells but even at doses of 2
microg did not kill CD28-negative Hut28 cells. The results of a one-way mixed
lymphocyte reaction demonstrated that the fusion protein has a range of
suppressive effects on HLA class I and II matched related donors and recipients, 
and HLA class I and II mismatched unrelated donors. Taken together, these results
demonstrate that we have developed a novel recombinant human B7-2-L-PE40KDEL
exotoxin fusion protein that specifically blocks the B7:CD28 costimulatory signal
system in a manner that may be of significant importance in preventing and
treating graft-versus-host or host-versus-graft diseases.

DOI: 10.1097/01.cji.0000211300.67750.71 
PMID: 17063121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

