
1. Gastroenterology. 2006 Nov;131(5):1573-83. Epub 2006 Aug 14.

Activation of mouse natural killer T cells accelerates liver regeneration after
partial hepatectomy.

Nakashima H(1), Inui T, Habu Y, Kinoshita M, Nagao S, Kawaguchi A, Miura S,
Shinomiya N, Yagita H, Seki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, National Defense Medical College,
Tokorozawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Activation of natural killer T cells with the synthetic ligand
alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GalCer) induced hepatotoxicity through the tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF) and Fas-ligand-mediated pathway in aged mice. The aim of
this study was to elucidate how alpha-GalCer-activated natural killer T cells
function in hepatocyte proliferation and liver regeneration in partially
hepatectomized (PHx) mice.
METHODS: Mice were injected with alpha-GalCer at 36 hours after 70% PHx.
Hepatocyte mitosis was evaluated by either mitotic figures or proliferating cell 
nuclear antigen staining. The role of TNF and Fas-ligand in hepatocyte mitosis
also was assessed.
RESULTS: In PHx mice injected with alpha-GalCer, hepatocyte mitosis was greatly
enhanced at 44 hours after surgery and the increase was more obvious in aged mice
than in young mice. The expression of both TNF receptor 1 and Fas-ligand in liver
natural killer T cells tended to increase after alpha-GalCer injection in PHx
mice. Treatment of mice with anti-NK1.1 Ab 3 days before and just after
hepatectomy greatly inhibited the effect of alpha-GalCer on hepatocyte mitosis
and liver regeneration. Furthermore, pretreatment of PHx mice with either
anti-TNF Ab or anti-FasL Ab 1 hour before alpha-GalCer injection mostly abrogated
the increase in hepatocyte proliferation. alpha-GalCer injection did not
accelerate hepatocyte proliferation in Fas-mutated lpr mice after PHx. CD1d-/-
mice without alpha-GalCer injection showed decreased hepatocyte mitosis after
PHx.
CONCLUSIONS: Activated natural killer T cells help hepatocyte proliferation and
liver regeneration after PHx via the TNF and Fas/Fas-ligand-mediated pathway.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2006.08.028 
PMID: 17064698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

