
1. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2007 Apr;91(3):253-66. Epub 2006 Oct 28.

Analysis of the composition of bacterial communities in oil reservoirs from a
southern offshore Brazilian basin.

Sette LD(1), Simioni KC, Vasconcellos SP, Dussan LJ, Neto EV, Oliveira VM.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Resources Division, CPQBA/UNICAMP, CP 6171, Campinas, SP, CEP
13081-970, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to characterize and compare the bacterial community
structure of two distinct oil samples from a petroleum field in Brazil by using
both molecular, based on the construction of 16S rRNA gene libraries, and
cultivation methods. Statistical comparisons of libraries based on Amplified
Ribosomal DNA Restriction Analysis (ARDRA) data revealed no significant
differences between the communities recovered in the non-biodegraded (NBD) and
highly biodegraded oils (HBD). BlastN analysis of the 16S rRNA gene sequences
representative of distinct ribotypes from both oils showed the presence of nine
different bacterial genera in these samples, encompassing members of the genera
Arcobacter, Halanaerobium, Marinobacter, Propionibacterium, Streptomyces,
Leuconostoc, Acinetobacter, Bacillus and Streptococcus. Enrichments obtained
using oil as inoculum and sole carbon source yielded bacterial isolates showing
high 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity with Achromobacter xylosoxidans, Bacillus 
subtilis, Brevibacillus sp., Dietzia sp. and Methylobacterium sp. Comparison
between the data obtained using cultivation-independent and enrichment cultures
suggests that different selection of community members may occur when using
distinct approaches. All the organisms found, except for Leuconostoc sp. and
Streptococus sp., have been previously reported in the literature as hydrocarbon 
degraders and/or associated to oil field environments.

DOI: 10.1007/s10482-006-9115-5 
PMID: 17072536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

