
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2007 Jan;73(2):432-41. Epub 2006 Nov 3.

Titration and conditional knockdown of the prfB gene in Escherichia coli: effects
on growth and overproduction of the recombinant mammalian selenoprotein
thioredoxin reductase.

Rengby O(1), Arn√©r ES.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Nobel Institute for Biochemistry, Department of Medical Biochemistry
and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Release factor 2 (RF2), encoded by the prfB gene in Escherichia coli, catalyzes
translational termination at UGA and UAA codons. Termination at UGA competes with
selenocysteine (Sec) incorporation at Sec-dedicated UGA codons, and RF2 thereby
counteracts expression of selenoproteins. prfB is an essential gene in E. coli
and can therefore not be removed in order to increase yield of recombinant
selenoproteins. We therefore constructed an E. coli strain with the endogenous
chromosomal promoter of prfB replaced with the titratable P(BAD) promoter.
Knockdown of prfB expression gave a bacteriostatic effect, while two- to
sevenfold overexpression of RF2 resulted in a slightly lowered growth rate in
late exponential phase. In a turbidostatic fermentor system the simultaneous
impact of prfB knockdown on growth and recombinant selenoprotein expression was
subsequently studied, using production of mammalian thioredoxin reductase as
model system. This showed that lowering the levels of RF2 correlated directly
with increasing Sec incorporation specificity, while also affecting total
selenoprotein yield concomitant with a lower growth rate. This study thus
demonstrates that expression of prfB can be titrated through targeted exchange of
the native promoter with a P(BAD)-promoter and that knockdown of RF2 can result
in almost full efficiency of Sec incorporation at the cost of lower total
selenoprotein yield.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02019-06 
PMCID: PMC1796992
PMID: 17085697  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

