
1. Parasite Immunol. 2006 Dec;28(12):643-7.

Experimental African trypanosomiasis: lack of effective CD1d-restricted antigen
presentation.

Shi MQ(1), Wang CR, Wei GJ, Pan WL, Appleyard G, Tabel H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, 
Canada.

BALB/c mice are highly susceptible to African trypanosomiasis, whereas C57BL/6
mice are relatively resistant. Other investigators have reported that the
synthesis of IgG antibodies to purified membrane form of variant surface
glycoprotein (mfVSG) of Trypanosoma brucei is CD1 restricted. In this study, we
examine the role of the CD1d/NKT cell pathway in susceptibility and resistance of
mice to infection by African trypanosomes. Administration of anti-CD1d antibodies
to Trypanosoma congolense-infected BALB/c mice neither affects the parasitemia
nor the survival time. Correspondingly, CD1d(-/-) and CD1d(+/+) BALB/c mice
infected with T. congolense or T. brucei show no differences in either
parasitaemia or survival time. The course of disease in relative resistant
C57BL/6 mice infected with T. congolense is also not affected by the absence of
CD1d. Parasitaemia, survival time, and plasma levels of IgG2a and IgG3
parasite-specific antibodies in infected CD1d(-/-) C57BL/6 are not different from
those of infected CD1d(+/+) C57BL/6 mice. We conclude that CD1d-restricted immune
responses do not play an important role in susceptibility/resistance of mice
infected with virulent African trypanosomes. We speculate that virulent
trypanosomes have an evasion mechanism that prevents the induction of a
parasite-specific, CD1d-restricted immune response by the host.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3024.2006.00898.x 
PMID: 17096643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

