
1. Mamm Genome. 2006 Nov;17(11):1130-9. Epub 2006 Nov 7.

Cloning of the bovine prion-like Shadoo (SPRN) gene by comparative analysis of
the predicted genomic locus.

Uboldi C(1), Paulis M, Guidi E, Bertoni A, Meo GP, Perucatti A, Iannuzzi L,
Raimondi E, Brunner RM, Eggen A, Ferretti L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology A. Buzzati-Traverso, University of
Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

SPRN is a new prion-like gene coding for Sho, a protein with significant
similarity to PrP. SPRN was initially described in zebrafish; however, the strong
evolutionary conservation led to the hypothesis that SPRN might be the ancestral 
prion-like gene. We mapped SPRN in Bos taurus by comparative analysis of the
locus and of the predicted flanking genes. BACs, spanning the whole SPRN genomic 
locus, were assigned to BTA26q23 by radiation hybrid mapping and fluorescent in
situ hybridization (FISH). Sequencing of five genes flanking SPRN, namely, ECHS1,
PAOX, MTG1, SPRN, and CYP2E1, high-resolution FISH on mechanically stretched
chromosomes, and combed BAC DNA allowed us to establish their order and
reciprocal orientation. The results confirmed that BTA26q23 corresponds to
HSA10q24.3-26.3, which is the site where the human SPRN is located. The gene
order in Bos taurus is the same as in man, cen-ECHS1-PAOX-MTG1-SPRN-CYP2E1-tel,
but PAOX has a different orientation in the two species. SPRN has the typical
two-exon PRNP arrangement, with the CDS fully contained within exon 2;
furthermore, it codes for a 143-amino-acid protein with 74.8% identity and 84.7% 
similarity with the human PRNP. RT-PCR and Northern blot analysis showed that
SPRN is expressed at high levels in brain and less in testis and lung.

DOI: 10.1007/s00335-006-0078-7 
PMID: 17091316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

