
1. Mol Psychiatry. 2007 Mar;12(3):264-72. Epub 2006 Nov 14.

Associations between Chlamydophila infections, schizophrenia and risk of HLA-A10.

Fellerhoff B(1), Laumbacher B, Mueller N, Gu S, Wank R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Ludwig-Maximilans University of Munich, Munich,
Germany. barbara.fellerhoff@med.uni-muenchen.de

Several microbes have been suspected as pathogenetic factors in schizophrenia. We
have previously observed increased frequencies of chlamydial infections and of
human lymphocyte antigen (HLA)-A10 in independent studies of schizophrenia. Our
aim here was to analyze frequencies of three types of Chlamydiaceae in
schizophrenic patients (n=72), random controls (n=225) and hospital-patient
controls (n=36), together with HLA-A genotypes. Patients were diagnosed with
schizophrenia according to Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders-IV. Blood samples were collected at the beginning of hospitalization
and analyzed with Chlamydiaceae species-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Control panels consisted of randomly selected volunteers and hospitalized,
non-schizophrenic patients. We found chlamydial infection in 40.3% of the
schizophrenic patients compared to 6.7% in the controls. The association of
schizophrenia with Chlamydiaceae infections was highly significant (P=1.39 x
10(-10), odds ratio (OR)=9.43), especially with Chlamydophila psittaci (P=2.81 x 
10(-7), OR=24.39). Schizophrenic carriers of the HLA-A10 genotype were clearly
most often infected with Chlamydophila, especially C. psittaci (P=8.03 x 10(-5), 
OR=50.00). Chlamydophila infections represent the highest risk factor yet found
to be associated with schizophrenia. This risk is even further enhanced in
carriers of the HLA-A10 genotype.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001925 
PMID: 17102800  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

