
1. J Immunol. 2006 Dec 1;177(11):7841-8.

IFN-beta-mediated up-regulation of CD1d in bacteria-infected APCs.

Raghuraman G(1), Geng Y, Wang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, 924 East 57th Street, Chicago,
IL 60637, USA.

The expression of CD1d molecules is essential for the selection and activation of
a unique subset of T cells, invariant NKT cells, which express limited TCR
diversity and have been demonstrated to function in both regulatory and
antimicrobial immune responses. Although it has been reported that the levels of 
CD1d expression can be modulated during infection, the mechanisms that mediate
this effect are poorly defined. In this study, we show that infection of
dendritic cells and macrophages both in vitro and in vivo with the intracellular 
pathogen Listeria monocytogenes leads to up-regulation of CD1d. IFN-beta is
required to mediate this up-regulation in L. monocytogenes infection, as well as 
being sufficient to up-regulate CD1d expression in vitro. Unlike MHC class I
molecules, the increased surface expression of CD1d by IFN-beta is not regulated 
at the transcriptional level. Confocal microscopy and metabolic labeling
experiments show that the total pool of CD1d protein is increased in
IFN-beta-treated cells and that increased surface expression of CD1d is not due
to the redistribution of the intracellular pool of CD1d. IFN-beta treatment
increases the de novo synthesis of CD1d. This change in surface CD1d expression
was functionally relevant, as IFN-beta-treated dendritic cells are more efficient
in stimulating invariant NKT cells than untreated controls. Taken together, these
data support a role for early IFN-beta-mediated up-regulation of CD1d in NKT cell
activation during infection.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.11.7841 
PMID: 17114455  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

