
1. Genet Mol Res. 2006 Aug 31;5(3):503-12.

Evaluation of the humoral immune response in BALB/c mice immunized with a naked
DNA vaccine anti-methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.

Roth DM(1), Senna JP, Machado DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University,
Melbourne, Australia. daniela.roth@vcp.monash.edu.au

Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is the major pathogen involved
in nosocomial infections, leading to high rates of morbidity and mortality in
hospitals worldwide. The methicillin resistance occurs due to the presence of an 
additional penicillin-binding protein, PBP2a, which has low affinity for
beta-lactam antibiotics. In the past few years, vancomycin has been the only
antibiotic option for treatment of infections caused by multiresistant MRSA;
however, reports of vancomycin-resistant strains have generated great concerns
regarding the treatment to overcome these infections. In the present study, we
report preliminary results regarding the humoral immune response generated in
BALB/c mice by two different doses of naked DNA vaccine containing an internal
region, comprising the serine-protease domain, of the PBP2a of MRSA. The
immunization procedure consisted of four immunizations given intramuscularly
within 15-day intervals. Blood was collect weekly and anti-PBP2a-specific
antibodies were screened by ELISA. BALB/c mice immunized with DNA vaccine
anti-PBP2a have shown higher antibody titers mainly after the fourth
immunization, and intriguingly, no correlation between the humoral immune
response and DNA dose was observed. Our results suggest that the DNA vaccine
anti-PBP2a induced an immune response by production of specific antibodies
anti-MRSA in a non-dose-dependent manner, and it could represent a new and
valuable approach to produce specific antibodies for passive immunization to
overcome MRSA infections.


PMID: 17117366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

