
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Nov 28;103(48):18131-6. Epub 2006 Nov 20.

A physical linkage between cystic fibrosis airway surface dehydration and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms.

Matsui H(1), Wagner VE, Hill DB, Schwab UE, Rogers TD, Button B, Taylor RM 2nd,
Superfine R, Rubinstein M, Iglewski BH, Boucher RC.

Author information: 
(1)Cystic Fibrosis/Pulmonary Research and Treatment Center, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

A vexing problem in cystic fibrosis (CF) pathogenesis has been to explain the
high prevalence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms in CF airways. We speculated
that airway surface liquid (ASL) hyperabsorption generates a concentrated airway 
mucus that interacts with P. aeruginosa to promote biofilms. To model CF vs.
normal airway infections, normal (2.5% solids) and CF-like concentrated (8%
solids) mucus were prepared, placed in flat chambers, and infected with an
approximately 5 x 10(3) strain PAO1 P. aeruginosa. Although bacteria grew to
10(10) cfu/ml in both mucus concentrations, macrocolony formation was detected
only in the CF-like (8% solids) mucus. Biophysical and functional measurements
revealed that concentrated mucus exhibited properties that restrict bacterial
motility and small molecule diffusion, resulting in high local bacterial
densities with high autoinducer concentrations. These properties also rendered
secondary forms of antimicrobial defense, e.g., lactoferrin, ineffective in
preventing biofilm formation in a CF-like mucus environment. These data link
airway surface liquid hyperabsorption to the high incidence of P. aeruginosa
biofilms in CF via changes in the hydration-dependent physical-chemical
properties of mucus and suggest that the thickened mucus gel model will be useful
to develop therapies of P. aeruginosa biofilms in CF airways.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0606428103 
PMCID: PMC1838718
PMID: 17116883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

