
1. Chem Biol Interact. 2007 Jan 5;165(1):1-13. Epub 2006 Oct 21.

Study of antimutagenic and antioxidant activities of gallic acid and
1,2,3,4,6-pentagalloylglucose from Pistacia lentiscus. Confirmation by microarray
expression profiling.

Abdelwahed A(1), Bouhlel I, Skandrani I, Valenti K, Kadri M, Guiraud P, Steiman
R, Mariotte AM, Ghedira K, Laporte F, Dijoux-Franca MG, Chekir-Ghedira L.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Pharmacognosie/Biologie Moléculaire 99/UR/07-03, Faculté de
Pharmacie/Médecine Dentaire de Monastir, Rue Avicenne, 5000 Monastir, Tunisia.

In vitro antioxidant and antimutagenic activities of two polyphenols isolated
from the fruits of Pistacia lentiscus was assessed. Antioxidant activity was
determined by the ability of each compound to scavenge the free radical
1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH*), to inhibit xanthine oxidase and to inhibit
the lipid peroxidation induced by H(2)O(2) in K562 cell line. Antimutagenic
activity was assayed with SOS chromotest using Escherichia coli PQ37 as tester
strain and Comet assay using K562 cell line. 1,2,3,4,6-Pentagalloylglucose was
found to be more effective to scavenge DPPH* radical and protect against lipid
peroxidation. Moreover, these two compounds induced an inhibitory activity
against nifuroxazide and aflatoxin B1 mutagenicity. The protective effect
exhibited by these molecules was also determined by analysis of gene expression
as response to an oxidative stress. For this purpose, we used a cDNA-microarray
containing 82 genes related to cell defense, essentially represented by
antioxidant and DNA repair proteins. We found that 1,2,3,4,6-pentagalloylglucose 
induced a decrease in the expression of 11 transcripts related to antioxidant
enzymes family (GPX1, TXN, AOE372, SHC1 and SEPW1) and DNA repair (POLD1, APEX,
POLD2, MPG, PARP and XRCC5). The use of Gallic acid, induced expression of TXN,
TXNRD1, AOE372, GSS (antioxidant enzymes) and LIG4, POLD2, MPG, GADD45A, PCNA,
RPA2, DDIT3, HMOX2, XPA, TDG, ERCC1 and GTF2H1 (DNA repair) as well as the
repression of GPX1, SEPW1, POLD1 and SHC1 gene expression.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbi.2006.10.003 
PMID: 17129579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

