
1. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2006 Dec;62(Pt 12):1466-74. Epub 2006 Nov
23.

Structure of Escherichia coli UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl:L-alanine ligase (MurC).

Deva T(1), Baker EN, Squire CJ, Smith CA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

The bacterial cell wall provides essential protection from the external
environment and confers strength and rigidity to counteract internal osmotic
pressure. Without this layer the cell would be easily ruptured and it is for this
reason that biosynthetic pathways leading to the formation of peptidoglycan have 
for many years been a prime target for effective antibiotics. Central to this
pathway are four similar ligase enzymes which add peptide groups to glycan
moieties. As part of a program to better understand the structure-function
relationships in these four enzymes, the crystal structure of Escherichia coli
UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl:L-alanine ligase (MurC) has been determined to 2.6 A
resolution. The structure was solved by multiwavelength anomalous diffraction
methods from a single selenomethionine-substituted crystal and refined to a
crystallographic R factor of 0.212 (R(free) = 0.259). The enzyme has a modular
multi-domain structure very similar to those of other members of the mur family
of ATP-dependent amide-bond ligases. Detailed comparison of these four enzymes
shows that considerable conformational changes are possible. These changes,
together with the recruitment of two different N-terminal domains, allow this
family of enzymes to bind a substrate which is identical at one end and at the
other has the growing peptide tail which will ultimately become part of the rigid
bacterial cell wall. Comparison of the E. coli and Haemophilus influenzae
structures and analysis of the sequences of known MurC enzymes indicate the
presence of a ;dimerization' motif in almost 50% of the MurC enzymes and points
to a highly conserved loop in domain 3 that may play a key role in amino-acid
ligand specificity.

DOI: 10.1107/S0907444906038376 
PMID: 17139082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

