
1. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2007 Jan;57(1):81-91.

Menstrual hemocidin HbB115-146 is an acidophilic antibacterial peptide
potentiating the activity of human defensins, cathelicidin and lysozyme.

Mak P(1), Siwek M, Pohl J, Dubin A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian
University, Krak√≥w, Poland. makp@mol.uj.edu.pl

PROBLEM: Our recent studies proved that menstrual discharge is exceptionally rich
in bactericidal hemoglobin peptides (hemocidins). Of special interest is the
behavior of hemocidins in low pH of the vagina, in different ionic strengths, and
in the presence of other specialized antibacterial molecules acting in this
organ.
METHODS OF STUDY: We studied the activity of a model representative of menstrual 
hemocidin: the peptide from human beta-globin, spanning residues 115-146
(HbB115-146). The bactericidal action of this peptide in different
physicochemical conditions, as well as the evaluation of the synergistic effect
of the peptide with mixtures of neutrophil alpha-defensin HNP-1, epithelial
beta-defensin HBD-1, cathelicidin LL-37 and lysozyme were studied using the
bacterial membrane permeability test.
RESULTS: The HbB115-146 is a salt-resistant antibiotic molecule strongly
potentiating its activity in acidic conditions (pH 4.4-5.0), characteristic for
the vagina. Hemocidin HbB115-146 is also an effective factor stimulating the
activity of other antibacterial polypeptides present in the female urogenital
tract. The observed synergistic effect is preserved or enhanced at lower pH and, 
with the exception of HBD-1, is observed also at physiological salt
concentrations.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study clearly demonstrate that hemocidins are
important polypeptide factors involved in maintaining vaginal immunity during
normal menstrual bleedings.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0897.2006.00456.x 
PMID: 17156194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

