
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2006 Dec;152(Pt 12):3765-3775. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.29290-0.

CD3+ cells transfer the hypersensitive granulomatous response to mycobacterial
glycolipid trehalose 6,6'-dimycolate in mice.

Guidry TV(1), Hunter RL(2), Actor JK(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas-Houston Health Science Center, Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Texas-Houston Medical School, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, MSB 2.214, University of
Texas-Houston Medical School, 6431 Fannin, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The granulomatous response is the characteristic histological feature of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection that is essential for organism containment. 
Trehalose 6,6-dimycolate (TDM), a cell-wall glycolipid present on most
mycobacterial species, has been implicated in the pathogenesis of M. tuberculosis
infection. TDM has potent immunoregulatory and inflammatory properties, and can
be used to model granulomatous reactions that mimic, in part, pathology caused
during active infection. This study examined the hypersensitive granulomatous
response, focusing on cellular responses specific to TDM. Lungs from mice
immunized with TDM emulsion demonstrated exacerbated histological damage,
inflammation, and lymphocytic infiltration upon subsequent challenge with TDM.
Splenocytes recovered from these mice demonstrated significant interferon
(IFN)-gamma production during recall response to TDM, as well as increased
production of proinflammatory mediators (tumour necrosis factor-alpha,
interleukin-6 and macrophage inflammatory protein-1alpha). The exacerbated
response could be adoptively transferred to na√Øve mice. Administration of
non-adherent lymphocytes or purified CD3(+) cells from TDM-immunized mice led to 
increased inflammation, lymphocytic infiltration, and vascular endothelial cell
damage upon challenge with TDM. Recipient mice that received immunized CD3(+)
lymphocytes demonstrated significant increases in Th1-type cytokines and
proinflammatory mediators in lung tissue following TDM challenge. When CD1d(-/-) 
mice were immunized with TDM, they failed to generate a specific IFN-gamma
response, suggesting a role for this molecule in the generation of
hypersensitivity. These experiments provide further evidence for the involvement 
of TDM-specific CD3(+) T cells in pathological damage elicited during M.
tuberculosis infection.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.29290-0 
PMID: 17159227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

