
1. Schweiz Med Wochenschr. 1977;(suppl 5):1-26.

[Bacterial endocarditis: clinical and bacteriological aspects and prognostic
factors].

[Article in French]

Crittin J, Waldvogel FA.

The microbiological, clinical and therapeutic aspects of all (71) cases of
bacterial endocarditis admitted to the HÃ´pital cantonal, Geneva, between August
1970 and October 1974 were reviewed: there was a definite trend towards higher
prevalence of acute cases compared to subacute cases. The pathogenic role of S.
epidermidis, mostly in cases of prosthetic valve endocarditis, could be
demonstrated in several cases. When defined initially by microbiological criteria
only, acute endocarditis were characterized by rapid evolution, destruction of
the valvular structures (especially aortic valve), and by further evolution under
adequate antibiotic therapy: thus, 10/25 patients with acute endocarditis died,
whereas the mortality rate in the subacute cases was only 10/46. Many cases in
our series showed one or more often frequent embolic phenomena: 70% of the cured 
cases and 80% of the patients with a fatal outcome. An unfavorable evolution
could be correlated with neurologic involvement, cardiac rhythm or conduction
disturbances, and/or heart failure; indeed, heart failure due to various
mechanisms was the single most frequent cause of death and is presently the main 
therapeutic problem. Thus, acute infection leading to destruction of the aortic
valve and to heart failure still carries a bad prognosis, even if emergency valve
replacement is attempted. Finally, 22/30 patients who developed a bacterial
endocarditis after oral or urological procedures knew about a heart murmur, but
did not receive antibiotic prophylaxis. This clearly shows that emphasis should
be put on the elaboration and diffusion of adequate prophylactic regimens.


PMID: 17156  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

