
1. Arch Microbiol. 2007 Mar;187(3):171-83. Epub 2006 Dec 12.

Arsenate detoxification in a Pseudomonad hypertolerant to arsenic.

Patel PC(1), Goulhen F, Boothman C, Gault AG, Charnock JM, Kalia K, Lloyd JR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Earth, Atmospheric and Environmental Sciences & Williamson Research 
Centre for Molecular Environmental Science, University of Manchester, Manchester,
M13 9PL, UK.

Pseudomonas sp. strain As-1, obtained from an electroplating industrial effluent,
was capable of growing aerobically in growth medium supplemented with up to 65 mM
arsenate (As (V)), significantly higher concentrations than those tolerated by
other reference arsenic resistant bacteria. The majority of the arsenic was
detected in culture supernatants as arsenite (As (III)) and X-ray absorbance
spectroscopy suggested that 30% of this cell-bound arsenic was As (V), 65% As
(III) and 5% of arsenic was associated with sulphur. PCR analysis using primers
designed against arsenic resistance genes of other Gram-negative bacteria
confirmed the presence of an arsenic resistance operon comprising of three genes,
arsR, arsB and arsC in order of predicted transcription, and consistent with a
role in intracellular reduction of As (V) and efflux of As (III). In addition to 
this classical arsenic resistance mechanism, other biochemical responses to
arsenic were implicated. Novel arsenic-binding proteins were purified from
cellular fractions, while proteomic analysis of arsenic-induced cultures
identified the upregulation of additional proteins not normally associated with
the metabolism of arsenic. Cross-talk with a network of proteins involved in
phosphate metabolism was suggested by these studies, consistent with the
similarity between the phosphate and arsenate anions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-006-0182-9 
PMID: 17160678  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

