
1. Infect Immun. 2007 Mar;75(3):1382-92. Epub 2006 Dec 18.

Role of RpoS in fine-tuning the synthesis of Vi capsular polysaccharide in
Salmonella enterica serotype Typhi.

Santander J(1), Wanda SY, Nickerson CA, Curtiss R 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)The Biodesign Institute, Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology,
Arizona State University, PO Box 875401, 1001 S. McAllister Avenue, Tempe, AZ
85287-5401, USA.

Regulation of the synthesis of Vi polysaccharide, a major virulence determinant
in Salmonella enterica serotype Typhi, is under the control of two regulatory
systems, ompR-envZ and rscB-rscC, which respond to changes in osmolarity. Some
serotype Typhi strains exhibit overexpression of Vi polysaccharide, which masks
clinical detection of lipopolysaccharide O antigen. This variation in Vi
polysaccharide and O antigen display (VW variation) has been observed since the
initial studies of serotype Typhi. In this study, we report that rpoS plays a
role in this increased expression in Vi polysaccharide. We constructed a variety 
of isogenic serotype Typhi mutants that differed in their expression levels of
RpoS and examined the role of the rpoS product in synthesis of Vi polysaccharide 
under different osmolarity conditions. Vi polysaccharide synthesis was also
examined in serotype Typhi mutants in which the native promoter of the rpoS was
replaced by an araCP(BAD) cassette, so that the expression of rpoS was arabinose 
dependent. The RpoS(-) strains showed increased syntheses of Vi polysaccharide,
which at low and medium osmolarities masked O antigen detection. In contrast,
RpoS(+) strains showed lower syntheses of Vi polysaccharide, and an increased
detection of O antigen was observed. During exponential growth, when rpoS is
unstable or present at low levels, serotype Typhi RpoS(+) strains overexpress the
Vi polysaccharide at levels comparable to those for RpoS(-) strains. Our results 
show that RpoS is another regulator of Vi polysaccharide synthesis and
contributes to VW variation in serotype Typhi, which has implications for the
development of recombinant attenuated Salmonella vaccines in humans.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00888-06 
PMCID: PMC1828562
PMID: 17178790  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

