
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2007 Jan;13(1):78-85.

Comparison of clinical and environmental isolates of Legionella pneumophila
obtained in the UK over 19 years.

Harrison TG(1), Doshi N, Fry NK, Joseph CA.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Systemic infection Laboratory, Agency Centre for Infections,
London, UK. tim.harrison@hpa.org.uk

Between January 1980 and December 1998, 3458 cases of Legionnaires' disease were 
reported to the national surveillance scheme in England and Wales. Of these, 463 
(13.4%) were reported as proven by culture and isolation of Legionella spp., with
96.3% being Legionella pneumophila. Serogroup (Sgp), monoclonal antibody (mAb)
subgrouping and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis data
were obtained for 321 (69.3%) of these, of which 284 were classified as being
unrelated to any other isolate in the study. Typing data were also available for 
117 unrelated environmental isolates of L. pneumophila obtained from England and 
Wales, giving a total of 401 unrelated isolates in the study. Of the clinical
isolates, 88.0% were Sgp1, compared with only 42.7% of environmental isolates (p 
<0.001); 79.6% of clinical isolates were subgrouped as mAb2+, compared with only 
12.8% of environmental isolates (p <0.001). RFLP typing identified 67 types among
the 401 isolates, with clinical isolates showing significantly less diversity
than environmental isolates (index of diversity (IOD) 0.944 vs. 0.958; p <0.05), 
with three RFLP types (1, 5 and 14) accounting for 40.0% of all clinical
isolates. Combining the phenotypic and genotypic data resulted in 173 distinct
phenons, with clinical isolates showing significantly less diversity than
environmental isolates (IOD 0.964 vs. 0.996; p <0.01). Three phenons accounted
for 30% of all clinical isolates. These data strongly suggest that some strains
of L. pneumophila are more likely to cause human infection than would be expected
from their distribution in the environment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2006.01558.x 
PMID: 17184291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

