
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jan 2;104(1):181-6. Epub 2006 Dec 21.

Isolation and functional characterization of murine prostate stem cells.

Lawson DA(1), Xin L, Lukacs RU, Cheng D, Witte ON.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, David Geffen School of Medicine, and Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The ability to isolate prostate stem cells is essential to explore their role in 
prostate development and disease. In vitro prostate colony- and sphere-forming
assays were used to quantitatively measure murine prostate stem/progenitor cell
enrichment and self-renewal. Cell surface markers were screened for their ability
to positively or negatively enrich for cells with enhanced growth potential in
these assays. Immunohistochemical and FACS analyses demonstrate that specific
cell surface markers can be used to discriminate prostate stromal (CD34(+)),
luminal epithelial (CD24(+)CD49f(-)), basal epithelial (CD24(+)CD49f(+)),
hematopoietic (CD45(+), Ter119(+)), and endothelial (CD31(+)) lineages. Sorting
for cells with a CD45(-)CD31(-)Ter119(-)Sca-1(+)CD49f(+) antigenic profile
results in a 60-fold enrichment for colony- and sphere-forming cells. These cells
can self-renew and expand to form spheres for many generations and can
differentiate to produce prostatic tubule structures containing both basal and
luminal cells in vivo. These cells also localize to the basal cell layer within
the region of the gland that is proximal to the urethra, which has been
identified as the prostate stem cell niche. Prostate stem cells can be isolated
to a purity of up to 1 in 35 by using this antigenic profile. The remarkable
similarity in cell surface profile between prostate and mammary gland stem cells 
suggests these markers may be conserved among epithelial stem cell populations.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0609684104 
PMCID: PMC1716155
PMID: 17185413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

