
1. J Immunol. 2007 Jan 15;178(2):1151-7.

IL-8 and IDO expression by human gingival fibroblasts via TLRs.

Mahanonda R(1), Sa-Ard-Iam N, Montreekachon P, Pimkhaokham A, Yongvanichit K,
Fukuda MM, Pichyangkul S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Faculty of Dentistry, Chulalongkorn University, 
Henry Dunant Road, Bangkok, Thailand. mrangsin@chula.ac.th

Human gingival fibroblasts (HGFs), a predominant cell type in tooth-supporting
structure, are presently recognized for their active role in the innate immune
response. They produce a variety of inflammatory cytokines in response to
microbial components such as LPS from the key periodontal pathogen, Porphyromonas
gingivalis. In this study, we demonstrated that HGFs expressed mRNA of TLRs 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, and 9, but not TLRs 7, 8, and 10. Stimulation of HGFs with highly
purified TLR2 ligand (P. gingivalis LPS), TLR3 ligand (poly(I:C)), TLR4 ligand
(Escherichia coli LPS), and TLR5 ligand (Salmonella typhimurium flagellin) led to
expression of IL-8 and IDO. A potent TLR 9 ligand, CpG oligodeoxynucleotide 2006 
had no effect, although HGFs showed a detectable TLR9 mRNA expression. No
significant enhancement on IL-8 or IDO expression was observed when HGFs were
stimulated with various combinations of TLR ligands. Surprisingly, the TLR9
ligand CpG oligodeoxynucleotide 2006 was able to specifically inhibit
poly(I:C)-induced IL-8 and IDO expression. TNF-alpha enhanced TLR ligand-induced 
IL-8 production in HGFs, whereas IFN-gamma enhanced TLR ligand-induced IDO
expression. HGF production of IDO in response to P. gingivalis LPS, IFN-gamma, or
the two in combination inhibited T cell proliferation in MLRs. The observed T
cell inhibition could be reversed by addition of either 1-methyl-dl-tryptophan or
l-tryptophan. Our results suggest an important role of HGFs not only in
orchestrating the innate immune response, but also in dampening potentially
harmful hyperactive inflammation in periodontal tissue.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.178.2.1151 
PMID: 17202379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

