
1. J Immunol. 2007 Jan 15;178(2):993-1001.

Oxidized phospholipids inhibit phagocytosis and impair outcome in gram-negative
sepsis in vivo.

Knapp S(1), Matt U, Leitinger N, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
sylvia.knapp@meduniwien.ac.at

Oxidized phospholipids that are generated during inflammation exert
anti-inflammatory properties and prevent death during murine endotoxemia.
Oxidized 1-palmitoyl-2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphorylcholine (OxPAPC)
inhibits the interaction of LPS with LPS-binding protein and CD14. In this study,
we determined the functional properties of OxPAPC and potential interference with
CD14 during abdominal sepsis caused by Escherichia coli. Administration of OxPAPC
rendered mice highly susceptible to E. coli peritonitis, as indicated by an
accelerated mortality and enhanced bacterial outgrowth and dissemination.
CD14(-/-) mice also displayed increased mortality and bacterial outgrowth and
OxPAPC did not further impair host defense in these animals. The mechanisms by
which OxPAPC and CD14 deficiency impaired the immune response differed: whereas
CD14(-/-) mice demonstrated a strongly reduced recruitment of phagocytes to the
site of the infection, OxPAPC did not influence the influx of inflammatory cells 
but strongly diminished the phagocytosing capacity of neutrophils and macrophages
by a CD14-independent mechanism. Furthermore, OxPAPC potently inhibited uptake of
fluorospheres as well as receptor-mediated endocytosis and fluid-phase
pinocytosis. These data suggest that oxidized phospholipids such as produced
during inflammatory reactions may contribute to mortality during Gram-negative
sepsis in vivo via impairment of the phagocytic properties of professional
phagocytes.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.178.2.993 
PMID: 17202362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

