
1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2007 Mar;14(3):304-11. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

DNA vaccine construct incorporating intercellular trafficking and intracellular
targeting motifs effectively primes and induces memory B- and T-cell responses in
outbred animals.

Mwangi W(1), Brown WC, Splitter GA, Davies CJ, Howard CJ, Hope JC, Aida Y, Zhuang
Y, Hunter BJ, Palmer GH.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington 99164, USA. wmwangi@cvm.tamu.edu

We developed a vaccine construct in which a BVP22 domain and an invariant-chain
major histocompatibility complex class II-targeting motif capable of enhancing
dendritic cell antigen uptake and presentation were fused to a sequence encoding 
a B- and T-cell antigen from the Anaplasma marginale major surface protein 1a and
tested whether this construct would prime and expand immune responses in outbred 
calves. A single inoculation with this construct effectively primed the immune
responses, as demonstrated by a significant enhancement of CD4(+) T-cell
proliferation compared to that in calves identically inoculated but inoculated
with a DNA construct lacking the targeting domains and compared to that in calves
inoculated with an empty vector. These proliferative responses were mirrored by
priming and expansion of gamma interferon-positive CD4(+) T cells and
immunoglobulin G responses against the linked B-cell epitope. Priming by the
single immunization induced memory that underwent rapid recall following
reexposure to the antigen. These results demonstrate that DNA vaccines targeting 
key intercellular and intracellular events significantly enhance priming and
expansion and support the feasibility of single-dose DNA immunization in outbred 
populations.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00363-06 
PMCID: PMC1828862
PMID: 17215335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

