
1. J Egypt Public Health Assoc. 2002;77(5-6):499-515.

Assessment of safety of frozen foods.

Gomaa NF(1), Fawzi M, Ibrahim NK, Ghoneim E.

Author information: 
(1)Food Hygiene Department, High Institute of Public Health.

This study aimed to assess the microbiological quality of 90 frozen food samples 
(50 samples of raw frozen vegetables including molokeya, okra, green peas, peas +
carrot, and artichoke, 20 of frozen poultry products and 20 of frozen meat
products), and to assess the level of women practice during handling. A
cross-sectional study was conducted. Results showed that the mean aerobic
mesophilic plate count of frozen vegetables was 3.4 x 10(5) +/- 7.3 x 10(5)
cfu/g. The mean mold and yeast count was 3.9 x 10(3) +/- 1.1 x 10(4) cfu/g. The
mean coliform count was 3.9 x 10 +/- 6.6 x 10 m.o./g. In case of meat product,
the mean aerobic count was 2.3 x 10(5) +/- 3.2 x 10(5), that of mold and yeast
was 2.5 x 10(5) +/- 8.8 x 10(5) cfu/g and that of coliform was 3.2 x 10(2) +/-
3.8 x 10(2) m.o./g. Poultry products on the other hand had a mean aerobic count
of 6.8 x 10(5) +/- 1.6 x 10(6), a mean mold and yeast count of 3.5 x 10(5) +/-
7.4 x 10(5) cfu/g and a mean coliform count of 6.4 x 10(2) +/- 5.2 x 10(2)
m.o./g. Fecal coliforms were detected only in 60.0% of meat product samples and
in 45.0% of poultry product samples. On the other hand Staph aureus was detected 
only in 10.0% of poultry product samples. Difference between the 5 types of
vegetables was statistically significant (P = 0.00, and 0.02, respectively) for
total plate and mold and yeasts counts. Among the 113 interviewed women, 80 used 
frozen food products. Twenty six of them (32.5%) had scores < 50%, those were
classified as being bad as they were handling frozen food improperly which would 
contribute to outbreaks of food borne diseases. Less than 4% of the users used
satisfactory practice during handling frozen foods. Illiteracy affected
significantly the level of practice.


PMID: 17216975  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

