
1. Int Microbiol. 2006 Dec;9(4):259-66.

Communities of green sulfur bacteria in marine and saline habitats analyzed by
gene sequences of 16S rRNA and Fenna-Matthews-Olson protein.

Alexander B(1), Imhoff JF.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute for Marine Sciences, University of Kiel, Germany.

Communities of green sulfur bacteria were studied in selected marine and saline
habitats on the basis of gene sequences of 16S rRNA and the Fenna- Matthews-Olson
(FMO) protein. The availability of group-specific primers for both 16S rDNA and
the fmoA gene, which is unique to green sulfur bacteria, has, for the first time,
made it possible to analyze environmental communities of these bacteria by
culture-independent methods using two independent genetic markers. Sequence
results obtained with fmoA genes and with 16S rDNA were largely congruent to each
other. All of the 16S rDNA and fmoA sequences from habitats of the Baltic Sea,
the Mediterranean Sea, Sippewissett Salt Marsh (Massachusetts, USA), and Bad
Water (Death Valley, California, USA) were found within salt-dependent
phylogenetic lines of green sulfur bacteria established by pure culture studies. 
This strongly supports the existence of phylogenetic lineages of green sulfur
bacteria specifically adapted to marine and saline environments and the exclusive
occurrence of these bacteria in marine and saline habitats. The great majority of
clone sequences belonged to different clusters of the Prosthecochloris genus and 
probably represent different species. Evidence for the occurrence of two new
species of Prosthecochloris was also obtained. Different habitats were dominated 
by representatives from the Prosthecochloris group and different clusters or
species of this genus were found either exclusively or as the clearly dominant
green sulfur bacterium at different habitats.


PMID: 17236159  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

