
1. Infect Immun. 2007 Apr;75(4):1730-7. Epub 2007 Jan 22.

Lactobacillus paracasei subsp. paracasei B21060 suppresses human T-cell
proliferation.

Peluso I(1), Fina D, Caruso R, Stolfi C, Caprioli F, Fantini MC, Caspani G,
Grossi E, Di Iorio L, Paone FM, Pallone F, Monteleone G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, Universit√† Tor Vergata, Via Montpellier 1,
00133 Rome, Italy.

Recent studies have shown that probiotics are beneficial in T-cell-mediated
inflammatory diseases. The molecular mechanism by which probiotics work remains
elusive, but accumulating evidence indicates that probiotics can modulate immune 
cell responses. Since T cells express receptors for bacterial products or
components, we examined whether different strains of lactobacilli directly
regulate the functions of human T cells. CD4(+) T cells were isolated from blood 
and intestinal lamina propria (LP) of normal individuals and patients with
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Mononuclear cells were also isolated from
Peyer's patches. Cells were activated with anti-CD3/CD2/CD28 in the presence or
absence of Lactobacillus paracasei subsp. paracasei B21060, L. paracasei subsp.
paracasei F19, or L. casei subsp. casei DG. Cell proliferation and death, Foxp3, 
intracellular pH, and cytokine production were evaluated by flow cytometry. We
showed that L. paracasei subsp. paracasei B21060 but neither L. paracasei subsp. 
paracasei F19 nor L. casei subsp. casei DG inhibited blood CD4(+) T-cell growth. 
This effect was associated with no change in cell survival, expression of Foxp3, 
or production of gamma interferon, interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5, and IL-10. L.
paracasei subsp. paracasei B21060-mediated blockade of CD4(+) T-cell
proliferation required a viable bacterium and was associated with decreased MCT-1
expression and low intracellular pH. L. paracasei subsp. paracasei B21060 also
inhibited the growth of Peyer's patch mononuclear cells, normal lymphocytes, and 
IBD CD4(+) LP lymphocytes without affecting cytokine production. The data show
that L. paracasei subsp. paracasei B21060 blocks T-cell growth, thus suggesting a
mechanism by which these probiotics could interfere with T-cell-driven immune
responses.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01172-06 
PMCID: PMC1865705
PMID: 17242060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

