
1. Sci Total Environ. 2007 Mar 1;374(1):43-50. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

Evaluation of the toxicological properties of ground- and surface-water samples
from the Aral Sea Basin.

Bosch K(1), Erdinger L, Ingel F, Khussainova S, Utegenova E, Bresgen N, Eckl PM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Salzburg, Department of Cell Biology, Hellbrunnerstr. 34, A-5020
Salzburg, Austria.

In order to determine whether there is a potential health risk associated with
the water supply in the Aral Sea Basin, ground- and surface-water samples were
collected in and around Aralsk and from the Aral Sea in 2002. Water samples from 
Akchi, a small town close to Almaty, served as controls. Bioassays with different
toxicological endpoints were employed to assess the general toxicological status.
Additionally, the samples were analysed for microbial contamination. The samples 
were tested in the primary hepatocyte assay for their potential to induce
micronuclei and chromosomal aberrations as cumulative indicators for
genotoxicity. In parallel, the effects on cell proliferation evidenced by mitotic
index and cytotoxicity such as the appearance of necrotic and apoptotic cells,
were determined. Furthermore, samples were examined using the Microtox assay for 
general toxicity. Chemical analysis according to European regulations was
performed and soil and water samples were analysed for DDT and DDE. The results
obtained indicated no increased cyto- or genotoxic potential of the water
samples, nor levels of DDT or DDE exceeding the thresholds levels suggested by
WHO. Our data therefore do not support the hypothesis that the contamination of
the drinking water in and around Aralsk is responsible for the health effects
previously described such as increased rates of liver disease and in particular
liver cancer. Microbiological analysis, however, revealed the presence of
contamination in most samples analysed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2006.11.048 
PMID: 17258298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

