
1. J Immunol. 2007 Feb 15;178(4):2056-64.

Changes in the role of the CD45 protein tyrosine phosphatase in regulating Lck
tyrosine phosphorylation during thymic development.

Falahati R(1), Leitenberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Tropical Medicine, George
Washington University, Washington, DC 20037.

CD45-dependent dephosphorylation of the negative regulatory C-terminal tyrosine
of the Src family kinase Lck, promotes efficient TCR signal transduction.
However, despite the role of CD45 in positively regulating Lck activity, the
distinct phenotypes of CD45 and Lck/Fyn-deficient mice suggest that the role of
CD45 in promoting Lck activity may be differentially regulated during thymocyte
development. In this study, we have found that the C-terminal tyrosine of Lck
(Y505) is markedly hyperphosphorylated in total thymocytes from CD45-deficient
mice compared with control animals. In contrast, regulation of the Lck Y505
phosphorylation in purified, double-negative thymocytes is relatively unaffected 
in CD45-deficient cells. These changes in the role of CD45 in regulating Lck
phosphorylation during thymocyte development correlate with changes in coreceptor
expression and the presence of coreceptor-associated Lck. Biochemical analysis of
coreceptor-associated and nonassociated Lck in thymocytes, and in cell lines
varying in CD4 and CD45 expression, indicate that CD45-dependent regulation of
Lck Y505 phosphorylation is most evident within the fraction of Lck that is
coreceptor associated. In contrast, Lck Y505 phosphorylation that is not
coreceptor associated is less affected by the absence of CD45. These data define 
distinct pools of Lck that are differentially regulated by CD45 during T cell
development.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.178.4.2056 
PMID: 17277109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

