
1. Novartis Found Symp. 2006;279:66-77; discussion 77-9, 216-9.

Immunity and tolerance to Aspergillus fumigatus.

Montagnoli C(1), Bozza S, Gaziano R, Zelante T, Bonifazi P, Moretti S, Bellocchio
S, Pitzurra L, Romani L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Science, University of
Perugia, 06126 Perugia, Italy.

The inherent resistance to diseases caused by Aspergillus fumigatus suggests the 
occurrence of regulatory mechanisms that provide the host with adequate defence
without necessarily eliminating the fungus or causing unacceptable levels of host
damage. Efficient responses to the fungus require different mechanisms of
immunity. Dendritic cells (DCs) are uniquely able to decode the fungus-associated
information and translate it into qualitatively different T helper (Th) and
regulatory (Treg) cell responses. A division of labour occurred between
functionally distinct Treg that were coordinately activated by a
CD28/B.7-dependent costimulatory pathway after exposure of mice to Aspergillus
conidia. Early in infection, inflammation was controlled by the expansion,
activation and local recruitment of CD4+CD25+ Treg capable of suppressing
neutrophils through the combined actions of interleukin (IL10) and cytotoxic T
lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA4) on indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO). The levels of 
IFNgamma produced in this early phase set the subsequent adaptive stage by
conditioning the IDO-dependent tolerogenic program of DCs and the subsequent
activation and expansion of tolerogenic Treg, which produced IL10 and
transforming growth factor (TGF)beta, inhibited Th2 cells, and prevented allergy 
to the fungus. Thus, regulation is an essential component of the host response in
infection and allergy to the fungus, and its manipulation may allow the pathogen 
to overcome host resistance and promote disease.


PMID: 17278386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

