
1. Infect Immun. 2007 May;75(5):2399-407. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

Induction of human beta-defensin 2 by the probiotic Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 
is mediated through flagellin.

Schlee M(1), Wehkamp J, Altenhoefer A, Oelschlaeger TA, Stange EF, Fellermann K.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart,
Germany.

Human beta-defensin 2 (hBD-2) is an inducible antimicrobial peptide synthesized
by the epithelium to counteract bacterial adherence and invasion. Proinflammatory
cytokines, as well as certain bacterial strains, have been identified as potent
endogenous inducers. Recently, we have found that hBD-2 induction by probiotic
Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 was mediated through NF-kappaB- and AP-1-dependent
pathways. The aim of the present study was to identify the responsible bacterial 
factor. E. coli Nissle 1917 culture supernatant was found to be more potent than 
the pellet, indicating a soluble or shed factor. Chemical analysis demonstrated
the factor to be heat resistant and proteinase digestible. Several E. coli Nissle
1917 deletion mutants were constructed and tested for their ability to induce
hBD-2 expression in Caco-2 cells. Deletion mutants for flagellin specifically
exhibited an impaired immunostimulatory capacity. Reinsertion of the flagellin
gene restored the induction capacity to normal levels. Isolated flagellin from E.
coli Nissle 1917 and from Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis induced hBD-2
mRNA significantly in contrast to the flagellin of the apathogenic E. coli strain
ATCC 25922. H1 flagellin antiserum abrogated hBD-2 expression induced by
flagellin as well as E. coli Nissle 1917 supernatant, confirming that flagellin
is the major stimulatory factor of E. coli Nissle 1917.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01563-06 
PMCID: PMC1865783
PMID: 17283097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

