
1. J Bacteriol. 1992 Jan;174(1):186-90.

Three N-terminal domains of beta-1,3-glucanase A1 are involved in binding to
insoluble beta-1,3-glucan.

Watanabe T(1), Kasahara N, Aida K, Tanaka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Faculty of Agriculture, Niigata
University, Japan.

Limited proteolysis of beta-1,3-glucanase A1 by three different proteases,
trypsin, chymotrypsin, and papain, gave three major active fragments. The sizes
of the three major fragments generated by each protease treatment were identical 
to those of beta-1,3-glucanase A2, A3, and A4 detected in both the culture
supernatant of Bacillus circulans WL-12 and the periplasmic space of Escherichia 
coli carrying a cloned glcA gene. These results indicate a four-domain structure 
for the enzyme. At the N terminus of the glucanase, duplicated segments of
approximately 100 amino acids were observed. N-terminal amino acid sequence
analysis revealed that the active fragments with sizes corresponding to those of 
A2 and A3 lack the first segment (domain) and both duplicated segments (domains),
respectively. The fragment corresponding to A4 lacks both duplicated segments and
the following ca. 120-amino-acid region. By losing the first, second, and third
(corresponding to the segment of 120 amino acids) domains, beta-1,3-glucanase
progressively lost the ability to bind to pachyman, beta-1,3-glucan. An active
fragment which did not have the three N-terminal domains did not show significant
binding to pachyman. Thus, all three N-terminal domains contribute to binding to 
beta-1,3-glucan, and the presence of three domains confers the highest binding
activity on the glucanase. The loss of these binding domains remarkably decreased
pachyman-hydrolyzing activity, indicating that the binding activity is essential 
for the efficient hydrolysis of insoluble beta-1,3-glucan.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.174.1.186-190.1992 
PMCID: PMC205694
PMID: 1729208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

