
1. Microbes Infect. 2007 Mar;9(3):300-7. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

Streptococcal DRS (distantly related to SIC) and SIC inhibit antimicrobial
peptides, components of mucosal innate immunity: a comparison of their
activities.

Fernie-King BA(1), Seilly DJ, Binks MJ, Sriprakash KS, Lachmann PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Immunology Group, Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0ES, UK.

"Streptococcal inhibitor of complement" (SIC) and "distantly related to SIC"
(DRS) are related virulence factors secreted by M1 and M12 strains of GAS,
respectively. The human mucosal innate immune system, important components of
which are beta-defensins, secretory leukocyte proteinase inhibitor (SLPI) and
lysozyme, provides the first line of defence against microorganisms. We report
the interaction between DRS and these proteins; further investigations into the
interaction of SIC with the beta-defensins; and compare the sensitivity of M12
and M1 GAS to SLPI. We show that SLPI, which kills M1 GAS and is inhibited by
SIC, cannot kill M12 GAS. DRS cannot inhibit SLPI killing of M1 GAS, although
ELISA shows binding of DRS to SLPI. We suggest that the target for SLPI on M1 GAS
resembles SIC, and soluble SIC inhibits by acting as a decoy for SLPI. M12 GAS
may not have this target and cannot interact with SLPI. DRS inhibits the
antibacterial action of hBD-2 and hBD-3. Binding of both SIC and DRS to hBD-2,
and DRS to hBD-3, shows small positive enthalpy, suggesting that binding is
largely hydrophobic. The data for SIC and hBD-3 indicate that this is not a
homogeneous bimolecular interaction. We conclude that DRS shares several of the
properties of SIC, and therefore can be considered an important virulence factor 
of M12 GAS and an aid to colonization of the host mucosae.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2006.12.006 
PMID: 17303463  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

