
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2007 May;148(2):325-37. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

Immunomodulation by mercuric chloride in vitro: application of different cell
activation pathways.

Hemdan NY(1), Lehmann I, Wichmann G, Lehmann J, Emmrich F, Sack U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Immunology and Transfusion Medicine (IKIT), University
of Leipzig, Germany. hemdan.nasr@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

Evidence is emerging that exposure to mercury (Hg) may elicit many pathological
manifestations, including immunomodulation. We tested whether changing cellular
activation pathways may affect the immunomodulation by Hg. Human cell cultures
were set up where isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cells, activated by
monoclonal antibodies (MoAb: anti-CD3/-CD28/-CD40) or heat-killed Salmonella
enterica serovar Enteritidis (hk-SE), exposed to mercuric chloride (HgCl2) for 24
h. Cell vitality was assessed by MTT assay, and modulation of cytokine profiles
were monitored by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), intracellular
cytokine staining and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
Results show that Hg doses above 15 ng/ml significantly reduced cell vitality (P 
< 0.05). Lower doses elicited distinct effects on T helper 1 (Th1) and Th2
cytokine expression depending on cellular activation pathways. In MoAb-stimulated
cells, interferon (IFN)-gamma, tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and interleukin
(IL)-6 production was reduced. Doses up to 0.150 and 0.5 microg/ml increased
IL-10 and IL-4 production, respectively, resulting in significantly reduced
Th1/Th2 ratios. Stimulation by hk-SE, however, elevated Th1/Th2 ratios due to
induction of IFN-gamma versus IL-10 production. Taken together, we conclude that 
low-level exposure to Hg, in the absence of inflammation, polarizes the immune
response toward Th2, but not in the case of Th1-polarized responses elicited by
Salmonella antigens that can be promoted instead. This demonstrates differential 
in vitro effects of Hg on the Th1/Th2 balance produced by different stimuli,
which may have important experimental and scientific implications.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2007.03338.x 
PMCID: PMC1868882
PMID: 17302730  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

