
1. Acta Biomed. 2006 Dec;77(3):157-62.

Diet and chronic constipation. Benefits of oral supplementation with symbiotic
zir fos (Bifidobacterium longum W11 + FOS Actilight).

Amenta M(1), Cascio MT, Di Fiore P, Venturini I.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Prevenzione e Cura Obesità, ASL 6 D.S. 1 Cefalù, Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Constipation is one of the most common disorders in Western
countries and it is known that dietary factors such as a low fiber diet and low
caloric intake are associated with this condition. Weight loss can disrupt the
intestinal ecosystem resulting in intestinal dysbiosis that worsens constipation.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of treatment with symbiotic zir
fos (Bifidobacterium longum W11 + FOS Actilight) on chronic constipation in
patients undergoing a weight loss diet.
METHODS: Our evaluation included the recording of age, gender, weight, height,
BMI, physical activity, constipation, diet, therapy compliance and laxative
supplies. A hypocaloric diet (1,200/1,400 cal.) was prescribed to all patients,
and they were submitted to a physical activity program and received 1 bag of
symbiotic zir fos per day for the entire duration of the study. Patients'
follow-up was available for up to 60 days.
RESULTS: Two hundred and ninety seven patients (79.4% women and 18.2% men, mean
age 32.2) were included in the study. The mean baseline BMI was 33.4 +/- 5.6
(range 22.8-56.3 Kg). The improvement of constipation turned out to be associated
to age (p < 0.01). Patients with a mean age of 35 +/- 12 showed an improvement of
constipation. BMI values were not significantly different among the groups of
patients with improved, worsened or unchanged constipation. No significative
difference was observed among groups due to physical activity. At the follow-up, 
after 20 days from the beginning of the study, patients that assumed at least
17/20 of the zir fos bags showed a greater improvement of constipation (p < 0.01)
than the remaining patients who assumed less than 17/20 of the zir fos bags or
that didn't assumed any at all. Patients that assumed laxatives (at least once a 
week) showedn to be more frequently associated with a worsening of constipation
(p < 0.001). Diet compliance does not seem to influence the course of
constipation.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate the utility of symbiotics in improving
constipation during hypocaloric diet in the treatment of obesity.


PMID: 17312986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

