
1. Protein Sci. 2007 Mar;16(3):441-8.

Important roles of hydroxylic amino acid residues in the function of Bacillus
subtilis adenylosuccinate lyase.

Segall ML(1), Cashman MA, Colman RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark,
Delaware 19716, USA.

Thr(93), Ser(94), Thr(140), and Ser(306) are conserved in all adenylosuccinate
lyases (ASL) and are close to other amino acids previously identified by
mutagenesis as being in the active site. To test their involvement in the
enzyme's function, each of these amino acids was replaced by alanine. All the
mutants exhibit circular dichroism spectra which are similar to that of wild-type
enzyme, indicating there is no appreciable change in secondary structure. T93A
exhibits 0.5% of the V(max) of wild-type ASL with a 10-fold increase in K(m) for 
adenylosuccinate. S94A has 65% of the V(max) of wild-type ASL with little change 
in K(m). T140A exhibits 0.03% of the activity of wild-type enzyme with an 11-fold
increase in K(m). S306A has 0.4% of the V(max) of wild-type ASL with a sevenfold 
increase in K(m). Measurements of the pH-V(max) profile reveal a pK(2) value for 
S94A of 7.83 and S306A of 7.65, in contrast to 8.24 for the wild-type enzyme and 
8.42 for T93A. Thr(93) may orient adenylosuccinate optimally for catalysis, while
Ser(94) stabilizes protonated His(89), a determinant of pK(2). Thr(140) may,
through hydrogen bonding, interact with Asn(270), an amino acid essential for
catalysis. Ser(306) may be involved in a hydrogen bond network that ultimately
stabilizes protonated His(68), which is probably the general acid in the reaction
of enzyme with substrate. The results of this paper demonstrate the importance in
the catalytic function of ASL of hydrogen bonds and hydrogen bonding networks
involving serine and threonine.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.062650007 
PMCID: PMC2203318
PMID: 17322529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

