
1. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Mar 15;16(6):691-703. Epub 2007 Mar 5.

15q11-13 GABAA receptor genes are normally biallelically expressed in brain yet
are subject to epigenetic dysregulation in autism-spectrum disorders.

Hogart A(1), Nagarajan RP, Patzel KA, Yasui DH, Lasalle JM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Rowe Program in Human Genetics, School of
Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Human chromosome 15q11-13 is a complex locus containing imprinted genes as well
as a cluster of three GABA(A) receptor subunit (GABR) genes-GABRB3, GABRA5 and
GABRG3. Deletion or duplication of 15q11-13 GABR genes occurs in multiple human
neurodevelopmental disorders including Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS), Angelman
syndrome (AS) and autism. GABRB3 protein expression is also reduced in Rett
syndrome (RTT), caused by mutations in MECP2 on Xq28. Although Gabrb3 is
biallelically expressed in mouse brain, conflicting data exist regarding the
imprinting status of the 15q11-13 GABR genes in humans. Using coding single
nucleotide polymorphisms we show that all three GABR genes are biallelically
expressed in 21 control brain samples, demonstrating that these genes are not
imprinted in normal human cortex. Interestingly, four of eight autism and one of 
five RTT brain samples showed monoallelic or highly skewed allelic expression of 
one or more GABR gene, suggesting that epigenetic dysregulation of these genes is
common to both disorders. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis of PWS and AS
samples with paternal and maternal 15q11-13 deletions revealed a paternal
expression bias of GABRB3, while RTT brain samples showed a significant reduction
in GABRB3 and UBE3A. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and bisulfite sequencing in
SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells demonstrated that MeCP2 binds to methylated CpG sites
within GABRB3. Our previous studies demonstrated that homologous 15q11-13 pairing
in neurons was dependent on MeCP2 and was disrupted in RTT and autism cortex.
Combined, these results suggest that MeCP2 acts as a chromatin organizer for
optimal expression of both alleles of GABRB3 in neurons.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddm014 
PMCID: PMC1934608
PMID: 17339270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

