
1. Curr Pharm Des. 2007;13(6):599-608.

Purine metabolism in Mycobacterium tuberculosis as a target for drug development.

Parker WB(1), Long MC.

Author information: 
(1)Southern Research Institute, Birmingham, AL 35205, USA. parker@sri.org

Tuberculosis remains a serious health problem throughout the world, and new drugs
are needed to help control this disease. We have identified several purine
nucleoside analogs that exhibit selective activity against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. The lead compound in this series is 2-methyl-adenosine
(methyl-Ado), which is active against proliferating and nonproliferating bacteria
due to its ability to inhibit protein synthesis. Methyl-Ado is activated by
adenosine kinase that is expressed in M. tuberculosis cells. The primary
intracellular metabolite is 2-methyl-AMP, although some methyl-ATP was also
produced in the cells. Adenosine kinase has been purified from M. tuberculosis
cells and its biochemical activity has been characterized and compared to that of
the human homolog. The gene for adenosine kinase has been determined to be
Rv2202c, which had been putatively identified as a sugar kinase. Because very
little is known about purine metabolism in M. tuberculosis, we have initiated
studies to characterize the enzymes that are involved in salvage of purine
nucleosides. We believe that enhanced knowledge of the characteristics of the
enzymes involved in purine salvage in M. tuberculosis should aid in the rational 
design of more potent purine analogs that can selectively inhibit M. tuberculosis
replication. Compounds in this class should be active against strains of M.
tuberculosis that are resistant to current agents used to treat this disease and 
may also target latent disease.

DOI: 10.2174/138161207780162863 
PMID: 17346177  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

