
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Feb 27;104(9):3514-9. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Point mutations in TOR confer Rheb-independent growth in fission yeast and
nutrient-independent mammalian TOR signaling in mammalian cells.

Urano J(1), Sato T, Matsuo T, Otsubo Y, Yamamoto M, Tamanoi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, Jonsson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Molecular Biology Institute, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Rheb is a unique member of the Ras superfamily GTP-binding proteins. We as well
as others previously have shown that Rheb is a critical component of the TSC/TOR 
signaling pathway. In fission yeast, Rheb is encoded by the rhb1 gene. Rhb1p is
essential for growth and directly interacts with Tor2p. In this article, we
report identification of 22 single amino acid changes in the Tor2 protein that
enable growth in the absence of Rhb1p. These mutants also exhibit decreased
mating efficiency. Interestingly, the mutations are located in the C-terminal
half of the Tor2 protein, clustering mainly within the FAT and kinase domains. We
noted some differences in the effect of a mutation in the FAT domain (L1310P) and
in the kinase domain (E2221K) on growth and mating. Although the Tor2p mutations 
bypass Rhb1p's requirement for growth, they are incapable of suppressing Rhb1p's 
requirement for resistance to stress and toxic amino acids, pointing to multiple 
functions of Rhb1p. In mammalian systems, we find that mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) carrying analogous mutations (L1460P or E2419K), although
sensitive to rapamycin, exhibits constitutive activation even when the cells are 
starved for nutrients. These mutations do not show significant difference in
their ability to form complexes with Raptor, Rictor, or mLST8. Furthermore, we
present evidence that mutant mTOR can complex with wild-type mTOR and that this
heterodimer is active in nutrient-starved cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0608510104 
PMCID: PMC1805553
PMID: 17360675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

