
1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Jun;1106:1-19. Epub 2007 Mar 14.

AMD3100 and CD26 modulate mobilization, engraftment, and survival of
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells mediated by the SDF-1/CXCL12-CXCR4 axis.

Broxmeyer HE(1), Hangoc G, Cooper S, Campbell T, Ito S, Mantel C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and the Walther Oncology Center,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.
hbroxmey@iupui.edu

The chemokine stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1/CXCL12) and its receptor,
CXCR4, are involved in a number of facets of the regulation of hematopoiesis at
the level of hematopoietic stem (HSCs) and progenitor (HPCs) cells. Modulation of
this ligand-receptor interaction may be of clinical utility. We now report that: 
(1) the CC chemokine, macrophage inflammatory protein-1alpha (MIP-1alpha/CCL3)
synergizes with AMD3100 (an antagonist of the binding of SDF-1/CXCL12 to CXCR4)
to rapidly mobilize HPCs to the blood of mice; moreover, the combination of
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) with AMD3100 and MIP-1alpha/CCL3,
given in a specific sequence, mobilizes the greatest number of HPCs compared to
any combination of two of these mobilizing agents; (2) pretreatment of recipient 
mice with Diprotin A, an inhibitor of CD26/Dipeptidylpeptidase IV (DPPIV),
enhances the competitive HSCs repopulating capacity of untreated donor cells; (3)
the survival-enhancing effects of SDF-1/CXCL12 on HPCs subjected in vitro to
delayed addition of growth factors (GFs) are mediated in part through the cell
cycle-related proteins p21(cip1/waf1) (as assessed using p21(cip1/waf1) -/- and
+/+ mice) and Mad2 (using Mad2 +/- and +/+ mice); and (4) deletion of CD26/DPPIV 
on mouse bone marrow cells increases the survival-enhancing effects of
SDF-1/CXCL12 on HPCs. These results demonstrate the means to increase the
mobilization of HPCs, the engrafting capability of HSCs, and responsiveness of
HPCs to the survival-enhancing activity of SDF-1/CXCL12, effects that may be of
practical value.

DOI: 10.1196/annals.1392.013 
PMID: 17360804  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

