
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Mar 27;104(13):5551-6. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

Saposin B is the dominant saposin that facilitates lipid binding to human CD1d
molecules.

Yuan W(1), Qi X, Tsang P, Kang SJ, Illarionov PA, Besra GS, Gumperz J, Cresswell 
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8011, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 May 22;104(21):9099. Illaniorov, Petr A [corrected
to Illarionov, Petr A].

CD1d molecules bind lipid antigens in the endocytic pathway, and access to the
pathway is important for the development of CD1d-restricted natural killer T
(NKT) cells. Saposins, derived from a common precursor, prosaposin, are small,
heat-stable lysosomal glycoproteins required for lysosomal degradation of
sphingolipids. Expression of prosaposin is required for efficient lipid binding
and recognition of human CD1d molecules by NKT cells. Despite high sequence
homology among the four saposins, they have different specificities for lipid
substrates and different mechanisms of action. To determine the saposins involved
in promoting lipid binding to CD1d, we expressed prosaposin deletion mutants
lacking individual saposins in prosaposin-negative, CD1d-positive cells. No
individual saposin proved to be absolutely essential, but the absence of saposin 
B resulted in the lowest recognition of alpha-galactosylceramide by NKT cells.
When recombinant exogenous saposins were added to the prosaposin-negative cells, 
saposin B was the most efficient in restoring CD1d recognition. Saposin B was
also the most efficient in mediating alpha-galactosylceramide binding to
recombinant plate-bound CD1d and facilitating NKT cell activation. Saposin B
could also mediate lipid binding to soluble CD1d molecules in a T
cell-independent assay. The optimal pH for saposin B-mediated lipid binding to
CD1d, pH 6, is higher than that of lysosomes, suggesting that saposin B may
facilitate lipid binding to CD1d molecules throughout the endocytic pathway.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0700617104 
PMCID: PMC1838443
PMID: 17372201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

