
1. Physiol Genomics. 2007 Jul 18;30(2):134-45. Epub 2007 Mar 20.

MyD88-dependent changes in the pulmonary transcriptome after infection with
Chlamydia pneumoniae.

Rodr√≠guez N(1), Mages J, Dietrich H, Wantia N, Wagner H, Lang R, Miethke T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, Technical
University of Munich, Munich, Germany.

Chlamydia pneumoniae, an intracellular bacterium, causes pneumonia in humans and 
mice. Toll-like receptors and the key adaptor molecule myeloid differentiation
factor-88 (MyD88) play a critical role in inducing immunity against this
microorganism and are crucial for survival. To explore the influence of MyD88 on 
induction of immune responses in vivo on a genome-wide level, wildtype (WT) or
MyD88(-/-) mice were infected with C. pneumoniae on anesthesia, and the pulmonary
transcriptome was analyzed 3 days later by microarrays. We found that the
infection caused pulmonary cellular infiltration in WT but not MyD88(-/-) mice.
Furthermore, it induced the transcription of 360 genes and repressed 18 genes in 
WT mice. Of these, 221 genes were not or weakly induced in lungs of MyD88(-/-)
mice. This cluster contains primarily genes encoding for chemokines and cytokines
like MIP-1alpha, MIP-2, MIP-1gamma, MCP-1, TNF, and KC and other immune effector 
molecules like immunoresponsive gene-1 and TLR2. Arginase was highly induced
after C. pneumoniae infection and was MyD88 dependent. Genes induced by
interferons were abundant in a cluster of 102 genes that were only partially
MyD88 dependent. Also, lcn2 (lipocalin-2) and timp1 were represented within this 
cluster. Interestingly, a set of 37 genes including sprr1a was induced more
strongly in MyD88(-/-) mice, and most of them are involved in the regulation of
cellular replication. In summary, ex vivo analysis of the pulmonary transcriptome
on infection with C. pneumoniae demonstrated a major impact of MyD88 on
inflammatory responses but not on interferon-type responses and identified
MyD88-independent genes involved in cellular replication.

DOI: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00011.2007 
PMID: 17374847  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

