
1. Infect Immun. 2007 Jun;75(6):2914-21. Epub 2007 Mar 26.

T-cell recognition of the HspX protein of Mycobacterium tuberculosis correlates
with latent M. tuberculosis infection but not with M. bovis BCG vaccination.

Geluk A(1), Lin MY, van Meijgaarden KE, Leyten EM, Franken KL, Ottenhoff TH,
Klein MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands. ageluk@lumc.nl

During stationary growth or in vitro conditions mimicking relevant aspects of
latency, the HspX protein (Rv2031c) is specifically upregulated by Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis. In this study we compared T-cell responses against HspX and the
secreted M. tuberculosis protein Ag85B (Rv1886c) in tuberculosis (TB) patients,
tuberculin skin test-positive individuals, M. bovis BCG-vaccinated individuals,
and healthy negative controls. Gamma interferon responses to HspX were
significantly higher in M. tuberculosis-exposed individuals than in M.
tuberculosis-unexposed BCG vaccinees. In contrast, no such differences were found
with respect to T-cell responses against Ag85B. Therefore, BCG-based vaccines
containing relevant fragments of HspX may induce improved responses against this 
TB latency antigen. To identify relevant major histocompatibility complex class
I- and class II-restricted HspX-specific T-cell epitopes, we immunized
HLA-A2/K(b) and HLA-DR3.Ab(0) transgenic (tg) mice with HspX. Two new T-cell
epitopes were identified, p91-105 and p31-50, restricted via HLA-A*0201 and
HLA-DRB1*0301, respectively. These epitopes were recognized by human T cells as
well, underlining the relevance of HspX T-cell recognition both in vivo and in
vitro. In line with the data in humans, BCG immunization of both tg strains did
not lead to T-cell responses against HspX-derived epitopes, whereas nonlatency
antigens were efficiently recognized. These data support the notion that BCG
vaccination per se does not induce T-cell responses against the latency antigen, 
HspX. Thus, we suggest that subunit vaccines incorporating HspX and/or other
latency antigens, as well as recombinant BCG strains expressing latency antigens 
need to be considered as new vaccines against TB.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01990-06 
PMCID: PMC1932904
PMID: 17387166  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

