
1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Dec;1090:182-7.

Jpk, a novel cell death inducer, regulates the expression of Hoxa7 in F9
teratocarcinoma cells, but not during apoptosis.

Lee EY(1), Kim MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Laboratory, Brain Korea 21 Project for
Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, C.P.O. Box 8044, Seoul
120-752, Korea.

Hox proteins play critical role in animal pattern formation during embryogenesis.
During the study on the regulation of Hox gene expression, a novel gene, Jpk, has
been isolated as a putative regulatory factor associating with the upstream
regulatory sequence of murine Hoxa7. Since overexpression of Jpk caused cell
death in bacteria as well as in eukaryotic cells and Hox has been reported to
participate in apoptosis, we tried to analyze the relationship between Jpk and
Hoxa7 during apoptosis after confirming the regulatory effect of Jpk on the
expression of Hoxa7 in F9 teratocarcinoma cells. For that purpose, an effector
(pEGFP-Jpk) and reporter (pGL2-NM307) plasmid containing a luciferase gene under 
the 307 bp (NM307) of Hoxa7 upstream regulatory sequence was constructed. In the 
presence of Jpk (effector), luciferase activity was increased and this
enhancement was decreased by siRNA against Jpk, suggesting that Jpk is a
regulatory factor of Hoxa7. In order to see whether Jpk still regulates the
expression of Hoxa7 during apoptosis, F9 cells were transiently transfected with 
pcDNA-Jpk, and the expression of Jpk, Hoxa7, and CHOP-10 was analyzed using
RT-PCR. Hoxa7 and CHOP-10 were not upregulated in the presence of Jpk although
Jpk seemed to cause apoptosis, indicating that the regulatory mechanism of Jpk on
the expression of Hoxa7 might be different depending on the cell status, that is,
an apoptotic or proliferative condition.

DOI: 10.1196/annals.1378.020 
PMID: 17384261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

