
1. J Invest Dermatol. 2007 Jul;127(7):1720-7. Epub 2007 Mar 29.

Barrier function, epidermal differentiation, and human beta-defensin 2 expression
in tinea corporis.

Jensen JM(1), Pfeiffer S, Akaki T, Schr√∂der JM, Kleine M, Neumann C, Proksch E,
Brasch J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

Tinea corporis is a superficial mycotic infection resulting in substantial
epidermal changes. We determined skin barrier function, epidermal
differentiation, and human-beta-defensin 2 (hBD-2) protein expression in 10
patients with tinea corporis caused by Trichophyton rubrum (T. rubrum). We found 
disturbed skin barrier function as shown by a significant increase in
transepidermal water loss (TEWL) and specific ultrastructural changes including
disturbed formation of extracellular lipid bilayers, lamellar body extrusion, and
deposit of clotted material at the stratum granulosum/stratum corneum interface. 
Epidermal proliferation in tinea increased several fold and accordingly,
proliferation and inflammation-associated keratins K6, K16, and K17 were
expressed. Expression of basal keratins K5 and K14 increased, whereas
differentiation-associated K10 was reduced. Reduction of the cornified envelope
proteins involucrin, loricrin, and the S100 protein filaggrin was also seen.
Reduced filaggrin expression correlated with reduced skin hydration; protein
breakdown products of filaggrin have been shown to be important for water
binding. Surprisingly, we found pronounced epidermal protein expression of hBD-2,
which may be related to disturbed epidermal differentiation and inflammation.
hBD-2 showed a weak, although significant, antifungal activity against T. rubrum 
in the turbidimetric assay and the immunohistological staining was somewhat less 
pronounced in areas directly underneath fungal hyphae in the stratum corneum.
Together, we describe profound changes in skin barrier structure and function,
epidermal proliferation, and differentiation including pronounced protein
expression of hBD-2 in tinea corporis.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700788 
PMID: 17392834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

