
1. Eur J Haematol. 2007 Jun;78(6):495-9. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Oral health risks associated with HLA-types of patients undergoing hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation.

Dobr T(1), Passweg J, Weber C, Tichelli A, Heim D, Meyer J, Gratwohl A, Waltimo
T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Preventive Dentistry and Oral Microbiology, Dental School,
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

AIM: Dental caries, gingivitis and periodontitis are frequent long-term
complications after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Not all
patients are affected equally. As HLA-genotypes are associated with many
functions of the immune system we made use of our long-standing oral health
program in HSCT recipients to compare oral health data with recipient
HLA-antigens.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This study includes 267 patients evaluated prior to a
planned HSCT at our institution between March 1987 and March 2002. Standardized
oral examinations were undertaken at fixed time points: pre-HSCT and at 6 and 12 
months post-HSCT. Evaluation included loss of radiologic attachment level,
decayed, missing, filled teeth (DMFT) index, and salivary flow rate. For 241
patients (120 males, 121 females) baseline values of these parameters were
compared with recipient HLA-A, -B, -C and -DR-antigens.
RESULTS: Significant correlations were found between increased DMFT and HLA-A32
(P = 0.05), -B5 (0.04), and -DR2 (0.05) as well as decreased DMFT with HLA-B35
(0.02) and -C4 (0.04). Significant associations were also found between certain
HLA-antigens and loss of radiologic periodontal attachment level [HLA-A1 (<0.01),
-C7 (0.04), and -B60 (0.05)], and saliva flow rate [HLA-A30 (0.02)].
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that there may be associations between
pretransplant caries, other oral parameters and HLA in patients at HSCT.
Confirmatory studies concerning the associations of certain HLA-antigens with
caries and periodontal diseases will be needed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2007.00841.x 
PMID: 17391311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

