
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2007 May;69(2):330-9. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

A detailed analysis of 16S ribosomal RNA gene segments for the diagnosis of
pathogenic bacteria.

Chakravorty S(1), Helb D, Burday M, Connell N, Alland D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and the Ruy V. Louren√ßo Center for the Study of
Emerging and Reemerging Pathogens, New Jersey Medical School, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, NJ 07103, USA.

Bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) genes contain nine "hypervariable regions"
(V1-V9) that demonstrate considerable sequence diversity among different
bacteria. Species-specific sequences within a given hypervariable region
constitute useful targets for diagnostic assays and other scientific
investigations. No single region can differentiate among all bacteria; therefore,
systematic studies that compare the relative advantage of each region for
specific diagnostic goals are needed. We characterized V1-V8 in 110 different
bacterial species including common blood borne pathogens, CDC-defined select
agents and environmental microflora. Sequence similarity dendrograms were created
for hypervariable regions V1-V8, and for selected combinations of regions or
short segments within individual hypervariable regions that might be appropriate 
for DNA probing and real-time PCR. We determined that V1 best differentiated
among Staphylococcus aureus and coagulase negative Staphylococcus sp. V2 and V3
were most suitable for distinguishing all bacterial species to the genus level
except for closely related enterobacteriaceae. V2 best distinguished among
Mycobacterium species and V3 among Haemophilus species. The 58 nucleotides-long
V6 could distinguish among most bacterial species except enterobacteriaceae. V6
was also noteworthy for being able to differentiate among all CDC-defined select 
agents including Bacillus anthracis, which differed from B. cereus by a single
polymorphism. V4, V5, V7 and V8 were less useful targets for genus or
species-specific probes. The hypervariable sequence-specific dendrograms and the 
"MEGALIGN" files provided online will be highly useful tools for designing
specific probes and primers for molecular assays to detect pathogenic bacteria,
including select agents.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2007.02.005 
PMCID: PMC2562909
PMID: 17391789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

