
1. Genes Immun. 2007 Jun;8(4):334-43. Epub 2007 Apr 12.

Impact of MHC class I alleles on the M. tuberculosis antigen-specific CD8+ T-cell
response in patients with pulmonary tuberculosis.

Weichold FF(1), Mueller S, Kortsik C, Hitzler WE, Wulf MJ, Hone DM, Sadoff JC,
Maeurer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Aeras Global TB Vaccine Foundation, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Challenged by scattered understanding of protective immunity to Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (MTB), we have mapped peptide epitopes to human leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-A*0101, A*0201, A*1101, A*2402, B*0702, B*0801 and B*1501 of the secreted
mycobacterial antigen Ag85B, a vaccine candidate that may be associated with
immune protection. Affinity (ED(50)) and half-life (t(1/2), off-rate) analysis
for individual peptide species on HLA-A and HLA-B molecules revealed binding
ranges between 10(-3) and 10(-7) M. After selection of the best matches, major
histocompatibility complex class I/peptide tetramer complexes were constructed to
measure the CD8+ T-cell responses directly ex vivo in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) derived from 57 patients with acute pulmonary
tuberculosis. Three patterns of (allele-) specific CD8+ recognition were
identified: (a). Focus on one dominant epitope with additional recognition of
several subdominant T-cell epitopes (HLA-A*0301, A*2402, B*0801 and B*1501); (b).
Co-dominant recognition of two distinct groups of peptides presented by
HLA-B*0702; and (c). Diverse and broad recognition of peptides presented by
HLA-A*0201. Peptides that bound with slow off-rates to class I alleles, that is
HLA-A*0201, were associated with low frequency of CD8+ T cells in PBMCs from
patients with tuberculosis. HLA-B alleles showed fast off-rates in peptide
binding and restricted high numbers (up to 6%) of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells
in patients with pulmonary tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.gene.6364392 
PMID: 17429413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

