
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2007 Oct;23(4):770-80. Epub 2007 Feb 25.

Electrophoretic and Western blot analyses of the lipopolysaccharide and
glycocalyx of Flavobacterium psychrophilum.

LaFrentz BR(1), Lindstrom NM, LaPatra SE, Call DR, Cain KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources and the Aquaculture Research
Institute, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844-1136, USA.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the aetiological agent of bacterial coldwater
disease (CWD) and rainbow trout fry syndrome (RTFS) and it has emerged as one of 
the most significant bacterial pathogens in salmonid aquaculture worldwide.
Previous studies have suggested that the O-polysaccharide (O-PS) component of the
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) of F. psychrophilum is highly immunogenic and may be
involved in eliciting a protective immune response in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss Walbaum). In the present study, SDS-PAGE and Western blotting techniques
were used to analyse the carbohydrate antigens of F. psychrophilum. Our analysis 
identified two distinct carbohydrate-banding patterns. One banding pattern
corresponds with LPS, and we hypothesise that the other carbohydrate-banding
pattern is that of the loosely associated glycocalyx of F. psychrophilum.
Electron microscopy of F. psychrophilum cells immunogold labelled with a
monoclonal antibody specific for this banding pattern supports this hypothesis as
the outermost layer of the bacterium was heavily labelled. This is a significant 
finding because the immunogenic antigens that have been referred to as the O-PS
of LPS, and implicated as potential vaccine candidate antigens, appear to be
components of the glycocalyx of F. psychrophilum. This research suggests that the
glycocalyx of F. psychrophilum may be an important antigen to consider for the
development of a vaccine to control CWD and RTFS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2007.02.005 
PMID: 17420143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

