
1. Immunology. 2007 Aug;121(4):545-54. Epub 2007 Apr 12.

CD45-associated protein promotes the response of primary CD4 T cells to
low-potency T-cell receptor (TCR) stimulation and facilitates CD45 association
with CD3/TCR and lck.

Leitenberg D(1), Falahati R, Lu DD, Takeda A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Tropical Medicine, George
Washington University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20037, USA. dLeit@gwu.edu

Although it is clear that the CD45 tyrosine phosphatase is required for efficient
T-cell activation and T-cell development, the factors that regulate CD45 function
remain uncertain. Previous data have indicated that there is an association of
CD45 with CD4 and the T-cell receptor (TCR) complex controlled by the variable
ectodomain of CD45 and, following activation, by high- and low-potency peptides. 
This suggests that controlling substrate access to CD45 may be an important
regulatory mechanism during T-cell activation. In the present study we have
examined the role of the transmembrane adapter-like molecule CD45-associated
protein (CD45-AP) in regulating the association of CD45 with CD3/TCR and lck, and
in regulating primary CD4(+) T-lymphocyte activation. In CD4(+) T cells from
CD45-AP-deficient mice, coimmunoprecipitation of CD45 with the CD3/TCR complex,
in addition to lck, is significantly reduced compared with wild-type T cells.
Functionally, this correlates with a decreased proliferative response, a decrease
in interleukin (IL)-2 production, and a decrease in calcium flux upon stimulation
with a low-potency altered peptide ligand. However, the response of
CD45-AP-deficient T cells to stimulation with a high-avidity agonist peptide was 
largely intact, except for a modest decrease in IL-2 production. These data
suggest that CD45-AP promotes or stabilizes the association of CD45 with
substrates and regulates the threshold of T-cell activation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2007.02602.x 
PMCID: PMC2265975
PMID: 17428310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

