
1. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2007 Jun;50(1):67-76. Epub 2007 Apr 10.

Primary administration of Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC533 in weaning period
suppresses the elevation of proinflammatory cytokines and CD86 gene expressions
in skin lesions in NC/Nga mice.

Inoue R(1), Otsuka M, Nishio A, Ushida K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Science, Kyoto Prefectural University, Shimogamo Kyoto,
Japan.

The administration of probiotic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) has been studied for
its potential to prevent atopic dermatitis (AD). The objective of this study was 
to assess the inhibitory mechanism of a skin lesion by LAB using an experimental 
model that we previously demonstrated in NC/Nga mice. Lactobacillus johnsonii
NCC533 (La1) was administered orally to the La1 group from 20 to 22 days after
birth, while phosphate-buffered saline was given to the control group. After the 
induction of skin lesions in 6-week-old mice, the expression of genes supposedly 
involved in AD was evaluated. Gene expression of the proinflammatory cytokines
[interleukin-8 (IL-8), IL-12 and IL-23] was significantly enhanced in the
lesional skin of the control group by the induction of the lesion, whereas gene
expression of those in the La1 group was not elevated. Interestingly, expression 
of the costimulatory molecule CD86 showed a pattern similar to the expression of 
the cytokines in the lesional skin. Moreover, the La1 group showed a
significantly lower gene expression of CD86 in Peyer's patches and mesenteric
lymph nodes than the control group. The suppression of proinflammatory cytokines 
and CD86 by primary administration of La1 may significantly contribute to the
inhibitory effect on the skin lesion.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2007.00233.x 
PMID: 17425659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

