
1. J Infect Dis. 2007 May 15;195(10):1497-503. Epub 2007 Apr 3.

High-cholesterol diet facilitates Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection and
up-regulates macrophage inflammatory protein-2 and CXCR2 expression in
apolipoprotein E-deficient mice.

Xiong Q(1), Wang X, Rikihisa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

BACKGROUND: Anaplasma phagocytophilum is an obligatory intracellular bacterium
that infects granulocytes and causes human granulocytic anaplasmosis (HGA). This 
bacterium requires cholesterol for host cell infection in vitro and incorporates 
exogenous cholesterol into its membrane.
METHODS: To understand the role of host cholesterol in A. phagocytophilum
infection in vivo, we analyzed the effects of a high-cholesterol diet and reduced
apolipoprotein E (apoE) activity on A. phagocytophilum infection in mice.
RESULTS: A high-cholesterol diet significantly facilitated A. phagocytophilum
infection in the spleen, liver, and blood of apoE-deficient (apoE(-/-)) mice,
compared with the level of infection in apoE(-/-) mice fed a normal-cholesterol
diet or wild-type (WT) mice fed a high- or normal-cholesterol diet. A.
phagocytophilum infection induced a significant elevation in the mRNA expression 
of macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-2 and an MIP-2 receptor, CXCR2, in the
spleen in apoE(-/-) mice fed a high-cholesterol diet, compared with the other 3
groups.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that high blood cholesterol levels resulting from
an interaction between dietary and genetic factors facilitate A. phagocytophilum 
infection and up-regulate a proinflammatory chemokine and its receptor, which may
contribute to HGA pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1086/514819 
PMID: 17436230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

