
1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2007 Nov;56(11):1755-63. Epub 2007 Apr 27.

Identification of a new hTERT-derived HLA-A*0201 restricted, naturally processed 
CTL epitope.

Thorn M(1), Wang M, Kl√∏verpris H, Schmidt EG, Fomsgaard A, Wenandy L, Berntsen A,
Brunak S, Buus S, Claesson MH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Immunology, Department of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, The Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen,
Blegdamsvej 3, 2200, Copenhagen N, Denmark.

By the use of a neural network capable of performing quantitative predictions of 
peptides binding to HLA-A*0201 molecules, we identified a number of nonamer
peptides derived from the catalytic subunit of telomerase, human telomerase
reverse transcriptase (hTERT). Five nonimmunogenic peptides with measured binding
affinities for HLA-A*0201 ranging from 155 to 1,298 nM were modified at the P1,
P2 and P9 positions, respectively, to achieve stronger HLA-A*0201 binding. One
peptide, mp30-38 (mp30), with an L to V substitution at position 9 was
subsequently found to be immunogenic in mp30 immunized HLA-A*0201/H2K(b) or HHD
transgenic mice. The T cell reactivity obtained was directed against both the
mp30 and against the unmodified p30. Anti-mp30 specific T cells generated in
HLA-A*0201 transgenic mice were dependent on TCR-CD8/MHC-I alpha3 binding and
therefore not capable of recognizing mp30-pulsed human HLA-A*0201(+) cells or
murine HLA-A*0201 transfectants. In order to show reactivity against naturally
processed peptide in human tumor cells, an hTERT positive HLA-A*0201 negative
colon carcinoma cell line (CCL220) was transfected with an HLA-A*0201/H2K(b) cDNA
construct and used as target in ELISPOT and cytotoxicity assays. The data show
that T cells from mp30 immunized HHD transgenic mice react specifically against
the CCL220 transfectant indicating that p30 is naturally processed. In
conclusion, we have identified a new CTL HLA-A*0201 restricted hTERT epitope,
which is now, included in an ongoing phase 2 vaccine trial of patients with
disseminated cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-007-0319-y 
PMID: 17464507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

