
1. Environ Microbiol. 2007 May;9(5):1146-61.

Biogeochemistry and biodiversity of methane cycling in subsurface marine
sediments (Skagerrak, Denmark).

Parkes RJ(1), Cragg BA, Banning N, Brock F, Webster G, Fry JC, Hornibrook E,
Pancost RD, Kelly S, Knab N, JÃ¸rgensen BB, Rinna J, Weightman AJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Earth, Ocean and Planetary Sciences, Cardiff University, Main
Building, Park Place, Cardiff CF103YE, UK. J.Parkes@earth.cf.ac.uk

This biogeochemical, molecular genetic and lipid biomarker study of sediments (
approximately 4 m cores) from the Skagerrak (Denmark) investigated methane
cycling in a sediment with a clear sulfate-methane-transition zone (SMTZ) and
where CH(4) supply was by diffusion, rather than by advection, as in more
commonly studied seep sites. Sulfate reduction removed sulfate by 0.7 m and CH(4)
accumulated below. (14)C-radiotracer measurements demonstrated active H(2)/CO(2) 
and acetate methanogenesis and anaerobic oxidation of CH(4) (AOM). Maximum AOM
rates occurred near the SMTZ ( approximately 3 nmol cm(-3) day(-1) at 0.75 m) but
also continued deeper, overall, at much lower rates. Maximum rates of H(2)/CO(2) 
and acetate methanogenesis occurred below the SMTZ but H(2)/CO(2) methanogenesis 
rates were x 10 those of acetate methanogenesis, and this was consistent with
initial values of (13)C-depleted CH(4) (delta(13)C c.-80 per thousand). Areal AOM
and methanogenic rates were similar ( approximately 1.7 mmol m(-2) day(-1)),
hence, CH(4) flux is finely balanced. A 16S rRNA gene library from 1.39 m
combined with methanogen (T-RFLP), bacterial (16S rRNA DGGE) and lipid biomarker 
depth profiles showed the presence of populations similar to some seep sites:
ANME-2a (dominant), ANME-3, Methanomicrobiales, Methanosaeta Archaea, with
abundance changes with depth corresponding to changes in activities and
sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB). Below the SMTZ to approximately 1.7 m CH(4)
became progressively more (13)C depleted (delta(13)C -82 per thousand) indicating
a zone of CH(4) recycling which was consistent with the presence of
(13)C-depleted archaeol (delta(13)C -55 per thousand). Pore water acetate
concentrations decreased in this zone (to approximately 5 microM), suggesting
that H(2), not acetate, was an important CH(4) cycling intermediate. The
potential biomarkers for AOM-associated SRB, non-isoprenoidal ether lipids,
increased below the SMTZ but this distribution reflected 16S rRNA gene sequences 
for JS1 and OP8 bacteria rather than those of SRB. At this site peak rates of
methane production and consumption are spatially separated and seem to be
conducted by different archaeal groups. Also AOM is predominantly coupled to
sulfate reduction, unlike recent reports from some seep and gassy sediment sites.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2006.01237.x 
PMID: 17472631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

