
1. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Apr;15(2):352-6.

[Construction and characterization of soluble HLA-A*0201-PR1 complex].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun WJ(1), Xu DG, Hu HL, Zou MJ, DU JF, Wang JF, Cai X, Wang JX, Ai HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Affiliated Hospital, Academy of Military Medical
Sciences, Beijing 100071, China.

This study was aimed to construct the soluble HLA-A*0201-PR1 complex for
preparation of HLA-A*0201-PR1 tetramer. The recombinant HLA-A*0201-BSP (BirA
substrate peptide) fusion protein as heavy chain and beta(2)-microglobulin
(beta(2) m) as light chain were expressed highly as insoluble aggregates in
Escherichia coli and then purified with gel filtration, and the final purity
reached above 90%. The two subunits were refolded to form an HLA-A*0201-peptide
complex by dilution method in the presence of an antigenic peptide PR1, a
HLA-A2-restricted peptide from proteinase 3 (aa 169 - 177, VLQELNVTV). Refolded
HLA-A*0201-PR1 complex was biotinylated using a BirA enzyme and purified by anion
exchange chromatography on a Q-Sepharose (fast flow) column. The extent of
reconstitution of the HLA-A*0201-PR1 complex was analyzed by HPLC gel filtration.
The refolded and biotinylated products were detected by Western blot and ELISA
with monoclonal antibody BB7.2 that recognized the natural conformations of
HLA-A2 and streptavidin. The results showed that the refolded complex was
composed of HLA-A*0201-BSP aggregate, HLA-A*0201-PR1 complex and beta(2) m, and
reconstitution yields of 18% with PR1 was obtained. Refolded HLA-A*0201-PR1
complex could be confirmed by practical immunological method and biotinylated
efficiently. It is concluded that the refolding and biotinylation of
HLA-A*0201-PR1 complex is successfully obtained. This work provides the basis for
the preparation of HLA-A*0201-PR1 tetramer.


PMID: 17493346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

