
1. Immunology. 2007 Oct;122(2):199-209. Epub 2007 May 9.

Aberrant T-cell ontogeny and defective thymocyte and colonic T-cell chemotactic
migration in colitis-prone Galphai2-deficient mice.

Elgbratt K(1), Bjursten M, Willén R, Bland PW, Hörnquist EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine, The
Sahlgrenska Academy at Göteborg University, Sweden.

Galphai2-deficient mice, which spontaneously develop colitis, have previously
been reported to have an increased frequency of mature, single positive
thymocytes compared to wild-type mice. In this study we further characterized the
intrathymic changes in these mice before and during overt colitis. Even before
the onset of colitis, Galphai2(-/-) thymi weighed less and contained fewer
thymocytes, and this was exacerbated with colitis development. Whereas precolitic
Galphai2(-/-) mice had unchanged thymocyte density compared to Galphai2(+/-) mice
of the same age, this was significantly decreased in mice with colitis. Thymic
atrophy in Galphai2(-/-) mice involved mainly the cortex. Using a five-stage
phenotypic characterization of thymocyte maturation based on expression of CD4,
CD8, TCRalphabeta, CD69 and CD62L, we found that both precolitic and colitic
Galphai2(-/-) mice had significantly increased frequencies of mature
single-positive CD4(+) and CD8(+) medullary thymocytes, and significantly reduced
frequencies and total numbers of immature CD4(+) CD8(+) double-positive
thymocytes compared to Galphai2(+/-) mice. Furthermore, cortical and transitional
precolitic Galphai2(-/-) thymocytes showed significantly reduced chemotactic
migration towards CXCL12, and a trend towards reduced migration to CCL25,
compared to wild-type thymocytes, a feature even more pronounced in colitic mice.
This impaired chemotactic migration of Galphai2(-/-) thymocytes could not be
reversed by increased chemokine concentrations. Galphai2(-/-) thymocytes also
showed reduced expression of the CCL25 receptor CCR9, but not CXCR4, the
receptor, for CXCL12. Finally, wild-type colonic lamina propria lymphocytes
migrated in response to CXCL12, but not CCL25 and, as with thymocytes, the
chemokine responsiveness was significantly reduced in Galphai2(-/-) mucosal
lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2007.02629.x 
PMCID: PMC2265997
PMID: 17490434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

