
1. FASEB J. 2007 Oct;21(12):3118-32. Epub 2007 May 16.

Thrombospondin-1 promotes cellular adherence of gram-positive pathogens via
recognition of peptidoglycan.

Rennemeier C(1), Hammerschmidt S, Niemann S, Inamura S, ZÃ¤hringer U, Kehrel BE.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wuerzburg, Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Wuerzburg,
Germany.

Thrombospondin-1 (TSP1) is a matricellular glycoprotein that has key roles in
interactions between human cells and components of the extracellular matrix. Here
we report a novel role for the lectin TSP1 in pathogen-host interactions. Binding
assays and flow cytometric analysis demonstrate that Streptococcus pneumoniae and
other gram-positive pathogens including S. pyogenes, Staphylococcus aureus, and
Listeria monocytogenes interact specifically with human TSP1. We also show for
the first time that host cell-bound TSP1 promotes adherence of gram-positive
pathogens to human epithelial and endothelial cell lines. Pretreatment of
bacteria with sodium periodate but not Pronase E substantially reduced
TSP1-mediated bacterial adherence to host cells, suggesting that a glycoconjugate
on the bacterial cell surface functions as the receptor for TSP1. Lipoteichoic
acids did not affect TSP1-mediated adherence of S. pneumoniae to host cells. In
contrast, attachment of S. pneumoniae and other gram-positive pathogens to host
cells via TSP1 was blocked by soluble peptidoglycan, indicating recognition of
bacterial peptidoglycan by TSP1. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that
recognition of gram-positive pathogens by TSP1 promotes bacterial colonization of
host tissue cells. In this scenario, peptidoglycan functions as adhesin and TSP1 
acts as a molecular bridge linking gram-positive bacteria with receptors on the
host cell.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.06-7992com 
PMID: 17507668  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

