
1. Biol Chem. 2007 May;388(5):513-21.

The protease domain of procollagen C-proteinase (BMP1) lacks substrate
selectivity, which is conferred by non-proteolytic domains.

Wermter C(1), Höwel M, Hintze V, Bombosch B, Aufenvenne K, Yiallouros I, Stöcker 
W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Department I, Cell and Matrix Biology, Johannes
Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.

Procollagen C-proteinase (PCP) removes the C-terminal pro-peptides of
procollagens and also processes other matrix proteins. The major splice form of
the PCP is termed BMP1 (bone morphogenetic protein 1). Active BMP1 is composed of
an astacin-like protease domain, three CUB (complement, sea urchin Uegf, BMP1)
domains and one EGF-like domain. Here we compare the recombinant human
full-length BMP1 with its isolated proteolytic domain to further unravel the
functional influence of the CUB and EGF domains. We show that the protease domain
alone cleaves truncated procollagen VII within the short telopeptide region into 
fragments of similar size as the full-length enzyme does. However, unlike
full-length BMP1, the protease domain does not stop at this point, but degrades
its substrate completely. Moreover, the protease domain cleaves other matrix
proteins such as fibronectin, collagen I and collagen IV, which are left intact
by the full-length enzyme. In addition, we show for the first time that
thrombospondin-1 is differently cleaved by both BMP1 and its catalytic domain. In
summary, our data support the concept that the C-terminal domains of BMP1 are
important for substrate recognition and for controlling and restricting its
proteolytic activity via exosite binding.

DOI: 10.1515/BC.2007.054 
PMID: 17516847  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

