
1. Infect Immun. 2007 Aug;75(8):3739-46. Epub 2007 May 21.

Endogenous interleukin-18 improves the early antimicrobial host response in
severe melioidosis.

Wiersinga WJ(1), Wieland CW, van der Windt GJ, de Boer A, Florquin S, Dondorp A, 
Day NP, Peacock SJ, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9, Room G2-132, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. w.j.wiersinga@amc.uva.nl

Melioidosis is caused by the soil saprophyte Burkholderia pseudomallei and is
endemic in Southeast Asia. The pathogenesis of melioidosis is still largely
unknown, although gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) seems to play an obligatory role
in host defense. Previously, we have shown that IFN-gamma production in
melioidosis is controlled in part by interleukin-18 (IL-18). The aim of the
present study was to determine the role of IL-18 in the immune response to B.
pseudomallei. For this the following investigations were performed. (i) Plasma
IL-18 and blood monocyte IL-18 mRNA levels were elevated in 34 patients with
culture-proven melioidosis compared to the levels in 32 local healthy controls;
in addition, IL-18 binding protein levels were markedly elevated in patients,
strongly correlating with mortality. (ii) IL-18 gene-deficient (IL-18 knockout
[KO]) mice showed accelerated mortality after intranasal infection with a lethal 
dose of B. pseudomallei, which was accompanied by enhanced bacterial growth in
their lungs, livers, spleens, kidneys, and blood at 24 and 48 h postinfection,
compared to wild-type mice. In addition, IL-18 KO mice displayed evidence of
enhanced hepatocellular injury and renal insufficiency. Together, these data
indicate that the enhanced production of IL-18 in melioidosis is an essential
part of a protective immune response to this severe infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00080-07 
PMCID: PMC1951987
PMID: 17517876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

