
1. Mycol Res. 2007 Apr;111(Pt 4):493-502. Epub 2007 Feb 8.

Argininosuccinate synthetase and argininosuccinate lyase: two ornithine cycle
enzymes from Agaricus bisporus.

Wagemaker MJ(1), Eastwood DC, van der Drift C, Jetten MS, Burton K, Van Griensven
LJ, Op den Camp HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, IWWR, Radboud University Nijmegen, Toernooiveld 1,
NL-6525 ED Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Accumulation of high quantities of urea in fruiting bodies is a known feature of 
larger basidiomycetes. Argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS) and argininosuccinate
lyase (ASL) are two ornithine cycle enzymes catalysing the last two steps in the 
arginine biosynthetic pathway. Arginine is the main precursor for urea formation.
In this work the nucleotide sequences of the genes and corresponding cDNAs
encoding argininosuccinate synthetase (ass) and argininosuccinate lyase (asl)
from Agaricus bisporus were determined. Eight and six introns were present in the
ass and asl gene, respectively. The location of four introns in the asl gene were
conserved among vertebrate asl genes. Deduced amino acid sequences, representing 
the first homobasidiomycete ASS and ASL protein sequences, were analysed and
compared with their counterparts in other organisms. The ass ORF encoded for a
protein of 425 amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of 47266Da. An
alignment with ASS proteins from other organisms revealed high similarity with
fungal and mammalian ASS proteins, 61-63% and 51-55% identity, respectively. The 
asl open reading frame (ORF) encoded a protein of 464 amino acids with an
calculated mass of 52337Da and similar to ASS shared the highest similarity with 
fungal ASL proteins, 59-60% identity. Northern analyses of ass and asl during
fruiting body formation and post-harvest development revealed that expression was
significantly up-regulated from developmental stage 3 on for all the tissues
studied. The expression reached a maximum at the later stages of fruiting body
growth, stages 6 and 7. Both ass and asl genes were up-regulated within 3h after 
harvest showing that the induction mechanism is very sensitive to the harvest
event and emphasizes the importance of the arginine biosynthetic
pathway/ornithine cycle in post-harvest physiology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mycres.2007.01.016 
PMID: 17512708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

