
1. Chin Med J (Engl). 2007 Apr 20;120(8):708-13.

Soluble expression of active human beta-defensin-3 in Escherichia coli and its
effects on the growth of host cells.

Si LG(1), Liu XC, Lu YY, Wang GY, Li WM.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Pediatric Research Institute, Beijing Children's Hospital Affiliated
to Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Human beta-defensin-3 (HBD(3)) is an epithelial peptide that has been
demonstrated to have a salt-insensitive broad spectrum of potent antimicrobial
activity. Expressing antimicrobial peptides in Escherichia coli (E. coli) is very
difficult for it can result in death of the bacterial host cells. Our aim was to 
establish a prokaryotic system expressing soluble HBD(3) protein and demonstrate 
the antimicrobial activity of the expressed protein. We then studied whether the 
host cells would activate the suicide pathways.
METHODS: We first cloned the complementary DNA coding for the mature chain of
HBD(3), inserted it into the vector PGEX-KG then transformed E. coli BL21 (DE3)
with the appropriate recombinant plasmid. After induction with 0.5 mmol/L
isopropyl-1-thio-beta-D-galactopyranoside (IPTG) the transformed E. coli produced
a recombinant glutathione S-transferase and HBD(3) (GST-HBD(3)) fusion protein.
The fusion protein was treated with thrombin to produce pure HBD(3) protein then 
the antimicrobial activity of HBD(3) was evaluated in a liquid microdilution
assay.
RESULTS: The fusion protein GST-HBD(3) was efficiently cleaved by thrombin and
yielded HBD(3) that had anti-staphylococcus aureus activity with a minimal
inhibitory concentration level of 12.5 microg/ml. The E. coli strain expressing
the recombinant protein did not grow slower than the empty vector strain.
CONCLUSION: Active HBD(3) in E. coli by expressing the recombinant protein
GST-HBD(3) could be produced, and suicide did not occur in the E. coli strain
expressing the recombinant protein.


PMID: 17517189  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

