
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jun 5;104(23):9770-5. Epub 2007 May 23.

Fc receptor-like 5 inhibits B cell activation via SHP-1 tyrosine phosphatase
recruitment.

Haga CL(1), Ehrhardt GR, Boohaker RJ, Davis RS, Cooper MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental and Clinical Immunology, Department of Microbiology,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

The Fc receptor-like protein 5 (FCRL5) on B cells has both an immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM)-like sequence and two consensus
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs (ITIM) in its cytoplasmic region.
To evaluate its signaling potential, we expressed constructs for chimeric
molecules composed of the cytoplasmic region of FCRL5 and the extracellular and
transmembrane regions of the IgG Fc receptor FcgammaRIIB in a B cell line lacking
an endogenous Fc receptor. Coligation of this fusion protein with the B cell
receptor (BCR) inhibited BCR-mediated calcium mobilization, intracellular
tyrosine phosphorylation, and Erk kinase activation. Our mutational analysis
indicated that, whereas tyrosines in both the inhibitory and activation motifs
are phosphorylated after ligation, only those in ITIMs influence BCR-mediated
signaling. This FCRL5 inhibitory effect was mediated through dual ITIM
recruitment of the SH2-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase, SHP-1, which in
turn dephosphorylates the ITAM-based tyrosines in BCR Igalpha/Igbeta
heterodimers. An FCRL5 inhibitory effect on BCR signaling was likewise
demonstrable for primary B cells. Although its ligand is presently unknown, we
conclude that FCRL5 has the functional potential to serve as an inhibitory
coreceptor on mature B cells in humans.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0703354104 
PMCID: PMC1887609
PMID: 17522256  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

