
1. Int J Parasitol. 2007 Sep;37(11):1233-41. Epub 2007 Apr 19.

Plasmodium falciparum Pf34, a novel GPI-anchored rhoptry protein found in
detergent-resistant microdomains.

Proellocks NI(1), Kovacevic S, Ferguson DJ, Kats LM, Morahan BJ, Black CG, Waller
KL, Coppel RL.

Author information: 
(1)NHMRC Program in Malaria, Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Vic. 
3800, Australia.

Apicomplexan parasites are characterised by the presence of specialised
organelles, such as rhoptries, located at the apical end of invasive forms that
play an important role in invasion of the host cell and formation of the
parasitophorous vacuole. In this study, we have characterised a novel Plasmodium 
falciparum rhoptry protein, Pf34, encoded by a single exon gene located on
chromosome 4 and expressed as a 34kDa protein in mature asexual stage parasites. 
Pf34 is expressed later in the life cycle than the previously described rhoptry
protein, Rhoptry Associated Membrane Antigen (RAMA). Orthologues of Pf34 are
present in other Plasmodium species and a potential orthologue has also been
identified in Toxoplasma gondii. Indirect immunofluorescence assays show that
Pf34 is located at the merozoite apex and localises to the rhoptry neck. Pf34,
previously demonstrated to be glycosyl-phosphatidyl-inositol (GPI)-anchored
[Gilson, P.R., Nebl, T., Vukcevic, D., Moritz, R.L., Sargeant, T., Speed, T.P.,
Schofield, L., Crabb, B.S. (2006) Identification and stoichiometry of
GPI-anchored membrane proteins of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium
falciparum. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 5, 1286-1299.], is associated with
parasite-derived detergent-resistant microdomains (DRMs). Pf34 is carried into
the newly invaded ring, consistent with a role for Pf34 in the formation of the
parasitophorous vacuole. Pf34 is exposed to the human immune system during
infection and is recognised by human immune sera collected from residents of
malaria endemic areas of Vietnam and Papua New Guinea.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2007.03.013 
PMCID: PMC2712672
PMID: 17521656  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

