
1. J Mol Biol. 2007 Jul 13;370(3):541-54. Epub 2007 May 4.

Substrate and product complexes of Escherichia coli adenylosuccinate lyase
provide new insights into the enzymatic mechanism.

Tsai M(1), Koo J, Yip P, Colman RF, Segall ML, Howell PL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Structure and Function, Research Institute, Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X8.

Adenylosuccinate lyase (ADL) catalyzes the breakdown of 5-aminoimidazole-
(N-succinylocarboxamide) ribotide (SAICAR) to 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide
ribotide (AICAR) and fumarate, and of adenylosuccinate (ADS) to adenosine
monophosphate (AMP) and fumarate in the de novo purine biosynthetic pathway. ADL 
belongs to the argininosuccinate lyase (ASL)/fumarase C superfamily of enzymes.
Members of this family share several common features including: a mainly
alpha-helical, homotetrameric structure; three regions of highly conserved amino 
acid residues; and a general acid-base catalytic mechanism with the overall
beta-elimination of fumarate as a product. The crystal structures of wild-type
Escherichia coli ADL (ec-ADL), and mutant-substrate (H171A-ADS) and -product
(H171N-AMP.FUM) complexes have been determined to 2.0, 1.85, and 2.0 A
resolution, respectively. The H171A-ADS and H171N-AMP.FUM structures provide the 
first detailed picture of the ADL active site, and have enabled the precise
identification of substrate binding and putative catalytic residues. Contrary to 
previous suggestions, the ec-ADL structures implicate S295 and H171 in base and
acid catalysis, respectively. Furthermore, structural alignments of ec-ADL with
other superfamily members suggest for the first time a large conformational
movement of the flexible C3 loop (residues 287-303) in ec-ADL upon substrate
binding and catalysis, resulting in its closure over the active site. This loop
movement has been observed in other superfamily enzymes, and has been proposed to
be essential for catalysis. The ADL catalytic mechanism is re-examined in light
of the results presented here.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.04.052 
PMCID: PMC4113493
PMID: 17531264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

