
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2007 Aug;149(2):327-34. Epub 2007 Jun 5.

Internal prostaglandin synthesis augments osteoprotegerin production in human
gingival fibroblasts stimulated by lipopolysaccharide.

Kiji M(1), Nagasawa T, Hormdee D, Yashiro R, Kobayashi H, Noguchi K, Nitta H,
Izumi Y, Ishikawa I.

Author information: 
(1)Periodontology, Department of Hard Tissue Engineering, Graduate School, Tokyo 
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Periodontitis is an inflammatory bone disease caused by Gram-negative anaerobic
bacteria. Osteoclast differentiation is regulated by the balance between receptor
activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL) and osteoprotegerin (OPG). The
purpose of this study was to examine the mechanism of OPG production in human
gingival fibroblasts (HGF) stimulated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from
periodontopathic bacteria. The expressions of Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR-2) and
TLR-4 in HGF were examined using flow-cytometry. HGF were stimulated with whole
cell extracts or LPS from Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans and Porphyromonas 
gingivalis with or without polymyxin B, a LPS inhibitor. In addition, HGF were
stimulated with LPS, prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)), various agonists of PGE
receptors (EP1, EP2, EP3 and EP4 agonists) with or without indomethacin (IND), a 
prostaglandin synthesis inhibitor. OPG and PGE(2) production was measured using
an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). HGF expressed both TLR-2 and TLR-4.
Both A. actinomycetemcomitans and P. gingivalis LPS augmented OPG expression in
HGF. Whole cell extracts from A. actinomycetemcomitans and P. gingivalis
augmented OPG production by HGF; the augmentation was suppressed by polymyxin B. 
IND suppressed OPG production in LPS-stimulated HGF. PGE(2) stimulated HGF to
produce OPG. EP1 and EP2 agonists, but not EP3 and EP4 agonists, increased OPG
production by HGF. These results suggest that LPS-induced OPG production by HGF
is regulated via EP1 and/or EP2 receptors by endogenously generated PGE(2).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2007.03414.x 
PMCID: PMC1941953
PMID: 17550374  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

