
1. Biochemistry. 2007 Jul 3;46(26):7740-53. Epub 2007 Jun 9.

Allosteric regulation of substrate channeling in tryptophan synthase: modulation 
of the L-serine reaction in stage I of the beta-reaction by alpha-site ligands.

Ngo H(1), Kimmich N, Harris R, Niks D, Blumenstein L, Kulik V, Barends TR,
Schlichting I, Dunn MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside, California
92521, USA.

In the tryptophan synthase bienzyme complex, indole produced by substrate
cleavage at the alpha-site is channeled to the beta-site via a 25 A long tunnel. 
Within the beta-site, indole and l-Ser react with pyridoxal 5'-phosphate in a
two-stage reaction to give l-Trp. In stage I, l-Ser forms an external aldimine,
E(Aex1), which converts to the alpha-aminoacrylate aldimine, E(A-A). Formation of
E(A-A) at the beta-site activates the alpha-site >30-fold. In stage II, indole
reacts with E(A-A) to give l-Trp. The binding of alpha-site ligands (ASLs) exerts
strong allosteric effects on the reaction of substrates at the beta-site: the
distribution of intermediates formed in stage I is shifted in favor of E(A-A),
and the binding of ASLs triggers a conformational change in the beta-site to a
state with an increased affinity for l-Ser. Here, we compare the behavior of new 
ASLs as allosteric effectors of stage I with the behavior of the natural product,
d-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. Rapid kinetics and kinetic isotope effects show
these ASLs bind with affinities ranging from micro- to millimolar, and the
rate-determining step for conversion of E(Aex1) to E(A-A) is increased by
8-10-fold. To derive a structure-based mechanism for stage I, X-ray structures of
both the E(Aex1) and E(A-A) states complexed with the different ASLs were
determined and compared with structures of the ASL complexes with the internal
aldimine [Ngo, H., Harris, R., Kimmich, N., Casino, P., Niks, D., Blumenstein,
L., Barends, T. R., Kulik, V., Weyand, M., Schlichting, I., and Dunn, M. F.
(2007) Biochemistry 46, 7713-7727].

DOI: 10.1021/bi7003872 
PMID: 17559232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

