
1. Ultramicroscopy. 2007 Oct;107(10-11):934-42. Epub 2007 May 7.

Comparison of the indentation and elasticity of E. coli and its spheroplasts by
AFM.

Sullivan CJ(1), Venkataraman S, Retterer ST, Allison DP, Doktycz MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science and Technology, The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN
37932, USA.

Atomic force microscopy (AFM) provides a unique opportunity to study live
individual bacteria at the nanometer scale. In addition to providing accurate
morphological information, AFM can be exploited to investigate membrane protein
localization and molecular interactions on the surface of living cells. A
prerequisite for these studies is the development of robust procedures for sample
preparation. While such procedures are established for intact bacteria, they are 
only beginning to emerge for bacterial spheroplasts. Spheroplasts are useful
research models for studying mechanosensitive ion channels, membrane transport,
lipopolysaccharide translocation, solute uptake, and the effects of antimicrobial
agents on membranes. Furthermore, given the similarities between spheroplasts and
cell wall-deficient (CWD) forms of pathogenic bacteria, spheroplast research
could be relevant in biomedical research. In this paper, a new technique for
immobilizing spheroplasts on mica pretreated with aminopropyltriethoxysilane
(APTES) and glutaraldehyde is described. Using this mounting technique, the
indentation and cell elasticity of glutaraldehyde-fixed and untreated
spheroplasts of E. coli in liquid were measured. These values are compared to
those of intact E. coli. Untreated spheroplasts were found to be much softer than
the intact cells and the silicon nitride cantilevers used in this study.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ultramic.2007.04.017 
PMID: 17574761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

