
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2007 Aug;7(8):1033-43. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Immune reconstitution after autologous hematopoietic transplantation with Lin-,
CD34+, Thy-1lo selected or intact stem cell products.

Singh RK(1), Varney ML, Leutzinger C, Vose JM, Bierman PJ, Buyukberber S, Ino K, 
Loh K, Nichols C, Inwards D, Rifkin R, Talmadge JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center 987660, Omaha, NE 68198-7660, USA. rsingh@unmc.edu

In sequential studies, we compared immune reconstitution following high-dose
chemotherapy (HDT) and stem cell transplantation (SCT) using intact mobilized
peripheral blood stem cell (PSC) in intermediate grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
(NHL) patients and CD34(+), lineage-negative (Lin(-)), Thy-1(lo)
(CD34(+)Lin(-)Thy-1(lo)) stem cells in low-grade NHL patients. Cytokine
expression and cellular phenotype and function were used as the basis of
comparison. Despite differences in cellular composition of the stem cell grafts, 
immune reconstitution in both groups was similar. Significantly higher levels of 
type 1- and 2-associated cytokine messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) were observed
both prior to and following transplant in the peripheral blood (PB) of both
cohorts as compared to normal individuals. Similar levels of interleukin (IL)-4, 
IL-10, interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) 
messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) were seen in PB mononuclear cells following
transplant with either product. In contrast, patients receiving isolated
CD34(+)Lin(-)Thy-1(lo) cells expressed significantly higher IL-2 levels at all
times examined post-transplant. Despite the high levels of cytokine gene
expression and rapid restoration to pretransplant levels of CD3 cell number by
day 30, T cell function and CD4:CD8 and CD4(+)CD45RA:CD4(+)CD45RO(+) ratios were 
significantly depressed in both cohorts compared to normal donors, and
significantly lower in patients transplanted with CD34(+)Lin(-)Thy-1(lo) compared
to patients receiving an intact PSC product. These data suggest that the
peripheral tolerance in patients receiving HDT and an autologous SCT occurs
independent of graft composition, although immune function and CD4 recovery are
better facilitated by transplantation of an intact product.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2007.03.006 
PMCID: PMC2034447
PMID: 17570320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

