
1. Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 May;21(5):532-5.

[Effect of hepatocyte growth factor on intestinal permeability and bacterial
translocation after small bowel transplantation in rat].

[Article in Chinese]

Li K(1), Li N, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)General Surgery Center of PLA, Chengdu Army General Hospital, Chengdu Sichuan,
610083, P. R. China. kzlchina@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) on intestinal
permeability and bacterial translocation after small bowel transplantation in
rats.
METHODS: Twenty Wistar rats were as receptors and twenty SD rats as donors. After
heterotopic intestinal grafting, cyclosporine A was administered at 6 mg/kg x day
intramuscularly for inhibiting rejection. The SD rats were divided into 2 groups 
(n = 10). HGF was administered at 150 microg/kg x day (HGF group) and normal
saline was administered at 150 microg/kg x day (control group). Intestinal
permeability and bacterial translocation to the mesenteric lymph nodes and portal
vein were assessed at the 8th postoperative day.
RESULTS: The lactulose and lactulose/ mannitol of control group
(0.0931%+/-0.0085% and 0.132+/-0.021) were higher than those of normal reference 
value (0.0150%+/-0.0020% and 0.020+/-0.005) (P < 0.05). The lactulose and
lactulose/ mannitol of HGF group (0.0396%+/-0.0090% and 0.056+/-0.013) were also 
higher than those of normal reference value (P<0.05). The bacterial culture
positive proportion of lymphaden in HGF group and control group were 10% and 60%,
showing statistically significant difference (P<0.05). The bacterial culture
positive proportion of portal vein in HGF group and control group were 10% and
20% respectively (P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: HGF can decrease intestinal permeability and bacterial translocation 
from the lumen of the graft to the mesenteric lymph nodes, thus improve gut
barrier function, may be of help to reduce the incidence of septic complications 
after intestinal grafting.


PMID: 17578297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

