
1. Infect Immun. 2007 Sep;75(9):4326-33. Epub 2007 Jun 25.

Protease-activated receptor 2 mediates human beta-defensin 2 and CC chemokine
ligand 20 mRNA expression in response to proteases secreted by Porphyromonas
gingivalis.

Dommisch H(1), Chung WO, Rohani MG, Williams D, Rangarajan M, Curtis MA, Dale BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, School of Dentistry, University of Washington, Box
357132, Seattle, WA 98195-7132, USA. hd2@u.washington.edu

The oral pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis secretes proteases such as
Arg-gingipain B (RgpB) that activate protease-activated receptors (PARs). Human
beta-defensins (hBDs) and the macrophage inflammatory protein 3alpha/CC chemokine
ligand 20 (CCL20) produced by epithelial cells are antimicrobial peptides that
provide cytokine function and play an important role in innate immunity. The aim 
of the present study was to determine whether specific members of the PAR family 
mediate the expression of these innate immunity markers in gingival epithelial
cells (GECs) when exposed to P. gingivalis cell-free culture supernatant or
purified RgpB. hBD-2 mRNA in GECs was induced in response to supernatant and
purified RgpB from P. gingivalis (P = 0.02 and P = 0.016, respectively). This
effect was abrogated by the protease inhibitor tosyl-l-lysine chloromethyl ketone
(TLCK) (P < 0.05). In response to P. gingivalis supernatant and to purified RgpB,
the hBD-2 mRNA expression was significantly decreased in PAR-2 gene knockdown
cells, whereas no change was detected in PAR-1 gene knockdown cells. CCL20 mRNA
expression also increased in response to the supernatant of P. gingivalis, and
this effect was blocked by the protease inhibitor, TLCK (P = 0.05 and P = 0.024, 
respectively), and was blocked in PAR-2 gene knockdown cells. Our data indicate
that hBD-2 and CCL20 mRNA up-regulation by P. gingivalis supernatant and purified
RgpB was mediated via PAR-2, but not via PAR-1, and that proteases play a role in
the regulation of innate immune responses in GECs. GECs use PARs to recognize P. 
gingivalis and mediate cell responses involved in innate immunity.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00455-07 
PMCID: PMC1951157
PMID: 17591792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

