
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2007 Sep;45(9):2798-801. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Convenient test using a combination of chelating agents for detection of
metallo-beta-lactamases in the clinical laboratory.

Kim SY(1), Hong SG, Moland ES, Thomson KS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research in Anti-Infectives and Biotechnology, Department of
Medical Microbiology & Immunology, Creighton University School of Medicine, 2500 
California Plaza, Omaha, NE 68178, USA.

Although transmissible metallo-beta-lactamases (MBLs) are a serious threat to
beta-lactam antibiotic therapy, the CLSI currently does not recommend testing
methods for the detection of MBLs. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
capability of double-disk tests (DDTs) by using disks containing a combination of
the chelators 2-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) and Tris-EDTA (TE) to detect MBLs.
Sixteen isolates (4 Acinetobacter baumannii isolates, 6 Pseudomonas aeruginosa
isolates, 1 Serratia marcescens isolate, 1 Aeromonas hydrophila isolate, 1
Aeromonas veronii isolate, 2 Chryseobacterium meningosepticum isolates, and 1
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia isolate) producing IMP-1, IMP-1-like, IMP-18, GIM-1,
SPM-1, VIM-2, VIM-2-like, and chromosomal MBLs and 20 isolates (7 Klebsiella
pneumoniae isolates, 3 Escherichia coli isolates, 5 Enterobacter cloacae
isolates, 2 S. marcescens isolates, 1 Proteus mirabilis isolate, and 2 A.
baumannii isolates) producing non-MBL carbapenemases, AmpC beta-lactamases, and
extended-spectrum beta-lactamases were tested. The DDT method was evaluated by
using four types of chelator disks (TE, high-strength TE, MPA, and TE plus 20
microl of MPA [at various concentrations]) and the beta-lactams imipenem (IPM),
meropenem (MEM), ertapenem (ERT), and ceftazidime (CAZ). DDTs with IPM and a TE
disk supplemented with 1:320 MPA detected all MBLs and yielded no false-positive 
results. Some, but not all, MBL producers were detected in IPM-based tests
involving the single chelator TE or MPA alone or by ERT- or CAZ-based tests.
IPM-based tests with MPA concentrations other than 1:320 and all MEM-based tests 
had suboptimal sensitivities or specificities. DDT with IPM and a TE disk
supplemented with 20 microl of 1:320 MPA appears to be convenient for the
detection of MBLs in the clinical laboratory.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.02486-06 
PMCID: PMC2045267
PMID: 17596358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

