
1. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2007 Jun;38(3):404-7.

[BCG cell wall proteins enhance clearance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in rat
lungs].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu XK(1), Zhou H, Huang N, Zhu BD, Feng Y, Wu Q, Wang BY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection and Immunity, West China School of Preclinical and
Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To test the function of BCG cell wall proteins in enhancing the
clearance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in rat lungs.
METHODS: The BCG cells were broken by supersonic technique. The cell wall
proteins were isolated by discontinues sucrose density-gradient centrifugation,
and fractionated by Sephadex G-150 chromatography. The relative molecular mass of
the isolated proteins was analyzed by SDS-PAGE. The hBD-1 gene mRNA expression in
the SPC-A-1 cells was identified by Northern blot and RT-PCR. The cell wall
component was injected intraperitoneally to the rats. Forty eight hours later, 5 
X 10(6) CFU of P. aeruginosa ATCC27853 or Staphylococcus aureus ATCC25923 were
inoculated via trachea. The bacteria colony in the supernatant of the homogenated
lungs of the rats was counted 24 hours after the inoculation.
RESULTS: Two protein components of BCG cell wall were fractionated. The relative 
molecular mass of component 2 was in the range of 18 X 10(3) -30 X 10(3). The
hBD-1 mRNA expression detected by Northern blot was markedly enhanced by the
stimulation of heat-inactivated BCG whole cells. The BCG-induced hBD-1 mRNA
expression in the SPC-A-1 cells detected by RT-PCR was mainly contributed by
fraction 2 of the BCG cell wall proteins. The bacteria decreased significantly in
the lungs of the rats with the injection of BCG component 2 (n=8, P<0. 01).
CONCLUSION: The fraction (relative molecular mass is 18 X 10(3) -30 X 10(3)) of
BCG cell wall proteins improve the defense of rat lungs against P. aeruginosa
infection.


PMID: 17593817  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

