
1. Protein Sci. 2007 Aug;16(8):1700-7. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

Effect of Asp69 and Arg310 on the pK of His68, a key catalytic residue of
adenylosuccinate lyase.

Sivendran S(1), Segall ML, Rancy PC, Colman RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark,
Delaware 19716, USA.

Adenylosuccinate lyase (ASL) of Bacillus subtilis contains three conserved
histidines, His(68), His(89), and His(141), identified by affinity labeling and
site-directed mutagenesis as critical to the intersubunit catalytic site. The
pH-V(max) profile for wild-type ASL is bell-shaped (pK (1) = 6.74 and pK (2) =
8.28). Only the alkaline side changes with temperature, characteristic of
histidine pKs. To identify determinants of pK (2) in the enzyme-substrate
complex, we replaced residues at two positions close to His(68) (but not to
His(89) or His(141)) in the structure. Compared with the specific activity of
1.75 mumol adenylosuccinate reacting/min/mg of wild-type enzyme at pH 7.0, mutant
enzymes D69E, D69N, R310Q, and R310K exhibit specific activities of 0.40, 0.04,
0.00083, and 0.10, respectively. While D69E has a K (m) for adenylosuccinate
similar to that of wild-type ASL, D69N and R310K exhibit modest increases in K
(m), and R310Q has an 11-fold increase in K (m). The mutant enzymes show no
significant change in molecular weight or secondary structure. The major change
is in the pH-V(max) profile: pK (2) is 8.48 for the D69E mutant and is decreased 
to 7.83 in D69N, suggesting a proximal negative charge is needed to maintain the 
high pK of 8.28 observed for wild-type enzyme and attributed to His(68).
Similarly, R310Q exhibits a decrease in its pK (2) (7.33), whereas R310K shows
little change in pK (2) (8.24). These results suggest that Asp(69) interacts with
His(68), that Arg(310) interacts with and orients the beta-carboxylate of
Asp(69), and that His(68) must be protonated for ASL to be active.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.072927207 
PMCID: PMC2203377
PMID: 17600142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

