
1. Ecology. 2007 Jun;88(6):1513-24.

Dispersal, density dependence, and population dynamics of a fungal microbe on
leaf surfaces.

Woody ST(1), Ives AR, Nordheim EV, Andrews JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin
53706, USA.

Despite the ubiquity and importance of microbes in nature, little is known about 
their natural population dynamics, especially for those that occupy terrestrial
habitats. Here we investigate the dynamics of the yeast-like fungus Aureobasidium
pullulans (Ap) on apple leaves in an orchard. We asked three questions. (1) Is
variation in fungal population density among leaves caused by variation in leaf
carrying capacities and strong density-dependent population growth that maintains
densities near carrying capacity? (2) Do resident populations have competitive
advantages over immigrant cells? (3) Do Ap dynamics differ at different times
during the growing season? To address these questions, we performed two
experiments at different times in the growing season. Both experiments used a 2 x
2 factorial design: treatment 1 removed fungal cells from leaves to reveal
density-dependent population growth, and treatment 2 inoculated leaves with an Ap
strain engineered to express green fluorescent protein (GFP), which made it
possible to track the fate of immigrant cells. The experiments showed that
natural populations of Ap vary greatly in density due to sustained differences in
carrying capacities among leaves. The maintenance of populations close to
carrying capacities indicates strong density-dependent processes. Furthermore,
resident populations are strongly competitive against immigrants, while
immigrants have little impact on residents. Finally, statistical models showed
high population growth rates of resident cells in one experiment but not in the
other, suggesting that Ap experiences relatively "good" and "bad" periods for
population growth. This picture of Ap dynamics conforms to commonly held, but
rarely demonstrated, expectations of microbe dynamics in nature. It also
highlights the importance of local processes, as opposed to immigration, in
determining the abundance and dynamics of microbes on surfaces in terrestrial
systems.

DOI: 10.1890/05-2026 
PMID: 17601143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

