
1. Apoptosis. 2007 Sep;12(9):1659-70.

Prevention of TGF-beta-induced apoptosis by interlukin-4 through Akt activation
and p70S6K survival signaling pathways.

Lin SJ(1), Chang C, Ng AK, Wang SH, Li JJ, Hu CP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology & Immunology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei,
Taiwan, Republic of China.

In this study, we demonstrate that interleukin-4 (IL-4) protects human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell line Hep3B from apoptosis induced by
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta). Further investigation of
IL-4-transduced signaling pathways revealed that both insulin response substrate 
1 and 2 (IRS-1/-2) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathways were 
activated after IL-4 stimulation. The IRS-1/-2 activation was accompanied by the 
activation of phosphotidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K), leading to Akt and p70
ribosomal protein S6 kinase (p70S6K). Interestingly, a protein kinase C (PKC)
inhibitor, Gö6976, inhibited the phosphorylation of Akt, suggesting that the Akt 
activation was PKC-dependent. Using specific inhibitors for PI3K or ERK, we
demonstrated that the PI3K pathway, but not the ERK pathway, was required for
protection. The constitutively active form of PI3K almost completely rescued
TGF-beta-induced apoptosis, further supporting the importance of the PI3K pathway
in the protective effect of IL-4. Furthermore, a dominant negative Akt and/or
Gö6976 only partially blocked the anti-apoptotic effect of IL-4. Similarly,
rapamycin, which interrupted the activation of p70S6K, also only partially
blocked the protective effect of IL-4. However, in the presence of both rapamycin
and dominant negative Akt with or without Gö6976, IL-4 almost completely lost the
anti-apoptotic effect, suggesting that both Akt and p70S6K pathways were required
for the protective effect of IL-4 against TGF-beta-induced apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s10495-007-0085-5 
PMID: 17624592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

