
1. Diabetes. 2007 Oct;56(10):2551-60. Epub 2007 Jul 9.

In vivo cytotoxicity of insulin-specific CD8+ T-cells in HLA-A*0201 transgenic
NOD mice.

Jarchum I(1), Baker JC, Yamada T, Takaki T, Marron MP, Serreze DV, DiLorenzo TP.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, 1300 Morris Park Ave., Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

OBJECTIVE: CD8(+) T-cells specific for islet antigens are essential for the
development of type 1 diabetes in the NOD mouse model of the disease. Such
T-cells can also be detected in the blood of type 1 diabetic patients, suggesting
their importance in the pathogenesis of the human disease as well. The
development of peptide-based therapeutic reagents that target islet-reactive
CD8(+) T-cells will require the identification of disease-relevant epitopes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We used islet-infiltrating CD8(+) T-cells from
HLA-A*0201 transgenic NOD mice in an interferon-gamma enzyme-linked immunospot
assay to identify autoantigenic peptides targeted during the spontaneous
development of disease. We concentrated on insulin (Ins), which is a key target
of the autoimmune response in NOD mice and patients alike.
RESULTS: We found that HLA-A*0201-restricted T-cells isolated from the islets of 
the transgenic mice were specific for Ins1 L3-11, Ins1 B5-14, and Ins1/2 A2-10.
Insulin-reactive T-cells were present in the islets of mice as young as 5 weeks
of age, suggesting an important function for these specificities early in the
pathogenic process. Although there was individual variation in peptide
reactivity, Ins1 B5-14 and Ins1/2 A2-10 were the immunodominant epitopes.
Notably, in vivo cytotoxicity to cells bearing these peptides was observed,
further confirming them as important targets of the pathogenic process.
CONCLUSIONS: The human versions of B5-14 and A2-10, differing from the murine
peptides by only a single residue, represent excellent candidates to explore as
CD8(+) T-cell targets in HLA-A*0201-positive type 1 diabetic patients.

DOI: 10.2337/db07-0332 
PMID: 17620420  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

