
1. Infect Immun. 2007 Sep;75(9):4638-47. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

Differential CD28 and inducible costimulatory molecule signaling requirements for
protective CD4+ T-cell-mediated immunity against genital tract Chlamydia
trachomatis infection.

Marks E(1), Verolin M, Stensson A, Lycke N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Mucosal Immunobiology and Vaccine
Research Center, Institute of Biomedicine, Gothenburg University, Box 435, 40530 
Gothenburg, Sweden.

Th1 cells and gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) production play critical roles in
protective immunity against genital tract infections by Chlamydia trachomatis.
Here we show that inducible costimulatory molecule (ICOS)(-/-) mice develop
greatly augmented host resistance against chlamydial infection. Protection
following a primary infection was characterized by strong Th1 immunity with
enhanced CD4(+) T-cell-mediated IFN-gamma production in the genital tract and
high expression of T-bet in the draining para-aortic lymph node. This Th1
dominance was associated with low expression of interleukin 10 (IL-10) mRNA in
the uteruses of protected ICOS(-/-) mice. By contrast, CD28(-/-) mice were
severely impaired in their adaptive immune response, demonstrating a lack of
CD4(+) T cells and IFN-gamma in the genital tract, with a substantial delay in
bacterial elimination compared to that seen in wild-type (WT) mice. Upon
reinfection, WT mice exhibited a transient local infection with evidence of
regulatory T-cell (Treg)/Foxp3 mRNA and a more balanced Th1 and Th2 response in
the genital tract than ICOS(-/-) mice, whereas 90% of the latter mice developed
sterile immunity, poor expression of local Treg/Foxp3 mRNA, and macroscopic signs
of enhanced local immunopathology. Therefore, different requirements for CD28
signaling and ICOS signaling clearly apply to host protection against a genital
tract infection by C. trachomatis. Whereas, CD28 signaling is critical, ICOS
appears to be dispensable and can have a dampening effect on Th1 development by
driving Th2 immunity and anti-inflammation through IL-10 production and promotion
of the Foxp3(+) Treg populations in the genital tract. Both the CD28-deficient
and the ICOS-deficient mice demonstrated poor specific antibody production,
supporting the fact that antibodies are not needed for protection against genital
tract chlamydial infections.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00465-07 
PMCID: PMC1951167
PMID: 17635872  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

