
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2007 Sep;7(9):1199-210. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

The effect of flavonoids on transduction mechanisms in lipopolysaccharide-treated
human gingival fibroblasts.

Gutiérrez-Venegas G(1), Jiménez-Estrada M, Maldonado S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Bioquímica de la División de Estudios de Posgrado de la
Facultad de Odontología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad
Universitaria, Mexico City, Mexico. gloria@fo.odonto.unam.mx

Periodontal disease comprises a group of infections that lead to inflammation of 
the gingival and destruction of periodontal tissues and is accompanied by the
loss of the alveolar bone with eventual exfoliation of the teeth. Porphyromonas
gingivalis is a Gram-negative bacteria obtained from the periodontal pocket of
patients with aggressive and chronic periodontitis. This bacteria presents in the
external membrane lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Flavonoids are molecules obtained
from plants and possess anti-inflammatory properties. Herein we characterize the 
effect of the flavonoids quercetin, genistein, luteolin, and quercetagetin on
LPS-activated transduction mechanism regulation in human gingival fibroblasts
(HGF). In this study, we investigated the role of the previously mentioned
flavonoids on mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activation induced by LPS
obtained from P. gingivalis. Our results showed that LPS treatment induces
activation of extracellular signal related kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), p38, and
c-jun-NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK). All flavonoids demonstrated an inhibitory
effect on MAPK activation, interleukin, 1beta, and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
expression, IL-1beta and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) synthesis. The most active
flavonoid was quercetagetin. Finally we found that the treatment with
quercetagetin had no effect on cellular viability or in genetic material
integrity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2007.05.004 
PMID: 17630199  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

