
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2007 Sep;76(4):741-52. Epub 2007 Jul 19.

Aerobic degradation of lindane (gamma-hexachlorocyclohexane) in bacteria and its 
biochemical and molecular basis.

Nagata Y(1), Endo R, Ito M, Ohtsubo Y, Tsuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Life Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences,
Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Sendai, 980-8577, Japan.
aynaga@ige.tohoku.ac.jp

gamma-Hexachlorocyclohexane (gamma-HCH, also called gamma-BHC and lindane) is a
halogenated organic insecticide that causes serious environmental problems. The
aerobic degradation pathway of gamma-HCH was extensively revealed in bacterial
strain Sphingobium japonicum (formerly Sphingomonas paucimobilis) UT26. gamma-HCH
is transformed to 2,5-dichlorohydroquinone through sequential reactions catalyzed
by LinA, LinB, and LinC, and then 2,5-dichlorohydroquinone is further metabolized
by LinD, LinE, LinF, LinGH, and LinJ to succinyl-CoA and acetyl-CoA, which are
metabolized in the citrate/tricarboxylic acid cycle. In addition to these
catalytic enzymes, a putative ABC-type transporter system encoded by linKLMN is
also essential for the gamma-HCH utilization in UT26. Preliminary examination of 
the complete genome sequence of UT26 clearly demonstrated that lin genes for the 
gamma-HCH utilization are dispersed on three large circular replicons with sizes 
of 3.5 Mb, 682 kb, and 191 kb. Nearly identical lin genes were also found in
other HCH-degrading bacterial strains, and it has been suggested that the
distribution of lin genes is mainly mediated by insertion sequence IS6100 and
plasmids. Recently, it was revealed that two dehalogenases, LinA and LinB, have
variants with small number of amino acid differences, and they showed dramatic
functional differences for the degradation of HCH isomers, indicating these
enzymes are still evolving at high speed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-007-1066-x 
PMID: 17634937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

