
1. Int J Med Microbiol. 2007 Oct;297(6):431-41. Epub 2007 Jul 12.

Bidirectional transcription of lipooligosaccharide synthesis genes from
Campylobacter jejuni.

Phongsisay V(1), Fry BN.

Author information: 
(1)School of Applied Sciences, RMIT University, Bundoora, Melbourne, Victoria
3083, Australia.

The lipooligosaccharide (LOS) molecules of Campylobacter jejuni are involved in
virulence and induction of the Guillain-Barr√© syndrome (GBS). This study analysed
the transcription of the LOS synthesis genes from the GBS-inducing C. jejuni
strain HB 93-13 under microaerobic conditions. Fourteen consecutive genes
Cj1132c, waaC, htrB, wlaNC, wlaND, cgtA, cgtB, cstII, neuB, neuC, neuA, wlaVA,
wlaQA, and waaF were included. The results of rapid amplification of cDNA ends
and single-stranded ligation of complementary ends showed initiation sites with
potential promoter regions on both DNA strands in the Cj1132c/waaC, cgtB/cstII,
and wlaQA/waaF strand-switch regions. Other termini without recognisable promoter
region were also found throughout the LOS gene cluster, suggesting a low
specificity of the polymerase during transcription. In addition, all gene
junction regions were cloned into the shuttle vector pMW10 carrying the
promoterless lacZ gene to identify functional promoter sites. Bidirectional
active promoters were found in the strand-switch regions. The results of RT-PCR
and cDNA blotting indicated that transcriptional linkage occurred between
different operons, indicating a lack of transcription termination within the LOS 
gene cluster. Moreover, the results of semi-quantitative RT-PCR and real-time
RT-PCR showed that both DNA strands were transcribed but transcription of the
coding strand was at a higher rate. The results presented here provide an insight
into transcription of the LOS synthesis gene cluster of C. jejuni.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2007.05.003 
PMID: 17631048  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

