
1. Immunology. 2007 Dec;122(4):522-31. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

Activation of human CD4+ T cells by targeting MHC class II epitopes to endosomal 
compartments using human CD1 tail sequences.

Niazi KR(1), Ochoa MT, Sieling PA, Rooke NE, Peter AK, Mollahan P, Dickey M,
Rabizadeh S, Rea TH, Modlin RL.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Translation Unit, Buck Institute, Novato, CA, USA.

Distinct CD4(+) T-cell epitopes within the same protein can be optimally
processed and loaded into major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II
molecules in disparate endosomal compartments. The CD1 protein isoforms traffic
to these same endosomal compartments as directed by unique cytoplasmic tail
sequences, therefore we reasoned that antigen/CD1 chimeras containing the
different CD1 cytoplasmic tail sequences could optimally target antigens to the
MHC class II antigen presentation pathway. Evaluation of trafficking patterns
revealed that all four human CD1-derived targeting sequences delivered antigen to
the MHC class II antigen presentation pathway, to early/recycling, early/sorting 
and late endosomes/lysosomes. There was a preferential requirement for different 
CD1 targeting sequences for the optimal presentation of an MHC class II epitope
in the following hierarchy: CD1b > CD1d = CD1c > > > CD1a or untargeted antigen. 
Therefore, the substitution of the CD1 ectodomain with heterologous proteins
results in their traffic to distinct intracellular locations that intersect with 
MHC class II and this differential distribution leads to specific functional
outcomes with respect to MHC class II antigen presentation. These findings may
have implications in designing DNA vaccines, providing a greater variety of tools
to generate T-cell responses against microbial pathogens or tumours.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2007.02666.x 
PMCID: PMC2266034
PMID: 17635609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

