
1. Mod Pathol. 2007 Sep;20(9):974-89. Epub 2007 Jul 20.

Gene expression profiling in human gastric mucosa infected with Helicobacter
pylori.

Hofman VJ(1), Moreilhon C, Brest PD, Lassalle S, Le Brigand K, Sicard D, Raymond 
J, Lamarque D, HÃ©buterne XA, Mari B, Barbry PJ, Hofman PM.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, INSERM ERI-21, Nice Cedex, France. hofman.p@chu-nice.fr

Pathogenic mechanisms associated with Helicobacter pylori infection enhance
susceptibility of the gastric epithelium to carcinogenic conversion. We have
characterized the gene expression profiles of gastric biopsies from 69 French
Caucasian patients, of which 43 (62%) were infected with H. pylori. The bacterium
was detected in 27 of the 42 antral biopsies examined and in 16 of the 27 fundic 
biopsies. Infected biopsies were selected for the presence of chronic active
gastritis, in absence of metaplasia and dysplasia of the gastric mucosa. Infected
antral and fundic biopsies exhibited distinct transcriptional responses. Altered 
responses were linked with: (1) the extent of polymorphonuclear leukocyte
infiltration, (2) bacterial density, and (3) the presence of the virulence
factors vacA, babA2, and cagA. Robust modulation of transcripts associated with
Toll-like receptors, signal transduction, the immune response, apoptosis, and the
cell cycle was consistent with expected responses to Gram-negative bacterial
infection. Altered expression of interferon-regulated genes (IFITM1, IRF4,
STAT6), indicative of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) II-mediated and
Th1-specific responses, as well as altered expression of GATA6, have previously
been described in precancerous states. Upregulation of genes abundantly expressed
in cancer tissues (UBD, CXCL13, LY96, MAPK8, MMP7, RANKL, CCL18) or in stem cells
(IFITM1 and WFDC2) may reveal a molecular switch towards a premalignant state in 
infected tissues. Tissue microarray analysis of a large number of biopsies, which
were either positive or negative for the cag-A virulence factor, when compared to
each other and to noninfected controls, confirmed observed gene alterations at
the protein level, for eight key transcripts. This study provides
'proof-of-principle' data for identifying molecular mechanisms driving H.
pylori-associated carcinogenesis before morphological evidence of changes along
the neoplastic progression pathway.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.3800930 
PMID: 17643099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

