
1. Mol Immunol. 2008 Jan;45(2):406-18. Epub 2007 Jul 23.

Cladosporium herbarum translationally controlled tumor protein (TCTP) is an
IgE-binding antigen and is associated with disease severity.

Rid R(1), Simon-Nobbe B, Langdon J, Holler C, Wally V, PÃ¶ll V, Ebner C, Hemmer W,
Hawranek T, Lang R, Richter K, MacDonald S, Rinnerthaler M, Laun P, Mari A,
Breitenbach M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Division of Genetics, University of Salzburg,
Hellbrunnerstrasse 34, A-5020 Salzburg, Austria.

Cladosporium herbarum represents one of the most important world-wide occurring
allergenic fungal species. The prevalence of IgE reactivity to C. herbarum in
patients suffering from allergy varies between 5 and 30% in the different
climatic zones. Since mold allergy has often been associated with severe asthma, 
along with other allergic symptoms, it is important to define more
comprehensively the allergen repertoire of this ascomycete. In this context we
are reporting our successful approach to identify, clone, produce as a
recombinant protein, purify and further characterize a new C. herbarum allergen
which is a close homolog of the human translationally controlled tumor protein
(TCTP, also called histamine releasing factor, HRF). The immunoreactivity of both
pure recombinant molecules was investigated by means of immunoblot analyses,
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays as well as histamine release studies. To
summarize, IgE antibodies from five out of nine individuals recognized both the
human and the fungal protein in immunoblots. The latter was able to cause
histamine release from human basophils with about half the efficiency compared to
its human homolog HRF. Cross-inhibition assays showed that the patients' IgEs
recognize common epitopes on both the human and C. herbarum proteins, but
however, only pre-incubation with C. herbarum TCTP could completely inhibit
reactivity with HRF. Furthermore, it appears that patients reactive to TCTP have 
a higher probability to suffer from asthma than other allergic patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2007.06.002 
PMID: 17645945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

