
1. Scand J Infect Dis. 2007;39(8):697-702.

Bacteremia is a prognostic factor for poor outcome in spontaneous bacterial
peritonitis.

Cho JH(1), Park KH, Kim SH, Bang JH, Park WB, Kim HB, Kim NJ, Oh MD, Lee HS, Choe
KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
South Korea.

We performed a retrospective study to determine the influence of bacteremia on
the mortality of patients with spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP), a major
complication of liver cirrhosis. Patients with SBP with identified pathogens from
ascites and/or blood were analyzed by retrospective review of clinical and
laboratory records in a university hospital in Korea for 3 y and classified into 
the bacteremic and non-bacteremic groups. The underlying liver function was
determined by model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score. Microbiological
response rate, ascites polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PML) count reduction rate,
and SBP-related mortality were compared between the 2 groups. To identify the
independent risk factors of mortality, a multiple logistic regression model was
used to control for the confounders. A total of 189 patients was enrolled in the 
study. Among 189 patients, 110 (58.2%) were bacteremic, and 79 (41.8%)
non-bacteremic. Escherichia coli was the most common etiologic organism, followed
by Klebsiella pneumoniae. MELD scores, microbiological response rate (82.6% vs
88.6%, p=0.295), and ascites PML count reduction rate (33.2% vs 44.8%, p=0.479)
were not different between the bacteremic and non-bacteremic group. However, the 
SBP-related mortality rate of the bacteremic group was significantly higher than 
that of the non-bacteremic group (37.3% vs 12.7%, p<0.001). Bacteremia (OR=2.86: 
95% CI 1.06-7.74, p=0.038), APACHE II score (OR=1.20: 95% CI 1.10-1.31, p<0.001),
MELD score (OR=1.07: 95% CI 1.01-1.31, p=0.016) and microbiological no response
(OR=5.51: 95% CI 1.82-16.72, p=0.003) were independent risk factors of
SBP-related mortality.

DOI: 10.1080/00365540701299582 
PMID: 17654346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

