
1. RNA Biol. 2007 Jul;4(2):85-92. Epub 2007 Jul 5.

E. coli glutamyl-tRNA synthetase is inhibited by anticodon stem-loop domains and 
a minihelix.

Gustilo EM(1), Dubois DY, Lapointe J, Agris PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695-7622, USA.

Portions of E. coli tRNA(Glu) having identity determinants for glutamyl-tRNA
synthetase (ERS, EC 6.1.1.17) have been designed to be the first RNA inhibitors
of a Class I synthetase. ERS recognizes the 2-thionyl group of
2-thio-5-methylaminomethyluridine (mnm(5)s(2)U(34)) in the first or wobble
anticodon position of E. coli tRNA(Glu). The interaction, as revealed by
structural analysis, though specific, appears tenuous. Thus, it is surprising
that RNAs designed from this tRNA's anticodon stem and loop domain with
(ASL(Glu)-s(2)U(34)) and without s(2)U(34) are bound by ERS and inhibit
aminoacylation of the native tRNA. ASL(Glu), ASL(Glu)-s(2)U(34), and a
minihelix(Glu) composed of identity determinants of the amino acid accepting stem
were thermally stable under conditions of aminoacylation (T(m)s = 75 +/- 1.5, 76 
+/- 0.9 and 83 +/- 2.0 degrees C, respectively). In binding competition, the
modified ASL(Glu)-s(2)U(34) bound ERS with a higher affinity (half maximal
inhibiting concentration, IC(50), 5.1 +/- 0.4 microM) than its unmodified
counterpart, ASL(Glu) (IC(50), 10.3 +/- 0.6 microM). The minihelix(Glu),
ASL(Glu)-s(2)U(34) and ASL(Glu) bound ERS with K(d)s of 9.9 +/- 3.3, 6.5 +/- 1.7 
and 20.5 +/- 3.8 microM. ERS aminoacylation of tRNA(Glu) was inhibited by the
tRNA fragments. Unmodified ASL(Glu), minihelix(Glu), and ASL(Glu)-s(2)U(34)
exhibited a K(ic) of 1.9 +/- 0.2 microM, 4.1 +/- 0.2 microM, and 6.5 +/- 0.1
microM, respectively. The modified ASL(Glu)-s(2)U(34), though having a higher
affinity for ERS, may be released more readily and thus, not be as good an
inhibitor as the unmodified ASL. Thus, the RNA constructs are effective tools to 
study RNA-protein interaction.

DOI: 10.4161/rna.4.2.4736 
PMID: 17671438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

