
1. J Immunol. 2007 Aug 15;179(4):2509-19.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis infects dendritic cells with high frequency and
impairs their function in vivo.

Wolf AJ(1), Linas B, Trevejo-Nu√±ez GJ, Kincaid E, Tamura T, Takatsu K, Ernst JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) is thought to reside in macrophages, although
infected dendritic cells (DCs) have been observed. Thus, although cellular
associations have been made, global characterization of the cells harboring Mtb
is lacking. We have performed temporal and quantitative characterization of the
cells harboring Mtb following aerosol infection of mice by using GFP-expressing
bacteria and flow cytometry. We discovered that Mtb infects phagocytic cells of
diverse phenotypes, that the predominant infected cell populations change with
time, and that myeloid DCs are the major cell population infected with Mtb in the
lungs and lymph nodes. We also found that the bacteria in the lung-draining lymph
node are transported there from the lungs by a CCL19/21-dependent mechanism and
that the transport of bacteria to the lymph node is a transient phenomenon
despite chronic infection. In addition, we found that the lymph node cell subsets
that are most efficacious in stimulating Mtb-specific, TCR-transgenic CD4(+) T
lymphocytes are not infected with the bacteria and are scarce or absent from the 
lungs of infected mice. Finally, we found that the lung cell populations that are
infected with Mtb at high frequency are relatively ineffective at stimulating
Ag-specific CD4(+) T lymphocytes, and we have obtained evidence that live Mtb can
inhibit MHC class II Ag presentation without a decrease in the surface expression
of MHC class II. These results indicate that Mtb targets DC migration and Ag
presentation in vivo to promote persistent infection.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.179.4.2509 
PMID: 17675513  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

