
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2007 Oct;45(10):3251-6. Epub 2007 Aug 8.

External quality assessment of a DNA sequence-based scheme for epidemiological
typing of Legionella pneumophila by an international network of laboratories.

Afshar B(1), Fry NK, Bellamy W, Underwood AP, Harrison TG; Members of the
European Working Group for Legionella Infections.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Systemic Infection Laboratory, Health Protection Agency,
Centre for Infections, 61 Colindale Avenue, London NW9 5EQ, United Kingdom.
Baharak.Afshar@HPA.org.uk

We report the results of an international external quality assessment (EQA)
program to assess the performance of laboratories in genotyping Legionella
pneumophila isolates using the standard European Working Group for Legionella
Infections sequence-based typing protocol. Three coded distributions of L.
pneumophila isolates were sent to laboratories in 12, 14, and 20 countries,
respectively. The data were returned by 11 of 16, 18 of 19, and 27 of 29 centers,
respectively. Incomplete submission of data resulted in exclusion from certain
aspects of the analyses. The number of centers achieving 100% score, for all loci
tested, rose successively from 50% (5 of 10) for the first EQA distribution, to
56% (9 of 16) for the second EQA distribution, to 76% (19 of 25) for the third
EQA distribution. A number of additional centers made only a few errors (one to
three) in each distribution. Sequence data from the first two distributions were 
collected in flat text file format and using specially developed software, the
sequence quality tool (SQT), in the third distribution. The SQT allows users to
upload trace files in standard file formats, automates basecalling using phred
and phrap software, contig assembly, trimming, and matching against a reference
library. The program described here allow users an independent measure of
sequence quality, and such schemes are vital in order to identify strengths and
weakness in centers responsible for the generation of genotyping data in
legionella outbreak investigation. The present study demonstrates that DNA
sequence data can be highly reproducible but, when independently assessed, in
practice frequently falls short of this goal. However, experience and training in
the methodology results in increased performance.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00898-07 
PMCID: PMC2045376
PMID: 17687012  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

