
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;27(19):6615-28. Epub 2007 Aug 6.

Cdc42 and phosphoinositide 3-kinase drive Rac-mediated actin polymerization
downstream of c-Met in distinct and common pathways.

Bosse T(1), Ehinger J, Czuchra A, Benesch S, Steffen A, Wu X, Schloen K, Niemann 
HH, Scita G, Stradal TE, Brakebusch C, Rottner K.

Author information: 
(1)Cytoskeleton Dynamics Group, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI),
Inhoffenstrasse 7, D-38124, Braunschweig, Germany.

Activation of c-Met, the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/scatter factor receptor
induces reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton, which drives epithelial cell
scattering and motility and is exploited by pathogenic Listeria monocytogenes to 
invade nonepithelial cells. However, the precise contributions of distinct
Rho-GTPases, the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases, and actin assembly regulators to
c-Met-mediated actin reorganization are still elusive. Here we report that
HGF-induced membrane ruffling and Listeria invasion mediated by the bacterial
c-Met ligand internalin B (InlB) were significantly impaired but not abrogated
upon genetic removal of either Cdc42 or pharmacological inhibition of
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3-kinase). While loss of Cdc42 or PI3-kinase
function correlated with reduced HGF- and InlB-triggered Rac activation, complete
abolishment of actin reorganization and Rac activation required the simultaneous 
inactivation of both Cdc42 and PI3-kinase signaling. Moreover, Cdc42 activation
was fully independent of PI3-kinase activity, whereas the latter partly depended 
on Cdc42. Finally, Cdc42 function did not require its interaction with the actin 
nucleation-promoting factor N-WASP. Instead, actin polymerization was driven by
Arp2/3 complex activation through the WAVE complex downstream of Rac. Together,
our data establish an intricate signaling network comprising as key molecules
Cdc42 and PI3-kinase, which converge on Rac-mediated actin reorganization
essential for Listeria invasion and membrane ruffling downstream of c-Met.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00367-07 
PMCID: PMC2099217
PMID: 17682062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

