
1. Development. 2007 Sep;134(18):3383-92. Epub 2007 Aug 15.

GLH-1, the C. elegans P granule protein, is controlled by the JNK KGB-1 and by
the COP9 subunit CSN-5.

Orsborn AM(1), Li W, McEwen TJ, Mizuno T, Kuzmin E, Matsumoto K, Bennett KL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Microbiology and Immunology Department, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO 65212, USA.

The GLHs (germline RNA helicases) are constitutive components of the
germline-specific P granules in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans and are
essential for fertility, yet how GLH proteins are regulated remains unknown.
KGB-1 and CSN-5 are both GLH binding partners, previously identified by
two-hybrid interactions. KGB-1 is a MAP kinase in the Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)
subfamily, whereas CSN-5 is a subunit of the COP9 signalosome. Intriguingly,
although loss of either KGB-1 or CSN-5 results in sterility, their phenotypes are
strikingly different. Whereas csn-5 RNA interference (RNAi) results in
under-proliferated germlines, similar to glh-1/glh-4(RNAi), the kgb-1(um3)
loss-of-function mutant exhibits germline over-proliferation. When kgb-1(um3)
mutants are compared with wild-type C. elegans, GLH-1 protein levels are as much 
as 6-fold elevated and the organization of GLH-1 in P granules is grossly
disrupted. A series of additional in vivo and in vitro tests indicates that KGB-1
and CSN-5 regulate GLH-1 levels, with GLH-1 targeted for proteosomal degradation 
by KGB-1 and stabilized by CSN-5. We propose the ;good cop: bad cop' team of
CSN-5 and KGB-1 imposes a balance on GLH-1 levels, resulting in germline
homeostasis. In addition, both KGB-1 and CSN-5 bind Vasa, a Drosophila germ
granule component; therefore, similar regulatory mechanisms might be conserved
from worms to flies.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.005181 
PMID: 17699606  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

