
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2007 Oct;45(10):3257-62. Epub 2007 Aug 15.

Bordetella pertussis strains circulating in Europe in 1999 to 2004 as determined 
by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis.

Hallander H(1), Advani A, Riffelmann M, von KÃ¶nig CH, Caro V, Guiso N, Mooi FR,
Gzyl A, Kaltoft MS, Fry NK, Mertsola J, He Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology Vaccinology, Swedish Institute for Infectious Disease
Control, Solna, Sweden.

Clinical isolates of Bordetella pertussis collected during the year 2004 (n =
153) in eight European countries, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, The
Netherlands, Poland, Sweden, and United Kingdom, were analyzed by pulsed-field
gel electrophoresis (PFGE), and their PFGE profiles were compared with those of
isolates collected in 1999 (n = 102). The 255 isolates produced 59 distinct PFGE 
profiles. Among the 153 isolates from 2004, 36 profiles were found, while within 
the 102 isolates from 1999, 33 profiles were detected. One PFGE profile, BpSR11, 
was dominant (30% to 50%) in all countries except Denmark (10%) and Poland (0%). 
In comparison with 1999, there was an increase in BpSR11 prevalence in Finland in
2004 from 5% to 40%, coinciding with a major incidence peak. Some other PFGE
profiles seemed to be associated with limited dissemination. Poland was the only 
country in which the most common actual European PFGE profiles were not found. In
a dendrogram analysis, all common PFGE profiles were identified within PFGE group
IV, and BpSR11 clustered together with PFGE subgroup IVbeta. Compared to the 1999
isolates, PFGE group V representative for pertactin variant prn3 strains had
disappeared, and a new cluster was seen. In conclusion, some PFGE profiles, such 
as BpSR11, evidently have a higher capacity to spread, suggesting increased
fitness to the present immunological environment. It is therefore of major
interest to continue with surveillance programs of B. pertussis isolates, as both
waning vaccine-derived immunity and strain variation may play a role in the
persistence of pertussis.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00864-07 
PMCID: PMC2045341
PMID: 17699646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

