
1. J Anim Sci. 2007 Dec;85(12):3340-7. Epub 2007 Aug 20.

Effects of dietary methionine and lysine sources on nutrient digestion, nitrogen 
utilization, and duodenal amino acid flow in growing goats.

Sun ZH(1), Tan ZL, Liu SM, Tayo GO, Lin B, Teng B, Tang SX, Wang WJ, Liao YP, Pan
YF, Wang JR, Zhao XG, Hu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Subtropical Agriculture, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hunan
410125, China.

This study investigated the effects of supplementation of various sources of Met 
and Lys on nutrient digestion, N utilization, and duodenal AA flows in growing
goats. Four 4-mo-old Liuyang Black wether goats were used in a 4 x 4 Latin square
experiment and were assigned to 4 dietary treatments: (1) control, (2) control + 
lipid-coated Met-Zn chelate and Lys-Mn chelate (PML), (3) control + Met-Zn
chelate and Lys-Mn chelate (CML), and (4) control + dl-Met, l-Lys-HCl,
ZnSO(4).7H(2)O, and MnSO(4).H(2)O (FML). Compared with control, PML reduced (P < 
0.05) ruminal NH(3) concentration, urinary N excretion, and plasma urea N
concentration and increased (P < 0.05) the activity of ruminal
endo-1,4-beta-d-glucanase and beta-glucosidase, the duodenal flow of N, N
retention (g/d as well as % of absorbed N), the duodenal flows of Met, Lys, His, 
Val, and total essential AA, and plasma concentrations of Lys, Val, Phe, and
total essential AA. Supplementing Zn-Met and Mn-Lys chelates had similar (P >
0.05) but lesser effects on these measures compared with PML, and the effects on 
most of the measures were not statistically significant (P > 0.05) when compared 
with control. Supplementing free-form Met and Lys had no effects compared with
control (P > 0.05). The results indicate that lipid coating and chelating of AA
provide a protection, and to a lesser extent by only chelating, of the AA from
microbial degradation in the rumen and possibly has effects on rumen
fermentation, which increases MP supply. This technology could improve productive
performance and be of potential benefit to ruminant production if cost-effective 
products are developed.

DOI: 10.2527/jas.2006-718 
PMID: 17709770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

