
1. J Immunol. 2007 Sep 1;179(5):3075-85.

Protein phosphatase 2A plays an important role in stromal cell-derived
factor-1/CXC chemokine ligand 12-mediated migration and adhesion of CD34+ cells.

Basu S(1), Ray NT, Atkinson SJ, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, 950 West Walnut Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. sunbasu@iupui.edu

Migration of hemopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPC) is required for homing 
to bone marrow following transplantation. Therefore, it is critical to understand
signals underlying directional movement of HSPC. Stromal cell-derived factor-1
(SDF-1)/CXCL12 is a potent chemoattractant for HSPC. In this study, we
demonstrate that the serine-threonine protein phosphatase (PP)2A plays an
important role in regulation of optimal level and duration of Akt/protein kinase 
B activation (a molecule important for efficient chemotaxis), in response to
SDF-1. Inhibition of PP2A, using various pharmacological inhibitors of PP2A
including okadaic acid (OA) as well as using genetic approaches including
dominant-negative PP2A-catalytic subunit (PP2A-C) or PP2A-C small interfering
RNA, in primary CD34(+) cord blood (CB) cells led to reduced chemotaxis. This was
associated with impairment in polarization and slower speed of movement in
response to SDF-1. Concomitantly, SDF-1-induced Akt phosphorylation was robust
and prolonged. Following SDF-1 stimulation, Akt and PP2A-C translocate to plasma 
membrane with enhanced association of PP2A-C with Akt observed at the plasma
membrane. Inhibition of PI3K by low-dose LY294002 partially recovered chemotactic
activity of cells pretreated with OA. In addition to chemotaxis, adhesion of
CD34(+) cells to fibronectin was impaired by OA pretreatment. Our study
demonstrates PP2A plays an important role in chemotaxis and adhesion of CD34(+)
CB cells in response to SDF-1. CD34(+) CB cells pretreated with OA showed
impaired ability to repopulate NOD-SCID mice in vivo, suggesting physiological
relevance of these observations.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.179.5.3075 
PMID: 17709522  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

