
1. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2008;145(1):58-86. Epub 2007 Aug 20.

The spectrum of fungal allergy.

Simon-Nobbe B(1), Denk U, PÃ¶ll V, Rid R, Breitenbach M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
birgit.simon@sbg.ac.at

Fungi can be found throughout the world. They may live as saprophytes, parasites 
or symbionts of animals and plants in indoor as well as outdoor environment. For 
decades, fungi belonging to the ascomycota as well as to the basidiomycota have
been known to cause a broad panel of human disorders. In contrast to pollen,
fungal spores and/or mycelial cells may not only cause type I allergy, the most
prevalent disease caused by molds, but also a large number of other illnesses,
including allergic bronchopulmonary mycoses, allergic sinusitis, hypersensitivity
pneumonitis and atopic dermatitis; and, again in contrast to pollen-derived
allergies, fungal allergies are frequently linked with allergic asthma.
Sensitization to molds has been reported in up to 80% of asthmatic patients.
Although research on fungal allergies dates back to the 19th century, major
improvements in the diagnosis and therapy of mold allergy have been hampered by
the fact that fungal extracts are highly variable in their protein composition
due to strain variabilities, batch-to-batch variations, and by the fact that
extracts may be prepared from spores and/or mycelial cells. Nonetheless, about
150 individual fungal allergens from approximately 80 mold genera have been
identified in the last 20 years. First clinical studies with recombinant mold
allergens have demonstrated their potency in clinical diagnosis. This review aims
to give an overview of the biology of molds and diseases caused by molds in
humans, as well as a detailed summary of the latest results on recombinant fungal
allergens.

2007 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000107578 
PMID: 17709917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

