
1. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2007 Dec;40(12):1671-9. Epub 2007 Oct 29.

Low expression of antigen-presenting and costimulatory molecules by lung cells
from tuberculosis patients.

Flores-Batista VC(1), Boechat N, Lago PM, Lazzarini LC, Pessanha LR, Almeida AS, 
Mafort TT, Kritski AL, Ho JL, Lapa-e-Silva JR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório Multidisciplinar de Pesquisa, Instituto de Doenças do Tórax,
Hospital Universitário Clementino Fraga Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil.

Costimulatory and antigen-presenting molecules are essential to the initiation of
T cell immunity to mycobacteria. The present study analyzed by
immunocytochemistry, using monoclonal antibodies and alkaline
phosphatase-anti-alkaline phosphatase method, the frequency of costimulatory
(CD86, CD40, CD40L, CD28, and CD152) and antigen-presenting (MHC class II and
CD1) molecules expression on human lung cells recovered by sputum induction from 
tuberculosis (TB) patients (N = 22) and non-TB controls (N = 17). TB cases showed
a statistically significant lower percentage of HLA-DR+ cells than control
subjects (21.9 +/- 4.2 vs 50.0 +/- 7.2%, P < 0.001), even though similar
proportions of TB cases (18/22) and control subjects (16/17, P = 0.36) had
HLA-DR-positive-stained cells. In addition, fewer TB cases (10/22) compared to
control subjects (16/17) possessed CD86-expressing cells (P = 0.04; OR: 0.05;
95%CI = 0.00-0.51), and TB cases expressed a lower percentage of CD86+ cells (P =
0.04). Moreover, TB patients with clinically limited disease ( pound1 lobe) on
chest X-ray exhibited a lower percentage of CD86-bearing cells compared to
patients with more extensive lung disease (>1 lobe) (P = 0.02). The lower
expression by lung cells from TB patients of HLA-DR and CD86, molecules involved 
in antigen presentation and activation of T cells, may minimize T cell
recognition of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, fostering an immune dysfunctional
state and active TB.

DOI: 10.1590/s0100-879x2006005000141 
PMID: 17713660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

