
1. Cell Microbiol. 2008 Jan;10(1):237-46. Epub 2007 Aug 17.

Toll-like receptor 2 contributes to antibacterial defence against
pneumolysin-deficient pneumococci.

Dessing MC(1), Florquin S, Paton JC, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. m.c.dessing@amc.uva.nl

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are pattern recognition receptors that recognize
conserved molecular patterns expressed by pathogens. Pneumolysin, an
intracellular toxin found in all Streptococcus pneumoniae clinical isolates, is
an important virulence factor of the pneumococcus that is recognized by TLR4.
Although TLR2 is considered the most important receptor for Gram-positive
bacteria, our laboratory previously could not demonstrate a decisive role for
TLR2 in host defence against pneumonia caused by a serotype 3 S. pneumoniae. Here
we tested the hypothesis that in the absence of TLR2, S. pneumoniae can still be 
sensed by the immune system through an interaction between pneumolysin and TLR4. 
C57BL/6 wild-type (WT) and TLR2 knockout (KO) mice were intranasally infected
with either WT S. pneumoniae D39 (serotype 2) or the isogenic
pneumolysin-deficient S. pneumoniae strain D39 PLN. TLR2 did not contribute to
antibacterial defence against WT S. pneumoniae D39. In contrast,
pneumolysin-deficient S. pneumoniae only grew in lungs of TLR2 KO mice. TLR2 KO
mice displayed a strongly reduced early inflammatory response in their lungs
during pneumonia caused by both pneumolysin-producing and pneumolysin-deficient
pneumococci. These data suggest that pneumolysin-induced TLR4 signalling can
compensate for TLR2 deficiency during respiratory tract infection with S.
pneumoniae.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2007.01035.x 
PMCID: PMC2253695
PMID: 17711480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

