
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2007 Nov;13(11):1083-8. Epub 2007 Aug 29.

Differences in peripheral blood lymphocyte phenotypes between Helicobacter
pylori-positive children and adults with duodenal ulcer.

Figueiredo Soares T(1), Aguiar Rocha G, Camargos Rocha AM, CorrÃªa-Oliveira R,
Martins-Filho OA, Teles Carvalho AS, Souto Bittencourt PF, Afonso Oliveira C,
Ferreira Nogueira AM, Alvares Cabral MM, Caetano Faria AM, Queiroz DM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Research in Bacteriology, Faculdade de Medicina/UFMG, Belo
Horizonte, Brazil.

The immunological mechanisms involved in the development of duodenal ulcer,
especially in childhood, are unclear. Helicobacter pylori-positive children and
adults, with and without duodenal ulcer, were therefore compared with respect to 
CD4(+) T-cells, and CD8(+) T-cells, B-cells and B1a-cells, as well as cell
activation (CD4(+)/HLA-DR(+) and CD8(+)/HLA-DR(+)) and co-stimulatory
(CD4(+)/CD28(+) and CD8(+)/CD28(+)) markers, in peripheral blood. Children with
and without duodenal ulcer differed significantly. In particular, there was a
phenotypic change in CD8(+) T-cells from children with ulcer that involved a 200%
increase in the number of CD8(+)/HLA-DR(+) cells/mm(3) and a decrease of 34.2% in
the number of CD8(+)/CD28(+) cells/mm(3). This phenotype of chronically activated
memory CD8(+) T-cells, which has also been observed in patients with AIDS and
tuberculosis, is associated with disease severity and progression. A lower
frequency of B1a-cells was also observed in the group of children with ulcer.
Conversely, no difference between infected adults with and without ulcer was
observed, but the percentage of CD4(+)/HLA-DR(+) cells was lower in adults with
ulcer, suggesting that a down-regulated immune response may play a role in the
development of duodenal ulcer in adults. Gastric inflammation correlated
positively with CD4(+) and chronically activated CD4(+) T-cells in children and
adults without duodenal ulcer, respectively. These results suggest that there are
differences in the immunophenotyping profile between H. pylori-positive children 
and adults with duodenal ulcer, indicating the possibility of distinct immune
mechanisms in the development of the disease according to age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2007.01814.x 
PMID: 17727687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

