
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Dec;82(6):1455-65. Epub 2007 Aug 28.

Modulation of CD1d-restricted NKT cell responses by CD4.

Chen X(1), Wang X, Besra GS, Gumperz JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA.

CD4+ and CD4- NKT cell populations have been shown to be functionally distinct,
but the role of CD4 molecules in NKT cell activation is not clear. Here, we have 
used human CD1d-restricted NKT cell clones to investigate the contribution of CD4
to NKT cell functional responses. Coligation of CD4 with the TCR/CD3 complex
resulted in enhanced cytokine secretion and increased calcium flux by CD4+ NKT
cell clones, indicating that CD4 is functionally active in these cells. CD4
blockade specifically inhibited cytokine secretion and proliferation of CD4+ NKT 
cell clones in response to CD1d+ APCs but did not affect cytotoxicity, suggesting
that CD4 preferentially modulates some NKT cell functional responses and not
others. Anti-CD4 mAb treatment inhibited NKT cell responses to both MHC class
II(+) and MHC class II(-) APCs, indicating that its effect was not due to
blocking CD4 binding to MHC class II molecules on APCs. The inhibitory effect of 
the anti-CD4 mAb also did not require recognition of CD1d by the NKT cell, since 
calcium flux was reduced in response to anti-CD3 mAb stimulation. Western blot
analysis revealed that anti-CD4 treatment resulted in increased phosphorylation
of an inhibitory site of p56(lck) (tyrosine 505). Thus, CD4 blockade interferes
with the course of CD3-mediated signaling events in NKT cells. These results
indicate that CD4 can contribute to NKT cell activation independently of the
presence of a CD4-ligand on APCs and suggest that it preferentially modulates
cytokine and proliferative responses.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0307163 
PMID: 17726154  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

