
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2007 Nov;13(11):1119-24. Epub 2007 Aug 24.

Identification of Legionella spp. by 19 European reference laboratories: results 
of the European Working Group for Legionella Infections External Quality
Assessment Scheme using DNA sequencing of the macrophage infectivity potentiator 
gene and dedicated online tools.

Fry NK(1), Afshar B, Bellamy W, Underwood AP, Ratcliff RM, Harrison TG; European 
Working Group for Legionella Infections.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Systemic Infection Laboratory, Health Protection Agency Centre
for Infections, London, UK.

Identification of Legionella spp. can be achieved by DNA sequencing of the
macrophage infectivity potentiator (mip) gene. The External Quality Assurance
(EQA) scheme described in this report is the first to assess the proficiency of
laboratories using this methodology. The results obtained from two EQA
distributions sent to European reference laboratories involved in Legionella
outbreak control and environmental monitoring are presented. Each distribution
contained a panel of ten coded Legionella strains. All strains were from clinical
and environmental sources and were considered to be wild-type strains.
Participants used dedicated online tools to compare sequence text files against a
database of known Legionella spp. The majority of centres (seven of ten, and 11
of 12) correctly identified all strains tested, in the first and second
distributions, respectively. Typically, sequence similarity values of 98-100%
were obtained when the test strains were compared with sequences contained in the
database. In all but one case, lower values indicated a poor quality sequence.
The exception was associated with the identification of a putative new species in
the first panel. Genotypic identification of Legionella can be achieved by the
use of standard protocols, dedicated identification libraries, and online tools. 
EQA schemes provide an independent measure of performance, and it is recommended 
that laboratories performing these techniques participate in such schemes,
thereby allowing optimisation of and improvements in their performance.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2007.01808.x 
PMID: 17725649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

