
1. Cardiovasc Revasc Med. 2007 Jul-Sep;8(3):189-202.

Mobilization of human CD34+ CD133+ and CD34+ CD133(-) stem cells in vivo by
consumption of an extract from Aphanizomenon flos-aquae--related to modulation of
CXCR4 expression by an L-selectin ligand?

Jensen GS(1), Hart AN, Zaske LA, Drapeau C, Gupta N, Schaeffer DJ, Cruickshank
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Holger NIS, 601 13 Avenue NE, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2E 1C7.
gitte@holgernis.com

OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study was to evaluate effects on human stem cells in 
vitro and in vivo of an extract from the edible cyanobacterium Aphanizomenon
flos-aquae (AFA) enriched for a novel ligand for human CD62L (L-selectin).
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Ligands for CD62L provide a mechanism for stem cell
mobilization in conjunction with down-regulation of the CXCR4 chemokine receptor 
for stromal derived factor 1. Affinity immunoprecipitation was used to identify a
novel ligand for CD62L from a water extract from AFA. The effects of AFA water
extract on CD62L binding and CXCR4 expression was tested in vitro using human
bone marrow CD34+ cells and the two progenitor cell lines, KG1a and K562. A
double-blind randomized crossover study involving 12 healthy subjects evaluated
the effects of consumption on stem cell mobilization in vivo.
RESULTS: An AFA extract rich in the CD62L ligand reduced the fucoidan-mediated
externalization of the CXCR4 chemokine receptor on bone marrow CD34+ cells by 30%
and the CD62L+ CD34+ cell line KG1A by 50% but did not alter the CXCR4 expression
levels on the CD34(-) cell line K562. A transient, 18% increase in numbers of
circulating CD34+ stem cells maximized 1 hour after consumption (P<.0003). When 3
noncompliant volunteers were removed from analysis, the increase in CD34+ cells
was 25% (P<.0001).
CONCLUSION: AFA water extract contains a novel ligand for CD62L. It modulates
CXCR4 expression on CD34+ bone marrow cells in vitro and triggers the
mobilization of CD34+ CD133+ and CD34+ CD133(-) cells in vivo.

DOI: 10.1016/j.carrev.2007.03.004 
PMID: 17765649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

