
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2007 Sep;57(Pt 9):2021-2025. doi:
10.1099/ijs.0.65188-0.

Halobacillus campisalis sp. nov., containing meso-diaminopimelic acid in the
cell-wall peptidoglycan, and emended description of the genus Halobacillus.

Yoon JH(1), Kang SJ(1), Jung YT(1), Oh TK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), PO Box 115, 
Yusong, Taejon, Korea.

A Gram-positive or variable, motile and coccoid or oval-shaped bacterial strain, 
ASL-17(T), was isolated from a marine solar saltern of the Yellow Sea in Korea
and its exact taxonomic position was investigated by a polyphasic approach.
Strain ASL-17(T) grew optimally at pH 7.0-8.0 and 37 degrees C. Phylogenetic
analysis based on 16S rRNA gene sequences showed that strain ASL-17(T) is most
closely affiliated phylogenetically to the genus Halobacillus. Strain ASL-17(T)
exhibited 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity values of 97.7-98.6 % to the type
strains of recognized Halobacillus species. Interestingly, strain ASL-17(T) had
cell-wall peptidoglycan based on meso-diaminopimelic acid, unlike other
Halobacillus species. It contained MK-7 as the predominant menaquinone. The major
fatty acids were anteiso-C(15 : 0), anteiso-C(17 : 0) and iso-C(16 : 0). The DNA 
G+C content was 42.1 mol%. DNA-DNA relatedness data and differential phenotypic
properties demonstrated that strain ASL-17(T) can be differentiated from
recognized Halobacillus species. On the basis of phenotypic, chemotaxonomic,
phylogenetic and genetic data, strain ASL-17(T) represents a novel species of the
genus Halobacillus, for which the name Halobacillus campisalis sp. nov. is
proposed. The type strain is ASL-17(T) (=KCTC 13144(T) =CCUG 54360(T)).

DOI: 10.1099/ijs.0.65188-0 
PMID: 17766866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

