
1. Toxicon. 2007 Nov;50(6):800-9. Epub 2007 Jul 4.

Concentrations of particulate and dissolved cylindrospermopsin in 21
Aphanizomenon-dominated temperate lakes.

Rücker J(1), Stüken A, Nixdorf B, Fastner J, Chorus I, Wiedner C.

Author information: 
(1)Brandenburg University of Technology, Department of Freshwater Conservation,
Bad Saarow Research Station, Seestrasse 45, 15526 Bad Saarow, Germany.
j.ruecker@limno-tu.cottbus.de

The cyanobacterial toxin cylindrospermopsin (CYN) is widely distributed in German
lakes, but volumetric data for risk assessment are lacking and it is unclear
which cyanobacterial species produce CYN in Europe. We therefore analyzed CYN
concentration and cyanobacterial composition of 21 German lakes in 2005. CYN was 
detected in 19 lakes (102 of 115 samples). In total, 45 samples contained
particulate CYN only, and 57 contained both dissolved and particulate CYN. The
concentrations were 0.002-0.484 microg L(-1) for particulate CYN and 0.08-11.75
microg L(-1) for dissolved CYN with a maximum of 12.1 microg L(-1) total CYN. A
drinking water guideline value of 1 microg L(-1) proposed by Humpage and Falconer
[2003. Oral toxicity of the cyanobacterial toxin CYN in male Swiss albino mice:
determination of no observed adverse effect level for deriving a drinking water
guideline value. Environ. Toxicol. 18, 94-103] was exceeded in 18 samples from
eight lakes due to high concentrations of dissolved CYN. CYN occurrence in the
German lakes could not be ascribed to the three known CYN-producing species
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii, Anabaena bergii and Aphanizomenon flos-aquae,
which were detected in some lakes in low abundances. The highest correlation
coefficients were observed between particulate CYN and the native Aphanizomenon
gracile. It occurred in 98 CYN-positive samples, was the most abundant Nostocales
and was the only Nostocales in five samples. This indicates that A. gracile is a 
potential CYN producer in German lakes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2007.06.019 
PMID: 17804031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

