
1. Mol Immunol. 2008 Feb;45(3):839-48. Epub 2007 Sep 14.

Functional analysis of the host defense peptide Human Beta Defensin-1: new
insight into its potential role in cancer.

Bullard RS(1), Gibson W, Bose SK, Belgrave JK, Eaddy AC, Wright CJ, Hazen-Martin 
DJ, Lage JM, Keane TE, Ganz TA, Donald CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 165 Ashley Avenue, PO Box
250620, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Although it is known that innate immunity is key for protecting the body against 
foreign agents such as bacteria, little is known about elements of the innate
immune system that have anti-tumor activity. Human Beta Defensin-1 (hBD-1), an
important component of the innate immune response, is lost at high frequencies in
malignant prostatic tissue, while high levels of expression are maintained in
adjacent benign regions. In prostate carcinoma, frequent genetic alterations
occur in the 8p22-23 region and several studies indicate there may be multiple
tumor suppressor genes present within this region. The high incidence of loss of 
hBD-1 expression in prostate cancer, along with its chromosomal location of
8p23.2, raised the possibility that it may play a role in tumor suppression. To
gain insight as to its function in prostate cancer, hBD-1 was cloned and
ectopically expressed in four prostate cancer cell lines. Induction of hBD-1
expression resulted in a decrease in cellular growth in DU145 and PC3 cells.
However, hBD-1 has no effect on the growth of androgen receptor (AR) positive
LNCaP prostate cancer cells, but was again growth suppressive to PC3 cells with
ectopic AR expression (PC3/AR+). hBD-1 also caused rapid induction of cytolysis
and caspase-mediated apoptosis in DU145 and PC3 prostate cancer cells. Although
the regulation of hBD-1 was not addressed in this study, our preliminary data
demonstrated that the pathways involved may include cMYC and PAX2. Data presented
here are the first to provide evidence of its potential role in prostate cancer
cell death.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2006.11.026 
PMCID: PMC2131727
PMID: 17868871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

