
1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2007;9(5):R94.

Expression and regulation of CCL18 in synovial fluid neutrophils of patients with
rheumatoid arthritis.

Auer J(1), Bläss M, Schulze-Koops H, Russwurm S, Nagel T, Kalden JR, Röllinghoff 
M, Beuscher HU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Wasserturmstrasse 3-5, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany.
judithschlenk@hotmail.com

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by the recruitment of leukocytes and
the accumulation of inflammatory mediators within the synovial compartment.
Release of the chemokine CCL18 has been widely attributed to antigen-presenting
cells, including macrophages and dendritic cells. This study investigates the
production of CCL18 in polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN), the predominant cell 
type recruited into synovial fluid (SF). Microarray analysis, semiquantitative
and quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction identified SF
PMN from patients with RA as a novel source for CCL18 in diseased joints. Highly 
upregulated expression of other chemokine genes was observed for CCL3, CXCL8 and 
CXCL10, whereas CCL21 was downregulated. The chemokine receptor genes were
differentially expressed, with upregulation of CXCR4, CCRL2 and CCR5 and
downregulation of CXCR1 and CXCR2. In cell culture experiments, expression of
CCL18 mRNA in blood PMN was induced by tumor necrosis factor alpha, whereas
synthesis of CCL18 protein required additional stimulation with a combination of 
IL-10 and vitamin D3. In comparison, recruited SF PMN from patients with RA were 
sensitized for CCL18 production, because IL-10 alone was sufficient to induce
CCL18 release. These results suggest a release of the T cell-attracting CCL18 by 
PMN when recruited to diseased joints. However, its production is tightly
regulated at the levels of mRNA expression and protein synthesis.

DOI: 10.1186/ar2294 
PMCID: PMC2212580
PMID: 17875202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

