
1. Clin Immunol. 2007 Nov;125(2):194-204. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Effect of bacterial endotoxin LPS on expression of INF-gamma and IL-5 in
T-lymphocytes from asthmatics.

Koch A(1), Knobloch J, Dammhayn C, Raidl M, Ruppert A, Hag H, Rottlaender D,
Müller K, Erdmann E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumology, University of Cologne, Clinic III for Internal
Medicine, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9, 50924 Köln (Cologne), Germany.
andrea.koch@uni-koeln.de

Epidemiological evidence, in vitro studies and animal models suggest that
exposure to the bacterial endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS) can influence the
development and severity of asthma. Although it is known that signaling through
Toll-like receptors (TLR) is required for adaptive T helper cell type 1 and 2
responses, it is unclear whether the LPS ligand TLR 4 is expressed on CD4(+) and 
CD8(+) T-lymphocytes and if so, whether LPS could modulate the T(H)1 or T(H)2
response in this context. The present authors have, therefore, examined the
expression of TLR 4 on peripheral blood CD4(+) and CD8(+) T-lymphocytes using
RT-PCR method and FACS analyses. Furthermore, the authors have studied the
IL-12-induced expression of the T(H)1-associated cytokine INF-gamma and the
IL-4-induced expression of the T(H)2-specific cytokine IL-5 in the presence of
LPS using ELISA and compared nine atopic asthmatic subjects and eleven nonatopic 
normal volunteers. There was an increased anti-CD3/anti-CD28-induced IL-5
expression in T cells of asthmatics compared with normals (p<0.01). In the
presence of IL-4 (10 ng/ml), there was an additional increase in IL-5 expression 
and this additional increase was greater in T cells of normals compared with
asthmatics (p<0.05). There was an expression of INF-gamma in
anti-CD3/anti-CD28-induced T-lymphocytes without differences between both groups 
(NS). In the presence of IL-12 (10 ng/ml), there was an increase in INF-gamma
release without differences between normals and asthmatics (NS). In the presence 
of different concentrations of LPS (10 ng/ml, 1 mug/ml), there was a decrease in 
IL-4-induced IL-5 expression without differences in both groups, indicating an
intact T(H)2 response to bacterial endotoxin LPS in asthma. Interestingly, LPS
increased the IL-12-induced INF-gamma release in a concentration-dependent manner
in T-lymphocytes of normals but this could not be found in T cells of asthmatics,
indicating an impaired T(H)1 response to bacterial endotoxin LPS in asthma. In
addition, there was a TLR 4 expression on CD4(+) T-lymphocytes of normals and to 
a lesser extent in asthmatics but this TLR 4 expression could not be found on
CD8(+) T cells of both groups. In conclusion, there may be an impaired
concentration-dependent LPS-induced T(H)1 rather than a T(H)2 response in
allergic adult asthmatics compared with normal volunteers. One reason for this
could be a reduced TLR 4 expression on CD4(+) T-lymphocytes of asthmatic
subjects.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2007.07.012 
PMID: 17884733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

