
1. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2007 Oct;13(10):1192-200. Epub 2007 Aug 3.

High incidence of invasive aspergillosis associated with intestinal
graft-versus-host disease following nonmyeloablative transplantation.

Labbé AC(1), Su SH, Laverdière M, Pépin J, Patiño C, Cohen S, Kiss T, Lachance S,
Sauvageau G, Busque L, Roy DC, Roy J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Hôpital
Maisonneuve-Rosemont and Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada.

Invasive aspergillosis (IA) remains a major complication following allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT). In contrast to conventional HSCT, few 
investigators have examined risk factors of IA associated with nonmyeloablative
(NMA) regimens characterized by outpatient administration, immunosuppression
rather than cytoreduction, and short duration of neutropenia posttransplant. We
report our results on a cohort of 125 patients treated homogenously who received 
a 6/6 matched sibling NMA HSCT designed to be performed on an outpatient basis.
Conditioning regimen included fludarabine (30 mg/m(2) x 5 days) and
cyclophosphamide (300 mg/m(2) x 5 days) followed by reinfusion of a minimum of 4 
x 10(6) CD34(+) cells/kg. Acute graft-versus-host disease (aGVHD) prophylaxis
consisted of tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF). Overall, 13 patients
developed IA (5 proved, 6 probable, 2 possible) 44-791 days (median 229) after
NMA HSCT, with a risk of 7% at 1, 11% at 2, and 15% at 3 years. Patients who
suffered from IA had poorer overall survival (crude hazard ratio 2.3; 95%
confidence interval [CI] 1.0-5.4; P = .045). Intestinal aGVHD or chronic GVHD
(cGVHD) was significantly associated with IA at 1 (27% versus 3%, P = .003), 2
(27% versus 8%, P = .01), and 3 years (37% versus 10%, P = .005). The use of
daclizumab was also significantly associated with IA at 3 years (47% versus 12%, 
P = .02). Age, sex, diagnosis, previous autologous transplant, duration of
neutropenia, occurrence of cytomegalovirus viremia, duration of steroids or MMF
intake, aGVHD, cGVHD, and cumulative number of days spent in hospital were not
associated with IA. After multivariate analysis, intestinal GVHD remained the
only statistically significant risk factor for IA at 1 (P = .003), 2 (P = .01),
and 3 years (P = .005). We conclude that in NMA HSCT, the risk of IA increases
over time and is significantly associated with intestinal GVHD. Because there is 
currently no surrogate in vitro markers of immunocompetence following NMA HSCT,
this clinical finding is of particular importance to identify a population at
higher risk who should be targeted for antimold prophylaxis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbmt.2007.06.013 
PMID: 17889356  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

