
1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 30;282(48):35361-72. Epub 2007 Sep 26.

Lateral compartmentalization of T cell receptor versus CD45 by galectin-N-glycan 
binding and microfilaments coordinate basal and activation signaling.

Chen IJ(1), Chen HL, Demetriou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, California 92697, USA.

Lateral compartmentalization of membrane proteins into microdomains regulates
signal transduction; however, structural determinants are incompletely
understood. Membrane glycoproteins bind galectins in proportion to the number
(i.e. NX(S/T) sites) and degree of GlcNAc branching within attached N-glycans,
forming a molecular lattice that negatively regulates T cell function and
autoimmunity. We find that in resting T cells, partition of CD45 inside and T
cell receptor (TCR)/CD4-Lck/Zap-70 outside microdomains is positively and
negatively regulated by the galectin lattice and actin cytoskeleton,
respectively. In the absence of TCR ligands, the galectin lattice counteracts
F-actin to retain CD45 in microdomains while concurrently blocking
TCR/CD4-Lck/Zap-70 partition to microdomains by preventing a conformational
change in the TCR that recruits Nck/Wiscott Aldrich Syndrome
(WASp)/SLP76/F-actin/CD4 to TCR. The counterbalancing activities of the galectin 
lattice and actin cytoskeleton negatively and positively regulate Lck activity in
resting cells and CD45 versus TCR clustering and signaling at the early immune
synapse, respectively. Microdomain-localized CD45 inactivates Lck and inhibits
TCR signaling at the early immune synapse. Thus, the galectin lattice and actin
cytoskeleton interact on opposing sides of the plasma membrane to control
microdomain structure and function, coupling basal growth signaling with
thresholds to activation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M706923200 
PMID: 17897956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

