
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2007 Oct;153(Pt 10):3517-3526. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.2007/008581-0.

Src homology domain 2 adaptors affect adherence of Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium to non-phagocytic cells.

Boyle EC(1)(2), Brown NF(2), Brumell JH(3)(4), Finlay BB(5)(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada.
(2)Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 
1Z4, Canada.
(3)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON M5S 1A8, Canada.
(4)Cell Biology Program, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada.

The ability of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) to
penetrate the intestinal epithelium is key to its pathogenesis. Bacterial
invasion can be seen as a two-step process initially requiring adherence to the
host cell surface followed by internalization into the host cell. Evidence
suggests that adherence of S. Typhimurium to host cells is receptor-mediated;
however, the host cell receptor(s) has/have not been identified. Internalization 
of S. Typhimurium absolutely requires the actin cytoskeleton yet only a few of
the cytoskeletal components involved in this process have been identified. In
order to identify host proteins that may play a role in S. Typhimurium invasion, 
the recruitment of actin-associated proteins was investigated. The contribution
of recruited Src homology 2 adaptor proteins to invasion was further investigated
and it was found that, while not involved in bacterial internalization itself,
the adaptors Nck and ShcA influenced adherence of S. Typhimurium to
non-phagocytic cells.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.2007/008581-0 
PMID: 17906149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

