
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2007 Dec;62(3):268-79. Epub 2007 Oct 3.

Low amounts of herbivory by root-knot nematodes affect microbial community
dynamics and carbon allocation in the rhizosphere.

Poll J(1), Marhan S, Haase S, Hallmann J, Kandeler E, Ruess L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Soil Science, University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany.

Increased carbon translocation to the rhizosphere via 'leakage' induced by low
amounts of plant parasitic nematodes can foster microorganisms. The effects of
the root-knot nematode Meloidogyne incognita on microbial biomass (C(mic)) and
community structure (phospholipid fatty acids) in the rhizosphere of barley were 
studied. Inoculation densities of 2000, 4000, and 8000 nematodes were well below 
the threshold level for plant damage. A (13)CO(2) pulse-labelling was performed
to assess the distribution of assimilated (13)C in the rhizosphere. Infection
with M. incognita increased the carbon concentration in shoots, and enhanced root
biomass slightly. The presence of nematodes did not affect microbial biomass, but
significantly changed the allocation of the recent photosynthate. Less plant
carbon was sequestered by microorganisms with increasing nematode abundance.
Microbial community structure was distinctly altered in the early stages of the
plant-nematode interactions. Both, bacteria and fungi, showed a positive response
with 2000, and a negative one with 4000 and 8000 M. incognita added. The results 
suggest that low-level root herbivory still imposes a considerable carbon demand,
and that proliferation of microorganisms due to increased rhizodeposition may be 
short-termed. The carbon flow to rhizosphere microbial communities is likely
dependent on the specific nematode-plant association and the developmental stage 
of the nematode in the host.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2007.00383.x 
PMID: 17916076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

