
1. J Immunol. 2007 Oct 15;179(8):5109-16.

Expression of CD80/86 on B cells is essential for autoreactive T cell activation 
and the development of arthritis.

O'Neill SK(1), Cao Y, Hamel KM, Doodes PD, Hutas G, Finnegan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology/Microbiology, Rush University, Medical Center,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Depletion of B cells in rheumatoid arthritis is therapeutically efficacious. Yet,
the mechanism by which B cells participate in the inflammatory process is
unclear. We previously demonstrated that Ag-specific B cells have two important
functions in the development of arthritis in a murine model of rheumatoid
arthritis, proteoglycan (PG)-induced arthritis (PGIA). PG-specific B cells
function as autoantibody-producing cells and as APCs that activate PG-specific T 
cells. Moreover, the costimulatory molecule CD86 is up-regulated on PG-specific B
cells in response to stimulation with PG. To address the requirement for
CD80/CD86 expression on B cells in the development of PGIA, we generated mixed
bone marrow chimeras in which CD80/CD86 is specifically deleted on B cells and
not on other APC populations. Chimeras with a specific deficiency in CD80/CD86
expression on B cells are resistant to the induction of PGIA. The concentration
of PG-specific autoantibody is similar in mice sufficient or deficient for
CD80/86-expressing B cells, which indicates that resistance to PGIA is not due to
the suppression of PG-specific autoantibody production. CD80/86-deficient B cells
failed to effectively activate PG-specific autoreactive T cells as indicated by
the failure of T cells from PG-immunized CD80/86-deficient B cell chimeras to
transfer arthritis into SCID mice. In vitro secondary recall responses to PG are 
also dependent on CD80/86-expressing B cells. These results demonstrate that a
CD80/86:CD28 costimulatory interaction between B cells and T cells is required
for autoreactive T cell activation and the induction of arthritis but not for B
cell autoantibody production.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.179.8.5109 
PMID: 17911596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

