
1. J Clin Dent. 2007;18(3):82-6.

A new mouthrinse combining zinc and chlorhexidine in low concentrations provides 
superior efficacy against halitosis compared to existing formulations: a
double-blind clinical study.

Thrane PS(1), Young A, Jonski G, RÃ¶lla G.

Author information: 
(1)Dental Faculty, University of Oslo, Norway. p.s.thrane@odont.uio.no

OBJECTIVE: Volatile sulfur compounds (VSC), mainly derived from bacteria located 
in deep crypts at the back of the tongue and from periodontal pockets, are
responsible for approximately 90% of halitosis (bad breath, malodor). The
objective of this double blind clinical study was to assess the clinical efficacy
of a new formulation for halitosis containing a combination of zinc (0.3% Zn) and
chlorhexidine (0.025% CHX) in low concentrations. The new formulation was
compared to some widely used and commercially available formulations containing
various enzymes and antibacterial agents in a clinical setting under controlled
conditions.
METHODOLOGY: Ten healthy volunteers participated in this study (5 female, 5 male,
mean age: 46.6, range: 26-79). Each participant served as their own control, and 
neither the investigator nor the ten test subjects knew which formulation they
were testing at any given time (double-blind design). Baseline H2S data were
obtained by cysteine rinsing for 30 seconds, 90 seconds mouth closure, and gas
chromatographic (GC) analysis of mouth air. On separate days, each participant
then rinsed for 60 seconds with 10 ml of each of the eight various formulations. 
Cysteine rinses were repeated at 1 hour, 2 hours, and 3 hours, and GC
measurements of oral H2S levels were again recorded.
RESULTS: The test rinse (0.3% Zn + 0.025% CHX) reduced the intraoral H2S levels
to 0.16% of control (range: 0.01-0.54%) after 1 hour, 0.4% after 2 hours, and
0.75% after 3 hours, providing superior efficacy in reducing H2S compared to the 
other formulations tested (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: A combination of Zn and CHX in low concentrations seems to be the
most efficient way to remove the VSC that causes bad breath at present. Studies
are underway to further explore the extraordinary efficacy of this combination
(close to 100%), suggesting a specific mode of action and a synergistic effect of
these two components.


PMID: 17913002  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

