
1. Infect Immun. 2008 Jan;76(1):78-88. Epub 2007 Oct 15.

Fibrotic response as a distinguishing feature of resistance and susceptibility to
pulmonary infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis in mice.

Marquis JF(1), Nantel A, LaCourse R, Ryan L, North RJ, Gros P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for the Study of Host Resistance, Department of Biochemistry, McGill
University, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3G 1Y6.

The differential susceptibility of inbred mouse strains DBA/2J (susceptible) and 
C57BL/6J (resistant) to pulmonary tuberculosis following aerosol infection is
under complex genetic control. In this report, transcriptional profiling with
RNAs from Mycobacterium tuberculosis-infected lungs was used to investigate the
physiological response, cell type, and biochemical pathways underlying
differential susceptibility to infection. Statistical analysis of cDNA-based
microarrays revealed that 1,097 transcripts showed statistically significant
changes in abundance (changes of > or = 1.5-fold) in at least one of four
experimental group comparisons (C57BL/6J [day 0] versus DBA/2J [day 0] mice,
C57BL/6J [day 90] versus DBA/2J [day 90] mice, C57BL/6J [day 90] versus C57BL/6J 
[day 0] mice, or DBA/2J [day 90] versus DBA/2J [day 0] mice). A group of genes
showing very high degrees of significance (changes of > or = 2.0-fold) displayed 
enrichment for transcripts associated with tissue remodeling and the fibrotic
response. The differential expression of fibrotic response genes (Sparc, Col1a1, 
Col1a2, Col4a1, and Col4a2) in the infected lungs of the two mouse strains was
validated by another microarray platform (Affymetrix oligonucleotide chips) and
by reverse transcription-PCR. Furthermore, the differential expression of
additional genes known to be associated with fibrosis (Mmp2, Timp1, and Arg1) was
also validated by these approaches. Overall, these results identify the
differential fibrotic response as a pathological basis for the high
susceptibility of DBA/2J mice to pulmonary tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00369-07 
PMCID: PMC2223652
PMID: 17938213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

