
1. Acta Reumatol Port. 2007 Jul-Sep;32(3):255-62.

[Infectious spondylodiscitis: a study of forty-one cases].

[Article in Portuguese]

Capelo J(1), Carragoso A, Albuquerque C, Mocho ML, Canto-Moreira N.

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Medicina Interna, Hospital de São Teotónio, EPE, Rua de Santo
António, 3500-184 Viseu. capelo.joana@gmail.com

OBJECTIVES: To characterize a series of patients with Infectious Spondylodiscitis
(IS).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Retrospective analysis of all cases diagnosed between
October of 1999 and April of 2006 in our hospital, by files review.
RESULTS: Forty one patients, mean age of 61.2 +- 15.1 years; 26 (63.4%) were
male. Thirty two (78.0%) had predisposing conditions or associated diseases and
12 (29.3%) had epidemiological risk. The most frequent clinical manifestations
were local pain (97.6%) and general complaints (51.2%). The mean duration of the 
symptoms was 12.5 weeks. Raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate was the most
frequent inflammatory marker. CT-scan was diagnostic in 3 cases and MRI in the
remainders. IS was most frequent in the lumbar spine. The etiological agent was
isolated in 22 patients (53.7 %) and in 4 (9.8%) the diagnosis was serological.
The diagnosis of Pyogenic Spondylodiscitis (PS) was presumed in 21 (51.2%) cases,
Granulomatous Spondylodiscitis (GS) in 18 (43.9%) and GS with pyogenic over
infection in 2 (4.9%). Fourteen patients had other infectious foci. All patients 
had antibiotic treatment. Two patients needed abscess CT-scan guided drainage and
five needed surgery. Twenty six patients (63.4%) had good evolution and 8 (19.5%)
had reasonable evolution; 6 patients had bad evolution (14.6%), dying; one
patient was lost for follow-up. Inflammatory markers decreased in the control
analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: The IS is a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge, being the high
index of suspicion of this pathology in the most susceptible patients fundamental
for early detection and adequate treatment.


PMID: 17932476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

