
1. Cancer Res. 2007 Oct 15;67(20):9980-5.

Mutant anthrax toxin B moiety (protective antigen) inhibits angiogenesis and
tumor growth.

Rogers MS(1), Christensen KA, Birsner AE, Short SM, Wigelsworth DJ, Collier RJ,
D'Amato RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Program and Department of Ophthalmology, Children's Hospital,
and Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. michael.rogers@tch.harvard.edu

Bacillus anthracis protective antigen (PA), the B subunit of the binary anthrax
toxin, binds to the cellular receptors capillary morphogenesis gene 2 protein and
tumor endothelial marker 8 with high affinity. Both receptors are expressed on
endothelial cells during angiogenesis. We sought to determine whether one could
inhibit angiogenesis by interfering with the binding of these receptors to their 
endogenous ligands. Here, we show that wild-type PA inhibits both vascular
endothelial growth factor-induced and basic fibroblast growth factor-induced
angiogenesis at moderate but statistically significant levels. Structure-activity
studies identified a PA mutant that exhibited markedly enhanced inhibition of
angiogenesis and also inhibited tumor growth in vivo. This mutant, PASSSR, is
unable to undergo normal cellular processing and, thus, remains bound to the
surface receptor. Further mutation of PASSSR so that it does not bind to these
cell surface receptors abolished its ability to inhibit angiogenesis. We conclude
that high-affinity anthrax toxin receptor (ATR) ligands, such as PA and PASSSR,
are angiogenesis inhibitors and that ATRs are useful targets for antiangiogenic
therapy. These results also suggest that endothelial cell-binding proteins from
additional pathogens may inhibit angiogenesis and raise the question of the role 
of such inhibition in pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0829 
PMID: 17942931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

