
1. J Bacteriol. 2007 Dec;189(24):8880-9. Epub 2007 Oct 19.

O-linked glycosylation ensures the normal conformation of the autotransporter
adhesin involved in diffuse adherence.

Charbonneau ME(1), Girard V, Nikolakakis A, Campos M, Berthiaume F, Dumas F,
Lépine F, Mourez M.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Montréal, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, 3200 Sicotte,
St.-Hyacinthe, Québec J2S 7C6, Canada.

The Escherichia coli adhesin involved in diffuse adherence (AIDA-I) is one of the
few glycosylated proteins found in Escherichia coli. Glycosylation is mediated by
a specific heptosyltransferase encoded by the aah gene, but little is known about
the role of this modification and the mechanism involved. In this study, we
identified several peptides of AIDA-I modified by the addition of heptoses by use
of mass spectrometry and N-terminal sequencing of proteolytic fragments of
AIDA-I. One threonine and 15 serine residues were identified as bearing heptoses,
thus demonstrating for the first time that AIDA-I is O-glycosylated. We observed 
that unglycosylated AIDA-I is expressed in smaller amounts than its glycosylated 
counterpart and shows extensive signs of degradation upon heat extraction. We
also observed that unglycosylated AIDA-I is more sensitive to proteases and
induces important extracytoplasmic stress. Lastly, as was previously shown, we
noted that glycosylation is required for AIDA-I to mediate adhesion to cultured
epithelial cells, but purified mature AIDA-I fused to GST was found to bind in
vitro to cells whether or not it was glycosylated. Taken together, our results
suggest that glycosylation is required to ensure a normal conformation of AIDA-I 
and may be only indirectly necessary for its cell-binding function.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00969-07 
PMCID: PMC2168594
PMID: 17951390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

