
1. Vet Microbiol. 2008 Mar 18;127(3-4):353-9. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

Flavobacterium columnare genomovar influences mortality in channel catfish
(Ictalurus punctatus).

Shoemaker CA(1), Olivares-Fuster O, Arias CR, Klesius PH.

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, Aquatic
Animal Health Research Unit, 990 Wire Road, Auburn, AL 36832, USA.
cshoemaker@ars.usda.gov

Flavobacterium columnare, causal agent of columnaris disease, is pathogenic to
many species of freshwater fish throughout the world. The United States channel
catfish (Ictalurus punctatus) aquaculture industry is severely impacted by
columnaris disease. The majority of the F. columnare isolates recovered from
diseased channel catfish belonged to either genomovars I or II. The objective of 
the present study was to determine if differences existed in the ability of these
genomovars to induce mortality in channel catfish. Single strand conformation
polymorphism analysis (SSCP) was used to ascribe the isolates used in this study 
to the appropriate genomovar. Immersion challenge experiments (15min immersion
exposure to approximately 5x10(5) to 1x10(6) CFU/mL) were carried out to assess
virulence of genomovar I and II isolates to channel catfish. The results
demonstrated that genomovar II (n=4) isolates were significantly (P<0.05) more
virulent to channel catfish fry (92-100% mortality) than genomovar I (n=3)
isolates (0-46% mortality). In vivo adhesion of the genetically characterized F. 
columnare also correlated (r2=0.73) to increased mortality in the challenged fry.
In fingerling channel catfish, significantly higher mortality (P<0.05) resulted
with genomovar II isolates ALM-05-182 and ALG-00-530 as compared to all the
genomovar I isolates (n=3). Mortality of genomovar II isolate BGFS-27 with
similar to genomovar II isolate (ALG-00-530) and two genomovar I isolates
(ALM-05-53 and 140). The results suggest that although both genomovars are
present in the aquatic environment, genomovar II appears to be more pathogenic
for channel catfish.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2007.09.003 
PMID: 17964085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

