
1. Environ Biosafety Res. 2007 Jan-Jun;6(1-2):55-69. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

Influence of flanking homology and insert size on the transformation frequency of
Acinetobacter baylyi BD413.

Simpson DJ(1), Dawson LF, Fry JC, Rogers HJ, Day MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Main Building, Park Place, 
Cardiff, UK.

RecA-mediated recombination requires regions of homology between donor and
recipient DNA for successful integration. This paper investigates the effect of
the relationship between the length of gene-sized inserts (434, 733, 2228 and
2400 bp) and flanking sequence homology (100 - ca. 11 000 bp) on transformation
frequency in Acinetobacter baylyi strain BD413. Both insert size and size of the 
homologous region were varied, which improves on previous studies that kept
insert size constant and varied only the homologous flank size. Transfer
frequency of a non-homologous single small gene for gentamicin resistance
(aac(3)I; 773 bp) was increased 18-fold when flanking homology was changed from
about 2000 bp to 8000 bp, but was reduced 234-fold when two genes were inserted
(nptII-gfp; 2400 bp) between similar homologous regions. To investigate the
effect of smaller regions of flanking homology (100 - 2000 bp), a partial
nptII-gfp deletion (434 bp) was restored. This confirmed that a minimum of 500 bp
on each flank was required for transformation to be affected by flanking
homology. The data obtained allowed development of a multiple regression equation
to predict transformation frequency from homology, insert size and total fragment
size for gene insertions. We also show that the ratio of flanking homology to
insert size and not the total size of donor DNA is the most important variable
determining transformation frequency. The equation developed was consistent with 
results previously reported by others, and so will be useful when using A. baylyi
as a model for gene transfer by transformation in the laboratory, environment and
for biosafety.

DOI: 10.1051/ebr:2007027 
PMID: 17961480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

