
1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2008 Jan;15(1):55-9. Epub 2007 Nov 7.

Association of Chlamydia pneumoniae infection with HLA-B*35 in patients with
coronary artery disease.

Palikhe A(1), Lokki ML, Saikku P, Leinonen M, Paldanius M, SeppÃ¤nen M, Valtonen
V, Nieminen MS, Sinisalo J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Helsinki University Central
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

The immune system may interplay between Chlamydia pneumoniae infection and
coronary artery disease (CAD). Major histocompatibility complex genes regulate
innate and adaptive immunity. Patients with CAD (n = 100) and controls (n = 74)
were enrolled. Human leukocyte antigens (HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-DRB1), four
lymphotoxin alpha single-nucleotide polymorphisms, and complement C4A and C4B
allotypes were typed, and their haplotypes were inferred. The presence of serum
C. pneumoniae immunoglobulin A (IgA) (titer, > or =40) or IgG (titer, > or =128) 
antibodies or immune complex (IC)-bound IgG antibodies (titer, > or =2) was
considered to be a serological marker suggesting chronic C. pneumoniae infection.
C. pneumoniae IgA antibodies were found more frequently in patients than in
controls (P = 0.04). Among the patients, multiple logistic regression analysis
showed the HLA-B*35 allele to be the strongest-risk gene for C. pneumoniae
infection (odds ratio, 7.88; 95% confidence interval, 2.44 to 25.43; P = 0.0006).
Markers of C. pneumoniae infection were found more frequently in patients with
the HLA-A*03-B*35 haplotype than in those without the haplotype (P = 0.007 for
IgA; P = 0.008 for IgG; P = 0.002 for IC). Smokers with HLA-B*35 or HLA-A*03-B*35
had markers of C. pneumoniae infection that appeared more often than in smokers
without these genes (P = 0.003 and P = 0.001, respectively). No associations were
found in controls. In conclusion, HLA-B*35 may be the link between chronic C.
pneumoniae infection and CAD.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00163-07 
PMCID: PMC2223860
PMID: 17989341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

