
1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jan 11;283(2):1120-7. Epub 2007 Nov 6.

Crystal structure of pyridoxamine-pyruvate aminotransferase from Mesorhizobium
loti MAFF303099.

Yoshikane Y(1), Yokochi N, Yamasaki M, Mizutani K, Ohnishi K, Mikami B, Hayashi
H, Yagi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioresources Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Kochi University, 
Monobe-Otsu 200, Nankoku, Kochi 783-8502, Japan.

Pyridoxamine-pyruvate aminotransferase (PPAT; EC 2.6.1.30) is a pyridoxal
5'-phosphate-independent aminotransferase and catalyzes reversible transamination
between pyridoxamine and pyruvate to form pyridoxal and L-alanine. The crystal
structure of PPAT from Mesorhizobium loti has been solved in space group
P4(3)2(1)2 and was refined to an R factor of 15.6% (R(free) = 20.6%) at 2.0 A
resolution. In addition, the structures of PPAT in complexes with pyridoxamine,
pyridoxal, and pyridoxyl-L-alanine have been refined to R factors of 15.6, 15.4, 
and 14.5% (R(free) = 18.6, 18.1, and 18.4%) at 1.7, 1.7, and 2.0 A resolution,
respectively. PPAT is a homotetramer and each subunit is composed of a large
N-terminal domain, consisting of seven beta-sheets and eight alpha-helices, and a
smaller C-terminal domain, consisting of three beta-sheets and four
alpha-helices. The substrate pyridoxal is bound through an aldimine linkage to
Lys-197 in the active site. The alpha-carboxylate group of the substrate
amino/keto acid is hydrogen-bonded to Arg-336 and Arg-345. The structures
revealed that the bulky side chain of Glu-68 interfered with the binding of the
phosphate moiety of pyridoxal 5'-phosphate and made PPAT specific to pyridoxal.
The reaction mechanism of the enzyme is discussed based on the structures and
kinetics results.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M708061200 
PMID: 17989071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

