
1. Int Immunol. 2008 Jan;20(1):21-9. Epub 2007 Nov 6.

Involvement of phospholipase D in regulating expression of anti-microbial peptide
human beta-defensin-2.

Krisanaprakornkit S(1), Chotjumlong P, Kongtawelert P, Reutrakul V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Odontology and Oral Pathology, Faculty of Dentistry, Chiang Mai 
University, Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand.

Human beta-defensin expression correlates with differentiation in oral
epithelium, and calcium ion, an important regulator of epithelial
differentiation, plays a critical role in regulation of human beta-defensin-2
(hBD-2) mRNA expression. Phospholipase D (PLD) also regulates epithelial
differentiation. Therefore, we examined the role of PLD in hBD-2 up-regulation by
cell wall extract of Fusobacterium nucleatum and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate 
(PMA), two known hBD-2 activators. We found that hBD-2 mRNA up-regulation in
human gingival epithelial cells (HGECs) by these two activators was mediated by
PLD activation and blocked by ethanol and 1-butanol, PLD inhibitors. PLD activity
was induced by stimulation with these two activators, and phosphatidic acid (PA),
a product generated from the PLD enzymatic activity, was detected in stimulated
HGECs. Dioctanoyl PA commonly used for PA induced hBD-2 mRNA expression. mRNAs
for PLD1 alpha and beta splice variants as well as PLD1 protein were
constitutively expressed, whereas mRNA and protein for PLD2 were expressed at
much lower levels than those for PLD1. Moreover, pre-treatment with
(+/-)-propanolol, an inhibitor of phosphatidic acid phosphohydrolases that are
the downstream signaling molecules in the PLD pathway, significantly blocked
hBD-2 mRNA induction by PMA in a dose-dependent manner. In conclusion, these
findings indicate the involvement of PLD activation in hBD-2 up-regulation in
HGECs, which correlates with the state of epithelial differentiation.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxm115 
PMID: 17986621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

