
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Feb;83(2):409-18. Epub 2007 Nov 8.

Commercial peptidoglycan preparations are contaminated with superantigen-like
activity that stimulates IL-17 production.

Li H(1), Nooh MM, Kotb M, Re F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Sciences, University of Tennessee Health Science
Center, 858 Madison Avenue, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

The immunomodulatory properties of peptidoglycan (PGN), a constituent of the
bacterial cell wall, have been studied extensively but with contrasting results. 
Recent studies have demonstrated that the TLR2-mediated inflammatory responses
elicited by Gram-positive PGN preparations are in fact a result of contaminating 
lipoproteins and lipoteichoic acid that can be removed only through sophisticated
extraction procedures. Here, we report that commercial preparations of
Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus pyogenes PGN are contaminated with
bacterial superantigens (SAg). The T cell-derived cytokines IL-17A and IL-17F
were induced by PGN preparations but not by TLR agonists or nucleotide-binding
and oligomerization domain-like receptor agonists in human PBMC. IL-17 induction 
by PGN preparations was sensitive to protease digestion and required TCR
signaling. Bacterial SAg could be detected by immunoblot in the PGN preparations,
and purified recombinant SAg were powerful inducers of IL-17. Finally, the PGN
preparations stimulated proliferation and expansion of T cells bearing specific
TCR V beta elements. Our results suggest that a large body of literature that
relied on commercial PGN preparations to study inflammatory diseases, such as
arthritis, where IL-17 also plays an important role, should be interpreted with
caution and possibly revisited. Future studies aimed at characterizing the
activities of PGN should use PGN preparations of proven purity.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0807588 
PMID: 17991761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

