
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2007 Dec 15;7(13):1723-31. Epub 2007 Sep 29.

Humanized forms of the CXCR1/CXCR2 antagonist, bovine CXCL8((3-74))K11R/G31P,
effectively block ELR-CXC chemokine activity and airway endotoxemia pathology.

Zhao X(1), Li F, Town JR, Zhang X, Wang W, Gordon JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, 
Canada.

Glu-Leu-Arg (ELR)-CXC chemokines are important in acute responses to bacterial
infections, wherein neutrophils are often critical to pathogen clearance.
However, excessive neutrophil recruitment augments the pathology of many
diseases. We have shown that bovine CXCL8((3-74))K11R/G31P (bG31P) is a highly
effective ELR-CXC chemokine and neutrophil antagonist in cattle, but herein we
wished to determine whether humanized forms of this antagonist would be similarly
effective. We thus examined the independent contributions of the
bovine-human-discrepant amino acids within CXCL8 to the biological activity of
bG31P. We first examined the effect of wholesale ligation of the carboxy half of 
hCXCL8 onto the amino half of bG31P, and found that this human-bovine chaemeric
G31P (hbG31P; i.e., bCXCL8((3-44))K11R/G31P-hCXCL8((45-72))) fully retained the
ELR-CXC chemokine antagonist activity of bG31P. Thus, hbG31P blocked the
abilities of human CXCL8 to chemoattract human neutrophil or induce reactive
oxygen intermediate (ROI) release. It was also a highly effective antagonist in
vivo in a guinea pig model of airway endotoxemia. We next methodically moved
through the 5' half of the hbG31P cDNA, using site-directed mutagenesis to
one-by-one make substitutions at each remaining discrepant amino acid (i.e., T3K,
H13Y, T15K, E35A, and S37T). We generated and tested the agonist and antagonist
activities of each analogue using human neutrophils and human CXCL8. We found
that none of these possessed better antagonist activities than hbG31P. Our data
thus suggests that partially humanized analogues of bG31P display significant
potential as antagonists of human ELR-CXC chemokines.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2007.09.008 
PMID: 17996682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

