
1. Dig Dis Sci. 2008 Jul;53(7):1785-91. Epub 2007 Nov 8.

Helicobacter pylori isolated from a patient with Ménétrier's disease increases
hepatocyte growth factor mRNA expression in gastric fibroblasts: comparison with 
Helicobacter pylori isolated from other gastric diseases.

Ishikawa T(1), Ando T, Obayashi H, Nakabe N, Okita M, Isozaki Y, Nagao Y, Oyamada
H, Nakajima Y, Kato H, Kokura S, Naito Y, Yoshida N, Yoshikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Matsushita Memorial Hospital, 5-55
Sotojima-cho, Moriguchi City, Osaka 570-8540, Japan.
ishikawa.takeshi002@jp.panasonic.com

Erratum in
    Dig Dis Sci. 2012 May;57(5):1424-5.

Ménétrier's disease has been reported to be associated with Helicobacter pylori
infection. The aim of this study was to investigate the genetic characteristics
of various virulence factors and cytokine expression profiles in Helicobacter
pylori isolated from patients with Ménétrier's disease. The genotyping of
virulence factors was accomplished by polymerase chain reaction-restriction
fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). Induction of various cytokines in MKN45 
cells or gastric fibroblasts by Helicobacter pylori stimulus was measured by
real-time reverse transcription-PCR. We found that the Helicobacter pylori strain
isolated from a patient with Ménétrier's disease was different from other strains
in the MseI-RFLP pattern of the ureC gene. Helicobacter pylori isolated from a
patient with Ménétrier's disease showed the highest hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF) and TNF-alpha mRNA expressions from gastric fibroblasts, and the highest
TNF-alpha expression from MKN45 cells. The results in this study suggest that the
difference in cytokine production, depending on the difference in bacteria
components, plays an important role in the development of Ménétrier's disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-007-0070-4 
PMID: 17990109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

