
1. J Immunol. 2007 Dec 1;179(11):7295-304.

Ex vivo expansion of CD4+CD25+FoxP3+ T regulatory cells based on synergy between 
IL-2 and 4-1BB signaling.

Elpek KG(1), Yolcu ES, Franke DD, Lacelle C, Schabowsky RH, Shirwan H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular Therapeutics, and Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

Naturally occurring CD4(+)CD25(+)FoxP3(+) T regulatory (Treg) cells require three
distinct signals transduced via TCR, CD28, and IL-2R for their development and
maintenance. These requirements served as the basis for several recently
developed ex vivo expansion protocols that relied on the use of solid
support-bound Abs to CD3 and CD28 in the presence of high dose IL-2. We report in
this study that Treg cells up-regulate the expression of inducible costimulatory 
receptor 4-1BB in response to IL-2, and stimulation using this receptor via a
novel form of 4-1BB ligand (4-1BBL) fused to a modified form of core streptavidin
(SA-4-1BBL) was effective in expanding these cells up to 110-fold within 3 wk.
Expanded cells up-regulated CD25, 4-1BB, and membranous TGF-beta, suppressed T
cell proliferation, and prevented the rejection of allogeneic islets upon
adoptive transfer into graft recipients. Importantly, SA-4-1BBL rendered
CD4(+)CD25(-) T effector cells refractive to suppression by Treg cells. This dual
function of signaling via 4-1BB, vis-Ã -vis Treg cell expansion and licensing T
effector cells resistant to Treg cell suppression, as well as the up-regulation
of 4-1BB by IL-2 may serve as important regulatory mechanisms for immune
homeostasis following antigenic challenge. Stimulation using a soluble form of
SA-4-1BBL represents a novel approach to expand Treg cells with potential
therapeutic applications in autoimmunity and transplantation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.179.11.7295 
PMID: 18025172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

