
1. Wound Repair Regen. 2007 Nov-Dec;15(6):907-15.

Interaction of epidermal growth factor, Ca2+, and matrix metalloproteinase-9 in
primary keratinocyte migration.

Morris VL(1), Chan BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Western Ontario,
London, Ontario, Canada. vmorris@uwo.ca

Elevations of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and Ca(2+) concentrations in the
wound site are associated with reepithelialization during wound healing. In
addition, Ca(2+) and EGF can both induce increases in matrix metalloproteinase-9 
(MMP-9) synthesis. However, little is known about the interplay of these events
in regulating the migration properties of primary keratinocytes on collagen I,
the most abundant extracellular matrix component in the skin. We found that EGF
stimulated both chemokinetic and chemotactic migration of primary keratinocytes
on collagen I; however, MMP-9 was required for EGF-stimulated chemotaxis but not 
EGF-stimulated chemokinesis. Calcium at 0.5 mM stimulated chemokinetic migration 
of keratinocytes. Together, Ca(2+) and EGF stimulated higher levels of
chemokinesis than either stimulus alone. Furthermore, Ca(2+) could restore the
ability of keratinocytes from MMP-9 null mice to undergo EGF-stimulated
chemotaxis. The phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase inhibitor LY294002 inhibited both
EGF- and Ca(2+)-stimulated chemokinetic migration. In contrast, the MEK inhibitor
PD98059 blocked Ca(2+)- but not EGF-stimulated chemokinetic migration of
keratinocytes. A combination of PD98059 and LY294002 was required to inhibit
Ca(2+) enhancement of EGF-stimulated migration completely. Calcium-stimulated
chemokinesis was completely blocked by either the protein kinase C-alpha
inhibitor GÃ¶6976 or the src/fyn inhibitor PP2. Using primary keratinocytes, our
results showed how the combined action of Ca(2+), EGF, and MMP-9 regulated the
contributions of extracellular-regulated kinase and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase
toward chemokinetic and chemotactic migration of keratinocytes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1524-475X.2007.00315.x 
PMID: 18028140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

