
1. Microbes Infect. 2007 Nov-Dec;9(14-15):1511-20. Epub 2007 Oct 7.

Reversible NK1.1 surface expression on invariant liver natural killer T cells
during Listeria monocytogenes infection.

Emoto M(1), Yoshizawa I, Emoto Y, Takahashi Y, Hurwitz R, Miamoto M, Kaufmann SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology,
Charit√©platz 1, D-10117 Berlin, Germany. memoto@health.gunma-u.ac.jp

The invariant (i) natural killer (NK)T cells consistently express the Valpha14
chain of the T cell receptor (TCR) and recognize alpha-galactosylceramide
(alpha-GalCer) presented by the nonpolymorphic presentation molecule CD1d.
Despite their name, the iNKT cells represent a heterogeneous population, which
can be divided on the basis of NK1.1 surface expression. Here we show that NK1.1 
surface expression on liver iNKT cells in mice fluctuates during Listeria
monocytogenes infection. At early stages of listeriosis, iNKT cells expressing
NK1.1 were numerically reduced and those lacking NK1.1 were increased. At later
time points, the NK1.1(-) iNKT cell population contracted, whereas NK1.1(+) iNKT 
cells reemerged. Alterations in NK1.1 surface expression on iNKT cells were
paralleled by numerical changes of interleukin (IL)-12 producers in the liver and
were completely prevented by endogenous IL-12 neutralization, whereas NK1.1
surface alterations on iNKT cells following alpha-GalCer stimulation were not
prevented. Adoptive cell transfer experiments revealed that the liver NK1.1(-)
iNKT cells from NK1.1(+) cell-depleted L. monocytogenes-infected mice accumulated
in the liver of recipient recombination-activating gene-1-deficient mice where
they acquired NK1.1 surface expression. Thus, we present first evidence that
NK1.1 surface expression on liver iNKT cells is reversible during L.
monocytogenes infection, and that different mechanisms underlie stimulation by
TCR and IL-12.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2007.09.019 
PMID: 18024119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

