
1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 1991 Dec 1;68(3):267-72.

Anaerobic degradation of 3-hydroxybenzoate by a newly isolated nitrate-reducing
bacterium.

Heising S(1), Brune A, Schink B.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Mikrobiologie I, Eberhard-Karls-Universität, Tübingen, F.R.G.

A Gram-negative nitrate-reducing bacterium, strain Asl-3, was isolated from
activated sludge with nitrate and 3-hydroxybenzoate as sole source of carbon and 
energy. The new isolate was facultatively anaerobic, catalase- and
oxidase-positive and polarly monotrichously flagellated. In addition to nitrate, 
nitrite, N2O, and O2 served as electron acceptors. Growth with 3-hydroxybenzoate 
and nitrate was biphasic: nitrate was completely reduced to nitrite before
nitrite reduction to N2 started. Benzoate, 3-hydroxybenzoate, 4-hydroxybenzoate, 
protocatechuate or phenyl-acetate served as electron and carbon source under
aerobic and anaerobic conditions. During growth with excess carbon source,
poly-beta-hydroxybutyrate was formed. These characteristics allow the affiliation
of strain Asl-3 with the family Pseudomonadaceae. Analogous to the pathway of
4-hydroxybenzoate degradation in other bacteria, the initial step in anaerobic
3-hydroxybenzoate degradation by this organism was activation to
3-hydroxy-benzoyl-CoA in an ATP-consuming reaction. Cell extracts of
3-hydroxybenzoate-grown cells exhibited 3-hydroxybenzoyl-CoA synthetase activity 
of 190 nmol min-1 mg protein-1 as well as benzoyl-CoA synthetase activity of 86
nmol min-1 mg protein-1. A reductive dehydroxylation of 3-hydroxybenzoyl-CoA
could not be demonstrated due to rapid hydrolysis of chemically synthesized
3-hydroxybenzoyl-CoA by cell extracts.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1097(91)90367-j 
PMID: 1804759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

