
1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2007 May;17(5):812-21.

Isolation and ars detoxification of arsenite-oxidizing bacteria from abandoned
arsenic-contaminated mines.

Chang JS(1), Yoon IH, Kim KW.

Author information: 
(1)Arsenic Geoenvironment Laboratory (National Research Laboratory), Department
of Environment Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of Science and
Technology, Gwangju 500-712, Korea.

The ecosystems of certain abandoned mines contain arsenic-resistant bacteria
capable of performing detoxification when an ars gene is present in the bacterial
genome. The ars gene has already been isolated from Pseudomonas putida and
identified as a member of the membrane transport regulatory deoxyribonucleic acid
family. The arsenite-oxidizing bacterial strains isolated in the present study
were found to grow in the presence of 66.7 mM sodium arsenate (V; Na2HAsO4.7H2O),
yet experienced inhibited growth when the sodium arsenite (III; NaAsO2)
concentration was higher than 26 mM. Batch experiment results showed that
Pseudomonas putida strain OS-5 completely oxidized 1 mM of As(III) to As(V)
within 35 h. An arsB gene encoding a membrane transport regulatory protein was
observed in arsenite-oxidizing Pseudomonas putida strain OS-5, whereas arsB,
arsH, and arrA were detected in strain OS-19, arsD and arsB were isolated from
strain RW-18, and arsR, arsD, and arsB were found in E. coli strain OS-80. The
leader gene of arsR, -arsD, was observed in a weak acid position. Thus, for
bacteria exposed to weak acidity, the ars system may cause changes to the
ecosystems of As-contaminated mines. Accordingly, the present results suggest
that arsR, arsD, arsAB, arsA, arsB, arsC, arsH, arrA, arrB, aoxA, aoxB, aoxC,
aoxD, aroA, and aroB may be useful for arsenite-oxidizing bacteria in abandoned
arsenic-contaminated mines.


PMID: 18051304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

