
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2008 Jan 15;121(1):74-83. Epub 2007 Nov 17.

Shelf-life of minimally processed lettuce and cabbage treated with gaseous
chlorine dioxide and cysteine.

Gómez-López VM(1), Ragaert P, Jeyachchandran V, Debevere J, Devlieghere F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Food Microbiology and Food Preservation, Ghent University,
Coupure Links, 653 - 9000 Gent, Belgium.

Gaseous ClO2 was evaluated for effectiveness in prolonging the shelf-life of
minimally processed (MP) lettuce and MP cabbage, previously immersed in a
cysteine solution in order to inhibit browning occurring during ClO2 treatment.
Each vegetable was shredded, washed, and separated in two portions, one to be
treated with ClO2 gas and the other to remain untreated as reference sample. The 
batch to be treated with ClO2 gas was immersed for 1 min in a 0.5% solution of
HCl.L-cysteine monohydrate. Then both batches were spun dried. MP vegetables were
decontaminated in a cabinet at 90-91% relative humidity and 22-25 degrees C up to
10 min, including 30 s of ClO2 injection into the cabinet. The ClO2 concentration
rose to 1.74 mg/L (MP lettuce) and 1.29 mg/L (MP cabbage). Then samples were
stored under modified atmosphere at 7 degrees C for shelf-life studies. Changes
in O2 and CO2 headspace concentrations, microbiological quality (aerobic plate
count (APC), psychrotrophs, lactic acid bacteria, and yeasts), sensory quality,
and pH were followed during storage. The respiration rate of the minimally
processed vegetables was significantly increased by the ClO2 gas treatment only
in the case of MP cabbage (P<0.05). The gas treatment reduced initially APC and
psychrotroph count of MP lettuce and APC, psychrotroph counts, yeast counts and
pH of MP cabbage (P<0.05). ClO2 treatment did not cause initially any significant
(P<0.05) sensorial alteration, except for a weak off-odour in MP lettuce.
Interestingly, no browning was observed after treating, which can be accounted to
the use of L-cysteine. Although an initial microbiological reduction was observed
due to ClO2 gas treatment, APC and psychrotroph counts reached in the samples
treated with ClO2 higher levels than in those non-treated with ClO2 before the
third day of the shelf-life study. Untreated and treated samples of MP lettuce
were sensorial unacceptable due to bad overall visual quality after 4 days, while
treated and untreated MP cabbage remained sensorial acceptable during the 9 days 
of the study. L-cysteine reduced (P<0.05) the decontamination efficacy of ClO2
when applied to MP cabbage but not in the case of MP lettuce. Gaseous ClO2 failed
to prolong the shelf-life of MP lettuce and MP cabbage, the reason for the
enhanced growth of microorganisms in decontaminated samples should be
investigated. Nonetheless, our results prove that it is possible to inhibit
browning caused by ClO2.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2007.11.036 
PMID: 18077040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

