
1. J Biochem. 2008 Mar;143(3):417-24. Epub 2007 Dec 15.

Staphylococcus aureus MurC participates in L-alanine recognition via histidine
343, a conserved motif in the shallow hydrophobic pocket.

Kurokawa K(1), Nishida S, Ishibashi M, Mizumura H, Ueno K, Yutsudo T, Maki H,
Murakami K, Sekimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. kurokawa@mol.f.u-tokyo.ac.jp

UDP-N-acetylmuramic acid:L-alanine ligase that is encoded by the murC gene, is
indispensable for bacterial peptidoglycan biosynthesis and an important target
for the development of antibacterial agents. Structure of MurC ligase with
substrates has been described, however, little validation via studying the
effects of mutations on the structure of MurC has been performed. In this study, 
we carried out a functional in vitro and in vivo characterization of
Staphylococcus aureus MurCH343Y protein that has a temperature-sensitive mutation
of a conserved residue in the predicted shallow hydrophobic pocket that holds a
short L-alanine side chain. Purified H343Y and wild-type MurC had K(m) values for
L-alanine of 3.2 and 0.44 mM, respectively, whereas there was no significant
difference in their K(m) values for ATP and UDP-N-acetylmuramic acid, suggesting 
the specific alteration of L-alanine recognition in MurCH343Y protein. In a
synthetic medium that excluded L-alanine, S. aureus murCH343Y mutant cells showed
an allele-specific slow growth phenotype that was suppressed by addition of
L-alanine. These results suggest that His343 of S. aureus MurC is essential for
high-affinity binding to L-alanine both in vitro and in vivo and provide
experimental evidence supporting the structural information of MurC ligase.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvm237 
PMID: 18084043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

