
1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008 Feb;121(2):361-7. Epub 2007 Dec 20.

Long-term immune reconstitution after anti-CD52-treated or anti-CD34-treated
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for severe T-lymphocyte immunodeficiency.

Slatter MA(1), Brigham K, Dickinson AM, Harvey HL, Barge D, Jackson A, Bown N,
Flood TJ, Cant AJ, Abinun M, Gennery AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Immunology, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals Foundation 
Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Results of treatment of severe T-lymphocyte immunodeficiencies by
means of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) transplantation have improved. T
cell-depleted haploidentical transplantations are successful if there is no
HLA-identical donor. Methods to remove T lymphocytes include addition of
anti-CD52 antibodies and CD34(+) HSC selection.
OBJECTIVE: Assessment of long-term immune function is important after these
treatments. We looked at immune reconstitution in 36 survivors for more than 2
years after HSC transplantation for severe T-lymphocyte immunodeficiencies and
compared engraftment quality between the 2 T-lymphocyte depletion methods.
METHODS: Chimerism, T- and B-lymphocyte subsets, immunoglobulin levels, and
specific antibody production at last follow-up were examined. The chi(2) (Fisher 
exact test) and Wilcoxon rank sum analyses were used to compare the groups.
RESULTS: Nineteen patients received anti-CD52-treated and 19 anti-CD34-treated
HSCs. More anti-CD52-treated patients had full donor myeloid chimerism (P =
.025). All patients had full donor T-lymphocyte chimerism. There was no
difference in donor B-lymphocyte chimerism, but significantly more
anti-CD52-treated patients had class-switched memory B lymphocytes (P = .024),
normal IgG levels, and normal responses to tetanus and Haemophilus influenzae
type B vaccination. More anti-CD52-treated patients with common gamma chain or
Janus-associated kinase 3 severe combined immunodeficiency had donor B
lymphocytes.
CONCLUSION: Long-term T-lymphocyte function is good with either treatment method,
with a low incidence of graft-versus-host disease. The results imply more
incomplete donor chimerism in anti-CD34-treated patients with less B-lymphocyte
function.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2007.10.035 
PMID: 18086494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

