
1. Plant Cell. 2008 Jan;20(1):213-27. doi: 10.1105/tpc.107.051862. Epub 2008 Jan 4.

Arabidopsis UEV1D promotes Lysine-63-linked polyubiquitination and is involved in
DNA damage response.

Wen R(1), Torres-Acosta JA, Pastushok L, Lai X, Pelzer L, Wang H, Xiao W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada S7N 5E5.

DNA damage tolerance (DDT) in budding yeast requires Lys-63-linked
polyubiquitination of the proliferating cell nuclear antigen. The
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Ubc13 and the Ubc enzyme variant (Uev) methyl
methanesulfonate2 (Mms2) are required for this process. Mms2 homologs have been
found in all eukaryotic genomes examined; however, their roles in multicellular
eukaryotes have not been elucidated. We report the isolation and characterization
of four UEV1 genes from Arabidopsis thaliana. All four Uev1 proteins can form a
stable complex with At Ubc13 or with Ubc13 from yeast or human and can promote
Ubc13-mediated Lys-63 polyubiquitination. All four Uev1 proteins can replace
yeast MMS2 DDT functions in vivo. Although these genes are ubiquitously expressed
in most tissues, UEV1D appears to express at a much higher level in germinating
seeds and in pollen. We obtained and characterized two uev1d null mutant T-DNA
insertion lines. Compared with wild-type plants, seeds from uev1d null plants
germinated poorly when treated with a DNA-damaging agent. Those that germinated
grew slower, and the majority ceased growth within 2 weeks. Pollen from uev1d
plants also displayed a moderate but significant decrease in germination in the
presence of DNA damage. This report links Ubc13-Uev with functions in DNA damage 
response in Arabidopsis.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.107.051862 
PMCID: PMC2254933
PMID: 18178771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

