
1. Int Immunol. 2008 Mar;20(3):307-15. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxm143. Epub 2008 Jan 9.

CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells in the small intestinal lamina propria show an
effector/memory phenotype.

Guo Z(1), Jang MH, Otani K, Bai Z, Umemoto E, Matsumoto M, Nishiyama M, Yamasaki 
M, Ueha S, Matsushima K, Hirata T, Miyasaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunodynamics, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells (Tregs) have been implicated in the suppression 
of pathogenic responses to both self- and non-self-antigens in the intestine.
However, their precise properties and functions in the gut, as well as the
molecular basis of their recruitment to the gut, are poorly understood. Here, we 
found that most of the CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells in the small intestinal lamina
propria (LP) express Foxp3 and exhibit an 'effector/memory' phenotype,
CD44(hi)CD45RB(lo)CD62L(-), whereas only a minority of the Foxp3(+)CD4(+)CD25(+) 
T cells in the spleen and mesenteric lymph nodes showed this phenotype. The Tregs
in the small intestinal LP (LP-Tregs) expressed higher levels of CCR4 and CCR9
and a substantially lower level of CCR7 than the Tregs in the spleen. In vitro,
the LP-Tregs showed chemotaxis to CCL25/thymus-expressed chemokine. In addition, 
they showed efficient chemotaxis to the CCR4 ligands, CCL17/thymus and
activation-regulated chemokine and CCL22/macrophage-derived chemokine, which are 
abundantly expressed by dendritic cells (DCs) in the small intestinal LP. In
vivo, approximately 50% of the LP-Tregs were closely associated or in direct
contact with LP-DCs. These findings demonstrate that LP-Tregs are phenotypically 
and functionally unique and raise the possibility that they are retained in the
small intestinal LP through the action of CCL17 and CCL22, which are locally
produced by LP-DCs.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxm143 
PMID: 18184698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

