
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2008 Mar;151(3):528-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2007.03587.x. 
Epub 2008 Jan 8.

Probiotic lactobacilli and VSL#3 induce enterocyte beta-defensin 2.

Schlee M(1), Harder J, Köten B, Stange EF, Wehkamp J, Fellermann K.

Author information: 
(1)Dr Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and University
of Tübingen, Stuttgart, Germany. miriam.schlee@ikp-stuttgart.de

Recent evidence suggests that probiotic bacteria may stabilize gut barrier
function via induction of anti-microbial peptides such as defensins. This study
aimed to elucidate the induction mechanism of the human beta defensin-2 (hBD-2)
gene by different probiotic lactobacillus strains. The expression of hBD-2 mRNA
peaked at 6 h of incubation upon treatment of Caco-2 cells and increased with
higher dosage of various probiotic bacteria. Deletion of nuclear factor
(NF)-kappaB and activator protein-1 (AP-1) binding sites on the hBD-2 promoter
resulted in a complete abrogation of promoter activation by probiotics. As
revealed by the use of specific mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
inhibitors the hBD-2 induction was dependent on the MAPK extracellular regulated 
kinase (ERK 1/2), p38 and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), although to varying
degrees. Several Lactobacillus strains and VSL#3, a probiotic cocktail of four
lactobacilli, three bifidum and one streptococcus species, induced the secretion 
of the hBD-2 peptide into the culture media as shown by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Thus, the present study suggests that lactobacilli
and the VSL#3 bacterial mixture strengthen intestinal barrier functions through
the up-regulation of hBD-2 via induction of proinflammatory pathways including
NF-kappaB and AP-1 as well as MAPKs.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2007.03587.x 
PMCID: PMC2276967
PMID: 18190603  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

