
1. Microb Pathog. 2008 May;44(5):426-34. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2007.11.006. Epub
2007 Nov 28.

Staphylococcus aureus lipoproteins trigger human corneal epithelial innate
response through toll-like receptor-2.

Li Q(1), Kumar A, Gui JF, Yu FS.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Eye Institute/Department of Ophthalmology, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Bacterial lipoproteins (LP) are a family of cell wall components found in a wide 
variety of bacteria. In this study, we characterized the response of HUCL, a
telomerase-immortalized human corneal epithelial cell (HCEC) line, to LP isolated
from Staphylococcus (S) aureus. S. aureus LP (saLP) prepared by Triton X-114
extraction stimulated the activation of NF-kappaB, JNK, and P38 signaling
pathways in HUCL cells. The extracts failed to stimulate NF-kappaB activation in 
HUCL cells after lipoprotein lipase treatment and in cell lines expressing TLR4
or TLR9, but not TLR2, indicating lipoprotein nature of the extracts. saLP
induced the up-regulation of a variety of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines
(IL-6, IL-8, ICAM-1), antimicrobial molecules (hBD-2, LL-37, and iNOS), and
homeostasis genes (Mn-SOD) at both the mRNA level and protein level. Similar
inflammatory response to saLP was also observed in primarily cultured HCECs using
the production of IL-6 as readout. Moreover, TLR2 neutralizing antibody blocked
the saLP-induced secretion of IL-6, IL-8 and hBD2 in HUCL cells. Our findings
suggest that saLP activates TLR2 and triggers innate immune response in the
cornea to S. aureus infection via production of proinflammatory cytokines and
defense molecules.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2007.11.006 
PMCID: PMC2408737
PMID: 18191935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

