
1. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2008 May;80(2):218-23. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2007.12.001. Epub 2008 Jan 10.

Necrotizing fasciitis: A life-threatening clinical disorder in uncontrolled type 
2 diabetic patients.

Oncul O(1), Erenoglu C, Top C, Küçükardali Y, Karabudak O, Kurt Y, Akin ML,
Cavuslu S, Celenk T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Gülhane Military 
Medical Academy, Haydarpaşa Training Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.

We presented 23 patients with necrotizing fasciitis (NF), 15 of whom had
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus (DM), for risk factors, clinical signs, laboratory
findings and prognosis during the period 1998 and 2006 in Istanbul. A hospital
incidence of NF was 14.2/100,000 admissions. Other risk factors were obesity in 9
and recent surgical trauma in 10 patients. The mean age of the patients with DM
was higher than that of the patients with non-DM (58.6+/-12.8 vs 43.0+/-17.2
years, p=0.028). The most frequently isolated microorganisms from tissue cultures
were Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Group A streptococci. Of the 23 
patients, 9 (39%), of whom 8 had DM, died between 2 and 29 days after admission. 
The mortality rate and length of hospitalization were longer in diabetic patients
than in others (p=0.02 and p=0.286, respectively). The mean blood glucose levels 
and HbA1C were higher in non-survival group than in survival group (195.6+/-41.5 
vs 133.7+/-22.1 and 10.6 vs 7.4) (p=0.04, r=0.39 and p=0.03, r=0.50,
respectively). In the univariate analysis, the hospitalization time (r=0.72),
white blood cell count (r=0.52) and surgical debridement count (r=0.47) were
found to be prognostic risk factors. Our results showed that NF is a very serious
life-threatening disorder in especially diabetic patients with bad metabolic
control.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diabres.2007.12.001 
PMID: 18190995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

