
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2008 Feb;151(2):326-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2007.03566.x.

Basal lymphoid aggregates in ulcerative colitis colon: a site for regulatory T
cell action.

Sitohy B(1), Hammarström S, Danielsson A, Hammarström ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Immunology, Umeå Unviersity, Umeå,
Sweden.

Regulatory T cells seem to play a central role in maintaining immune tolerance in
the gut mucosa. Previously we have shown that interleukin (IL)-10 is produced at 
high levels in the inflamed colonic tissue of ulcerative colitis (UC) patients.
The cellular source was CD4+ T cells, suggesting local activation of regulatory T
cells. The present study was performed to determine whether the frequency of
regulatory T cells is increased in UC colon and whether they are present in the
basal lymphoid aggregates, the prominent microanatomical structure in UC colon.
Colonic tissue specimens from UC and control patients were analysed for
frequencies of lamina propria lymphocytes expressing the regulatory T cell
markers forkhead box protein 3 (FoxP3), CD25 and glucocorticoid-induced tumour
necrosis factor receptor family-related gene (GITR) as well as CD28, CD4 and CD3 
by using marker specific reagents in immunomorphometry. Two-colour
immunohistochemistry was used for detection of CD25/IL-10, FoxP3/IL-10 and
CD25/FoxP3 double-positive cells. GITR+ and FoxP3+ cells were present in normal
colon mucosa, although at a relatively low frequency, and were located
preferentially within the solitary follicles. UC was associated with
significantly increased frequencies of CD25+, GITR+ and FoxP3+ lamina propria
lymphocytes both within the basal lymphoid aggregates and in the lamina propria
outside. Many of the CD25+ cells co-expressed FoxP3 as well as IL-10, suggesting 
that these are indeed IL-10 secreting regulatory T cells, activated in an attempt
to counteract the inflammation. Increased frequency of regulatory T cell subtypes
seems insufficient to control the disease activity in UC.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2007.03566.x 
PMCID: PMC2276944
PMID: 18190460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

