
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jan 22;105(3):871-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0709819105.
Epub 2008 Jan 16.

Direct transfer of starter substrates from type I fatty acid synthase to type III
polyketide synthases in phenolic lipid synthesis.

Miyanaga A(1), Funa N, Awakawa T, Horinouchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculture and Life Sciences,
University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

Alkylresorcinols and alkylpyrones, which have a polar aromatic ring and a
hydrophobic alkyl chain, are phenolic lipids found in plants, fungi, and
bacteria. In the Gram-negative bacterium Azotobacter vinelandii, phenolic lipids 
in the membrane of dormant cysts are essential for encystment. The aromatic
moieties of the phenolic lipids in A. vinelandii are synthesized by two type III 
polyketide synthases (PKSs), ArsB and ArsC, which are encoded by the ars operon. 
However, details of the synthesis of hydrophobic acyl chains, which might serve
as starter substrates for the type III polyketide synthases (PKSs), were unknown.
Here, we show that two type I fatty acid synthases (FASs), ArsA and ArsD, which
are members of the ars operon, are responsible for the biosynthesis of
C(22)-C(26) fatty acids from malonyl-CoA. In vivo and in vitro reconstitution of 
phenolic lipid synthesis systems with the Ars enzymes suggested that the
C(22)-C(26) fatty acids produced by ArsA and ArsD remained attached to the ACP
domain of ArsA and were transferred hand-to-hand to the active-site cysteine
residues of ArsB and ArsC. The type III PKSs then used the fatty acids as starter
substrates and carried out two or three extensions with malonyl-CoA to yield the 
phenolic lipids. The phenolic lipids in A. vinelandii were thus found to be
synthesized solely from malonyl-CoA by the four members of the ars operon. This
is the first demonstration that a type I FAS interacts directly with a type III
PKS through substrate transfer.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0709819105 
PMCID: PMC2242712
PMID: 18199837  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

