
1. Infect Immun. 2008 Apr;76(4):1719-27. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00870-07. Epub 2008 Jan
22.

Direct binding of human NK cell natural cytotoxicity receptor NKp44 to the
surfaces of mycobacteria and other bacteria.

Esin S(1), Batoni G, Counoupas C, Stringaro A, Brancatisano FL, Colone M,
Maisetta G, Florio W, Arancia G, Campa M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Patologia Sperimentale, Biotecnologie Mediche, Infettivologia 
ed Epidemiologia, University of Pisa, Via San Zeno 35-39, 56127 Pisa, Italy.
esin@biomed.unipi.it

Our previous studies demonstrated that Mycobacterium bovis bacillus
Calmette-Gu√©rin (BCG) can directly interact with human NK cells and induce the
proliferation, gamma interferon production, and cytotoxic activity of such cells 
without the need for accessory cells. Thus, the aim of the present study was to
identify the putative receptor(s) responsible for the recognition of BCG by human
NK cells and potentially involved in the activation of NK cells. To this end, we 
first investigated the surface expression of three NK cell-activating receptors
belonging to the natural cytoxicity receptor (NCR) family on highly purified
human NK cells upon in vitro direct stimulation with BCG. An induction of the
surface expression of NKp44, but not of NKp30 or NKp46, was observed after 3 and 
4 days of in vitro stimulation with live BCG. The NKp44 induction involved mainly
a particular NK cell subset expressing the CD56 marker at high density,
CD56(bright). In order to establish whether NKp44 could directly bind to BCG,
whole BCG cells were stained with soluble forms of the three NCRs chimeric for
the human immunoglobulin G (IgG) Fc fragment (NKp30-Fc, NKp44-Fc, NKp46-Fc),
followed by incubation with a phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated goat anti-human IgG
antibody. Analysis by flow cytometry of the complexes revealed a higher PE
fluorescence intensity for BCG incubated with NKp44-Fc than for BCG incubated
with NKp30-Fc, NKp46-Fc, or negative controls. The binding of NKp44-Fc to the BCG
surface was confirmed with immunogold labeling using transmission electron
microscopy, suggesting the presence of a putative ligand(s) for human NKp44 on
the BCG cell wall. Similar binding assays performed on a number of gram-positive 
and gram-negative bacteria revealed a pattern of NKp44-Fc binding restricted to
members of the genus Mycobacterium, to the mycobacterium-related species Nocardia
farcinica, and to Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Altogether, the results obtained
indicate, for the first time, that at least one member of the NCR family (NKp44) 
may be involved in the direct recognition of bacterial pathogens by human NK
cells.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00870-07 
PMCID: PMC2292874
PMID: 18212080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

