
1. Infect Immun. 2008 Apr;76(4):1565-71. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01381-07. Epub 2008 Jan
22.

Identification of an HLA-A*0201-restricted T-cell epitope on the MPT51 protein, a
major secreted protein derived from Mycobacterium tuberculosis, by MPT51
overlapping peptide screening.

Aoshi T(1), Nagata T, Suzuki M, Uchijima M, Hashimoto D, Rafiei A, Suda T, Chida 
K, Koide Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
1-20-1 Handa-yama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan.

CD8+ T cells play a pivotal role in protection against Mycobacterium tuberculosis
infection. We identified a novel HLA-A*0201-restricted CD8+ T-cell epitope on a
dominant secreted antigen of M. tuberculosis, MPT51, in HLA-A*0201 transgenic HHD
mice. HHD mice were immunized with plasmid DNA encoding MPT51 with gene gun
bombardment, and gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) production by the immune
splenocytes was analyzed. In response to overlapping synthetic peptides covering 
the mature MPT51 sequence, the splenocytes were stimulated to produce IFN-gamma
by only one peptide, p51-70. Three-color flow cytometric analysis of
intracellular IFN-gamma and cell surface CD4 and CD8 staining revealed that the
MPT51 p51-70 peptide contains an immunodominant CD8+ T-cell epitope. Further
analysis using computer algorithms permitted identification of a bona fide T-cell
epitope, p53-62. A major histocompatibility complex class I stabilization assay
using T2 cells confirmed that this epitope binds to HLA-A*0201. The T cells were 
capable of lysing MPT51 p53-62 peptide-pulsed T2 cells. In addition, MPT51
p53-62-specific memory CD8+ T cells were found in tuberculin skin test-positive
HLA-A*0201+ healthy individuals. Use of this HLA-A*0201-restricted CD8+ T-cell
epitope for analysis of the role of MPT51-specific T cells in M. tuberculosis
infection and for design of vaccines against tuberculosis is feasible.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01381-07 
PMCID: PMC2292891
PMID: 18212086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

