
1. Infect Immun. 2008 Apr;76(4):1434-44. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01242-07. Epub 2008 Jan
22.

Regulatory roles of CD1d-restricted NKT cells in the induction of toxic
shock-like syndrome in an animal model of fatal ehrlichiosis.

Stevenson HL(1), Crossley EC, Thirumalapura N, Walker DH, Ismail N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious
Diseases, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, 301 University
Boulevard, Galveston, TX 77555-0609, USA.

CD1d-restricted NKT cells are key players in host defense against various
microbial infections. Using a murine model of fatal ehrlichiosis, we investigated
the role of CD1d-restricted NKT cells in induction of toxic shock-like syndrome
caused by gram-negative, lipopolysaccharide-lacking, monocytotropic Ehrlichia.
Our previous studies showed that intraperitoneal infection of wild-type (WT) mice
with virulent Ehrlichia (Ixodes ovatus Ehrlichia [IOE]) results in CD8+
T-cell-mediated fatal toxic shock-like syndrome marked by apoptosis of CD4+ T
cells, a weak CD4+ Th1 response, overproduction of tumor necrosis factor alpha
and interleukin-10, and severe liver injury. Although CD1d-/- mice succumbed to
high-dose IOE infection similar to WT mice, they did not develop signs of toxic
shock, as shown by elevated bacterial burdens, low serum levels of tumor necrosis
factor, normal serum levels of liver enzymes, and the presence of few apoptotic
hepatic cells. An absence of NKT cells restored the percentages and absolute
numbers of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and CD11b+ cells in the spleen compared to WT
mice and was also associated with decreased expression of Fas on splenic CD4+
lymphocytes and granzyme B in hepatic CD8+ lymphocytes. Furthermore, our data
show that NKT cells promote apoptosis of macrophages and up-regulation of the
costimulatory molecule CD40 on antigen-presenting cells, including dendritic
cells, B cells, and macrophages, which may contribute to the induction of
pathogenic T-cell responses. In conclusion, our data suggest that NKT cells
mediate Ehrlichia-induced T-cell-mediated toxic shock-like syndrome, most likely 
via cognate and noncognate interactions with antigen-presenting cells.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01242-07 
PMCID: PMC2292873
PMID: 18212072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

