
1. FEBS J. 2008 Feb;275(4):799-810. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06253.x. Epub 2008
Jan 22.

Purification and functional characterization of human 11beta hydroxylase
expressed in Escherichia coli.

Zöllner A(1), Kagawa N, Waterman MR, Nonaka Y, Takio K, Shiro Y, Hannemann F,
Bernhardt R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany.

The human 11beta-hydroxylase (hCYP11B1) is responsible for the conversion of
11-deoxycortisol into the major mammalian glucocorticoid, cortisol. The reduction
equivalents needed for this reaction are provided via a short electron transfer
chain consisting of a [2Fe-2S] ferredoxin and a FAD-containing reductase. On the 
biochemical and biophysical level, little is known about hCYP11B1 because it is
very unstable for analyses performed in vitro. This instability is also the
reason why it has not been possible to stably express it so far in Escherichia
coli and subsequently purify it. In the present study, we report on the
successful and reproducible purification of recombinant hCYP11B1 coexpressed with
molecular chaperones GroES/GroEL in E. coli. The protein was highly purified to
apparent homogeneity, as observed by SDS/PAGE. Upon mass spectrometry, the
mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of the protein was estimated to be 55 761, which is
consistent with the value 55 760.76 calculated for the form lacking the
translational initiator Met. The functionality of hCYP11B1 was analyzed using
different methods (substrate conversion assays, stopped-flow, Biacore). The
results clearly demonstrate that the enzyme is capable of hydroxylating its
substrates at position 11-beta. Moreover, the determined NADPH coupling
percentage for the hCYP11B1 catalyzed reactions using either 11-deoxycortisol or 
11-deoxycorticosterone as substrates was approximately 75% in both cases. Biacore
and stopped-flow measurements indicate that hCYP11B1 possesses more than one
binding site for its redox partner adrenodoxin, possibly resulting in the
formation of more than one productive complexes. In addition, we performed CD
measurements to obtain information about the structure of hCYP11B1.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06253.x 
PMID: 18215163  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

