
1. Immunol Invest. 2008;37(1):63-78. doi: 10.1080/08820130701555035.

Impaired interleukin-2 synthesis and T cell proliferation following
antibody-mediated CD3 and CD2 or CD28 cross-linking in trans: evidence that T
cell activation requires the engagement of costimulatory molecules within the
immunological synapse.

Watson CL(1), Furlong SJ, Hoskin DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

Although the T cell costimulatory molecules CD2 and CD28 are enriched within the 
immunological synapse (IS), it has been suggested that costimulatory molecules
need not be localized to the contact site between a T cell and an
antigen-presenting cell (APC) in order to costimulate T cell activation. To
determine whether CD2 or CD28 engagement outside of the IS is sufficient to
costimulate T cell activation, we compared mouse T cell responses to anti-CD3 and
anti-CD2 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) or anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 mAbs immobilized 
on the same, i.e., in cis, or on different, i.e., in trans, 10 micron polystyrene
microspheres. In comparison to T cells that were stimulated with co-immobilized
anti-CD3 and anti-CD2 or anti-CD28 mAbs, DNA synthesis, interleukin (IL)-2
production, and cellular proliferation were all severely impaired following T
cell stimulation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD2 mAbs or anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 mAbs
on different microspheres. Deficient cellular proliferation and IL-2 synthesis by
T cells that experienced CD3 and CD2 or CD28 cross-linking in trans provides
evidence that costimulatory molecules must function in the context of the IS for 
optimal T cell activation.

DOI: 10.1080/08820130701555035 
PMID: 18214800  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

