
1. Cytokine. 2008 Mar;41(3):307-14. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2007.12.009. Epub 2008 Jan
28.

Expression of CXC and CC type of chemokines and its receptors in tuberculous and 
non-tuberculous effusions.

Pokkali S(1), Das SD, R L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tuberculosis Research Centre, Mayor V.R. Ramanathan 
Road, Chetpet, Chennai 600 031, India.

Chemokines mediate their biological functions by transmigration of various immune
cells to the site of infection. Tuberculous pleurisy provides an effective model 
to study the role of chemokines in the recruitment of immune cells to the pleura.
Our aim was to understand the cumulative effect of chemokines (IP-10, MIG, IL-8, 
MCP-1, MIP-1alpha and RANTES) and its receptors (CXCR2, CXCR3, CCR1, CCR2, CCR5
and CCR7) in the recruitment of CD4(+) T cells obtained from blood (BL) and
pleural fluid (PF) of tuberculous (TB) and non-tuberculous (NTB) patients. We
observed significant increase in CD4(+) T cells in TB PF indicating lymphocytic
rich effusion. All chemokines except RANTES were significantly high in PF
compared to BL in TB group, whereas IL-8 and MCP-1 showed significant increase
only in NTB PF. The significantly high levels of IFN-gamma and TauNuF-alpha in TB
PF and their positive correlation with IP-10 and MIP-1alpha indicated their
synergistic action to elicit a strong protective Th1 response. In spite of high
levels of Th1 cytokines and chemokines in TB PF, significantly lower levels of
RANTES indicated its limited role at the site. The CXC receptors in PF of both
the groups and CC receptors except CCR5 in TB PF were significantly high compared
to BL. Only CXCR2, CCR5 and CCR7 showed significant increase in TB compared to
NTB. Thus a selective concentration of chemokines, cytokines and abundant
expression of chemokine receptors confirm the accumulation of activated and
memory T cells at the site of infection and help in polarizing Th1 immune
response.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2007.12.009 
PMID: 18226915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

