
1. Bull Math Biol. 2008 May;70(4):1140-62. doi: 10.1007/s11538-008-9294-5. Epub 2008
Feb 1.

Does dormancy increase fitness of bacterial populations in time-varying
environments?

Malik T(1), Smith HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Mount Allison University, 67
York Street, Sackville, NB, Canada, E4L 1E6.

A simple family of models of a bacterial population in a time varying environment
in which cells can transit between dormant and active states is constructed. It
consists of a linear system of ordinary differential equations for active and
dormant cells with time-dependent coefficients reflecting an environment which
may be periodic or random, with alternate periods of low and high resource
levels. The focus is on computing/estimating the dominant Lyapunov exponent, the 
fitness, and determining its dependence on various parameters and the two
strategies-responsive and stochastic-by which organisms switch between dormant
and active states. A responsive switcher responds to good and bad times by making
timely and appropriate transitions while a stochastic switcher switches
continuously without regard to the environmental state. The fitness of a
responsive switcher is examined and compared with fitness of a stochastic
switcher, and with the fitness of a dormancy-incapable organism. Analytical
methods show that both switching strategists have higher fitness than a
dormancy-incapable organism when good times are rare and that responsive switcher
has higher fitness than stochastic switcher when good times are either rare or
common. Numerical calculations show that stochastic switcher can be most fit when
good times are neither too rare or too common.

DOI: 10.1007/s11538-008-9294-5 
PMID: 18239978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

