
1. Biochemistry. 2008 Mar 4;47(9):2923-34. doi: 10.1021/bi701400c. Epub 2008 Feb 1.

Evaluation of types of interactions in subunit association in Bacillus subtilis
adenylosuccinate lyase.

De Zoysa Ariyananda L(1), Colman RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark,
Delaware 19716, USA.

Adenylosuccinate lyase (ASL) of Bacillus subtilis is a homotetramer in which
three subunits contribute to each of four active sites. We sought to evaluate the
types of interactions responsible for subunit association by studying the
enzyme's oligomeric structure at low temperatures as compared to 25 degrees C, in
the presence of KBr and after mutagenesis. Analytical ultracentrifugation data
reveal that at 25 degrees C ASL is active and exists as 100% tetramer, while at 8
and 4 degrees C, as hydrophobic interactions are weakened, the catalytic activity
decreases strikingly and the enzyme dissociates to a mixture of
monomer-dimer-trimer, with small amounts of tetramer. In the presence of
increasing concentrations of KBr (0.1-2.5 M), which disrupts electrostatic
interactions, ASL is dissociated initially to monomer-dimer, with small amounts
of trimer-tetramer, and then the monomer species predominates along with small
amounts of trimer-tetramer. Very low enzymatic activity was found under these
conditions. Accordingly, we postulate that electrostatic interactions are a major
source of oligomeric stabilization of B. subtilis ASL. We selected for
mutagenesis the closest charged residues (His (299)/Glu (239) and Arg (167)/Asp
(217) pairs) located in the subunit interface that has the largest surface area. 
All of the mutants have low V max values, high K M values, and decreased
molecular masses. We conclude that both hydrophobic and electrostatic
interactions play roles in maintaining the ASL tetramer and this structure is
essential for adenylosuccinate lyase activity.

DOI: 10.1021/bi701400c 
PMID: 18237141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

