
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2008 Apr;152(1):95-101. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2008.03596.x. 
Epub 2008 Jan 28.

Human leucocyte antigen class II association in idiopathic bronchiectasis, a
disease of chronic lung infection, implicates a role for adaptive immunity.

Boyton RJ(1), Smith J, Jones M, Reynolds C, Ozerovitch L, Chaudhry A, Wilson R,
Rose M, Altmann DM.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Immunology Group, NHLI, Sir Alexander Fleming Building, South Kensington 
Campus, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College, London, UK.
r.boyton@imperial.ac.uk

The aetiology of idiopathic bronchiectasis, a lung disease where chronic
inflammation and bacterial infection leads to progressive lung damage, is
unknown. A possible role for natural killer cells has been highlighted
previously. However, a role for adaptive immunity is suggested by the presence of
CD4 and CD8 T cells in diseased lung tissue. Evidence of a human leucocyte
antigen (HLA) class II disease association would further implicate a role for
adaptive immunity. To establish if there is any HLA association, we analysed
HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-DQA1, HLA-DQB1 and HLA-DRB1 alleles in patients with idiopathic
bronchiectasis and controls. Genomic DNA from 92 adults with idiopathic
bronchiectasis and 101 healthy controls was analysed by polymerase chain reaction
with sequence-specific primers. We found an increase in the prevalence of
HLA-DRB1*01 DQA1*01/DQB1*05 genes in idiopathic bronchiectasis; that is, the
HLA-DR1, DQ5 haplotype (odds ratio 2.19, 95% confidence interval 1.15-4.16, P =
0.0152) compared with control subjects. The association with HLA-DR1, DQ5
implicates a role for CD4 T cells restricted by these molecules in susceptibility
to the progressive lung damage seen in this disease. This may operate either
through influencing susceptibility to specific pathogens or to self-reactivity
and requires further investigation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2008.03596.x 
PMCID: PMC2384066
PMID: 18241227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

