
1. J Immunol. 2008 Feb 15;180(4):2514-21.

Regulatory T cells prevent control of experimental African trypanosomiasis.

Wei G(1), Tabel H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan, Canada.

African trypanosomes are single-cell, extra-cellular blood parasites causing
profound immunosuppression. Susceptible BALB/c mice infected s.c. into a footpad 
with 10(4) Trypanosoma congolense die with fulminating parasitemia within 10
days. We injected BALB/c mice 2 days before such an infection with different
doses of a depleting mAb specific for CD25, a surface marker of regulatory T
cells (Tregs). Pretreatment with a low, optimal dose of anti-CD25 resulted in a
dramatic effect, in that the infected mice did not develop parasitemia, as well
as eliminated all parasites and showed no signs of disease. Their spleens showed 
a 100% reduction of CD4(+)CD25(high) T cells and overall a 70% reduction of
CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) T cells 7 days postinfection. The protective effect of
treatment with an optimal dose of anti-CD25 could be reversed by administration
of l-N6-(1-imminoethyl) lysine, a specific inhibitor of inducible NO synthase or 
administration of anti-CD8 Ab. Analysis of the cytokine patterns and cell surface
marker in infected mice pretreated with anti-CD25 Abs pointed to a potential NKT 
cell response. We then conducted infections in CD1d(-/-) mice. From our
observations, we conclude that CD4(+)CD25(high)Foxp3(+) Tregs prevent, in normal 
infected susceptible mice, an early protective response mediated by CD8(+) NKT
cell-dependent activation of macrophages to kill parasites by production of NO.
Our results also indicate that different populations of NKT cells have protective
or suppressive effects. Our observations lead us to propose a hypothesis of
cross-regulation of NKT cells and Tregs in trypanosome infections.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.180.4.2514 
PMID: 18250461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

