
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 May;83(5):1118-27. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0807567. Epub 2008 Feb 5.

Human Langerhans cells selectively activated via Toll-like receptor 2 agonists
acquire migratory and CD4+T cell stimulatory capacity.

Peiser M(1), Koeck J, Kirschning CJ, Wittig B, Wanner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Bioinformatics, Charit√© CBF, Berlin,
Germany. matthias.peiser@charite.de

In epidermal Langerhans cells (LCs), the expression pattern and the functions of 
TLRs have been poorly characterized. By using mAb, we show that LCs from human
skin express TLR1, -2, -5, -6, and -9, the cognate receptors for detection of
specific bacteria-derived molecules. As compared with other TLR agonists, LCs
acquired a more matured phenotype when activated by specific bacterial or
synthetic TLR2 agonists. In addition, monocyte-derived Langerin(+)/CD1c(+)LCs
(CD1c(+)MoLCs) secreted higher amounts of IL-6 and TNF-alpha by stimulation via
TLR2 than by stimulation via TLR3, -4, -5, -8, and -9. In contrast to MoLCs,
dendritic cells, generated from the same donor monocytes, were activated by
agonists of TLRs other than TLR2 as well. Lipopeptides triggering TLR2 induced
IL-1R-associated kinase-1 phosphorylation and migration toward the chemokines
CCL19 and CCL21 in epidermal LCs and CD1c(+)MoLCs. Up-regulation of CD86, CD83,
and CCR7, TNF-alpha and IL-6, and NF-kappaB activation and proliferation of
CD4(+)T cells could be inhibited TLR2-specific blockage using antibodies prior to
TLR2 activation. Application of anti-TLR1, anti-TLR6, and anti-TLR2 indicated an 
exclusive role of TLR2 in IL-6 induction in human LCs. Collectively, our results 
show that TLR2 expressed by LCs mediates inflammatory responses to lipopeptides, 
which implicates a central role in sensing pathogens in human skin.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0807567 
PMID: 18252867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

