
1. Infect Immun. 2008 May;76(5):1866-76. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01044-07. Epub 2008 Feb
19.

Genetic susceptibility to chronic hepatitis is inherited codominantly in
Helicobacter hepaticus-infected AB6F1 and B6AF1 hybrid male mice, and progression
to hepatocellular carcinoma is linked to hepatic expression of lipogenic genes
and immune function-associated networks.

Garc√≠a A(1), Ihrig MM, Fry RC, Feng Y, Xu S, Boutin SR, Rogers AB, Muthupalani S,
Samson LD, Fox JG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Comparative Medicine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77
Massachusetts Ave. 16-825, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Helicobacter hepaticus causes hepatitis in susceptible strains of mice. Previous 
studies indicated that A/JCr mice are susceptible and C57BL/6NCr mice are
resistant to H. hepaticus-induced hepatitis. We used F1 hybrid mice derived from 
A/J and C57BL/6 matings to investigate their phenotype and determine their
hepatic gene expression profile in response to H. hepaticus infection. F1 hybrid 
mice, as well as parental A/J and C57BL/6 mice, were divided equally into control
and H. hepaticus-infected groups and euthanized at 18 months postinoculation.
Hepatic lesions were evaluated histologically and the differential hepatic gene
expression in F1 mice was determined by microarray-based global gene expression
profiling analysis. H. hepaticus-infected parental strains including A/J and
C57BL/6 mice, as well as F1 mice, developed significant hepatitis. Overall,
hepatocellular carcinomas or dysplastic liver lesions were observed in 69% of H. 
hepaticus-infected F1 male mice and H. hepaticus was isolated from hepatic
tissues of all F1 mice with liver tumors. Liver tumors, characterized by hepatic 
steatosis, developed in livers with high hepatitis scores. To identify gene
expression specific to H. hepaticus-induced hepatitis and progression to
hepatocellular carcinoma in F1 mice, a method using comparative group
transcriptome analysis was utilized. The canonical pathway most significantly
enriched was immunological disease. Fatty acid synthase and steaoryl-coenzyme A
desaturase, the two rate-limiting enzymes in lipogenesis, were upregulated in
neoplastic relative to dysplastic livers. This study suggests a synergistic
interaction between hepatic steatosis and infectious hepatitis leading to
hepatocellular carcinoma. The use of AB6F1 and B6AF1 mice, as well as genetically
engineered mice, on a C57BL/6 background will allow studies investigating the
role of chronic microbial hepatitis and steatohepatitis in the pathogenesis of
liver cancer.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01044-07 
PMCID: PMC2346688
PMID: 18285497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

