
1. PLoS Pathog. 2008 Feb 8;4(2):e31. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0040031.

Salp15 binding to DC-SIGN inhibits cytokine expression by impairing both
nucleosome remodeling and mRNA stabilization.

Hovius JW(1), de Jong MA, den Dunnen J, Litjens M, Fikrig E, van der Poll T,
Gringhuis SI, Geijtenbeek TB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Ixodes ticks are major vectors for human pathogens, such as Borrelia burgdorferi,
the causative agent of Lyme disease. Tick saliva contains immunosuppressive
molecules that facilitate tick feeding and B. burgdorferi infection. We here
demonstrate, to our knowledge for the first time, that the Ixodes scapularis
salivary protein Salp15 inhibits adaptive immune responses by suppressing human
dendritic cell (DC) functions. Salp15 inhibits both Toll-like receptor- and B.
burgdorferi-induced production of pro-inflammatory cytokines by DCs and
DC-induced T cell activation. Salp15 interacts with DC-SIGN on DCs, which results
in activation of the serine/threonine kinase Raf-1. Strikingly, Raf-1 activation 
by Salp15 leads to mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK)-dependent
decrease of IL-6 and TNF-alpha mRNA stability and impaired nucleosome remodeling 
at the IL-12p35 promoter. These data demonstrate that Salp15 binding to DC-SIGN
triggers a novel Raf-1/MEK-dependent signaling pathway acting at both cytokine
transcriptional and post-transcriptional level to modulate Toll-like
receptor-induced DC activation, which might be instrumental to tick feeding and
B. burgdorferi infection, and an important factor in the pathogenesis of Lyme
disease. Insight into the molecular mechanism of immunosuppression by tick
salivary proteins might provide innovative strategies to combat Lyme disease and 
could lead to the development of novel anti-inflammatory or immunosuppressive
agents.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0040031 
PMCID: PMC2242833
PMID: 18282094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

