
1. Transfusion. 2008 May;48(5):836-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2008.01644.x. Epub
2008 Feb 21.

pH value promotes growth of Staphylococcus epidermidis in platelet concentrates.

Störmer M(1), Kleesiek K, Dreier J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Laboratoriums- und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bad
Oeynhausen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The platelet (PLT) storage lesion is characterized metabolically by a
pH value associated with lactic acid generation. PLT storage conditions support
the growth of Staphylococcus epidermidis, the most common organism implicated in 
bacterial contamination of PLT concentrates (PCs). Here, different factors that
influence bacterial growth in PCs are discussed and the relation between pH
values of PCs and citrate plasma (CP) is studied, with emphasis on bacterial
proliferation.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: The PLT lesion with regard to pH decrease and lactic
acid production was monitored during storage and correlated to bacterial
proliferation properties. A total of 115 coagulase-negative staphylococci,
especially S. epidermidis isolates, were characterized for their proliferation in
different blood components (CP, buffy coat-derived, and apheresis PCs).
Furthermore, the influence of donor-specific, product-specific, species-specific,
and strain-specific factors on bacterial proliferation was investigated.
RESULTS: PCs showed a lower pH value in comparison to plasma during storage.
Bacterial proliferation in PCs and the failure to grow in CP were determined with
all organisms tested. No correlation to donor-specific, species-specific, or
strain-specific factors was observed. Lowering the pH of CP resulted in bacterial
proliferation, whereas a pH increase in the PC unit inhibited the proliferation
of S. epidermidis.
CONCLUSION: With emphasis on bacterial proliferation, the significant difference 
between PC and CP is the presence of metabolizing PLTs. The pH values of stored
PLTs, but not those of stored plasma, support the growth of S. epidermidis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2008.01644.x 
PMID: 18298602  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

