
1. J Immunol. 2008 Mar 1;180(5):3478-84.

Lipoteichoic acid-induced lung inflammation depends on TLR2 and the concerted
action of TLR4 and the platelet-activating factor receptor.

Knapp S(1), von Aulock S, Leendertse M, Haslinger I, Draing C, Golenbock DT, van 
der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
sylvia.knapp@meduniwien.ac.at

Lipoteichoic acid (LTA) is a major outer cell wall component of Gram-positive
bacteria that has been implicated as an important factor in the inflammatory
response following bacterial infection. In vitro data indicate roles for TLR2,
platelet-activating factor receptor (PAFR), CD14, and LPS-binding protein (LBP)
in cellular responsiveness to LTA, whereas the mechanisms contributing to LTA
effects in vivo have never been investigated. Using mice deficient for LBP, CD14,
TLR2, TLR4, or PAFR, we now examined the role of these molecules in pulmonary
inflammation induced by highly purified LTA in vivo. Although pulmonary LBP
increased dose-dependently following administration of LTA, the inflammatory
response was unaltered in LBP-/- mice. TLR2 proved to be indispensable for the
initiation of an inflammatory response, as polymorphonuclear cell influx,
TNF-alpha, keratinocyte-derived chemokine, and MIP-2 release were abolished in
TLR2-/- mice. Minor effects such as moderately decreased TNF-alpha and MIP-2
levels were observed in the absence of CD14, indicating a role for CD14 as a
coreceptor. Quite surprisingly, the absence of TLR4 greatly diminished pulmonary 
inflammation and the same phenotype was observed in PAFR-/- animals. In contrast 
to all other mice studied, only TLR4-/- and PAFR-/- mice displayed significantly 
elevated IL-10 pulmonary concentrations. These data suggest that TLR2 is the
single most important receptor signaling the presence of LTA within the lungs in 
vivo, whereas TLR4 and PAFR may influence lung inflammation induced by LTA either
by sensing LTA directly or through recognition and signaling of endogenous
mediators induced by the interaction between LTA and TLR2.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.180.5.3478 
PMID: 18292574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

