
1. Stem Cells. 2008 May;26(5):1186-201. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0821. Epub 2008 
Feb 28.

Functional network reconstruction reveals somatic stemness genetic maps and
dedifferentiation-like transcriptome reprogramming induced by GATA2.

Huang TS(1), Hsieh JY, Wu YH, Jen CH, Tsuang YH, Chiou SH, Partanen J, Anderson
H, Jaatinen T, Yu YH, Wang HW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University, No.
155, Sec 2, Li-Nong Street, Taipei 112, Taiwan.

Somatic stem cell transplantation holds great promise in regenerative medicine.
The best-characterized adult stem cells are mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), neural
stem cells (NSCs), and CD133(+) hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). The applications
of HSCs are hampered since these cells are difficult to maintain in an
undifferentiated state in vitro. Understanding genes responsible for stem cell
properties and their interactions will help on this issue. The construction of
stem cell genetic networks will also help to develop rational strategies to
revert somatic cells back to a stem-like state. We performed a systemic study on 
human CD133(+) HSCs, NSCs, MSCs, and embryonic stem cells and two different
progenies of CD133(+) HSCs, microvascular endothelial cells (MVECs) and
peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Genes abundant in each or in all three
somatic stem cells were identified. We also observed complex genetic networks
functioning in postnatal stem cells, in which several genes, such as PTPN11 and
DHFR, acted as hubs to maintain the stability and connectivity of the whole
genetic network. Eighty-seven HSC genes, including ANGPT1 and GATA2, were
independently identified by comparing CD34(+)CD33(-)CD38(-) hematopoietic stem
cells with CD34(+) precursors and various matured progenies. Introducing GATA2
into MVECs resulted in dedifferentiation-like transcriptome reprogramming, with
HSC genes (such as ANGPT1) being up and endothelial genes (such as EPHB2) being
down. This study provides a foundation for a more detailed understanding of human
somatic stem cells. Expressing the newly discovered stem cell genes in matured
cells might lead to a global reversion of somatic transcriptome to a stem-like
status.

DOI: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0821 
PMID: 18308945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

