
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 11;105(10):3837-42. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0712250105. Epub 2008 Mar 3.

Identification of phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase type II beta as HLA class
II-restricted target in graft versus leukemia reactivity.

Griffioen M(1), van der Meijden ED, Slager EH, Honders MW, Rutten CE, van
Luxemburg-Heijs SA, von dem Borne PA, van Rood JJ, Willemze R, Falkenburg JH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Hematology and Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden
University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9600, 2300 RC, Leiden, The Netherlands.
m.griffioen@lumc.nl

Patients with hematological malignancies can be successfully treated with
HLA-matched T cell-depleted allogeneic stem cell transplantation (alloSCT) and
subsequent donor lymphocyte infusions (DLIs). The efficacy of DLI is mediated by 
donor T cells recognizing minor histocompatibility antigens (mHags) on malignant 
recipient cells. Because HLA class II molecules are predominantly expressed on
hematopoietic cells, mHag-specific CD4(+) T cells may selectively mediate graft
versus leukemia (GvL) reactivity without graft versus host disease (GvHD). In
this study, we used a recombinant bacteria cDNA library for the identification of
the first autosomal HLA class II (HLA-DQB1*0603)-restricted mHag LB-PI4K2B-1S
encoded by the broadly expressed phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase type II beta gene.
A polyclonal CD4(+) T cell response against LB-PI4K2B-1S was demonstrated in a
patient with relapsed chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) who responded to DLI after
HLA-matched alloSCT. LB-PI4K2B-1S-specific CD4(+) T cells recognized and lysed
the CD34(+) CML cells of the patient and other leukemic cells as well as high
HLA-DQ-expressing normal hematopoietic cells. HLA-DQ expression on normal cells
of nonhematopoietic origin was moderately up-regulated by IFN-gamma and not
sufficient for T cell recognition. We hypothesize that LB-PI4K2B-1S-specific
CD4(+) T cells contributed to the antitumor response by both directly eliminating
malignant cells as effector cells and stimulating CD8(+) T cell immunity as
helper cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0712250105 
PMCID: PMC2268788
PMID: 18316730  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

