
1. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2008 Jul;20(7):843-50. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2982.2008.01085.x. Epub 2008 Feb 25.

The D-alanine content of lipoteichoic acid is crucial for Lactobacillus
plantarum-mediated protection from visceral pain perception in a rat colorectal
distension model.

Duncker SC(1), Wang L, Hols P, Bienenstock J.

Author information: 
(1)Intestinal Disease Research Program, McMaster University, The Brain-Body
Institute, St Joseph's Healthcare, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The mechanisms leading to positive effects of probiotics in irritable bowel
syndrome and inflammatory bowel disease have not been clarified, but the possible
involvement of cell wall components is widely discussed. Reduction of the
D-alanine content of lipoteichoic acid (LTA) in Lactobacillus plantarum (Dlt(-)
mutant) enhanced its anti-inflammatory properties in a mouse colitis model.
Another lactobacillus species inhibited visceral pain perception in response to
colorectal distension (CRD) in rats. Therefore, we investigated if LTA
modification influences the constitutive intestinal pain perception in addition
to modulation of cytokine release. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were gavaged with L. 
plantarum, L. plantarum Dlt(-) mutant or buffer control, respectively and the
responses to CRD were tested in this non-inflammatory model. Tumour necrosis
factor (TNF), interferon (IFN)-gamma and interleukin (IL)-10 release were
measured in colon tissue homogenates and upon anti-CD3/CD28 activation of
isolated splenocytes and mesenteric lymphocytes. Control animals showed
significant bradycardia following noxious CRD, whereas only the L. plantarum
Dlt(-) mutant inhibited the response. The mutant also decreased the
activation-induced release of TNF and IFN-gamma from mesenteric T cells and the
IL-10 concentration in colonic tissue, while increasing the activation-induced
secretion of IL-10 in splenocytes and mesenteric lymphocytes and the baseline
IL-10 release of splenocytes. In conclusion, d-alanine depletion of LTA in L.
plantarum inhibited visceral pain perception in healthy, non-inflamed rats.
Regardless of the non-inflammatory nature of the model decreased visceral pain
perception was seen in parallel with anti-inflammatory properties.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2982.2008.01085.x 
PMID: 18312544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

