
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2008 Mar;154(Pt 3):852-864. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.2007/012336-0.

Clonal population structure of Legionella pneumophila inferred from allelic
profiling.

Edwards MT(1)(2), Fry NK(2), Harrison TG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Statistics, Modelling and Bioinformatics Department, Health Protection Agency 
Centre for Infections, London, UK.
(2)Respiratory and Systemic Infection Laboratory, Health Protection Agency Centre
for Infections, London, UK.

The population structure of Legionella pneumophila was investigated by analysing 
nucleotide sequences from six loci (flaA, pilE, asd, mip, mompS and proA) of 335 
globally distributed isolates from clinical and environmental sources over a
29-year period (1977-2006). Data were obtained from unrelated isolates from
Europe (n=270), Japan (n=31), Canada (n=7), the USA (n=24) and Australia (n=1).
The country of origin of two strains was unknown. Analysis of these isolates
indicated significant linkage disequilibrium between the six loci. Application of
six sequence-based recombination detection tests did not reveal evidence of
recombination, but estimates of rates of recombination and mutation made by a
seventh test suggested that recombination could have occurred at a rate similar
to, but probably lower than, that of mutation. Genealogies inferred under models 
with and without recombination were congruent with each other, providing no
definitive evidence regarding recombination, and were in agreement with sequence 
clusters identified by graph methods. Further evidence supporting the distinct
nature of two of the three subspecies of L. pneumophila, subsp. fraseri and
subsp. pascullei, was also found. The ratios of non-synonymous to synonymous
nucleotide polymorphisms for each of the allele sets were examined and revealed
that the putative virulence loci mompS and pilE are under diversifying pressure, 
while the allelic regions of three other loci linked to virulence (flaA, proA and
mip) do not appear to be.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.2007/012336-0 
PMID: 18310031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

