
1. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2008;13(3):375-90. doi: 10.2478/s11658-008-0009-6. Epub 2008 
Feb 29.

High intracellular Zn2+ ions modulate the VHR, ZAP-70 and ERK activities of LNCaP
prostate cancer cells.

Wong PF(1), Abubakar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya,
50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Malignant prostate tissues have markedly reduced zinc (Zn(2+)) contents in
comparison to non-malignant tissues. In this study, we restored a high
intracellular Zn(2+) level to LNCaP prostate cancer cells by culturing the cells 
in a growth medium supplemented with a supraphysiological concentration of Zn(2+)
(10 microg/ml) over 5 weeks. The intracellular Zn(2+) level increased in the
Zn(2+)-treated cells, and there was a marked increase in the presence of
zincosomes, a Zn(2+)-specific intracellular organelle. The proliferation rate of 
the Zn(2+)-treated cells was markedly reduced. There was also a significant
increase (36.6% +/- 6.4%) in the total tyrosine phosphorylated proteins. Vaccinia
H1-related (VHR) phosphatase, zeta chain-associated protein-70 (ZAP-70) kinase
and phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 1 and 2 (p-ERK 1
and 2) were also present in higher abundance. Treatment with TPEN, which chelates
Zn(2+), reduced the abundance of VHR phosphatase and ZAP-70 kinase, but increased
the abundance of p-ERK 1. However, the TPEN treatment restored the Zn(2+)-treated
LNCaP cell proliferation to a rate comparable to that of the non Zn(2+)-treated
cells. These results highlight the importance of a high intracellular Zn(2+)
content and the VHR/ZAP-70-associated pathways in the modulation of LNCaP
prostate cancer cell growth.

DOI: 10.2478/s11658-008-0009-6 
PMCID: PMC6276015
PMID: 18311544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

