
1. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 2;283(18):12489-500. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M707988200. Epub 2008
Mar 3.

Sequestration of NF-kappaB signaling complexes in lipid rafts contributes to
repression of NF-kappaB in T lymphocytes under hyperthermia stress.

Yan G(1), Huang J, Jarbadan NR, Jiang Y, Cheng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Microbiology and Immunology, and Penn State Cancer
Institute, Penn State University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania
17033, USA.

Sepsis causes extensive apoptosis of lymphocytes, a pathological condition that
is frequently associated with hyperthermia. Heat stress has been implicated to
repress the activation of an inflammatory mediator, nuclear factor of kappaB
(NF-kappaB), which sensitizes cells to apoptosis mediated by inflammatory
cytokine, tumor necrosis factor alpha. However, the molecular mechanism of
hyperthermia-associated loss of T cells remains unclear. We show that
hyperthermia causes rapid translocation of IkappaB kinase (IKK) and NF-kappaB
complexes into the plasma membrane-associated lipid rafts in T cells. Heat stress
induces aggregation of Carma1 in lipid rafts, which in turn recruits protein
kinase C theta (PKC theta) and Bcl10 to the microdomains, causing subsequent
membrane translocation of the IKK and NF-kappaB signalosomes. Depletion of Carma1
and inhibition of PKC theta impair accumulation of NF-kappaB complexes in lipid
rafts. Heat stress prohibits IkappaB kinase activity by sequestrating the IKK and
NF-kappaB complexes in lipid rafts and by segregating the chaperone protein
Hsp90, an essential cofactor for IKK, from the IKK complex. This process
ultimately results in functional deficiency of NF-kappaB and renders T cells
resistant to tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced activation of IKK, thereby
contributing to the apoptotic loss of T lymphocytes in sepsis-associated
hyperthermia.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M707988200 
PMID: 18316375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

