
1. J Dent Res. 1991 Sep;70(9):1272-7.

Cell attachment activity of cementum proteins and mechanism of endotoxin
inhibition.

Olson S(1), Arzate H, Narayanan AS, Page RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle 98195.

Cementum occupies a unique anatomical location where soft connective tissues of
the periodontium are attached to root surfaces. Cell attachment properties of
proteins present in cementum were studied. Human and bovine cementum were
extracted with 0.5 mol/L CH3COOH followed by 4 mol/L guanidine, and proteins were
separated by ion-exchange chromatography and SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis. Cells were labeled with radioactive amino acids and added to
tissue-culture plastic plates incubated with cementum proteins, and attachment
was measured. Results showed that cementum proteins promoted the attachment of
smooth muscle cells, endothelial cells, and fibroblasts, but not epithelial
cells. Fibroblasts attached more efficiently than other cell types, and they
manifested spreading with re-organization of actin filaments. No attachment
occurred to plates incubated with endotoxin from A. actinomycetemcomitans. Fewer 
fibroblasts attached to plates treated with cementum proteins in the presence of 
endotoxin, but cells pre-treated with endotoxin attached normally. Attachment was
not inhibited when plates were incubated first with attachment proteins and then 
with endotoxin; however, it was decreased when endotoxin or bovine serum albumin 
preceded cementum proteins. Cementum proteins with Mr 68,000, 61,000, 55,000, and
36,000 (p68, p61, p55, and p36, respectively) manifested attachment activity,
while protein(s) with Mr 23,000-24,000 did not. Western blots revealed that
guanidine extracts contained three bands cross-reacting with anti-bovine
sialoprotein-II antibody, but the p61, p55, and p36 were negative. We conclude
that cementum contains bovine sialoprotein-II and at least four other fibroblast 
attachment proteins, and that they do not support epithelial cell
attachment.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1177/00220345910700090801 
PMID: 1833426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

