
1. Environ Microbiol. 2008 Jun;10(6):1591-600. doi:
10.1111/j.1462-2920.2008.01575.x. Epub 2008 Mar 4.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain RW41 mineralizes 4-chlorobenzenesulfonate, the
major polar by-product from DDT manufacturing.

Blasco R(1), Ramos JL, Wittich RM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Biología Molecular y Genética, Facultad de
Veterinaria, Universidad de Extremadura, E-10071 Cáceres, Spain.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa RW41 is the first bacterial strain, which could be
isolated by virtue of its capability to mineralize 4-chlorobenzenesulfonic acid
(4CBSA), the major polar by-product of the chemical synthesis of
1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis-(4-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDT). This capability makes the
isolate a promising candidate for the development of bioremediation technologies.
The bacterial mineralization of 4CBSA proceeds under oxygenolytic desulfonation
and transient accumulation of sulfite which then is oxidized to sulfate. High
enzyme activities for the turnover of 4-chlorocatechol were measured. The further
catabolism proceeded through 3-chloromuconate and, probably, the instable
4-chloromuconolactone, which is directly hydrolyzed to maleylacetate. Detectable 
levels of maleylacetate reductase were only present when cells were grown with
4CBSA. When the ordinary catechol pathway was induced during growth on
benzenesulfonate, catechol was ortho-cleaved to cis,cis-muconate and a partially 
purified muconate cycloisomerase transformed it to muconolactone in vitro. The
same enzyme transformed 3-chloro-cis,cis-muconate into cis-dienelactone (76%) and
the antibiotically active protoanemonin (24%). These observations are indicative 
for a not yet highly evolved catabolism for halogenated substrates by bacterial
isolates from environmental samples which, on the other hand, are able to
productively recycle sulfur and chloride ions from synthetic
haloorganosulfonates.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2008.01575.x 
PMID: 18331335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

