
1. Immunology. 1991 Sep;74(1):99-106.

IgA-mediated inhibition of human leucocyte function by interference with Fc gamma
and C3b receptors.

Saito K(1), Kato C, Katsuragi H, Komatsuzaki A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Microbiology, School of Dentistry, Nippon Dental
University, Niigata, Japan.

The inhibitory effects of IgA from human colostrum, and IgA1 and IgA2 from human 
serum on the chemiluminescence (CL) response and phagocytosis of
polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PML) to Staphylococcus epidermidis and the CL
response to formylmethionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (FMLP) were studied. The
dose-dependent inhibition of the luminol-mediated CL response of human PML to the
bacteria was observed in the presence of more than 0.1 mg/ml IgA from both
colostrum and serum. The preincubation of PML with a solution of IgA enhanced the
suppressive effect of IgA on the cells. Removal of IgA from the reaction mixture 
after preincubation resulted in recovery, with time, of the response of PML to
the bacteria. The bacteria treated with IgA did not give rise to any inhibition
of the response. The CL response of PML to FMLP was not affected by the presence 
of IgA in the reaction mixture. The decrease of phagocytic activity of PML in the
presence of IgA resulted in a decrease of NADPH oxidase activity of PML after
stimulation with the bacteria as compared with the absence of IgA. The effect of 
IgA on the receptors of Fc and C3b (CR1) on the surface of PML was measured by
monitoring erythrocyte-antibody (EA) or erythrocyte-antibody-complement (EAC)
rosette formation and by direct and indirect immunofluorescence techniques using 
anti-CR1 antibody and Fc-specific antibodies. The presence of IgA in the reaction
mixture led to a quantitative decrease in CR1 and the ability to bind IgG to the 
surface of PML.


PMCID: PMC1384678
PMID: 1834550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

