
1. ISME J. 2008 Apr;2(4):379-92. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2007.97. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

Improved group-specific PCR primers for denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis
analysis of the genetic diversity of complex microbial communities.

MÃ¼hling M(1), Woolven-Allen J, Murrell JC, Joint I.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, The Hoe, Plymouth, UK. mmuh@pml.ac.uk

Phylum- and class-specific PCR primers were tested for the production of clone
libraries and for denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis of
complex bacterial communities. Primers were designed to specifically amplify 16S 
rRNA gene fragments of the phyla Bacteroidetes, Planctomycetes and Firmicutes, of
three classes of the phylum Proteobacteria, the Alphaproteobacteria,
Betaproteobacteria and Gammaproteobacteria, and of the Cyanobacteria (including
chloroplast 16S rRNA genes). The specificity of the seven primer pairs was tested
by producing clone libraries from environmental DNA samples from mesotrophic
(Norwegian coastal) and oligotrophic (Northern Atlantic Gyre) environments. Five 
of the seven primer pairs specifically amplified target 16S rRNA gene sequences. 
Exceptions were the Betaproteobacteria- and Firmicutes-specific primers, which
were relatively successful with coastal water mesocosm samples but less so with
the Northern Atlantic Gyre sample. Phylogenetic analysis of sequences from the
Gammaproteobacteria clone library revealed that the coastal sample yielded a
number of clones that clustered within clades that belong to the oligotrophic
marine Gammaproteobacteria (OMG) group, indicating that this group is not
confined exclusively to the oligotrophic environment. Comparison of the bacterial
diversity of the environmental DNA sample from the coastal and the open ocean
using a two- or three-step nested PCR-DGGE process revealed significant
differences in the bacterial communities. The application of the group-specific
primers provides a higher resolution genetic fingerprinting approach than
existing DGGE primer sets.

DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2007.97 
PMID: 18340335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

