
1. Infect Immun. 2008 May;76(5):2169-76. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01705-07. Epub 2008 Mar
17.

Wall teichoic acid deficiency in Staphylococcus aureus confers selective
resistance to mammalian group IIA phospholipase A(2) and human beta-defensin 3.

Koprivnjak T(1), Weidenmaier C, Peschel A, Weiss JP.

Author information: 
(1)Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, The University of Iowa, 2501
Crosspark Road, MTF D109, Coralville, IA 52241, USA. tomaz-koprivnjak@uiowa.edu

Wall teichoic acids (WTAs) and membrane lipoteichoic acids (LTAs) are the major
polyanionic polymers in the envelope of Staphylococcus aureus. WTAs in S. aureus 
play an important role in bacteriophage attachment and bacterial adherence to
certain host cells, suggesting that WTAs are exposed on the cell surface and
could also provide necessary binding sites for cationic antimicrobial peptides
and proteins (CAMPs). Highly cationic mammalian group IIA phospholipase A(2)
(gIIA PLA(2)) kills S. aureus at nanomolar concentrations by an action(s) that
depends on initial electrostatic interactions, cell wall penetration, membrane
phospholipid (PL) degradation, and activation of autolysins. A tagO mutant of S. 
aureus that lacks WTA is up to 100-fold more resistant to PL degradation and
killing by gIIA PLA(2) and CAMP human beta-defensin 3 (HBD-3) but has the
sensitivity of the wild type (wt) to other CAMPs, such as Magainin II amide,
hNP1-3, LL-37, and lactoferrin. In contrast, there is little or no difference in 
either gIIA PLA(2) activity toward cell wall-depleted protoplasts of the wt and
tagO strains of S. aureus or in binding of gIIA PLA(2) to wt and tagO strains.
Scanning and transmission electron microscopy reveal increased surface
protrusions in the S. aureus tagO mutant that might account for reduced activity 
of bound gIIA PLA(2) and HBD-3 toward the tagO mutant. In summary, the absence of
WTA in S. aureus causes a selective increase in bacterial resistance to gIIA
PLA(2) and HBD-3, the former apparently by reducing access and/or activity of
bound antibacterial enzyme to the bacterial membrane.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01705-07 
PMCID: PMC2346714
PMID: 18347049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

