
1. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Apr;38(4):1001-11. doi: 10.1002/eji.200738000.

Glycolipid-activated NKT cells support the induction of persistent plasma cell
responses and antibody titers.

Devera TS(1), Shah HB, Lang GA, Lang ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, BMSB1035, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.

NKT cell activation with CD1d-binding glycolipid alpha-galactosylceramide
(alpha-GC) enhances antibody responses to co-administered T-dependent antigen.
The efficacy of alpha-GC relative to other CD1d-binding glycolipids and adjuvants
is not known. There is little information on how NKT cells affect antibody
production beyond initial booster-stimulated recall responses. We therefore
tested the hypothesis that alpha-GC stimulates induction of plasma cells and
antibody responses as effectively as Th1- and Th2-skewing variants of alpha-GC
and several other adjuvants. C57BL/6 and CD1d-/- mice were immunized with
nitrophenol-conjugated keyhole limpet hemocyanin (NP-KLH) plus alpha-GC or NP-KLH
plus adjuvants before administration of an NP-KLH booster and assessing antibody 
responses and plasma cell frequency. alpha-GC boosted long-term antibody
responses as efficiently as all other agents tested and induced plasma cells that
were detected in bone marrow 13 weeks after immunization. We then determined
whether NKT cells were required in the presence of other adjuvants. CD1d-/- mice 
had a reduced induction of plasma cells in response to NP-KLH/Alum as compared to
C57BL/6 mice. However, NKT cells were not required for the continued presence of 
those cells that were induced. Although NKT cells are capable of inducing
persistent plasma cell responses, they may not play a major role in supporting
longevity post-induction.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200738000 
PMCID: PMC3500907
PMID: 18350547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

