
1. Immunol Rev. 2008 Apr;222:117-28. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2008.00613.x.

Oral DNA vaccines target the tumor vasculature and microenvironment and suppress 
tumor growth and metastasis.

Xiang R(1), Luo Y, Niethammer AG, Reisfeld RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, 
USA.

Four novel oral DNA vaccines provide protection against melanoma, colon, breast, 
and lung carcinoma in mouse models. Vaccines are delivered by attenuated
Salmonella typhimurium to secondary lymphoid organs and respectively target
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2, transcription factor Fos-related
antigen-1, anti-apoptosis protein survivin and Legumain, an asparaginyl
endopeptidase specifically overexpressed on tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs)
in the tumor microenvironment (TME). These vaccines are all capable of inducing
potent cell-mediated protective immunity against self-antigens, resulting in
marked suppression of tumor growth and dissemination. Key mechanisms induced by
these DNA vaccines include efficient suppression of angiogenesis in the tumor
vasculature and marked activation of cytotoxic T cells, natural killer cells, and
antigen-presenting dendritic cells. The vaccine targeting Legumain establishes
the new paradigm whereby a reduction in the density of TAMs in the TME decreases 
the release of factors potentiating tumor growth and angiogenesis. This, in turn,
remodels the TME and decreases its immunosuppressive milieu and thereby
potentiates the DNA vaccine's ability to effectively suppress tumor cell
proliferation, vascularization, and metastasis. It is anticipated that such
research efforts will lead to novel DNA-based vaccines that will be effective for
the treatment of cancer.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2008.00613.x 
PMID: 18363997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

