
1. Tissue Antigens. 2008 Jun;71(6):530-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2008.01038.x.
Epub 2008 Apr 2.

Lymphotoxin alpha LTA+496C allele is a risk factor for periodontitis in patients 
with coronary artery disease.

Palikhe A(1), Lokki ML, Pussinen PJ, Paju S, Ahlberg J, Asikainen S, Sepp√§nen M, 
Valtonen V, Nieminen MS, Sinisalo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland.

Periodontitis and coronary artery disease (CAD) are inflammatory diseases and
associated with each other. The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) region
carries genes involved in immune response and inflammation. We investigated
whether the MHC genes correlate with the presence of periodontitis or with the
occurrence of periodontal pathogens in patients with CAD. Blood and saliva
samples from CAD patients (n = 106) were collected at the time of
hospitalization. Nine MHC genetic markers [human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A,
HLA-B, HLA-DRB1, lymphotoxin alpha (LTA) +253(a/g), +496(C/T), +633(c/g),
+724(C/A), C4A and C4B)] were typed. Based on panoramic tomography, patients were
categorized into nonperiodontitis and periodontitis groups. Two major periodontal
pathogens, Aggregatibacter (Actinobacillus) actinomycetemcomitans and
Porphyromonas gingivalis, were cultivated and polymerase chain reaction-amplified
from salivary samples. Serum immunoglobulin (Ig)A and IgG antibody levels to
these pathogens were measured. In the univariate analysis, LTA+496C allele (OR = 
5.29; 95% CI = 2.07-13.51, P = 0.00027), and the occurrence of P. gingivalis in
saliva (OR = 4.74; 95% CI = 1.64-13.70; P = 0.002) were more frequent in
periodontitis when compared with nonperiodontitis. Similarly, serum IgA antibody 
level against the pathogen was increased in periodontitis (P = 0.048). In the
multiple logistic regression analysis, when a wide range of covariates was
included, the LTA+496C allele (OR = 10.87; 95% CI = 3.23-36.60; P = 0.00012) and 
the elevated serum IgA antibody level against P. gingivalis (OR = 1.56; 95% CI = 
1.05-2.30; P = 0.026) remained as significant risk factors for periodontitis. In 
conclusion, the major finding of this study is that the LTA+496C allele is
associated with periodontitis in patients with CAD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2008.01038.x 
PMID: 18384488  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

