
1. Can J Infect Dis Med Microbiol. 2006 Sep;17(5):291-5.

Probiotics to prevent the need for, and augment the use of, antibiotics.

Reid G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Western Ontario.

Although humans and microbes are inseparable, our knowledge and understanding of 
the majority of microbes that help keep us alive and well is in desperate need of
further investigation. Of the organisms that influence humans before birth and
inhabit various niches from birth to old age, we know little about their
identity, origin, metabolic properties, attributes and mechanisms of interactions
with the host and surrounding microbes. The use of probiotics ("live
microorganisms which when administered in adequate amounts confer a health
benefit on the host") has re-emerged as a means to restore and boost the
beneficial microbes in our bodies. The timing of resurgent interest in this
ancient field coincides with the need to augment or replace antibiotics whose
side effects are unwelcome and whose efficacy is diminishing due to drug
resistance. Evidence that probiotic strains can act as adjuncts to antibiotic
therapy by reducing adverse effects, improving antibiotic function and enhancing 
mucosal immunity is mounting. It is to our discredit that basic research on
microbial ecology has been stalled in Canada for the past 20 years. If supported,
research into indigenous and probiotic microbes will form an important part of
future research that sheds light on health, disease and a basic understanding of 
life itself. In some cases, probiotics will be the difference between a good
quality of life and a bad one, or perhaps even life over death. Improvements in
clinical studies, manufacturing and regulatory standards must coincide with this 
progress to ensure that physicians and consumers have reliable, proven products
for safe and efficacious use.

DOI: 10.1155/2006/934626 
PMCID: PMC2095085
PMID: 18382642 

