
1. Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 15;68(8):2576-80. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6858.

BCR/ABL inhibits mismatch repair to protect from apoptosis and induce point
mutations.

Stoklosa T(1), Poplawski T, Koptyra M, Nieborowska-Skorska M, Basak G, Slupianek 
A, Rayevskaya M, Seferynska I, Herrera L, Blasiak J, Skorski T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

BCR/ABL kinase-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) cells display genomic 
instability leading to point mutations in various genes including bcr/abl and
p53, eventually causing resistance to imatinib and malignant progression of the
disease. Mismatch repair (MMR) is responsible for detecting misincorporated
nucleotides, resulting in excision repair before point mutations occur and/or
induction of apoptosis to avoid propagation of cells carrying excessive DNA
lesions. To assess MMR activity in CML, we used an in vivo assay using the
plasmid substrate containing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) gene
corrupted by T:G mismatch in the start codon; therefore, MMR restores EGFP
expression. The efficacy of MMR was reduced approximately 2-fold in
BCR/ABL-positive cell lines and CD34(+) CML cells compared with normal
counterparts. MMR was also challenged by N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine
(MNNG), which generates O(6)-methylguanine and O(4)-methylthymine recognized by
MMR system. Impaired MMR activity in leukemia cells was associated with better
survival, accumulation of p53 but not of p73, and lack of activation of caspase 3
after MNNG treatment. In contrast, parental cells displayed accumulation of p53, 
p73, and activation of caspase 3, resulting in cell death. Ouabain-resistance
test detecting mutations in the Na(+)/K(+) ATPase was used to investigate the
effect of BCR/ABL kinase-mediated inhibition of MMR on mutagenesis.
BCR/ABL-positive cells surviving the treatment with MNNG displayed approximately 
15-fold higher mutation frequency than parental counterparts and predominantly
G:C-->A:T and A:T-->G:C mutator phenotype typical for MNNG-induced unrepaired
lesions. In conclusion, these results suggest that BCR/ABL kinase abrogates MMR
activity to inhibit apoptosis and induce mutator phenotype.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6858 
PMID: 18413724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

