
1. Blood. 2008 Jun 15;111(12):5637-45. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-05-092866. Epub 2008 
Apr 16.

Type I NKT cells protect (and type II NKT cells suppress) the host's innate
antitumor immune response to a B-cell lymphoma.

Renukaradhya GJ(1), Khan MA, Vieira M, Du W, Gervay-Hague J, Brutkiewicz RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5181, USA.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are a T-cell subpopulation known to possess
immunoregulatory functions and recognize CD1d molecules. The majority of NKT
cells express an invariant T-cell receptor (TCR) alpha chain rearrangement
(Valpha14 Jalpha18 in mice; Valpha24 Jalpha18 in humans) and are called type I
NKT cells; all other NKT cells are type II. In the current study, we have
analyzed the roles for these NKT-cell subsets in the host's innate antitumor
response against a murine B-cell lymphoma model in vivo. In tumor-bearing mice,
we found that type I NKT cells conferred protection in a CD1d-dependent manner,
whereas type II NKT cells exhibited inhibitory activity. Pro- and
anti-inflammatory cytokines secreted by splenocytes from tumor-bearing mice
correlated with tumor progression. Myeloid cells (CD11b(+)Gr1(+)) were present in
large numbers at the tumor site and in the spleen of tumor-bearing type I
NKT-deficient mice, suggesting that antitumor immunosurveillance was inhibited by
CD11b(+)Gr1(+) cells. Overall, these data suggest that there are distinct roles
for NKT-cell subsets in response to a B-cell lymphoma in vivo, pointing to
potential novel targets to be exploited in immunotherapeutic approaches against
blood cancers.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2007-05-092866 
PMCID: PMC2424159
PMID: 18417738  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

