
1. J Exp Med. 2008 May 12;205(5):1121-32. doi: 10.1084/jem.20071698. Epub 2008 Apr
21.

Virulent Shigella flexneri subverts the host innate immune response through
manipulation of antimicrobial peptide gene expression.

Sperandio B(1), Regnault B, Guo J, Zhang Z, Stanley SL Jr, Sansonetti PJ, Pédron 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Pathogénie Microbienne Moléculaire, Département de Biologie
Cellulaire et Infection, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

Antimicrobial factors are efficient defense components of the innate immunity,
playing a crucial role in the intestinal homeostasis and protection against
pathogens. In this study, we report that upon infection of polarized human
intestinal cells in vitro, virulent Shigella flexneri suppress transcription of
several genes encoding antimicrobial cationic peptides, particularly the human
beta-defensin hBD-3, which we show to be especially active against S. flexneri.
This is an example of targeted survival strategy. We also identify the MxiE
bacterial regulator, which controls a regulon encompassing a set of virulence
plasmid-encoded effectors injected into host cells and regulating innate
signaling, as being responsible for this dedicated regulatory process. In vivo,
in a model of human intestinal xenotransplant, we confirm at the transcriptional 
and translational level, the presence of a dedicated MxiE-dependent system
allowing S. flexneri to suppress expression of antimicrobial cationic peptides
and promoting its deeper progression toward intestinal crypts. We demonstrate
that this system is also able to down-regulate additional innate immunity genes, 
such as the chemokine CCL20 gene, leading to compromised recruitment of dendritic
cells to the lamina propria of infected tissues. Thus, S. flexneri has developed 
a dedicated strategy to weaken the innate immunity to manage its survival and
colonization ability in the intestine.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20071698 
PMCID: PMC2373844
PMID: 18426984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

