
1. Genome Res. 2008 Jun;18(6):930-8. doi: 10.1101/gr.073460.107. Epub 2008 Apr 25.

Identification of active transcriptional regulatory modules by the functional
assay of DNA from nucleosome-free regions.

Yaragatti M(1), Basilico C, Dailey L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York 10016, USA.

The identification of transcriptional regulatory modules within mammalian genomes
is a prerequisite to understanding the mechanisms controlling regulated gene
expression. While high-throughput microarray- and sequencing-based approaches
have been used to map the genomic locations of sites of nuclease hypersensitivity
or target DNA sequences bound by specific protein factors, the identification of 
regulatory elements using functional assays, which would provide important
complementary data, has been relatively rare. Here we present a method that
permits the functional identification of active transcriptional regulatory
modules using a simple procedure for the isolation and analysis of DNA derived
from nucleosome-free regions (NFRs), the 2% of the cellular genome that contains 
these elements. The more than 100 new active regulatory DNAs identified in this
manner from F9 cells correspond to both promoter-proximal and distal elements,
and display several features predicted for endogenous transcriptional regulators,
including localization within DNase-accessible chromatin and CpG islands, and
proximity to expressed genes. Furthermore, comparison with published ChIP-seq
data of ES-cell chromatin shows that the functional elements we identified
correspond with genomic regions enriched for H3K4me3, a histone modification
associated with active transcriptional regulatory elements, and that the
correspondence of H3K4me3 with our promoter-distal elements is largely ES-cell
specific. The majority of the distal elements exhibit enhancer activity.
Importantly, these functional DNA fragments are an average 149 bp in length,
greatly facilitating future applications to identify transcription factor binding
sites mediating their activity. Thus, this approach provides a tool for the
high-resolution identification of the functional components of active promoters
and enhancers.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.073460.107 
PMCID: PMC2413160
PMID: 18441229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

