
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008 Jul;52(7):2599-607. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00028-08. 
Epub 2008 Apr 28.

The human CXC chemokine granulocyte chemotactic protein 2 (GCP-2)/CXCL6 possesses
membrane-disrupting properties and is antibacterial.

Linge HM(1), Collin M, Nordenfelt P, MÃ¶rgelin M, Malmsten M, Egesten A.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Infection, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University,
SE-221 84 Lund, Sweden. hlinge@nshs.edu

Granulocyte chemotactic protein 2 (GCP-2)/CXCL6 is a CXC chemokine expressed by
macrophages and epithelial and mesenchymal cells during inflammation. Through
binding and activation of its receptors (CXCR1 and CXCR2), it exerts
neutrophil-activating and angiogenic activities. Here we show that GCP-2/CXCL6
itself is antibacterial. Antibacterial activity against gram-positive and
gram-negative pathogenic bacteria of relevance to mucosal infections was seen at 
submicromolar concentrations (minimal bactericidal concentration at which 50% of 
strains tested were killed, 0.063 +/- 0.01 to 0.37 +/- 0.03 muM). In killed
bacteria, GCP-2/CXCL6 associated with bacterial surfaces, which showed membrane
disruption and leakage. A structural prediction indicated the presence of three
antiparallel NH(2)-terminal beta-sheets and a short amphipathic COOH-terminal
alpha-helix; the latter feature is typical of antimicrobial peptides. However,
when the synthetic derivatives corresponding to the NH(2)-terminal (50 amino
acids) and COOH-terminal (19 amino acids, corresponding to the putative
alpha-helix) regions were compared, higher antibacterial activity was observed
for the NH(2)-terminus-derived peptide, indicating that the holopeptide is
necessary for full antibacterial activity. An artificial model of bacterial
membranes confirmed these findings. The helical content of GCP-2/CXCL6 in the
presence or absence of lipopolysaccharide or negatively charged membranes was
studied by circular dichroism. As with many antibacterial peptides, membrane
disruption by GCP-2/CXCL6 was dose-dependently reduced in the presence of NaCl,
which, we here demonstrate, inhibited the binding of the peptide to the bacterial
surface. Compared with CXC chemokines ENA-78/CXCL5 and NAP-2/CXCL7, GCP-2/CXCL6
showed a 90-fold-higher antibacterial activity. Taken together, GCP/CXCL6, in
addition to its chemotactic and angiogenic properties, is likely to contribute to
direct antibacterial activity during localized infection.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00028-08 
PMCID: PMC2443903
PMID: 18443119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

