
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2008 May 31;124(2):183-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2008.03.009. Epub 2008 Mar 27.

Characterization of TEM-, SHV- and AmpC-type beta-lactamases from
cephalosporin-resistant Enterobacteriaceae isolated from swine.

Rayamajhi N(1), Kang SG, Lee DY, Kang ML, Lee SI, Park KY, Lee HS, Yoo HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, KRF
Zoonotic Disease Priority Research Institute, Brain Korea 21 for Veterinary
Science, Seoul National University, San 56-1, Shilim 9 dong, Kwanak-Ku, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

Extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) and AmpC-producing Enterobacteriaceae are
an increasing problem in human medicine and an emerging problem in the veterinary
field. Our study, therefore, focused on assessing the prevalence of
beta-lactamases isolated from swine. Sixty-six Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium), 33 Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis (S.
Enteritidis), 26 Klebsiella pneumonia (K. pneumoniae) and 130 Escherichia coli
(E. coli) pig isolates collected from 1999-2006 were screened for beta-lactam
resistance by the disk diffusion test (DDT) and micro-broth dilution. Among the
isolates, five E. coli and five K. pneumoniae exhibited reduced susceptibility to
the cephalosporins tested. PCR, plasmid profiling and Southern blot hybridization
showed the presence of multiple beta-lactamases in these isolates of animal
origin. Hybridization patterns of the DHA-1 specific probe indicated that
dissemination of DHA-1 related beta-lactamases could be attributed to plasmids of
one common size among the enteric microbes of animal origin. To the best of our
knowledge, this study reports the first identification of SHV-28 and DHA-1 from
microbes of animal origin.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2008.03.009 
PMID: 18455821  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

