
1. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2008 Apr;40(2):174-7.

[Congenital anti-candida of human vaginal epithelial cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu Zh(1), Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetric and Gynecology, Peking University First Hospital,
Beijing 100034, China. xyxlzh@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To further investigate pathogenesis about vulvovaginal candidiasis
(VVC).
METHODS: Human normal vaginal epithelial cells in vitro were cultured by tissue
culture and keratinocyto serum free medium. Passaging epithelial cells were
cocultured with candida albicans medium in separate wells for 0, 3, 6, 12, 24,
and 48 h. Control epithelial cells were cultured alone in separate wells. For
examination of cytokines and chemokines, at each time point, the coculture
supernatant and the control culture were collected. ELISA was applied to detect
the levels of HBDj1, HBDj2 and SPjA protein expression in the vaginal epithelial 
cells (HBD-1:F=62.784Ã¬P=0.001; HBD-2: F=5127.984, P=0.000; F=542.210, P=0.000).
Also, we collected the vaginal doughing water of VVC patients and healthy women, 
and detected the levels of SP-A, then analysed the data.
RESULTS: In the trail of human vaginal epithelial cells, in contrast to the
control group, the medium group induced the epithelial cells to secrete more
HBD-1, HBD-2 and SP-A at h48, which was considered to be significant (P<0.05). In
the trail of human vaginal doughing water, in contrast to the control group, the 
levels of SP-A of VVC group were higher, which was considered to be significant
(P<0.05). The levels of SP-A of recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis (RVVC) group
were higher than those of VVC group and control group.
CONCLUSION: Human vaginal epithelial cells function as congenital anti-Candida
albicans and can secrete HBD-1, HBD-2 and SP-A. When infected by Candida
albicans, human vaginal epithelial cells can secrete HBD-1, HBD-2 and SP-A The
levels of SP-A of RVVC patients are probably higher than those of VVC patients.


PMID: 18458694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

