
1. Protein Sci. 2008 Jul;17(7):1162-74. doi: 10.1110/ps.034777.108. Epub 2008 May 9.

Effect of a new non-cleavable substrate analog on wild-type and serine mutants in
the signature sequence of adenylosuccinate lyase of Bacillus subtilis and Homo
sapiens.

Sivendran S(1), Colman RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark,
Delaware 19716, USA.

Adenylosuccinate lyase (ASL) catalyzes two beta-elimination reactions in purine
biosynthesis, leading to the question of whether the two substrates occupy the
same or different active sites. Kinetic studies of Bacillus subtilis and human
ASL with a new substrate analog, adenosine phosphonobutyric acid, 2'(3'),
5'-diphosphate (APBADP), show that it acts as a competitive inhibitor with
respect to either substrate (K(I) approximately 0.1 microM), indicating that the 
two substrates occupy the same active site. Binding studies show that both the B.
subtilis and human ASLs bind up to 4 mol of APBADP per mole of enzyme tetramer
and that both enzymes exhibit cooperativity: negative for B. subtilis ASL and
positive for human ASL. Mutant B. subtilis ASLs, with replacements for residues
previously identified as critical for catalysis, bind the substrate analog
similarly to wild-type ASL. Two serines in a flexible loop of ASL have been
proposed to play roles in catalysis because they are close to the substrate in
the crystal structure of Escherichia coli ASL. We have now mutated the
corresponding serines to alanines in B. subtilis and human ASL to evaluate their 
involvement in enzyme function. Kinetic data reveal that human Ser(289) and B.
subtilis Ser(262) and Ser(263) are essential for catalysis, while the ability of 
these Ser mutants to bind APBADP suggests that they do not contribute to
substrate affinity. Although these serines are not visible in the crystal
structure of human adenylosuccinate lyase complexed with substrate or products
(PDB #2VD6), they may be interacting with the active sites.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.034777.108 
PMCID: PMC2442012
PMID: 18469177  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

