
1. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Dec;28(12):813-7.

[Expression and relationship of p27(kip1) and its nuclear export factor Jab1 in
lymphoma cell Jurkat].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang YC(1), Zhao YM, Shen AG, Lu JX, Zhang DM, He S, Cheng C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nantong University, Nantong 226001,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression and relationship of p27(kip1) and its
nuclear export factor Jab1 during proliferation process of lymphoma cell.
METHODS: Jurkat and Raji cells were treated with serum starvation and then serum 
release. The protein and mRNA expression of p27(kip1), Jab1 in the cells were
detected by Western blot and RT-PCR respectively. LMB were used for stimulating
Jurkat cells during their proliferation process, and then the expression changes 
of p27(kip1) and Jab1 were detected. An eukaryotic expression plasmid(pcDNA3.
1-myc) containing Jab1 was constructed. Jurkat cell were transfected in vitro
with or without pcDNA3. 1-myc-Jab1. Double immunolabelling was used to identify
the localization of p27(kip1). Immunoprecipitation was used to detect the
combination of p27(kip1) and Jab1.
RESULTS: The growth of Jurkat and Raji cells were blocked by serum starvation.
The total protein amount of p27(kip1) increased while that of Jab1 decreased. The
reverse changes were happened after serum release, but the mRNA expression of
p27(kip1) has no significant change. LMB could inhibit the cell proliferation
caused by serum release. The expression of p27(kip1) was up-regulated and Jab1
down-regulated when Jurkat cells were treated with LMB. After pcDNA3. 1-myc-Jab1 
infected Jurkat cells for 48 h, the distribution of p27(kip1) was translocated
from nucleus into cytoplasma. p27(kip1) and Jab1 could form compound in Jurkat
and Raji cells detected by Immunoprecipitation.
CONCLUSION: Jab1 may influence the location and expression of p27(kip1) through
integrating with p27(kip1), and then participates in regulating the growth of NHL
cell through interfering with the function of p27(kip1).


PMID: 18476592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

