
1. BMC Microbiol. 2008 May 15;8:76. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-8-76.

Complete genome sequence of Treponema pallidum ssp. pallidum strain SS14
determined with oligonucleotide arrays.

Matejkov√° P(1), Strouhal M, Smajs D, Norris SJ, Palzkill T, Petrosino JF,
Sodergren E, Norton JE, Singh J, Richmond TA, Molla MN, Albert TJ, Weinstock GM.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, 
Alkek N1619, Houston, TX 77030, USA. matej@med.muni.cz

BACKGROUND: Syphilis spirochete Treponema pallidum ssp. pallidum remains the
enigmatic pathogen, since no virulence factors have been identified and the
pathogenesis of the disease is poorly understood. Increasing rates of new
syphilis cases per year have been observed recently.
RESULTS: The genome of the SS14 strain was sequenced to high accuracy by an
oligonucleotide array strategy requiring hybridization to only three arrays
(Comparative Genome Sequencing, CGS). Gaps in the resulting sequence were filled 
with targeted dideoxy-terminators (DDT) sequencing and the sequence was confirmed
by whole genome fingerprinting (WGF). When compared to the Nichols strain, 327
single nucleotide substitutions (224 transitions, 103 transversions), 14
deletions, and 18 insertions were found. On the proteome level, the highest
frequency of amino acid-altering substitution polymorphisms was in novel genes,
while the lowest was in housekeeping genes, as expected by their evolutionary
conservation. Evidence was also found for hypervariable regions and multiple
regions showing intrastrain heterogeneity in the T. pallidum chromosome.
CONCLUSION: The observed genetic changes do not have influence on the ability of 
Treponema pallidum to cause syphilitic infection, since both SS14 and Nichols are
virulent in rabbit. However, this is the first assessment of the degree of
variation between the two syphilis pathogens and paves the way for phylogenetic
studies of this fascinating organism.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-8-76 
PMCID: PMC2408589
PMID: 18482458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

