
1. J Cyst Fibros. 2008 Sep;7(5):433-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jcf.2008.03.006. Epub 2008 May
21.

Improvement in clinical markers in CF patients using a reduced glutathione
regimen: an uncontrolled, observational study.

Visca A(1), Bishop CT, Hilton SC, Hudson VM.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Pulmonologist, ASL Cuneo 1, Piedmont, Italy - CF Section.
alfredo.visca@fastwebnet.it

CFTR mutation, which causes cystic fibrosis (CF), has also recently been
identified as causing glutathione system dysfunction and systemic deficiency of
reduced glutathione (GSH). Such dysfunction and deficiency regarding GSH may
contribute to the pathophysiology of CF. We followed 13 patients (age range 1-27 
years) with cystic fibrosis who were using a regimen of reduced glutathione
(GSH), including oral glutathione and inhaled buffered glutathione in an
uncontrolled, observational study. Dosage ranged from 66-148 mg/kg/day in divided
doses, and the term examined was the initial 5.5 months of GSH use (45 days of
incrementally adjusted dose, plus 4 months of use at full dosage). Baseline and
post-measurements of FEV1 percent predicted, BMI percentile, and weight
percentile were noted, in addition to bacterial status and pulmonary
exacerbations. Significant improvement in the following clinical parameters was
observed: average improvement in FEV1 percent predicted (N=10) was 5.8 percentage
points (p<0.0001), average weight percentile (N=13) increased 8.6 points
(p<0.001), BMI percentile (N=11) improved on average 1.22 points (p<0.001). All
patients improved in FEV1 and BMI, if measured in their case; 12 of 13 patients
improved in weight percentile. Positive sputum cultures of bacteria in 11
patients declined from 13 to 5 (p<0.03) with sputum cultures of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa becoming negative in 4 of 5 patients previously culturing PA,
including two of three patients chronically infected with PA as determined by
antibody status. Use of a daily GSH regimen appears to be associated in CF
patients with significant improvement in lung function and weight, and a
significant decline in bacteria cultured in this uncontrolled study. These
findings bear further clinical investigation in larger, randomized, controlled
studies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcf.2008.03.006 
PMID: 18499536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

