
1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009 May;115(2):269-77. doi: 10.1007/s10549-008-0072-8. 
Epub 2008 May 28.

Cancer stem/progenitor cell active compound 8-quinolinol in combination with
paclitaxel achieves an improved cure of breast cancer in the mouse model.

Zhou J(1), Zhang H, Gu P, Margolick JB, Yin D, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Bloomberg School of
Public Health, The Johns Hopkins University, 615 N. Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD
21205, USA.

Increasing evidence suggests that breast cancer is caused by cancer stem cells
and the cure of breast cancer requires eradication of breast cancer stem cells.
In this study, we established and characterized a sphere culture model derived
from side population cells from the human breast cancer cell line MCF7. The
sphere culture could be maintained long term and was enriched in cells expressing
known breast cancer stem cell marker CD44+CD24-. These sphere cells showed higher
colony formation ability in vitro and higher tumorigenicity in vivo than MCF7
cells, suggesting the enrichment of breast cancer stem/progenitor cells. To
identify compounds that preferentially inhibit the sphere cells, we performed a
compound library screening. Two lead compounds, NSC24076 and NSC125034 and an
analog of NSC125034, 8-quinolinol (8Q), were identified as having preferential
activity against the sphere cells. 8Q showed some antitumor activity alone but
had much better therapeutic effect and relapse prevention when combined with
paclitaxel than either 8Q or paclitaxel alone in both MCF7 and MDA-MB-435
xenograft models. We propose that compounds selectively targeting cancer
stem/progenitor cells when combined with standard chemotherapy drugs may produce 
an improved treatment of cancer without significant relapse.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-008-0072-8 
PMCID: PMC3320107
PMID: 18506619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

