
1. J Contam Hydrol. 2008 Jul 29;99(1-4):112-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jconhyd.2008.03.010. 
Epub 2008 Apr 10.

Quaternary stratigraphy, sediment characteristics and geochemistry of
arsenic-contaminated alluvial aquifers in the Ganges-Brahmaputra floodplain in
central Bangladesh.

Shamsudduha M(1), Uddin A, Saunders JA, Lee MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geology and Geography, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA.

This study focuses on the Quaternary stratigraphy, sediment composition,
mineralogy, and geochemistry of arsenic (As)-contaminated alluvial aquifers in
the Ganges-Brahmaputra floodplain in the central Bangladesh. Arsenic
concentrations in 85 tubewells in Manikganj area, 70 km northwest of Dhaka City, 
range from 0.25 microg/L to 191 microg/L with a mean concentration of 33
microg/L. Groundwater is mainly Ca-HCO(3) type with high concentrations of
dissolved As, Fe, and Mn, but low level of SO(4). The uppermost aquifer occurs
between 10 m and 80 m below the surface that has a mean arsenic concentration of 
35 microg/L. Deeper aquifer (>100 m depth) has a mean arsenic concentration of 18
microg/L. Sediments in the upper aquifer are mostly gray to dark-gray, whereas
sediments in the deep aquifer are mostly yellowing-gray to brown. Quartz,
feldspar, mica, hornblende, garnet, kyanite, tourmaline, magnetite, ilmenite are 
the major minerals in sediments from both aquifers. Biotite and potassium
feldspar are dominant in shallow aquifer, although plagioclase feldspar and
garnet are abundant in deep aquifer sediments. Sediment composition suggests a
mixed provenance with sediment supplies from both orogenic belts and cratons.
High arsenic concentrations in sediments are found within the upper 50 m in
drilled core samples. Statistical analysis shows that As, Fe, Mn, Ca, and P are
strongly correlated in sediments. Concentrations of Cd, Cu, Ni, Zn, and Bi also
show strong correlations with arsenic in the Manikganj sediment cores. Authigenic
goethite concretions, possibly formed by bacteria, are found in the shallow
sediments, which contain arsenic of a concentration as high as 8.8 mg/kg. High
arsenic concentrations in aquifers are associated with fine-grained sediments
that were derived mostly from the recycled orogens and relatively rapidly
deposited mainly by meandering channels during the Early to Middle Holocene
rising sea-level conditions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconhyd.2008.03.010 
PMID: 18502538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

