
1. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2008 Jun;128(6):933-40.

Antimutagenic activity of a novel ascorbic derivative, disodium isostearyl
2-O-L-ascorbyl phosphate.

Hisama M(1), Matsuda S, Shibayama H, Iwaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Central Research Center, Toyo Beauty Co. Ltd., 3-13-8 Higashinakamoto,
Higashinari-ku, Osaka, Japan. hisama@toyobeauty.jp

A novel amphiphilic vitamin C derivative, disodium isostearyl 2-O-L-ascorbyl
phosphate (VCP-IS-2Na) possessing an alkyl chain of C(18) to a stable ascorbate
derivative sodium L-ascorbic acid 2-phosphate (VCP-Na), was synthesized and
evaluated as an anti-mutagen with suppressive effect on SOS-inducing activity on 
mutagen in the Salmonella typhimurium TA1535/pSK1002 umu test. VCP-IS-2Na was
assayed with chemical mutagens, N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG),
2-(2-furyl)-3-(5-nitro-2-furyl) acrylamide (furylfuramide) and 4-nitroquinolin
1-oxide (4NQO), which do not require liver metabolizing enzymes. VCP-IS-2Na at a 
concentration of 0.40 micromol/ml suppressed 66.2%, 54.7% and 60.2% of the
SOS-inducing activity on MNNG, furylfuramide, and 4NQO, and the 50% inhibitory
dose value (ID(50)) was 0.12 micromol/ml, 0.26 micromol/ml, and 0.17 micromol/ml,
respectively. In addition, VCP-IS-2Na was assayed with 2-aminoanthracene (2AA)
and 3-amino-1,4-dimethyl-5H-pyrido[4,3-b]indole (Trp-P-1), which require liver
metabolizing enzymes. To study the structure-activity relationship, L-ascorbic
acid (VC) and VCP-Na were also assayed with all mutagens. VCP-IS-2Na, suppressed 
the chemical and physical mutagens-induced SOS response greater than VC and
VCP-Na in the umu test. Also, the antimutagenic activities of VCP-IS-2Na, VC, and
VCP-Na against MNNG and Trp-P-1 were assayed by the Ames test using the S.
typhimurium TA100 strain. In summary, this research suggests that VCP-IS-2Na
showed potent antimutagenic effects against chemical mutagens and UV irradiation.

DOI: 10.1248/yakushi.128.933 
PMID: 18520139  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

