
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2008 Jun;154(Pt 6):1793-1801. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.2008/016600-0.

Analysis of the Flavobacterium psychrophilum outer-membrane subproteome and
identification of new antigenic targets for vaccine by immunomics.

Dumetz F(1), Duchaud E(2), Claverol S(3), Orieux N(1), Papillon S(1), Lapaillerie
D(3), Le Hénaff M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université Bordeaux 1, CNRS UMR 5805 EPOC, Place du Dr Peyneau, F-33120
Arcachon, France.
(2)Unité de Virologie et Immunologie Moléculaires, INRA, Domaine de Vilvert,
F-78352 Jouy-en-Josas Cedex, France.
(3)Plateforme Génomique Fonctionnelle, Université Victor Segalen Bordeaux 2, 146 
Rue Léo Saignat, F-33076 Bordeaux Cedex, France.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is an important infectious Gram-negative bacterium
causing cold-water disease (CWD) and rainbow trout fry syndrome. Outer-membrane
proteins (OMPs) are key molecules with regard to the interface between the cell
and its environment. Therefore, we sought to define the outer-membrane (OM)
subproteome of F. psychrophilum in order to gain insight into the biology and
pathogenesis of this bacterium and to identify the dominant antigens targeted by 
the rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) immune system during infection. First,
OMs were prepared from a cell-envelope suspension by differential Sarkosyl
(sodium lauryl sarcosinate) solubility. We then isolated the OMPs and identified 
36 proteins from 34 spots resolved by two-dimensional electrophoresis and
LC-MS/MS. An immunoproteomic approach using antibodies from CWD-convalescent
rainbow trout was then used to identify 25 immunoreactive F. psychrophilum
antigens that may be relevant in pathogenesis and diagnosis. These included the
previously characterized surface-exposed OMPs OmpA, OmpH/P18 and FspA, as well as
newly described antigenic proteins. This study provides a number of novel
candidate proteins for developing vaccine(s) against flavobacteriosis infection
in aquaculture.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.2008/016600-0 
PMID: 18524934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

