
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2008 Jun;154(Pt 6):1677-1685. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.2007/015263-0.

Protein HGFI from the edible mushroom Grifola frondosa is a novel 8 kDa class I
hydrophobin that forms rodlets in compressed monolayers.

Yu L(1)(2), Zhang B(2), Szilvay GR(1), Sun R(2), JÃ¤nis J(3), Wang Z(2), Feng
S(2), Xu H(2), Linder MB(1), Qiao M(2).

Author information: 
(1)VTT Biotechnology, Technical Research Centre of Finland, PO Box 1000, FI-02044
VTT, Finland.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, No. 94 Weijin Road, Tianjin
300071, PR China.
(3)University of Joensuu, Department of Chemistry, PO Box 111, FI-80101 Joensuu, 
Finland.

Hydrophobins are a group of low-molecular-mass, cysteine-rich proteins that have 
unusual biophysical properties. They are highly surface-active and can
self-assemble at hydrophobic-hydrophilic interfaces, forming surface layers that 
are able to reverse the hydropathy of surfaces. Here we describe a novel
hydrophobin from the edible mushroom Grifola frondosa, which was named HGFI and
belongs to class I. The hydrophobin gene was identified during sequencing of
random clones from a cDNA library, and the corresponding protein was isolated as 
a hot SDS-insoluble aggregate from the cell wall. The purified HGFI was found to 
have 83 amino acids. The protein sequence deduced from the cDNA sequence had 107 
amino acids, from which a 24 aa signal sequence had been cleaved off in the
mature protein. This signal sequence was 5 aa longer than had been predicted on
the basis of signal peptide analysis of the cDNA. Rodlet mosaic structures were
imaged using atomic force microscopy (AFM) on mica surfaces after drying-down
HGFI solutions. Using Langmuir films we were also able to take images of both the
hydrophobic and hydrophilic sides of films formed at the air-water interface. No 
distinct structure was observed in films compressed once, but in films compressed
several times rodlet structures could be seen. Most rodlets were aligned in the
same direction, indicating that formation of rodlets may be promoted during
compression of the monolayer.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.2007/015263-0 
PMID: 18524922  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

