
1. FEBS J. 2008 Jul;275(13):3421-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06498.x. Epub
2008 Jun 4.

Identification of a glycosphingolipid transfer protein GLTP1 in Arabidopsis
thaliana.

West G(1), Viitanen L, Alm C, Mattjus P, Salminen TA, Edqvist J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacy, Abo Akademi University, Turku,
Finland.

Arabidopsis thaliana At2g33470 encodes a glycolipid transfer protein (GLTP) that 
enhances the intervesicular trafficking of glycosphingolipids in vitro. GLTPs
have previously been identified in animals and fungi but not in plants. Thus,
At2g33470 is the first identified plant GLTP and we have designated it AtGTLP1.
AtGLTP1 transferred BODIPY-glucosylceramide at a rate of 0.7 pmol x s(-1), but
BODIPY-galactosylceramide and BODIPY-lactosylceramide were transferred slowly,
with rates below 0.1 pmol x s(-1). AtGLTP1 did not transfer BODIPY-sphingomyelin,
monogalactosyldiacylglycerol or digalactosyldiacylglycerol. The human GLTP
transfers BODIPY-glucosylceramide, BODIPY-galactosylceramide and
BODIPY-lactosylceramide with rates greater than 0.8 pmol.s(-1). Structural models
showed that the residues that are most critical for glycosphingolipid binding in 
human GLTP are conserved in AtGLTP1, but some of the sugar-binding residues are
unique, and this provides an explanation for the distinctly different transfer
preferences of AtGLTP1 and human GLTP. The AtGLTP1 variant Arg59Lys/Asn95Leu
showed low BODIPY-glucosylceramide transfer activity, indicating that Arg59
and/or Asn95 are important for the specific binding of glucosylceramide to
AtGLTP1. We also show that, in A. thaliana, AtGLTP1 together with At1g21360 and
At3g21260 constitute a small gene family orthologous to the mammalian GLTPs.
However, At1g21360 and At3g21260 did not transfer any of the tested lipids in
vitro.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06498.x 
PMID: 18537822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

