
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2008 Sep;61(1):65-72. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2008.04.007. Epub
2008 May 1.

A new protocol for high-yield purification of recombinant human
CXCL8((3-72))K11R/G31P expressed in Escherichia coli.

Cheng HT(1), Huang KC, Yu HY, Gao KJ, Zhao X, Li F, Town J, Gordon JR, Cheng JW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Department of Life Science, National Tsing Hua
University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan.

The ELR-CXC chemokines are important to neutrophil inflammation in many acute and
chronic diseases. Among them, CXCL8 (interleukin-8, IL-8), binds to both the
CXCR1 and CXCR2 receptors with high affinity and the expression levels of CXCL8
are elevated in many inflammatory diseases. Recently, an analogue of human CXCL8,
CXCL8((3-72))K11R/G31P (hG31P) has been developed. It has been demonstrated that 
hG31P is a high affinity antagonist for both CXCR1 and CXCR2. To obtain large
quantities of hG31P, we have successfully constructed and expressed hG31P in
Escherichia coli. Moreover, we have developed a new protocol for high-yield
purification of hG31P and for the removal of lipopolysaccharide (LPS, endotoxin) 
associated with hG31P due to the expression in E. coli. The purity of hG31P is
more than 95% and the final yield is 9.7mg hG31P per gram of cell paste. The
purified hG31P was tested by various biological assays. In addition, the
structural properties of hG31P were studied by circular dichroism (CD),
ultracentrifuge, isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), and nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. Our results indicate that this purification
protocol is very simple and easy to amplify at a large scale. The results of this
study will provide an effective route to produce enough hG31P for future clinical
studies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2008.04.007 
PMID: 18541440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

