
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2008 Aug;46(8):2555-60. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00666-08. Epub 2008
Jun 11.

Rifampin resistance, Beijing-W clade-single nucleotide polymorphism cluster group
2 phylogeny, and the Rv2629 191-C allele in Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains.

Chakravorty S(1), Aladegbami B, Motiwala AS, Dai Y, Safi H, Brimacombe M, Helb D,
Alland D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, and the Ruy V.
Louren√ßo Center for the Study of Emerging and Reemerging Pathogens, New Jersey
Medical School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, NJ
07103, USA.

Rifampin resistance is a key prognostic marker for treatment success in
tuberculosis patients. Recently, Wang et al. demonstrated that Rv2629 A191C
mutations were present in 99.1% of rifampin-resistant and 0% of
rifampin-susceptible clinical Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates and that
overexpression of the Rv2629 191C allele in Mycobacterium smegmatis produced an
eightfold increase in rifampin resistance. These results suggested that Rv2629
could be a cause of rifampin resistance and a valuable target for rifampin
resistance detection assays. We developed a molecular-beacon assay to study the
association between Rv2629 191 alleles and rifampin resistance in 246
geographically and phylogenetically diverse clinical M. tuberculosis isolates.
The 191C allele was present in 30/98 (30.6%) rifampin-resistant isolates and
25/148 (16.9%) rifampin-susceptible isolates and was more common in isolates from
Asia. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated complete overlap between the 191C allele
and single nucleotide polymorphism cluster group 2 (SCG-2), a phylogenetic
lineage that corresponds to the Beijing-W clade of M. tuberculosis. All 55 (100%)
191C isolates were SCG-2, while none of the 191 191A isolates were SCG-2 (P <
0.001). No association was found between the 191C allele and rifampin resistance 
in an analysis that included the SCG type (P = 1.0). Also, in contrast to the
findings of Wang et al., we found that overexpression of either Rv2629 191 allele
in M. smegmatis did not produce an increase in rifampin resistance. We conclude
that the Rv2629 191C allele is not associated with rifampin resistance and that
the allele cannot be used as a molecular target to detect rifampin resistance.
The allele appears to be an excellent marker for the Beijing-W clade/SCG-2
phylogenetic group.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00666-08 
PMCID: PMC2519504
PMID: 18550732  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

