
1. BMC Microbiol. 2008 Jun 13;8:95. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-8-95.

Sequencing and expression of two arsenic resistance operons with different
functions in the highly arsenic-resistant strain Ochrobactrum tritici SCII24T.

Branco R(1), Chung AP, Morais PV.

Author information: 
(1)IMAR-Laboratory of Microbiology 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal.
rbranco@student.zoo.uc.pt

BACKGROUND: Arsenic (As) is a natural metalloid, widely used in anthropogenic
activities, that can exist in different oxidation states. Throughout the world,
there are several environments contaminated with high amounts of arsenic where
many organisms can survive. The most stable arsenical species are arsenate and
arsenite that can be subject to chemically and microbiologically oxidation,
reduction and methylation reactions. Organisms surviving in arsenic contaminated 
environments can have a diversity of mechanisms to resist to the harmful effects 
of arsenical compounds.
RESULTS: The highly metal resistant Ochrobactrum tritici SCII24 was able to grow 
in media with arsenite (50 mM), arsenate (up to 200 mM) and antimonite (10 mM).
This strain contains two arsenic and antimony resistance operons (ars1 and ars2),
which were cloned and sequenced. Sequence analysis indicated that ars1 operon
contains five genes encoding the following proteins: ArsR, ArsD, ArsA,
CBS-domain-containing protein and ArsB. The ars2 operon is composed of six genes 
that encode two other ArsR, two ArsC (belonging to different families of arsenate
reductases), one ACR3 and one ArsH-like protein. The involvement of ars operons
in arsenic resistance was confirmed by cloning both of them in an Escherichia
coli ars-mutant. The ars1 operon conferred resistance to arsenite and antimonite 
on E. coli cells, whereas the ars2 operon was also responsible for resistance to 
arsenite and arsenate. Although arsH was not required for arsenate resistance,
this gene seems to be important to confer high levels of arsenite resistance.
None of ars1 genes were detected in the other type strains of genus Ochrobactrum,
but sequences homologous with ars2 operon were identified in some strains.
CONCLUSION: A new strategy for bacterial arsenic resistance is described in this 
work. Two operons involved in arsenic resistance, one giving resistance to
arsenite and antimonite and the other giving resistance to arsenate were found in
the same bacterial strain.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-8-95 
PMCID: PMC2440759
PMID: 18554386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

