
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jul;36(12):4172-80. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn360. Epub 2008
Jun 16.

Studies on Methanocaldococcus jannaschii RNase P reveal insights into the roles
of RNA and protein cofactors in RNase P catalysis.

Pulukkunat DK(1), Gopalan V.

Author information: 
(1)Ohio State Biochemistry Program and Department of Biochemistry, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Ribonuclease P (RNase P), a ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex required for tRNA
maturation, comprises one essential RNA (RPR) and protein subunits (RPPs)
numbering one in bacteria, and at least four in archaea and nine in eukarya.
While the bacterial RPR is catalytically active in vitro, only select
euryarchaeal and eukaryal RPRs are weakly active despite secondary structure
similarity and conservation of nucleotide identity in their putative catalytic
core. Such a decreased archaeal/eukaryal RPR function might imply that their
cognate RPPs provide the functional groups that make up the active site. However,
substrate-binding defects might mask the ability of some of these RPRs, such as
that from the archaeon Methanocaldococcus jannaschii (Mja), to catalyze precursor
tRNA (ptRNA) processing. To test this hypothesis, we constructed a ptRNA-Mja RPR 
conjugate and found that indeed it self-cleaves efficiently (k(obs), 0.15 min(-1)
at pH 5.5 and 55 degrees C). Moreover, one pair of Mja RPPs (POP5-RPP30) enhanced
k(obs) for the RPR-catalyzed self-processing by approximately 100-fold while the 
other pair (RPP21-RPP29) had no effect; both binary RPP complexes significantly
reduced the monovalent and divalent ionic requirement. Our results suggest a
common RNA-mediated catalytic mechanism in all RNase P and help uncover parallels
in RNase P catalysis hidden by plurality in its subunit make-up.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkn360 
PMCID: PMC2475606
PMID: 18558617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

