
1. J Immunol. 2008 Jul 1;181(1):81-91.

Critical role for the chemokine receptor CXCR6 in homeostasis and activation of
CD1d-restricted NKT cells.

Germanov E(1), Veinotte L, Cullen R, Chamberlain E, Butcher EC, Johnston B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.

NK T (NKT) cells play important roles in the regulation of diverse immune
responses. However, little is known about the mechanisms that regulate
homeostasis and activation of these cells. Thymic NKT cells up-regulated the
chemokine receptor CXCR6 following positive selection and migrated toward CXCL16 
in vitro. However, CXCR6 was not essential for thymic development or maturation. 
In contrast, liver and lung NKT cells were depleted in CXCR6+/- and CXCR6-/-
mice. The reduction in liver and lung NKT cells coincided with an increase in
bone marrow NKT cells, suggesting a redistribution of NKT cells in CXCR6-/-
animals. In wild-type mice, CXCL16 neutralization reduced accumulation of mature 
NK1.1+, but not immature NK1.1- NKT cell recent thymic emigrants in the liver.
Given that thymic NKT cells are preferentially exported as NK1.1- cells, this
suggests an additional role for CXCR6/CXCL16 in maturation or survival of
immature liver NKT cells. CXCL16 blockade did not deplete resident NK1.1+ NKT
cells, indicating that CXCR6/CXCL16 are not required to retain mature NKT cells
in the liver. Cytokine production by liver and spleen NKT cells was impaired in
CXCR6-/- mice following in vivo stimulation with alpha-galactosylceramide,
implicating a novel role for CXCR6 in NKT cell activation. Reduced IFN-gamma
production was not due to an intrinsic defect as production was normal following 
PMA and ionomycin stimulation. Preformed transcripts for IL-4, but not IFN-gamma,
were reduced in CXCR6-/- liver NKT cells. These data identify critical roles for 
CXCR6/CXCL16 in NKT cell activation and the regulation of NKT cell homeostasis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.1.81 
PMID: 18566372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

