
1. Blood Rev. 2009 Jan;23(1):25-47. doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2008.05.003. Epub 2008 Jul
2.

Prognostic markers in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a comprehensive review.

Van Bockstaele F(1), Verhasselt B, Philipp√© J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium.

SUMMARY: The clinical course of individual CLL patients is highly variable, with 
life expectancies ranging from months to decades. Importantly, a significant
subset of patients presents with low grade CLL, but will nevertheless develop a
more aggressive and life-threatening disease. As these patients may potentially
benefit from early treatment, it is crucial to assess patients' prognosis at
diagnosis, allowing individual risk-adapted therapy. Reliable predictions of
prognosis in an early stage of the disease have long been lacking in the clinical
workup of CLL patients. During the last decades many efforts have been made to
identify prognostic markers in CLL, resulting in a plethora of reports describing
the predictive value of different parameters with regard to overall survival,
disease progression and response to therapy. In this review, we attempt to
provide an overview of the literature and we discuss the most important
prognostic markers in CLL, from clinical staging systems and serum markers over
proliferation markers and cytogenetics to more recent markers like the IgV(H)
mutation status and its possible surrogate markers. Particular attention is paid 
to the advantages and drawbacks of all different markers, both from a clinical
and from a technical point-of-view, highlighting the accomplishments as well as
the remaining challenges in this rapidly evolving area of CLL research. Although 
the great majority of prognostic markers is not included in current international
treatment guidelines, several of these markers deserve to be evaluated in
prospective clinical trials and may eventually contribute to an improved clinical
management of CLL patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.blre.2008.05.003 
PMID: 18599169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

