
1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 5;283(36):25046-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803776200. Epub 2008 
Jul 3.

Human AlkB homolog 1 is a mitochondrial protein that demethylates
3-methylcytosine in DNA and RNA.

Westbye MP(1), Feyzi E, Aas PA, Vågbø CB, Talstad VA, Kavli B, Hagen L, Sundheim 
O, Akbari M, Liabakk NB, Slupphaug G, Otterlei M, Krokan HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology, N-7489 Trondheim, Norway.

The Escherichia coli AlkB protein and human homologs hABH2 and hABH3 are
2-oxoglutarate (2OG)/Fe(II)-dependent DNA/RNA demethylases that repair
1-methyladenine and 3-methylcytosine residues. Surprisingly, hABH1, which
displays the strongest homology to AlkB, failed to show repair activity in two
independent studies. Here, we show that hABH1 is a mitochondrial protein, as
demonstrated using fluorescent fusion protein expression, immunocytochemistry,
and Western blot analysis. A fraction is apparently nuclear and this fraction
increases strongly if the fluorescent tag is placed at the N-terminal end of the 
protein, thus interfering with mitochondrial targeting. Molecular modeling of
hABH1 based upon the sequence and known structures of AlkB and hABH3 suggested an
active site almost identical to these enzymes. hABH1 decarboxylates 2OG in the
absence of a prime substrate, and the activity is stimulated by methylated
nucleotides. Employing three different methods we demonstrate that hABH1
demethylates 3-methylcytosine in single-stranded DNA and RNA in vitro.
Site-specific mutagenesis confirmed that the putative Fe(II) and 2OG binding
residues are essential for activity. In conclusion, hABH1 is a functional
mitochondrial AlkB homolog that repairs 3-methylcytosine in single-stranded DNA
and RNA.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M803776200 
PMCID: PMC3259822
PMID: 18603530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

