
1. Peptides. 2008 Oct;29(10):1657-63. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2008.05.019. Epub 2008
Jul 7.

Regulation of human beta-defensin-2 by Mycobacterium bovis bacillus
Calmette-Guérin (BCG): involvement of PKC, JNK, and PI3K in human lung epithelial
cell line (A549).

Méndez-Samperio P(1), Miranda E, Trejo A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Inmunología, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, D.F.
11340 México, Mexico. pmendezs@bios.encb.ipn.mx

Human beta-defensin (HBD)-2 is an inducible antimicrobial peptide that plays an
important role in innate immunity. Induction of this peptide by mycobacteria in
epithelial cells has been reported. However, the mechanism(s) by which
Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) triggers gene transcription of
HBD-2 remains poorly understood. In the present work we found that treatment of
human epithelial cells with Ro32-0432 or Gö6976, two selective inhibitors of
protein kinase C (PKC), significantly reduced the effect of M. bovis BCG on
induced HBD-2 mRNA expression (65 and 80% inhibition by 10microM Ro32-0432, and
1microM Gö6976 as assessed by real-time PCR, respectively). Moreover, there was
increased activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt in A549 cells infected with M. bovis
BCG, and this JNK and PI3K activation was mediated through PKC. Finally, we found
that M. bovis BCG-induced HBD-2 mRNA gene expression in A549 cells was dependent 
on JNK, and PI3K determined by real-time PCR analysis, which was attenuated by
inhibitors of JNK (SP600125 and AG126), and PI3K (wortmannin and Ly294002). These
studies are the first to show that M. bovis BCG-induced HBD-2 mRNA expression in 
A549 cells is regulated at least in part through activation of signaling proteins
of PKC, JNK and PI3K.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2008.05.019 
PMID: 18603327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

