
1. J Immunol. 2008 Jul 15;181(2):1375-85.

CD11c expression identifies a population of extrafollicular antigen-specific
splenic plasmablasts responsible for CD4 T-independent antibody responses during 
intracellular bacterial infection.

Racine R(1), Chatterjee M, Winslow GM.

Author information: 
(1)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Albany, NY 12201, USA.

Although T-independent immunity is known to be generated against bacterial
capsular and cell wall polysaccharides expressed by a number of bacterial
pathogens, it has not been studied in depth during intracellular bacterial
infections. Our previous study demonstrated that Ehrlichia muris, an obligate
intracellular tick-borne pathogen, generates protective classical TI responses in
CD4 T cell-deficient C57BL/6 mice. We found that E. muris T-independent immunity 
is accompanied by the expansion of a very large extrafollicular spleen population
of CD11c(low)-expressing plasmablasts that exhibit characteristics of both B-1
and marginal zone B cells. The plasmablasts comprised up to 15% of the total
spleen lymphocytes and approximately 70% of total spleen IgM(high)IgD(low) cells 
during peak infection in both wild-type and MHC class II-deficient mice. The
CD11c(low) cells exhibited low surface expression of B220, CD19, and CD1d, high
expression of CD11b, CD43, but did not express CD5. Approximately 50% of the
CD11c(low) cells also expressed CD138. In addition to CD11b and CD11c, the
plasmablasts expressed the beta(1) (CD29) and alpha4 (CD49d) integrins, as well
as the chemokine receptor CXCR4, molecules which may play roles in localizing the
B cells extrafollicular region of the spleen. During peak infection, the
CD11c(low) cells accounted for the majority of the IgM-producing splenic B cells 
and nearly all of the E. muris outer membrane protein-specific IgM-secreting
cells. Thus, during this intracellular bacterial infection, CD11c expression
identifies a population of Ag-specific spleen plasmablasts responsible for
T-independent Ab production.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.2.1375 
PMCID: PMC2645789
PMID: 18606692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

