
1. Ann Med. 2008;40(7):482-95. doi: 10.1080/07853890802082096.

The genetic and environmental basis of atopic diseases.

Grammatikos AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Gennimatas General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.
agrammat@med.auth.gr

The prevalence of atopic diseases has increased abruptly in recent years in most 
Westernized societies, making the question why this happened the topic of a
heated debate. The best paradigm available to date to explain this steep rise,
the 'hygiene hypothesis', supports that it is the excess 'cleanliness' of our
environments that has led to the decline in the number of infectious stimuli that
are necessary for the proper development of our immune system. Recent findings
support that it is the combined effect that not only pathogenic, but also
non-pathogenic microorganisms, and even their structural components,can exert on 
the immune system that deters from the development of atopic responses. Adding to
these results are intriguing new findings on the effect different gene
polymorphisms can have on an individual's predisposition to allergic diseases.
The most important linkages produced, to date, include those among the genes for 
IL-4, IL-13, HLA-DRB, TNF, LTA,FCER1B, IL-4RA, ADAM33, TCR alpha/delta, PHF11,
GPRA, TIM, p40, CD14, DPP10, T-bet, GATA-3, and FOXP3 and allergic disorders. The
two parallel research efforts, epidemiologic and genetic, are only recently
starting to converge,producing fascinating results on the effect particular
gene-environment interactions might have in the development of atopy.The most
important lesson learned through this tremendous research effort is that not only
a small number but thousands and millions of separate risk factors act in
concordance in the production of the allergic phenotype.

DOI: 10.1080/07853890802082096 
PMID: 18608118  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

