
1. Proteomics. 2008 Aug;8(15):2994-3003. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200800243.

Separation of phosphoprotein isotypes having the same number of phosphate groups 
using phosphate-affinity SDS-PAGE.

Kinoshita E(1), Kinoshita-Kikuta E, Matsubara M, Yamada S, Nakamura H, Shiro Y,
Aoki Y, Okita K, Koike T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Molecular Science, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. kinoeiji@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

Herein, we demonstrate the separation of phosphoprotein isotypes having the same 
number of phosphate groups using phosphate-affinity SDS-PAGE. The
phosphate-affinity site is a polyacrylamide-bound Phos-tag that enables the
mobility shift detection of phosphoproteins from their nonphosphorylated
counterparts. As the first practical example of the separation, we characterized 
the monophosphorylated Tau isotypes by each of three tyrosine kinases, c-Abl,
MET, and Fyn. Each monophosphoisotype phosphorylated at the Tyr-394, Tyr-197, or 
Tyr-18 was detected as three distinct migration bands. As a further application, 
we extended this technique to the mobility shift analysis of His and Asp
phosphoisotypes in the Sinorhizobium meliloti FixL/FixJ two-component system.
FixL is autophosphorylated at the His-285 with ATP, and the phosphate group is
transferred to the Asp-54 of FixJ and subsequently removed by the FixL
phosphatase activity. Using this method, we first performed simultaneous
detection of the phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated isotypes of FixL and FixJ
generated in their phosphotransfer reaction in vitro. As a result, a
monophosphoisotype of FixL containing the phosphorylated His residue was
confirmed. As for FixJ, on the other hand, two monophosphoisotypes were detected 
as two distinct migration bands. One is a well-known isotype phosphorylated at
the Asp-54. The other is a novel isotype phosphorylated at the His-84.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200800243 
PMID: 18615432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

