
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1976 Nov 9;449(2):169-87.

Function of three cytochromes in photosynthesis of whole cells of Rhodospirillum 
rubrum as studied by flash spectroscopy. Evidence for two types of reaction
center.

van Grondelle R, Duysens LN, van der Wal HN.

1. Changes in the absorption spectrum induced by 10-mus flashes and continuous
light of various intensities were studied in whole cells of Rhodospirillum rubrum
in the presence and absence of 2-n-heptyl-4-hydroxyquinoline-N-oxide(HOQNO) and
antimycin A. 2. Three cytochromes, c-420 (cytochrome c2), c-560 (cytochrome b)
and c-428 were photoactive and gamma and alpha peaks at 420 and 550, 428 and 560,
and 428 and 551 nm, respectively; they were photooxidized following the flash
with half times of 0.3, 0.6 and 7 ms in the approximate ratios of 1/100, 1/300
and 1/1000 (cytochrome oxidized/antenna chlorophyll) and became reduced with half
times of 12 ms, 60 ms and 0.7 s, respectively. c-428 and c-560 have not been
distinguished before. 3. From a detailed analysis of the kinetics of P+ (oxidized
reaction center chlorophyll) and the cytochromes, we conclude that 5% of the P+
(P2+) oxidizes c-428, whereas the remaining 95% of P+ (P1+) oxidizes c-420. At
actinic light intensities low enough to keep c-420 fully reduced, approx. 4-5% of
P becomes oxidized, accompanied by all c-428. The P2+ -P2 difference spectrum
induced by this weak light is, when corrected for a shift to longer wavelengths
of the bacteriochlorophyll absorption band at 878 nm, identical to the difference
spectrum caused by the photooxidation of the remaining P1. At low flash
intensity, c-428 becomes preferentially photooxidized, which suggests that the
reaction centers where c-428 functions as a secondary donor contain much more
antenna pigments compared to the centers where c-420 serves this purpose. 4.
c+-420 is reduced in a competitive way by reduced c-560 (t 1/2=7 ms), and by an
electron donor pool, (t 1/2=15 ms). HOQNO inhibits both pathways; antimycin A
only the first. In the presence of HOQNO, c-560 is in the oxidized state in the
dark, and is reduced in a light flash (t 1/2=100 ms), indicating that c-560 acts 
in a cyclic electron transport chain connected to P1. 5. The ratio of numbers of 
molecules P1 and antenna bacteriochlorophyll, transferring excitation energy to
P1, is P1/bacteriochlorophyll1=1/30 P2: bacteriochlorophyll2=1/300; c-420/P1=1:2;
c-560/P1=1/6; C-428/P2=1/1; bacteriochlorophyll2=7:3. If P2 is oxidized,
excitation energy is transferred from bacteriochlorophyll2 to
bacteriochlorophyll1.

DOI: 10.1016/0005-2728(76)90131-6 
PMID: 186114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

