
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2008 Nov;8(11):1513-23. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2008.06.007.
Epub 2008 Jul 11.

Characterization of the transduction pathway involved in c-fos and c-jun
expression induced by Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans lipopolysaccharides
in human gingival fibroblasts.

Gutiérrez-Venegas G(1), Castillo-Alemán R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Bioquímica, División de Estudios de Posgrado e Investigación,
Facultad de Odontología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de
México, México. gloria@fo.odonto.unam.mx

Periodontal disease is an inflammatory disease caused by infection with oral
bacteria that results in tooth exfoliation. Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) are a major
component of the outer membrane of Gram-negative microorganisms and are involved 
in the inflammatory response. c-fos and c-jun are involved in pathological
conditions such as inflammatory disorders. Inflammatory signaling cascades
leading to c-fos activation in human gingival fibroblasts (HGFs) are not well
characterized. Thus, we have investigated the kinase pathways involved in c-fos
and c-jun activation induced by LPS in human gingival fibroblasts. LPS promoted a
dose- and time-dependent increase in c-fos transcription.
Phosphoinositide-phospholipase C inhibitor (U-73122), protein kinase A inhibitor 
(H89), MEK1 inhibitor (PD 98,059), p38 inhibitor (SB203580), and tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors (genistein and herbimycin) attenuated the LPS effect, while the PI-3 K
inhibitor (Wortmannin) had no effect on LPS-induced c-fos transcription. Protein 
kinase C inhibitors (Ro 31-8220, calphostin C, staurosporine, and chelerythrine
chloride) also inhibited LPS-induced c-fos transcription. However, long-term
treatment (24 -h) with the PKC activator tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate (PMA)
had no significant effect on LPS-induced transcription in HGFs. We also found an 
increase in c-jun expression in HGF stimulated with LPS. In addition, experiments
using pharmacological inhibitors of individual mitogen-activated protein kinases 
(MAPK) and of protein kinase C (PKC) revealed that p38, ERK 1/2, and PKC are
involved in LPS-induced c-jun expression. Our results indicate that LPS-induced
c-fos and c-jun expressions are mediated by two different signaling pathways: one
through phosphoinositide-phospholipase C via an upstream protein tyrosine kinase,
which activates PKC isoforms that are insensitive to phorbol stress, and the
second through activation of protein kinase A (PKA). Both kinases regulate the
phosphorylation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase ERK 1/2 and p38.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2008.06.007 
PMID: 18621151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

