
1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2009 May;58(5):769-75. doi: 10.1007/s00262-008-0555-9.
Epub 2008 Jul 17.

Salmonella typhimurium engineered to produce CCL21 inhibit tumor growth.

Loeffler M(1), Le'Negrate G, Krajewska M, Reed JC.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute for Medical Research, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Intravenously-applied bacteria tend to accumulate in tumors and can sporadically 
lead to tumor regression. Systemic administration of attenuated Salmonella
typhimurium is safe and has shown no significant adverse effects in humans. The
purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that engineering S. typhimurium 
to express a chemokine, CCL21, would increase anti-tumor activity. We engineered 
an attenuated strain of S. typhimurium to produce the chemokine CCL21. Attenuated
S. typhimurium expressing CCL21 significantly inhibited the growth of primary
tumors and pulmonary metastases in preclinical models of multi-drug-resistant
murine carcinomas, while control bacteria did not. Histological analysis of
tumors showed marked inflammatory cell infiltrates in mice treated with
CCL21-expressing but not control bacteria. Levels of cytokines and chemokines
known to be induced by CCL21 [e.g., interferon-gamma (INFgamma), CXCL9, and
CXCL10] were significantly elevated in tumors of mice treated with
CCL21-expressing but not control S. typhimurium. The anti-tumor activity was
found to be dependent on CD4- and CD8-expressing cells, based on
antibody-mediated in vivo immuno-depletion experiments. Anti-tumor activity was
achieved without evidence of toxicity. In summary, chemokine-expressing,
attenuated bacteria may provide a novel approach to cancer immunotherapy for
effective and well-tolerated in vivo delivery of immunomodulatory proteins.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-008-0555-9 
PMID: 18633610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

