
1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2008 Sep;300(8):441-9. doi: 10.1007/s00403-008-0866-x. Epub
2008 Jul 22.

An investigation of antistreptococcal antibody responses in guttate psoriasis.

Nahary L(1), Tamarkin A, Kayam N, Sela S, Fry L, Baker B, Powles A, Rogers S,
Benhar I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, The George S Wise
Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel.

In two-thirds of patients with guttate psoriasis (GP), there is good evidence
that the eruption is triggered by a streptococcal throat infection. We attempted 
to determine if a specific epitope of the bacterial pathogen was associated with 
the humoral immune response in GP patients. Antibody titres against
beta-haemolytic streptococci (BHS) extracts in sera from 14 patients with GP, 10 
healthy controls and 10 chronic plaque psoriasis (CPP) patients were determined
by ELISA. Antibody BHS reactivity was investigated using immunoblotting, followed
by epitope mapping using peptide-phage display. The highest GP antibody titres
(10,000-25,000) were found in sera that had a matching streptococcal isolate,
three sera had high (5,000-12,500) and seven had raised titres (500-5,000). In
the healthy control group, three had relatively high and seven lower titres. All 
the CPP sera had very low titres (<500). In the immunoblots, three major bands
were recognised by all the GP sera, and, to a lesser extent, by four healthy
controls. No GP-specific protein was identified. Epitope mapping identified 10
phage clones that specifically bound 2 or 3 GP sera, displaying five different
peptide sequences that were not streptococcal in origin. These findings suggest
that the antigen specificity of the humoral response to BHS in GP does not differ
from that of non-psoriatic individuals.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-008-0866-x 
PMID: 18648827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

