
1. Arch Microbiol. 2008 Dec;190(6):611-22. doi: 10.1007/s00203-008-0409-z. Epub 2008
Jul 25.

Effect of a highly concentrated lipopeptide extract of Bacillus subtilis on
fungal and bacterial cells.

Etchegaray A(1), de Castro Bueno C, de Melo IS, Tsai SM, Fiore MF, Silva-Stenico 
ME, de Moraes LA, Teschke O.

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Qu√≠mica, PUC-Campinas, C. Postal 317, Campinas, SP 13012-970,
Brazil. augusto.etchegaray@puc-campinas.edu.br

Lipopeptides produced by Bacillus subtilis are known for their high antifungal
activity. The aim of this paper is to show that at high concentration they can
damage the surface ultra-structure of bacterial cells. A lipopeptide extract
containing iturin and surfactin (5 mg mL(-1)) was prepared after isolation from
B. subtilis (strain OG) by solid phase extraction. Analysis by atomic force
microscope (AFM) showed that upon evaporation, lipopeptides form large aggregates
(0.1-0.2 microm(2)) on the substrates silicon and mica. When the same solution is
incubated with fungi and bacteria and the system is allowed to evaporate,
dramatic changes are observed on the cells. AFM micrographs show disintegration
of the hyphae of Phomopsis phaseoli and the cell walls of Xanthomonas campestris 
and X. axonopodis. Collapses to fungal and bacterial cells may be a result of
formation of pores triggered by micelles and lamellar structures, which are
formed above the critical micelar concentration of lipopeptides. As observed for 
P. phaseoli, the process involves binding, solubilization, and formation of novel
structures in which cell wall components are solubilized within lipopeptide
vesicles. This is the first report presenting evidences that vesicles of
uncharged and negatively charged lipopeptides can alter the morphology of
gram-negative bacteria.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-008-0409-z 
PMID: 18654762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

