
1. Microbes Infect. 2008 Jul;10(8):868-77. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2008.04.019. Epub
2008 May 7.

Gene-expression profiles in murine melioidosis.

Wiersinga WJ(1), Dessing MC, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. w.j.wiersinga@amc.uva.nl

Melioidosis, caused by the bacterium Burkholderia pseudomallei, is a septicemic
illness, often associated with pneumonia and bacterial dissemination to distant
sites. Recently we reported the inflammatory mRNA profile in blood leukocytes
during human melioidosis. Knowledge of the inflammatory gene expression profile
in the pulmonary compartment after infection with B. pseudomallei, however, is
highly limited. We therefore aimed to characterize the inflammatory mRNA profile 
in the pulmonary and systemic compartment during murine melioidosis. By using a
newly developed mouse specific Multiplex-Ligation-dependent-Probe-Amplification
(MLPA) assay we determined the expression profile of 33 genes encoding
inflammatory proteins in lung tissue, leukocytes in bronchoalveolar-lavage-fluid 
(BALF) and blood leukocytes in mice before and at several time points after
intranasal infection with B. pseudomallei. Relative to na√Øve mice, mice
intranasally infected with B. pseudomallei showed increased transcription of a
whole array of genes involved in inflammation, Toll-like receptor-signaling,
coagulation, fibrinolysis, cell adhesion, tissue repair and homeostasis in the
lung, BALF and blood compartment. Notably, many inflammatory genes were shown to 
be differentially expressed during the course of infection. These data provide
new information on compartmentalized inflammatory gene-expression profiles after 
infection with B. pseudomallei, increasing our insights into the extent of
inflammation activation in the pulmonary and systemic compartment during
melioidosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2008.04.019 
PMID: 18653369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

