
1. Immunobiology. 2008;213(7):567-75. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2008.01.007. Epub 2008
Mar 4.

Differential migration of human monocyte-derived dendritic cells after infection 
with prevalent clinical strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Rajashree P(1), Supriya P, Das SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tuberculosis Research Centre (ICMR), Mayor VR
Ramanathan Road, Chetpet, Chennai 600031, India.

Dendritic cells (DCs) play a key role in the host immune response to infections. 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) can inhibit the maturation of DCs and impair
their ability to stimulate T cell proliferation. Here, we assessed in vitro
migratory behavior of human monocyte-derived DCs (MoDC) when infected with
various MTB strains (H37Rv and prevalent clinical strains S7 and S10 from South
India). The migration of Rv and S7 infected MoDC towards secondary lymphoid
chemokine (CCL21) was 50% lower after 1 day of infection compared to LPS
stimulation. This reduced cell migration may be due to a block in the chemokine
receptor switch from CCR5 to CCR7 expression on MoDC. Only clinical strain S10
infected MoDC showed an up-regulation of CCR7 and down-regulation of CCR5
expression, similar to LPS stimulated MoDC. While Rv and S7 infected MoDC did not
display any alteration in expression of these receptors. Similarly, Rv and S7
infected MoDC did not induce IL-8, IP-10 and MCP-1 chemokine production. This
reduction in chemokine levels was reflected in the reduced chemoattraction of
CD4(+) T cells also. These findings suggest that there is variation in the
stimulation of MoDC with different clinical strains of MTB and this variation may
be dependent upon the virulence of the strain.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2008.01.007 
PMID: 18656704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

