
1. Cell Res. 2008 Dec;18(12):1210-9. doi: 10.1038/cr.2008.87.

Apaf-1-deficient fog mouse cell apoptosis involves hypo-polarization of the
mitochondrial inner membrane, ATP depletion and citrate accumulation.

Katoh I(1), Sato S, Fukunishi N, Yoshida H, Imai T, Kurata S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Medicine and 
Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi 409-3898, Japan.

To explore how the intrinsic apoptosis pathway is controlled in the spontaneous
fog (forebrain overgrowth) mutant mice with an Apaf1 splicing deficiency, we
examined spleen and bone marrow cells from Apaf1(+/+) (+/+) and Apaf1(fog/fog)
(fog/fog) mice for initiator caspase-9 activation by cellular stresses. When the 
mitochondrial inner membrane potential (Deltapsim) was disrupted by
staurosporine, +/+ cells but not fog/fog cells activated caspase-9 to cause
apoptosis, indicating the lack of apoptosome (apoptosis protease activating
factor 1 (Apaf-1)/cytochrome c/(d)ATP/procaspase-9) function in fog/fog cells.
However, when a marginal ( approximately 20%) decrease in Deltapsim was caused by
hydrogen peroxide (0.1 mM), peroxynitritedonor 3-morpholinosydnonimine (0.1 mM)
and UV-C irradiation (20 J/m(2)), both +/+ and fog/fog cells triggered
procaspase-9 auto-processing and its downstream cascade activation. Supporting
our previous results, procaspase-9 pre-existing in the mitochondria induced its
auto-processing before the cytosolic caspase activation regardless of the
genotypes. Cellular ATP concentration significantly decreased under the
hypoactive Deltapsim condition. Furthermore, we detected accumulation of citrate,
a kosmotrope known to facilitate procaspase-9 dimerization, probably due to a
feedback control of the Krebs cycle by the electron transfer system. Thus,
mitochondrial in situ caspase-9 activation may be caused by the major metabolic
reactions in response to physiological stresses, which may represent a mode of
Apaf-1-independent apoptosis hypothesized from recent genetic studies.

DOI: 10.1038/cr.2008.87 
PMID: 18663378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

