
1. Immunogenetics. 2008 Nov;60(11):645-54. doi: 10.1007/s00251-008-0321-3. Epub 2008
Jul 31.

Asian population frequencies and haplotype distribution of killer cell
immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) genes among Chinese, Malay, and Indian in
Singapore.

Lee YC(1), Chan SH, Ren EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 5 Science Drive 2, MD4, Singapore, Singapore, 117597.

Killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) gene frequencies have been shown 
to be distinctly different between populations and contribute to functional
variation in the immune response. We have investigated KIR gene frequencies in
370 individuals representing three Asian populations in Singapore and report here
the distribution of 14 KIR genes (2DL1, 2DL2, 2DL3, 2DL4, 2DL5, 2DS1, 2DS2, 2DS3,
2DS4, 2DS5, 3DL1, 3DL2, 3DL3, 3DS1) with two pseudogenes (2DP1, 3DP1) among
Singapore Chinese (n = 210); Singapore Malay (n = 80), and Singapore Indian (n = 
80). Four framework genes (KIR3DL3, 3DP1, 2DL4, 3DL2) and a nonframework
pseudogene 2DP1 were detected in all samples while KIR2DS2, 2DL2, 2DL5, and 2DS5 
had the greatest significant variation across the three populations. Fifteen
significant linkage patterns, consistent with associations between genes of A and
B haplotypes, were observed. Eighty-four distinct KIR profiles were determined in
our populations, 38 of which had not been described in other populations. KIR
haplotype studies were performed using nine Singapore Chinese families comprising
34 individuals. All genotypes could be resolved into corresponding pairs of
existing haplotypes with eight distinct KIR genotypes and eight different
haplotypes. The haplotype A2 with frequency of 63.9% was dominant in Singapore
Chinese, comparable to that reported in Korean and Chinese Han. The A haplotypes 
predominate in Singapore Chinese, with ratio of A to B haplotypes of
approximately 3:1. Comparison with KIR frequencies in other populations showed
that Singapore Chinese shared similar distributions with Chinese Han, Japanese,
and Korean; Singapore Indian was found to be comparable with North Indian Hindus 
while Singapore Malay resembled the Thai.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-008-0321-3 
PMID: 18668235  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

