
1. Lancet. 2008 Aug 2;372(9636):392-7. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61159-9.

Effect of eradication of Helicobacter pylori on incidence of metachronous gastric
carcinoma after endoscopic resection of early gastric cancer: an open-label,
randomised controlled trial.

Fukase K(1), Kato M, Kikuchi S, Inoue K, Uemura N, Okamoto S, Terao S, Amagai K, 
Hayashi S, Asaka M; Japan Gast Study Group.

Collaborators: Fukase K, Kato M, Kikuchi S, Inoue K, Uemura N, Okamoto S, Terao
S, Amagai K, Asaka M, Kikuchi S, Inatsuchi S, Arakawa T, Sakaki N, Kato T,
Watanabe Y, Ohara S, Aida S, Iijima K, Nasu J, Doi T, Endo H, Shirai T, Takagi A,
Inaba T, Aoyama N, Shirasaka D, Azuma T, Ishihata R, Chiba T, Nishio A, Yazumi S,
Kawanami T, Sawada M, Konda Y, Okazaki K, Nakamura T, Komatsu H, Miwa J, Kaise M,
Kamoshida T, Yagi K, Sato H, Fuke H, Sone Y, Satoh K, Kihira K, Kawata H, Sugano 
K, Fujisaki J, Yanaka A, Nakajima S, Nomura H, Mizuno M, Okada H, Furukawa K,
Yamazaki Y, Kagaya T, Kasugai K, Joh T, Sasaki M, Harada K, Tsutsumi T, Aoyagi K,
Maeda K, Mizumachi S, Suzuki M, Furuta T, Shirai N, Suwaki K, Matsuda M, Satomura
Y, Miura M, Takahashi S, Imoto I, Horiki N, Sugiyama A, Kato T, Isomoto H,
Murakami K, Fujioka T, Sugihara M, Goto H, Matsui S, Nakayama J, Katsuyama T,
Sugiyama T, Haruma K, Tominaga S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Yamagata Prefectural Central Hospital,
Yamagata, Japan.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2008 Aug 2;372(9636):350-2.
    ACP J Club. 2008 Nov 18;149(5):12.
    Gastroenterology. 2009 Jul;137(1):377-9.

BACKGROUND: The relation between Helicobacter pylori infection and gastric cancer
has been proven in epidemiological studies and animal experiments. Our aim was to
investigate the prophylactic effect of H pylori eradication on the development of
metachronous gastric carcinoma after endoscopic resection for early gastric
cancer.
METHODS: In this multi-centre, open-label, randomised controlled trial, 544
patients with early gastric cancer, either newly diagnosed and planning to have
endoscopic treatment or in post-resection follow-up after endoscopic treatment,
were randomly assigned to receive an H pylori eradication regimen (n=272) or
control (n=272). Randomisation was done by a computer-generated randomisation
list and was stratified by whether the patient was newly diagnosed or
post-resection. Patients in the eradication group received lansoprazole 30 mg
twice daily, amoxicillin 750 mg twice daily, and clarithromycin 200 mg twice
daily for a week; those in the control group received standard care, but no
treatment for H pylori. Patients were examined endoscopically at 6, 12, 24, and
36 months after allocation. The primary endpoint was diagnosis of new carcinoma
at another site in the stomach. Analyses were by intention to treat. This trial
is registered with the UMIN Clinical Trials Registry, number UMIN000001169.
FINDINGS: At 3-year follow-up, metachronous gastric carcinoma had developed in
nine patients in the eradication group and 24 in the control group. In the full
intention-to-treat population, including all patients irrespective of length of
follow-up (272 patients in each group), the odds ratio for metachronous gastric
carcinoma was 0.353 (95% CI 0.161-0.775; p=0.009); in the modified
intention-to-treat population, including patients with at least one
post-randomisation assessment of tumour status and adjusting for loss to
follow-up (255 patients in the eradication group, 250 in the control group), the 
hazard ratio for metachronous gastric carcinoma was 0.339 (95% CI 0.157-0.729;
p=0.003). In the eradication group, 19 (7%) patients had diarrhoea and 32 (12%)
had soft stools.
INTERPRETATION: Prophylactic eradication of H pylori after endoscopic resection
of early gastric cancer should be used to prevent the development of metachronous
gastric carcinoma.
FUNDING: Hiroshima Cancer Seminar Foundation.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61159-9 
PMID: 18675689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

