
1. J Med Assoc Thai. 2008 Jun;91(6):895-907.

Computer tomographic findings of the brain in HIV-patients at Ramathibodi
Hospital.

Hongsakul K(1), Laothamatas J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand. keeratihongsakul@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: To determine the underlying cause of the brain lesions in adult HIV
patients referred for CT scan at Ramathibodi Hospital and to evaluate accuracy of
CT for the diagnosis of the brain lesion.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: Data from first CT scan of the brain of 195 adult HIV
patients at Ramathibodi Hospital were reviewed The final diagnoses from medical
records were assessed followed by CSF analysis, pathological report, and
therapeutic treatment. The accuracy of the CT brain was evaluated using
sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive
value (NPV).
RESULTS: One hundred ninety five adult seropositive patients for HIV underwent CT
scan of the brain, 59% were HIV encephalopathy (HIVE), 22% toxoplasmosis, 9%
cryptococcoma, 5% tuberculous meningitis, 4% tuberculoma, 3% progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), 2% lymphoma, and 1% normal. In
non-specified causes (from CT scan), 33% were meningitis, 4% cerebritis, and 5%
infarction. CT was found to have high sensitivity, specificity, PPV, and NPV for 
toxoplasmosis (92%, 96%, 86%, and 98%, respectively).
CONCLUSION: HIV encephalopathy was the most common finding of adult HIV brains.
Toxoplasmosis was the most common opportunistic parenchymal brain lesion in adult
HIV brains. CT was the modality of choice for diagnosis and exclusion of
toxoplasmosis, but it cannot determine the cause of disease showing meningitis
pattern.


PMID: 18697391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

