
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Dec;1786(2):87-104. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2008.07.002. 
Epub 2008 Jul 22.

Drug development against metastasis-related genes and their pathways: a rationale
for cancer therapy.

Iiizumi M(1), Liu W, Pai SK, Furuta E, Watabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, Southern
Illinois University, School of Medicine, 801 N. Rutledge Street, P.O. Box 19626, 
Springfield, Illinois 62794-9626, USA.

It is well recognized that the majority of cancer related deaths is caused by
metastatic diseases. Therefore, there is an urgent need for the development of
therapeutic intervention specifically targeted to the metastatic process. In the 
last decade, significant progress has been made in this research field, and many 
new concepts have emerged that shed light on the molecular mechanism of
metastasis cascade which is often portrayed as a succession of six distinct
steps; localized invasion, intravasation, translocation, extravasation,
micrometastasis and colonization. Successful metastasis is dependent on the
balance and complex interplay of both the metastasis promoters and suppressors in
each step. Therefore, the basic strategy of our interventions is aimed at either 
blocking the promoters or potentiating the suppressors in this disease process.
Toward this goal, various kinds of antibodies and small molecules have been
designed. These include agents that block the ligand-recepter interaction of
metastasis promoters (HGF/c-Met), antagonize the metastasis-promoting enzymes
(AMF, uPA and MMP) and inhibit the transcriptional activity of metastasis
promoter (beta-Catenin). On the other hand, the intriguing roles of metastasis
suppressors and their signal pathways have been extensively studied and various
attempts have been made to potentiate these factors. Small molecules have been
developed to restore the expression or mimic the function of
metastasis-suppressor genes such as NM23, E-cadherin, Kiss-1, MKK4 and NDRG1, and
some of them are under clinical trials. This review summarizes our current
understanding of the molecular pathway of tumor metastasis and discusses
strategies and recent development of anti-metastatic drugs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2008.07.002 
PMCID: PMC2645343
PMID: 18692117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

