
1. Eur J Dermatol. 2008 Sep-Oct;18(5):489-98. doi: 10.1684/ejd.2008.0484. Epub 2008 
Aug 8.

The role of streptococcal hypersensitivity in the pathogenesis of Behçet's
Disease.

Kaneko F(1), Oyama N, Yanagihori H, Isogai E, Yokota K, Oguma K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Dermato-Immunology and -Allergy, Southern TOHOKU Research
Institute for Neuroscience, Koriyama, Fukushima, Japan. f.kaneko@mt.strins.or.jp

Behçet's disease (BD) is still considered as a mysterious multisystemic disorder 
characterized by recurrent involvement of muco-cutaneous, ocular, intestinal,
vascular and/or nervous system organs. In this review, we would like to highlight
and discuss several important advances in our understanding of the pathogenesis
of BD based on the intrinsic genetic factors including HLA-B51 and MICA
expression and extrinsic triggering factors. As one of the extrinsic triggering
factors, we focused on the hypersensitivity against oral streptococci which might
be acquired through the innate immune mechanism. It was found that HLA-B51
restricted CD8 T cell response was clearly correlated with the target tissues
expressing MICA*009 by stress in active BD patients with HLA-B51 as the intrinsic
factors. Bes-1 gene and HSP-65 derived from oral S. sanguinis, which is the
uncommon serotype (KTH-1, strain BD113-20), are supposed to play important roles 
as an extrinsic factor in BD pathogenesis. The peptides of the Bes-1 gene are
highly homologous with the retinal protein Brn3b and moreover, the Bes-1 peptides
were homologous with HSP-65 derived from microorganisms in association with the
counterpart human HSP-60, which appeared reactively in the patients. HSP-65/60
also has high homologies with the respective T cell epitope of BD patients.
Although HSP-65/60 and the peptides of Bes-1 gene were found to stimulate PBMCs
from BD patients in the production of pro-inflammatory Th1 type cytokines, some
homologous peptides of HSP-65 with T cell epitopes were found to reduce IL-8,
IL-12 and TNF-alpha produced from PBMCs of active BD patients. The findings might
be correlated with the clinically therapeutic effects for BD patients with severe
uveitis, who were led to immunotolerance by the peptide of human HSP-60
(336-351), as previously reported. Then, the pathogenesis of BD was discussed
referring to intrinsic genetic factors and extrinsic triggering factors in
aspects of streptococcal hypersensitivity, which might be acquired through the
innate immune mechanisms. The BD symptoms were thought to be due to vascular
reactions as immune responses in correlation with monocyte expressed
streptococcal agents.

DOI: 10.1684/ejd.2008.0484 
PMID: 18693149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

