
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Dec;84(6):1422-33. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0308199. Epub 2008 Aug
21.

Dynamics of lung macrophage activation in response to helminth infection.

Siracusa MC(1), Reece JJ, Urban JF Jr, Scott AL.

Author information: 
(1)The W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, 615 North Wolfe
Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Most of our understanding of the development and phenotype of alternatively
activated macrophages (AAMs) has been obtained from studies investigating the
response of bone marrow- and peritoneal-derived cells to IL-4 or IL-13
stimulation. Comparatively little is known about the development of AAMs in the
lungs, and how the complex signals associated with pulmonary inflammation
influence the AAM phenotype. Here, we use Nippostrongylus brasiliensis to
initiate AAM development and define the dynamics of surface molecules, gene
expression, and cell function of macrophages isolated from lung tissue at
different times postinfection (PI). Initially, lung macrophages take on a foamy
phenotype, up-regulate MHC and costimulatory molecules, express reduced levels of
TNF and IL-12, and undergo proliferation. Cells isolated between days 8 and 15 PI
adopt a dense, granular phenotype and exhibit reduced levels of costimulatory
molecules and elevated levels of programmed death ligand-1 (PDL-1) and PDL-2 and 
an increase in IL-10 expression. Functionally, AAMs isolated on days 13-15 PI
demonstrate an enhanced capacity to take up and sequester antigen. However, these
same cells did not mediate antigen-specific T cell proliferation and dampened the
proliferation of CD3/CD28-activated CD4+ T cells. These data indicate that the
alternative activation of macrophages in the lungs, although initiated by
IL-4/IL-13, is a dynamic process that is likely to be influenced by other immune 
and nonimmune factors in the pulmonary environment.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0308199 
PMCID: PMC2614596
PMID: 18719016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

