
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Aug 26;105(34):12343-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0805189105. Epub 2008 Aug 18.

The origin recognition complex is dispensable for endoreplication in Drosophila.

Park SY(1), Asano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

The origin recognition complex (ORC) is an essential component of the
prereplication complex (pre-RC) in mitotic cell cycles. The role of ORC as a
foundation to assemble the pre-RC is conserved from yeast to human. Furthermore, 
in metazoans ORC plays a key role in determining the timing of replication
initiation and origin usage. In this report we have produced and analyzed a
Drosophila orc1 allele to investigate the roles of ORC1 in three different modes 
of DNA replication during development. As expected, ORC1 is essential for mitotic
replication and proliferation in brains and imaginal discs, as well as for gene
amplification in ovarian follicle cells. Surprisingly, however, ORC1 is not
required for endoreplication. Decreased cell number in orc1 mutant salivary
glands is consistent with the idea that undetectable levels of maternal ORC1
during embryogenesis fail to support further proliferation. Nevertheless, these
cells begin endoreplicating normally and reach a final ploidy of >1000C in the
absence of zygotic synthesis of ORC1. The dispensability of ORC is further
supported by an examination of other ORC members, whereas Double-parked
protein/Cdt1 and minichromosome maintenance proteins are apparently essential for
endoreplication, implying that some aspects of initiation are shared among the
three modes of DNA replication. This study provides insight into the physiologic 
roles of ORC during metazoan development and proposes that DNA replication
initiation is governed differently in mitotic and endocycles.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0805189105 
PMCID: PMC2527913
PMID: 18711130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

