
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2008 Oct;74(19):5934-42. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02602-07. Epub 
2008 Aug 22.

Crenarchaeota and their role in the nitrogen cycle in a subsurface radioactive
thermal spring in the Austrian Central Alps.

Weidler GW(1), Gerbl FW, Stan-Lotter H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Division of Molecular Biology, University of
Salzburg, Billrothstrasse 11, A-5020 Salzburg, Austria.

Previous results from a 16S rRNA gene library analysis showed high diversity
within the prokaryotic community of a subterranean radioactive thermal spring,
the "Franz-Josef-Quelle" (FJQ) in Bad Gastein, Austria, as well as evidence for
ammonia oxidation by crenarchaeota. This study reports further characterization
of the community by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis,
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and semiquantitative nitrification
measurements. DGGE bands from three types of samples (filtered water, biofilms on
glass slides, and naturally grown biofilms), including samples collected at two
distinct times (January 2005 and July 2006), were analyzed. The archaeal
community consisted mainly of Crenarchaeota of the soil-subsurface-freshwater
group (group 1.1b) and showed a higher diversity than in the previous 16S rRNA
gene library analysis, as was also found for crenarchaeal amoA genes. No
bacterial amoA genes were detected. FISH analysis of biofilms indicated the
presence of archaeal cells with an abundance of 5.3% (+/-4.5%) in the total
4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)-stained community. Microcosm experiments of 
several weeks in duration showed a decline of ammonium that correlated with an
increase of nitrite, the presence of crenarchaeal amoA genes, and the absence of 
bacterial amoA genes. The data suggested that only ammonia-oxidizing archaea
(AOA) perform the first step of nitrification in this 45 degrees C environment.
The crenarchaeal amoA gene sequences grouped within a novel cluster of amoA
sequences from the database, originating from geothermally influenced
environments, for which we propose the designation "thermal spring" cluster and
which may be older than most AOA from soils on earth.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02602-07 
PMCID: PMC2565979
PMID: 18723663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

