
1. Br J Cancer. 2008 Sep 2;99(5):741-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604526. Epub 2008 Aug
19.

Mage-b vaccine delivered by recombinant Listeria monocytogenes is highly
effective against breast cancer metastases.

Kim SH(1), Castro F, Gonzalez D, Maciag PC, Paterson Y, Gravekamp C.

Author information: 
(1)California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, 475 Brannan Street, San 
Francisco, CA 94107, USA.

New therapies are needed that target breast cancer metastases. In previous
studies, we have shown that vaccination with pcDNA3.1-Mage-b DNA vaccine is
effective against breast cancer metastases. In the study presented here, we have 
further enhanced the efficacy of Mage-b vaccination through the improved delivery
of the vaccine using recombinant Listeria monocytogenes (LM). Three overlapping
fragments of Mage-b as well as the complete protein-encoding region of Mage-b
have been expressed as a fusion protein with a truncated non-cytolytic form of
listeriolysin O (LLO) in recombinant LM. These different Mage-b vaccine strains
were preventively tested for their efficacy against breast cancer metastases in a
syngeneic mouse tumour model 4T1. The LM-LLO-Mage-b/2nd, expressing position
311-660 of the cDNA of Mage-b, was the most effective vaccine strain against
metastases in the 4T1 mouse breast tumour model. Vaccination with
LM-LLO-Mage-b/2nd dramatically reduced the number of metastases by 96% compared
with the saline group and by 88% compared with the vector control group (LM-LLO),
and this correlated with strong Mage-b-specific CD8 T-cell responses in the
spleen, after restimulation with Mage-b. However, no effect of LM-LLO-Mage-b/2nd 
was observed on 4T1 primary tumours, which may be the result of a complete
absence of Mage-b-specific immune responses in the draining lymph nodes.
Vaccination with LM-LLO-Mage-b/2nd could be an excellent follow-up after removal 
of the primary tumour, to eliminate metastases and residual tumour cells.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604526 
PMCID: PMC2528142
PMID: 18728665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

