
1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 7;283(45):30772-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804824200. Epub 2008
Aug 22.

The organization of LH2 complexes in membranes from Rhodobacter sphaeroides.

Olsen JD(1), Tucker JD, Timney JA, Qian P, Vassilev C, Hunter CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10
2TN, UK. j.olsen@sheffield.ac.uk

The mapping of the photosynthetic membrane of Rhodobacter sphaeroides by atomic
force microscopy (AFM) revealed a unique organization of arrays of dimeric
reaction center-light harvesting I-PufX (RC-LH1-PufX) core complexes surrounded
and interconnected by light-harvesting LH2 complexes (Bahatyrova, S., Frese, R.
N., Siebert, C. A., Olsen, J. D., van der Werf, K. O., van Grondelle, R.,
Niederman, R. A., Bullough, P. A., Otto, C., and Hunter, C. N. (2004) Nature 430,
1058-1062). However, membrane regions consisting solely of LH2 complexes were
under-represented in these images because these small, highly curved areas of
membrane rendered them difficult to image even using gentle tapping mode AFM and 
impossible with contact mode AFM. We report AFM imaging of membranes prepared
from a mutant of R. sphaeroides, DPF2G, that synthesizes only the LH2 complexes, 
which assembles spherical intracytoplasmic membrane vesicles of approximately 53 
nm diameter in vivo. By opening these vesicles and adsorbing them onto mica to
form small, < or =120 nm, largely flat sheets we have been able to visualize the 
organization of these LH2-only membranes for the first time. The transition from 
highly curved vesicle to the planar sheet is accompanied by a change in the
packing of the LH2 complexes such that approximately half of the complexes are
raised off the mica surface by approximately 1 nm relative to the rest. This
vertical displacement produces a very regular corrugated appearance of the planar
membrane sheets. Analysis of the topographs was used to measure the distances and
angles between the complexes. These data are used to model the organization of
LH2 complexes in the original, curved membrane. The implications of this
architecture for the light harvesting function and diffusion of quinones in
native membranes of R. sphaeroides are discussed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M804824200 
PMCID: PMC2662159
PMID: 18723509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

