
1. Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 1;68(17):6884-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1101.

BCR/ABL and other kinases from chronic myeloproliferative disorders stimulate
single-strand annealing, an unfaithful DNA double-strand break repair.

Cramer K(1), Nieborowska-Skorska M, Koptyra M, Slupianek A, Penserga ET, Eaves
CJ, Aulitzky W, Skorski T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

Myeloproliferative disorders (MPD) are stem cell-derived clonal diseases arising 
as a consequence of acquired aberrations in c-ABL, Janus-activated kinase 2
(JAK2), and platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) that generate
oncogenic fusion tyrosine kinases (FTK), including BCR/ABL, TEL/ABL, TEL/JAK2,
and TEL/PDGFbetaR. Here, we show that FTKs stimulate the formation of reactive
oxygen species and DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) both in hematopoietic cell
lines and in CD34(+) leukemic stem/progenitor cells from patients with chronic
myelogenous leukemia (CML). Single-strand annealing (SSA) represents a relatively
rare but very unfaithful DSB repair mechanism causing chromosomal aberrations.
Using a specific reporter cassette integrated into genomic DNA, we found that
BCR/ABL and other FTKs stimulated SSA activity. Imatinib-mediated inhibition of
BCR/ABL abrogated this effect, implicating a kinase-dependent mechanism. Y253F,
E255K, T315I, and H396P mutants of BCR/ABL that confer imatinib resistance also
stimulated SSA. Increased expression of either nonmutated or mutated BCR/ABL
kinase, as is typical of blast phase cells and very primitive chronic phase CML
cells, was associated with higher SSA activity. BCR/ABL-mediated stimulation of
SSA was accompanied by enhanced nuclear colocalization of RAD52 and ERCC1, which 
play a key role in the repair. Taken together, these findings suggest a role of
FTKs in causing disease progression in MPDs by inducing chromosomal instability
through the production of DSBs and stimulation of SSA repair.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1101 
PMCID: PMC2531069
PMID: 18757400  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

