
1. J Infect Dis. 2008 Oct 15;198(8):1189-97. doi: 10.1086/591917.

Preferential protection of Borrelia burgdorferi sensu stricto by a Salp15
homologue in Ixodes ricinus saliva.

Hovius JW(1), Schuijt TJ, de Groot KA, Roelofs JJ, Oei GA, Marquart JA, de Beer
R, van 't Veer C, van der Poll T, Ramamoorthi N, Fikrig E, van Dam AP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. j.w.hovius@amc.uva.nl

BACKGROUND: Ixodes ticks are the main vectors for Borrelia burgdorferi sensu
lato. In the United States, B. burgdorferi is the sole causative agent of Lyme
borreliosis and is transmitted by Ixodes scapularis. In Europe, 3 Borrelia
species-B. burgdorferi, B. garinii, and B. afzelii-are prevalent, which are
transmitted by Ixodes ricinus. The I. scapularis salivary protein Salp15 has been
shown to bind to B. burgdorferi outer surface protein (Osp) C, protecting the
spirochete from antibody-mediated killing.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We recently identified a Salp15 homologue in I. ricinus,
Salp15 Iric-1. Here, we have demonstrated, by solid-phase overlays, enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay, and surface plasmon resonance, that Salp15 Iric-1 binds to
B. burgdorferi OspC. Importantly, this binding protected the spirochete from
antibody-mediated killing in vitro and in vivo; immune mice rechallenged with B. 
burgdorferi preincubated with Salp15 Iric-1 displayed significantly higher
Borrelia numbers and more severe carditis, compared with control mice.
Furthermore, Salp15 Iric-1 was capable of binding to OspC from B. garinii and B. 
afzelii, but these Borrelia species were not protected from antibody-mediated
killing.
CONCLUSIONS: Salp15 Iric-1 interacts with all European Borrelia species but
differentially protects B. burgdorferi from antibody-mediated killing, putatively
giving this Borrelia species a survival advantage in nature.

DOI: 10.1086/591917 
PMCID: PMC4317250
PMID: 18752445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

