
1. Environ Sci Technol. 2008 Aug 15;42(16):5978-84.

Can physicochemical and microbial soil properties explain enantiomeric shifts of 
chiral organochlorines?

Koblicková M(1), Ducek L, Jarkovský J, Hofman J, Bucheli TD, Klánová J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Masaryk
University, Kamenice 126/3, 625 00 Brno, Czech Republic.

Enantiomeric fractions (EF) of PCB 95, 132, 149, and 174, alpha-HCH, o,p'-DDD,
and o,p'-DDT were analyzed in 112 soil samples using two-dimensional gas
chromatography and triple-quadrupole mass spectrometry. To assess the soil
conditions that facilitate enantioselective fractionation of chiral compounds, EF
values of selected PCBs were further correlated with a wide range of
physicochemical and microbial soil parameters in an attempt to identify the
influential factors and their mutual relations. It was evident that soils where
nonracemic ratios of investigated compounds were found were more carbon rich but 
they also contained significantly more humic and fulvic acids and total nitrogen.
These specific physicochemical properties were accompanied by significantly
increased values of all key biotic variables, the amount of microbial biomass,
and its respiration activity (both basal and substrate-induced). Therefore, the
shifts from racemic ratios appeared to be associated with more sustainable and
active soil microflora. Among other abiotic characteristics, most significant
differences were detected in the soil texture. Soil samples with significant
shifts contained increased amount of clay component and correspondingly decreased
proportion of sand fraction. These differences can also be associated with more
intensive microbial activity, because clay content and texture with an increased 
amount of microaggregates are known to be favorable for soil microflora and its
viability.

DOI: 10.1021/es800625d 
PMID: 18767654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

