
1. Environ Microbiol. 2009 Jan;11(1):111-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2008.01745.x. 
Epub 2008 Sep 8.

Potential for phosphonoacetate utilization by marine bacteria in temperate
coastal waters.

Gilbert JA(1), Thomas S, Cooley NA, Kulakova A, Field D, Booth T, McGrath JW,
Quinn JP, Joint I.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, The Hoe, Plymouth PL1 3DH, UK.
jagi@pml.ac.uk

Phosphonates are organic compounds that contain a C-P bond and are a poorly
characterized component of the marine phosphorus cycle. They may represent a
potential source of bioavailable phosphorus, particularly in oligotrophic
conditions. This study has investigated the distribution of the phnA gene which
encodes phosphonoacetate hydrolase, the enzyme that mineralizes phosphonoacetate.
Using newly designed degenerate primers targeting the phnA gene we analysed the
potential for phosphonoacetate utilization in DNA and cDNA libraries constructed 
from a phytoplankton bloom in the Western English Channel during July 2006. Total
RNA was isolated and reverse transcribed and phosphonoacetate hydrolase (phnA)
transcripts were PCR amplified from the cDNA with the degenerate primers, cloned 
and sequenced. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated considerable diversity with 14 
sequence types yielding five unique phnA protein groups. We also identified 28
phnA homologues in a 454-pyrosequencing metagenomic and metatranscriptomic study 
from a coastal marine mesocosm, indicating that > 3% of marine bacteria in this
study contained phnA. phnA homologues were also present in a metagenomic fosmid
library from this experiment. Finally, cultures of four isolates of potential
coral pathogens belonging to the Vibrionaceae contained the phnA gene. In the
laboratory, these isolates were able to grow with phosphonoacetate as sole P and 
C source. The fact that the capacity to utilize phosphonoacetate was evident in
each of the three coastal environments suggests the potential for widespread
utilization of this bioavailable P source.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2008.01745.x 
PMID: 18783384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

