
1. J Cell Sci. 2008 Oct 15;121(Pt 20):3325-34. doi: 10.1242/jcs.030163. Epub 2008
Sep 16.

TM9SF4 is required for Drosophila cellular immunity via cell adhesion and
phagocytosis.

Bergeret E(1), Perrin J, Williams M, Grunwald D, Engel E, Thevenon D, Taillebourg
E, Bruckert F, Cosson P, Fauvarque MO.

Author information: 
(1)CEA, iRTSV, LTS, 38054 Grenoble, France.

Nonaspanins are characterised by a large N-terminal extracellular domain and nine
putative transmembrane domains. This evolutionarily conserved family comprises
three members in Dictyostelium discoideum (Phg1A, Phg1B and Phg1C) and Drosophila
melanogaster, and four in mammals (TM9SF1-TM9SF4), the function of which is
essentially unknown. Genetic studies in Dictyostelium demonstrated that Phg1A is 
required for cell adhesion and phagocytosis. We created Phg1A/TM9SF4-null mutant 
flies and showed that they were sensitive to pathogenic Gram-negative, but not
Gram-positive, bacteria. This increased sensitivity was not due to impaired Toll 
or Imd signalling, but rather to a defective cellular immune response.
TM9SF4-null larval macrophages phagocytosed Gram-negative E. coli inefficiently, 
although Gram-positive S. aureus were phagocytosed normally. Mutant larvae also
had a decreased wasp egg encapsulation rate, a process requiring
haemocyte-dependent adhesion to parasitoids. Defective cellular immunity was
coupled to morphological and adhesion defects in mutant larval haemocytes, which 
had an abnormal actin cytoskeleton. TM9SF4, and its closest paralogue TM9SF2,
were both required for bacterial internalisation in S2 cells, where they
displayed partial redundancy. Our study highlights the contribution of phagocytes
to host defence in an organism possessing a complex innate immune response and
suggests an evolutionarily conserved function of TM9SF4 in eukaryotic phagocytes.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.030163 
PMID: 18796536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

