
1. Infect Immun. 2008 Nov;76(11):5072-81. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00677-08. Epub 2008 Sep
15.

CadA negatively regulates Escherichia coli O157:H7 adherence and intestinal
colonization.

Vazquez-Juarez RC(1), Kuriakose JA, Rasko DA, Ritchie JM, Kendall MM, Slater TM, 
Sinha M, Luxon BA, Popov VL, Waldor MK, Sperandio V, Torres AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX 77555-1070, USA.

Adherence of pathogenic Escherichia coli strains to intestinal epithelia is
essential for infection. For enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) serotype O157:H7,
we have previously demonstrated that multiple factors govern this pathogen's
adherence to HeLa cells (A. G. Torres and J. B. Kaper, Infect. Immun.
71:4985-4995, 2003). One of these factors is CadA, a lysine decarboxylase, and
this protein has been proposed to negatively regulate virulence in several
enteric pathogens. In the case of EHEC strains, CadA modulates expression of the 
intimin, an outer membrane adhesin involved in pathogenesis. Here, we inactivated
cadA in O157:H7 strain 86-24 to investigate the role of this gene in EHEC
adhesion to tissue-cultured monolayers, global gene expression patterns, and
colonization of the infant rabbit intestine. The cadA mutant did not possess
lysine decarboxylation activity and was hyperadherent to tissue-cultured cells.
Adherence of the cadA mutant was nearly twofold greater than that of the wild
type, and the adherence phenotype was independent of pH, lysine, or cadaverine in
the media. Additionally, complementation of the cadA defect reduced adherence
back to wild-type levels, and it was found that the mutation affected the
expression of the intimin protein. Disruption of the eae gene (intimin-encoding
gene) in the cadA mutant significantly reduced its adherence to tissue-cultured
cells. However, adherence of the cadA eae double mutant was greater than that of 
an 86-24 eae mutant, suggesting that the enhanced adherence of the cadA mutant is
not entirely attributable to enhanced expression of intimin in this background.
Gene array analysis revealed that the cadA mutation significantly altered EHEC
gene expression patterns; expression of 1,332 genes was downregulated and that of
132 genes was upregulated in the mutant compared to the wild-type strain.
Interestingly, the gene expression variation shows an EHEC-biased gene alteration
including intergenic regions. Two putative adhesins, flagella and F9 fimbria,
were upregulated in the cadA mutant, suggestive of their association with
adherence in the absence of the Cad regulatory mechanism. In the infant rabbit
model, the cadA mutant outcompeted the wild-type strain in the ileum but not in
the cecum or mid-colon, raising the possibility that CadA negatively regulates
EHEC pathogenicity in a tissue-specific fashion.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00677-08 
PMCID: PMC2573373
PMID: 18794292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

