
1. Kidney Int. 2009 Jan;75(1):52-9. doi: 10.1038/ki.2008.454. Epub 2008 Sep 17.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 regulates neutrophil influx during acute
pyelonephritis.

Roelofs JJ(1), Teske GJ, Bonta PI, de Vries CJ, Meijers JC, Weening JJ, van der
Poll T, Florquin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. j.j.roelofs@amc.uva.nl

Acute pyelonephritis, frequently caused by Escherichia coli, is a substantial
health problem. Plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1) not only inhibits 
plasminogen activation but is also involved in cell migration. To determine if it
has a role in host defense, we induced pyelonephritis in PAI-1 gene knockout and 
wild-type mice by intravesical inoculation with uropathogenic E. coli 1677.
Bacterial growth was determined on blood agar plates in portions of the kidneys
homogenized in sterile saline. Kidney levels of PAI-1 were increased in infected 
compared to control mice, suggesting a physiological role for PAI-1 during
pyelonephritis. The knockout mice had significantly more bacterial outgrowth in
kidney homogenates compared to the wild-type mice. Strikingly, higher
colony-forming units were accompanied by increased levels of the cytokines
TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, and IL-6 in the kidneys of knockout mice, but levels of the 
chemokines KC and MIP-2 were not different. Remarkably, plasma levels of KC were 
higher, but renal neutrophil influx was significantly lower, in the knockout than
in the wild-type mice. Our study shows that PAI-1 is critically involved in host 
defense against E. coli-induced acute pyelonephritis, in part, by modulating
neutrophil influx.

DOI: 10.1038/ki.2008.454 
PMID: 18800031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

