
1. J Immunol. 2008 Oct 1;181(7):4613-20.

T cells from Leishmania major-susceptible BALB/c mice have a defect in
efficiently up-regulating CXCR3 upon activation.

Barbi J(1), Brombacher F, Satoskar AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43221,
USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2009 Feb 1;182(3):1771.

Genetic background influences the outcome of Leishmania major infection. C57BL/6 
mice mount a Th1 response and resolve infection. In contrast, BALB/c mice mount a
Th2 response and develop chronic lesions. This susceptible phenotype is seen even
though BALB/c mice generate IFN-gamma-producing T cells at proportions similar to
C57BL/6 mice in their lymph nodes (LN) early after infection. We had previously
shown that chemokine receptor CXCR3 mediates immunity against L. major by
recruiting IFN-gamma-producing T cells to the lesions of C57BL/6 mice. Therefore,
we hypothesized that IFN-gamma-secreting T cells in BALB/c mice are unable to
confer protection because they may be defective in up-regulating CXCR3. To test
this hypothesis, we analyzed kinetics of CXCR3-expressing T cells in the LN and
lesions of BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice during L. major infection. Additionally, we
compared the ability of T cells from BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice to up-regulate CXCR3
upon activation. We found that resolution of L. major infection in C57BL/6 mice
was associated with an increase in the proportion of CXCR3(+) T cells in regional
LN and lesions, whereas disease progression in BALB/c mice was associated with a 
decrease in these populations. Anti-CD3/CD28-activated T cells from naive BALB/c 
but not C57BL/6 mice were defective in up-regulating CXCR3. Impaired induction of
CXCR3 on BALB/c T cells was not due to lack of IFN-gamma and was mediated
partially by IL-10 but not IL-4 or IL-13. We propose that defective CXCR3
up-regulation on T cells in BALB/c mice may contribute to L. major
susceptibility.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.7.4613 
PMCID: PMC2562238
PMID: 18802063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

