
1. J Immunol. 2008 Oct 1;181(7):4723-32.

Arrestin 3 mediates endocytosis of CCR7 following ligation of CCL19 but not
CCL21.

Byers MA(1), Calloway PA, Shannon L, Cunningham HD, Smith S, Li F, Fassold BC,
Vines CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, The University 
of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Internalization of ligand bound G protein-coupled receptors, an important
cellular function that mediates receptor desensitization, takes place via
distinct pathways, which are often unique for each receptor. The C-C chemokine
receptor (CCR7) G protein-coupled receptor is expressed on naive T cells,
dendritic cells, and NK cells and has two endogenous ligands, CCL19 and CCL21.
Following binding of CCL21, 21 +/- 4% of CCR7 is internalized in the HuT 78 human
T cell lymphoma line, while 76 +/- 8% of CCR7 is internalized upon binding to
CCL19. To determine whether arrestins mediated differential internalization of
CCR7/CCL19 vs CCR7/CCL21, we used small interfering RNA (siRNA) to knock down
expression of arrestin 2 or arrestin 3 in HuT 78 cells. Independent of arrestin 2
or arrestin 3 expression, CCR7/CCL21 internalized. In contrast, following
depletion of arrestin 3, CCR7/CCL19 failed to internalize. To examine the
consequence of complete loss of both arrestin 2 and arrestin 3 on CCL19/CCR7
internalization, we examined CCR7 internalization in arrestin 2(-/-)/arrestin
3(-/-) murine embryonic fibroblasts. Only reconstitution with arrestin 3-GFP but 
not arrestin 2-GFP rescued internalization of CCR7/CCL19. Loss of arrestin 2 or
arrestin 3 blocked migration to CCL19 but had no effect on migration to CCL21.
Using immunofluorescence microscopy, we found that arrestins do not cluster at
the membrane with CCR7 following ligand binding but cap with CCR7 during receptor
internalization. These are the first studies that define a role for arrestin 3 in
the internalization of a chemokine receptor following binding of one but not both
endogenous ligands.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.7.4723 
PMCID: PMC7877961
PMID: 18802075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

