
1. J Environ Sci (China). 2008;20(8):998-1005.

Environmental monitoring and fuzzy synthetic evaluation of municipal solid waste 
transfer stations in Beijing in 2001-2006.

Li C(1), Li G, Luo Y, Li Y, Huang J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Resource and Environment Science, China Agriculture University,
Belting 100094, China. lichp-xj@163.com

Transfer station (TS) is an integral part of present-day municipal solid waste
(MSW) management systems. To provide information for the incorporation of waste
facilities within the current integrated waste management system, the authors
measured the existing environmental quality at five MSW TSs. Discharged
wastewater, air, and noise were monitored and assayed at the five TSs in Beijing 
in 2001-2006 during rainy seasons (RSs) and dry seasons (DSs). Except Ammonia
(NH3) and hydrogen sulfide (H2S), the analytical results of total suspended
particles (TSPs), odor, noise, ammonium nitrogen (NH4(+)-N), chemical oxygen
demand (COD(Cr)), biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5), suspended solid (SS), and
fecal coliform concentrations were all degree-varied higher than the criteria
limit in China. Using fuzzy mathematics, the environmental quality of MSW TSs in 
Beijing was classified into five categories, with levels of certainty of
belonging to different categories and evaluations. The result indicated that the 
whole environmental quality of Datun TS, Majialou TS, and Xiaowuji TS, in
Beijing, were bad during 2001-2006 in RSs and DSs. Except in 2002, the entire
environmental quality of the Wuluju TS during 2001-2006 in RSs was poor. Only in 
the DSs of 2002 and 2003 was the whole environmental quality of the Wuluju TS
good. The whole environmental quality of the Yamenkou TS during 2001-2006 in DSs 
was bad, which was lower than that of 2001-2006 DSs.

DOI: 10.1016/s1001-0742(08)62199-3 
PMID: 18817081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

