
1. Protein Sci. 2008 Dec;17(12):2134-44. doi: 10.1110/ps.038125.108. Epub 2008 Sep
24.

Crystal structures of Mycobacterium tuberculosis S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine
hydrolase in ternary complex with substrate and inhibitors.

Reddy MC(1), Kuppan G, Shetty ND, Owen JL, Ioerger TR, Sacchettini JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843-2128, USA.

S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase (SAHH) is a ubiquitous enzyme that plays a
central role in methylation-based processes by maintaining the intracellular
balance between S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) and S-adenosylmethionine. We report 
the first prokaryotic crystal structure of SAHH, from Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
(Mtb), in complex with adenosine (ADO) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.
Structures of complexes with three inhibitors are also reported: 3'-keto
aristeromycin (ARI), 2-fluoroadenosine, and 3-deazaadenosine. The ARI complex is 
the first reported structure of SAHH complexed with this inhibitor, and confirms 
the oxidation of the 3' hydroxyl to a planar keto group, consistent with its
prediction as a mechanism-based inhibitor. We demonstrate the in vivo enzyme
inhibition activity of the three inhibitors and also show that 2-fluoradenosine
has bactericidal activity. While most of the residues lining the ADO-binding
pocket are identical between Mtb and human SAHH, less is known about the binding 
mode of the homocysteine (HCY) appendage of the full substrate. We report the 2.0
A resolution structure of the complex of SAHH cocrystallized with SAH. The most
striking change in the structure is that binding of HCY forces a rotation of
His363 around the backbone to flip out of contact with the 5' hydroxyl of the ADO
and opens access to a nearby channel that leads to the surface. This complex
suggests that His363 acts as a switch that opens up to permit binding of
substrate, then closes down after release of the cleaved HCY. Differences in the 
entrance to this access channel between human and Mtb SAHH are identified.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.038125.108 
PMCID: PMC2590921
PMID: 18815415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

