
1. Transgenic Res. 2009 Feb;18(1):71-87. doi: 10.1007/s11248-008-9218-z. Epub 2008
Sep 26.

Mycoplasma contamination of murine embryonic stem cells affects cell parameters, 
germline transmission and chimeric progeny.

Markoullis K(1), Bulian D, Hölzlwimmer G, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Heiliger KJ,
Zitzelsberger H, Scherb H, Mysliwietz J, Uphoff CC, Drexler HG, Adler T, Busch
DH, Schmidt J, Mahabir E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Medicine, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research
Center for Environmental Health, Ingolstädter Landstrasse 1, 85764, Neuherberg,
Germany.

Murine embryonic stem cells (mESCs) inoculated at passage P13 with the mycoplasma
species M. hominis, M. fermentans and M. orale and cultured over 20 passages
showed reduced growth rate and viability (P < 0.0001) compared to control mESCs. 
Spectral karyotypic analysis of mycoplasma-infected mESCs showed a number of
non-clonal chromosomal aberrations which increased with the duration of
infection. The differentiation status of the infected mESCs was most affected at 
passage P13+6 where the infection was strongest and 46.3% of the mESCs expressed 
both POU5F1 and SSEA-1 markers whereas 84.8% of control mESCs expressed both
markers. The percentage of germline chimeras from mycoplasma-infected mESCs was
examined after blastocyst injection and embryo transfer to suitable recipients at
different passages and, compared to the respective control group, was most
affected at passage P13+5 (50% vs. 90%; P < 0.07). Further reductions were
obtained at the same passage in the percentage of litters born (50% vs. 100%; P <
0.07) and in the percentage of pups born (22% vs. 45%; P < 0.001). Thirty three
chimeras (39.8%) obtained from blastocyst injection with mycoplasma-infected
mESCs showed reduced body weight (P < 0.0001), nasal discharge,
osteoarthropathia, and cachexia. Flow cytometric analysis of plasma from chimeras
produced with mycoplasma-infected mESCs revealed statistically significant
differences in the proportions of T-cells and increased levels of IgG1 (P <
0.001), IgG2a (P < 0.05) and IgM (P < 0.05), anti-DNA antibodies (P < 0.05) and
rheumatoid factor (P < 0.01). The present data indicate that mycoplasma
contamination of mESCs affects various cell parameters, germline transmission,
and postnatal development of the resulting chimeras.

DOI: 10.1007/s11248-008-9218-z 
PMID: 18819014  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

