
1. Am J Pathol. 2008 Nov;173(5):1566-76. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.071153. Epub 2008 
Sep 25.

Involvement of the lysophosphatidic acid-generating enzyme autotaxin in
lymphocyte-endothelial cell interactions.

Nakasaki T(1), Tanaka T, Okudaira S, Hirosawa M, Umemoto E, Otani K, Jin S, Bai
Z, Hayasaka H, Fukui Y, Aozasa K, Fujita N, Tsuruo T, Ozono K, Aoki J, Miyasaka
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

Autotaxin (ATX) is a secreted protein with lysophospholipase D activity that
generates lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) from lysophosphatidylcholine. Here we
report that functional ATX is selectively expressed in high endothelial venules
(HEVs) of both lymph nodes and Peyer's patches. ATX expression was
developmentally regulated and coincided with lymphocyte recruitment to the lymph 
nodes. In adults, ATX expression was independent of HEV-expressed chemokines such
as CCL21 and CXCL13, innate immunity signals including those via TLR4 or MyD88,
and of the extent of lymphocyte trafficking across the HEVs. ATX expression was
induced in venules at sites of chronic inflammation. Receptors for the ATX enzyme
product LPA were constitutively expressed in HEV endothelial cells (ECs). In
vitro, LPA induced strong morphological changes in HEV ECs. Forced ATX expression
caused cultured ECs to respond to lysophosphatidylcholine, up-regulating
lymphocyte binding to the ECs in a LPA receptor-dependent manner under both
static and flow conditions. Although in vivo depletion of circulating ATX did not
affect lymphocyte trafficking into the lymph nodes, we surmise, based on the
above data, that ATX expressed by HEVs acts on HEVs in situ to facilitate
lymphocyte binding to ECs and that ATX in the general circulation does not play a
major role in this process. Tissue-specific inactivation of ATX will verify this 
hypothesis in future studies of its mechanism of action.

DOI: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.071153 
PMCID: PMC2570145
PMID: 18818380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

