
1. Sci Total Environ. 1991 Apr 15;103(2-3):229-43.

Comparative toxicity of organotin compounds to rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss) yolk sac fry.

de Vries H(1), Penninks AH, Snoeij NJ, Seinen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pharmacology, Pharmacy and Toxicology, University of 
Utrecht, Netherlands.

The comparative toxicity of various organotin compounds was investigated in early
life stages of the rainbow trout. Beginning with yolk sac fry, trout were
continuously exposed for 110 days to tributyl- (TBTC), triphenyl- (TPhTC) or
tricyclohexyltin chloride (TCHTC) at concentrations of 0.12-15 nM, to
trimethyltin chloride (TMTC) at concentrations of 3-75 nM or to dibutyl- (DBTC)
or diphenyltin chloride (DPhTC) at 160-4000 nM. The diorganotin compounds DBTC
and DPhTC were about three orders of magnitude less toxic than the triorganotin
homologs TBTC and TPhTC. Both for DBTC and DPhTC, a no-observable-effect
concentration (NOEC) of 160 nM was established, corresponding to 40 and 60 ppb,
respectively. Of the triorganotin compounds, TCHTC appeared to be the most toxic,
inducing 100% mortality within 1 week at a concentration of 3 nM. Only a few
trout survived exposure to 0.6 nM TCHTC for 110 days. TBTC and TPhTC caused acute
mortality at a concentration of 15 nM. For both TBTC and TPhTC a NOEC of 0.12 nM 
was established, corresponding to water concentrations of 40 and 50 ppt,
respectively. Histopathological examination revealed depletion of glycogen in
liver cells of both di- and triorganotin exposed fish, except in the case of
TMTC. No signs of toxicity were observed in fish exposed to up to 75 nM TMTC, the
highest concentration tested. Atrophy of the thymus, the most prominent sign of
toxicity of di- and tributyltin compounds in mammalian species, was not observed 
in early life stages of rainbow trout. Tail melanization was observed in the
groups exposed to 3 nM TPhTC, 3 nM TBTC, 800 nM DBTC and 800 nM DPhTC. At the end
of the exposure period, resistance to infection was examined by an
intraperitoneal challenge with Aeromonas hydrophila, a secondary pathogenic
bacterium to fish. Resistance of bacterial challenge was found to be decreased
even at the lowest-effect concentration of both di- and triorganotin compounds.

DOI: 10.1016/0048-9697(91)90148-8 
PMID: 1882234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

