
1. Eur Respir J. 2009 Feb;33(2):375-81. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00103408. Epub 2008
Oct 1.

Stimulation of acetylcholine receptors impairs host defence during pneumococcal
pneumonia.

Giebelen IA(1), Leendertse M, Florquin S, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9, Room G2-130, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. t.vanderpoll@amc.uva.nl

The cholinergic nervous system can inhibit the systemic inflammation accompanying
sepsis by virtue of a specific action of acetylcholine on alpha7 cholinergic
receptors. The current authors sought to determine the effect of nicotine, an
alpha7 cholinergic receptor agonist, on the host response to pneumonia caused by 
Streptococcus pneumoniae. Mice were intranasally infected with S. pneumoniae and 
treated with nicotine or saline intraperitoneally using a treatment schedule
shown to improve host defence against abdominal sepsis. Nicotine treatment was
associated with a transiently enhanced growth of S. pneumoniae, as indicated by
higher bacterial loads in both lungs and blood at 24 h after infection. At 48 h
after infection, bacterial burdens had increased in both treatment groups and
differences were no longer present. Remarkably, mice treated with nicotine showed
enhanced lung inflammation at 24 h after infection. Moreover, both lung and
plasma concentrations of the pro-inflammatory cytokines tumour necrosis
factor-alpha and interferon-gamma were higher in nicotine-treated animals at this
time-point. Additional studies examining the effect of nicotine on the immediate 
(4-h) inflammatory response to S. pneumoniae did not reveal an anti-inflammatory 
effect of nicotine either. The present data suggest that nicotine transiently
impairs host defence in pneumococcal pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00103408 
PMID: 18829677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

