
1. Environ Int. 2009 Feb;35(2):336-41. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2008.08.008. Epub 2008 
Sep 26.

Persistent organochlorine compounds in peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus) eggs
from South Greenland: levels and temporal changes between 1986 and 2003.

Vorkamp K(1), Thomsen M, Møller S, Falk K, Sørensen PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Chemistry and Microbiology, National Environmental
Research Institute, Aarhus University, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark. kvo@dmu.dk

Thirty-seven addled peregrine falcon eggs collected in South Greenland between
1986 and 2003 were analysed for their content of the organochlorine compounds
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), dichlorodiphenyl tricloroethane (DDT) and its
degradation products, hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH) isomers and hexachlorobenzene
(HCB). PCBs and DDT (including metabolites) were by far the most abundant OC
groups, with median concentrations of 55 and 40 microg/g lw, respectively. The
concentrations were high in an Arctic context, but similar to previously reported
levels from Alaska and Norway and slightly lower than concentrations measured in 
eggs from industrialised regions. Geographical differences may be of importance, 
considering the migration of peregrine falcons and their prey. SigmaHCH and HCB
had median concentrations of 0.39 and 0.17 microg/g lw, respectively. On average,
DDE accounted for 97% of SigmaDDT, but was below critical levels for eggshell
thinning. All compound groups showed a weak decreasing trend over the study
period, which was statistically significant for HCB and close to being
significant for SigmaHCH. The weak decrease of SigmaPCB and SigmaDDT is different
from other time trend studies from Greenland, usually showing a more pronounced
decrease in the beginning of the study period, followed by a certain
stabilisation in recent years.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2008.08.008 
PMID: 18823663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

