
1. J Immunol. 2008 Oct 15;181(8):5374-85.

Normal development and activation but altered cytokine production of
Fyn-deficient CD4+ T cells.

Mamchak AA(1), Sullivan BM, Hou B, Lee LM, Gilden JK, Krummel MF, Locksley RM,
DeFranco AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

The Src family kinase Fyn is expressed in T cells and has been shown to
phosphorylate proteins involved in TCR signaling, cytoskeletal reorganization,
and IL-4 production. Fyn-deficient mice have greatly decreased numbers of NKT
cells and have thymocytes and T cells with compromised responses following Ab
crosslinking of their TCRs. Herein we have addressed the role of Fyn in
peptide/MHC class II-induced CD4(+) T cell responses. In Fyn-deficient mice,
CD4(+) T cells expressing the DO11.10 TCR transgene developed normally, and the
number and phenotype of naive and regulatory DO11.10(+)CD4(+) T cells in the
periphery were comparable with their wild-type counterparts. Conjugation with
chicken OVA peptide 323-339-loaded APCs, and the subsequent proliferation in
vitro or in vivo of DO11.10(+) Fyn-deficient CD4(+) T cells, was virtually
indistinguishable from the response of DO11.10(+) wild-type CD4(+) T cells.
Proliferation of Fyn-deficient T cells was not more dependent on costimulation
through CD28. Additionally, we have found that differentiation, in vitro or in
vivo, of transgenic CD4(+) Fyn-deficient T cells into IL-4-secreting effector
cells was unimpaired, and under certain conditions DO11.10(+) Fyn-deficient
CD4(+) T cells were more potent cytokine-producing cells than DO11.10(+)
wild-type CD4(+) T cells. These data demonstrate that ablation of Fyn expression 
does not alter most Ag-driven CD4(+) T cell responses, with the exception of
cytokine production, which under some circumstances is enhanced in Fyn-deficient 
CD4(+) T cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.8.5374 
PMCID: PMC2657555
PMID: 18832694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

