
1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2009 May;58(5):759-67. doi: 10.1007/s00262-008-0599-x.
Epub 2008 Oct 3.

Her-2 DNA versus cell vaccine: immunogenicity and anti-tumor activity.

Whittington PJ(1), Radkevich-Brown O, Jacob JB, Jones RF, Weise AM, Wei WZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, School of Medicine, Wayne State
University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Direct comparison and ranking of vaccine formulations in pre-clinical studies
will expedite the identification of cancer vaccines for clinical trials. Two
human ErbB-2 (Her-2) vaccines, naked DNA and whole cell vaccine, were tested
side-by-side in wild type and Her-2 transgenic mice. Both vaccines can induce
humoral and cellular immunity to the entire repertoire of Her-2 epitopes. Mice
were electro-vaccinated i.m. with a mixture of pGM-CSF and pE2TM, the latter
encodes Her-2 extracellular and transmembrane domains. Alternatively, mice were
injected i.p. with human ovarian cancer SKOV3 cells that have amplified Her-2. In
wild type mice, comparable levels of Her-2 antibodies (Ab) were induced by these 
two vaccines. However, T cell immunity and protection against Her-2(+) tumors
were superior in DNA vaccinated mice. In BALB Her-2 transgenic (Tg) mice, which
were tolerant to Her-2, DNA and cell vaccines were administered after regulatory 
T cells (Treg) were removed by anti-CD25 mAb. Again, comparable levels of Her-2
Ab were induced, but DNA vaccines rendered greater anti-tumor activity. In B6xDR3
Her-2 Tg mice that expressed the autoimmune prone HLA-DR3 allele, higher levels
of Her-2 Ab were induced by SKOV3 cell than by Her-2 DNA. But anti-tumor activity
was still more profound in DNA vaccinated mice. Therefore, Her-2 DNA vaccine
induced greater anti-tumor immunity than cell vaccine, whether mice were tolerant
to Her-2 or susceptible to autoimmunity. Through such side-by-side comparisons in
appropriate pre-clinical test systems, the more effective vaccine formulations
will emerge as candidates for clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-008-0599-x 
PMCID: PMC3827718
PMID: 18836716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

