
1. Diabetes Care. 2009 Jan;32(1):94-9. doi: 10.2337/dc08-0821. Epub 2008 Oct 3.

Weight gain in early life predicts risk of islet autoimmunity in children with a 
first-degree relative with type 1 diabetes.

Couper JJ(1), Beresford S, Hirte C, Baghurst PA, Pollard A, Tait BD, Harrison LC,
Colman PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Women's and Children's Hospital and 
Discipline of Paediatrics, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
jennifer.couper@adelaide.edu.au

OBJECTIVE: In a prospective birth cohort study, we followed infants who had a
first-degree relative with type 1 diabetes to investigate the relationship
between early growth and infant feeding and the risk of islet autoimmunity.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Infants with a first-degree relative with type 1
diabetes were identified during their mother's pregnancy. Dietary intake was
recorded prospectively to determine duration of breast-feeding and age at
introduction of cow's milk protein, cereals, meat, fruit, and vegetables. At
6-month reviews, length (or height) and weight, antibodies to insulin, GAD65, the
tyrosine phosphatase-like insulinoma antigen, and tissue transglutaminase were
measured. Islet autoimmunity was defined as persistent elevation of one or more
islet antibodies at consecutive 6-month intervals, including the most recent
measure, and was the primary outcome measure.
RESULTS: Follow-up of 548 subjects for 5.7 +/- 3.2 years identified 46 children
with islet autoimmunity. Weight z score and BMI z score were continuous
predictors of risk of islet autoimmunity (adjusted hazard ratios 1.43 [95% CI
1.10-1.84], P = 0.007, and 1.29 [1.01-1.67], P = 0.04, respectively). The risk of
islet autoimmunity was greater in subjects with weight z score >0 than in those
with weight z score < or =0 over time (2.61 [1.26-5.44], P = 0.01). Weight z
score and BMI z score at 2 years and change in weight z score between birth and 2
years, but not dietary intake, also predicted risk of islet autoimmunity.
CONCLUSIONS: Weight gain in early life predicts risk of islet autoimmunity in
children with a first-degree relative with type 1 diabetes.

DOI: 10.2337/dc08-0821 
PMCID: PMC2606838
PMID: 18835948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

