
1. J Infect Dis. 2008 Nov 1;198(9):1388-97. doi: 10.1086/592220.

CD14 impairs host defense against gram-negative sepsis caused by Burkholderia
pseudomallei in mice.

Wiersinga WJ(1), de Vos AF, Wieland CW, Leendertse M, Roelofs JJ, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Centers for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. w.j.wiersinga@amc.uva.nl

BACKGROUND: CD14 is a pattern-recognition receptor that can facilitate the
presentation of bacterial components to either Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) or
TLR4. We have recently shown that during melioidosis, a severe infection caused
by the gram-negative bacterium Burkholderia pseudomallei, TLR2 but not TLR4
impacts the immune response of the intact host in vivo.
METHODS: The function of CD14 in melioidosis was analyzed by means of in vitro
and in vivo approaches, using wild-type (WT) and CD14 knockout (KO) mice.
RESULTS: CD14-deficient macrophages and whole blood leukocytes released less
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha on stimulation with B. pseudomallei or B.
pseudomallei lipopolysaccharide in vitro, compared with WT cells. Strikingly,
CD14 KO mice intranasally inoculated with B. pseudomallei demonstrated reduced
lethality and significantly decreased bacterial outgrowth, compared with WT mice.
Administration of recombinant soluble CD14 to CD14 KO mice partially reversed
their phenotype to that of WT mice. Lastly, CD14 deficiency did not alter the
capacity of macrophages or neutrophils to phagocytose or kill B. pseudomallei.
CONCLUSION: CD14 is crucially involved in the recognition of B. pseudomallei by
innate immune cells but plays a remarkable detrimental role in the host response 
against B. pseudomallei. Inhibition of CD14 may be a novel treatment strategy in 
melioidosis.

DOI: 10.1086/592220 
PMID: 18855560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

