
1. Vet Res. 2009 Jan-Feb;40(1):5. doi: 10.1051/vetres:2008043. Epub 2008 Oct 16.

Early immune response following Salmonella enterica subspecies enterica serovar
Typhimurium infection in porcine jejunal gut loops.

Meurens F(1), Berri M, Auray G, Melo S, Levast B, Virlogeux-Payant I, Chevaleyre 
C, Gerdts V, Salmon H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA), UR1282, Infectiologie
Animale et Sant√© Publique, F-37380 Nouzilly (Tours), France.
Francois.Meurens@tours.inra.fr

Salmonella enterica subspecies enterica serovar Typhimurium, commonly called S.
Typhimurium, can cause intestinal infections in humans and various animal species
such as swine. To analyze the host response to Salmonella infection in the pig we
used an in vivo gut loop model, which allows the analysis of multiple immune
responses within the same animal. Four jejunal gut-loops were each inoculated
with 3 x 10(8) cfu of S. Typhimurium in 3 one-month-old piglets and mRNA
expressions of various cytokines, chemokines, transcription factors,
antimicrobial peptides, toll like and chemokine receptors were assessed by
quantitative real-time PCR in the Peyer's patch and the gut wall after 24 h.
Several genes such as the newly cloned CCRL1/CCX-CKR were assessed for the first 
time in the pig at the mRNA level. Pro-inflammatory and T-helper type-1 (Th1)
cytokine mRNA were expressed at higher levels in infected compared to
non-infected control loops. Similarly, some B cell activation genes, NOD2 and
toll like receptor 2 and 4 transcripts were more expressed in both tissues while 
TLR5 mRNA was down-regulated. Interestingly, CCL25 mRNA expression as well as the
mRNA expressions of its receptors CCR9 and CCRL1 were decreased both in the
Peyer's patch and gut wall suggesting a potential Salmonella strategy to reduce
lymphocyte homing to the intestine. In conclusion, these results provide insight 
into the porcine innate mucosal immune response to infection with entero-invasive
microorganisms such as S. Typhimurium. In the future, this knowledge should help 
in the development of improved prophylactic and therapeutic approaches against
porcine intestinal S. Typhimurium infections.

DOI: 10.1051/vetres:2008043 
PMCID: PMC2695014
PMID: 18922229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

