
1. Immunol Lett. 2008 Dec 22;121(2):93-6. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2008.09.005. Epub
2008 Oct 18.

Differential dose-dependent effects of prednisolone on shedding of endothelial
adhesion molecules during human endotoxemia.

Lemaire LC(1), de Kruif MD, Giebelen IA, van Zoelen MA, van't Veer C, van der
Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Room 
G2-132, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Low dose prednisolone was shown to be beneficial in the treatment of the Acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and septic shock. One corticosteroid-induced
effect, postulated to mediate corticosteroid-induced anti-inflammatory effects,
is decreased expression of adhesion molecules on endothelial cells, thereby
preventing leukocyte recruitment at inflammatory sites. The current study aimed
to investigate the effect of increasing doses of prednisolone on the release of
soluble adhesion molecules in healthy volunteers challenged with endotoxin.
Therefore, 32 healthy, male volunteers received prednisolone orally at doses of
0mg, 3mg, 10mg or 30 mg at 2h before injection of endotoxin prepared from
Escherichia coli (4 ng/kg) and levels of soluble E-selectin (sE-selectin),
soluble VCAM-1 (sVCAM-1) and soluble ICAM-1 (sICAM-1) were measured. Levels of
all markers were increased after induction of endotoxemia. Levels of sE-selectin 
were inhibited by a dose of 3mg prednisolone and levels of sVCAM-1 were decreased
after a dose of 10mg. Maximal inhibition of both sE-selectin and sVCAM-1 levels
was achieved by the highest dose of prednisolone 30 mg. Remarkably, prednisolone 
3mg potentiated endotoxin-induced sVCAM-1 release. Levels of sICAM-1 were not
affected by prednisolone. Together, the data suggest that prednisolone
differentially and dose-dependently influences the release of soluble endothelial
adhesion molecules during human endotoxemia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2008.09.005 
PMID: 18930765  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

