
1. PLoS One. 2008;3(10):e3494. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003494. Epub 2008 Oct 23.

MyD88 dependent signaling contributes to protective host defense against
Burkholderia pseudomallei.

Wiersinga WJ(1), Wieland CW, Roelofs JJ, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. w.j.wiersinga@amc.uva.nl

BACKGROUND: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) have a central role in the recognition of 
pathogens and the initiation of the innate immune response. Myeloid
differentiation primary-response gene 88 (MyD88) and TIR-domain-containing
adaptor protein inducing IFNbeta (TRIF) are regarded as the key signaling adaptor
proteins for TLRs. Melioidosis, which is endemic in SE-Asia, is a severe
infection caused by the gram-negative bacterium Burkholderia pseudomallei. We
here aimed to characterize the role of MyD88 and TRIF in host defense against
melioidosis.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: First, we found that MyD88, but not TRIF,
deficient whole blood leukocytes released less TNFalpha upon stimulation with B. 
pseudomallei compared to wild-type (WT) cells. Thereafter we inoculated MyD88
knock-out (KO), TRIF mutant and WT mice intranasally with B. pseudomallei and
found that MyD88 KO, but not TRIF mutant mice demonstrated a strongly accelerated
lethality, which was accompanied by significantly increased bacterial loads in
lungs, liver and blood, and grossly enhanced liver damage compared to WT mice.
The decreased bacterial clearance capacity of MyD88 KO mice was accompanied by a 
markedly reduced early pulmonary neutrophil recruitment and a diminished
activation of neutrophils after infection with B. pseudomallei. MyD88 KO
leukocytes displayed an unaltered capacity to phagocytose and kill B.
pseudomallei in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: MyD88 dependent signaling, but not TRIF dependent signaling,
contributes to a protective host response against B. pseudomallei at least in
part by causing early neutrophil recruitment towards the primary site of
infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003494 
PMCID: PMC2566818
PMID: 18946505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

