
1. J Immunol. 2008 Nov 1;181(9):6082-91.

Selective regulation of TCR signaling pathways by the CD45 protein tyrosine
phosphatase during thymocyte development.

Falahati R(1), Leitenberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Tropical Medicine, George
Washington University, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

In CD45-deficient animals, there is a severe defect in thymocyte-positive
selection, resulting in an absence of mature T cells and the accumulation of
thymocytes at the DP stage of development. However, the signaling defect(s)
responsible for the block in development of mature single-positive T cells is not
well characterized. Previous studies have found that early signal transduction
events in CD45-deficient cell lines and thymocytes are markedly diminished
following stimulation with anti-CD3. Nevertheless, there are also situations in
which T cell activation and TCR signaling events can be induced in the absence of
CD45. For example, CD45-independent TCR signaling can be recovered upon
simultaneous Ab cross-linking of CD3 and CD4 compared with cross-linking of CD3
alone. These data suggest that CD45 may differentially regulate TCR signaling
events depending on the nature of the signal and/or on the differentiation state 
of the cell. In the current study, we have assessed the role of CD45 in
regulating primary thymocyte activation following physiologic stimulation with
peptide. Unlike CD3-mediated stimulation, peptide stimulation of CD45-deficient
thymocytes induces diminished, but readily detectable TCR-mediated signaling
events, such as phosphorylation of TCR-associated zeta, ZAP70, linker for
activation of T cells, and Akt, and increased intracellular calcium
concentration. In contrast, phosphorylation of ERK, which is essential for
positive selection, is more severely affected in the absence of CD45. These data 
suggest that CD45 has a selective role in regulating different aspects of T cell 
activation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.9.6082 
PMCID: PMC2671959
PMID: 18941197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

