
1. Blood. 2009 Apr 2;113(14):3254-63. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-07-168906. Epub 2008
Oct 23.

Notch signaling is required for proliferation but not for differentiation at a
well-defined beta-selection checkpoint during human T-cell development.

Taghon T(1), Van de Walle I, De Smet G, De Smedt M, Leclercq G, Vandekerckhove B,
Plum J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium. Tom.Taghon@ugent.be

Notch signaling is absolutely required for beta-selection during mouse T-cell
development, both for differentiation and proliferation. In this report, we
investigated whether Notch has an equally important role during human T-cell
development. We show that human CD34(+) thymocytes can differentiate into
CD4(+)CD8beta(+) double positive (DP) thymocytes in the absence of Notch
signaling. While these DP cells phenotypically resemble human beta-selected
cells, they lack a T-cell receptor (TCR)-beta chain. Therefore, we characterized 
the beta-selection checkpoint in human T-cell development, using CD28 as a
differential marker at the immature single positive CD4(+)CD3(-)CD8alpha(-)
stage. Through intracellular TCR-beta staining and gene expression analysis, we
show that CD4(+)CD3(-)CD8alpha(-)CD28(+) thymocytes have passed the
beta-selection checkpoint, in contrast to CD4(+)CD3(-)CD8alpha(-)CD28(-) cells.
These CD4(+)CD3(-)CD8alpha(-)CD28(+) thymocytes can efficiently differentiate
into CD3(+)TCRalphabeta(+) human T cells in the absence of Notch signaling.
Importantly, preselection CD4(+)CD3(-)CD8alpha(-)CD28(-) thymocytes can also
differentiate into CD3(+)TCRalphabeta(+) human T cells without Notch activation
when provided with a rearranged TCR-beta chain. Proliferation of human
thymocytes, however, is clearly Notch-dependent. Thus, we have characterized the 
beta-selection checkpoint during human T-cell development and show that human
thymocytes require Notch signaling for proliferation but not for differentiation 
at this stage of development.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2008-07-168906 
PMID: 18948571  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

