
1. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2008 Dec;21(12):737-44. doi: 10.1093/protein/gzn057. Epub
2008 Nov 5.

Importance of the Ca2+-binding sites in the N-catalytic domain of a family I.3
lipase for activity and stability.

Kuwahara K(1), Angkawidjaja C, Matsumura H, Koga Y, Takano K, Kanaya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Material and Life Science, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka
University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

A family I.3 lipase from Pseudomonas sp. MIS38 (PML) contains three
Ca(2+)-binding sites (Ca1-Ca3) in the N-catalytic domain. Of them, the Ca1 site
is formed only in an open conformation. To analyze the role of these
Ca(2+)-binding sites, three mutant proteins D157A-PML, D275A-PML and D337A-PML,
which are designed to remove the Ca1, Ca2 and Ca3 sites, respectively, were
constructed. Of them, the crystal structures of D157A-PML and D337A-PML in a
closed conformation were determined. Both structures are nearly identical to that
of the wild-type protein, except that the Ca3 site is missing in the D337A-PML
structure. D157A-PML was as stable as the wild-type protein. Nevertheless, it
exhibited little lipase and very weak esterase activities. D275A-PML was less
stable than the wild-type protein by approximately 5 degrees C in T(1/2). It
exhibited weak but significant lipase and esterase activities when compared with 
the wild-type protein. D337A-PML was also less stable than the wild-type protein 
by approximately 5 degrees C in T(1/2) but was fully active. These results
suggest that the Ca1 site is required to make the active site fully open by
anchoring lid 1. The Ca2 and Ca3 sites contribute to the stabilization of PML.
The Ca2 site is also required to make PML fully active.

DOI: 10.1093/protein/gzn057 
PMID: 18987131  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

