
1. Infect Immun. 2009 Jan;77(1):360-6. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00909-08. Epub 2008 Nov 3.

Beta2-microglobulin-dependent bacterial clearance and survival during murine
Klebsiella pneumoniae bacteremia.

Cogen AL(1), Moore TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0642, 
USA.

Klebsiella pneumoniae is a leading cause of both community-acquired and
nosocomial gram-negative bacterial pneumonia. A significant clinical complication
of Klebsiella pulmonary infections is peripheral blood dissemination, resulting
in a systemic infection concurrent with the localized pulmonary infection. We
report here on the critical importance of beta(2)-microglobulin expression during
murine K. pneumoniae bacteremia. Beta(2)-microglobulin knockout mice displayed
significantly increased mortality upon intravenous inoculation that correlated
with increased bacterial burden in the blood, liver, and spleen. As
beta(2)-microglobulin knockout mice lack both CD8(+) T cells and invariant NK T
cells, mouse models specifically deficient in either cell population were
examined to see if this would account for the increased mortality noted in
beta(2)-microglobulin knockout mice. Surprisingly, neither CD8 T-cell-deficient
(TAP-1 knockout; in vivo anti-CD8 antibody treatment) nor invariant NK (iNK)
T-cell-deficient (CD1d knockout, J alpha281 knockout) mice were more susceptible 
to K. pneumoniae bacteremia. Combined, these studies clearly indicate the
importance of a beta(2)-microglobulin-dependent but CD8 T-cell- and iNK
T-cell-independent mechanism critical for survival during K. pneumoniae
bacteremia.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00909-08 
PMCID: PMC2612254
PMID: 18981251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

