
1. Biochem J. 1991 Sep 15;278 ( Pt 3):809-16.

Evidence that gene G7a in the human major histocompatibility complex encodes
valyl-tRNA synthetase.

Hsieh SL(1), Campbell RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, U.K.

Erratum in
    Biochem J 1992 Feb 1;281(Pt 3):879.

At least 36 genes have now been located in a 680 kb segment of DNA between the
class I and class II multigene families within the class III region of the human 
major histocompatibility complex on chromosome 6p21.3. The complete nucleotide
sequence of the 4.3 kb mRNA of one of these genes, G7a (or BAT6), has been
determined from cDNA and genomic clones. The single-copy G7a gene encodes a
1265-amino-acid protein of molecular mass 140,457 Da. Comparison of the derived
amino acid sequence of the G7a protein with the National Biomedical Research
Foundation protein databases revealed 42% identity in a 250-amino-acid overlap
with Bacillus stearothermophilus valyl-tRNA synthetase, 38.0% identity in a
993-amino-acid overlap with Escherichia coli valyl-tRNA synthetase (val RS), and 
48.3% identity in a 1043-amino-acid overlap with Saccharomyces cerevisiae
valyl-tRNA synthetase. The protein sequence of G7a contains two short consensus
sequences, His-Ile-Gly-His and Lys-Met-Ser-Lys-Ser, which is the typical
signature structure of class I tRNA synthetases and indicative of the presence of
the Rossman fold. In addition, the molecular mass of the G7a protein is the same 
as that of other mammalian valyl-tRNA synthetases. These features and the high
sequence identity with yeast valyl-tRNA synthetase strongly support the fact that
the G7a gene, located within the major histocompatibility complex, encodes the
human valyl-tRNA synthetase.

DOI: 10.1042/bj2780809 
PMCID: PMC1151418
PMID: 1898367  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

