
1. Perit Dial Int. 2008 Nov-Dec;28(6):637-40.

Effects of peritoneal dialysis solutions low in GDPs on peritonitis and exit-site
infection rates.

Furkert J(1), Zeier M, Schwenger V.

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology and Gastroenterology, SLK-Kliniken Heilbronn, Bad Friedrichshall,
Germany. juergen.furkert@slk-kliniken.de

BACKGROUND: Peritoneal dialysis (PD) solutions sterilized at a low pH level
contain only minimal amounts of glucose degradation products (GDPs). The latter
are known to have an adverse effect on the peritoneal membrane. The present study
retrospectively analyzes the effects on the incidences of peritonitis and
exit-site infections.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data concerning the frequency of peritonitis and exit-site
infections for 120 patients treated with PD were collected. Before 2000, 67 of
these patients received conventional dialysates and from 2000 on, 53 patients
were treated with the new dialysis fluids. Furthermore, a correlation between the
incidence of infections and the duration of treatment with dialysis was
established.
RESULTS: It was observed that the use of dialysis solutions low in GDPs resulted 
in significantly lower rates of peritonitis (p = 0.002) and exit-site infections 
(p = 0.02). When using the new treatment, peritonitis occurred, on average, after
48 months of treatment and exit-site infections after 34 months of treatment.
DISCUSSION: The result supports the hypothesis that the use of the new,
biocompatible, PD solutions contributes to considerable reduction in the rates of
peritonitis and exit-site infections. As it is not expected that randomized
prospective studies will be conducted in the future, further observational
studies should be carried out in order to affirm the observed tendencies.


PMID: 18981395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

