
1. Microbes Infect. 2009 Jan;11(1):40-8. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2008.10.006. Epub
2008 Nov 1.

Trehalose 6,6'-dimycolate on the surface of Mycobacterium tuberculosis modulates 
surface marker expression for antigen presentation and costimulation in murine
macrophages.

Kan-Sutton C(1), Jagannath C, Hunter RL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Texas at
Houston Health Science Center, 6431 Fannin Street, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
celestine.kan@uth.tmc.edu

Trehalose 6,6'-dimycolate (TDM) is the most abundant lipid extracted from
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB). TDM promotes MTB survival by decreasing
phagosomal acidification and phagolysosomal fusion in macrophages. Delipidation
of MTB using petroleum ether removes TDM and decreases MTB survival within host
cells. TDM reconstituted onto MTB restores its virulent wild-type
characteristics. We investigated the role of TDM in regulating surface marker
expression in MTB-infected macrophages. Macrophages were infected with wild-type,
delipidated, and TDM-reconstituted MTB for 24h and measured for changes in
surface marker expression. TDM on MTB was found to specifically target MHCII,
CD1d, CD40, CD80 and CD86. Both wild-type and TDM-reconstituted MTB suppressed or
induced no change in expression of these surface markers, whereas delipidated MTB
increased expression of the same markers. MTB-infected macrophages were also
overlaid with MHCII-restricted T cell hybridomas which recognize Antigen 85B.
Macrophages infected by wild-type and TDM-reconstituted MTB did not present
antigen as well as delipidated MTB-infected macrophages. The evidence shown
furthers supports the notion that TDM present on MTB promotes its survival and
persistence in host macrophages.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2008.10.006 
PMCID: PMC2680729
PMID: 19007905  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

