
1. Infect Immun. 2009 Jan;77(1):485-91. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00863-08. Epub 2008 Nov 10.

Neutrophils are essential for rapid clearance of Enterococcus faecium in mice.

Leendertse M(1), Willems RJ, Giebelen IA, Roelofs JJ, Bonten MJ, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center, 1105 AZ 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. m.leendertse@amc.uva.nl

A progressive increase in infections with multiresistant Enterococcus faecium has
been reported, especially in cancer patients and neutropenic patients. Despite
its increasing importance as a nosocomial pathogen, knowledge of the pathogenesis
of E. faecium infections is highly limited. In this study, we investigated the
role of neutrophils during peritonitis with subsequent bacteremia caused by E.
faecium. Therefore, we depleted neutrophils by intraperitoneal injections of
monoclonal antibody RB6-8C5. Mice were followed for 5 days, and the enterococcal 
outgrowth and inflammatory response were compared between neutropenic mice and
immunoglobulin G-injected control mice. Neutropenic mice demonstrated a severe
delay in enterococcal clearance from all cultured organs (peritoneal fluid,
blood, and lung and liver tissue). In particular, neutropenic mice remained
bacteremic for up to 3 days, whereas all nonneutropenic mice had cleared the
bacteria from circulation by 2 days. Furthermore, neutropenic mice displayed
elevated peritoneal cytokine and chemokine levels 1 day after the infection and
attracted fewer macrophages into the peritoneal cavity. In the circulation, a
prolonged elevation of tumor necrosis factor alpha, interleukin-6, and the
acute-phase proteins serum amyloid A and complement 3 were measured in
neutropenic mice. In conclusion, attraction of neutrophils to the primary site of
E. faecium infection is important for a rapid clearance of this bacterium,
thereby attenuating a systemic inflammatory response.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00863-08 
PMCID: PMC2612258
PMID: 19001080  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

