
1. Immunology. 2009 Aug;127(4):512-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2008.02958.x. Epub
2008 Nov 7.

Inhibition of type 1 diabetes in filaria-infected non-obese diabetic mice is
associated with a T helper type 2 shift and induction of FoxP3+ regulatory T
cells.

HÃ¼bner MP(1), Stocker JT, Mitre E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA. mhubner@usuhs.mil

We sought to determine whether Litomosoides sigmodontis, a filarial infection of 
rodents, protects against type 1 diabetes in non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice.
Six-week-old NOD mice were sham-infected or infected with either L3 larvae, adult
male worms, or adult female worms. Whereas 82% of uninfected NOD mice developed
diabetes by 25 weeks of age, no L. sigmodontis-infected mice developed disease.
Although all mice had evidence of ongoing islet cell inflammation by histology,
L. sigmodontis-infected mice had greater numbers of total islets and
non-infiltrated islets than control mice. Protection against diabetes was
associated with a T helper type 2 (Th2) shift, as interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-5
release from alpha-CD3/alpha-CD28-stimulated splenocytes was greater in L.
sigmodontis-infected mice than in uninfected mice. Increased circulating levels
of insulin-specific immunoglobulin G1, showed that this Th2 shift occurs in
response to one of the main autoantigens in diabetes. Multicolour flow cytometry 
studies demonstrated that protection against diabetes in L. sigmodontis-infected 
NOD mice was associated with significantly increased numbers of splenic CD4(+)
CD25(+) FoxP3(+) regulatory T cells. Interestingly, injection of crude worm
antigen into NOD mice also resulted in protection against type 1 diabetes, though
to a lesser degree than infection with live L. sigmodontis worms. In conclusion, 
these studies demonstrate that filarial worms can protect against the onset of
type 1 diabetes in NOD mice. This protection is associated with a Th2 shift, as
demonstrated by cytokine and antibody production, and with an increase in CD4(+) 
CD25(+) FoxP3(+) regulatory T cells.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2008.02958.x 
PMCID: PMC2729528
PMID: 19016910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

