
1. Cell Microbiol. 2009 Mar;11(3):433-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01265.x.
Epub 2008 Nov 7.

Clustering transfers the translocated Escherichia coli receptor into lipid rafts 
to stimulate reversible activation of c-Fyn.

Hayward RD(1), Hume PJ, Humphreys D, Phillips N, Smith K, Koronakis V.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Pathology, Cambridge, UK.

Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) mimic a ligand-receptor interaction to
induce 'pedestal-like' pseudopodia on mammalian cells, providing a tractable
system to study tyrosine kinase signalling to the actin cytoskeleton. EPEC
delivers its own receptor (Tir), which is engaged by a bacterial surface ligand
(intimin). When Tir delivery and activity are uncoupled, intimin-induced Tir
clustering stimulates Tir(Y474) phosphorylation by the Src-family kinase (SFK)
c-Fyn, triggering actin polymerization and pedestal formation. How c-Fyn
specifically targets Tir and is regulated remains unknown. We show that
clustering transfers Tir into cholesterol-rich detergent-resistant microdomains
(DRMs), a signal prompting transient c-Fyn accumulation at bacterial adhesion
sites. Co-clustering of Tir(Y474) and c-Fyn in DRMs rapidly stimulates robust
kinase activation both by induced c-Fyn(Y531) dephosphorylation to unlock the
inactive state and by reciprocal c-Fyn(Y417) autophosphorylation to promote
activity. After signal induction, c-Fyn dissipates and the resting state restored
by Csk-dependent phosphorylation of c-Fyn(Y531). These data illustrate a
sophisticated mechanism evolved by a pathogen effector to reversibly regulate
SFKs, and resolve early interactions at a model receptor initiating tyrosine
kinase signalling.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01265.x 
PMID: 19016778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

