
1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 16;284(3):1694-701. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807890200. Epub 2008 
Nov 21.

Host cell autophagy is induced by Toxoplasma gondii and contributes to parasite
growth.

Wang Y(1), Weiss LM, Orlofsky A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 
10461, USA.

Autophagy has been shown to contribute to defense against intracellular bacteria 
and parasites. In comparison, the ability of such pathogens to manipulate host
cell autophagy to their advantage has not been examined. Here we present evidence
that infection by Toxoplasma gondii, an intracellular protozoan parasite, induces
host cell autophagy in both HeLa cells and primary fibroblasts, via a mechanism
dependent on host Atg5 but independent of host mammalian target of rapamycin
suppression. Infection led to the conversion of LC3 to the
autophagosome-associated form LC3-II, to the accumulation of LC3-containing
vesicles near the parasitophorous vacuole, and to the relocalization toward the
vacuole of structures labeled by the phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate indicator
YFP-2xFYVE. The autophagy regulator beclin 1 was concentrated in the vicinity of 
the parasitophorous vacuole in infected cells. Inhibitor studies indicated that
parasite-induced autophagy is dependent on calcium signaling and on abscisic
acid. At physiologically relevant amino acid levels, parasite growth became
defective in Atg5-deficient cells, indicating a role for host cell autophagy in
parasite recovery of host cell nutrients. A flow cytometric analysis of cell size
as a function of parasite content revealed that autophagy-dependent parasite
growth correlates with autophagy-dependent consumption of host cell mass that is 
dependent on parasite progression. These findings indicate a new role for
autophagy as a pathway by which parasites may effectively compete with the host
cell for limiting anabolic resources.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M807890200 
PMCID: PMC2615531
PMID: 19028680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

