
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2009 Feb;26(2):220-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2008.10.013.
Epub 2008 Nov 8.

Structure, organization and expression of common carp (Cyprinus carpio L.) NKEF-B
gene.

Huang R(1), Gao LY, Wang YP, Hu W, Guo QL.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China.

Natural killer (NK) cell enhancing factor (NKEF) belongs to the newly defined
peroxiredoxin (Prx) family. Its functions are to enhance NK cell cytotoxicity and
to protect DNA and proteins from oxidative damage. In this study, a partial cDNA 
sequence of carp NKEF-B was isolated from thymus cDNA library. Subsequently, the 
full-length cDNA of carp NKEF-B was obtained by means of 3' and 5' RACE,
respectively. The full-length cDNA of carp NKEF-B was 1022 bp, consisting of a 73
bp 5'-terminal untranslated region (UTR), a 355 bp 3'-terminal UTR, and a 594 bp 
open reading frame coding for a protein of 197 amino acids. Carp NKEF-B contained
two consensus Val-Cys-Pro (VCP) motifs and three consensus cysteine (Cys-51,
Cys-70 and Cys-172) residues. Sequence comparison showed that the deduced amino
acid sequence of carp NKEF-B had an overall similarity of 74-96% to that of other
species homologues. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that carp NKEF-B forms a
cluster with other known teleost NKEF-Bs. Then, by PCR we obtained a 5.1-k long
genomic DNA of carp NKEF-B containing six exons and five introns. Real-time
RT-PCR results showed that carp NKEF-B gene was predominantly detected in kidney 
and head kidney under un-infected conditions. Whereas under SVCV-infection
condition, the expression of NKEF-B gene was significantly increased in blood
cells, gill, intestine and spleen, but maintained in liver, and decreased
significantly in kidney and head kidney. Finally, the rNKEF-B was constructed and
expressed in Escherichia coli. By using an antibody against carp rNKEF-B,
immunohistochemical study further indicated that NKEF-B positive cells are mainly
some RBCs and a few epithelial cells in gill and intestine, and that under
SVCV-infection condition, these positive cells or positive products in their
cytoplasm were mainly increased in gill and spleen sections of carp. The results 
obtained in the present study will help to understand the function of NKEF-B in
teleost innate immunity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2008.10.013 
PMID: 19032984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

