
1. J Clin Invest. 2008 Dec;118(12):3990-4001. doi: 10.1172/JCI31350. Epub 2008 Nov
6.

KBMA Listeria monocytogenes is an effective vector for DC-mediated induction of
antitumor immunity.

Skoberne M(1), Yewdall A, Bahjat KS, Godefroy E, Lauer P, Lemmens E, Liu W,
Luckett W, Leong M, Dubensky TW, Brockstedt DG, Bhardwaj N.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York
10016, USA. Mojcaskoberne@yahoo.de

Vaccine strategies that utilize human DCs to enhance antitumor immunity have yet 
to realize their full potential. Approaches that optimally target a spectrum of
antigens to DCs are urgently needed. Here we report the development of a platform
for loading DCs with antigen. It is based on killed but metabolically active
(KBMA) recombinant Listeria monocytogenes and facilitates both antigen delivery
and maturation of human DCs. Highly attenuated KBMA L. monocytogenes were
engineered to express an epitope of the melanoma-associated antigen MelanA/Mart-1
that is recognized by human CD8+ T cells when presented by the MHC class I
molecule HLA-A*0201. The engineered KBMA L. monocytogenes induced human DC
upregulation of costimulatory molecules and secretion of pro-Th1 cytokines and
type I interferons, leading to effective priming of Mart-1-specific human CD8+ T 
cells and lysis of patient-derived melanoma cells. KBMA L. monocytogenes
expressing full-length NY-ESO-1 protein, another melanoma-associated antigen,
delivered the antigen for presentation by MHC class I and class II molecules
independent of the MHC haplotype of the DC donor. A mouse therapeutic tumor model
was used to show that KBMA L. monocytogenes efficiently targeted APCs in vivo to 
induce protective antitumor responses. Together, our data demonstrate that KBMA
L. monocytogenes may be a powerful platform that can both deliver recombinant
antigen to DCs for presentation and provide a potent DC-maturation stimulus,
making it a potential cancer vaccine candidate.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI31350 
PMCID: PMC2579623
PMID: 19033668  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

