
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Mar 25;19(6):1243-9.

Regulatory factor-X binding to mutant HLA-DRA promoter sequences.

Hasegawa SL(1), Sloan JH, Reith W, Mach B, Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322.

The class II genes of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) encode a family 
of cell surface glycoproteins that present processed antigen to the T cell
receptor. Class II genes are regulated coordinately, responding to both
immunologic and developmental signals. Conserved sequence elements 5' to class II
genes have been shown to be important in transcriptional control. One of these
sequences, the X box, is a specific target for the binding of the factor RF-X. In
the hereditary HLA class II deficiency, a form of primary immunodeficiency, a
regulatory defect in expression of class II genes is associated with a defect in 
the binding of RF-X. To determine the basepairs that are important for this
binding interaction, a series of single basepair substitutions spanning the X box
motif of the DRA gene was constructed and tested for binding of RF-X by gel
electrophoresis mobility shift assays (EMSAs). Several, but not all, of the
mutants severely affected binding of RF-X. In addition, the binding of both the
natural and the recombinant form of RF-X was affected with the same specificity. 
A comparison of X box basepair positions important for RF-X binding to DRA with
sequences conserved between X boxes of other class II alpha chain genes suggests 
that high affinity RF-X binding is important for a high level of expression and
may explain differences in the levels of class II expression of different class
II alpha chains.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/19.6.1243 
PMCID: PMC333849
PMID: 1903200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

