
1. J Immunol. 2008 Dec 15;181(12):8267-77.

TLR9-activating DNA up-regulates ZAP70 via sustained PKB induction in IgM+ B
cells.

Bekeredjian-Ding I(1), Doster A, Schiller M, Heyder P, Lorenz HM, Schraven B,
Bommhardt U, Heeg K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Hospital
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. bekeredjian-ding@uni-heidelberg.de

In the past, ZAP70 was considered a T cell-specific kinase, and its aberrant
expression in B-CLL cells was interpreted as a sign of malignant transformation
and dedifferentiation. It was only recently that ZAP70 was detected in normal
human B cells. In this study, we show that TLR9-activated B cells resemble B-cell
chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells with regard to CD5, CD23, CD25, and heat shock
protein 90 expression. Furthermore, stimulatory CpG and GpC DNA oligonucleotides 
target CD27(+)IgM(+) and CD27(-)IgM(+) B cells (but not IgM(-) B cells) and
enhance ZAP70 expression predominantly in the IgM(+)CD27(+) B cell subset. ZAP70 
is induced via activation of TLR-7 or -9 in a MyD88-dependent manner, depends on 
protein kinase B (PKB)/mammalian target of rapamycin signaling and is rapamycin
sensitive. Furthermore, ZAP70 expression levels correlate with induction of
cyclin A2, prolonged B cell proliferation, and sustained induction of PKB. These 
events are not observed upon CD40 ligation. However, this deficit can be overcome
by the expression of constitutively active PKB, given that CD40 ligation of
PKB-transgenic B cells induces B cell proliferation and ZAP70 expression. These
results highlight a major difference between CD40- and TLR-7/9-mediated B cell
activation and suggest that ZAP70 expression levels in B cells give an estimate
of the proliferative potential and the associated PKB availability.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.12.8267 
PMID: 19050243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

