
1. Mol Immunol. 2009 Jan;46(3):345-54. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.10.025. Epub 2008 
Dec 5.

cAMP regulates IL-10 production by normal human T lymphocytes at multiple levels:
a potential role for MEF2.

Liopeta K(1), Boubali S, Virgilio L, Thyphronitis G, Mavrothalassitis G,
Dimitracopoulos G, Paliogianni F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Patras, Patras, 
Greece.

Signal transduction by the cAMP/cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) pathway is 
triggered through multiple receptors and is important for many processes in a
variety of cells. In T cells, the engagement of the TCR-CD3 complex induces cAMP,
a second messenger that controls immune response. IL-10, produced by a variety of
lymphocyte subpopulations, is an important regulator of this response exerting a 
wide range of immunomodulatory actions. Elevation of cAMP has been shown to
increase IL-10 production by monocytes. However, the mechanism of cAMP mediated
regulation of IL-10 production by T lymphocytes remains unclear. In this study
using normal peripheral T lymphocytes stimulated either through the TCR-CD3
complex or the TCR-CD3 and the CD28 molecule, we show that IL-10 is produced
mainly by memory T lymphocytes after either way of stimulation and is drastically
inhibited (70-90%) by cAMP elevating agents. cAMP mediated inhibition was
reversed by the use of the specific PKA inhibitor Rp-8-Br-cAMP but not by the
addition of exogenous rhIL-2, indicating that the inhibitory effect depends on
PKA activation and is not secondary to IL-2 inhibition. Inhibition is taking
place at both transcriptional and posttranscriptional level. Transfection of a
luciferase reporter plasmid carrying the IL-10 promoter in T cells, revealed that
TCR/CD28-induced activation was inhibited by 60% by cAMP elevation. The most
sensitive part to cAMP mediated inhibition was a fragment of 135 bp upstream of
TATA box, which contains multiple binding sites for MEF-2. Overexpression of
MEF-2 in the same cells increased IL-10 promoter activity by 2.5-fold.
Stimulation through TCR/CD28 increased MEF-2 binding in its corresponding binding
sites which was inhibited by 80% in the presence of cAMP elevating agents. These 
results suggest that the inhibitory effect of cAMP on IL-10 production by normal 
peripheral T lymphocytes is cell type and stimulus specific, exerted on multiple 
levels and involves MEF2 transcription factor.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.10.025 
PMID: 19058854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

