
1. PLoS Pathog. 2008 Dec;4(12):e1000239. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000239. Epub
2008 Dec 12.

Innate invariant NKT cells recognize Mycobacterium tuberculosis-infected
macrophages, produce interferon-gamma, and kill intracellular bacteria.

Sada-Ovalle I(1), Chiba A, Gonzales A, Brenner MB, Behar SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Cellular immunity to Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) requires a coordinated
response between the innate and adaptive arms of the immune system, resulting in 
a type 1 cytokine response, which is associated with control of infection. The
contribution of innate lymphocytes to immunity against Mtb remains controversial.
We established an in vitro system to study this question. Interferon-gamma is
produced when splenocytes from uninfected mice are cultured with Mtb-infected
macrophages, and, under these conditions, bacterial replication is suppressed.
This innate control of bacterial replication is dependent on CD1d-restricted
invariant NKT (iNKT) cells, and their activation requires CD1d expression by
infected macrophages as well as IL-12 and IL-18. We show that iNKT cells, even in
limiting quantities, are sufficient to restrict Mtb replication. To determine
whether iNKT cells contribute to host defense against tuberculosis in vivo, we
adoptively transferred iNKT cells into mice. Primary splenic iNKT cells obtained 
from uninfected mice significantly reduce the bacterial burden in the lungs of
mice infected with virulent Mtb by the aerosol route. Thus, iNKT cells have a
direct bactericidal effect, even in the absence of synthetic ligands such as
alpha-galactosylceramide. Our finding that iNKT cells protect mice against
aerosol Mtb infection is the first evidence that CD1d-restricted NKT cells
mediate protection against Mtb in vivo.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000239 
PMCID: PMC2588496
PMID: 19079582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

