
1. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2008 Nov;37(6):622-8.

[Effect of Porphyromonas gingivalis lipopolysaccharide on induced secretion of
inflammatory cytokines by different cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen YF(1), Yan J, Zhang DY, Chen LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, College of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310009, China. yanchen_5657@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of Porphyromonas gingivalis lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) on induced secretion of inflammatory cytokines by different cell lines.
METHODS: LPS of P. gingivalis strain ATCC33277 (Pg-LPS) was extracted with
phenol-water method, and identified by Limulus test and infrared spectrum
analysis. KB, HGF-1 and THP-1 cells were treated with Pg-LPS of different
concentrations and time duration, a commercial LPS of E.coli strain O111:B4
(E-LPS) was used as the control. TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, IL-6 and IL-8 levels in
culture supernatants were measured by quantitative ELISA.
RESULT: The minimal dosages of both Pg-LPS and E-LPS to solidify Limulus agents
were 15 ng/ml and their infrared spectrums were similar. With the treatment of
Pg-LPS or E-LPS, the TNF-alpha and IL-1beta levels secreted by HGF-1 cells were
remarkably increased with a single perk (P<0.01) while a continuous enhancement
of secretion by THP-1 cells was observed (P<0.01). Either Pg-LPS or E-LPS
stimulated HGF-1 or THP-1 cells to continuously increase the secretion of IL-6
(P<0.01). Both Pg-LPS and E-LPS induced IL-8 secretion by THP-1 cells (P<0.01),
but only Pg-LPS showed the similar effect on HGF-1 cells (P<0.01). Neither Pg-LPS
nor E-LPS induced KB cells to secrete inflammatory cytokines.
CONCLUSION: Pg-LPS can promote target cells to increase their secretion of
inflammatory cytokines. KB cells can not be used as the target cell to determine 
inflammation-causing effect of LPS.


PMID: 19084961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

