
1. Immunity. 2008 Dec 19;29(6):958-70. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.11.001. Epub 2008 
Dec 11.

Microbial flora drives interleukin 22 production in intestinal NKp46+ cells that 
provide innate mucosal immune defense.

Satoh-Takayama N(1), Vosshenrich CA, Lesjean-Pottier S, Sawa S, Lochner M, Rattis
F, Mention JJ, Thiam K, Cerf-Bensussan N, Mandelboim O, Eberl G, Di Santo JP.

Author information: 
(1)Cytokines and Lymphoid Development Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris F-75724,
France.

Natural killer (NK) cells are innate lymphocytes with spontaneous antitumor
activity, and they produce interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) that primes immune
responses. Whereas T helper cell subsets differentiate from naive T cells via
specific transcription factors, evidence for NK cell diversification is limited. 
In this report, we characterized intestinal lymphocytes expressing the NK cell
natural cytotoxicity receptor NKp46. Gut NKp46+ cells were distinguished from
classical NK cells by limited IFN-gamma production and absence of perforin,
whereas several subsets expressed the nuclear hormone receptor retinoic acid
receptor-related orphan receptor t (RORgammat) and interleukin-22 (IL-22).
Intestinal NKp46+IL-22+ cells were generated via a local process that was
conditioned by commensal bacteria and required RORgammat. Mice lacking
IL-22-producing NKp46+ cells showed heightened susceptibility to the pathogen
Citrobacter rodentium, consistent with a role for intestinal NKp46+ cells in
immune protection. RORgammat-driven diversification of intestinal NKp46+ cells
thereby specifies an innate cellular defense mechanism that operates at mucosal
surfaces.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.11.001 
PMID: 19084435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

