
1. Pak J Biol Sci. 2007 Nov 1;10(21):3742-51.

Effect of varying dietary protein sources on growth and spawning performance and 
gonad maturation of red tilapia reard in sea water.

Moharram SG(1), Raky FA.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Oceanography and Fisheries, Alexandria, Egypt.

Four-week-old Red tilapia fry with an average weight of 1.9 g were reared in
saline water (36%) for 190 days on 6 formulated iscaloric diet of protein level
(28%). The experiment was conducted in glass aquaria. Six diets were formulated
including a control diet based on fish meal (diet 1) and fish silage (diet 2) and
soybean (diet 3). The other 3 based diets supplemented with 35% fish meal and 60%
fish silage (diet 4), 35% fish meal +65% soybean diet (5) and 50% fish silage
+50% soybean (diet 6). There were six treatments in duplicates. The results
indicate that supplementation with 65% fish silage let to a significant (p<0.05) 
growth performance (final weight gain 152.2 +/- 1.1 g, SGR 1.08 and daily gain
0.80 +/- 0.06 g day(-1)) and efficient feed utilization (FCR 1.9, PER 2)
comparable to other diets. Complete replacement with soybean resulted a
significant (p>0.05) low growth performance (weight gain 2.43 +/- 0.06 g, SGR
0.65 and 0.41 +/- 0.01 g daily weight gain) and less efficient in feed
utilization (FCR 2.9 and PER 1.2). The present study also investigated the
reproductive performance of red tilapia in sea water. The six diets were fed to
red tilapia fries. The first spawning of the brood stock of fish groups occurred 
at almost the same age. There was a significant (p<0.05) difference in the
absolute fecundity fertilization and hatching rate of fertilized eggs among fish 
fed soybean and the other diets. While no significant difference in the spawning 
intervals, gonad maturation, egg size, were resulted.

DOI: 10.3923/pjbs.2007.3742.3751 
PMID: 19090226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

