
1. Cancer Gene Ther. 2009 Jun;16(6):489-97. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2008.98. Epub 2008 Dec 
19.

Adoptive immunotherapy using human peripheral blood lymphocytes transferred with 
RNA encoding Her-2/neu-specific chimeric immune receptor in ovarian cancer
xenograft model.

Yoon SH(1), Lee JM, Cho HI, Kim EK, Kim HS, Park MY, Kim TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

The current gene transfer technology for single chain (scFv)-based chimeric
immune receptor (CIR) has relied on retrovirus and lentivirus vectors which
require a long time to obtain sufficient number of transduced cells and stably
incorporate into genome. To ameliorate these limitations, we applied RNA
electroporation to human peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) activated with
anti-CD3 antibody and interleukin-2 (IL-2) for 3 days and assessed that PBL
transiently expressing anti-Her-2/neu CIR (CIR-PBL) containing signaling portion 
of CD28 and CD3zeta could elicit strong cytotoxicity in vitro and antitumor
responses in vivo. The CIR-PBL expressed high level of CIR in CD4+, CD8+ and
CD56+ cells. Her-2/neu-specific stimulation induced secretion of type-I cytokines
including interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), IL-8 and granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor, and IFN-gamma secretion was mainly mediated by CD8+ T 
cells. CIR-PBL specifically killed SKOV3 cell line expressing Her-2/neu. Adoptive
transfer of CIR-PBL in SKOV3 xenograft model led to significant inhibition of
tumor growth compared with transfer of mock-transduced PBL and showed higher
inhibition than those with Herceptin, humanized monoclonal antibody specific for 
Her-2/neu. These results provided evidence that electroporation of CIR RNA to
human PBLs could be used for rapid generation and high number of therapeutic
antigen-specific T cells for adoptive immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1038/cgt.2008.98 
PMID: 19096447  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

