
1. Infect Immun. 2009 Mar;77(3):1044-52. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00449-08. Epub 2008 Dec
22.

Toll-like receptor 2 and NALP2 mediate induction of human beta-defensins by
fusobacterium nucleatum in gingival epithelial cells.

Ji S(1), Shin JE, Kim YS, Oh JE, Min BM, Choi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oromaxillofacial Infection and Immunity, School of Dentistry and
Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University, Jongno-gu, Seoul, South
Korea.

We previously reported that infection by Fusobacterium nucleatum strongly induced
the expression of both human beta-defensin 2 (HBD-2) and HBD-3 by gingival
epithelial cells. The aim of this study was to characterize the pattern
recognition receptors (PRRs) and regulatory mechanisms involved in the induction 
of HBD-2 and -3 expression by F. nucleatum in gingival epithelial cells.
Immortalized human gingival epithelial HOK-16B cells were infected with live or
heat-killed F. nucleatum, and the expression of HBDs and interleukin-8 (IL-8) was
examined by real-time reverse transcription-PCR and enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay, respectively. Live, but not heat-killed, F. nucleatum invaded HOK-16B
cells, as seen by confocal microscopy and flow cytometry. Live F. nucleatum
induced both HBD-2 and -3 efficiently, whereas heat-killed bacteria induced only 
HBD-3 at a reduced level. Knockdown of NACHT-LRR- and pyrin domain-containing
protein 2 (NALP2), the most abundant intracellular PRR in HOK-16B cells, by RNA
interference (RNAi) significantly reduced the induction of HBD-3 but not HBD-2
and IL-8. In addition, knockdown of Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) by RNAi reduced
the upregulation of HBD-2 and -3 but not IL-8. Heat-killed F. nucleatum was
hindered in its ability to activate TLR2 and JNK signaling pathways. Theses data 
show that TLR2 and NALP2 mediate the induction of HBDs by F. nucleatum in
gingival epithelial cells, but thresholds for the two HBD genes are different.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00449-08 
PMCID: PMC2643647
PMID: 19103770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

