
1. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 15;182(2):766-73.

Cross-linking of CD80 on CD4+ T cells activates a calcium-dependent signaling
pathway.

Podojil JR(1), Miller SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology and Interdepartmental Immunobiology
Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois
60611, USA.

CD80 expressed on the surface of APCs provides a positive costimulatory signal to
naive CD4+ T cells via CD28 during activation. However, CD80 is also expressed on
the surface of activated CD4+ T cells, and cross-linking CD80 on the surface of
CD4+ T cells activated in the presence of Th1-promoting cytokines induces a
direct up-regulation of T-bet, IFN-gamma, and Bcl(XL) expression in primary CD4+ 
T cells. The present data show that naive CD4+ T cells activated in Th1-promoting
conditions in the presence of anti-CD80 mAb increase the level of IFN-gamma
produced by increasing the rate of IFN-gamma mRNA transcription, which is
supported by an increase in the level of T-bet phosphorylation and T-bet binding 
to the third intronic enhancer in the IFN-gamma locus. Furthermore, anti-CD80
mAb-induced increase in IFN-gamma expression and T-bet phosphorylation is
dependent upon the activation of a Ca2+-dependent pathway as shown by anti-CD80
mAb-induced intracellular Ca2+ flux following CD80 cross-linking. These findings 
indicate a novel regulatory role for CD80-mediated intracellular signals in CD4+ 
T cells and have important implications for disease therapies using
anti-costimulatory mAbs as use of an intact CD80 mAb may lead to CD80
cross-linking on activated T cells and enhanced proinflammatory cytokine
production.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.182.2.766 
PMCID: PMC2844901
PMID: 19124719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

