
1. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 15;182(2):1069-78.

Cell-mediated immunity to Toxoplasma gondii develops primarily by local Th1 host 
immune responses in the absence of parasite replication.

Gigley JP(1), Fox BA, Bzik DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, 
NH 03756, USA.

A single inoculation of mice with the live, attenuated Toxoplasma gondii uracil
auxotroph strain cps1-1 induces long-lasting immunity against lethal challenge
with hypervirulent strain RH. The mechanism for this robust immunity in the
absence of parasite replication has not been addressed. The mechanism of
long-lasting immunity, the importance of route of immunization, cellular
recruitment to the site of infection, and local and systemic inflammation were
evaluated. Our results show that infection with cps1-1 elicits long-lasting CD8+ 
T cell- mediated immunity. We show that immunization with cps1-1-infected
dendritic cells elicits long-lasting immunity. Intraperitoneal infection with
cps1-1 induced a rapid influx of GR1+ neutrophils and two stages of GR1+CD68+
inflammatory monocyte infiltration into the site of inoculation. CD19+ B cells
and CD3+ T cells steadily increase for 8 days after infection. CD8+ T cells were 
rapidly recruited to the site of infection and increased faster than CD4+ T
cells. Surprisingly, cps1-1 infection induced high systemic levels of bioactive
IL-12p70 and a very low level and transient systemic IFN-gamma. Furthermore, we
show significant levels of these inflammatory cytokines were locally produced at 
the site of cps1-1 inoculation. These findings offer new insight into
immunological mechanisms and local host responses to a non-replicating type I
parasite infection associated with development of long-lasting immunity to
Toxoplasma gondii.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.182.2.1069 
PMCID: PMC2615398
PMID: 19124750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

