
1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Jan;8(1):178-84. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0643.

CXCR4-gp120-IIIB interactions induce caspase-mediated apoptosis of prostate
cancer cells and inhibit tumor growth.

Singh S(1), Bond VC, Powell M, Singh UP, Bumpers HL, Grizzle WE, Lillard JW Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, James Graham Brown Cancer Center,
University of Louisville School of Medicine, 580 South Preston Street, Baxter II 
Room 304, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) has been implicated in prostate cancer
metastasis and this receptor also acts as a coreceptor for HIV-1 120-kDa
glycoprotein variant IIIB (gp120-IIIB). The interaction between CXCR4 and
gp120-IIIB has been shown to mediate apoptosis of both immune and endothelial
cells. In this study, we have examined the effects of gp120-IIIB on
hormone-refractory prostate cancer cells (PC3 and DU145) in vitro and tumor
growth in vivo. Normal prostatic epithelial (PrEC) and prostate cancer cell lines
were treated with gp120-IIIB with or without anti-CXCR4 antibody. Caspase
expression was evaluated by real-time PCR and active caspase assays. Apoptosis
was determined by flow cytometry. gp120-IIIB treatment correlated with active
caspase-3 and -9 expression and apoptosis of prostate cancer cells but not PrEC
cells. This effect was significantly inhibited after CXCR4 blockade. PC3 and
DU145 tumor-bearing mice received intraperitoneal injections of gp120-IIIB and
controls received bovine serum albumin in PBS. PC3 and DU145 tumor sizes were
measured over time and excised tumors were evaluated for CD44, CD34, lymphatic
endothelial cell marker LYVE-1, active caspase-3, and active caspase-9 expression
by immunohistochemistry. The tumor size in mice receiving gp120-IIIB was
significantly smaller than compared with tumors in control mice. This regression 
was associated with significant decreases in CD44, CD34, and LYVE-1 and increases
in active caspase-3 and -9 expression. These results suggest that gp120-IIIB
induced apoptosis in prostate cancer cells and reduced tumor-associated
lymphoendothelial cells.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0643 
PMCID: PMC3600559
PMID: 19139127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

