
1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Jan;8(1):214-24. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0722.

Inhibition of fatty acid synthase by luteolin post-transcriptionally
down-regulates c-Met expression independent of proteosomal/lysosomal degradation.

Coleman DT(1), Bigelow R, Cardelli JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feist-Weiller Cancer Center,
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 1501 Kings Highway,
Shreveport, LA 71130, USA.

The hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/c-Met signaling pathway is involved in the
progression of several cancers and associated with increased tumor invasion and
metastatic potential. We determined previously that the polyphenol
epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibited HGF-induced c-Met phosphorylation in a
variety of tumor cell lines in part by disrupting lipid rafts. Fatty acid
synthase (FASN) is implicated in cancer progression and may regulate lipid raft
function. We therefore examined the effects of luteolin, a potent FASN inhibitor,
on c-Met signaling. Luteolin blocked HGF-induced c-Met phosphorylation and
scattering of DU145 prostate cancer cells, but inhibition required at least a 4 h
preincubation time. Western blot analysis indicated that inhibition of
HGF-induced scattering by luteolin occurred coincident with reduction of total
c-Met protein in DU145 cells. In addition, luteolin-induced c-Met down-regulation
was mimicked by a pharmacologic inhibitor of FASN, C75, or short hairpin RNA
knockdown of FASN. Consistent with a role for FASN, loss of c-Met in cells
treated with C75 or luteolin was prevented by exogenous addition of palmitate.
Luteolin-induced loss of c-Met primarily occurred at a post-transcriptional level
and involved cell surface internalization but did not involve translation
inhibition, nor was it dependent on the activity of the 26S proteosome or acidic 
lysosomes. Taken together, our study shows a novel connection between FASN
activity and c-Met protein expression and suggests that luteolin could act as a
novel HGF/c-Met inhibitor by reducing expression of this receptor.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0722 
PMCID: PMC2741738
PMID: 19139131  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

