
1. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2009 Mar;234(3):342-53. doi: 10.3181/0807-RM-226. Epub
2009 Jan 14.

Maitake beta-glucan enhances umbilical cord blood stem cell transplantation in
the NOD/SCID mouse.

Lin H(1), De Stanchina E, Zhou XK, She Y, Hoang D, Cheung SW, Cassileth B,
Cunningham-Rundles S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cornell University Weill Medical College, 1300 York 
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Beta glucans are cell wall constituents of yeast, fungi and bacteria, as well as 
mushrooms and barley. Glucans are not expressed on mammalian cells and are
recognized as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPS) by pattern
recognition receptors (PRR). Beta glucans have potential activity as biological
response modifiers for hematopoiesis and enhancement of bone marrow recovery
after injury. We have reported that Maitake beta glucan (MBG) enhanced mouse bone
marrow (BMC) and human umbilical cord blood (CB) cell granulocyte-monocyte colony
forming unit (GM-CFU) activity in vitro and protected GM-CFU forming stem cells
from doxorubicin (DOX) toxicity. The objective of this study was to determine the
effects of MBG on expansion of phenotypically distinct subpopulations of
progenitor and stem cells in CB from full-term infants cultured ex vivo and on
homing and engraftment in vivo in the nonobese diabetic/severe combined
immunodeficient (NOD/SCID) mouse. MBG promoted a greater expansion of
CD34+CD33+CD38- human committed hematopoietic progenitor (HPC) cells compared to 
the conventional stem cell culture medium (P = 0.002 by ANOVA). CD34+CXCR4+CD38- 
early, uncommitted human hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) numbers showed a trend
towards increase in response to MBG. The fate of CD34+ enriched CB cells after
injection into the sublethally irradiated NOS/SCID mouse was evaluated after
retrieval of xenografted human CB from marrow and spleen by flow cytometric
analysis. Oral administration of MBG to recipient NOS/SCID mice led to enhanced
homing at 3 days and engraftment at 6 days in mouse bone marrow (P = 0.002 and P 
= 0.0005, respectively) compared to control mice. More CD34+ human CB cells were 
also retrieved from mouse spleen in MBG treated mice at 6 days after
transplantation. The studies suggest that MBG promotes hematopoiesis through
effects on CD34+ progenitor cell expansion ex vivo and when given to the
transplant recipient could enhance CD34+ precursor cell homing and support
engraftment.

DOI: 10.3181/0807-RM-226 
PMCID: PMC4567044
PMID: 19144872  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

