
1. Blood. 2009 Mar 12;113(11):2416-25. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-03-144121. Epub 2009 
Jan 15.

PARP-14, a member of the B aggressive lymphoma family, transduces survival
signals in primary B cells.

Cho SH(1), Goenka S, Henttinen T, Gudapati P, Reinikainen A, Eischen CM, Lahesmaa
R, Boothby M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 
37232, USA.

Poly(ADP-ribos)ylation is one of the longest-known but most enigmatic
posttranslational modifications transducing specific signals. The enzyme
responsible for the majority of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerization in cells, PARP-1,
promotes DNA repair but also mediates a caspase-independent form of apoptosis in 
response to stressors such as irradiation. However, the biologic function of most
other PARPs is not known. Macro-PARPs constitute one branch of the large family
of PARP-like proteins also designated as B aggressive lymphoma proteins (BAL1,
2a/2b, 3, or PARP-9, PARP-14, and PARP-15). To elucidate biologic role(s) of a
BAL-family macro-PARP, we analyzed mice deficient in PARP-14, a binding partner
of the IL-4-induced transcription factor Stat6. We show here that PARP-14 plays a
fundamental role mediating protection against apoptosis in IL-4-treated B cells, 
including that after DNA damage, and mediates IL-4 effects on the levels of gene 
products that regulate cell survival, proliferation, and lymphomagenesis.
Collectively, the results establish that PARP-14 mediates regulation of gene
expression and lymphocyte physiology by IL-4 and has a function distinct from
PARP-1. Furthermore, the findings suggest mechanisms by which BAL-family proteins
might influence pathologic processes involving B lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2008-03-144121 
PMCID: PMC2656269
PMID: 19147789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

