
1. Cell Prolif. 2009 Feb;42(1):83-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2008.00575.x.

Effects of PI3-k/Akt short hairpin RNA on proliferation, fibronectin production
and synthesis of thrombospondin-1 and transforming growth factor-beta1 in
glomerular mesangial cells induced by sublytic C5b-9 complexes.

Gao L(1), Zhang Y, Qiu W, Xu W, Feng X, Ren J, Jiang X, Wang H, Zhao D, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, China.

OBJECTIVES: To explore proliferation of glomerular mesangial cells (GMC) and
secretion of extracellular matrix (fibronectin induced by sublytic C5b-9
complexes), and then ascertain the role of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3-k)/Akt signal pathway in these processes, by using small hairpin RNAs.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The expression of cyclin D(2), (3)H-thymidine into DNA and 
production of fibronectin including thrombospondin-1 and transforming growth
factor-beta(1) in the GMCs stimulated by sublytic C5b-9 or transfected with
expression vectors of PI3-k and Akt short hairpin RNA or LY294002 (PI3-k
inhibitor) were measured by Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(PCR), Western blot, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and (3)H-thymidine
incorporation ((3)H-TdR), respectively.
RESULTS: The expression of cyclin D(2), (3)H-thymidine into DNA and fibronectin
in the GMCs stimulated by sublytic C5b-9 could all be increased, and the
elevations of these parameters mentioned above were also markedly reduced in the 
GMCs transfected with vectors of PI3-k and Akt short hairpin RNA or LY294002,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that sublytic C5b-9 can promote proliferation of
GMCs and secretion of fibronectin as well as synthesis of thrombospondin-1 and
transforming growth factor-beta(1). The PI3-k/Akt signal pathway in these
reactions, mediated by sublytic C5b-9 complexes, may play at least a partial
role.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2008.00575.x 
PMCID: PMC6495855
PMID: 19143766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

