
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2009 Jul;28(7):781-91. doi:
10.1007/s10096-009-0705-9. Epub 2009 Jan 21.

Distribution of Legionella pneumophila serogroups, monoclonal antibody subgroups 
and DNA sequence types in recent clinical and environmental isolates from England
and Wales (2000-2008).

Harrison TG(1), Afshar B, Doshi N, Fry NK, Lee JV.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Systemic Infections Department, HPA Centre for Infections, 61 
Colindale Avenue, London, NW9 5HT, UK. tim.harrison@hpa.org.uk

Clinical isolates of Legionella pneumophila, obtained from 167 patients, who
acquired their illness in the community in England and Wales between January 2000
and March 2008, were compared with 276 environmental isolates of L. pneumophila
obtained over the same period as part of the routine sampling of 'managed' water 
systems. The 443 isolates were typed by monoclonal antibody (mAb) subgrouping and
the internationally standardised, seven-gene loci, sequence-based typing (SBT)
scheme of the European Working Group for Legionella Infections (EWGLI). Of the
clinical isolates, 97.6% were L. pneumophila serogroup (sgp) 1, compared with
only 55.8% of environmental isolates (P = 0.0002); 91.6% were subgrouped as
mAb3/1+ve, compared with only 8.3% of environmental isolates (P < 0.0001). The
isolates were very diverse, with SBT identifying 111 sequence types (STs) (index 
of diversity [IOD] 0.954). Among the clinical isolates, 42 ST were seen, with one
(ST47) accounting for 25.7% and three (ST47, ST37 and ST62) accounting for 46.1% 
of all isolates. Eighty-two STs were identified among the environmental isolates,
with two (ST1 and ST79) accounting for 34.1% of these. Comparison of the STs seen
among clinical and environmental isolates showed that there was very little
overlap between the two populations (P < 0.0001), with common clinical strains
found in the environment very infrequently: 0.4, 0.7 and 0% (ST47, ST37 and ST62,
respectively), and common environmental strains rarely causing disease: 4.8 and
1.2% (ST1 and ST79, respectively). Combining phenotypic and genotypic data
identified 144 phenons (IOD 0.970); 52 among clinical isolates and 101 among
environmental isolates. The most abundant clinical strain, mAb 'Allentown' ST47, 
accounted for 22.8% of cases, but was only found once in the environment.
Conversely, mAb 'Oxford/OLDA' ST1 was the most common environmental strain
(17.0%), but only caused two infections. A review of the published data shows
that mAb 'Allentown' ST47 is also an important cause of infection in France and
possibly in the Netherlands. However, it was not found in a large study of German
clinical isolates. This study confirms previous work showing that just a few
strains of L. pneumophila cause the majority of community-acquired Legionella
infection in England and Wales, and that these clinically significant strains are
only rarely found in managed water systems. These data suggest that knowing which
particular strain is present in an environment might be at least as important as 
knowing the quantity in which legionellae are present.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-009-0705-9 
PMID: 19156453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

