
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2009 Mar;47(3):680-8. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01838-08. Epub 2009 Jan 
21.

Changes in genetic diversity of the Bordetella pertussis population in the United
Kingdom between 1920 and 2006 reflect vaccination coverage and emergence of a
single dominant clonal type.

Litt DJ(1), Neal SE, Fry NK.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Systemic Infection Laboratory, Health Protection Agency Centre
for Infections, 61 Colindale Avenue, London NW9 5EQ, United Kingdom.
david.litt@hpa.org.uk

Pertussis (whooping cough) is a potentially fatal respiratory disease caused by
the bacterium Bordetella pertussis. Despite effective vaccination programs, there
has been concern in some developed countries that pertussis cases are on the
increase. We characterized 703 clinical B. pertussis isolates collected in the
United Kingdom between 1920 and 2006 using multilocus variable-number tandem
repeat analysis (MLVA), pertactin (prnA) and pertussis toxin (ptxA) genotyping,
and serotyping. The results showed that the genetic diversity of the bacterial
population decreased during periods of high vaccine coverage. However, it was
elevated between 1977 and 1986, when vaccine coverage in the United Kingdom was
low and epidemics occurred. A high proportion of MLVA types during this epidemic 
period were novel, and the prnA(2) and prnA(3) alleles were seen for the first
time in the United Kingdom. MLVA-27 appeared in 1982, was codominant during the
1998-to-2001 period, and comprised approximately 70% of isolates during both the 
2002-to-2004 and the 2005-to-2006 periods. The United Kingdom is dominated
currently by an MLVA-27 prnA(2) ptxA(1) serotype Fim3 clonal type. Even during
recent periods dominated by MLVA-27, many novel types were found at low
frequencies, suggesting that either there are a large number of uncommon MLVA
types circulating at low frequencies or new types are constantly arising. This
supports a hypothesis that MLVA-27 is under some form of positive selection
conferring increased survival in a highly vaccinated population. There has been
no significant change to the bacterial population in the first 2 years since the 
United Kingdom switched from a whole-cell to an acellular vaccine.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01838-08 
PMCID: PMC2650949
PMID: 19158267  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

