
1. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2009 Apr;55(3):378-87. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2008.00529.x. Epub 2009 Jan 12.

Cellular response induced by a galactose-specific adhesin of enteroaggregative
Escherichia coli in INT-407 cells.

Goyal A(1), Bhattacharyya S, Majumdar S, Narang A, Ghosh S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education &
Research, Chandigarh, India.

In the present study, the role of a fimbrial galactose-specific adhesin of the T7
strain of enteroaggregative Escherichia coli (EAEC-T7) in the signal transduction
pathways in human small intestinal epithelial cells (INT-407) was explored. The
adhesin was purified by anion exchange chromatography using a Mono Q HR5/5 column
in the AKTA purifier system. The characteristic stacked brick pattern of
aggregative adherence of EAEC-T7 to INT-407 cells was found to be inhibited in
the presence of immunoglobulin G against the purified adhesin as well as
d-galactose. The adhesin induced a significant increase in the intracellular
calcium concentration [Ca(2+)](i) in INT-407 cells, which was reduced in the
presence of dantrolene (inhibitor of intracellular calcium stores), verapamil,
calciseptin (calcium channel blockers) as well as neomycin [inhibitor of
phospholipase C (PLC)]. Further, an increased level of PLCgamma1 and inositol
1,4,5-tri phosphate as well as enhanced activity of protein kinase C (PKC) in the
adhesin-stimulated cells were found to be downregulated in the presence of
neomycin and U73122 (inhibitors of PLC) and H-7 (inhibitor of PKC), respectively.
The adhesin could also induce interleukin-8 secretion from INT-407 cells, which
was inhibited in the presence of dantrolene as well as staurosporin (inhibitor of
PKC). Collectively, our results have suggested that the galactose-specific
adhesin-induced signal transduction pathway might play a crucial role in the
EAEC-induced pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2008.00529.x 
PMID: 19159427  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

