
1. FASEB J. 2009 Jun;23(6):1663-71. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-117283. Epub 2009 Jan 23.

T-cell receptor signaling is mediated by transient Lck activity, which is
inhibited by inorganic mercury.

Ziemba SE(1), Menard SL, McCabe MJ Jr, Rosenspire AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Genetically susceptible rodents exposed to low nontoxic levels of inorganic
mercury (Hg(2+)) develop idiosyncratic autoimmune disease associated with
defective T-cell function. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying this
phenomenon remain mostly unexplained. Brief exposure of T cells to micromolar
concentrations of Hg(2+) leads to physiologically relevant nontoxic cellular
mercury burdens, and as we have previously reported, attenuates T-cell receptor
(TCR) signal strength by approximately 50%. We have found this to be the result
of an inadequate activation of the tyrosine kinase ZAP-70, which is
hypophosphorylated following TCR stimulation in Hg(2+) burdened cells when
compared to untreated controls. In T cells, ZAP-70 phosphorylation is dependent
on lymphocyte-specific protein tyrosine kinase (Lck) activity, which in turn is
either positively or negatively regulated by the phosphorylation of specific Lck 
tyrosine residues. In particular, the general belief is that Lck is negatively
regulated by phosphorylation of tyrosine 192 (Y192). We now demonstrate by
Western blotting that, in Jurkat T cells, TCR signal transduction (and ZAP-70
phosphorylation) was positively associated with a rapid transient phosphorylation
of Y192, which was inhibited in cells that were briefly (5 min) exposed to 5
microM Hg(2+). Thus, Hg(2+) inhibits a critical activating role played by Lck
Y192 during the most proximal events of the TCR-induced cell signaling.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.08-117283 
PMCID: PMC2698652
PMID: 19168706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

