
1. Laryngoscope. 2009 Feb;119(2):401-8. doi: 10.1002/lary.20064.

The effect of topical amphotericin B on inflammatory markers in patients with
chronic rhinosinusitis: a multicenter randomized controlled study.

Ebbens FA(1), Georgalas C, Luiten S, van Drunen CM, Badia L, Scadding GK,
Hellings PW, Jorissen M, Mullol J, Cardesin A, Bachert C, van Zele TP, Lund VJ,
Fokkens WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. f.a.ebbens@amc.uva.nl

Comment in
    Laryngoscope. 2010 Jan;120(1):210-2; author reply 213-4.

BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that an exaggerated immune response to fungi is
crucial in the pathogenesis of chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS). Based on this
rationale, the use of topical antifungals (amphotericin B) has been advocated.
Studies on its clinical effectiveness are, however, contradictory.
OBJECTIVES: To examine the effect of nasal antifungal treatment on secreted
mediators in samples of nasal lavage fluid from patients with CRS with or without
nasal polyps (NP).
METHODS: Part two of a prospective double-blind, placebo-controlled multicenter
clinical trial investigating the effect of 13 weeks of treatment with
amphotericin B or placebo on the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines
and growth factors (i.e., IL-1beta, IL-1RA, IL-2, IL-2R, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, 
IL-7, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12 (p40/p70 subunits), IL-13, IL-15, IL-17, TNF-alpha,
IFN-alpha, IFN-gamma, G-CSF, GM-CSF, MIP-1alpha, MIP-1beta, IP-10, MIG, eotaxin, 
RANTES, MCP-1, MCP-2, MCP-3, VEGF, EGF, FGF-basic, HGF, Gro-alpha) and albumin
via a fluorescent enzyme immunoassay in nasal lavage specimens of CRS patients
with or without NP.
RESULTS: Topical amphotericin B had no significant effect on the level of any of 
the tested pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors in CRS
nasal lavage samples. Treatment with placebo, however, increased the level of
MIP-1alpha and MIP-1beta, which are mediators involved in wound healing.
CONCLUSIONS: Topical amphotericin B has no significant effect on activation
markers of nasal inflammatory cells in chronic rhinosinusitis with or without
nasal polyps.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.20064 
PMID: 19160404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

