
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2009 Jul;28(7):745-55. doi:
10.1007/s10096-008-0695-z. Epub 2009 Jan 24.

Human beta-defensins--at the front line of the peritonsillar abscess.

Schwaab M(1), Hansen S, Pearson MD, Shagdarsuren S, Dazert S.

Author information: 
(1)Department for ENT, Head and Neck Surgery, St. Elisabeth-Hospital,
Ruhr-University-Bochum, Bleichstr. 15, 44787, Bochum, Germany.
matthiasschwaab@gmx.de

Antimicrobial proteins like human beta-defensins 1-4 (hBD1-4) protect the surface
of organs against different bacteria. Little is still known about these proteins 
within an abscess formation. The purpose of this study was to analyse and
describe the distribution of the antimicrobial proteins hBD 1-4 within the
peritonsillar abscess. A total of 17 peritonsillar abscesses were analysed.
Immunohistochemical stainings were performed, characteristic pictures were taken,
and the mean colour intensity was measured using a specific imaging software. A
statistical analysis compared the areas of interest of the specific protein
staining with the one of the control staining. A total of 4,573 areas of
interests were measured. A significantly stronger expression was detected for
hBD1 in the surface epithelium, crypt, epithelium of the crypt, lymphocytic cap, 
and abscess formation in the hBD1 staining in comparison to the control samples. 
But there was no significance in the specific hBD1-protein expression in
comparison to the control samples in the lymphoid follicle and in the germinal
centre. There was a significantly stronger hBD2, hBD3, and hBD4 expression in all
areas of interest for the specifics stainings in comparison to the control
samples. In conclusion, we developed different scenarios which could lead to a
peritonsillar abscess formation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-008-0695-z 
PMID: 19169721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

