
1. BMC Microbiol. 2009 Jan 29;9:19. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-19.

Enterococcal surface protein Esp is not essential for cell adhesion and
intestinal colonization of Enterococcus faecium in mice.

Heikens E(1), Leendertse M, Wijnands LM, van Luit-Asbroek M, Bonten MJ, van der
Poll T, Willems RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, the Netherlands. E.heikens@umcutrecht.nl

BACKGROUND: Enterococcus faecium has globally emerged as a cause of
hospital-acquired infections with high colonization rates in hospitalized
patients. The enterococcal surface protein Esp, identified as a potential
virulence factor, is specifically linked to nosocomial clonal lineages that are
genetically distinct from indigenous E. faecium strains. To investigate whether
Esp facilitates bacterial adherence and intestinal colonization of E. faecium, we
used human colorectal adenocarcinoma cells (Caco-2 cells) and an experimental
colonization model in mice.
RESULTS: No differences in adherence to Caco-2 cells were found between an Esp
expressing strain of E. faecium (E1162) and its isogenic Esp-deficient mutant
(E1162Deltaesp). Mice, kept under ceftriaxone treatment, were inoculated orally
with either E1162, E1162Deltaesp or both strains simultaneously. Both E1162 and
E1162Deltaesp were able to colonize the murine intestines with high and
comparable numbers. No differences were found in the contents of cecum and colon.
Both E1162 and E1162Deltaesp were able to translocate to the mesenteric lymph
nodes.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that Esp is not essential for Caco-2 cell
adherence and intestinal colonization or translocation of E. faecium in mice.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-9-19 
PMCID: PMC2639590
PMID: 19178704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

