
1. Acta Odontol Latinoam. 2008;21(2):153-8.

Cytokines produced by CD4+ T cells against a synthetic GTF-I(1301-1322) peptide
of Streptococcus mutans in naturally sensitized humans.

Roa NS(1), Gómez SI, Rodríguez A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Dental Research, School of Dentistry, Pontificia Universidad
Javeriana, Bogotá, Colombia. nelly.roa@javeriana.edu.co

Streptococcus mutans (S. mutans) is the main etiological agent in dental caries. 
Its virulence factors are the proteins PAc and glucosyltransferase (GTF), which
are related to its physiopathogenia and have been used in research for a dental
caries vaccine. It was reported that using experimental animal models,
GTF-I(1301-1322) synthetic peptide from the GLU region of the GTFs has Tepitopes,
induces production of serum antibodies in saliva and reduces the presence of
caries, but little is known about the cellular response in naturally sensitized
humans. The aim of this study was to observe whether GTF-I(1301-1322) peptide is 
capable of activating CD4+ T cells in PBMC from naturally sensitized humans, to
classify the response and to establish the relationship with dental caries. The
study was conducted on 30 individuals classified into the following 3 groups:
active caries (AC), History of Caries (HC), and free of caries (H). A blood
sample was drawn from each individual. Specific antigen stimulation and flow
cytometry analyses were used to determine cells producing the cytokines IFN-gamma
(type 1 cytokine) and IL-13 (type 2 cytokine). Cell memory response to
GTF-I(1301-1322) peptide was found in naturally sensitized humans. Three
different responses were detected: TH0, TH1, and NR. The percentage of CD4+ T
cells producing the cytokines IFN-gamma (type 1 cytokine) was greater than the
percentage producing IL-13 (p=0.006). No statistically significant differences
were found among the three groups for the other variables studied (p < or =
0.05). In conclusion, specific cellular immune responses against the
GTF-I(1301-1322) peptide of S. mutans does not differ between individuals who are
naturally sensitized, caries- resistant or with caries.


PMID: 19177852  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

