
1. J Periodontal Res. 2009 Aug;44(4):459-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0765.2008.01147.x. 
Epub 2008 Nov 3.

The upregulation of cystatin C in human gingival fibroblasts stimulated with
cyclosporine A.

Tsai CH(1), Yang SF, Huang FM, Chang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Cystatin C is a 13 kDa non-glycosylated, basic protein 
belonging to the cystatin family. It is consistently and dramatically upregulated
in a variety of fibrotic diseases. However, little is known about the correlation
between cystatin C and cyclosporine A-induced gingival overgrowth. The aim of
this study was to compare cystatin C expression in normal, healthy gingival
tissues and cyclosporine A-induced gingival overgrowth specimens and further
explore the potential mechanism that may result in cystatin C expression.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Fifteen cyclosporine A-induced gingival overgrowth
specimens and five normal gingival tissues were examined by immunohistochemistry.
Three human gingival fibroblast (HGF) strains were established from
crown-lengthening surgery. The reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
was used to investigate the effects on HGFs exposed to cyclosporine A. In
addition, predominant periodontal pathogens (Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans and Porphyromonas gingivalis) and proinflammatory cytokines
(interleukin-1alpha and tumor necrosis factor-alpha) were added to seek the
possible regulatory mechanisms of cystatin C expression.
RESULTS: The cystatin C staining in gingival tissue was stronger in the
cyclosporine A-induced gingival overgrowth group than in the normal gingival
group (p < 0.05). Intensive staining for cystatin C expression was observed
mainly in the cytoplasm of fibroblasts, epithelial cells and inflammatory cells. 
Moreover, cystatin C expression was significantly higher in cyclosporine
A-induced gingival overgrowth specimens with higher levels of inflammatory
infiltrates (p < 0.05). A concentration of 200 ng/mL cyclosporine A was found to 
increase cystatin C expression in HGFs in a time-dependent manner (p < 0.05). The
addition of periodontal pathogens and proinflammatory cytokines significantly
increased the expression of cystatin C compared with cyclosporine A alone (p <
0.05).
CONCLUSION: The increased ability of protein accumulation by cystatin C is one of
several factors mediating cyclosporine A-induced gingival overgrowth. In
addition, cyclosporine A may predispose to gingival overgrowth in inflammatory
environments.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0765.2008.01147.x 
PMID: 19178644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

