
1. Immunology. 2009 Sep;128(1 Suppl):e335-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2008.02967.x.
Epub 2008 Oct 30.

The acute-phase response impairs host defence against Enterococcus faecium
peritonitis.

Leendertse M(1), Willems RJ, Giebelen IA, van den Pangaart PS, Bonten MJ, van der
Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. m.leendertse@amc.uva.nl

Enterococcus faecium is an emerging pathogen that causes infections in
hospitalized patients with various co-morbid diseases. These underlying diseases 
are often associated with an acute-phase response that renders patients
vulnerable to nosocomial infections. To study the influence of the acute-phase
response induced by sterile tissue injury on host defence against E. faecium,
mice were injected subcutaneously with either turpentine or casein 1 day before
intraperitoneal infection with E. faecium. Control mice were subcutaneously
injected with saline or sodium bicarbonate, respectively. Turpentine and casein
induced an acute-phase response as reflected by increases in the plasma
concentrations of interleukin-6, serum amyloid P and C3. A pre-existent
acute-phase response in mice was associated with a strongly reduced capacity to
clear E. faecium, resulting in prolonged bacteraemia for several days. The
inflammatory response to E. faecium was impaired in mice with an acute-phase
response, as shown by reduced capacity to mount a neutrophilic leucocytosis in
peripheral blood and by decreased local cytokine concentrations. These data
indicate that the acute-phase response impairs host defence against E. faecium,
suggesting that this condition may contribute to the increased vulnerability of
critically ill patients to enterococcal infections.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2008.02967.x 
PMCID: PMC2753956
PMID: 19175794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

