
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 17;106(7):2307-12. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0810059106. Epub 2009 Jan 26.

Cross-presenting human gammadelta T cells induce robust CD8+ alphabeta T cell
responses.

Brandes M(1), Willimann K, Bioley G, Lévy N, Eberl M, Luo M, Tampé R, Lévy F,
Romero P, Moser B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, CH-3000 Bern 9, Switzerland.

Gammadelta T cells are implicated in host defense against microbes and tumors but
their mode of function remains largely unresolved. Here, we have investigated the
ability of activated human Vgamma9Vdelta2(+) T cells (termed gammadelta T-APCs)
to cross-present microbial and tumor antigens to CD8(+) alphabeta T cells.
Although this process is thought to be mediated best by DCs, adoptive transfer of
ex vivo antigen-loaded, human DCs during immunotherapy of cancer patients has
shown limited success. We report that gammadelta T-APCs take up and process
soluble proteins and induce proliferation, target cell killing and cytokine
production responses in antigen-experienced and naïve CD8(+) alphabeta T cells.
Induction of APC functions in Vgamma9Vdelta2(+) T cells was accompanied by the
up-regulation of costimulatory and MHC class I molecules. In contrast, the
functional predominance of the immunoproteasome was a characteristic of
gammadelta T cells irrespective of their state of activation. Gammadelta T-APCs
were more efficient in antigen cross-presentation than monocyte-derived DCs,
which is in contrast to the strong induction of CD4(+) alphabeta T cell responses
by both types of APCs. Our study reveals unexpected properties of human
gammadelta T-APCs in the induction of CD8(+) alphabeta T effector cells, and
justifies their further exploration in immunotherapy research.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0810059106 
PMCID: PMC2650152
PMID: 19171897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

