
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2009 Mar;67(3):381-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2008.00645.x.
Epub 2009 Jan 24.

Minerals in soil select distinct bacterial communities in their microhabitats.

Carson JK(1), Campbell L, Rooney D, Clipson N, Gleeson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Soil Biology Group, School of Earth and Geographical Sciences M087, University
of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia. jdavis@graduate.uwa.edu.au

We tested the hypothesis that different minerals in soil select distinct
bacterial communities in their microhabitats. Mica (M), basalt (B) and rock
phosphate (RP) were incubated separately in soil planted with Trifolium
subterraneum, Lolium rigidum or left unplanted. After 70 days, the mineral and
soil fractions were separated by sieving. Automated ribosomal intergenic spacer
analysis was used to determine whether the bacterial community structure was
affected by the mineral, fraction and plant treatments. Principal coordinate
plots showed clustering of bacterial communities from different fraction and
mineral treatments, but not from different plant treatments. Permutational
multivariate anova (permanova) showed that the microhabitats of M, B and RP
selected bacterial communities different from each other in unplanted and L.
rigidum, and in T. subterraneum, bacterial communities from M and B differed
(P<0.046). permanova also showed that each mineral fraction selected bacterial
communities different from the surrounding soil fraction (P<0.05). This study
shows that the structure of bacterial communities in soil is influenced by the
mineral substrates in their microhabitat and that minerals in soil play a greater
role in bacterial ecology than simply providing an inert matrix for bacterial
growth. This study suggests that mineral heterogeneity in soil contributes to the
spatial variation in bacterial communities.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2008.00645.x 
PMID: 19187213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

