
1. Water Sci Technol. 2009;59(2):261-5. doi: 10.2166/wst.2009.868.

Biodegradation of 17alpha-methyltestosterone and isolation of MT-degrading
bacterium from sediment of Nile tilapia masculinization pond.

Homklin S(1), Wattanodorn T, Ong SK, Limpiyakorn T.

Author information: 
(1)International Postgraduate Programs in Environmental Management, Graduate
School, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.

The fast growing and highly tolerant fish Nile tilapia is one of the most
commonly raised fish in the aquaculture industry. To produce an all-male
population, a common practice is to feed the Nile tilapia fry with
17alpha-methyltestosterone (MT)-impregnated food. Uneaten fish food with MT may
accumulate in the masculinization ponds and be released into the receiving
waters. Not much is known about the fate of MT in the fish farms and in the
receiving streams. The objective of this study is to investigate the
biodegradation of MT under aerobic condition and to isolate responsible
microorganisms. Aerobic biodegradation tests were conducted with MT
concentrations of 0.3, 1.0, 5.0, 7.0, and 10.0 mg/L using sediment from the
masculinization pond as microbial seed. The results suggested that MT is
biodegradable. Lag phase was not observed in all cases. With initial
concentrations of 0.3, 1.0, 5.0, 7.0, and 10.0 mg/l, the first-order degradation 
rates were 0.52, 0.23, 0.17, 0.13 and 0.10 day(-1), respectively. Degradation
rates were found to decrease with an increase in the initial MT concentration.
Analysis of 16S rRNA gene sequences of a strain isolated from the sediment
indicated that the strain was highly similar to Pimelobacter simplex strain S151 
(100%) which is in the genus Nocardioidaceae. Using this strain, MT is degraded
with a first-order degradation rate of 0.044 h(-1) excluding the lag phase. This 
is the first work reporting biodegradation of MT and isolation of MT-degrading
bacterium from environment.

DOI: 10.2166/wst.2009.868 
PMID: 19182335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

