
1. J Environ Sci (China). 2008;20(11):1348-55.

Biogeochemical cyclic activity of bacterial arsB in arsenic-contaminated mines.

Chang JS(1), Ren X, Kim KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environment Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of
Science and Technology (GIST), 261 Cheomdan-gwagiro, Buk-gu, Gwangju, Republic of
Korea. jinsoosu@gist.ac.kr

Biogeochemical cyclic activity of the ars (arsenic resistance system) operon is
arsB influx/efflux encoded by the ecological of Pseudomonas putida. This suggests
that studying arsenite-oxidizing bacteria may lead to a better understanding of
molecular geomicrobiology, which can be applied to the bioremediation of
arsenic-contaminated mines. This is the first report in which multiple
arsB-binding mechanisms have been used on indigenous bacteria. In ArsB (strains
OS-5; ABB83931; OS-19; ABB04282 and RW-28; ABB88574), there are ten putative
enzyme, Histidine (His) 131, His 133, His 137, Arginine (Arg) 135, Arg 137, Arg
161, Trptohan (Trp) 142, Trp 164, Trp 166, and Trp 171, which are each located in
different regions of the partial sequence. The adenosine triphosphate
(ATP)-binding cassette transports, binding affinities and associating ratable
constants show that As-binding is comparatively insensitive to the location of
the residues within the moderately stable alpha-helical structure. The
alpha-helical structures in ArsB-permease and anion permease arsB have been shown
to import/export arsenic in P. putida. We proposed that arsB residues, His 131,
His 133, His 137, Arg 135, Arg 137, Arg 161, Trp 142, Trp 164, Trp 166, and Trp
171 are required for arsenic binding and activation of arsA/arsB or arsAB. This
arsB influx/efflux pum-ping is important, and the effect in arsenic species
change and mobility in mine soil has got a significantly ecological role because 
it allows arsenic oxidizing/reducing bacteria to control biogeochemical cycle of 
abandoned mines.

DOI: 10.1016/s1001-0742(08)62232-9 
PMID: 19202875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

