
1. Cell Microbiol. 2009 May;11(5):842-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2009.01299.x.
Epub 2009 Feb 10.

Rhamnolipid-induced shedding of flagellin from Pseudomonas aeruginosa provokes
hBD-2 and IL-8 response in human keratinocytes.

Gerstel U(1), Czapp M, Bartels J, Schröder JM.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.

Several 'pathogen-associated molecular pattern' (PAMP) of the opportunistic
pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa activate the innate immune system in epithelial
cells. Particularly the production of antimicrobial peptides such as the human
beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2) and proinflammatory cytokines as the interleukin (IL)-8
is boosted. In the present study culture supernatants of static grown P.
aeruginosa were found to be potent hBD-2 and IL-8 inducers, indicating a soluble 
or shedded PAMP, comparable to that of heat-killed bacterial supernatants. In
subsequent analyses this PAMP was identified as flagellin, the major structural
protein of the flagella. Flagellin is known to be an immunostimulatory potent
factor, but the mechanisms by which P. aeruginosa is able to remove flagellin
from the flagella remain unknown. Here we provide evidence for the presence of a 
factor responsible for release of flagellin from the flagella. Purification of
this factor and subsequent mass spectrometry analyses identified rhamnolipids as 
responsible agents. Our findings indicate that maybe upon adhesion to surfaces P.
aeruginosa alters the outer membrane composition in a rhamnolipid-depending
manner, thereby shedding flagellin from the flagella. In turn epithelial cells
recognize flagellin and cause the synthesis of antimicrobial peptides as well as 
recruitment of inflammatory cells by induction of proinflammatory cytokines.

© 2009 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2009.01299.x 
PMID: 19215625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

