
1. Cancer Invest. 2009 Jun;27(5):575-81. doi: 10.1080/07357900802620851.

Expression profile of human beta-defensin 3 in oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Kesting MR(1), Loeffelbein DJ, Hasler RJ, Wolff KD, Rittig A, Schulte M, Hirsch
T, Wagenpfeil S, Jacobsen F, Steinstraesser L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Technische Universität München, 
Germany.

Although it is known that innate immunity is important for protecting the body
against foreign agents such as bacteria, little is known about elements of the
innate immune system that have antitumor activity. This prospective study was
designed to investigate the function of human beta-defensin 3 (hBD-3), an
important component of the innate immune response, in oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC). Paired cancerous and noncancerous specimens of 45 patients who 
underwent surgical treatment for OSCC were examined for hBD-3 expression on
protein and mRNA. Clinical and pathological features such as age, gender, tumor
and lymph node status, UICC stage, and histological grading were correlated.
hBD-3 was significantly overexpressed in tumors in comparison to healthy tissue
examined with real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis (p = .004). Immunohistochemical stain for hBD-3 was
much more pronounced in tumors than in corresponding healthy mucosa. The results 
illustrate that hBD-3 is frequently overexpressed in oral squamous cell
carcinomas and seems to be related to oncogenesis. Increased expression of hBD-3 
in oral squamous cell carcinomas suggests its potential role in the pathogenesis 
of oral cancer. This might be a starting point for novel
pharmacological/molecular treatment modalities.

DOI: 10.1080/07357900802620851 
PMID: 19219676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

