
1. J Exp Med. 2009 Mar 16;206(3):497-505. doi: 10.1084/jem.20082129. Epub 2009 Feb
16.

Identification of antigen-presenting dendritic cells in mouse aorta and cardiac
valves.

Choi JH(1), Do Y, Cheong C, Koh H, Boscardin SB, Oh YS, Bozzacco L, Trumpfheller 
C, Park CG, Steinman RM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Physiology and Immunology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY 10065, USA.

Presumptive dendritic cells (DCs) bearing the CD11c integrin and other markers
have previously been identified in normal mouse and human aorta. We used CD11c
promoter-enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP) transgenic mice to visualize 
aortic DCs and study their antigen-presenting capacity. Stellate EYFP(+) cells
were readily identified in the aorta and could be double labeled with antibodies 
to CD11c and antigen-presenting major histocompatability complex (MHC) II
products. The DCs proved to be particularly abundant in the cardiac valves and
aortic sinus. In all aortic locations, the CD11c(+) cells localized to the
subintimal space with occasional processes probing the vascular lumen. Aortic DCs
expressed little CD40 but expressed low levels of CD1d, CD80, and CD86. In
studies of antigen presentation, DCs selected on the basis of EYFP expression or 
binding of anti-CD11c antibody were as effective as DCs similarly selected from
the spleen. In particular, the aortic DCs could cross-present two different
protein antigens on MHC class I to CD8(+) TCR transgenic T cells. In addition,
after intravenous injection, aortic DCs could capture anti-CD11c antibody and
cross-present ovalbumin to T cells. These results indicate that bona fide DCs are
a constituent of the normal aorta and cardiac valves.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20082129 
PMCID: PMC2699134
PMID: 19221394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

