
1. J Mol Biol. 2009 Feb 27;386(3):841-53.

Crystal structure of myeloid cell activating receptor leukocyte Ig-like receptor 
A2 (LILRA2/ILT1/LIR-7) domain swapped dimer: molecular basis for its non-binding 
to MHC complexes.

Chen Y(1), Gao F, Chu F, Peng H, Zong L, Liu Y, Tien P, Gao GF.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

The leukocyte Ig-like receptor (LILR/ILT/LIR) family comprises 13 members that
are either activating or inhibitory receptors, regulating a broad range of cells 
in the immune responses. LILRB1 (ILT2), LILRB2 (ILT4) and LILRA1 (LIR6) can
recognize MHC (major histocompatibility complex) class I or class I-like
molecules, and LILRB1/HLA-A2, LILRB1/UL18 and LILRB2/HLA-G complex (extracellular
domains D1D2) structures have been solved recently. The details of binding to MHC
have been described. Despite high levels of sequence similarity among LILRA1,
LILRA2 (ILT1), LILRA3 (ILT6) and LILRB1/B2, all earlier experiments showed that
LILRA2 does not bind to MHC, but the reason is unknown. Here, we report the
LILRA2 extracellular D1D2 domain crystal structure at 2.6 A resolution, which
reveals structural shifts of the corresponding MHC-binding amino acid residues in
comparison with LILR B1/B2, explaining its non-binding to MHC molecules. We
identify some key residues with great influence on the local structure, which
exist only in the MHC-binding receptors. Moreover, we show that LILRA2 forms a
domain-swapped dimer. Further work with these key swapping residues yields a
monomeric form, confirming that the domain-swapping is primarily amino acid
sequence-specific. The structure described here supports the dimer conformation
in solution observed earlier, and implies a stress-induced regulation by
dimerization, consistent with its function as a heat shock promoter.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.01.006 
PMID: 19230061  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

