
1. J Immunol. 2009 Mar 1;182(5):2816-26. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803648.

PD-1/PD-L blockade prevents anergy induction and enhances the anti-tumor
activities of glycolipid-activated invariant NKT cells.

Parekh VV(1), Lalani S, Kim S, Halder R, Azuma M, Yagita H, Kumar V, Wu L, Kaer
LV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Invariant NKT (iNKT) cells recognize glycolipid Ags, such as the marine
sponge-derived glycosphingolipid alpha-galactosylceramide (alphaGalCer) presented
by the CD1d protein. In vivo activation of iNKT cells with alphaGalCer results in
robust cytokine production, followed by the acquisition of an anergic phenotype. 
Here we have investigated mechanisms responsible for the establishment of
alphaGalCer-induced iNKT cell anergy. We found that alphaGalCer-activated iNKT
cells rapidly up-regulated expression of the inhibitory costimulatory receptor
programmed death (PD)-1 at their cell surface, and this increased expression was 
retained for at least one month. Blockade of the interaction between PD-1 and its
ligands, PD-L1 and PD-L2, at the time of alphaGalCer treatment prevented the
induction iNKT cell anergy, but was unable to reverse established iNKT cell
anergy. Consistently, injection of alphaGalCer into PD-1-deficient mice failed to
induce iNKT cell anergy. However, blockade of the PD-1/PD-L pathway failed to
prevent bacterial- or sulfatide-induced iNKT cell anergy, suggesting additional
mechanisms of iNKT cell tolerance. Finally, we showed that blockade of PD-1/PD-L 
interactions enhanced the antimetastatic activities of alphaGalCer. Collectively,
our findings reveal a critical role for the PD-1/PD-L costimulatory pathway in
the alphaGalCer-mediated induction of iNKT cell anergy that can be targeted for
the development of immunotherapies.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803648 
PMCID: PMC2709814
PMID: 19234176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

