
1. J Immunol. 2009 Mar 15;182(6):3793-800. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802996.

B7 costimulation is critical for host control of chronic Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infection.

Bhatt K(1), Uzelac A, Mathur S, McBride A, Potian J, Salgame P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey,
Center for Emerging Pathogens, Newark, NJ 07101, USA.

Although much is understood regarding the role of B7/CD28 family of costimulatory
molecules in regulating host resistance in the context of several pathogens,
analogous information with Mycobacterium tuberculosis is lacking. To address the 
requirements of B7-mediated costimulation in host resistance against
tuberculosis, mice deficient in both B7.1 and B7.2 (B7DKO) were aerosol infected 
with M. tuberculosis Erdman and disease progression was monitored. We report
herein that B7DKO mice are initially able to contain the bacterial load in the
lung, but exhibit enhanced susceptibility during chronic infection. Despite the
early control of bacterial replication, B7DKO mice essentially start off with
compromised Th1 immunity and slower granulomatous response in the lung,
characterized by markedly reduced lymphocytic infiltration. As the infection
progresses from acute phase to the chronic phase, the nascent granulomas in the
B7DKO lungs never fully achieve the architecture of granulomas developing in
wild-type mice. Instead, lesions spread progressively to involve much of the lung
in the B7DKO mice, ultimately leading to necrosis. Thus, early control of M.
tuberculosis growth in the lung can occur in the absence of B7 costimulation and 
is less dependent on Th1 immunity and formation of a granulomatous structure.
However, B7 costimulation is critical for long-term containment of infection
within lung granulomas. These findings suggest that the use of
costimulation-based immunomodulators may have significant repercussions on the
induction of host protective immunity against tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802996 
PMID: 19265158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

