
1. J Immunol. 2009 Mar 15;182(6):3668-77. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803579.

ESAT-6 inhibits production of IFN-gamma by Mycobacterium tuberculosis-responsive 
human T cells.

Wang X(1), Barnes PF, Dobos-Elder KM, Townsend JC, Chung YT, Shams H, Weis SE,
Samten B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiologyand Immunology, Center for Pulmonary and Infectious 
Disease Control, University of Texas Health Science Center, Tyler, TX 75708, USA.

The Mycobacterium tuberculosis early secreted Ag of 6 kDa (ESAT-6) is a potent Ag
for human T cells and is a putative vaccine candidate. However, ESAT-6 also
contributes to virulence in animal models, mediates cellular cytolysis, and
inhibits IL-12 production by mononuclear phagocytes. We evaluated the effects of 
ESAT-6 and its molecular chaperone, culture filtrate protein of 10 kDa (CFP10),
on the capacity of human T cells to produce IFN-gamma and proliferate in response
to TCR activation. Recombinant ESAT-6, but not CFP10, markedly inhibited
IFN-gamma production by T cells stimulated with M. tuberculosis or with the
combination of anti-CD3 and anti-CD28, in a dose-dependent manner. ESAT-6 also
inhibited T cell production of IL-17 and TNF-alpha but not IL-2. Preincubation of
ESAT-6 with CFP10 under conditions that favor dimer formation did not affect
inhibition of IFN-gamma. ESAT-6 decreased IFN-gamma transcription and reduced
expression of the transcription factors, ATF-2 and c-Jun, which normally bind to 
the IFN-gamma proximal promoter and stimulate mRNA expression. ESAT-6 inhibited T
cell IFN-gamma secretion through mechanisms that did not involve cellular
cytotoxicity or apoptosis. ESAT-6, but not CFP10, bound to T cells and inhibited 
expression of early activation markers without reducing activation of ZAP70. We
conclude that ESAT-6 directly inhibits human T cell responses to mycobacterial
Ags by affecting TCR signaling pathways downstream of ZAP70.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803579 
PMCID: PMC5488288
PMID: 19265145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

