
1. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2009 Apr;22(2):102-8. doi: 10.1097/QCO.0b013e328322e727.

Immunity to Burkholderia pseudomallei.

Wiersinga WJ(1), van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Center for Experimental and
Molecular Medicine and Department of Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. w.j.wiersinga@amc.uva.nl

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Largely due to its recognition as a biological threat agent,
current knowledge on melioidosis, caused by the Gram-negative bacterium
Burkholderia pseudomallei, has increased tremendously over the last years. This
review summarizes current understanding on the molecular characterization of B.
pseudomallei and the immunology of melioidosis.
RECENT FINDINGS: The genome of B. pseudomallei is composed of two chromosomes of 
which the largest part represents the B. pseudomallei core genome, whereas the
remaining accessory genome has been associated with bacterial virulence.
Virulence factors, most notably quorum sensing, type III secretion system,
lipopolysaccharide and other surface polysaccharides, flagella and various
factors essential for the intracellular life cycle of B. pseudomallei, have been 
further characterized. The neutrophils play a critical in host defense, which is 
initiated by the Toll-like receptors. The proinflammatory immune
response--including the activation of coagulation-- and its regulation have been 
further dissected.
SUMMARY: Severe melioidosis can probably be seen as the clinical manifestation of
a pathogen recognition receptor mediated dysregulation of the immune response to 
invading B. pseudomallei. B. pseudomallei employs numerous tactics to evade the
immune response. Studies on host-pathogen interactions in melioidosis have
identified a whole range of potential new treatment targets.

DOI: 10.1097/QCO.0b013e328322e727 
PMID: 19276877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

