
1. Infect Immun. 2009 May;77(5):1734-45. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00027-09. Epub 2009 Mar 9.

An Ehrlichia chaffeensis tandem repeat protein interacts with multiple host
targets involved in cell signaling, transcriptional regulation, and vesicle
trafficking.

Wakeel A(1), Kuriakose JA, McBride JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Center for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious
Diseases, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555-0609, usa.

Ehrlichia chaffeensis is an obligately intracellular bacterium that exhibits
tropism for mononuclear phagocytes forming cytoplasmic membrane-bound
microcolonies called morulae. To survive and replicate within phagocytes, E.
chaffeensis exploits the host cell by modulating a number of host cell processes,
but the ehrlichial effector proteins involved are unknown. In this study, we
determined that p47, a secreted, differentially expressed, tandem repeat (TR)
protein, interacts with multiple host proteins associated with cell signaling,
transcriptional regulation, and vesicle trafficking. Yeast two-hybrid analysis
revealed that p47 interacts with polycomb group ring finger 5 (PCGF5) protein,
Src protein tyrosine kinase FYN (FYN), protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor 
type 2 (PTPN2), and adenylate cyclase-associated protein 1 (CAP1). p47
interaction with these proteins was further confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation
assays and colocalization in HeLa cells transfected with p47-green fluorescent
fusion protein (AcGFP1-p47). Moreover, confocal microscopy demonstrated
p47-expressing dense-cored (DC) ehrlichiae colocalized with PCGF5, FYN, PTPN2,
and CAP1. An amino-terminally truncated form of p47 containing TRs interacted
only with PCGF5 and not with FYN, PTPN2, and CAP1, indicating differences in p47 
domains that are involved in these interactions. These results demonstrate that
p47 is involved in a complex network of interactions involving numerous host cell
proteins. Furthermore, this study provides a new insight into the molecular and
functional distinction of DC ehrlichiae, as well as the effector proteins
involved in facilitating ehrlichial survival in mononuclear phagocytes.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00027-09 
PMCID: PMC2681728
PMID: 19273555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

