
1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2009 May;16(5):692-8. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00485-08. Epub 2009 
Mar 11.

Evidence of a functional B-cell immunodeficiency in adults who experience
serogroup C meningococcal disease.

Foster RA(1), Carlring J, McKendrick MW, Lees A, Borrow R, Read RC, Heath AW.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Infection and Immunity, University of Sheffield School of Medicine and
Biomedical Science, Sheffield, United Kingdom.

After adolescence, the incidence of meningococcal disease decreases with age as a
result of the cumulative immunizing effect of repeated nasopharyngeal
colonization. Nevertheless, some adults succumb to meningococcal disease, so we
hypothesized that this is due to a subtle functional immunological defect.
Peripheral blood lymphocytes derived from survivors of serogroup C meningococcal 
disease and from age- and sex-matched controls were incubated with a polyclonal
B-cell activator containing anti-immunoglobulin D (alpha-delta-dex) employed to
mimic antigen-specific stimuli encountered during immune responses to bacterial
polysaccharides, with and without T-cell activation (using anti-CD3/anti-CD28).
Subsequent proliferation and activation of T and B lymphocytes were measured. In 
patients, T-cell responses to polyclonal stimuli and the delivery of T-cell help 
to B cells were unimpaired. Levels of B-cell proliferation in response to
alpha-delta-dex stimulation alone were low in all samples but were significantly 
lower in patients than in controls, and these differences were more pronounced
with the addition of T-cell help. The data are consistent with the presence of a 
subtle immunodeficiency in adults who have exhibited susceptibility to
meningococcal disease. This defect is manifested as an impaired B-cell response
to T-cell-independent type 2 antigens analogous to bacterial capsular
polysaccharide.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00485-08 
PMCID: PMC2681599
PMID: 19279166  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

