
1. J Bacteriol. 2009 May;191(9):3142-8. doi: 10.1128/JB.01575-08. Epub 2009 Mar 6.

Isolation and characterization of Azotobacter vinelandii mutants impaired in
alkylresorcinol synthesis: alkylresorcinols are not essential for cyst
desiccation resistance.

Segura D(1), Vite O, Romero Y, Moreno S, Castañeda M, Espín G.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiología Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología UNAM, Apdo
Postal 510-3, Cuernavaca, Morelos 62271, México. daniel@ibt.unam.mx

During encystment of Azotobacter vinelandii, a family of alkylresorcinols (ARs)
and alkylpyrones (APs) are synthesized. In the mature cyst, these lipids replace 
the membrane phospholipids and are also components of the layers covering the
cyst. In this study, A. vinelandii strains unable to synthesize ARs were isolated
after mini-Tn5 mutagenesis. Cloning and nucleotide sequencing of the affected
loci revealed the presence of the transposons within the arsA gene of the
previously reported arsABCD gene cluster, which encodes a type I fatty acid
synthase. A mutant strain (SW-A) carrying an arsA mutation allowing transcription
of arsBCD was constructed and shown to be unable to produce ARs, indicating that 
the ArsA protein is essential for the synthesis of these phenolic lipids.
Transcription of arsA was induced 200-fold in cells undergoing encystment, but
only 14-fold in aged cultures of A. vinelandii, in accordance with AR synthesis
and cyst formation percentages under the two conditions. Although it was
previously reported that the inactivation of arsB abolishes AR synthesis and
results in a failure in encystment, the arsA mutants were able to form cysts
resistant to desiccation. These data indicate that ARs play a structural role in 
the exine layer of the cysts, but they are not essential for either cyst
formation or for desiccation resistance.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01575-08 
PMCID: PMC2681798
PMID: 19270099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

