
1. Scand J Immunol. 2009 Mar;69(3):203-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2008.02213.x.

Modified human beta 2-microglobulin (desLys(58)) displays decreased affinity for 
the heavy chain of MHC class I and induces nitric oxide production and apoptosis.

Wang M(1), Harhaji L, Lamberth K, Harndahl M, Buus S, Heegaard NH, Claesson MH,
Nissen MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of International Health, Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of
Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. wang@sund.ku.dk

Beta2-microglobulin (beta2m) is the light chain of major histocompatibility
complex class I (MHC-I) molecules, and is a prerequisite for the binding of
peptides to the heavy chain and their presentation to CD8+ T cells. beta2m can be
modified in vivo and in vitro by proteolytic cleavage by complement C1 and
subsequent carboxypeptidase B-like activity--processes that lead to the
generation of desLys(58) beta2m (dbeta2m). This work aims to study the effect of 
dbeta2m on peptide binding to MHC-I, the influence of dbeta2m on the binding of
beta2m to the MHC-I heavy chain and the biological activity of dbeta2m. Both
beta2m and dbeta2m are able to support the generation of MHC-I/peptide complexes 
at 18 degrees C, but complexes formed in the presence of dbeta2m destabilize at
37 degrees C. Moreover, a 250 times higher concentration of dbeta2m than of
beta2m is needed to displace MHC-I associated beta2m from the cell surface. In
addition, only beta2m is able to restore MHC-I/peptide complex formation on
acid-treated cells whereas dbeta2m appears to bind preferentially to denatured
MHC-I heavy chains. In cell cultures, exogenously added dbeta2m, but not beta2m, 
induces apoptotic cell death in monocytic leukaemic cell lines but spares other
kinds of leukaemic cells. Additionally, the presence of dbeta2m, and to a lesser 
extent beta2m, enhances IFN-gamma-induced NO production by monocytic leukaemic
cells. In conclusion, these data show that dbeta2m is not able to support the
formation of a stable tri-molecular MHC-I complex at physiological temperature
and that dbeta2m exerts other biological functions compared to beta2m when bound 
to cells.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2008.02213.x 
PMID: 19281532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

