
1. Microbes Infect. 2009 Apr;11(4):524-30. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2009.02.007. Epub
2009 Mar 13.

ST2 deficient mice display a normal host defense against pulmonary infection with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Wieland CW(1), van der Windt GJ, Florquin S, McKenzie AN, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Meibergdreef 9,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. c.wieland@amc.uva.nl

Tuberculosis, caused by Mycobacterium (M.) tuberculosis, is a devastating
infectious disease causing many deaths world-wide every year. Successful host
defense mainly depends on a strong Th type 1 response. We investigated the role
of T1/ST2 (recently identified as the receptor for IL-33), a typical Th2 marker
in the assumption that a shift towards a beneficial Th1 response would occur in
the absence of ST2. For this, ST2 KO and WT mice were intranasally infected with 
a virulent strain of M. tuberculosis (150 CFU). In line with our hypothesis, ST2 
KO animals displayed increased numbers of lymphocytes infiltrating the lung after
2 weeks of infection, increased IFNgamma production by splenocytes in ST2 KO mice
early in infection and enhanced lung IFNgamma levels at the chronic phase of the 
disease. However, we did not detect any differences between ST2 KO and WT mice in
mycobacterial loads in lungs or liver after M. tuberculosis infection. The
pulmonary inflammatory response, as measured by relative lung weights, cytokine
and chemokine levels as well as histopathological analysis, was similar in ST2 KO
and WT mice. These data suggest that apart from inducing a modest shift towards
the Th1 response, the role of ST2 during murine M. tuberculosis infection is
limited.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2009.02.007 
PMID: 19286469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

