
1. BMC Pediatr. 2009 Mar 18;9:22. doi: 10.1186/1471-2431-9-22.

Effect of the consumption of a fermented dairy product containing Bifidobacterium
lactis DN-173 010 on constipation in childhood: a multicentre randomised
controlled trial (NTRTC: 1571).

Tabbers MM(1), Chmielewska A, Roseboom MG, Boudet C, Perrin C, Szajewska H,
Benninga MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Emma's Children's
Hospital/Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. m.m.tabbers@amc.nl

BACKGROUND: Constipation is a frustrating symptom affecting 3% of children
worldwide. Randomised controlled trials show that both polyethylene glycol and
lactulose are effective in increasing defecation frequency in children with
constipation. However, in 30-50%, these children reported abdominal pain,
bloating, flatulence, diarrhoea, nausea and bad taste of the medication. Two
recent studies have shown that the fermented dairy product containing
Bifidobacterium lactis strain DN-173 010 is effective in increasing stool
frequency in constipation-predominant irritable bowel syndrome patients with a
defecation frequency < 3/week and in constipated women with a defecation
frequency < 3/week. Goal of this study is to determine whether this fermented
dairy product is effective in the treatment of constipated children with a
defecation frequency < 3/week.
METHODS/DESIGN: It is a two nation (The Netherlands and Poland) double-blind,
placebo-controlled randomised multicentre trial in which 160 constipated children
(age 3-16 years) with a defecation frequency <3/week will be randomly allocated
to consume a fermented dairy product containing Bifidobacterium lactis DN-173 010
or a control product, twice a day, for 3 weeks. During the study all children are
instructed to try to defecate on the toilet for 5-10 minutes after each meal (3
times a day) and daily complete a standardized bowel diary. Primary endpoint is
stool frequency. Secondary endpoints are stool consistency, faecal incontinence
frequency, pain during defecation, digestive symptoms (abdominal pain,
flatulence), adverse effects (nausea, diarrhoea, bad taste) and intake of rescue 
medication (Bisacodyl). Rate of success and rate of responders are also
evaluated, with success defined as > or = 3 bowel movements per week and < or =1 
faecal incontinence episode over the last 2 weeks of product consumption and
responder defined as a subject reporting a stool frequency > or = 3 on the last
week of product consumption. To demonstrate that the success percentage in the
intervention group will be 35% and the success percentage in the control group
(acidified milk without ferments, toilet training, bowel diary) will be 15%, with
alpha 0.05 and power 80%, a total sample size of 160 patients was calculated.
CONCLUSION: This study is aimed to show that the fermented dairy product
containing Bifidobacterium lactis strain DN-173 010 is effective in increasing
stool frequency after 3 weeks of product consumption in children with functional 
constipation and a defecation frequency < 3/week.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2431-9-22 
PMCID: PMC2662858
PMID: 19296845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

