
1. Exp Mol Med. 2009 Mar 31;41(3):161-70. doi: 10.3858/emm.2009.41.3.019.

Selective addition of CXCR3(+) CCR4(-) CD4(+) Th1 cells enhances generation of
cytotoxic T cells by dendritic cells in vitro.

Yoon SH(1), Yun SO, Park JY, Won HY, Kim EK, Sohn HJ, Cho HI, Kim TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea Seoul 137-701, Korea.

Increasing importance is being given to the stimulation of Th1 response in cancer
immunotherapy because its presence can shift the direction of adaptive immune
responses toward protective immunity. Based on chemokine receptor expression,
CXCR3(+) CCR4(-) CD4(+) T cells as Th1-type cells were investigated its capacity 
in monocyte-derived dendritic cell (DC) maturation and polarization, and
induction of antigen specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) in vitro. The levels 
of IL-4, IL-5 and IL-10 were decreased to the basal level compared with high
production of IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha, and IL-2 in CXCR3+CCR4-CD4+ T cells
stimulated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies. Co-incubation of activated
CD4(+) or CXCR3(+) CCR4-CD4(+) T cells with DC (CD4(+/) DC or CXCR3(+) CD4(+/)
DC, respectively) particularly up-regulated IL-12 and CD80 expression compared
with DC matured with TNF-a and LPS (mDC). Although there was no significant
difference between the effects of the CXCR3(+) CCR4(-) CD4(+) and CD4(+) T cells 
on DC phenotype expression, CXCR3(+) CD4(+/) DC in CTL culture were able to
expand number of CD8(+) T cells and increased frequencies of IFN-gamma secreting 
cells and overall cytolytic activity against tumor antigen WT-1. These results
demonstrated that the selective addition of CXCR3(+) CCR4(-) CD4(+) T cells to
CTL cultures could enhance the induction of CTLs by DC in vitro, and implicated
on a novel strategy for adoptive T cell therapy.

DOI: 10.3858/emm.2009.41.3.019 
PMCID: PMC2679244
PMID: 19293635  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

