
1. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2009 Nov;20(7):624-32. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-3038.2008.00843.x. Epub 2009 Feb 28.

The regulatory function of umbilical cord blood CD4(+) CD25(+) T cells stimulated
with anti-CD3/anti-CD28 and exogenous interleukin (IL)-2 or IL-15.

Lee CC(1), Lin SJ, Cheng PJ, Kuo ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Graduate Institute of Basic Medical
Science, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

The abundance of CD4(+) CD25(+) regulatory T cells in umbilical cord blood (UCB) 
might contribute to the decreased severity of graft-vs.-host disease (GVHD) for
UCB transplantation. This study aims to characterize the phenotypes and
suppressive function of UCB CD4(+) CD25(+) T cells under the influence of
anti-CD3/anti-CD28 (CD3/CD28) and exogenous interleukin (IL)-2 or IL-15. Higher
percentages of CD4(+) CD25(high) and FoxP3(+) cells were detected in UCB compared
to their adult counterparts. IL-15 was as effective as IL-2 in enhancing the
proliferation of CD3/CD28 stimulated UCB CD4(+) CD25(+) T cells. Phenotypically, 
IL-2/IL-15-stimulated UCB CD4(+) CD25(+) T cells expressed higher level of
CTLA-4, GITR, membrane bound transforming growth factor-beta (mTGF-beta), and
especially Foxp-3 than controls. IL-2/IL-15-stimulated UCB CD4(+) CD25(+) T cells
also produced much higher IL-10 and TGF-beta than controls; while
IL-2/IL-15-stimulated UCB CD4(+) CD25(-) T cells showed increased TGF-beta, but
not IL-10 production. IL-2/IL-15-cultured UCB CD4(+) CD25(+) T cells showed
comparable suppressor activity on allogeneic adult CD4(+) T-cell proliferation
compared to controls, partly through a contact-dependent fashion. Taken together,
IL-2/IL-15-stimulated UCB CD4(+) CD25(+) T cells show distinct regulatory T-cell 
phenotypic and functional features, and may be applied for the alleviation of
GVHD severity following UCB transplantation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-3038.2008.00843.x 
PMID: 19302176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

