
1. J Cataract Refract Surg. 2009 Apr;35(4):770-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jcrs.2009.01.004.

United Kingdom survey of antibiotic prophylaxis practice after publication of the
ESCRS Endophthalmitis Study.

Gore DM(1), Angunawela RI, Little BC.

Author information: 
(1)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom. danielmgore@gmail.com

The European Society of Cataract & Refractive Surgeons Endophthalmitis Study
published preliminary results in 2006 showing a near 5-fold decrease in the rates
of postoperative endophthalmitis with the use of intracameral cefuroxime. The
study findings have generated considerable controversy, and 1 year later its
recommendations had been heeded by only 6% of American Society of Cataract and
Refractive Surgery (ASCRS) members. This poll sought to gauge the uptake among
surgeons in the United Kingdom and survey their response to its findings.
Fifty-five percent of respondents were using intracameral cefuroxime; 48% had
switched after publication of the ESCRS study. Of those remaining, 68% reported
their main concern was the risk for dilution errors in the absence of a
commercially preformulated preparation, with 67% stating they would switch if
such a product became available. Sixty-eight percent considered the lack of a
subconjunctival cefuroxime treatment arm within the study a major methodology
flaw. Sixty-seven percent said they do not consider penicillin allergy a
contraindication to intracameral cefuroxime use, with the remaining 33% opting
for alternative antibiotic prophylaxis. The majority of United Kingdom and
Ireland Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgeons members have switched to
intracameral cefuroxime, despite the absence of previously preferred practice in 
the study design. The major barrier to its further use appears to be the lack of 
a commercially available preformulated preparation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcrs.2009.01.004 
PMID: 19304103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

