
1. Cell Signal. 2009 Aug;21(8):1298-307. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2009.03.014. Epub
2009 Mar 24.

Role of mitogen-activated protein kinases in Thy-1-induced T-lymphocyte
activation.

Conrad DM(1), Furlong SJ, Doucette CD, Boudreau RT, Hoskin DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia B3H1X5, Canada.

Thy-1 (CD90) crosslinking by monoclonal antibodies (mAb) in the context of
costimulation causes the activation of mouse T-lymphocytes; however, the
associated signal transduction processes have not been studied in detail. In this
study we investigated the role of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) in
Thy-1-mediated T-lymphocyte activation using mAb-coated polystyrene microspheres 
to crosslink Thy-1 and costimulatory CD28 on murine T-lymphocytes. Concurrent
Thy-1 and CD28 crosslinking induced DNA synthesis by T-lymphocytes, as well as
interleukin (IL)-2 and IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) alpha chain (CD25) expression.
Increased phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2, p38
MAPK, and c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase (JNK) was also observed. Pharmacologic 
inhibition of ERK1/2 or JNK activation inhibited Thy-1-induced DNA synthesis and 
IL-2 production by T-lymphocytes. p38 MAPK inhibition also decreased DNA
synthesis in Thy-1-stimulated T-lymphocytes; however, IL-2 production was
increased in these cells. Inhibition of JNK, but not ERK1/2 or p38 MAPK, caused a
marked reduction in Thy-1-induced CD25 expression. In addition, inhibition of p38
MAPK or JNK, but not ERK1/2, impaired the growth of IL-2-dependent CTLL-2
T-lymphocytes but did not substantially affect CD25 expression. Finally,
exogenous IL-2 reversed the inhibitory effect of ERK1/2 or JNK inhibition on
Thy-1-stimulated DNA synthesis by T-lymphocytes but did not substantially reverse
JNK inhibition of CD25 expression. Collectively, these results suggest that
during Thy-1-induced T-lymphocyte activation, ERK1/2 and JNK promoted IL-2
production whereas p38 MAPK negatively regulated IL-2 expression. JNK signalling 
was also required for CD25 expression. IL-2R signalling involved both p38 MAPK
and JNK in CTLL-2 cells, whereas p38 MAPK was most important for IL-2R signalling
in primary T-lymphocytes. MAPKs are therefore essential signalling intermediates 
for the Thy-1-driven proliferation of mouse T-lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2009.03.014 
PMID: 19324083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

