
1. Immunobiology. 2009;214(4):291-302. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2008.09.004. Epub 2008
Nov 1.

Feedback loop of immune regulation by CD4+CD25+ Treg.

Jung YJ(1), Seoh JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, 911-1
Mok-6-Dong, Yangchon-Gu, Seoul 158-710, Republic of Korea.

Naturally occurring regulatory T cells (Tregs), residing in CD4+CD25+ fraction,
are important in the maintenance of immune homeostasis. One of the functional
characteristics of Tregs is close relationship between suppressive activity and
anergy in vitro. Meanwhile, many in vitro assays have observed Treg proliferation
and suppressive activities in different settings, i.e., in the absence and
presence of CD25(-) responder cells. If the presence of responder cells affect
the proliferation of Tregs, comparison between the two settings would be
inappropriate. In the present study, we traced proliferation as well as
suppressive activities of Tregs in the same setting of coculture in response to
varying concentrations of anti-CD3 and anti-CD28. Quantitative analysis using two
parameters, precursor frequency and CD25 mean fluorescence intensity, reflecting 
early and late proliferative responsiveness, respectively, showed that
proliferation of Tregs was dependent on the responder cells and proliferating
Tregs preserved suppressive activities. Transwell assay and neutralization assay 
showed that the enhancement of Treg proliferation by the responder cells was
mediated through secreted IL-2. Quantitative analysis also showed distinct mode
of suppression by Tregs according to the presence or absence of anti-CD28. In the
absence of anti-CD28, Tregs suppressed the initial proliferation, whereas in the 
presence of anti-CD28, Tregs suppressed only the late expansion of the responder 
cells by lowering CD25 expression. Considering that Tregs cannot produce IL-2 by 
themselves while they constitutively express CD25 (IL-2Ralpha), dependency of
Tregs on their target of suppression (responder cells) for proliferation supports
the model for feedback loop of immune regulation by Tregs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2008.09.004 
PMID: 19327546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

