
1. RNA Biol. 2009 Jul-Aug;6(3):266-75. Epub 2009 Jul 3.

Deep sequencing of Salmonella RNA associated with heterologous Hfq proteins in
vivo reveals small RNAs as a major target class and identifies RNA processing
phenotypes.

Sittka A(1), Sharma CM, Rolle K, Vogel J.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany.

The bacterial Sm-like protein, Hfq, is a key factor for the stability and
function of small non-coding RNAs (sRNAs) in Escherichia coli. Homologues of this
protein have been predicted in many distantly related organisms yet their
functional conservation as sRNA-binding proteins has not entirely been clear. To 
address this, we expressed in Salmonella the Hfq proteins of two eubacteria
(Neisseria meningitides, Aquifex aeolicus) and an archaeon (Methanocaldococcus
jannaschii), and analyzed the associated RNA by deep sequencing. This in vivo
approach identified endogenous Salmonella sRNAs as a major target of the foreign 
Hfq proteins. New Salmonella sRNA species were also identified, and some of these
accumulated specifically in the presence of a foreign Hfq protein. In addition,
we observed specific RNA processing defects, e.g., suppression of precursor
processing of SraH sRNA by Methanocaldococcus Hfq, or aberrant accumulation of
extracytoplasmic target mRNAs of the Salmonella GcvB, MicA or RybB sRNAs. Taken
together, our study provides evidence of a conserved inherent sRNA-binding
property of Hfq, which may facilitate the lateral transmission of regulatory
sRNAs among distantly related species. It also suggests that the expression of
heterologous RNA-binding proteins combined with deep sequencing analysis of RNA
ligands can be used as a molecular tool to dissect individual steps of RNA
metabolism in vivo.

DOI: 10.4161/rna.6.3.8332 
PMID: 19333007  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

