
1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2009 Apr;301(4):307-17. doi: 10.1007/s00403-009-0945-7. Epub
2009 Mar 28.

Coordinated integrin and growth factor regulation of primary keratinocyte
migration mediated through extracellular signal regulated kinase and
phosphoinositide 3-kinase.

Watson A(1), Morris VL, Chan BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Western Ontario,
London, ON N6A 5C1, Canada.

We have examined coordinated integrin and growth factor regulation of primary
keratinocyte migration mediated by phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and
mitogen-activated extracellular-regulated kinase (MEK)/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK). On collagen I and fibronectin substrates, both
epidermal growth factor (EGF) and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) stimulated
chemokinetic (random) and chemotactic (directional) migration. On provisional
matrix, a combination of fibronectin and fibrin found in the early phase of wound
healing, EGF and HGF-stimulated significant chemotactic but little or no
chemokinetic cell movement. Blocking mAbs to integrin alpha2beta1 and alpha5beta1
effectively inhibited EGF- and HGF-stimulated chemokinetic and chemotactic cell
movement on collagen I and fibronectin, respectively; however, HGF-stimulated
chemotactic migration on collagen I was only partially inhibited by alpha2beta1
blocking mAb. Differentiated keratinocytes underwent reduced chemokinetic and
chemotactic migration compared with undifferentiated keratinocytes; however,
EGF-stimulated migration was reduced more than HGF-stimulated migration. When the
migratory response on collagen I and fibronectin was assessed in the presence of 
the MEK-specific inhibitor PD98059, EGF- and HGF-stimulated chemotaxis was
significantly reduced, whereas PD98059 had little effect on the stimulated
chemokinesis. PI3K-specific inhibitor LY294002 reduced EGF- and HGF-stimulated
chemokinesis and chemotaxis on collagen I and fibronectin. Thus beta1 integrins
acted in concert with EGF and HGF to regulate migration of primary keratinocytes 
on extracellular matrix components via PI3K and MEK/ERK.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-009-0945-7 
PMID: 19330341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

