
1. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 May;20(10):2615-25. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-12-1162. Epub 2009
Apr 1.

Mrpl36 is important for generation of assembly competent proteins during
mitochondrial translation.

Prestele M(1), Vogel F, Reichert AS, Herrmann JM, Ott M.

Author information: 
(1)Zellbiologie, Technische Universit√§t Kaiserslautern, 67663 Kaiserslautern,
Germany.

The complexes of the respiratory chain represent mosaics of nuclear and
mitochondrially encoded components. The processes by which synthesis and assembly
of the various subunits are coordinated remain largely elusive. During evolution,
many proteins of the mitochondrial ribosome acquired additional domains pointing 
at specific properties or functions of the translation machinery in mitochondria.
Here, we analyzed the function of Mrpl36, a protein associated with the large
subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome. This protein, homologous to the ribosomal 
protein L31 from bacteria, contains a mitochondria-specific C-terminal domain
that is not required for protein synthesis per se; however, its absence decreases
stability of Mrpl36. Cells lacking this C-terminal domain can still synthesize
proteins, but these translation products fail to be properly assembled into
respiratory chain complexes and are rapidly degraded. Surprisingly,
overexpression of Mrpl36 seems to even increase the efficiency of mitochondrial
translation. Our data suggest that Mrpl36 plays a critical role during
translation that determines the rate of respiratory chain assembly. This
important function seems to be carried out by a stabilizing activity of Mrpl36 on
the interaction between large and small ribosomal subunits, which could influence
accuracy of protein synthesis.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e08-12-1162 
PMCID: PMC2682602
PMID: 19339279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

