
1. J Immunol. 2009 Apr 15;182(8):4957-64. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0801324.

Contribution of adenosine A2B receptors to inflammatory parameters of
experimental colitis.

Frick JS(1), MacManus CF, Scully M, Glover LE, Eltzschig HK, Colgan SP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Hospital, TÃ¼bingen,
Germany.

Inflammatory diseases influence tissue metabolism, significantly altering the
profile of extracellular adenine nucleotides. A number of studies have suggested 
that adenosine (Ado) may function as an endogenously generated anti-inflammatory 
molecule. Given the central role of intestinal epithelial cells to the
development of colitis, we hypothesized that specific Ado receptors would
contribute to disease resolution in mucosal inflammation as modeled by dextran
sodium sulfate (DSS) colitis. Initial profiling studies revealed that murine
intestinal epithelial cells express predominantly the Ado A2B receptor (AA2BR)
and to a lesser extent AA2AR. Guided by these results, we examined the
contribution of AA2BR to colitis. Initial studies indicated that the severity of 
colitis was increased in Aa2br(-/-) mice relative to Aa2br(+/+) controls, as
reflected by increased weight loss, colonic shortening, and disease activity
indices. Likewise, enteral administration of the selective AA2BR inhibitor
PSB1115 to Aa2br(+/+) mice resulted in a similar increase in severity of DSS
colitis. Cytokine profiling of colonic tissue revealed specific deficiencies in
IL-10 in Aa2br(-/-) mice relative to controls. Extensions of these findings in
cultured human intestinal epithelial cells revealed that stable Ado analogs
induce IL-10 mRNA and protein and that such increases can be blocked with
PSB1115. Taken together, these studies indicate a central regulatory role for
AA2BR-modulated IL-10 in the acute inflammatory phase of DSS colitis, thereby
implicating AA2BR as an endogenously protective molecule expressed on intestinal 
epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0801324 
PMCID: PMC2831100
PMID: 19342675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

