
1. J Immunol. 2009 Apr 15;182(8):4830-5. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802902.

N-glycosylation enhances presentation of a MHC class I-restricted epitope from
tyrosinase.

Ostankovitch M(1), Altrich-Vanlith M, Robila V, Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carter Immunology Center, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

We recently demonstrated that the mechanism of processing of an
HLA-A*0201-restricted peptide epitope, Tyr(369)(D), derived from the membrane
protein tyrosinase, involves retrotranslocation of glycosylated molecules from
the endoplasmic reticulum to the cytosol, removal of an N-linked carbohydrate
from Asn(371) by peptide N-glycanase, proteolysis by the proteasome and other
proteases, and retransport of the resulting peptides into the endoplasmic
reticulum for association with HLA-A*0201. Carbohydrate removal results in
deamidation of Asn(371) to aspartic acid. The asparagine-containing homolog of
this peptide, Tyr(369)(N), is not presented by tyrosinase-expressing cells, and
this has been presumed to be due to quantitative glycosylation of Asn(371).
Although examining cytosolic intermediates that accumulated in human melanoma
cells treated with proteasome inhibitors, we were surprised to find both
molecules that had been deglycosylated by peptide N-glycanase and a large number 
of molecules that had not been previously glycosylated. The failure of
Tyr(369)(N) to be processed and presented from these latter molecules may be
partially due to a process of deamidation independent of glycosylation. However, 
we also established that proteasomes degrade tyrosinase molecules that are still 
glycosylated, giving rise to a set of discrete intermediates that are not
observed when unglycosylated molecules are degraded. We propose that Tyr(369)(N) 
fails to be presented because unglycosylated tyrosinase is degraded rapidly and
relatively nonselectively. In contrast, glycosylation alters the selectivity of
tyrosinase processing by the proteasome, enhancing the production or survival of 
Tyr(369)(D).

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802902 
PMCID: PMC2859980
PMID: 19342661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

