
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2009 Aug;66(2):165-71. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2009.03.010. Epub
2009 Apr 7.

Comparison of two expression platforms in respect to protein yield and quality:
Pichia pastoris versus Pichia angusta.

Mack M(1), Wannemacher M, Hobl B, Pietschmann P, Hock B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Technical Microbiology, Mannheim University of Applied Sciences,
Paul-Wittsack-Str. 10, 68163 Mannheim, Germany. m.mack@hs-mannheim.de

The methylotrophic yeasts Pichia pastoris and Pichia angusta (Hansenula
polymorpha) were used for the comparative heterologous production of two model
mammalian proteins of pharmaceutical interest, the NK1-fragment (22 kDa) of human
hepatocyte growth factor and the extracellular domain (28 kDa) of mouse tissue
factor (MTF). Both recombinant proteins were engineered to contain an N-terminal 
Strep- (WSHPQFEK) and a C-terminal His(6)-tag. In addition, both proteins
contained the pre-pro-sequence of Saccharomyces cerevisiae mating factor alpha to
allow secretion. Following vector construction, transformation and zeocin
amplification, the best Pichia producers were identified in a screening procedure
using Western blot and a Luminex xMAP based high-throughput method. Recombinant
NK1-fragment and MTF were purified from culture supernatants of the best
producers by affinity chromatography (Ni-nitrilotriacetic acid columns). Using P.
pastoris as a host for the synthesis of NK1-fragment a protein yield of 5.7 mg/l 
was achieved. In comparable expression experiments P.angusta yielded 1.6 mg/l of 
NK1-fragment. NK1-fragment apparently was not glycosylated in either system. For 
the production of MTF, P. pastoris was also the superior host yielding 1.2mg/l
glycosylated recombinant protein whereas P. angusta was clearly less efficient
(<0.2mg/l MTF). For both expression systems no correlation between the amount of 
recombinant protein and the copy number of the chromosomally integrated
heterologous genes was found. In P. pastoris strains less degradation of the two 
model recombinant proteins was observed. Altogether, this paper provides a
structured protocol for rapidly identifying productive Pichia strains for the
synthesis of full-length recombinant proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2009.03.010 
PMID: 19358890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

