
1. Ultramicroscopy. 2009 Jul;109(8):845-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ultramic.2009.03.035.
Epub 2009 Mar 26.

Contribution to the elucidation of the structure of the bacterial flagellum
nano-motor through AFM imaging of the M-Ring.

Chalmeau J(1), Dagkessamanskaia A, Le Grimellec C, Francois JM, Sternick J, Vieu 
C.

Author information: 
(1)LAAS-CNRS, Universit√© de Toulouse, 7 Avenue du Colonel Roche, F-31077
Toulouse, France. jchalmea@laas.fr

The flagellar nano-motor of bacteria is one of the most interesting and amazing
natural nano-machine. Despite its discovery 30 years ago, some details of its
structure and mechanisms are not yet elucidated. Several studies have revealed
some important aspects of its structure and numerous data are available today;
however, the inner mechanisms of the nano-motor have not been yet resolved,
partially due to the lack of information about the 3D assembly, shape and
interactions of the different parts in experimental environment as close as
possible as the native cellular conditions. We have developed an approach using
atomic force microscopy imaging in liquid media, which allows us to study part of
the motor in native liquid environment. In this work, we are interested in the
FliG proteins, identified as the key functional proteins of this nano-machine. We
report 3D images of their assembly on surfaces, which could be representative of 
the so-called M-ring part of the nano-motor. These images have been acquired on
both mica surfaces and on supported bilayer membranes mimetics of E. coli native 
membrane. The systematic analysis of the shape and the size of different recorded
assemblies made us believe that the FliG organization we observed could lead to a
new model for the structure and mechanism of the flagellar nano-motor.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ultramic.2009.03.035 
PMID: 19361928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

