
1. J Nucl Med. 2009 May;50(5):823-6. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.108.055533. Epub 2009 Apr
16.

Microbial targeting of 99mTc-labeled recombinant human beta-defensin-3 in an
animal model of infection: a feasibility pilot study.

Liberatore M(1), Pala A, Scaccianoce S, Anagnostou C, Di Tondo U, Calandri E,
D'Elia P, Gross MD, Rubello D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiological Sciences, La Sapienza Rome University, Rome, Italy.

Comment in
    J Nucl Med. 2009 May;50(5):671-3.

Human beta-defensin-3 (HBD-3) is an antimicrobial peptide with bactericidal
effects on many gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria and some yeast species
and, if radiolabeled, might be used to distinguish bacterial infection from
sterile inflammation. The goals of the present study were to develop methods for 
radiolabeling HBD-3 with (99m)Tc and to perform preliminary investigations on
(99m)Tc-labeled HBD-3 as a means to evaluate induced infection in an animal
model. To this purpose, Staphylococcus aureus-induced infection was used to
evaluate the capability of (99m)Tc-HBD-3 to distinguish infection from aseptic
inflammation in rats.METHODS: Twenty to 40 microg of recombinant HBD-3 were
labeled with (99m)Tc(+) hexa-coordinated with 3 molecules of CO and H(2)O and
separated by a column from free (99m)Tc. (99m)Tc-HBD-3 was added to cultures of a
bacterial suspension of S. aureus and Escherichia coli to evaluate in vitro
antibacterial activity. A bacterial suspension of S. aureus and a carrageenan
solution were used to induce infection and sterile inflammation, respectively, in
opposite thighs of 9 adult rats. Three separate experiments were performed on
groups of 3 rats each. The animals received different doses of (99m)Tc-HBD-3
injected through a cannula into the jugular vein. After sacrifice of the animals,
tissue samples were obtained from sites of infection, inflammation, and control
muscle (left foreleg) at 1, 3, and 5 h after (99m)Tc-HBD-3 administration. Tissue
samples were weighed and then counted in a well-counter. Simultaneously, 1 mL of 
a standard solution of (99m)Tc-HBD-3 corresponding to each administered dose was 
counted.
RESULTS: (99m)Tc-HBD-3 retained antibacterial activity. Radioactivity in tissue
samples from the infected sites was significantly higher than that in samples of 
either induced inflammation or normal control muscle (ratio, approximately 3:1)
at 3 and 5 h after injection, whereas similar radioactivity counts were observed 
for tissue samples from aseptic inflammation sites and normal control muscle.
CONCLUSION: In this investigation, (99m)Tc-HBD-3 retained antibacterial activity 
and successfully distinguished infection from aseptic inflammation in adult rats.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.108.055533 
PMID: 19372483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

