
1. J Immunol. 2009 May 1;182(9):5730-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803114.

Pertussis toxin signals through the TCR to initiate cross-desensitization of the 
chemokine receptor CXCR4.

Schneider OD(1), Weiss AA, Miller WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University
of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.

Pertussis toxin (PTx) has been shown to exert a variety of effects on immune
cells independent of its ability to ADP-ribosylate G proteins. Of these effects, 
the binding subunit of PTx (PTxB) has been shown to block signaling via the
chemokine receptor CCR5, but the mechanism involved in this process is unknown.
Here, we show that PTxB causes desensitization of a related chemokine receptor,
CXCR4, and explore the mechanism by which this occurs. CXCR4 is the receptor for 
the chemokine stromal cell-derived factor 1alpha (SDF-1alpha) and elicits a
number of biological effects, including stimulation of T cell migration. PTxB
treatment causes a decrease in CXCR4 surface expression, inhibits G
protein-associated signaling, and blocks SDF-1alpha-mediated chemotaxis. We show 
that PTxB mediates these effects by activating the TCR signaling network, as the 
effects are dependent on TCR and ZAP70 expression. Additionally, the activation
of the TCR with anti-CD3 mAb elicits a similar set of effects on CXCR4 activity, 
supporting the idea that TCR signaling leads to cross-desensitization of CXCR4.
The inhibition of CXCR4 by PTxB is rapid and transient; however, the catalytic
activity of PTx prevents CXCR4 signaling in the long term. Thus, the effects of
PTx holotoxin on CXCR4 signaling can be divided into two phases: short term by
the B subunit, and long term by the catalytic subunit. These data suggest that
TCR crosstalk with CXCR4 is likely a normal cellular process that leads to
cross-desensitization, which is exploited by the B subunit of PTx.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803114 
PMCID: PMC2766007
PMID: 19380820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

