
1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jun 12;284(24):16595-16608. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.006387. Epub 
2009 Apr 20.

Role of SUMO in RNF4-mediated promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) degradation:
sumoylation of PML and phospho-switch control of its SUMO binding domain
dissected in living cells.

Percherancier Y(1), Germain-Desprez D(2), Galisson F(1), Mascle XH(2), Dianoux
L(1), Estephan P(2), Chelbi-Alix MK(3), Aubry M(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the CNRS FRE2937, Institut André Lwoff, Villejuif 94801, France.
(2)Département de Biochimie, Université de Montréal, Montréal H3C 3J7, Canada.
(3)From the CNRS FRE2937, Institut André Lwoff, Villejuif 94801, France.
Electronic address: mchelbi@vjf.cnrs.fr.
(4)Département de Biochimie, Université de Montréal, Montréal H3C 3J7, Canada.
Electronic address: muriel.aubry@umontreal.ca.

Promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) is a tumor suppressor acting as the
organizer of subnuclear structures called PML nuclear bodies (NBs). Both covalent
modification of PML by the small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) and non-covalent 
binding of SUMO to the PML SUMO binding domain (SBD) are necessary for PML NB
formation and maturation. PML sumoylation and proteasome-dependent degradation
induced by the E3 ubiquitin ligase, RNF4, are enhanced by the acute promyelocytic
leukemia therapeutic agent, arsenic trioxide (As2O3). Here, we established a
novel bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) assay to dissect and
monitor PML/SUMO interactions dynamically in living cells upon addition of
therapeutic agents. Using this sensitive and quantitative SUMO BRET assay that
distinguishes PML sumoylation from SBD-mediated PML/SUMO non-covalent
interactions, we probed the respective roles of covalent and non-covalent
PML/SUMO interactions in PML degradation and interaction with RNF4. We found
that, although dispensable for As2O3-enhanced PML sumoylation and RNF4
interaction, PML SBD core sequence was required for As2O3- and RNF4-induced PML
degradation. As confirmed with a phosphomimetic mutant, phosphorylation of a
stretch of serine residues, contained within PML SBD was needed for PML
interaction with SUMO-modified protein partners and thus for NB maturation.
However, mutation of these serine residues did not impair As2O3- and RNF4-induced
PML degradation, contrasting with the known role of these phosphoserine residues 
for casein kinase 2-promoted PML degradation. Altogether, these data suggest a
model whereby sumoylation- and SBD-dependent PML oligomerization within NBs is
sufficient for RNF4-mediated PML degradation and does not require the
phosphorylation-dependent association of PML with other sumoylated partners.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.006387 
PMCID: PMC2713554
PMID: 19380586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

