
1. Ups J Med Sci. 2009;114(2):65-72. doi: 10.1080/03009730802642337.

Immunohistochemical localization of phosphohistidine phosphatase PHPT1 in mouse
and human tissues.

Zhang XQ(1), Sundh UB, Jansson L, Zetterqvist O, Ek P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

Protein histidine phosphorylation accounts for about 6% of the total protein
phosphorylation in eukaryotic cells; still details concerning histidine
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation are limited. A mammalian 14-kDa
phosphohistidine phosphatase, also denominated PHPT1, was found 6 years ago that 
provided a new tool in the study of phosphohistidine phosphorylation. The
localization of PHPT1 mRNA by Northern blot analysis revealed high expression in 
heart and skeletal muscle. The main object of the present study was to determine 
the PHPT1 expression on protein level in mouse tissues in order to get further
information on the physiological role of the enzyme. Tissue samples from adult
mice and 14.5-day-old mouse embryos were processed for immunostaining using a
PHPT1-specific polyclonal antibody. The same antibody was also provided to the
Swedish human protein atlas project (HPR)
(http://www.proteinatlas.org/index.php). The results from both studies were
essentially consistent with the previously reported expression of mRNA of a few
human tissues. In addition, several other tissues, including testis, displayed a 
high protein expression. A salient result of the present investigation was the
ubiquitous expression of the PHPT1 protein and its high expression in
continuously dividing epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1080/03009730802642337 
PMCID: PMC2852761
PMID: 19396692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

