
1. J Biol Chem. 1991 Nov 25;266(33):22199-205.

NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase. Cloning, nucleotide sequence, and
disruption of the IDH2 gene from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Cupp JR(1), McAlister-Henn L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine 92717.

NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae is
composed of two nonidentical subunits, designated IDH1 (Mr approximately 40,000) 
and IDH2 (Mr approximately 39,000). We have isolated and characterized a yeast
genomic clone containing the IDH2 gene. The amino acid sequence deduced from the 
gene indicates that IDH2 is synthesized as a precursor of 369 amino acids (Mr
39,694) and is processed upon mitochondrial import to yield a mature protein of
354 amino acids (Mr 37,755). Amino acid sequence comparison between S. cerevisiae
IDH2 and S. cerevisiae NADP(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase shows no
significant sequence identity, whereas comparison of IDH2 and Escherichia coli
NADP(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase reveals a 33% sequence identity. To
confirm the identity of the IDH2 gene and examine the relationship between IDH1
and IDH2, the IDH2 gene was disrupted by genomic replacement in a haploid yeast
strain. The disruption strain expressed no detectable IDH2, as determined by
Western blot analysis, and was found to lack NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate
dehydrogenase activity, indicating that IDH2 is essential for a functional
enzyme. Overexpression of IDH2, however, did not result in increased
NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase activity, suggesting that both IDH1 and
IDH2 subunits are required for catalytic activity. The disruption strain was
unable to utilize acetate as a carbon source and exhibited a 2-fold slower growth
rate than wild type strains on glycerol or lactate. This growth phenotype is
consistent with NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase performing an essential
role in the oxidative function of the citric acid cycle.


PMID: 1939242  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

