
1. Microbes Infect. 2009 Mar;11(3):384-93. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2009.01.001. Epub
2009 Jan 14.

Antibacterial activity of human defensins on anaerobic intestinal bacterial
species: a major role of HBD-3.

Nuding S(1), Zabel LT, Enders C, Porter E, Fellermann K, Wehkamp J, Mueller HA,
Stange EF.

Author information: 
(1)Dr Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology Stuttgart and
University of Tuebingen, Auerbachstr. 112, 70376 Stuttgart, Germany.
sabine.nuding@ikp-stuttgart.de

Defensins are natural mucosal antimicrobial peptides and their broad spectrum
activity against aerobic or facultative anaerobic bacteria has been well
investigated. The aim of this study was to systematically examine the
antibacterial activity of the small intestinal Paneth cell derived alpha-defensin
HD5 and the major colonic beta-defensins HBD-1-3 against strict anaerobic
intestinal bacteria. The antibacterial activity was assessed with a flow
cytometric assay employing a membrane potential sensitive dye as marker for loss 
of cell viability. The majority of the tested strains belonging to the dominant
anaerobe genera of the gut, Bacteroides and Parabacteroides, were only minimally 
affected by the constitutively expressed defensins HD5 and HBD-1. The inducible
defensin HBD-2 had a limited antibacterial effect, whereas the inducible HBD-3
exhibited potent activity against most strains. The effect of HBD-3 on
Bacteroides sp. appeared to be dependent on the presence of oxygen. Bacteroides
fragilis strains isolated from blood during bacteremia or from extraintestinal
infections were more resistant to HBD-3 than strains from the physiological gut
flora. Thus, defensin resistance is not only species- but also strain-specific
and may be clinically relevant in the host-bacteria interaction influencing
mucosal translocation and systemic infection.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2009.01.001 
PMID: 19397883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

