
1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jun 19;284(25):17340-17351. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.010108. Epub 
2009 Apr 27.

Autoprocessing of the Escherichia coli AIDA-I autotransporter: a new mechanism
involving acidic residues in the junction region.

Charbonneau MÈ(1), Janvore J(1), Mourez M(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Canada Research Chair on Bacterial Animal Diseases, Université de
Montréal, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, 3200 Sicotte, St.-Hyacinthe, Québec
J2S 7C6, Canada.
(2)From the Canada Research Chair on Bacterial Animal Diseases, Université de
Montréal, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, 3200 Sicotte, St.-Hyacinthe, Québec
J2S 7C6, Canada. Electronic address: m.mourez@umontreal.ca.

The cleavage of the autotransporter adhesin involved in diffuse adherence
(AIDA-I) of Escherichia coli yields a membrane-embedded fragment, AIDAc, and an
extracellular fragment, the mature AIDA-I adhesin. The latter remains
noncovalently associated with AIDAc but can be released by heat treatment. In
this study we determined the mechanism of AIDA-I cleavage. We showed that AIDA-I 
processing is an autocatalytic event by monitoring the in vitro cleavage of an
uncleaved mutant protein isolated from inclusion bodies. Furthermore, by
following changes in circular dichroism spectra and protease resistance of the
renaturated protein, we showed that the cleavage of the protein is correlated
with folding. With site-directed deletions, we showed that the catalytic activity
of the protein lies in a region encompassing amino acids between Ala-667 and
Thr-953, which includes the conserved junction domain of some autotransporters.
With site-directed point mutations, we also found that Asp-878 and Glu-897 are
involved in the processing of AIDA-I and that a mutation preserving the acidic
side chain of Asp-878 was tolerated, giving evidence that this carboxylic acid
group is directly involved in catalysis. Last, we confirmed that cleavage of
AIDA-I is intramolecular. Our results unveil a new mechanism of auto-processing
in the autotransporter family.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.010108 
PMCID: PMC2719369
PMID: 19398552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

