
1. Infect Immun. 2009 Jul;77(7):3080-9. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00611-08. Epub 2009 Apr 27.

Distinct roles of CD28- and CD40 ligand-mediated costimulation in the development
of protective immunity and pathology during Chlamydia muridarum urogenital
infection in mice.

Chen L(1), Cheng W, Shivshankar P, Lei L, Zhang X, Wu Y, Yeh IT, Zhong G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Health Science 
Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78229, USA.

Infection with Chlamydia muridarum in the mouse urogenital tract can induce both 
protective immunity and inflammatory pathologies, which has been used as a model 
for understanding the immune and pathogenic mechanisms of C. trachomatis
infection. We compared the roles of CD28- and CD40 ligand (CD40L)-mediated
costimulation in C. muridarum infection. Mice with CD28 or CD80/CD86 gene
knockout (KO) displayed an infection course similar to that of wild-type mice
during both primary and secondary infection, suggesting that CD28-mediated
costimulation is not required for protection against C. muridarum infection.
However, mice deficient in CD40L or CD40 displayed a prolonged infection course
after primary or secondary infection, suggesting that CD40-CD40L costimulation
plays an essential role in the development of anti-C. muridarum immunity.
Interestingly, the CD28- or CD80/CD86-deficient mice displayed significantly
lower levels of inflammatory pathologies in the upper genital tracts after
primary infection, although the attenuation in inflammation was no longer
significant during secondary infection. However, the CD40L or CD40 KO mice
developed inflammatory pathologies as severe as those in wild-type mice following
either primary or secondary infection despite the obvious deficits in adaptive
immunity in these KO mice. The resistance of CD28 or CD80/CD86 KO mice to
chlamydial infection correlated with production of gamma interferon, while the
development of inflammatory pathologies in CD40L or CD40 KO mice correlated with 
the production of other proinflammatory cytokines in mouse urogenital tracts
during the early stages of the infection. These observations together suggest
that C. muridarum-induced protective immunity and inflammatory pathologies can be
mediated by distinct costimulatory signals.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00611-08 
PMCID: PMC2708556
PMID: 19398542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

