
1. Br J Cancer. 2009 May 19;100(10):1638-46. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605055. Epub 2009 
Apr 28.

CXCR1 and CXCR2 enhances human melanoma tumourigenesis, growth and invasion.

Singh S(1), Nannuru KC, Sadanandam A, Varney ML, Singh RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5845, USA.

The aggressiveness of malignant melanoma is associated with differential
expression of CXCL-8 and its receptors, CXCR1 and CXCR2. However, the precise
functional role of these receptors in melanoma progression remains unclear. In
this study, we investigate the precise functional role of CXCR1 and CXCR2 in
melanoma progression. CXCR1 or CXCR2 were stably overexpressed in human melanoma 
cell lines, SBC-2 (non-tumourigenic) and A375P (low-tumourigenic) exhibiting low 
endogenous expression of receptors. Functional assays were performed to study the
resulting changes in cell proliferation, motility and invasion, and in vivo
tumour growth using a mouse xenograft model. Our data demonstrated that CXCR1- or
CXCR2-overexpressing SBC-2 and A375P melanoma cells had enhanced proliferation,
chemotaxis and invasiveness in vitro. Interestingly, CXCR1 or CXCR2
overexpression in SBC-2 cells induced tumourigenicity, and A375P cells
significantly enhanced tumour growth as examined in vivo. Immunohistochemical
analyses showed significantly increased tumour cell proliferation and microvessel
density and reduced apoptosis in tumours generated from CXCR1- or
CXCR2-overexpressing melanoma cells. CXCR1- or CXCR2-induced modulation of
melanoma cell proliferation and migration was observed to be mediated through the
activation of ERK1/2 phosphorylation. Together, these studies demonstrate that
CXCR1 and CXCR2 play essential role in growth, survival, motility and invasion of
human melanoma.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605055 
PMCID: PMC2696769
PMID: 19401689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

