
1. Virchows Arch. 2009 Jun;454(6):685-94. doi: 10.1007/s00428-009-0780-4. Epub 2009 
May 3.

The antimicrobial peptide HBD-2 and the Toll-like receptors-2 and -4 are induced 
in synovial membranes in case of septic arthritis.

Varoga D(1), Klostermeier E, Paulsen F, Wruck C, Lippross S, Brandenburg LO,
Tohidnezhad M, Seekamp A, Tillmann B, Pufe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Trauma Surgery, UKSH Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

Septic arthritis is frequently observed especially in immune-compromised or
chronically diseased patients and leads to functional impairment due to tissue
destruction. Recently, production of antimicrobial peptides (AMP) was observed in
articular cartilage after exposure to bacteria. This report examines the role of 
synoviocyte-derived AMPs in innate defense mechanisms of articular joints.
Samples of healthy, low-grade synovialitis and septic synovial membranes were
assessed for the expression of human beta-defensin-2 (HBD-2) and Toll-like
receptor-2 and -4 (TLR) by immunohistochemistry and enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA). A stable synoviocyte line (K4IM) was used for in vitro experiments
and assayed for endogenous HBD-2 and TLR production after exposure to
inflammatory cytokines or bacterial supernatants by reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), real-time RT-PCR, Western blot, ELISA, and
dual luciferase assay. Healthy human synovial membranes and cultured synoviocytes
are able to produce HBD-2 and TLR-1-5 at basal expression levels. Samples of
bacteria-colonized synovial membranes produce higher levels of HBD-2 when
compared with samples of healthy tissues. K4IM synoviocytes exposed to
Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, or proinflammatory cytokines
demonstrated a clear HBD-2 transcription and protein induction. TLR-2 and -4 are 
known to have a critical role in the recognition of gram-positive and
gram-negative bacteria in epithelia and are induced in mesenchymal synoviocytes
after bacterial exposure on transcription and on protein level. This report
demonstrates an unappreciated role of synovial membranes: samples of septic
synovial membranes and cultured synoviocytes exposed to bacteria produce
increased amounts of the AMP HBD-2 and the bacteria recognition receptors TLR-2
and -4. The induction of anti-inflammatory pathways in infected synoviocytes
suggests involvement in intra-articular defense mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-009-0780-4 
PMID: 19412702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

