
1. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2009 Jul;56(2):129-42. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2009.00558.x. Epub 2009 Apr 8.

Anthrax infection inhibits the AKT signaling involved in the E-cadherin-mediated 
adhesion of lung epithelial cells.

Popova T(1), Espina V, Bailey C, Liotta L, Petricoin E, Popov S.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biodefense and Infectious Diseases, George Mason
University, Manassas, VA 20110, USA.

The effect of anthrax infection on phosphoprotein signaling was studied in human 
small airway lung epithelial cells exposed to B. anthracis spores of the
plasmidless dSterne strain in comparison with the Sterne strain containing the
toxigenic plasmid (pXO1). The differential regulation of phosphorylation was
found in the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade (ERK, p38, and P90RSK), the
PI3K cascade (AKT, GSK-3alpha/beta), and downstream in the case of the
proapoptotic BAD and the transcription factor STAT3. Both strains stimulate
phosphorylation of CREB and inhibit phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 required for
activation of cap-dependent translation. Downregulation of the survival AKT
phosphorylation by the Sterne strain inhibits the process of Ca(2+)-dependent
homophilic interaction of E-cadherin (EC) upon formation or repair of cell-cell
contacts. Both lethal and edema toxins produced by the Sterne strain inhibit the 
AKT phosphorylation induced during the EC-mediated signaling. Activity of ERK1/2 
and p38 inhibitors indicates that inhibition of AKT phosphorylation takes place
through the ERK1/2-PI3K crosstalk. In Sterne spore-challenged mice, a specific
inhibitor of PI3K/AKT, wortmannin, accelerates the lethal outcome, and reduction 
of AKT phosphorylation in the circulating blood cells coincides with the death of
animals. We conclude that the PI3K/AKT pathway controlling the integrity of
epithelium plays an important survival role in anthrax infection.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2009.00558.x 
PMCID: PMC2734923
PMID: 19416348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

