
1. Immunol Rev. 2009 May;229(1):337-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2009.00773.x.

Molecular mechanisms of T-cell receptor and costimulatory molecule
ligation/blockade in autoimmune disease therapy.

Podojil JR(1), Miller SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology and Interdepartmental Immunobiology
Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA.

SUMMARY: Pro-inflammatory CD4(+) T-cell-mediated autoimmune diseases, such as
multiple sclerosis and type 1 diabetes, are hypothesized to be initiated and
maintained by activated antigen-presenting cells presenting self antigen to
self-reactive interferon-gamma and interleukin-17-producing CD4(+) T-helper (Th) 
type 1/Th17 cells. To date, the majority of Food and Drug Administration-approved
therapies for autoimmune disease primarily focus on the global inhibition of
immune inflammatory activity. The goal of ongoing research in this field is to
develop both therapies that inhibit/eliminate activated autoreactive cells as
well as antigen-specific treatments, which allow for the directed blockade of the
deleterious effects of self-reactive immune cell function. According to the
two-signal hypothesis, activation of a naive antigen-specific CD4(+) T cell
requires both stimulation of the T-cell receptor (TCR) (signal 1) and stimulation
of costimulatory molecules (signal 2). There also exists a balance between
pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory immune cell activity, which is regulated
by the type and strength of the activating signal as well as the local cytokine
milieu in which the naive CD4(+) T cell is activated. To this end, the majority
of ongoing research is focused on the delivery of suboptimal TCR stimulation in
the absence of costimulatory molecule stimulation, or potential blockade of
stimulatory accessory molecules. Therefore, the signaling pathways involved in
the induction of CD4(+) T-cell anergy, as apposed to activation, are topics of
intense interest.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2009.00773.x 
PMCID: PMC2845642
PMID: 19426232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

