
1. J Chemother. 2009 Apr;21(2):170-80.

Moxifloxacin for the treatment of patients with complicated intra-abdominal
infections (the AIDA Study).

Weiss G(1), Reimnitz P, Hampel B, Muehlhofer E, Lippert H; AIDA Study Group.

Collaborators: Bonvehi P, Lamberghini R, Maurizi D, Zlocowski J, Hauser H, Herbst
F, Blondiau J, Jacobs F, de Cleva R, Zilberstein B, Boese-Landgraf J, Buechlera
M, Engemann R, Gloor B, Herfarth C, Hopt U, Koch H, Steinert F, Lippert H,
Pietsch P, Vestweber K, Walgenbach S, Weimann A, Zuehlke H, Bernardos A, Jordá R,
Rello J, Sánchez M, Alhava E, Haerkoenen N, Miettinen P, Silvasti S, Cabanis P,
Dazza F, Desvignes G, Frileux P, Grange D, Letoublon C, Bassaris H, Nikolaidis P,
Cotter E, Dan M, Kitzes R, Raz R, Rubinstein E, Jáuregui Cruz A, Franco G,
Córdova Gutiérrez H, Leal de Rosal P, Guillén Peña R, Molina Pérez J, Poblano M, 
Ruiz Palacios G, Bruining HA, Mouton JW, van der Hoven B, van der Linden CJ, van 
Zanten AH, Krook H, Hall-Angerås M, Toernqvist A, Warren B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University Hospital, Magdeburg, Germany.
guenter.weiss@klinikum-magdeburg.de

This prospective, randomized, open, international, multicenter study of adults
with complicated intra-abdominal infections (cIAI) compared the efficacy and
safety of sequential intravenous (i.v.) to oral (p.o.) moxifloxacin 400 mg once
daily, with that of i.v. ceftriaxone 2 g once daily, plus metronidazole 500 mg
three times daily, followed by p.o. amoxicillin/clavulanate 625 mg three times
daily. The primary efficacy variable was clinical cure at test of cure (TOC) (day
28-42 after study entry) in the per protocol (PP) population. Of 595 patients in 
the study, 511 patients were valid for PP analysis (246 moxifloxacin, 265
ceftriaxone/metronidazole). Sequential moxifloxacin was noninferior to the
comparator regimen--clinical cure rates at TOC were 80.9% versus 82.3%
(moxifloxacin versus ceftriaxone/metronidazole; 95% CI -8.9, 4.2%). The incidence
of adverse events was comparable between the two treatment groups. Therefore,
sequential moxifloxacin monotherapy is as effective and safe as combination
therapy with i.v. ceftriaxone plus i.v. metronidazole followed by oral
amoxicillin/clavulanate for the treatment of cIAI.

DOI: 10.1179/joc.2009.21.2.170 
PMID: 19423470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

