
1. Blood. 2009 Jul 16;114(3):667-76. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-02-205492. Epub 2009
May 11.

NKT cells mediate pulmonary inflammation and dysfunction in murine sickle cell
disease through production of IFN-gamma and CXCR3 chemokines.

Wallace KL(1), Marshall MA, Ramos SI, Lannigan JA, Field JJ, Strieter RM, Linden 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908,
USA.

Ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI) triggers an inflammatory cascade that is
initiated by the activation of CD1d-restricted iNKT cells. In sickle cell disease
(SCD), misshapen erythrocytes evoke repeated transient bouts of microvascular
IRI. Compared with C57BL/6 controls, NY1DD mice have more numerous and activated 
(CD69(+), interferon-gamma(+) [IFN-gamma(+)]) lung, liver, and spleen iNKT cells 
that are hyperresponsive to hypoxia/reoxygenation. NY1DD mice have increased
pulmonary levels of IFN-gamma, IFN-gamma-inducible chemokines (CXCL9, CXCL10),
and elevated numbers of lymphocytes expressing the chemokine receptor CXCR3.
Treating NY1DD mice with anti-CD1d antibody to inhibit iNKT cell activation
reverses baseline pulmonary dysfunction manifested as elevated vascular
permeability, decreased arterial oxygen saturation, and increased numbers of
activated leukocytes. Anti-CD1d antibodies decrease pulmonary levels of IFN-gamma
and CXCR3 chemokines. Neutralization of CXCR3 receptors ameliorates pulmonary
dysfunction. Crossing NY1DD to lymphocyte-deficient Rag1(-/-) mice decreases
pulmonary dysfunction. This is counteracted by the adoptive transfer of 1 million
NKT cells. Like mice, people with SCD have increased numbers of activated
circulating iNKT cells expressing CXCR3. Together, these data indicate that iNKT 
cells play a pivotal role in sustaining inflammation in SCD mice by a pathway
involving IFN-gamma and production of chemotactic CXCR3 chemokines and that this 
mechanism may translate to human disease.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2009-02-205492 
PMCID: PMC2713467
PMID: 19433855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

