
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2009 Nov;15(11):1020-5. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-0691.2009.02773.x. Epub 2009 Apr 24.

Procalcitonin kinetics in Legionella pneumophila pneumonia.

de Jager CP(1), de Wit NC, Weers-Pothoff G, van der Poll T, Wever PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine and Intensive Care, Jeroen Bosch Ziekenhuis, 
's-Hertogenbosch, the Netherlands. p.de.jager@jbz.nl

Little is known about procalcitonin (PCT) levels in patients with
community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) caused by Legionella pneumophila. The aim of
the present study was to investigate this infection marker in patients admitted
with L. pneumophila pneumonia in relation to conventional inflammatory
parameters, severity of pneumonia upon admission and clinical outcome. Eighteen
patients admitted with CAP caused by L. pneumophila serogroup 1 were
retrospectively examined. PCT measurements were carried out during the first week
of admission in addition to measurements of C-reactive protein (CRP), white blood
cell (WBC) count and registration of severity of pneumonia upon admission
(CURB-65 score). The mean PCT level upon admission in patients with L.
pneumophila pneumonia was 13.5 ng/mL (range 0.3-55.7 ng/mL). Mean CRP level was
397 mg/L (range 167-595 mg/L) and mean WBC count 11.7 x 10(9)/L (range 4.5-20.4 x
10(9)/L). Initial high PCT levels were indicative of more severe disease as
reflected by prolonged intensive care unit (ICU) stay and/or in-hospital death.
Patients admitted to the ICU showed significantly higher PCT levels compared with
the remaining patients [26.7 ng/mL (range 4.6-55.7 ng/mL) vs. 6.9 ng/mL (range
0.3-29.3 ng/mL); p 0.019]. There was a significant correlation between Acute
Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation-II scores upon ICU admission and initial
PCT levels upon hospital admission (r = 0.86; p 0.027). Persistently increased
PCT levels during treatment were indicative of unfavourable clinical outcome.
Conventional inflammatory parameters (CRP and WBC) and the CURB-65 score lacked
this discriminatory capacity in our study population. PCT may therefore be a
valuable tool in the initial clinical assessment and follow-up of patients with
L. pneumophila pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2009.02773.x 
PMID: 19438643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

