
1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

PLoS One. 2009;4(5):e5528. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005528. Epub 2009 May 13.

Analysis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific CD8 T-cells in patients with
active tuberculosis and in individuals with latent infection.

Caccamo N(1), Guggino G, Meraviglia S, Gelsomino G, Di Carlo P, Titone L,
Bocchino M, Galati D, Matarese A, Nouta J, Klein MR, Salerno A, Sanduzzi A, Dieli
F, Ottenhoff TH.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biopatologia e Metodologie Biomediche, Universit√† di Palermo, 
Palermo, Italy. caccamo@unipa.it

Retraction in
    PLoS One. 2019 Sep 19;14(9):e0223028.

CD8 T-cells contribute to control of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, but
little is known about the quality of the CD8 T-cell response in subjects with
latent infection and in patients with active tuberculosis disease. CD8 T-cells
recognizing epitopes from 6 different proteins of Mycobacterium tuberculosis were
detected by tetramer staining. Intracellular cytokines staining for specific
production of IFN-gamma and IL-2 was performed, complemented by phenotyping of
memory markers on antigen-specific CD8 T-cells. The ex-vivo frequencies of
tetramer-specific CD8 T-cells in tuberculous patients before therapy were lower
than in subjects with latent infection, but increased at four months after
therapy to comparable percentages detected in subjects with latent infection. The
majority of CD8 T-cells from subjects with latent infection expressed a
terminally-differentiated phenotype (CD45RA+CCR7(-)). In contrast, tuberculous
patients had only 35% of antigen-specific CD8 T-cells expressing this phenotype, 
while containing higher proportions of cells with an effector memory- and a
central memory-like phenotype, and which did not change significantly after
therapy. CD8 T-cells from subjects with latent infection showed a codominance of 
IL-2+/IFN-gamma+ and IL-2(-)/IFN-gamma+ T-cell populations; interestingly, only
the IL-2+/IFN-gamma+ population was reduced or absent in tuberculous patients,
highly suggestive of a restricted functional profile of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis-specific CD8 T-cells during active disease. These results suggest
distinct Mycobacterium tuberculosis specific CD8 T-cell phenotypic and functional
signatures between subjects which control infection (subjects with latent
infection) and those who do not (patients with active disease).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005528 
PMCID: PMC2678250
PMID: 19436760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

