
1. J Immunol. 2009 Jun 1;182(11):6879-88. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803670.

Generation of T cells from human embryonic stem cell-derived hematopoietic zones.

Timmermans F(1), Velghe I, Vanwalleghem L, De Smedt M, Van Coppernolle S, Taghon 
T, Moore HD, Leclercq G, Langerak AW, Kerre T, Plum J, Vandekerckhove B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESC) are pluripotent stem cells. A major challenge
in the field of hESC is the establishment of specific differentiation protocols
that drives hESC down a particular lineage fate. So far, attempts to generate T
cells from hESC in vitro were unsuccessful. In this study, we show that T cells
can be generated in vitro from hESC-derived hematopoietic precursor cells present
in hematopoietic zones (HZs). These zones are morphologically similar to blood
islands during embryonic development, and are formed when hESC are cultured on
OP9 stromal cells. Upon subsequent transfer of these HZs on OP9 cells expressing 
high levels of Delta-like 1 and in the presence of growth factors, cells expand
and differentiate to T cells. Furthermore, we show that T cells derive
exclusively from a CD34(high)CD43(low) population, further substantiating the
notion that hESC-derived CD34(high)CD43(low) cells are formed in HZs and are the 
only population containing multipotent hematopoietic precursor cells.
Differentiation to T cells sequentially passes through the physiological
intermediates: CD34(+)CD7(+) T/NK committed, CD7(+)CD4(+)CD8(-) immature single
positive, CD4(+)CD8(+) double positive, and finally CD3(+)CD1(-)CD27(+) mature T 
cell stages. TCRalphabeta(+) and TCRgammadelta(+) T cells are generated. Mature T
cells are polyclonal, proliferate, and secrete cytokines in response to mitogens.
This protocol for the de novo generation of T cells from hESC could be clinically
and scientifically relevant.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803670 
PMID: 19454684  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

