
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2009 Sep;86(3):671-80. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1008638. Epub 2009 May 18.

CC chemokine ligand-2 synergizes with the nonchemokine G protein-coupled receptor
ligand fMLP in monocyte chemotaxis, and it cooperates with the TLR ligand LPS via
induction of CXCL8.

Gouwy M(1), Struyf S, Verbeke H, Put W, Proost P, Opdenakker G, Van Damme J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Rega Institute for Medical Research,
University of Leuven, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

During inflammatory reactions, endogenously produced cytokines and chemokines act
in a network and interact with hormones and neurotransmitters to regulate host
immune responses. These signaling circuitries are even more interfaced during
infections, when microbial agonists activate TLR, RLR, and NLR receptors. On the 
basis of the discovery of synergy between chemokines for neutrophil attraction,
we extend here this phenomenon between the chemokine MCP-1/CCL2 and the GPCR
ligand fMLP or the TLR4 agonist LPS on monocytes. In fact, the bacterial
tripeptide fMLP, but not the cytokines IL-1beta or IFN-gamma, significantly and
dose-dependently synergized with CCL2 in monocyte chemotaxis. Furthermore, LPS
rapidly induced the expression of IL-8/CXCL8 but not of the CCL2 receptor CCR2 in
monocytic cells. In turn, the induced CXCL8 synergized with CCL2 for mononuclear 
cell chemotaxis, and the chemotactic effect was mediated by CXCR1/CXCR2, because 
CXCL8 receptor antagonists or antibodies were capable of blocking the synergy,
while keeping the responsiveness to CCL2 intact. These data recapitulate in vitro
the complexity of innate immune regulation, provide a novel mechanism of
enhancing monocyte chemotaxis during bacterial infections with gram-negative
bacteria and demonstrate the importance of local contexts in inflammatory and
infectious insults.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.1008638 
PMID: 19451399  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

