
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jun 2;106(22):8969-74. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0810883106. Epub 2009 May 18.

A central role for venom in predation by Varanus komodoensis (Komodo Dragon) and 
the extinct giant Varanus (Megalania) priscus.

Fry BG(1), Wroe S, Teeuwisse W, van Osch MJ, Moreno K, Ingle J, McHenry C,
Ferrara T, Clausen P, Scheib H, Winter KL, Greisman L, Roelants K, van der Weerd 
L, Clemente CJ, Giannakis E, Hodgson WC, Luz S, Martelli P, Krishnasamy K, Kochva
E, Kwok HF, Scanlon D, Karas J, Citron DM, Goldstein EJ, McNaughtan JE, Norman
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Venomics Research Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.
bgf@unimelb.edu.au

The predatory ecology of Varanus komodoensis (Komodo Dragon) has been a subject
of long-standing interest and considerable conjecture. Here, we investigate the
roles and potential interplay between cranial mechanics, toxic bacteria, and
venom. Our analyses point to the presence of a sophisticated combined-arsenal
killing apparatus. We find that the lightweight skull is relatively poorly
adapted to generate high bite forces but better adapted to resist high pulling
loads. We reject the popular notion regarding toxic bacteria utilization.
Instead, we demonstrate that the effects of deep wounds inflicted are potentiated
through venom with toxic activities including anticoagulation and shock
induction. Anatomical comparisons of V. komodoensis with V. (Megalania) priscus
fossils suggest that the closely related extinct giant was the largest venomous
animal to have ever lived.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0810883106 
PMCID: PMC2690028
PMID: 19451641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

