
1. Zoonoses Public Health. 2010 Jun;57(4):244-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1863-2378.2008.01219.x. Epub 2009 Apr 8.

Detection of atypical cultivable canine gastric Helicobacter strain and its
biochemical and morphological characters in naturally infected dogs.

Asl AS(1), Jamshidi S, Mohammadi M, Soroush MH, Bahadori A, Oghalaie A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Tabriz
Islamic Azad University, Tabriz, Iran. ashasl@yahoo.com

Helicobacter-like organisms are frequently found in canine stomachs, but the
relationship between such organisms and gastric pathology has not been
established. However, some such organisms have zoonotic importance. The aims of
this study were to evaluate the morphological and biochemical characteristics of 
cultivable canine gastric Helicobacter-like organisms (GHLOs) in pets and stray
dogs and their prevalence in these two groups of dogs. Specimens were taken by
gastroscopy from 30 clinically healthy stray dogs and 30 pet dogs. Cultures were 
positive from biopsies of 11/30 of stray and 6/30 of pet dogs. The isolated
Helicobacters were observed by light microscopy and studied by biochemical,
physiological and PCR analysis. Some of the isolated GHLO's displayed atypical
shapes that were similar to Helicobacter pylori or Helicobacter acinonychis in
stray dogs' cytological examinations. They had 2-3 helices and were smaller than 
other canine GHLOs. One of these atypical Helicobacter strains was cultured. It
was not possible to distinguish such strains by routine PCR and biochemical
evaluations. Electron microscopy showed a smaller Helicobacter (2 microm in
length) with 2 or 3 helixes. This study demonstrates that not all canine gastric 
Helicobacters are 5-15 microm in length, as has been previously proposed, and
portrays the need for further investigation of canine GHLOs.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1863-2378.2008.01219.x 
PMID: 19486497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

