
1. Biochemistry. 2009 Jul 7;48(26):6052-61. doi: 10.1021/bi900154f.

Structure, dynamics, and activity of an all-cysteine mutated human beta
defensin-3 peptide analogue.

Chandrababu KB(1), Ho B, Yang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, 3 Science Drive 3, Faculty of Science, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 117543.

Human beta defensin-3 (HBD-3) is a unique potent antimicrobial peptide. To
explore the importance of the three-dimensional structure of HBD-3 in its
activity and selectivity, we have mutated all six cysteine residues of HBD-3 to
other amino acids, expressed the mutant (named as Def-A) in Escherichia coli, and
analyzed the mutant's activity, structure, and dynamics. Def-A is active against 
several bacterial strains, but the activity is influenced by the ionic strength
of the environment. When subjected to vesicles like POPG or to micelles like SDS,
Def-A is changed from a random coil structure to an ordered helical form. We have
determined the structure of Def-A in SDS micelle and found that it is folded into
two distinct helices separated by a proline kink. We propose that the long
N-terminal helix with many hydrophobic residues is inserted inside the micelle
while the C-terminal helix with one large positive charge patch is located
outside the micelle and interacts with the charged head groups of the micelle.
The model is supported by NMR relaxation and H-D exchange data. Our results
indicate that in addition to the number of positively charged residues and
hydrophobic residues, the arrangement of these residues in the three-dimensional 
space is important to the antimicrobial selectivity and salt-dependent activity
of human beta defensins.

DOI: 10.1021/bi900154f 
PMID: 19480463  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

