
1. Microb Ecol. 2010 Jan;59(1):130-40. doi: 10.1007/s00248-009-9541-9. Epub 2009 Jun
4.

Small-scale diversity and succession of fungi in the detritusphere of rye
residues.

Poll C(1), Brune T, Begerow D, Kandeler E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Soil Science and Land Evaluation, University of Hohenheim,
Stuttgart, Germany. poll@uni-hohenheim.de

Transport of litter carbon in the detritusphere might determine fungal abundance 
and diversity at the small scale. Rye residues were applied to the surface of
soil cores with two different water contents and incubated at 10 degrees C for 2 
and 12 weeks. Fungal community structure was analysed by constructing clone
libraries of 18S rDNA and subsequent sequencing. Litter addition induced fungal
succession in the adjacent soil and decreased detectable fungal diversity mainly 
due to the huge supply of substrates. Ergosterol content and
N-acetyl-glucosaminidase activity indicated fungal growth after 2 weeks.
Simultaneously, the structure of the fungal community changed, with
Mortierellaceae proliferating during the initial phase of litter decomposition.
Ergosterol measurements were unable to detect this early fungal growth because
Mortierellaceae do not produce ergosterol. In the late phase during decomposition
of polymeric substrates, like cellulose and chitin, the fungal community was
dominated by Trichocladium asperum. Water content influenced community
composition only during the first 2 weeks due to its influence on transport
processes in the detritusphere and on competition between fungal species. Our
results underline the importance of species identification in understanding
decomposition processes in soil.

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-009-9541-9 
PMID: 19495854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

