
1. Tissue Antigens. 2009 Aug;74(2):156-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2009.01282.x.
Epub 2009 Jun 4.

HLA haplotypes and birth weight variation: is your future going to be light or
heavy?

Capittini C(1), Pasi A, Bergamaschi P, Tinelli C, De Silvestri A, Mercati MP,
Badulli C, Garlaschelli F, Sbarsi I, Guarene M, Martinetti M, Salvaneschi L,
Cuccia M.

Author information: 
(1)Immunogenetics Laboratory, Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University
of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. capittini@ipvgen.unipv.it

Birth weight is known to be a direct indicator of perinatal mortality and a clear
predictor of adult pathologies too. It has been correlated with several causes of
mortality in adulthood: low birth weight with diabetes, nephropathy and
cardiovascular diseases and high birth weight with autoimmune diseases and
cancer. In genome-wide studies, an extended human leucocyte antigen (HLA) region 
has been linked to birth weight variation. We focused our attention on the HLA
haplotypes marked by HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-DRB1 polymorphisms in 1206 healthy
Caucasian newborns belonging to the Cord Blood Bank of Pavia (Italy) and their
mothers, aiming to investigate the association between this restricted HLA region
and birth weight variation. In our study, the HLA-B*38;DRB1*13 haplotype showed
an ascending trend among centiles addressing to the high foetal weight. The
HLA-A*02;B*15 haplotype showed a descending trend among centiles addressing to
the low foetal weight. Besides the acknowledged correlation between the HLA-A*02 
and HLA-B*15 alleles (as well as low birth weight) and type I diabetes and
between the HLA-B*38 and HLA-DRB1*13 alleles (as well as high birth weight) and
several autoimmune diseases, we cannot predict if our babies, healthy at birth,
will suffer from these pathologies during life. Nevertheless, our data point to
the HLA telomeric end for markers linked to the low birth weight and to the HLA
centromeric end for markers linked to the high birth weight, thus limiting the
region involved in birth weight variation, which still represents a useful
predictor of disease risk in adulthood.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2009.01282.x 
PMID: 19500315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

