
1. Int Immunol. 2009 Jul;21(7):843-58. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxp050. Epub 2009 Jun 10.

The analysis of the functions of human B and T cells in humanized
NOD/shi-scid/gammac(null) (NOG) mice (hu-HSC NOG mice).

Watanabe Y(1), Takahashi T, Okajima A, Shiokawa M, Ishii N, Katano I, Ito R, Ito 
M, Minegishi M, Minegishi N, Tsuchiya S, Sugamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.

'Humanized mice' are anticipated to be a valuable tool for studying the human
immune system, but the reconstituted human immune cells have not yet been well
characterized. Here, we extensively investigated the differentiation and
functions of human B and T cells in a supra-immunodeficient mouse strain,
NOD/shi-scid/gammac(null) (NOG) reconstituted with CD34(+) hematopoietic stem
cells obtained from umbilical cord blood. In these hu-HSC NOG mice, the
development of human B cells was partially blocked, and a significant number of
B-cell progenitors accumulated in the spleen. The mature CD19(+)IgM(+)IgD(+)
human B cells of the hu-HSC NOG mice could produce IgG in vivo and in vitro by
antigenic stimulation. In contrast, although human T cells with an apparently
normal phenotype developed, most of them could neither proliferate nor produce
IL-2 in response to antigenic stimulation by anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies in
vitro. The positive selection of human T cells in the thymus was sufficiently
functional, if not complete, and mainly mediated by mouse class II, suggesting
that the human T cells lost their function in the periphery. We found that
multiple mechanisms were involved in the T-cell abnormalities. Collectively, our 
results demonstrate that further improvements are necessary before humanized mice
with a functional human immune system are achieved.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxp050 
PMID: 19515798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

