
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2009;551:89-104. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-999-4_8.

Amplified fragment-length polymorphism analysis.

Fry NK(1), Savelkoul PH, Visca P.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Systemic Infection Laboratory, Health Protection Agency,
Centre for Infections, London, UK.

Amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) analysis is a universal polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR)-based DNA fingerprinting technique comprising three main
stages: (i) digestion of genomic DNA with restriction endonucleases and ligation 
to double-stranded adaptors (each comprised of two oligonucleotides), thus
creating restriction fragments with identical known adaptor sequences; (ii)
specific amplification of a subset of these DNA fragments using primers (one
labeled) targeting the adaptor sequences and additional selected bases within the
unknown genomic DNA; and (iii) analysis of the patterns (usually automated).
Differences or polymorphisms between samples are revealed by separation of the
labeled fragments by electrophoresis (standard agarose, high-resolution
denaturing acrylamide, or capillary gels). Comparison of banding patterns is
typically achieved using dedicated fingerprinting analysis software. The
advantages of AFLP analysis include the ability to use a universal protocol in
combination with different restriction endonucleases and the choice of adding one
or more selective nucleotides in the PCR -primers to achieve optimal results
relatively quickly without prior knowledge of DNA sequences from a large variety 
of (micro)organisms. The method also has the potential for high-throughput and
local electronic database pattern storage with relatively low cost. Disadvantages
include variation in the precision of sizing of fragments, leading to suboptimal 
reproducibility, particularly across different platforms.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-60327-999-4_8 
PMID: 19521869  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

