
1. BMC Immunol. 2009 Jun 12;10:36. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-10-36.

The expression of the beta-defensins hBD-2 and hBD-3 is differentially regulated 
by NF-kappaB and MAPK/AP-1 pathways in an in vitro model of Candida esophagitis.

Steubesand N(1), Kiehne K, Brunke G, Pahl R, Reiss K, Herzig KH, Schubert S,
Schreiber S, FÃ¶lsch UR, Rosenstiel P, Arlt A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein,
Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany. nadine@steubesand.org

BACKGROUND: Candida albicans resides on epithelial surfaces as part of the
physiological microflora. However, under certain conditions it may cause
life-threatening infections like Candida sepsis. Human beta-defensins (hBDs) are 
critical components of host defense at mucosal surfaces and we have recently
shown that hBD-2 and hBD-3 are upregulated in Candida esophagitis. We therefore
studied the role of Candidate signalling pathways in order to understand the
mechanisms involved in regulation of hBD-expression by C. albicans. We used the
esophageal cell line OE21 and analysed the role of paracrine signals from
polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) in an in vitro model of esophageal
candidiasis.
RESULTS: Supernatants of C. albicans or indirect coculture with C. albicans
induces upregulation of hBD-2 and hBD-3 expression. PMNs strongly amplifies C.
albicans-mediated induction of hBDs. By EMSA we demonstrate that C. albicans
activates NF-kappaB and AP-1 in OE21 cells. Inhibition of these pathways revealed
that hBD-2 expression is synergistically regulated by both NF-kappaB and AP-1. In
contrast hBD-3 expression is independent of NF-kappaB and relies solely on an
EGFR/MAPK/AP-1-dependent pathway.
CONCLUSION: Our analysis of signal transduction events demonstrate a functional
interaction of epithelial cells with PMNs in response to Candida infection
involving divergent signalling events that differentially govern hBD-2 and hBD-3 
expression.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2172-10-36 
PMCID: PMC2702365
PMID: 19523197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

