
1. PLoS One. 2009 Jun 17;4(6):e5945. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005945.

NSOM/QD-based direct visualization of CD3-induced and CD28-enhanced nanospatial
coclustering of TCR and coreceptor in nanodomains in T cell activation.

Zhong L(1), Zeng G, Lu X, Wang RC, Gong G, Yan L, Huang D, Chen ZW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Primate Biomedical
Research, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2010;5(3) doi:
10.1371/annotation/0cc4d7c5-134f-4db0-919f-14f74dd7846e..
    PLoS One. 2010;5(3). doi:
10.1371/annotation/5d0d3323-53ea-4e3a-a9f8-ca4cddcdce52.
    PLoS One. 2010;5(3). doi:
10.1371/annotation/d1055919-c5cf-423b-a068-224c9eacc58a.

Direct molecular imaging of nano-spatial relationship between T cell receptor
(TCR)/CD3 and CD4 or CD8 co-receptor before and after activation of a primary T
cell has not been reported. We have recently innovated application of near-field 
scanning optical microscopy (NSOM) and immune-labeling quantum dots (QD) to image
Ag-specific TCR response during in vivo clonal expansion, and now up-graded the
NSOM/QD-based nanotechnology through dipole-polarization and dual-color imaging. 
Using this imaging system scanning cell-membrane molecules at a best-optical
lateral resolution, we demonstrated that CD3, CD4 or CD8 molecules were
distinctly distributed as single QD-bound molecules or nano-clusters equivalent
to 2-4 QD fluorescence-intensity/size on cell-membrane of un-stimulated primary T
cells, and approximately 6-10% of CD3 were co-clustering with CD4 or CD8 as
70-110 nm nano-clusters without forming nano-domains. The ligation of TCR/CD3 on 
CD4 or CD8 T cells led to CD3 nanoscale co-clustering or interaction with CD4 or 
CD8 co-receptors forming 200-500 nm nano-domains or >500 nm micro-domains. Such
nano-spatial co-clustering of CD3 and CD4 or CD3 and CD8 appeared to be an
intrinsic event of TCR/CD3 ligation, not purely limited to MHC engagement, and be
driven by Lck phosphorylation. Importantly, CD28 co-stimulation remarkably
enhanced TCR/CD3 nanoscale co-clustering or interaction with CD4 co-receptor
within nano- or micro-domains on the membrane. In contrast, CD28 co-stimulation
did not enhance CD8 clustering or CD3-CD8 co-clustering in nano-domains although 
it increased molecular number and density of CD3 clustering in the enlarged
nano-domains. These nanoscale findings provide new insights into TCR/CD3
interaction with CD4 or CD8 co-receptor in T-cell activation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005945 
PMCID: PMC2693923
PMID: 19536289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

