
1. J Immunol. 2009 Jul 1;183(1):533-42. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802189.

In vivo lipopolysaccharide exposure of human blood leukocytes induces
cross-tolerance to multiple TLR ligands.

de Vos AF(1), Pater JM, van den Pangaart PS, de Kruif MD, van 't Veer C, van der 
Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam and Center for Experimental and
Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. a.f.devos@amc.uva.nl

In vitro and in vivo experiments in mice have shown that exposure of cells to the
TLR4 ligand LPS induces tolerance toward a second exposure to LPS and induces
cross-tolerance to certain other TLR ligands. Recently, we found that LPS
tolerance in experimental human endotoxemia and Gram-negative sepsis is
associated with elevated levels of IL-1R-associated kinase M, an intracellular
negative regulator of MyD88-dependent TLR signaling. In the present study, we
investigated whether in vivo exposure of humans to LPS induces tolerance in
circulating leukocytes to other TLR agonists that rely either on MyD88- dependent
or on MyD88-independent signaling. Analysis of TNF, IL-1beta, IL-6, and IL-10
levels in whole blood demonstrated that leukocytes were hyporesponsive to ex vivo
LPS restimulation 3-8 h after i.v. LPS injection (4 ng/kg). Reduced cytokine
release during the same interval was also observed in whole blood further
stimulated with MyD88-dependent ligands for TLR2, TLR5, and TLR7 or with whole
bacteria. Strikingly, blood leukocytes were also tolerant to a ligand for TLR3,
which signals solely through a MyD88-independent (Toll IL-1R domain-containing
adaptor-inducing IFN-beta (TRIF)-dependent) pathway. The hyporesponsiveness of
leukocytes to TLR3 ligation was associated with reduced rather than increased
levels of the recently identified TRIF inhibitor SARM. Taken together, these data
indicate that systemic LPS challenge of human volunteers induces cross-tolerance 
to multiple TLR ligands that signal in a MyD88-dependent or MyD88-independent
manner and suggest that LPS exposure of human blood leukocytes may hamper the
inflammatory response to various microbial components.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802189 
PMID: 19542464  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

