
1. Toxicon. 2009 Nov;54(6):802-17. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2009.06.014. Epub 2009 Jun
21.

Antibacterial activity of six novel peptides from Tityus discrepans scorpion
venom. A fluorescent probe study of microbial membrane Na+ permeability changes.

Díaz P(1), D'Suze G, Salazar V, Sevcik C, Shannon JD, Sherman NE, Fox JW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory on Cellular Neuropharmacology, Biophysics and Biochemistry Center, 
Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Científicas, Caracas, Venezuela.

Six novel peptides (named bactridines) were isolated from Tityus discrepans
scorpion venom. From mass spectrometry molecular masses were 6916, 7362, 7226,
7011, 7101 and 7173 Da (bactridines 1-6). Bactridines 1 and 2 were sequenced by
Edman degradation. The sequences and in silico analysis, indicated that they are 
positively charged polypeptides comprised of 61 and 64 amino acids (AA),
respectively, bactridine 1 and bactridine 2 containing 4 disulfide bridges.
Bactridine 1 was only toxic to cockroaches and crabs, and bactridine 2-6 were
only toxic to mice. Bactridine 1 has a 78% sequence identity with ardiscretin.
Ardisctretin is an insect specific sodium toxin which also produces a small
depolarization and induces repetitive firing in squid axons resembling those of
DDT [1,10(pchlorobenzyl) 2-trichloretane] in its ability to slow down action
potential, to induce repetitive firing. Measured as the minimal inhibitory
concentration, bactridines had high antibacterial activity against a wide range
of gram positive and gram negative bacteria. Complete bacterial growth inhibition
occurred at concentrations from 20 to 80 microM depending on the bacteria and
peptide tested. Effects on membrane Na(+) permeability induced by bactridines
were observed on Yersinia enterocolitica loaded with 1 microM CoroNa Red. CoroNa 
Red fluorescence leakage from bacteria was observed after exposure to 0.3 microM 
of any bactridine tested, indicating that they modified Na(+) membrane
permeability. This effect was blocked by 10 microM amiloride and by 25 microM
mibefradil drugs that affect Na(+) and Ca(2+) channels respectively. We found no 
evidence of changes of K(+) or Ca(2+) concentrations neither inside nor outside
the bacteria in experiments using the fluorescent dyes Fluo 4AM (10 microM) and
PBFI (20 microM).

DOI: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2009.06.014 
PMID: 19540868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

