
1. J Infect Dis. 2009 Aug 1;200(3):399-408. doi: 10.1086/600075.

Engagement of Toll-like receptor 2 on CD4(+) T cells facilitates local immune
responses in patients with tuberculous pleurisy.

Chen X(1), Zhang M, Zhu X, Deng Q, Liu H, Larmonier N, Graner MW, Zhou B.

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Shenzhen Third
Hospital, Shenzhen, China. chenxinchun@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Although it has been recognized that Mycobacterium tuberculosis
contains large amounts of Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) ligands, their direct
effects on CD4(+) T cells and the clinical implications have not been determined.
METHODS: With the recent finding that activated CD4(+) T cells express TLR2 as a 
costimulatory receptor, we hypothesized that M. tuberculosis and its components
may directly affect CD4(+) T cells by engaging TLR2, thus facilitating the
expansion and function of these lymphocytes in tuberculous pleura.
RESULTS: Our results indicate that CD4(+) T cells from the pleural fluid and
peripheral blood of patients with tuberculosis show significantly increased TLR2 
expression, compared with those from healthy donors. TLR2 ligand activity was
also significantly higher in the tuberculous pleural fluid than in the serum from
healthy donors or patients with pulmonary tuberculosis. M. tuberculosis TLR2
ligands, 19-kDa lipoprotein, and live bacillus Calmette-Gu√©rin all modulated
cytokine production (interferon gamma and interleukin 17), cellular
proliferation, survival, and migration of CD4(+) T cells isolated from pleural
fluid and activated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that direct interaction between M. tuberculosis
TLR2 ligands and CD4(+) T cells facilitated local CD4(+) T cell immune responses 
in patients with tuberculous pleurisy.

DOI: 10.1086/600075 
PMID: 19552525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

