
1. J Immunol. 2009 Jul 15;183(2):897-906. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803014. Epub 2009
Jun 24.

Propionic acid secreted from propionibacteria induces NKG2D ligand expression on 
human-activated T lymphocytes and cancer cells.

Andresen L(1), Hansen KA, Jensen H, Pedersen SF, Stougaard P, Hansen HR,
Jurlander J, Skov S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Disease Biology, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

We found that propionic acid secreted from propionibacteria induces expression of
the NKG2D ligands MICA/B on activated T lymphocytes and different cancer cells,
without affecting MICA/B expression on resting peripheral blood cells. Growth
supernatant from propionibacteria or propionate alone could directly stimulate
functional MICA/B surface expression and MICA promoter activity by a mechanism
dependent on intracellular calcium. Deletion and point mutations further
demonstrated that a GC-box motif around -110 from the MICA transcription start
site is essential for propionate-mediated MICA promoter activity. Other
short-chain fatty acids such as lactate, acetate, and butyrate could also induce 
MICA/B expression. We observed a striking difference in the molecular signaling
pathways that regulate MICA/B. A functional glycolytic pathway was essential for 
MICA/B expression after exposure to propionate and CMV. In contrast, compounds
with histone deacetylase-inhibitory activity such as butyrate and FR901228
stimulated MICA/B expression through a pathway that was not affected by
inhibition of glycolysis, clearly suggesting that MICA/B is regulated through
different molecular mechanisms. We propose that propionate, produced either by
bacteria or during cellular metabolism, has significant immunoregulatory function
and may be cancer prophylactic.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803014 
PMID: 19553547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

