
1. Stem Cells. 2009 Sep;27(9):2301-11. doi: 10.1002/stem.165.

Fibroblastic colony-forming unit bone marrow cells delay progression to gastric
dysplasia in a helicobacter model of gastric tumorigenesis.

Wang SS(1), Asfaha S, Okumura T, Betz KS, Muthupalani S, Rogers AB, Tu S,
Takaishi S, Jin G, Yang X, Wu DC, Fox JG, Wang TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases, Columbia University Medical Center, 
New York, New York 10032, USA.

Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been shown to have immune
modulatory effects. Despite efforts to identify these cells in vivo, to date,
MSCs have been defined mainly by their in vitro cell characteristics. Here, we
show that Lin(-)CD44(hi)Sca1(-)cKit+CD34(-) cells make up approximately 0.5%-1%
of murine whole bone marrow cells and yield nearly an equal amount of
fibroblastic colony-forming units (CFU-F) as whole bone marrow. After
transplantation into lethally irradiated recipients,
Lin(-)CD44(hi)Sca1(-)cKit+CD34(-) cells engrafted in the bone marrow long-term
and demonstrated characteristics of MSCs, including capacity to differentiate
into osteoblasts and adipocytes. To examine whether
Lin(-)CD44(hi)Sca1(-)cKit+CD34(-) cells have immune modulatory effects, in vitro 
coculture with activated CD4+ T-cells resulted in decreased Th17 cell
differentiation by Lin(-)CD44(hi)Sca1(-)cKit+CD34(-) cells. Furthermore, serial
infusions with Lin(-)CD44(hi)Sca1(-)cKit+CD34(-) cells reduced the progression to
low-grade gastric dysplasia in mice infected with chronic Helicobacter felis (p =
.038). This correlated with reduced gastric interleukin (IL)-17F, IL-22, and
ROR-gammat gene expression in responding mice (p < .05). These data suggest that 
bone marrow derived Lin(-)CD44(hi)Sca1(-)cKit+CD34(-) cells have characteristics 
of MSCs and reduce progression of early gastric tumorigenesis induced by chronic 
H. felis infection. The prevention of dysplastic changes may occur through
inhibition of Th17-dependent pathways.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.165 
PMCID: PMC2887309
PMID: 19591219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

