
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jul 28;106(30):12424-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0905409106. Epub 2009 Jul 15.

Capillary morphogenesis protein-2 is the major receptor mediating lethality of
anthrax toxin in vivo.

Liu S(1), Crown D, Miller-Randolph S, Moayeri M, Wang H, Hu H, Morley T, Leppla
SH.

Author information: 
(1)Bacterial Toxins and Therapeutics Section, Laboratory of Bacterial Diseases,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. shliu@niaid.nih.gov

Anthrax toxin, a major virulence factor of Bacillus anthracis, gains entry into
target cells by binding to either of 2 von Willebrand factor A domain-containing 
proteins, tumor endothelium marker-8 (TEM8) and capillary morphogenesis protein-2
(CMG2). The wide tissue expression of TEM8 and CMG2 suggest that both receptors
could play a role in anthrax pathogenesis. To explore the roles of TEM8 and CMG2 
in normal physiology, as well as in anthrax pathogenesis, we generated TEM8- and 
CMG2-null mice and TEM8/CMG2 double-null mice by deleting TEM8 and CMG2
transmembrane domains. TEM8 and CMG2 were found to be dispensable for mouse
development and life, but both are essential in female reproduction in mice. We
found that the lethality of anthrax toxin for mice is mostly mediated by CMG2 and
that TEM8 plays only a minor role. This is likely because anthrax toxin has
approximately 11-fold higher affinity for CMG2 than for TEM8. Finally, the
CMG2-null mice are also shown to be highly resistant to B. anthracis spore
infection, attesting to the importance of both anthrax toxin and CMG2 in anthrax 
infections.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0905409106 
PMCID: PMC2718377
PMID: 19617532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

