
1. J Infect Dis. 2009 Sep 1;200(5):765-73. doi: 10.1086/604730.

Receptor for advanced glycation end products facilitates host defense during
Escherichia coli-induced abdominal sepsis in mice.

van Zoelen MA(1), Schmidt AM, Florquin S, Meijers JC, de Beer R, de Vos AF,
Nawroth PP, Bierhaus A, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. M.A.vanZoelen@amc.uva.nl

Erratum in
    J Infect Dis. 2009 Nov 15;200(10):1629.

BACKGROUND: The receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) mediates a
variety of inflammatory responses.
METHODS: To determine the role of RAGE in the innate immune response to abdominal
sepsis caused by Escherichia coli, RAGE-deficient (RAGE(-/-)) and normal
wild-type mice were intraperitoneally injected with E. coli. In a separate
experiment, wild-type mice received either anti-RAGE immunoglobulin (Ig) G or
control IgG.
RESULTS: E. coli sepsis resulted in an up-regulation of RAGE in the liver but not
in the lungs. RAGE-deficient mice demonstrated an enhanced bacterial outgrowth in
their peritoneal cavity and increased dissemination of the infection, accompanied
by increased hepatocellular injury and exaggerated systemic cytokine release and 
coagulation activation, 20 h after intraperitoneal administration of E. coli.
Wild-type mice treated with anti-RAGE IgG also displayed a diminished defense
against the growth and/or dissemination of E. coli. RAGE was important for the
initiation of the host response, as reflected by a reduced immune and
procoagulant response early after intraperitoneal injection of E. coli
lipopolysaccharide.
CONCLUSION: These data are the first to suggest that intact RAGE signaling
contributes to an effective antibacterial defense during E. coli sepsis, thereby 
limiting the accompanying inflammatory and procoagulant response.

DOI: 10.1086/604730 
PMID: 19627249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

