
1. J Mol Biol. 2009 Sep 25;392(3):614-29. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.07.037. Epub 2009 
Jul 20.

The protective antigen component of anthrax toxin forms functional octameric
complexes.

Kintzer AF(1), Thoren KL, Sterling HJ, Dong KC, Feld GK, Tang II, Zhang TT,
Williams ER, Berger JM, Krantz BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, 94720, USA.

The assembly of bacterial toxins and virulence factors is critical to their
function, but the regulation of assembly during infection has not been studied.
We begin to address this question using anthrax toxin as a model. The protective 
antigen (PA) component of the toxin assembles into ring-shaped homooligomers that
bind the two other enzyme components of the toxin, lethal factor (LF) and edema
factor (EF), to form toxic complexes. To disrupt the host, these toxic complexes 
are endocytosed, such that the PA oligomer forms a membrane-spanning channel that
LF and EF translocate through to enter the cytosol. Using single-channel
electrophysiology, we show that PA channels contain two populations of
conductance states, which correspond to two different PA pre-channel oligomers
observed by electron microscopy-the well-described heptamer and a novel octamer. 
Mass spectrometry demonstrates that the PA octamer binds four LFs, and assembly
routes leading to the octamer are populated with even-numbered, dimeric and
tetrameric, PA intermediates. Both heptameric and octameric PA complexes can
translocate LF and EF with similar rates and efficiencies. Here, we report a
3.2-A crystal structure of the PA octamer. The octamer comprises approximately
20-30% of the oligomers on cells, but outside of the cell, the octamer is more
stable than the heptamer under physiological pH. Thus, the PA octamer is a
physiological, stable, and active assembly state capable of forming lethal toxins
that may withstand the hostile conditions encountered in the bloodstream. This
assembly mechanism may provide a novel means to control cytotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.07.037 
PMCID: PMC2742380
PMID: 19627991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

