
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2009 Nov;86(5):1217-26. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0908517. Epub 2009 Jul
22.

Human mast cells synthesize and release angiogenin, a member of the ribonuclease 
A (RNase A) superfamily.

Kulka M(1), Fukuishi N, Metcalfe DD.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Council, 550 University Ave., Charlottetown, PE, Canada.
marianna.kulka@nrc.ca

ANG is a plasma protein with angiogenic and ribonucleolytic activity implicated
in tumor growth, heart failure, wound healing, asthma, and the composition of the
adult gut microflora. Human mast cells (HuMC) are similarly associated with
modulation of vascular permeability, angiogenic processes, wound healing, and
asthma. We hypothesized that HuMC express and secrete ANG in response to
divergent stimuli. ANG expression was evaluated in the LAD2 HMC, the HMC-1, and
CD34+-derived HuMC, following exposure to live Escherichia coli, TLR ligands, or 
neuropeptides and following FcepsilonRI aggregation. Expression and production of
ANG were determined by microarray analysis, qRT-PCR, confocal microscopy, and
ELISA. Microarray analysis showed that ANG is up-regulated by LAD2 cells exposed 
to live E. coli. qRT-PCR analysis revealed that LAD2, HMC-1, and HuMC
constitutively expressed ANG mRNA and that it was up-regulated by exposure to E. 
coli. Activation of HuMC by FcepsilonRI aggregation resulted in release of small 
amounts of ANG (<100 pg/mL), whereas compound 48/80, NGF, LPS, PGN, and flagellin
activated HuMC to secrete >160 pg/mL ANG. These observations demonstrate that
HuMC store and secrete ANG to a variety of stimuli and suggest that MC-derived
ANG is available in the subsequent inflammatory response.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0908517 
PMCID: PMC2774883
PMID: 19625371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

