
1. J Immunol. 2009 Aug 1;183(3):1644-56. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900858.

Incorporation of NKT cell-activating glycolipids enhances immunogenicity and
vaccine efficacy of Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guerin.

Venkataswamy MM(1), Baena A, Goldberg MF, Bricard G, Im JS, Chan J, Reddington F,
Besra GS, Jacobs WR Jr, Porcelli SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY10461, USA.

The attenuated strain of Mycobacterium bovis known as bacille Calmette-Gu√©rin
(BCG) has been widely used as a vaccine for prevention of disease by
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, but with relatively little evidence of success.
Recent studies suggest that the failure of BCG may be due to its retention of
immune evasion mechanisms that delay or prevent the priming of robust protective 
cell-mediated immunity. In this study, we describe an approach to enhance the
immunogenicity of BCG by incorporating glycolipid activators of CD1d-restricted
NKT cells, a conserved T cell subset with the potential to augment many types of 
immune responses. A method was developed for stably incorporating two forms of
the NKT cell activator alpha-galactosylceramide into live BCG organisms, and the 
impact of this on stimulation of T cell responses and protective
antimycobacterial immunity was evaluated. We found that live BCG containing
relatively small amounts of incorporated alpha-galactosylceramide retained the
ability to robustly activate NKT cells. Compared with immunization with
unmodified BCG, the glycolipid-modified BCG stimulated increased maturation of
dendritic cells and markedly augmented the priming of Ag-specific CD8(+) T cells 
responses. These effects were correlated with improved protective effects of
vaccination in mice challenged with virulent M. tuberculosis. These results
support the view that mycobacteria possess mechanisms to avoid stimulation of
CD8(+) T cell responses and that such responses contribute significantly to
protective immunity against these pathogens. Our findings raise the possibility
of a simple modification of BCG that could yield a more effective vaccine for
control of tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900858 
PMCID: PMC2719834
PMID: 19620317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

