
1. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2009 Aug;8(8):1109-21. doi: 10.1586/erv.09.56.

How do natural killer T cells help B cells?

Lang ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. mark-lang@ouhsc.edu

CD1d-restricted natural killer (NKT) cells are important contributors to
antigen-specific antibody responses. There is, therefore, considerable interest
in the design and implementation of strategies to appropriately activate NKT
cells and boost vaccine-induced protective antibody responses. In order to
achieve these goals, investigators are examining the mechanisms by which NKT
cells enhance antibody responses. Although information is limited, it is now
appreciated that both cognate and noncognate interactions between CD1d-expressing
B cells and NKT cells drive enhanced antibody responses. NKT cells may provide
B-cell help in the form of direct receptor-mediated interactions as well as by
secretion of soluble effectors, including cytokines. In this article, we review
the evidence in support of these mechanisms and discuss how they likely take
place in the context of interactions of NKT cells with other cell types, such as 
dendritic cells and helper T cells. We also discuss the evidence that NKT cells
affect discrete differentiation events in the multistep process by which a naive 
B cell experiences antigen and develops into a memory B cell or an
antibody-secreting plasma cell. Since most information on NKT cells and humoral
immunity has been derived from murine studies, we discuss what is known about
human NKT cells and humoral immunity. We offer thoughts on whether the findings
in murine systems will translate to humans.

DOI: 10.1586/erv.09.56 
PMCID: PMC2747240
PMID: 19627191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

