
1. Med Mycol. 2010 Mar;48(2):285-90. doi: 10.1080/13693780903103952.

Genetic diversity in Blastomyces dermatitidis: implications for PCR detection in 
clinical and environmental samples.

Meece JK(1), Anderson JL, Klein BS, Sullivan TD, Foley SL, Baumgardner DJ,
Brummitt CF, Reed KD.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Center, Marshfield Clinic Research Foundation, Marshfield
Clinic, Marshfield, Wisconsin 54449, USA. jennifer@mcrf.mfl dclin.edu

Blastomycosis is a serious and potentially fatal infection caused by the
thermally dimorphic fungus Blastomyces dermatitidis. Polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) assays targeting the BAD-1 virulence gene promoter have been developed to
aid in the detection of the pathogen in clinical and environmental samples.
However, little is known regarding the genetic diversity of B. dermatitidis and
how this might affect the performance characteristics of these assays. We
explored the genetic relatedness of 106 clinical and environmental isolates of B.
dermatitidis using a previously described rDNA PCR restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP) assay. In addition, we looked for polymorphisms in the
promoter region upstream of BAD-1. RFLP analysis showed that all isolates fell
into one of five genotypic groups, designated A through E. Genotypic groups A and
B predominated, comprising 50/106 (47.2%) and 51/106 (48.1%) of isolates,
respectively. Three of 106 (2.8%) isolates were genotype C. Genotypes D and E
represented novel genotypes and were each associated with single clinical
isolates. PCR of the BAD-1 promoter revealed significant size differences among
amplification products. Fifty-one of 106 isolates (50/50 RFLP genotypic group A
and 1/51 genotypic group B) had amplicons of 663-bp, nearly twice the size of the
expected product. Sequence analysis of amplification products from 17
representative isolates revealed four haplotypes and showed that the size
disparity was due to two large insertions. Because these insertions were present 
in a high percentage of isolates, the utility of the PCR assays for diagnostic
purposes could be affected. However, the novel RFLP genotypes and multiple BAD-1 
haplotypes may prove useful as markers in population genetic studies.

DOI: 10.1080/13693780903103952 
PMCID: PMC3003939
PMID: 19626547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

