
1. J Immunol. 2009 Aug 15;183(4):2678-87. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803398. Epub 2009
Jul 27.

Distinct responses of human monocyte subsets to Aspergillus fumigatus conidia.

Serbina NV(1), Cherny M, Shi C, Bleau SA, Collins NH, Young JW, Pamer EG.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA. serbinan@mskcc.org

Aspergillus fumigatus is an environmental fungus that causes life-threatening
infections in neutropenic patients. In the absence of intact innate immunity,
inhaled A. fumigatus spores (conidia) germinate in the lung, forming hyphae that 
invade blood vessels and disseminate to other tissues. Although macrophages and
neutrophils are postulated to provide defense against invasive fungal infection, 
animal models and human studies suggest that circulating monocytes also
contribute to antifungal immunity. Although human monocyte subsets, defined as
either CD14(+)CD16(-) or CD14(+)CD16(+), have been extensively characterized,
their respective roles during fungal infection remain undefined. We isolated
CD14(+)CD16(-) and CD14(+)CD16(+) monocytes from healthy allogeneic hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation donors and compared their ability to phagocytose and
inhibit A. fumigatus conidia. Both monocyte subsets efficiently phagocytose
conidia, but only CD14(+)CD16(-) monocytes inhibit conidial germination yet
secrete little TNF. In contrast CD14(+)CD16(+) do not inhibit conidial
germination and secrete large amounts of TNF. Although CD14(+)CD16(-) and
CD14(+)CD16(+) monocytes differ in their response to dormant conidia, responses
are similar if conidia are already germinated at the time of monocyte uptake. Our
study demonstrates that functional CD14(+)CD16(-) and CD14(+)CD16(+) monocytes
can be isolated from allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation donors
and that these subsets differ in their response to A. fumigatus conidia.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803398 
PMCID: PMC2753882
PMID: 19635902  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

