
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2010 Jan;60(Pt 1):15-20. doi: 10.1099/ijs.0.008318-0. 
Epub 2009 Jul 30.

Jeotgalibacillus salarius sp. nov., isolated from a marine saltern, and
reclassification of Marinibacillus marinus and Marinibacillus campisalis as
Jeotgalibacillus marinus comb. nov. and Jeotgalibacillus campisalis comb. nov.,
respectively.

Yoon JH(1), Kang SJ(1), Schumann P(2), Oh TK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), PO Box 115, 
Yusong, Taejon, Republic of Korea.
(2)DSMZ-Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen GmbH, Mascheroder 
Weg 1B, D-38124 Braunschweig, Germany.

A Gram-variable, motile and rod-shaped bacterial strain, ASL-1(T), was isolated
from a marine saltern located on the coast of the Yellow Sea, Korea. A
neighbour-joining phylogenetic tree based on 16S rRNA gene sequences showed that 
strain ASL-1(T) clustered with Jeotgalibacillus alimentarius YKJ-13(T) and that
this cluster joined the clade comprising the type strains of two Marinibacillus
species. Strain ASL-1(T) exhibited 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity values of
97.3 % to J. alimentarius YKJ-13(T) and 96.5 % to the type strains of
Marinibacillus marinus and Marinibacillus campisalis. The chemotaxonomic
properties of strain ASL-1(T) were similar to those of one or two of the genera
Jeotgalibacillus and Marinibacillus. The peptidoglycan type was A1alpha linked
directly through L-lysine as the diamino acid. Strain ASL-1(T) contained MK-7 as 
the predominant menaquinone with the presence of a significant amount of MK-8.
The predominant fatty acid was anteiso-C(15 : 0). The DNA G+C content was 42.9
mol%. Differential phenotypic properties, together with the phylogenetic and
genetic distinctiveness, revealed that strain ASL-1(T) could be differentiated
from J. alimentarius and the two Marinibacillus species. On the basis of the data
presented, strain ASL-1(T) represents a novel species within the genus
Jeotgalibacillus, for which the name Jeotgalibacillus salarius sp. nov. is
proposed. The type strain is ASL-1(T) (=KCTC 13257(T)=CCUG 56751(T)). It is also 
proposed that Marinibacillus marinus and Marinibacillus campisalis be
reclassified as Jeotgalibacillus marinus comb. nov. (type strain 581(T)=DSM
1297(T)=ATCC 29841(T)=CCUG 28884(T)=CIP 103308(T)=LMG 6930(T)) and
Jeotgalibacillus campisalis comb. nov. (type strain SF-57(T)=KCCM 41644(T)=JCM
11810(T)), respectively.

DOI: 10.1099/ijs.0.008318-0 
PMID: 19643870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

