
1. Infect Immun. 2009 Oct;77(10):4574-83. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00222-09. Epub 2009 Aug
3.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis cell wall glycolipids directly inhibit CD4+ T-cell
activation by interfering with proximal T-cell-receptor signaling.

Mahon RN(1), Rojas RE, Fulton SA, Franko JL, Harding CV, Boom WH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve 
University and University Hospitals, Case Medical Center, 10900 Euclid Avenue,
BRB 1010B, Cleveland, OH 44106-4984, USA. rnm4@case.edu

Immune evasion is required for Mycobacterium tuberculosis to survive in the face 
of robust adaptive CD4(+) T-cell responses. We have previously shown that M.
tuberculosis can indirectly inhibit CD4(+) T cells by suppressing the major
histocompatibility complex class II antigen-presenting cell function of
macrophages. This study was undertaken to determine if M. tuberculosis could
directly inhibit CD4(+) T-cell activation. Murine CD4(+) T cells were purified
from spleens by negative immunoaffinity selection followed by flow sorting.
Purified CD4(+) T cells were activated for 16 to 48 h with CD3 and CD28
monoclonal antibodies in the presence or absence of M. tuberculosis and its
subcellular fractions. CD4(+) T-cell activation was measured by interleukin 2
production, proliferation, and expression of activation markers, all of which
were decreased in the presence of M. tuberculosis. Fractionation identified that 
M. tuberculosis cell wall glycolipids, specifically, phosphatidylinositol
mannoside and mannose-capped lipoarabinomannan, were potent inhibitors.
Glycolipid-mediated inhibition was not dependent on Toll-like receptor signaling 
and could be bypassed through stimulation with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
and ionomycin. ZAP-70 phosphorylation was decreased in the presence of M.
tuberculosis glycolipids, indicating that M. tuberculosis glycolipids directly
inhibited CD4(+) T-cell activation by interfering with proximal T-cell-receptor
signaling.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00222-09 
PMCID: PMC2747961
PMID: 19651854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

