
1. PLoS One. 2009 Aug 6;4(8):e6534. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006534.

Increased numbers of IL-7 receptor molecules on CD4+CD25-CD107a+ T-cells in
patients with autoimmune diseases affecting the central nervous system.

Vudattu NK(1), Kuhlmann-Berenzon S, Khademi M, Seyfert V, Olsson T, Maeurer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: High content immune profiling in peripheral blood may reflect immune 
aberrations associated with inflammation in multiple sclerosis (MS) and other
autoimmune diseases affecting the central nervous system.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 46 patients with
multiple sclerosis (MS), 9 patients diagnosed with relapsing remitting MS (RRMS),
13 with secondary progressive multiple sclerosis (SPMS), 9 with other
neurological diseases (OND) and well as 15 healthy donors (HD) were analyzed by
12 color flow cytometry (TCRalphabeta, TCRgammadelta, CD4, CD8alpha, CD8beta,
CD45RA, CCR7, CD27, CD28, CD107a, CD127, CD14) in a cross-sectional study to
identify variables significantly different between controls (HD) and patients
(OND, RRMS, SPMS). We analyzed 187 individual immune cell subsets (percentages)
and the density of the IL-7 receptor alpha chain (CD127) on 59 individual immune 
phenotypes using a monoclonal anti-IL-7R antibody (clone R34.34) coupled to a
single APC molecule in combination with an APC-bead array. A non-parametric
analysis of variance (Kruskal-Wallis test) was conducted in order to test for
differences among the groups in each of the variables. To correct for the
multiplicity problem, the FDR correction was applied on the p-values. We
identified 19 variables for immune cell subsets (percentages) which allowed to
segregate healthy individuals and individuals with CNS disorders. We did not
observe differences in the relative percentage of IL-7R-positive immune cells in 
PBMCs. In contrast, we identified significant differences in IL-7 density,
measured on a single cell level, in 2/59 variables: increased numbers of CD127
molecules on TCRalphabeta+CD4+CD25 (intermed) T-cells and on
TCRalphabeta+CD4+CD25-CD107a+ T-cells (mean: 28376 Il-7R binding sites on cells
from HD, 48515 in patients with RRMS, 38195 in patients with SPMS and 33692 IL-7 
receptor binding sites on cells from patients with OND).
CONCLUSION: These data show that immunophenotyping represents a powerful tool to 
differentiate healthy individuals from individuals suffering from neurological
diseases and that the number of IL-7 receptor molecules on differentiated
TCRalphabeta+CD4+CD25-CD107a+ T-cells, but not the percentage of IL-7R-positive
cells, segregates healthy individuals from patients with neurological disorders.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006534 
PMCID: PMC2717329
PMID: 19657390  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

