
1. Ocul Immunol Inflamm. 2009 Jul-Aug;17(4):249-56. doi: 10.1080/09273940902999356.

Immune response genes in uveitis.

Du L(1), Kijlstra A, Yang P.

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, The First Affiliated Hospital,
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, PR China.

Uveitis is defined as an intraocular inflammation induced by different
etiologies. Though the precise pathogenesis is still unknown, accumulating
evidence shows that both innate and adaptive immune responses may be predominant 
mechanisms involved in the development of uveitis. Toll-like receptors have been 
shown to be expressed in the human eye and play an important role in infectious
uveitis. The NOD proteins, expressed mainly in the cytosol by APCs, recognize the
products of bacteria and participate in the development of uveitis. HLA genes
have been associated with some uveitis entities, including acute anterior uveitis
(HLA-B27), Behcet disease (HLA-B51), birdshot retinochoroidopathy (HLA-A29),
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome (HLA-DR4), sarcoidosis, sympathetic ophthalmia,
juvenile idiopathic arthritis, tubulointerstitial nephritis and uveitis (TINU)
syndrome, and pars planitis (HLA-DR15). The exact mechanism whereby certain HLA
genes predispose to a certain uveitis entity has not yet been elucidated. In
addition, several studies have demonstrate that polymorphisms in certain immune
response genes, such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF), MHC class I
polypeptide-related sequence A (MICA), interleukin-1 (IL-1), and some chemokines,
may contribute to the development of human uveitis. Polymorphisms in the gene
coding for the costimulatory molecule known as cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4
(CTLA-4) were recently found in Chinese patients with VKH syndrome but not in
patients with Behcet disease. Further developments in the unraveling of immune
response genes may lead to a better understanding of human uveitis and will
hopefully allow the development of novel treatment regimes.

DOI: 10.1080/09273940902999356 
PMID: 19657978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

