
1. Environ Microbiol. 2009 Dec;11(12):3132-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2009.02017.x.
Epub 2009 Jul 31.

The seasonal structure of microbial communities in the Western English Channel.

Gilbert JA(1), Field D, Swift P, Newbold L, Oliver A, Smyth T, Somerfield PJ,
Huse S, Joint I.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, Plymouth, PL1 3DH, UK.
jagi@pml.ac.uk

Very few marine microbial communities are well characterized even with the weight
of research effort presently devoted to it. Only a small proportion of this
effort has been aimed at investigating temporal community structure. Here we
present the first report of the application of high-throughput pyrosequencing to 
investigate intra-annual bacterial community structure. Microbial diversity was
determined for 12 time points at the surface of the L4 sampling site in the
Western English Channel. This was performed over 11 months during 2007. A total
of 182 560 sequences from the V6 hyper-variable region of the small-subunit
ribosomal RNA gene (16S rRNA) were obtained; there were between 11 327 and 17 339
reads per sample. Approximately 7000 genera were identified, with one in every 25
reads being attributed to a new genus; yet this level of sampling far from
exhausted the total diversity present at any one time point. The total data set
contained 17 673 unique sequences. Only 93 (0.5%) were found at all time points, 
yet these few lineages comprised 50% of the total reads sequenced. The most
abundant phylum was Proteobacteria (50% of all sequenced reads), while the SAR11 
clade comprised 21% of the ubiquitous reads and approximately 12% of the total
sequenced reads. In contrast, 78% of all operational taxonomic units were only
found at one time point and 67% were only found once, evidence of a large and
transient rare assemblage. This time series shows evidence of seasonally
structured community diversity. There is also evidence for seasonal succession,
primarily reflecting changes among dominant taxa. These changes in structure were
significantly correlated to a combination of temperature, phosphate and silicate 
concentrations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2009.02017.x 
PMID: 19659500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

