
1. J Immunol. 2009 Sep 1;183(5):3014-22. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802509. Epub 2009
Aug 10.

Mast cells down-regulate CD4+CD25+ T regulatory cell suppressor function via
histamine H1 receptor interaction.

Forward NA(1), Furlong SJ, Yang Y, Lin TJ, Hoskin DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.

Mast cells promote both innate and acquired immune responses, but little is known
about the effect of mast cells on T regulatory (T(reg)) cell function. In this
study, we show for the first time that the capacity of murine CD4(+)CD25(+)
T(reg) cells to suppress in vitro proliferation by CD4(+)CD25(-) T responder
(T(resp)) cells in response to anti-CD3/anti-CD28 mAb-coated beads was reduced in
the presence of syngeneic bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMC) activated by
FcepsilonR cross-linking. Activated BMMC culture supernatants or exogenous
histamine also inhibited T(reg) cell suppressor function while the histamine H1
receptor-specific antagonist loratadine, but not the H2 receptor-specific
antagonist famotidine, restored T(reg) cell suppressor function in the presence
of activated BMMC or activated BMMC culture supernatants. Moreover, treatment of 
T(reg) cells with loratadine, but not famotidine, rescued T(reg) cell suppressor 
function in the presence of exogenous histamine. In addition, the H1
receptor-specific agonist 2-pyridylethylamine dihydrochloride inhibited T(reg)
cell suppressor function to an extent that was comparable to histamine, whereas
the H2 receptor-specific agonist amthamine dihydrobromide was without effect.
Both T(reg) cells and T(resp) cells expressed H1 receptors. Exposure to histamine
caused T(reg) cells to express lower levels of CD25 and the T(reg) cell-specific 
transcription factor Foxp3. Taken together, these data indicate that
BMMC-elaborated histamine inhibited T(reg) cell suppressor function by signaling 
through the H1 receptor. We suggest that histamine released as a result of mast
cell activation by microbial products might cause a transient decrease in T(reg) 
cell suppressor function, thereby enhancing the development of protective
immunity.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802509 
PMID: 19667094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

