
1. Parasitology. 2009 Sep;136(11):1357-65. doi: 10.1017/S0031182009990655. Epub 2009
Aug 7.

Increased susceptibility to Strongyloides venezuelensis in mice due to
Mycobacterium bovis co-infection which modulates production of Th2 cytokines.

Carmo AM(1), Vicentini MA, Dias AT, Alves LL, Alves CC, Brandi JS, De Paula ML,
Fernandes A, Barsante MM, Souza MA, Teixeira HC, Negrão-Corrêa D, Ferreira AP.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Parasitologia, Microbiologia e Imunologia, Instituto de
Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora,
36036-330, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

An estimated quarter of the world's population possesses an infection caused by
gastrointestinal nematodes, which induce a Th2 type immune response. Concomitant 
infection of nematodes with Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which induces a
predominantly Th1 type response, is very frequent in tropical and subtropical
regions. This study examined immune responses of BALB/c mice infected with
Strongyloides venezuelensis and then co-infected with Mycobacterium bovis. The
number of worms in the intestine, eggs in feces, cytokine production in lungs and
intestine and the expression of CD80, CD86, CTLA-4 and CD28 cell markers on
pulmonary cells were analysed. Our results indicate that co-infected mice had an 
increased parasite burden, which correlates with elevated IFN-gamma and IL-10
cytokine production and decreased IL-4 and IL-13. Moreover, decreased expression 
of CD80 and increased expression of CTLA-4 were observed in co-infected mice. Our
data point out that susceptibility to Strongyloides venezuelensis infection is
increased by Mycobacterium bovis co-infection, resulting in higher parasite
survival.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182009990655 
PMID: 19660155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

