
1. Innate Immun. 2009 Dec;15(6):325-35. doi: 10.1177/1753425909104899.

Differential modulation of human {beta}-defensins expression in human gingival
epithelia by Porphyromonas gingivalis lipopolysaccharide with tetra- and
penta-acylated lipid A structures.

Lu Q(1), Darveau RP, Samaranayake LP, Wang CY, Jin L.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Hong Kong, Prince Philip Dental Hospital, Hong Kong.

Porphyromonas gingivalis lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is a crucial virulence factor
strongly involved in the development of chronic periodontitis. It displays a
significant amount of lipid A structural heterogeneity, containing both tetra-
(LPS(1435/1449) ) and penta-acylated (LPS( 1690)) lipid A structures with
opposing effects on E-selectin expression in human endothelial cells. Little is
known about how these two isoforms of P. gingivalis LPS could differentially
affect host innate immune responses in human gingival epithelia. The present
study compares the modulatory effects of P. gingivalis LPS(1435/1449) and
LPS(1690) on the expression of human beta-defensins (hBDs) in the reconstituted
human gingival epithelium, and examines the involvements of a panel of pattern
recognition receptors in the modulatory effects concerned. It is shown that
hBD-1, hBD-2 and hBD-3 mRNAs are significantly up-regulated by P. gingivalis
LPS(1690), but down-regulated by P. gingivalis LPS( 1435/1449). Toll-like
receptor (TLR) 2 and CD14 mRNAs are also differentially regulated, and the
modulation of hBD-2 expression may be through the co-operation of both TLR2 and
TLR4. This study suggests that P. gingivalis LPS with different lipid A
structures could differentially modulate host innate immune responses in human
gingival epithelia, which may be a hitherto undescribed novel pathogenic
mechanism of P. gingivalis in periodontal pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1177/1753425909104899 
PMID: 19675119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

