
1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 2;284(40):27065-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.019174. Epub 2009
Aug 11.

Homologous recombination but not nucleotide excision repair plays a pivotal role 
in tolerance of DNA-protein cross-links in mammalian cells.

Nakano T(1), Katafuchi A, Matsubara M, Terato H, Tsuboi T, Masuda T, Tatsumoto T,
Pack SP, Makino K, Croteau DL, Van Houten B, Iijima K, Tauchi H, Ide H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematical and Life Sciences, Graduate School of Science,
Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8526, Japan.

DNA-protein cross-links (DPCs) are unique among DNA lesions in their unusually
bulky nature. The steric hindrance imposed by cross-linked proteins (CLPs) will
hamper DNA transactions, such as replication and transcription, posing an
enormous threat to cells. In bacteria, DPCs with small CLPs are eliminated by
nucleotide excision repair (NER), whereas oversized DPCs are processed
exclusively by RecBCD-dependent homologous recombination (HR). Here we have
assessed the roles of NER and HR for DPCs in mammalian cells. We show that the
upper size limit of CLPs amenable to mammalian NER is relatively small (8-10 kDa)
so that NER cannot participate in the repair of chromosomal DPCs in mammalian
cells. Moreover, CLPs are not polyubiquitinated and hence are not subjected to
proteasomal degradation prior to NER. In contrast, HR constitutes the major
pathway in tolerance of DPCs as judged from cell survival and RAD51 and
gamma-H2AX nuclear foci formation. Induction of DPCs results in the accumulation 
of DNA double strand breaks in HR-deficient but not HR-proficient cells,
suggesting that fork breakage at the DPC site initiates HR and reactivates the
stalled fork. DPCs activate both ATR and ATM damage response pathways, but there 
is a time lag between two responses. These results highlight the differential
involvement of NER in the repair of DPCs in bacterial and mammalian cells and
demonstrate the versatile and conserved role of HR in tolerance of DPCs among
species.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.019174 
PMCID: PMC2785636
PMID: 19674975  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

