
1. J Immunol. 2009 Sep 1;183(5):3332-43. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900600. Epub 2009
Aug 12.

CXCR2-dependent mucosal neutrophil influx protects against colitis-associated
diarrhea caused by an attaching/effacing lesion-forming bacterial pathogen.

Spehlmann ME(1), Dann SM, Hruz P, Hanson E, McCole DF, Eckmann L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA.

Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) is a major cause of diarrheal disease in
young children, yet symptoms and duration are highly variable for unknown
reasons. Citrobacter rodentium, a murine model pathogen that shares important
functional features with EPEC, colonizes mice in colon and cecum and causes
inflammation, but typically little or no diarrhea. We conducted genome-wide
microarray studies to define mechanisms of host defense and disease in C.
rodentium infection. A significant fraction of the genes most highly induced in
the colon by infection encoded CXC chemokines, particularly CXCL1/2/5 and
CXCL9/10, which are ligands for the chemokine receptors CXCR2 and CXCR3,
respectively. CD11b(+) dendritic cells were the major producers of CXCL1, CXCL5, 
and CXCL9, while CXCL2 was mainly induced in macrophages. Infection of
gene-targeted mice revealed that CXCR3 had a significant but modest role in
defense against C. rodentium, whereas CXCR2 had a major and indispensable
function. CXCR2 was required for normal mucosal influx of neutrophils, which act 
as direct antibacterial effectors. Moreover, CXCR2 loss led to severe diarrhea
and failure to express critical components of normal ion and fluid transport,
including ATPase beta(2)-subunit, CFTR, and DRA. The antidiarrheal functions were
unique to CXCR2, since other immune defects leading to increased bacterial load
and inflammation did not cause diarrhea. Thus, CXCR2-dependent processes,
particularly mucosal neutrophil influx, not only contribute to host defense
against C. rodentium, but provide protection against infection-associated
diarrhea.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900600 
PMCID: PMC3419829
PMID: 19675161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

