
1. J Surg Res. 2010 Aug;162(2):264-73. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2009.04.047. Epub 2009 Jun
6.

A novel ELR-CXC chemokine antagonist reduces intestinal ischemia
reperfusion-induced mortality, and local and remote organ injury.

Zhao X(1), Town JR, Yang A, Zhang X, Paur N, Sawicki G, Gordon JR.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Group (Department of Veterinary Microbiology), University 
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Neutrophil sequestration plays an important role in mediating local
and remote organ injury induced by ischemia and reperfusion (I/R). The
Glu-Leu-Arg (ELR)-CXC subfamily of chemokines, all CXCR1 or CXCR2 ligands, are
primary agonists for such neutrophil recruitment. Herein, we assessed the effects
of a combined CXCR1/CXCR2 antagonist, CXCL8((3-72))K11R/G31P (G31P), on
neutrophilic local (gut) and distant organ injury and outcomes after superior
mesenteric artery I/R in rats.
METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats (n=6-10) were subjected to either sham
treatment or superior mesenteric artery ischemia for 1h; all animals received
either saline or G31P (500 mug/kg, s.c.) and were euthanized for assessment after
either 2 or 5h of arterial reperfusion. Survival and gut pathology, and pulmonary
neutrophils were assessed directly, while bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid
total protein levels and red blood cell (RBC) numbers were determined by protein 
assay and direct counting. Expression of inflammatory mediators in the lung and
jejunum was measured by quantitative RT-PCR, colorimetric or gel zymography
assays.
RESULTS: Sham treatment animals suffered no discernible gut or pulmonary
pathology. At 2 and 5h after reperfusion, the survival levels of the
saline-treated I/R injury animals were 80% and 50%, respectively, while all
G31P-treated animals survived. I/R injury led to substantial villous pathology
within the jejunum, and G31P significantly reduced these pathology scores as well
as neutrophil infiltration of the jejunal lamina propria and lung parenchyma, and
vascular leakage into the airways (BAL protein). The tissue injury increased
expression of myeloperoxidase and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9 in
the gut tissues, but G31P treatment did not significantly affect this response.
Intestinal I/R increased expression of IL-1, IL-6, GRO, and MIP-2 in the ischemic
jejunum and the lung tissues, but here too G31P treatment had no palliative
effects on these responses.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that full-spectrum ELR-CXC chemokine antagonism
has significant protective effects against I/R-induced local and remote organ
injury.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2009.04.047 
PMID: 19691980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

