
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 1;106(35):14972-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0904465106. Epub 2009 Aug 13.

Selective reciprocity in antimicrobial activity versus cytotoxicity of hBD-2 and 
crotamine.

Yount NY(1), Kupferwasser D, Spisni A, Dutz SM, Ramjan ZH, Sharma S, Waring AJ,
Yeaman MR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, LAC-Harbor University of California, Los
Angeles Medical Center, Torrance, CA 90509, USA.

Recent discoveries suggest cysteine-stabilized toxins and antimicrobial peptides 
have structure-activity parallels derived by common ancestry. Here, human
antimicrobial peptide hBD-2 and rattlesnake venom-toxin crotamine were compared
in phylogeny, 3D structure, target cell specificity, and mechanisms of action.
Results indicate a striking degree of structural and phylogenetic congruence.
Importantly, these polypeptides also exhibited functional reciprocity: (i) they
exerted highly similar antimicrobial pH optima and spectra; (ii) both altered
membrane potential consistent with ion channel-perturbing activities; and (iii)
both peptides induced phosphatidylserine accessibility in eukaryotic cells.
However, the Na(v) channel-inhibitor tetrodotoxin antagonized hBD-2 mechanisms,
but not those of crotamine. As crotamine targets eukaryotic ion channels,
computational docking was used to compare hBD-2 versus crotamine interactions
with prototypic bacterial, fungal, or mammalian Kv channels. Models support
direct interactions of each peptide with Kv channels. However, while crotamine
localized to occlude Kv channels in eukaryotic but not prokaryotic cells, hBD-2
interacted with prokaryotic and eukaryotic Kv channels but did not occlude
either. Together, these results support the hypothesis that antimicrobial and
cytotoxic polypeptides have ancestral structure-function homology, but evolved to
preferentially target respective microbial versus mammalian ion channels via
residue-specific interactions. These insights may accelerate development of
anti-infective or therapeutic peptides that selectively target microbial or
abnormal host cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0904465106 
PMCID: PMC2736466
PMID: 19706485  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

