
1. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Oct;39(10):2682-94. doi: 10.1002/eji.200939364.

The outermost N-terminal region of tapasin facilitates folding of major
histocompatibility complex class I.

Roder G(1), Geironson L, Darabi A, Harndahl M, Schafer-Nielsen C, Skj√∏dt K, Buus 
S, Paulsson K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Immunology, Institute of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, Panum Institute, DK-2200
Copenhagen, Denmark. groder@sund.ku.dk

Tapasin (Tpn) is an ER chaperone that is uniquely dedicated to MHC-I
biosynthesis. It binds MHC-I molecules, integrates them into peptide-loading
complexes, and exerts quality control of the bound peptides; only when an
"optimal peptide" is bound will the MHC-I be released and exported to the cell
surface for presentation to T cells. The exact mechanisms of Tpn quality control 
and the criteria for being an optimal peptide are still unknown. Here, we have
generated a recombinant fragment of human Tpn, Tpn(1-87) (representing the 87
N-terminal and ER-luminal amino acids of the mature Tpn protein). Using a
biochemical peptide-MHC-I-binding assay, recombinant Tpn(1-87) was found to
specifically facilitate peptide-dependent folding of HLA-A*0201. Furthermore, we 
used Tpn(1-87) to generate a monoclonal antibody, alphaTpn(1-87)/80, specific for
natural human Tpn and capable of cellular staining of ER localized Tpn. Using
overlapping peptides, the epitope of alphaTpn(1-87)/80 was located to Tpn(40-44),
which maps to a surface-exposed loop on the Tpn structure. Together, these
results demonstrate that the N-terminal region of Tpn can be recombinantly
expressed and adopt a structure, which at least partially resembles that of WT
Tpn, and that this region of Tpn features chaperone activity facilitating peptide
binding of MHC-I.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200939364 
PMID: 19728311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

