
1. Int Immunol. 2009 Nov;21(11):1239-49. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxp086. Epub 2009 Sep
7.

Recombinant YopJ induces apoptosis in murine peritoneal macrophages in vitro:
involvement of mitochondrial death pathway.

Pandey AK(1), Sodhi A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi, India.

Yersinia species during infection adhere to host immune cells primarily to
macrophages and employ its secretary proteins known as Yersinia outer proteins to
trigger death in infected cells. In the present study, it is shown that
recombinant Yersinia outer protein J (rYopJ) could induce apoptosis in murine
peritoneal macrophages in vitro as assessed by morphological features,
internucleosomal DNA fragmentation, change in mitochondrial membrane potential
(MMP) (Deltapsim), activation of caspases and Annexin V binding. rYopJ-induced
cell death was dose and time dependent. Pre-treatment with broad-spectrum caspase
inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK, caspase-3 inhibitor Ac-DEVD-CHO and caspase-8 inhibitor
Z-IETD-FMK prevented the change in MMP and DNA fragmentation, suggesting
caspase-dependent apoptosis of rYopJ-treated macrophages. Blocking the
endocytosis by pre-treatment of cells with cytochalasin B did not prevent the
rYopJ-induced macrophages apoptosis. The data further suggest that rYopJ-induced 
apoptosis is mediated by molecules upstream of caspase-8 and relay through
mitochondrial pathway involving Bax, Bcl-2, activation of caspase-8 and
caspase-3, Bid and polyadenosine diphosphate-ribose polymerase cleavage,
cytochrome c release and DNA fragmentation.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxp086 
PMID: 19736292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

