
1. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2009 Nov;57(2):116-24. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2009.00586.x. Epub 2009 Jul 24.

Toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) mediates human beta-defensin-2 (HBD-2) induction in
response to Chlamydia pneumoniae in mononuclear cells.

Romano Carratelli C(1), Mazzola N, Paolillo R, Sorrentino S, Rizzo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Microbiology and Clinical
Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, Second University of Naples,
Naples, Italy. caterina.romanocarratelli@unina2.it

Monocytes are pivotal effector cells of the innate immune system that are vital
for recognizing and eliminating invasive microbial pathogens. When microbial
products bind to pathogen-recognition receptors, monocytes are activated and
release a broad array of cytokines and defensins that orchestrate the host innate
and adaptive immune responses. The aim of the present study is to investigate
whether Toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) mediates human beta-defensin-2 (HBD-2)
induction in response to Chlamydia pneumoniae in mononuclear cells. We showed
that TLR4 is expressed in U937 cells and monocytes infected with viable
microorganisms in a time-dependent fashion, while heat-inactivated microorganisms
induced a lesser expression, albeit still significant, of TLR4 compared with
viable organisms; flow cytometric analysis, in particular, revealed a higher
level of TLR4 expression at 48 and 72 h postinfection. In addition, U937 cells
and monocytes responded to C. pneumoniae in a TLR4-dependent manner with
induction of mRNA and protein of the antimicrobial peptide HBD-2. The treatment
of cells with TLR4-neutralizing antibody resulted in a decrease in C.
pneumoniae-induced HBD-2 production. This study reveals that TLRs not only
recognize ligands but also the types of effector molecules induced, namely,
antimicrobial peptides. An understanding of the importance of the TLR-mediated
antimicrobial mechanisms may provide new avenues for the development of
therapeutic regimens aimed at activating the body's own defenses by stimulating
TLR-dependent pathways.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2009.00586.x 
PMID: 19735472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

