
1. J Mol Biol. 2009 Nov 13;393(5):1043-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.08.068. Epub 2009
Sep 3.

Solution structure of an archaeal RNase P binary protein complex: formation of
the 30-kDa complex between Pyrococcus furiosus RPP21 and RPP29 is accompanied by 
coupled protein folding and highlights critical features for protein-protein and 
protein-RNA interactions.

Xu Y(1), Amero CD, Pulukkunat DK, Gopalan V, Foster MP.

Author information: 
(1)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Ribonuclease P (RNase P) is a ribonucleoprotein (RNP) enzyme that catalyzes the
Mg(2+)-dependent 5' maturation of precursor tRNAs. In all domains of life, it is 
a ribozyme: the RNase P RNA (RPR) component has been demonstrated to be
responsible for catalysis. However, the number of RNase P protein subunits (RPPs)
varies from 1 in bacteria to 9 or 10 in eukarya. The archaeal RPR is associated
with at least 4 RPPs, which function in pairs (RPP21-RPP29 and RPP30-POP5). We
used solution NMR spectroscopy to determine the three-dimensional structure of
the protein-protein complex comprising Pyrococcus furiosus RPP21 and RPP29. We
found that the protein-protein interaction is characterized by coupled folding of
secondary structural elements that participate in interface formation. In
addition to detailing the intermolecular contacts that stabilize this 30-kDa
binary complex, the structure identifies surfaces rich in conserved basic
residues likely vital for recognition of the RPR and/or precursor tRNA.
Furthermore, enzymatic footprinting experiments allowed us to localize the
RPP21-RPP29 complex to the specificity domain of the RPR. These findings provide 
valuable new insights into mechanisms of RNP assembly and serve as important
steps towards a three-dimensional model of this ancient RNP enzyme.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.08.068 
PMCID: PMC2782587
PMID: 19733182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

