
1. Immunology. 2009 Sep;128(1 Suppl):e766-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03081.x.
Epub 2009 Feb 17.

Osteopontin is not crucial to protective immunity during murine tuberculosis.

van der Windt GJ(1), Wieland CW, Wiersinga WJ, Florquin S, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. g.j.vanderwindt@amc.uva.nl

Upon infection with Mycobacterium (M.) tuberculosis, the development of a strong 
T helper 1 (Th1)-mediated adaptive immune response is considered as being most
important for containment of the infection. Osteopontin (OPN) is a phosphorylated
glycoprotein that is chemotactic for inflammatory cells and has been implicated
in the induction of Th1 responses and granulomatous disease. We tested the
hypothesis that OPN facilitates protective immunity during M. tuberculosis
infection using wild-type (WT) and OPN knockout (KO) mice in a model of pulmonary
tuberculosis. OPN expression was up-regulated in alveolar macrophages and
lymphoid cells during M. tuberculosis infection. There were no significant
differences in bacterial outgrowth, inflammation or recruitment of lymphocytes,
macrophages and polymorphonuclear cells in the lungs after 2 and 5 weeks of
infection. However, the numbers of CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells were reduced in the 
absence of OPN 5 weeks after infection. Similar concentrations of cytokine were
observed in lungs from both WT mice and OPN KO mice; however, there was a trend
towards decreased levels of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) in OPN KO mice 5 weeks
after infection. Despite an unaltered immune response in the early phase of
tuberculosis, OPN KO mice had a modest survival advantage. Of note, both
pulmonary bacterial loads and lung inflammation were reduced in these mice 31
weeks after infection. These data suggest that OPN is not crucial for protective 
immunity upon M. tuberculosis infection and during the late phase of tuberculosis
may even be detrimental for the host.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03081.x 
PMCID: PMC2753915
PMID: 19740338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

