
1. J Immunol. 2009 Oct 1;183(7):4628-38. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803300. Epub 2009
Sep 14.

Beneficial immunomodulation by Streptococcus mutans anti-P1 monoclonal antibodies
is Fc independent and correlates with increased exposure of a relevant target
epitope.

Robinette RA(1), Oli MW, McArthur WP, Brady LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, University of Florida College of Dentistry, P.O.
Box 100424, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. rrobinette@dental.ufl.edu

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2009 Nov 15;183(10):6849.

We showed previously that deliberate immunization of BALB/c mice with immune
complexes (IC) of the cariogenic bacterium Streptococcus mutans and mAbs against 
its surface adhesin P1 results in changes in the specificity and isotype of
elicited anti-P1 Abs. Depending on the mAb, changes were beneficial, neutral, or 
detrimental, as measured by the ability of the serum from immunized mice to
inhibit bacterial adherence to human salivary agglutinin by a BIAcore surface
plasmon resonance assay. The current study further defined changes in the host
response that result from immunization with IC containing beneficial mAbs, and
evaluated mechanisms by which beneficial immunomodulation could occur in this
system. Immunomodulatory effects varied depending upon genetic background, with
differing results in C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice. Desirable effects following IC
immunization were observed in the absence of activating FcRs in BALB/c Fcer1g
transgenic mice. mAb F(ab')(2) mediated desirable changes similar to those
observed using intact IgG. Sera from IC-immunized BALB/c mice that were better
able to inhibit bacterial adherence demonstrated an increase in Abs able to
compete with an adherence-inhibiting anti-P1 mAb, and binding of a beneficial
immumomodulatory mAb to S. mutans increased exposure of that epitope. Consistent 
with a mechanism involving a mAb-mediated structural alteration of P1 on the cell
surface, immunization with truncated P1 derivatives lacking segments that
contribute to recognition by beneficial immunomodulatory mAbs resulted in an
improvement in the ability of elicited serum Abs to inhibit bacterial adherence
compared with immunization with the full-length protein.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803300 
PMCID: PMC2810654
PMID: 19752237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

