
1. J Immunother. 2009 Oct;32(8):875-83. doi: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e3181b56ad9.

Vaccination of melanoma patients with Melan-A/Mart-1 peptide and Klebsiella outer
membrane protein p40 as an adjuvant.

Lienard D(1), Avril MF, Le Gal FA, Baumgaertner P, Vermeulen W, Blom A, Geldhof
C, Rimoldi D, Pagliusi S, Romero P, Dietrich PY, Corvaia N, Speiser DE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Onco-Immunology, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research,
Hôpital Orthopédique, CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Toll-like receptor ligands are potentially useful adjuvants for the development
of clinical T cell vaccination. Here we investigated the novel Toll-like
receptor2 ligand P40, the outer membrane protein A derived from Klebsiella
pneumoniae. Seventeen human leukocyte antigen-A*0201 positive stage III/IV
melanoma patients were vaccinated with P40 and Melan-A/Mart-1 peptide
subcutaneously in monthly intervals. Adverse reactions were mild-to-moderate.
Fourteen patients received at least 8 vaccinations and were thus evaluable for
clinical tumor and immune responses. Seven patients experienced progressive
disease, whereas 2 patients had stable disease throughout the trial period, 1 of 
them with regression of multiple skin metastases. The remaining 5 patients had no
measurable disease. Melan-A/Mart-1 specific CD8 T cells were analyzed ex vivo,
with positive results in 6 of 14 evaluable patients. Increased percentages of T
cells were found in three patients, memory/effector T cell differentiation in 4
patients, and a positive interferon-gamma Elispot assay in 1 patient. Antibody
responses to P40 were observed in all patients. We conclude that vaccination with
peptide and P40 was feasible and induced ex vivo detectable tumor antigen
specific T cell responses in 6 of 14 patients with advanced melanoma.

DOI: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e3181b56ad9 
PMID: 19752746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

