
1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Sep;5(9):e1000596. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000596. Epub 2009
Sep 25.

Streptococcus pneumoniae serotype 1 capsular polysaccharide induces CD8CD28
regulatory T lymphocytes by TCR crosslinking.

Mertens J(1), Fabri M, Zingarelli A, Kubacki T, Meemboor S, Groneck L, Seeger J, 
Bessler M, Hafke H, Odenthal M, Bieler JG, Kalka C, Schneck JP, Kashkar H,
Kalka-Moll WM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University of
Cologne Medical Center, KÃ¶ln, Germany.

Zwitterionic capsular polysaccharides (ZPS) of commensal bacteria are
characterized by having both positive and negative charged substituents on each
repeating unit of a highly repetitive structure that has an alpha-helix
configuration. In this paper we look at the immune response of CD8(+) T cells to 
ZPSs. Intraperitoneal application of the ZPS Sp1 from Streptococcus pneumoniae
serotype 1 induces CD8(+)CD28(-) T cells in the spleen and peritoneal cavity of
WT mice. However, chemically modified Sp1 (mSp1) without the positive charge and 
resembling common negatively charged polysaccharides fails to induce
CD8(+)CD28(-) T lymphocytes. The Sp1-induced CD8(+)CD28(-) T lymphocytes are
CD122(low)CTLA-4(+)CD39(+). They synthesize IL-10 and TGF-beta. The Sp1-induced
CD8(+)CD28(-) T cells exhibit immunosuppressive properties on CD4(+) T cells in
vivo and in vitro. Experimental approaches to elucidate the mechanism of CD8(+) T
cell activation by Sp1 demonstrate in a dimeric MHC class I-Ig model that Sp1
induces CD8(+) T cell activation by enhancing crosslinking of TCR. The expansion 
of CD8(+)CD28(-) T cells is independent, of direct antigen-presenting cell/T cell
contact and, to the specificity of the T cell receptor (TCR). In CD8(+)CD28(-) T 
cells, Sp1 enhances Zap-70 phosphorylation and increasingly involves NF-kappaB
which ultimately results in protection versus apoptosis and cell death and
promotes survival and accumulation of the CD8(+)CD28(-) population. This is the
first description of a naturally occurring bacterial antigen that is able to
induce suppressive CD8(+)CD28(-) T lymphocytes in vivo and in vitro. The
underlying mechanism of CD8(+) T cell activation appears to rely on enhanced TCR 
crosslinking. The data provides evidence that ZPS of commensal bacteria play an
important role in peripheral tolerance mechanisms and the maintenance of the
homeostasis of the immune system.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000596 
PMCID: PMC2742891
PMID: 19779562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

