
1. Hum Reprod. 2009 Dec;24(12):3090-5. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dep339. Epub 2009 Sep 26.

Association of MICA gene polymorphisms with Chlamydia trachomatis infection and
related tubal pathology in infertile women.

Mei B(1), Luo Q, Du K, Huo Z, Wang F, Yu P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Central South
University, 88 Xiangya Road, Changsha 410008, China.

BACKGROUND: The course and morbidity of Chlamydia trachomatis infections are
determined by host genetic factors, virulence of the micro-organism and
environmental factors. Major histocompatibility complex class I chain-related A
(MICA) gene is highly polymorphic as a potential host genetic candidate. The aim 
of this study was to investigate the association of polymorphic extracellular
domains of MICA with C. trachomatis infection and related tubal factor
infertility.
METHODS: Effect of MICA on the susceptibility to C. trachomatis infection and its
association with tubal pathology were investigated in 214 infertile women
recruited during the period from 2004 to 2007. Subjects were tested for C.
trachomatis antibodies, and were further divided into two groups: those with (n =
42) and without (n = 59) tubal pathology based on laparoscopy results. The
relationship between prevalence of C. trachomatis, tubal pathology and MICA
allele polymorphisms was analysed.
RESULTS: Women with tubal infertility more often had antibodies to C. trachomatis
[66.7 versus 39.1%; odds ratio (OR): 3.12, 95% CI: 1.68-5.78, P = 0.004] than
infertile women without tubal pathology. Moreover, allele 008 had a highly
negative correlation with C. trachomatis infection (P(c) = 0.0036, OR: 2.14),
while other allele polymorphisms showed no significant association with the
disease. No statistically significant differences were found in the MICA allele
frequencies of C. trachomatis-positive women with or without tubal pathology.
CONCLUSIONS: The association of a specific MICA allele with C. trachomatis IgG
antibodies among women with infertility suggests that the MICA locus might modify
host susceptibility to C. trachomatis infection.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/dep339 
PMID: 19783834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

