
1. Hepatol Res. 2010 Jan 1;40(1):83-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1872-034X.2009.00578.x. Epub 
2009 Sep 25.

Role of Kupffer cells in the outgrowth of colorectal cancer liver metastases.

Paschos KA(1), Majeed AW, Bird NC.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Research Group, Section of Oncology, School of Medicine, Royal
Hallamshire Hospital, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.

Colorectal cancer is one of the commonest malignancies in the "developed" world. 
The liver constitutes the main host organ for its distant metastases which, when 
present, augur a bad prognosis for the disease. Kupffer cells (KCs) are
macrophages that constantly reside within the liver and form an effective first
line defence against multiple harmful agents which reach the hepatic sinusoids
via the portal circulation. KCs remove chemical compounds and dead or damaged
cells, eliminate bacteria and protect against invading tumour cells. They may
play a crucial tumouricidal role, exerting cytotoxic and cytostatic functions
through the release of multiple cytokines and chemokines. Subsequently,
colorectal metastasising cells are destroyed either by KC-performed phagocytosis 
or via the stimulation of other immune cells which migrate into the sinusoids and
act accordingly. On the contrary, KC products, including cytokines, growth
factors and matrix-degrading enzymes may promote liver metastasis, supporting
tumour cell extravasation, motility and invasion. Current research aims to
exploit the antineoplastic properties of KCs in new therapeutic approaches of
colorectal cancer liver metastasis. Numerous agents, such as the granulocyte
macrophage-colony stimulating factor, interferon gamma, muramyl peptide analogues
and various antibody based treatments, have been tested in experimental models
with promising results. Future trials may investigate their use in everyday
clinical practice and compare their therapeutic value with current treatment of
the disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1872-034X.2009.00578.x 
PMID: 19788686 

