
1. J Immunol. 2009 Oct 15;183(8):5171-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901027. Epub 2009
Sep 25.

CCR7 deficiency on dendritic cells enhances fungal clearance in a murine model of
pulmonary invasive aspergillosis.

Hartigan AJ(1), Westwick J, Jarai G, Hogaboam CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.

Aspergillus fumigatus is a sporulating fungus found ubiquitously in the
environment and is easily cleared from immunocompetent hosts. Invasive
aspergillosis develops in immunocompromised patients, and is a leading cause of
mortality in hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. CCR7 and its ligands,
CCL19 and CCL21, are responsible for the migration of dendritic cells from sites 
of infection and inflammation to secondary lymphoid organs. To investigate the
role of CCR7 during invasive aspergillosis, we used a well-characterized
neutropenic murine model. During invasive aspergillosis, mice with a CCR7
deficiency in the hematopoietic compartment exhibited increased survival and less
pulmonary injury compared with the appropriate wild-type control. Flow cytometric
analysis of the chimeric mice revealed an increase in the number of dendritic
cells present in the lungs of CCR7-deficient chimeras following infection with
Aspergillus conidia. An adoptive transfer of dendritic cells into neutropenic
mice provided a protective effect during invasive aspergillosis, which was
further enhanced with the adoptive transfer of CCR7-deficient dendritic cells.
Additionally, CCR7-deficient dendritic cells activated in vitro with Aspergillus 
conidia expressed higher TNF-alpha, CXCL10, and CXCL2 levels, indicating a more
activated cellular response to the fungus. Our results suggest that the absence
of CCR7 is protective during invasive aspergillosis in neutropenic mice.
Collectively, these data demonstrate a potential deleterious role for CCR7 during
primary immune responses directed against A. fumigatus.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901027 
PMID: 19783686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

