
1. Infect Immun. 2009 Dec;77(12):5380-8. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00649-09. Epub 2009 Sep
21.

Long-term immunity to lethal acute or chronic type II Toxoplasma gondii infection
is effectively induced in genetically susceptible C57BL/6 mice by immunization
with an attenuated type I vaccine strain.

Gigley JP(1), Fox BA, Bzik DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dartmouth Medical School, 1 Medical
Center Drive, Lebanon, New Hampshire 03756, USA.

C57BL/6 (B6) mice are genetically highly susceptible to chronic type II
Toxoplasma gondii infections that invariably cause lethal toxoplasmic
encephalitis. We examined the ability of an attenuated type I vaccine strain to
elicit long-term immunity to lethal acute or chronic type II infections in
susceptible B6 mice. Mice immunized with the type I cps1-1 vaccine strain were
not susceptible to a lethal (100-cyst) challenge with the type II strain ME49.
Immunized mice challenged with 10 ME49 cysts exhibited significant reductions in 
brain cyst and parasite burdens compared to naive mice, regardless of the route
of challenge infection. Remarkably, cps1-1 strain-immunized B6 mice chronically
infected with ME49 survived for at least 12 months without succumbing to the
chronic infection. Potent immunity to type II challenge infections persisted for 
at least 10 months after vaccination. While the cps1-1 strain-elicited immunity
did not prevent the establishment of a chronic infection or clear established
brain cysts, cps1-1 strain-elicited CD8(+) immune T cells significantly inhibited
recrudescence of brain cysts during chronic ME49 infection. In addition, we show 
that uracil starvation of the cps1-1 strain induces early markers of bradyzoite
differentiation. Collectively, these results suggest that more effective immune
control of chronic type II infection in the genetically susceptible B6 background
is established by vaccination with the nonreplicating type I uracil auxotroph
cps1-1 strain.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00649-09 
PMCID: PMC2786442
PMID: 19797073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

