
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 13;106(41):17443-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0908530106. Epub 2009 Sep 24.

Fungal infection counters insecticide resistance in African malaria mosquitoes.

Farenhorst M(1), Mouatcho JC, Kikankie CK, Brooke BD, Hunt RH, Thomas MB,
Koekemoer LL, Knols BG, Coetzee M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Entomology, Wageningen University and Research Centre, P.O. Box 
8031, 6700 EH Wageningen, The Netherlands.

The evolution of insecticide resistance in mosquitoes is threatening the
effectiveness and sustainability of malaria control programs in various parts of 
the world. Through their unique mode of action, entomopathogenic fungi provide
promising alternatives to chemical control. However, potential interactions
between fungal infection and insecticide resistance, such as cross-resistance,
have not been investigated. We show that insecticide-resistant Anopheles
mosquitoes remain susceptible to infection with the fungus Beauveria bassiana.
Four different mosquito strains with high resistance levels against pyrethroids, 
organochlorines, or carbamates were equally susceptible to B. bassiana infection 
as their baseline counterparts, showing significantly reduced mosquito survival. 
Moreover, fungal infection reduced the expression of resistance to the key public
health insecticides permethrin and dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane. Mosquitoes
preinfected with B. bassiana or Metarhizium anisopliae showed a significant
increase in mortality after insecticide exposure compared with uninfected control
mosquitoes. Our results show a high potential utility of fungal biopesticides for
complementing existing vector control measures and provide products for use in
resistance management strategies.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0908530106 
PMCID: PMC2762667
PMID: 19805146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

