
1. J Immunol. 2009 Oct 15;183(8):4859-70. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900714.

Functionally mature CD4 and CD8 TCRalphabeta cells are generated in OP9-DL1
cultures from human CD34+ hematopoietic cells.

Van Coppernolle S(1), Verstichel G, Timmermans F, Velghe I, Vermijlen D, De Smedt
M, Leclercq G, Plum J, Taghon T, Vandekerckhove B, Kerre T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium.

Human CD34(+) hematopoietic precursor cells cultured on delta-like ligand 1
expressing OP9 (OP9-DL1) stromal cells differentiate to T lineage cells. The
nature of the T cells generated in these cultures has not been studied in detail.
Since these cultures do not contain thymic epithelial cells which are the main
cell type mediating positive selection in vivo, generation of conventional helper
CD4(+) and cytotoxic CD8(+) TCRalphabeta cells is not expected. Phenotypically
mature CD27(+)CD1(-) TCRgammadelta as well as TCRalphabeta cells were generated
in OP9-DL1 cultures. CD8 and few mature CD4 single-positive TCRalphabeta cells
were observed. Mature CD8 single-positive cells consisted of two subpopulations: 
one expressing mainly CD8alphabeta and one expressing CD8alphaalpha dimers.
TCRalphabeta CD8alphaalpha and TCRgammadelta cells both expressed the IL2Rbeta
receptor constitutively and proliferated on IL-15, a characteristic of
unconventional T cells. CD8alphabeta(+) and CD4(+) TCRalphabeta cells were
unresponsive to IL-15, but could be expanded upon TCR stimulation as mature
CD8alphabeta(+) and CD4(+) T cells. These T cells had the characteristics of
conventional T cells: CD4(+) cells expressed ThPOK, CD40L, and high levels of
IL-2 and IL-4; CD8(+) cells expressed Eomes, Runx3, and high levels of granzyme, 
perforin, and IFN-gamma. Induction of murine or human MHC class I expression on
OP9-DL1 cells had no influence on the differentiation of mature CD8(+) cells.
Similarly, the presence of dendritic cells was not required for the generation of
mature CD4(+) or CD8(+) T cells. These data suggest that positive selection of
these cells is induced by interaction between T precursor cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900714 
PMID: 19801512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

