
1. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom. 2009 Nov;23(21):3465-77. doi: 10.1002/rcm.4274.

Analysis of S-adenosylmethionine and related sulfur metabolites in bacterial
isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (BAA-47) by liquid chromatography/electrospray
ionization coupled to a hybrid linear quadrupole ion trap and Fourier transform
ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry.

Cataldi TR(1), Bianco G, Abate S, Mattia D.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica, UniversitÃ  degli Studi di Bari, Campus Universitario,
Via E. Orabona 4, 70126 Bari, Italy. tommaso.cataldi@chimica.uniba.it

A comprehensive and highly selective method for detecting in bacterial
supernatants a modified sulfur nucleoside, S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM), and its
metabolites, i.e., S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), adenosine (Ado),
5'-deoxy-5'-methylthioadenosine (MTA), adenine (Ade), S-adenosyl-methioninamine
(dcSAM), homocysteine (Hcy) and methionine (Met), was developed. The method is
based on reversed-phase liquid chromatography with positive electrospray
ionization (ESI+) coupled to a hybrid linear quadrupole ion trap (LTQ) and 7-T
Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (FTICRMS). A gradient
elution was employed with a binary solvent of 0.05 M ammonium formate at pH 4 and
acetonitrile. The assay involves a simultaneous cleanup of cell-free bacterial
broths by solid-phase extraction and trace enrichment of metabolites with a
50-fold concentration factor by using immobilized phenylboronic and
anion-exchange cartridges. While the quantitative determination of SAM was
performed using stable-isotope-labeled SAM-d3 as an internal standard, in the
case of Met and Ade, Met-13C and Ade-15N2 were employed as isotope-labeled
internal standards, respectively. This method enabled the identification of SAM
and its metabolites in cell-free culture of Pseudomonas aeruginosa grown in Davis
minimal broth (formulation without sulphur organic compounds), with routine
sub-ppm mass accuracies (-0.27 +/- 0.68 ppm). The resulting contents of
S(C)S(S)-SAM, S(S)-dcSAM, MTA, Ado and Met in the free-cell supernatant of P.
aeruginosa was 56.4 +/- 2.1 nM, 32.2 +/- 2.2 nM, 0.91 +/- 0.10 nM, 19.6 +/- 1.2
nM and 1.93 +/- 0.02 microM (mean +/- SD, n = 4 extractions), respectively. We
report also the baseline separation (Rs > or = 1.5) of both diastereoisomeric
forms of SAM (S(C)S(S) and S(C)R(S)) and dcSAM (S(S) and R(S)), which can be very
useful to establish the relationship between the biologically active versus the
inactive species, S(C)S(S)/S(C)R(S) and S(S)/R(S) of SAM and dcSAM, respectively.
An additional confirmation of SAM-related metabolites was accomplished by a
systematic study of their MS/MS spectra.

Copyright 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/rcm.4274 
PMID: 19813285  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

