
1. J Immunol. 2009 Nov 1;183(9):5799-806. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803406. Epub 2009
Oct 7.

Resistance of human alveolar macrophages to Bacillus anthracis lethal toxin.

Wu W(1), Mehta H, Chakrabarty K, Booth JL, Duggan ES, Patel KB, Ballard JD,
Coggeshall KM, Metcalf JP.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Department of Medicine, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

The etiologic agent of inhalational anthrax, Bacillus anthracis, produces
virulence toxins that are important in the disease pathogenesis. Current studies 
suggest that mouse and human macrophages are susceptible to immunosuppressive
effects of one of the virulence toxins, lethal toxin (LT). Thus a paradigm has
emerged that holds that the alveolar macrophage (AM) does not play a significant 
role in the innate immune response to B. anthracis or defend against the pathogen
as it is disabled by LT. This is inconsistent with animal models and autopsy
studies that show minimal disease at the alveolar surface. We examined whether AM
are immunosuppressed by LT. We found that human AM were relatively resistant to
LT-mediated innate immune cytokine suppression, MEK cleavage, and induction of
apoptosis as compared with mouse RAW 264.7 macrophages. Mouse AM and murine bone 
marrow-derived macrophages were also relatively resistant to LT-mediated
apoptosis despite intermediate sensitivity to MEK cleavage. The binding component
of LT, protective Ag, does not attach to human AM, although it did bind to mouse 
AM, murine bone marrow-derived macrophages, and RAW 264.7 macrophages. Human AM
do not produce significant amounts of the protective Ag receptor anthrax toxin
receptor 1 (TEM8/ANTXR1) and anthrax toxin receptor 2 (CMG2/ANTXR2). Thus, mature
and differentiated AM are relatively resistant to the effects of LT as compared
with mouse RAW 264.7 macrophages. AM resistance to LT may enhance clearance of
the pathogen from the alveolar surface and explain why this surface is relatively
free of B. anthracis in animal models and autopsy studies.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803406 
PMCID: PMC2770336
PMID: 19812208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

