
1. EMBO J. 2009 Nov 18;28(22):3579-90. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.286. Epub 2009 Oct 8.

Adaptability of the semi-invariant natural killer T-cell receptor towards
structurally diverse CD1d-restricted ligands.

Florence WC(1), Xia C, Gordy LE, Chen W, Zhang Y, Scott-Browne J, Kinjo Y, Yu KO,
Keshipeddy S, Pellicci DG, Patel O, Kjer-Nielsen L, McCluskey J, Godfrey DI,
Rossjohn J, Richardson SK, Porcelli SA, Howell AR, Hayakawa K, Gapin L, Zajonc
DM, Wang PG, Joyce S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 2009 Dec 2;28(23):3781.

The semi-invariant natural killer (NK) T-cell receptor (NKTcr) recognises
structurally diverse glycolipid antigens presented by the monomorphic CD1d
molecule. While the alpha-chain of the NKTcr is invariant, the beta-chain is more
diverse, but how this diversity enables the NKTcr to recognise diverse antigens, 
such as an alpha-linked monosaccharide (alpha-galactosylceramide and
alpha-galactosyldiacylglycerol) and the beta-linked trisaccharide
(isoglobotriaosylceramide), is unclear. We demonstrate here that NKTcrs, which
varied in their beta-chain usage, recognised diverse glycolipid antigens with a
similar binding mode on CD1d. Nevertheless, the NKTcrs recognised distinct
epitopic sites within these antigens, including alpha-galactosylceramide, the
structurally similar alpha-galactosyldiacylglycerol and the very distinct
isoglobotriaosylceramide. We also show that the relative roles of the CDR loops
within the NKTcr beta-chain varied as a function of the antigen. Thus, while
NKTcrs characteristically use a conserved docking mode, the NKTcr beta-chain
allows these cells to recognise unique aspects of structurally diverse
CD1d-restricted ligands.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2009.286 
PMCID: PMC2782097
PMID: 19816402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

