
1. Ginekol Pol. 2009 Aug;80(8):609-14.

[Analysis of risk factors for nosocomial infections in the Neonatal Intensive
Care Unit of the Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin in the years
2005-2008].

[Article in Polish]

Elster T(1), Beata Czeszyńska M, Sochaczewska D, Konefał H, Baryła-Pankiewicz E.

Author information: 
(1)Klinika Neonatologii PAM w Szczecinie.

The aim of the study was to assess the significance of some perinatal risk
factors and neonatal complications in occurrence of nosocomial infections in the 
population of NICU patients.MATERIAL AND METHODS: Analysis of risk factors was
performed in all patients treated in the years 2005-2008 in NICU Department of
the Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, Poland. Five hundred and seventeen
neonates divided into groups with and without occurrence of nosocomial infection 
were included into the study.
RESULTS: Seventy-nine (15.28%) neonates developed nosocomial infection. Among
them pneumonia (56.96%) and sepsis (21.5%) were the most common. The proportion
of Gram-positive and Gram negative organisms were 44.3% and 50.6% respectively.
The main risk factor for nosocomial infection was colonization (sensitivity--100%
and specificity--94.75%). Univariate analysis showed that premature rupture of
fetal membrane, GA<32 hbd, birthweight <2000 g, respiratory insufficiency
intracranial hemorrhages and oral feeding intolerance were associated with the
development of nosocomial infection. Multivariate stepwise logistic regression
analysis showed that mechanical ventilation - OR 9.42 [4.45-19.96] p<0.0001,
intracranial hemorrhages--OR 4.12 [2.21-7.67] p<0.0001, necessity of Infant-Flow 
method--OR 3.32 [1.82-6.06] p<0.0001or n-CPAP method--OR 1.92 [1.07-3.44] p<0.05,
necrotizing enterocolitis--OR 2.38 [1.17-4.87] p<0.05 and intrauterine
hypotrophy--OR 1.8 [1.07-3.76] p<0.05 were sets of predicted factors for the
development of nosocomial infection. We conclude that colonization of NICU
patients with hospital pathogens is the most important risk factor of nosocomial 
infection incidence. Besides colonization, significant additional risk factors
for nosocomial infection were mechanical ventilation, intraventricular
hemorrhages, low birth weight and low gestational age.


PMID: 19824460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

