
1. Crit Care. 2009;13(5):R162. doi: 10.1186/cc8128. Epub 2009 Oct 12.

Methemoglobinemia in critically ill patients during extended hemodialysis and
simultaneous disinfection of the hospital water supply.

Bek MJ(1), Laule S, Reichert-JÃ¼nger C, Holtkamp R, Wiesner M, Keyl C.

Author information: 
(1)Dialysis Centre Bad Krozingen, Heart Centre Bad Krozingen, Suedring 15, 79189 
Bad Krozingen, Germany. Bek.Martin@web.de.

Comment in
    Crit Care. 2009;13(6):1007.

INTRODUCTION: To evaluate the cause of methemoglobinemia in patients undergoing
extended daily hemodialysis/hemodiafiltration we analyzed the relationship
between methemoglobinemia and the water disinfection schedule of the hospital.
METHODS: We reviewed all arterial blood gas analyses, obtained over a one-year
period, in patients undergoing extended hemodialysis/hemodiafiltration, and
compared the methemoglobin concentrations obtained on the days when the water
supply was disinfected, using a hydrogen peroxide/silver ion preparation, with
data measured on disinfection-free days.
RESULTS: The evaluation of 706 measurements revealed a maximum methemoglobin
fraction of 1.0 (0.8; 1.2) % (median and 25th; 75th percentiles) during
hemodialysis/hemodiafiltration on the disinfection-free days. The methemoglobin
fraction increased to 5.9 (1.3; 8.4) % with a maximal value of 12.2% on the days 
of water disinfection (P < 0.001 compared to disinfection-free days). Spot checks
on hydrogen peroxide concentrations in the water supply, the permeate, and the
dialysate, using a semi-quantitative test, demonstrated levels between 10 and 25 
mg/l during water disinfection.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that even a regular hospital water
disinfection technique can be associated with significant methemoglobinemia
during extended hemodialysis. Clinicians should be aware of this potential
hazard.

DOI: 10.1186/cc8128 
PMCID: PMC2784392
PMID: 19821985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

