
1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2009 Dec 3;8(12):1400-10. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2009.09.009.

Adenine removal activity and bacterial complementation with the human MutY
homologue (MUTYH) and Y165C, G382D, P391L and Q324R variants associated with
colorectal cancer.

Kundu S(1), Brinkmeyer MK, Livingston AL, David SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California Davis, One Shields Avenue,
Davis, CA 95616, USA.

MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP) is the only inherited colorectal cancer syndrome
that is associated with inherited biallelic mutations in a base excision repair
gene. The MUTYH glycosylase plays an important role in preventing mutations
associated with 8-oxoguanine (OG) by removing adenine residues that have been
misincorporated opposite OG. MAP-associated mutations are present throughout
MUTYH, with a large number coding for missense variations. To date the available 
information on the functional properties of MUTYH variants is conflicting. In
this study, a kinetic analysis of the adenine glycosylase activity of MUTYH and
several variants was undertaken using a correction for active fraction to control
for differences due to overexpression and purification. Using these methods, the 
rate constants for steps involved in the adenine removal process were determined 
for the MAP variants Y165C, G382D, P391L and Q324R MUTYH. Under single-turnover
conditions, the rate of adenine removal for these four variants was found to be
30-40% of WT MUTYH. In addition, the ability of MUTYH and the variants to
suppress mutations and complement for the absence of MutY in Escherichia coli was
assessed using rifampicin resistance assays. The presence of WT and Q324R MUTYH
resulted in complete suppression of the mutation frequency, while G382D MUTYH
showed reduced ability to suppress the mutation frequency. In contrast, the
mutation frequency observed upon expression of P391L and Y165C MUTYH were similar
to the controls, suggesting no activity toward preventing DNA mutations. Notably,
though all variations studied herein resulted in similar reductions in adenine
glycosylase activity, the effects in the bacterial complementation are quite
different. This suggests that the consequences of a specific amino acid variation
on overall repair in a cellular context may be magnified.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2009.09.009 
PMCID: PMC2789978
PMID: 19836313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

