
1. Braz Oral Res. 2008;22 Suppl 1:44-54.

Halitosis: a review of associated factors and therapeutic approach.

Cortelli JR(1), Barbosa MD, Westphal MA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Taubaté, Taubaté, SP, Brazil. jrcortelli@uol.com.br

Halitosis or bad breath is an oral health condition characterized by unpleasant
odors emanating consistently from the oral cavity. The origin of halitosis may be
related both to systemic and oral conditions, but a large percentage of cases,
about 85%, are generally related to an oral cause. Causes include certain foods, 
poor oral health care, improper cleaning of dentures, dry mouth, tobacco products
and medical conditions. Oral causes are related to deep carious lesions,
periodontal disease, oral infections, peri-implant disease, pericoronitis,
mucosal ulcerations, impacted food or debris and, mainly, tongue coating. Thus,
the aim of the present review was to describe the etiological factors, prevalence
data and the therapeutic mechanical and chemical approaches related to halitosis.
In general, halitosis most often results from the microbial degradation of oral
organic substrates including volatile sulfur compounds (VSC). So far, there are
few studies evaluating the prevalence of oral malodor in the world population.
These studies reported rates ranging from 22% to more than 50%. The mechanical
and chemical treatment of halitosis has been addressed by several studies in the 
past four decades. Many authors agree that the solution of halitosis problems
must include the reduction of the intraoral bacterial load and/or the conversion 
of VSC to nonvolatile substrates. This could be achieved by therapy procedures
that reduce the amount of microorganisms and substrates, especially on the
tongue.

DOI: 10.1590/s1806-83242008000500007 
PMID: 19838550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

