
1. Vaccine. 2009 Dec 11;28(2):512-22. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.09.127. Epub 2009 
Oct 29.

A novel form of 4-1BBL has better immunomodulatory activity than an agonistic
anti-4-1BB Ab without Ab-associated severe toxicity.

Schabowsky RH(1), Elpek KG, Madireddi S, Sharma RK, Yolcu ES, Bandura-Morgan L,
Miller R, MacLeod KJ, Mittler RS, Shirwan H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular Therapeutics, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, and James Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville, KY 40202,
United States.

Agonistic Abs to select costimulatory members of CD28 and TNFR family have shown 
efficacy in various preclinical cancer immunotherapeutic settings. However, the
use of agonistic Abs is often associated with severe toxicity due to non-specific
activation of lymphocytes. We hypothesized that natural costimulatory ligands may
serve as more potent and safer alternative to agonistic Abs for immunotherapy. In
this communication, we focused on 4-1BBL as the molecule of choice because of the
pleiotropic effects of 4-1BB signaling in the immune system and the demonstrated 
therapeutic efficacy of 4-1BB agonistic Abs in preclinical cancer and infection
models. We report that a novel form of soluble ligand, SA-4-1BBL, delivered more 
potent and qualitatively different signals to T cells than an agonistic Ab.
Importantly, while treatment of naïve mice with the agonistic Ab resulted in
severe toxicity, as assessed by enlarged spleen and peripheral LNs, non-specific 
T cell proliferation, hepatitis, and systemic inflammatory cytokine production,
treatment with SA-4-1BBL lacked these immune anomalies. Agonistic Ab treatment
produced full toxicity in FcgammaR(-/-) or complement C1q(-/-) or C3(-/-)
knockout mice, suggesting lack of involvement of stimulatory FcgammaRs or
complement system in the observed toxicity. Naïve and memory T cells served as
direct targets of anti-4-1BB Ab-mediated toxicity. Potent immunostimulatory
activity combined with lack of toxicity rationalizes further development of
soluble SA-4-1BBL as an immunomodulatory component of therapeutic vaccines
against cancer and chronic infections.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.09.127 
PMCID: PMC2805442
PMID: 19836479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

