
1. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Dec;39(12):3477-87. doi: 10.1002/eji.200939896.

Clever-1/Stabilin-1 regulates lymphocyte migration within lymphatics and
leukocyte entrance to sites of inflammation.

Karikoski M(1), Irjala H, Maksimow M, Miiluniemi M, Granfors K, Hernesniemi S,
Elima K, Moldenhauer G, Schledzewski K, Kzhyshkowska J, Goerdt S, Salmi M,
Jalkanen S.

Author information: 
(1)MediCity and Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of 
Turku and National Institute of Health and Welfare, Turku, Finland.

Clever-1/Stabilin-1 is a scavenger receptor present on lymphatic and sinusoidal
endothelium as well as on a subset of type II macrophages. It is also induced on 
vasculature at sites of inflammation. However, its in vivo function has remained 
practically unknown and this work addresses those unknown aspects. We demonstrate
using in vivo models that Clever-1/Stabilin-1 mediates migration of T and B
lymphocytes to the draining lymph nodes in vivo and identify the adhesive epitope
of the Clever-1/Stabilin-1 molecule responsible for the interaction between
lymphocytes and lymphatic endothelium. Moreover, we demonstrate that Ab blocking 
of Clever-1/Stabilin-1 efficiently inhibits peritonitis in mice by decreasing the
entrance of granulocytes by 50%, while migration of monocytes and lymphocytes
into the inflamed peritoneum is prevented almost completely. Despite efficient
anti-inflammatory activity the Ab therapy does not dramatically dampen immune
responses against the bacterial and foreign protein Ag tested and bacterial
clearance. These results indicate that anti-Clever-1/Stabilin-1 treatment can
target two different arms of the vasculature--traffic via lymphatics and inflamed
blood vessels.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200939896 
PMID: 19830743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

