
1. Ren Fail. 2009;31(7):597-601.

Emphysematous pyelonephritis: a case report series of four patients with review
of literature.

Mohsin N(1), Budruddin M, Lala S, Al-Taie S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Royal Hospital, Muscat, Oman. nabmoh@omantel.net.om

Emphysematous pyelonephritis (EPN) is an acute necrotizing infection with gas
presence in the kidney, perinephric space, and/or urinary collecting system that 
carries a bad prognosis. Some clinical conditions predispose to this entity, such
as diabetes mellitus, urinary tract obstruction, and immune-incompetence.
Immediate resuscitation, broad-spectrum antibiotics, percutaneous and surgical
drainage, and emergent and delayed nephrectomy are therapeutic options that
should be applied in a timely fashion. We report our experience of four patients 
with EPN. Two of the patients were kidney transplant recipients, one patient had 
bilateral urolithiasis, and one patient was an elderly patient with debilitated
general condition and an abdominal mass that could not be defined. Late
transplant nephrectomy was performed in one patient, and three patients were
treated conservatively. Three patients died, including the patient who had
transplant nephrectomy. One patient who presented with lithiasis showed a
remarkable recovery with conservative management. The bacteria involved were E.
Coli and a resistant Klebsiella. We conclude that EPN is a life-threatening
condition that carries a bad prognosis. Early diagnosis is essential for a
positive outcome. Therapeutic measures should be applied immediately after
diagnosis. An aggressive approach including nephrectomy may be emergently
required.

DOI: 10.1080/08860220903003396 
PMID: 19839858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

