
1. Protein Sci. 2009 Dec;18(12):2615-23. doi: 10.1002/pro.274.

Structural and functional characterization of a triple mutant form of S100A7
defective for Jab1 binding.

West NR(1), Farnell B, Murray JI, Hof F, Watson PH, Boulanger MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria,
British Columbia, Canada.

S100A7 (psoriasin) is a calcium- and zinc-binding protein implicated in breast
cancer. We have shown previously that S100A7 enhances survival mechanisms in
breast cells through an interaction with c-jun activation domain binding protein 
1 (Jab1), and an engineered S100A7 triple mutant (Asp(56)Gly, Leu(78)Met, and
Gln(88)Lys-S100A7(3)) ablates Jab1 binding. We extend these results to include
defined breast cancer cell lines and demonstrate a disrupted S100A7(3)/Jab1
phenotype is maintained. To establish the basis for the abrogated Jab1 binding,
we have recombinantly produced S100A7(3), demonstrated that it retains the
ability to form an exceptionally thermostable dimer, and solved the three
dimensional crystal structure to 1.6 A. Despite being positioned at the dimer
interface, the Leu(78)Met mutation is easily accommodated and contributes to a
methionine-rich pocket formed by Met(12), Met(15), and Met(34). In addition to
altering the surface charge, the Gln(88)Lys mutation results in a nearby
rotameric shift in Tyr(85), leading to a substantially reorganized surface cavity
and may influence zinc binding. The final mutation of Asp(56) to Gly results in
the largest structural perturbation shortening helix IV by one full turn. It is
noteworthy that position 56 lies in one of two divergent clusters between S100A7 
and the functionally distinct yet highly homologous S100A15. The structure of
S100A7(3) provides a unique perspective from which to characterize the
S100A7-Jab1 interaction and better understand the distinct functions between
S100A7, and it is closely related paralog S100A15.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.274 
PMCID: PMC2821279
PMID: 19844956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

