
1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2010 Jan;17(1):168-75. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00208-09. Epub 2009
Oct 28.

Peptide microarray-based identification of Mycobacterium tuberculosis epitope
binding to HLA-DRB1*0101, DRB1*1501, and DRB1*0401.

Gaseitsiwe S(1), Valentini D, Mahdavifar S, Reilly M, Ehrnst A, Maeurer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institutet, and the Swedish Institute for Infectious Disease Control (SMI),
Nobels VÃ¤g 18, SE. 17182 Stockholm, Sweden.

A more effective vaccine against Mycobacterium tuberculosis is needed, and a
number of M. tuberculosis vaccine candidates are currently in preclinical or
clinical phase I and II studies. One of the strategies to select M. tuberculosis 
(protein) targets to elicit a CD8(+) or CD4(+) T-cell response is to gauge the
binding of candidate peptides to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I
or class II molecules, a prerequisite for successful peptide presentation and to 
expand antigen-specific T cells. We scanned 61 proteins from the M. tuberculosis 
proteome for potential MHC class II-presented epitopes that could serve as
targets for CD4(+) T-cell responses. We constructed a peptide microarray
consisting of 7,466 unique peptides derived from 61 M. tuberculosis proteins. The
peptides were 15-mers overlapping by 12 amino acids. Soluble recombinant
DRB1*0101 (DR1), DRB1*1501 (DR2), and DRB1*0401 (DR4) monomers were used to gauge
binding to individual peptide species. Out of 7,466 peptides, 1,282, 674, and
1,854 peptides formed stable complexes with HLA-DR1, -DR2, and -DR4,
respectively. Five hundred forty-four peptides bound to all three MHC class II
molecules, 609 bound to only two, and 756 bound to only a single MHC class II
molecule. This allowed us to rank M. tuberculosis proteins by epitope density. M.
tuberculosis proteins contained "hot spots," i.e., regions with enriched MHC
class II binding epitopes. Two hundred twenty-two peptides that formed MHC class 
II-peptide complexes had previously been described as exclusively recognized by
IgG in sera from patients with active pulmonary tuberculosis, but not in sera
from healthy individuals, suggesting that these peptides serve as B-cell and
CD4(+) T-cell epitopes. This work helps to identify not only M. tuberculosis
peptides with immunogenic potential, but also the most immunogenic proteins. This
information is useful for vaccine design and the development of future tools to
explore immune responses to M. tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00208-09 
PMCID: PMC2812096
PMID: 19864486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

