
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2010 Jan;48(1):229-37. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01463-09. Epub 2009 Oct
28.

Rapid detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and rifampin resistance by use of
on-demand, near-patient technology.

Helb D(1), Jones M, Story E, Boehme C, Wallace E, Ho K, Kop J, Owens MR, Rodgers 
R, Banada P, Safi H, Blakemore R, Lan NT, Jones-LÃ³pez EC, Levi M, Burday M,
Ayakaka I, Mugerwa RD, McMillan B, Winn-Deen E, Christel L, Dailey P, Perkins MD,
Persing DH, Alland D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New Jersey Medical School, University of Medicine and 
Dentistry, New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey 07103, USA.

Current nucleic acid amplification methods to detect Mycobacterium tuberculosis
are complex, labor-intensive, and technically challenging. We developed and
performed the first analysis of the Cepheid Gene Xpert System's MTB/RIF assay, an
integrated hands-free sputum-processing and real-time PCR system with rapid
on-demand, near-patient technology, to simultaneously detect M. tuberculosis and 
rifampin resistance. Analytic tests of M. tuberculosis DNA demonstrated a limit
of detection (LOD) of 4.5 genomes per reaction. Studies using sputum spiked with 
known numbers of M. tuberculosis CFU predicted a clinical LOD of 131 CFU/ml.
Killing studies showed that the assay's buffer decreased M. tuberculosis
viability by at least 8 logs, substantially reducing biohazards. Tests of 23
different commonly occurring rifampin resistance mutations demonstrated that all 
23 (100%) would be identified as rifampin resistant. An analysis of 20
nontuberculosis mycobacteria species confirmed high assay specificity. A small
clinical validation study of 107 clinical sputum samples from suspected
tuberculosis cases in Vietnam detected 29/29 (100%) smear-positive
culture-positive cases and 33/39 (84.6%) or 38/53 (71.7%) smear-negative
culture-positive cases, as determined by growth on solid medium or on both solid 
and liquid media, respectively. M. tuberculosis was not detected in 25/25 (100%) 
of the culture-negative samples. A study of 64 smear-positive culture-positive
sputa from retreatment tuberculosis cases in Uganda detected 63/64 (98.4%)
culture-positive cases and 9/9 (100%) cases of rifampin resistance. Rifampin
resistance was excluded in 54/55 (98.2%) susceptible cases. Specificity rose to
100% after correcting for a conventional susceptibility test error. In
conclusion, this highly sensitive and simple-to-use system can detect M.
tuberculosis directly from sputum in less than 2 h.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01463-09 
PMCID: PMC2812290
PMID: 19864480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

