
1. Scand J Immunol. 2009 Nov;70(5):481-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2009.02322.x.

Immune responses in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma treated with
dendritic cells pulsed with tumor lysate.

Soleimani A(1), Berntsen A, Svane IM, Pedersen AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of International Health, Immunology and Microbiology, The Panum
Institute, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

Patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC) have a limited life
expectancy but still a subset of these patients develop immune and clinical
responses after immunotherapy including dendritic cell (DC) vaccination. In a
recently published phase I/II trials, fourteen HLA-A2 negative patients with
progressive mRCC were vaccinated with autologous DC pulsed with allogeneic tumour
lysate. Low-dose IL-2 administered subcutaneously was given concomitantly. In
this study, we analysed lysate specific proliferation of PBMCs from these
patients together with the TH1/TH2 balance of the responding T cells. Also, serum
concentrations of IL-10, IL-12, IL-15, IL-17 and IL-18 from these patients and
additional thirteen HLA-A2 positive mRCC patients treated with autologous DC
pulsed with survivin and telomerase peptides were analysed during vaccination to 
identify systemic immune responses and potential response biomarkers. In HLA-A2
negative mRCC patients a spontaneous predominance of TH1 secreting tumour lysate 
specific T cells was observed prior to vaccination in patients attaining stable
disease (SD) during treatment whereas patients with continued progressive disease
(PD) had a mixed TH1/TH2 response. The TH1/TH2 balance was unchanged during
vaccination also when tumour lysate specific T cell responses increased. An
increase in IL-12, IL-17 and IL-18 serum concentrations was observed during
vaccination but no difference between patients with SD and PD was observed. IL-10
or IL-15 was not measurable in serum.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2009.02322.x 
PMID: 19874553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

