
1. Plant Physiol. 2010 Jan;152(1):267-80. doi: 10.1104/pp.109.148049. Epub 2009 Nov 
4.

Disruption of poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation mechanisms alters responses of Arabidopsis
to biotic stress.

Adams-Phillips L(1), Briggs AG, Bent AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin
53706, USA.

Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation is a posttranslational protein modification in which
ADP-ribose (ADP-Rib) units derived from NAD(+) are attached to proteins by
poly(ADP-Rib) polymerase (PARP) enzymes. ADP-Rib groups are removed from these
polymer chains by the enzyme poly(ADP-Rib) glycohydrolase (PARG). In animals,
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation is associated with DNA damage responses and programmed
cell death. Previously, we hypothesized a role for poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation in
plant defense responses when we detected defense-associated expression of the
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation-related genes PARG2 and NUDT7 and observed altered callose
deposition in the presence of a chemical PARP inhibitor. The role of
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation in plant defenses was more extensively investigated in
this study, using Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Pharmacological inhibition 
of PARP using 3-aminobenzamide perturbs certain innate immune responses to
microbe-associated molecular patterns (flg22 and elf18), including callose
deposition, lignin deposition, pigment accumulation, and phenylalanine ammonia
lyase activity, but does not disrupt other responses, such as the initial
oxidative burst and expression of some early defense-associated genes. Mutant
parg1 seedlings exhibit exaggerated seedling growth inhibition and pigment
accumulation in response to elf18 and are hypersensitive to the DNA-damaging
agent mitomycin C. Both parg1 and parg2 knockout plants show accelerated onset of
disease symptoms when infected with Botrytis cinerea. Cellular levels of ADP-Rib 
polymer increase after infection with avirulent Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato
DC3000 avrRpt2(+), and pathogen-dependent changes in the poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation
of discrete proteins were also observed. We conclude that poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation 
is a functional component in plant responses to biotic stress.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.109.148049 
PMCID: PMC2799362
PMID: 19889874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

