
1. J Mol Model. 2010 May;16(5):1003-9. doi: 10.1007/s00894-009-0602-2. Epub 2009 Oct
29.

Homology modelling of a sensor histidine kinase from Aeromonas hydrophila.

Fazil MH(1), Kumar S, Subbarao N, Pandey HP, Singh DV.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Biology, Institute of Life Sciences, Nalco Square,
Bhubaneswar, 751023, India.

Aeromonas hydrophila has been implicated in extra-intestinal infection and
diarrhoea in humans. Targetting unique effectors of bacterial pathogens is
considered a powerful strategy for drug design against bacterial variations to
drug resistance. The two-component bacterial system involving sensor histidine
kinase (SHK) and its response regulators is considered a lucrative target for
drug design. This is the first report describing a three-dimensional (3D)
structure for SHK of A. hydrophila. The model was constructed by homology
modelling using the X-ray structure of PleD--a response regulator--in conjunction
with cdiGMP (PDB code 1W25) and HemAT sensor domain (PDB code 1OR4)--a globin
coupled sensor. A combination of homology modelling methodology and molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations was applied to obtain a reasonable structure to
understand the dynamic behaviour of SHK. Homology modelling was performed using
MODELLER9v2 software. The structure was relaxed to eliminate bad atomic contacts.
The final model obtained by molecular mechanics and dynamics methods was assessed
using PROCHECK and VERIFY 3D graph, which confirmed that the final refined model 
is reliable. Until complete biochemical and structural data of SHK are determined
by experimental means, this model can serve as a valuable reference for
characterising the protein and could be explored for drug targetting by design of
suitable inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1007/s00894-009-0602-2 
PMID: 19882182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

