
1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2009 Dec 15;17(24):8168-73. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2009.10.035. Epub
2009 Oct 22.

Synthesis and biological evaluation of a novel series of pyrazole chalcones as
anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and antimicrobial agents.

Bandgar BP(1), Gawande SS, Bodade RG, Gawande NM, Khobragade CN.

Author information: 
(1)Organic Chemistry Research Laboratory, School of Chemical Sciences, Solapur
University, Solapur 413 255, India. bandgar_bp@yahoo.com

A novel series of
1-(2,4-dimethoxy-phenyl)-3-(1,3-diphenyl-1H-pyrazol-4-yl)-propenone (3) have been
prepared by the Claisen-Schmidt condensation of 1-(2,4-dimethoxy-phenyl)-ethanone
(1) and substituted 1,3-diphenyl-1H-pyrazole-4-carbaldehydes (2). Substituted
1,3-diphenyl-1H-pyrazole-4-carbaldehydes (2) were prepared by Vilsmeir-Haack
reaction on acetophenonephenylhydrazones to offer the target compounds. The
structures of the compounds were established by IR, (1)H NMR and mass spectral
analysis. All the compounds were evaluated for their anti-inflammatory (TNF-alpha
and IL-6 inhibitory assays), antioxidant (DPPH free radical scavenging assay) and
antimicrobial activities (agar diffusion method) against some pathogenic bacteria
and fungi. Of 10 compounds screened, compounds 3a, 3c and 3g exhibited promising 
IL-6 inhibitory (35-70% inhibition, 10 microM), free radical scavenging (25-35%
DPPH activity) and antimicrobial activities (MIC 100 microg/mL and 250 microg/mL)
at varied concentrations. The structure-activity relationship (SAR) and in silico
drug relevant properties (HBD, HBA, PSA, cLogP, molecular weight, E(HOMO) and
E(LUMO)) further confirmed that the compounds are potential lead compounds for
future drug discovery study. Toxicity of the compounds was evaluated
theoretically and experimentally and revealed to be nontoxic except 3d and 3j.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2009.10.035 
PMID: 19896853  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

