
1. Traffic. 2010 Jan;11(1):151-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2009.01003.x.

The function of yeast epsin and Ede1 ubiquitin-binding domains during receptor
internalization.

Dores MR(1), Schnell JD, Maldonado-Baez L, Wendland B, Hicke L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, 2205 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

The formation of a primary endocytic vesicle is a dynamic process involving the
transient organization of adaptor and scaffold proteins at the plasma membrane.
Epsins and Eps15-like proteins are ubiquitin-binding proteins that act early in
this process. The yeast epsins, Ent1 and Ent2, carry functional
ubiquitin-interacting motifs (UIMs), whereas the yeast Eps15-like protein, Ede1, 
has a C-terminal ubiquitin-associated (UBA) domain. Analysis of mutants lacking
early endocytic adaptors reveals that the ubiquitin-binding domains (UBDs) of
Ent2 and Ede1 are likely to function primarily to mediate protein-protein
interactions between components of the early endocytic machinery. Cells that lack
epsin and Ede1 UBDs are able to internalize activated, ubiquitinated receptors.
Furthermore, under conditions in which epsin UIMs are important for receptor
internalization, receptors internalized via both ubiquitin-dependent and
ubiquitin-independent signals require the UIMs, indicating that UIM function is
not restricted to ubiquitinated receptors. Epsin UIMs share function with non-UBD
protein-protein interaction motifs in Ent2 and Ede1, and the Ede1 UBA domain
appears to negatively regulate interactions between endocytic proteins. Together,
our results suggest that the ubiquitin-binding domains within the yeast epsin
Ent2 and Ede1 are involved in the formation and regulation of the endocytic
network.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2009.01003.x 
PMCID: PMC2896001
PMID: 19903324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

