
1. Immunology. 2010 Mar;129(3):338-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03163.x. Epub
2009 Nov 11.

CD4(+) T-cell activation is differentially modulated by bacteria-primed dendritic
cells, but is generally down-regulated by n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids.

Brix S(1), Lund P, Kjaer TM, Straarup EM, Hellgren LI, Fr√∏kiaer H.

Author information: 
(1)Nutritional Immunology Group, Center for Biological Sequence Analysis,
Department of Systems Biology, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark. 
sbp@bio.dtu.dk

Appropriate activation of CD4(+) T cells is fundamental for efficient initiation 
and progression of acquired immune responses. Here, we showed that CD4(+) T-cell 
activation is dependent on changes in membrane n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
(PUFAs) and is dynamically regulated by the type of signals provided by dendritic
cells (DCs). Upon interaction with DCs primed by different concentrations and
species of gut bacteria, CD4(+) T cells were activated according to the type of
DC stimulus. The levels of CD80 were found to correlate to the levels of
expression of CD28 and to the proliferation of CD4(+) T cells, while the presence
of CD40 and CD86 on DCs inversely affected inducible costimulator (ICOS) and
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) levels in CD4(+) T cells. For all DC
stimuli, cells high in n-3 PUFAs showed reduced ability to respond to CD28
stimulation, to proliferate, and to express ICOS and CTLA-4. Diminished T-cell
receptor (TCR) and CD28 signalling was found to be responsible for n-3 PUFA
effects. Thus, the dietary fatty acid composition influences the overall level of
CD4(+) T-cell activation induced by DCs, while the priming effect of the DC
stimuli modulates CD80, CD86 and CD40 levels, thereby affecting and shaping
activation of acquired immunity by differential regulation of proliferation and
costimulatory molecule expression in CD4(+) T cells.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03163.x 
PMCID: PMC2826679
PMID: 19909377  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

