
1. Infect Immun. 2010 Jan;78(1):115-24. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00949-09. Epub 2009 Nov 9.

CD44 deficiency is associated with enhanced Escherichia coli-induced
proinflammatory cytokine and chemokine release by peritoneal macrophages.

van der Windt GJ(1), van 't Veer C, Florquin S, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center,
Meibergdreef 9, Room G2-132, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
g.j.vanderwindt@amc.uva.nl

CD44 is involved in several immune responses, such as cellular adhesion,
migration, proliferation, and activation. Peritonitis is an important cause of
sepsis, and Escherichia coli is one of the major pathogens involved therein. We
sought to determine the role of CD44 in the host response to E. coli-induced
abdominal sepsis and to assess the function of CD44 in the activation of primary 
peritoneal macrophages by E. coli or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) purified from this 
bacterium by using wild-type (WT) and CD44 knockout (KO) mice. CD44 KO mice
already demonstrated enhanced CXC chemokine levels in peritoneal lavage fluid at 
6 h after infection, whereas tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) and
interleukin-6 levels were elevated at 20 h postinfection. In line with this, CD44
KO mouse peritoneal macrophages released more TNF-alpha and macrophage
inflammatory protein 2 (MIP-2) than did WT cells upon stimulation with E. coli or
LPS in the presence of autologous serum. In contrast, plasma TNF-alpha levels
were lower in CD44 KO mice and CD44 KO blood leukocytes secreted similar amounts 
of TNF-alpha and MIP-2 upon ex vivo incubation with E. coli or LPS. The
proinflammatory phenotype of CD44 KO macrophages was not associated with an
altered expression of inhibitors of Toll-like receptor signaling, whereas it
could be partially reversed by addition of WT serum. CD44 deficiency did not
impact on leukocyte recruitment into the peritoneal cavity or organ failure.
These data suggest that CD44 differentially influences cytokine and chemokine
release by different leukocyte subsets.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00949-09 
PMCID: PMC2798194
PMID: 19901064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

