
1. J Immunol. 2009 Dec 1;183(11):7478-88. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900542. Epub 2009
Nov 16.

CCR5 ligands modulate CXCL12-induced chemotaxis, adhesion, and Akt
phosphorylation of human cord blood CD34+ cells.

Basu S(1), Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Research Institute No. 2 Building, Room 302, 950
West Walnut Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. sunbasu@iupui.edu

CXCL12 and its receptor CXCR4 play an important role in hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cell (HSPC) migration from and retention within the bone marrow. 
HSPCs are very selective in their chemotactic response and undergo chemotaxis
only in response to CXCL12. In addition to CXCR4, HSPCs express receptors for
various other chemokines; however, the role of these receptors is not well
understood. Freshly isolated CD34(+) cells (highly enriched for HSPCs) from cord 
blood (CB) express low levels of CCR5; however, if the cells were washed with
acidic buffer before Ab staining to remove any ligand bound to CCR5, then nearly 
80% of CD34(+) CB cells were found to express CCR5 on the cell surface. Although 
none of the CCR5 ligands investigated in this study (CCL3, CCL4, and CCL5)
induced chemotaxis, at relatively high concentrations they transiently enhanced
CXCL12-mediated chemotaxis of CD34(+) CB cells. In contrast, CXCL12-mediated
adhesion of cells to VCAM-1-coated surfaces was reduced if CD34(+) CB cells were 
pretreated with these CCR5 ligands for 15 min. The effect of these chemokines on 
CXCL12-mediated responses was not at the level of CXCR4 expression, but on
downstream signaling pathways elicited by CXCL12. Pretreatment with CCR5
chemokines enhanced CXCL12-mediated Akt phosphorylation, but down-modulated
calcium flux in CD34(+) CB cells. Modulation of CXCL12-mediated responses of
CD34(+) cells by CCR5 chemokines provides a possible mechanism that underlies
movement of HSPCs during inflammation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900542 
PMCID: PMC2818985
PMID: 19917679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

