
1. J Bacteriol. 2010 Feb;192(3):643-56. doi: 10.1128/JB.00700-09. Epub 2009 Nov 20.

Analysis of lipid export in hydrocarbonoclastic bacteria of the genus
Alcanivorax: identification of lipid export-negative mutants of Alcanivorax
borkumensis SK2 and Alcanivorax jadensis T9.

Manilla-Pérez E(1), Reers C, Baumgart M, Hetzler S, Reichelt R, Malkus U,
Kalscheuer R, Wältermann M, Steinbüchel A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekulare Mikrobiologie und Biotechnologie, Westfälische
Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Corrensstrasse 3, D-48149 Münster, Germany.

Triacylglycerols (TAGs), wax esters (WEs), and polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are
the major hydrophobic compounds synthesized in bacteria and deposited as
cytoplasmic inclusion bodies when cells are cultivated under imbalanced growth
conditions. The intracellular occurrence of these compounds causes high costs for
downstream processing. Alcanivorax species are able to produce extracellular
lipids when the cells are cultivated on hexadecane or pyruvate as the sole carbon
source. In this study, we developed a screening procedure to isolate lipid
export-negative transposon-induced mutants of bacteria of the genus Alcanivorax
for identification of genes required for lipid export by employing the dyes Nile 
red and Solvent Blue 38. Three transposon-induced mutants of A. jadensis and
seven of A. borkumensis impaired in lipid secretion were isolated. All isolated
mutants were still capable of synthesizing and accumulating these lipids
intracellularly and exhibited no growth defect. In the A. jadensis mutants, the
transposon insertions were mapped in genes annotated as encoding a putative DNA
repair system specific for alkylated DNA (Aj17), a magnesium transporter (Aj7),
and a transposase (Aj5). In the A. borkumensis mutants, the insertions were
mapped in genes encoding different proteins involved in various transport
processes, like genes encoding (i) a heavy metal resistance (CZCA2) in mutant
ABO_6/39, (ii) a multidrug efflux (MATE efflux) protein in mutant ABO_25/21,
(iii) an alginate lyase (AlgL) in mutants ABO_10/30 and ABO_19/48, (iv) a
sodium-dicarboxylate symporter family protein (GltP) in mutant ABO_27/29, (v) an 
alginate transporter (AlgE) in mutant ABO_26/1, or (vi) a two-component system
protein in mutant ABO_27/56. Site-directed MATE, algE, and algL gene disruption
mutants, which were constructed in addition, were also unable to export neutral
lipids and confirmed the phenotype of the transposon-induced mutants. The
putative localization of the different gene products and their possible roles in 
lipid excretion are discussed. Beside this, the composition of the intra- and
extracellular lipids in the wild types and mutants were analyzed in detail.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00700-09 
PMCID: PMC2812445
PMID: 19933359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

