
1. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2009;23(6):839-48. doi:
10.1016/j.bpg.2009.10.004.

Acid-related disorders in the elderly.

Franceschi M(1), Di Mario F, Leandro G, Maggi S, Pilotto A.

Author information: 
(1)Endoscopy Unit, Department of Surgery, ASL Alto Vicentino, De Lellis Hospital,
Via De Lellis, Schio (VI), Italy. lisa.franceschi@alice.it

Diseases of the upper gastrointestinal tract such as gastroesophageal reflux
disease (GERD), peptic ulcer and gastric cancer become more common and more
severe with advancing age. Older individuals also tend to have a higher
prevalence of co-morbid factors, such as Helicobacter pylori infection, presence 
of other diseases, or use of medications (e.g., nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs, bisphosphonates) that increase their risk for acid-related disorders.
Unfortunately, in the elderly patient with these disorders symptom presentation
may be slight or atypical, resulting in a delayed diagnosis. In general, the
treatment of older individuals with peptic ulcer or GERD and its complications is
similar to that of younger individuals. Proton pump inhibitors are the basis of
therapy for symptom relief, healing of erosive esophagitis and peptic ulceration,
reduction of the risk for NSAID induced mucosal damage, and prevention of disease
relapses. The strongest prevalence of H.pylori infection in the elderly, as well 
as the role of H.pylori in the occurrence of gastric lesions, in particular ulcer
diseases, gastric precancerous lesions and gastric cancer, make the diagnosis and
the eradication of H.pylori in this population of the utmost importance.
Strategies to improve the management of upper gastrointestinal diseases in older 
people will reduce mortality and improve quality of life.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpg.2009.10.004 
PMID: 19942162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

