
1. Curr Genomics. 2009 Jun;10(4):216-22. doi: 10.2174/138920209788488481.

Signaling Transduction Network Mediated by Tumor Suppressor/Susceptibility Genes 
in NPC.

Wu M(1), Li X, Li X, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Central South University, Hunan, the People's
Republic of China.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a polygenetic disease. SPLUNC1, UBAP1, BRD7,
NAG7, NOR1, NGX6 and LTF genes were found to be tumor suppressor/susceptibility
genes in different stages of NPC. SPLUNC1, an early warning molecular diagnosis
marker, inhibits the bacteria clone formation, and is an innated immune molecule.
SPLUNC1 can negatively regulate the ERK/MAPK signaling transduction pathway to
inhibit NPC cell proliferation and induce apoptosis. BRD7, a transcript
regulation factor, interacts with BRD2, and promotes apoptosis induced by BRD2.
Its promoter is regulated by c-Myc and SP1. BRD7 inhibits NPC cell cycle
progression, preventing passage through G0/G1 by suppressing ras/MEK/ERK, Rb/E2F 
and Wnt signaling pathways. Abnormal activation of BRD7 is crucial to cell cycle 
turbulence in NPC. NGX6, a metastasis-associated protein, can negative-regulate
the EGF/Ras/MAPK signaling transduction pathway, and interacts with ezrin protein
to inhibit NPC cell invasion and metastasis. LTF, also a metastasis-associated
protein, can negatively regulate MAPK signal transduction pathways, such as JNK2 
and ERK, to inhibit NPC cell proliferation and growth. Taken together, it was
found that these tumor suppressor/susceptibility genes can regulate key molecules
involved in cell signal pathways such as ras/MEK/ERK, Rb/E2F and EGFR
ras/MEK/MAPK, and can regulate the expression of some adhesion molecules such as 
ezrin, nm23 and alpha-catenin. According to functional genomics and signaling
transduction pathways, we have described a signaling cross-talk network between
the tumor suppressor/susceptibility genes involved in NPC. These tumor
suppressor/susceptibility genes may be potential treatment targets for NPC in the
future.

DOI: 10.2174/138920209788488481 
PMCID: PMC2709932
PMID: 19949542 

