
1. Hum Mutat. 2010 Feb;31(2):159-66. doi: 10.1002/humu.21158.

MUTYH mutations associated with familial adenomatous polyposis: functional
characterization by a mammalian cell-based assay.

Molatore S(1), Russo MT, D'Agostino VG, Barone F, Matsumoto Y, Albertini AM,
Minoprio A, Degan P, Mazzei F, Bignami M, Ranzani GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP) is a colorectal cancer syndrome, due to
biallelic mutations of MUTYH. This Base Excision Repair gene encodes for a DNA
glycosylase that specifically mitigates the high mutagenic potential of the
8-hydroxyguanine (8-oxodG) along the DNA. Aim of this study was to characterize
the biological effects, in a mammalian cell background, of human MUTYH mutations 
identified in MAP patients (137insIW [c.411_416dupATGGAT; p.137insIleTrp]; R171W 
[c.511C>T; p.Arg171Trp]; E466del [c.1395_1397delGGA; p.Glu466del]; Y165C
[c.494A>G; p.Tyr165Cys]; and G382D [c.1145G>A; p.Gly382Asp]). We set up a novel
assay in which the human proteins were expressed in Mutyh(-/-) mouse defective
cells. Several parameters, including accumulation of 8-oxodG in the genome and
hypersensitivity to oxidative stress, were then used to evaluate the consequences
of MUTYH expression. Human proteins were also obtained from Escherichia coli and 
their glycosylase activity was tested in vitro. The cell-based analysis
demonstrated that all MUTYH variants we investigated were dysfunctional in Base
Excision Repair. In vitro data complemented the in vivo observations, with the
exception of the G382D mutant, which showed a glycosylase activity very similar
to the wild-type protein. Our cell-based assay can provide useful information on 
the significance of MUTYH variants, improving molecular diagnosis and genetic
counseling in families with mutations of uncertain pathogenicity.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21158 
PMID: 19953527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

