
1. J Biotechnol. 2010 Feb 15;145(4):350-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2009.11.019. Epub 
2009 Dec 1.

Efficient production of extracellular proteins with Escherichia coli by means of 
optimized coexpression of bacteriocin release proteins.

Sommer B(1), Friehs K, Flaschel E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fermentation Engineering, Faculty of Technology, Bielefeld
University, POB 100 131, D-33501 Bielefeld, Germany.

Aiming to facilitate the accessibility of recombinant proteins produced with
Escherichia coli, extracellular expression may be achieved by means of
bacteriocin release protein (BRP) coexpression. Different types of BRPs were
tested in order to optimize protein secretion into the culture medium. Those
included the well-studied BRPs of the Colicin E1 and Cloacin DF13 bacteriocins
and variants thereof. BRP expression was stringently controlled by means of the
arabinose inducible P(BAD) promoter, which accounts for a broad-range adjustment 
of expression strength. Using appropriate arabinose concentrations, a
concentration range was determined, that allowed efficient secretion of the model
proteins alkaline phosphatase and beta-lactamase, with 90-95% of the proteins
released into the culture medium. Kinetic investigations into BRP expression and 
protein secretion revealed a rapid increase of extracellular protein
concentration within 5-10 min past induction. Alternatively to fine-tuned BRP
expression during cultivation, protein production and secretion could be
decoupled by establishment of appropriate induction strategies and up to 90% of
alkaline phosphatase was released into the culture medium within 3h after
reaching maximum biomasss concentrations. Both, fine-tuned and growth decoupled
BRP expression accounted for extracellular alkaline phosphatase concentrations of
roughly 500 mg l(-1) of culture broth and selectivities of 50mg of this enzyme
per gram of cell dry mass, respectively.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2009.11.019 
PMID: 19958803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

