
1. Transl Oncol. 2009 Dec;2(4):329-40.

Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 expression associated with gene
demethylation confers anoikis resistance in early phases of melanocyte malignant 
transformation.

Ricca TI(1), Liang G, Suenaga AP, Han SW, Jones PA, Jasiulionis MG.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology Department, Universidade Federal de 
São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Although anoikis resistance has been considered a hallmark of malignant
phenotype, the causal relation between neoplastic transformation and
anchorage-independent growth remains undefined. We developed an experimental
model of murine melanocyte malignant transformation, where a melanocyte lineage
(melan-a) was submitted to sequential cycles of anchorage blockade, resulting in 
progressive morphologic alterations, and malignant transformation. Throughout
this process, cells corresponding to premalignant melanocytes and melanoma cell
lines were established and show progressive anoikis resistance and increased
expression of Timp1. In melan-a melanocytes, Timp1 expression is suppressed by
DNA methylation as indicated by its reexpression after 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
treatment. Methylation-sensitive single-nucleotide primer extension analysis
showed increased demethylation in Timp1 in parallel with its expression along
malignant transformation. Interestingly, TIMP1 expression has already been
related with negative prognosis in some human cancers. Although described as a
MMP inhibitor, this protein has been associated with apoptosis resistance in
different cell types. Melan-a cells overexpressing Timp1 showed increased
survival in suspension but were unable to form tumors in vivo, whereas
Timp1-overexpressing melanoma cells showed reduced latency time for tumor
appearance and increased metastatic potential. Here, we demonstrated for the
first time an increment in Timp1 expression since the early phases of melanocyte 
malignant transformation, associated to a progressive gene demethylation, which
confers anoikis resistance. In this way, Timp1 might be considered as a valued
marker for melanocyte malignant transformation.

DOI: 10.1593/tlo.09220 
PMCID: PMC2781071
PMID: 19956395 

