
1. Blood. 2010 Feb 4;115(5):1088-97. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-05-223198. Epub 2009
Dec 4.

Short-term inhibition of p53 combined with keratinocyte growth factor improves
thymic epithelial cell recovery and enhances T-cell reconstitution after murine
bone marrow transplantation.

Kelly RM(1), Goren EM, Taylor PA, Mueller SN, Stefanski HE, Osborn MJ, Scott HS, 
Komarova EA, Gudkov AV, Holl√§nder GA, Blazar BR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Oncology, and Blood and Marrow Transplantation,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Myeloablative conditioning before bone marrow transplantation (BMT) results in
thymic epithelial cell (TEC) injury, T-cell immune deficiency, and susceptibility
to opportunistic infections. Conditioning regimen-induced TEC damage directly
contributes to slow thymopoietic recovery after BMT. Keratinocyte growth factor
(KGF) is a TEC mitogen that stimulates proliferation and, when given before
conditioning, reduces TEC injury. Some TEC subsets are refractory to KGF and
functional T-cell responses are not fully restored in KGF-treated BM transplant
recipients. Therefore, we investigated whether the addition of a pharmacologic
inhibitor, PFT-beta, to transiently inhibit p53 during radiotherapy could spare
TECs from radiation-induced damage in congenic and allogeneic BMTs. Combined
before BMT KGF + PFT-beta administration additively restored numbers of cortical 
and medullary TECs and improved thymic function after BMT, resulting in higher
numbers of donor-derived, naive peripheral CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells. Radiation
conditioning caused a loss of T-cell zone fibroblastic reticular cells (FRCs) and
CCL21 expression in lymphoid stroma. KGF + PFT-beta treatment restored both FRC
and CCL21 expression, findings that correlated with improved T-cell
reconstitution and an enhanced immune response against Listeria monocytogenes
infection. Thus, transient p53 inhibition combined with KGF represents a novel
and potentially translatable approach to promote rapid and durable thymic and
peripheral T-cell recovery after BMT.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2009-05-223198 
PMCID: PMC2817635
PMID: 19965631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

