
1. Mol Cancer. 2009 Dec 7;8:116. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-116.

Identification of iGb3 and iGb4 in melanoma B16F10-Nex2 cells and the iNKT
cell-mediated antitumor effect of dendritic cells primed with iGb3.

Dias BR(1), Rodrigues EG, Nimrichter L, Nakayasu ES, Almeida IC, Travassos LR.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Oncology Unit (UNONEX), Department of Microbiology, Immunology
and Parasitology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
coquiek@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: CD1d-restricted iNKT cells are protective against murine melanoma
B16F10-Nex2 growing subcutaneously in syngeneic C57Bl/6 mice as inferred from the
fast tumor development in CD1d-KO in comparison with wild type animals. CD1d
glycoproteins are related to the class I MHC molecules, and are involved in the
presentation, particularly by dentritic cells (DC), of lipid antigens to iNKT
cells. In the present work we attempted to identify the endogenous lipid mediator
expressed in melanoma cells inducing such immunesurveillance response and study
the possibility of protecting animals challenged with tumor cells with
lipid-primed DC.
RESULTS: Crude cytosolic and membrane fractions from in vivo growing melanoma
contained iNKT-stimulating substances. Lipids were then extracted from these
cells and one of the fractions (i.e. F3A) was shown to prime bone marrow-derived 
dendritic cells (BMDC) to stimulate iNKT murine hybridoma (DN32D3) cells to
produce IL-2. The active fraction was analyzed by electrospray ionization-mass
spectrometry (ESI-LIT-MS) and both iGb3 and iGb4 were identified along with GM3. 
When iGb3 was incubated with BMDC and tested with DN32D3 cells, IL-2 was equally 
produced indicating iNKT cell activation. GM3 consistently inhibited this
response. To assess the antitumor response-induced by iGb3, a cytotoxicity assay 
in vitro was used with [3H]-thymidine labeled B16F10-Nex2 cells. At
target/effector (iGb3-activated iNKT) cell ratio of 100(-1)-100(-4) tumor cell
lysis was shown. The antitumor activity in vivo was tested in mice challenged
i.v. with B16F10-Nex2 cells and treated with iGb3- or
alpha-galactosylceramide-primed DCs. A 4-fold lower tumor load in the lungs was
observed with either treatment.
CONCLUSION: Our results show the expression of globo and isoglobohexosylceramides
in murine melanoma B16F10-Nex2. The expression of iGb3 and its precursor, iGb4,
on tumor cells may prime an effective iNKT cell-dependent antitumor response,
modulated negatively by GM3 which is also produced in these cells. iGb3-primed
BMDC exerted a significant iNKT cell-mediated anti-tumor activity in mice
challenged with melanoma cells.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-116 
PMCID: PMC2795753
PMID: 19968878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

