
1. J Immunol. 2010 Jan 15;184(2):658-65. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903414. Epub 2009
Dec 4.

Ins2 deficiency augments spontaneous HLA-A*0201-restricted T cell responses to
insulin.

Jarchum I(1), DiLorenzo TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Type 1 diabetes results from the autoimmune destruction of insulin-producing beta
cells by T cells specific for beta cell Ags, including insulin. In humans, the
non-MHC locus conferring the strongest disease susceptibility is the insulin
gene, and alleles yielding lower thymic insulin expression are predisposing. We
sought to incorporate this characteristic into an HLA-transgenic model of the
disease and to determine the influence of reduced thymic insulin expression on
CD8+ T cell responses to preproinsulin. We examined NOD.Ins2(-/-) mice, which do 
not express insulin in the thymus and show accelerated disease, to determine
whether they exhibit quantitative or qualitative differences in CD8+ T cell
responses to preproinsulin. We also generated NOD.Ins2(-/-) mice expressing type 
1 diabetes-associated HLA-A*0201 (designated NOD.beta2m(-/-).HHD.Ins2(-/-)) in an
effort to obtain an improved humanized disease model. We found that CD8+ T cell
reactivity to certain insulin peptides was more readily detected in NOD.Ins2(-/-)
mice than in NOD mice. Furthermore, the proportion of insulin-reactive CD8+ T
cells infiltrating the islets of NOD.Ins2(-/-) mice was increased.
NOD.beta2m(-/-).HHD.Ins2(-/-) mice exhibited rapid onset of disease and had an
increased proportion of HLA-A*0201-restricted insulin-reactive T cells, including
those targeting the clinically relevant epitope Ins B10-18. Our results suggest
that insulin alleles that predispose to type 1 diabetes in humans do so, at least
in part, by facilitating CD8+ T cell responses to the protein. We propose the
NOD.beta2m(-/-).HHD.Ins2(-/-) strain as an improved humanized disease model, in
particular for studies seeking to develop therapeutic strategies targeting
insulin-specific T cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903414 
PMCID: PMC2858386
PMID: 19966211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

