
1. Infect Immun. 2010 Feb;78(2):672-9. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00808-09. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

Treponema denticola suppresses expression of human {beta}-defensin-3 in gingival 
epithelial cells through inhibition of the toll-like receptor 2 axis.

Shin JE(1), Kim YS, Oh JE, Min BM, Choi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oromaxillofacial Infection & Immunity, School of Dentistry and
Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University, 28-2 Yeongeon-dong,
Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-749, South Korea.

We reported previously that Treponema denticola, one of the periodontal
pathogens, suppresses the expression of human beta-defensins (HBDs) in human
gingival epithelial cells. To identify the mechanisms involved in this
suppression, immortalized and normal human gingival epithelial cells were
infected with live or heat-killed T. denticola for 24 h, and then the expression 
of HBDs was examined by real-time RT-PCR. Live T. denticola suppressed the
expression of HBD-3 substantially and also suppressed the expression of HBD-1 and
HBD-2. However, heat-killed bacteria did not produce a suppressive effect but
instead slightly upregulated the levels of HBD-2 and HBD-3. In contrast to live
T. denticola, which reduced the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) and NF-kappaB within an hour of infection, heat-killed bacteria did not
show any inhibitory effect on the MAPK and NF-kappaB signaling pathways.
Knockdown of Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) via RNA interference abolished the
suppressive effect of T. denticola on the expression of HBD-3. Heat-killed T.
denticola but not live bacteria could activate TLR2 in CHO/CD14/TLR2 reporter
cells, suggesting that T. denticola contains a heat-labile inhibitor(s) of TLR2
in addition to ligands recognized by TLR2. Indeed, live T. denticola was able to 
inhibit TLR2 activation by Pam(3)CSK. In conclusion, T. denticola suppressed the 
expression of HBD-3 by inhibiting the TLR2 axis in gingival epithelial cells.
These results may provide new insight into the pathogenesis of periodontitis
caused by T. denticola.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00808-09 
PMCID: PMC2812195
PMID: 19995893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

