
1. Vaccine. 2010 Feb 10;28(6):1468-76. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.11.071. Epub 2009
Dec 6.

Multiple innate signaling pathways cooperate with CD40 to induce potent,
CD70-dependent cellular immunity.

McWilliams JA(1), Sanchez PJ, Haluszczak C, Gapin L, Kedl RM.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Department of Immunology, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO
80206, United States.

We have previously shown that Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists cooperate with
CD40 to generate CD8 T cell responses exponentially larger than the responses
generated with traditional vaccine formulations. We have also shown that combined
TLR agonist/anti-CD40 immunization uniquely induces the upregulation of CD70 on
antigen bearing dendritic cells (DCs). In contrast, immunization with either a
TLR agonist or a CD40 stimulus alone does not significantly increase CD70
expression on DCs. Furthermore, the CD8(+) T cell response generated by combined 
TLR agonist/anti-CD40 immunization is dependent on the expression of CD70 by DCs,
as CD70 blockade following immunization dramatically decreases the CD8 T cell
response. Here we show that other innate pathways, independent of the TLRs, can
also cooperate with CD40 to induce potent, CD70 dependent, CD8 T cell responses. 
These innate stimuli include Type I IFN (IFN) and alpha-galactosylceramide
(alphaGalCer) or aC-GalCer, glycolipids that are presented by a nonclassical
class I MHC molecule, CD1d, and are able to activate NKT cells. Furthermore, this
combined IFN/anti-CD40 immunization generates protective memory against bacterial
challenge with Listeria monocytogenes. Together these data indicate the
importance of assessing CD70 expression on DCs as a marker for the capacity of a 
given vaccine formulation to potently activate cellular immunity. Our data
indicate that optimal induction of CD70 expression requires a coordinated
stimulation of both innate (TLR, IFN, alphaGalCer) and adaptive (CD40) signaling 
pathways.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.11.071 
PMCID: PMC2822033
PMID: 19995538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

