
1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2009 Dec;89 Suppl 1:S74-6. doi:
10.1016/S1472-9792(09)70017-4.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis ESX-1 system-secreted protein ESAT-6 but not CFP10
inhibits human T-cell immune responses.

Samten B(1), Wang X, Barnes PF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pulmonary and Infectious Disease Control, University of Texas
Health Science Center, Tyler, TX 75708-3154, USA. buka.samten@uthct.edu

The secreted proteins of M. tuberculosis, early secreted antigenic target 6 kDa
(ESAT-6) and culture filtrate protein 10 kDa (CFP10), have been identified as
antigenic proteins with potent T-cell stimulatory effects, and therefore have
been the focus of tuberculosis vaccine studies. However, recent work showed that 
secretion of these proteins by the specialized ESAT-6 secretion system (ESX)-1 of
M. tuberculosis is associated with virulence and pathogenesis. The studies
demonstrated that ESAT-6 inhibits antigen-presenting cell function by reducing
IL-12 production by macrophages through interrupting TLR2 signaling pathways and 
inducing macrophage apoptosis. However, the effect of ESAT-6 on T cells remains
unexplored. To address this question, we studied the effect of recombinant ESAT-6
and CFP10 on human primary T-cell IFN-gamma secretion and proliferation. ESAT-6, 
but not CFP10, inhibited IFN-gamma production by T cells stimulated with M.
tuberculosis or with anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28, in a dose-dependent manner. ESAT-6 
also inhibited T-cell production of IL-17 and TNF-a, but not IL-2. Presence of
CFP10 as part of the ESAT-6/CFP10 heterodimer did not affect ESAT-6 inhibition of
T-cell IFN-gamma production. ESAT-6 inhibited the proliferation of CD3+ cells in 
response to TCR stimulation. ESAT-6 decreased T-cell IFN-gamma secretion by
mechanisms independent of cytotoxicity or apoptosis. ESAT-6 reduced IFN-gamma
mRNA levels by inhibiting the expression of the transcription factors, ATF-2,
c-Jun and CREB, which upregulate IFN-gamma gene expression in T cells through
binding to the IFN-gamma proximal promoter. ESAT-6, but not CFP10, bound to T
cells and inhibited expression of early activation markers without reducing
phosphorylation of ZAP70, a proximal TCR signaling molecule. We conclude that
ESAT-6 directly inhibits human T-cell responses by affecting TCR signaling
pathways downstream of ZAP70.

DOI: 10.1016/S1472-9792(09)70017-4 
PMID: 20006311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

