
1. Infect Immun. 2010 Mar;78(3):1135-46. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00940-09. Epub 2009 Dec
14.

Klebsiella pneumoniae capsule polysaccharide impedes the expression of
beta-defensins by airway epithelial cells.

Moranta D(1), Regueiro V, March C, Llobet E, Margareto J, Larrarte E, Garmendia
J, Bengoechea JA.

Author information: 
(1)Program Infection and Immunity, Fundaci√≥n Caubet- CIMERA Illes Balears,
Recinto Hospital Joan March, 07110 Bunyola, Spain.

Erratum in
    Infect Immun. 2010 Dec;78(12):5352. Larrate, Eider [corrected to Larrarte,
Eider].

Human beta-defensins (hBDs) contribute to the protection of the respiratory tract
against pathogens. It is reasonable to postulate that pathogens have developed
countermeasures to resist them. Klebsiella pneumoniae capsule polysaccharide
(CPS), but not the lipopolysaccharide O antigen, mediated resistance against hBD1
and hBD2. hBD3 was the most potent hBD against Klebsiella. We investigated the
possibility that as a strategy for survival in the lung, K. pneumoniae may not
activate the expression of hBDs. Infection of A549 and normal human bronchial
cells with 52145-Deltawca(K2), a CPS mutant, increased the expression of hBD2 and
hBD3. Neither the wild type nor the lipopolysaccharide O antigen mutant increased
the expression of hBDs. In vivo, 52145-Deltawca(K2) induced higher levels of mBD4
and mBD14, possible mouse orthologues of hBD2 and hBD3, respectively, than the
wild type. 52145-Deltawca(K2)-dependent upregulation of hBD2 occurred via
NF-kappaB and mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) p44/42, Jun N-terminal
protein kinase (JNK)-dependent pathways. The increase in hBD3 expression was
dependent on the MAPK JNK. 52145-Deltawca(K2) engaged Toll-like receptors 2 and 4
(TLR2 and TLR4) to activate hBD2, whereas hBD3 expression was dependent on NOD1. 
K. pneumoniae induced the expression of CYLD and MKP-1, which act as negative
regulators for 52145-Deltawca(K2)-induced expression of hBDs. Bacterial
engagement of pattern recognition receptors induced CYLD and MKP-1, which may
initiate the attenuation of proinflammatory pathways. The results of this study
indicate that K. pneumoniae CPS not only protects the pathogen from the
bactericidal action of defensins but also impedes their expression. These
features of K. pneumoniae CPS may facilitate pathogen survival in the hostile
environment of the lung.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00940-09 
PMCID: PMC2825953
PMID: 20008534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

