
1. Immunology. 2010 Apr;129(4):496-505. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03201.x. Epub 
2009 Nov 25.

Extensive major histocompatibility complex class I binding promiscuity for
Mycobacterium tuberculosis TB10.4 peptides and immune dominance of human
leucocyte antigen (HLA)-B*0702 and HLA-B*0801 alleles in TB10.4 CD8 T-cell
responses.

Axelsson-Robertson R(1), Weichold F, Sizemore D, Wulf M, Skeiky YA, Sadoff J,
Maeurer MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden.

The molecular definition of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class
I-presented CD8(+) T-cell epitopes from clinically relevant Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (Mtb) target proteins will aid in the rational design of
T-cell-based diagnostics of tuberculosis (TB) and the measurement of TB
vaccine-take. We used an epitope discovery system, based on recombinant MHC class
I molecules that cover the most frequent Caucasian alleles [human leucocyte
antigen (HLA)-A*0101, A*0201, A*0301, A*1101, A*2402, B*0702, B*0801 and B*1501],
to identify MHC class I-binding peptides from overlapping 9-mer peptides
representing the Mtb protein TB10.4. A total of 33 MHC class I-binding epitopes
were identified, spread across the entire amino acid sequence, with some
clustering at the N- and C-termini of the protein. Binding of individual peptides
or closely related peptide species to different MHC class I alleles was
frequently observed. For instance, the common motif of xIMYNYPAMx bound to six of
eight alleles. Affinity (50% effective dose) and off-rate (half life) analysis of
candidate Mtb peptides will help to define the conditions for CD8(+) T-cell
interaction with their nominal MHC class I-peptide ligands. Subsequent
construction of tetramers allowed us to confirm the recognition of some of the
epitopes by CD8(+) T cells from patients with active pulmonary TB. HLA-B alleles 
served as the dominant MHC class I restricting molecules for anti-Mtb
TB10.4-specific CD8(+) T-cell responses measured in CD8(+) T cells from patients 
with pulmonary TB.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03201.x 
PMCID: PMC2842496
PMID: 20002212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

