
1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2010 Feb;35(2):138-45. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2009.09.024. Epub 2009 Dec 16.

Antibacterial and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-neutralising activity of human
cationic antimicrobial peptides against periodontopathogens.

Lee SH(1), Jun HK, Lee HR, Chung CP, Choi BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Microbiology and Immunology, School of Dentistry, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

In this study, we investigated the antibacterial activity of eight antimicrobial 
peptides (AMPs), comprising four human beta-defensins (HBDs), three human
neutrophil defensins (HNPs) and the cathelicidin LL-37, against two
representative periodontopathogens, Prevotella intermedia and Tannerella
forsythia. The neutralising effect of these AMPs on expression of interleukin
(IL)-1beta, IL-8 and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) induced by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from P. intermedia and T. forsythia was also tested in
THP-1 cells and human gingival fibroblasts. Prevotella intermedia was susceptible
to HBD-3 and LL-37 but was resistant to HBD-1, HBD-2, HBD-4, HNP-1, HNP-2 and
HNP-3 at concentrations up to 10microM. However, all of the AMPs except HNP-2 at 
5microM significantly inhibited the expression of IL-1beta, IL-8 and ICAM-1
induced by P. intermedia LPS. Tannerella forsythia showed marked susceptibility
to the AMPs tested in the following order: LL-37, HBD-3, HBD-2, HBD-1, HNP-1 and 
HBD-4. All of the AMPs except HNP-3 had significant neutralising effects on T.
forsythia LPS activity. The AMPs showing LPS-neutralising activity inhibited LPS 
binding to the cells. These results suggest that AMPs may be considered as
preventive and therapeutic agents against mixed bacterial infections such as
periodontitis by eliminating the pathogens themselves as well as reducing the
activity of LPS.

Crown Copyright 2009. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2009.09.024 
PMID: 20006468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

