
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2010 Mar;86(2):731-41. doi: 10.1007/s00253-009-2370-4.
Epub 2009 Dec 15.

Synthesis of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) by Lactobacillus plantarum DSM19463: 
functional grape must beverage and dermatological applications.

Di Cagno R(1), Mazzacane F, Rizzello CG, De Angelis M, Giuliani G, Meloni M, De
Servi B, Gobbetti M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Protezione delle Piante e Microbiologia Applicata, Facoltà di 
Agraria, Università degli Studi di Bari, Via G. Amendola 165/a, 70126, Bari,
Italy.

Agriculture surplus were used as substrates to synthesize gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA) by Lactobacillus plantarum DSM19463 for the manufacture of a functional
beverage or as a novel application for dermatological purposes. Dilution of the
grape must to 1 or 4% (w/v) of total carbohydrates favored higher cell yield and 
synthesis of GABA with respect to whey milk. Optimal conditions for synthesizing 
GABA in grape must were: initial pH 6.0, initial cell density of Log 7.0 cfu/mL, 
and addition of 18.4 mM L-glutamate. L. plantarum DSM19463 synthesized 4.83 mM of
GABA during fermentation at 30 degrees C for 72 h. The fermented grape must also 
contain various levels of niacin, free minerals, and polyphenols, and Log 10.0
cfu/g of viable cells of L. plantarum DSM19463. Freeze dried preparation of grape
must was applied to the SkinEthic(R) Reconstructed Human Epidermis or multi-layer
human skin model (FT-skin tissue). The effect on transcriptional regulation of
human beta-defensin-2 (HBD-2), hyaluronan synthase (HAS1), filaggrin (FGR), and
involucrin genes was assayed through RT-PCR. Compared to GABA used as pure
chemical compound, the up-regulation HBD-2 was similar while the effect on the
expression of HAS1 and FGR genes was higher.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-009-2370-4 
PMID: 20013120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

