
1. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2010 Jan;10(1):28-35.

An orally bioavailable c-Met kinase inhibitor potently inhibits brain tumor
malignancy and growth.

Guessous F(1), Zhang Y, diPierro C, Marcinkiewicz L, Sarkaria J, Schiff D,
Buchanan S, Abounader R.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, USA.

The receptor tyrosine kinase, c-Met and its ligand hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)
are important regulators of malignancy in human cancer including brain tumors.
c-Met is frequently activated in brain tumors and has emerged as a promising
target for molecular therapies. Recently, an orally bioavailable small molecule
kinase inhibitor of c-Met (SGX523) was developed by SGX Pharmaceuticals. We
tested the effects of this inhibitor on c-Met brain tumor cell activation,
c-Met-dependent malignancy, and in vivo glioma xenograft growth. SGX523 potently 
inhibited c-Met activation and c-Met-dependent signaling at nanomolar
concentrations in glioma cells, primary gliomas, glioma stem cells and
medulloblastoma cells. SGX523 treatment inhibited c-Met-dependent brain tumor
cell proliferation and G1/S cell cycle progression. SGX523 also inhibited brain
tumor cell migration and invasion. Furthermore, systemic delivery of SGX523 via
oral gavage to mice bearing orthotopic human glioblastoma xenografts led to a
significant decrease of in vivo tumor growth. These studies show that c-Met
activation and c-Met-dependent brain tumor cell and stem cell malignancy can be
inhibited by small molecules. The study also shows for the first time that oral
delivery of a small molecule kinase inhibitor of c-Met inhibits intracranial
tumor growth. These findings suggest that targeting c-Met with small molecule
kinase inhibitors is a promising approach for brain tumor therapy.

DOI: 10.2174/1871520611009010028 
PMCID: PMC3278215
PMID: 20015006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

