
1. Mol Immunol. 2010 Feb;47(5):943-52. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.11.009. Epub 2009 
Dec 16.

Mycobacterial antigen(s) induce anergy by altering TCR- and TCR/CD28-induced
signalling events: insights into T-cell unresponsiveness in leprosy.

Dagur PK(1), Sharma B, Kumar G, Khan NA, Katoch VM, Sengupta U, Joshi B.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Division, National JALMA Institute for Leprosy and Other
Mycobacterial Diseases (ICMR), Taj Ganj, Agra 282001, U.P., India.

Present study investigates the role of Mycobacterium leprae (M. leprae) antigens 
on TCR- and TCR/CD28-induced signalling leading to T-cell activation and further 
correlates these early biochemical events with T-cell anergy, as prevailed in
advanced stages of leprosy. We observed that both whole cell lystae (WCL) and
soluble fraction of M. leprae sonicate (MLSA) not only inhibited TCR,
thapsigargin and ionomycin induced calcium fluxes by diminishing the opening of
calcium channels, but also TCR- or TCR/CD28-induced proximal signalling events
like phosphorylation of Zap-70 and protein kinase-C (PKC) activity. Study of TCR-
and TCR/CD28-induced downstream signals revealed that M. leprae antigens curtail 
phosphorylation of both Erk1/2 and p38MAPK, consequently altering terminal
signalling events like reduced binding of NFAT on IL-2 promoter and transcription
of IL-2 gene, diminished expression of activation markers (CD25 and CD69).
Furthermore, M. leprae fractions significantly inhibited IL-2 secretion and
T-cell blastogenesis in healthy individuals. Altogether, results suggest that M. 
leprae interferes with TCR/CD28-induced upstream as well as downstream signalling
events resulting in reduced IL-2 production and thus inhibition in T-cell
proliferation, which might be responsible for T-cell unresponsiveness leading to 
stage of immunosuppression and consequently, for the progression of disease.

(c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.11.009 
PMID: 20018378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

