
1. Transplantation. 2009 Dec 27;88(12):1349-59. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e3181bd7b3a.

Bortezomib can suppress activation of rapamycin-resistant memory T cells without 
affecting regulatory T-cell viability in non-human primates.

Kim JS(1), Lee JI, Shin JY, Kim SY, Shin JS, Lim JH, Cho HS, Yoon IH, Kim KH, Kim
SJ, Park CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Seoul National University College
of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Memory T cells specific for donor antigens are currently recognized
as a significant barrier for maintaining a successful transplant. Furthermore, it
has been shown that commonly used immunosuppressive drugs do not alleviate this
memory response. Here, we report that rapamycin allows significant proliferation 
of memory T cells and bortezomib can abrogate the proliferation of
rapamycin-resistant memory T cells when preserving the survival of regulatory T
cells.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells freshly isolated from non-human
primates were stimulated with anti-CD3/CD28 antibodies, and inhibitory and
apoptotic effects of rapamycin and bortezomib on memory T-cell proliferation were
investigated. The CD95 marker in CD3+ T cells was used for the separate
enrichment of memory T cells and na√Øve T cells.
RESULTS: Rapamycin at the level even higher than therapeutic concentration could 
not suppress the proliferation of a significant proportion of memory T cells.
However, the combined administration of bortezomib and rapamycin abrogated the
proliferation of rapamycin-resistant memory T cells. Furthermore, bortezomib
preserved the survival of preexisting CD4+ FoxP3+ regulatory T cells, while
inducing apoptosis of CD4+ FoxP3- conventional T cells. The combined
administration of low doses of rapamycin and bortezomib also exerted an additive 
effect on suppressing T-cell proliferation. Cytokine analysis demonstrated that
bortezomib could not only suppress rapamycin-permissive interleukin (IL)-6
production, but also production of interferon (IFN)-gamma, IL-4, and IL-10.
CONCLUSIONS: This article provides in vitro data from which immunosuppressive
regimens for the effective control of memory T cells in non-human preclinical
experiments and in clinical trials are selected.

DOI: 10.1097/TP.0b013e3181bd7b3a 
PMID: 20029331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

