
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2010 Apr;87(4):691-701. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0409227. Epub 2009 Dec
22.

The T cell receptor-mediated phosphorylation of Pyk2 tyrosines 402 and 580 occurs
via a distinct mechanism than other receptor systems.

Collins M(1), Tremblay M, Chapman N, Curtiss M, Rothman PB, Houtman JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
2210 MERF, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

The tyrosine kinase Pyk2 is vital for integrating receptor-mediated signals
controlling adhesion and motility in neuronal, epithelial, and hematopoietic cell
types. In T cells, the stimulation of the TCR and costimulatory, chemokine,
cytokine, and integrin receptors leads to the phosphorylation of Pyk2 and the
induction of its catalytic activity. However, our understanding of the mechanism 
of the TCR-induced, site-specific phosphorylation of this kinase is incomplete
and contradictory. To address this issue, the role of individual signaling
pathways in the phosphorylation of Pyk2 tyrosines 402 and 580 upon TCR activation
was assessed in human T cells. In contrast to other receptor systems, the
TCR-induced phosphorylation of Pyk2 tyrosines 402 and 580 was dependent on the
Src family kinases, Fyn or Lck. Interestingly, the TCR-mediated phosphorylation
of Pyk2 tyrosines 402 and 580 did not require Ca(2+) influx, ZAP-70 activation,
actin cytoskeleton rearrangement, or PI3K function. These observations are
different than other receptor systems, which require the induction of one or more
of these pathways. Together, these data have defined more fully the mechanism for
the TCR-induced phosphorylation of specific sites on Pyk2, suggesting that the
TCR has a distinct pathway for the activation of Pyk2 compared with other
receptor systems.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0409227 
PMID: 20028775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

