
1. J Invest Dermatol. 2010 Apr;130(4):985-94. doi: 10.1038/jid.2009.384. Epub 2009
Dec 24.

Sebum free fatty acids enhance the innate immune defense of human sebocytes by
upregulating beta-defensin-2 expression.

Nakatsuji T(1), Kao MC, Zhang L, Zouboulis CC, Gallo RL, Huang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, San Diego, California 92161, USA.

Various sebum free fatty acids (FFAs) have shown antibacterial activity against a
broad range of gram-positive bacteria, resulting in the suggestion that they are 
accountable, at least partially, for the direct antimicrobial activity of the
skin surface. In this study, we examined the effects of sebum FFAs on the
antimicrobial peptide (AMP)-mediated innate immune defense of human sebocytes.
Incubation of lauric acid, palmitic acid, or oleic acid (OA) with human sebocytes
dramatically enhanced their expression of human beta-defensin (hBD)-2, one of the
predominant AMPs found in the skin, whereas remarkable increases in hBD-1, hBD-3,
and human cathelicidin LL-37 were not observed. Secreted hBD-2 was detectable by 
western blotting in the supernatant of sebocyte culture incubated with each FFA, 
but not with a vehicle control. The supernatant of FFA-incubated sebocyte culture
showed antimicrobial activity against Propionibacterium acnes, whereas the
enhanced antimicrobial activity of human sebocytes was neutralized by anti-hBD-2 
IgG. In addition, the FFA-induced hBD-2 expression was suppressed by blocking the
cluster of differentiation (CD)36 fatty acid translocase on the surface of
sebocytes with anti-human CD36 IgG or blocking the NF-kappaB signaling pathway
with BMS-345541, a highly selective inhibitor of inhibitory kappaB kinase. These 
data suggest that sebum FFAs upregulate the expression of hBD-2 in human
sebocytes, which may enhance the disinfecting activity of the human sebaceous
gland. The FFA-induced upregulation of hBD-2 is facilitated by CD36-mediated FFA 
uptake and NF-kappaB-mediated transactivation. The upregulation of mouse
beta-defensin 4, a mouse ortholog for hBD-2, was also observed in the hair
follicle sebaceous glands of mouse ear skin after an epicutaneous application of 
OA, the most hBD-2-inducible FFA tested. This report highlights the potential of 
using FFAs as a multifunctional antimicrobial therapy agent for acne vulgaris
treatment; FFAs may provide direct antibacterial activities against P. acnes and 
enhance the skin's innate antibacterial defense by inducing the expression of
hBD-2 in sebocytes as well.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2009.384 
PMCID: PMC3057125
PMID: 20032992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

