
1. Cell Microbiol. 2010 May 1;12(5):626-39. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2009.01421.x.
Epub 2009 Dec 21.

The innate immune molecule, NOD1, regulates direct killing of Helicobacter pylori
by antimicrobial peptides.

Grubman A(1), Kaparakis M, Viala J, Allison C, Badea L, Karrar A, Boneca IG, Le
Bourhis L, Reeve S, Smith IA, Hartland EL, Philpott DJ, Ferrero RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

The cytosolic innate immune molecule, NOD1, recognizes peptidoglycan (PG)
delivered to epithelial cells via the Helicobacter pylori cag pathogenicity
island (cagPAI), and has been implicated in host defence against cagPAI(+)H.
pylori bacteria. To further clarify the role of NOD1 in host defence, we
investigated NOD1-dependent regulation of human beta-defensins (DEFBs) in two
epithelial cell lines. Our findings identify that NOD1 activation, via either
cagPAI(+) bacteria or internalized PG, was required for DEFB4 and DEFB103
expression in HEK293 cells. To investigate cell type-specific induction of DEFB4 
and DEFB103, we generated stable NOD1'knockdown' (KD) and control AGS cells.
Reporter gene assay and RT-PCR analyses revealed that only DEFB4 was induced in
an NOD1-/cagPAI-dependent fashion in AGS cells. Moreover, culture supernatants
from AGS control, but not AGS NOD1 KD cells, stimulated with cagPAI(+)H. pylori, 
significantly reduced H. pylori bacterial numbers. siRNA studies confirmed that
human beta-defensin 2 (hBD-2), but not hBD-3, contributes to the antimicrobial
activity of AGS cell supernatants against H. pylori. This study demonstrates, for
the first time, the involvement of NOD1 and hBD-2 in direct killing of H. pylori 
bacteria by epithelial cells and confirms the importance of NOD1 in host defence 
mechanisms against cagPAI(+)H. pylori infection.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2009.01421.x 
PMID: 20039881  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

