
1. J Gastrointest Surg. 2010 Mar;14(3):449-61. doi: 10.1007/s11605-009-1045-x. Epub 
2009 Dec 22.

Colonic gene expression in conventional and germ-free mice with a focus on the
butyrate receptor GPR109A and the butyrate transporter SLC5A8.

Cresci GA(1), Thangaraju M, Mellinger JD, Liu K, Ganapathy V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Butyrate is a bacterial fermentation product that produces its
beneficial effects on colon through GPR109A, a butyrate receptor, and SLC5A8, a
butyrate transporter. In this study, we compared the expression of GPR109A and
SLC5A8 between conventional mice and germ-free mice to test the hypothesis that
the expression of these two proteins will be decreased in germ-free mice compared
to conventional mice because of the absence of bacterial fermentation products
and that colonization of germ-free mouse colon with conventional bacteria will
reverse these changes.
METHODS: RNA was prepared from the ileum and colon of conventional mice and
germ-free mice and used for RT-PCR to determine mRNA levels. Tissue sections were
used for immunohistochemical analysis to monitor the expression of GPR109A and
SLC5A8 at the protein level. cDNA microarray was used to determine the
differential expression of the genes in the colon between conventional mice and
germ-free mice.
RESULTS: In conventional mice with normal bacterial colonization of the
intestinal tract, GPR109A and SLC5A8 are expressed on the apical membrane of
epithelial cells lining the ileum and colon. In germ-free mice, the expression of
GPR109A and SLC5A8 is reduced markedly in the ileum and colon. The expression
returns to normal levels when the intestinal tract of germ-free mice is colonized
with bacteria. The expression of the Na(+)-coupled glucose transporter, SGLT1,
follows a similar pattern. Microarray analysis identifies approximately 700 genes
whose expression is altered more than twofold in germ-free mice compared to
conventional mice. Among these genes are the chloride/bicarbonate exchanger
SLC26A3 and the water channel aquaporin 4. The expression of SLC26A3 and AQP4 in 
ileum and colon is reduced in germ-free mice, but the levels return to normal
upon bacterial colonization.
CONCLUSION: Gut bacteria play an active role in the control of gene expression in
the host intestinal tract, promoting the expression of the genes that are
obligatory for the biological actions of the bacterial fermentation product
butyrate and also the genes that are related to electrolyte and water absorption.

DOI: 10.1007/s11605-009-1045-x 
PMID: 20033346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

