
1. Med Sci Monit. 2010 Jan;16(1):BR1-5.

Effects of blue-green algae extracts on the proliferation of human adult stem
cells in vitro: a preliminary study.

Shytle DR(1), Tan J, Ehrhart J, Smith AJ, Sanberg CD, Sanberg PR, Anderson J,
Bickford PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, USF, Tampa, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Adult stem cells are known to have a reduced restorative capacity as 
we age and are more vulnerable to oxidative stress resulting in a reduced ability
of the body to heal itself. We have previously reported that a proprietary
nutraceutical formulation, NT-020, promotes proliferation of human hematopoietic 
stem cells in vitro and protects stem cells from oxidative stress when given
chronically to mice in vivo. Because previous reports suggest that the blue green
algae, Aphanizomenon flos-aquae (AFA) can modulate immune function in animals, we
sought to investigate the effects of AFA on human stem cells in cultures.
MATERIAL/METHODS: Two AFA products were used for extraction: AFA whole (AFA-W)
and AFA cellular concentrate (AFA-C). Water and ethanol extractions were
performed to isolate active compounds for cell culture experiments. For cell
proliferation analysis, human bone marrow cells or human CD34+ cells were
cultured in 96 well plates and treated for 72 hours with various extracts. An MTT
assay was used to estimate cell proliferation.
RESULTS: We report here that the addition of an ethanol extract of AFA-cellular
concentrate further enhances the stem cell proliferative action of NT-020 when
incubated with human adult bone marrow cells or human CD34+ hematopoietic
progenitors in culture. Algae extracts alone had only moderate activity in these 
stem cell proliferation assays.
CONCLUSIONS: This preliminary study suggests that NT-020 plus the ethanol extract
of AFA cellular concentrate may act to promote proliferation of human stem cell
populations.


PMID: 20037479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

