
1. J Immunol. 2010 Feb 1;184(3):1218-26. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902620. Epub 2010
Jan 4.

Commensal microbiota and CD8+ T cells shape the formation of invariant NKT cells.

Wei B(1), Wingender G, Fujiwara D, Chen DY, McPherson M, Brewer S, Borneman J,
Kronenberg M, Braun J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Commensal bacteria play an important role in formation of the immune system, but 
the mechanisms involved are incompletely understood. In this study, we analyze
CD1d-restricted invariant NKT (iNKT) cells in germfree mice and in two colonies
of C57BL/6 mice termed conventional flora and restricted flora (RF), stably
bearing commensal microbial communities of diverse but distinct composition. In
germfree mice, iNKT cells were moderately reduced, suggesting that commensal
microbiota were partially required for the antigenic drive in maintaining
systemic iNKT cells. Surprisingly, even greater depletion of iNKT cell population
occurred in RF mice. This was in part attributable to reduced RF levels of
intestinal microbial taxa (Sphingomonas spp.) known to express antigenic
glycosphingolipid products. However, memory and activated CD8(+) T cells were
also expanded in RF mice, prompting us to test whether CD8(+) T cell activity
might be further depleting iNKT cells. Indeed, iNKT cell numbers were restored in
RF mice bearing the CD8alpha(-/-) genotype or in adult wild-type RF mice acutely 
depleted with anti-CD8 Ab. Moreover, iNKT cells were restored in RF mice bearing 
the Prf1(-/-) phenotype, a key component of cytolytic function. These findings
indicate that commensal microbiota, through positive (antigenic drive) and
negative (cytolytic depletion by CD8(+) T cells) mechanisms, profoundly shape the
iNKT cell compartment. Because individuals greatly vary in the composition of
their microbial communities, enteric microbiota may play an important epigenetic 
role in the striking differences in iNKT cell abundance in humans and therefore
in their potential contribution to host immune status.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902620 
PMCID: PMC3458428
PMID: 20048124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

