
1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Mar;298(3):G395-401. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00465.2009. Epub 2009 Dec 31.

Lactobacillus acidophilus stimulates the expression of SLC26A3 via a
transcriptional mechanism.

Raheja G(1), Singh V, Ma K, Boumendjel R, Borthakur A, Gill RK, Saksena S,
Alrefai WA, Ramaswamy K, Dudeja PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago and Jesse Brown
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 60612, USA.

Clinical efficacy of probiotics in treating various forms of diarrhea has been
clearly established. However, mechanisms underlying antidiarrheal effects of
probiotics are not completely defined. Diarrhea is caused either by decreased
absorption or increased secretion of electrolytes and solutes in the intestine.
In this regard, the electroneutral absorption of two major electrolytes, Na(+)
and Cl(-), occurs mainly through the coupled operation of Na(+)/H(+) exchangers
and Cl(-)/OH(-) exchangers. Previous studies from our laboratory have shown that 
Lactobacillus acidophilus (LA) acutely stimulated Cl(-)/OH(-) exchange activity
via an increase in the surface levels of the apical anion exchanger SLC26A3
(DRA). However, whether probiotics influence SLC26A3 expression and promoter
activity has not been examined. The present studies were, therefore, undertaken
to investigate the long-term effects of LA on SLC26A3 expression and promoter
activity. Treatment of Caco-2 cells with LA for 6-24 h resulted in a significant 
increase in Cl(-)/OH(-) exchange activity. DRA mRNA levels were also
significantly elevated in response to LA treatment starting as early as 8 h.
Additionally, the promoter activity of DRA was increased by more than twofold
following 8 h LA treatment of Caco-2 cells. Similar to the in vitro studies, in
vivo studies using mice gavaged with LA also showed significantly increased DRA
mRNA ( approximately 4-fold) and protein expression in the colonic regions as
assessed by Western blot analysis and immunofluorescence. In conclusion, increase
in DRA promoter activity and expression may contribute to the upregulation of
intestinal electrolyte absorption and might underlie the potential antidiarrheal 
effects of LA.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00465.2009 
PMCID: PMC2838518
PMID: 20044511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

