
1. J Fish Dis. 2010 Apr;33(4):285-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2009.01120.x. Epub
2010 Jan 3.

Genetic diversity and antimicrobial resistance of Flavobacterium psychrophilum
isolated from cultured rainbow trout, Onchorynchus mykiss (Walbaum), in Spain.

Del Cerro A(1), Márquez I, Prieto JM.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio Regional de Investigación y Desarrollo Agroalimentario (SERIDA), Area
de Sanidad Animal, Travesía del Hospital, Gijón, Spain.
anadelcerro@rocketmail.com

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the causative agent of bacterial cold-water
disease (CWD) and rainbow trout fry syndrome (RTFS) in salmonids. These diseases 
are a major problem in the aquaculture industry in Spain, and a better
understanding of the epidemiology of F. psychrophilum isolates is necessary to
improve management strategies. In this study, to investigate genetic variability 
of this bacterium, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis after DNA digestion with
endonuclease StuI, plasmid profiling analysis and antimicrobial susceptibility
testing were undertaken with 25 isolates of F. psychrophilum from Spain. These
isolates were classified into 17 patterns by PFGE analysis, which were grouped
into four clusters and seven independent branches. Twenty isolates (80%)
possessed plasmids of 3.5 kb (n = 13) or 5.5 kb (n = 7). No plasmids were
associated with antibiotic resistance to oxytetracycline (OTC) or florfenicol
(FLO). Twenty isolates (80%) had minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) to OTC 
of between 2.4 and 9.7 microg mL(-1), and all isolates were susceptible to FLO. A
relationship between the origin of the isolates and PFGE genotypes was found.
Plasmid profile typing correlated with PFGE profile typing, whereas no
correlation was found between antimicrobial susceptibility testing and PFGE
profiles. These results suggest that the population of F. psychrophilum with
pathogenic potential in northern Spain is quite heterogeneous.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2009.01120.x 
PMID: 20059636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

