
1. J Infect Dis. 2010 Feb 15;201(4):544-52. doi: 10.1086/650341.

The complement system facilitates clearance of Enterococcus faecium during murine
peritonitis.

Leendertse M(1), Willems RJ, Flierman R, de Vos AF, Bonten MJ, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam. The Netherlands. m.leendertse@amc.uva.nl

BACKGROUND: Infections with multidrug-resistant enterococci are a growing problem
worldwide. Little is known about the host defense against enterococcal diseases. 
In vitro studies have demonstrated an important role played by complement
proteins in neutrophil-mediated phagocytosis. In this study, we investigated the 
importance of complement in an in vivo model of Enterococcus faecium peritonitis.
METHODS: Peripheral neutrophils and peritoneal macrophages were incubated with E.
faecium that had been preincubated with decomplemented or normal plasma, and
phagocytosis and killing were examined. E. faecium peritonitis was induced in
C57BL/6 mice rendered complement deficient by intraperitoneal injection with
cobra venom factor (CVF) and in complement 3 (C3) knockout mice. The course of
the infection was compared with that in saline control and wild-type mice,
respectively, at several time points up to 48 h after infection.
RESULTS: Opsonization by complement enhanced phagocytosis by neutrophils and
macrophages. CVF-treated and C3 knockout mice were severely hampered in clearing 
E. faecium from all organs and tissues under study (peritoneal fluid, blood,
lungs, and liver). Higher peritoneal cytokine and chemokine levels were measured 
in decomplemented mice, whereas no differences in systemic or peritoneal cell
kinetics were detected.
CONCLUSION: Complement deficiency severely hampers the clearance of E. faecium
peritonitis and subsequent systemic infection.

DOI: 10.1086/650341 
PMID: 20064073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

