
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2010 Jun 15;135(3-4):208-17. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2009.11.016. Epub 2009 Dec 21.

Differentially expressed genes associated with Staphylococcus aureus mastitis in 
dairy goats.

Pisoni G(1), Moroni P, Genini S, Stella A, Boettcher PJ, Cremonesi P,
Scaccabarozzi L, Giuffra E, Castiglioni B.

Author information: 
(1)Università degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Patologia Animale, Igiene e 
Sanità Pubblica Veterinaria, via Celoria 10, 20133 Milan, Italy.
giuliano.pisoni@unimi.it

To study gene expression within the mammary glands of dairy goats with mastitis, 
mRNA was collected from milk somatic cells (MSCs) of left udder halves challenged
with Staphylococcus aureus and right udder halves infused with PBS, as control,
at different time points (0, 12, 24 and 48h post-infection). Transcriptional
profiles were investigated using bovine cDNA microarrays; of the total 288
differentially expressed genes identified with ANOVA analysis (False Discovery
Rate=0.05, 1.5-fold change), 26, 36 and 16 genes were down-regulated at 12, 24
and 48h post-infection, respectively, while 60, 141 and 9 genes were up-regulated
at the same corresponding time points. The expression profiles clearly changed at
24h post-infection with 177 genes significantly altered, corresponding to a
10-fold increase of S. aureus bacterial count in milk from infected udders.
Differential expression of selected genes (CD2BP2, BCAP31, MHCII, FOSL2, MAPK13, 
ILT5 and JUNB) was also confirmed by real-time PCR at the different time points
considered, showing high correlation with the microarray measurements and high
reliability of the microarray analyses. The most readily inducible classes of
genes in caprine MSCs infected with S. aureus were pro-inflammatory cytokines,
chemokines and their receptors; IL-1alpha, lymphotoxin alpha, granulocyte
chemotactic protein (CXCL6), and IL-2 receptor gamma were all up-regulated in
infected udders versus healthy controls. This study identified a number of
differentially expressed genes induced by S. aureus intramammary infection and
demonstrates the intricacy of the patterns of gene expression that influence host
response to a complex pathogen of significant relevance to both human and
veterinary medicine.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2009.11.016 
PMID: 20060596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

