
1. J Immunol. 2010 Feb 15;184(4):2130-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901528. Epub 2010
Jan 18.

Loss of CD4+ T cell IL-6R expression during inflammation underlines a role for
IL-6 trans signaling in the local maintenance of Th17 cells.

Jones GW(1), McLoughlin RM, Hammond VJ, Parker CR, Williams JD, Malhotra R,
Scheller J, Williams AS, Rose-John S, Topley N, Jones SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection, Immunity and Biochemistry, School of Medicine,
Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales, UK.

IL-6 responses are classically orchestrated via a membrane-bound IL-6R (CD126)
alpha subunit (classical IL-6R signaling) or through a soluble form of this
cognate receptor (IL-6 trans signaling). Appraisal of IL-6R expression on human
and mouse T cells emphasized that IL-6R expression is closely linked with that of
CCR7 and CD62L. In this regard, infiltrating effector T cells from clinical and
experimental peritonitis episodes lose IL-6R expression, and anti-CD3/CD28 Ab
costimulation of peripheral T cells in vitro leads to a downregulation in IL-6R
expression. Consequently, IL-6 signaling through membrane-bound IL-6R seems to be
limited to naive or central memory T cell populations. Loss of IL-6R expression
by activated T cells further suggests that these effector cells might still
retain IL-6 responsiveness via IL-6 trans signaling. Using IL-6R-deficient mice
and recombinant tools that modulate the capacity of IL-6 to signal via its
soluble receptor, we report that local control of IL-6 trans signaling regulates 
the effector characteristics of the T cell infiltrate and promotes the
maintenance of IL-17A-secreting CD4(+) T cells. Therefore, we concluded that
classical IL-6R signaling in naive or central memory CD4(+) T cells is required
to steer their effector characteristics, whereas local regulation of soluble
IL-6R activity might serve to maintain the cytokine profile of the Th cell
infiltrate. Therefore, the activation status of a T cell population is linked
with an alteration in IL-6 responsiveness.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901528 
PMID: 20083667  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

