
1. Int Immunol. 2010 Mar;22(3):191-203. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxp127. Epub 2010 Jan
21.

Predominant occupation of the class I MHC molecule H-2Kwm7 with a single
self-peptide suggests a mechanism for its diabetes-protective effect.

Brims DR(1), Qian J, Jarchum I, Mikesh L, Palmieri E, Ramagopal UA, Malashkevich 
VN, Chaparro RJ, Lund T, Hattori M, Shabanowitz J, Hunt DF, Nathenson SG, Almo
SC, Dilorenzo TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune disease characterized by T cell-mediated
destruction of insulin-producing pancreatic beta cells. In both humans and the
non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse model of T1D, class II MHC alleles are the primary
determinant of disease susceptibility. However, class I MHC genes also influence 
risk. These findings are consistent with the requirement for both CD4(+) and
CD8(+) T cells in the pathogenesis of T1D. Although a large body of work has
permitted the identification of multiple mechanisms to explain the
diabetes-protective effect of particular class II MHC alleles, studies examining 
the protective influence of class I alleles are lacking. Here, we explored this
question by performing biochemical and structural analyses of the murine class I 
MHC molecule H-2K(wm7), which exerts a diabetes-protective effect in NOD mice. We
have found that H-2K(wm7) molecules are predominantly occupied by the single
self-peptide VNDIFERI, derived from the ubiquitous protein histone H2B. This
unexpected finding suggests that the inability of H-2K(wm7) to support T1D
development could be due, at least in part, to the failure of peptides from
critical beta-cell antigens to adequately compete for binding and be presented to
T cells. Predominant presentation of a single peptide would also be expected to
influence T-cell selection, potentially leading to a reduced ability to select a 
diabetogenic CD8(+) T-cell repertoire. The report that one of the predominant
peptides bound by T1D-protective HLA-A*31 is histone derived suggests the
potential translation of our findings to human diabetes-protective class I MHC
molecules.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxp127 
PMCID: PMC2829095
PMID: 20093428  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

