
1. Exp Dermatol. 2010 Jul 1;19(7):628-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2009.01030.x.
Epub 2010 Jan 19.

Differential expression of antimicrobial peptides in margins of chronic wounds.

Dressel S(1), Harder J, Cordes J, Wittersheim M, Meyer-Hoffert U, Sunderkötter C,
Gläser R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Germany.

Skin wounds usually heal without major infections, although the loss of the
mechanical epithelial barrier exposes the tissue to various bacteria. One reason 
may be the expression of antimicrobial peptides (AMP) of which some [human
beta-defensins (hBD) and LL-37] were recently shown to support additionally
certain steps of wound healing. There are no studies which have compared
expression patterns of different classes of AMP in chronic wounds. The aim of our
study was therefore to analyse the expression profile of hBD-2, hBD-3, LL-37,
psoriasin and RNase 7 by immunohistochemistry from defined wound margins of
chronic venous ulcers. We detected a strong induction of psoriasin and hBD-2 in
chronic wounds in comparison with healthy skin. Except for stratum corneum, no
expression of RNase 7 and LL-37 was detected in the epidermis while expression of
hBD-3 was heterogeneous. Bacterial swabs identified Staphylococcus aureus and
additional bacterial populations, but no association between colonization and AMP
expression was found. The differential expression of AMP is noteworthy
considering the high bacterial load of chronic ulcers. Clinically,
supplementation of AMP with the capability to enhance wound healing besides
restricting bacterial overgrowth could present a physiological support for
treatment of disturbed wound healing.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2009.01030.x 
PMID: 20100198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

