
1. Physiol Genomics. 2010 Apr 1;41(2):161-70. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00197.2009. Epub 2010 Jan 26.

Mammary gene expression profiles during an intramammary challenge reveal
potential mechanisms linking negative energy balance with impaired immune
response.

Moyes KM(1), Drackley JK, Morin DE, Rodriguez-Zas SL, Everts RE, Lewin HA, Loor
JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois, USA.

Our objective was to compare mammary tissue gene expression profiles during a
Streptococcus uberis (S. uberis) mastitis challenge between lactating cows
subjected to dietary-induced negative energy balance (NEB; n = 5) and cows fed ad
libitum to maintain positive energy balance (PEB; n = 5) to better understand the
mechanisms associated with NEB and risk of mastitis during the transition period.
The NEB cows were feed-restricted to 60% of calculated net energy for lactation
requirements for 7 days, and cows assigned to PEB were fed the same diet for ad
libitum intake. Five days after feed restriction, one rear mammary quarter of
each cow was inoculated with 5,000 cfu of S. uberis (O140J). At 20 h
postinoculation, S. uberis-infected mammary quarters from all cows were biopsied 
for RNA extraction. Negative energy balance resulted in 287 differentially
expressed genes (DEG; false discovery rate â‰¤ 0.05), with 86 DEG upregulated and
201 DEG downregulated in NEB vs. PEB. Canonical pathways most affected by NEB
were IL-8 signaling (10 genes), glucocorticoid receptor signaling (13), and
NRF2-mediated oxidative stress response (10). Among the genes differentially
expressed by NEB, cell growth and proliferation (48) and cellular development
(36) were the most enriched functions. Regarding immune response, HLA-A was
upregulated due to NEB, whereas the majority of genes involved in immune response
were downregulated (e.g., AKT1, IRAK1, MAPK9, and TRAF6). This study provided new
avenues for investigation into the mechanisms relating NEB and susceptibility to 
mastitis in lactating dairy cows.

DOI: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00197.2009 
PMCID: PMC4073896
PMID: 20103698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

