
1. Immunology. 2010 Jun;130(2):288-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03234.x. Epub
2010 Jan 19.

Acidification-dependent activation of CD1d-restricted natural killer T cells is
intact in cystic fibrosis.

Rzemieniak SE(1), Hirschfeld AF, Victor RE, Chilvers MA, Zheng D, van den Elzen
P, Turvey SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, BC Children's Hospital and Child & Family Research
Institute, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC.

CD1d-restricted natural killer T (NKT) cells are emerging as critical regulators 
of the immune response to infectious agents, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa;
and therapies to augment NKT-cell activation may represent a novel approach to
treat chronic, antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections. We examined the
capacity of dendritic cells (DCs) from people with cystic fibrosis (CF) to
activate NKT cells. Our study was motivated by three lines of evidence: (i) NKT
cells play a critical role in clearing P. aeruginosa infection; (ii) activation
of NKT cells requires acidification-dependent processing of glycolipid antigens
within the endolysosomal compartment; and (iii) endolysosomal acidification may
be reduced in CF. We demonstrated that NKT-cell activation was dependent upon
intact organelle acidification as inhibitors of the vacuolar (H(+))-ATPases
prevented DCs from activating NKT cells with two glycolipid antigens,
alpha-galactosylceramide and galactose-galactosylceramide. In contrast, cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) chloride channel dysfunction 
had no significant biological impact on the capacity of DCs to activate NKT
cells. Dendritic cells from subjects with CF and DCs treated with the
thiazolidinone CFTR(inh)-172 inhibitor showed no reduction in their ability to
activate NKT cells. Based on these data, we find no evidence for an inherent
defect in glycolipid antigen presentation to NKT cells in CF subjects.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03234.x 
PMCID: PMC2878472
PMID: 20102408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

