
1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 19;285(12):8711-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.099788. Epub 2010 
Jan 25.

Endotoxin conditioning induces VCP/p97-mediated and inducible nitric-oxide
synthase-dependent Tyr284 nitration in protein phosphatase 2A.

Ohama T(1), Brautigan DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Center 
for Cell Signaling, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Endotoxins activate Toll-like receptors and reprogram cells to be refractory to
secondary exposure. Here we found that activation of different Toll-like
receptors elicited a time- and dose-dependent increase in the levels of the
protein phosphatase 2A catalytic subunit (PP2Ac) but not its partner A subunit.
We purified the lipopolysaccharide-induced form of PP2A by chromatography plus
immunoprecipitation and used mass spectrometry to identify VCP/p97 as a novel
partner for PP2Ac. Endogenous VCP/p97 and PP2Ac were co-immunoprecipitated from
primary murine macrophages and human lymphocytes. GST-VCP/p97 bound purified PP2A
in pulldown assays, showing direct protein-protein interaction. Endotoxin
conditioning of macrophages induced formation of 3-nitrotyrosine in the PP2Ac
associated with VCP/p97, a response severely reduced in macrophages from iNOS
knock-out mice. The reaction of purified PP2A with peroxynitrite dissociated the 
A subunit, and 3-nitro-Tyr(284) was identified in PP2Ac by mass spectrometry.
Myc-PP2Ac (Y284F) expressed in cells was resistant to peroxynitrite-induced
nitration and reduction of A subunit binding. Transient expression of either
VCP/p97 or PP2Ac was sufficient to elevate levels of the dual specificity
phosphatase DUSP1, reduce p38 MAPK activation, and suppress tumor necrosis
factor-alpha release. We propose that VCP/p97-mediated Tyr nitration of PP2A
increases the levels of phosphatases PP2A and DUSP1 to contribute to the
refractory response of conditioned cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.099788 
PMCID: PMC2838294
PMID: 20100830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

