
1. Ren Fail. 2010 Jan;32(1):55-61. doi: 10.3109/08860220903367494.

Comparison of typical endocapillary and atypical mesangial proliferation in
postinfectious glomerulonephritis.

Hsieh YP(1), Wen YK, Chen ML.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Changhua Christian Medical Center, Changhua, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: There is a broad spectrum of glomerular histological findings in
postinfectious glomerulonephritis (PIGN). We conducted this retrospective study
to compare the clinicopathological features between two distinct morphology of
PIGN.
METHODS: Thirteen patients with typical endocapillary proliferation and eight
patients with atypical mesangial proliferation were enrolled in this study. The
patients' records were reviewed with respect to clinical presentation,
microbiology, serology, morphology of renal biopsy, and clinical course.
RESULTS: In comparison of histological parameters, glomerular neutrophil
infiltration was more commonly present in typical endocapillary proliferation
group (p = 0.018). Glomerular IgA dominant or co-dominant deposition was more
frequently seen in atypical mesangial proliferation group (p = 0.032). In a
comparison of clinical parameters, atypical mesangial proliferation group had
lesser degrees of proteinuria, higher serum levels of complement, and higher
rates of staphylococcal infection, although none of the differences was
statistically significant. Glomerular morphology did not seem to affect the renal
outcome. Moreover, our data suggested that the percentage of patients with
atypical mesangial proliferation significantly increased over time (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Atypical mesangial proliferation may represent a resolution stage of
PIGN. The nature of subclinical infection with a more protracted course may
contribute to the increasing recognition of this resolving PIGN at the time of
renal biopsy. Another possible explanation is that the atypical morphology may be
a peculiar pattern of post-staphylococcal glomerulonephritis, which was
increasingly identified in PIGN over the past 10 years.

DOI: 10.3109/08860220903367494 
PMID: 20113267  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

