
1. Microbes Infect. 2010 May;12(5):364-73. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2010.01.010. Epub
2010 Feb 1.

Identification of an HLA-A*0201-restricted CD8(+) T-cell epitope encoded within
Leptospiral immunoglobulin-like protein A.

Guo YJ(1), Wang KY, Sun SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Second
Military Medical University, Xiangyin Road 800, Shanghai 200433, China.

Leptospirosis is an important zoonosis in humans. Immunity against leptospiral
infection was thought to be primarily humoral, and limited studies have addressed
the role of CD8(+)T cells. Leptospiral immunoglobulin-like protein A (LigA) is an
important protective antigen of Leptospira and a potential target for
Leptospira-specific cell-mediated immunity. In this study, twenty LigA-derived
peptides were tested their binding affinity and stability for the HLA-A*0201
molecule. Peptides with high binding affinity and stability for HLA-A*0201 were
then assessed their capacity to elicit specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL)
responses using cytotoxicity, ELISPOT assays for IFN-gamma and HLA-A*0201-peptide
tetramer assays. We identified a HLA-A*0201-restricted epitope, LigA(305-313)
KLIVTPAAL in Leptospira LigA. CTLs specific for LigA(305-313) were elicited both 
in HLA-A2.1/K(b) transgenic mice and in patients with a clinical and/or
laboratory diagnosis of leptospirosis. Staining of the HLA-A*0201-LigA(305-313)
tetramer revealed the presence of LigA(305-313)-specific CTLs in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) sourced from five patients infected with three
different serovars of Leptospira. In conclusion, we report the existence of
specific cytotoxic CD8(+)T cells in patients with leptospirosis and we suggest
that the newly identified epitope, LigA(305-313), will be helpful in enhancing
the understanding of the mechanism of immunity to leptospirosis.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2010.01.010 
PMID: 20123035  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

