
1. Infect Immun. 2010 Apr;78(4):1610-7. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00002-10. Epub 2010 Feb 1.

CD1d-dependent B-cell help by NK-like T cells leads to enhanced and sustained
production of Bacillus anthracis lethal toxin-neutralizing antibodies.

Devera TS(1), Aye LM, Lang GA, Joshi SK, Ballard JD, Lang ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

The current Bacillus anthracis vaccine consists largely of protective antigen
(PA), the protein of anthrax toxin that mediates entry of edema factor (EF) or
lethal factor (LF) into cells. PA induces protective antibody (Ab)-mediated
immunity against Bacillus anthracis but has limited efficacy and duration. We
previously demonstrated that activation of CD1d-restricted natural killer-like T 
cells (NKT) with a CD1d-binding glycolipid led to enhanced Ab titers specific for
foreign antigen (Ag). We therefore tested the hypothesis that activation of NKT
cells with the CD1d ligand (alpha-galactosylceramide [alpha-GC]) at the time of
immunization improves PA-specific Ab responses. We observed that alpha-GC
enhanced PA-specific Ab titers in C57BL/6 mice. In CD1d(-/-) mice deficient in
type I and type II NKT cells the anti-PA Ab response was diminished. In
Jalpha281(-/-) mice expressing CD1d but lacking type I alpha-GC-reactive NKT
cells, alpha-GC did not enhance the Ab response. In vitro neutralization assays
were performed and showed that the Ab titers correlated with protection of
macrophages against anthrax lethal toxin (LT). The neutralization capacity of the
Ab was further tested in lethal challenge studies, which revealed that NKT
activation leads to enhanced in vivo protection against LT. Anti-PA Ab titers,
neutralization, and protection were then measured over a period of several
months, and this revealed that NKT activation leads to a sustained protective Ab 
response. These results suggest that NKT-activating CD1d ligands could be
exploited for the development of improved vaccines for Bacillus anthracis that
increase not only neutralizing Ab titers but also the duration of the protection 
afforded by Ab.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00002-10 
PMCID: PMC2849421
PMID: 20123711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

