
1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 2;285(14):10616-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.069070. Epub 2010
Feb 1.

Conformation change in a self-recognizing autotransporter modulates bacterial
cell-cell interaction.

Girard V(1), Côté JP, Charbonneau ME, Campos M, Berthiaume F, Hancock MA,
Siddiqui N, Mourez M.

Author information: 
(1)Canada Research Chair on Bacterial Animal Diseases, Université de Montréal,
Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec J2S 7C6, Canaada.

Bacteria mostly live as multicellular communities, although they are unicellular 
organisms, yet the mechanisms that tie individual bacteria together are often
poorly understood. The adhesin involved in diffuse adherence (AIDA-I) is an
adhesin of diarrheagenic Escherichia coli strains. AIDA-I also mediates bacterial
auto-aggregation and biofilm formation and thus could be important for the
organization of communities of pathogens. Using purified protein and whole
bacteria, we provide direct evidence that AIDA-I promotes auto-aggregation by
interacting with itself. Using various biophysical and biochemical techniques, we
observed a conformational change in the protein during AIDA-AIDA interactions,
strengthening the notion that this is a highly specific interaction. The
self-association of AIDA-I is of high affinity but can be modulated by sodium
chloride. We observe that a bile salt, sodium deoxycholate, also prevents AIDA-I 
oligomerization and bacterial auto-aggregation. Thus, we propose that AIDA-I, and
most likely other similar autotransporters such as antigen 43 (Ag43) and TibA,
organize bacterial communities of pathogens through a self-recognition mechanism 
that is sensitive to the environment. This could permit bacteria to switch
between multicellular and unicellular lifestyles to complete their infection.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.069070 
PMCID: PMC2856270
PMID: 20123991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

