
1. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2010 Mar;14(3):347-55.

Effector memory T-cells dominate immune responses in tuberculosis treatment:
antigen or bacteria persistence?

Tapaninen P(1), Korhonen A, Pusa L, Seppälä I, Tuuminen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland. pekka.tapaninen@helsinki.fi

OBJECTIVE: To compare ex vivo immunological responses upon stimulation of
lymphocytes with Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific antigens in three groups: 1)
subjects diagnosed with tuberculosis (TB) in the early 1940s and 1950s but who
did not receive anti-tuberculosis chemotherapy (n = 5), 2) subjects treated with 
anti-tuberculosis agents prior to the rifampicin (RMP) era (n = 26) and 3)
subjects who received RMP as a part of modern combination therapy (n = 7).
DESIGN: A total of 38 healthy subjects, mean age 70 +/- 13 years, with a history 
of previously treated TB were recruited. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were 
collected and analysed as a batch by ELISpot. Representative samples with high
reactivities were further immunophenotypically characterised.
RESULTS: No differences between the studied groups were detected with regard to
the frequencies of reactive lymphocytes. The dominant immunophenotypic profile of
the representative responders, irrespective of the treatment schemes, was
CD4+CD45RO+CD45RA-CD27-CD28-CCR7-, compatible with the fast reacting effector
memory T-cell lineage (T(EM)).
CONCLUSION: Specific T(EM) cells persist even in subjects treated for TB decades 
ago with modern anti-tuberculosis chemotherapy. Additional studies are needed to 
address the question of what drives the survival of T(EM) after adequate
treatment: persistence of antigens or bacteria.


PMID: 20132627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

