
1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2010 May;298(5):L687-95. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00365.2009. Epub 2010 Feb 12.

Induction of human β-defensin-2 in pulmonary epithelial cells by Legionella
pneumophila: involvement of TLR2 and TLR5, p38 MAPK, JNK, NF-κB, and AP-1.

Scharf S(1), Hippenstiel S, Flieger A, Suttorp N, N'Guessan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Internal Medicine/Infectious Diseases and Pulmonary Medicine, Charité
- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany.

Legionella pneumophila is an important causative agent of severe pneumonia in
humans. Human alveolar epithelium is an effective barrier for inhaled
microorganisms and actively participates in the initiation of innate host
defense. Induction of antimicrobial peptide human β-defensin-2 (hBD-2) by various
stimuli in epithelial cells has been reported. However, the mechanisms by which
bacterial infections enhance hBD-2 expression remain poorly understood. In this
study, we investigated the effect of the pulmonary pathogen L. pneumophila on
induction of hBD-2 in human pulmonary epithelial cells. Infection with L.
pneumophila markedly increased hBD-2 production, and the response was attenuated 
in Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 and TLR5 transient knockdown cells. Furthermore,
pretreatment with SB-202190 (an inhibitor of p38 MAPK) and JNK II (an inhibitor
of c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase), but not U0126 (an inhibitor of ERK), reduced L. 
pneumophila-induced hBD-2 release in A549 cells. L. pneumophila-induced hBD-2
liberation was mediated via recruitment of NF-κB and AP-1 to the hBD-2 gene
promoter. Additionally, we showed that exo- and endogenous hBD-2 elicited a
strong antimicrobial effect towards L. pneumophila. Together, these results
suggest that L. pneumophila induces hBD-2 release in A549 cells, and the
induction seems to be mediated through TLR2 and TLR5 as well as activation of p38
MAPK, JNK, NF-κB, and AP-1.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00365.2009 
PMID: 20154223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

