
1. Anim Sci J. 2009 Oct;80(5):510-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1740-0929.2009.00664.x.

Association of the amino acid motifs of BoLA-DRB3 alleles with mastitis pathogens
in Japanese Holstein cows.

Yoshida T(1), Mukoyama H, Furuta H, Kondo Y, Takeshima SN, Aida Y, Kosugiyama M, 
Tomogane H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Animal Science, Nippon Veterinary and Life Science University,
Musashino, Tokyo, Japan. yoshidat@nvlu.ac.jp

The association of the polymorphism of bovine leukocyte antigen (BoLA-DRB3)
genes, identified by the polymerase chain reaction sequence-based typing
(PCR-SBT) method, with resistance and susceptibility to mastitis caused by
Streptococci, coagulase-negative Staphylococci, Escherichia coli and
Staphylococcus aureus was investigated. Blood samples for DNA extraction were
collected from 170 Holstein cows (129 mastitis and 41 healthy cows) from 5
districts in Chiba prefecture, Japan. Susceptibility or resistance to the
mastitis-causing pathogens was thought to vary by the presence of amino acid
substitutions at the 9, 11, 13, and 30 positions. DRB3*0101 and DRB3*1501 had
amino acid motifs of Glu(9), Ser(11), Ser(13), and Tyr(30), and they were
considered to have susceptibility to all 4 mastitis pathogens. In contrast,
DRB3*1101 and DRB3*1401 had amino acid motifs of Gln(9), His(11), Gly(13), and
His(30) in these positions, and they also had Val(86), so these alleles were
considered to have resistance to Streptococcal and coagulase-negative
Staphylococcal mastitis. However, in the case of Escherichia coli mastitis, amino
acid substitutions at the 9, 11, 13, and 30 positions had little effect, but
rather substitutions at the 47, 67 positions of pocket 7, and at the 71, 74
positions of pocket 4, Tyr(47), Ile(67), Ala(71), and Ala(74), were associated
with resistance. This motif was present in DRB3*1201.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1740-0929.2009.00664.x 
PMID: 20163614  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

