
1. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2010 Sep;15(5):605-17. doi: 10.1007/s12192-010-0173-2.
Epub 2010 Feb 19.

The early-onset torsion dystonia-associated protein, torsinA, displays molecular 
chaperone activity in vitro.

Burdette AJ(1), Churchill PF, Caldwell GA, Caldwell KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL
35487-0344, USA.

TorsinA is a member of the AAA+ ATPase family of proteins and, notably, is the
only known ATPase localized to the ER lumen. It has been suggested to act as a
molecular chaperone, while a mutant form associated with early-onset torsion
dystonia, a dominantly inherited movement disorder, appears to result in a net
loss of function in vivo. Thus far, no studies have examined the chaperone
activity of torsinA in vitro. Here we expressed and purified both wild-type (WT) 
and mutant torsinA fusion proteins in bacteria and examined their ability to
function as molecular chaperones by monitoring suppression of luciferase and
citrate synthase (CS) aggregation. We also assessed their ability to hold
proteins in an intermediate state for refolding. As measured by light scattering 
and SDS-PAGE, both WT and mutant torsinA effectively, and similarly, suppressed
protein aggregation compared to controls. This function was not further enhanced 
by the presence of ATP. Further, we found that while neither form of torsinA
could protect CS from heat-induced inactivation, they were both able to
reactivate luciferase when ATP and rabbit reticulocyte lysate were added. This
suggests that torsinA holds luciferase in an intermediate state, which can then
be refolded in the presence of other chaperones. These data provide conclusive
evidence that torsinA acts as a molecular chaperone in vitro and suggests that
early-onset torsion dystonia is likely not a consequence of a loss in torsinA
chaperone activity but might be an outcome of insufficient torsinA localization
at the ER to manage protein folding or trafficking.

DOI: 10.1007/s12192-010-0173-2 
PMCID: PMC3006618
PMID: 20169475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

