
1. Anim Sci J. 2009 Oct;80(5):498-509. doi: 10.1111/j.1740-0929.2009.00663.x.

Association of BoLA-DRB3 alleles identified by a sequence-based typing method
with mastitis pathogens in Japanese Holstein cows.

Yoshida T(1), Mukoyama H, Furuta H, Kondo Y, Takeshima SN, Aida Y, Kosugiyama M, 
Tomogane H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Animal Science, Nippon Veterinary and Life Science University,
Musashino, Tokyo, Japan. yoshidat@nvlu.ac.jp

The association of the polymorphism of bovine leukocyte antigen (BoLA-DRB3) genes
identified by the polymerase chain reaction sequence-based typing (PCR-SBT)
method with resistance and susceptibility to mastitis caused by pathogenic
bacteria was investigated. Blood samples for DNA extraction were collected from
194 Holstein cows (41 healthy cows and 153 mastitis cows including 24
mixed-infection cows infected with 2 or 3 species of pathogens) from 5 districts 
of Chiba prefecture, Japan. Sixteen BoLA-DRB3 alleles were detected. The 4 main
alleles of DRB3*0101, *1501, *1201, and *1101 constituted 56.8% of the total
number of alleles detected. Mastitis cows were divided into 2 groups: group 1
with single-infection cows and group 2 with all mastitis cows including 24
mixed-infection cows. The differences in the frequencies of BoLA-DRB3 alleles and
the number of cows homozygous or heterozygous for each BoLA-DRB3 allele between
healthy cows and the 2 groups of mastitis cows were evaluated. Furthermore,
similar comparisons were performed between healthy cows and the 2 groups of
mastitis cows for each mastitis pathogen. It was considered that the 4 alleles,
namely, DRB3*0101, *1501, *1201, and *1101 had specific resistance and
susceptibility to 4 different mastitis pathogens. Thus, DRB3*0101 might be
associated with susceptibility to coagulase-negative Staphylococci and
Escherichia coli, and DRB3*1501 might be associated with susceptibility to
Escherichia coli. However, DRB3*1101 might be associated with resistance to
Streptococci and coagulase-negative Staphylococci, and DRB3*1201, with resistance
to Streptococci, Escherichia coli, and Staphylococcus aureus.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1740-0929.2009.00663.x 
PMID: 20163613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

