
1. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2010 Nov;45(11):1645-52. doi: 10.1038/bmt.2010.28. Epub
2010 Feb 22.

Prognostic significance of genetic variants in the IL-23/Th17 pathway for the
outcome of T cell-depleted allogeneic stem cell transplantation.

Carvalho A(1), Cunha C, Di Ianni M, Pitzurra L, Aloisi T, Falzetti F, Carotti A, 
Bistoni F, Aversa F, Romani L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical 
Sciences, University of Perugia, Via del Giochetto, Perugia, Italy.
aacarvalho2008@gmail.com

T helper (Th) 17 cells have emerged as important mediators in infectious and
inflammatory diseases and, recently, in transplant rejection. We analyzed the
associations between five common genetic variants in the IL-23/Th17 signaling
pathway, namely in IL17A, IL17F and IL23R genes, and clinical outcome in T
cell-depleted allogeneic SCT (allo-SCT). In the multivariate analysis, variants
in IL23R and IL17A genes were the most important prognostic factors. Thus,
patient GA genotype at rs11209026 in IL23R was associated with improved overall
survival (hazard ratio (HR)=0.48; P=0.028) and, in donor, with decreased risk of 
fungal infections (P=0.05). In contrast, patient TC and CC genotypes at rs8193036
in IL17A gene were associated with increased risk of CMV infection (HR=3.68;
P=0.011) and patient acute GVHD (HR=7.08; P=0.008), respectively. These results
suggest that genetic variants in the IL-23/Th17 inflammatory pathway are
important prognostic factors for the clinical outcome of allo-SCT. Although
validation studies are ultimately required, our results would suggest the
potential usefulness of IL-23/Th17 genotyping in donor selection and patient
evaluation.

DOI: 10.1038/bmt.2010.28 
PMID: 20173782  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

