
1. Infect Immun. 2010 May;78(5):2099-107. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00962-09. Epub 2010 Feb
22.

CCR7 deficiency leads to leukocyte activation and increased clearance in response
to pulmonary Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection.

Eppert BL(1), Motz GT, Wortham BW, Flury JL, Borchers MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, 3223 Eden Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0056, USA.

CCR7 is a chemokine receptor expressed on the surfaces of T cells, B cells, and
mature dendritic cells that controls cell migration in response to the cognate
ligands CCL19 and CCL21. CCR7 is critical for the generation of an adaptive T
cell response. However, the roles of CCR7 in the host defense against pulmonary
infection and innate immunity are not well understood. We investigated the role
of CCR7 in the host defense against acute pulmonary infection with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. We intranasally infected C57BL/6 mice with P. aeruginosa and
characterized the expression of CCR7 ligands and the surface expression of CCR7
on pulmonary leukocytes. In response to infection, expression of CCL19 and
expression of CCL21 were oppositely regulated, and myeloid dendritic cells
upregulated CCR7 expression. We further examined the effects of CCR7 deficiency
on the inflammatory response to P. aeruginosa infection. We infected Ccr7(-/-)
and wild-type mice with P. aeruginosa and characterized the accumulation of
pulmonary leukocytes, production of proinflammatory mediators, neutrophil
activation, and bacterial clearance. CCR7 deficiency led to an accumulation of
myeloid dendritic cells and T cells in the lung in response to infection. CCR7
deficiency resulted in higher expression of CD80 and CD86 on dendritic cells;
increased production of interleukin-12/23p40 (IL-12/23p40), gamma interferon
(IFN-gamma), and IL-1 alpha; increased neutrophil respiratory burst; and,
ultimately, increased clearance of acute P. aeruginosa infection. In conclusion, 
our results suggest that CCR7 deficiency results in a heightened proinflammatory 
environment in response to acute pulmonary P. aeruginosa infection and
contributes to more efficient clearance.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00962-09 
PMCID: PMC2863523
PMID: 20176793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

