
1. Haematologica. 2010 Mar;95(3):367-75. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.006890.

Rho GTPase Cdc42 is essential for human T-cell development.

Smits K(1), Iannucci V, Stove V, Van Hauwe P, Naessens E, Meuwissen PJ, AriÃ«n KK,
Bentahir M, Plum J, Verhasselt B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Rho GTPases are involved in the regulation of many cell functions,
including some related to the actin cytoskeleton. Different Rho GTPases have been
shown to be important for T-cell development in mice. However, their role in
human T-cell development has not yet been explored.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We examined the expression and activation of Rho GTPases
along different stages of T-cell development in the human thymus. Early stage
human thymocytes were transduced with constitutively active and dominant negative
mutants of different Rho GTPases to explore their role in human T-cell
development, as analyzed in fetal thymus organ cultures. The use of these mutants
as well as Rho GTPase-specific inhibitors allowed us to explore the role of
GTPases in thymocyte migration.
RESULTS: We found that the expression of several Rho GTPases is differently
regulated during successive stages of T-cell development in man, suggesting a
specific role in human thymopoiesis. In chimeric fetal thymus organ culture,
T-cell development was not or only mildly affected by expression of dominant
negative Rac1 and Rac2, but was severely impaired in the presence of dominant
negative Cdc42, associated with enhanced apoptosis and reduced proliferation.
Kinetic analysis revealed that Cdc42 is necessary in human T-cell development
both before and after expression of the pre-T-cell receptor. Using inhibitors and
retrovirally transferred mutants of the aforementioned Rho GTPases, we showed
that only Rac1 is necessary for migration of different thymocyte subsets,
including the early CD34(+) fraction, towards stromal cell-derived factor-1
alpha. Constitutively active mutants of Rac1, Rac2 and Cdc42 all impaired
migration towards stromal cell-derived factor-1 alpha and T-cell development to
different degrees.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report on Rho GTPases in human T-cell development,
showing the essential role of Cdc42. Our data suggest that enhanced apoptotic
death and reduced proliferation rather than disturbed migration explains the
decreased thymopoiesis induced by dominant negative Cdc42.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2009.006890 
PMCID: PMC2833065
PMID: 20207844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

