
1. J Aquat Anim Health. 2009 Dec;21(4):229-38. doi: 10.1577/H07-054.1.

Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays for a bacterial thiaminase I 
gene and the thiaminase-producing bacterium Paenibacillus thiaminolyticus.

Richter CA(1), Wright-Osment MK, Zajicek JL, Honeyfield DC, Tillitt DE.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Geological Survey, Columbia Environmental Research Center, 4200 New Haven
Road, Columbia, Missouri 65201, USA. crichter@usgs.gov

The thiaminase I enzyme produced by the gram-positive bacterium Paenibacillus
thiaminolyticus isolated from the viscera of Lake Michigan alewives Alosa
pseudoharengus is currently the only defined source of the thiaminase activity
linked to thiamine (vitamin B1) deficiency in early mortality syndrome (EMS) in
the larvae of Great Lakes salmonines. Diets of alewife or isolated strains of P. 
thiaminolyticus mixed in a semipurified diet and fed to lake trout Salvelinus
namaycush have been shown to produce EMS in fry. We utilized quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) to aid in studies of the sources of P.
thiaminolyticus and thiaminase I. Quantitative PCR assays were established to
detect the thiaminase I gene of P. thiaminolyticus, the 16S rRNA gene from most
species of bacteria, and the 16S rRNA gene specifically from P. thiaminolyticus
and a few closely related taxa. The Q-PCR assays are linear over at least six
orders of magnitude and can detect the thiaminase I gene of P. thiaminolyticus
from as few as 1,000 P. thiaminolyticus cells/g of sample or the Paenibacillus
16S rRNA gene from as few as 100 P. thiaminolyticus cells/g of sample. The
initial results from alewife viscera samples with high thiaminase activity
yielded unexpectedly low densities of P. thiaminolyticus cells; Paenibacillus
thiaminolyticus was detectable in 2 of 6 alewife viscera tested at densities on
the order of 100 cells/g out of 100,000,000 total bacterial cells/g. The low
numbers of P. thiaminolyticus detected suggest that alewives contain additional
non-P. thiaminolyticus sources of thiaminase activity.

DOI: 10.1577/H07-054.1 
PMID: 20218497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

