
1. J Cell Sci. 2010 Apr 1;123(Pt 7):1151-9. doi: 10.1242/jcs.063644. Epub 2010 Mar
9.

HGF-induced invasion by prostate tumor cells requires anterograde lysosome
trafficking and activity of Na+-H+ exchangers.

Steffan JJ(1), Williams BC, Welbourne T, Cardelli JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA 71130, USA.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is found in tumor microenvironments, and
interaction with its tyrosine kinase receptor Met triggers cell invasion and
metastasis. It was previously shown that acidic extracellular pH stimulated
peripheral lysosome trafficking, resulting in increased cathepsin B secretion and
tumor cell invasion, which was dependent upon sodium-proton exchanger (NHE)
activity. We now demonstrate that HGF induced the trafficking of lysosomes to the
cell periphery, independent of HGF-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
HGF-induced anterograde lysosome trafficking depended upon the PI3K pathway,
microtubules and RhoA, resulting in increased cathepsin B secretion and invasion 
by the cells. HGF-induced NHE activity via increased net acid production, and
inhibition of NHE activity with 5-(N-ethyl-N-isopropyl)-amiloride (EIPA), or a
combination of the NHE1-specific drug cariporide and the NHE3-specific drug s3226
prevented HGF-induced anterograde trafficking and induced retrograde trafficking 
in HGF-overexpressing cells. EIPA treatment reduced cathepsin B secretion and
HGF-induced invasion by the tumor cells. Lysosomes were located more peripherally
in Rab7-shRNA-expressing cells and these cells were more invasive than control
cells. Overexpression of the Rab7 effector protein, RILP, resulted in a
juxtanuclear location of lysosomes and reduced HGF-induced invasion. Together,
these results suggest that the location of lysosomes is an inherently important
aspect of invasion by tumor cells.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.063644 
PMCID: PMC2844323
PMID: 20215403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

