
1. Mol Cells. 2010 Apr;29(4):407-12. doi: 10.1007/s10059-010-0048-5. Epub 2010 Mar
4.

Treponema denticola suppresses expression of human beta-defensin-2 in gingival
epithelial cells through inhibition of TNFalpha production and TLR2 activation.

Shin JE(1), Choi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oromaxillofacial Infection and Immunity, Brain Korea 21 CLS,
School of Dentistry and Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University,
Seoul, 110-749, Korea.

We previously reported that Treponema denticola, a periodontal pathogen,
suppressed the expression of human beta-defensins (HBDs) and IL-8 in human
gingival epithelial cells. To clarify the receptor(s) involved in the suppression
of HBD-2, immortalized gingival epithelial (HOK-16B) cells were infected with
live or heat-killed T. denticola for 24 h, and the expression of HBD-2 was
examined by real-time RT-PCR. Live T. denticola, but not heat-killed bacteria,
suppressed the expression of HBD-2 about 40%. Time courses of suppression
revealed that T. denticola suppressed HBD-2 expression only at late time points, 
which was accompanied with the suppression of TNFalpha production. Neutralization
of TNFalpha with an antibody abrogated the suppressive effect of T. denticola on 
HBD-2. Accordingly, heat-killed T. denticola did not suppress TNFalpha
production. Knock-down of toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 via RNA interference
reversed the suppressive effect of T. denticola on the expression of HBD-3, but
not on the production of TNFalpha. Collectively, T. denticola suppresses the
expression of HBD-2 in gingival epithelial cells by inhibiting the TLR2 axis and 
TNFalpha production, which may contribute to the pathogenesis of periodontitis by
T. denticola.

DOI: 10.1007/s10059-010-0048-5 
PMID: 20213311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

