
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Mar 23;107(12):5489-94. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0912818107. Epub 2010 Mar 8.

Shh pathway activation is present and required within the vertebrate limb bud
apical ectodermal ridge for normal autopod patterning.

Bouldin CM(1), Gritli-Linde A, Ahn S, Harfe BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, The Genetics Institute,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Expression of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) in the posterior mesenchyme of the developing 
limb bud regulates patterning and growth of the developing limb by activation of 
the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway. Through the analysis of Shh and Hh signaling
target genes, it has been shown that activation in the limb bud mesoderm is
required for normal limb development to occur. In contrast, it has been stated
that Hh signaling in the limb bud ectoderm cannot occur because components of the
Hh signaling pathway and Hh target genes have not been found in this tissue.
However, recent array-based data identified both the components necessary to
activate the Hh signaling pathway and targets of this pathway in the limb bud
ectoderm. Using immunohistochemistry and various methods of detection for targets
of Hh signaling, we found that SHH protein and targets of Hh signaling are
present in the limb bud ectoderm including the apex of the bud. To directly test 
whether ectodermal Hh signaling was required for normal limb patterning, we
removed Smo, an essential component of the Hh signaling pathway, from the apical 
ectodermal ridge (AER). Loss of functional Hh signaling in the AER resulted in
disruption of the normal digit pattern and formation of additional postaxial
cartilaginous condensations. These data indicate that contrary to previous
accounts, the Hh signaling pathway is present and required in the developing limb
AER for normal autopod development.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0912818107 
PMCID: PMC2851812
PMID: 20212115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

