
1. Infect Immun. 2010 May;78(5):2024-33. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00118-10. Epub 2010 Mar
15.

Bacteroides fragilis enterotoxin induces human beta-defensin-2 expression in
intestinal epithelial cells via a mitogen-activated protein kinase/I kappaB
kinase/NF-kappaB-dependent pathway.

Yoon YM(1), Lee JY, Yoo D, Sim YS, Kim YJ, Oh YK, Kang JS, Kim S, Kim JS, Kim JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Hanyang University College of Medicine, 17
Haengdang-dong, Sungdong-gu, Seoul 133-791, Korea.

Enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis (ETBF) produces an approximately 20-kDa
heat-labile enterotoxin (BFT) that plays an essential role in mucosal
inflammation. Although spontaneous disappearance of ETBF infection is common,
little information is available on regulated expression of antibacterial factors 
in response to BFT stimulation. This study investigates the role of BFT in human 
beta-defensin 2 (hBD-2) induction from intestinal epithelial cells. Stimulation
of HT-29 and Caco-2 intestinal epithelial cell lines with BFT resulted in the
induction of hBD-2. Activation of a reporter gene for hBD-2 was dependent on the 
presence of NF-kappaB binding sites. In contrast, suppression of AP-1 did not
affect hBD-2 expression in BFT-stimulated cells. Inhibition of p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) using SB203580 and small interfering RNA 
(siRNA) transfection resulted in a significant reduction in BFT-induced I kappaB 
kinase (IKK)/NF-kappaB activation and hBD-2 expression. Our results suggest that 
a pathway including p38 MAPK, IKK, and NF-kappaB activation is required for hBD-2
induction in intestinal epithelial cells exposed to BFT, and may be involved in
the host defense following infection with ETBF.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00118-10 
PMCID: PMC2863550
PMID: 20231411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

