
1. BMC Microbiol. 2010 Mar 16;10:78. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-10-78.

Interactions between endocarditis-derived Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp.
gallolyticus isolates and human endothelial cells.

Vollmer T(1), Hinse D, Kleesiek K, Dreier J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut f√ºr Laboratoriums- und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Bad Oeynhausen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus is an important
causative agent of infective endocarditis (IE) but the knowledge on virulence
factors is limited and the pathogenesis of the infection is poorly understood. In
the present study, we established an experimental in vitro IE cell culture model 
using EA.hy926 and HUVEC cells to investigate the adhesion and invasion
characteristics of 23 Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus strains from
different origins (human IE-derived isolates, other human clinical isolates,
animal isolates). Adhesion to eight components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) 
and the ability to form biofilms in vitro was examined in order to reveal
features of S. gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus endothelial infection. In
addition, the strains were analyzed for the presence of the three virulence
factors gtf, pilB, and fimB by PCR.
RESULTS: The adherence to and invasion characteristics of the examined S.
gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus strains to the endothelial cell line EA.hy926
differ significantly among themselves. In contrast, the usage of three different 
in vitro models (EA.hy926 cells, primary endothelial cells (HUVECs), mechanical
stretched cells) revealed no differences regarding the adherence to and invasion 
characteristics of different strains. Adherence to the ECM proteins collagen I,
II and IV revealed the highest values, followed by fibrinogen, tenascin and
laminin. Moreover, a strong correlation was observed in binding to these proteins
by the analyzed strains. All strains show the capability to adhere to polystyrole
surfaces and form biofilms. We further confirmed the presence of the genes of two
known virulence factors (fimB: all strains, gtf: 19 of 23 strains) and
demonstrated the presence of the gene of one new putative virulence factor (pilB:
9 of 23 strains) by PCR.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides the first description of S. gallolyticus subsp.
gallolyticus adhesion and invasion of human endothelial cells, revealing
important initial information of strain variability, behaviour and
characteristics of this as yet barely analyzed pathogen.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-10-78 
PMCID: PMC2846920
PMID: 20233397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

