
1. Mol Microbiol. 2010 May;76(3):616-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07108.x. Epub
2010 Mar 10.

Positioning cell wall synthetic complexes by the bacterial morphogenetic proteins
MreB and MreD.

White CL(1), Kitich A, Gober JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, and Molecular Biology Institute,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1569, USA.

In Caulobacter crescentus, intact cables of the actin homologue, MreB, are
required for the proper spatial positioning of MurG which catalyses the final
step in peptidoglycan precursor synthesis. Similarly, in the periplasm, MreC
controls the spatial orientation of the penicillin binding proteins and a lytic
transglycosylase. We have now found that MreB cables are required for the
organization of several other cytosolic murein biosynthetic enzymes such as MraY,
MurB, MurC, MurE and MurF. We also show these proteins adopt a subcellular
pattern of localization comparable to MurG, suggesting the existence of
cytoskeletal-dependent interactions. Through extensive two-hybrid analyses, we
have now generated a comprehensive interaction map of components of the bacterial
morphogenetic complex. In the cytosol, this complex contains both murein
biosynthetic enzymes and morphogenetic proteins, including RodA, RodZ and MreD.
We show that the integral membrane protein, MreD, is essential for lateral
peptidoglycan synthesis, interacts with the precursor synthesizing enzymes MurG
and MraY, and additionally, determines MreB localization. Our results suggest
that the interdependent localization of MreB and MreD functions to spatially
organize a complex of peptidoglycan precursor synthesis proteins, which is
required for propagation of a uniform cell shape and catalytically efficient
peptidoglycan synthesis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07108.x 
PMID: 20233306  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

