
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2010 Jun;29(6):643-50. doi:
10.1007/s10096-010-0908-0. Epub 2010 Mar 21.

T regulatory cells and Th1/Th2 cytokines in peripheral blood from tuberculosis
patients.

He XY(1), Xiao L, Chen HB, Hao J, Li J, Wang YJ, He K, Gao Y, Shi BY.

Author information: 
(1)Central Lab., The 309th Hospital of the Chinese People's Liberation Army,
China, No. 17 Heishanhu Road, Haidian District, Beijing, 100091, China.
xwhe@sohu.com

About 10% of people infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis develop active
tuberculosis (TB), and Th1 effector cells and Th1 cytokines play key roles in
controlling M. tuberculosis infection. Here, we hypothesise that this
susceptibility to M. tuberculosis infection is linked to increased T regulatory
(Treg) cells and Th2 cytokines in TB patients. To test this, we recruited 101
participants (71 TB patients, 12 non-TB pulmonary diseases and 18 healthy
subjects) and investigated Treg cells and Th1/Th2 cytokines in peripheral blood. 
CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells and CD4(+)CD25(+)FoxP3(+) T cells significantly increased
and IL-5 dramatically decreased in TB patients relative to healthy subjects.
CD8(+)CD28(-) T cells, IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha, IL-10 and IL-4 significantly
increased in patients with culture and sputum smear-positive pulmonary TB
(PTB(+)) compared with healthy subjects. CD4(+)CD25(+)FoxP3(+) and CD8(+)CD28(-) 
T cells significantly decreased in PTB(+) after one month of chemotherapy.
CD4(+), CD4(+)CD25(+) and CD8(+)CD28(+) T cells significantly increased in
extra-pulmonary TB patients after one month of chemotherapy. These findings
suggest that M. tuberculosis infection induces circulating CD4(+)CD25(+)FoxP3(+) 
and CD8(+)CD28(-) T cell expansion, which may be related to the progression of M.
tuberculosis infection, and that the balance between effector immune responses
and suppression immune responses is essential to control M. tuberculosis
infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-010-0908-0 
PMID: 20306324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

