
1. Infect Immun. 2010 Jun;78(6):2529-43. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00005-10. Epub 2010 Mar
22.

Fine-tuning synthesis of Yersinia pestis LcrV from runaway-like replication
balanced-lethal plasmid in a Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium vaccine
induces protection against a lethal Y. pestis challenge in mice.

Torres-Escobar A(1), Juárez-Rodríguez MD, Gunn BM, Branger CG, Tinge SA, Curtiss 
R 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology at Biodesign Institute and
School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287-5401,
USA.

A balanced-lethal plasmid expression system that switches from low-copy-number to
runaway-like high-copy-number replication (pYA4534) was constructed for the
regulated delayed in vivo synthesis of heterologous antigens by vaccine strains. 
This is an antibiotic resistance-free maintenance system containing the asdA gene
(essential for peptidoglycan synthesis) as a selectable marker to complement the 
lethal chromosomal DeltaasdA allele in live recombinant attenuated Salmonella
vaccines (RASVs) such as Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium strain chi9447. 
pYA4534 harbors two origins of replication, pSC101 and pUC (low and high copy
numbers, respectively). The pUC replication origin is controlled by a genetic
switch formed by the operator/promoter of the P22 cro gene (O/P(cro)) (P(R)),
which is negatively regulated by an arabinose-inducible P22 c2 gene located on
both the plasmid and the chromosome (araC P(BAD) c2). The absence of arabinose,
which is unavailable in vivo, triggers replication to a high-copy-number plasmid 
state. To validate these vector attributes, the Yersinia pestis virulence antigen
LcrV was used to develop a vaccine against plague. An lcrV sequence encoding
amino acids 131 to 326 (LcrV196) was optimized for expression in Salmonella,
flanked with nucleotide sequences encoding the signal peptide (SS) and the
carboxy-terminal domain (CT) of beta-lactamase, and cloned into pYA4534 under the
control of the P(trc) promoter to generate plasmid pYA4535. Our results indicate 
that the live Salmonella vaccine strain chi9447 harboring pYA4535 efficiently
stimulated a mixed Th1/Th2 immune response that protected mice against lethal
challenge with Y. pestis strain CO92 introduced through either the intranasal or 
subcutaneous route.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00005-10 
PMCID: PMC2876574
PMID: 20308296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

