
1. Syst Appl Microbiol. 2010 Apr;33(3):154-64. doi: 10.1016/j.syapm.2010.02.004.
Epub 2010 Mar 20.

Arsenic-resistant bacteria associated with roots of the wild Cirsium arvense (L.)
plant from an arsenic polluted soil, and screening of potential plant
growth-promoting characteristics.

Cavalca L(1), Zanchi R, Corsini A, Colombo M, Romagnoli C, Canzi E, Andreoni V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Alimentari e Microbiologiche, Universit√† 
degli Studi di Milano, Via Celoria 2, Milano-20133, Italy.

A rhizobacterial community, associated with the roots of wild thistle Cirsium
arvense (L.) growing in an arsenic polluted soil, was studied by fluorescence in 
situ hybridization (FISH) analysis in conjunction with cultivation-based methods.
In the bulk, rhizosphere, and rhizoplane fractions of the soil, the qualitative
picture obtained by FISH analysis of the main phylogenetic bacterial groups was
similar and was predominantly comprised of Alphaproteobacteria,
Betaproteobacteria, and Gammaproteobacteria. The arsenic-resistant isolates
belonged to 13 genera, the most abundant being those of Bacillus, Achromobacter, 
Brevundimonas, Microbacterium, and Ochrobactrum. Most bacteria grew in the
presence of high arsenic concentrations (over 100mM arsenate and 10mM arsenite). 
Most strains possessed the ArsC, ArsB and ACR3 genes homologous to arsenate
reductase and to the two classes of arsenite efflux pumps, respectively, peculiar
to the ars operon of the arsenic detoxification system. ArsB and ACR3 were
present simultaneously in highly resistant strains. An inconsistency between 16S 
rRNA phylogenetic affiliations and the arsenate reductase sequences of the
strains was observed, indicating possible horizontal transfer of arsenic
resistance genes in the soil bacterial community. Several isolates were able to
reduce arsenate and to oxidise arsenite. In particular, Ancylobacter
dichloromethanicum strain As3-1b possessed both characteristics, and arsenite
oxidation occurred in the strain also under chemoautotrophic conditions. Some
rhizobacteria produced siderophores, indole acetic acid and
1-amino-cyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid deaminase, thus possessing potential plant
growth-promoting traits.

DOI: 10.1016/j.syapm.2010.02.004 
PMID: 20303688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

