
1. Langmuir. 2010 Jun 1;26(11):9094-103. doi: 10.1021/la9047853.

Interfacial electrochemical electron transfer processes in bacterial biofilm
environments on Au(111).

Hu Y(1), Zhang J, Ulstrup J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, DTU Chemistry Building 207, Technical University of
Denmark DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark.

We have studied Streptococcus mutans (S. mutans) biofilm growth and growth
inhibition on Au(111)-surfaces using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and
interfacial electrochemistry of a number of redox probe molecules. AFM of the
biofilm growth and growth inhibition on both mica and Au(111)-surfaces was
followed by sampling at given times, drying the samples naturally, and imaging.
The electrochemical investigations were based on single-crystal Au(111)-electrode
surfaces to exclude polycrystallinity as a cause of inhomogeneous voltammetric
broadening on the biofilm covered electrode surfaces. The redox couples were
chosen for their positive ([Ru(NH(3))(6)](3+/2+), [Co(terpy)(2)](3+/2+), terpy = 
2,2',2''-terpyridine) or negative ([Fe(CN)(6)](3-/4-), [IrCl(6)](3-/4-))
electrostatic charge. [Co(NH(3))(6)](3+/2+) and [Co(phen)(3)](3+/2+) (phen =
1,10-phenanthroline) were other inhibition factors investigated. The positively
and negatively charged redox probe couples displayed antagonistic inhibition and 
voltammetric patterns. [Ru(NH(3))(6)](3+/2+) and the homologous compound
[Co(NH(3))(6)](3+/2+) were the only probe compounds to effect growth inhibition. 
On the other hand, cyclic voltammetry (CV) of both [Ru(NH(3))(6)](3+/2+)
(positively charged, biofilm growth inhibitor) and [Co(terpy)(2)](3+/2+)
(positively charged, no biofilm growth inhibition) displayed fully reversible CV 
on biofilm covered electrodes, almost indistinguishable from CV at bare
Au(111)-electrode surfaces. In comparison, CVs of [Fe(CN)(6)](3-/4-) and
[IrCl(6)](3-/4-) (both negatively charged and no growth inhibition) were
distorted from planar diffusion behavior on bare Au(111)-electrode surfaces
toward spherical diffusion behavior on S. mutans biofilm covered
Au(111)-electrode surfaces. DNAase treatment of the biofilm covered
Au(111)-electrode surface partly restores planar diffusion CV of
[Fe(CN)(6)](3-/4-) and [IrCl(6)](3-/4-). This is reflected in a decrease of the
growth rate and the appearance of molecular-scale structures near the bacterial
edges as imaged by AFM after DNAase treatment. A rationale for the different
voltammetric behavior of positively and negatively charged redox probe molecules 
based on electrostatic properties of the local surface environment is offered.

DOI: 10.1021/la9047853 
PMID: 20334394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

