
1. Mol Oral Microbiol. 2010 Apr;25(2):89-101. doi: 10.1111/j.2041-1014.2010.00569.x.

Porphyromonas gingivalis infection sequesters pro-apoptotic Bad through Akt in
primary gingival epithelial cells.

Yao L(1), Jermanus C, Barbetta B, Choi C, Verbeke P, Ojcius DM, Yilmaz O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology and Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Porphyromonas gingivalis, a self-limiting oral pathogen, can colonize and
replicate in gingival epithelial cells (GECs). P. gingivalis-infected GECs are
protected from mitochondrion-dependent apoptosis, partially through activation of
phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling. Biochemical events associated with 
P. gingivalis-induced inhibition of apoptosis include the blocking of
mitochondrial membrane permeability and cytochrome-c release. We studied
functional importance of Akt and the status of associated key mitochondrial
molecules, pro-apoptotic Bad and caspase-9, during infection of GECs. We found
that P. gingivalis infection caused significant phosphorylation of Bad
progressively, while messenger RNA levels for Bad slowly decreased. Fluorescence 
microscopy showed translocation of the mitochondrial Bad to the cytosol
post-infection. Conversely, P. gingivalis lost the ability to promote
phosphorylation and translocation of Bad in Akt-deficient GECs. Caspase-9
activation induced by a chemical inducer of apoptosis was significantly inhibited
by infection over time. However, Akt depletion by small interfering RNA did not
reverse inhibition of caspase-9 activation by infection. Hence, P. gingivalis
inactivates pro-apoptotic Bad through Akt. The inhibition of caspase-9 activation
appears to be independent of Akt. Overall, our findings suggest that Akt is a key
component of anti-apoptotic pathways stimulated by P. gingivalis. The P.
gingivalis uses other mitochondrial pathways to protect host cells from
cell-death and to ensure its survival in gingival epithelium.

DOI: 10.1111/j.2041-1014.2010.00569.x 
PMCID: PMC2894563
PMID: 20331797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

