
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2010 Jun;29(6):623-32. doi:
10.1007/s10096-010-0904-4. Epub 2010 Mar 27.

Skin bacteria after chlorhexidine exposure-is there a difference in response to
human beta-Defensin-3?

Reichel M(1), Heisig A, Heisig P, Kampf G.

Author information: 
(1)BODE Chemie GmbH, Scientific Affairs, Melanchthonstr. 27, 22525, Hamburg,
Germany. mirja.reichel@bode-chemie.de

We investigated whether exposure to sub-lethal concentrations of chlorhexidine
digluconate (CHG) changed the response of five Staphylococcus spp. to human
beta-Defensin-3 (hBD-3). The change in response for each strain was determined in
vitro with time-kill experiments in suspension by comparing the mean log(10)
reduction caused by hBD-3 at 1.5 and 3 h in exposed and non-exposed bacteria. The
identity of staphylococcal species was verified by DNA sequence homology in the
gyrA genes in comparison with reference strains. Baseline sub-lethal
concentrations allowing visible bacterial growth were between 0.0625 and 0.25
microg/ml. Sub-lethal CHG concentrations increased within 3 days in two isolates.
For S. capitis 19/2, CHG-exposed cells were less susceptible to 0.5 microg/ml
hBD-3 (log(10) reduction 0.78 versus 2.06 at 1.5 h; p < 0.001; t-test). For S.
aureus, however, CHG-exposed cells were more susceptible to 1 microg/ml hBD-3.
The observed changes between CHG-exposed and non-exposed cells did not indicate a
general trend in response to hBD-3. Overall, we found no consistent evidence that
3 days of exposure to CHG changed the response of five Staphylococcus spp. to
hBD-3. The use of CHG for skin antisepsis is, based on our data, unlikely to
change the natural defence activity of hBD-3.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-010-0904-4 
PMID: 20339890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

