
1. Biochemistry. 1991 Jun 4;30(22):5539-46.

Mechanism of adenylate kinase. Demonstration of a functional relationship between
aspartate 93 and Mg2+ by site-directed mutagenesis and proton, phosphorus-31, and
magnesium-25 NMR.

Yan HG(1), Tsai MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Ohio State University, Columbus 43210.

Earlier magnetic resonance studies suggested no direct interaction between Mg2+
ions and adenylate kinase (AK) in the AK.MgATP (adenosine 5'-triphosphate)
complex. However, recent NMR studies concluded that the carboxylate of aspartate 
119 accepts a hydrogen bond from a water ligand of the bound Mg2+ ion in the
muscle AK.MgATP complex [Fry, D.C., Kuby, S.A., & Mildvan, A.S. (1985)
Biochemistry 24, 4680-4694]. On the other hand, in the 2.6-A crystal structure of
the yeast AK.MgAP5A [P1,P5-bis(5'-adenosyl)pentaphosphate] complex, the Mg2+ ion 
is in proximity to aspartate 93 [Egner, U., Tomasselli, A.G., & Schulz, G.E.
(1987) J. Mol. Biol. 195, 649-658]. Substitution of Asp-93 with alanine resulted 
in no change in dissociation constants, 4-fold increases in Km, and a 650-fold
decrease in kcat. Notable changes have been observed in the chemical shifts of
the aromatic protons of histidine 36 and a few other aromatic residues. However, 
the results of detailed analyses of the free enzymes and the AK.MgAP5A complexes 
by one- and two-dimensional NMR suggested that the changes are due to localized
perturbations. Thus it is concluded that Asp-93 stabilizes the transition state
by ca. 3.9 kcal/mol. The next question is how. Since proton NMR results indicated
that binding of Mg2+ to the AK.AP5A complex induces some changes in the proton
NMR signals of WT but not those of D93A, the functional role of Asp-93 should be 
in binding to Mg2+.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00236a029 
PMID: 2036423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

