
1. Infect Immun. 2010 Jun;78(6):2620-30. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01169-09. Epub 2010 Apr 5.

Importance of CXC chemokine receptor 2 in alveolar neutrophil and exudate
macrophage recruitment in response to pneumococcal lung infection.

Herbold W(1), Maus R, Hahn I, Ding N, Srivastava M, Christman JW, Mack M,
Reutershan J, Briles DE, Paton JC, Winter C, Welte T, Maus UA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Laboratory for Experimental Lung Research,
Hannover School of Medicine, Hannover, Germany.

Sustained neutrophilic infiltration is known to contribute to organ damage, such 
as acute lung injury. CXC chemokine receptor 2 (CXCR2) is the major receptor
regulating inflammatory neutrophil recruitment in acute and chronic inflamed
tissues. Whether or not the abundant neutrophil recruitment observed in severe
pneumonia is essential for protective immunity against Streptococcus pneumoniae
infections is incompletely defined. Here we show that CXCR2 deficiency severely
perturbs the recruitment of both neutrophils and exudate macrophages associated
with a massive bacterial outgrowth in distal airspaces after infection with S.
pneumoniae, resulting in 100% mortality in knockout (KO) mice within 3 days.
Moreover, irradiated wild-type mice reconstituted with increasing amounts of
CXCR2 KO bone marrow (10, 25, 50, and 75% KO) have correspondingly decreased
numbers of both neutrophils and exudate macrophages, which is associated with a
stepwise increase in bacterial burden and a reciprocal stepwise decrease in
survival in S. pneumoniae-induced pulmonary infection. Finally, application of
the CXCR2 antagonist SB-225002 resulted in decreased alveolar neutrophil and
exudate macrophage recruitment in mice along with increased lung bacterial loads 
after infection with S. pneumoniae. Together, these data show that CXC chemokine 
receptor 2 serves a previously unrecognized nonredundant role in the regulation
of both neutrophil and exudate macrophage recruitment to the lung in response to 
S. pneumoniae infection. In addition, we demonstrate that a threshold level of 10
to 25% of reduced neutrophil recruitment is sufficient to cause increased
mortality in mice infected with S. pneumoniae.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01169-09 
PMCID: PMC2876546
PMID: 20368349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

