
1. J Innate Immun. 2009;1(6):618-30. doi: 10.1159/000233235. Epub 2009 Aug 5.

Eosinophils utilize multiple chemokine receptors for chemotaxis to the parasitic 
nematode Strongyloides stercoralis.

Stein LH(1), Redding KM, Lee JJ, Nolan TJ, Schad GA, Lok JB, Abraham D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Protective innate immunity to the nematode Strongyloides stercoralis requires
eosinophils in the parasite killing process. Experiments were performed to
determine if an extract of S. stercoralis would trigger eosinophil chemotaxis,
and to then compare the chemotactic migration response, including second
messenger signals and receptors, to those mechanisms triggered by host
chemoattractants. Eosinophils undergo both chemotaxis and chemokinesis to soluble
parasite extract in transwell plates. Pretreatment of eosinophils with pertussis 
toxin, a G protein-coupled receptor inhibitor, inhibited migration of the
eosinophils to the parasite extract. Likewise, blocking PI3K, tyrosine kinase,
p38 and p44/42 inhibited eosinophil chemotaxis to parasite extract. Furthermore, 
CCR3, CXCR4 or CXCR2 antagonists significantly inhibited eosinophil chemotaxis to
the parasite extract. Molecular weight fractionation of parasite extract revealed
that molecules attracting eosinophils were present in several fractions, with
molecules greater than 30 kDa being the most potent. Treating the extract with
proteinase K or chitinase significantly inhibited its ability to induce
chemotaxis, thereby demonstrating that the chemoattractants were both protein and
chitin. Therefore, chemoattractants derived from parasites and host species
stimulate similar receptors and second messenger signals to induce eosinophil
chemotaxis. Parasite extract stimulates multiple receptors on the eosinophil
surface, which ensures a robust innate immune response to the parasite.

(c) 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000233235 
PMCID: PMC2919510
PMID: 20375616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

