
1. Eur Respir J. 2010 Dec;36(6):1337-45. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00002710. Epub 2010
Apr 8.

Osteopontin promotes host defense during Klebsiella pneumoniae-induced pneumonia.

van der Windt GJ(1), Hoogerwerf JJ, de Vos AF, Florquin S, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Klebsiella pneumoniae is a common cause of nosocomial pneumonia. Osteopontin
(OPN) is a phosphorylated glycoprotein involved in inflammatory processes, some
of which is mediated by CD44. The aim of this study was to determine the role of 
OPN during K. pneumoniae-induced pneumonia. Wild-type (WT) and OPN knockout (KO) 
mice were intranasally infected with 10‚Å¥ colony forming units of K. pneumoniae,
or administered Klebsiella lipopolysaccharides (LPS). In addition, recombinant
OPN (rOPN) was intranasally administered to WT and CD44 KO mice. During
Klebsiella pneumonia, WT mice displayed elevated pulmonary and plasma OPN levels.
OPN KO and WT mice showed similar pulmonary bacterial loads 6 h after infection; 
thereafter, Klebsiella loads were higher in lungs of OPN KO mice and the
mortality rate in this group was higher than in WT mice. Early neutrophil
recruitment into the bronchoalveolar space was impaired in the absence of OPN
after intrapulmonary delivery of either Klebsiella bacteria or Klebsiella LPS.
Moreover, rOPN induced neutrophil migration into the bronchoalveolar space,
independent from CD44. In vitro, OPN did not affect K. pneumoniae growth or
neutrophil function. In conclusion, OPN levels were rapidly increased in the
bronchoalveolar space during K. pneumoniae pneumonia, where OPN serves a
chemotactic function towards neutrophils, thereby facilitating an effective
innate immune response.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00002710 
PMID: 20378602  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

