
1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2010 Jun;17(6):889-94. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00044-10. Epub 2010
Apr 7.

Oral vaccination with attenuated Salmonella enterica strains encoding T-cell
epitopes from tumor antigen NY-ESO-1 induces specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
responses.

Meng JZ(1), Dong YJ, Huang H, Li S, Zhong Y, Liu SL, Wang YD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Peking University Health Science Center, 38th
Xueyuan Rd. Haidian, Beijing 100191, People's Republic of China.

Bacterial fimbriae can accept foreign peptides and display them on the cell
surface. A highly efficient gene replacement method was used to generate peptide 
vaccines based on Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium SL3261. The T-cell
epitopes (NY-ESO-1 p157-165 and p157-167) from NY-ESO-1, which is a promising
target antigen in patients for the specific immune recognition of cancer, were
incorporated into the gene encoding AgfA (the major subunit protein of thin
aggregative fimbriae of Salmonella) by replacing an equal length of the DNA
segment. To improve cytotoxic T-lymphocyte recognition, both termini of the
peptide were flanked by double alanine (AA) residues. Immunofluorescence
microscopy with AgfA-specific antiserum verified the expression of chimeric AgfA,
which was also proved by a Congo red binding assay. Oral immunizations of
HLA-A*0201 transgenic mice with recombinant SL3261 strains encoding NY-ESO-1
p157-165 or p157-167 induced NY-ESO-1 p157-165-specific CD8(+) T cells, detected 
by an HLA-A*0201 pentamer, and induced a T-cell response detected by an
enzyme-linked immunospot assay. The Salmonella fimbrial display system was
efficient at the induction of an antitumor cellular immune response in vivo,
providing a new strategy for the development of efficient cancer vaccinations.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00044-10 
PMCID: PMC2884430
PMID: 20375244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

