
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Aug;38(15):5047-58. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq239. Epub 2010
Apr 12.

Constitutive fusion of ubiquitin to PCNA provides DNA damage tolerance
independent of translesion polymerase activities.

Pastushok L(1), Hanna M, Xiao W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, SK, Canada.

In response to replication-blocking DNA lesions, proliferating cell nuclear
antigen (PCNA) can be conjugated with a single ubiquitin (Ub) or Lys63-linked Ub 
chains at the Lys164 residue, leading to two modes of DNA damage tolerance (DDT),
namely translesion synthesis (TLS) and error-free DDT, respectively. Several
reports suggest a model whereby monoubiquitylated PCNA recruits TLS polymerases
through an enhanced physical association. We sought to examine this model in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae through artificial fusions of Ub to PCNA in vivo. We
created N- and C- terminal gene fusions of Ub to PCNA-K164R (collectively called 
PCNA.Ub) and found that both conferred tolerance to DNA damage. The creation of
viable PCNA.Ub strains lacking endogenous PCNA enabled a thorough analysis of
roles for PCNA mono-Ub in DDT. As expected, the DNA damage resistance provided by
PCNA.Ub is not dependent on RAD18 or UBC13. Surprisingly, inactivation of TLS
polymerases did not abolish PCNA.Ub resistance to DNA damage, nor did PCNA.Ub
cause elevated spontaneous mutagenesis, which is a defining characteristic of
REV3-dependent TLS activity. Taken together, our data suggest that either the
monoubiquitylation of PCNA does not promote TLS activity in all cases or PCNA.Ub 
reveals a currently undiscovered role for monoubiquitylated PCNA in DNA damage
tolerance.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq239 
PMCID: PMC2926605
PMID: 20385585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

