
1. Shock. 2010 Nov;34(5):461-6. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e3181e14ca0.

Apheresis of activated leukocytes with an immobilized polymyxin B filter in
patients with septic shock.

Kumagai T(1), Takeyama N, Yabuki T, Harada M, Miki Y, Kanou H, Inoue S, Nakagawa 
T, Noguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency & Critical Care Medicine, Aichi Medical University,
Nagakute, Aichi, Japan. kuma@aichi-med-u.ac.jp

In this study, we examined the effects of direct hemoperfusion through filters
with immobilized polymyxin B (PMX-DHP) on leukocyte function and plasma levels of
cytokines in patients with septic shock. We found that PMX-DHP caused increased
expression of C-X-C chemokine receptor 1 (CXCR1) and CXCR2, along with decreased 
expression of CD64 and CD11b, by circulating neutrophils in patients with septic 
shock. Plasma levels of cytokines, including interleukin 6 (IL-6), IL-8, IL-10,
and high-mobility group box 1, were elevated in patients with septic shock
compared with healthy controls, but cytokine levels were not altered by PMX-DHP. 
These results suggest that PMX-DHP influences neutrophils via a mechanism that
does not involve cytokine. Ex vivo perfusion of heparinized blood from patients
with sepsis and septic shock through PMX filters in a laboratory circuit caused a
significant decrease in neutrophil and monocyte counts. After 120 min of
perfusion, neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes were decreased by 78%, 70%,
and 10%, respectively, compared with baseline values. Flow cytometric analysis
indicated that activated neutrophils with high levels of CD11b/CD64 expression
and low levels of CXCR1/CXCR2 expression showed preferential adhesion to PMX
filters. Neutrophils isolated from the blood after ex vivo PMX perfusion caused
less damage to an endothelial cell monolayer than cells from sham-treated blood, 
whereas neutrophil phagocytosis of opsonized Escherichia coli was unaffected.
These results indicate that PMX-DHP selectively removes activated neutrophils and
reduces the ability of circulating cells to cause endothelial damage. Selective
removal of activated neutrophils using PMX-DHP may improve the systemic
inflammatory response in patients with septic shock.

DOI: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e3181e14ca0 
PMID: 20386499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

