
1. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 7;5(4):e10053. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010053.

FAM5C contributes to aggressive periodontitis.

Carvalho FM(1), Tinoco EM, Deeley K, Duarte PM, Faveri M, Marques MR, Mendon√ßa
AC, Wang X, Cuenco K, Menezes R, Garlet GP, Vieira AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Biology, Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Aggressive periodontitis is characterized by a rapid and severe periodontal
destruction in young systemically healthy subjects. A greater prevalence is
reported in Africans and African descendent groups than in Caucasians and
Hispanics. We first fine mapped the interval 1q24.2 to 1q31.3 suggested as
containing an aggressive periodontitis locus. Three hundred and eighty-nine
subjects from 55 pedigrees were studied. Saliva samples were collected from all
subjects, and DNA was extracted. Twenty-one single nucleotide polymorphisms were 
selected and analyzed by standard polymerase chain reaction using TaqMan
chemistry. Non-parametric linkage and transmission distortion analyses were
performed. Although linkage results were negative, statistically significant
association between two markers, rs1935881 and rs1342913, in the FAM5C gene and
aggressive periodontitis (p = 0.03) was found. Haplotype analysis showed an
association between aggressive periodontitis and the haplotype A-G
(rs1935881-rs1342913; p = 0.009). Sequence analysis of FAM5C coding regions did
not disclose any mutations, but two variants in conserved intronic regions of
FAM5C, rs57694932 and rs10494634, were found. However, these two variants are not
associated with aggressive periodontitis. Secondly, we investigated the pattern
of FAM5C expression in aggressive periodontitis lesions and its possible
correlations with inflammatory/immunological factors and pathogens commonly
associated with periodontal diseases. FAM5C mRNA expression was significantly
higher in diseased versus healthy sites, and was found to be correlated to the
IL-1beta, IL-17A, IL-4 and RANKL mRNA levels. No correlations were found between 
FAM5C levels and the presence and load of red complex periodontopathogens or
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans. This study provides evidence that FAM5C
contributes to aggressive periodontitis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010053 
PMCID: PMC2850931
PMID: 20383335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

