
1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2010 Jun;298(6):H2054-61. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00921.2009. Epub 2010 Apr 9.

Circulating endothelial progenitor cells are not affected by acute systemic
inflammation.

Padfield GJ(1), Tura O, Haeck ML, Short A, Freyer E, Barclay GR, Newby DE, Mills 
NL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Univ. of Edinburgh, Chancellor's Bldg.,
Edinburgh EH16 4SU, UK. gareth.padfield@nhs.net

Vascular injury causes acute systemic inflammation and mobilizes endothelial
progenitor cells (EPCs) and endothelial cell (EC) colony-forming units (EC-CFUs).
Whether such mobilization occurs as part of a nonspecific acute phase response or
is a phenomenon specific to vascular injury remains unclear. We aimed to
determine the effect of acute systemic inflammation on EPCs and EC-CFU
mobilization in the absence of vascular injury. Salmonella typhus vaccination was
used as a model of acute systemic inflammation. In a double-blind randomized
crossover study, 12 healthy volunteers received S. typhus vaccination or placebo.
Phenotypic EPC populations enumerated by flow cytometry [CD34(+)VEGF receptor
(VEGF)R-2(+)CD133(+), CD14(+)VEGFR-2(+)Tie2(+), CD45(-)CD34(+), as a surrogate
for late outgrowth EPCs, and CD34(+)CXCR-4(+)], EC-CFUs, and serum cytokine
concentrations (high sensitivity C-reactive protein, IL-6, and stromal-derived
factor-1) were quantified during the first 7 days. Vaccination increased
circulating leukocyte (9.8 + or - 0.6 vs. 5.1 + or - 0.2 x 10(9) cells/l, P <
0.0001), serum IL-6 [0.95 (0-1.7) vs. 0 (0-0) ng/l, P = 0.016], and VEGF-A [60
(45-94) vs. 43 (21-64) pg/l, P = 0.006] concentrations at 6 h and serum high
sensitivity C-reactive protein at 24 h [2.7 (1.4-3.6) vs. 0.4 (0.2-0.8) mg/l, P =
0.037]. Vaccination caused a 56.7 + or - 7.6% increase in CD14(+) cells at 6 h (P
< 0.001) and a 22.4 + or - 6.9% increase in CD34(+) cells at 7 days (P = 0.04).
EC-CFUs, putative vascular progenitors, and the serum stromal-derived factor-1
concentration were unaffected throughout the study period (P > 0.05 for all). In 
conclusion, acute systemic inflammation causes nonspecific mobilization of
hematopoietic progenitor cells, although it does not selectively mobilize
putative vascular progenitors. We suggest that systemic inflammation is not the
primary stimulus for EPC mobilization after acute vascular injury.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00921.2009 
PMCID: PMC2886634
PMID: 20382859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

