
1. J Immunol. 2010 May 15;184(10):5732-42. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803944. Epub 2010 
Apr 14.

TLR2 utilization of Borrelia does not induce p38- and IFN-beta autocrine
loop-dependent expression of CD38, resulting in poor migration and weak IL-12
secretion of dendritic cells.

Hartiala P(1), Hytönen J, Yrjänäinen H, Honkinen M, Terho P, Söderström M,
Penttinen MA, Viljanen MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Turku,
Finland. pauliina.hartiala@utu.fi

Lyme borreliosis is a tick-borne bacterial infection that in many cases is
limited to the skin. However, in some patients the bacterium evades the immune
response and disseminates into various organs. Dendritic cells (DCs) are among
the first cells to meet invading pathogens in the skin. We have previously shown 
that CD38, an ectoenzyme involved in the migration of DCs and generally
upregulated by microbial stimuli, is not upregulated in Borrelia
garinii-stimulated DCs. In this paper, we characterize the cellular events that
lead to the absence of CD38 on the DC surface after B. garinii stimulation and
investigate the consequences of absent CD38 expression for the migration of DCs
in vitro and in vivo. The data show that 1) effective signaling via p38 MAPK (and
STAT1 and NF-kappaB) is needed for CD38 expression and 2) TLR2 stimulation, as
opposed to TLR4 stimulation, does not induce IFN-beta autocrine loop-dependent
expression of CD38 and secretion of IL-12. Further, we show that 3) B.
garinii-stimulated DCs do not migrate effectively toward CCL19 and CCL21 and 4)
after B. garinii infection of mice, the number of DCs migrating from the
infection site to draining lymph nodes is only half that induced by Escherichia
coli infection. Our results provide evidence for the first time that different
TLR use results in different CD38 expression, which correlates with the migratory
potential of DCs.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803944 
PMID: 20393136  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

