
1. Prev Vet Med. 2010 Jul 1;95(3-4):224-30. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2010.03.009.

Risk factors for herd breakdown with bovine tuberculosis in 148 cattle herds in
the south west of England.

Ram√≠rez-Villaescusa AM(1), Medley GF, Mason S, Green LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Rd.,
Coventry, West Midlands CV4 7AL, England, UK.

Bovine tuberculosis (bTB) is caused by Mycobacterium bovis. The disease has a
long latent period, heterogenous spread, can infect many species and can persist 
in the environment. In the UK, the rate of herd breakdowns (HBD) with bTB is
increasing. A retrospective cohort study of 148 cattle herds was set up to
investigate risk factors for HBD from October 2001 to November 2004. Herds were
selected from farms located in the randomised badger culling trial (RBCT) and
comprised holdings (24%) that were restocked with cattle after the foot and mouth
disease (FMD) epidemic in 2001 and holdings (76%) that were continuously stocked 
throughout the FMD epidemic. Farmers were interviewed between June 2003 and
February 2004. Questions on herd and farm management were asked for the period
October 2001 to June 2003. Data on herd testing for bTB were sourced from the
VetNet database and historic data from 1995 were used in the analysis. A discrete
time survival analysis was used to examine factors associated with the risk of
HBD. By the end of the study period, November 2004, 50% of study herds had
experienced a HBD with bTB at least once. Farms that were restocked for less than
1 year after FMD had a reduced risk of HBD (P<0.01) compared with continuously
stocked farms in the same year. This reduced risk did not persist after 1 year of
restocking. Feeding vitamin and mineral lick supplements compared with not
feeding these supplements also reduced the risk of HBD. Factors associated with
an increased risk of HBD were storing manure and slurry indoors or in a closed
container, spreading manure all year round, herds with dairy cattle compared with
herds without dairy cattle, increasing herd size, purchase of cattle from
markets, location of the farm in the proactive area of the RBCT compared with
survey only and location of farms in Somerset and North Devon. The lower risk of 
HBD in the first year after restocking but not the second or third year suggests 
that removal of all cattle might have lowered the infectious load of M. bovis on 
these premises for a period of time but that this did not persist once cattle
were reintroduced. Purchase of cattle from markets suggests that there was a risk
of introduction or re-introduction of bTB from these cattle. Method of storage or
lack of storage of slurry might aid persistence of M. bovis in the environment if
M. bovis survives in slurry in some circumstances.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2010.03.009 
PMID: 20399521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

