
1. Infect Immun. 2010 Jul;78(7):3112-7. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00078-10. Epub 2010 Apr 19.

Severity of Staphylococcus aureus infection of the skin is associated with
inducibility of human beta-defensin 3 but not human beta-defensin 2.

Zanger P(1), Holzer J, Schleucher R, Scherbaum H, Schittek B, Gabrysch S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Tropenmedizin, Eberhard Karls Universität, Tübingen, Germany.
philipp.zanger@med.uni-tuebingen.de

Gram-positive bacteria are the predominant cause of skin infections.
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are believed to be of major importance in skin's
innate defense against these pathogens. This study aimed at providing clinical
evidence for the contribution of AMP inducibility to determining the severity of 
Gram-positive skin infection. Using real-time PCR, we determined the induction of
human beta-defensin 2 (HBD-2), HBD-3, and RNase 7 by comparing healthy and
lesional mRNA levels in 32 patients with Gram-positive skin infection. We then
examined whether AMP induction differed by disease severity, as measured by
number of recurrences and need for surgical drainage in patients with
Staphylococcus aureus-positive lesions. We found that HBD-2 and -3, but not RNase
7, mRNA expression was highly induced by Gram-positive bacterial infection in
otherwise healthy skin. Less induction of HBD-3, but not HBD-2, was associated
with more-severe S. aureus skin infection: HBD-3 mRNA levels were 11.4 times
lower in patients with more than 6 recurrences (P = 0.01) and 8.8 times lower in 
patients reporting surgical drainage (P = 0.01) than in the respective baseline
groups. This suggests that inducibility of HBD-3 influences the severity of
Gram-positive skin infection in vivo. The physiological function of HBD-2
induction in this context remains unclear.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00078-10 
PMCID: PMC2897370
PMID: 20404083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

