
1. J Infect Dis. 2010 Jun 1;201(11):1753-63. doi: 10.1086/652495.

Bacterial lipoproteins differentially regulate human primary and memory CD4+ T
and B cell responses to pneumococcal protein antigens through Toll-like receptor 
2.

Zhang Q(1), Bagrade L, Clarke E, Paton JC, Nunez DA, Finn A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol,
UK. qibo.zhang@liv.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Bacterial lipoproteins (BLPs) are expressed across a range of
bacteria and are able to activate Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR-2). BLPs enhance
immune responses in naive individuals and have therefore been tested as candidate
vaccine adjuvants. It is not known whether BLPs affect any preexisting immunity
(eg, memory cell response in primed individuals). Colonization with pneumococcus 
(PNC), which primes for memory cell response, is common in young children.
METHODS: We studied effects of BLPs on memory and primary B and CD4+ T cell
responses to pneumococcal proteins using adenoidal cells from children.
RESULTS: Although BLPs enhanced the primary antibody responses seen in some
children with no detectable nasal PNC, BLPs unexpectedly reduced the memory
antibody responses in children with positive nasal culture results. Likewise,
BLPs augmented the naive but inhibited the memory antigen-driven CD4+ T cell
response. The downregulation of the memory responses was associated with
increases in interleukin 10 and inducible costimulatory molecule expression, as
well as a decrease in CD28 expression in memory CD4+ T cells; all were blocked by
anti-TLR2 and anti-B7h antibodies. Augmentation of naive CD4+ T cell
proliferation was blocked by anti-B7.2.
CONCLUSION: Differential regulation of primary and memory responses by BLPs
through TLR2 may have important implications for therapeutic and vaccination
strategies against bacterial infection.

DOI: 10.1086/652495 
PMID: 20402597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

