
1. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Apr;15(4):938-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01066.x.

Gliadin fragments promote migration of dendritic cells.

Chladkova B(1), Kamanova J, Palova-Jelinkova L, Cinova J, Sebo P, Tuckova L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Specific Cellular Immunity, Institute of Microbiology, Academy
of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.

In genetically predisposed individuals, ingestion of wheat gliadin provokes a
T-cell-mediated enteropathy, celiac disease. Gliadin fragments were previously
reported to induce phenotypic maturation and Th1 cytokine production by human
dendritic cells (DCs) and to boost their capacity to stimulate allogeneic T
cells. Here, we monitor the effects of gliadin on migratory capacities of DCs.
Using transwell assays, we show that gliadin peptic digest stimulates migration
of human DCs and their chemotactic responsiveness to the lymph node-homing
chemokines CCL19 and CCL21. The gliadin-induced migration is accompanied by
extensive alterations of the cytoskeletal organization, with dissolution of
adhesion structures, podosomes, as well as up-regulation of the CC chemokine
receptor (CCR) 7 on cell surface and induction of cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 enzyme
that mediates prostaglandin E2 (PGE₂) production. Blocking experiments confirmed 
that gliadin-induced migration is independent of the TLR4 signalling. Moreover,
we showed that the α-gliadin-derived 31-43 peptide is an active
migration-inducing component of the digest. The migration promoted by gliadin
fragments or the 31-43 peptide required activation of p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK). As revealed using p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580, this was
responsible for DC cytoskeletal transition, CCR7 up-regulation and PGE₂
production in particular. Taken together, this study provides a new insight into 
pathogenic features of gliadin fragments by demonstrating their ability to
promote DC migration, which is a prerequisite for efficient priming of naive T
cells, contributing to celiac disease pathology.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01066.x 
PMCID: PMC3922678
PMID: 20406323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

