
1. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 16;5(4):e10183. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010183.

Role of CD14 in a mouse model of acute lung inflammation induced by different
lipopolysaccharide chemotypes.

Anas AA(1), Hovius JW, van 't Veer C, van der Poll T, de Vos AF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Recognition of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is required for effective
defense against invading gram-negative bacteria. Recently, in vitro studies
revealed that CD14 is required for activation of the myeloid differentiation
factor (MyD)88-dependent Toll-like receptor (TLR)4 signaling pathway by smooth
(S)-LPS, but not by rough (R)-LPS. The present study investigated the role of
CD14 in induction of lung inflammation in mice by these different LPS chemotypes.
METHODOLOGY/RESULTS: Neutrophil accumulation and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
release in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid were determined 6 hours after intranasal 
treatment of wild type (WT) and CD14 knock-out (KO) mice with different doses
S-LPS or R-LPS. The contribution of CD14 to lung inflammation induced by S-LPS or
R-LPS depended on the LPS dose. At low doses, S-LPS and R-LPS induced neutrophil 
influx in a CD14-dependent manner. Low dose S-LPS-induced cytokine release also
depended on CD14. Strikingly, neutrophil influx and TNF release induced by high
dose S-LPS or R-LPS was diminished in the presence of CD14. Intranasal
administration of sCD14 to CD14 KO mice treated with S-LPS partially reversed the
inflammatory response to the response observed in WT mice.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, CD14 modulates effects of both S-LPS and R-LPS within
the lung in a similar way. Except for R-LPS-induced TNF release, S-LPS and R-LPS 
at low dose induced acute lung inflammation in a CD14-dependent manner, while the
inflammatory response triggered by high dose S-LPS or R-LPS was diminished by
CD14.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010183 
PMCID: PMC2855719
PMID: 20419140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

