
1. Mol Immunol. 2010 Jun;47(10):1882-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.03.018. Epub 2010
Apr 24.

CD44 interacts directly with Lck in a zinc-dependent manner.

Lefebvre DC(1), Lai JC, Maeshima N, Ford JL, Wong AS, Cross JL, Johnson P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Life Sciences Institute, University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3, Canada.

CD44 is a widely expressed cell adhesion molecule with functional similarities to
the selectin and integrin adhesion molecules. CD44 has a lectin domain that binds
hyaluronan, a component of the extracellular matrix. Interactions between CD44
and hyaluronan promote lymphocyte rolling under flow and cell-cell and
cell-matrix adhesion. Attachment of lymphocytes to immobilized CD44 antibodies
induces cell adhesion and spreading, which is dependent on Src family kinase
activity. Both Lck and Fyn associate with CD44 in T cells. CD4 and CD8 associate 
with Lck via a zinc-dependent interaction that is inhibited by the divalent metal
cation chelator, 1,10-phenanthroline. Here we show that both CD4 and
CD44-mediated T cell spreading is abolished in the presence of
1,10-phenanthroline and their association with Lck is significantly reduced. In
contrast, the co-immunoprecipitation of Fyn by CD44 was unaffected. The
cytoplasmic domain of CD44 was required for divalent cation-dependent association
of Lck, but not for its association with Fyn. Mutational analysis of CD44
revealed that cysteine residues were not essential for the interaction nor were
the carboxy-terminal 41 amino acids. Progressive deletion of the remaining 31
amino acids of the CD44 cytoplasmic domain revealed the importance of this
membrane proximal region for its association with Lck. Using purified recombinant
proteins, we demonstrated a direct, zinc-inducible interaction between the
cytoplasmic domain of CD44 and Lck but not Fyn. The zinc-inducible interaction
required the first 13 amino acids of the cytoplasmic domain of CD44 and the
non-catalytic regions of Lck. Taken together, we conclude that CD44 directly
associates with Lck in a zinc-inducible manner and this is important for the
transmission of CD44-mediated signaling events leading to T cell spreading.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.03.018 
PMID: 20417561  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

