
1. Oncogene. 2010 Jun 24;29(25):3605-18. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.123. Epub 2010 Apr
26.

Essential role of PI3-kinase pathway in p53-mediated transcription: Implications 
in cancer chemotherapy.

Suvasini R(1), Somasundaram K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India.

The PI3-kinase pathway is the target of inactivation in achieving better cancer
chemotherapy. Here, we report that p53-mediated transcription is inhibited by
pharmacological inhibitors and a dominant-negative mutant of PI3-kinase, and this
inhibition was relieved by a constitutively active mutant of PI3-kinase. Akt/PKB 
and mTOR, the downstream effectors of PI3-kinase, were also found to be
essential. LY294002 (PI3-kinase inhibitor) pre-treatment altered the
post-translational modifications and the sub-cellular localization of p53.
Although LY294002 increased the chemosensitivity of cells to low concentrations
of adriamycin (adriamycin-low), it protected the cells from cytotoxicity induced 
by high concentrations of adriamycin (adriamycin-high) in a p53-dependent manner.
Further, we found that LY294002 completely abolished the activation of p53 target
genes (particularly pro-apoptotic) under adriamycin-high conditions, whereas it
only marginally repressed the p53 target genes under adriamycin-low conditions;
in fact, it further activated the transcription of NOXA, HRK, APAF1 and CASP5
genes. Thus, the differential effect of PI3-kinase on p53 functions seems to be
responsible for the differential regulation of DNA damage-induced cytotoxicity
and cell death by PI3-kinase. Our finding becomes relevant in the light of
ongoing combination chemotherapy trials with the PI3-kinase pathway inhibitors
and underscores the importance of p53 status in the careful formulation of
combination chemotherapies.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2010.123 
PMID: 20418912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

