
1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2010 Jun 4;9(6):700-7. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2010.03.008. Epub
2010 Apr 24.

Functional analysis of MUTYH mutated proteins associated with familial
adenomatous polyposis.

D'Agostino VG(1), Minoprio A, Torreri P, Marinoni I, Bossa C, Petrucci TC,
Albertini AM, Ranzani GN, Bignami M, Mazzei F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

The MUTYH DNA glycosylase specifically removes adenine misincorporated by
replicative polymerases opposite the oxidized purine 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine
(8-oxoG). A defective protein activity results in the accumulation of G>T
transversions because of unrepaired 8-oxoG:A mismatches. In humans, MUTYH
germline mutations are associated with a recessive form of familial adenomatous
polyposis and colorectal cancer predisposition (MUTYH-associated polyposis, MAP).
Here we studied the repair capacity of the MUTYH variants R171W, E466del,
137insIW, Y165C and G382D, identified in MAP patients. Following expression and
purification of human proteins from a bacterial system, we investigated MUTYH
incision capacity on an 8-oxoG:A substrate by standard glycosylase assays. For
the first time, we employed the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) technology for
real-time recording of the association/dissociation of wild-type and MUTYH
variants from an 8-oxoG:A DNA substrate. When compared to the wild-type protein, 
R171W, E466del and Y165C variants showed a severe reduction in the binding
affinity towards the substrate, while 137insIW and G382D mutants manifested only 
a slight decrease mainly due to a slower rate of association. This reduced
binding was always associated with impairment of glycosylase activity, with
adenine removal being totally abrogated in R171W, E466del and Y165C and only
partially reduced in 137insIW and G382D. Our findings demonstrate that SPR
analysis is suitable to identify defective enzymatic behaviour even when mutant
proteins display minor alterations in substrate recognition.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2010.03.008 
PMID: 20418187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

