
1. J Immunol. 2010 Jun 1;184(11):6188-98. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000261. Epub 2010
Apr 26.

Genome-wide RNA interference in Drosophila cells identifies G protein-coupled
receptor kinase 2 as a conserved regulator of NF-kappaB signaling.

Valanne S(1), Myllymäki H, Kallio J, Schmid MR, Kleino A, Murumägi A, Airaksinen 
L, Kotipelto T, Kaustio M, Ulvila J, Esfahani SS, Engström Y, Silvennoinen O,
Hultmark D, Parikka M, Rämet M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.

Because NF-kappaB signaling pathways are highly conserved in evolution, the fruit
fly Drosophila melanogaster provides a good model to study these cascades. We
carried out an RNA interference (RNAi)-based genome-wide in vitro reporter assay 
screen in Drosophila for components of NF-kappaB pathways. We analyzed 16,025
dsRNA-treatments and identified 10 novel NF-kappaB regulators. Of these, nine
dsRNA-treatments affect primarily the Toll pathway. G protein-coupled receptor
kinase (Gprk)2, CG15737/Toll pathway activation mediating protein, and u-shaped
were required for normal Drosomycin response in vivo. Interaction studies
revealed that Gprk2 interacts with the Drosophila IkappaB homolog Cactus, but is 
not required in Cactus degradation, indicating a novel mechanism for NF-kappaB
regulation. Morpholino silencing of the zebrafish ortholog of Gprk2 in fish
embryos caused impaired cytokine expression after Escherichia coli infection,
indicating a conserved role in NF-kappaB signaling. Moreover, small interfering
RNA silencing of the human ortholog GRK5 in HeLa cells impaired NF-kappaB
reporter activity. Gprk2 RNAi flies are susceptible to infection with
Enterococcus faecalis and Gprk2 RNAi rescues Toll(10b)-induced blood cell
activation in Drosophila larvae in vivo. We conclude that Gprk2/GRK5 has an
evolutionarily conserved role in regulating NF-kappaB signaling.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000261 
PMID: 20421637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

