
1. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Aug 1;316(13):2113-22. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2010.04.010. Epub 
2010 Apr 27.

TRAM1 is involved in disposal of ER membrane degradation substrates.

Ng CL(1), Oresic K, Tortorella D.

Author information: 
(1)One Gustave L. Levy Place, Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA. caroline.ng@mssm.edu

ER quality control consists of monitoring protein folding and targeting misfolded
proteins for proteasomal degradation. ER stress results in an unfolded protein
response (UPR) that selectively upregulates proteins involved in protein
degradation, ER expansion, and protein folding. Given the efficiency in which
misfolded proteins are degraded, there likely exist cellular factors that enhance
the export of proteins across the ER membrane. We have reported that
translocating chain-associated membrane protein 1 (TRAM1), an ER-resident
membrane protein, participates in HCMV US2- and US11-mediated dislocation of MHC 
class I heavy chains (Oresic, K., Ng, C.L., and Tortorella, D. 2009). Consistent 
with the hypothesis that TRAM1 is involved in the disposal of misfolded ER
proteins, cells lacking TRAM1 experienced a heightened UPR upon acute ER stress, 
as evidenced by increased activation of unfolded protein response elements (UPRE)
and elevated levels of NF-kappaB activity. We have also extended the involvement 
of TRAM1 in the selective degradation of misfolded ER membrane proteins
Cln6(M241T) and US2, but not the soluble degradation substrate
alpha(1)-antitrypsin null(HK). These degradation model systems support the
paradigm that TRAM1 is a selective factor that can enhance the dislocation of ER 
membrane proteins.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2010.04.010 
PMCID: PMC2900547
PMID: 20430023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

