
1. Cardiovasc Ther. 2011 Dec;29(6):362-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-5922.2010.00152.x.
Epub 2010 Apr 23.

Cardiac natriuretic peptides: from basic discovery to clinical practice.

Hayek S(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiac Growth and Differentiation, Department of Biochemistry, 
Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
ON, Canada.

Discoveries of the cardiac natriuretic peptides ANP, BNP, and CNP along with
studies of their function and regulation in health and disease, have led to
breakthroughs in the understanding and clinical management of heart failure.
Analysis of the ANP and BNP promoters and patterns of expression uncovered a set 
of key regulators and pathways that converge onto these sensitive markers of
early myocyte differentiation and cardiac stress. Among the most studied are the 
transcription factors GATA4, TBX5, and NKX2-5, which are central to cardiac
development and mutations of which are associated with congenital heart disease. 
In clinical practice, plasma natriuretic peptides levels have been used as
quantitative biomarkers of heart failure and proved to be highly effective for
the diagnosis of heart failure, for risk-stratification of patients and guided
therapy, as well as for screening for subclinical cardiac stress. Emerging
studies are revealing the cardioprotective attributes of these peptides and may
offer new therapeutic venues for myocardial infarction and heart failure.
Clinical trials have documented the benefits and risks of the use of synthetic
ANP (Anaritide) and BNP (Nesiritide) for treating heart failure, renal failure,
and hypertension. This review summarizes the function and regulation of cardiac
natriuretic peptides and the translation of the basic biochemical discoveries
into clinical practice both at the diagnostic and therapeutic level.

Â© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1755-5922.2010.00152.x 
PMID: 20433683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

