
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 18;107(20):9382-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1001870107. Epub 2010 May 3.

Visualization and structural analysis of the bacterial magnetic organelle
magnetosome using atomic force microscopy.

Yamamoto D(1), Taoka A, Uchihashi T, Sasaki H, Watanabe H, Ando T, Fukumori Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192,
Japan.

The unique ability of magnetotactic bacteria to navigate along a geomagnetic
field is accomplished with the help of prokaryotic organelles, magnetosomes. The 
magnetosomes have well-ordered chain-like structures, comprising
membrane-enveloped, nano-sized magnetic crystals, and various types of
specifically associated proteins. In this study, we applied atomic force
microscopy (AFM) to investigate the spatial configuration of isolated
magnetosomes from Magnetospirillum magneticum AMB-1 in near-native buffer
conditions. AFM observation revealed organic material with a approximately 7-nm
thickness surrounding a magnetite crystal. Small globular proteins, identified as
magnetosome-associated protein MamA, were distributed on the mica surface around 
the magnetosome. Immuno-labeling with AFM showed that MamA is located on the
magnetosome surface. In vitro experiments showed that MamA proteins interact with
each other and form a high molecular mass complex. These findings suggest that
magnetosomes are covered with MamA oligomers in near-native environments.
Furthermore, nanodissection revealed that magnetosomes are built with
heterogeneous structures that comprise the organic layer. This study provides
important clues to the supramolecular architecture of the bacterial organelle,
the magnetosome, and insight into the function of the proteins localized in the
organelle.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1001870107 
PMCID: PMC2889057
PMID: 20439702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

