
1. J Mol Biol. 2010 Jul 2;400(1):82-95. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.04.051. Epub 2010
May 11.

X-ray crystallographic and MD simulation studies on the mechanism of interfacial 
activation of a family I.3 lipase with two lids.

Angkawidjaja C(1), Matsumura H, Koga Y, Takano K, Kanaya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Material and Life Science, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka
University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The interfacial activation mechanism of family I.3 lipase from Pseudomonas sp.
MIS38 (PML), which has two alpha-helical lids (lid1 and lid2), was investigated
using a combination of X-ray crystallography and molecular dynamics (MD)
simulation. The crystal structure of PML in an open conformation was determined
at 2.1 A resolution in the presence of Ca(2+) and Triton X-100. Comparison of
this structure with that in the closed conformation indicates that both lids
greatly change their positions and lid1 is anchored by the calcium ion (Ca1) in
the open conformation. This structure was not seriously changed even when the
protein was dialyzed extensively against the Ca(2+)-free buffer containing Triton
X-100 before crystallization, indicating that the open conformation is fairly
stable unless a micellar substance is removed. The crystal structure of the PML
derivative, in which the active site serine residue (Ser207) is
diethylphosphorylated by soaking the crystal of PML in the open conformation in a
solution containing diethyl p-nitrophenyl phosphate, was also determined. This
structure greatly resembles that in the open conformation, indicating that PML
structure in the open conformation represents that in the active form. MD
simulation of PML in the open conformation in the absence of micelles showed that
lid2 closes first, while lid1 maintains its open conformation. Likewise, MD
simulation of PML in the closed conformation in the absence of Ca(2+) and in the 
presence of octane or trilaurin micelles showed that lid1 opens, while lid2
remains closed. These results suggest that Ca1 functions as a hook for
stabilization of a fully opened conformation of lid1 and for initiation of
subsequent opening of lid2.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.04.051 
PMID: 20438738  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

