
1. Oncogene. 2010 Jul 1;29(26):3845-53. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.149. Epub 2010 May 3.

Oncogenic E17K mutation in the pleckstrin homology domain of AKT1 promotes
v-Abl-mediated pre-B-cell transformation and survival of Pim-deficient cells.

Guo G(1), Qiu X, Wang S, Chen Y, Rothman PB, Wang Z, Chen Y, Wang G, Chen JL.

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chaoyang District, Beijing, China.

Abl-mediated transformation requires the activation of multiple pathways involved
in the cellular proliferation and survival, including PI3K/AKT and
JAK/STAT-dependent Pim kinases. Recently, the E17K mutation in the AKT1 has been 
associated with multiple human malignancies and leukemia in mice. However, this
mutation has not been identified in Abl-transformed cells. We investigated the
presence of the AKT1(E17K) mutation in v-Abl-transformed cell clones. AKT1(E17K) 
was detected in 3 (2.6%) of 116 specimens examined. To show the involvement of
AKT1(E17K) directly in v-Abl-mediated tumorigenesis, we infected bone marrow
cells from mice with bicistronic retroviruses encoding v-Abl and either wild-type
or the mutant AKT1. Interestingly, we found that E17K mutant greatly increased
the v-Abl transformation efficiency as compared with wild-type AKT1. Ectopic
expression of E17K mutant increased the expression levels of antiapoptotic
protein BCL2 and phosphorylation levels of proapoptotic protein BAD. This
correlated with an increased protection from imatinib-induced apoptosis in Abl
transformants. Furthermore, AKT1(E17K) promotes survival of the Pim-deficient
cells, indicating a functional link between AKT and Pim in v-Abl transformation. 
In addition, AKT1(E17K) delays loss of Pim-1 and Pim-2 protein levels on v-Abl
inactivation, which suggests that there exists reciprocal signaling between AKT
and Pim in v-Abl transformants.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2010.149 
PMID: 20440266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

