
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2010 Oct;73(2):203-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2010.05.001. Epub
2010 May 10.

Human SUMO fusion systems enhance protein expression and solubility.

Wang Z(1), Li H, Guan W, Ling H, Wang Z, Mu T, Shuler FD, Fang X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology and Engineering of Ministry of
Education, Jilin University, 2519 Jiefang Road, Changchun 130021, China.

A major challenge associated with recombinant protein production in Escherichia
coli is generation of large quantities of soluble, functional protein. Yeast SUMO
(small ubiquitin-related modifier), has been shown to enhance heterologous
protein expression and solubility as fusion tag, however, the effects of human
SUMOs on protein expression have not been investigated. Here we describe the use 
of human SUMO1 and SUMO2 as a useful gene fusion technology. Human SUMO1 and
SUMO2 fusion expression vectors were constructed and tested in His-tag and
ubiquitin fusion expression systems. Two difficult-to-express model proteins,
matrix metalloprotease-13 (MMP13) and enhanced green fluorescence protein (eGFP) 
were fused to the C-terminus of the human SUMO1 and SUMO2 expression vectors.
These constructs were expressed in E. coli and evaluation of MMP13 and eGFP
expression and solubility was conducted. We found that both SUMO1 and SUMO2 had
the ability to enhance the solubility of MMP13 and eGFP, with the SUMO2 tag
having a more significant effect. Since fusion tags produce varying quantities of
soluble proteins, we assessed the effect of SUMO2 coupled with ubiquitin (Ub).
SUMO2-ubiquitin and ubiquitin-SUMO2 fusion expression plasmids were constructed
with eGFP as a passenger protein. Following expression in E. coli, both plasmids 
could improve eGFP expression and solubility similar to the SUMO2 fusion and
better than the ubiquitin fusion. The sequential order of SUMO2 and ubiquitin had
little effect on expression and solubility of eGFP. Purification of eGFP from the
gene fusion product, SUMO2-ubiquitin-eGFP, involved cleavage by a deubiquitinase 
(Usp2-cc) and Ni-Sepharose column chromatography. The eGFP protein was purified
to high homogeneity. In summary, human SUMO1 and SUMO2 are useful gene fusion
technologies enhancing the expression, solubility and purification of model
heterologous proteins.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2010.05.001 
PMID: 20457256  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

