
1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2010 Jul;17(7):1104-10. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00481-09. Epub
2010 May 12.

Functional T-cell deficiency in adolescents who experience serogroup C
meningococcal disease despite receiving the meningococcal serogroup C conjugate
vaccine.

Foster RA(1), Carlring J, Lees A, Borrow R, Ramsay M, Kacsmarski E, Miller E,
McKendrick MW, Heath AW, Read RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection and Immunity, University of Sheffield Medical School, 
Beech Hill Rd., Sheffield S10 2RX, United Kingdom.

Some individuals have experienced meningococcal disease despite receiving the
meningococcal serogroup C conjugate (MCC) vaccine in adolescence. We sought to
determine whether this is due to subclinical functional B- or T-cell
immunodeficiency. Of 53 vaccine failures identified by enhanced surveillance of
England and Wales from 1999 to 2004, 15 received MCC vaccine in adolescence, 9 of
whom were recruited 2 to 6 years following convalescence from meningococcal
disease. Their peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were incubated with
polyclonal activators designed to mimic T-cell-independent B-cell stimulation by 
bacterial polysaccharides and the T-cell stimulation provided by the protein
component of the conjugate vaccine. Subsequent proliferation and activation of T 
and B lymphocytes were measured, along with T-cell help to B cells. Compared to
age-, sex-, geographically, and ethnicity-matched controls, CD4 T-cell
proliferation rates in response to both anti-CD3 (T-cell receptor [TCR])
stimulation and anti-CD3 in the presence of B cells activated through anti-IgD
conjugated to dextran (alpha-delta-dex) were lower in PBMCs derived from vaccine 
failures (P = 0.044 and P = 0.029, respectively). There was reduced CD4 cell
activation of the patient cells compared to controls following stimulation by CD3
(P = 0.048). B-cell activation during incubation of PBMCs with the T-cell
stimuli, anti-CD3 (P = 0.044), or anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 (P = 0.018) was
relatively impaired in patients. Anti-tetanus toxoid IgG concentrations were
lower in the vaccine failure group (P = 0.0385). There was a relative defect of
T-cell responsiveness to T-cell-dependent antigen stimulation in MCC vaccine
failures, which was manifested in reduced T-cell help to B cells.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00481-09 
PMCID: PMC2897263
PMID: 20463106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

