
1. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2007 May;3(3):287-98. doi: 10.1586/1744666X.3.3.287.

Dissecting genetic predisposition to inflammatory bowel disease: current progress
and prospective application.

Annese V(1), Latiano A, Palmieri O, Andriulli A.

Author information: 
(1)Unit√† e Laboratorio di Gastroenterologia ed Endoscopia, Ospedale I.R.C.C.S
'Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza', Viale Cappuccini, 1-71013 San Giovanni Rotondo 
(Fg), Italy. v.annese@operapadrepio.it

Over the last 10 years, sensitive advancement has been made in the study of
genetic susceptibility to inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Complementary
methodologies of linkage, fine-mapping and candidate-gene studies have led to the
identification of a number of susceptibility genes and loci, including caspase
activation and recruitment domain 15 (CARD15), major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) and IBD5, whereas many other genes (nucleotide oligomerization domain 1
[NOD1], tumor-upregulated CARD-containing antagonist of caspase-9 [TUCAN],
Toll-like receptors [TLR], interleukin 23 receptor [IL23R], multidrug resistance 
1 [MDR1], myosin IXb [MYO9B], chemokine [C-Cmotif] ligand 20 [CCL20], human
beta-defensin 2 [HBD-2], autophagy-related 16-like 1 [ATG16L1]) are still
awaiting confirmation. The CARD15 gene is currently the most widely replicated
and investigated gene. The exact sequence of events that link CARD15 variants to 
early pathogenetic changes is unknown. However, the role of the encoded protein
confirms the relevance of appropriate responses by the innate immune system to
intestinal bacteria, including the production of antimicrobial peptides
(defensins). With the implementation of new genomics and proteomics
methodologies, genetic research will advance our further understanding of the
clinical heterogeneity of IBD and tackle the complex interactions between genetic
and environmental risk factors.

DOI: 10.1586/1744666X.3.3.287 
PMID: 20477673 

