
1. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2010 May;75(5):444-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-0285.2010.00957.x.

The use of biochemical and biophysical tools for triage of high-throughput
screening hits - A case study with Escherichia coli phosphopantetheine
adenylyltransferase.

Miller JR(1), Thanabal V, Melnick MM, Lall M, Donovan C, Sarver RW, Lee DY, Ohren
J, Emerson D.

Author information: 
(1)Pfizer, Inc. Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA. James.Miller2@merck.com
<James.Miller2@merck.com>

High-throughput screening is utilized by pharmaceutical researchers and,
increasingly, academic investigators to identify agents that act upon enzymes,
receptors, and cellular processes. Screening hits include molecules that
specifically bind the target and a greater number of non-specific compounds. It
is necessary to 'triage' these hits to identify the subset worthy of further
exploration. As part of our antibacterial drug discovery effort, we applied a
suite of biochemical and biophysical tools to accelerate the triage process. We
describe application of these tools to a series of
9-oxo-4,9-dihydropyrazolo[5,1-b]quinazoline-2-carboxylic acids (PQ) hits from a
screen of Escherichia coli phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT). Initial
confirmation of specific binding to phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase was
obtained using biochemical and biophysical tools, including a novel orthogonal
assay, isothermal titration calorimetry, and saturation transfer difference NMR. 
To identify the phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase sub-site bound by these
inhibitors, two techniques were utilized: steady-state enzyme kinetics and a
novel (19)F NMR method in which fluorine-containing fragments that bind the ATP
and/or phosphopantetheine sites serve as competitive reporter probes. These data 
are consistent with PQs binding the ATP sub-site. In addition to identification
of a series of PPAT inhibitors, the described hit triage process is broadly
applicable to other enzyme targets in which milligram quantities of purified
target protein are available.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1747-0285.2010.00957.x 
PMID: 20486930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

