
1. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2010 Jul 1;59(2):143-51. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2010.00674.x. Epub 2010 Mar 23.

Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans accelerates atherosclerosis with an
increase in atherogenic factors in spontaneously hyperlipidemic mice.

Zhang T(1), Kurita-Ochiai T, Hashizume T, Du Y, Oguchi S, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nihon University School of
Dentistry at Matsudo, Chiba, Japan.

Cariogenic and periodontal pathogens are thought to be etiological factors in the
development of cardiovascular disease. We assessed the involvement of the
periodontal pathogen Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans and cariogenic
pathogen Streptococcus mutans in the development of atherosclerosis in
apolipoprotein E-deficient spontaneously hyperlipidemic (Apoe(shl)) mice. The
mice were treated intravenously with A. actinomycetemcomitans HK1651, S. mutans
GS-5, or phosphate-buffered saline three times a week for 3 weeks and killed at
15 weeks of age. The areas of the aortic sinus that were covered with
atherosclerotic plaque were significantly larger in Apoe(shl) mice challenged
with A. actinomycetemcomitans compared with S. mutans- or vehicle-challenged
mice. Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans challenge increased serum
high-sensitive C-reactive protein and lipopolysaccharide levels. Bacterial DNA
was detected in the blood, heart, and spleen, but not in the liver. Furthermore, 
serum interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-8, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and MCP-1 levels
and Toll-like receptor (TLR)2, TLR4, ICAM-1, E-selectin, P-selectin, LOX-1,
HSP60, CCL19, CCL21, CCR7, and MCP-1 expressions in the aorta were significantly 
increased in mice challenged with A. actinomycetemcomitans. These results suggest
that systemic infection with A. actinomycetemcomitans accelerates atherosclerosis
in Apoe(shl) mice by exposing the whole microorganisms or their products,
followed by initiating inflammation. Increases in proatherogenic factors may
explain the aggravation of atherosclerosis by A. actinomycetemcomitans infection.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2010.00674.x 
PMID: 20482627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

