
1. Cell Microbiol. 2010 Nov;12(11):1562-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01488.x.

CD34 mediates intestinal inflammation in Salmonella-infected mice.

Grassl GA(1), Faustmann M, Gill N, Zbytnuik L, Merkens H, So L, Rossi FM, McNagny
KM, Finlay BB.

Author information: 
(1)Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 
1Z3, Canada.

CD34 is a highly glycosylated sialomucin expressed on a variety of cells, ranging
from vascular endothelial cells to haematopoietic stem cells. Depending on its
glycosylation state, CD34 has been shown to promote or inhibit cell adhesion and 
migration; however, a functional role for CD34 in the gut has not been
determined. Using a model of Salmonella-induced gastroenteritis, we investigated 
the role of CD34 in the context of infection. Upon oral infection, the number of 
CD34+ cells detected in the submucosa, vascular endothelium and lamina propria
significantly increased in S. Typhimurium-infected C57Bl/6 mice. The pathology of
S. Typhimurium-infected C57Bl/6 mice was characterized by recruitment of
neutrophils to the site of inflammation, submucosal oedema and crypt destruction.
In contrast, Cd34(-/-) mice showed a delayed pathology, a defect in inflammatory 
cell migration into the intestinal tissue and enhanced survival. Importantly,
this was not due to a lack of chemotactic signals in Cd34(-/-) mice as these mice
had either similar or significantly higher levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines
and chemokines post infection when compared with infected C57/Bl6 control mice.
In summary, we demonstrate a novel role for CD34 in enhancing migration of
inflammatory cells and thereby exacerbating host-mediated immunopathology in the 
intestine of S. Typhimurium-infected mice.

Â© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01488.x 
PMID: 20497179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

