
1. Chem Biodivers. 2010 May;7(5):1051-64. doi: 10.1002/cbdv.200900320.

Gene network analysis during early infection of human coronary artery smooth
muscle cells by Trypanosoma cruzi and Its gp83 ligand.

Nde PN(1), Johnson CA, Pratap S, Cardenas TC, Kleshchenko YY, Furtak VA, Simmons 
KJ, Lima MF, Villalta F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Meharry Medical
College, 1005 Dr. D. B. Todd Jr. Blvd., Nashville, TN 37208-3599, USA.

Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas' disease, infects heart and
muscle cells leading to cardiac arrest, followed by death. The genetic
architectures in the early T. cruzi infection process of human cells are unknown.
To understand the genetic architectures of the early invasion process of T.
cruzi, we conducted gene transcription microarray analysis, followed by gene
network construction of the host cell response in primary human coronary artery
smooth muscle (HCASM) cells infected with T. cruzi or exposed to T. cruzi gp83, a
ligand used by the trypanosome to bind host cells. Using seven RT-PCR verified
up-regulated genes (FOSB, ATF5, INPP1, CCND2, THBS1, LAMC1, and APLP2) as the
seed for network construction, we built an interaction network of the early T.
cruzi infection process containing 165 genes, connected by 598 biological
interactions. This interactome network is centered on the BCL6 gene as a hub.
Silencing the expression of two seed genes (THBS1 and LAMC1) by RNAi reduced T.
cruzi infection. Overall, our results elucidate the significant and complex
process involved in T. cruzi infection of HCASM cells at the transcriptome level.
This is the first elucidation into the interactome network in human cells caused 
by T. cruzi and its gp83 ligand.

DOI: 10.1002/cbdv.200900320 
PMCID: PMC2910116
PMID: 20491065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

