
1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010 Jun;19(6):1409-22. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-1077.

Identification of potential serum biomarkers of glioblastoma: serum osteopontin
levels correlate with poor prognosis.

Sreekanthreddy P(1), Srinivasan H, Kumar DM, Nijaguna MB, Sridevi S, Vrinda M,
Arivazhagan A, Balasubramaniam A, Hegde AS, Chandramouli BA, Santosh V, Rao MR,
Kondaiah P, Somasundaram K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study is to identify serum biomarkers with
classification and prognosis utility for astrocytoma, in particular glioblastoma 
(GBM).
METHODS: Our previous glioma microarray database was mined to identify genes that
encode secreted or membrane-localized proteins. Subsequent analysis was done
using significant analysis of microarrays, followed by reverse
transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) and immunohistochemical validation in
tumor tissues, ELISA and Western blot validation in sera, and correlation with
survival of GBM patients.
RESULTS: Significant analysis of microarrays identified 31 upregulated and 3
downregulated genes specifically in GBMs. RT-qPCR validation on an independent
set of samples confirmed the GBM-specific differential expression of several
genes, including three upregulated (CALU, CXCL9, and TIMP1) and two downregulated
(GPX3 and TIMP3) novel genes. With respect to osteopontin (OPN), we show the
GBM-specific upregulation by RT-qPCR and immunohistochemical staining of tumor
tissues. Elevated serum OPN levels in GBM patients were also shown by ELISA and
Western blot. GBM patients with high serum OPN levels had poorer survival than
those with low serum OPN levels (median survival 9 versus 22 months respectively;
P = 0.0001). Further, we also show high serum TIMP1 levels in GBM patients
compared with grade II/III patients by ELISA and downregulation of serum GPX3 and
TIMP3 proteins in GBMs compared with normal control by Western blot analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Several novel potential serum biomarkers of GBM are identified and
validated. High serum OPN level is found as a poor prognostic indicator in GBMs.
IMPACT: Identified serum biomarkers may have potential utility in astrocytoma
classification and GBM prognosis.

Copyright 2010 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-1077 
PMID: 20530493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

