
1. ISME J. 2011 Jan;5(1):1-7. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2010.79. Epub 2010 Jun 10.

Will ocean acidification affect marine microbes?

Joint I(1), Doney SC, Karl DM.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, The Hoe, Plymouth, UK.
irj@pml.ac.uk

The pH of the surface ocean is changing as a result of increases in atmospheric
carbon dioxide (CO(2)), and there are concerns about potential impacts of lower
pH and associated alterations in seawater carbonate chemistry on the
biogeochemical processes in the ocean. However, it is important to place these
changes within the context of pH in the present-day ocean, which is not constant;
it varies systematically with season, depth and along productivity gradients. Yet
this natural variability in pH has rarely been considered in assessments of the
effect of ocean acidification on marine microbes. Surface pH can change as a
consequence of microbial utilization and production of carbon dioxide, and to a
lesser extent other microbially mediated processes such as nitrification. Useful 
comparisons can be made with microbes in other aquatic environments that readily 
accommodate very large and rapid pH change. For example, in many freshwater
lakes, pH changes that are orders of magnitude greater than those projected for
the twenty second century oceans can occur over periods of hours. Marine and
freshwater assemblages have always experienced variable pH conditions. Therefore,
an appropriate null hypothesis may be, until evidence is obtained to the
contrary, that major biogeochemical processes in the oceans other than
calcification will not be fundamentally different under future higher CO(2)/lower
pH conditions.

DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2010.79 
PMCID: PMC3105673
PMID: 20535222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

