
1. Microbes Infect. 2010 Oct;12(11):846-53. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2010.05.012. Epub 
2010 Jun 11.

Protective cellular responses to Burkholderia mallei infection.

Rowland CA(1), Lever MS, Griffin KF, Bancroft GJ, Lukaszewski RA.

Author information: 
(1)Dstl, Biomedical Sciences, Porton Down, Salisbury SP40JQ, UK.
carowland@dstl.gov.uk

Burkholderia mallei is a Gram-negative bacillus causing the disease glanders in
humans. During intraperitoneal infection, BALB/c mice develop a chronic disease
characterised by abscess formation where mice normally die up to 70 days
post-infection. Although cytokine responses have been investigated, cellular
immune responses to B. mallei infection have not previously been characterised.
Therefore, the influx and activation status of splenic neutrophils, macrophages
and T cells was examined during infection. Gr-1+ neutrophils and F4/80+
macrophages infiltrated the spleen 5 h post-infection and an increase in
activated macrophages, neutrophils and T cells occurred by 24 h post-infection.
Mice depleted of Gr-1+ cells were acutely susceptible to B. mallei infection,
succumbing to the infection 5 days post-infection. Mice depleted of both CD4 and 
CD8 T cells did not succumb to the infection until 14 days post-infection.
Infected μMT (B cell) and CD28 knockout mice did not differ from wildtype mice
whereas iNOS-2 knockout mice began to succumb to the infection 30 days
post-infection. The data presented suggests that Gr-1+ cells, activated early in 
B. mallei infection, are essential for controlling the early, innate response to 
B. mallei infection and T cells or nitric oxide are important during the later
stages of infection.

Crown Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2010.05.012 
PMID: 20542133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

