
1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2010 Aug;17(8):1269-73. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00166-10. Epub
2010 Jun 16.

Mobilization of CD34+ progenitor cells in association with decreased
proliferation in the bone marrow of macaques after administration of the Fms-like
tyrosine kinase 3 ligand.

Reeves RK(1), Wei Q, Fultz PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 530 Third
Avenue South, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (FLT3-L) is critical for the differentiation
and self-renewal of CD34+ progenitor cells in primates and has been used
therapeutically to mobilize progenitor and dendritic cells in vivo. However,
little is known regarding the expansion of progenitor cells outside of peripheral
blood, particularly in bone marrow (BM), where progenitor cells primarily reside.
Evaluation of FLT3-L-mediated cell mobilization during lentivirus infections,
where the numbers of CD34+ progenitor cells are reduced, is limited. We
enumerated frequencies and absolute numbers of CD34+ progenitor cells in blood
and BM of naive and SIV- or SHIV-infected macaques during and after the
administration of FLT3-L. Flow cytometric analyses revealed that, while CD34+
cells increased in the circulation, no expansion was observed in BM. Furthermore,
in the BM intracellular Ki67, a marker of cell proliferation, was downregulated
in CD34+ progenitor cells but was upregulated significantly in the bulk cell
population. Although the exact mechanism(s) remains unclear, these data suggest
that CD34+ cell mobilization in blood was the result of cellular emigration from 
BM and not the proliferation of CD34+ cells already in the periphery. It is
possible that the decreased progenitor cell proliferation observed in BM is
evidence of a negative regulatory mechanism preventing hyperproliferation and
development of neoplastic cells.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00166-10 
PMCID: PMC2916240
PMID: 20554805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

