
1. Immunol Lett. 2010 Aug 16;132(1-2):61-8. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2010.06.001. Epub
2010 Jun 8.

IL-2-deprivation and TGF-beta are two non-redundant suppressor mechanisms of
CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cell which jointly restrain CD4+CD25- cell activation.

Wang G(1), Khattar M, Guo Z, Miyahara Y, Linkes SP, Sun Z, He X, Stepkowski SM,
Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Toledo
College of Medicine, Toledo, OH 43614, USA.

The benefits of immunotherapy by regulatory T (Treg) cells are unpredictable
partially due to the uncertainty of their suppressive mechanism. In fact, various
suppressive mechanisms have been proposed but each remains controversial. To
better understand Treg-mediated suppression, we have investigated factors which
may influence the suppressive effects. In an in vitro suppression assay,
over-expression of anti-apoptotic Bcl2 enhancing survival of conventional T
responder cells (Tconvs) did not subvert Treg-mediated suppression. In contrast, 
enhancing activation of Tconvs by increasing the potency of calcium signals
completely abrogated Treg-mediated suppression. While Tregs were incapable of
suppressing already activated Tconvs, they prevented expression of activation
markers on na√Øve Tconvs during activation, thereby indicating that Tregs mediate 
suppression through controlling early activation stage. Interestingly, IL-2
deprivation or TGF-beta, two suppressive mechanisms, did not effectively inhibit 
Tconv activation and proliferation when applied alone. In contrast, IL-2
deprivation combined with TGF-beta suppressed Tconv activation as potently as
Tregs. More importantly, in the transwell system, that separates Tregs from
Tconvs, TGF-beta contributed to Treg suppression under IL-2 depriving condition. 
In conclusion, these two suppressive mechanisms acting in concert may be
necessary to effectively restrain the early activation of Tconvs.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2010.06.001 
PMCID: PMC2922908
PMID: 20570629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

