
1. Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung. 2010 Jun;57(2):109-22. doi:
10.1556/AMicr.57.2010.2.4.

Investigation of mineral water springs of Miercurea Ciuc (Csíkszereda) region
(Romania) with cultivation-dependent microbiological methods.

Máthé I(1), Táncsics A, György E, Pohner Z, Vladár P, Székely AJ, Márialigeti K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Technical and Natural Sciences, Sapientia Hungarian University
of Transylvania, Miercurea Ciuc, Romania.

Water samples of ten mineral water springs at Miercurea Ciuc (Csíkszereda) region
(Romania) were examined during 2005-2006 using cultivation-dependent
microbiological methods. The results of standard hygienic bacteriological tests
showed that the Hargita Spring had perfect and five other springs had
microbiologically acceptable water quality (Zsögöd-, Nagy-borvíz-, Taploca-,
Szentegyháza- and Lobogó springs). The water of Borsáros Spring was exceptionable
(high germ count, presence of Enterococcus spp.).Both standard bacteriological
and molecular microbiological methods indicated that the microbiological water
quality of the Szeltersz-, Nádasszék- and Délo springs was not acceptable. Bad
water quality resulted from inadequate spring catchment and hygiene (low yield,
lack of runoff, negligent usage of the springs, horse manure around the
spring).The 16S rRNA gene-based identification of strains isolated on standard
meat-peptone medium resulted in the detection of typical aquatic organisms such
as Shewanella baltica, Aeromonas spp., Pseudomonas veronii, Psychrobacter sp,.
Acinetobacter spp. and allochthonous microbes, like Nocardia, Streptomyces,
Bacillus, Microbacterium , and Arthrobacter strains indicating the impact of
soil. Other allochthonous microbes, such as Staphylococcus spp., Micrococcus sp.,
Lactococcus sp., Clostridium butyricum, Yersinia spp., Aerococcus sp., may have
originated from animal/human sources.

DOI: 10.1556/AMicr.57.2010.2.4 
PMID: 20587384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

