
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2010 Sep;10(9):1068-76. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2010.06.007.
Epub 2010 Jun 11.

Negative modulation of invariant natural killer T cell responses to glycolipid
antigens by p38 MAP kinase.

Stuart JK(1), Bisch SP, Leon-Ponte M, Hayatsu J, Mazzuca DM, Maleki Vareki S,
Haeryfar SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario, Canada.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are CD1d-restricted, glycolipid-reactive 
lymphocytes with potent immunoregulatory characteristics. Although recent years
have witnessed intensified interest in iNKT cells, little is known about
intracellular signaling pathways that control iNKT cell responses, including
those mediated by mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs). We employed
selective inhibitors of ERK1/2, JNK and p38 to examine the importance of these
MAPKs in iNKT cell responses to the prototype glycolipid antigen
alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha GC). Activation of DN32.D3 iNKT cells in the
presence of PD98059 led to decreased interleukin (IL)-2 production, indicating a 
role for ERK in mouse iNKT cell responses. In contrast, addition of the JNK
inhibitor SP600125 to cultures did not significantly affect cytokine production, 
suggesting that JNK is not critically needed for iNKT cell responses.
Interestingly, selective inhibition of p38 by either SB203580 or SK&F 86002
resulted in augmented IL-2 production by DN32.D3 cells after stimulation with
alpha GC. This was also evident when iNKT cells were stimulated with an anti-CD3 
monoclonal antibody thus bypassing the requirement for CD1d-mediated antigen
presentation, indicating that p38 inhibition affects signal transduction
downstream of iNKT cells' T cell receptors. Primary splenic iNKT cells similarly 
exhibited enhanced cytokine response to alpha GC when cultured in the presence of
p38 inhibitors. Importantly, in vivo administration of SB203580 resulted in
higher IL-4 and interferon-gamma secretion in alpha GC-treated mice. These
results demonstrate that MAPKs play distinct signaling roles in iNKT cells and
that both in vitro and in vivo iNKT cell responses to glycolipid antigens can be 
negatively modulated by p38.

(c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2010.06.007 
PMID: 20584631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

