
1. Vaccine. 2010 Aug 23;28(37):6094-103. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2010.06.074. Epub
2010 Jul 3.

Regulated delayed expression of rfc enhances the immunogenicity and protective
efficacy of a heterologous antigen delivered by live attenuated Salmonella
enterica vaccines.

Kong Q(1), Liu Q, Jansen AM, Curtiss R 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, The Biodesign Institute and
School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.

The Salmonella rfc gene encodes the O-antigen polymerase. We constructed three
strains in which we replaced the native rfc promoter with the arabinose-dependent
araC P(BAD) promoter so that rfc expression was dependent on exogenously supplied
arabinose provided during in vitro growth. The three mutant strains were designed
to synthesize different amounts of Rfc by altering the ribosome-binding sequence 
and start codon. We examined these strains for a number of in vitro
characteristics compared to an isogenic Deltarfc mutant and the wild-type parent 
strain. One promoter-replacement mutation, DeltaP(rfc174), yielded an optimal
profile, exhibiting wild-type characteristics when grown with arabinose, and
Deltarfc characteristics when grown without arabinose. In addition, when
administered orally, the DeltaP(rfc174) strain was completely attenuated in for
virulence in mice. The DeltaP(rfc174) mutation was introduced into attenuated
Salmonella vaccine strain chi9241 (DeltapabA DeltapabB DeltaasdA) followed by
introduction of an Asd(+) balanced-lethal plasmid to designed for expression of
the pneumococcal surface protein PspA. Mice immunized with either chi9241 or its 
DeltaP(rfc174) derivative expressing pspA were protected against S. pneumoniae
challenge.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2010.06.074 
PMCID: PMC3956130
PMID: 20599580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

