
1. Cell Microbiol. 2010 Nov;12(11):1622-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01495.x.

The ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase UCH-L1 promotes bacterial invasion by altering
the dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton.

Bassères E(1), Coppotelli G, Pfirrmann T, Andersen JB, Masucci M, Frisan T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Invasion of eukaryotic target cells by pathogenic bacteria requires extensive
remodelling of the membrane and actin cytoskeleton. Here we show that the
remodelling process is regulated by the ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase UCH-L1
that promotes the invasion of epithelial cells by Listeria monocytogenes and
Salmonella enterica. Knockdown of UCH-L1 reduced the uptake of both bacteria,
while expression of the catalytically active enzyme promoted efficient
internalization in the UCH-L1-negative HeLa cell line. The entry of L.
monocytogenes involves binding to the receptor tyrosine kinase Met, which leads
to receptor phosphorylation and ubiquitination. UCH-L1 controls the early
membrane-associated events of this triggering cascade since knockdown was
associated with altered phosphorylation of the c-cbl docking site on Tyr1003,
reduced ubiquitination of the receptor and altered activation of downstream
ERK1/2- and AKT-dependent signalling in response to the natural ligand Hepatocyte
Growth Factor (HGF). The regulation of cytoskeleton dynamics was further
confirmed by the induction of actin stress fibres in HeLa expressing the active
enzyme but not the catalytic mutant UCH-L1(C90S) . These findings highlight a
previously unrecognized involvement of the ubiquitin cycle in bacterial entry.
UCH-L1 is highly expressed in malignant cells that may therefore be particularly 
susceptible to invasion by bacteria-based drug delivery systems.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01495.x 
PMID: 20608941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

