
1. Peptides. 2010 Sep;31(9):1654-60. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2010.06.010. Epub 2010 
Jun 19.

In vitro bactericidal activity of human beta-defensin 2 against nosocomial
strains.

Routsias JG(1), Karagounis P, Parvulesku G, Legakis NJ, Tsakris A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens, 75 M.Asias St., 11527 Athens, Greece. jroutsias@med.uoa.gr

Human beta-defensin 2 (hBD-2) is a 41-amino acid cationic peptide of the innate
immune system that serves as antimicrobial molecule. We determined the
bactericidal activity of synthetic hBD-2 against nosocomial strains belonging to 
eight different bacterial species and exhibiting various antimicrobial resistance
phenotypes. The native disulfide connectivity was found essential for the
bactericidal activity of hBD-2, while sodium chloride concentration was reversely
associated with its potency. hBD-2 exhibited high bactericidal activity against
Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterococcus faecalis,
Enterococcus faecium and Staphylococcus aureus clinical strains.
Characteristically, A. baumannii strains that exhibited multi-drug resistant
(MDR) phenotypes were susceptible to lower concentrations of hBD-2
(vLD(90)=3.25-4.5 microg/ml) in comparison with non-MDR (wild-type) A. baumannii 
strains (vLD(90)=3.90-9.35 microg/ml). Bactericidal activity of hBD-2 was less
pronounced against Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Proteus mirabilis 
strains but was significantly enhanced against strains of these species that
exhibited resistance to several beta-lactam antibiotics. These observations give 
indications that the natural hBD-2 has a potential therapeutic role against
bacterial pathogens and particularly against those exhibiting MDR phenotypes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2010.06.010 
PMID: 20600430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

