
1. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2010 Oct;60(1):49-56. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2010.00715.x.

A role for CXC chemokine receptor-2 in the pathogenesis of urogenital Chlamydia
muridarum infection in mice.

Lee HY(1), Schripsema JH, Sigar IM, Lacy SR, Kasimos JN, Murray CM, Ramsey KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Chicago College of Osteopathic
Medicine, Midwestern University, IL, USA.

We tested the hypothesis that a specific chemokine receptor, CXC chemokine
receptor-2 (CXCR2), mediates acute inflammatory damage during chlamydial
urogenital infection, which ultimately leads to the chronic sequelae of
hydrosalpinx - a surrogate marker of infertility. Homozygous CXCR2 genetic
knockouts (CXCR2-/-), heterozygous littermates (CXCR2+/-) or homozygous wild-type
(wt) controls (CXCR2+/+) were infected intravaginally with Chlamydia muridarum.
Although no change was observed in the infection in the lower genital tract based
on CXCR zygosity, a delay in the ascension of infection into the upper genital
tract was seen in CXCR2-/- mice. Significantly elevated peripheral blood
neutrophil counts were observed in CXCR2-/- mice when compared with controls.
Reduced rates of acute inflammatory indices were observed in the affected tissue,
indicating reduced neutrophil extravasation capacity in the absence of CXCR2. Of 
note was a reduction in the postinfection development of hydrosalpinx that
correlated with CXCR2 zygosity, with both CXCR2-/- (13%) and their CXCR2+/- (35%)
littermates displaying significantly lower rates of hydrosalpinx formation than
the wt CXCR2-sufficient mice (93%). We conclude that CXCR2 ligands are a major
chemotactic signal that induces damaging acute inflammation and the resulting
chronic pathology during the repair phase of the host response, but are
dispensable for the resolution of infection.

Â© 2010 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2010.00715.x 
PMID: 20602634  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

