
1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Jul 1;6:e1000979. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000979.

Leprosy and the adaptation of human toll-like receptor 1.

Wong SH(1), Gochhait S, Malhotra D, Pettersson FH, Teo YY, Khor CC, Rautanen A,
Chapman SJ, Mills TC, Srivastava A, Rudko A, Freidin MB, Puzyrev VP, Ali S,
Aggarwal S, Chopra R, Reddy BS, Garg VK, Roy S, Meisner S, Hazra SK, Saha B,
Floyd S, Keating BJ, Kim C, Fairfax BP, Knight JC, Hill PC, Adegbola RA,
Hakonarson H, Fine PE, Pitchappan RM, Bamezai RN, Hill AV, Vannberg FO.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

Leprosy is an infectious disease caused by the obligate intracellular pathogen
Mycobacterium leprae and remains endemic in many parts of the world. Despite
several major studies on susceptibility to leprosy, few genomic loci have been
replicated independently. We have conducted an association analysis of more than 
1,500 individuals from different case-control and family studies, and observed
consistent associations between genetic variants in both TLR1 and the
HLA-DRB1/DQA1 regions with susceptibility to leprosy (TLR1 I602S, case-control P 
= 5.7 x 10(-8), OR = 0.31, 95% CI = 0.20-0.48, and HLA-DQA1 rs1071630,
case-control P = 4.9 x 10(-14), OR = 0.43, 95% CI = 0.35-0.54). The effect sizes 
of these associations suggest that TLR1 and HLA-DRB1/DQA1 are major
susceptibility genes in susceptibility to leprosy. Further population
differentiation analysis shows that the TLR1 locus is extremely differentiated.
The protective dysfunctional 602S allele is rare in Africa but expands to become 
the dominant allele among individuals of European descent. This supports the
hypothesis that this locus may be under selection from mycobacteria or other
pathogens that are recognized by TLR1 and its co-receptors. These observations
provide insight into the long standing host-pathogen relationship between human
and mycobacteria and highlight the key role of the TLR pathway in infectious
diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000979 
PMCID: PMC2895660
PMID: 20617178  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

