
1. J Immunol. 2010 Aug 15;185(4):2059-70. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902693. Epub 2010
Jul 12.

CD45 regulates migration, proliferation, and progression of double negative 1
thymocytes.

Lai JC(1), Wlodarska M, Liu DJ, Abraham N, Johnson P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Life Sciences Institute, University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

CD45 is a protein tyrosine phosphatase that is expressed on all nucleated
hematopoietic cells, from stem cells to memory cells. Although its function in
regulating the threshold of Ag receptor signaling is well established, its role
in other leukocytes, particularly progenitor cells, is not well defined. In this 
study, we find CD45 affects early thymocyte development. Examination of the
CD4(-)CD8(-) double negative (DN) populations revealed a significant reduction in
the DN1 population, in both the numbers of CD117(+) DN1 cells (the early
thymocyte progenitors) and the CD117(-) DN1 cells in the thymus of CD45(-/-)
mice. There was also a reduced frequency of CCR9(+) Lin(-)Sca-1(+)c-Kit(+) cells 
and common lymphoid progenitors in the CD45(-/-) bone marrow. Competitive bone
marrow reconstitution showed a reduced contribution of DN1 cells from CD45(-/-)
cells, consistent with an intrinsic defect in these cells. CD45(-/-) DN1 cells
exhibited reduced proliferation in vivo and reduced CXCL12-mediated migration in 
vitro. The loss of CD45 led to the accumulation of an intermediate DN1.5
thymocyte population in vivo that was dependent on Notch for progression. In
vivo, CD117(-) DN1 cells gave rise to gammadelta T cells. In vitro, CD117(-) DN1 
cells progressed to DN4 on OP9-DL1 cells but CD117(-) DN1 cells lacking CD45 did 
not. CD45(-/-) CD117(-) DN1 cells were also deficient in TCRbeta expression.
Thus, CD45 deficiency affects the development and progression of DN1 thymocytes.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902693 
PMID: 20624943  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

