
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2010 Sep;88(1):265-75. doi: 10.1007/s00253-010-2749-2.
Epub 2010 Jul 13.

Assessment of heterologous butyrate and butanol pathway activity by measurement
of intracellular pathway intermediates in recombinant Escherichia coli.

Fischer CR(1), Tseng HC, Tai M, Prather KL, Stephanopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Room 56-469, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

In clostridia, n-butanol production from carbohydrates at yields of up to 76% of 
the theoretical maximum and at titers of up to 13 g/L has been reported. However,
in Escherichia coli, several groups have reported butyric acid or butanol
production from recombinant expression of clostridial genes, at much lower titers
and yields. To pinpoint deficient steps in the recombinant pathway, we developed 
an analytical procedure for the determination of intracellular pools of key
pathway intermediates and applied the technique to the analysis of three sets of 
E. coli strains expressing various combinations of butyrate biosynthesis genes.
Low expression levels of the hbd-encoded S-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase
were insufficient to convert acetyl-CoA to 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA, indicating that 
hbd was a rate-limiting step in the production of butyryl-CoA. Increasing hbd
expression alleviated this bottleneck, but in resulting strains, our pool size
measurements and thermodynamic analysis showed that the reaction step catalyzed
by the bcd-encoded butyryl-CoA dehydrogenase was rate-limiting. E. coli strains
expressing both hbd and ptb-buk produced crotonic acid as a byproduct, but this
byproduct was not observed with expression of related genes from non-clostridial 
organisms. Our thermodynamic interpretation of pool size measurements is
applicable to the analysis of other metabolic pathways.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-010-2749-2 
PMCID: PMC2921503
PMID: 20625717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

