
1. J Chem Ecol. 2010 Aug;36(8):837-46. doi: 10.1007/s10886-010-9826-y. Epub 2010 Jul
10.

Lack of evidence for HLA-linked patterns of odorous carboxylic acids released
from glutamine conjugates secreted in the human axilla.

Natsch A(1), Kuhn F, Tiercy JM.

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences, Givaudan Schweiz AG, Ueberlandstrasse, 138, Duebendorf, 8600,
Switzerland. andreas.natsch@givaudan.com

Genetic factors within the major histocompatibility locus (MHC) have been shown
to influence body odors in mice. MHC-dependent preferences for body odors also
have been reported in humans. The axillary glands are a key odor-forming organ in
humans, and it is assumed that they provide behaviorally relevant odors. Volatile
carboxylic acids are the most diverse class of known axillary odorants, and the
pattern of these acids is genetically determined. These acids are released by an 
N(alpha)-acyl-glutamine-aminoacylase present in skin bacteria. We tested a
hypothesis concerning whether or not the inherited individual-specific patterns
of odorous acids are strongly influenced by polymorphic genes in the MHC. Axilla 
secretions were collected in 12 families, comprising 3 to 6 siblings, who had
been typed for HLA-A, B, and DRB1 loci. The samples were treated with
N(alpha)-acyl-glutamine-aminoacylase, and the methyl esters of the released acids
were analyzed with comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography (GC x GC) and
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (ToF MS). The patterns of the analytes were
compared by distance analysis. The distance was lowest between samples taken from
the same individual, confirming the presence of donor-specific odor-prints. A
much higher distance was observed between siblings, but there were no differences
among siblings sharing none, one, or both HLA-A,B,DRB1 haplotypes. By applying
principal component analysis, a clear clustering of samples taken from one
individual was confirmed, but no clustering was observed for siblings sharing
identical HLA-A,B,DRB1 alleles. Thus, the genetically determined pattern of
N-acyl-glutamine conjugates of volatile carboxylic acids, secreted in the human
axilla, appears not to be determined by genes residing in the HLA complex.

DOI: 10.1007/s10886-010-9826-y 
PMID: 20623248  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

