
1. Cancer Res. 2010 Jul 15;70(14):5912-22. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0528.

Inhibition of ADP ribosylation prevents and cures helicobacter-induced gastric
preneoplasia.

Toller IM(1), Altmeyer M, Kohler E, Hottiger MO, Müller A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Cancer Research and Institute of Veterinary
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.

Gastric adenocarcinoma develops as a consequence of chronic inflammation of the
stomach lining that is caused by persistent infection with the bacterium
Helicobacter pylori. Gastric carcinogenesis progresses through a sequence of
preneoplastic lesions that manifest histologically as atrophic gastritis,
intestinal metaplasia, and dysplasia. We show here in several preclinical models 
of Helicobacter-induced atrophic gastritis, epithelial hyperplasia, and
metaplasia that the inhibition of ADP ribosylation by the small-molecule
inhibitor PJ34 not only prevents the formation of gastric cancer precursor
lesions, but also efficiently reverses preexisting lesions. PJ34 exerts its
chemopreventive and therapeutic effects by impairing Helicobacter-specific T-cell
priming and T(H)1 polarization in the gut-draining mesenteric lymph nodes. The
subsequent infiltration of pathogenic T cells into the gastric mucosa and the
ensuing gastric T cell-driven immunopathology are prevented efficiently by PJ34. 
Our data indicate that PJ34 directly suppresses T-cell effector functions by
blocking the IFN-gamma production of mesenteric lymph node T cells ex vivo. Upon 
exposure to PJ34, purified T cells failed to synthesize ADP-ribose polymers and
to activate the transcription of genes encoding IFN-gamma, interleukin 2, and the
interleukin 2 receptor alpha chain in response to stimuli such as CD3/CD28
cross-linking or phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate/ionomycin. The immunosuppressive
and chemoprotective effects of PJ34 therefore result from impaired T-cell
activation and T(H)1 polarization, and lead to the protection from preneoplastic 
gastric immunopathology. In conclusion, ADP-ribosylating enzymes constitute novel
targets for the treatment of Helicobacter-associated gastric lesions predisposing
infected individuals to gastric cancer and may also hold promise for the
treatment of other T cell-driven chronic inflammatory conditions and autoimmune
pathologies.

(c)2010 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0528 
PMID: 20634404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

