
1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Sep;299(3):G602-13. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00511.2009. Epub 2010 Jul 15.

Association between chronic liver and colon inflammation during the development
of murine syngeneic graft-versus-host disease.

Brandon JA(1), Perez J, Jennings CD, Cohen DA, Sindhava VJ, Bondada S, Kaplan AM,
Bryson JS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Kentucky Medical Center, Lexington, USA.

The murine model of cyclosporine A (CsA)-induced syngeneic graft-versus-host
disease (SGVHD) is a bone marrow (BM) transplantation model that develops chronic
colon inflammation identical to other murine models of CD4(+) T cell-mediated
colitis. Interestingly, SGVHD animals develop chronic liver lesions that are
similar to the early peribiliary inflammatory stages of clinical chronic liver
disease, which is frequently associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Therefore, studies were initiated to investigate the chronic liver inflammation
that develops in the SGVHD model. To induce SGVHD, mice were lethally irradiated,
reconstituted with syngeneic BM, and treated with CsA. All of the SGVHD animals
that developed colitis also develop chronic liver inflammation. Liver samples
from control and SGVHD animals were monitored for tissue pathology, RNA for
inflammatory mediators, and phenotypic analysis and in vitro reactivity of the
inflammatory infiltrate. Diseased animals developed lesions of intrahepatic and
extrahepatic bile ducts. Elevated levels of mRNA for molecules associated with
chronic liver inflammation, including mucosal cellular adhesion molecule -1, the 
chemokines CCL25, CCL28, CCR9, and T(H)1- and T(H)17-associated cytokines were
observed in livers of SGVHD mice. CD4(+) T cells were localized to the
peribiliary region of the livers of diseased animals, and an enhanced
proliferative response of liver-associated mononuclear cells against colonic
bacterial antigens was observed. The murine model of SGVHD colitis may be a
valuable tool to study the entero-hepatic linkage between chronic colon
inflammation and inflammatory liver disease.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00511.2009 
PMCID: PMC2950686
PMID: 20634434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

