
1. Innate Immun. 2011 Oct;17(5):463-9. doi: 10.1177/1753425910375582. Epub 2010 Jul 
20.

Inducible expression of human β-defensin 2 by Chlamydophila pneumoniae in brain
capillary endothelial cells.

Tiszlavicz Z(1), Endrész V, Németh B, Megyeri K, Orosz L, Seprényi G, Mándi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunobiology, University of Szeged,
Hungary.

Defensins are an important family of natural antimicrobial peptides.
Chlamydophila pneumoniae, a common cause of acute respiratory infection, has a
tendency to cause persistent inflammatory diseases such as atherosclerosis, which
may lead to cardiovascular disease or stroke. As endothelial cells are related to
the physiopathology of stroke, the effects of in vitro C. pneumoniae infection on
the expression of human β-defensin 2 (HBD-2) in brain capillary endothelial cells
(BB19) was investigated. A time-dependent increase in HBD-2 mRNA was observed by 
means of real-time reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) in BB19 cells following C. 
pneumoniae infection, with a maximum increase at 24 h. A gradual induction of
HBD-2 protein in the C. pneumoniae-infected endothelial cells was detected by
immunoblotting. Immunofluorescence revealed the staining of HBD-2 in the
cytoplasm of endothelial cells following C. pneumoniae infection. The secretion
of HBD-2 (confirmed by ELISA) was significantly elevated 24 h after C. pneumoniae
infection. These novel results indicate that HBD-2 is expressed and produced in
the human brain capillary endothelial cells upon infection with C. pneumoniae,
and provide evidence that HBD-2 plays a role in the early immune responses to C. 
pneumoniae and probably in the immunopathogenesis of atherosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1177/1753425910375582 
PMID: 20647256  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

