
1. World J Surg Oncol. 2010 Jul 22;8:62. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-8-62.

CCL25-CCR9 interaction modulates ovarian cancer cell migration, metalloproteinase
expression, and invasion.

Johnson EL(1), Singh R, Singh S, Johnson-Holiday CM, Grizzle WE, Partridge EE,
Lillard JW Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry, & Immunology, Morehouse School of
Medicine, 720 Westview Drive SW, Atlanta, GA 30310-1495, USA.

BACKGROUND: Ovarian carcinoma (OvCa) is the most lethal gynecological malignancy 
among women and its poor prognosis is mainly due to metastasis. Chemokine
receptor CCR9 is primarily expressed by a small subset of immune cells and its
only natural ligand, CCL25, is largely expressed in the thymus, which involutes
with age. Other than the thymus, CCL25 is expressed by the small bowel.
Interactions between CCL25 and CCR9 have been implicated in leukocyte trafficking
to the small bowel, a frequent metastatic site for OvCa cells. The current study 
shows OvCa tissue and cells significantly express CCR9, which interacts with
CCL25 to support carcinoma cell migration and invasion.
METHODS: RT-PCR and flow cytometry techniques were used to quantify the
expression CCR9 by OvCa cells. OvCa tissue microarrays (TMA) was used to confirm 
CCR9 expression in clinical samples. The Aperio ScanScope scanning system was
used to quantify immunohistochemical staining. Cell invasion and migration assays
were performed using cell migration and matrigel invasion chambers. Matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP) mRNAs were quantified by RT-PCR and active MMPs were
quantified by ELISA.
RESULTS: Our results show significantly (p<0.001) higher expression of CCR9 by
mucinous adenocarcinoma, papillary serous carcinoma, and endometriod ovarian
carcinoma cases, than compared to non-neoplastic ovarian tissue. Furthermore,
CCR9 expression was significantly elevated in OvCa cell lines (OVCAR-3 and
CAOV-3) in comparison to normal adult ovarian epithelial cell mRNA. OvCa cells
showed higher migratory and invasive potential towards chemotactic gradients of
CCL25, which was inhibited by anti-CCR9 antibodies. Expression of collagenases
(MMP-1, -8, and -13), gelatinases (MMP-2 and -9), and stromelysins (MMP-3, -10,
and -11) by OvCa cells were modulated by CCL25 in a CCR9-dependent fashion.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate both biological significance and clinical 
relevance of CCL25 and CCR9 interactions in OvCa cell metastasis.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-7819-8-62 
PMCID: PMC2927595
PMID: 20649989  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

