
1. Biochimie. 2010 Dec;92(12):1793-800. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2010.07.009. Epub 2010
Jul 24.

Purification and biochemical characterization of Mur ligases from Staphylococcus 
aureus.

Patin D(1), Boniface A, Kovač A, Hervé M, Dementin S, Barreteau H,
Mengin-Lecreulx D, Blanot D.

Author information: 
(1)Univ Paris-Sud, Laboratoire des Enveloppes Bactériennes et Antibiotiques,
Institut de Biochimie et Biophysique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR 8619, Orsay
F-91405, France.

The Mur ligases (MurC, MurD, MurE and MurF) catalyze the stepwise synthesis of
the UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl-pentapeptide precursor of peptidoglycan. The murC, murD,
murE and murF genes from Staphylococcus aureus, a major pathogen, were cloned and
the corresponding proteins were overproduced in Escherichia coli and purified as 
His(6)-tagged forms. Their biochemical properties were investigated and compared 
to those of the E. coli enzymes. Staphylococcal MurC accepted L-Ala, L-Ser and
Gly as substrates, as the E. coli enzyme does, with a strong preference for
L-Ala. S. aureus MurE was very specific for L-lysine and in particular did not
accept meso-diaminopimelic acid as a substrate. This mirrors the E. coli MurE
specificity, for which meso-diaminopimelic acid is the preferred substrate and
L-lysine a very poor one. S. aureus MurF appeared less specific and accepted both
forms (L-lysine and meso-diaminopimelic acid) of UDP-MurNAc-tripeptide, as the E.
coli MurF does. The inverse and strict substrate specificities of the two MurE
orthologues is thus responsible for the presence of exclusively
meso-diaminopimelic acid and L-lysine at the third position of the peptide in the
peptidoglycans of E. coli and S. aureus, respectively. The specific activities of
the four Mur ligases were also determined in crude extracts of S. aureus and
compared to cell requirements for peptidoglycan biosynthesis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2010.07.009 
PMID: 20659527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

