
1. Eur Respir J. 2011 Apr;37(4):848-57. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00076510. Epub 2010
Jul 22.

Host defence during Klebsiella pneumonia relies on haematopoietic-expressed
Toll-like receptors 4 and 2.

Wieland CW(1), van Lieshout MH, Hoogendijk AJ, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Experimental and Molecular Medicine, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. c.wieland@amc.uva.nl

In this study, the relative roles of Toll-like receptor (TLR)2 and TLR4 were
investigated independently and together. Moreover, we studied the role of
haematopoietic compartment in anti-Klebsiella host defence. We infected TLR2 and 
TLR4 single-, and TLR2×4 double knockout (KO) animals with different doses of
Klebsiella pneumoniae. In addition, bone marrow chimeric mice were created and
infected. TLR4 played a more prominent role in antibacterial defence than TLR2,
considering that only TLR4 KO mice demonstrated enhanced bacterial growth in
lungs and spleen 24 h after infection with 3×10³ colony-forming units of
Klebsiella compared with wild-type (WT) mice. In late-stage infection or after
exposure to a higher infectious dose, bacterial counts in lungs of TLR2 KO
animals were elevated compared with WT mice and TLR2×4 KO animals were more
susceptible to infection than TLR4 KO mice. TLR signalling in cells of
haematopoietic origin is of primary importance in host defence against K.
pneumoniae. These data suggest that: 1) TLR4 drives the antibacterial host
response after induction of pneumonia with relatively low Klebsiella doses; 2)
TLR2 becomes involved at a later phase of the infection and/or upon exposure to
higher bacterial burdens; and 3) haematopoietic TLR2 and TLR4 are important for
an adequate host response during Klebsiella pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00076510 
PMID: 20650991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

