
1. Nature. 2010 Aug 26;466(7310):1125-8. doi: 10.1038/nature09343.

NRMT is an alpha-N-methyltransferase that methylates RCC1 and retinoblastoma
protein.

Tooley CE(1), Petkowski JJ, Muratore-Schroeder TL, Balsbaugh JL, Shabanowitz J,
Sabat M, Minor W, Hunt DF, Macara IG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Center for Cell Signaling, University of Virginia 
School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA. ces5g@virginia.edu

The post-translational methylation of alpha-amino groups was first discovered
over 30 years ago on the bacterial ribosomal proteins L16 and L33 (refs 1, 2),
but almost nothing is known about the function or enzymology of this
modification. Several other bacterial and eukaryotic proteins have since been
shown to be alpha-N-methylated. However, the Ran guanine nucleotide-exchange
factor, RCC1, is the only protein for which any biological function of
alpha-N-methylation has been identified. Methylation-defective mutants of RCC1
have reduced affinity for DNA and cause mitotic defects, but further
characterization of this modification has been hindered by ignorance of the
responsible methyltransferase. All fungal and animal N-terminally methylated
proteins contain a unique N-terminal motif, Met-(Ala/Pro/Ser)-Pro-Lys, indicating
that they may be targets of the same, unknown enzyme. The initiating Met is
cleaved, and the exposed alpha-amino group is mono-, di- or trimethylated. Here
we report the discovery of the first alpha-N-methyltransferase, which we named
N-terminal RCC1 methyltransferase (NRMT). Substrate docking and mutational
analysis of RCC1 defined the NRMT recognition sequence and enabled the
identification of numerous new methylation targets, including SET (also known as 
TAF-I or PHAPII) and the retinoblastoma protein, RB. Knockdown of NRMT
recapitulates the multi-spindle phenotype seen with methylation-defective RCC1
mutants, demonstrating the importance of alpha-N-methylation for normal bipolar
spindle formation and chromosome segregation.

DOI: 10.1038/nature09343 
PMCID: PMC2939154
PMID: 20668449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

