
1. Microbes Infect. 2010 Nov;12(12-13):919-27. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2010.07.009.
Epub 2010 Jul 27.

CD44-independent activation of the Met signaling pathway by HGF and InlB.

Dortet L(1), Veiga E, Bonazzi M, Cossart P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité des interactions Bactéries-Cellules, 25 rue du Dr.
Roux, 75015 Paris, France.

Listeria monocytogenes is a facultative intracellular Gram-positive bacterium
responsible for listeriosis. It is able to invade, survive and replicate in
phagocytic and non-phagocytic cells. The L. monocytogenes surface protein InlB
interacts with c-Met, the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) receptor, inducing
bacterial internalization in numerous non-phagocytic cells. As InlB and HGF are
known to trigger similar signaling pathways upon c-Met activation, we
investigated the role of CD44, and more specifically its isoform CD44v6, in
bacterial internalization in non-phagocytic cells. Indeed, CD44, the hyaluronic
acid transmembrane receptor, and more specifically its isoform CD44v6 have been
reported as necessary for the activation of c-Met upon the interaction with
either the endogenous ligand HGF or the L. monocytogenes surface protein InlB.
Our results demonstrate that, in the cell lines that we used, CD44 receptors play
no role in the activation of c-Met, neither during L. monocytogenes entry, nor
upon HGF activation. Furthermore, none of the CD44 isoforms was recruited at the 
L. monocytogenes entry site, and depletion by siRNA of total CD44 or of CD44v6
isoform did not reduce bacterial infections. Conversely, the overexpression of
CD44 or CD44v6 had no significant effect on L. monocytogenes internalization.
Together our results reveal that the activation of c-Met can be largely
CD44-independent.

Copyright © 2010 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier SAS. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2010.07.009 
PMID: 20670691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

