
1. J Immunol. 2010 Sep 1;185(5):2998-3006. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001296. Epub 2010 
Jul 30.

Escherichia coli K1 promotes the ligation of CD47 with thrombospondin-1 to
prevent the maturation of dendritic cells in the pathogenesis of neonatal
meningitis.

Mittal R(1), Gonzalez-Gomez I, Prasadarao NV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Saban Research Institute, Children's
Hospital, Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are professional APCs providing a critical link between
adaptive and innate immune responses. Our previous studies have shown that
Escherichia coli K1 internalization of myeloid DCs suppressed the maturation of
the cells for which outer membrane protein A (OmpA) expression is essential. In
this study, we demonstrate that infection of DCs with OmpA(+) E. coli
significantly upregulates the expression of CD47, an integrin-associated protein,
and its natural ligand thrombospondin 1 (TSP-1). Pretreatment of DCs with
anti-CD47 blocking Ab or knocking down the expression of CD47 or TSP-1, but not
signal regulatory protein alpha by small interfering RNA, abrogated the
suppressive effect of E. coli K1. Ligation of CD47 with a mAb prevented the
maturation and cytokine production by DCs upon stimulation with LPS similar to
the inhibitory effect induced by OmpA(+) E. coli. In agreement with the in vitro 
studies, suppression of CD47 or TSP-1 expression in newborn mice by a novel in
vivo small interfering RNA technique protected the animals against E. coli K1
meningitis. Reconstitution of CD47 knockdown mice with CD47(+) DCs renders the
animals susceptible to meningitis by E. coli K1, substantiating the role of CD47 
expression in DCs for the occurrence of meningitis. Our results demonstrate a
role for CD47 for the first time in bacterial pathogenesis and may be a novel
target for designing preventive approaches for E. coli K1 meningitis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001296 
PMID: 20675593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

