
1. Sci Signal. 2010 Aug 3;3(133):ra59. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2000976.

The nonphagocytic NADPH oxidase Duox1 mediates a positive feedback loop during T 
cell receptor signaling.

Kwon J(1), Shatynski KE, Chen H, Morand S, de Deken X, Miot F, Leto TL, Williams 
MS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vascular and Inflammatory Diseases, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 800 West Baltimore Street,
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. kwonja@niaid.nih.gov

Production of reactive oxygen species, often by NADPH (reduced form of
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) oxidases, plays a role in the
signaling responses of cells to many receptor stimuli. Here, we describe the
function of the calcium-dependent, nonphagocytic NADPH oxidase Duox1 in primary
human CD4(+) T cells and cultured T cell lines. Duox1 bound to inositol
1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor 1 and was required for early T cell receptor
(TCR)-stimulated production of hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) through a pathway
that was dependent on TCR-proximal kinases. Transient or stable knockdown of
Duox1 inhibited TCR signaling, especially phosphorylation of tyrosine-319 of zeta
chain-associated protein kinase of 70 kilodaltons (ZAP-70), store-operated entry 
of calcium ions (Ca(2+)), and activation of extracellular signal-regulated
kinase. The production of cytokines was also inhibited by knockdown of Duox1.
Duox1-mediated inactivation of Src homology 2 domain-containing protein tyrosine 
phosphatase 2 promoted the phosphorylation of ZAP-70 and its association with the
Src family tyrosine kinase Lck and the CD3zeta chain of the TCR complex. Thus, we
suggest that activation of Duox1, downstream of proximal TCR signals, generates
H(2)O(2) that acts in a positive feedback loop to enhance and sustain further TCR
signaling.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.2000976 
PMCID: PMC2941205
PMID: 20682913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

