
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Jul 15;88(14):5989-92.

Class I-induced resistance to natural killing: identification of nonpermissive
residues in HLA-A2.

Storkus WJ(1), Salter RD, Alexander J, Ward FE, Ruiz RE, Cresswell P, Dawson JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710.

Structural characteristics of major histocompatibility complex class I antigens
associated with natural killer (NK)-resistance phenomena were examined. Previous 
research has shown that transfection of class I genomic DNA clones into class
I-deficient, NK-sensitive target cell lines results in transfectants exhibiting
class I+, NK-resistant phenotypes. In contrast to the HLA-A3, -B7, -B27, and
-Bw58 class I molecules, the HLA-A2 class I molecules were shown not to protect
target cells from NK activity. Here we show that this nonprotective phenotype
maps to the alpha 1 domain of the HLA-A2 molecule by examining the NK-protective 
capacity of the natural interdomain recombinant HLA-Aw69 molecule. HLA-Aw69,
which consists of an alpha 1 domain exhibiting homology with HLA-Aw68, and alpha 
2/alpha 3/transmembrane-cytoplasmic domains, exhibiting homologies with HLA-A2,
mimics HLA-Aw68 and provides HLA-A,B null target cell (C1R) transfectants with
increased resistance to NK. Further, the inability of transfected HLA-A2 to
confer protection against NK activity can be completely attributed to the
expression of a "nonpermissive" residue at position 74 in the alpha 1 domain.
Site-directed mutation of the His-74 residue in HLA-A2 to the Asp-74 (HLA-A3,
-Aw68, -Aw69, -B7) residue generates a mutant that provides C1R cell line
transfectants an NK-resistant phenotype. As His-74 blocks access to a side pocket
in the HLA-A2 antigen-binding cleft, these results support the critical
involvement of residues within the peptide-binding groove of class I molecules in
determining the NK susceptibility phenotype of class I+ target cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.88.14.5989 
PMCID: PMC52007
PMID: 2068075  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

