
1. Biochemistry. 2010 Aug 31;49(34):7403-10. doi: 10.1021/bi100887w.

Anthrax toxin receptor 1/tumor endothelial marker 8: mutation of conserved
inserted domain residues overrides cytosolic control of protective antigen
binding.

Ramey JD(1), Villareal VA, Ng C, Ward SC, Xiong JP, Clubb RT, Bradley KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Anthrax toxin receptor 1 (ANTXR1)/tumor endothelial marker 8 (TEM8) is one of two
known proteinaceous cell surface anthrax toxin receptors. A metal ion dependent
adhesion site (MIDAS) present in the integrin-like inserted (I) domain of ANTXR1 
mediates the binding of the anthrax toxin subunit, protective antigen (PA). Here 
we provide evidence that single point mutations in the I domain can override
regulation of ANTXR1 ligand-binding activity mediated by intracellular signals. A
previously reported MIDAS mutant of ANTXR1 (T118A) was found to retain normal
metal ion binding and secondary structure but failed to bind PA, consistent with 
a locked inactive state. Conversely, mutation of a conserved I domain
phenylalanine residue to a tryptophan (F205W) increased the proportion of
cell-surface ANTXR1 that bound PA, consistent with a locked active state.
Interestingly, the K(D) and total amount of PA bound by the isolated ANTXR1 I
domain were not affected by the F205W mutation, indicating that ANTXR1 is
preferentially found in the active state in the absence of inside-out signaling. 
Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy and (1)H-(15)N heteronuclear single-quantum 
coherence (HSQC) nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) revealed that structural
changes between T118A, F205W, and WT I domains were minor despite a greater than 
10(3)-fold difference in their abilities to bind toxin. Regulation of toxin
binding has important implications for the design of toxin inhibitors and for the
targeting of ANTXR1 for antitumor therapies.

DOI: 10.1021/bi100887w 
PMCID: PMC2942075
PMID: 20690680  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

