
1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2010 Dec;302(10):745-56. doi: 10.1007/s00403-010-1074-z. Epub 
2010 Aug 10.

Protease-activated receptor-2 mediates the expression of inflammatory cytokines, 
antimicrobial peptides, and matrix metalloproteinases in keratinocytes in
response to Propionibacterium acnes.

Lee SE(1), Kim JM, Jeong SK, Jeon JE, Yoon HJ, Jeong MK, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, 712 Eonjuro, Kangnam-gu, Seoul 135-720, Korea.

Propionibacterium acnes (P. acnes) has been known to produce various exogenous
proteases, however, their role in acne pathogenesis remains largely unknown.
Proteases elicit cellular responses, at least in part, via proteinase-activated
receptor-2 (PAR-2), which is known to mediate inflammation and immune response.
In this study, we investigated whether proteases from P. acnes could activate
PAR-2 on keratinocytes and induce pro-inflammatory cytokines, antimicrobial
peptides (AMPs), and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) via PAR-2 signaling. We
examined PAR-2 expression and protease activity in acne lesions using
immunofluorescence staining and in situ zymography. The effect of the culture
supernatant of P. acnes on Ca(2+) signaling in immortalized keratinocytes (HaCaT)
was measured using a fluorescence method. HaCaT cells were treated with P. acnes 
strain ATCC 6919 culture supernatant, with or without pretreatment with serine
protease inhibitor or selective PAR-2 antagonist and the gene expression of
pro-inflammatory cytokines, AMPs, and MMPs was detected using real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. We found that the protease activity and 
PAR-2 expression were increased in acne lesions. The P. acnes culture supernatant
induced calcium signaling in keratinocytes via PAR-2 and stimulated the mRNA
expression of interleukin (IL)-1α, -8, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, human beta 
defensin (hBD)-2, LL-37, MMP-1, -2, -3, -9, and -13 in keratinocytes, which was
significantly inhibited by serine protease inhibitor as well as selective PAR-2
specific antagonist. These results indicate that PAR-2 plays an important role in
the pathogenesis of acne by inducing inflammatory mediators in response to
proteases secreted from P. acnes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-010-1074-z 
PMCID: PMC2970807
PMID: 20697725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

