
1. Vet Microbiol. 2011 Jan 10;147(1-2):155-61. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2010.06.022.
Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Comparative susceptibility of Atlantic salmon and rainbow trout to Yersinia
ruckeri: relationship to O antigen serotype and resistance to serum killing.

Haig SJ(1), Davies RL, Welch TJ, Reese RA, Verner-Jeffreys DW.

Author information: 
(1)Cefas Weymouth Laboratory, The Nothe, Barrack Road, Weymouth, Dorset DT4 8UB, 
UK.

A study was undertaken to compare the virulence and serum killing resistance
properties of Atlantic salmon and rainbow trout Yersinia ruckeri isolates. Five
isolates, covering heat-stable O-antigen O1, O2 and O5 serotypes, were tested for
virulence towards fry and juveniles of both species by experimental bath
challenge. The sensitivity of 15 diverse isolates to non-immune salmon and
rainbow trout serum was also examined. All five isolates caused significant
mortality in salmon fry. Serotype O1 isolate 06059 caused the highest mortality
in salmon (74% and 70% in fry and juveniles, respectively). Isolate 06041, a
typical ERM-causing serotype O1 UK rainbow trout strain, caused mortalities in
both rainbow trout and salmon. None of the salmon isolates caused any mortalities
in 150-250 g rainbow trout, and only serotype O2 isolate 06060 caused any
significant mortality (10%) in rainbow trout fry. Disease progression and
severity was affected by water temperature. Mortality in salmon caused by the
isolates 06059 and 05094 was much higher at 16 °C (74% and 33%, respectively)
than at 12 °C (30 and 4% respectively). Virulent rainbow trout isolates were
generally resistant to sera from both species, whereas salmon isolates varied in 
their serum sensitivity. Convalescent serum from salmon and rainbow trout that
had been infected by serotype O1 isolates mediated effective classical pathway
complement killing of serotype O1 and O5 isolates that were resistant to normal
sera. Overall, strains recovered from infected salmon possess a wider range of
phenotypic properties (relative virulence, O serotype and possession of
serum-resistance factors), compared to ERM-causing rainbow trout isolates.

Crown Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2010.06.022 
PMID: 20691549  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

