
1. Infect Immun. 2010 Nov;78(11):4922-35. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00297-10. Epub 2010 Aug
16.

CD28 exerts protective and detrimental effects in a pulmonary model of
paracoccidioidomycosis.

Felonato M(1), Pina A, Bernardino S, Loures FV, de Araujo EF, Calich VL.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Imunologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas da Universidade
de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

T-cell immunity has been claimed as the main immunoprotective mechanism against
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis infection, the most important fungal infection in
Latin America. As the initial events that control T-cell activation in
paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) are not well established, we decided to investigate 
the role of CD28, an important costimulatory molecule for the activation of
effector and regulatory T cells, in the immunity against this pulmonary pathogen.
Using CD28-deficient (CD28(-/-)) and normal wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 mice, we were 
able to demonstrate that CD28 costimulation determines in pulmonary
paracoccidioidomycosis an early immunoprotection but a late deleterious effect
associated with impaired immunity and uncontrolled fungal growth. Up to week 10
postinfection, CD28(-/-) mice presented increased pulmonary and hepatic fungal
loads allied with diminished production of antibodies and pro- and
anti-inflammatory cytokines besides impaired activation and migration of effector
and regulatory T (Treg) cells to the lungs. Unexpectedly, CD28-sufficient mice
progressively lost the control of fungal growth, resulting in an increased
mortality associated with persistent presence of Treg cells, deactivation of
inflammatory macrophages and T cells, prevalent presence of anti-inflammatory
cytokines, elevated fungal burdens, and extensive hepatic lesions. As a whole,
our findings suggest that CD28 is required for the early protective T-cell
responses to P. brasiliensis infection, but it also induces the expansion of
regulatory circuits that lately impair adaptive immunity, allowing uncontrolled
fungal growth and overwhelming infection, which leads to precocious mortality of 
mice.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00297-10 
PMCID: PMC2976317
PMID: 20713624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

