
1. Epigenetics. 2010 Nov-Dec;5(8):710-5. doi: 10.4161/epi.5.8.13106. Epub 2010 Nov
1.

Differential epithelial cell response upon stimulation with the Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans strains VT 1169, VT 1560 DAM⁻ and ATCC 4318.

Eberhard J(1), Banasch T, Jepsen S, Dommisch H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prostethic Dentistry, Hannover Medical School, Germany.
eberhard.joerg@mh-hannover.de

Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans is known to play a role in human
inflammatory oral diseases. The present study aimed to test whether GECs from
different individuals show an altered immune response when exposed to wild-type
A. actinomycetemcomitans biofilms (VT 1169 and ATCC43718) versus VT 1560 lacking 
a DNA-adenine-methyltransferase (DAM⁻). GECs were cultured from biopsies derived 
from three healthy subjects (A, B, and C). To obtain A. actinomycetemcomitans
biofilms, each strain (VT 1169, ATCC 43718, and VT 1560 DAM⁻) was separately
cultured on polymer disks. The mRNA expression of hBD-2, Rnase7, IL-8, and
glycerylaldehyd-3-phosphodehydrogenase was analyzed using semi-quantitative
RT-PCR. In GECs, the DAM⁻ strain VT 1560 led to a reduced gene expression of
hBD-2 and IL-8 compared to VT 1169, but not ATCC 43718. In GECs from subject C,
the mRNA expression of hBD-2 and IL-8 was significantly up regulated in response 
to A. actinomycetemcomitans VT 1169 compared to VT 1560 DAM⁻ and ATCC 43718
(p≤0,05), whereas GECs from subject A and B did not show significant changes for 
hBD-2 or IL-8 gene expression upon stimulation with either of the strains tested.
The present study indicates strain-dependent and subject-specific immune
responses in GECs after exposure to DAM(+) or DAM⁻ A. actinomycetemcomitans.

DOI: 10.4161/epi.5.8.13106 
PMID: 20716951  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

