
1. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2010 Sep;43(9):853-8. Epub 2010 Aug 16.

Lipopolysaccharide-induced expression of cell surface receptors and cell
activation of neutrophils and monocytes in whole human blood.

Gomes NE(1), Brunialti MK, Mendes ME, Freudenberg M, Galanos C, Salomão R.

Author information: 
(1)Disciplina de Infectologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) activates neutrophils and monocytes, inducing a wide
array of biological activities. LPS rough (R) and smooth (S) forms signal through
Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), but differ in their requirement for CD14. Since the 
R-form LPS can interact with TLR4 independent of CD14 and the differential
expression of CD14 on neutrophils and monocytes, we used the S-form LPS from
Salmonella abortus equi and the R-form LPS from Salmonella minnesota mutants to
evaluate LPS-induced activation of human neutrophils and monocytes in whole blood
from healthy volunteers. Expression of cell surface receptors and reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and nitric oxide (NO) generation were measured by flow cytometry in
whole blood monocytes and neutrophils. The oxidative burst was quantified by
measuring the oxidation of 2',7'-dichlorofluorescein diacetate and the NO
production was quantified by measuring the oxidation of
4-amino-5-methylamino-2',7'-difluorofluorescein diacetate. A small increase of
TLR4 expression by monocytes was observed after 6 h of LPS stimulation. Monocyte 
CD14 modulation by LPS was biphasic, with an initial 30% increase followed by a
40% decrease in expression after 6 h of incubation. Expression of CD11b was
rapidly up-regulated, doubling after 5 min on monocytes, while down-regulation of
CXCR2 was observed on neutrophils, reaching a 50% reduction after 6 h. LPS
induced low production of ROS and NO. This study shows a complex LPS-induced cell
surface receptor modulation on human monocytes and neutrophils, with up- and
down-regulation depending on the receptor. R- and S-form LPS activate human
neutrophils similarly, despite the low CD14 expression, if the stimulation occurs
in whole blood.

DOI: 10.1590/s0100-879x2010007500078 
PMID: 20721471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

