
1. J Immunol. 2010 Sep 15;185(6):3227-38. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903066. Epub 2010
Aug 20.

Crosstalk between PKA and Epac regulates the phenotypic maturation and function
of human dendritic cells.

Garay J(1), D'Angelo JA, Park Y, Summa CM, Aiken ML, Morales E, Badizadegan K,
Fiebiger E, Dickinson BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Parasitology, Louisiana State
University Health Science Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

The cAMP-dependent signaling pathways that orchestrate dendritic cell (DC)
maturation remain to be defined in detail. Although cAMP was previously thought
to signal exclusively through protein kinase A (PKA), it is now clear that cAMP
also activates exchange protein activated by cAMP (Epac), a second major cAMP
effector. Whether cAMP signaling via PKA is sufficient to drive DC maturation or 
whether Epac plays a role has not been examined. In this study, we used cAMP
analogs to selectively activate PKA or Epac in human monocyte-derived DCs and
examined the effect of these signaling pathways on several hallmarks of DC
maturation. We show that PKA activation induces DC maturation as evidenced by the
increased cell-surface expression of MHC class II, costimulatory molecules, and
the maturation marker CD83. PKA activation also reduces DC endocytosis and
stimulates chemotaxis to the lymph node-associated chemokines CXCL12 and CCL21.
Although PKA signaling largely suppresses cytokine production, the net effect of 
PKA activation translates to enhanced DC activation of allogeneic T cells. In
contrast to the stimulatory effects of PKA, Epac signaling has no effect on DC
maturation or function. Rather, Epac suppresses the effects of PKA when both
pathways are activated simultaneously. These data reveal a previously
unrecognized crosstalk between the PKA and Epac signaling pathways in DCs and
raise the possibility that therapeutics targeting PKA may generate immunogenic
DCs, whereas those that activate Epac may produce tolerogenic DCs capable of
attenuating allergic or autoimmune disease.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903066 
PMCID: PMC3100203
PMID: 20729327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

