
1. J Mol Biol. 2010 Oct 15;403(1):40-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.08.025. Epub 2010
Aug 21.

Solution structure of the heterotrimeric complex between the interaction domains 
of RFX5 and RFXAP from the RFX gene regulatory complex.

Laird KM(1), Briggs LL(1), Boss JM(2), Summers MF(1), Garvie CW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, Baltimore
County, 1000 Hilltop Circle, Baltimore, MD 21250, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, 1510 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, Baltimore
County, 1000 Hilltop Circle, Baltimore, MD 21250, USA. Electronic address:
colin.garvie@roche.com.

The mammalian immune response is mediated by a heterotetrameric transcriptional
control complex, called regulatory factor X (RFX), that regulates the expression 
of major histocompatibility complex class II genes. RFX comprises three proteins:
RFX5 (two copies), RFXAP, and RFXB, and mutations and deletions that prevent the 
assembly of the RFX complex have been linked to a severe immunodeficiency
disorder. Two RFX5 molecules and one RFXAP molecule assemble in the cytoplasm
prior to nuclear localization, a process mediated by an N-terminal "dimerization 
domain" of RFX5 (RFX5(N)) and a C-terminal domain of RFXAP (RFXAP(C)). We
previously presented evidence that RFXAP(C) is unstructured in the absence of
RFX5(N) but adopts a regular structure in the RFX5(N)(2)-RFXAP(C) complex and
that the RFX5(N)(2)-RFXAP(C) complex binds RFXB with high affinity. We now report
the structure of the RFX5(N)(2)-RFXAP(C) complex, determined in solution by
(15)N- and (13)C-edited NMR spectroscopy. RFX5(N) consists of a long central
helix flanked by two shorter helices. The central helices of the two RFX5(N)
molecules form an antiparallel coiled coil, and the flanking helices pack at the 
ends of the long helices in a perpendicular arrangement such that the RFX5(N)
dimer is shaped like a staple. RFXAP(C) consists of two α-helices that form a
V-shaped structure that packs within the RFX5(N)(2) staple. Leucine residues in
the leucine-rich region of RFX5(N) (62-LYLYLQL-68) that are critical for major
histocompatibility complex class II gene expression in vivo contribute to both
the dimer (Leu64 and Leu68) and the RFX5(N)-RFXAP(C) interfaces (Leu62 and
Leu66). The clustering of hydrophobic residues from different regions of RFXAP(C)
suggests a potential binding site for RFXB.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.08.025 
PMCID: PMC2949527
PMID: 20732328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

