
1. Zh Mikrobiol Epidemiol Immunobiol. 2010 Jul-Aug;(4):48-54.

[Induction of dendritic cells maturation by staphylococcal antigens].

[Article in Russian]

Kuz'menko OM, Akhmatov EA, Lebedinskaia EA.

AIM: To study the ability to induce dendritic cells maturation obtained from bone
marrow of mice by staphylococcal complex of antigens containing bacterial ligands
for Toll-like receptors (lipopeptides, lipoproteins, and peptidoglycans).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Commercially available TNF-alpha, inductors ofdendritic
cells (DCs) maturation, as well C57/BL line mice were used for the study.
Immunophenotype of DCs was assessed by flow cytometry and monoclonal antibodies
against cellular antigens. Cytological study using phase-contrast microscopy as
well as electron microscopy were performed. Levels of cytokines were measured by 
ELISA.
RESULTS: Obtained DCs had typical morphologic characteristics of mature cells.
However the culture was still heterogenous with presence of macrophages that was 
evident from immunophenotype of obtained cells: CD34(-/+), CD38+, CD40+, CD80+,
CD86+, MHC II+, F4/80(-/+). Number of TLR2-expressing cells was also reliably
increased in culture of DCs that confirms the presence of corresponding ligands
binding with this type of receptor in the preparation. Application of each
studied preparation resulted in synthesis of large amount of TNF-alpha, IL-6,
IL-1beta, IL-12 by DCs, and IFN-gamma by several types of them (RP and CB24).
Although the intensity of induced cytokine synthesis varied for each preparation,
it was many times higher compared with immature DCs.
CONCLUSION: High synthesis level and wide spectrum of cytokine production
demonstrated that under the influence of bacterial ligands DCs acquired
characteristics needed for effective antigen presentation and priming of immune
response.


PMID: 20795386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

