
1. Infect Immun. 2010 Nov;78(11):4467-76. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00138-10. Epub 2010 Sep
7.

Inadequate binding of immune regulator factor H is associated with sensitivity of
Borrelia lusitaniae to human complement.

Dieterich R(1), Hammerschmidt C, Richter D, Skerka C, Wallich R, Matuschka FR,
Zipfel PF, Kraiczy P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, University Hospital
of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.

Spirochetes belonging to the Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato complex differ in
resistance to complement-mediated killing by human serum. Here, we characterize
complement sensitivity of a panel of B. lusitaniae isolates derived from ticks
collected in Germany and Portugal as well as one patient-derived isolate, PoHL.
All isolates are highly susceptible to complement-mediated lysis in human serum
and activate complement predominantly by the alternative pathway, leading to an
increased deposition of complement components C3, C6, and the terminal complement
complex. Interestingly, serum-sensitive B. lusitaniae isolates were able to bind 
immune regulator factor H (CFH), and some strains also bound CFH-related protein 
1 (CFHR1) and CFHR2. Moreover, CFH bound to the surface of B. lusitaniae was
inefficient in mediating C3b conversion. Furthermore, the identification and
characterization of a potential CFH-binding protein, OspE, revealed that this
molecule possesses a significantly reduced binding capacity for CFH compared to
that of CFH-binding OspE paralogs expressed by various serum-resistant Borrelia
species. This finding suggests that a reduced binding capability of CFH is
associated with an increased serum sensitivity of B. lusitaniae to human
complement.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00138-10 
PMCID: PMC2976354
PMID: 20823202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

