
1. J Bacteriol. 2010 Nov;192(22):6001-16. doi: 10.1128/JB.00778-10. Epub 2010 Sep
10.

Legionella pneumophila strain 130b possesses a unique combination of type IV
secretion systems and novel Dot/Icm secretion system effector proteins.

Schroeder GN(1), Petty NK, Mousnier A, Harding CR, Vogrin AJ, Wee B, Fry NK,
Harrison TG, Newton HJ, Thomson NR, Beatson SA, Dougan G, Hartland EL, Frankel G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Microbiology and Infection, Division of Cell and
Molecular Biology, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.

Legionella pneumophila is a ubiquitous inhabitant of environmental water
reservoirs. The bacteria infect a wide variety of protozoa and, after accidental 
inhalation, human alveolar macrophages, which can lead to severe pneumonia. The
capability to thrive in phagocytic hosts is dependent on the Dot/Icm type IV
secretion system (T4SS), which translocates multiple effector proteins into the
host cell. In this study, we determined the draft genome sequence of L.
pneumophila strain 130b (Wadsworth). We found that the 130b genome encodes a
unique set of T4SSs, namely, the Dot/Icm T4SS, a Trb-1-like T4SS, and two Lvh
T4SS gene clusters. Sequence analysis substantiated that a core set of 107
Dot/Icm T4SS effectors was conserved among the sequenced L. pneumophila strains
Philadelphia-1, Lens, Paris, Corby, Alcoy, and 130b. We also identified new
effector candidates and validated the translocation of 10 novel Dot/Icm T4SS
effectors that are not present in L. pneumophila strain Philadelphia-1. We
examined the prevalence of the new effector genes among 87 environmental and
clinical L. pneumophila isolates. Five of the new effectors were identified in 34
to 62% of the isolates, while less than 15% of the strains tested positive for
the other five genes. Collectively, our data show that the core set of conserved 
Dot/Icm T4SS effector proteins is supplemented by a variable repertoire of
accessory effectors that may partly account for differences in the virulences and
prevalences of particular L. pneumophila strains.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00778-10 
PMCID: PMC2976443
PMID: 20833813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

