
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2011 Feb;75(2):192-203. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2010.09.008. Epub 
2010 Sep 17.

A high-throughput protein refolding screen in 96-well format combined with design
of experiments to optimize the refolding conditions.

Dechavanne V(1), Barrillat N, Borlat F, Hermant A, Magnenat L, Paquet M,
Antonsson B, Chevalet L.

Author information: 
(1)Geneva Research Center, Merck Serono S.A., Department of Protein and Cell
Sciences, 9 Chemin des Mines, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland.
vincent.dechavanne@merckserono.net

Production of correctly folded and biologically active proteins in
Escherichiacoli can be a challenging process. Frequently, proteins are recovered 
as insoluble inclusion bodies and need to be denatured and refolded into the
correct structure. To address this, a refolding screening process based on a
96-well assay format supported by design of experiments (DOE) was developed for
identification of optimal refolding conditions. After a first generic screen of
96 different refolding conditions the parameters that produced the best yield
were further explored in a focused DOE-based screen. The refolding efficiency and
the quality of the refolded protein were analyzed by RP-HPLC and SDS-PAGE. The
results were analyzed by the DOE software to identify the optimal concentrations 
of the critical additives. The optimal refolding conditions suggested by DOE were
verified in medium-scale refolding tests, which confirmed the reliability of the 
predictions. Finally, the refolded protein was purified and its biological
activity was tested in vitro. The screen was applied for the refolding of
Interleukin 17F (IL-17F), stromal-cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1α/CXCL12), B
cell-attracting chemokine 1 (BCA-1/CXCL13), granulocyte macrophage colony
stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and the complement factor C5a. This procedure
identified refolding conditions for all the tested proteins. For the proteins
where refolding conditions were already available, the optimized conditions
identified in the screening process increased the yields between 50% and 100%.
Thus, the method described herein is a useful tool to determine the feasibility
of refolding and to identify high-yield scalable refolding conditions optimized
for each individual protein.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2010.09.008 
PMID: 20851186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

