
1. Syst Appl Microbiol. 2010 Nov;33(7):416-25. doi: 10.1016/j.syapm.2010.06.008.
Epub 2010 Sep 18.

Genetic diversity of native soybean bradyrhizobia from different topographical
regions along the southern slopes of the Himalayan Mountains in Nepal.

Risal CP(1), Yokoyama T, Ohkama-Ohtsu N, Djedidi S, Sekimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)United Graduate School of Agri. Science, Tokyo Univ. of Agri. and Tech., Tokyo
183-8509, Japan.

Soybean-nodulating bradyrhizobia are genetically diverse and are classified into 
different species. In this study, the genetic diversity of native soybean
bradyrhizobia isolated from different topographical regions along the southern
slopes of the Himalayan Mountains in Nepal was explored. Soil samples were
collected from three different topographical regions with contrasting climates. A
local soybean cultivar, Cobb, was used as a trap plant to isolate bradyrhizobia. 
A total of 24 isolates selected on the basis of their colony morphology were
genetically characterized. For each isolate, the full nucleotide sequence of the 
16S rRNA gene and ITS region, and partial sequences of the nifD and nodD1 genes
were determined. Two lineages were evident in the conserved gene phylogeny; one
representing Bradyrhizobium elkanii (71% of isolates), and the other representing
Bradyrhizobium japonicum (21%) and Bradyrhizobium yuanmingense (8%). Phylogenetic
analyses revealed three novel lineages in the Bradyrhizobium elkanii clade,
indicating high levels of genetic diversity among Bradyrhizobium isolates in
Nepal. B. japonicum and B. yuanmingense strains were distributed in areas from
2420 to 2660 m above sea level (asl), which were mountain regions with a
temperate climate. The B. elkanii clade was distributed in two regions; hill
regions ranging from 1512 to 1935 m asl, and mountain regions ranging from 2420
to 2660 m asl. Ten multi-locus genotypes were detected; seven among B. elkanii,
two among B. japonicum, and one among B. yuanmingense-related isolates. The
results indicated that there was higher species-level diversity of Bradyrhizobium
in the temperate region than in the sub-tropical region along the southern slopes
of the Himalayan Mountains in Nepal.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.syapm.2010.06.008 
PMID: 20851547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

