
1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 3;285(49):38473-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.143727. Epub 2010
Sep 20.

Binding of the human complement regulators CFHR1 and factor H by streptococcal
collagen-like protein 1 (Scl1) via their conserved C termini allows control of
the complement cascade at multiple levels.

Reuter M(1), Caswell CC, Lukomski S, Zipfel PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Hans Knoell Institute, 07745 Jena, Germany.

Group A streptococci (GAS) utilize soluble human complement regulators to evade
host complement attack. Here, we characterized the binding of the terminal
complement complex inhibitor complement Factor H-related protein 1 (CFHR1) and of
the C3 convertase regulator Factor H to the streptococcal collagen-like proteins 
(Scl). CFHR1 and Factor H, but no other member of the Factor H protein family
(CFHR2, CFHR3, or CFHR4A), bound to the two streptococcal proteins Scl1.6 and
Scl1.55, which are expressed by GAS serotypes M6 and M55. The two human
regulators bound to the Scl1 proteins via their conserved C-terminal attachment
region, i.e. CFHR1 short consensus repeats 3-5 (SCR3-5) and Factor H SCR18-20.
Binding was affected by ionic strength and by heparin. CFHR1 and the C-terminal
attachment region of Factor H did not bind to Scl1.1 and Scl2.28 proteins but did
bind to intact M1-type and M28-type GAS, which express Scl1.1 and Scl2.28,
respectively, thus arguing for the presence of an additional binding mechanism to
CFHR1 and Factor H. Furthermore mutations within the C-terminal heparin-binding
region and Factor H mutations that are associated with the acute renal disease
atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome blocked the interaction with the two
streptococcal proteins. Binding of CFHR1 affected the complement regulatory
functions of Factor H on the level of the C3 convertase. Apparently, streptococci
utilize two types of complement regulator-acquiring surface proteins; type A
proteins, as represented by Scl1.6 and Scl1.55, bind to CFHR1 and Factor H via
their conserved C-terminal region and do not bind the Factor H-like protein 1
(FHL-1). On the contrary, type B proteins, represented by M-, M-like, and the
fibronectin-binding protein Fba proteins, bind Factor H and FHL-1 via domain SCR7
and do not bind CFHR1. In conclusion, binding of CFHR1 is at the expense of
Factor H-mediated regulatory function at the level of C3 convertase and at the
gain of a regulator that controls complement at the level of the C5 convertase
and formation of the terminal complement complex.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.143727 
PMCID: PMC2992280
PMID: 20855886  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

