
1. Am J Pathol. 2010 Nov;177(5):2483-94. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.100562. Epub 2010 
Sep 23.

CD44 deficiency is associated with increased bacterial clearance but enhanced
lung inflammation during Gram-negative pneumonia.

van der Windt GJ(1), Florquin S, de Vos AF, van't Veer C, Queiroz KC, Liang J,
Jiang D, Noble PW, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Department of Pathology, Academic
Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9, Room G2-130, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Klebsiella pneumoniae is a frequently isolated causative pathogen in respiratory 
tract infections. CD44 is a transmembrane adhesion molecule that has been
implicated in several immunological processes. To determine the role of CD44
during Klebsiella pneumonia, we intranasally infected wild-type and CD44 knockout
(KO) mice with 10(2) to 10(4) colony-forming units of K. pneumoniae or
administered Klebsiella lipopolysaccharide. During lethal infection, CD44
deficiency was associated with reduced bacterial growth and dissemination
accompanied by enhanced pulmonary inflammation. After infection with lower
Klebsiella doses, CD44 KO mice but not wild-type mice demonstrated mortality.
After infection with even lower bacterial doses, which were cleared by most mice 
of both strains, CD44 KO mice displayed enhanced lung inflammation 4 and 10 days 
postinfection, indicating that CD44 is important for the resolution of pulmonary 
inflammation after nonlethal pneumonia. In accordance, CD44 KO mice showed a
diminished resolution of lung inflammation 4 days after intrapulmonary delivery
of lipopolysaccharide. CD44 deficiency was associated with the accumulation of
hyaluronan together with reduced gene expression levels of the negative
regulators of Toll-like receptor signaling, interleukin-1R-associated kinase M,
A20, and suppressor of cytokine signaling 3. In conclusion, the absence of CD44
affects various components and phases of the host response during Klebsiella
pneumonia, reducing bacterial outgrowth and dissemination and enhancing pulmonary
pathology during lethal infection, and diminishing the resolution of lung
inflammation during sublethal infection.

DOI: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.100562 
PMCID: PMC2966805
PMID: 20864681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

