
1. Water Sci Technol. 2010;62(6):1393-400. doi: 10.2166/wst.2010.349.

Sensitivity analysis of an urban stormwater microorganism model.

McCarthy DT(1), Deletic A, Mitchell VG, Diaper C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil Engineering & Centre for Water Sensitive Cities, Monash
University, Wellington Rd, Clayton Vic 3800, Australia.
david.mccarthy@eng.monash.edu.au

This paper presents the sensitivity analysis of a newly developed model which
predicts microorganism concentrations in urban stormwater (MOPUS--MicroOrganism
Prediction in Urban Stormwater). The analysis used Escherichia coli data
collected from four urban catchments in Melbourne, Australia. The MICA program
(Model Independent Markov Chain Monte Carlo Analysis), used to conduct this
analysis, applies a carefully constructed Markov Chain Monte Carlo procedure,
based on the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, to explore the model's posterior
parameter distribution. It was determined that the majority of parameters in the 
MOPUS model were well defined, with the data from the MCMC procedure indicating
that the parameters were largely independent. However, a sporadic correlation
found between two parameters indicates that some improvements may be possible in 
the MOPUS model. This paper identifies the parameters which are the most
important during model calibration; it was shown, for example, that parameters
associated with the deposition of microorganisms in the catchment were more
influential than those related to microorganism survival processes. These
findings will help users calibrate the MOPUS model, and will help the model
developer to improve the model, with efforts currently being made to reduce the
number of model parameters, whilst also reducing the slight interaction
identified.

DOI: 10.2166/wst.2010.349 
PMID: 20861555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

