
1. Thorax. 2010 Oct;65(10):870-7. doi: 10.1136/thx.2010.136317.

The influence of pre-existing diabetes mellitus on the host immune response and
outcome of pneumonia: analysis of two multicentre cohort studies.

Yende S(1), van der Poll T, Lee M, Huang DT, Newman AB, Kong L, Kellum JA, Harris
TB, Bauer D, Satterfield S, Angus DC; GenIMS and Health ABC study.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research, Investigation, and Systems Modeling of Acute Illness
(CRISMA) Laboratory, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
yendes@upmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Although diabetes mellitus is implicated in susceptibility to
infection, the association of diabetes with the subsequent course and outcome is 
unclear.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of two multicentre cohorts was carried out. The
effect of pre-existing diabetes on the host immune response, acute organ function
and mortality in patients hospitalised with community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) in
the GenIMS study (n=1895) and on mortality following either CAP or non-infectious
hospitalisations in the population-based cohort study, Health ABC (n=1639) was
determined. Measurements included the mortality rate within the first year, risk 
of organ dysfunction, and immune responses, including circulating inflammatory
(tumour necrosis factor, interleukin 6, interleukin 10), coagulation (Factor IX, 
thrombin-antithrombin complexes, antithrombin), fibrinolysis
(plasminogen-activator inhibitor-1 and D-dimer) and cell surface markers (CD120a,
CD120b, human leucocyte antigen (HLA)-DR, Toll-like receptor-2 and Toll-like
receptor-4).
RESULTS: In GenIMS, diabetes increased the mortality rate within the first year
after CAP (unadjusted HR 1.41, 95% CI 1.12 to 1.76, p=0.002), even after
adjusting for pre-existing cardiovascular and renal disease (adjusted HR 1.3, 95%
CI 1.03 to 1.65, p=0.02). In Health ABC, diabetes increased the mortality rate
within the first year following CAP hospitalisation, but not after
hospitalisation for non-infectious illnesses (significant interaction for
diabetes and reason for hospitalisation (p=0.04); HR for diabetes on mortality
over the first year after CAP 1.87, 95% CI 0.76 to 4.6, p=0.16, and after
non-infectious hospitalisation 1.16, 95% CI 0.8 to 1.6, p=0.37). In GenIMS,
immediate immune response was similar, as evidenced by similar circulating immune
marker levels, in the emergency department and during the first week. Those with 
diabetes had a higher risk of acute kidney injury during hospitalisation (39.3%
vs 31.7%, p=0.005) and they were more likely to die due to cardiovascular and
kidney disease (34.4% vs 26.8% and 10.4% vs 4.5%, p=0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Pre-existing diabetes was associated with a higher risk of death
following CAP. The mechanism is not due to an altered immune response, at least
as measured by a broad panel of circulating and cell surface markers, but may be 
due to worsening of pre-existing cardiovascular and kidney disease.

DOI: 10.1136/thx.2010.136317 
PMCID: PMC3306240
PMID: 20861291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

