
1. FEBS J. 2010 Nov;277(21):4474-89. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07834.x. Epub
2010 Sep 28.

The N-terminal hybrid binding domain of RNase HI from Thermotoga maritima is
important for substrate binding and Mg2+-dependent activity.

Jongruja N(1), You DJ, Kanaya E, Koga Y, Takano K, Kanaya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Material and Life Science, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Thermotoga maritima ribonuclease H (RNase H) I (Tma-RNase HI) contains a hybrid
binding domain (HBD) at the N-terminal region. To analyze the role of this HBD,
Tma-RNase HI, Tma-W22A with the single mutation at the HBD, the C-terminal RNase 
H domain (Tma-CD) and the N-terminal domain containing the HBD (Tma-ND) were
overproduced in Escherichia coli, purified and biochemically characterized.
Tma-RNase HI prefers Mg(2+) to Mn(2+) for activity, and specifically loses most
of the Mg(2+)-dependent activity on removal of the HBD and 87% of it by the
mutation at the HBD. Tma-CD lost the ability to suppress the RNase H deficiency
of an E. coli rnhA mutant, indicating that the HBD is responsible for in vivo
RNase H activity. The cleavage-site specificities of Tma-RNase HI are not
significantly changed on removal of the HBD, regardless of the metal cofactor.
Binding analyses of the proteins to the substrate using surface plasmon resonance
indicate that the binding affinity of Tma-RNase HI is greatly reduced on removal 
of the HBD or the mutation. These results indicate that there is a correlation
between Mg(2+)-dependent activity and substrate binding affinity. Tma-CD was as
stable as Tma-RNase HI, indicating that the HBD is not important for stability.
The HBD of Tma-RNase HI is important not only for substrate binding, but also for
Mg(2+)-dependent activity, probably because the HBD affects the interaction
between the substrate and enzyme at the active site, such that the scissile
phosphate group of the substrate and the Mg(2+) ion are arranged ideally.

© 2010 The Authors Journal compilation © 2010 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07834.x 
PMID: 20875084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

