
1. Immunobiology. 2011 Apr;216(4):497-504. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2010.08.008. Epub
2010 Sep 6.

The antimycotic drugs itraconazole and terbinafine hydrochloride induce the
production of human β-defensin-3 in human keratinocytes.

Kanda N(1), Kano R, Ishikawa T, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Teikyo University, School of Medicine, 11-1,
Kaga-2, Itabashi-Ku, Tokyo, Japan. nmk@med.teikyo-u.ac.jp

The antimicrobial peptide human β-defensin-3 (hBD-3) is produced by epidermal
keratinocytes, and exhibits broad killing activity against bacteria or fungi.
Prostaglandin D(2) enhances hBD-3 production in human keratinocytes by
stimulating a transcription factor, activator protein-1 via chemoattractant
receptor-homologous molecule expressed on T helper 2 cells (CRTH2). Prostaglandin
H(2), a precursor of prostaglandin D(2) can be converted to thromboxane A(2).
Certain antimycotic drugs act on keratinocytes and modulate their production of
chemokines. In this in vitro study, we examined the effects of antimycotics on
hBD-3 production in human keratinocytes. Antimycotics itraconazole and
terbinafine hydrochloride increased hBD-3 secretion and mRNA levels in parallel
to the enhanced activity of activator protein-1, expression and phosphorylation
of activator protein-1 component, c-Fos, but fluconazole was ineffective. These
effects were abrogated by CRTH2 antagonist. Itraconazole and terbinafine
hydrochloride increased prostaglandin D(2) release from keratinocytes and reduced
the release of thromboxane B(2), a thromboxane A(2) metabolite. The conditioned
medium from itraconazole or terbinafine hydrochloride-treated keratinocytes
inhibited the growth of Candida albicans dependently on hBD-3. These results
suggest that itraconazole and terbinafine hydrochloride may enhance c-Fos
expression and phosphorylation, activator protein-1 activity and hBD-3 production
by increasing prostaglandin D(2) release from keratinocytes. These antimycotic
drugs may suppress thromboxane A(2) synthesis and redirect the conversion of
prostaglandin H(2) towards prostaglandin D(2). The induction of hBD-3 in
keratinocytes is another possible mechanism for the antimycrobial effects of
these drugs, which may augment the cutaneous defense activity against infection.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2010.08.008 
PMID: 20875690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

