
1. Leukemia. 2010 Dec;24(12):1993-2002. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.216. Epub 2010 Sep 30.

Eicosanoid regulation of hematopoiesis and hematopoietic stem and progenitor
trafficking.

Hoggatt J(1), Pelus LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) transplantation is a potentially curative treatment
for numerous hematological malignancies. The transplant procedure as performed
today takes advantage of HSC trafficking; either egress of HSC from the bone
marrow to the peripheral blood, that is, mobilization, for acquisition of the
hematopoietic graft, and/or trafficking of HSC from the peripheral blood to bone 
marrow niches in the recipient patient, that is HSC homing. Numerous studies,
many of which are reviewed herein, have defined hematopoietic regulatory
mechanisms mediated by the 20-carbon lipid family of eicosanoids, and recent
evidence strongly supports a role for eicosanoids in regulation of hematopoietic 
trafficking, adding a new role whereby eicosanoids regulate hematopoiesis.
Short-term exposure of HSC to the eicosanoid prostaglandin E(2) increases CXCR4
receptor expression, migration and in vivo homing of HSC. In contrast,
cannabinoids reduce hematopoietic progenitor cell (HPC) CXCR4 expression and
induce HPC mobilization when administered in vivo. Leukotrienes have been shown
to alter CD34(+) cell adhesion, migration and regulate HSC proliferation,
suggesting that eicosanoids have both opposing and complimentary roles in the
regulation of hematopoiesis. As numerous FDA approved compounds regulate
eicosanoid signaling or biosynthesis, the utility of eicosanoid-based therapeutic
strategies to improve hematopoietic transplantation can be rapidly evaluated.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2010.216 
PMCID: PMC3099594
PMID: 20882043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

