
1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 10;285(50):38781-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.152173. Epub 2010
Oct 1.

CCR7/CCL21 migration on fibronectin is mediated by phospholipase Cgamma1 and
ERK1/2 in primary T lymphocytes.

Shannon LA(1), Calloway PA, Welch TP, Vines CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics, and Immunology, The University
of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

CCR7 binds to its cognate ligand, CCL21, to mediate the migration of circulating 
naive T lymphocytes to the lymph nodes. T lymphocytes can bind to fibronectin, a 
constituent of lymph nodes, via their β1 integrins, which is a primary mechanism 
of T lymphocyte migration; however, the signaling pathways involved are unclear. 
We report that rapid (within 2 min) and transient phosphorylation of ERK1/2 is
required for T cell migration on fibronectin in response to CCL21. Conversely,
prevention of ERK1/2 phosphorylation by inhibition of its kinase, MAPK/MEK,
prevented T lymphocyte migration. Previous studies have suggested that
phospholipase Cγ1 (PLCγ1) can mediate phosphorylation of ERK1/2, which is
required for β1 integrin activation. Paradoxically, we found that inhibition of
PLCγ1 phosphorylation by the general PLC inhibitor U73122 was associated with a
delayed and reduced phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and reduced migration of T
lymphocytes on fibronectin. To further characterize the relationship between
ERK1/2 and PLCγ1, we reduced PLCγ1 levels by 85% using shRNA and observed a
reduced phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and a significant loss of CCR7-mediated
migration of T lymphocytes on fibronectin. In addition, we found that inhibition 
of ERK1/2 phosphorylation by U0126 resulted in a decreased phosphorylation of
PLCγ1, suggesting a feedback loop between ERK1/2 and PLCγ1. Overall, these
results suggest that the CCR7 signaling pathway leading to T lymphocyte migration
on fibronectin is a β1 integrin-dependent pathway involving transient ERK1/2
phosphorylation, which is modulated by PLCγ1.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.152173 
PMCID: PMC2998076
PMID: 20889506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

