
1. J Infect Dis. 2010 Nov 15;202(10):1600-7. doi: 10.1086/656787. Epub 2010 Oct 6.

Therapeutic recombinant murine activated protein C attenuates pulmonary
coagulopathy and improves survival in murine pneumococcal pneumonia.

Schouten M(1), van 't Veer C, van den Boogaard FE, Gerlitz B, Grinnell BW,
Roelofs JJ, Levi M, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. m.schouten@amc.uva.nl

BACKGROUND: Recombinant human activated protein C (APC) improves survival of
patients with severe sepsis; this beneficial effect is especially apparent in
patients with pneumococcal pneumonia. The aim of this study was to determine the 
effect of APC treatment initiated after induction of pneumococcal pneumonia on
pulmonary coagulation, inflammation, and survival, with or without concurrent
antibiotic therapy.
METHODS: Mice were infected intranasally with viable Streptococcus pneumoniae and
were treated intraperitoneally after 24 h of infection with vehicle, recombinant 
mouse (rm) APC (125 μg), ceftriaxone (500 μg), or rm-APC plus ceftriaxone.
Treatment with rm-APC or vehicle was repeated every 8 h for a maximum of 96 h.
Animals were either killed 48 h after infection or were monitored in a survival
study (with an extra dose of ceftriaxone given after 72 h).
RESULTS: Rm-APC treatment inhibited pulmonary activation of coagulation, as
reflected by lower levels of thrombin-antithrombin complexes and D-dimer. Rm-APC 
did not affect the pulmonary levels of 55 inflammatory mediators in the context
of antibiotic therapy. Rm-APC added to ceftriaxone markedly improved survival,
compared with ceftriaxone treatment alone.
CONCLUSIONS: Rm-APC inhibits pulmonary activation of coagulation and, when added 
to antibiotic therapy, improves survival in murine pneumococcal pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1086/656787 
PMID: 20925531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

