
1. Can J Microbiol. 2010 Sep;56(9):771-6. doi: 10.1139/w10-064.

Invasive aspergillosis promotes tumor growth and severity in a tumor-bearing
mouse model.

Sohrabi N(1), Hassan ZM, Khosravi AR, Tebianian M, Mahdavi M, Tootian Z, Ebrahimi
SM, Yadegari MH, Gheflati Z.

Author information: 
(1)Mycology Research Center, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Tehran, Tehran, Iran. nsohrabi75@yahoo.com

Invasive aspergillosis increases in chronic immunosuppressive diseases such as
cancer. There is little information about the mechanisms by which Aspergillus
infection affects the immune regulation and microenvironment of cancer cells.
Hence, this study was aimed at investigating the effect of invasive aspergillosis
on immunosurveillance, metastasis, and prognosis of cancer in tumor-bearing mice.
After implantation of mouse mammary tumor in BALB/c mice, they were infected with
Aspergillus conidia intravenously. For comparison, groups of mice were
experimentally infected with Aspergillus conidia or implanted with tumor cells
separately. Seven days after Aspergillus infection, the serum levels of tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1) were measured by ELISA, and
subsequently regulatory T lymphocytes were analyzed by flow cytometry. The
survival of animals and mean tumor size were then determined. Our results
indicated that tumor sizes in mice increased significantly after infection with
Aspergillus conidia. Moreover, invasive aspergillosis enhanced the population of 
regulatory lymphocytes and level of TIMP-1. This study supports the idea that
massive Aspergillus infection could stimulate tumor growth and increases the
possibility of a bad prognosis. As a result, treatment of Aspergillus infection
could be considered an important issue for efficient cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1139/w10-064 
PMID: 20921987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

