
1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 17;285(51):40081-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.184457. Epub 2010
Oct 14.

Novel channel enzyme fusion proteins confer arsenate resistance.

Wu B(1), Song J, Beitz E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry,
Christian-Albrechts-Universit√§t zu Kiel, 24118 Kiel, Germany.

Steady exposure to environmental arsenic has led to the evolution of vital
cellular detoxification mechanisms. Under aerobic conditions, a two-step process 
appears most common among microorganisms involving reduction of predominant,
oxidized arsenate (H(2)As(V)O(4)(-)/HAs(V)O(4)(2-)) to arsenite (As(III)(OH)(3)) 
by a cytosolic enzyme (ArsC; Escherichia coli type arsenate reductase) and
subsequent extrusion via ArsB (E. coli type arsenite transporter)/ACR3 (yeast
type arsenite transporter). Here, we describe novel fusion proteins consisting of
an aquaglyceroporin-derived arsenite channel with a C-terminal arsenate reductase
domain of phosphotyrosine-phosphatase origin, providing transposable, single
gene-encoded arsenate resistance. The fusion occurred in actinobacteria from
soil, Frankia alni, and marine environments, Salinispora tropica; Mycobacterium
tuberculosis encodes an analogous ACR3-ArsC fusion. Mutations rendered the
aquaglyceroporin channel more polar resulting in lower glycerol permeability and 
enhanced arsenite selectivity. The arsenate reductase domain couples to
thioredoxin and can complement arsenate-sensitive yeast strains. A second isoform
with a nonfunctional channel may use the mycothiol/mycoredoxin cofactor pool.
These channel enzymes constitute prototypes of a novel concept in metabolism in
which a substrate is generated and compartmentalized by the same molecule.
Immediate diffusion maintains the dynamic equilibrium and prevents toxic
accumulation of metabolites in an energy-saving fashion.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.184457 
PMCID: PMC3000990
PMID: 20947511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

