
1. J Immunol. 2010 Nov 15;185(10):5915-25. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001233. Epub 2010 
Oct 13.

Generation of mucosal dendritic cells from bone marrow reveals a critical role of
retinoic acid.

Feng T(1), Cong Y, Qin H, Benveniste EN, Elson CO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294, USA.

It is unknown how dendritic cells (DCs) become specialized as mucosal DCs and
maintain intestinal homeostasis. We report that a subset of bone marrow cells
freshly isolated from C57BL/6 mice express the retinoic acid (RA)-synthesizing
enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase family 1, subfamily A2 (ALDH1a2) and are capable of
providing RA to DC precursors in the bone marrow microenvironment. RA induced
bone marrow-derived DCs to express CCR9 and ALDH1a2 and conferred upon them
mucosal DC functions, including induction of Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells,
IgA-secreting B cells, and gut-homing molecules. This response of DCs to RA was
dependent on a narrow time window and stringent dose effect. RA promoted bone
marrow-derived DC production of bioactive TGF-β by inhibiting suppressor of
cytokine signaling 3 expression and thereby enhancing STAT3 activation. These RA 
effects were evident in vivo, in that mucosal DCs from vitamin A-deficient mice
had reduced mucosal DC function, namely failure to induce Foxp3(+) regulatory T
cells. Furthermore, MyD88 signaling enhanced RA-educated DC ALDH1a2 expression
and was required for optimal TGF-β production. These data indicate that RA plays 
a critical role in the generation of mucosal DCs from bone marrow and in their
functional activity.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001233 
PMCID: PMC4454342
PMID: 20944006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

