
1. Folia Microbiol (Praha). 2010 Sep;55(5):422-6. doi: 10.1007/s12223-010-0071-0.
Epub 2010 Oct 13.

Characterization and antimicrobial activity of
4-(β-D-glucopyranosyl-1→4-α-L-rhamnopyranosyloxy)-benzyl thiocarboxamide; a novel
bioactive compound from Moringa oleifera seed extract.

Oluduro OA(1), Aderiye BI, Connolly JD, Akintayo ET, Famurewa O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Ado-Ekiti, PMB 5363 Ado-Ekiti,
Nigeria. oluduro2003@yahoo.co.co.u.

Antimicrobial activity of crude seed extract of Moringa oleifera was investigated
by thin layer chromatography bioassay against Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, Cladosporium cladosporioides, and Penicillium 
sclerotigenum; most of them were prominently inhibited by an isolate with R(F)
0.92-0.96. Characterization and identification of the extract revealed the
occurrence of three bioactive compounds: 4-(α-L-rhamnopyranosyloxy)benzyl
isothiocyanate, methyl N-4-(α-L-rhamnopyranosyloxy) benzyl carbamate (both known 
compounds), and 4-(β-D-glucopyranosyl-1→4-α-L-rhamnopyranosyloxy)-benzyl
thiocarboxamide, existence of which in any Moringa spp. or plant is reported for 
the first time. The UV spectrum of the novel compound showed maximum absorption
at 273 and 225 nm in MeOH while the IR spectrum revealed several characteristic
bands at 3100, 2900, 1700, 1500, 1300, 1100 and 1000 cm(-1). The (1)H-NMR showed 
signals at 1.2 and 3.77 ppm and the (13)C-NMR presented signals at 155, 122, 91.7
and 98.4 ppm. All the compounds at 5 mg/L had very high bactericidal activity
against some of test pathogens even at contact period 1-2 h.
4-(β-D-Glucopyranosyl-1→4-α-L-rhamnopyranosyloxy)benzyl thiocarboxamide was the
most potent, with 99.2 % inhibition toward Shigella dysenteriae and 100 % toward 
Bacillus cereus, E. coli and Salmonella typhi within 4 h of contact.

DOI: 10.1007/s12223-010-0071-0 
PMID: 20941575  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

