
1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2010 Dec;36(6):549-56. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2010.08.015. Epub 2010 Oct 16.

Probing interfacial interactions of bacteria on metal nanoparticles and
substrates with different surface properties.

Luo J(1), Chan WB, Wang L, Zhong CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, State University of New York at Binghamton,
Binghamton, NY 13902, USA.

This report describes the findings of an investigation of interfacial
interactions of bacteria (Pseudomonas aeruginosa) on metal nanoparticles and
substrates with different surface properties. In addition to the antibacterial
activity of metal nanoparticles, the results of atomic force microscopy (AFM)
probing of the interfacial interactions of P. aeruginosa on flat substrates with 
different surface properties, including a hydrophilic mica and a hydrophobic
highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), and with different nanoparticle
patterns are the focus of this discussion. AFM imaging data revealed that the
interaction of the hydrophilic mica surface with P. aeruginosa keeps the cell
outer membrane relatively 'rigid'. The cell outline is largely retained even
under the condition of dense packing on the surface. In contrast, the interaction
of the hydrophobic HOPG surface renders the cell outer membrane relatively
'soft'. This soft nature maximises its contact area with the substrate so that
the cell outline is altered to fill intercell voids. Demonstration of the
viability of creating a nanoparticle-patterned AFM imaging platform in which the 
assembled nanoparticles inactivate bacteria whereas the bottom substrate promotes
bacterial adhesion may find applications in high-throughput screening or assays
of bacterial adhesion and antibacterial activity of metal nanoparticles.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. and the International Society of Chemotherapy. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2010.08.015 
PMID: 20952165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

