
1. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 20;5(10):e13519. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013519.

Complement factor H-related proteins CFHR2 and CFHR5 represent novel ligands for 
the infection-associated CRASP proteins of Borrelia burgdorferi.

Siegel C(1), Hallstr√∂m T, Skerka C, Eberhardt H, Uzonyi B, Beckhaus T, Karas M,
Wallich R, Stevenson B, Zipfel PF, Kraiczy P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, University Hospital
of Frankfurt, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

BACKGROUND: One virulence property of Borrelia burgdorferi is its resistance to
innate immunity, in particular to complement-mediated killing. Serum-resistant B.
burgdorferi express up to five distinct complement regulator-acquiring surface
proteins (CRASP) which interact with complement regulator factor H (CFH) and
factor H-like protein 1 (FHL1) or factor H-related protein 1 (CFHR1). In the
present study we elucidate the role of the infection-associated CRASP-3 and
CRASP-5 protein to serve as ligands for additional complement regulatory proteins
as well as for complement resistance of B. burgdorferi.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To elucidate whether CRASP-5 and CRASP-3 interact
with various human proteins, both borrelial proteins were immobilized on magnetic
beads. Following incubation with human serum, bound proteins were eluted and
separated by Glycine-SDS-PAGE. In addition to CFH and CFHR1, complement
regulators CFHR2 and CFHR5 were identified as novel ligands for both borrelial
proteins by employing MALDI-TOF. To further assess the contributions of CRASP-3
and CRASP-5 to complement resistance, a serum-sensitive B. garinii strain G1
which lacks all CFH-binding proteins was used as a valuable model for functional 
analyses. Both CRASPs expressed on the B. garinii outer surface bound CFH as well
as CFHR1 and CFHR2 in ELISA. In contrast, live B. garinii bound CFHR1, CFHR2, and
CFHR5 and only miniscute amounts of CFH as demonstrated by serum adsorption
assays and FACS analyses. Further functional analysis revealed that upon NHS
incubation, CRASP-3 or CRASP-5 expressing borreliae were killed by complement.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In the absence of CFH and the presence of CFHR1, CFHR2 
and CFHR5, assembly and integration of the membrane attack complex was not
efficiently inhibited indicating that CFH in co-operation with CFHR1, CFHR2 and
CFHR5 supports complement evasion of B. burgdorferi.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013519 
PMCID: PMC2958145
PMID: 20975954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

