
1. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 14;5(10):e13394. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013394.

S100A8/A9 is not involved in host defense against murine urinary tract infection.

Dessing MC(1), Butter LM, Teske GJ, Claessen N, van der Loos CM, Vogl T, Roth J, 
van der Poll T, Florquin S, Leemans JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. m.c.dessing@amc.uva.nl

BACKGROUND: Inflammation is commonly followed by the release of endogenous
proteins called danger associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) that are able to
warn the host for eminent danger. S100A8/A9 subunits are DAMPs that belong to the
S100 family of calcium binding proteins. S100A8/A9 complexes induce an
inflammatory response and their expression correlates with disease severity in
several inflammatory disorders. S100A8/A9 promote endotoxin- and Escherichia (E.)
coli-induced sepsis showing its contribution in systemic infection. The role of
S100A8/A9 during a local infection of the urinary tract system caused by E. coli 
remains unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We investigated the contribution of S100A8/A9 in 
acute urinary tract infection (UTI) by instilling 2 different doses of
uropathogenic E. coli transurethrally in wild type (WT) and S100A9 knockout (KO) 
mice. Subsequently, we determined bacterial outgrowth, neutrophilic infiltrate
and inflammatory mediators in bladder and kidney 24 and 48 hours later. UTI
resulted in a substantial increase of S100A8/A9 protein in bladder and kidney
tissue of WT mice. S100A9 KO mice displayed similar bacterial load in bladder or 
kidney homogenate compared to WT mice using 2 different doses at 2 different time
points. S100A9 deficiency had little effect on the inflammatory responses to E.
Coli-induced UTI infection, as assessed by myeloperoxidase activity in bladder
and kidneys, histopathologic analysis, and renal and bladder cytokine
concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that despite high S100A8/A9 expression in bladder and kidney
tissue upon UTI, S100A8/A9 does not contribute to an effective host response
against E. Coli in the urinary tract system.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013394 
PMCID: PMC2954806
PMID: 20976233  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

