
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2010 Nov 24;58(22):11852-6. doi: 10.1021/jf1028202. Epub 2010 
Oct 27.

Simultaneous degradation of mixed insecticides by mixed fungal culture isolated
from sewage sludge.

Kulshrestha G(1), Kumari A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Agricultural Chemicals, Indian Agricultural Research Institute,
New Delhi 110012, India. gitakul@rediffmail.com

The degradation of mixed (DDT and chlorpyrifos) insecticides by mixed insecticide
enriched cultures was investigated. The mixed fungal population was isolated from
mixed insecticide acclimatized sewage sludge over a period of 90 days. Gas
chromatography was used to detect the concentration of mixed insecticides and
calculate the degradation efficiency. The results showed that the degradation
capability of the mixed microbial culture was higher in low concentrations than
in high concentrations of the mixed insecticides. After 12 weeks of incubation,
mixed pesticide enriched cultures were able to degrade 79.5-94.4% of DDT and
73.6-85.9% of chlorpyrifos in facultative cometabolic conditions. The fungal
strains isolated from the mixed microbial consortium were identified as Fusarium 
sp. isolates GFSM-4 (ITCC 6841) and GFSM-5 (ITCC 6842). The fungal culture GFSM-4
could not utilize mixed insecticides as source of carbon and nitrogen, probably
due to high combined toxicity of the mixed insecticides. Liquid media deficient
in carbon (1% mannitol) and nitrogen (0.1% sodium nitrate) source increased the
degradation efficiency of DDT and chlorpyrifos to 69 and 45%, respectively. The
media with normal carbon and deficient nitrogen (0.1% sodium nitrate) sources
extensively increased the degradation efficiencies of DDT (94%) and chlorpyrifos 
(69.2%). Traces of p,p'-dichlorobenzophenone and desdiethylchlorpyrifos were
observed in the liquid medium, which did not accumulate probably due to further
rapid degradation. This fungal isolate (GFSM-4) was able to degrade
simultaneously DDT (26.94%) and chlorpyrifos (24.94%) in sterile contaminated (50
mg of each insecticide kg(-1)) soil in aerobic conditions.

DOI: 10.1021/jf1028202 
PMID: 20979383  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

