
1. J Med Genet. 2011 Jan;48(1):38-47. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.078998. Epub 2010 Oct
26.

CDKN2BAS is associated with periodontitis in different European populations and
is activated by bacterial infection.

Schaefer AS(1), Richter GM, Dommisch H, Reinartz M, Nothnagel M, Noack B, Laine
ML, Folwaczny M, Groessner-Schreiber B, Loos BG, Jepsen S, Schreiber S.

Author information: 
(1)Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology,
Kiel, Germany. a.schaefer@ikmb.uni-kiel.de

Epidemiological studies have indicated a relationship between coronary heart
disease (CHD) and periodontitis. Recently, CDKN2BAS was reported as a shared
genetic risk factor of CHD and aggressive periodontitis (AgP), but the causative 
variant has remained unknown. To identify and validate risk variants in different
European populations, we first explored 150 kb of the genetic region of CDKN2BAS 
including the adjacent genes CDKN2A and CDKN2B, covering 51 tagging single
nucleotide polymorphisms (tagSNPs) in AgP and chronic periodontitis (CP) in
individuals of Dutch origin (n=313). In a second step, we tested the significant 
SNP associations in an independent AgP and CP population of German origin
(n=1264). For the tagSNPs rs1360590, rs3217992, and rs518394, we could validate
the associations with AgP before and after adjustment for the covariates smoking,
gender and diabetes, with SNP rs3217992 being the most significant (OR 1.48, 95% 
CI 1.19 to 1.85; p=0.0004). We further showed in vivo gene expression of
CDKN2BAS, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, and CDK4 in healthy and inflamed gingival epithelium
(GE) and connective tissue (CT), and detected a significantly higher expression
of CDKN2BAS in healthy CT compared to GE (p=0.004). After 24 h of stimulation
with Porphyromonas gingivalis in Streptococcus gordonii pre-treated gingival
fibroblast (HGF) and cultured gingival epithelial cells (GECs), we observed a
25-fold and fourfold increase of CDKN2BAS gene expression in HGFs (p=0.003) and
GECs (p=0.004), respectively. Considering the global importance of CDKN2BAS in
the disease risk of CHD, this observation supports the theory of inflammatory
components in the disease physiology of CHD.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2010.078998 
PMID: 20978019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

