
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2011 Jan;163(1):123-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2010.04282.x. 
Epub 2010 Oct 29.

Chronic colitis induces expression of β-defensins in murine intestinal epithelial
cells.

Rahman A(1), Fahlgren A, Sundstedt C, Hammarström S, Danielsson A, Hammarström
ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Immunology, Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden.

Anti-microbial peptides are important effectors in innate immunity. In the gut
they defend against pathogens, shape the commensal microbiota and probably
control intestinal homeostasis. Ulcerative colitis (UC), but not Crohn's disease,
shows increased expression of inducible β-defensins (hBD-2, hBD-3 and hBD-4) in
colonic epithelial cells. Does inducible defensin production precede the chronic 
intestinal inflammation characteristic of UC, or is it a consequence of the T
cell-driven chronic inflammation? The aim was to analyse defensin mRNA and
protein expression in colonic epithelial cells in two colitis mouse models
resembling UC, the interleukin (IL)-2(-/-) mouse and the dextran sulphate sodium 
(DSS)-induced colitis mouse. Defensin mRNA was assayed by in situ hybridization
and quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). Defensin peptide was assayed by immunohistochemistry. Mouse β-defensin 
3 (mBD-3, orthologue to hBD-2) was up-regulated strongly in colonic epithelium of
15-week-old IL-2(-/-) mice and DSS-induced colitis mice with chronic bowel
inflammation, but not in apparently healthy IL-2(-/-) 5-week-old mice, IL-2(+/-) 
15-week-old mice or in acute stage DSS mice. Up-regulation was seen both at the
mRNA- and at the protein level (only mBD-3 investigated). IL-17, but not several 
other cytokines, including interferon (IFN)-γ, induced mBD-3 mRNA expression in
mouse colon carcinoma cells. The mRNA expression level of the constitutively
expressed α-defensin, cryptdin-4, was up-regulated marginally in acute stage
DSS-colitis mice and in IL-2(-/-) mice before signs of colitis. Inducible
β-defensin expression in colonic epithelium is the consequence of the chronic
bowel inflammation caused by activated T cells releasing cytokines including
IL-17.

© 2010 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Immunology © 2010 British Society
for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2010.04282.x 
PMCID: PMC3010919
PMID: 21039426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

