
1. Int Immunol. 2010 Dec;22(12):915-25. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxq446. Epub 2010 Nov 3.

PD-1-PD-L1 pathway impairs T(h)1 immune response in the late stage of infection
with Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guérin.

Sakai S(1), Kawamura I, Okazaki T, Tsuchiya K, Uchiyama R, Mitsuyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Yoshida Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

A major concern still prevails as to the reason why various mycobacteria are able
to persist within infected host in which protective immunity is generated. To
address this question, we monitored the generation of protective T cells during
infection with Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG). CD4(+) T cells
obtained 3 weeks after infection conferred protection against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis challenge and produced IFN-γ and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α upon 
antigen stimulation. However, these abilities were decreased after 6 weeks of
infection even though BCG was not thoroughly eliminated from the host. We
analyzed the expression of ligands for the CD28/CTLA-4 family receptors on
antigen-presenting cells and found that the expression of PD-L1, a ligand for
programmed cell death-1 (PD-1), was up-regulated later than 3 weeks of infection.
We also found that bacterial numbers in the spleen of PD-1-deficient mice were
significantly reduced compared with wild-type mice at 6 and 12 weeks after BCG
infection. Furthermore, CD4(+) T cells of PD-1-deficient mice showed a higher
ability to confer protection and produce IFN-γ and TNF-α even at 12 weeks after
infection. These results indicate that the PD-1-PD-L1 pathway impairs T(h)1
immunity in the late stage of BCG infection, thereby facilitating the bacterial
persistence in the host.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxq446 
PMID: 21047981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

