
1. BMC Microbiol. 2010 Nov 2;10:276. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-10-276.

The small regulatory RNA molecule MicA is involved in Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium biofilm formation.

Kint G(1), De Coster D, Marchal K, Vanderleyden J, De Keersmaecker SC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Microbial and Plant Genetics, KU Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 20,
3001 Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: LuxS is the synthase enzyme of the quorum sensing signal AI-2. In
Salmonella Typhimurium, it was previously shown that a luxS deletion mutant is
impaired in biofilm formation. However, this phenotype could not be complemented 
by extracellular addition of quorum sensing signal molecules.
RESULTS: Analysis of additional S. Typhimurium luxS mutants indicated that the
LuxS enzyme itself is not a prerequisite for a wild type mature biofilm. However,
in close proximity of the luxS coding sequence, a small RNA molecule, MicA, is
encoded on the opposite DNA strand. Interference with the MicA expression level
showed that a balanced MicA level is essential for mature Salmonella biofilm
formation. Several MicA targets known to date have previously been reported to be
implicated in biofilm formation in Salmonella or in other bacterial species.
Additionally, we showed by RT-qPCR analysis that MicA levels are indeed altered
in some luxS mutants, corresponding to their biofilm formation phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that the S. Typhimurium biofilm formation phenotype of a
luxS mutant in which the complete coding region is deleted, is dependent on the
sRNA molecule MicA, encoded in the luxS adjacent genomic region, rather than on
LuxS itself. Future studies are required to fully elucidate the role of MicA in
Salmonella biofilm formation.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-10-276 
PMCID: PMC2987988
PMID: 21044338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

