
1. J Innate Immun. 2011;3(1):99-108. doi: 10.1159/000321156. Epub 2010 Oct 29.

Cysteine-cysteinyl chemokine receptor 6 mediates invariant natural killer T cell 
airway recruitment and innate stage resistance during mycobacterial infection.

Stolberg VR(1), Chiu BC, Martin BE, Shah SA, Sandor M, Chensue SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School Ann Arbor, Ann 
Arbor, Mich., USA.

This study examined the contribution of cysteine-cysteinyl chemokine receptor 6
(CCR6) to the innate pulmonary antimycobacterial immune response. Using a mouse
model of Mycobacterium bovis BCG airway infection, we detected maximal induction 
of the CCR6 agonist CCL20 in lungs at 1 week after infection. Infected CCR6
knockout (CCR6-/-) mice displayed an early impairment of bacterial clearance, but
ultimately eliminated the attenuated organisms with the onset of adaptive
immunity. Flow-cytometric analyses of bronchoalveolar lavages and dispersed lungs
revealed a 60% reduction in TCR-α/β+ T cells in airways but no compromise of
TCR-γ/δ+ T cells. The subset of CD1d-restricted, CD8-TCR-α/β+ natural killer
cells, which mediate innate mycobacterial resistance, was profoundly reduced
(90%). Analysis of the adaptive response using ovalbumin-specific transgenic TCR 
T cell (OT-II) transfer combined with infection with recombinant M. bovis BCG
producing ovalbumin peptide indicated no impairment of adaptive T cell activation
in CCR6-/- mice. There was also no impairment of the induction of
cytokine-producing cells in draining lymphoid tissue of CCR6-/- mice. Taken
together, our findings indicate that CCR6 is not required for induction of the
adaptive antimycobacterial response, but is likely critical to airway compartment
mobilization of TCR-α/β+CCR6+ innate and adaptive effector T cells.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000321156 
PMCID: PMC3245832
PMID: 21042003  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

