
1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011 Jan;22(1):187-95. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2010060611. Epub 2010
Nov 4.

Postinfectious glomerulonephritis in the elderly.

Nasr SH(1), Fidler ME, Valeri AM, Cornell LD, Sethi S, Zoller A, Stokes MB,
Markowitz GS, D'Agati VD.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, Division of Anatomic Pathology, Hilton 10-20, 200 First Street,
SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. nasr.samih@mayo.edu

Postinfectious glomerulonephritis (PIGN) is primarily a childhood disease that
occurs after an upper respiratory tract infection or impetigo; its occurrence in 
older patients is not well characterized. Here, we report 109 cases of PIGN in
patients ≥65 years old diagnosed by renal biopsy. The male to female ratio was
2.8:1. An immunocompromised background was present in 61%, most commonly diabetes
or malignancy. The most common site of infection was skin, followed by pneumonia 
and urinary tract infection. The most common causative agent was staphylococcus
(46%) followed by streptococcus (16%) and unusual gram-negative organisms.
Hypocomplementemia was present in 72%. The mean peak serum creatinine was 5.1
mg/dl, and 46% of patients required acute dialysis. The most common light
microscopic patterns were diffuse (53%), focal (28%), and mesangial (13%)
proliferative glomerulonephritis. IgA-dominant PIGN occurred in 17%. Of the 72
patients with ≥3 months of follow-up (mean, 29 months), 22% achieved complete
recovery, 44% had persistent renal dysfunction, and 33% progressed to ESRD. The
presence of diabetes, higher creatinine at biopsy, dialysis at presentation, the 
presence of diabetic glomerulosclerosis, and greater tubular atrophy and
interstitial fibrosis predicted ESRD. In summary, the epidemiology of PIGN is
shifting as the population ages. Older men and patients with diabetes or
malignancy are particularly at risk, and the sites of infection and causative
organisms differ from the typical childhood disease. Prognosis for these older
patients is poor, with fewer than 25% recovering full renal function.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2010060611 
PMID: 21051737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

