
1. Methods Enzymol. 2010;485:481-97. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-381296-4.00026-9.

Screening for novel constitutively active CXCR2 mutants and their cellular
effects.

Park G(1), Masi T, Choi CK, Kim H, Becker JM, Sparer TE.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Tennessee, Department of Microbiology, Knoxville, Tennessee,
USA.

Chemokines play an important role in inflammatory, developmental, and homeostatic
processes. Deregulation of this system results in various diseases including
tumorigenesis and cancer metastasis. Deregulation can occur when constitutively
active mutant (CAM) chemokine receptors are locked in the "on" position. This can
lead to cellular transformation/tumorigenesis. The CXC chemokine receptor 2
(CXCR2) is a G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) expressed on neutrophils, some
monocytes, endothelial cells, and some epithelial cells. CXCR2 activation with
CXC chemokines induces leukocyte migration, trafficking, leukocyte degranulation,
cellular differentiation, and angiogenesis. Activation of CXCR2 can lead to
cellular transformation. We hypothesized that CAM CXCR2s may play a role in
cancer development. In order to identify CXCR2 CAMs, potential mutant CXCR2
receptors were screened using a modified Saccharomyces cerevisiae high-throughput
system. S. cerevisiae has been used successfully to identify GPCR/G-protein
interactions and autocrine selection for peptide agonists. The CXCR2 CAMs
identified from this screen were characterized in mammalian cells. Their ability 
to transform cells in vitro was shown using foci formation, soft-agar growth,
impedance measurement assays, and in vivo tumor growth following hind flank
inoculation into mice. Signaling pathways contributing to cellular transformation
were identified using luciferase reporter assays. Studying constitutively active 
GPCRs is an approach to "capturing" pluridimensional GPCRs in a "locked"
activation state. In order to address the residues necessary for CXCR2
activation, we used S. cerevisiae for screening novel CAMs and characterized them
using mammalian reporter assays.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-381296-4.00026-9 
PMID: 21050933  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

