
1. Mol Cells. 2010 Dec;30(6):519-26. doi: 10.1007/s10059-010-0142-8. Epub 2010 Nov
5.

Intracellular degradation of Fusobacterium nucleatum in human gingival epithelial
cells.

Ji S(1), Shin JE, Kim YC, Choi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oromaxillofacial Infection and Immunity, Brain Korea 21 CLS,
School of Dentistry and Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University,
Seoul 110-749, Korea.

The role of Fusobacterium nucleatum in oral health and disease is controversial. 
We have previously shown that F. nucleatum invades gingival epithelial cells.
However, the destiny of the internalized F. nucleatum is not clear. In the
present study, the intracellular destiny of F. nucleatum and its cytopathic
effect on gingival epithelial cells were studied. The ability of F. nucleatum and
seven other oral bacterial species to invade immortalized human gingival
epithelial (HOK-16B) cells were compared by confocal microscopy and flow
cytometry. F. nucleatum had the highest invasive capacity, comparable to that of 
Porphyromonas gingivalis, a periodontal pathogen. Confocal microscopic
examination revealed colocalization of internalized F. nucleatum with endosomes
and lysosomes. Examination by transmission electron microscopy revealed that most
intracellular F. nucleatum was located within vesicular structures with single
enclosed membranes. Furthermore, F. nucleatum could not survive within gingival
epithelial cells and had no cytopathic effects on host cells. Interestingly,
endosomal maturation played a role in induction of the antimicrobial peptides
human beta defensin (HBD)-2 and -3 by F. nucleatum from gingival epithelial
cells. F. nucleatum is destined to enter an endocytic degradation pathway after
invasion and has no cytopathic effect on gingival epithelial cells, which may
cast new light on the role of F. nucleatum in the pathogenesis of periodontitis.

DOI: 10.1007/s10059-010-0142-8 
PMID: 21057979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

