
1. ISME J. 2011 Apr;5(4):704-16. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2010.169. Epub 2010 Nov 11.

Microbial methanol uptake in northeast Atlantic waters.

Dixon JL(1), Beale R, Nightingale PD.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, West Hoe, Plymouth, Devon, UK.
jod@pml.ac.uk

Methanol is the predominant oxygenated volatile organic compound in the
troposphere, where it can significantly influence the oxidising capacity of the
atmosphere. However, we do not understand which processes control oceanic
concentrations, and hence, whether the oceans are a source or a sink to the
atmosphere. We report the first methanol loss rates in seawater by demonstrating 
that (14)C-labelled methanol can be used to determine microbial uptake into
particulate biomass, and oxidation to (14)CO(2). We have found that methanol is
used predominantly as a microbial energy source, but also demonstrated its use as
a carbon source. We report biological methanol oxidation rates between 2.1 and
8.4  nmol l(-1) day(-1) in surface seawater of the northeast Atlantic. Kinetic
experiments predict a V(max) of up to 29  nmol l(-1) day(-1), with a high
affinity K(m) constant of 9.3  nM in more productive coastal waters. We report
surface concentrations of methanol in the western English channel of 97±8  nM
(n=4) between May and June 2010, and for the wider temperate North Atlantic
waters of 70±13  nM (n=6). The biological turnover time of methanol has been
estimated between 7 and 33 days, although kinetic experiments suggest a 7-day
turnover in more productive shelf waters. Methanol uptake rates into microbial
particles significantly correlated with bacterial and phytoplankton parameters,
suggesting that it could be used as a carbon source by some bacteria and possibly
some mixotrophic eukaryotes. Our results provide the first methanol loss rates
from seawater, which will improve the understanding of the global methanol
budget.

DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2010.169 
PMCID: PMC3105731
PMID: 21068775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

