
1. Int J Radiat Biol. 2011 Jan;87(1):8-23. doi: 10.3109/09553002.2010.518203. Epub
2010 Nov 10.

Genetic background and lymphocyte populations after total-body exposure to iron
ion radiation.

Gridley DS(1), Pecaut MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Radiation Research Laboratories, Divisions
of Microbiology & Biochemistry, Loma Linda University and Medical Center, Loma
Linda, California 92354, USA. dgridley@dominion.llumc.edu

PURPOSE: Particle radiations could significantly impact astronaut health during
space missions. This study quantified the effects of iron ion radiation on
lymphocytes in two strains of mice differing in susceptibility to
radiation-induced acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and thymic lymphoma (TL): C57BL/6 
(AML resistant, TL sensitive) and CBA/Ca (AML sensitive, TL resistant).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The animals (n = 60/strain) were irradiated with ⁵⁶Fe(26+)
(1 GeV) to total doses of 0, 0.5, 2 and 3 Gray (Gy) at an average dose rate of 1 
Gy/min and euthanised on days 4 and 30 thereafter; blood, spleen, and bone marrow
were collected for flow cytometry analyses. Cells expressing the following
molecules were quantified: Cluster of differentiation (CD) 4, CD8, CD25, CD34,
CD71, B220 (isoform of CD45 on B cells), NK1.1 (marker on natural killer or NK
cells, C57B mice), panNK (marker on NK cells, CBA mice), and Sca1 (stem cell
antigen 1).
RESULTS: Exposure to radiation resulted in different distribution patterns in
lymphocyte populations and leukocytes expressing activation and progenitor
markers in the two mouse strains. Significant main effects were dependent upon
strain, as well as radiation dose, body compartment, and time of assessment.
Especially striking differences were noted on day 4 after 3 Gy irradiation,
including in the CD4:CD8 ratio [blood, C57 (2.83 ± 0.25) vs. CBA (6.19 ± 0.24);
spleen, C57 (2.29 ± 0.12) vs. CBA (4.98 ± 0.22)], %CD25(+) mononuclear cells in
bone marrow [C57 (5.62 ± 1.19) vs. CBA (12.45 ± 0.93)] and %CD34(+)Sca1(+) cells 
in bone marrow [CD45¹° gate, C57 (2.72 ± 0.74) vs. CBA (21.44 ± 0.73)].
CONCLUSION: The results show that genetic background, as well as radiation dose
and time post-exposure, had a profound impact on lymphocyte populations, as well 
as other leukocytes, after exposure to iron ion radiation.

DOI: 10.3109/09553002.2010.518203 
PMID: 21067301  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

