
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2011 Mar;30(3):307-12. doi:
10.1007/s10096-010-1104-y. Epub 2010 Nov 11.

What to do and what not to do in serological diagnosis of pertussis:
recommendations from EU reference laboratories.

Guiso N(1), Berbers G, Fry NK, He Q, Riffelmann M, Wirsing von König CH; EU
Pertstrain group.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Bordetella pertussis-specific antibodies can be detected by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) or multiplex immunoassays. Assays use purified or
mixed antigens, and only pertussis toxin (PT) is specific for B. pertussis. The
interpretation of results can be based on dual-sample or single-sample serology
using one or two cut-offs. The EU Pertstrain group recommends that: (i) ELISAs
and multiplex immunoassays should use purified non-detoxified PT as an antigen,
that they should have a broad linear range and that they should express results
quantitatively in International Units per millilitre (IU/ml); (ii) a single or
dual diagnostic cut-off for single-serum serology using IgG-anti-PT between 50
and 120 IU/ml should be used, and diagnostic serology cannot be validly
interpreted for one year after vaccination with acellular pertussis (aP)
vaccines; (iii) IgA-anti-PT should only be used with indeterminate IgG-anti-PT
levels or when a second sample cannot be obtained. This group discourages using: 
(i) other antigens in routine diagnostics, as they are not specific; (ii)
micro-agglutination, due to its lack of sensitivity; (iii) immunoblots for
pertussis serodiagnosis, as results cannot be quantified; (iv) other methods,
such as complement fixation or indirect immunofluorescence, due to their low
sensitivity and/or specificity.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-010-1104-y 
PMCID: PMC3034915
PMID: 21069406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

