
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2010 Dec 8;58(23):12366-72. doi: 10.1021/jf102902f. Epub 2010 
Nov 9.

Effect of Aeromonas hydrophila on reductive dechlorination of DDTs by zero-valent
iron.

Cao F(1), Li FB, Liu TX, Huang DY, Wu CY, Feng CH, Li XM.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou
510640, China.

This study presents a reductive transformation method that combines zerovalent
iron (ZVI) and Aeromonas hydrophila HS01 with iron oxide reduction property to
degrade DDT (1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane) under anoxic
conditions. The results suggest that HS01 has weak capability in terms of
reducing DDT to DDD (1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane) and nearly
failed to reduce DDD or its transformed intermediates. The coexistence of ZVI and
HS01 results in a slight enhancement of DDT degradation compared with the ZVI
system alone. The reduction of intermediates by ZVI, however, can be obviously
accelerated in the presence of HS01, and the addition of
anthraquinone-2,6-disulfonic disodium salt (AQDS) can accelerate the
transformation rates further, especially for intermediate reduction. The analysis
of the amount and electrochemical properties of Fe(III)/Fe(II) indicates that the
presence of HS01 with or without AQDS is beneficial to the reduction of Fe(III)
to Fe(II), resulting in the removal of passivating ferric precipitates on the ZVI
surface. A mechanism and pathway that clarify the roles of ZVI, HS01, and AQDS in
the ZVI + HS01 + AQDS system for DDT transformation are proposed. The quick
removal of surface ferric precipitates is thought to be the reason for the
enhancement of the transformation of DDT and its intermediates.

DOI: 10.1021/jf102902f 
PMID: 21062044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

