
1. Immunology. 2011 Mar;132(3):361-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2010.03369.x. Epub
2010 Nov 11.

Engagement of glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins results in enhanced 
mouse and human invariant natural killer T cell responses.

Mannik LA(1), Chin-Yee I, Sharif S, Van Kaer L, Delovitch TL, Haeryfar SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Western Ontario, 
London, ON, Canada.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are a small subset of lymphocytes that
recognize glycolipid antigens in the context of CD1d and consequently produce
large quantities of pro-inflammatory and/or anti-inflammatory cytokines. Several 
transmembrane glycoproteins have been implicated in the co-stimulation of iNKT
cell responses. However, whether glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored
proteins can function in this capacity is not known. Here, we demonstrate that
antibody-mediated cross-linking of the prototype mouse GPI-anchored protein Thy-1
(CD90) on the surface of a double-negative (CD4⁻CD8⁻) iNKT cell line leads to
cytokine production at both the mRNA and protein levels. In addition, Thy-1
triggering enhanced cytokine secretion by iNKT cells that were concomitantly
stimulated with α-galactosylceramide (αGC), consistent with a co-stimulatory role
for Thy-1 in iNKT cell activation. This was also evident when a CD4+ mouse iNKT
cell line or primary hepatic NKT cells were stimulated with αGC and/or anti-Thy-1
antibody. Cross-linking Ly-6A/E, another GPI-anchored protein, could also boost
cytokine secretion by αGC-stimulated iNKT cells, suggesting that the observed
effects reflect a general property of GPI-anchored proteins. To extend these
results from mouse to human cells, we focused on CD55, a GPI-anchored protein
that, unlike Thy-1, is expressed on human iNKT cells. Cross-linking CD55
augmented αGC-induced iNKT cell responses as judged by more vigorous
proliferation and higher CD69 expression. Collectively, these findings
demonstrate for the first time that GPI-anchored proteins are able to
co-stimulate CD1d-restricted, glycolipid-reactive iNKT cells in both mice and
humans.

© 2010 The Authors. Immunology © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2010.03369.x 
PMCID: PMC3044902
PMID: 21070234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

