
1. Blood. 2011 Jan 27;117(4):1250-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-303339. Epub 2010
Nov 17.

Human MAIT cells are xenobiotic-resistant, tissue-targeted, CD161hi
IL-17-secreting T cells.

Dusseaux M(1), Martin E, Serriari N, Péguillet I, Premel V, Louis D, Milder M, Le
Bourhis L, Soudais C, Treiner E, Lantz O.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie des Tumeurs, Institut Curie, 26 rue d'Ulm, Paris,
France.

Mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells are very abundant in humans and have 
antimicrobial specificity, but their functions remain unclear. MAIT cells are
CD161(hi)IL-18Rα(+) and either CD4(-)CD8(-) (DN) or CD8αβ(int) T cells. We now
show that they display an effector-memory phenotype
(CD45RA(-)CD45RO(+)CD95(hi)CD62L(lo)), and their chemokine receptor expression
pattern (CCR9(int)CCR7(-)CCR5(hi)CXCR6(hi)CCR6(hi)) indicates preferential homing
to tissues and particularly the intestine and the liver. MAIT cells can represent
up to 45% of the liver lymphocytes. They produce interferon-γ and Granzyme-B as
well as high levels of interleukin-17 after phorbol myristate acetate + ionomycin
stimulation. Most MAIT cells are noncycling cells (< 1% are Ki-67(+)) and express
the multidrug resistance transporter (ABCB1). As expected from this phenotype,
MAIT cells are more resistant to chemotherapy than other T-cell populations.
These features might also allow MAIT cells to resist the xenobiotics potentially 
secreted by the gut bacteria. We also show that this population does not appear
to have antiviral specificity and that CD8 MAIT cells include almost all the
ABCB1(+)CD161(hi) CD8 T cells. Together with their already known abundance and
antimicrobial specificity, the gut-liver homing characteristics, high expression 
of ABCB1, and ability to secrete interleukin-17 probably participate in the
antibacterial properties of MAIT cells.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-303339 
PMID: 21084709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

