
1. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 1;186(1):489-98. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002639. Epub 2010 Nov
22.

Nonconventional CD8+ T cell responses to Listeria infection in mice lacking MHC
class Ia and H2-M3.

Cho H(1), Choi HJ, Xu H, Felio K, Wang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University, Chicago,
IL 60611, USA.

CD8(+) T cells restricted to MHC class Ib molecules other than H2-M3 have been
shown to recognize bacterial Ags. However, the contribution of these T cells to
immune responses against bacterial infection is not well defined. To investigate 
the immune potential of MHC class Ib-restricted CD8(+) T cells, we have generated
mice that lack both MHC class Ia and H2-M3 molecules (K(b-/-)D (b-/-)M3(-/-)).
The CD8(+) T cells present in K(b-/-)D (b-/-)M3(-/-) mice display an activated
surface phenotype and are able to secrete IFN-γ rapidly upon anti-CD3 and
anti-CD28 stimulation. Although the CD8(+) T cell population is reduced in
K(b-/-)D (b-/-)M3(-/-) mice compared with that in K(b-/-)D (b-/-) mice, this
population retains the capacity to expand significantly in response to primary
infection with the bacteria Listeria monocytogenes. However, K(b-/-)D
(b-/-)M3(-/-) CD8(+) T cells do not expand upon secondary infection, similar to
what has been observed for H2-M3-restricted T cells. CD8(+) T cells isolated from
Listeria-infected K(b-/-)D (b-/-)M3(-/-) mice exhibit cytotoxicity and secrete
proinflammatory cytokines in response to Listeria-infected APCs. These T cells
are protective against primary Listeria infection, as Listeria-infected K(b-/-)D 
(b-/-)M3(-/-) mice exhibit reduced bacterial burden compared with that of
infected β(2)-microglobulin-deficient mice that lack MHC class Ib-restricted
CD8(+) T cells altogether. In addition, adoptive transfer of Listeria-experienced
K(b-/-)D (b-/-)M3(-/-) splenocytes protects recipient mice against subsequent
Listeria infection in a CD8(+) T cell-dependent manner. These data demonstrate
that other MHC class Ib-restricted CD8(+) T cells, in addition to
H2-M3-restricted T cells, contribute to antilisterial immunity and may contribute
to immune responses against other intracellular bacteria.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002639 
PMCID: PMC3068915
PMID: 21098224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

