
1. Med Mycol. 2011 Jul;49(5):458-66. doi: 10.3109/13693786.2010.535031. Epub 2010
Nov 22.

Disruption of sphingolipid biosynthetic gene IPT1 reduces Candida albicans
adhesion and prevents activation of human gingival epithelial cell innate immune 
defense.

Rouabhia M(1), Mukherjee PK, Lattif AA, Curt S, Chandra J, Ghannoum MA.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Recherche en Écologie Buccale, Faculté de Médecine Dentaire,
Université Laval, Québec City, Québec, Canada. mahmoud.rouabhia@fmd.ulaval.ca

We demonstrated the effect of a Candida albicans sphingolipid biosynthetic gene, 
IPT1, on the interaction between gingival epithelial and Candida cells using
monolayer cultures and engineered human oral mucosa tissue (EHOM). Disrupting the
IPT1 gene greatly reduced Candida adhesion to gingival epithelial cells, compared
to the wild-type and revertant strains. The yeasts adhesion to epithelial cells
may activate toll-like receptors (TLRs). Cell response against Candida infection 
was thus investigated by evaluating TLR expression and antimicrobial peptide
(AMP) production. The wild-type and revertant strains both activated TLR2, TLR4, 
TLR6, and TLR9 gene expression in the epithelial cells, whereas the Δipt1 mutant 
Candida strain had no effect on this expression. This finding was supported by an
increased AMP expression (human β-defensin HBD-2 and HBD-3) in the EHOM tissue
infected with the wild-type and revertant Candida strains, and a decreased
expression in the Δipt1 mutant-infected model. HBD protein secretion confirmed
the absence of any effect by the Δipt1 on epithelial cell innate defense. This is
the first study to demonstrate that a disruption of the IPT1 gene affects
Candida-host interaction, thus preventing TLR activation and β-defensin
expression.

DOI: 10.3109/13693786.2010.535031 
PMID: 21091155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

