
1. RNA. 2011 Jan;17(1):145-54. doi: 10.1261/rna.2459611. Epub 2010 Nov 22.

DEAH-box ATPase Prp16 has dual roles in remodeling of the spliceosome in
catalytic steps.

Tseng CK(1), Liu HL, Cheng SC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan 112, Republic of China.

The assembly of the spliceosome involves dynamic rearrangements of interactions
between snRNAs, protein components, and the pre-mRNA substrate. DExD/H-box
ATPases are required to mediate structural changes of the spliceosome, utilizing 
the energy of ATP hydrolysis. Two DExD/H-box ATPases are required for the
catalytic steps of the splicing pathway, Prp2 for the first step and Prp16 for
the second step, both belonging to the DEAH subgroup of the protein family. The
detailed mechanism of their action was not well understood until recently, when
Prp2 was shown to be required for the release of U2 components SF3a and SF3b,
presumably to allow the binding of Cwc25 to promote the first transesterification
reaction. We show here that Cwc25 and Yju2 are released after the reaction in
Prp16- and ATP-dependent manners, possibly to allow for the binding of Prp22,
Prp18, and Slu7 to promote the second catalytic reaction. The binding of Cwc25 to
the spliceosome is destabilized by mutations at the branchpoint sequence,
suggesting that Cwc25 may bind to the branch site. We also show that Prp16 has an
ATP-independent role in the first catalytic step, in addition to its known role
in the second step. In the absence of ATP, Prp16 stabilizes the binding of Cwc25 
to the spliceosome formed with branchpoint mutated pre-mRNAs to facilitate their 
splicing. Our results uncovered novel functions of Prp16 in both catalytic steps,
and provide mechanistic insights into splicing catalysis.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.2459611 
PMCID: PMC3004056
PMID: 21098140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

