
1. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2010;2010:3739-42. doi:
10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5627499.

Self-assembly and recrystallization of bacterial S-layer proteins of Bacillus
sphaericus and Bacillus thuringiensis on silicone, mica and quartz crystal
supports.

Habibi N(1), Caneva Soumetz F, Giulianelli M, Pastorino L, Herrera O, Sbrana F,
Raiteri R, Ruggiero C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Communication, Computer and System Sciences, Nanobiotechnology
and Medical Informatics Laboratory, University of Genova, Italy.

The Oriented architecture of macromolecules plays a critical role in many aspects
of Nanobiotechnology such as in the development of biosensors. To this regard,
S-layers which constitute the outermost cell envelope component of many
prokaryotic organisms, represent unique self assembled systems with the
capability to rearrange into monomolecular and oriented arrays. These properties 
can be exploited to promote their crystallization on surfaces (e.g. silicone)
which is pivotal for the subsequent immobilization of macromolecules and
development of new biosensors. In this work the crystallization of bacterial
S-layers obtained from Bacillus thuringiensis and Bacillus sphaericus CCM2177 on 
silicone, mica and quartz crystal surfaces were investigated. The SDS page
results of S-layers isolated from the above mentioned bacteria put in evidence
that their molecular weight (MW) was around 120 KDa and, as reported in the
literature, slightly higher for those extracted by Bacillus thuringiensis. In
addition, results showed that S-layers isolated from Bacillus thuringiensis form 
large crystalline domains on mica after 5 min whereas those extracted from
Bacillus sphaericus CCM 2177 form a compact monolayer on silicone after 2 h.
Results in this work put in evidence the possibility to use these substrates for 
the fabrication of sensitive biosensors.

DOI: 10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5627499 
PMID: 21096866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

