
1. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 1;186(1):183-94. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001737. Epub 2010 Nov
22.

A marked reduction in priming of cytotoxic CD8+ T cells mediated by
stress-induced glucocorticoids involves multiple deficiencies in
cross-presentation by dendritic cells.

Hunzeker JT(1), Elftman MD, Mellinger JC, Princiotta MF, Bonneau RH,
Truckenmiller ME, Norbury CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, Pennsylvania
State University, Hershey, PA 17033, USA.

Protracted psychological stress elevates circulating glucocorticoids, which can
suppress CD8(+) T cell-mediated immunity, but the mechanisms are incompletely
understood. Dendritic cells (DCs), required for initiating CTL responses, are
vulnerable to stress/corticosterone, which can contribute to diminished CTL
responses. Cross-priming of CD8(+) T cells by DCs is required for initiating CTL 
responses against many intracellular pathogens that do not infect DCs. We
examined the effects of stress/corticosterone on MHC class I (MHC I)
cross-presentation and priming and show that stress/corticosterone-exposed DCs
have a reduced ability to cross-present OVA and activate MHC
I-OVA(257-264)-specific T cells. Using a murine model of psychological stress and
OVA-loaded β(2)-microglobulin knockout "donor" cells that cannot present Ag, DCs 
from stressed mice induced markedly less Ag-specific CTL proliferation in a
glucocorticoid receptor-dependent manner, and endogenous in vivo T cell cytolytic
activity generated by cross-presented Ag was greatly diminished. These deficits
in cross-presentation/priming were not due to altered Ag donation, Ag uptake
(phagocytosis, receptor-mediated endocytosis, or fluid-phase uptake), or
costimulatory molecule expression by DCs. However, proteasome activity in
corticosterone-treated DCs or splenic DCs from stressed mice was partially
suppressed, which limits formation of antigenic peptide-MHC I complexes. In
addition, the lymphoid tissue-resident CD11b(-)CD24(+)CD8α(+) DC subset, which
carries out cross-presentation/priming, was preferentially depleted in stressed
mice. At the same time, CD11b(-)CD24(+)CD8α(-) DC precursors were increased,
suggesting a block in development of CD8α(+) DCs. Therefore,
glucocorticoid-induced changes in both the cellular composition of the immune
system and intracellular protein degradation contribute to impaired CTL priming
in stressed mice.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001737 
PMCID: PMC3701459
PMID: 21098225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

