
1. Cytokine. 2011 Feb;53(2):130-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2010.10.009. Epub 2010 Nov
23.

Glycogen synthase kinase 3: a point of convergence for the host inflammatory
response.

Wang H(1), Brown J, Martin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Louisville School of 
Medicine, Louisville, KY 40202, United States.

The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway has been shown to play a central
role in regulating the host inflammatory response. Recent studies characterizing 
the downstream effector molecules within the PI3K pathway have identified that
the serine/threonine kinase, glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), plays a pivotal
role in regulating the production of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines. In
innate immune cells, GSK3 inactivation augments anti-inflammatory cytokine
production while concurrently suppressing the production of pro-inflammatory
cytokines. The role of GSK3 in T cell biology has also been studied in detail and
is involved in regulating multiple downstream signaling processes mediated by the
T cell receptor (TCR), the co-stimulatory molecule CD28, and the IL-17 receptor. 
In vivo studies assessing the therapeutic properties of GSK3 inhibitors have
shown that the inactivation of GSK3 can protect the host from immune-mediated
pathology and death. This review will highlight the immunological importance GSK3
plays within different signal transduction pathways of the immune system, the
cellular mechanisms regulating the activity of GSK3, the role of GSK3 in innate
and adaptive immune responses, and the in vivo use of GSK3 inhibitors to treat
inflammatory mediated diseases in animals.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2010.10.009 
PMCID: PMC3021641
PMID: 21095632  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

