
1. J Immune Based Ther Vaccines. 2010 Nov 24;8:8. doi: 10.1186/1476-8518-8-8.

Ex vivo development, expansion and in vivo analysis of a novel lineage of
dendritic cells from hematopoietic stem cells.

Han S(1), Wang Y, Wang B, Patel E, Okada S, Yang LJ, Moreb JS, Chang LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, 32610 USA. lchang@mgm.ufl.edu.

Dendritic cells (DCs) play a key role in innate and adaptive immunity but the
access to sufficient amount of DCs for basic and translational research has been 
limited.We established a novel ex vivo system to develop and expand DCs from
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HPCs). Both human and mouse HPCs were
expanded first in feeder culture supplemented with c-Kit ligand (KL, stem cell
factor, steel factor or CD117 ligand), Flt3 ligand (fms-like tyrosine kinase 3,
Flt3L, FL), thrombopoietin (TPO), IL-3, IL-6, and basic fibroblast growth factor 
(bFGF), and then in a second feeder culture ectopically expressing all above
growth factors plus GM-CSF and IL-15.In the dual culture system, CD34+ HPCs
differentiated toward DC progenitors (DCPs), which expanded more than five orders
of magnitude. The DCPs showed myeloid DC surface phenotype with up-regulation of 
transcription factors PU.1 and Id2, and DC-related factors homeostatic chemokine 
ligand 17 (CCL17) and beta-chemokine receptor 6 (CCR6). Multiplex ELISA array and
cDNA microarray analyses revealed that the DCPs shared some features of IL-4 and 
IL-15 DCs but displayed a pronounced proinflammatory phenotype. DCP-derived DCs
showed antigen-uptake and immune activation functions analogous to that of the
peripheral blood-derived DCs. Furthermore, bone marrow HPC-derived DCP vaccines
of tumor-bearing mice suppressed tumor growth in vivo.This novel approach of
generating DCP-DCs, which are different from known IL-4 and IL-15 DCs, overcomes 
both quantitative and qualitative limitations in obtaining functional autologous 
DCs from a small number of HPCs with great translational potential.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-8518-8-8 
PMCID: PMC3004889
PMID: 21106069 

