
1. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 23;5(11):e13804. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013804.

IL-17A/F-signaling does not contribute to the initial phase of mucosal
inflammation triggered by S. Typhimurium.

Songhet P(1), Barthel M, Röhn TA, Van Maele L, Cayet D, Sirard JC, Bachmann M,
Kopf M, Hardt WD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, D-BIOL, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.

Salmonella enterica subspecies 1 serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) causes
diarrhea and acute inflammation of the intestinal mucosa. The pro-inflammatory
cytokines IL-17A and IL-17F are strongly induced in the infected mucosa but their
contribution in driving the tissue inflammation is not understood. We have used
the streptomycin mouse model to analyze the role of IL-17A and IL-17F and their
cognate receptor IL-17RA in S. Typhimurium enterocolitis. Neutralization of
IL-17A and IL-17F did not affect mucosal inflammation triggered by infection or
spread of S. Typhimurium to systemic sites by 48 h p.i. Similarly, Il17ra(-/-)
mice did not display any reduction in infection or inflammation by 12 h p.i. The 
same results were obtained using S. Typhimurium variants infecting via the TTSS1 
type III secretion system, the TTSS1 effector SipA or the TTSS1 effector SopE.
Moreover, the expression pattern of 45 genes encoding chemokines/cytokines
(including CXCL1, CXCL2, IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-1α, IL-1β, IFNγ, CXCL-10, CXCL-9,
IL-6, CCL3, CCL4) and antibacterial molecules was not affected by Il17ra
deficiency by 12 h p.i. Thus, in spite of the strong increase in Il17a/Il17f mRNA
in the infected mucosa, IL-17RA signaling seems to be dispensable for eliciting
the acute disease. Future work will have to address whether this is attributable 
to redundancy in the cytokine signaling network.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013804 
PMCID: PMC2990720
PMID: 21124903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

