
1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 Aug;45(2):393-402. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2010-0342OC.
Epub 2010 Dec 3.

Novel regulators of the systemic response to lipopolysaccharide.

Yang IV(1), Alper S, Lackford B, Rutledge H, Warg LA, Burch LH, Schwartz DA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genes, Environment and Health, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO
80206, USA. yangi@njhealth.org

Our understanding of the role that host genetic factors play in the initiation
and severity of infections caused by gram-negative bacteria is incomplete. To
identify novel regulators of the host response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 11
inbred murine strains were challenged with LPS systemically. In addition to two
strains lacking functional TLR4 (C3H/HeJ and C57BL/6J(TLR4-/-)), three murine
strains with functional TLR4 (C57BL/6J, 129/SvImJ, and NZW/LacJ) were found to be
relatively resistant to systemic LPS challenge; the other six strains were
classified as sensitive. RNA from lung, liver, and spleen tissue was profiled on 
oligonucleotide microarrays to determine if unique transcripts differentiate
susceptible and resistant strains. Gene expression analysis identified the
Hedgehog signaling pathway and a number of transcription factors (TFs) involved
in the response to LPS. RNA interference-mediated inhibition of six TFs (C/EBP,
Cdx-2, E2F1, Hoxa4, Nhlh1, and Tead2) was found to diminish IL-6 and TNF-Î±
production by murine macrophages. Mouse lines with targeted mutations were used
to verify the involvement of two novel genes in innate immunity. Compared with
wild-type control mice, mice deficient in the E2F1 transcription factor were
found to have a reduced inflammatory response to systemic LPS, and mice
heterozygote for Ptch, a gene involved in Hedgehog signaling, were found to be
more responsive to systemic LPS. Our analysis of gene expression data identified 
novel pathways and transcription factors that regulate the host response to
systemic LPS. Our results provide potential sepsis biomarkers and therapeutic
targets that should be further investigated in human populations.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2010-0342OC 
PMCID: PMC3175565
PMID: 21131441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

