
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 11;286(6):4236-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.200964. Epub 2010 
Dec 3.

Aberrant corepressor interactions implicated in PML-RAR(alpha) and
PLZF-RAR(alpha) leukemogenesis reflect an altered recruitment and release of
specific NCoR and SMRT splice variants.

Mengeling BJ(1), Phan TQ, Goodson ML, Privalsky ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Biological Sciences, University of
California at Davis, Davis, California 95616, USA.

Human acute promyelocytic leukemia is causally linked to chromosomal
translocations that generate chimeric retinoic acid receptor-α proteins (x-RARα
fusions). Wild-type RARα is a transcription factor that binds to the SMRT/NCoR
family of corepressors in the absence of hormone but releases from corepressor
and binds coactivators in response to retinoic acid. In contrast, the x-RARα
fusions are impaired for corepressor release and operate in acute promyelocytic
leukemia as dominant-negative inhibitors of wild-type RARα. We report that the
two most common x-RARα fusions, PML-RARα and PLZF-RARα, have gained the ability
to recognize specific splice variants of SMRT and NCoR that are poorly recognized
by RARα. These differences in corepressor specificity between the normal and
oncogenic receptors are further magnified in the presence of a retinoid X
receptor heteromeric partner. The ability of retinoids to fully release
corepressor from PML-RARα differs for the different splice variants, a phenomenon
relevant to the requirement for supraphysiological levels of this hormone in
differentiation therapy of leukemic cells. We propose that this shift in the
specificity of the x-RARα fusions to a novel repertoire of corepressors
contributes to the dominant-negative and oncogenic properties of these
oncoproteins and helps explain previously paradoxical aspects of their behavior.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.200964 
PMCID: PMC3039402
PMID: 21131350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

