
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2011 Feb;49(2):549-56. doi: 10.1128/JCM.02071-10. Epub 2010 Dec
8.

Candida palmioleophila: characterization of a previously overlooked pathogen and 
its unique susceptibility profile in comparison with five related species.

Jensen RH(1), Arendrup MC.

Author information: 
(1)Mycology Division, Department for Microbiological Surveillance and Research,
Statens Serum Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Candida palmioleophila has previously been misidentified as C. famata or C.
guilliermondii. We have investigated traditional and modern identification
methods for the identification of this and related species. Forty-one clinical
isolates previously identified as C. famata or C. guilliermondii and 8 reference 
strains were included. Color development on CHROMagar, growth temperature ranges,
micromorphologies, carbon assimilation (ID32C), matrix-assisted laser desorption 
ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) profiles, and
susceptibility profiles (mica- and anidulafungin and itra-, vori-, posa-, and
fluconazole MICs were determined by EUCAST method EDef 7.1, and caspofungin MICs 
were determined by Etest) were determined, and results were compared to those of 
molecular identification (ITS1 and ITS2 sequencing). The following five different
species were identified among the clinical isolates by sequencing, but no C.
famata isolates were found: C. guilliermondii (22 isolates), C. palmioleophila (8
isolates), C. fermentati (6 isolates), C. lusitaniae (3 isolates), and C.
intermedia (2 isolates). C. palmioleophila developed a distinct scintillating
color of turquoise to rose, grew at 40°C, and failed to produce pseudohyphae
within 14 days. The ID32C profile for 7/9 C. palmioleophila isolates was
5367352315, and all were unable to hydrolyze esculin (Esc). The six related
species were well discriminated by MALDI-TOF MS. The susceptibility pattern for
C. palmioleophila was unique, as the echinocandin MICs were low (range, 0.008 to 
0.125 μg/ml) and fluconazole MICs were high (range, 8 to >16 μg/ml). Correct
identification of C. palmioleophila is important due to its unique susceptibility
profile. Identification is possible yet laborious with conventional techniques,
whereas MALDI-TOF MS easily separated the related species.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.02071-10 
PMCID: PMC3043495
PMID: 21147953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

