
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2011 Feb;28(4):517-33.

A novel OmpY porin from Yersinia pseudotuberculosis: structure, channel-forming
activity and trimer thermal stability.

Solov'eva TF(1), Likhatskaya GN, Khomenko VA, Stenkova AM, Kim NY, Portnyagina
OY, Novikova OD, Trifonov EV, Nurminski EA, Isaeva MP.

Author information: 
(1)Pacific Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry FEBRAS, prospect 100-let
Vladivostoku 159, Vladivostok 690022, Russia.

A novel OmpY porin was predicted based on the Yersinia pseudotuberculosis genome 
analysis. Whereas it has the different genomic annotation such as "outer membrane
protein N" (ABS46310.1) in str. IP 31758 or "outer membrane protein C2, porin"
(YP_070481.1) in str. IP32953, it might be warranted to rename the OmpN/OmpC2 to 
OmpY, "outer membrane protein Y", where letter "Y" pertained to Yersinia. Both
phylogenetic analysis and genomic localization clearly support that the OmpY
porin belongs to a new group of general bacterial porins. The recombinant OmpY
protein with its signal sequence was overexpressed in porin-deficient Escherichia
coli strain. The mature rOmpY was shown to insert into outer membrane as a
trimer. The OmpY porin, isolated from the outer membrane, was studied employing
spectroscopic, electrophoretic and bilayer lipid membranes techniques. The far UV
CD spectrum of rOmpY was essentially identical to that of Y. pseudotuberculosis
OmpF. The near UV CD spectrum of rOmpY was weaker and smoother than that of OmpF.
The rOmpY single-channel conductance was 180 ± 20 pS in 0.1 M NaCl and was lower 
than that of the OmpF porin. As was shown by electrophoretic and bilayer lipid
membrane experiments, the rOmpY trimers were less thermostable than the OmpF
trimers. The porins differed in the trimer-monomer transition temperature by
about 20°C. The three-dimensional structural models of the Y. pseudotuberculosis 
OmpY and OmpF trimers were generated and the intra- and intermonomeric
interactions stabilizing the porins were investigated. The difference in the
thermal stability of OmpY and OmpF trimers was established to correlate with the 
difference in intermonomeric polar contacts.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2011.10508592 
PMID: 21142221  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

