
1. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 15;186(2):878-90. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002269. Epub 2010
Dec 13.

TLR-2-activated B cells suppress Helicobacter-induced preneoplastic gastric
immunopathology by inducing T regulatory-1 cells.

Sayi A(1), Kohler E, Toller IM, Flavell RA, M端ller W, Roers A, M端ller A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Z端rich, Z端rich 8057,
Switzerland.

B cells regulate autoimmune pathologies and chronic inflammatory conditions such 
as autoimmune encephalomyelitis and inflammatory bowel disease. The potential
counterregulatory role of B cells in balancing pathogen-specific immune responses
and the associated immunopathology is less well understood owing to the lack of
appropriate persistent infection models. In this paper, we show that B cells have
the ability to negatively regulate adaptive immune responses to bacterial
pathogens. Using mouse models of infection with Helicobacter felis, a close
relative of the human gastrointestinal pathogen H. pylori, we found that B cells 
activated by Helicobacter TLR-2 ligands induce IL-10-producing CD4(+)CD25(+) T
regulatory-1 (Tr-1)-like cells in vitro and in vivo. Tr-1 conversion depends on
TCR signaling and a direct T-/B-interaction through CD40/CD40L and CD80/CD28. B
cell-induced Tr-1 cells acquire suppressive activity in vitro and suppress
excessive gastric Helicobacter-associated immunopathology in vivo. Adoptive
cotransfer of MyD88-proficient B cells and Tr-1 cells restores a normal gastric
mucosal architecture in MyD88(-/-) and IL-10(-/-) mice in a manner that depends
on T cellular, but not B cellular, IL-10 production. Our findings describe a
novel mechanism of B cell-dependent Tr-1 cell generation and function in a
clinically relevant disease model. In conclusion, we demonstrate that the B
cell/Tr-1 cell axis is essential for balancing the control of Helicobacter
infection with the prevention of excessive Th1-driven gastric immunopathology,
promoting gastric mucosal homeostasis on the one hand and facilitating
Helicobacter persistence on the other.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002269 
PMID: 21149607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

