
1. Blood. 2011 Feb 10;117(6):1880-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-09-309468. Epub 2010
Dec 10.

Differential requirements for the Ets transcription factor Elf-1 in the
development of NKT cells and NK cells.

Choi HJ(1), Geng Y, Cho H, Li S, Giri PK, Felio K, Wang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University, Chicago,
IL 60611, USA.

E26 Transformation specific (Ets) family transcription factors control the
expression of a large number of genes regulating hematopoietic cell development
and function. Two such transcription factors, Ets-1 and myeloid Elf-1-like factor
(MEF), have been shown to play critical roles in both natural killer (NK)- and
NKT-cell development, but not in the development of conventional T cells. In this
study, we address the role of E74-like factor 1 (Elf-1), another Ets family
transcription factor that is closely related to MEF but divergent from Ets-1, in 
NK- and NKT-cell development using Elf-1-deficient (Elf-1(-/-)) mice. Whereas the
proportion of NK cells in Elf-1(-/-) mice was normal, the proportion of NKT cells
was significantly reduced in the thymus and periphery of Elf-1(-/-) mice compared
with wild-type (WT) mice. Although Ets-1-deficient mice lack NKT cells
altogether, Elf-1(-/-) mice exhibited only a partial block in NKT-cell
development caused by a cell-intrinsic defect in the selection, survival, and
maturation of NKT cells. In addition, residual NKT cells found in Elf-1(-/-) mice
produced less cytokine upon antigen stimulation compared with WT NKT cells. Our
data demonstrate that Elf-1 plays an important and nonredundant role in the
development and function of NKT cells, but is not involved in NK-cell
development.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-09-309468 
PMCID: PMC3056637
PMID: 21148815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

