
1. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2011 Apr;24(4):361-72. doi: 10.1093/protein/gzq113. Epub
2010 Dec 14.

Identification and engineering of human variable regions that allow expression of
stable single-chain T cell receptors.

Aggen DH(1), Chervin AS, Insaidoo FK, Piepenbrink KH, Baker BM, Kranz DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 600 S.
Mathews Ave., Urbana, IL, 61801, USA.

Single-chain antibody fragments (scFv), consisting of two linked variable regions
(V(H) and V(L)), are a versatile format for engineering and as potential
antigen-specific therapeutics. Although the analogous format for T cell receptors
(TCRs), consisting of two linked V regions (Vα and Vβ; referred to here as scTv),
could provide similar opportunities, all wild-type scTv proteins examined to date
are unstable. This obstacle has prevented scTv fragments from being widely used
for engineering or therapeutics. To further explore whether some stable human
scTv fragments could be expressed, we used a yeast system in which display of
properly folded domains correlates with ability to express the folded scTv in
soluble form. We discovered that, unexpectedly, scTv fragments that contained the
human Vα2 region (IMGT: TRAV12 family) were displayed and properly associated
with different Vβ regions. Furthermore, a single polymorphic residue (Ser(α49))
in the framework region conferred additional thermal stability. These stabilized 
Vα2-containing scTv fragments could be expressed at high levels in Escherichia
coli, and used to stain target cells that expressed the specific pep-HLA-A2
complexes. Thus, the scTv fragments can serve as a platform for engineering TCRs 
with diverse specificities, and possibly for therapeutic or diagnostic
applications.

DOI: 10.1093/protein/gzq113 
PMCID: PMC3049343
PMID: 21159619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

