
1. J Mol Biol. 2011 Feb 18;406(2):257-74. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.11.042. Epub 2010 
Dec 17.

The human mitochondrial tRNAMet: structure/function relationship of a unique
modification in the decoding of unconventional codons.

Bilbille Y(1), Gustilo EM, Harris KA, Jones CN, Lusic H, Kaiser RJ, Delaney MO,
Spremulli LL, Deiters A, Agris PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA.

Human mitochondrial mRNAs utilize the universal AUG and the unconventional
isoleucine AUA codons for methionine. In contrast to translation in the
cytoplasm, human mitochondria use one tRNA, hmtRNA(Met)(CAU), to read AUG and AUA
codons at both the peptidyl- (P-), and aminoacyl- (A-) sites of the ribosome. The
hmtRNA(Met)(CAU) has a unique post-transcriptional modification,
5-formylcytidine, at the wobble position 34 (f(5)C(34)), and a cytidine
substituting for the invariant uridine at position 33 of the canonical U-turn in 
tRNAs. The structure of the tRNA anticodon stem and loop domain
(hmtASL(Met)(CAU)), determined by NMR restrained molecular modeling, revealed how
the f(5)C(34) modification facilitates the decoding of AUA at the P- and the
A-sites. The f(5)C(34) defined a reduced conformational space for the nucleoside,
in what appears to have restricted the conformational dynamics of the anticodon
bases of the modified hmtASL(Met)(CAU). The hmtASL(Met)(CAU) exhibited a C-turn
conformation that has some characteristics of the U-turn motif. Codon binding
studies with both Escherichia coli and bovine mitochondrial ribosomes revealed
that the f(5)C(34) facilitates AUA binding in the A-site and suggested that the
modification favorably alters the ASL binding kinetics. Mitochondrial translation
by many organisms, including humans, sometimes initiates with the universal
isoleucine codons AUU and AUC. The f(5)C(34) enabled P-site codon binding to
these normally isoleucine codons. Thus, the physicochemical properties of this
one modification, f(5)C(34), expand codon recognition from the traditional AUG to
the non-traditional, synonymous codons AUU and AUC as well as AUA, in the
reassignment of universal codons in the mitochondria.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.11.042 
PMCID: PMC3662834
PMID: 21168417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

