
1. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 15;186(2):1068-80. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002212. Epub 2010
Dec 17.

Genome-based in silico identification of new Mycobacterium tuberculosis antigens 
activating polyfunctional CD8+ T cells in human tuberculosis.

Tang ST(1), van Meijgaarden KE, Caccamo N, Guggino G, Klein MR, van Weeren P,
Kazi F, Stryhn A, Zaigler A, Sahin U, Buus S, Dieli F, Lund O, Ottenhoff TH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Technical University of Denmark, 2800
Lyngby, Denmark.

Although CD8(+) T cells help control Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, their 
M. tuberculosis Ag repertoire, in vivo frequency, and functionality in human
tuberculosis (TB) remains largely undefined. We have performed genome-based
bioinformatics searches to identify new M. tuberculosis epitopes presented by
major HLA class I supertypes A2, A3, and B7 (covering 80% of the human
population). A total of 432 M. tuberculosis peptides predicted to bind to
HLA-A*0201, HLA-A*0301, and HLA-B*0702 (representing the above supertypes) were
synthesized and HLA-binding affinities determined. Peptide-specific CD8(+) T cell
proliferation assays (CFSE dilution) in 41 M. tuberculosis-responsive donors
identified 70 new M. tuberculosis epitopes. Using HLA/peptide tetramers for the
18 most prominently recognized HLA-A*0201-binding M. tuberculosis peptides,
recognition by cured TB patients' CD8(+) T cells was validated for all 18
epitopes. Intracellular cytokine staining for IFN-γ, IL-2, and TNF-α revealed
mono-, dual-, as well as triple-positive CD8(+) T cells, indicating these M.
tuberculosis peptide-specific CD8(+) T cells were (poly)functional. Moreover,
these T cells were primed during natural infection, because they were absent from
M. tuberculosis-noninfected individuals. Control CMV peptide/HLA-A*0201 tetramers
stained CD8(+) T cells in M. tuberculosis-infected and noninfected individuals
equally, whereas Ebola peptide/HLA-A*0201 tetramers were negative. In conclusion,
the M. tuberculosis-epitope/Ag repertoire for human CD8(+) T cells is much
broader than hitherto suspected, and the newly identified M. tuberculosis Ags are
recognized by (poly)functional CD8(+) T cells during control of infection. These 
results impact on TB-vaccine design and biomarker identification.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002212 
PMID: 21169544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

