
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jan 4;108(1):266-71. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1016791108.
Epub 2010 Dec 20.

Single dose of anti-CTLA-4 enhances CD8+ T-cell memory formation, function, and
maintenance.

Pedicord VA(1), Montalvo W, Leiner IM, Allison JP.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Immunology, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.

CTLA-4, an Ig superfamily molecule with homology to CD28, is one of the most
potent negative regulators of T-cell responses. In vivo blockade of CTLA-4
exacerbates autoimmunity, enhances tumor-specific T-cell responses, and may
inhibit the induction of T-cell anergy. Clinical trials of CTLA-4-blocking
antibodies to augment T-cell responses to malignant melanoma are at an advanced
stage; however, little is known about the effects of CTLA-4 blockade on memory
CD8(+) T-cell responses and the formation and maintenance of long-term CD8(+)
T-cell memory. In our studies, we show that during in vivo memory CD8(+) T-cell
responses to Listeria monocytogenes infection, CTLA-4 blockade enhances bacterial
clearance and increases memory CD8(+) T-cell expansion. This is followed by an
accumulation of memory cells that are capable of producing the effector cytokines
IFN-γ and TNF-α. We also demonstrate that in a vaccination setting, blocking
CTLA-4 during CD8(+) T-cell priming leads to increased expansion and maintenance 
of antigen-specific memory CD8(+) T cells without adversely affecting the overall
T-cell repertoire. This leads to an increase in memory cell effector function and
improved protective immunity against further bacterial challenges. These results 
indicate that transient blockade of CTLA-4 enhances memory CD8(+) T-cell
responses and support the possible use of CTLA-4-blocking antibodies during
vaccination to augment memory formation and maintenance.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1016791108 
PMCID: PMC3017182
PMID: 21173239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

