
1. BMC Immunol. 2010 Dec 22;11:63. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-11-63.

Bifidobacterium animalis AHC7 protects against pathogen-induced NF-κB activation 
in vivo.

O'Mahony D(1), Murphy S, Boileau T, Park J, O'Brien F, Groeger D, Konieczna P,
Ziegler M, Scully P, Shanahan F, Kiely B, O'Mahony L.

Author information: 
(1)Alimentary Health Ltd., National University of Ireland, Cork, Ireland.
liam.omahony@siaf.uzh.ch

BACKGROUND: Bifidobacteria and lactobacilli are among the early and important
colonizers of the gastrointestinal tract and are generally considered to be part 
of a normal, healthy microbiota. It is believed that specific strains within the 
microbiota can influence host immune-reactivity and may play a role in protection
from infection and aberrant inflammatory activity. One such strain,
Bifidobacterium animalis AHC7, has been previously shown to protect against
Salmonella typhimurium infection in mice and helps resolve acute idiopathic
diarrhea in dogs. The aim of this study was to investigate the potential
molecular and cellular mechanisms underpinning the Bifidobacterium animalis AHC7 
protective effect.
RESULTS: Following 4 hours of infection with Salmonella typhimurium, NF-κB
activation was significantly elevated in vivo in placebo and Enterococcus
faecium-fed animals while Bifidobacterium animalis AHC7 consumption significantly
attenuated the NF-κB response. In vitro anti-CD3/CD28 stimulated Peyer's patch
cells secreted significantly less TNF-α and IFN-γ following Bifidobacterium
animalis AHC7 consumption. Stimulated cells released more IL-12p70 but this
difference did not reach statistical significance. No alteration in mucosal IL-6,
IL-10 or MCP-1 levels were observed. No statistically significant change in the
cytokine profile of mesenteric lymph node cells was noted. In vitro,
Bifidobacterium animalis AHC7 was bound by dendritic cells and induced secretion 
of both IL-10 and IL-12p70. In addition, co-culture of CD4+ T cells with
Bifidobacterium animalis AHC7-stimulated dendritic cells resulted in a
significant increase in CD25+Foxp3+ T cell numbers.
CONCLUSION: Bifidobacterium animalis AHC7 exerts an anti-inflammatory effect via 
the attenuation of pro-inflammatory transcription factor activation in response
to an infectious insult associated with modulation of pro-inflammatory cytokine
production within the mucosa. The cellular mechanism underpinning Bifidobacterium
animalis AHC7 mediated attenuation of NF-κB activation may include recognition of
the bacterium by dendritic cells and induction of CD25+Foxp3+ T cells.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2172-11-63 
PMCID: PMC3016395
PMID: 21176205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

