
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 25;286(8):6479-89. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.206722. Epub 2010 
Dec 21.

Glycoside hydrolase family 89 alpha-N-acetylglucosaminidase from Clostridium
perfringens specifically acts on GlcNAc alpha1,4Gal beta1R at the non-reducing
terminus of O-glycans in gastric mucin.

Fujita M(1), Tsuchida A, Hirata A, Kobayashi N, Goto K, Osumi K, Hirose Y,
Nakayama J, Yamanoi T, Ashida H, Mizuno M.

Author information: 
(1)Noguchi Institute, 1-8-1 Kaga, Itabashi, Tokyo 173-0003, Japan.
fujita@noguchi.or.jp

In mammals, α-linked GlcNAc is primarily found in heparan sulfate/heparin and
gastric gland mucous cell type mucin. α-N-acetylglucosaminidases (αGNases)
belonging to glycoside hydrolase family 89 are widely distributed from bacteria
to higher eukaryotes. Human lysosomal αGNase is well known to degrade heparin and
heparan sulfate. Here, we reveal the substrate specificity of αGNase (AgnC) from 
Clostridium perfringens strain 13, a bacterial homolog of human αGNase, by
chemically synthesizing a series of disaccharide substrates containing α-linked
GlcNAc. AgnC was found to release GlcNAc from GlcNAcα1,4Galβ1pMP and GlcNAcα1pNP 
substrates (where pMP and pNP represent p-methoxyphenyl and p-nitrophenyl,
respectively). AgnC also released GlcNAc from porcine gastric mucin and cell
surface mucin. Because AgnC showed no activity against any of the
GlcNAcα1,2Galβ1pMP, GlcNAcα1,3Galβ1pMP, GlcNAcα1,6Galβ1pMP, and
GlcNAcα1,4GlcAβ1pMP substrates, this enzyme may represent a specific glycosidase 
required for degrading α-GlcNAc-capped O-glycans of the class III mucin secreted 
from the stomach and duodenum. Deletion of the C-terminal region containing
several carbohydrate-binding module 32 (CBM32) domains significantly reduced the 
activity for porcine gastric mucin; however, activity against GlcNAcα1,4Galβ1pMP 
was markedly enhanced. Dot blot and ELISA analyses revealed that the deletion
construct containing the C-terminal CBM-C2 to CBM-C6 domains binds strongly to
porcine gastric mucin. Consequently, tandem CBM32 domains located near the C
terminus of AgnC should function by increasing the affinity for branched or
clustered α-GlcNAc-containing glycans. The agnC gene-disrupted strain showed
significantly reduced growth on the class III mucin-containing medium compared
with the wild type strain, suggesting that AgnC might have an important role in
dominant growth in intestines.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.206722 
PMCID: PMC3057825
PMID: 21177247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

