
1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Nov;130(2):387-98. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-1300-6. 
Epub 2010 Dec 29.

Resveratrol suppresses growth of cancer stem-like cells by inhibiting fatty acid 
synthase.

Pandey PR(1), Okuda H, Watabe M, Pai SK, Liu W, Kobayashi A, Xing F, Fukuda K,
Hirota S, Sugai T, Wakabayashi G, Koeda K, Kashiwaba M, Suzuki K, Chiba T, Endo
M, Fujioka T, Tanji S, Mo YY, Cao D, Wilber AC, Watabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology & Cell Biology, Southern
Illinois University School of Medicine, 801 N. Rutledge St., PO Box 19626,
Springfield, IL 62794-9626, USA.

Resveratrol is a natural polyphenolic compound and has been shown to exhibit
cardio-protective as well as anti-neoplastic effects on various types of cancers.
However, the exact mechanism of its anti-tumor effect is not clearly defined.
Resveratrol has been shown to have strong hypolipidemic effect on normal
adipocytes and as hyper-lipogenesis is a hallmark of cancer cell physiology, the 
effect of resveratrol on lipid synthesis in cancer stem-like cells
(CD24(-)/CD44(+)/ESA(+)) that were isolated from both ER+ and ER- breast cancer
cell lines was examined. The authors found that resveratrol significantly reduced
the cell viability and mammosphere formation followed by inducing apoptosis in
cancer stem-like cells. This inhibitory effect of resveratrol is accompanied by a
significant reduction in lipid synthesis which is caused by the down-regulation
of the fatty acid synthase (FAS) gene followed by up-regulation of pro-apoptotic 
genes, DAPK2 and BNIP3. The activation of apoptotic pathway in the cancer
stem-like cells was suppressed by TOFA and by Fumonisin B1, suggesting that
resveratrol-induced apoptosis is indeed through the modulation of FAS-mediated
cell survival signaling. Importantly, resveratrol was able to significantly
suppress the growth of cancer stem-like cells in an animal model of xenograft
without showing apparental toxicity. Taken together, the results of this study
indicate that resveratrol is capable of inducing apoptosis in the cancer
stem-like cells through suppression of lipogenesis by modulating FAS expression, 
which highlights a novel mechanism of anti-tumor effect of resveratrol.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-010-1300-6 
PMCID: PMC3404809
PMID: 21188630  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

