
1. Exp Eye Res. 2011 Mar;92(3):209-20. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2010.12.005. Epub 2010
Dec 31.

Toll-like receptor activation modulates antimicrobial peptide expression by
ocular surface cells.

Redfern RL(1), Reins RY, McDermott AM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Houston, College of Optometry, 505 J. Davis Armistead Building, 
4901 Calhoun Road, Houston, TX 77204-2020, USA.

The ability of the ocular surface to respond to pathogens is in part attributed
to toll-like receptors (TLRs) that recognize conserved motifs on various
microbes. This study examines TLR expression on various ocular surface cells, if 
TLR agonists can modulate the expression of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), human 
beta defensins (hBD) and cathelicidin (hCAP-18/LL-37) which maybe functionally
active against Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) and if TLR agonists or AMPs can
modulate TLR mRNA expression. TLR1-10 mRNA expression was examined in corneal
epithelial, corneal stromal cells and conjunctival epithelial cells by RT-PCR. To
confirm protein expression flow cytometry or immunostaining was performed for
selected TLRs on some cell cultures. Ocular surface cells were cultured with a
range of TLR agonists and then hBD-1, 2, 3, or hCAP-18 mRNA and protein
expression was determined by RT-PCR and immunoblotting. In some experiments,
cells were cultured with a cocktail of agonists for TLR3, 5 and 6/2 and the
antimicrobial activity of the culture media was tested against PA. TLR mRNA
expression was also examined in primary human corneal epithelial cells (HCEC)
treated with either 3 μg/ml of hBD-2, 5 μg/ml of LL-37 or TLR4, 5 and 9 agonists.
Overall, the ocular surface cells expressed mRNA for most of the TLRs but some
differences were found. TLR2 was not detected in corneal fibroblasts, TLR4 was
not detected in primary cultured or freshly isolated HCEC, TLR5 was not detected 
in conjunctival epithelial cells (IOBA-NHC) and corneal fibroblasts, TLR7 was not
detected in freshly isolated HCEC and TLR10 was not detected in HCEC and
IOBA-NHC. TLR8 mRNA was not expressed by any of the samples tested.
Immunostaining of cadaver corneas revealed TLR5 and 9 expression throughout the
cornea while TLR3 was significantly expressed only in the epithelium. Flow
cytometry and immunostaining revealed cultured fibroblasts expressed TLR9 but had
no significant TLR3 expression. hBD-2 expression was upregulated by TLR1/2, 3, 4,
5 and 6/2 agonists depending on the cell type, whereas only the TLR3 agonist
upregulated the expression of hCAP-18 in primary HCEC. The combination of TLR3, 5
and 6/2 agonists in primary HCEC, upregulated hBD-2 and hCAP-18 mRNA and peptide 
expression and secretion into the culture media, which significantly killed PA.
This antimicrobial activity was primarily attributed to LL-37. TLR agonists did
not modulate TLR expression itself, however, LL-37 or hBD-2 downregulated TLR5, 7
and/or 9 mRNA depending on the cell type. TLRs are expressed on the ocular
surface and TLR agonists trigger the production of LL-37 and hBD-2, with LL-37
being particularly important for protecting the ocular surface against PA
infection.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2010.12.005 
PMCID: PMC3049847
PMID: 21195713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

