
1. Cancer Microenviron. 2010 Mar 31;3(1):29-47. doi: 10.1007/s12307-010-0044-5.

T cells and stromal fibroblasts in human tumor microenvironments represent
potential therapeutic targets.

Barnas JL(1), Simpson-Abelson MR, Yokota SJ, Kelleher RJ, Bankert RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Witebsky Center, School of Medicine
and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York,
138 Farber Hall, 3435 Main Street, Buffalo, NY 14214 USA.

The immune system of cancer patients recognizes tumor-associated antigens
expressed on solid tumors and these antigens are able to induce tumor-specific
humoral and cellular immune responses. Diverse immunotherapeutic strategies have 
been used in an attempt to enhance both antibody and T cell responses to tumors. 
While several tumor vaccination strategies significantly increase the number of
tumor-specific lymphocytes in the blood of cancer patients, most vaccinated
patients ultimately experience tumor progression. CD4+ and CD8+ T cells with an
effector memory phenotype infiltrate human tumor microenvironments, but most are 
hyporesponsive to stimulation via the T cell receptor (TCR) and CD28 under
conditions that activate memory T cells derived from the peripheral blood of the 
cancer patients or normal donors. Attempts to identify cells and molecules
responsible for the TCR signaling arrest of tumor-infiltrating T cells have
focused largely upon the immunosuppressive effects of tumor cells, tolerogenic
dendritic cells and regulatory T cells. Here we review potential mechanisms by
which human T cell function is arrested in the tumor microenvironment with a
focus on the immunomodulatory effects of stromal fibroblasts. Determining in vivo
which cells and molecules are responsible for the TCR arrest in human
tumor-infiltrating T cells will be necessary to formulate and test strategies to 
prevent or reverse the signaling arrest of the human T cells in situ for a more
effective design of tumor vaccines. These questions are now addressable using
novel human xenograft models of tumor microenvironments.

DOI: 10.1007/s12307-010-0044-5 
PMCID: PMC2990491
PMID: 21209773 

