
1. J Immunol. 2011 Feb 1;186(3):1646-55. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001654. Epub 2011
Jan 5.

NLRP4 negatively regulates autophagic processes through an association with
beclin1.

Jounai N(1), Kobiyama K, Shiina M, Ogata K, Ishii KJ, Takeshita F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biodefense Research, Yokohama City University Graduate
School of Medicine, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan.

Although more than 20 putative members have been assigned to the
nucleotide-binding and oligomerization domain-like receptor (NLR) family, their
physiological and biological roles, with the exception of the inflammasome, are
not fully understood. In this article, we show that NLR members, such as NLRC4,
NLRP3, NLRP4, and NLRP10 interact with Beclin1, an important regulator of
autophagy, through their neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein, MHC class II
transcription activator, incompatibility locus protein from Podospora anserina,
and telomerase-associated protein domain. Among such NLRs, NLRP4 had a strong
affinity to the Beclin1 evolutionally conserved domain. Compromising NLRP4 via
RNA interference resulted in upregulation of the autophagic process under
physiological conditions and upon invasive bacterial infections, leading to
enhancement of the autophagic bactericidal process of group A streptococcus.
NLRP4 recruited to the subplasma membrane phagosomes containing group A
streptococcus and transiently dissociated from Beclin1, suggesting that NLRP4
senses bacterial infection and permits the initiation of Beclin1-mediated
autophagic responses. In addition to a role as a negative regulator of the
autophagic process, NLRP4 physically associates with the class C vacuolar
protein-sorting complex, thereby negatively regulating maturation of the
autophagosome and endosome. Collectively, these results provide novel evidence
that NLRP4, and possibly other members of the NLR family, plays a crucial role in
biogenesis of the autophagosome and its maturation by the association with
regulatory molecules, such as Beclin1 and the class C vacuolar protein-sorting
complex.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001654 
PMID: 21209283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

