
1. J Oral Sci. 2010 Dec;52(4):583-91.

Suppressive effect of ethanolic Kaempferia pandurata Roxb. extract on matrix
metalloproteinase-2 expression in Porphyromonas gingivalis-treated human gingival
fibroblasts in vitro.

Yanti(1), Hwang JK.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biotechnology, Atma Jaya Catholic University, Jakarta, Indonesia.
yanti@atmajaya.ac.id

In periodontal disease, gingival fibroblasts activated by the Gram-negative
anaerobic bacterium Porphyromonas gingivalis induce overexpression of matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), which is involved in inflammatory progression. This 
process is followed by tissue destruction and bone loss. In the present study, we
investigated the in vitro effect of the ethanolic Kaempferia pandurata Roxb.
extract on expression of MMP-2 in P. gingivalis-treated human gingival
fibroblast-1 (HGF-1) cells. In addition, we utilized gelatin zymography, Western 
blotting, and reverse transcription-PCR analysis to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms underlying MMP-2 inhibition via the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) and cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB) signaling pathways.
Treatment with K. pandurata extract (1-10 Âµg/ml) dose-dependently suppressed the 
activity, secretion, and protein expression of MMP-2 in HGF-1 cells exposed to P.
gingivalis. At the transcriptional level, inhibition of MMP-2 gene expression by 
K. pandurata was mediated by phosphorylation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and
CREB signaling pathways in P. gingivalis-treated HGF-1 cells. These results
suggest that K. pandurata extract suppresses MMP-2 expression at the protein and 
gene levels via downregulation of the principal JNK and CREB signaling pathways. 
Due to its efficacy in inhibiting MMP-mediated periodontal destruction, K.
pandurata might represent a new, potent periodontal therapy.

DOI: 10.2334/josnusd.52.583 
PMID: 21206161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

