
1. Biol Pharm Bull. 2011;34(1):120-7.

Reparixin, an inhibitor of CXCR1 and CXCR2 receptor activation, attenuates blood 
pressure and hypertension-related mediators expression in spontaneously
hypertensive rats.

Kim HY(1), Choi JH, Kang YJ, Park SY, Choi HC, Kim HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Aging-associated Vascular Disease Research Center,
College of Medicine, Yeungnam University, Namgu, Daegu 705â€“717, South Korea.

Reparixin, an inhibitor of CXCL8 receptor CXCR1 and CXCR2 activation, has been
shown to attenuate inflammatory responses in various injury models. In the
present study, the hypertension-related functional roles of reparixin were
examined in hypertensive animals. Spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) at the
age of 18 weeks were administered a subcutaneous injection of reparixin (5 mg/kg)
daily for 3 weeks (SHR-R, n=5). Control groups consisted of normal saline-treated
SHR (SHR-N, n=5) and normotensive Wistar-Kyoto rats (WKY-N, n=5). Reparixin
effectively decreased systolic blood pressure and increased the blood flow. The
thoracic aorta wall thickness was significantly decreased in SHR-R compared to
SHR-N. Expressions of CXCL8, CCL2, 12-lipoxygenase (LO) and endothelin (ET)-1
were significantly decreased in SHR-R thoracic aorta tissues compared to SHR-N.
Furthermore, expression of angiotensin II subtype I receptor (AT(1)R) protein was
decreased in SHR-R thoracic aorta tissues compared to SHR-N. In addition, the
plasma levels of nitric oxide were slightly elevated in SHR-R compared to the
levels in SHR-N. These findings indicate that inhibition of hypertension-related 
mediators by reparixin results in the reduction of blood pressure in SHR.
Therefore, these results suggest that reparixin-mediated blockade of CXCL8
receptor activation attenuates vascular hypertension in SHR.

DOI: 10.1248/bpb.34.120 
PMID: 21212529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

