
1. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2011 May;24(5):411-8. doi: 10.1093/protein/gzq122. Epub 2011
Jan 7.

Importance of an extreme C-terminal motif of a family I.3 lipase for stability.

Kuwahara K(1), Angkawidjaja C, Koga Y, Takano K, Kanaya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Material and Life Science, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka
University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

A five-residue sequence motif (VTLVG) located at positions 15-19 from the
C-terminus of family I.3 lipase from Pseudomonas sp. MIS38 (PML) and an extreme
C-terminal motif (DGIVIA) located at the C-terminus of PML are relatively well
conserved in the passenger proteins of type 1 secretion system (T1SS). To analyze
the role of these motifs, four mutant proteins of PML (PMLΔ5, PMLΔ10, 3A-PML and 
2A-PML) were constructed. PMLΔ5 and PMLΔ10 lack the C-terminal 5 and 10 residues 
of PML, respectively. 3A-PML has triple mutations within an extreme C-terminal
motif and 2A-PML has double mutations within a five-residue sequence motif.
Secretion of these proteins was analyzed using Escherichia coli DH5 cells
carrying Lip system (T1SS for family I.3 lipase). The secretion level of 2A-PML
was dramatically reduced when compared with that of PML, whereas the secretion
level of 3A-PML was comparable to that of PML, indicating that a five-residue
sequence motif, instead of an extreme C-terminal motif, is required for secretion
of PML. None of the mutations and truncations seriously affects the enzymatic
activity of PML. However, 3A-PML, PMLΔ5 and PMLΔ10 were less stable than PML by
2.1, 7.6 and 7.6°C in T(1/2), respectively, and by 5.0, 21.3 and 17.9 kJ/mol in
ΔG(H(2)O), respectively. These results indicate that an extreme C-terminal motif 
of PML is important for stability.

DOI: 10.1093/protein/gzq122 
PMID: 21216728  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

