
1. Clin Oral Investig. 2012 Feb;16(1):95-100. doi: 10.1007/s00784-010-0504-9. Epub
2011 Jan 14.

Antibacterial properties and human gingival fibroblast cell compatibility of
TiO2/Ag compound coatings and ZnO films on titanium-based material.

Chang YY(1), Lai CH, Hsu JT, Tang CH, Liao WC, Huang HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Ming Dao University, 369
Wen-Hua Rd., Peetow, ChangHua, 52345, Taiwan.

Titanium (Ti)-based materials are widely used in biomedical implant components
and are applied successfully in various types of bone-anchored reconstructions.
However, in dental implants the Ti materials contact not only bone but also
gingival tissues, and are partially exposed to the oral cavity that includes
bacteria. This study used titania and silver (TiO(2)/Ag) compound coatings and
zinc oxide (ZnO) films to enhance the antibacterial activity of the Ti-based
implant. The hydrophobicity of each sample was examined by measuring the contact 
angle. Streptococcus mutans and human gingival fibroblast (HGF) was cultured on
the coated samples, and the antibacterial effects and cell compatibility were
determined using a Syto9 fluorescence staining and MTT methods. For the TiO(2)/Ag
samples, depositing Ag on the plate at a higher power (which increased the
proportion of Ag) increased the contact angle and the hydrophobicity. The
bacterial count was lowest for the 50 W TiO(2)/Ag sample, which contained 5.9%
Ag. The contact angles of the ZnO samples did not show the same tendency. The
antibacterial effect was higher on ZnO-coated samples since bacterial count was
threefold lower on ZnO samples as compared to control samples (Ti plate). From
the MTT assay test, the mean optical density values for TiO(2)/Ag-coated samples 
after 72 h of HGF adhesion were similar to the value obtained from the uncoated
Ti. However, biocompatibility was lower on ZnO films than in control samples.
Conclusively, the antibacterial activity was higher but the cell compatibility
was lower on ZnO films than on TiO(2)/Ag coatings.

DOI: 10.1007/s00784-010-0504-9 
PMID: 21234622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

