
1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2011 Apr;300(4):G547-53. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00251.2010. Epub 2011 Jan 13.

IL-1β and ADAM17 are central regulators of β-defensin expression in Candida
esophagitis.

Pahl R(1), Brunke G, Steubesand N, Schubert S, Böttner M, Wedel T, Jürgensen C,
Hampe J, Schäfer H, Zeissig S, Schreiber S, Rosenstiel P, Reiss K, Arlt A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Kiel, Germany University
Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Germany.

Candida albicans resides on epithelial surfaces as part of the physiological
microflora. However, under certain conditions, it may cause life-threatening
infections, including Candida sepsis. We have recently shown that human
β-defensins (hBDs) hBD-2 and hBD-3 are upregulated in Candida esophagitis and
that this antifungal host response is distinctly regulated by NF-κB and
MAPK/activator protein-1 (AP-1) pathways. Here, we show that C. albicans induces 
hBD-2 through an autocrine IL-1β loop and that activation of the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) by endogenous transforming growth factor-α (TGF-α) is a
crucial event in the induction of hBD-3. To further dissect upstream signaling
events, we investigated expression of the central sheddases for EGFR ligands
ADAM10 and ADAM17 in the healthy and infected esophagus. Next, we used
pharmaceutical inhibitors and small-interfering RNA-mediated knock down of ADAM10
and ADAM17 to reveal that ADAM17-induced shedding of TGF-α is a crucial step in
the induction of hBD-3 expression in response to Candida infection. In
conclusion, we describe for the first time an autocrine IL-1β loop responsible
for the induction of hBD-2 expression and an ADAM17-TGF-α-EGFR-MAPK/AP-1 pathway 
leading to hBD-3 upregulation in the course of a Candida infection of the
esophagus.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00251.2010 
PMID: 21233274  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

