
1. Fungal Genet Biol. 2011 Apr;48(4):445-55. doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2011.01.001. Epub
2011 Jan 13.

Differential roles of the phospholipase C genes in fungal development and
pathogenicity of Magnaporthe oryzae.

Choi J(1), Kim KS, Rho HS, Lee YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, Center for Fungal Genetic Resources,
and Center for Fungal Pathogenesis, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-921,
Republic of Korea.

Calcium plays a critical role in a variety of cellular processes in cells.
However, relatively little is known about the biological effects of Ca²+
signaling on morphogenesis and pathogenesis in the rice blast fungus Magnaporthe 
oryzae compared to other signaling pathways. We have previously demonstrated that
MoPLC1-mediated calcium regulation is important for infection-related development
and pathogenicity in M. oryzae. In the present study, four genes encoding
phospholipase C (PLC) isozymes (MoPLC2 to MoPLC5), which differ from MoPLC1 in
their domain organization, were additionally identified. The C2 domain involved
in Ca²+-dependent membrane binding is found only in MoPLC2 and MoPLC3. Detailed
functional analysis using deletion mutants for MoPLC2 and MoPLC3 indicated that
MoPLC2 and MoPLC3 play essential roles in development. The two deletion mutants
for MoPLC2 and MoPLC3 showed reduced conidiation and a defect in
appressorium-mediated penetration. Reintroduction of the genes restored defects
of ΔMoplc2 and ΔMoplc3. Notably, ΔMoplc2 and ΔMoplc3 mutants developed multiple
appressoria on separate germ tubes of a conidium, indicating that MoPLC2- and
MoPLC3-regulated signaling suppresses a feedback loop of a pathway for
appressorial development. The similarity in phenotypic defects between the two
mutants indicates that both MoPLC2 and MoPLC3 are important for regulation of
appropriate levels of signaling molecules in a similar manner. Comparative
analysis indicated that the two MoPLCs-mediated signaling pathways have
interrelated, but distinct, roles in the development of M. oryzae.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fgb.2011.01.001 
PMID: 21237279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

