
1. Chem Biol Interact. 2011 May 30;191(1-3):129-36. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2011.01.008. 
Epub 2011 Jan 14.

Enzymatic properties of ALDH1L2, a mitochondrial 10-formyltetrahydrofolate
dehydrogenase.

Strickland KC(1), Krupenko NI, Dubard ME, Hu CJ, Tsybovsky Y, Krupenko SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, United States.

10-Formyltetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase (FDH, ALDH1L1), an abundant cytosolic
enzyme of folate metabolism, shares significant sequence similarity with enzymes 
of the aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) family. The enzyme converts
10-formyltetrahydrofolate (10-fTHF) to tetrahydrofolate and CO(2) in an
NADP(+)-dependent manner. The mechanism of this reaction includes three
consecutive steps with the final occurring in an ALDH-homologous domain. We have 
recently identified a mitochondrial isoform of FDH (mtFDH), which is the product 
of a separate gene, ALDH1L2. Its overall identity to cytosolic FDH is about 74%, 
and the identity between the ALDH domains rises up to 79%. In the present study, 
human mtFDH was expressed in Escherichia coli, purified to homogeneity, and
characterized. While the recombinant enzyme was capable of catalyzing the 10-fTHF
hydrolase reaction, it did not produce detectable levels of ALDH activity.
Despite the lack of typical ALDH catalysis, mtFDH was able to perform the
characteristic 10-fTHF dehydrogenase reaction after reactivation by recombinant
4'-phosphopantetheinyl transferase (PPT) in the presence of coenzyme A. Using
site-directed mutagenesis, it was determined that PPT modifies mtFDH specifically
at Ser375. The C-terminal domain of mtFDH (residues 413-923) was also expressed
in E. coli and characterized. This domain was found to exist as a tetramer and to
catalyze an esterase reaction that is typical of other ALDH enzymes. Taken
together, our studies suggest that ALDH1L2 has enzymatic properties similar to
its cytosolic counterpart, although the inability to catalyze the ALDH reaction
with short-chain aldehyde substrates remains an unresolved issue at present.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbi.2011.01.008 
PMCID: PMC3103650
PMID: 21238436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

