
1. Microbiol Res. 2011 Sep 20;166(6):494-507. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2010.10.002.
Epub 2011 Jan 14.

Isolation, characterization and expression analysis of the ornithine
decarboxylase gene (ODC1) of the entomopathogenic fungus, Metarhizium anisopliae.

Madrigal Pulido J(1), Padilla Guerrero I, Magaña Martínez Ide J, Cacho Valadez B,
Torres Guzman JC, Salazar Solis E, Felix Gutierrez Corona J, Schrank A, Jiménez
Bremont F, González Hernandez A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología, Universidad de Guanajuato, Guanajuato, Gto., Mexico.

The gene ODC1, which codes for the ornithine decarboxylase enzyme, was isolated
from the entomopathogenic fungus, Metarhizium anisopliae. The deduced amino acid 
sequence predicted a protein of 447 amino acids with a molecular weight of 49.3
kDa that contained the canonical motifs of ornithine decarboxylases. The ODC1
cDNA sequence was expressed in Escherichia coli cells; radiometric enzyme assays 
showed that the purified recombinant protein had ornithine decarboxylase
activity. The optimum pH of the purified Odc1 protein was 8.0-8.5, and the
optimum reaction temperature was 37°C. The apparent K(m) for ornithine at a
pyridoxal phosphate concentration of 20mM was 22 μM. The competitive inhibitor of
ODC activity, 1,4-diamino-2-butanone (DAB), at 0.25 mM inhibited 95% of ODC
activity. The ODC1 mRNA showed an increase at the beginning of appressorium
formation in vitro. During the M. anisopliae invasion process into Plutella
xylostella larvae, the ODC1 mRNA showed a discrete increase within the
germinating spore and during appressorium formation. The second expression peak
was higher and prolonged during the invasion and death of the insect. The ODC1
gene complements the polyamine auxotrophy of Yarrowia lipolytica odc null mutant.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micres.2010.10.002 
PMID: 21236653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

