
1. Lab Invest. 2011 Apr;91(4):588-97. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2010.206. Epub 2011 Jan
17.

The role of CD44 in the acute and resolution phase of the host response during
pneumococcal pneumonia.

van der Windt GJ(1), Hoogendijk AJ, de Vos AF, Kerver ME, Florquin S, van der
Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most prevalent pathogen causing
community-acquired pneumonia. CD44 is a transmembrane adhesion molecule,
expressed by a wide variety of cell types, that has several functions in innate
and adaptive immune responses. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that CD44 
is involved in the host response during pneumococcal pneumonia. On intranasal
infection with a lethal dose of S. pneumoniae CD44-knockout (KO) mice showed a
prolonged survival when compared with wild-type mice, which was accompanied by a 
diminished pulmonary bacterial growth and reduced dissemination to distant body
sites. Whereas, proinflammatory cytokine responses and lung pathology were not
affected, CD44 deficiency resulted in increased early neutrophil influx into the 
lung. In separate experiments, we confirmed a detrimental role of CD44 in host
defense against pneumococci during sublethal pneumonia, as demonstrated by an
improved capacity of CD44 KO mice to clear a low infectious dose. In addition,
CD44 appeared important for the resolution of lung inflammation during sublethal 
pneumonia, as shown by histopathology of lung tissue slides. In conclusion, we
show here that CD44 facilitates bacterial outgrowth and dissemination during
pneumococcal pneumonia, which in lethal infection results in a prolonged survival
of CD44 KO mice. Moreover, during sublethal pneumonia CD44 contributes to the
resolution of the inflammatory response.

DOI: 10.1038/labinvest.2010.206 
PMID: 21242959  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

