
1. Eur J Cell Biol. 2011 Nov;90(11):944-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2010.11.007. Epub
2011 Jan 17.

New insights into the mode of action of the actin ADP-ribosylating virulence
factors Salmonella enterica SpvB and Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin.

Barth H(1), Aktories K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Universitätsklinikum Ulm, Germany.
holger.barth@uni-ulm.de

The C2 toxin from Clostridium botulinum represents the prototype of the family of
binary actin-ADP-ribosylating toxins. These toxins covalently transfer ADP-ribose
from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+)) onto arginine-177 of actin in the
cytosol of eukaryotic cells resulting in depolymerization of actin filaments and 
cell rounding. The C2 toxin consists of two non-linked proteins, the enzyme
component C2I and the binding and translocation component C2II, which delivers
C2I into host cells. The ADP-ribosyltransferase SpvB from Salmonella enterica
also modifies actin, but is delivered into the host cell cytosol from
intracellular growing Salmonella, most likely via type-III-secretion. We
characterized the mode of action of SpvB in comparison to C2 toxin in vitro and
in intact cells. We identified arginine-177 as the target for SpvB-catalyzed
mono-ADP-ribosylation of actin. To compare the cellular responses following
modification of actin by SpvB or by the binary toxins without the influence of
other Salmonella virulence factors, we constructed a cell-permeable fusion toxin 
to deliver the catalytic domain of SpvB (C/SpvB) into the cytosol of target
cells. This review summarizes recent findings of research on the actin
ADP-ribosylating toxins regarding their cellular uptake, molecular mode of action
and the cellular consequences following ADP-ribosylation of actin.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2010.11.007 
PMID: 21247657  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

