
1. Rev Med Chir Soc Med Nat Iasi. 2010 Jul-Sep;114(3):896-9.

[Research regarding extended-spectrum beta-lactamases produced by enterobacteria 
strains].

[Article in Romanian]

Copăcianu B(1), Tuchiluş C, Poiata A, Iancu LS.

Author information: 
(1)Doctorand al Universităţii de Medicină şi Farmacie Gr. T. Popa Iaşi.

AIM: To evaluate the susceptiblity of extended spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)
producing organisms among Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae, isolated
between January-October 2009 from hospital and community.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: From 611 enterobacteria strains, for 112 strains (E. coli,
n = 84 and K. pneumoniae, n = 28), the ESBL phenotypic confirmation was performed
with double disk test (DDT) and the replacement disk method. The minimum
inhibitory concentrations (MICs) for next antimicrobial agents tested:
ceftazidime, cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, cefepime, cefpirome, imipenem, meropenem,
ertapenem, moxifloxacin, gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, ofloxacin were performed by 
agar dilution method. Resistance rates were reported using the Clinical
Laboratory Standard Institute (CLSI) breakpoints for the fully susceptible
category; moderately susceptible isolates were classified as resistant. K.
pneumoniae ATCC 700603 and E. coli ATCC 25922 were used for quality control.
RESULTS: Resistance rates for ceftazidime, cefotaxime, ceftriaxone and aztreonam 
among tested strains were very high: 84.5%, 100%, 100% and 96.4% for E. coli and 
98.8%, 98.8%, 97.6% and 89.2% for K. pneumoniae, with the MIC90 values > 256 mg/L
for either antimicrobial tested agent. The MICs for fourth generation
cephalosporins ranges from 4 mg/L to 512 mg/L. The MICs for tested quinolones
were > 2 mg/L for 89.2% strains. Using breakpoint for susceptibility, all
isolates were sensitive to ertapenem, imipenem and meropenem.
CONCLUSIONS: We noticed a high resistance rate for ceftazidime, cefotaxime,
ceftriaxone and aztreonam. In this study, carbapenems demonstrated the highest
degree of activity.


PMID: 21243821  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

