
1. Mar Biotechnol (NY). 2011 Oct;13(5):868-82. doi: 10.1007/s10126-010-9347-2. Epub 
2011 Jan 19.

Cellular localization of debromohymenialdisine and hymenialdisine in the marine
sponge Axinella sp. using a newly developed cell purification protocol.

Song YF(1), Qu Y, Cao XP, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Bioproducts Engineering Group, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 457 Zhongshan Road, Dalian, 116023, Liaoning, China.

Sponges (Porifera), as the best known source of bioactive marine natural products
in metazoans, play a significant role in marine drug discovery and development.
As sessile filter-feeding animals, a considerable portion of the sponge biomass
can be made of endosymbiotic and associated microorganisms. Understanding the
cellular origin of targeted bioactive compounds from sponges is therefore
important not only for providing chemotaxonomic information but also for defining
the bioactive production strategy in terms of sponge aquaculture, cell culture,
or fermentation of associated bacteria. The two alkaloids debromohymenialdisine
(DBH) and hymenialdisine (HD), which are cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors with 
pharmacological activities for treating osteoarthritis and Alzheimer's disease,
have been isolated from the sponge Axinella sp. In this study, the cellular
localization of these two alkaloids was determined through the quantification of 
these alkaloids in different cell fractions by high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC). First, using a differential centrifugation method, the
dissociated cells were separated into different groups according to their sizes. 
The two bioactive alkaloids were mainly found in sponge cells obtained from
low-speed centrifugation. Further cell purifications were accomplished by a newly
developed multi-step protocol. Four enriched cell fractions (C1, C2, C3, and C4) 
were obtained and subjected to light and transmission electron microscopy,
cytochemical staining, and HPLC quantification. Compared to the low
concentrations in other cell fractions, DBH and HD accounted for 10.9% and 6.1%, 
respectively, of dry weight in the C1 fraction. Using the morphological
characteristics and cytochemical staining results, cells in the C1 fraction were 
speculated to be spherulous cells. This result shows that DBH and HD in Axinella 
sp. are located in sponge cells and mostly stored in spherulous cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s10126-010-9347-2 
PMID: 21246234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

