
1. Phytopathology. 2011 May;101(5):535-43. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-09-10-0257.

Identification of a second Asian soybean rust resistance gene in Hyuuga soybean.

Kendrick MD(1), Harris DK, Ha BK, Hyten DL, Cregan PB, Frederick RD, Boerma HR,
Pedley KF.

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture-Agricultureal Research Service, Ft.
Detrick, MD, USA.

ABSTRACT Asian soybean rust (ASR) is an economically significant disease caused
by the fungus Phakopsora pachyrhizi. The soybean genes Rpp3 and Rpp?(Hyuuga)
confer resistance to specific isolates of the pathogen. Both genes map to
chromosome 6 (Gm06) (linkage group [LG] C2). We recently identified 12 additional
soybean accessions that harbor ASR resistance mapping to Gm06, within 5
centimorgans of Rpp3 and Rpp?(Hyuuga). To further characterize genotypes with
resistance on Gm06, we used a set of eight P. pachyrhizi isolates collected from 
geographically diverse areas to inoculate plants and evaluate them for
differential phenotypic responses. Three isolates elicited different responses
from soybean accessions PI 462312 (Ankur) (Rpp3) and PI 506764 (Hyuuga)
(Rpp?[Hyuuga]). In all, 11 of the new accessions yielded responses identical to
either PI 462312 or Hyuuga and 1 of the new accessions, PI 417089B (Kuro daizu), 
differed from all others. Additional screening of Hyuuga-derived recombinant
inbred lines indicated that Hyuuga carries two resistance genes, one at the Rpp3 
locus on Gm06 and a second, unlinked ASR resistance gene mapping to Gm03 (LG-N)
near Rpp5. These findings reveal a natural case of gene pyramiding for ASR
resistance in Hyuuga and underscore the importance of utilizing multiple isolates
of P. pachyrhizi when screening for ASR resistance.

DOI: 10.1094/PHYTO-09-10-0257 
PMID: 21244223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

