
1. Microb Biotechnol. 2010 Sep;3(5):564-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-7915.2010.00188.x.
Epub 2010 Jun 21.

Culturing marine bacteria - an essential prerequisite for biodiscovery.

Joint I(1), Mühling M, Querellou J.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, The Hoe, Plymouth PL1 3DH, UK.
irj@pml.ac.uk

The potential for using marine microbes for biodiscovery is severely limited by
the lack of laboratory cultures. It is a long-standing observation that standard 
microbiological techniques only isolate a very small proportion of the wide
diversity of microbes that are known in natural environments from DNA sequences. 
A number of explanations are reviewed. The process of establishing laboratory
cultures may destroy any cell-to-cell communication that occurs between organisms
in the natural environment and that are vital for growth. Bacteria probably grow 
as consortia in the sea and reliance on other bacteria for essential nutrients
and substrates is not possible with standard microbiological approaches. Such
interactions should be considered when designing programmes for the isolation of 
marine microbes. The benefits of novel technologies for manipulating cells are
reviewed, including single cell encapsulation in gel micro-droplets. Although
novel technologies offer benefits for bringing previously uncultured microbes
into laboratory culture, many useful bacteria can still be isolated using
variations of plating techniques. Results are summarized for a study to culture
bacteria from a long-term observatory station in the English Channel. Bacterial
biodiversity in this assemblage has recently been characterized using
high-throughput sequencing techniques. Although Alphaproteobacteria dominated the
natural bacterial assemblage throughout the year, Gammaproteobacteria were the
most frequent group isolated by plating techniques. The use of different gelling 
agents and the addition of ammonium to seawater-based agar did lead to the
isolation of a higher proportion of Alphaproteobacteria. Variation in medium
composition was also able to increase the recovery of other groups of particular 
interest for biodiscovery, such as Actinobacteria.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2010 Society for Applied Microbiology
and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-7915.2010.00188.x 
PMCID: PMC3815769
PMID: 21255353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

