
1. J Immunol. 2011 Feb 15;186(4):2033-41. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003015. Epub 2011
Jan 21.

Limiting the amount and duration of antigen exposure during priming increases
memory T cell requirement for costimulation during recall.

Floyd TL(1), Koehn BH, Kitchens WH, Robertson JM, Cheeseman JA, Stempora L,
Larsen CP, Ford ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Emory Transplant Center, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GA 30322, USA.

Donor-reactive memory T cells (Tmem) can play an important role in mediating
graft rejection after transplantation. Transplant recipients acquire
donor-reactive Tmem not only through prior sensitization with alloantigens but
also through previous exposure to environmental pathogens that are cross-reactive
with allogeneic peptide-MHC complexes. Current dogma suggests that most, if not
all, Tmem responses are independent of the requirement for CD28 and/or
CD154/CD40-mediated costimulation to mount a recall response. However,
heterogeneity among Tmem is increasingly being appreciated, and one important
factor known to impact the function and phenotype of Ag-specific T cell responses
is the amount/duration of Ag exposure. Importantly, the impact of Ag exposure on 
development of costimulation independence is currently unknown. In this study, we
interrogated the effect of decreased Ag amount/duration during priming on the
ability of donor-reactive Tmem to mediate costimulation blockade-resistant
rejection during a recall response after transplantation in a murine model.
Recipients possessing donor-reactive Tmem responses that were generated under
conditions of reduced Ag exposure exhibited similar frequencies of Ag-specific T 
cells at day 30 postinfection, but, strikingly, failed to mediate costimulation
blockade-resistant rejection after challenge with an OVA-expressing skin graft.
Thus, these data demonstrate the amount/duration of Ag exposure is a critical
factor in determining Tmem's relative requirement for costimulation during the
recall response after transplantation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003015 
PMCID: PMC3057172
PMID: 21257960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

