
1. J Immunol. 2011 Feb 15;186(4):2309-20. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002959. Epub 2011
Jan 24.

Distinct functions for the glycans of tapasin and heavy chains in the assembly of
MHC class I molecules.

Rizvi SM(1), Del Cid N, Lybarger L, Raghavan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Complexes of specific assembly factors and generic endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
chaperones, collectively called the MHC class I peptide-loading complex (PLC),
function in the folding and assembly of MHC class I molecules. The glycan-binding
chaperone calreticulin (CRT) and partner oxidoreductase ERp57 are important in
MHC class I assembly, but the sequence of assembly events and specific
interactions involved remain incompletely understood. We show that the
recruitments of CRT and ERp57 to the PLC are codependent and also dependent upon 
the ERp57 binding site and the glycan of the assembly factor tapasin.
Furthermore, the ERp57 binding site and the glycan of tapasin enhance β(2)m and
MHC class I heavy (H) chain recruitment to the PLC, with the ERp57 binding site
having the dominant effect. In contrast, the conserved MHC class I H chain glycan
played a minor role in CRT recruitment into the PLC, but impacted the recruitment
of H chains into the PLC, and glycan-deficient H chains were impaired for
tapasin-independent and tapasin-assisted assembly. The conserved MHC class I
glycan and tapasin facilitated an early step in the assembly of H chain-β(2)m
heterodimers, for which tapasin-ERp57 or tapasin-CRT complexes were not required.
Together, these studies provide insights into how PLCs are constructed,
demonstrate two distinct mechanisms by which PLCs can be stabilized, and suggest 
the presence of intermediate H chain-deficient PLCs.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002959 
PMCID: PMC3057457
PMID: 21263072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

