
1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2011 Jan;39(1):315-20. doi: 10.1042/BST0390315.

Bioturbation: impact on the marine nitrogen cycle.

Laverock B(1), Gilbert JA, Tait K, Osborn AM, Widdicombe S.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, Plymouth PL1 3DH, UK.
bonver@pml.ac.uk

Sediments play a key role in the marine nitrogen cycle and can act either as a
source or a sink of biologically available (fixed) nitrogen. This cycling is
driven by a number of microbial remineralization reactions, many of which occur
across the oxic/anoxic interface near the sediment surface. The presence and
activity of large burrowing macrofauna (bioturbators) in the sediment can
significantly affect these microbial processes by altering the physicochemical
properties of the sediment. For example, the building and irrigation of burrows
by bioturbators introduces fresh oxygenated water into deeper sediment layers and
allows the exchange of solutes between the sediment and water column. Burrows can
effectively extend the oxic/anoxic interface into deeper sediment layers, thus
providing a unique environment for nitrogen-cycling microbial communities. Recent
studies have shown that the abundance and diversity of micro-organisms can be far
greater in burrow wall sediment than in the surrounding surface or subsurface
sediment; meanwhile, bioturbated sediment supports higher rates of coupled
nitrification-denitrification reactions and increased fluxes of ammonium to the
water column. In the present paper we discuss the potential for bioturbation to
significantly affect marine nitrogen cycling, as well as the molecular techniques
used to study microbial nitrogen cycling communities and directions for future
study.

DOI: 10.1042/BST0390315 
PMID: 21265795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

