
1. Microb Biotechnol. 2009 Jan;2(1):15-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-7915.2008.00048.x.
Epub 2008 Oct 15.

Positively regulated bacterial expression systems.

Brautaset T(1), Lale R, Valla S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Sintef Materials and Chemistry, Sintef,
Trondheim, Norway. trygve.brautaset@sintef.no

Regulated promoters are useful tools for many aspects related to recombinant gene
expression in bacteria, including for high-level expression of heterologous
proteins and for expression at physiological levels in metabolic engineering
applications. In general, it is common to express the genes of interest from an
inducible promoter controlled either by a positive regulator or by a repressor
protein. In this review, we discuss established and potentially useful positively
regulated bacterial promoter systems, with a particular emphasis on those that
are controlled by the AraC-XylS family of transcriptional activators. The systems
function in a wide range of microorganisms, including enterobacteria, soil
bacteria, lactic bacteria and streptomycetes. The available systems that have
been applied to express heterologous genes are regulated either by sugars
(L-arabinose, L-rhamnose, xylose and sucrose), substituted benzenes,
cyclohexanone-related compounds, ε-caprolactam, propionate, thiostrepton, alkanes
or peptides. It is of applied interest that some of the inducers require the
presence of transport systems, some are more prone than others to become
metabolized by the host and some have been applied mainly in one or a limited
number of species. Based on bioinformatics analyses, the AraC-XylS family of
regulators contains a large number of different members (currently over 300), but
only a small fraction of these, the XylS/Pm, AraC/P(BAD), RhaR-RhaS/rhaBAD,
NitR/PnitA and ChnR/Pb regulator/promoter systems, have so far been explored for 
biotechnological applications.

© 2008 The Authors; Journal compilation © 2008 Society for Applied Microbiology
and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-7915.2008.00048.x 
PMCID: PMC3815419
PMID: 21261879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

