
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2011 Mar;89(5):1527-36. doi:
10.1007/s00253-011-3100-2. Epub 2011 Jan 29.

Evaluation of promoters for gene expression in polyhydroxyalkanoate-producing
Cupriavidus necator H16.

Fukui T(1), Ohsawa K, Mifune J, Orita I, Nakamura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Tokyo Institute of Technology, B-37 4259 Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501,
Japan. tfukui@bio.titech.ac.jp

Five kinds of promoters were evaluated as tools for regulated gene expression in 
the PHA-producing bacterium Cupriavidus necator. Several broad-host-range
expression vectors were constructed by which expression of a reporter gene gfp
was controlled by P(lac), P(tac), or P(BAD) derived from Escherichia coli, or
promoter regions of phaC1 (P(phaC)) or phaP1 (P(phaP)) derived from C. necator.
Then, the gfp-expression profiles were determined in C. necator strains harboring
the constructed vectors when the cells were grown on fructose or soybean oil.
P(lac), P(tac), P(phaC), and P(phaP ) mediated constitutive gene expression,
among which P(tac) was the strongest promoter. lacI-P(tac) was not thoroughly
functional even after addition of isopropyl-Î²-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG),
probably due to inability of C. necator to uptake IPTG. Gene expression by
araC-P(BAD) could be regulated by varying L-arabinose concentration in the
medium, although P(3HB) production rate was slightly decreased in the
recombinant. phaR-P(phaP) exhibited an expression profile tightly coupled with
P(3HB) accumulation, suggesting application of the vector harboring phaR-P(phaP )
for gene expression specific at the PHA-biosynthesis phase. The properties of
these promoters were expected to be useful for effective engineering of PHA
biosynthesis in C. necator.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-011-3100-2 
PMID: 21279346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

