
1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Apr 12;134(3):865-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.01.028. Epub
2011 Feb 1.

Tannin-rich fraction from Terminalia catappa inhibits quorum sensing (QS) in
Chromobacterium violaceum and the QS-controlled biofilm maturation and LasA
staphylolytic activity in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Taganna JC(1), Quanico JP, Perono RM, Amor EC, Rivera WL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Applied Microbiology, Institute of Biology, College of Science, 
University of the Philippines, Diliman, Quezon City 1101, Philippines.
Joemar.Taganna@up.edu.ph

AIM OF THE STUDY: The study aimed to test the activity of Terminalia catappa L.
against bacterial quorum sensing (QS) in order to provide a potential scientific 
basis for the traditional use of leaf extracts of this plant as an antiseptic.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The anti-QS activity of the methanolic leaf extract of
Terminalia catappa was detected through the inhibition of the QS-controlled
violacein pigment production in Chromobacterium violaceum. Fractions resulting
from size-exclusion chromatography were assayed. The most active fraction was
characterized through qualitative phytochemical detection methods. The effect of 
this fraction on known QS-controlled phenotypes in test strains was assessed.
RESULTS: The fraction with the highest activity (labeled as TCF12) was
characterized to be tannin-rich. It specifically inhibited QS-controlled
violacein production in Chromobacterium violaceum with 50% reduction achieved at 
62.5 μg mL(-1) without significantly affecting growth up to about 962 μg mL(-1). 
The assessment of its effects on LasA activity of Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC
10145 found that the production of this virulence determinant is reduced in a
concentration dependent manner with about 50% reduction at 62.5 μg mL(-1).
Furthermore, it was found that TCF12 was able to inhibit the maturation of
biofilms of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a phenotype that has also been known to be
QS-regulated.
CONCLUSION: Therefore, tannin-rich components of Terminalia catappa leaves are
able to inhibit certain phenotypic expression of QS in the test strains used.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.01.028 
PMID: 21291979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

