
1. Biosci Rep. 2011 Oct;31(5):371-9. doi: 10.1042/BSR20100123.

IQ-motif selectivity in human IQGAP2 and IQGAP3: binding of calmodulin and myosin
essential light chain.

Atcheson E(1), Hamilton E(1), Pathmanathan S(1), Greer B(1), Harriott P(1),
Timson DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Queen's University Belfast, Medical Biology
Centre, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast BT9 7BL, U.K.

The IQGAP [IQ-motif-containing GAP (GTPase-activating protein)] family members
are eukaryotic proteins that act at the interface between cellular signalling and
the cytoskeleton. As such they collect numerous inputs from a variety of
signalling pathways. A key binding partner is the calcium-sensing protein CaM
(calmodulin). This protein binds mainly through a series of IQ-motifs which are
located towards the middle of the primary sequence of the IQGAPs. In some IQGAPs,
these motifs also provide binding sites for CaM-like proteins such as myosin
essential light chain and S100B. Using synthetic peptides and native gel
electrophoresis, the binding properties of the IQ-motifs from human IQGAP2 and
IQGAP3 have been mapped. The second and third IQ-motifs in IQGAP2 and all four of
the IQ-motifs of IQGAP3 interacted with CaM in the presence of calcium ions.
However, there were differences in the type of interaction: while some IQ-motifs 
were able to form complexes with CaM which were stable under the conditions of
the experiment, others formed more transient interactions. The first IQ-motifs
from IQGAP2 and IQGAP3 formed transient interactions with CaM in the absence of
calcium and the first motif from IQGAP3 formed a transient interaction with the
myosin essential light chain Mlc1sa. None of these IQ-motifs interacted with
S100B. Molecular modelling suggested that all of the IQ-motifs, except the first 
one from IQGAP2 formed α-helices in solution. These results extend our knowledge 
of the selectivity of IQ-motifs for CaM and related proteins.

DOI: 10.1042/BSR20100123 
PMCID: PMC3263943
PMID: 21299499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

