
1. J Basic Microbiol. 2011 Apr;51(2):129-35. doi: 10.1002/jobm.201000086. Epub 2011 
Feb 7.

Expression and characterization of a second L-amino acid deaminase isolated from 
Proteus mirabilis in Escherichia coli.

Baek JO(1), Seo JW, Kwon O, Seong SI, Kim IH, Kim CH.

Author information: 
(1)Microbe-based Fusion Technology Research Center, Jeonbuk Branch Institute,
Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology KRIBB, Jeongeup,
Jeonbuk, South Korea.

L-amino acid deaminases catalyze the deamination of natural L-amino acids. Two
types of L-amino acid deaminase have been identified in Proteus species. One
exhibits high levels of activity toward a wide range of aliphatic and aromatic
L-amino acids, typically L-phenylalanine, whereas the other acts on a relatively 
narrow range of basic L-amino acids, typically L-histidine. In this study, we
cloned, expressed, and characterized a second amino acid deaminase, termed Pm1,
from P. mirabilis KCTC 2566. Homology alignment of the deduced amino acid
sequence of Pm1 demonstrated that the greatest similarity (96%) was with the
L-amino acid deaminase (LAD) of P. vulgaris, and that homology with Pma was
relatively low (72%). Also, similar to LAD, Pm1 was most active on L-histidine,
indicating that Pm1 belongs to the second type of amino acid deaminase. In
agreement with this conclusion, the V(max) and K(m) values of Pm1 were 119.7 (μg 
phenylpyruvic acid/mg/min) and 31.55 mM phenylalanine, respectively, values lower
than those of Pma. The Pml deaminase will be very useful industrially in the
preparation of commercially valuable materials including urocanic acid and
α-oxoglutarate.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.201000086 
PMID: 21298676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

