
1. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 31;6(1):e16624. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016624.

Structural characterization of outer membrane components of the type IV pili
system in pathogenic Neisseria.

Jain S(1), Mo≈õcicka KB, Bos MP, Pachulec E, Stuart MC, Keegstra W, Boekema EJ,
van der Does C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and
Biotechnology Institute and the Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials,
University of Groningen, Haren, The Netherlands.

Structures of the type IV pili secretin complexes from Neisseria gonorrhoeae and 
Neisseria meningitidis, embedded in outer membranes were investigated by
transmission electron microscopy. Single particle averaging revealed additional
domains not observed previously. Secretin complexes of N. gonorrhoeae showed a
double ring structure with a 14-15-fold symmetry in the central ring, and a
14-fold symmetry of the peripheral ring with 7 spikes protruding. In secretin
complexes of N. meningitidis, the spikes were absent and the peripheral ring was 
partly or completely lacking. When present, it had a 19-fold symmetry. The
structures of the complexes in several pil mutants were determined. Structures
obtained from the pilC1/C2 adhesin and the pilW minor pilin deletion strains were
similar to wild-type, whereas deletion of the homologue of N. meningitidis PilW
resulted in the absence of secretin structures. Remarkably, the pilE pilin
subunit and pilP lipoprotein deletion mutants showed a change in the symmetry of 
the peripheral ring from 14 to 19 and loss of spikes. The pilF ATPase mutant also
lost the spikes, but maintained 14-fold symmetry. These results show that
secretin complexes contain previously unidentified large and flexible extra
domains with a probable role in stabilization or assembly of type IV pili.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016624 
PMCID: PMC3031610
PMID: 21304951  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

