
1. RNA Biol. 2011 Jan-Feb;8(1):132-42. Epub 2011 Jan 1.

Effect of mutations on the p53 IRES RNA structure: implications for de-regulation
of the synthesis of p53 isoforms.

Grover R(1), Sharathchandra A, Ponnuswamy A, Khan D, Das S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India.

Earlier we have demonstrated the presence of internal ribosome entry site (IRES) 
within tumor suppressor p53 mRNA. Here we have mapped the putative secondary
structure of p53- IRES RNA using information from chemical probing and nuclease
mapping experiments. Additionally, the secondary structure of the IRES element of
the wild-type RNA was compared with cancer-derived silent mutant p53 RNAs. These 
mutations might result in the conformational alterations of p53-IRES RNAs. The
results also indicate decreased IRES activities of the mutants as compared to
wild-type RNA. Further, it was observed that some of the cytoplasmic trans-acting
factors, critical for enhancing IRES function, were unable to bind mutant RNAs as
efficiently as to wild-type. Our results suggest that hnRNP C1/C2 binds to
p53-IRES and siRNA mediated partial silencing of hnRNP C1/C2 showed appreciable
decrease in IRES function and consequent decrease in the level of the
corresponding p53 isoform. Interestingly mutant p53 IRES showed lesser binding
with hnRNP C1/C2 protein. Finally, upon doxorubicin treatment, the mutant RNAs
were unable to show enhanced p53 synthesis to similar extent compared to wild
type. Taken together, these observations suggest that mutations occurring in the 
p53 IRES might have profound implications for de-regulation of its expression and
activity.

DOI: 10.4161/rna.8.1.14260 
PMID: 21317560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

