
1. J Bacteriol. 2011 Apr;193(8):1930-42. doi: 10.1128/JB.01091-10. Epub 2011 Feb 11.

Fatty acid-related phylogeny of myxobacteria as an approach to discover
polyunsaturated omega-3/6 Fatty acids.

Garcia R(1), Pistorius D, Stadler M, Müller R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Natural Products Helmholtz-Institute for
Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research,
Saarland University, Campus C2 3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.

In an analysis of 47 aerobic myxobacterial strains, representing 19 genera in
suborders Cystobacterineae, Nannocystineae, Sorangiineae, and a novel isolate,
"Aetherobacter" SBSr008, an enormously diverse array of fatty acids (FAs) was
found. The distribution of straight-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and branched-chain 
fatty acids (BCFAs) supports the reported clustering of strains in the
phylogenetic tree based on 16S rRNA genes. This finding additionally allows the
prediction and assignment of the novel isolate SBSr008 into its corresponding
taxon. Sorangiineae predominantly contains larger amounts of SCFA (57 to 84%)
than BCFA. On the other hand, Cystobacterineae exhibit significant BCFA content
(53 to 90%), with the exception of the genus Stigmatella. In Nannocystineae, the 
ratio of BCFA and SCFA seems dependent on the taxonomic clade. Myxobacteria could
also be identified and classified by using their specific and predominant FAs as 
biomarkers. Nannocystineae is remarkably unique among the suborders for its
absence of hydroxy FAs. After the identification of arachidonic (AA) FA in
Phaselicystidaceae, eight additional polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs)
belonging to the omega-6 and omega-3 families were discovered. Here we present a 
comprehensive report of FAs found in aerobic myxobacteria. Gliding bacteria
belonging to Flexibacter and Herpetosiphon were chosen for comparative analysis
to determine their FA profiles in relation to the myxobacteria.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01091-10 
PMCID: PMC3133044
PMID: 21317327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

