
1. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 20;6(1):e16166. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016166.

Glucose depletion in the airway surface liquid is essential for sterility of the 
airways.

Pezzulo AA(1), Guti√©rrez J, Duschner KS, McConnell KS, Taft PJ, Ernst SE, Yahr
TL, Rahmouni K, Klesney-Tait J, Stoltz DA, Zabner J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, United
States of America.

Diabetes mellitus predisposes the host to bacterial infections. Moreover,
hyperglycemia has been shown to be an independent risk factor for respiratory
infections. The luminal surface of airway epithelia is covered by a thin layer of
airway surface liquid (ASL) and is normally sterile despite constant exposure to 
bacteria. The balance between bacterial growth and killing in the airway
determines the outcome of exposure to inhaled or aspirated bacteria: infection or
sterility. We hypothesized that restriction of carbon sources--including
glucose--in the ASL is required for sterility of the lungs. We found that airway 
epithelia deplete glucose from the ASL via a novel mechanism involving polarized 
expression of GLUT-1 and GLUT-10, intracellular glucose phosphorylation, and low 
relative paracellular glucose permeability in well-differentiated cultures of
human airway epithelia and in segments of airway epithelia excised from human
tracheas. Moreover, we found that increased glucose concentration in the ASL
augments growth of P. aeruginosa in vitro and in the lungs of hyperglycemic ob/ob
and db/db mice in vivo. In contrast, hyperglycemia had no effect on
intrapulmonary bacterial growth of a P. aeruginosa mutant that is unable to
utilize glucose as a carbon source. Our data suggest that depletion of glucose in
the airway epithelial surface is a novel mechanism for innate immunity. This
mechanism is important for sterility of the airways and has implications in
hyperglycemia and conditions that result in disruption of the epithelial barrier 
in the lung.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016166 
PMCID: PMC3029092
PMID: 21311590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

