
1. Curr Probl Dermatol. 2011;40:107-115. doi: 10.1159/000321060. Epub 2011 Feb 10.

Oral care.

Hitz Lindenmüller I, Lambrecht JT.

Adequate dental and oral hygiene may become a challenge for all users and
especially for elderly people and young children because of their limited motor
skills. The same holds true for patients undergoing/recovering from
chemo-/radiotherapy with accompanying sensitive mucosal conditions. Poor dental
hygiene can result in tooth decay, gingivitis, periodontitis, tooth loss, bad
breath (halitosis), fungal infection and gum diseases. The use of a toothbrush is
the most important measure for oral hygiene. Toothbrushes with soft bristles
operated carefully by hand or via an electric device help to remove plaque and to
avoid mucosal trauma. A handlebar with a grip cover can be helpful for manually
disabled patients or for those with reduced motor skills. In case of oral hygiene
at the bedside or of patients during/after chemo-/radiotherapy a gauze pad can be
helpful for gently cleaning the teeth, gums and tongue. The use of fluoride
toothpaste is imperative for the daily oral hygiene. Detergents such as sodium
lauryl sulphate improve the cleaning action but may also dehydrate and irritate
the mucous membrane. The use of products containing detergents and flavouring
agents (peppermint, menthol, cinnamon) should therefore be avoided by bedridden
patients or those with dry mouth and sensitive mucosa. Aids for suitable
interdental cleaning, such as dental floss, interdental brushes or dental sticks,
are often complicated to operate. Their correct use should be instructed by
healthcare professionals. To support dental care, additional fluoridation with a 
fluoride gel or rinse can be useful. Products further containing antiseptics such
as chlorhexidine or triclosan reduce the quantity of bacteria in the mouth. For
patients undergoing or having undergone radio-/chemotherapy, a mouthwash that
concomitantly moisturizes the oral mucosa is advisable.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000321060 
PMID: 21325845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

