
1. Vaccine. 2011 Apr 5;29(16):2986-98. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.01.099. Epub 2011
Feb 12.

A live attenuated strain of Yersinia pestis KIM as a vaccine against plague.

Sun W(1), Six D, Kuang X, Roland KL, Raetz CR, Curtiss R 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease and Vaccinology, The Biodesign Institute,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.

Erratum in
    Vaccine. 2011 Aug 5;29(34):5820.

Yersinia pestis, the causative agent of plague, is a potential weapon of
bioterrorism. Y. pestis evades the innate immune system by synthesizing
tetra-acylated lipid A with poor Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)-stimulating activity
at 37°C, whereas hexa-acylated lipid A, a potent TLR4 agonist, is made at lower
temperatures. Synthesis of Escherichia coli LpxL, which transfers the secondary
laurate chain to the 2'-position of lipid A, in Y. pestis results in production
of hexa-acylated lipid A at 37°C, leading to significant attenuation of
virulence. Previously, we described a Y. pestis vaccine strain in which crp
expression is under the control of the arabinose-regulated araC P(BAD) promoter, 
resulting in a 4-5 log reduction in virulence. To reduce the virulence of the crp
promoter mutant further, we introduced E. coli lpxL into the Y. pestis
chromosome. The χ10030(pCD1Ap) (ΔlpxP32::P(lpxL)lpxL ΔP(crp21)::TT araC
P(BAD)crp) construct likewise produced hexa-acylated lipid A at 37°C and was
significantly more attenuated than strains harboring each individual mutation.
The LD(50) of the mutant in mice, when administered subcutaneously or
intranasally was >10(7)-times and >10(4)-times greater than wild type,
respectively. Mice immunized subcutaneously with a single dose of the mutant were
completely protected against a subcutaneous challenge of 3.6×10(7) wild-type Y.
pestis and significantly protected (80% survival) against a pulmonary challenge
of 1.2×10(4) live cells. Intranasal immunization also provided significant
protection against challenges by both routes. This mutant is an immunogenic,
highly attenuated live Y. pestis construct that merits further development as a
vaccine candidate.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.01.099 
PMCID: PMC3073832
PMID: 21320544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

