
1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2011 May 1;50(9):1144-50. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.02.013. Epub 2011 Feb 18.

Concentration of the antibacterial precursor thiocyanate in cystic fibrosis
airway secretions.

Lorentzen D(1), Durairaj L, Pezzulo AA, Nakano Y, Launspach J, Stoltz DA, Zamba
G, McCray PB Jr, Zabner J, Welsh MJ, Nauseef WM, Bánfi B.

Author information: 
(1)Inflammation Program, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa
City, IA 52242, USA.

A recently discovered enzyme system produces antibacterial hypothiocyanite
(OSCN(-)) in the airway lumen by oxidizing the secreted precursor thiocyanate
(SCN(-)). Airway epithelial cultures have been shown to secrete SCN(-) in a
CFTR-dependent manner. Thus, reduced SCN(-) availability in the airway might
contribute to the pathogenesis of cystic fibrosis (CF), a disease caused by
mutations in the CFTR gene and characterized by an airway host defense defect. We
tested this hypothesis by analyzing the SCN(-) concentration in the nasal airway 
surface liquid (ASL) of CF patients and non-CF subjects and in the
tracheobronchial ASL of CFTR-ΔF508 homozygous pigs and control littermates. In
the nasal ASL, the SCN(-) concentration was ~30-fold higher than in serum
independent of the CFTR mutation status of the human subject. In the
tracheobronchial ASL of CF pigs, the SCN(-) concentration was somewhat reduced.
Among human subjects, SCN(-) concentrations in the ASL varied from person to
person independent of CFTR expression, and CF patients with high SCN(-) levels
had better lung function than those with low SCN(-) levels. Thus, although CFTR
can contribute to SCN(-) transport, it is not indispensable for the high SCN(-)
concentration in ASL. The correlation between lung function and SCN(-)
concentration in CF patients may reflect a beneficial role for SCN(-).

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.02.013 
PMCID: PMC3070840
PMID: 21334431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

