
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2011 May;90(3):971-80. doi: 10.1007/s00253-011-3154-1.
Epub 2011 Feb 20.

A novel cold-adapted lipase from Acinetobacter sp. XMZ-26: gene cloning and
characterisation.

Zheng X(1), Chu X, Zhang W, Wu N, Fan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
No. 12 Zhongguancun South Street, Beijing 100081, People's Republic of China.
xiaomeizheng84@yahoo.cn

Acinetobacter sp. XMZ-26 (ACCC 05422) was isolated from soil samples obtained
from glaciers in Xinjiang Province, China. The partial nucleotide sequence of a
lipase gene was obtained by touchdown PCR using degenerate primers designed based
on the conserved domains of cold-adapted lipases. Subsequently, a complete gene
sequence encoding a 317 amino acid polypeptide was identified. Our novel lipase
gene, lipA, was overexpressed in Escherichia coli. The recombinant protein (LipA)
was purified by Ni-affinity chromatography, and then deeply characterised. The
LipA resulted to hydrolyse pNP esters of fatty acids with acyl chain length from 
C2 to C16, and the preferred substrate was pNP octanoate showing a k(cat) =
560.52 ± 28.32 s(-1), K(m) = 0.075 ± 0.008 mM, and a k(cat)/K(m) = 7,377.29 ±
118.88 s(-1) mM(-1). Maximal LipA activity was observed at a temperature of 15°C 
and pH 10.0 using pNP decanoate as substrate. That LipA peaked at such a low
temperature and remained most activity between 5°C and 35°C indicated that it was
a cold-adapted enzyme. Remarkably, this lipase retained much of its activity in
the presence of commercial detergents and organic solvents, including Ninol,
Triton X-100, methanol, PEG-600, and DMSO. This cold-adapted lipase may find
applications in the detergent industry and organic synthesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-011-3154-1 
PMID: 21336927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

