
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2011 May;90(3):961-70. doi: 10.1007/s00253-010-3079-0.
Epub 2011 Feb 19.

Molecular cloning and characterization of a new cold-active esterase from a
deep-sea metagenomic library.

Fu C(1), Hu Y, Xie F, Guo H, Ashforth EJ, Polyak SW, Zhu B, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and
Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 1 West
Beichen Road, Chaoyang District, 100101, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

A clone which conferred lipolytic activity at low temperature was identified from
a fosmid library constructed from a South China Sea marine sediment sample. The
gene responsible, estF, consisted of 1,080 bp that encoded 359 amino acid
residues, with a typical N-terminal signal peptide of 28 amino acid residues. A
phylogenetic analysis of amino acid sequence with other lipolytic enzymes
revealed that EstF and seven closely related putative lipolytic enzymes comprised
a unique clade in the phylogenetic tree. Moreover, these hypothetic esterases
showed unique conservative sites in the amino acid sequence. The recombinant EstF
was overexpressed and purified, and its biochemical properties were partially
characterized. The optimal substrate for EstF to hydrolyze among a panel of
p-nitrophenyl esters (C2 to C16) was p-nitrophenyl butyrate (C4), with a K(m) of 
0.46 mM. Activity quickly decreased with substrates containing an acyl chain
length longer than 10 carbons. We found that EstF was active in the temperature
range of 0-60°C, showed the best activity at 50°C, but was unstable at 60°C. It
exhibited a high level of activity in the pH range of 7.0-10.0 showing the
highest activity at pH 9.0.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-010-3079-0 
PMID: 21336688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

