
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2011 May;89(5):735-42. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0510279. Epub 2011 Feb 17.

Simvastatin antagonizes CD40L secretion, CXC chemokine formation, and pulmonary
infiltration of neutrophils in abdominal sepsis.

Zhang S(1), Rahman M, Zhang S, Qi Z, Thorlacius H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Skåne University Hospital, Lund University, Malmö,
Sweden.

Statins have been reported to exert anti-inflammatory actions and protect against
septic organ dysfunction. Herein, we hypothesized that simvastatin may attenuate 
neutrophil activation and lung damage in abdominal sepsis. Male C57BL/6 mice were
pretreated with simvastatin (0.5 or 10 mg/kg) before CLP. In separate groups,
mice received an anti-CD40L antibody or a CXCR2 antagonist (SB225002) prior to
CLP. BALF and lung tissue were harvested for analysis of neutrophil infiltration,
as well as edema and CXC chemokine formation. Blood was collected for analysis of
Mac-1 and CD40L expression on neutrophils and platelets, as well as soluble CD40L
in plasma. Simvastatin decreased CLP-induced neutrophil infiltration and edema
formation in the lung. Moreover, Mac-1 expression increased on septic
neutrophils, which was significantly attenuated by simvastatin. Inhibition of
CD40L reduced CLP-induced up-regulation of Mac-1 on neutrophils. Simvastatin
prevented CD40L shedding from the surface of platelets and reduced circulating
levels of CD40L in septic mice. CXC chemokine-induced migration of neutrophils in
vitro was decreased greatly by simvastatin. Moreover, simvastatin abolished
CLP-evoked formation of CXC chemokines in the lung, and a CXCR2 antagonist
attenuated pulmonary accumulation of neutrophils. Our data suggest that the
inhibitory effect of simvastatin on pulmonary accumulation of neutrophils may be 
related to a reduction of CD40L secretion into the circulation, as well as a
decrease in CXC chemokine formation in the lung. Thus, these protective
mechanisms help to explain the beneficial actions exerted by statins, such as
simvastatin, in sepsis.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0510279 
PMID: 21330348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

