
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Mar 16;133(10):3316-9. doi: 10.1021/ja111607x. Epub 2011 Feb 
22.

Detection of formate, rather than carbon monoxide, as the stoichiometric
coproduct in conversion of fatty aldehydes to alkanes by a cyanobacterial
aldehyde decarbonylase.

Warui DM(1), Li N, NÃ¸rgaard H, Krebs C, Bollinger JM Jr, Booker SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, United States.

The second of two reactions in a recently discovered pathway through which
saturated fatty acids are converted to alkanes (and unsaturated fatty acids to
alkenes) in cyanobacteria entails scission of the C1-C2 bond of a fatty aldehyde 
intermediate by the enzyme aldehyde decarbonylase (AD), a ferritin-like protein
with a dinuclear metal cofactor of unknown composition. We tested for and failed 
to detect carbon monoxide (CO), the proposed C1-derived coproduct of alkane
synthesis, following the in vitro conversion of octadecanal (R-CHO, where R =
n-C(17)H(35)) to heptadecane (R-H) by the Nostoc punctiforme AD isolated
following its overproduction in Escherichia coli. Instead, we identified formate 
(HCO(2)(-)) as the stoichiometric coproduct of the reaction. Results of
isotope-tracer experiments indicate that the aldehyde hydrogen is retained in the
HCO(2)(-) and the hydrogen in the nascent methyl group of the alkane originates, 
at least in part, from solvent. With these characteristics, the reaction appears 
to be formally hydrolytic, but the improbability of a hydrolytic mechanism having
the primary carbanion as the leaving group, the structural similarity of the ADs 
to other O(2)-activating nonheme di-iron proteins, and the dependence of in vitro
AD activity on the presence of a reducing system implicate some type of redox
mechanism. Two possible resolutions to this conundrum are suggested.

DOI: 10.1021/ja111607x 
PMCID: PMC3069495
PMID: 21341652  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

