
1. Med Hypotheses. 2011 May;76(5):706-16. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.02.002. Epub 2011
Feb 23.

Speculations on the initiation of chromosome replication in Escherichia coli: the
dualism hypothesis.

Norris V(1).

Author information: 
(1)AMMIS Laboratory, EA 3829, Department of Biology, University of Rouen, 76821
Mont Saint Aignan, France. victor.norris@univ-rouen.fr

The exact nature of the mechanism that triggers initiation of chromosome
replication in the best understood of all organisms, Escherichia coli, remains
mysterious. Here, I suggest that this mechanism evolved in response to the
problems that arise if chromosome replication does not occur. E. coli is now
known to be highly structured. This leads me to propose a mechanism for
initiation of replication based on the dynamics of large assemblies of molecules 
and macromolecules termed hyperstructures. In this proposal, hyperstructures and 
their constituents are put into two classes, non-equilibrium and equilibrium,
that spontaneously separate and that are appropriate for life in either good or
bad conditions. Maintaining the right ratio(s) of non-equilibrium to equilibrium 
hyperstructures is therefore a major challenge for cells. I propose that this
maintenance entails a major transfer of material from equilibrium to
non-equilibrium hyperstructures once per cell and I further propose that this
transfer times the cell cycle. More specifically, I speculate that the dialogue
between hyperstructures involves the structuring of water and the condensation of
cations and that one of the outcomes of ion condensation on ribosomal
hyperstructures and decondensation from the origin hyperstructure is the
separation of strands at oriC responsible for triggering initiation of
replication. The dualism hypothesis that comes out of these speculations may help
integrate models for initiation of replication, chromosome segregation and cell
division with the 'prebiotic ecology' scenario of the origins of life.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.02.002 
PMID: 21349650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

