
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 29;286(17):15496-506. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.189951. Epub
2011 Feb 23.

Fold and function of the InlB B-repeat.

Ebbes M(1), Bleymüller WM, Cernescu M, Nölker R, Brutschy B, Niemann HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Bielefeld University, Universitätsstrasse 25, 33615
Bielefeld, Germany.

Host cell invasion by the facultative intracellular pathogen Listeria
monocytogenes requires the invasion protein InlB in many cell types. InlB
consists of an N-terminal internalin domain that binds the host cell receptor
tyrosine kinase Met and C-terminal GW domains that bind to glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs). Met binding and activation is required for host cell invasion, while the 
interaction between GW domains and GAGs enhances this effect. Soluble InlB
elicits the same cellular phenotypes as the natural Met ligand hepatocyte growth 
factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF), e.g. cell scatter. So far, little is known about 
the central part of InlB, the B-repeat. Here we present a structural and
functional characterization of the InlB B-repeat. The crystal structure reveals a
variation of the β-grasp fold that is most similar to small ubiquitin-like
modifiers (SUMOs). However, structural similarity also suggests a potential
evolutionary relation to bacterial mucin-binding proteins. The B-repeat defines
the prototype structure of a hitherto uncharacterized domain present in over a
thousand bacterial proteins. Generally, this domain probably acts as a spacer or 
a receptor-binding domain in extracellular multi-domain proteins. In cellular
assays the B-repeat acts synergistically with the internalin domain conferring to
it the ability to stimulate cell motility. Thus, the B-repeat probably binds a
further host cell receptor and thereby enhances signaling downstream of Met.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.189951 
PMCID: PMC3083156
PMID: 21345802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

