
1. Int J Oncol. 2011 May;38(5):1279-85. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.953. Epub 2011 Feb 23.

CCL25 mediates migration, invasion and matrix metalloproteinase expression by
breast cancer cells in a CCR9-dependent fashion.

Johnson-Holiday C(1), Singh R, Johnson E, Singh S, Stockard CR, Grizzle WE,
Lillard JW Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Immunology, Morehouse School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30310-1495, USA.

Breast cancer (BrCa) is one of the most frequently diagnosed cancers and the
second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in North American women. Most
deaths are caused by metastasis, and BrCa is characterized by a distinct
metastatic pattern involving lymph nodes, bone marrow, lung, liver and brain.
Migration of metastatic cells share many similarities with leukocyte trafficking,
which are regulated by chemokines and their receptors. The current study
evaluates the expression and functional role of CCR9, and its only known ligand, 
CCL25, in BrCa cell migration and invasion. Quantitative immunohistochemical
analysis showed that both moderately and poorly differentiated BrCa tissue
expressed significantly more (P<0.0001) CCR9 compared to non-neoplastic breast
tissue. Interestingly, poorly differentiated BrCa tissue expressed significantly 
more (P<0.0001) CCR9 compared to moderately differentiated BrCa tissue.
Similarly, CCR9 was highly expressed by the aggressive breast cancer cell line
(MDA-MD-231) compared to the less aggressive MCF-7. Migration as well as invasion
assays were used to evaluate the functional interaction between CCR9 and CCL25 in
BrCa cell lines (MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7). Neutralizing CCR9-CCL25 interactions
significantly impaired the migration and invasion of BrCa cells. Furthermore,
CCL25 enhanced the expression of MMP-1, -9, -11 and -13 active proteins by BrCa
cells in a CCR9-dependent fashion. These studies show CCR9 is functionally and
significantly expressed by BrCa (poorly > moderately differentiated) tissue and
cells as well as that CCL25 activation of this receptor promotes breast tumor
cell migration, invasion and MMP expression, which are key components of BrCa
metastasis.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2011.953 
PMCID: PMC3760515
PMID: 21344163  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

