
1. Am J Pathol. 2011 Mar;178(3):1190-200. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.11.067.

Chemokine receptor CXCR2 mediates bacterial clearance rather than neutrophil
recruitment in a murine model of pneumonic plague.

Eisele NA(1), Lee-Lewis H, Besch-Williford C, Brown CR, Anderson DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, University of Missouri, Columbia,
Missouri 65211, USA.

Pulmonary infection by Yersinia pestis causes pneumonic plague, a necrotic
bronchopneumonia that is rapidly lethal and highly contagious. Acute pneumonic
plague accompanies the up-regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines and
chemokines, suggesting that the host innate immune response may contribute to the
development of disease. To address this possibility, we sought to understand the 
consequences of neutrophil recruitment during pneumonic plague, and we studied
the susceptibility of C3H-HeN mice lacking the CXC chemokine KC or its receptor
CXC receptor 2 (CXCR2) to pulmonary Y. pestis infection. We found that without Kc
or Cxcr2, disease progression was accelerated both in bacterial growth and
development of primary bronchopneumonia. When examined in an antibody clearance
model, Cxcr2(-/-) mice were not protected by neutralizing Y. pestis antibodies,
yet bacterial growth in the lungs was delayed in a manner associated with a
neutrophil-mediated inflammatory response. After this initial delay, however,
robust neutrophil recruitment in Cxcr2(-/-) mice correlated with bacterial growth
and the development of fulminant pneumonic and septicemic plague. In contrast,
attenuated Y. pestis lacking the conserved pigmentation locus could be cleared
from the lungs in the absence of Cxcr2 indicating virulence factors within this
locus may inhibit CXCR2-independent pathways of bacterial killing. Together, the 
data suggest CXCR2 uniquely induces host defense mechanisms that are effective
against virulent Y. pestis, raising new insight into the activation of
neutrophils during infection.

Copyright Â© 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.11.067 
PMCID: PMC3070576
PMID: 21356370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

