
1. Mol Ther. 2011 May;19(5):951-9. doi: 10.1038/mt.2011.25. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Engineering and visualization of bacteria for targeting infarcted myocardium.

Le UN(1), Kim HS, Kwon JS, Kim MY, Nguyen VH, Jiang SN, Lee BI, Hong Y, Shin MG, 
Rhee JH, Bom HS, Ahn Y, Gambhir SS, Choy HE, Min JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Chonnam National University Medical School,
Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

Optimization of the specific affinity of cardiac delivery vector could
significantly improve the efficiency of gene/protein delivery, yet no cardiac
vectors to date have sufficient target specificity for myocardial infarction
(MI). In this study, we explored bacterial tropism for infarcted myocardium based
on our previous observations that certain bacteria are capable of targeting the
hypoxic regions in solid tumors. Out of several Escherichia coli or Salmonella
typhimurium strains, the S. typhimurium defective in the synthesis of ppGpp
(ΔppGpp S. typhimurium) revealed accumulation and selective proliferation in the 
infarcted myocardium without spillover to noncardiac tissue. The Salmonellae that
were engineered to express a variant of Renilla luciferase gene (RLuc8), under
the control of the E. coli arabinose operon promoter (P(BAD)), selectively
targeted and delivered RLuc8 in the infarcted myocardium only upon injection of
L-arabinose. An examination of the infarct size before and after infection, and
estimations of C-reactive protein (CRP) and procalcitonin indicated that
intravenous injection of ΔppGpp S. typhimurium did not induce serious local or
systemic immune reactions. This current proof-of-principle study demonstrates for
the first time the capacity of Salmonellae to target infarcted myocardium and to 
serve as a vehicle for the selective delivery of therapeutic agents in MI.

DOI: 10.1038/mt.2011.25 
PMCID: PMC3098638
PMID: 21364539  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

