
1. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 25;6(2):e16899. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016899.

Thermal- and oxidative stress causes enhanced release of NKG2D ligand-bearing
immunosuppressive exosomes in leukemia/lymphoma T and B cells.

Hedlund M(1), Nagaeva O, Kargl D, Baranov V, Mincheva-Nilsson L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Clinical Microbiology, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden.

Immune evasion from NK surveillance related to inadequate NK-cell function has
been suggested as an explanation of the high incidence of relapse and fatal
outcome of many blood malignancies. In this report we have used Jurkat and Raji
cell lines as a model for studies of the NKG2D receptor-ligand system in T-and B 
cell leukemia/lymphoma. Using real-time quantitative RT-PCR and immunoflow
cytometry we show that Jurkat and Raji cells constitutively express mRNA and
protein for the stress-inducible NKG2D ligands MICA/B and ULBP1 and 2, and
up-regulate the expression in a cell-line specific and stress-specific manner.
Furthermore, we revealed by electron microscopy, immunoflow cytometry and western
blot that these ligands were expressed and secreted on exosomes, nanometer-sized 
microvesicles of endosomal origin. Acting as a decoy, the NKG2D ligand-bearing
exosomes downregulate the in vitro NKG2D receptor-mediated cytotoxicity and thus 
impair NK-cell function. Interestingly, thermal and oxidative stress enhanced the
exosome secretion generating more soluble NKG2D ligands that aggravated the
impairment of the cytotoxic response. Taken together, our results might partly
explain the clinically observed NK-cell dysfunction in patients suffering from
leukemia/lymphoma. The adverse effect of thermal and oxidative stress, enhancing 
the release of immunosuppressive exosomes, should be considered when cytostatic
and hyperthermal anti-cancer therapies are designed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016899 
PMCID: PMC3045385
PMID: 21364924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

