
1. Microb Drug Resist. 2011 Jun;17(2):291-7. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2010.0144. Epub 2011
Mar 9.

Analysis of Staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec in Staphylococcus haemolyticus
and Staphylococcus sciuri: identification of a novel ccr gene complex with a
newly identified ccrA allotype (ccrA7).

Urushibara N(1), Paul SK, Hossain MA, Kawaguchiya M, Kobayashi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan. noriko-u@sapmed.ac.jp

Methicillin resistance in staphylococci is conferred by the acquisition in its
chromosome of the mecA gene, which is located on a mobile genetic element called 
staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec (SCCmec). Genetic type of SCCmec is
defined by combination of mec gene complex class and cassette chromosome
recombinase gene (ccr) allotype. In this study, we analyzed genetic diversity of 
the SCCmec in 11 Staphylococcus haemolyticus strains and a Staphylococcus sciuri 
strain, which were recently isolated from clinical specimens in Bangladesh. Among
these strains, only two S. haemolyticus strains were proved to have the known
types of SCCmec, that is, SCCmec V (class C2 mec-ccrC) and VII (class C1
mec-ccrC). Five S. haemolyticus strains were assigned two unique mec-ccr gene
complexes combination; that is, class C1 mec-ccrA4B4 (four isolates) and class A 
mec-ccrC (one isolate). In the remaining four S. haemolyticus strains with class 
C1 mec, no known ccr allotypes could be detected. A single S. sciuri strain with 
class A mec complex carried a ccrA gene belonging to a novel allotype designated 
ccrA7, together with ccrB3. The ccrA7 gene in the S. sciuri strain showed
61.7%-82.7% sequence identity to the ccrA gene sequences published so far, and
75.3% identity to ccrA3, which is a component of the type 3 ccr complex
(ccrA3-ccrB3) in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. The results of the 
present study indicated that mec gene complex and ccr genes in coagulase-negative
staphylococci are highly divergent, and distinct from those of common
methicillin-resistant S. aureus. Identification of the novel ccrA7 allotype
combined with ccrB3 suggested an occurrence of recombination between different
ccr complexes in nature.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2010.0144 
PMID: 21388304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

