
1. Chembiochem. 2011 Apr 11;12(6):922-31. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201100024. Epub 2011 Mar
8.

Mining the cinnabaramide biosynthetic pathway to generate novel proteasome
inhibitors.

Rachid S(1), Huo L, Herrmann J, Stadler M, Köpcke B, Bitzer J, Müller R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Natural Products (MINS), Helmholtz Institute for
Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research 
(HZI), Saarland University, Campus C2.3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.

The cinnabaramides and salinosporamides are mixed PKS/NRPS natural products
isolated from a terrestrial streptomycete and a marine actinomycete,
respectively. They interfere with the proteasome and thus potentially inhibit the
growth of cancer cells. The compounds exhibit a γ-lactam-β-lactone bicyclic ring 
structure attached to a cyclohexenyl unit and a PKS side chain. As a first step
towards improving anticancer activity and permitting genetic approaches to novel 
analogues, we have cloned and characterized the cinnabaramide biosynthetic genes 
from Streptomyces sp. JS360. In addition to the expected PKS and NRPS genes, the 
cluster encodes functionalities for the assembly of the hexyl side chain
precursor. The corresponding enzymes exhibit relaxed substrate specificities
towards a number of synthesized precursors, enabling production of novel
chlorinated cinnabaramides. These were isolated and analyzed for activity,
revealing that derivatives bearing a chlorine atom in the PKS side chain show
higher inhibitory potentials towards the proteasome's proteolytic subunits
(especially the trypsin and chymotrypsin units) and higher cytotoxicities towards
human tumor cell lines than the parent cinnabaramide A. Although their activities
towards the proteasome were weaker than that of salinosporamide A, the
cinnabaramides were found to inhibit the growth of various fungi with greater
potency.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201100024 
PMID: 21387511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

