
1. J Breath Res. 2010 Mar;4(1):017003. doi: 10.1088/1752-7155/4/1/017003. Epub 2010 
Mar 2.

Extra-oral halitosis: an overview.

Tangerman A(1), Winkel EG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Dentistry and Oral Hygiene, Department of Periodontology,
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands. a.tangerman@mdl.umcn.nl

Halitosis can be subdivided into intra-oral and extra-oral halitosis, depending
on the place where it originates. Most reports now agree that the most frequent
sources of halitosis exist within the oral cavity and include bacterial
reservoirs such as the dorsum of the tongue, saliva and periodontal pockets,
where anaerobic bacteria degrade sulfur-containing amino acids to produce the
foul smelling volatile sulfur compounds (VSCs), especially hydrogen sulfide
(H(2)S) and methyl mercaptan (CH(3)SH). Tongue coating is considered to be the
most important source of VSCs. Oral malodor can now be treated effectively.
Special attention in this overview is given to extra-oral halitosis. Extra-oral
halitosis can be subdivided into non-blood-borne halitosis, such as halitosis
from the upper respiratory tract including the nose and from the lower
respiratory tract, and blood-borne halitosis. The majority of patients with
extra-oral halitosis have blood-borne halitosis. Blood-borne halitosis is also
frequently caused by odorous VSCs, in particular dimethyl sulfide (CH3SCH3).
Extra-oral halitosis, covering about 5-10% of all cases of halitosis, might be a 
manifestation of a serious disease for which treatment is much more complicated
than for intra-oral halitosis. It is therefore of utmost importance to
differentiate between intra-oral and extra-oral halitosis. Differences between
intra-oral and extra-oral halitosis are discussed extensively. The importance of 
applying odor characterization of various odorants in halitosis research is also 
highlighted in this article. The use of the odor index, odor threshold values and
simulation of bad breath samples is explained.

DOI: 10.1088/1752-7155/4/1/017003 
PMID: 21386205  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

