
1. Parasitol Res. 2011 Sep;109(3):707-13. doi: 10.1007/s00436-011-2302-y. Epub 2011 
Mar 5.

Efficacy of an energy block containing Duddingtonia flagrans in the control of
gastrointestinal nematodes of sheep.

Sagüés MF(1), Fusé LA, Fernández AS, Iglesias LE, Moreno FC, Saumell CA.

Author information: 
(1)Área de Parasitología y Enfermedades Parasitarias, Departamento de Sanidad
Animal y Medicina Preventiva, Universidad Nacional del Centro, Campus
Universitario, B7000GHG Tandil, Argentina. federica@vet.unicen.edu.ar

The efficacy of the nematode-trapping fungus Duddingtonia flagrans incorporated
into an energy block was evaluated for the control of gastrointestinal nematodes 
in sheep. Four naturally parasitised sheep with average nematode egg counts of
2,470 eggs per gram grazed by pairs on two similar parasite-free paddocks for 30 
days. During that period, one pair of sheep (treated animals, T1) received an
energy block containing chlamydospores of D. flagrans at a dose of 200,000
chlamydopores/kg bw/day, while the second pair (control animals, C1) received a
fungus-free energy block. The animals in both groups were taken off the paddocks 
after contaminating the pastures for a month with either nematode eggs plus
fungal chlamydospores (T1) or nematode eggs alone (C1). Twelve parasite-free
sheep were divided into two groups of six animals each, the treated group (T2)
was placed on the paddock previously contaminated with parasites and fungus,
while the control group (C2) was placed on the parasite-only paddock. These two
groups grazed on their respective paddocks during 30 days and were then housed
for 15 days, after which period they were slaughtered in order to determine the
parasite burden present in each animal. Results showed that animals in group T2
harboured significantly less nematodes than their counterpart in group C2. The
efficacy of D. flagrans was 92% against the total parasite burden, 100% against
Haemonchus contortus and Teladorsagia circumcincta, 89.9% against
Trichostrongylus colubriformis, 87.5% against Cooperia onchopora, and 90% against
Trichostrongylus axei. No efficacy was detected against Nematodirus spathiger,
Trichuris ovis and T. skrjabini.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-011-2302-y 
PMID: 21380576  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

