
1. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 1990;4(3):142-6.

Pretreatment of prosthetic valve sewing-ring with the antibiotic/fibrin sealant
compound as a prophylactic tool against prosthetic valve endocarditis.

Karck M(1), Siclari F, Wahlig H, Sperling U, Schmid C, Haverich A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Hannover Medical School, FRG.

Prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) remains a dreaded complication following
heart valve replacement despite perioperative antibiotic (AB) prophylaxis. In
order to increase the AB concentration in the sewing ring, an experimental study 
including topical application of the gentamicin derivative EMD 46/217 and fibrin 
sealant (F) as AB-carrier was initiated. In vitro pretreatment of Dacron with the
gentamicin derivative and F was followed by constant AB release for 3 weeks. In a
subsequent animal study, four Dacron rings with different pretreatment were
implanted in the descending aorta of 10 pigs after direct contamination with
10(8) Staphylococcus aureus solution. One ring was pretreated with the AB/F
compound, a second ring with the AB alone. Ring 3 (no pretreatment) and ring 4 (F
alone) served as controls. After 1 week, the sewing rings and their corresponding
implantation sites were assayed for measurement of AB-content and for culture.
The AB content of AB/F-rings was 24.99 +/- 7.16 micrograms/g wet weight, while
rings pretreated with the AB alone contained no measurable drug amounts with the 
exception of one specimen (0.5 microgram/g) (AB/F vs. AB-rings: P less than
0.0005). The corresponding implantation sites to AB/F rings contained 1.07 +/-
0.54 micrograms/g AB, whereas in only 2 of 10 implantation sites of AB rings, low
AB levels were found (0.05 and 0.2 micrograms/g) (AB/F vs. AB ring implantation
sites: P less than 0.0005). While all control rings and 9 of 10 AB rings were
infected, 5 of 10 AB/F rings remained sterile after culture (AB/F vs. AB rings: P
= 0.05). This finding correlated with the AB content in the suture
rings.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/1010-7940(90)90185-3 
PMID: 2139788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

