
1. Pharmazie. 2011 Jan;66(1):69-74.

A screening of curcumin derivatives for antibacterial phototoxic effects studies 
on curcumin and curcuminoids. XLIII.

Haukvik T(1), Bruzell E, Kristensen S, TÃ¸nnesen HH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Oslo, School of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutics, P.O.Box
1068 Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway. Tone.haukvik@farmasi.uio.no

Curcumin, bis(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)-1,6-heptadiene-3,5-dione, has potential 
as a photosensitiser for photodynamic treatment of localised superficial
infections in e.g., the mouth or skin. The aim of the present study was to
evaluate the in vitro antibacterial phototoxic potential of a series of five
curcumin derivatives. The gram-positive Enterococcus faecalis and the
gram-negative Escherichia coli were used as bacterial models. The bacteria were
exposed to curcuminoid preparations in two concentrations (2.5 and 25.0 microM)
in combination with a constant irradiation dose (5 J/cm2). The UV-VIS absorption 
spectrum of the curcuminoids was in the same range as curcumin, 300-500 nm.
Compound 1 (dimethoxycurcumin; C1) and compound 3 (bisdemethoxycurcumin; C3) were
strongly phototoxic towards E. faecalis (no surviving bacteria) and showed a
lower but significant effect towards E. coli (< or = 0.5 log reductions and 1 - 4
log reductions, respectively). Compound 2 (C2) and compound 4 (C4) in combination
with blue light reduced the colony forming ability of E. faecalis (approximately 
1-4 log reductions). The phototoxic effect of the curcuminoids varied with
concentration, and for compounds C1, C2 and C3 it was further influenced by the
addition of polyethylene glycol 400 (PEG 400) to the preparations.
2,6-Divanillylidenecyclohexanone (C5) showed very low phototoxic potential (< 0.2
log reductions) under the conditions used in the present study. The addition of
polyethylene glycol 400 (PEG 400) seemed to increase the solubility of compound
C1, C3 and C5 in phosphate buffered saline (PBS). This investigation demonstrates
the importance and influence of the substituents on the phenolic rings and the
keto-enol moiety for the phototoxic potential of curcumin and its derivatives.


PMID: 21391438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

