
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 6;286(18):15943-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.177634. Epub 2011
Mar 10.

Sts-2 is a phosphatase that negatively regulates zeta-associated protein (ZAP)-70
and T cell receptor signaling pathways.

San Luis B(1), Sondgeroth B, Nassar N, Carpino N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA.

T cell activity is controlled in large part by the T cell receptor (TCR). The TCR
detects the presence of foreign pathogens and activates the T cell-mediated
immune reaction. Numerous intracellular signaling pathways downstream of the TCR 
are involved in the process of T cell activation. Negative regulation of these
pathways helps prevent excessive and deleterious T cell responses. Two homologous
proteins, Sts-1 and Sts-2, have been shown to function as critical negative
regulators of TCR signaling. The phosphoglycerate mutase-like domain of Sts-1
(Sts-1(PGM)) has a potent phosphatase activity that contributes to the
suppression of TCR signaling. The function of Sts-2(PGM) as a phosphatase has
been less clear, principally because its intrinsic enzyme activity has been
difficult to detect. Here, we demonstrate that Sts-2 regulates the level of
tyrosine phosphorylation on targets within T cells, among them the critical T
cell tyrosine kinase Zap-70. Utilizing new phosphorylated substrates, we
demonstrate that Sts-2(PGM) has clear, albeit weak, phosphatase activity. We
further pinpoint Sts-2 residues Glu-481, Ser-552, and Ser-582 as specificity
determinants, in that an Sts-2(PGM) triple mutant in which these three amino
acids are altered to their counterparts in Sts-1(PGM) has substantially increased
activity. Our results suggest that the phosphatase activities of both suppressor 
of TCR signaling homologues cooperate in a similar but independent fashion to
help set the threshold for TCR-induced T cell activation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.177634 
PMCID: PMC3091203
PMID: 21393235  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

