
1. Scand J Immunol. 1990 Apr;31(4):397-403.

Zinc ions inhibit factor I-mediated release of CR1-bound immune complexes and
degradation of cell-bound complement factors C3b and C4b.

Jepsen HH(1), Teisner B, Svehag SE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Odense University, Denmark.

ZnCl2 exerted a dose-dependent inhibition of citrate-phosphate-dextrose (CPD)
plasma-induced release of 125I-labelled BSA-anti-BSA immune complexes (IC) bound 
to complement receptor type 1 (CR1, CD35) in human whole blood. Maximal
inhibition was observed at 10 mM of ZnCl2. Furthermore, the release of IC bound
to erythrocyte (E)-CR1 by purified factor I, factor I-deficient serum plus
purified factor I, or normal human serum was reduced by approximately 90%, 64%,
and 52%, respectively, in the presence of 10 mM ZnCl2. The effect of ZnCl2 on
factor I-mediated degradation of cell-bound C3b/C4b was also investigated
employing CPD blood or E from a factor I-deficient donor. These cells expressed
covalently bound C3b and C4b as demonstrated by a simple agglutination technique.
Upon incubation of CPD whole blood with purified factor I, or of E with purified 
factor I or normal CPD plasma, the C-fragments were cleaved and the cells were no
longer agglutinated by antibodies to C3c and C4c. The presence of ZnCl2 prevented
this factor I-mediated degradation of C3b and C4b, as evidenced by the unaffected
agglutination of the cells by the antibodies. We conclude that ZnCl2 inhibited
factor I activity since: (1) release of complement-preopsonized IC from E-CR1 by 
purified factor I was markedly inhibited (90%) in the presence of ZnCl2, (2)
preincubation of the cells with ZnCl2 caused only a moderate inhibition (32-38%) 
of the IC release, and (3) degradation by purified factor I of covalently
cell-bound C3b and C4b was abrogated in the presence of 10 mM ZnCl2.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.1990.tb02785.x 
PMID: 2139734  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

