
1. Blood. 2011 May 5;117(18):4773-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-330514. Epub 2011
Mar 10.

Hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells, generation of induced pluripotent stem
cells, and isolation of endothelial progenitors from 21- to 23.5-year
cryopreserved cord blood.

Broxmeyer HE(1), Lee MR, Hangoc G, Cooper S, Prasain N, Kim YJ, Mallett C, Ye Z, 
Witting S, Cornetta K, Cheng L, Yoder MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. hbroxmey@iupui.edu

Cryopreservation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and hematopoietic progenitor 
cells (HPCs) is crucial for cord blood (CB) banking and transplantation. We
evaluated recovery of functional HPC cryopreserved as mononuclear or unseparated 
cells for up to 23.5 years compared with prefreeze values of the same CB units.
Highly efficient recovery (80%-100%) was apparent for granulocyte-macrophage and 
multipotential hematopoietic progenitors, although some collections had
reproducible low recovery. Proliferative potential, response to multiple
cytokines, and replating of HPC colonies was extensive. CD34(+) cells isolated
from CB cryopreserved for up to 21 years had long-term (â‰¥ 6 month) engrafting
capability in primary and secondary immunodeficient mice reflecting recovery of
long-term repopulating, self-renewing HSCs. We recovered functionally responsive 
CD4(+) and CD8(+) T lymphocytes, generated induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells
with differentiation representing all 3 germ cell lineages in vitro and in vivo, 
and detected high proliferative endothelial colony forming cells, results of
relevance to CB biology and banking.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-330514 
PMCID: PMC3100689
PMID: 21393480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

