
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2011 Apr 29;146(3):228-34. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2011.02.012. Epub 2011 Feb 18.

Use of Carnobacterium maltaromaticum cultures and hydroalcoholic extract of
Lippia sidoides Cham. against Listeria monocytogenes in fish model systems.

dos Reis FB(1), de Souza VM, Thomaz MR, Fernandes LP, de Oliveira WP, De Martinis
EC.

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Ciências Farmacêuticas de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São
Paulo, Av. do Café s/n, 14040-903 Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.

Minimally processed refrigerated ready-to-eat fishes may offer health risk of
severe infection to susceptible individuals due to contamination by the
psychrotolerant bacterium L. monocytogenes. In this work, inhibition of L.
monocytogenes by a plant extract and lactic acid bacteria (LAB) was studied in
model fish systems kept at 5 °C for 35 days. For that, fillets of tropical fish
"surubim" (Pseudoplatystoma sp.) and hydroalcoholic extract of the plant Lippia
sidoides Cham. ("alecrim pimenta") were used. Fish peptone broth (FPB), "surubim"
broth and "surubim" homogenate were inoculated with combinations of L.
monocytogenes and bacteriocin-producing Carnobacterium maltaromaticum (C2 and
A9b(+)) and non bacteriocin-producing C. maltaromaticum (A9b(-)), in the presence
or absence of extract of "alecrim pimenta" (EAP). In all model systems,
monocultures of L. monocytogenes and carnobacteria reached final populations
≥10(8) CFU/ml after 35 days, except for L. monocytogenes in "surubim" homogenate 
(10(4) CFU/ml). In FPB, EAP alone and combined with cultures of LAB inhibited L. 
monocytogenes but carnobacteria without EAP were only weakly antilisterial. In
"surubim" broth, EAP alone did not prevent L. monocytogenes growth but cultures
of carnobacteria combined or not with EAP inhibited L. monocytogenes, with more
pronounced effect being observed for C. maltaromaticum C2, which produced
bacteriocin. In "surubim" homogenate, EAP alone and combined with cultures of C. 
maltaromaticum A9b(-) and A9b(+) were strongly inhibitory to L. monocytogenes,
while C. maltaromaticum C2 with EAP caused transient inhibition of L.
monocytogenes. No significant inhibition of L. monocytogenes was observed for
carnobacteria in "surubim" homogenate without EAP. In conclusion, it was observed
that the use of EAP and cultures of carnobacteria have potential to inhibit L.
monocytogenes in fish systems and the applications should be carefully studied,
considering the influence of food matrix.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2011.02.012 
PMID: 21419508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

