
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2011 Jul;77(1):95-106. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6941.2011.01091.x. Epub 2011 Apr 15.

Influence of land-use intensity on the spatial distribution of N-cycling
microorganisms in grassland soils.

Keil D(1), Meyer A, Berner D, Poll C, Schützenmeister A, Piepho HP, Vlasenko A,
Philippot L, Schloter M, Kandeler E, Marhan S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Soil Science and Land Evaluation, Soil Biology Section,
University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany.

A geostatistical approach using replicated grassland sites (10 m × 10 m) was
applied to investigate the influence of grassland management, i.e. unfertilized
pastures and fertilized mown meadows representing low and high land-use intensity
(LUI), on soil biogeochemical properties and spatial distributions of
ammonia-oxidizing and denitrifying microorganisms in soil. Spatial
autocorrelations of the different N-cycling communities ranged between 1.4 and
7.6 m for ammonia oxidizers and from 0.3 m for nosZ-type denitrifiers to scales
>14 m for nirK-type denitrifiers. The spatial heterogeneity of ammonia oxidizers 
and nirS-type denitrifiers increased in high LUI, but decreased for
biogeochemical properties, suggesting that biotic and/or abiotic factors other
than those measured are driving the spatial distribution of these microorganisms 
at the plot scale. Furthermore, ammonia oxidizers (amoA ammonia-oxidizing archaea
and amoA ammonia-oxidizing bacteria) and nitrate reducers (napA and narG) showed 
spatial coexistence, whereas niche partitioning was found between nirK- and
nirS-type denitrifiers. Together, our results indicate that spatial analysis is a
useful tool to characterize the distribution of different functional microbial
guilds with respect to soil biogeochemical properties and land-use management. In
addition, spatial analyses allowed us to identify distinct distribution ranges
indicating the coexistence or niche partitioning of N-cycling communities in
grassland soil.

© 2011 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2011.01091.x 
PMID: 21410493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

