
1. Environ Microbiol. 2011 Jun;13(6):1500-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02452.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 21.

As yet uncultured bacteria phylogenetically classified as Prevotella,
Lachnospiraceae incertae sedis and unclassified Bacteroidales, Clostridiales and 
Ruminococcaceae may play a predominant role in ruminal biohydrogenation.

Huws SA(1), Kim EJ, Lee MR, Scott MB, Tweed JK, Pinloche E, Wallace RJ, Scollan
ND.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological, Environmental and Rural Sciences (IBERS), Aberystwyth
University, Gogerddan, Aberystwyth SY23 3EB, UK.

Microbial biohydrogenation of dietary poly-unsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) to
saturated fatty acids (SFA) in the rumen results in the high ratio of SFA/PUFA in
ruminant products, such as meat and milk. In vitro, Butyrivibrio
proteoclasticus-related bacteria extensively biohydrogenate PUFA to SFA, yet
their contribution in the rumen has not been confirmed. The aim of this study was
to evaluate the role of Butyrivibrio proteoclasticus group bacteria in ruminal
biohydrogenation and to assess the possible role of other bacteria. Fish oil at
0%, 1.5% and 3% dry matter intake was fed to eight Holstein × Friesian steers, in
order to elicit changes in the extent of PUFA biohydrogenation. Fatty acid and B.
proteoclasticus group 16S rRNA concentrations in rumen digesta were determined.
Correlation between digesta 18:0 concentration and B. proteoclasticus group 16S
rRNA concentration was low. Terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism and
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) coupled with multivariate
statistics revealed that many terminal restriction fragments (T-RFs) and DGGE
bands were linked to cis-9, trans-11 conjugated linoleic acid (CLA), 18:1
trans-11 and 18:0 ruminal concentrations. MiCA T-RF predictive identification
software showed that these linked T-RFs were likely to originate from as yet
uncultured bacteria classified as Prevotella, Lachnospiraceae incertae sedis, and
unclassified Bacteroidales, Clostridiales and Ruminococcaceae. Sequencing of
linked DGGE bands also revealed that as yet uncultured bacteria classified as
Prevotella, Anaerovoax (member of the Lachnospiraceae incertae sedis family), and
unclassified Clostridiales and Ruminococcaceae may play a role in
biohydrogenation.

© 2011 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02452.x 
PMID: 21418494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

