
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Apr 13;133(14):5198-201. doi: 10.1021/ja200070u. Epub 2011
Mar 22.

A rapid fluorescence-based assay for classification of iNKT cell activating
glycolipids.

Arora P(1), Venkataswamy MM, Baena A, Bricard G, Li Q, Veerapen N, Ndonye R, Park
JJ, Lee JH, Seo KC, Howell AR, Chang YT, Illarionov PA, Besra GS, Chung SK,
Porcelli SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Structural variants of α-galactosylceramide (αGC) that activate invariant natural
killer T cells (iNKT cells) are being developed as potential immunomodulatory
agents for a variety of applications. Identification of specific forms of these
glycolipids that bias responses to favor production of proinflammatory vs
anti-inflammatory cytokines is central to current efforts, but this goal has been
hampered by the lack of in vitro screening assays that reliably predict the in
vivo biological activity of these compounds. Here we describe a
fluorescence-based assay to identify functionally distinct αGC analogues. Our
assay is based on recent findings showing that presentation of glycolipid
antigens by CD1d molecules localized to plasma membrane detergent-resistant
microdomains (lipid rafts) is correlated with induction of interferon-γ secretion
and Th1-biased cytokine responses. Using an assay that measures lipid raft
residency of CD1d molecules loaded with αGC, we screened a library of ∼200
synthetic αGC analogues and identified 19 agonists with potential Th1-biasing
activity. Analysis of a subset of these novel candidate Th1 type agonists in vivo
in mice confirmed their ability to induce systemic cytokine responses consistent 
with a Th1 type bias. These results demonstrate the predictive value of this
novel in vitro assay for assessing the in vivo functionality of glycolipid
agonists and provide the basis for a relatively simple high-throughput assay for 
identification and functional classification of iNKT cell activating glycolipids.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

DOI: 10.1021/ja200070u 
PMCID: PMC3072113
PMID: 21425779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

