
1. J Immunol. 2011 May 1;186(9):5388-96. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003765. Epub 2011
Mar 23.

Attenuated Bordetella pertussis vaccine candidate BPZE1 promotes human dendritic 
cell CCL21-induced migration and drives a Th1/Th17 response.

Fedele G(1), Bianco M, Debrie AS, Locht C, Ausiello CM.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Malattie Infettive, Parassitarie ed Immunomediate, Istituto
Superiore di Sanit√†, 00161 Rome, Italy. giorgio.fedele@iss.it

New vaccines against pertussis are needed to evoke full protection and
long-lasting immunological memory starting from the first administration in
neonates--the major target of the life-threatening pertussis infection. A novel
live attenuated Bordetella pertussis vaccine strain, BPZE1, has been developed by
eliminating or detoxifying three important B. pertussis virulence factors:
pertussis toxin, dermonecrotic toxin, and tracheal cytotoxin. We used a human
preclinical ex vivo model based on monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MDDCs) to
evaluate BPZE1 immunogenicity. We studied the effects of BPZE1 on MDDC functions,
focusing on the impact of Bordetella-primed dendritic cells in the regulation of 
Th and suppressor T cells (Ts). BPZE1 is able to activate human MDDCs and to
promote the production of a broad spectrum of proinflammatory and regulatory
cytokines. Moreover, conversely to its parental wild-type counterpart BPSM,
BPZE1-primed MDDCs very efficiently migrate in vitro in response to the lymphatic
chemokine CCL21, due to the inactivation of pertussis toxin enzymatic activity.
BPZE1-primed MDDCs drove a mixed Th1/Th17 polarization and also induced
functional Ts. Experiments performed in a Transwell system showed that cell
contact rather than the production of soluble factors was required for
suppression activity. Overall, our findings support the potential of BPZE1 as a
novel live attenuated pertussis vaccine, as BPZE1-challenged dendritic cells
might migrate from the site of infection to the lymph nodes, prime Th cells,
mount an adaptive immune response, and orchestrate Th1/Th17 and Ts responses.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003765 
PMID: 21430219  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

