
1. J Pathol. 2011 May;224(1):67-77. doi: 10.1002/path.2851. Epub 2011 Mar 22.

Prominent expression of sialyl Lewis X-capped core 2-branched O-glycans on high
endothelial venule-like vessels in gastric MALT lymphoma.

Kobayashi M(1), Mitoma J, Hoshino H, Yu SY, Shimojo Y, Suzawa K, Khoo KH, Fukuda 
M, Nakayama J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Shinshu University Graduate School of
Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan. motokoba@shinshu-u.ac.jp

High endothelial venule (HEV)-like vessels have been observed in gastric B cell
lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue type (MALT lymphoma), as well as in
its preceding lesion, chronic Helicobacter pylori gastritis. Previously we
reported that glycans on HEV-like vessels in the latter lesion served as
L-selectin ligands, although their function is unclear. We have investigated
sialyl Lewis X (sLeX)-related glycoepitopes and found that MECA-79(-)
/HECA-452(+) /NCC-ST-439(+) HEV-like vessels preferentially mark gastric MALT
lymphoma compared to chronic H. pylori gastritis. We then constructed CHO cell
lines expressing potential MECA-79(-) /HECA-452(+) /NCC-ST-439(+) glycans, as
well as other sLeX-type glycans, on CD34 and evaluated L-selectin binding to
those cells, using L-selectin-IgM chimera binding and lymphocyte adhesion assays.
L-selectin-IgM chimeras bound to CHO cells expressing 6-sulpho-sLeX attached to
core 2-branched O-glycans with or without 6-sulpho-sLeX attached to extended core
1 O-glycans, but only marginally to other CHO cell lines. By contrast, CHO cells 
expressing 6-sulpho-sLeX attached to extended core 1 and/or core 2-branched
O-glycans, as well as non-sulphated sLeX attached to core 2-branched O-glycans,
showed substantial lymphocyte binding, while binding was negligible on lines
expressing 6-sulpho- and non-sulphated sLeX attached to N-glycans and
non-sulphated sLeX attached to extended core 1 O-glycans. These results indicate 
that MECA-79(-) /HECA-452(+) /NCC-ST-439(+) glycans, specifically, 6-sulpho- and 
non-sulphated sLeXs attached to core 2-branched O-glycans, expressed on HEV-like 
vessels in gastric MALT lymphoma function as L-selectin ligands and likely
contribute to H. pylori-specific T cell recruitment in the progression of gastric
MALT lymphoma.

Copyright Â© 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.2851 
PMCID: PMC3076943
PMID: 21432854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

