
1. Metallomics. 2011 Apr;3(4):404-9. doi: 10.1039/c0mt00105h. Epub 2011 Mar 24.

Reorientation of cytochrome c2 upon interaction with oppositely charged
macromolecules probed by SR EPR: implications for the role of dipole moment to
facilitate collisions in proper configuration for electron transfer.

Sarewicz M(1), Pietras R, Froncisz W, Osyczka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, ul Gronostajowa 7, 30-307 Krak√≥w, Poland.

The reaction of water-soluble cytochrome c (c(2)) with its physiological redox
partners is facilitated by electrostatic attractions between the two protein
surfaces. Using spin-labeled cytochrome c(2) from Rhodobacter capsulatus and
pulse electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) measurements we compared spatial
orientation of cytochrome c(2) upon its binding to surfaces of opposite charge.
We observed that cytochrome c(2) can use its negatively charged "back" side when 
exposed to interact with positively charged surfaces (DEAE resin) which is the
opposite to the use of its positively charged "front" side in physiological
interaction with negatively charged binding domain of cytochrome bc(1). The later
orientation is also adopted upon non-physiological binding of cytochrome c(2) to 
negatively charged carboxymethyl cellulose resin. These results directly
demonstrate how the electric dipolar nature of cytochrome c(2) influences its
orientation in interactions with charged surfaces, which may facilitate
collisions with other redox proteins in a proper orientation to support
physiologically-competent electron transfer. Saturation recovery EPR provides an 
attractive tool for monitoring spatial orientation of proteins in their
interaction with surfaces in liquid phase. It is particularly valuable for
metalloproteins engaged in redox reactions as a means to monitor the geometry and
dynamics of formation of protein complexes in measurements that are independent
of electron transfer processes.

DOI: 10.1039/c0mt00105h 
PMID: 21431229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

