
1. Blood. 2011 May 26;117(21):5643-51. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-325332. Epub 2011 
Mar 29.

TIP110/p110nrb/SART3/p110 regulation of hematopoiesis through CMYC.

Liu Y(1), Timani K, Mantel C, Fan Y, Hangoc G, Cooper S, He JJ, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. yliu2@iupui.edu

Intracellular factors are involved in and essential for hematopoiesis. HIV-1
Tat-interacting protein of 110 kDa (TIP110; p110(nrb)/SART3/p110) is an
RNA-binding nuclear protein implicated in the regulation of HIV-1 gene and host
gene transcription, pre-mRNA splicing, and cancer immunology. In the present
study, we demonstrate a role for TIP110 in the regulation of hematopoiesis.
TIP110 was expressed in human CD34(+) cells and decreased with differentiation of
CD34(+) cells. TIP110 mRNA was also expressed in phenotyped mouse marrow
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs). Using 
TIP110 transgenic (TIP110(TG)) and haploinsufficient (TIP110(+/-)) mice, we found
that increased TIP110 expression enhanced HPC numbers, survival, and cell
cycling, whereas decreased TIP110 expression had the opposite effects. Moreover, 
TIP110(+/-) bone marrow HPCs responded more effectively, and TIP110(TG) HPCs less
effectively, than those of wild-type control mice to recovery from the
cell-cycle-active drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Unexplained sex differences were
noted in HSC competitive repopulating ability, but not HPC numbers, in TIP110(TG)
mice. Intracellularly, TIP110 regulated CMYC and GATA2 expression at the
transcriptional level, and TIP110 and CMYC reciprocally regulated the expression 
of each other. These results demonstrate a role for TIP110 in the regulation of
hematopoiesis, effects that are likely linked to TIP110 regulation of CMYC.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-325332 
PMCID: PMC3110023
PMID: 21447833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

