
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Apr 22;407(4):801-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.03.103. Epub 2011 Apr 2.

Curcumin blocks interleukin (IL)-2 signaling in T-lymphocytes by inhibiting IL-2 
synthesis, CD25 expression, and IL-2 receptor signaling.

Forward NA(1), Conrad DM, Power Coombs MR, Doucette CD, Furlong SJ, Lin TJ,
Hoskin DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.

Curcumin (diferulomethane) is the principal curcuminoid in the spice tumeric and 
a potent inhibitor of activation-induced T-lymphocyte proliferation; however, the
molecular basis of this immunosuppressive effect has not been well studied. Here 
we show that micromolar concentrations of curcumin inhibited DNA synthesis by
mouse CD4(+) T-lymphocytes, as well as interleukin-2 (IL-2) and CD25 (α chain of 
the high affinity IL-2 receptor) expression in response to antibody-mediated
cross-linking of CD3 and CD28. Curcumin acted downstream of protein kinase C
activation and intracellular Ca(2+) release to inhibit IκB phosphorylation, which
is required for nuclear translocation of the transcription factor NFκB. In
addition, IL-2-dependent DNA synthesis by mouse CTLL-2 cells, but not
constitutive CD25 expression, was impaired in the presence of curcumin, which
demonstrated an inhibitory effect on IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) signaling.
IL-2-induced phosphorylation of STAT5A and JAK3, but not JAK1, was diminished in 
the presence of curcumin, indicating inhibition of critical proximal events in
IL-2R signaling. In line with the inhibitory action of curcumin on IL-2R
signaling, pretreatment of CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T-cells with curcumin
downregulated suppressor function, as well as forkhead box p3 (Foxp3) expression.
We conclude that curcumin inhibits IL-2 signaling by reducing available IL-2 and 
high affinity IL-2R, as well as interfering with IL-2R signaling.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.03.103 
PMID: 21443863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

