
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Jun;79(6):2324-34. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01316-10. Epub 2011 Mar
28.

Deletion of mtrC in Haemophilus ducreyi increases sensitivity to human
antimicrobial peptides and activates the CpxRA regulon.

Rinker SD(1), Trombley MP, Gu X, Fortney KR, Bauer ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, 635 Barnhill Drive, Room MS 420, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5124, USA.

Haemophilus ducreyi resists killing by antimicrobial peptides encountered during 
human infection, including cathelicidin LL-37, α-defensins, and β-defensins. In
this study, we examined the role of the proton motive force-dependent multiple
transferable resistance (MTR) transporter in antimicrobial peptide resistance in 
H. ducreyi. We found a proton motive force-dependent effect on H. ducreyi's
resistance to LL-37 and β-defensin HBD-3, but not α-defensin HNP-2. Deletion of
the membrane fusion protein MtrC rendered H. ducreyi more sensitive to LL-37 and 
human β-defensins but had relatively little effect on α-defensin resistance. The 
mtrC mutant 35000HPmtrC exhibited phenotypic changes in outer membrane protein
profiles, colony morphology, and serum sensitivity, which were restored to wild
type by trans-complementation with mtrC. Similar phenotypes were reported in a
cpxA mutant; activation of the two-component CpxRA regulator was confirmed by
showing transcriptional effects on CpxRA-regulated genes in 35000HPmtrC. A cpxR
mutant had wild-type levels of antimicrobial peptide resistance; a cpxA mutation 
had little effect on defensin resistance but led to increased sensitivity to
LL-37. 35000HPmtrC was more sensitive than the cpxA mutant to LL-37, indicating
that MTR contributed to LL-37 resistance independent of the CpxRA regulon. The
CpxRA regulon did not affect proton motive force-dependent antimicrobial peptide 
resistance; however, 35000HPmtrC had lost proton motive force-dependent peptide
resistance, suggesting that the MTR transporter promotes proton motive
force-dependent resistance to LL-37 and human β-defensins. This is the first
report of a β-defensin resistance mechanism in H. ducreyi and shows that LL-37
resistance in H. ducreyi is multifactorial.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01316-10 
PMCID: PMC3125844
PMID: 21444663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

