
1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2011 Jul;301(1):G39-49. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00509.2010. Epub 2011 Mar 31.

Colonic microbiota alters host susceptibility to infectious colitis by modulating
inflammation, redox status, and ion transporter gene expression.

Ghosh S(1), Dai C, Brown K, Rajendiran E, Makarenko S, Baker J, Ma C, Halder S,
Montero M, Ionescu VA, Klegeris A, Vallance BA, Gibson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of British Columbia Okanagan, Kelowna,
Canada.

Individuals vary in their resistance to enteric infections. The role of the
intestinal microbiota in altering susceptibility to enteric infection is
relatively unknown. Previous studies have identified that C3H/HeOuJ mice suffer
100% mortality during Citrobacter rodentium-induced colitis, whereas C57BL/6 mice
recover from infection. The basis for their differences in susceptibility is
unclear and has been mainly attributed to differences in host genetics. This
study investigated the role of the intestinal microbiota in altering
susceptibility to C. rodentium-induced colitis. When the feces of C57BL/6 mice
were gavaged into antibiotic treated C3H/HeOuJ mice, the C57BL/6 microflora led
to a complete reversal in mortality patterns where 100% of the C3H/HeOuJ mice
survived infection. This protection corresponded with reduced colonic pathology
and less systemic pathogen load and was associated with increased inflammatory
and redox responses with reduced epithelial cell death. C3H/HeOuJ mice are
normally susceptible to infection-induced dehydration due to defective expression
of colonic ion transporters such as Dra, CA IV, and CA I; expression of these
genes was normalized when C3H/HeOuJ mice were colonized with the C57BL/6
microflora. Together, these data reveal that the colonic microbiota play a
critical role in protecting against intestinal infection by inducing
proinflammatory and prooxidant responses that control pathogen load as well as
ion transporter gene expression previously shown to prevent fatal dehydration.
Protection of mice from lethal colitis was associated with higher levels of
bacteria from Bacteroidetes. This study reveals that the microbiota is sufficient
to overcome inherent genetic susceptibility patterns in C3H/HeOuJ mice that cause
mortality during C. rodentium infection.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00509.2010 
PMID: 21454446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

