
1. Blood. 2011 Jun 23;117(25):6939-47. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-325951. Epub 2011 
Mar 31.

β₂-glycoprotein I: a novel component of innate immunity.

Agar C(1), de Groot PG, Mörgelin M, Monk SD, van Os G, Levels JH, de Laat B,
Urbanus RT, Herwald H, van der Poll T, Meijers JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Blood. 2011 Jun 23;117(25):6743-4.

Sepsis is a systemic host response to invasive infection by bacteria. Despite
treatment with antibiotics, current mortality rates are in the range of 20%-25%, 
which makes sepsis the most important cause of death in intensive care.
Gram-negative bacteria are a prominent cause of sepsis. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS),
one of the major constituents of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria,
plays a major role in activating the host's immune response by binding to
monocytes and other cells. Several proteins are involved in neutralization and
clearance of LPS from the bloodstream. Here, we provide evidence that
β₂-glycoprotein I (β₂GPI) is a scavenger of LPS. In vitro, β₂GPI inhibited
LPS-induced expression of tissue factor and IL-6 from monocytes and endothelial
cells. Binding of β₂GPI to LPS caused a conformational change in β₂GPI that led
to binding of the β₂GPI-LPS complex to monocytes and ultimately clearance of this
complex. Furthermore, plasma levels of β₂GPI were inversely correlated with
temperature rise and the response of inflammatory markers after a bolus injection
of LPS in healthy individuals. Together, these observations provide evidence that
β₂GPI is involved in the neutralization and clearance of LPS and identify β₂GPI
as a component of innate immunity.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-325951 
PMID: 21454452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

