
1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2011 May 5;10(5):518-25. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2011.02.007.
Epub 2011 Apr 5.

Coordinated action of the Fanconi anemia and ataxia telangiectasia pathways in
response to oxidative damage.

Castillo P(1), Bogliolo M, Surralles J.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Instability and DNA Repair Group, Department of Genetics and
Microbiology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain.

Fanconi anemia (FA) and ataxia telangiectasia (AT) share common traits such
chromosomal instability and proneness to hematological cancers. Both AT and FA
cell lines, and patients, are characterized by abnormally high levels of
oxidative stress markers. The key FA protein FANCD2 is phosphorylated on Ser 222 
by ATM after ionizing radiation (IR), thus allowing normal activation of the
S-phase checkpoint, and ATM cells are known to be hypersensitive to oxidative
damage. In this work we show that FANCD2 deficient cells have a defective S-phase
checkpoint after Hydrogen Peroxide (H(2)O(2)) induced oxidative damage. ATM
dependent phosphorylation of FANCD2 at the S222 residue is necessary for normal
S-phase checkpoint activation after oxidative stress, while FANCD2
monoubiquitination at K561 is dispensable. We also show that FANCD2 is not
required for base excision repair of 8-oxoG and other DNA lesions (abasic sites, 
uracils), while treatments that exclusively induce 8-oxoG, but not DNA double
strand breaks, fail to activate FANCD2 monoubiquitination, thus indicating that
the known accumulation of 8-oxoG in FA cells reflects an overproduction of ROS
rather than defective processing of oxidized bases. We conclude that the handling
of DNA damage after H(2)O(2)-induced oxidative stress requires the coordinated
action of FANCD2 and ATM.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2011.02.007 
PMID: 21466974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

