
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Jul;79(7):2658-62. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00101-11. Epub 2011 Apr 4.

Persistent nasal carriage of Staphylococcus aureus is associated with deficient
induction of human beta-defensin 3 after sterile wounding of healthy skin in
vivo.

Zanger P(1), Nurjadi D, Vath B, Kremsner PG.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Tropenmedizin, Eberhard Karls Universität, Tübingen 72074,
Germany. philipp.zanger@med.uni-tuebingen.de

Persistent nasal carriage of Staphylococcus aureus is the primary reservoir for
this pathogen and a risk factor for infection. The nares of 12 to 30% of healthy 
individuals are persistently colonized with staphylococci. Elucidating the yet
enigmatic determinants of this phenomenon is of major public health interest. We 
hypothesized that differences in the levels of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) that
are found in human skin and have pronounced antistaphylococcal activity may
contribute to this phenomenon. We compared constitutive and induced mRNA levels
of RNase 7 and human β-defensin 3 (HBD-3) in healthy and experimentally wounded
gluteal skin of 60 volunteers after ascertaining their carrier status through
repeated nasal cultures. We found that levels of HBD-3 expression in skin of
persistent nasal carriers of S. aureus were lower: induced levels in carriers
were 63% (95% confidence interval, 43 to 94%; P = 0.02) and constitutive levels
were 76% (95% confidence interval, 52 to 110%; P = 0.14) of those found in
noncarriers. No such associations were present for RNase 7. In conjunction with
existing knowledge, these findings suggest that healthy individuals with
deficient HBD-3 expression in keratinocytes are more prone to persistent nasal
colonization with S. aureus.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00101-11 
PMCID: PMC3191999
PMID: 21464083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

