
1. Hybridoma (Larchmt). 2011 Feb;30(1):1-9. doi: 10.1089/hyb.2010.0062.

Polyreactivity of monoclonal antibodies made against human erythrocyte membranes 
with various pathogenic bacteria.

Kolberg J(1), Ihle Ã˜, Thiede B, Aase A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, Norwegian Institute of Public
Health, Nydalen, Oslo, Norway. jan.kolberg@fhi.no

Glycophorins comprise the major sialoglycoproteins of the human erythrocyte
membrane. Several years ago we described a murine monoclonal antibody (MAb),
designated 124,D-7 (IgM), developed by in vitro immunization with human
erythrocyte membranes as antigen. We found the MAb reacted with a
neuraminidase-dependent epitope on glycophorin A. Recent findings using ELISA
with various bacteria as coating antigens have demonstrated strong
cross-reactions of MAb 124,D-7 with some bacteria like Legionella and no reaction
with bacteria such as Streptococcus pneumoniae. A second MAb, 130,E-4 (IgM),
generated by the in vitro immunization technique, agglutinated human red cells
irrespective of blood groups. This MAb showed strong cross-reactions with
bacteria different from those being positive with MAb 124,D-7. The broad
cross-reactivities of the two MAbs suggested that they are polyreactive
antibodies. Sequencing of the V(H) and V(L) genes of MAb 124,D-7 showed germ-like
sequences characteristic of polyreactive antibodies. The nucleotide sequences of 
the V(H) and V(L) genes of MAb 124,D-7 matched sequences coding for antibodies
against CD34 and cross-reacting streptococcal antibodies. For Legionella
pneumophila, the main interacting band on immunoblots was identified as the major
outer membrane protein by mass spectrometry after separation by isoelectric
focusing followed by SDS-PAGE. Flow cytometry showed that the epitope for MAb
124,D-7 was not displayed on live L. pneumophila but became exposed after heat
treatment. Studies with one of the control MAbs, 145,F-2, directed against
phosphorylcholine, which is known to be present on erythrocytes and some
bacteria, showed that the epitope is deeply buried in the human erythrocyte
membrane as neither neuraminidase nor papain exposed the epitope. The positive
control MAb 3/1 directed against an epitope on LPS of L. pneumophila revealed
weak cross-reactions with Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

DOI: 10.1089/hyb.2010.0062 
PMID: 21466280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

