
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2011 Jul;111(1):54-69. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2011.05027.x.
Epub 2011 Apr 28.

Characterization and immobilization of purified Aspergillus
flavipesl-methioninase: continuous production of methanethiol.

El-Sayed AS(1), Shindia AA.

Author information: 
(1)Botany and Microbiology Department, Faculty of Science, Zagazig University,
Zagazig, Egypt. ash_elsayed25@yahoo.com

AIMS: To immobilize the purified Aspergillus flavipesl-methioninase on solid
carriers for continuous production of methanethiol with high purity, by the
enzymatic methods.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The purified l-methioninase was immobilized using different 
methods, and physicochemical and kinetic studies for the potent immobilized
enzyme were conducted parallel to the soluble one. The activity of the purified
extracellular enzyme was 1·8-fold higher than intracellular one from submerged
cultures of A. flavipes. Among the tested methods, polyacrylamide (42·2%),
Ca-alginate (40·9%) and chitin (40·8%) displayed the highest immobilization
efficiency. The thermal inactivation rate was strongly decreased for
chitin-immobilized enzyme (0·222 s⁻¹) comparing to soluble enzyme (0·51 s⁻¹).
Enzyme immobilization efficiency was greatly improved using 4·0% glutaraldehyde
and 41·6/6·3 (T/C) as spacers for chitin and polyacrylamide-enzyme conjugates,
comparing to their controls. Also the incorporation of lysine, glutathione,
cysteine and dithiothreitol as active site protectants significantly enhance the 
catalytic efficiency of immobilized enzyme. The activity of enzyme was increased 
by 4·5- and 3·5-fold using glutathione plus DDT and glutathione plus methionine, 
for chitin and polyacrylamide enzyme, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Chitin enzyme gave a plausible stability till fourth cycle for
production of methanethiol under controlled system. Applying GC and HNMR
analysis, methanethiol has identical chemical structure to the standard compound.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Technically, a new method for continuous
production of pure methanethiol, with broad applications, was developed using a
simple low expenses method.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Applied Microbiology © 2011 The Society for
Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2011.05027.x 
PMID: 21466637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

