
1. J Dent Res. 2011 Jul;90(7):874-9. doi: 10.1177/0022034511403743. Epub 2011 Apr 6.

Cytolethal distending toxin damages the oral epithelium of gingival explants.

Damek-Poprawa M(1), Haris M, Volgina A, Korostoff J, DiRienzo JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The cytolethal distending toxin (Cdt), expressed by the periodontal pathogen
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, inhibits the proliferation of cultured
epithelial cells by arresting the cell cycle. The gingival epithelium is an early
line of defense against microbial assault. When damaged, bacteria collectively
gain entry into underlying connective tissue where microbial products can affect 
infiltrating inflammatory cells, leading to the destruction of the attachment
apparatus. Histological evaluation of rat and healthy human gingival tissue
exposed ex vivo to the Cdt for 36 and 18 hours, respectively, revealed extensive 
detachment of the keratinized outer layer and distention of spinous and basal
cells in the oral epithelium. Treated human tissue also exhibited disruption of
rete pegs and dissolution of cell junctions. Cells in the connective tissue
appeared unaffected. Primary gingival epithelial cells, but not gingival
fibroblasts, isolated from the same healthy human tissue were cell-cycle-arrested
when treated with the toxin. These findings provide new evidence that the Cdt
severely damages the oral epithelium, ex vivo, by specifically targeting
epithelial cells, in situ. The Cdt shows preferential targeting of the epithelium
as opposed to connective tissue in animal and human gingival explant
models.ABBREVIATIONS: cytolethal distending toxin (Cdt), connective tissue (CT), 
4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), human gingival epithelial cells (HGEC),
human gingival explants (HGX), human gingival fibroblasts (HGF), junctional
epithelium (JE), oral epithelium (OE), rete pegs (RP), sulcular epithelium (SE).

DOI: 10.1177/0022034511403743 
PMCID: PMC3148007
PMID: 21471326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

