
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2011 Aug;77(2):248-63. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6941.2011.01109.x. Epub 2011 May 9.

Enrichment and cultivation of prokaryotes associated with the sulphate-methane
transition zone of diffusion-controlled sediments of Aarhus Bay, Denmark, under
heterotrophic conditions.

Webster G(1), Sass H, Cragg BA, Gorra R, Knab NJ, Green CJ, Mathes F, Fry JC,
Weightman AJ, Parkes RJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Earth and Ocean Sciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales, UK.

The prokaryotic activity, diversity and culturability of diffusion-controlled
Aarhus Bay sediments, including the sulphate-methane transition zone (SMTZ), were
determined using a combination of geochemical, molecular (16S rRNA and mcrA
genes) and cultivation techniques. The SMTZ had elevated sulphate reduction and
anaerobic oxidation of methane, and enhanced cell numbers, but no active
methanogenesis. The prokaryotic population was similar to that in other SMTZs,
with Deltaproteobacteria, Gammaproteobacteria, JS1, Planctomycetes, Chloroflexi, 
ANME-1, MBG-D and MCG. Many of these groups were maintained in a heterotrophic
(10 mM glucose, acetate), sediment slurry with periodic low sulphate and acetate 
additions (~2 mM). Other prokaryotes were also enriched including methanogens,
Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Synergistetes and TM6. This slurry was then inoculated
into a matrix of substrate and sulphate concentrations for further selective
enrichment. The results demonstrated that important SMTZ bacteria can be
maintained in a long-term, anaerobic culture under specific conditions. For
example, JS1 grew in a mixed culture with acetate or acetate/glucose plus
sulphate. Chloroflexi occurred in a mixed culture, including in the presence of
acetate, which had previously not been shown to be a Chloroflexi subphylum I
substrate, and was more dominant in a medium with seawater salt concentrations.
In contrast, archaeal diversity was reduced and limited to the orders
Methanosarcinales and Methanomicrobiales. These results provide information about
the physiology of a range of SMTZ prokaryotes and shows that many can be
maintained and enriched under heterotrophic conditions, including those with few 
or no cultivated representatives.

Â© 2011 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2011.01109.x 
PMID: 21477007  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

