
1. Mol Med Rep. 2009 Jan-Feb;2(1):51-61. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000061.

Gene expression profile of mesenchymal stromal cells after co-culturing with
injured liver tissue.

Cho KA(1), Ju SY, Ryu KH, Woo SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University,
158-710 Seoul, Korea.

Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are a potential cell source for the development 
of therapeutic products. Recent studies have shown that the transplantation of
MSCs to damaged organs, including the heart, liver and kidneys, results in the
restoration of the damaged tissues. However, the mechanisms underlying this
regeneration process have yet to be clearly characterized. Consequently, in this 
study, we focused on the therapeutic potential of MSCs in injured liver tissue by
evaluating the gene expression profiles of MSCs in the presence of injured liver 
and normal liver cells using a microarray chip containing 44,000 genes. In order 
to mimic the state of liver cell regeneration in vitro, we respectively
co-cultured MSCs with CCl4-injured liver cells and normal liver cells from
C57BL/6 female mice. After 48 h of co-culturing, MSCs were collected and the RNA 
was extracted for microarray analysis. Under conditions of co-culture with normal
liver cells, upregulated expression of CXCR6, CCR3, IL-2, IL-11, CD34, CD74,
procollagen, FMS-like tyrosine kinase, neuregulin 4, Wnt2 and catenins was noted.
Under conditions of co-culture with the CCl4-injured liver cells, expression of
CXCL2, cytoglobin, erythropoietin, v-Erb, hypoxia-inducible factor 3 (α subunit),
retinoic acid receptor β and Vav2 was upregulated. Our research provides
information regarding the differential molecular mechanisms that regulate the
properties of MSCs in the regeneration of injured liver tissue.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr_00000061 
PMID: 21475790 

