
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 May 4;133(17):6720-7. doi: 10.1021/ja200079a. Epub 2011 Apr
7.

Criterion for amino acid composition of defensins and antimicrobial peptides
based on geometry of membrane destabilization.

Schmidt NW(1), Mishra A, Lai GH, Davis M, Sanders LK, Tran D, Garcia A, Tai KP,
McCray PB, Ouellette AJ, Selsted ME, Wong GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois
61801, USA.

Defensins comprise a potent class of membrane disruptive antimicrobial peptides
(AMPs) with well-characterized broad spectrum and selective microbicidal effects.
By using high-resolution synchrotron small-angle X-ray scattering to investigate 
interactions between heterogeneous membranes and members of the defensin
subfamilies, α-defensins (Crp-4), β-defensins (HBD-2, HBD-3), and θ-defensins
(RTD-1, BTD-7), we show how these peptides all permeabilize model bacterial
membranes but not model eukaryotic membranes: defensins selectively generate
saddle-splay ("negative Gaussian") membrane curvature in model membranes rich in 
negative curvature lipids such as those with phosphoethanolamine (PE) headgroups.
These results are shown to be consistent with vesicle leakage assays. A mechanism
of action based on saddle-splay membrane curvature generation is broadly
enabling, because it is a necessary condition for processes such as pore
formation, blebbing, budding, and vesicularization, all of which destabilize the 
barrier function of cell membranes. Importantly, saddle-splay membrane curvature 
generation places constraints on the amino acid composition of membrane
disruptive peptides. For example, we show that the requirement for generating
saddle-splay curvature implies that a decrease in arginine content in an AMP can 
be offset by an increase in both lysine and hydrophobic content. This "design
rule" is consistent with the amino acid compositions of 1080 known cationic AMPs.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

DOI: 10.1021/ja200079a 
PMCID: PMC3090259
PMID: 21473577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

