
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2011 Oct;56(10):1073-80. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2011.03.006. 
Epub 2011 Apr 6.

Reduction in lipopolysaccharide-induced apoptosis of fibroblasts obtained from a 
patient with gingival overgrowth during nifedipine-treatment.

Takeuchi R(1), Matsumoto H, Akimoto Y, Fujii A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Molecular Pharmacology, Nihon University School of
Dentistry at Matsudo, 2-870-1 Sakaecho-Nishi, Matsudo, Chiba 271-8587, Japan.
takeuchi.reiri@nihon-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: We have previously demonstrated that the mechanism of nifedipine
(NIF)-induced gingival overgrowth is related to the observation that
proliferation and cell cycle progression of gingival fibroblasts derived from NIF
reactive patient (NIFr) are greater than those from NIF non-reactive patient
(NIFn). Gingival overgrowth has also been reported to be a result of inhibited
apoptosis of gingival fibroblasts. Apoptosis in fibroblasts is induced by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Thus, we focused upon evaluating whether there is a
difference in LPS-induced apoptosis between NIFn and NIFr.
METHODS: Both NIFn and NIFr were arrested in DMEM containing 0.5% FBS, stimulated
by LPS, and assayed for apoptosis, cell cycle analysis, Western blotting, and
caspase activity.
RESULTS: Compared to NIFn, the number of apoptotic cells was significantly
decreased and the percentage of cells in S and G(2)/M phase was significantly
increased in NIFr. The levels of Bax and cytochrome c proteins in NIFr were not
up-regulated by LPS compared with NIFn. Both NIFn and NIFr displayed the
following changes in protein expression: increased Bad, decreased Bcl-xL, and
unchanged Bcl-2 and p53. Caspase-3 and -9 activities were significantly increased
by LPS in NIFn but were unchanged in NIFr. Caspase-2 activity remained constant
whilst caspase-8 activity significantly increased upon LPS treatment in both NIFn
and NIFr.
CONCLUSION: Bad, Bax, cytochrome c, p53, and caspases-2, -3, -8, and -9 are
pro-apoptotic proteins. Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL are anti-apoptotic proteins. Thus, the
mechanism of NIF-induced gingival overgrowth might be related to decreased
apoptosis in NIFr through a reduction of Bax, cytochrome c, and caspase-3 and -9.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2011.03.006 
PMID: 21474118  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

