
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 17;286(24):21353-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.226449. Epub
2011 Apr 12.

Conserved interaction between transferrin and transferrin-binding proteins from
porcine pathogens.

Silva LP(1), Yu R, Calmettes C, Yang X, Moraes TF, Schryvers AB, Schriemer DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, Canada.

Gram-negative porcine pathogens from the Pasteurellaceae family possess a surface
receptor complex capable of acquiring iron from porcine transferrin (pTf). This
receptor consists of transferrin-binding protein A (TbpA), a transmembrane iron
transporter, and TbpB, a surface-exposed lipoprotein. Questions remain as to how 
the receptor complex engages pTf in such a way that iron is positioned for
release, and whether divergent strains present distinct recognition sites on Tf. 
In this study, the TbpB-pTf interface was mapped using a combination of mass
shift analysis and molecular docking simulations, localizing binding uniquely to 
the pTf C lobe for multiple divergent strains of Actinobacillus plueropneumoniae 
and suis. The interface was further characterized and validated with
site-directed mutagenesis. Although targeting a common lobe, variants differ in
preference for the two sublobes comprising the iron coordination site. Sublobes
C1 and C2 participate in high affinity binding, but sublobe C1 contributes in a
minor fashion to the overall affinity. Further, the TbpB-pTf complex does not
release iron independent of other mediators, based on competitive iron binding
studies. Together, our findings support a model whereby TbpB efficiently captures
and presents iron-loaded pTf to other elements of the uptake pathway, even under 
low iron conditions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.226449 
PMCID: PMC3122195
PMID: 21487007  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

