
1. J Autoimmun. 2011 Aug;37(1):28-38. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2011.03.001. Epub 2011 Apr
12.

Human NKT cells direct the differentiation of myeloid APCs that regulate T cell
responses via expression of programmed cell death ligands.

Hegde S(1), Lockridge JL, Becker YA, Ma S, Kenney SC, Gumperz JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, 53706, USA.

NKT cells are innate lymphocytes that can recognize self or foreign lipids
presented by CD1d molecules. NKT cells have been shown to inhibit the development
of autoimmunity in murine model systems, however, the pathways by which they
foster immune tolerance remain poorly understood. Here we show that autoreactive 
human NKT cells stimulate monocytes to differentiate into myeloid APCs that have 
a regulatory phenotype characterized by poor conjugate formation with T cells.
The NKT cell instructed myeloid APCs show elevated expression of the inhibitory
ligand PD-L2, and blocking PD-L1 and PD-L2 during interactions of the APCs with T
cells results in improved cluster formation and significantly increased T cell
proliferative responses. The elevated expression of PD-L molecules on
NKT-instructed APCs appears to result from exposure to extracellular ATP that is 
produced during NKT-monocyte interactions, and blocking purinergic signaling
during monocyte differentiation results in APCs that form clusters with T cells
and stimulate their proliferation. Finally, we show that human monocytes and NKT 
cells that are injected into immunodeficient mice co-localize together in spleen 
and liver, and after 3 days in vivo in the presence of NKT cells a fraction of
the myeloid cells have upregulated markers associated with differentiation into
professional APCs. These results suggest that autoreactive human NKT cells may
promote tolerance by inducing the differentiation of regulatory myeloid APCs that
limit T cell proliferation through expression of PD-L molecules.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2011.03.001 
PMCID: PMC3110565
PMID: 21486688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

