
1. Open Parasitol J. 2010;4:72-76.

REGULATION of the EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX INTERACTOME by Trypanosoma cruzi.

Cardenas TC(1), Johnson CA, Pratap S, Nde PN, Furtak V, Kleshchenko YY, Lima MF, 
Villalta F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Meharry Medical
College, Nashville, TN 37208-3599, USA.

It has been shown that the invasive trypomastigote forms of Trypanosoma cruzi use
and modulate components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) during the initial
process of infection. Infective trypomastigotes up-regulate the expression of
laminin Î³-1 (LAMC1) and thrombospondin (THBS1) to facilitate the recruitment of
trypomastigotes to enhance cellular infection. Silencing the expression of LAMC1 
and THBS1 by stable RNAi dramatically reduces trypanosome infection. T. cruzi
gp83, a ligand that mediates the attachment of trypanosomes to cells to initiate 
infection, up-regulates LAMC1 expression to enhance cellular infection. Infective
trypomastigotes interact with LAMC1 through galectin-3 (LGALS3), a human lectin, 
to enhance cellular infection. Silencing the expression of LGALS3 also reduces
cellular infection. Some trypanosome surface molecules also interact with the ECM
to facilitate infection. Despite the role of the ECM in T. cruzi infection,
almost nothing is known about the ECM interactome networks operating in the
process of T. cruzi infection. In this mini review, we critically analyze and
discuss the regulation of the ECM by T. cruzi and its gp83 ligand, and present
the first elucidation of the human ECM interactome network, regulated by T. cruzi
and its gp83 ligand, to facilitate cellular infection. The elucidation of the
human ECM interactome regulated by T. cruzi is critically important to the
understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of T. cruzi infection and developing 
novel approaches of intervention in Chagas' disease.

DOI: 10.2174/1874421401004010072 
PMCID: PMC3075921
PMID: 21499436 

