
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2011 Sep;11(9):1195-204. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2011.03.020. 
Epub 2011 Apr 12.

A combination of the TLR4 agonist CIA05 and alum promotes the immune responses to
Bacillus anthracis protective antigen in mice.

Wui SR(1), Kim HK, Han JE, Kim JM, Kim YH, Chun JH, Cho YJ, Lee NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, College of Bioscience, Sejong
University, 98 Kunja-dong, Kwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-747, Republic of Korea.

Anthrax is an infectious disease caused by Bacillus anthracis. The currently
licensed human anthrax vaccines contain protective antigen (PA) as a major
protective component and alum as an adjuvant. In this study, we investigated
whether CIA05, a TLR4 agonist, is able to promote the immune response to an
anthrax vaccine adjuvanted with alum. BALB/c mice were immunized
intraperitoneally three times at 2-week intervals with a recombinant B. anthracis
PA alone or in combination with CIA05 in the absence or presence of alum, and
immune responses were determined 2 or 3 weeks after the third immunization. The
results showed that the combination of CIA05 and alum significantly increased
both serum anti-PA IgG antibody and toxin-neutralizing antibody titers, and the
adjuvant effects were greater when lower antigen doses were used for
immunization. Both CIA05 and alum stimulated PA-specific splenocyte secretion of 
interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5, and IL-6. A combination of the two yielded synergistic 
effects on IL-4 secretion, but CIA05 tended to repress IL-5 and IL-6 secretions
induced by alum. Co-administration of CIA05 and alum also increased GL7
expression in B220(+)CD24(+) splenic cells, indicating the ability to activate B 
cells. These data suggest that CIA05, combined with alum, could be used to
achieve higher immune responses to PA, leading to the development of an effective
anthrax vaccine.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2011.03.020 
PMID: 21492746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

