
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Jul;79(7):2578-85. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00168-11. Epub 2011 Apr
18.

Essential role of factor B of the alternative complement pathway in complement
activation and opsonophagocytosis during acute pneumococcal otitis media in mice.

Li Q(1), Li YX, Stahl GL, Thurman JM, He Y, Tong HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, College of Medicine and Public Health, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

We recently reported that the complement system plays a pivotal role in innate
immune defense against Streptococcus pneumoniae during acute otitis media (OM) in
mice. The current study was designed to determine which of the complement
pathways are activated during acute pneumococcal OM and whether components of
complement are expressed in the middle ear epithelium. Gene expression was
determined by quantitative PCR, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and
immunofluorescence staining. We found that S. pneumoniae induced increased gene
expression of factor B of the alternative complement pathway and C3 in mouse
middle ear epithelium. Activation of factor B and C3 in the middle ear lavage
fluids was significantly greater than in simultaneously obtained serum samples as
determined by Western blotting. Using mice deficient in complement C1qa, factor
B, and factor B/C2, we found that complement C3 activation and opsonophagocytosis
of S. pneumoniae were greatly attenuated in factor B- and factor B/C2-deficient
mice. These findings support the concept that local complement activation is an
important host innate immune response and that activation of the alternative
complement pathway represents one of the innate immune defense mechanisms against
pneumococcal infection during the early stage of acute OM.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00168-11 
PMCID: PMC3191997
PMID: 21502587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

