
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2012 Feb;90(2):248-52. doi: 10.1038/icb.2011.33. Epub 2011 Apr
26.

Induction of CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(-) regulatory T cells by Thy-1 stimulation of
CD4(+) T cells.

Conrad DM(1), Coombs MR, Furlong SJ, Forward NA, Hoskin DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.

Thy-1 (CD90) on mouse T cells has been reported to have both T-cell activating
and regulatory roles. In this study, we show that monoclonal antibody
(mAb)-mediated crosslinking of Thy-1 on CD4(+) mouse T-cells-induced regulatory T
(T(reg)) cells that expressed CD25, CD39 and glucocorticoid-induced tumor
necrosis factor receptor family-related gene, but not CD73, CD122 or Foxp3. The
proliferation of CD4(+) T(responder) cells in response to
anti-CD3/anti-CD28mAb-coated T-cell expander beads or syngeneic dendritic cells
and soluble anti-CD3mAb was inhibited by Thy-1-induced T(reg) cells, in spite of 
elevated IL-2 levels in the co-cultures. Interestingly, stimulation with T-cell
expander beads caused Thy-1-induced T(reg) cells to synthesize large amounts of
interleukin-2 (IL-2). IL-10 was also elevated in co-cultures of activated
T(responder) cells and Thy-1-induced T(reg) cells. However, mAb-mediated
neutralization of IL-10 did not restore T(responder)-cell proliferation to
control levels, which excluded IL-10 as a potential mediator of Thy-1-induced
T(reg)-cell suppressor function. In addition, Thy-1-induced T(reg) cells did not 
inhibit IL-2-dependent proliferation of CTLL-2 cells, suggesting that IL-2
receptor signaling remained intact in the presence of Thy-1-induced T(reg) cells.
We suggest that T(reg) cells induced by Thy-1 ligation in vivo may contribute to 
the maintenance of T-cell homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1038/icb.2011.33 
PMID: 21519344  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

