
1. J Immunol. 2011 Jun 1;186(11):6607-16. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003995. Epub 2011
Apr 22.

An HLA-presented fragment of macrophage migration inhibitory factor is a
therapeutic target for invasive breast cancer.

Hawkins O(1), Verma B, Lightfoot S, Jain R, Rawat A, McNair S, Caseltine S,
Mojsilovic A, Gupta P, Neethling F, Almanza O, Dooley W, Hildebrand W, Weidanz J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

This report describes a novel HLA/peptide complex with potential prognostic and
therapeutic roles for invasive breast cancer. Macrophage migration inhibitory
factor (MIF) mediates inflammation and immunity, and MIF overexpression is
observed in breast cancer. We hypothesized that the HLA class I of cancerous
breast epithelial cells would present MIF-derived peptides. Consistent with this 
hypothesis, the peptide FLSELTQQL (MIF(19-27)) was eluted from the HLA-A*0201
(HLA-A2) of breast cancer cell lines. We posited that if this MIF(19-27)/HLA-A2
complex was exclusively found in invasive breast cancer, it could be a useful
prognostic indicator. To assess the presentation of MIF peptides by the HLA of
various cells and tissues, mice were immunized with the MIF(19-27)/HLA-A2
complex. The resulting mAb (RL21A) stained invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) but
not ductal carcinoma in situ, fibroadenoma, or normal breast tissues. RL21A did
not stain WBCs (total WBCs) or normal tissues from deceased HLA-A2 donors,
substantiating the tumor-specific nature of this MIF/HLA complex. As this MIF/HLA
complex appeared specific to the surface of IDC, RL21A was tested as an
immunotherapeutic for breast cancer in vitro and in vivo. In vitro, RL21A killed 
the MDA-MB-231 cell line via complement and induction of apoptosis. In an in vivo
orthotopic mouse model, administration of RL21A reduced MDA-MB-231 and BT-20
tumor burden by 5-fold and by >2-fold, respectively. In summary, HLA-presented
MIF peptides show promise as prognostic cell surface indicators for IDC and as
targets for immunotherapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003995 
PMID: 21515791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

