
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 10;286(23):20547-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.230151. Epub
2011 Apr 25.

Tapasin discriminates peptide-human leukocyte antigen-A*02:01 complexes formed
with natural ligands.

Roder G(1), Geironson L, Rasmussen M, Harndahl M, Buus S, Paulsson K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Immunology, Institute of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, Panum DK-2200 Copenhagen, 
Denmark.

A plethora of peptides are generated intracellularly, and most peptide-human
leukocyte antigen (HLA)-I interactions are of a transient, unproductive nature.
Without a quality control mechanism, the HLA-I system would be stressed by futile
attempts to present peptides not sufficient for the stable peptide-HLA-I complex 
formation required for long term presentation. Tapasin is thought to be central
to this essential quality control, but the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. 
Here, we report that the N-terminal region of tapasin, Tpn(1-87), assisted
folding of peptide-HLA-A*02:01 complexes according to the identity of the
peptide. The facilitation was also specific for the identity of the HLA-I heavy
chain, where it correlated to established tapasin dependence hierarchies. Two
large sets of HLA-A*02:01 binding peptides, one extracted from natural HLA-I
ligands from the SYFPEITHI database and one consisting of medium to high affinity
non-SYFPEITHI ligands, were studied in the context of HLA-A*02:01 binding and
stability. We show that the SYFPEITHI peptides induced more stable HLA-A*02:01
molecules than the other ligands, although affinities were similar. Remarkably,
Tpn(1-87) could functionally discriminate the selected SYFPEITHI peptides from
the other peptide binders with high sensitivity and specificity. We suggest that 
this HLA-I- and peptide-specific function, together with the functions exerted by
the more C-terminal parts of tapasin, are major features of tapasin-mediated
HLA-I quality control. These findings are important for understanding the
biogenesis of HLA-I molecules, the selection of presented T-cell epitopes, and
the identification of immunogenic targets in both basic research and vaccine
design.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.230151 
PMCID: PMC3121515
PMID: 21518758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

