
1. Leukemia. 2011 Aug;25(8):1259-67. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.91. Epub 2011 Apr 26.

Monoubiquitinated Fanconi anemia D2 (FANCD2-Ub) is required for BCR-ABL1
kinase-induced leukemogenesis.

Koptyra M(1), Stoklosa T, Hoser G, Glodkowska-Mrowka E, Seferynska I, Klejman A, 
Blasiak J, Skorski T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

Comment in
    Leukemia. 2012 Jun;26(6):1447-8.

Fanconi D2 (FANCD2) is monoubiquitinated on K561 (FANCD2-Ub) in response to DNA
double-strand breaks (DSBs) to stimulate repair of these potentially lethal DNA
lesions. FANCD2-Ub was upregulated in CD34+ chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) cells 
and in BCR-ABL1 kinase-positive cell lines in response to elevated levels of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and DNA cross-linking agent mitomycin C.
Downregulation of FANCD2 and inhibition of FANCD2-Ub reduced the clonogenic
potential of CD34+ CML cells and delayed BCR-ABL1 leukemogenesis in mice.
Retarded proliferation of BCR-ABL1 positive FANCD2-/- leukemia cells could be
rescued by FANCD2 expression. BCR-ABL1 positive FANCD2-/- cells accumulated more 
ROS-induced DSBs in comparison with BCR-ABL1 positive FANCD2+/+ cells.
Antioxidants diminished the number of DSBs and enhanced proliferation of BCR-ABL1
positive FANCD2-/- cells. Expression of wild-type FANCD2 and FANCD2(S222A)
phosphorylation-defective mutant (deficient in stimulation of intra-S phase
checkpoint, but proficient in DSB repair), but not FANCD2(K561R)
monoubiquitination-defective mutant (proficient in stimulation of intra-S phase
checkpoint, but deficient in DSB repair) reduced the number of DSBs and
facilitated proliferation of BCR-ABL1 positive FANCD2-/- cells. We hypothesize
that FANCD2-Ub has an important role in BCR-ABL1 leukemogenesis because of its
ability to facilitate the repair of numerous ROS-induced DSBs.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2011.91 
PMCID: PMC3145022
PMID: 21519342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

