
1. Respir Res. 2011 May 2;12:59. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-12-59.

IL-4 and IL-13 exposure during mucociliary differentiation of bronchial
epithelial cells increases antimicrobial activity and expression of antimicrobial
peptides.

Zuyderduyn S(1), Ninaber DK, Schrumpf JA, van Sterkenburg MA, Verhoosel RM, Prins
FA, van Wetering S, Rabe KF, Hiemstra PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. s.zuyderduyn@lumc.nl

The airway epithelium forms a barrier against infection but also produces
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) and other inflammatory mediators to activate the
immune system. It has been shown that in allergic disorders, Th2 cytokines may
hamper the antimicrobial activity of the epithelium. However, the presence of Th2
cytokines also affects the composition of the epithelial layer which may alter
its function. Therefore, we investigated whether exposure of human primary
bronchial epithelial cells (PBEC) to Th2 cytokines during mucociliary
differentiation affects expression of the human cathelicidin antimicrobial
protein (hCAP18)/LL-37 and human beta defensins (hBD), and antimicrobial
activity.PBEC were cultured at an air-liquid interface (ALI) for two weeks in the
presence of various concentrations of IL-4 or IL-13. Changes in differentiation
and in expression of various AMPs and the antimicrobial proteinase inhibitors
secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor (SLPI) and elafin were investigated as
well as antimicrobial activity.IL-4 and IL-13 increased mRNA expression of
hCAP18/LL-37 and hBD-2. Dot blot analysis also showed an increase in hCAP18/LL-37
protein in apical washes of IL-4-treated ALI cultures, whereas Western Blot
analysis showed expression of a protein of approximately 4.5 kDa in basal medium 
of IL-4-treated cultures. Using sandwich ELISA we found that also hBD-2 in apical
washes was increased by both IL-4 and IL-13. SLPI and elafin levels were not
affected by IL-4 or IL-13 at the mRNA or protein level. Apical wash obtained from
IL-4- and IL-13-treated cultures displayed increased antimicrobial activity
against Pseudomonas aeruginosa compared to medium-treated cultures. In addition, 
differentiation in the presence of Th2 cytokines resulted in increased MUC5AC
production as has been shown previously.These data suggest that prolonged
exposure to Th2 cytokines during mucociliary differentiation contributes to
antimicrobial defence by increasing the expression and release of selected
antimicrobial peptides and mucus.

DOI: 10.1186/1465-9921-12-59 
PMCID: PMC3113720
PMID: 21529380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

