
1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Jun 14;136(1):111-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.04.018. Epub 
2011 Apr 15.

Labisia pumila var. alata reduces bacterial load by inducing uroepithelial cell
apoptosis.

Fazliana M(1), Ramos NL, Lüthje P, Sekikubo M, Holm A, Wan Nazaimoon WM, Brauner 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumour and Cell Biology, Division of Clinical
Microbiology, Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital, S-171 76 
Stockholm, Sweden.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Labisia pumila var. alata (LPva) is a traditional
medicinal herb used by Malaysian women to treat many ailments of the
genitourinary tract. Its phytoestrogenic properties suggest potential to prevent 
recurrent urinary tract infection (UTI) in women post menopause. The aim of this 
study was therefore to investigate the mechanisms of action of LPva in an in
vitro model of UTI.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Bladder epithelial cell lines T24 and 5637 and
uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) strain CFT073 were used to model
uroepithelial infection. The ability of LPva to induce programmed cell death was 
tested using the Annexin-V-FLUOS and TUNEL assays. Expression of caveolin-1, β1
integrin and antimicrobial peptides HBD-2 and LL-37 in response to LPva treatment
and/or infection, was assessed using RT real-time PCR. Effects on protein
expression were confirmed by Western blot analysis. Sensitivity and yeast
agglutination assays were employed to determine if LPva had antimicrobial
activities and/or interacted with type 1 fimbriae, respectively. Finally,
bacterial adherence and invasion to cells treated with LPva was examined.
RESULTS: LPva induced uroepithelial apoptosis which was coupled with upregulated 
expression of caveolin-1 and downregulation of β1 integrin. LPva did not exhibit 
direct antimicrobial properties and did not influence antimicrobial peptide
levels in cells. Additionally, LPva did not interact with type 1 fimbriae and did
not affect adherence in comparison to non-treated control cells. However, LPva
significantly reduced the number of intracellular UPEC in bladder epithelial
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that LPva has beneficial applications against
UPEC infection due to its ability to induce programmed cell death and reduce
bacterial invasion of the uroepithelium.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.04.018 
PMID: 21524700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

