
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;89(7):786-91. doi: 10.1038/icb.2011.1. Epub 2011 May 
3.

Suppressors of cytokine signaling inhibit effector T cell responses during
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection.

Srivastava V(1), Vashishta M, Gupta S, Singla R, Singla N, Behera D, Natarajan K.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi, India. 2004.varsha@gmail.com

Protective immune responses during Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tuberculosis)
infection are regulated at multiple levels and critically dependent on the
balance in the secretion of pro-inflammatory and regulatory cytokines. A key
factor that governs this balance at the cellular level is suppressors of cytokine
signaling (SOCS). We recently demonstrated that toll-like receptor 2 and
dendritic cell (DC)-SIGNR1 differentially regulate SOCS1 expression in DCs during
M. tuberculosis infection. This consecutively regulated IL-12 production and
determined M. tuberculosis survival. In this study, we characterized the role of 
SOCS1 in regulating effector responses from CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells during M.
tuberculosis infection. Our data indicate that T cells from M.
tuberculosis-infected mice show increased and differential association of SOCS1
with CD3 and CD28, when compared with uninfected mice. While SOCS1 displays
increased association with CD3 than CD28 in CD4(+) T cells; SOCS1 is associated
more with CD28 than CD3 in CD8(+) T cells. Further, SOCS1 shows increased
association with IL-12 and IL-2 receptors in both CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells from 
infected mice when compared with naive mice. Silencing SOCS1 in T cells increased
signal transduction from T cell receptor (TCR) and CD28 with enhanced activation 
of key signaling molecules and proliferation. Significantly, SOCS1-silenced T
cells mediated enhanced clearance of M. tuberculosis inside macrophages. Finally,
adoptive transfer of SOCS1-silenced T cells in M. tuberculosis-infected mice
mediated significant reduction in M. tuberculosis loads in spleen. These results 
exemplify the negative role played by SOCS1 during T cell priming and effector
functions during M. tuberculosis infection.

DOI: 10.1038/icb.2011.1 
PMID: 21537342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

