
1. World J Surg Oncol. 2011 May 3;9:46. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-9-46.

CCR9-CCL25 interactions promote cisplatin resistance in breast cancer cell
through Akt activation in a PI3K-dependent and FAK-independent fashion.

Johnson-Holiday C(1), Singh R, Johnson EL, Grizzle WE, Lillard JW Jr, Singh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Immunology, Morehouse School of
Medicine, 720 Westview Drive SW, Atlanta, GA 30310 USA.

BACKGROUND: Chemotherapy heavily relies on apoptosis to kill breast cancer (BrCa)
cells. Many breast tumors respond to chemotherapy, but cells that survive this
initial response gain resistance to subsequent treatments. This leads to
aggressive cell variants with an enhanced ability to migrate, invade and survive 
at secondary sites. Metastasis and chemoresistance are responsible for most
cancer-related deaths; hence, therapies designed to minimize both are greatly
needed. We have recently shown that CCR9-CCL25 interactions promote BrCa cell
migration and invasion, while others have shown that this axis play important
role in T cell survival. In this study we have shown potential role of CCR9-CCL25
axis in breast cancer cell survival and therapeutic efficacy of cisplatin.
METHODS: Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation, Vybrant apoptosis and TUNEL
assays were performed to ascertain the role of CCR9-CCL25 axis in
cisplatin-induced apoptosis of BrCa cells. Fast Activated Cell-based ELISA (FACE)
assay was used to quantify In situ activation of PI3Kp85, AktSer473, GSK-3βSer9
and FKHRThr24 in breast cancer cells with or without cisplatin treatment in
presence or absence of CCL25.
RESULTS: CCR9-CCL25 axis provides survival advantage to BrCa cells and inhibits
cisplatin-induced apoptosis in a PI3K-dependent and focal adhesion kinase
(FAK)-independent fashion. Furthermore, CCR9-CCL25 axis activates cell-survival
signals through Akt and subsequent glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK-3β) and
forkhead in human rhabdomyosarcoma (FKHR) inactivation. These results show that
CCR9-CCL25 axis play important role in BrCa cell survival and low
chemotherapeutic efficacy of cisplatin primarily through PI3K/Akt dependent
fashion.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-7819-9-46 
PMCID: PMC3110128
PMID: 21539750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

