
1. J Food Sci. 2011 Apr;76(3):S164-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3841.2011.02082.x.

Comparison of sodium acid sulfate to citric acid to inhibit browning of fresh-cut
potatoes.

Calder BL(1), Kash EA, Davis-Dentici K, Bushway AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Maine, 5735
Hitchner Hall, Orono, ME 04469-5735, USA. beth.calder@umit.maine.edu

Sodium acid sulfate (SAS) dip treatments were evaluated against a distilled water
control and citric acid (CA) to compare its effectiveness in reducing enzymatic
browning of raw, French-fry cut potatoes. Two separate studies were conducted
with dip concentrations ranging from 0%, 1%, and 3% in experiment 1 to 0%, 2%,
and 2.5% in experiment 2 to determine optimal dip concentrations. Russet Burbank 
potatoes were peeled, sliced, and dipped for 1 min and stored at 3 °C. Color,
texture, fry surface pH, and microbiological analyses were conducted on days 0,
7, and 14. The 3% SAS- and CA-treated samples had significantly (p<0.0001) lower 
pH levels on fry surfaces than all other treatments. Both acidulants had
significantly (p≤0.05) lower aerobic plate counts compared to controls in both
studies by day 7. However, SAS appeared to be the most effective at the 3% level 
in maintaining a light fry color up to day 14 and had the highest L-values than
all other treatments. The 3% SAS-treated fry slices appeared to have the least
change in textural properties over storage time, having a significantly
(p=0.0002) higher force value (kg force [kgf]) than the other treatments during
experiment 1, without any signs of case-hardening that appeared in the control
and CA-treated samples. SAS was just as comparable to CA in reducing surface fry 
pH and also lowering microbial counts over storage time. According to the
results, SAS may be another viable acidulant to be utilized in the fresh-cut
fruit and vegetable industry.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3841.2011.02082.x 
PMID: 21535855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

