
1. Metab Eng. 2011 Jul;13(4):373-82. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2011.04.002. Epub 2011 Apr
22.

Metabolic engineering of Clostridium tyrobutyricum for n-butanol production.

Yu M(1), Zhang Y, Tang IC, Yang ST.

Author information: 
(1)William G. Lowrie Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Clostridium tyrobutyricum ATCC 25755, a butyric acid producing bacterium, has
been engineered to overexpress aldehyde/alcohol dehydrogenase 2 (adhE2, Genebank 
no. AF321779) from Clostridium acetobutylicum ATCC 824, which converts
butyryl-CoA to butanol, under the control of native thiolase (thl) promoter.
Butanol titer of 1.1g/L was obtained in C. tyrobutyricum overexpressing adhE2.
The effects of inactivating acetate kinase (ack) and phosphotransbutyrylase (ptb)
genes in the host on butanol production were then studied. A high C4/C2 product
ratio of 10.6 (mol/mol) was obtained in ack knockout mutant, whereas a low C4/C2 
product ratio of 1.4 (mol/mol) was obtained in ptb knockout mutant, confirming
that ack and ptb genes play important roles in controlling metabolic flux
distribution in C. tyrobutyricum. The highest butanol titer of 10.0g/L and
butanol yield of 27.0% (w/w, 66% of theoretical yield) were achieved from glucose
in the ack knockout mutant overexpressing adhE2. When a more reduced substrate
mannitol was used, the butanol titer reached 16.0 g/L with 30.6% (w/w) yield (75%
theoretical yield). Moreover, C. tyrobutyricum showed good butanol tolerance,
with >80% and ∼60% relative growth rate at 1.0% and 1.5% (v/v) butanol. These
results suggest that C. tyrobutyricum is a promising heterologous host for
n-butanol production from renewable biomass.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2011.04.002 
PMID: 21530675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

