
1. Geobiology. 2011 Jul;9(4):330-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1472-4669.2011.00281.x. Epub
2011 Apr 29.

Niche differentiation among mat-forming, sulfide-oxidizing bacteria at cold seeps
of the Nile Deep Sea Fan (Eastern Mediterranean Sea).

Grünke S(1), Felden J, Lichtschlag A, Girnth AC, De Beer D, Wenzhöfer F, Boetius 
A.

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Joint Research Group on Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred
Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research, Bremerhaven, Germany.
sgruenke@mpi-bremen.de

Sulfidic muds of cold seeps on the Nile Deep Sea Fan (NDSF) are populated by
different types of mat-forming sulfide-oxidizing bacteria. The predominant
sulfide oxidizers of three different mats were identified by microscopic and
phylogenetic analyses as (i) Arcobacter species producing cotton-ball-like sulfur
precipitates, (ii) large filamentous sulfur bacteria including Beggiatoa species,
and (iii) single, spherical Thiomargarita species. High resolution in situ
microprofiles revealed different geochemical settings selecting for the different
mat types. Arcobacter mats occurred where oxygen and sulfide overlapped above the
seafloor in the bottom water interface. Filamentous sulfide oxidizers were
associated with steep gradients of oxygen and sulfide in the sediment. A dense
population of Thiomargarita was favored by temporarily changing supplies of
oxygen and sulfide in the bottom water. These results indicate that the decisive 
factors in selecting for different mat-forming bacteria within one deep-sea
province are spatial or temporal variations in energy supply. Furthermore, the
occurrence of Arcobacter spp.-related 16S rRNA genes in the sediments below all
three types of mats, as well as on top of brine lakes of the NDSF, indicates that
this group of sulfide oxidizers can switch between different life modes depending
on the geobiochemical habitat setting.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1472-4669.2011.00281.x 
PMID: 21535364  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

