
1. Mol Oral Microbiol. 2011 Jun;26(3):187-99. doi: 10.1111/j.2041-1014.2011.00607.x.
Epub 2011 Jan 31.

Streptococcus mutans strains recovered from caries-active or caries-free
individuals differ in sensitivity to host antimicrobial peptides.

Phattarataratip E(1), Olson B, Broffitt B, Qian F, Brogden KA, Drake DR, Levy SM,
Banas JA.

Author information: 
(1)Dows Institute for Dental Research, College of Dentistry, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA, USA.

Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are among the repertoire of host innate immune
defenses. In the oral cavity, several AMPs are present in saliva and have
antimicrobial activities against oral bacteria, including Streptococcus mutans, a
primary etiological agent of dental caries. In this study, we hypothesized that
unique S. mutans strains, as determined by DNA fingerprinting from sixty
13-year-old subjects with or without experience of caries, would have different
susceptibilities to α-defensins-1-3 (HNP-1-3), β-defensins-2-3 (HBD-2-3) and
LL-37. The salivary levels of these peptides in subjects were also measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. We found that S. mutans strains from children
with active caries showed greater resistance to salivary HNP-1-2, HBD-2-3 and
LL-37 at varying concentrations than those from caries-free subjects. In
addition, combinations of these peptides increased their antimicrobial activity
against S. mutans either additively or synergistically. The salivary levels of
these peptides were highly variable among subjects with no correlation to host
caries experience. However, the levels of a number of these peptides in saliva
appeared to be positively correlated within an individual. Our findings suggest
that the relative ability of S. mutans to resist host salivary AMPs may be
considered a potential virulence factor for this species such that S. mutans
strains that are more resistant to these peptides may have an ecological
advantage to preferentially colonize within dental plaque and increase the risk
of dental caries.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.2041-1014.2011.00607.x 
PMCID: PMC3092152
PMID: 21545696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

