
1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2011 Jun 10;10(6):620-8. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2011.04.009.
Epub 2011 May 6.

RAD5a and REV3 function in two alternative pathways of DNA-damage tolerance in
Arabidopsis.

Wang S(1), Wen R, Shi X, Lambrecht A, Wang H, Xiao W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, SK, Canada S7N 5E5.

DNA-damage tolerance (DDT) in yeast is composed of two parallel pathways and
mediated by sequential ubiquitinations of PCNA. While monoubiquitination of PCNA 
promotes translesion synthesis (TLS) that is dependent on polymerase ζ consisted 
of a catalytic subunit Rev3 and a regulatory subunit Rev7, polyubiquitination of 
PCNA by Mms2-Ubc13-Rad5 promotes error-free lesion bypass. Inactivation of these 
two pathways results in a synergistic effect on DNA-damage responses; however,
this two-branch DDT model has not been reported in any multicellular organisms.
In order to examine whether Arabidopsis thaliana possesses a two-branch DDT
system, we created rad5a rev3 double mutant plant lines and compared them with
the corresponding single mutants. Arabidopsis rad5a and rev3 mutations are indeed
synergistic with respect to root growth inhibition induced by
replication-blocking lesions, suggesting that AtRAD5a and AtREV3 are required for
error-free and TLS branches of DDT, respectively. Unexpectedly this study reveals
three modes of genetic interactions in response to different types of DNA damage,
implying that plant RAD5 and REV3 are also involved in DNA damage responses
independent of DDT. By comparing with yeast cells, it is apparent that plant TLS 
is a more frequently utilized means of lesion bypass than error-free DDT in
plants.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2011.04.009 
PMID: 21549648  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

