
1. J Bacteriol. 1990 Mar;172(3):1232-40.

Specific A/G-to-C.G mismatch repair in Salmonella typhimurium LT2 requires the
mutB gene product.

Lu AL(1), Cuipa MJ, Ip MS, Shanabruch WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of
Maryland, Baltimore 21201.

An assay has been developed that permits analysis of repair of A/G mismatches to 
C.G base pairs in cell extracts of Salmonella typhimurium LT2. This A/G mismatch 
repair is independent of ATP, dam methylation, and mutS gene function. The gene
product of mutB has been shown to be involved in the dam-independent pathway
through the in vitro assay. Moreover, specific DNA-protein complexes and an
endonuclease can be detected in S. typhimurium extracts by using DNA fragments
containing an A/G mismatch. These activities are not observed with substrates
which have a T/G mismatch or no mismatch. The S. typhimurium endonuclease, like
the A/G endonuclease found in Escherichia coli (A-L. Lu and D.-Y. Chang, Cell
54:805-812, 1988), makes incisions at the first phosphodiester bond 3' to and the
the second phosphodiester bond 5' to the dA of the A/G mismatch. No incision site
was detected on the other DNA strand. Extracts prepared from mutB mutants cannot 
form A/G mismatch-specific DNA-protein complexes and do not contain the A/G
endonuclease activity. Thus the A/G mismatch specific binding and nicking
activities are probably involved in the A/G mismatch repair pathway. Preliminary 
analysis of the mutational spectrum of the mutB strain has indicated that this
mutator allele causes an increase in C.G-to-A.T transversions without affecting
the frequencies of other transversion or transition events. In addition, the mutB
gene has been mapped to the 64-min region of the S. typhimurium chromosome.
Together, this biochemical and genetic evidence suggests that the mutB gene
product of S. typhimurium is the homolog of the E. coli micA (and/or mutY) gene
product.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.172.3.1232-1240.1990 
PMCID: PMC208588
PMID: 2155196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

