
1. Mar Drugs. 2011 Mar 22;9(3):466-77. doi: 10.3390/md9030466.

Preparation of calibration standards of N1-H paralytic shellfish toxin analogues 
by large-scale culture of cyanobacterium Anabaena circinalis (TA04).

Watanabe R(1), Suzuki T, Oshima Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Institute of Fisheries Science, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama
236-8648, Japan. tsuzuki@affrc.go.jp

Mouse bioassay is the official testing method to quantify paralytic shellfish
toxins (PSTs) in bivalves. A number of alternative analytical methods have been
reported. Some methods have been evaluated by a single laboratory validation.
Among the different types of methods, chemical analyses are capable of
identifying and quantifying the toxins, however a shortage of the necessary
calibration standards hampers implementation of the chemical analyses in routine 
monitoring of PSTs in bivalves. In our present study, we studied preparation of
major PST analogues as calibrants by large-scale cultivation of toxic freshwater 
cyanobacteria Anabaena circinalis TA04. The cells were steadily grown in 10 L
bottle for 28 days. The primary N1-H toxins, C1/C2, were produced at a
concentration of 1.3 ± 0.1 μmol/L. The intracellular and extracellular toxins
occupied 80% and 20%, respectively. Over 220 μmol of the toxins was obtained from
approximately 200 L of the culture over six months, demonstrating that it is
sufficient to prepare saxitoxin analogues. The toxins were chemically converted
to six N1-H analogues. Preparation of the analogues was carried out at relatively
high yields (50-90%). The results indicate that our preparation method is useful 
to produce N1-H toxins. In our present study, detailed conditions for preparation
of one of the rare N1-H analogues, gonyautoxin-5, were investigated.

DOI: 10.3390/md9030466 
PMCID: PMC3083661
PMID: 21556170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

