
1. Injury. 2012 Feb;43(2):137-42. doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2011.03.044. Epub 2011 May
10.

Multiple trauma induces serum production of host defence peptides.

Lippross S(1), Klueter T, Steubesand N, Oestern S, Mentlein R, Hildebrandt F,
Podschun R, Pufe T, Seekamp A, Varoga D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Trauma Surgery, University Medical Center of Schleswig-Holstein,
Campus Kiel, Germany.

Today multiple trauma still is associated with a high mortality. Although severe 
open fractures and wounds can give rise to local infections and sepsis, the
overall infection rate of multiply injured patients is surprisingly low. We have 
investigated serum of multiply injured patients with respect to antibacterial
properties and screened for host defence peptides (HDP) that constitute a class
of fast acting and rapidly available molecules preventing bacterial infection.
Serum specimens were obtained from multiply injured patients. Radial diffusion
assays were performed to investigate antimicrobial properties. Ultrafiltration
and heat-inactivation were used to rule out antimicrobial activity of large
proteins i.e. complement factors. ELISA was performed to analyse serum
concentrations of the human beta-defensins 2 and 3 (hBD-2 and hBD-3), LL-37 and
the proinflammatory cytokines interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) and interleukin-6 (IL-6). 
Serum of multiply injured patients showed greater zones of inhibition in
antimicrobial testing against Gram negative und positive bacteria. This effect
was mediated by proteins smaller than 10 kDa, inactivation of the complement
system does not significantly reduce antibacterial action. hBD-2, hBD-3 and LL-37
concentrations were significantly elevated after trauma and followed different
characteristic concentration curves. Similar patterns of concentration profiles
were recorded for hBD-2/IL-6 and hBD-3/IFN-γ suggesting a stimulatory influence
within their induction process. With this study we provide evidence, that serum
of multiply injured patients has by far higher antibacterial capacity than that
of healthy donors. As possible mediators we have detected the HDP hBD-2, hBD-3
and LL-37 and their inducers in serum of multiply injured patients.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.injury.2011.03.044 
PMID: 21561617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

