
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Aug;79(8):3053-63. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01108-10. Epub 2011 May
16.

Requirement for invariant chain in macrophages for Mycobacterium tuberculosis
replication and CD1d antigen presentation.

Sill√© FC(1), Martin C, Jayaraman P, Rothchild A, Fortune S, Besra GS, Behar SM,
Boes M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis is an intracellular bacterium that persists in
phagosomes of myeloid cells. M. tuberculosis-encoded factors support pathogen
survival and reduce fusion of phagosomes with bactericidal lysosomal
compartments. It is, however, not entirely understood if host factors that
mediate endosomal fusion affect M. tuberculosis intracellular localization and
survival. Neither is it known if endosomal fusion influences induction of host
immune reactivity by M. tuberculosis-infected cells. Lysosomal degradation of M. 
tuberculosis appears to be pivotal for making available lipid substrates for
assembly into lipid-CD1d complexes to allow activation of CD1d-restricted
invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells. To clarify the role for endosomal fusion
in M. tuberculosis survival and induction of host CD1d-mediated immune defense,
we focused our studies on the invariant chain (Ii). Ii regulates endosome docking
and fusion and thereby controls endosomal transport. Through direct binding, Ii
also directs intracellular transport of the class II major histocompatibility
complex and CD1d. Our findings demonstrate that upon infection of Ii-knockout
(Ii(-/-)) macrophages, M. tuberculosis is initially retained in early endosomal
antigen 1-positive lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1-negative phagosomes,
which results in slightly impaired pathogen replication. The absence of Ii did
not affect the ability of uninfected and infected macrophages to produce nitric
oxide, tumor necrosis factor alpha, or interleukin-12. However, induction of cell
surface CD1d was impaired in infected Ii(-/-) macrophages, and CD1d-restricted
iNKT cells were unable to suppress bacterial replication when they were
cocultured with M. tuberculosis-infected Ii(-/-) macrophages. Thus, while the
host factor Ii is not essential for the formation of the M.
tuberculosis-containing vacuole, its presence is crucial for iNKT cell
recognition of infected macrophages.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01108-10 
PMCID: PMC3147586
PMID: 21576321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

