
1. FEBS J. 2011 Jul;278(14):2540-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08179.x. Epub
2011 Jun 13.

Glutamate racemization and catabolism in Fusobacterium varium.

Ramezani M(1), Resmer KL, White RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

The pathways of glutamate catabolism in the anaerobic bacterium Fusobacterium
varium, grown on complex, undefined medium and chemically defined, minimal
medium, were investigated using specifically labelled (13)C-glutamate. The
metabolic end-products acetate and butyrate were isolated from culture fluids and
derivatized for analysis by nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectrometry. On 
complex medium, labels from L-[1-(13)C]glutamate and L-[4-(13)C]glutamate were
incorporated into C1 of acetate and equally into C1/C3 of butyrate, while label
derived from L-[5-(13)C]glutamate was not incorporated. The isotopic
incorporation results and the detection of glutamate mutase and 3-methylaspartate
ammonia lyase in cell extracts are most consistent with the methylaspartate
pathway, the best known route of glutamate catabolism in Clostridium species.
When F. varium was grown on defined medium, label from L-[4-(13)C]glutamate was
incorporated mainly into C4 of butyrate, demonstrating a major role for the
hydroxyglutarate pathway. Upon addition of coenzyme B(12) or cobalt ion to the
defined medium in replicate experiments, isotope was located equally at C1/C3 of 
butyrate in accord with the methylaspartate pathway. Racemization of D-glutamate 
and subsequent degradation of L-glutamate via the methylaspartate pathway are
supported by incorporation of label into C2 of acetate and equally into C2/C4 of 
butyrate from D-[3-(13)C]glutamate and the detection of a cofactor-independent
glutamate racemase in cell extracts. Together the results demonstrate a major
role for the methylaspartate pathway of glutamate catabolism in F. varium and
substantial participation of the hydroxyglutarate pathway when coenzyme B(12) is 
not available.

© 2011 The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08179.x 
PMID: 21575137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

