
1. J Mol Biol. 2011 Jul 1;410(1):105-17. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.04.065. Epub 2011
May 5.

Structural and functional analysis of C2-type ketoreductases from modular
polyketide synthases.

Zheng J(1), Keatinge-Clay AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712, USA.

The process by which α-stereocenters of polyketide intermediates are set by
modular polyketide synthases (PKSs) when condensation is not immediately followed
by reduction is mysterious. However, the reductase-incompetent ketoreductase (KR)
from the third module of 6-deoxyerythronolide B synthase has been proposed to
operate as a racemase, aiding in the epimerization process that reverses the
orientation of the α-methyl group of the polyketide intermediate generated by the
ketosynthase to the configuration observed in the 6-deoxyerythronolide B final
product. To learn more about the epimerization process, the structure of the
C2-type KR from the third module of the pikromycin synthase, analogous to the KR 
from the third module of 6-deoxyerythronolide B synthase, was determined to 1.88 
Å resolution. This first structural analysis of this KR-type reveals differences 
from reductase-competent KRs such as that the site NADPH binds to
reductase-competent KRs is occluded by side chains and the putative catalytic
tyrosine possesses more degrees of freedom. The active-site geometry may enable
C2-type KRs to align the thioester and β-keto groups of a polyketide intermediate
to reduce the pK(a) of the α-proton and accelerate its abstraction. Results from 
in vivo assays of engineered PKSs support that C2-type KRs cooperate with
epimer-specific ketosynthases to set the configurations of substituent-bearing
α-carbons.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.04.065 
PMID: 21570406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

