
1. J Biochem. 2011 Sep;150(3):295-302. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvr057. Epub 2011 May 18.

Crystal structure of the tandem-type universal stress protein TTHA0350 from
Thermus thermophilus HB8.

Iino H(1), Shimizu N, Goto M, Ebihara A, Fukui K, Hirotsu K, Kuramitsu S.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN SPring-8 Center, Harima Institute, 1-1-1 Kouto, Sayo, Hyogo 679-5148,
Japan.

The genome sequence of an extremely thermophilic bacterium, Thermus thermophilus 
HB8, revealed that TTHA0350 is a tandem-type universal stress protein (Usp)
consisting of two Usp domains. Usp proteins, which are characterized by a
conserved domain consisting of 130-160 amino acids, are inducibly expressed under
a large number of stress conditions. The N-terminal domain of TTHA0350 contains a
motif similar to the consensus ATP-binding one (G-2 x-G-9x-G-(S/T)), but the
C-terminal one seems to lack the consensus motif. In order to determine its
structural properties, we determined the crystal structures of TTHA0350 in the
unliganded form and TTHA0350•2ATP at 2.50 and 1.70 Å resolution, respectively.
This is the first structure determination of a Usp family protein in both
unliganded and ATP-liganded forms. TTHA0350 is folded into a fan-shaped structure
which is similar to that of tandem-type Usp protein Rv2623 from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. However, the dimer assembly with C2-symmetry in TTHA0350 is quite
different from that with D2-symmetry in Rv2623. The X-ray structure showed that
not only the N-terminal but also the C-terminal domain binds one ATP, although
the ATP-binding motif could not be detected in the C-terminal domain. The loop
interacting with ATP in the C-terminal domain is in a conformation quite
different from that in the N-terminal domain.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvr057 
PMID: 21593057  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

