
1. BMC Genomics. 2011 May 20;12:253. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-253.

Understanding Streptococcus suis serotype 2 infection in pigs through a
transcriptional approach.

Liu M(1), Fang L, Tan C, Long T, Chen H, Xiao S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Pathogens, State Key Laboratory of Agricultural
Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.

BACKGROUND: Streptococcus suis serotype 2 (S. suis 2) is an important pathogen of
pigs. S suis 2 infections have high mortality rates and are characterized by
meningitis, septicemia and pneumonia. S. suis 2 is also an emerging zoonotic
agent and can infect humans that are exposed to pigs or their by-products. To
increase our knowledge of the pathogenesis of meningitis, septicemia and
pneumonia in pigs caused by S. suis 2, we profiled the response of peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), brain and lung tissues to infection with S. suis 
2 strain SC19 using the Affymetrix Porcine Genome Array.
RESULTS: A total of 3,002 differentially expressed transcripts were identified in
the three tissues, including 417 unique genes in brain, 210 in lung and 213 in
PBMC. These genes showed differential expression (DE) patterns on analysis by
visualization and integrated discovery (DAVID). The DE genes involved in the
immune response included genes related to the inflammatory response (CD163), the 
innate immune response (TLR2, TLR4, MYD88, TIRAP), cell adhesion (CD34, SELE,
SELL, SELP, ICAM-1, ICAM-2, VCAM-1), antigen processing and presentation (MHC
protein complex) and angiogenesis (VEGF), together with genes encoding cytokines 
(interleukins). Five selected genes were validated by qRT-PCR analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: We studied the response to infection with S. suis 2 strain SC19 by
microarray analysis. Our findings confirmed some genes identified in previous
studies and discovered numerous additional genes that potentially function in S. 
suis 2 infections in vivo. This new information will form the foundation of
future investigations into the pathogenesis of S. suis.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-253 
PMCID: PMC3113788
PMID: 21599948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

