
1. Infect Immun. 1990 Jun;58(6):1720-9.

Interaction of Treponema denticola TD-4, GM-1, and MS25 with human gingival
fibroblasts.

Weinberg A(1), Holt SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio 78284-7894.

The adherence of Treponema denticola GM-1, TD-4, and MS25 to human gingival
fibroblasts (HGFs) was studied to serve as an introduction to investigations into
the interactions of these oral bacteria with human host cells. Under both aerobic
(5% CO2) and anaerobic (85% N2 plus 10% H2 plus 5% CO2) environments, the
interactions with the HGFs were such that strains GM-1 and MS25 were consistently
more adherent than strain TD-4. Polyclonal antibodies to GM-1 inhibited GM-1
adherence by 70%, while MS25 and TD-4 showed differing degrees of cross-reactive 
inhibition, indicative of common but not identical epitopes on the surface of the
three T. denticola strains. Pretreatment of the three strains with trypsin did
not inhibit adherence; proteinase K did, however, inhibit this interaction by
80%. Trypsin pretreatment of the HGFs resulted in increases in adherence of 50
and 86% for GM-1 and MS25, respectively, while a decrease of 41% was noted for
TD-4. Exposure of the T. denticola strains to sugars and lectin pretreatment of
the HGFs implicated adherence mediation by mannose and galactose residues on the 
HGF surface. Periodate treatment of HGFs resulted in a 50% drop in adherence for 
GM-1 and MS25, but did not decrease that of TD-4. Addition of fetal bovine serum 
inhibited adherence of the three strains to differing degrees, with TD-4 being
the most susceptible. Addition of purified fibronectin (100 micrograms/ml)
resulted in greater than 50% inhibition in GM-1 and MS25 adherence, while a 25%
increase occurred with TD-4. While strain differences were noted in some of the
parameters studied, the results indicate two possibilities for T. denticola-HGF
adherence: a lectinlike adhesin(s) on the T. denticola surface with affinity for 
galactose and mannose on the HGF surface, and a serum host factor(s) bridging T. 
denticola and HGFs.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.58.6.1720-1729.1990 
PMCID: PMC258714
PMID: 2160430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

