
1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2012 Feb;18(2):284-93. doi: 10.1002/ibd.21769. Epub 2011 May
25.

B cells exposed to enterobacterial components suppress development of
experimental colitis.

Schmidt EG(1), Larsen HL, Kristensen NN, Poulsen SS, Claesson MH, Pedersen AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of International Health, Immunology and Microbiology, Panum
Institute, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. Esbens@sund.ku.dk

BACKGROUND: B cells positively contribute to immunity by antigen presentation to 
CD4(+) T cells, cytokine production, and differentiation into antibody secreting 
plasma cells. Accumulating evidence implies that B cells also possess
immunoregulatory functions closely linked to their capability of IL-10 secretion.
METHODS: Colitis development was followed in CD4(+) CD25(-) T cell transplanted
SCID mice co-transferred with B cells exposed to an enterobacterial extract
(ebx-B cells). B and T cell cytokine expression was measured by flow cytometry
and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: We demonstrate that splenic B cells exposed to ebx produce large amounts
of IL-10 in vitro and express CD1d and CD5 previously known to be associated with
regulatory B cells. In SCID mice transplanted with colitogenic CD4(+) CD25(-) T
cells, co-transfer of ebx-B cells significantly suppressed development of
colitis. Suppression was dependent on B cell-derived IL-10, as co-transfer of
IL-10 knockout ebx-B cells failed to suppress colitis. Ebx-B cell-mediated
suppression of colitis was associated with a decrease in interferon gamma
(IFN-γ)-producing T(H) 1 cells and increased frequencies of Foxp3-expressing T
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that splenic B cells exposed to
enterobacterial components acquire immunosuppressive functions by which they can 
suppress development of experimental T cell-mediated colitis in an
IL-10-dependent way.

Copyright © 2011 Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ibd.21769 
PMID: 21618359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

