
1. Immunology. 2011 Aug;133(4):442-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2011.03455.x. Epub
2011 Jun 1.

Lactobacillus gasseri OLL2809 and its RNA suppress proliferation of CD4(+) T
cells through a MyD88-dependent signalling pathway.

Yoshida A(1), Yamada K, Yamazaki Y, Sashihara T, Ikegami S, Shimizu M, Totsuka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, The University of Tokyo, France.

Recent studies have shown that probiotics are beneficial in prevention and
improvement of inflammatory diseases. Accumulating evidence indicates that
probiotics can modulate immune cell responses, although the specific molecular
mechanism by which probiotics work remains elusive. Because T cells express
receptors for microbial components, we examined whether the probiotic strain
Lactobacillus gasseri OLL2809 (LG2809) and its components regulate murine CD4(+) 
T-cell activation. LG2809, as well as two other Lactobacillus strains, inhibited 
proliferation of CD4(+) T cells; LG2809 had the strongest suppressive activity
among them. RNA isolated from LG2809 was also shown to have suppressive activity.
We observed this suppressive effect in the culture of CD4(+) T cells stimulated
with anti-CD3/CD28 treatment, suggesting a direct effect on CD4(+) T cells. In
contrast, the suppressive effect was not observed for CD4(+) T cells from myeloid
differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88) protein-deficient mice, and was 
abrogated in the presence of an anti-oxidant reagent, N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC).
These results demonstrate that the suppressive effect of LG2809 and its RNA
occurred through a MyD88-dependent signalling pathway and suggest involvement of 
a reactive oxygen species-dependent mechanism. LG2809 RNA injected subcutaneously
suppressed delayed-type-hypersensitivity response in DO11.10 mice, and the
suppression was abrogated by treatment with NAC. Collectively, these results
suggest that suppression of T-cell proliferation by RNA may be one of the
mechanisms when a probiotic bacterial strain exerts suppressive effects on
inflammatory responses.

© 2011 The Authors. Immunology © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2011.03455.x 
PMCID: PMC3143356
PMID: 21627651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

