
1. J Phys Chem B. 2011 Jun 23;115(24):7963-71. doi: 10.1021/jp201296m. Epub 2011 May
31.

The hydrogen-bond switch reaction of the Blrb Bluf domain of Rhodobacter
sphaeroides.

Mathes T(1), van Stokkum IH, Bonetti C, Hegemann P, Kennis JT.

Author information: 
(1)Biophysics Group, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Faculty of Sciences,
Vrije Universiteit, De Boelelaan 1081, 1081 HV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
tilo.mathes.1@biologie.hu-berlin.de

The BlrB protein from Rhodobacter sphaeroides is a small 136 amino acid
photoreceptor belonging to the BLUF family of blue light receptors. It contains
merely the conserved BLUF fold responsible for binding the flavin pigment and a
short C-terminal extension of unknown function. We investigated the primary
photoreactions of BlrB by picosecond fluorescence and transient absorption
spectroscopy. After excitation of the flavin the fluorescence decays in an H/D
isotope independent manner with time constants of 21 and 390 ps, indicating a
BLUF characteristic heterogeneous excited state quenched by electron transfer. By
transient absorption spectroscopy, we observed a rapid relaxation of a
vibrationally hot excited state within 6 ps upon excitation at 400 nm. The
relaxed excited state evolves biexponentially with 18 ps (27%) and 216 ps (73%)
into the signaling state spectrum indicated by a growing absorptive feature at
492 nm. Additionally, a broad triplet feature is observed as residual absorbance 
at a delay of 5 ns, which we attribute to derive from a significant fraction of
free flavin in the sample. The photochemistry of BlrB is similar to other small
BLUF proteins in respect to the fast formation of the photoproduct but does not
resolve any further intermediates. We compare the photoreaction with other BLUF
proteins on the basis of available spectroscopic data and crystal structures. An 
arginine close to the C2‚ïêO carbonyl of the flavin is likely to be a key
determinant for the fast electron transfer in BlrB. Additionally, the orientation
of the electron-donating tyrosine in respect to the flavin might play a role in
the so far unique kinetic separation of the semiquinonic intermediates in
Slr1694.

DOI: 10.1021/jp201296m 
PMID: 21627064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

