
1. Curr Microbiol. 2011 Aug;63(2):131-7. doi: 10.1007/s00284-011-9947-8. Epub 2011
May 28.

Analysis of Escherichia coli isolated from patients affected by Crohn's disease.

Raso T(1), Crivellaro S, Chirillo MG, Pais P, Gaia E, Savoia D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine S. Luigi
Gonzaga, University of Torino, S. Luigi Gonzaga Hospital, Regione Gonzole 10,
Orbassano, Turin, Italy.

The etiopathogenesis of Crohn's disease (CD) is still controversial: several
genetic, immunologic, and environmental factors, including some bacteria, have
been implicated. This study has been devised to assess the involvement of
Escherichia coli in CD. Seven E.Â coli strains were isolated from 14 biopsies
obtained from ileocolic ulcers of patients affected by inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD), including six with ulcerative colitis and eight with CD. Five strains,
exclusively isolated from CD patients, were found inside mucosal cells. Different
PCR techniques (for chuA, yjaA, TspE4.C2, escV, and bfpB genes) were performed
and PFGE was carried out to characterize these bacteria in comparison with other 
E. coli strains isolated from non-IBD specimens. The correlation of these
characters with bacterial invasiveness on intestinal (Caco-2) and phagocytic
(U937) cells was assessed. Overall our pilot data suggest that five among eight
strains isolated from CD patients belonged to the adherent-invasive E. coli
(AIEC) group, and were invasive on Caco-2 cells and resistant to phagocytosis.
These findings suggest that these bacteria could be considered target organisms
whose elimination could reduce the intestinal inflammatory process and CD
progression.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-011-9947-8 
PMID: 21626145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

