
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19980. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019980. Epub 2011 May 20.

Novel two-component systems implied in antibiotic production in Streptomyces
coelicolor.

Yepes A(1), Rico S, Rodríguez-García A, Santamaría RI, Díaz M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Funcional y Genómica/Departamento de Microbiología y
Genética, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas/Universidad de
Salamanca, Edificio Departamental, Campus Miguel de Unamuno, Salamanca, Spain.

The abundance of two-component systems (TCSs) in Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2)
genome indicates their importance in the physiology of this soil bacteria.
Currently, several TCSs have been related to antibiotic regulation, and the
purpose in this study was the characterization of five TCSs, selected by sequence
homology with the well-known absA1A2 system, that could also be associated with
this important process. Null mutants of the five TCSs were obtained and two
mutants (ΔSCO1744/1745 and ΔSCO4596/4597/4598) showed significant differences in 
both antibiotic production and morphological differentiation, and have been
renamed as abr (antibiotic regulator). No detectable changes in antibiotic
production were found in the mutants in the systems that include the ORFs
SCO3638/3639, SCO3640/3641 and SCO2165/2166 in any of the culture conditions
assayed. The system SCO1744/1745 (AbrA1/A2) was involved in negative regulation
of antibiotic production, and acted also as a negative regulator of the
morphological differentiation. By contrast, the system SCO4596/4597/4598
(AbrC1/C2/C3), composed of two histidine kinases and one response regulator, had 
positive effects on both morphological development and antibiotic production.
Microarray analyses of the ΔabrC1/C2/C3 and wild-type transcriptomes revealed
downregulation of actII-ORF4 and cdaR genes, the actinorhodin and
calcium-dependent antibiotic pathway-specific regulators respectively. These
results demonstrated the involvement of these new two-component systems in
antibiotic production and morphological differentiation by different approaches. 
One is a pleiotropic negative regulator: abrA1/A2. The other one is a positive
regulator composed of three elements, two histidine kinases and one response
regulator: abrC1/C2/C3.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019980 
PMCID: PMC3098853
PMID: 21625497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

