
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20191. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020191. Epub 2011 May 26.

Diversity of SCCmec elements in methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative
staphylococci clinical isolates.

Zong Z(1), Peng C, Lü X.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infectious Diseases, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China. zongzhiy@scu.edu.cn

BACKGROUND: Methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative staphylococci (MR-CoNS) are 
opportunistic pathogens and serve as a large reservoir of staphylococcal cassette
chromosome mec (SCCmec). Characterization of SCCmec in MR-CoNS can generate
useful information on the mobilization and evolution of this element.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Non-repetitive MR-CoNS clinical isolates (n = 84;
39 S. epidermidis, 19 S. haemolyticus, 9 S. hominis, 6 S. capitis, 4 S. warneri, 
2 S. cohnii, 2 S. saprophyticus, 1 S. kloosii, 1 S. simulans and 1 S.
massiliensis) were collected. All isolates could grow on plates with 4 mg/L
cefoxitin and all had mecA as detected by PCR. Strain typing using RAPD and
ERIC-PCR revealed that almost all isolates were of different strains. SCCmec
typing was performed using multiplex PCR published previously. For isolates in
which SCCmec could not be typed, the mec complex classes were determined by
additional PCR and the ccr genes were amplified with published or newly-designed 
primers and then sequenced. SCCmec types were assigned for 63 isolates by
multiplex PCR and were assigned for 14 other isolates by PCR targeting mec and
ccr. Among 77 isolates with determined SCCmec types, 54 had a single type,
including type III (n = 19), IV (n = 14), V (n = 10), II (n = 2), I (n = 1), VIII
(n = 1) and five unnamed types (n = 7), while 23 isolates had two types, III+V
(n = 12), II+V (n = 8), II+IV (n = 2) or IV+V (n = 1). The five unnamed types
were assigned UT1 (class A mec, ccrA1/ccrB4), UT2 (class C1 mec, ccrA4/ccrB4),
UT3 (class A mec, ccrA5/ccrB3), UT4 (class C2 mec, ccrA2/ccrB2 plus ccrC1) and
UT5 (class A mec, ccrA1/ccrB1 plus ccrC1).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: SCCmec types III, IV and V were prevalent in MR-CoNS
and many isolates could harbor more than one type. Several new types of SCCmec
were identified, highlighting the great genetic diversity and the need of
developing classification schemes for SCCmec in MR-CoNS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020191 
PMCID: PMC3102682
PMID: 21637845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

