
1. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2012 Apr;25(4):358-63. doi:
10.3109/14767058.2011.578695. Epub 2011 Jun 1.

Evidence of in vitro differential secretion of human beta-defensins-1, -2, and -3
after selective exposure to Streptococcus agalactiae in human fetal membranes.

Zaga-Clavellina V(1), Garcia-Lopez G, Flores-Espinosa P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Instituto Nacional de Perinatologia, Mexico City, 
Mexico. sciencefeedback@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this work was to characterize the individual contribution
of the amnion (AMN) and choriodecidua (CHD) regions to the secretion of human
beta defensins (HBD)-1, -2, and -3, after stimulation with Streptococcus
agalactiae.
METHODS: Full-thickness membranes were mounted on a Transwell device, constituted
by two independent chambers; 1 × 10(6) CFU/ml of S. agalactiae were added to
either the AMN or CHD face or to both. Secretion profiles of HBD-1, HBD-2, and
HBD-3 to the culture medium were quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
sandwich assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: Secretion profile of HBD-1 remained without significant changes; HBD-2
secretion level by the CHD increased 2.0 (2.73 ± 0.19 pg/μg) and 2.6 (3.62 ± 0.60
pg/μg) times when the stimulus was applied only to the CHD region and
simultaneously to both compartments, respectively. The bacterial stimulation in
the AMN induced a 2.0 times (2.06 ± 0.29 pg/μg) increase in this region. HBD-3
secretion level increased significantly in the CHD (15.65 ± 2.68 pg/μg) and the
AMN (14.94 ± 1.85 pg/μg) only when both regions were stimulated simultaneously.
CONCLUSION: The stimulation of human fetal membranes with S. agalactiae induced a
differential and tissue-specific profile of HBD-1, HBD-2, and HBD-3 secretion.

DOI: 10.3109/14767058.2011.578695 
PMID: 21631237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

