
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 29;286(30):26828-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.254086. Epub
2011 Jun 1.

Novel ganglioside-mediated entry of botulinum neurotoxin serotype D into neurons.

Kroken AR(1), Karalewitz AP, Fu Z, Kim JJ, Barbieri JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA.

Botulinum Neurotoxins (BoNTs) are organized into seven serotypes, A-G. Although
several BoNT serotypes enter neurons through synaptic vesicle cycling utilizing
dual receptors (a ganglioside and a synaptic vesicle-associated protein), the
entry pathway of BoNT/D is less well understood. Although BoNT/D entry is
ganglioside-dependent, alignment and structural studies show that BoNT/D lacks
key residues within a conserved ganglioside binding pocket that are present in
BoNT serotypes A, B, E, F, and G, which indicate that BoNT/D-ganglioside
interactions may be unique. In this study BoNT/D is shown to have a unique
association with ganglioside relative to the other BoNT serotypes, utilizing a
ganglioside binding loop (GBL, residues Tyr-1235-Ala-1245) within the receptor
binding domain of BoNT/D (HCR/D) via b-series gangliosides, including GT1b, GD1b,
and GD2. HCR/D bound gangliosides and entered neurons dependent upon the aromatic
ring of Phe-1240 within the GBL. This is the first BoNT-ganglioside interaction
that is mediated by a phenylalanine. In contrast, Trp-1238, located near the N
terminus of the ganglioside binding loop, was mostly solvent-inaccessible and
appeared to contribute to maintaining the loop structure. BoNT/D entry and
intoxication were enhanced by membrane depolarization via synaptic vesicle
cycling, where HCR/D colocalized with synaptophysin, a synaptic vesicle marker,
but immunoprecipitation experiments did not detect direct association with
synaptic vesicle protein 2. Thus, BoNT/D utilizes unique associations with
gangliosides and synaptic vesicles to enter neurons, which may facilitate new
neurotoxin therapies.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.254086 
PMCID: PMC3143643
PMID: 21632541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

