
1. Int J Oncol. 2011 Aug;39(2):373-81. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1059. Epub 2011 May 31.

Expression and histopathological correlation of CCR9 and CCL25 in ovarian cancer.

Singh R(1), Stockard CR, Grizzle WE, Lillard JW Jr, Singh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Immunology, Morehouse School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30310, USA.

Ovarian carcinoma is the most lethal gynecological malignancy among women and its
poor prognosis is mainly due to metastasis. Chemokine receptor CCR9 is primarily 
expressed by a small subset of immune cells. The interactions between CCL25 and
CCR9 have been implicated in leukocyte trafficking to the small bowel, a frequent
metastatic site for ovarian cancer cells. We have previously shown that ovarian
cancer cells express CCR9 and play an important role in cell migration, invasion 
and survival in the presence of its natural ligand in vitro. In this study, we
have evaluated the expression of CCR9 and CCL25 in ovarian cancer cells and
clinical samples. Ovarian cancer tissue microarrays from University of Alabama at
Birmingham and AccuMax were stained for CCR9 and CCL25. Aperio ScanScope was used
to acquire 80X digital images and expression analysis of CCR9 and CCL25. Flow
cytometry and the Image stream system were used to conform the expression of CCR9
and CCL25 in ovarian cancer cells. Our results show significantly higher
(p<0.001) expression of CCR9 and CCL25 in serous adenocarcinoma followed by
serous papillary cystadenoma, endometrioid adenocarcinoma, mucinous
adenocarcinoma, cystadenoma, mucinous boderline adenocarcinoma, clear cell
carcinoma, granulosa cell tumor, dysgerminoma, transitional cell carcinoma,
Brenner tumor, yolk sac tumor, adenocarcinoma and fibroma cases, compared to
non-neoplastic ovarian tissue. Similar to tissue expression, CCR9 was also
significantly expressed by the ovarian cancer cell lines (OVCAR-3 and SK-OV-3) in
comparison to normal adult ovarian epithelial cell. We provide the first evidence
that CCR9 and its natural ligand CCL25 are highly expressed by ovarian cancer
tissue and their expression correlates with histological subtypes. Expression of 
this chemokine receptor and its ligand CCL25 within primary tumor tissue further 
suggests a potential role of this chemokine-receptor axis in ovarian cancer
progression.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1059 
PMCID: PMC3760589
PMID: 21637913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

