
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 19;286(33):29241-29248. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.236893. Epub 
2011 Jun 1.

Structure and mechanism of the diiron benzoyl-coenzyme A epoxidase BoxB.

Rather LJ(1), Weinert T(2), Demmer U(2), Bill E(3), Ismail W(1), Fuchs G(1),
Ermler U(4).

Author information: 
(1)Mikrobiologie, Institut für Biologie II, Universität Freiburg, Schänzlestrasse
1, D-79104 Freiburg.
(2)Max-Planck-Institut für Biophysik, Max-von-Laue-Strasse 3, D-60438 Frankfurt
am Main, and.
(3)Max-Planck-Institut für Bioanorganische Chemie, Stiftstrasse 34-36, D-45470
Mülheim an der Ruhr, Germany.
(4)Max-Planck-Institut für Biophysik, Max-von-Laue-Strasse 3, D-60438 Frankfurt
am Main, and. Electronic address: ulrich.ermler@biophys.mpg.de.

The coenzyme A (CoA)-dependent aerobic benzoate metabolic pathway uses an
unprecedented chemical strategy to overcome the high aromatic resonance energy by
forming the non-aromatic 2,3-epoxybenzoyl-CoA. The crucial dearomatizing reaction
is catalyzed by three enzymes, BoxABC, where BoxA is an NADPH-dependent
reductase, BoxB is a benzoyl-CoA 2,3-epoxidase, and BoxC is an epoxide ring
hydrolase. We characterized the key enzyme BoxB from Azoarcus evansii by
structural and Mössbauer spectroscopic methods as a new member of class I diiron 
enzymes. Several family members were structurally studied with respect to the
diiron center architecture, but no structure of an intact diiron enzyme with its 
natural substrate has been reported. X-ray structures between 1.9 and 2.5 Å
resolution were determined for BoxB in the diferric state and with bound
substrate benzoyl-CoA in the reduced state. The substrate-bound reduced state is 
distinguished from the diferric state by increased iron-ligand distances and the 
absence of directly bridging groups between them. The position of benzoyl-CoA
inside a 20 Å long channel and the position of the phenyl ring relative to the
diiron center are accurately defined. The C2 and C3 atoms of the phenyl ring are 
closer to one of the irons. Therefore, one oxygen of activated O(2) must be
ligated predominantly to this proximate iron to be in a geometrically suitable
position to attack the phenyl ring. Consistent with the observed iron/phenyl
geometry, BoxB stereoselectively should form the 2S,3R-epoxide. We postulate a
reaction cycle that allows a charge delocalization because of the phenyl ring and
the electron-withdrawing CoA thioester.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.236893 
PMCID: PMC3190730
PMID: 21632537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

