
1. Microb Drug Resist. 2012 Feb;18(1):47-51. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2011.0014. Epub 2011
Jun 7.

Prevalence of vanC vancomycin-resistant enterococci in the teaching hospitals of 
the University of Debrecen, Hungary.

Dombr치di Z(1), Dobay O, Nagy K, Koz치k A, Dombr치di V, Szab칩 J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.
zsuzsanna.dombradi@gmail.com

Vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) are common nosocomial pathogens; however, 
until now they have been rarely encountered in Hungary. In the present study, we 
investigated the prevalence of VRE in the teaching hospitals of the University of
Debrecen. Of 7,271 Enterococcus-containing clinical samples collected between
2004 and 2009, we identified 16 VRE. Species-specific polymerase chain reaction
was used to detect Enterococcus faecalis, Enterococcus faecium, Enterococcus
casseliflavus, and Enterococcus gallinarum. Multiplex polymerase chain reaction
was performed to identify the vancomycin resistance genes: vanA, vanB, vanC1/C2, 
vanD, vanE, and vanG. Restriction digestion with SalI and HindIII was introduced 
to differentiate the vanC1 and vanC2 genes from each other. Genetic relationships
between the strains were investigated by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis.
Overall, we identified the vanC1 resistance gene in 14 E. gallinarum and the
vanC2 resistance gene in two E. casseliflavus strains. Except for two samples,
the isolates had different pulsed-field gel electrophoresis types, suggesting
sporadic emergence of the resistant bacteria. In addition, antibiotic resistance 
profile was determined by E-test. Three E. gallinarum strains proved to be
resistant to gentamicin because of the presence of the aacA-aphD gene. Although
the prevalence of VRE in Debrecen is rather low, the appearance of multiple
resistances is of concern.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2011.0014 
PMID: 21649462  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

