
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 5;286(31):27663-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.246975. Epub 2011
Jun 7.

Perturbation of BRD4 protein function by BRD4-NUT protein abrogates cellular
differentiation in NUT midline carcinoma.

Yan J(1), Diaz J, Jiao J, Wang R, You J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

NUT midline carcinoma (NMC) belongs to a class of highly lethal and poorly
differentiated epithelial cancers arising mainly in human midline organs. NMC is 
caused by the chromosome translocation-mediated fusion of the NUT (nuclear
protein in testis) gene on chromosome 15 to a few other genes, most frequently
the BRD4 gene on chromosome 19. The mechanism by which the BRD4-NUT fusion
product blocks NMC cellular differentiation and contributes to oncogenesis
remains elusive. In this study, we show that BRD4-NUT and BRD4 colocalize in
discrete nuclear foci that are hyperacetylated but transcriptionally inactive.
BRD4-NUT recruits histone acetyltransferases to induce histone hyperacetylation
in these chromatin foci, which provide docking sites for accumulation of
additional BRD4 and associated P-TEFB (positive transcription elongation factor
b) complexes in the transcriptionally inactive BRD4-NUT foci. These molecular
events lead to repression of a BRD4Â·P-TEFB downstream target gene c-fos, a
component of activator protein 1 (AP-1), that directly regulates epithelial
differentiation. Knockdown of BRD4-NUT in NMC cells disperses the
transcriptionally inactive chromatin foci and releases the transcriptional
activators to stimulate c-fos expression, leading to restoration of cellular
differentiation. Our study provides a novel mechanism by which the BRD4-NUT
oncogene perturbs BRD4 functions to block cellular differentiation and to
contribute to the oncogenic progression in the highly aggressive NMC.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.246975 
PMCID: PMC3149357
PMID: 21652721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

