
1. Molecules. 2011 Jun 9;16(6):4818-27. doi: 10.3390/molecules16064818.

Effects of fractionation and combinatorial evaluation of Tamarindus indica
fractions for antibacterial activity.

Nwodo UU(1), Iroegbu CU, Ngene AA, Chigor VN, Okoh AI.

Author information: 
(1)Applied and Environmental Microbiology Research Group (AEMREG), Department of 
Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Fort Hare, Private Bag X1314, Alice 
5700, South Africa. uchenwodo@gmail.com

Six fractions, named TiA - TiF, were obtained by fractionating the crude ethanol 
extract of the stem bark of Tamarindus indica using column chromatographic
techniques. On TLC, fraction TiB showed five bands, TiC three bands, while TiD
and TiE showed two bands each. TiC, TiD and TiE were re-eluted with different
solvent systems to yield two fractions each, while TiB yielded four. These
subfractions were designated B1-B4; C1-C2; D1-D2 and E1-E2, respectively.
Tannins, flavonoids and alkaloids, among other components, were detected, albeit 
in different proportions with respect to fractions and subfractions and were
compartmentalized with respect to the solvent systems used. The in vitro
antibacterial activity of fractions and subfractions was tested separately and in
combinations using the agar well diffusion technique. The susceptibly of test
strains (expressed as %) were: 83.3% (TiA and TiB), 75.0% (crude extract and
TiC), 66.7% (TiD), 50.0% (TiE) and 16.7% (TiF) when used singly, whereas in
combination, the corresponding susceptibilities were 100% (CE), 83.3% (DE), 66.7%
(AB, AF, BC, BD, DE and EF), 50% (AC and CD), 33.3% (BE and BF) and 16.7% (AD)
against Gram negative bacteria strains and 100% (EF), 80% (DE), 60% (AB, BC and
CE), 40% (AC, BD, BF, CF and DF) and 20% (AE, AF, BE and CD) against Gram
positive strains. Percentage susceptibility with combinatorial use of
re-fractions ranged from 85.7-57.1% and 60-40% against Gram negative and positive
strains (TiB subfractions), respectively, 100-85.7% and 40-0% against Gram
negative and positive strains (TiC, TiD and TiE sub-fractions).

DOI: 10.3390/molecules16064818 
PMCID: PMC6264773
PMID: 21659967  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

