
1. Blood. 2011 Jul 28;118(4):1062-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-09-307256. Epub 2011
Jun 7.

Targeting RAD51 phosphotyrosine-315 to prevent unfaithful recombination repair in
BCR-ABL1 leukemia.

Slupianek A(1), Dasgupta Y, Ren SY, Gurdek E, Donlin M, Nieborowska-Skorska M,
Fleury F, Skorski T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Temple
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Chronic myeloid leukemia chronic phase (CML-CP) CD34(+) cells contain numerous
DNA double-strand breaks whose unfaithful repair may contribute to chromosomal
instability and disease progression to blast phase (CML-BP). These phenomena are 
often associated with the appearance of imatinib-resistant BCR-ABL1 kinase
mutants (eg, T315I) and overexpression of BCR-ABL1. Here we show that BCR-ABL1
(nonmutated and T315I mutant) promoted RAD51 recombinase-mediated unfaithful
homeologous recombination repair (HomeoRR) in a dosage-dependent manner. BCR-ABL1
SH3 domain interacts with RAD51 proline-rich regions, resulting in direct
phosphorylation of RAD51 on Y315 (pY315). RAD51(pY315) facilitates dissociation
from the complex with BCR-ABL1 kinase, migrates to the nucleus, and enhances
formation of the nuclear foci indicative of recombination sites. HomeoRR and
RAD51 nuclear foci were strongly reduced by RAD51(Y315F) phosphorylation-less
mutant. In addition, peptide aptamer mimicking RAD51(pY315) fragment, but not
that with Y315F phosphorylation-less substitution, diminished RAD51 foci
formation and inhibited HomeoRR in leukemia cells. In conclusion, we postulate
that BCR-ABL1 kinase-mediated RAD51(pY315) promotes unfaithful HomeoRR in
leukemia cells, which may contribute to accumulation of secondary chromosomal
aberrations responsible for CML relapse and progression.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-09-307256 
PMCID: PMC3148158
PMID: 21653319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

