
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2011 Nov;92(3):509-17. doi: 10.1007/s00253-011-3362-8.
Epub 2011 Jun 11.

Chemo-enzymatic synthesis of polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) incorporating
2-hydroxybutyrate by wild-type class I PHA synthase from Ralstonia eutropha.

Han X(1), Satoh Y, Satoh T, Matsumoto K, Kakuchi T, Taguchi S, Dairi T, Munekata 
M, Tajima K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology and Macromolecular Chemistry, Graduate School of
Engineering, Hokkaido University, N13W8, Kita-ku, Sapporo, 060-8628, Japan.

A previously established improved two-phase reaction system has been applied to
analyze the substrate specificities and polymerization activities of
polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) synthases. We first analyzed the substrate specificity
of propionate coenzyme A (CoA) transferase and found that 2-hydroxybutyrate (2HB)
was converted into its CoA derivative. Then, the synthesis of PHA incorporating
2HB was achieved by a wild-type class I PHA synthase from Ralstonia eutropha. The
PHA synthase stereoselectively polymerized (R)-2HB, and the maximal molar ratio
of 2HB in the polymer was 9 mol%. The yields and the molecular weights of the
products were decreased with the increase of the (R)-2HB concentration in the
reaction mixture. The weight-average molecular weight of the polymer
incorporating 9 mol% 2HB was 1.00 × 10(5), and a unimodal peak with
polydispersity of 3.1 was observed in the GPC chart. Thermal properties of the
polymer incorporating 9 mol% 2HB were analyzed by DSC and TG-DTA. T (g), T (m),
and T (d) (10%) were observed at -1.1°C, 158.8°C, and 252.7°C, respectively. In
general, major components of PHAs are 3-hydroxyalkanoates, and only engineered
class II PHA synthases have been reported as enzymes having the ability to
polymerize HA with the hydroxyl group at C2 position. Thus, this is the first
report to demonstrate that wild-type class I PHA synthase was able to polymerize 
2HB.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-011-3362-8 
PMID: 21667085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

