
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2011 Aug 15;148(3):156-63. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2011.05.016. Epub 2011 May 27.

Involvement of Clostridium gasigenes and C. algidicarnis in 'blown pack' spoilage
of Brazilian vacuum-packed beef.

Silva AR(1), Paulo EN, Sant'Ana AS, Chaves RD, Massaguer PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, Faculty of Food Engineering (FEA), University of
Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP, Brazil. alers.marques@gmail.com

The objectives of this study were to isolate psychrotrophic clostridia from
Brazilian vacuum-packed beef cuts (spoiled or not) and to identify the isolates
by using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Anaerobic psychrotrophic microorganisms were
also enumerated and samples were collected to verify the incidence of
psychrotrophic clostridia in the abattoir environment. Vacuum-packed beef cuts
(n=8 grossly distended and n=5 non-spoiled) and environmental samples were
obtained from a beef packing plant located in the state of São Paulo, Brazil.
Each sample was divided in three subsamples (exudate, beef surface and beef core)
that were analyzed for vegetative forms, total spore-forming, and sulfide
reducing spore-forming, both activated by alcohol and heat. Biochemical profiles 
of the isolates were obtained using API20A, with further identification using 16S
rRNA gene sequencing. The growth temperature and the pH range were also assessed.
Populations of psychrotrophic anaerobic vegetative microorganisms of up to
10(10)CFU/(g, mL or 100 cm(2)) were found in 'blown pack' samples, while in
non-spoiled samples populations of 10(5)CFU/(g, CFU/mL or CFU/100 cm(2)) was
found. Overall, a higher population of total spores and sulfide reducing spores
activated by heat in spoiled samples was found. Clostridium gasigenes (n=10) and 
C. algidicarnis (n=2) were identified using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Among the
ten C. gasigenes isolates, six were from spoiled samples (C1, C2 and C9), two
were isolated from non-spoiled samples (C4 and C5) and two were isolated from the
hide and the abattoir corridor/beef cut conveyor belt. C. algidicarnis was
recovered from spoiled beef packs (C2). Although some samples (C3, C7, C10 and
C14) presented signs of 'blown pack' spoilage, Clostridium was not recovered. C. 
algidicarnis (n=1) and C. gasigenes (n=9) isolates have shown a psychrotrophic
behavior, grew in the range 6.2-8.2. This is the first report on the isolation of
psychrotrophic Clostridium (C. gasigenes and C. algidicarnis) in Brazil. This
study shows that psychrotrophic Clostridium may pose a risk for the stability of 
vacuum-packed beef produced in tropical countries during shelf-life and
highlights the need of adopting control measures to reduce their incidence in
abattoir and the occurrence of 'blown pack' spoilage.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2011.05.016 
PMID: 21669470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

