
1. Ups J Med Sci. 2011 Aug;116(3):161-8. doi: 10.3109/03009734.2011.585253. Epub
2011 Jun 17.

A screening method for phosphohistidine phosphatase 1 activity.

Beckman-Sundh U(1), Ek B, Zetterqvist O, Ek P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

Abstract Introduction. Research in the field of protein-bound phosphohistidine
phosphorylation has been hampered by the difficulties in analysis and detection
of phosphohistidine. Therefore a screening method was developed primarily for the
analysis of phosphohistidine phosphatase 1 (PHPT1) activity. Methods. A highly
positively charged substrate, Ac-Val-Arg-Leu-Lys-His-Arg-Lys-Leu-Arg-pNA,
containing the peptide surrounding the phosphorylated histidine in ion channel
KCa3.1 was chemically phosphorylated using phosphoramidate. Excess
phosphoramidate was removed by anion exchange chromatography using a micro spin
column. After incubation of the eluate with PHPT1, the removed phosphate was
bound on a consecutive anion exchange spin column. The eluate was assayed in a
micro plate format for remaining phosphate in the substrate
Ac-Val-Arg-Leu-Lys-His(P)-Arg-Lys-Leu-Arg-pNA. Histone H4, also highly positive
in charge, was subjected to the same procedure to explore the possibility to use 
other substrates to PHPT1 in this assay format. Results. It was found that
Ac-Val-Arg-Leu-Lys-His(P)-Arg-Lys-Leu-Arg-pNA and phosphohistone H4 were
dephosphorylated by PHPT1. The apparent K(m) for
Ac-Val-Arg-Leu-Lys-His(P)-Arg-Lys-Leu-Arg-pNA was in the order of 10 Î¼M.Using
this method, phosphohistidine phosphatase activity was detected in mouse liver
cell sap with Ac-Val-Arg-Leu-Lys-His(P)-Arg-Lys-Leu-Arg-pNA as substrate.
Discussion. The described method for determination of PHPT1 activity is
comparably much easier and faster than presently used methods for detection of
phosphohistidine phosphatase activity. It is also sensitive, since the lower
activity limit was 5 pmol phosphate released per min. It has the potential to be 
used both for more rapid screening for inhibitors and activators to
phosphohistidine phosphatases and for screening of histidine kinases.

DOI: 10.3109/03009734.2011.585253 
PMCID: PMC3128721
PMID: 21679093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

