
1. BMJ Case Rep. 2009;2009. pii: bcr07.2008.0441. doi: 10.1136/bcr.07.2008.0441.
Epub 2009 Jun 1.

Whipple's disease: misdiagnosed as sarcoidosis with further tricuspid valve
endocarditis and pulmonary embolism - a case report.

Berent R(1), Auer J, Lassnig E, von Duvillard SP, Crouse SF, Tuppy H, Eber B.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Rehabilitation, Stifterstrasse 11, Bad Schallerbach,
4701, Austria.

GH Whipple described a 36-year-old physician in 1907 with gradual loss of weight 
and strength, stools consisting chiefly of neutral fat and fatty acids,
indefinite abdominal signs and a peculiar multiple arthritis. The patient died of
this progressive illness. Whipple called it intestinal lipodystrophy since he
observed accumulation of large masses of neutral fats and fatty acids in the
lymph spaces. It was renamed Whipple's disease in 1949. An infectious aetiology
was suspected as early as Whipple's initial report. However, successful treatment
with antibiotics was not reported until 1952, which resulted in dramatic clinical
responses. The cause is now known to be Tropheryma whipplei. Light and electron
microscopy of infected tissue identified a gram-positive, non-acid-fast, periodic
acid-Schiff (PAS) positive bacillus with a characteristic trilamellar plasma
membrane resembling that of gram-negative bacteria. Whipple's disease is
extremely rare. It is a systemic infectious disorder affecting mostly middle-aged
white men. The clinical presentation is often non-specific, which may make its
diagnosis difficult. The four cardinal clinical manifestations are arthralgias,
weight loss, diarrhoea and abdominal pain. The frequently vague articular
symptoms can precede the diagnosis of Whipple's disease by an average of 6-8
years. Lymph nodes and other tissues may present diagnostic problems, since the
changes in routinely stained sections may mimic those of sarcoidosis. The
detection of PAS-positive histiocytes in the small intestine remains the mainstay
of the diagnosis, although Whipple's disease without gastrointestinal involvement
is described. We illustrate a case in which, retrospectively, the clinical
presentation would have been typical for Whipple's disease. However, the clinical
presentation and the histological examinations of lymph nodes, liver biopsies and
ascites initially were misinterpreted as sarcoidosis with consecutive
immunosuppressive therapy and progressive worsening of the patient's health
presenting at least as sepsis with endocarditis.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr.07.2008.0441 
PMCID: PMC3027720
PMID: 21686811 

