
1. J Immunol. 2011 Jul 15;187(2):911-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100588. Epub 2011 Jun
20.

Neutrophil mobilization from the bone marrow during polymicrobial sepsis is
dependent on CXCL12 signaling.

Delano MJ(1), Kelly-Scumpia KM, Thayer TC, Winfield RD, Scumpia PO, Cuenca AG,
Harrington PB, O'Malley KA, Warner E, Gabrilovich S, Mathews CE, Laface D,
Heyworth PG, Ramphal R, Strieter RM, Moldawer LL, Efron PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville,
FL 32610-0286, USA.

Neutrophils are essential for successful host eradication of bacterial pathogens 
and for survival to polymicrobial sepsis. During inflammation, the bone marrow
provides a large reserve of neutrophils that are released into the peripheral
circulation where they traverse to sites of infection. Although neutrophils are
essential for survival, few studies have investigated the mechanisms responsible 
for neutrophil mobilization from the bone marrow during polymicrobial sepsis.
Using a cecal ligation and puncture model of polymicrobial sepsis, we
demonstrated that neutrophil mobilization from the bone marrow is not dependent
on TLR4, MyD88, TRIF, IFNARα/β, or CXCR2 pathway signaling during sepsis. In
contrast, we observed that bone marrow CXCL12 mRNA abundance and specific CXCL12 
levels are sharply reduced, whereas splenic CXCR4 mRNA and cell surface
expression are increased during sepsis. Blocking CXCL12 activity significantly
reduced blood neutrophilia by inhibiting bone marrow release of granulocytes
during sepsis. However, CXCL12 inhibition had no impact on the expansion of bone 
marrow neutrophil precursors and hematopoietic progenitors. Bone marrow
neutrophil retention by CXCL12 blockade prevented blood neutrophilia, inhibited
peritoneal neutrophil accumulation, allowed significant peritoneal bacterial
invasion, and increased polymicrobial sepsis mortality. We concluded that changes
in the pattern of CXCL12 signaling during sepsis are essential for neutrophil
bone marrow mobilization and host survival but have little impact on bone marrow 
granulopoiesis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100588 
PMCID: PMC3635667
PMID: 21690321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

