
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2011 Dec;92(6):1187-96. doi:
10.1007/s00253-011-3403-3. Epub 2011 Jun 21.

Characterization of a recombinant cellobiose 2-epimerase from
Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus and its application in the production of
mannose from glucose.

Park CS(1), Kim JE, Choi JG, Oh DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Seoul, Republic
of Korea.

A putative N-acyl-D-glucosamine 2-epimerase from Caldicellulosiruptor
saccharolyticus was cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli. The recombinant
enzyme was identified as a cellobiose 2-epimerase by the analysis of the activity
for substrates, acid-hydrolyzed products, and amino acid sequence. The cellobiose
2-epimerase was purified with a specific activity of 35 nmol min(-1) mg(-1) for
D-glucose with a 47-kDa monomer. The epimerization activity for D-glucose was
maximal at pH 7.5 and 75°C. The half-lives of the enzyme at 60°C, 65°C, 70°C,
75°C, and 80°C were 142, 71, 35, 18, and 4.6 h, respectively. The enzyme
catalyzed the epimerization reactions of the aldoses harboring hydroxyl groups
oriented in the right-hand configuration at the C2 position and the left-hand
configuration at the C3 position, such as D-glucose, D-xylose, L-altrose,
L-idose, and L-arabinose, to their C2 epimers, such as D-mannose, D-lyxose,
L-allose, L-gulose, and L-ribose, respectively. The enzyme catalyzed also the
isomerization reactions. The enzyme exhibited the highest activity for mannose
among monosaccharides. Thus, mannose at 75 g l(-1) and fructose at 47.5 g l(-1)
were produced from 500 g l(-1) glucose at pH 7.5 and 75°C over 3 h by the enzyme.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-011-3403-3 
PMID: 21691788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

