
1. J Immunol. 2011 Aug 1;187(3):1393-402. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100980. Epub 2011
Jun 24.

ML1419c peptide immunization induces Mycobacterium leprae-specific
HLA-A*0201-restricted CTL in vivo with potential to kill live mycobacteria.

Geluk A(1), van den Eeden SJ, Dijkman K, Wilson L, Kim HJ, Franken KL, Spencer
JS, Pessolani MC, Pereira GM, Ottenhoff TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden
2333 ZA, The Netherlands. ageluk@lumc.nl

MHC class I-restricted CD8(+) T cells play an important role in protective
immunity against mycobacteria. Previously, we showed that p113-121, derived from 
Mycobacterium leprae protein ML1419c, induced significant IFN-γ production by
CD8(+) T cells in 90% of paucibacillary leprosy patients and in 80% of
multibacillary patients' contacts, demonstrating induction of M. leprae-specific 
CD8(+) T cell immunity. In this work, we studied the in vivo role and functional 
profile of ML1419c p113-121-induced T cells in HLA-A*0201 transgenic mice.
Immunization with 9mer or 30mer covering the p113-121 sequence combined with TLR9
agonist CpG induced HLA-A*0201-restricted, M. leprae-specific CD8(+) T cells as
visualized by p113-121/HLA-A*0201 tetramers. Most CD8(+) T cells produced IFN-γ, 
but distinct IFN-γ(+)/TNF-α(+) populations were detected simultaneously with
significant secretion of CXCL10/IFN-γ-induced protein 10, CXCL9/MIG, and VEGF.
Strikingly, peptide immunization also induced high ML1419c-specific IgG levels,
strongly suggesting that peptide-specific CD8(+) T cells provide help to B cells 
in vivo, as CD4(+) T cells were undetectable. An additional important
characteristic of p113-121-specific CD8(+) T cells was their capacity for in vivo
killing of p113-121-labeled, HLA-A*0201(+) splenocytes. The cytotoxic function of
p113-121/HLA-A*0201-specific CD8(+) T cells extended into direct killing of
splenocytes infected with live Mycobacterium smegmatis expressing ML1419c: both
9mer and 30mer induced CD8(+) T cells that reduced the number of
ML1419c-expressing mycobacteria by 95%, whereas no reduction occurred using
wild-type M. smegmatis. These data, combined with previous observations in
Brazilian cohorts, show that ML1419c p113-121 induces potent CD8(+) T cells that 
provide protective immunity against M. leprae and B cell help for induction of
specific IgG, suggesting its potential use in diagnostics and as a subunit
(vaccine) for M. leprae infection.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100980 
PMCID: PMC3140574
PMID: 21705623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

