
1. Biochemistry. 2011 Jul 26;50(29):6396-408. doi: 10.1021/bi200706v. Epub 2011 Jul 
5.

The dioxygenase-encoding olsD gene from Burkholderia cenocepacia causes the
hydroxylation of the amide-linked fatty acyl moiety of ornithine-containing
membrane lipids.

González-Silva N(1), López-Lara IM, Reyes-Lamothe R, Taylor AM, Sumpton D,
Thomas-Oates J, Geiger O.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Apdo.
Postal 565-A, Cuernavaca, Morelos CP62251, Mexico.

Burkholderia cenocepacia is an important opportunistic pathogen, and one of the
most striking features of the Burkholderia genus is the collection of polar
lipids present in its membrane, including phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) and
ornithine-containing lipids (OLs), as well as the 2-hydroxylated derivatives of
PE and OLs (2-OH-PE and 2-OH-OLs, respectively), which differ from the standard
versions by virtue of the presence of a hydroxyl group at C2 (2-OH) of an
esterified fatty acyl residue. Similarly, a lipid A-esterified myristoyl group
from Salmonella typhimurium can have a 2-hydroxy modification that is due to the 
LpxO enzyme. We thus postulated that 2-hydroxylation of 2-OH-OLs might be
catalyzed by a novel dioxygenase homologue of LpxO. In B. cenocepacia, we have
now identified two open reading frames (BCAM1214 and BCAM2401) homologous to LpxO
from S. typhimurium. The introduction of bcam2401 (designated olsD) into
Sinorhizobium meliloti leads to the formation of one new lipid and in B.
cenocepacia of two new lipids. Surprisingly, the lipid modifications on OLs due
to OlsD occur on the amide-linked fatty acyl chain. This is the first report of a
hydroxyl modification of OLs on the amide-linked fatty acyl moiety. Formation of 
hydroxylated OLs occurs only when the biosynthesis pathway for nonmodified
standard OLs is intact. The hydroxyl modification of OLs on the amide-linked
fatty acyl moiety occurs only under acid stress conditions. An assay has been
developed for the OlsD dioxygenase, and an initial characterization of the enzyme
is presented.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

DOI: 10.1021/bi200706v 
PMID: 21707055  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

