
1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 Dec;45(6):1239-47. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2010-0412OC.
Epub 2011 Jun 30.

Molecular signature of a right heart failure program in chronic severe pulmonary 
hypertension.

Drake JI(1), Bogaard HJ, Mizuno S, Clifton B, Xie B, Gao Y, Dumur CI, Fawcett P, 
Voelkel NF, Natarajan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, USA.

Right heart failure is the cause of death of most patients with severe pulmonary 
arterial hypertensive (PAH) disorders, yet little is known about the cellular and
molecular causes of right ventricular failure (RVF). We first showed a
differential gene expression pattern between normal rat right and left
ventricles, and postulated the existence of a molecular right heart failure
program that distinguishes RVF from adaptive right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH),
and that may differ in some respects from a left heart failure program. By means 
of microarrays and transcriptional sequencing strategies, we used two models of
adaptive RVH to characterize a gene expression pattern reflective of growth and
the maintenance of myocardial structure. Moreover, two models of RVF were
associated with fibrosis, capillary rarefaction, the decreased expression of
genes encoding the angiogenesis factors vascular endothelial growth factor,
insulin-like growth factor 1, apelin, and angiopoeitin-1, and the increased
expression of genes encoding a set of glycolytic enzymes. The treatment of
established RVF with a Î²-adrenergic receptor blocker reversed RVF, and partly
reversed the molecular RVF program. We conclude that normal right and left
ventricles demonstrate clearly discernable differences in the expression of mRNA 
and microRNA, and that RVH and RVF are characterized by distinct patterns of gene
expression that relate to cell growth, angiogenesis, and energy metabolism.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2010-0412OC 
PMCID: PMC3361357
PMID: 21719795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

