
1. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2011 Oct;55(10):1533-42. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201100052. Epub
2011 Jun 28.

Suppression subtractive hybridization identifies bacterial genomic regions that
are possibly involved in hBD-2 regulation by enterocytes.

Ghadimi D(1), Hassan M, Njeru PN, de Vrese M, Geis A, Shalabi SI, Abdel-Razek ST,
Abdel-Khair Ael-A, Heller KJ, Schrezenmeir J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biochemistry of Nutrition, Max Rubner-Institut,
Hermann-Weigmann, Kiel, Germany. darab.ghadimi@mri.bund.de

SCOPE: Human β-defensin 2 (hBD-2) is an inducible antimicrobial peptide
synthesized by the epithelium to counteract bacterial adherence and invasion. It 
has been suggested that probiotic bacteria sustain gut barrier function via
induction of defensins. The goals of this study were (i) to evaluate the
potential immunomodulatory effects of 11 different Lactobacillus fermentum
strains isolated from Kimere, an African fermented pearl millet (Pennisetum
glaucum) dough, on the hBD-2 secretion by human intestinal CaCo-2 cell line and
(ii) to examine genetic differences between two strains of L. fermentum (K2-Lb4
and K11-Lb3) which differed in their effect on the production of hBD-2 in this
study.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Totally, 46 strains of L. fermentum from Kimere were
isolated and characterized using molecular biology methods including pulsed-field
gel electrophoresis patterns. After performing time- and dose-experiments, CaCo-2
cells were incubated with or without bacteria for 12 h. L. fermentum PZ1162 was
included as the positive control. Cell-free supernatants were analyzed for hBD-2 
protein by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). To identify potential
bacterial genes associated with hBD-2 regulation, suppression subtractive
hybridization (SSH) was used. Among the 11 strains tested, only two strains of
bacteria, K11-Lb3 and K2-Lb6, significantly induced the production of hBD-2 by
CaCo-2 cells. This effect was strain-specific, dose-dependent and particularly
seems to be bacterial genomic-dependent as manifested by SSH. L. fermentum
strains with and without hBD-2 inducing effect differed in genes encoding
proteins involved in glycosylation of cell-wall proteins e.g.
glycosyltransferase, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase, rod shape-determining
protein MreC, lipoprotein precursors, sugar ABC transporters, and glutamine ABC
transporter ATP-binding protein.
CONCLUSION: This study implies that certain strains of L. fermentum isolated from
Kimere may stimulate the intestinal innate defense through the induction of
hBD-2. The molecular basis of hBD-2 induction by L. fermentum strain K11-Lb3 may 
be based on glycosylated cell-surface structures synthesized with the aid of
glycosyltransferase, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase, and rod
shape-determining protein MreC.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/mnfr.201100052 
PMID: 21710560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

