
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020694. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

N-terminal Gly(224)-Gly(411) domain in Listeria adhesion protein interacts with
host receptor Hsp60.

Jagadeesan B(1), Fleishman Littlejohn AE, Amalaradjou MA, Singh AK, Mishra KK, La
D, Kihara D, Bhunia AK.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Food Microbiology Laboratory, Department of Food Science, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, Indiana, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Listeria adhesion protein (LAP) is a housekeeping bifunctional enzyme
consisting of N-terminal acetaldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) and C-terminal alcohol
dehydrogenase (ADH). It aids Listeria monocytogenes in crossing the epithelial
barrier through a paracellular route by interacting with its host receptor, heat 
shock protein 60 (Hsp60). To gain insight into the binding interaction between
LAP and Hsp60, LAP subdomain(s) participating in the Hsp60 interaction were
investigated.
METHODS: Using a ModBase structural model, LAP was divided into 4 putative
subdomains: the ALDH region contains N1 (Met(1)-Pro(223)) and N2
(Gly(224)-Gly(411)), and the ADH region contains C1 (Gly(412)-Val(648)) and C2
(Pro(649)-Val(866)). Each subdomain was cloned and overexpressed in Escherichia
coli and purified. Purified subdomains were used in ligand overlay,
immunofluorescence, and bead-based epithelial cell adhesion assays to analyze
each domain's affinity toward Hsp60 protein or human ileocecal epithelial HCT-8
cells.
RESULTS: The N2 subdomain exhibited the greatest affinity for Hsp60 with a K(D)
of 9.50±2.6 nM. The K(D) of full-length LAP (7.2±0.5 nM) to Hsp60 was comparable 
to the N2 value. Microspheres (1 µm diameter) coated with N2 subdomain showed
significantly (P<0.05) higher binding to HCT-8 cells than beads coated with other
subdomains and this binding was inhibited when HCT-8 cells were pretreated with
anti-Hsp60 antibody to specifically block epithelial Hsp60. Furthermore, HCT-8
cells pretreated with purified N2 subdomain also reduced L. monocytogenes
adhesion by about 4 log confirming its involvement in interaction with epithelial
cells.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that the N2 subdomain in the LAP ALDH domain is
critical in initiating interaction with mammalian cell receptor Hsp60 providing
insight into the molecular mechanism of pathogenesis for the development of
potential anti-listerial control strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020694 
PMCID: PMC3126804
PMID: 21738582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

