
1. APMIS. 2011 Aug;119(8):551-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2011.02773.x. Epub 2011
Jun 15.

Astrocytoma cells upregulate expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines after
co-culture with activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Jehs T(1), Faber C, Juel HB, Nissen MH.

Author information: 
(1)Eye Research Unit, Department of International Health, Immunology and
Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. tjehs@sund.ku.dk

In this study, we investigated the effect of CD3/CD28-activated peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) on two human astrocytoma cell lines (1321N1 and
CCF-STTG1), with respect to the expression of cytokines and chemokines. We used
an in vitro co-culture system in which the astrocytoma cells and PBMCs were
separated by a membrane in a transwell system. Proliferation of T cells was
quantified by a [(3) H]-thymidine incorporation assay. Differential gene
expression of astrocytoma cells cultured alone or with PBMCs was identified using
gene arrays. Protein expression of CCL3, CCL5, CXCL8, CXCL9, CXCL10, IL6, and
IL1β was determined by Luminex. Co-culture of activated T cells and astrocytoma
cells resulted in inhibition of T cell proliferation. Moreover, astrocytoma cells
upregulated a number of pro-inflammatory genes including CCL3, CCL5, CXCL8,
CXCL9, CXCL10, IL6, and IL1β upon co-culture with activated PBMCs. These results 
were confirmed on the protein level. Astrocytoma cells inhibited the
proliferation of T cells, indicating that astrocytes may play an important role
in controlling T cell mediated immune responses in the brain. Contrary to this,
soluble factors derived from CD3/CD28-activated PBMCs affected the transcriptome 
of astrocytoma cells, which then upregulated several pro-inflammatory genes and
proteins. This could be part of neuroinflammatory events and may play a role in
neurodegenerative diseases.

© 2011 The Authors. APMIS © 2011 APMIS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2011.02773.x 
PMID: 21749456  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

