
1. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2011 Oct;165(3-4):949-62. doi:
10.1007/s12010-011-9311-2. Epub 2011 Jul 9.

Expression and characterization of a novel lipase from Aspergillus fumigatus with
high specific activity.

Shangguan JJ(1), Liu YQ, Wang FJ, Zhao J, Fan LQ, Li SX, Xu JH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering, East China University of
Science and Technology, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai 200237, People's Republic of
China.

A novel lipase gene from Aspergillus fumigatus, afl1-1, was cloned and expressed 
with a molecular mass of 38 kDa in Escherichia coli for the first time. The
recombinant lipase had a preference for short carbon chain p-nitrophenyl esters, 
especially toward C2 p-nitrophenyl ester and exhibited potent hydrolysis activity
that had not been observed. The optimum pH and temperature of this new enzyme
were 8.5 and 65 °C, respectively. The recombinant lipase (AFL1-1) is an alkaline 
enzyme which was stable in the pH range 6.0∼8.5 for 16 h (at 4 °C) and at 30∼50
°C for 1 h. It is an intracellular enzyme which was purified approximately
8.47-fold with an overall yield of 86.1% by single-step Ni-NTA affinity
purification, with a very high specific activity of approximately 1.00 × 10(3) U 
mg(-1) on a standard substrate of p-nitrophenyl acetate. The Michaelis-Menten
kinetic parameters V (max) and K (m) of the lipase were 1.37 mM mg(-1) min(-1)
and 14.0 mM, respectively. Ca(2+) and other metal ions could not activate the
lipase. According to the homology analysis and site-directed mutagenesis assay,
the catalytic triad of the recombinant lipase was identified as Ser-165, Asp-260,
and His-290 residues.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-011-9311-2 
PMID: 21744116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

