
1. Sci Total Environ. 2011 Sep 1;409(19):3820-8. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.06.041. Epub 2011 Jul 12.

Phytoplankton development and ecological status during a cyanobacterial bloom in 
a tributary bay of the Three Gorges Reservoir, China.

Wang L(1), Cai Q, Tan L, Kong L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, PR China.

Reservoirs can provide suitable conditions for cyanobacterial bloom development, 
which may impact on water quality and biological communities. Weekly surveys in a
cyanobacterial bloom process were carried out in the mainstream and Xiangxi Bay
of the Three Gorges Reservoir (China), from June 6 to July 18 in 2008. By
application of the phytoplankton functional group approach, the spatiotemporal
pattern, impact factors, and the ecological status based on Q index (assemblage
index) were analyzed. The depth of euphotic layer was apparently the key factor
driving the phytoplankton functional group variations. Longitudinal patterns of
phytoplankton distribution were detected during this bloom: in the beginning
phase, groups D (mainly Stephanodiscus hantzschii) and B (Cyclotella stelligera) 
dominated in the mainstream of the Three Gorges Reservoir and the mouth area of
Xiangxi Bay, group Y (Cryptomonas species) dominated in the upper area, while
groups J (mainly Pediastrum duplex), F (mainly Sphaerocystis schroeteri) and G
(Pandorina morum and Eudorina elegans) were important in other areas; in the mid 
phase, group M became absolutely dominant in the whole region; and in the ending 
phase, besides groups M and Y, groups X2 (Chroomonas acuta, Pyramimonas nanella, 
etc.) and Lo (Ceratium hirundinella) became more important in the lower and upper
area respectively. Generally the ecological status was bad, temporally varied
with the bloom process. No spatial difference of ecological status was found in
the mainstream, while longitudinal patterns in Xiangxi Bay were detected for
different phases: firstly a few sites had relatively better status than the
others, then nearly all the sites were in the bad condition, and at last the
status in the downstream was better than that in the upstream. The longitudinal
patterns of ecological status were related to phytoplankton distribution,
disturbed by jacking from the downstream and flood from the upstream of Xiangxi
Bay.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.06.041 
PMID: 21752429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

