
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 2;108(31):12875-80. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1109379108. Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Small RNAs endow a transcriptional activator with essential repressor functions
for single-tier control of a global stress regulon.

Gogol EB(1), Rhodius VA, Papenfort K, Vogel J, Gross CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and Department of Cell and Tissue
Biology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

The Escherichia coli σ(E) envelope stress response monitors and repairs the outer
membrane, a function central to the life of Gram-negative bacteria. The σ(E)
stress response was characterized as a single-tier activation network comprised
of ~100 genes, including the MicA and RybB noncoding sRNAs. These highly
expressed sRNAs were thought to carry out the specialized function of halting de 
novo synthesis of several abundant porins when envelope homeostasis was
perturbed. Using a systematic target profiling and validation approach we
discovered that MicA and RybB are each global mRNA repressors of both distinct
and shared targets, and that the two sRNAs constitute a posttranscriptional
repression arm whose regulatory scope rivals that of the protein-based σ(E)
activation arm. Intriguingly, porin mRNAs constitute only ~1/3 of all targets and
new nonporin targets predict roles for MicA and RybB in crosstalk with other
regulatory responses. This work also provides an example of evolutionarily
unrelated sRNAs that are coinduced and bind the same targets, but at different
sites. Our finding that expression of either MicA or RybB sRNA protects the cell 
from the loss of viability experienced when σ(E) activity is inadequate
illustrates the importance of the posttranscriptional repression arm of the
response. σ(E) is a paradigm of a single-tier stress response with a clear
division of labor in which highly expressed noncoding RNAs (MicA, RybB) endow a
transcriptional factor intrinsically restricted to gene activation (σ(E)) with
the opposite repressor function.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1109379108 
PMCID: PMC3150882
PMID: 21768388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

