
1. RNA. 2011 Sep;17(9):1678-87. doi: 10.1261/rna.2592411. Epub 2011 Jul 20.

YrdC exhibits properties expected of a subunit for a tRNA threonylcarbamoyl
transferase.

Harris KA(1), Jones V, Bilbille Y, Swairjo MA, Agris PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695-7622, USA.

The post-transcriptional nucleoside modifications of tRNA's anticodon domain form
the loop structure and dynamics required for effective and accurate recognition
of synonymous codons. The N(6)-threonylcarbamoyladenosine modification at
position 37 (t(6)A(37)), 3'-adjacent to the anticodon, of many tRNA species in
all organisms ensures the accurate recognition of ANN codons by increasing codon 
affinity, enhancing ribosome binding, and maintaining the reading frame. However,
biosynthesis of this complex modification is only partially understood. The
synthesis requires ATP, free threonine, a single carbon source for the carbamoyl,
and an enzyme yet to be identified. Recently, the universal protein family
Sua5/YciO/YrdC was associated with t(6)A(37) biosynthesis. To further investigate
the role of YrdC in t(6)A(37) biosynthesis, the interaction of the Escherichia
coli YrdC with a heptadecamer anticodon stem and loop of lysine tRNA
(ASL(Lys)(UUU)) was examined. YrdC bound the unmodified ASL(Lys)(UUU) with high
affinity compared with the t(6)A(37)-modified ASL(Lys)(UUU) (K(d) = 0.27 ± 0.20
μM and 1.36 ± 0.39 μM, respectively). YrdC also demonstrated specificity toward
the unmodified versus modified anticodon pentamer UUUUA and toward threonine and 
ATP. The protein did not significantly alter the ASL architecture, nor was it
able to base flip A(37), as determined by NMR, circular dichroism, and
fluorescence of 2-aminopuine at position 37. Thus, current data support the
hypothesis that YrdC, with many of the properties of a putative threonylcarbamoyl
transferase, most likely functions as a component of a heteromultimeric protein
complex for t(6)A(37) biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.2592411 
PMCID: PMC3162333
PMID: 21775474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

