
1. Environ Sci Technol. 2011 Sep 1;45(17):7481-8. doi: 10.1021/es200724x. Epub 2011 
Aug 5.

Genotoxicity and endocrine-disruption potentials of sediment near an oil spill
site: two years after the Hebei Spirit oil spill.

Ji K(1), Seo J, Liu X, Lee J, Lee S, Lee W, Park J, Khim JS, Hong S, Choi Y, Shim
WJ, Takeda S, Giesy JP, Choi K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

The Hebei Spirit oil spill episode (December 7, 2007) has affected the western
coastal area of South Korea; however, there is limited information on the
potential toxicity of the oil spill to the ecosystem or humans. The potential
toxicity of sediments collected from the affected area (n = 22) 2 years after the
spill was evaluated. Acute lethal toxicity tests using Vibrio fischeri and Moina 
macrocopa and tests for genotoxicity and alteration of steroidogenesis using
chicken DT40 cells and H295R cells, respectively, were conducted. Both crude and 
weathered oil extracts were evaluated in order to link the observed toxicity in
the sediment extracts to the oil spill. Whereas toxicity to bacteria and daphnids
was observed in only two elutriate samples, 10 of the 22 sediment extracts showed
genotoxic potential in DT40 cells. The mechanisms of genotoxicity involved
nucleotide excision repair (XPA(-/)), homologous recombination (RAD54(-/-)), and 
translesion synthesis pathways (REV3(-/-)). In addition, nine sediment extracts
caused significantly greater production of E2 in H295R cells, and significant
up-regulation of CYP19, CYP11B2, and 3Î²HSD2 by sediment extracts was observed.
The pattern of toxicities observed in both crude and weathered oil samples was
similar to that observed in the sediment extracts. The genotoxicicity and
endocrine-disruption potential of the sediment extracts suggest a need for
long-term followup for such toxicity in humans and wildlife in this area.

DOI: 10.1021/es200724x 
PMID: 21786741  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

