
1. J Biotechnol. 2011 Sep 20;155(3):269-74. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2011.07.004. Epub
2011 Jul 19.

Genetic manipulation of butyrate formation pathways in Clostridium butyricum.

Cai G(1), Jin B, Saint C, Monis P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, The University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.

Clostridium butyricum is one of the commonly used species for fermentative
hydrogen production. While producing H₂, it can produce acids (lactic, acetic and
butyric acids) and CO₂, as well as a small amount of ethanol. It has been
proposed that elimination of competing pathways, such as the butyrate formation
pathway, should increase H₂ yields in Clostridium species. However, the
application of this strategy has been hindered by the unavailability of genetic
tools for these organisms. In this study, we successfully transferred a plasmid
(pMTL007) to C. butyricum by inter-specific conjugation with Escherichia coli and
disrupted hbd, the gene encoding β-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase in C.
butyricum. Fermentation data showed that inactivation of hbd in C. butyricum
eliminated the butyrate formation pathway, resulting in a significant increase in
ethanol production and an obvious decrease in H₂ yield compared with the wild
type strain. However, under low partial pressure of H₂, the hbd-deficient strain 
showed increased H₂ production with the simultaneous decrease of ethanol
production, indicating that H₂ production by C. butyricum may compete for NADH
with the ethanol formation pathway. Together with the discovery of a potential
bifurcating hydrogenase, this study extends our understanding of the mechanism of
H₂ production by C. butyricum.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2011.07.004 
PMID: 21787814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

