
1. Microbes Infect. 2011 Nov;13(12-13):1111-20. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2011.06.014.
Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Antimicrobial peptides in the duodenum at the acute and convalescent stages in
patients with diarrhea due to Vibrio cholerae O1 or enterotoxigenic Escherichia
coli infection.

Shirin T(1), Rahman A, Danielsson Å, Uddin T, Bhuyian TR, Sheikh A, Qadri SS,
Qadri F, Hammarström ML.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Diarrheal Disease Research, Bangladesh, Dhaka,
Bangladesh.

Patients with acute watery diarrhea caused by Vibrio cholerae O1 or
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) were analyzed for innate immune factors
produced by the epithelium during the disease process. Duodenal biopsies were
obtained from study participants at the acute (day 2) and convalescent (day 21)
stages of disease. Levels of α-defensin (HD-5 and -6), β-defensin (hBD-1-4), and 
cathelicidin (LL-37) mRNAs were determined by real-time qRT-PCR. hBD-2, HD-5,
LL-37 peptides were analyzed in duodenal epithelium by immunomorphometry.
Concentration of hBD-2 in stool was determined by ELISA. Specimens from healthy
controls were also analyzed. hBD-2 mRNA levels were significantly increased at
acute stage of diarrhea; hBD-2 peptide was detected in fecal specimens but barely
in duodenal epithelium at acute stage. Immunomorphometry analysis showed that
Paneth cells contain significantly higher amounts of HD-5 pre/propeptide at
convalescence (P<0.01) and in healthy controls (P<0.001) compared to acute stage,
LL-37 peptide levels also decreased at acute stage while mRNA levels remained
unchanged. mRNA expression levels of the other antimicrobial peptides remained
unchanged with higher levels of α-defensins than β-defensins. V. cholerae induced
an innate immune response at the acute stage of disease characterized by
increased expression of hBD-2, and continued expression of hBD-1, HD-5-6, and
LL-37.

Copyright © 2011 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2011.06.014 
PMID: 21782033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

