
1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2011 Jul;21(7):667-74.

A new esterase, belonging to hormone-sensitive lipase family, cloned from
Rheinheimera sp. isolated from industrial effluent.

Virk AP(1), Sharma P, Capalash N.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology, Panjab University, Chandigarh 160014, India.

The gene for esterase (rEst1) was isolated from a new species of genus
Rheinheimera by functional screening of E. coli cells transformed with the
pSMART/HaeIII genomic library. E. coli cells harboring the esterase gene insert
could grow and produce clear halo zones on tributyrin agar. The rEst1 ORF
consisted of 1,029 bp, corresponding to 342 amino acid residues with a molecular 
mass of 37 kDa. The signal P program 3.0 revealed the presence of a signal
peptide of 25 amino acids. Esterase activity, however, was associated with a
homotrimeric form of molecular mass 95 kDa and not with the monomeric form. The
deduced amino acid sequence showed only 54% sequence identity with the closest
lipase from Cellvibrio japonicus strain Ueda 107. Conserved domain search and
multiple sequence alignment revealed the presence of an esterase/ lipase
conserved domain consisting of a GXSXG motif, HGGG motif (oxyanion hole) and HGF 
motif, typical of the class IV hormone sensitive lipase family. On the basis of
the sequence comparison with known esterases/ lipases, REst1 represents a new
esterase belonging to class IV family. The purified enzyme worked optimally at 50
degrees C and pH 8, utilized pNP esters of short chain lengths, and showed best
catalytic activity with p-nitrophenyl butyrate (Câ‚„), indicating that it was an
esterase. The enzyme was completely inhibited by PMSF and DEPC and showed
moderate organotolerance.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1103.03008 
PMID: 21791951  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

