
1. Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2752-62. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-02-334698. Epub 2011
Jul 25.

Innate signals overcome acquired TCR signaling pathway regulation and govern the 
fate of human CD161(hi) CD8α⁺ semi-invariant T cells.

Turtle CJ(1), Delrow J, Joslyn RC, Swanson HM, Basom R, Tabellini L, Delaney C,
Heimfeld S, Hansen JA, Riddell SR.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA 98109, USA. cturtle@fhcrc.org

Type 17 programmed CD161(hi)CD8α(+) T cells contribute to mucosal immunity to
bacteria and yeast. In early life, microbial colonization induces proliferation
of CD161(hi) cells that is dependent on their expression of a semi-invariant
Vα7.2(+) TCR. Although prevalent in adults, CD161(hi)CD8α(+) cells exhibit weak
proliferative and cytokine responses to TCR ligation. The mechanisms responsible 
for the dichotomous response of neonatal and adult CD161(hi) cells, and the
signals that enable their effector function, have not been established. We
describe acquired regulation of TCR signaling in adult memory CD161(hi)CD8α(+) T 
cells that is absent in cord CD161(hi) cells and adult CD161(lo) cells. Regulated
TCR signaling in CD161(hi) cells was due to profound alterations in TCR signaling
pathway gene expression and could be overcome by costimulation through CD28 or
innate cytokine receptors, which dictated the fate of their progeny.
Costimulation with IL-1β during TCR ligation markedly increased proinflammatory
IL-17 production, while IL-12-induced Tc1-like function and restored the response
to TCR ligation without costimulation. CD161(hi) cells from umbilical cord blood 
and granulocyte colony stimulating factor-mobilized leukaphereses differed in
frequency and function, suggesting future evaluation of the contribution of
CD161(hi) cells in hematopoietic stem cell grafts to transplant outcomes is
warranted.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-02-334698 
PMCID: PMC3172793
PMID: 21791427  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

