
1. Biosecur Bioterror. 2011 Sep;9(3):239-50. doi: 10.1089/bsp.2011.0005. Epub 2011
Aug 5.

Public response to an anthrax attack: reactions to mass prophylaxis in a scenario
involving inhalation anthrax from an unidentified source.

SteelFisher G(1), Blendon R, Ross LJ, Collins BC, Ben-Porath EN, Bekheit MM,
Mailhot JR.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Opinion Research Program, Harvard School of Public Health, Department 
of Health Policy and Management, Kresge, 677 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. gsteel@hsph.harvard.edu

An attack with Bacillus anthracis ("anthrax") is a known threat to the United
States. When weaponized, it can cause inhalation anthrax, the deadliest form of
the disease. Due to the rapid course of inhalation anthrax, delays in initiation 
of antibiotics may decrease survival chances. Because a rapid response would
require cooperation from the public, there is a need to understand the public's
response to possible mass dispensing programs. To examine the public's response
to a mass prophylaxis program, this study used a nationally representative poll
of 1,092 adults, supplemented by a targeted focus on 3 metropolitan areas where
anthrax attacks occurred in 2001: New York City (n=517), Washington, DC (n=509), 
and Trenton/Mercer County, NJ (n=507). The poll was built around a "worst-case
scenario" in which cases of inhalation anthrax are discovered without an
identified source and the entire population of a city or town is asked to receive
antibiotic prophylaxis within a 48-hour period. Findings from this poll provide
important signs of public willingness to comply with public health
recommendations for obtaining antibiotics from a dispensing site, although they
also indicate that public health officials may face several challenges to
compliance, including misinformation about the contagiousness of inhalation
anthrax; fears about personal safety in crowds; distrust of government agencies
to provide sufficient, safe, and effective medicine; and hesitation about
ingesting antibiotic pills after receiving them. In general, people living in
areas where anthrax attacks occurred in 2001 had responses similar to those of
the nation as a whole.

DOI: 10.1089/bsp.2011.0005 
PMID: 21819225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

