
1. Kidney Int. 2011 Nov;80(10):1064-72. doi: 10.1038/ki.2011.257. Epub 2011 Aug 3.

Acute pyelonephritis and renal scarring are caused by dysfunctional innate
immunity in mCxcr2 heterozygous mice.

Svensson M(1), Yadav M, Holmqvist B, Lutay N, Svanborg C, Godaly G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Glycobiology, Institute of
Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

The CXCR1 receptor and chemokine CXCL8 (IL-8) support neutrophil-dependent
clearance of uropathogenic Escherichia coli from the urinary tract. CXCR1 is
reduced in children prone to pyelonephritis, and heterozygous hCXCR1
polymorphisms are more common in this patient group than in healthy individuals, 
strongly suggesting a disease association. Since murine CXCR2 (mCXCR2) is
functionally similar to human CXCR1, we determined effects of gene heterozygosity
on the susceptibility to urinary tract infection by infecting heterozygous
(mCxcr2(+/-)) mice with uropathogenic Escherichia coli. Clearance of infection
and tissue damage were assessed as a function of innate immunity in comparison to
that in knockout (mCxcr2(-/-)) and wild-type (mCxcr2(+/+)) mice. Acute
sepsis-associated mortality was increased and bacterial clearance drastically
impaired in heterozygous compared to wild-type mice. Chemokine and neutrophil
responses were delayed along with evidence of neutrophil retention and unresolved
kidney inflammation 1 month after infection. This was accompanied by epithelial
proliferation and subepithelial fibrosis. The heterozygous phenotype was
intermediate, between knockout and wild-type mice, but specific immune cell
infiltrates that accompany chronic infection in knockout mice were not found.
Hence, the known heterozygous CXCR1 polymorphisms may predispose patients to
acute pyelonephritis and urosepsis.

DOI: 10.1038/ki.2011.257 
PMCID: PMC3257042
PMID: 21814172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

