
1. Zoonoses Public Health. 2011 Dec;58(8):540-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1863-2378.2011.01400.x. Epub 2011 Apr 6.

Exploitation of intestinal colonization-inhibition between salmonella organisms
for live vaccines in poultry: potential and limitations.

Methner U(1), Haase A, Berndt A, Martin G, Nagy B, Barrow PA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bacterial Infections and Zoonoses, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institute, 
Federal Research Institute for Animal Health, Jena, Germany.
ulrich.methner@fli.bund.de

Immunization represents one of the most important methods to increase the
resistance of chickens against Salmonella infection. In addition to the
development of an adaptive immune response, oral administration of live
Salmonella strains to day-old chicks provides protection against infection within
hours by intestinal colonization-inhibition. For the exploitation of this
phenomenon, practical information on colonization-inhibition between Salmonella
organisms is needed. Colonization-inhibition capacity between Salmonella strains 
from serogroups B, C1, C2, D and G was assessed in chickens. The most profound
level of intestinal colonization-inhibition occurred between isogenic strains.
Inhibition between strains of the same serovar was greater than that between
strains of different serovars. The degree of inhibition between different
serovars was not sufficiently high to identify a single strain which might
inhibit a wide range of other Salmonella organisms. However, as Salmonella
Enteritidis is the dominant serovar in poultry in many countries and because of
the profound colonization-inhibition within this serovar there is a considerable 
potential to exploit this phenomenon in the development of novel live S.
Enteritidis vaccines. Treatment of young chicks with mixtures of different
Salmonella serovars resulted not only in a very strong growth inhibition of the
isogenic strains but also in a substantial inhibition of heterologous serovars.
The potential of mixtures of heterologous Salmonella strains as a 'Salmonella
Inhibition Culture' and as a 'live Salmonella vaccine' should be further
explored.

Â© 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1863-2378.2011.01400.x 
PMID: 21824353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

