
1. J Proteome Res. 2011 Oct 7;10(10):4869-75. doi: 10.1021/pr2004715. Epub 2011 Aug 
25.

Absolute SILAC-compatible expression strain allows Sumo-2 copy number
determination in clinical samples.

Matic I(1), Jaffray EG, Oxenham SK, Groves MJ, Barratt CL, Tauro S, Stanley-Wall 
NR, Hay RT.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, College of Life
Sciences, University of Dundee, DD1 5EH, Scotland, United Kingdom.

Quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics is a vital tool in modern life
science research. In contrast to the popularity of approaches for relative
protein quantitation, the widespread use of absolute quantitation has been
hampered by inefficient and expensive production of labeled protein standards. To
optimize production of isotopically labeled standards, we genetically modified a 
commonly employed protein expression Escherichia coli strain, BL21 (DE3), to
construct an auxotroph for arginine and lysine. This bacterial strain allows
low-cost, high-level expression of fully labeled proteins with no conversion of
labeled arginine to proline. In combination with a fluorescence-based
quantitation of standards and nontargeted LC-MS/MS analysis of unfractionated
total cell lysates, this strain was used to determine the copy number of a
post-translational modifier, small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO-2), in HeLa,
human sperm, and chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells. By streamlining and
improving the generation of labeled standards, this production system increases
the breadth of absolute quantitation by mass spectrometry and will facilitate a
far wider uptake of this important technique than previously possible.

DOI: 10.1021/pr2004715 
PMCID: PMC3189705
PMID: 21830832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

