
1. Cancer Gene Ther. 2011 Dec;18(12):859-70. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2011.55. Epub 2011 Aug
26.

SV40 T/t-common polypeptide inhibits angiogenesis and growth of
HER2-overexpressing human ovarian cancer.

Hsueh SP(1), Hsu WB, Wen CC, Wang WB.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is frequently overexpressed in
human ovarian cancers and its overexpression is associated with increased
angiogenesis, increased metastasis and reduced survival. Inhibition of HER2 in
HER2-overexpressing cancers can lead to reduced angiogenesis and improved
survival. Previously, we reported that SV40 T/t-common polypeptide has
transcriptional repression activity and can inhibit HER2 expression. In this
study, we investigated the effect of T/t-common on the angiogenesis-inducing
activity of HER2-overexpressing human SK-OV-3 ovarian cancer cells. We found that
compared to conditioned medium from control SK-OV-3 cancer cells, conditioned
medium from T/t-common-expressing SK-OV-3 cells had a reduced ability to induce
endothelial cell migration and tube formation in vitro and microvessel formation 
in vivo. These data indicate that T/t-common can inhibit the ability of SK-OV-3
cancer cells to induce angiogenesis. T/t-common was found to be able to
downregulate the expression of several proangiogenic factors, including vascular 
endothelial growth factor-A, interleukin-8, basic fibroblast growth factor,
matrix metalloproteinase-2 and urokinase-type plasminogen activator, and
upregulate antiangiogenic factors, including thrombospondin-1 and tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 in SK-OV-3 cancer cells. Finally, we
demonstrated that T/t-common could inhibit the angiogenesis and growth of
HER2-overexpressing human ovarian tumor in NOD/SCID mice. Taken together, the
data suggest that T/t-common had the potential to be developed as a new
antiangiogenic agent specific for treating HER2-overexpressing ovarian cancers.

DOI: 10.1038/cgt.2011.55 
PMID: 21869825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

