
1. Glycobiology. 2012 Mar;22(3):379-88. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwr110. Epub 2011 Aug
25.

The N-acetyl-binding pocket of N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases also accommodates
a sugar analog with a chemical handle at C2.

Pasek M(1), Ramakrishnan B, Boeggeman E, Mercer N, Dulcey AE, Griffiths GL, Qasba
PK.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Glycobiology Section, Center for Cancer Research Nanobiology
Program, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

In recent years, sugars with a unique chemical handle have been used to detect
and elucidate the function of glycoconjugates. Such chemical handles have
generally been part of an N-acetyl moiety of a sugar. We have previously
developed several applications using the single mutant
Y289L-β1,4-galactosyltransferase I (Y289L-β4Gal-T1) and the wild-type
polypeptide-α-GalNAc-T enzymes with UDP-C2-keto-Gal. Here, we describe for the
first time that the GlcNAc-transferring enzymes-R228K-Y289L-β4Gal-T1 mutant
enzyme, the wild-type human β1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase-2 and human
Maniac Fringe-can also transfer the GlcNAc analog C2-keto-Glc molecule from
UDP-C2-keto-Glc to their respective acceptor substrates. Although the
R228K-Y289L-β4Gal-T1 mutant enzyme transfers the donor sugar substrate GlcNAc or 
its analog C2-keto-Glc only to its natural acceptor substrate, GlcNAc, it does
not transfer to its analog C2-keto-Glc. Thus, these observations suggest that the
GlcNAc-transferring glycosyltransferases can generally accommodate a chemical
handle in the N-acetyl-binding cavity of the donor sugar substrate, but not in
the N-acetyl-binding cavity of the acceptor sugar.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwr110 
PMCID: PMC3267528
PMID: 21868414  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

