
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 14;286(41):35456-35465. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.236794. Epub 
2011 Aug 23.

Histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9) methyltransferase recruitment to the interleukin-2
(IL-2) promoter is a mechanism of suppression of IL-2 transcription by the
transforming growth factor-β-Smad pathway.

Wakabayashi Y(1), Tamiya T(1), Takada I(1), Fukaya T(1), Sugiyama Y(1), Inoue
N(1), Kimura A(1), Morita R(1), Kashiwagi I(1), Takimoto T(1), Nomura M(2),
Yoshimura A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine,
35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan and Japan Science and
Technology Agency, CREST, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0075, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582,
Japan.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine,
35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan and Japan Science and
Technology Agency, CREST, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0075, Japan. Electronic address: 
yoshimura@a6.keio.jp.

Suppression of IL-2 βproduction from T cells is an important process for the
immune regulation by TGF-β. However, the mechanism by which this suppression
occurs remains to be established. Here, we demonstrate that Smad2 and Smad3, two 
major TGF-β-downstream transcription factors, are redundantly essential for
TGF-β-mediated suppression of IL-2 production in CD4(+) T cells using Smad2- and 
Smad3-deficient T cells. Both Smad2 and Smad3 were recruited into the proximal
region of the IL-2 promoter in response to TGF-β. We then investigated the
histone methylation status of the IL-2 promoter. Although both histone H3 lysine 
9 (H3K9) and H3K27 trimethylation have been implicated in gene silencing, only
H3K9 trimethylation was increased in the proximal region of the IL-2 promoter in 
a Smad2/3-dependent manner, whereas H3K27 trimethylation was not. The H3K9
methyltransferases Setdb1 and Suv39h1 bound to Smad3 and suppressed IL-2 promoter
activity in collaboration with Smad3. Overexpression of Suv39h1 in 68-41 T cells 
strongly inhibited IL-2 production in response to T cell receptor stimulation
irrespective of the presence or absence of TGF-β, whereas Setdb1 overexpression
only slightly suppressed IL-2 production. Silencing of Suv39h1 by shRNA reverted 
the suppressive effect of TGF-β on IL-2 production. Furthermore, TGF-β induced
Suv39h1 recruitment to the proximal region of the IL-2 promoter in wild type
primary T cells; however, this was not observed in Smad2(-/-)Smad3(+/-) T cells. 
Thus, we propose that Smads recruit H3K9 methyltransferases Suv39h1 to the IL-2
promoter, thereby inducing suppressive histone methylation and inhibiting T cell 
receptor-mediated IL-2 transcription.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.236794 
PMCID: PMC3195630
PMID: 21862595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

