
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 7;286(40):34941-50. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.286427. Epub 2011
Aug 23.

Molecular mechanisms for synchronized transcription of three complement C1q
subunit genes in dendritic cells and macrophages.

Chen G(1), Tan CS, Teh BK, Lu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine and Immunology
Programme, National University of Singapore, Block MD4, 5 Science Drive 2,
Singapore 117597.

Hereditary homozygous C1q deficiency is rare, but it almost certainly causes
systemic lupus erythematosus. On the other hand, C1q levels can decline in
systemic lupus erythematosus patients without apparent C1q gene defects and the
versatility in C1q production is a likely cause. As an 18-subunit protein, C1q is
assembled in a 1:1:1 ratio from three different subunits. The three human C1q
genes are closely bundled on chromosome 1 (C1qA-C1qC-C1qB) and their basal and
IFNγ-stimulated expression, largely restricted to macrophages and dendritic
cells, is apparently synchronized. We cloned the three gene promoters and
observed that although the C1qB promoter exhibited basal and IFNγ-stimulated
activities consistent with the endogenous C1qB gene, the activities of the cloned
C1qA and C1qC promoters were suppressed by IFNγ. To certain extents, these were
corrected when the C1qB promoter was cloned at the 3' end across the luciferase
reporter gene. A 53-bp element is essential to the activities of the C1qB
promoter and the transcription factors PU.1 and IRF8 bound to this region. By
chromatin immunoprecipitation, the C1qB promoter was co-precipitated with PU.1
and IRF8. shRNA knockdown of PU.1 and IRF8 diminished C1qB promoter response to
IFNγ. STAT1 instead regulated C1qB promoter through IRF8 induction. Collectively,
our results reveal a novel transcriptional mechanism by which the expression of
the three C1q genes is synchronized.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.286427 
PMCID: PMC3186423
PMID: 21862594  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

