
1. Ecotoxicology. 2012 Jan;21(1):202-12. doi: 10.1007/s10646-011-0779-x. Epub 2011
Aug 31.

Molecular identification of arsenic-resistant estuarine bacteria and
characterization of their ars genotype.

Sri Lakshmi Sunita M(1), Prashant S, Bramha Chari PV, Nageswara Rao S, Balaravi
P, Kavi Kishor PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Osmania University, Hyderabad 500 007, India.

In the present study, 44 arsenic-resistant bacteria were isolated through serial 
dilutions on agar plate with concentrations ≥0.05 mM of sodium arsenite and ≥10
mM of sodium arsenate from Mandovi and Zuari--estuarine water systems. The ars
genotype characterization in 36 bacterial isolates (resistant to 100 mM of sodium
arsenate) revealed that only 17 isolates harboured the arsA (ATPase), B (arsenite
permease) and C (arsenate reductase) genes on the plasmid DNA. The arsA, B and C 
genes were individually detected using PCR in 16, 9 and 13 bacterial isolates
respectively. Molecular identification of the 17 isolates bearing the ars
genotype was carried using 16S rDNA sequencing. A 1300 bp full length arsB gene
encoding arsenite efflux pump and a 409 bp fragment of arsC gene coding for
arsenate reductase were isolated from the genera Halomonas and Acinetobacter.
Phylogenetic analysis of arsB and arsC genes indicated their close genetic
relationship with plasmid borne ars genes of E. coli and arsenate reductase of
plant origin. The putative arsenate reductase gene isolated from Acinetobacter
species complemented arsenate resistance in E. coli WC3110 and JM109 validating
its function. This study dealing with isolation of native arsenic-resistant
bacteria and characterization of their ars genes might be useful to develop
efficient arsenic detoxification strategies for arsenic contaminated aquifers.

DOI: 10.1007/s10646-011-0779-x 
PMID: 21879358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

