
1. Pharmacol Res. 2012 Jan;65(1):111-9. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2011.08.003. Epub 2011
Aug 18.

Inhibition of AMPK-dependent autophagy enhances in vitro antiglioma effect of
simvastatin.

Misirkic M(1), Janjetovic K, Vucicevic L, Tovilovic G, Ristic B, Vilimanovich U, 
Harhaji-Trajkovic L, Sumarac-Dumanovic M, Micic D, Bumbasirevic V, Trajkovic V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
Belgrade, Dr Subotica 1, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.

The role of autophagy, a process in which the cell self-digests its own
components, was investigated in glioma cell death induced by the
hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase-inhibiting drug simvastatin.
Induction of autophagy and activation of autophagy-regulating signalling pathways
were analyzed by immunoblotting. Flow cytometry/fluorescent microscopy was used
to assess autophagy-associated intracellular acidification and apoptotic markers 
(phosphatidylserine exposure, DNA fragmentation and caspase activation). Cell
viability was determined by crystal violet, MTT or LDH release assay. Simvastatin
treatment of U251 and C6 glioma cell lines caused the appearance of
autophagolysosome-like intracytoplasmic acidic vesicles. The induction of
autophagy in U251 cells was confirmed by the upregulation of
autophagosome-associated LC3-II and pro-autophagic beclin-1, as well as by the
downregulation of the selective autophagic target p62. Simvastatin induced the
activation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and its target Raptor, while
simultaneously downregulating activation of Akt. Mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR), a major AMPK/Akt downstream target and a major negative autophagy
regulator, and its substrate p70 S6 kinase 1 were also inhibited by simvastatin. 
Mevalonate, the product of HMG-CoA reductase enzymatic activity, AMPK siRNA or
pharmacological inactivation of AMPK with compound C suppressed, while the
inhibitors of Akt (10-DEBC hydrochloride) and mTOR (rapamycin) mimicked autophagy
induction by simvastatin. Inhibition of autophagy with bafilomycin A1,
3-methyladenine and LC3β shRNA, as well as AMPK inhibition with compound C or
AMPK siRNA, markedly increased apoptotic death of simvastatin-treated U251 cells.
These data suggest that inhibition of AMPK-dependent autophagic response might
sensitize glioma cells to statin-induced apoptotic death.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2011.08.003 
PMID: 21871960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

