
1. J Exp Med. 2011 Sep 26;208(10):1941-8. doi: 10.1084/jem.20111083. Epub 2011 Aug
29.

Cannabinoid receptor 2 positions and retains marginal zone B cells within the
splenic marginal zone.

Muppidi JR(1), Arnon TI, Bronevetsky Y, Veerapen N, Tanaka M, Besra GS, Cyster
JG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
and Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.

Specialized B cells residing in the splenic marginal zone (MZ) continuously
survey the blood for antigens and are important for immunity to systemic
infections. However, the cues that uniquely attract cells to the MZ have not been
defined. Previous work demonstrated that mice deficient in cannabinoid receptor 2
(CB2) have decreased numbers of MZ B cells but it has been unclear whether CB2
regulates MZ B cell development or positioning. We show that MZ B cells are
highly responsive to the CB2 ligand 2-arachidonylglycerol (2-AG) and that CB2
antagonism rapidly displaces small numbers of MZ B cells to the blood. Antagonism
for longer durations depletes MZ B cells from the spleen. In mice deficient in
sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor function, CB2 antagonism causes MZ B cell
displacement into follicles. Moreover, CB2 overexpression is sufficient to
position B cells to the splenic MZ. These findings establish a role for CB2 in
guiding B cells to the MZ and in preventing their loss to the blood. As a
consequence of their MZ B cell deficiency, CB2-deficient mice have reduced
numbers of CD1d-high B cells. We show that CB2 deficiency results in diminished
humoral responses to a CD1d-restricted systemic antigen.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20111083 
PMCID: PMC3182059
PMID: 21875957  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

