
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Oct 12;133(40):15979-91. doi: 10.1021/ja203005j. Epub 2011
Sep 14.

Spectroscopic and computational studies of α-keto acid binding to Dke1:
understanding the role of the facial triad and the reactivity of β-diketones.

Diebold AR(1), Straganz GD, Solomon EI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305,
United States.

The O(2) activating mononuclear nonheme iron enzymes generally have a common
facial triad (two histidine and one carboxylate (Asp or Glu) residue) ligating
Fe(II) at the active site. Exceptions to this motif have recently been identified
in nonheme enzymes, including a 3His triad in the diketone cleaving dioxygenase
Dke1. This enzyme is used to explore the role of the facial triad in directing
reactivity. A combination of spectroscopic studies (UV-vis absorption, MCD, and
resonance Raman) and DFT calculations is used to define the nature of the binding
of the α-keto acid, 4-hydroxyphenlpyruvate (HPP), to the active site in Dke1 and 
the origin of the atypical cleavage (C2-C3 instead of C1-C2) pattern exhibited by
this enzyme in the reaction of α-keto acids with dioxygen. The reduced charge of 
the 3His triad induces α-keto acid binding as the enolate dianion, rather than
the keto monoanion, found for α-keto acid binding to the 2His/1 carboxylate
facial triad enzymes. The mechanistic insight from the reactivity of Dke1 with
the α-keto acid substrate is then extended to understand the reaction mechanism
of this enzyme with its native substrate, acac. This study defines a key role for
the 2His/1 carboxylate facial triad in α-keto acid-dependent mononuclear nonheme 
iron enzymes in stabilizing the bound α-keto acid as a monoanion for its
decarboxylation to provide the two additional electrons required for O(2)
activation.

DOI: 10.1021/ja203005j 
PMCID: PMC3191879
PMID: 21870808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

