
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2011 Oct;77(20):7394-400. doi: 10.1128/AEM.06047-11. Epub
2011 Aug 26.

Occurrence of intestinal and extraintestinal virulence genes in Escherichia coli 
isolates from rainwater tanks in Southeast Queensland, Australia.

Ahmed W(1), Hodgers L, Masters N, Sidhu JP, Katouli M, Toze S.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Land and Water, Ecosciences Precinct, 41 Boggo Road, Brisbane 4102,
Queensland, Australia. Warish.Ahmed@csiro.au

In this study, 200 Escherichia coli isolates from 22 rainwater tank samples in
Southeast Queensland, Australia, were tested for the presence of 20 virulence
genes (VGs) associated with intestinal and extraintestinal pathotypes. In
addition, E. coli isolates were also classified into phylogenetic groups based on
the detection of the chuA, yjaA, and TSPE4.C2 genes. Of the 22 rainwater tanks, 8
(36%) and 5 (23%) were positive for the eaeA (belonging to enteropathogenic E.
coli [EPEC] and Shiga-toxigenic E. coli [STEC]) and ST1 (belonging to
enterotoxigenic E. coli [ETEC]) genes, respectively. VGs (cdtB, cvaC, ibeA, kpsMT
allele III, PAI, papAH, and traT) belonging to extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli
(ExPEC) were detected in 15 (68%) of the 22 rainwater tanks. Of the 22 samples,
17 (77%) and 11 (50%) contained E. coli belonging to phylogenetic groups A and
B1, respectively. Similarly, 10 (45%) and 16 (72%) contained E. coli belonging to
phylogenetic groups B2 and D, respectively. Of the 96 of the 200 strains from 22 
tanks that were VG positive, 40 (42%) were carrying a single VG, 36 (37.5%) were 
carrying two VGs, 17 (18%) were carrying three VGs, and 3 (3%) had four or more
VGs. This study reports the presence of multiple VGs in E. coli strains belonging
to the STEC, EPEC, ETEC, and ExPEC pathotypes in rainwater tanks. The public
health risks associated with potentially clinically significant E. coli in
rainwater tanks should be assessed, as the water is used for drinking and other, 
nonpotable purposes. It is recommended that rainwater be disinfected using
effective treatment procedures such as filtration, UV disinfection, or simply
boiling prior to drinking.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.06047-11 
PMCID: PMC3194882
PMID: 21873477  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

