
1. BMC Genet. 2011 Sep 2;12:78. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-12-78.

MHC polymorphism and disease resistance to Vibrio anguillarum in 8 families of
half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis).

Du M(1), Chen SL, Liu YH, Liu Y, Yang JF.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab for Sustainable Utilization of Marine Fisheries Resources, Ministry of
Agriculture, Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery 
Sciences, 266071, Qingdao, China.

BACKGROUND: Genes in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) have a critical
role in both the innate and adaptive immune responses because of their
involvement in presenting foreign peptides to T cells. However, the nature has
remained largely unknown.
RESULTS: We examined the genetic variation in MHC class IIB in half-smooth tongue
sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis) after challenge with vibrio anguillarum. Two
thousand and four hundred fry from 12 half-smooth tongue sole families were
challenged with Vibrio anguillarum. To determine any association between alleles 
and resistance or susceptibility to V. anguillarum, 160 individuals from four
high-resistance (HR, < 40.55% mortality) families and four low-resistance (LR, > 
73.27% mortality) families were selected for MHC IIB exon2 gene sequence
analysis. The MHC IIB exon2 genes of tongue sole displayed a high level of
polymorphism and were discovered at least four loci. Meanwhile, the dN/dS [the
ratio of non-synonymous (dN) substitutions to synonymous (dS) substitutions] in
the peptide-binding region (PBR) was higher than that in the non-peptide-binding 
region (non-PBR). Eighty-eight alleles were discovered among 160 individuals, and
13 out of 88 alleles were used to analyze the distribution pattern between the
resistant and susceptible families. Certain alleles presented in HR and LR with a
different frequency, while other alleles were discovered in only the HR or LR
families, not both. Five alleles, Cyse-DBB*6501, Cyse-DBB*4002, Cyse-DBB*6102,
Cyse-DBB*5601 and Cyse-DBB*2801, were found to be associated with susceptibility 
to V. anguillarum with a frequency of 1.25%, 1.25%, 1.25%, 1.25% and 2.5% in the 
HR families, and 35%, 33.75%, 27.5%, 16.25%, 15% in the LR families (p < 0.01,
0.01, 0.01, 0.01, 0.01), respectively. Four alleles, Cyse-DBB*3301,
Cyse-DBB*4701, Cyse-DBB*6801 and Cyse-DBB*5901, were found to be associated with 
resistance to V. anguillarum, with a frequency of 13.75%, 11.25%, 11.25%, 8.75%
in the HR families and 1.25%, 1.25%, 1.25%, 1.25% and 1.25% in the LR families (p
< 0.01, 0.05, 0.05 and p = 0.064), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Elucidation of the role of MHC II B genes in half-smooth tongue sole
should prove to be helpful to the in-depth development of marker-assisted
selective breeding in half-smooth tongue sole.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2156-12-78 
PMCID: PMC3199252
PMID: 21888646  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

