
1. Mech Ageing Dev. 2011 Aug;132(8-9):449-58. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2011.08.002. Epub
2011 Aug 22.

DNA base excision repair gene polymorphisms modulate human cognitive performance 
and decline during normal life span.

Lillenes MS(1), Espeseth T, Støen M, Lundervold AJ, Frye SA, Rootwelt H, Reinvang
I, Tønjum T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Neuroscience, Institute of Microbiology,
University of Oslo, Norway.

To test the hypothesis that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in DNA repair 
genes are associated with cognitive performance during normal aging, the
relationship between SNPs in selected exons in DNA base excision repair (BER)
genes and cognitive performance was examined in 712 healthy Norwegian individuals
aged 20-75 years. SNPs examined included PolB(Pro242Arg), hOGG1(Ser326Cys), MutYH
(Met22Val), MutYH(His324Gln), APE1(Gln51His), APE1(Glu148Asp), XRCC1(Lys298Asn), 
XRCC1(Arg7Leu), NEIL1(Asp252Asn), and NEIL2(Arg257Leu). XRCC1(Arg7Leu) and
PolB(Pro242Arg) were characterized by single nucleotide variations (≤0.1%
homozygote SNPs). hOGG1(Ser326Cys) (Ser/Cys 40.8%/Cys/Cys 5.7%), MutYH(His324Gln)
(His/Gln37%/Gln/Gln 6.0%) and APE1(Glu148Asp) (Glu/Asp 51.3%/Asp/Asp 23.0%) were 
characterized by higher SNP frequencies. MutYH(Met22Val), APE1(Gln51His) and
NEIL2(Arg257Leu) occurred at intermediate SNP frequencies of 11.5, 7.6 and 5.3%, 
respectively. Interestingly, hOGG1(Ser326Cys) and APE1(Gln51His) had genotype by 
age interactions with general cognitive function, reasoning, control and speed of
processing in cross-sectional analysis and a significant effect on longitudinal
decline. Dispersed association effects involving MutYH(His324Gln),
MutYH(Met22Val), PolB(Pro242Arg) and NEIL2(Arg257Leu) were also detected when
APOE or CHRNA4, were included in the statistical model, a result consistent with 
proposed involvement of the latter markers in human cognitive decline and/or
function. In summary, the results support the notion that polymorphisms in BER
genes modulate cognitive performance in healthy elderly individuals.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mad.2011.08.002 
PMID: 21884718  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

