
1. J Immunol. 2011 Oct 1;187(7):3578-86. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101772. Epub 2011
Aug 31.

MicroRNA-155 is essential for the T cell-mediated control of Helicobacter pylori 
infection and for the induction of chronic Gastritis and Colitis.

Oertli M(1), Engler DB, Kohler E, Koch M, Meyer TF, Müller A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich,
Switzerland.

MicroRNAs govern immune responses to infectious agents, allergens, and
autoantigens and function by posttranscriptional repression of their target
genes. In this paper, we have addressed the role of microRNA-155 (miR-155) in the
control of Helicobacter pylori infection of the gastrointestinal tract and the
development of H. pylori-induced chronic gastritis and associated gastric
preneoplastic pathology. We show that miR-155 is upregulated in the gastric
mucosa of experimentally infected mice and that miR-155(-/-) mice fail to control
H. pylori infection as a result of impaired pathogen-specific Th1 and Th17
responses. miR-155(-/-) mice are also less well protected against challenge
infection after H. pylori-specific vaccination than their wild-type (wt)
counterparts. As a consequence of their impaired T cell responses to H. pylori,
miR-155(-/-) mice develop less severe infection-induced immunopathology
manifesting as chronic atrophic gastritis, epithelial hyperplasia, and intestinal
metaplasia. T cells from miR-155(-/-) mice that are activated by CD3/CD28
cross-linking expand less and produce less IFN-γ and IL-17 than wt T cells.
Finally, we show in this paper using adoptive transfers that the phenotypes of
miR-155(-/-) mice are likely due to T cell-intrinsic defects. In contrast to wt T
cells, miR-155(-/-) T cells from infected donors do not control H. pylori
infections in T cell-deficient recipients, do not differentiate into Th1 or Th17 
cells, and do not cause immunopathology. In addition, naive miR-155(-/-) T cells 
fail to induce chronic Th17-driven colitis in an adoptive transfer model. In
conclusion, miR-155 expression is required for the Th17/Th1 differentiation that 
underlies immunity to H. pylori infection on the one hand and
infection-associated immunopathology on the other.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101772 
PMID: 21880981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

