
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Nov;79(11):4559-68. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05692-11. Epub 2011 Sep
6.

Role for the SRC family kinase Fyn in sphingolipid acquisition by chlamydiae.

Mital J(1), Hackstadt T.

Author information: 
(1)Host-Parasite Interactions Section, Laboratory of Intracellular Parasites,
NIAID, NIH, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, 903 South 4th Street, Hamilton, MT
59840, USA.

The bacterial obligate intracellular pathogen Chlamydia trachomatis replicates
within a membrane-bound vacuole termed the inclusion. From within this protective
environment, chlamydiae usurp numerous functions of the host cell to promote
chlamydial survival and replication. Here we utilized a small interfering RNA
(siRNA)-based screening protocol designed to identify host proteins involved in
the trafficking of sphingomyelin to the chlamydial inclusion. Twenty-six host
proteins whose deficiency significantly decreased sphingomyelin trafficking to
the inclusion and 16 proteins whose deficiency significantly increased
sphingomyelin trafficking to the inclusion were identified. The reduced
sphingomyelin trafficking caused by downregulation of the Src family tyrosine
kinase Fyn was confirmed in more-detailed analyses. Fyn silencing did not alter
sphingomyelin synthesis or trafficking in the absence of chlamydial infection but
reduced the amount of sphingomyelin trafficked to the inclusion in infected
cells, as determined by two independent quantitative assays. Additionally,
inhibition of Src family kinases resulted in increased cellular retention of
sphingomyelin and significantly decreased incorporation into elementary bodies of
both C. trachomatis and Chlamydophila caviae.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.05692-11 
PMCID: PMC3257913
PMID: 21896774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

