
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 4;286(44):38115-38127. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.278572. Epub
2011 Sep 6.

Asp- and Glu-specific novel dipeptidyl peptidase 11 of Porphyromonas gingivalis
ensures utilization of proteinaceous energy sources.

Ohara-Nemoto Y(1), Shimoyama Y(2), Kimura S(2), Kon A(2), Haraga H(2), Ono T(3), 
Nemoto TK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Molecular Biology, Course of Medical and Dental Sciences,
Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki 852-8588.
Electronic address: ynemoto@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.
(2)Division of Molecular Microbiology, Department of Microbiology, Iwate Medical 
University, Yahaba-cho 028-3691, Japan.
(3)Department of Oral Molecular Biology, Course of Medical and Dental Sciences,
Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki 852-8588.

Porphyromonas gingivalis and Porphyromonas endodontalis, asaccharolytic
black-pigmented anaerobes, are predominant pathogens of human chronic and
periapical periodontitis, respectively. They incorporate di- and tripeptides from
the environment as carbon and energy sources. In the present study we cloned a
novel dipeptidyl peptidase (DPP) gene of P. endodontalis ATCC 35406, designated
as DPP11. The DPP11 gene encoded 717 amino acids with a molecular mass of 81,090 
Da and was present as a 75-kDa form with an N terminus of Asp(22). A homology
search revealed the presence of a P. gingivalis orthologue, PGN0607, that has
been categorized as an isoform of authentic DPP7. P. gingivalis DPP11 was
exclusively cell-associated as a truncated 60-kDa form, and the gene ablation
retarded cell growth. DPP11 specifically removed dipeptides from oligopeptides
with the penultimate N-terminal Asp and Glu and has a P2-position preference to
hydrophobic residues. Optimum pH was 7.0, and the k(cat)/K(m) value was higher
for Asp than Glu. Those activities were lost by substitution of Ser(652) in P.
endodontalis and Ser(655) in P. gingivalis DPP11 to Ala, and they were
consistently decreased with increasing NaCl concentration. Arg(670) is a unique
amino acid completely conserved in all DPP11 members distributed in the genera
Porphyromonas, Bacteroides, and Parabacteroides, whereas this residue is
converted to Gly in all authentic DPP7 members. Substitution analysis suggested
that Arg(670) interacts with an acidic residue of the substrate. Considered to
preferentially utilize acidic amino acids, DPP11 ensures efficient degradation of
oligopeptide substrates in these Gram-negative anaerobic rods.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.278572 
PMCID: PMC3207481
PMID: 21896480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

