
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2012 Mar;93(5):2099-108. doi:
10.1007/s00253-011-3533-7. Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Detection of invasive Candida albicans infection using a specific (99m)Tc-labeled
monoclonal antibody for the C. albicans germ tube.

Ge L(1), Wang L, Song QH, Yang MF, Sun RM, Zhong BY, Xu Y, Huang DD, Hao F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, 400038, China.

Accurate diagnosis is critical for effective treatment of the invasive infection 
by Candida albicans. Here, we investigated whether a (99m) technetium
(Tc)-labeled Fab' fragment of the monoclonal antibody specific for the C.
albicans germ tube could specifically identify an invasive C. albicans infection.
The germ tube of C. albicans was used as an immunogen to obtain monoclonal
antibodies and the Fab' fragment of MAb03.2 C1-C2 with highest affinity and
specificity was labeled with (99m)Tc. In vitro binding assays showed that the
labeled Fab' preferentially bound to the germ tubes of C. albicans
(4.23 ± 0.17 × 10(2) Bq per 1 × 10(7) cells). These values were significantly
higher than those for blastospores of C. albicans, blastospores of heat-killed C.
albicans, Aspergillus fumigatus, Staphylococcus aureus, and Escherichia coli
(P < 0.05). By using in vivo biodistribution and planar imaging with single
photon emission computed tomography, we demonstrated a significant specific
accumulation of radioactivity in C. albicans-infected tissues. In summary,
(99m)Tc-MAb03.2 C1-C2 Fab' is able to specifically accumulate in C.
albicans-infected tissues, but not in tissue infected with A. fumigatus or
bacteria or in a sterile inflammation. This study provides a new and specific
radiopharmaceutical for the diagnosis of invasive C. albicans infections.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-011-3533-7 
PMID: 21894481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

