
1. Shock. 2011 Oct;36(4):417-23. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e31822bcef0.

Nebulized anticoagulants limit coagulopathy but not inflammation in pseudomonas
aeruginosa-induced pneumonia in rats.

Cornet AD(1), Hofstra JJ, Vlaar AP, van den Boogaard FE, Roelofs JJ, van der Poll
T, Levi M, Groeneveld AB, Schultz MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Intensive Care and Anesthesiology (LEICA), Academic
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Disturbed alveolar fibrin turnover is a characteristic feature of pneumonia.
Inhibitors of coagulation could exert lung-protective effects via anticoagulant
(inhibiting fibrin deposition) and possibly anti-inflammatory pathways, but could
also affect host defense. In this randomized controlled in vivo laboratory study,
rats were challenged intratracheally with Pseudomonas aeruginosa, inducing
pneumonia, and randomized to local treatment with normal saline (placebo),
recombinant human activated protein C (rh-APC), plasma-derived antithrombin (AT),
heparin, or danaparoid. Induction of P. aeruginosa pneumonia resulted in
activation of pulmonary coagulation and inhibition of pulmonary fibrinolysis, as 
reflected by increased pulmonary levels of thrombin-AT complexes and fibrin
degradation products and decreased pulmonary levels plasminogen activator
activity. Pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia was accompanied by systemic
coagulopathy, since systemic levels of thrombin-AT complexes increased, and
systemic levels of plasminogen activator activity decreased. Although rh-APC and 
plasma-derived AT potently limited pulmonary coagulopathy, neither heparin nor
danaparoid affected net pulmonary fibrin turnover. Recombinant human APC also
displayed systemic anticoagulant effects. Neither bacterial clearance nor
pulmonary inflammation was affected by anticoagulant therapy. Nebulization of
rh-APC or plasma-derived AT attenuated pulmonary coagulopathy, but not bacterial 
clearance or inflammation, in a rat model of P. aeruginosa pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e31822bcef0 
PMID: 21897338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

