
1. Thromb Haemost. 2011 Dec;106(6):1189-96. doi: 10.1160/TH11-06-0438. Epub 2011 Sep
8.

Recombinant activated protein C attenuates coagulopathy and inflammation when
administered early in murine pneumococcal pneumonia.

Schouten M(1), van 't Veer C, Roelofs JJ, Gerlitz B, Grinnell BW, Levi M, van der
Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Center for Infection and
Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Meibergdreef 9, Room G2-130, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
m.schouten@amc.uva.nl

Recombinant human activated protein C (APC), which has both anticoagulant and
anti-inflammatory properties, improves survival of patients with severe sepsis.
This beneficial effect is especially apparent in patients with pneumococcal
pneumonia. Earlier treatment with APC in sepsis has been associated with a better
therapeutic response as compared to later treatment. In a mouse model it was
recently confirmed that recombinant murine (rm-)APC decreases coagulation
activation and improves survival in pneumococcal pneumonia; however, APC did not 
impact on the inflammatory response. The aim of this study was to determine the
effect of APC treatment instigated early in infection on activation of
coagulation and inflammation after induction of pneumococcal pneumonia. Mice were
infected intranasally with viable S. pneumoniae . Mice were treated with rm-APC
(125 Î¼g) or vehicle intraperitoneally 12 hours after infection and were
sacrificed after 20 hours, after which blood and organs were harvested for
determination of bacterial outgrowth, coagulation activation and inflammatory
markers. In this early treatment model, rm-APC treatment inhibited pulmonary and 
systemic activation of coagulation as reflected by lower levels of
thrombin-antithrombin complexes and D-dimer. Moreover, rm-APC reduced the levels 
of a large number of cytokines and chemokines in the lung. When administered
early in pneumococcal pneumonia, rm-APC inhibits systemic and pulmonary
activation of coagulation and moreover exerts various anti-inflammatory effects
in the lung.

DOI: 10.1160/TH11-06-0438 
PMID: 21901240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

