
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2012 Jan;81(1):49-54. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2011.08.029. Epub
2011 Aug 31.

Generation of bioactive recombinant Ancylostoma caninum anticoagulant peptide c2.

Tong Y(1), Zhou J(2), Mao M(1), Gao J(3), Yuan L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Early Developmental and Injuries, West China Institute of Woman 
and Children's Health, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610041, PR China; Department of Pediatrics, West China Second University 
Hospital, Sichuan University, PR China; Key Laboratory of Obstetric & Gynecologic
and Pediatric Diseases and Birth Defects of Ministry of Education, PR China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610041, PR China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041, PR China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Obstetric & Gynecologic and Pediatric Diseases and Birth
Defects of Ministry of Education, PR China; Open laboratory, West China Institute
of Woman and Children's Health, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041, PR China. Electronic address: xing.yuan7811@163.com.

Thrombus formation is a crucial factor in the precipitation of unstable angina or
myocardial infarction. Recently, several anticoagulant serine protease inhibitors
have been identified from adult Ancylostoma caninum hookworms. One of them, A.
caninum anticoagulant peptide c2 (AcAPc2), can inhibit the activity of factor
VIIa/tissue factor complex to exert its antithrombotic effect. However, it is
difficult to adopt traditional expression and purification systems to yield
high-purity recombinant AcAPc2 (rAcAPc2). Here, we employed a simple method to
produce high-yield and high-purity rAcAPc2. We obtained the full-length
double-stranded cDNA encoding AcAPc2 by overlapping PCR and cloned it into an
intein-based expression vector. The AcAPc2 cDNA was expressed in Escherichia coli
and comprised 30% of the total bacterial proteins. The expressed rAcAPc2 was
purified by cleaving the fused chitin-binding domain at pH 7.2. Finally, we
produced a high yield of rAcAPc2 at a purity of greater than 98%. Importantly,
the generated rAcAPc2 prolonged the prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT) of human plasma in vitro in a dose-dependent manner.
Therefore, this method to generate the high-purity and bioactive rAcAPc2 may
contribute to the scientific research on its biological function and the
treatment of thrombotic diseases.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2011.08.029 
PMID: 21907287  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

