
1. J Struct Funct Genomics. 2011 Sep;12(3):175-9. doi: 10.1007/s10969-011-9117-z.
Epub 2011 Sep 9.

Solution NMR structure of Dsy0195 homodimer from Desulfitobacterium hafniense:
first structure representative of the YabP domain family of proteins involved in 
spore coat assembly.

Yang Y(1), Ramelot TA, Cort JR, Wang H, Ciccosanti C, Jiang M, Janjua H, Acton
TB, Xiao R, Everett JK, Montelione GT, Kennedy MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Miami University, 701 East High
Street, Oxford, OH 45056, USA.

Protein domain family YabP (PF07873) is a family of small protein domains that
are conserved in a wide range of bacteria and involved in spore coat assembly
during the process of sporulation. The 62-residue fragment of Dsy0195 from
Desulfitobacterium hafniense, which belongs to the YabP family, exists as a
homodimer in solution under the conditions used for structure determination using
NMR spectroscopy. The structure of the Dsy0195 homodimer contains two identical
62-residue monomeric subunits, each consisting of five anti-parallel beta strands
(β1, 23-29; β2, 31-38; β3, 41-46; β4, 49-59; β5, 69-80). The tertiary structure
of the Dsy0195 monomer adopts a cylindrical fold composed of two beta sheets. The
two monomer subunits fold into a homodimer about a single C2 symmetry axis, with 
the interface composed of two anti-parallel beta strands, β1-β1' and β5b-β5b',
where β5b refers to the C-terminal half of the bent β5 strand, without any domain
swapping. Potential functional regions of the Dsy0195 structure were predicted
based on conserved sequence analysis. The Dsy0195 structure reported here is the 
first representative structure from the YabP family.

DOI: 10.1007/s10969-011-9117-z 
PMCID: PMC3697068
PMID: 21904870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

