
1. J Infect Dis. 2011 Nov;204(9):1349-57. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir544. Epub 2011 Sep 
7.

LPLUNC1 modulates innate immune responses to Vibrio cholerae.

Shin OS(1), Uddin T, Citorik R, Wang JP, Della Pelle P, Kradin RL, Bingle CD,
Bingle L, Camilli A, Bhuiyan TR, Shirin T, Ryan ET, Calderwood SB, Finberg RW,
Qadri F, Larocque RC, Harris JB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
02114, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies demonstrate that long palate, lung, and nasal
epithelium clone 1 protein (LPLUNC1) is involved in immune responses to Vibrio
cholerae, and that variations in the LPLUNC1 promoter influence susceptibility to
severe cholera in humans. However, no functional role for LPLUNC1 has been
identified.
METHODS: We investigated the role of LPLUNC1 in immune responses to V. cholerae, 
assessing its affect on bacterial growth and killing and on innate inflammatory
responses to bacterial outer membrane components, including purified
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and outer membrane vesicles. We performed immunostaining
for LPLUNC1 in duodenal biopsies from cholera patients and uninfected controls.
RESULTS: LPLUNC1 decreased proinflammatory innate immune responses to V. cholerae
and Escherichia coli LPS. The effect of LPLUNC1 was dose-dependent and occurred
in a TLR4-dependent manner. LPLUNC1 did not affect lipoprotein-mediated TLR2
activation. Immunostaining demonstrated expression of LPLUNC1 in Paneth cells in 
cholera patients and controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that LPLUNC1 is expressed in Paneth cells
and likely plays a role in modulating host inflammatory responses to V. cholerae 
infection. Attenuation of innate immune responses to LPS by LPLUNC1 may have
implications for the maintenance of immune homeostasis in the intestine.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jir544 
PMCID: PMC3182310
PMID: 21900486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

