
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Oct 19;133(41):16503-9. doi: 10.1021/ja205504z. Epub 2011 Sep
23.

Pyochelin enantiomers and their outer-membrane siderophore transporters in
fluorescent pseudomonads: structural bases for unique enantiospecific
recognition.

Brillet K(1), Reimmann C, Mislin GL, Noël S, Rognan D, Schalk IJ, Cobessi D.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 7242 Biotechnologie et Signalisation Cellulaire, Université de
Strasbourg-CNRS, Irebs-ESBS, Boulevard Sébastien Brant, 67412 Illkirch, France.

Pyochelin (Pch) and enantiopyochelin (EPch) are enantiomeric siderophores, with
three chiral centers, produced under iron limitation conditions by Pseudomonas
aeruginosa and Pseudomonas fluorescens , respectively. After iron chelation in
the extracellular medium, Pch-Fe and EPch-Fe are recognized and transported by
their specific outer-membrane transporters: FptA in P. aeruginosa and FetA in P. 
fluorescens . Structural analysis of FetA-EPch-Fe and FptA-Pch-Fe, combined with 
mutagenesis and docking studies revealed the structural basis of the
stereospecific recognition of these enantiomers by their respective transporters.
Whereas FetA and FptA have a low sequence identity but high structural homology, 
the Pch and EPch binding pockets do not share any structural homology, but
display similar physicochemical properties. The stereospecific recognition of
both enantiomers by their corresponding transporters is imposed by the
configuration of the siderophore's C4'' and C2'' chiral centers. This recognition
involves specific hydrogen bonds between the Arg91 guanidinium group and EPch-Fe 
for FetA and between the Leu117-Leu116 main chain and Pch-Fe for FptA. FetA and
FptA are the first membrane receptors to be structurally described with opposite 
binding enantioselectivities for their ligands, giving insights into the
structural basis of their enantiospecificity.

DOI: 10.1021/ja205504z 
PMID: 21902256  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

