
1. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2011 Sep 1;67(Pt 9):1032-7.
doi: 10.1107/S1744309111004349. Epub 2011 Aug 13.

Structures of phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase from Burkholderia
pseudomallei.

Edwards TE(1), Leibly DJ, Bhandari J, Statnekov JB, Phan I, Dieterich SH,
Abendroth J, Staker BL, Van Voorhis WC, Myler PJ, Stewart LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Structural Genomics Center for Infectious Disease (SSGCID), USA.
tedwards@embios.com

Phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT) catalyzes the fourth of five steps 
in the coenzyme A biosynthetic pathway, reversibly transferring an adenylyl group
from ATP onto 4'-phosphopantetheine to yield dephospho-coenzyme A and
pyrophosphate. Burkholderia pseudomallei is a soil- and water-borne pathogenic
bacterium and the etiologic agent of melioidosis, a potentially fatal systemic
disease present in southeast Asia. Two crystal structures are presented of the
PPAT from B. pseudomallei with the expectation that, because of the importance of
the enzyme in coenzyme A biosynthesis, they will aid in the search for defenses
against this pathogen. A crystal grown in ammonium sulfate yielded a 2.1 Å
resolution structure that contained dephospho-coenzyme A with partial occupancy. 
The overall structure and ligand-binding interactions are quite similar to other 
bacterial PPAT crystal structures. A crystal grown at low pH in the presence of
coenzyme A yielded a 1.6 Å resolution structure in the same crystal form.
However, the experimental electron density was not reflective of fully ordered
coenzyme A, but rather was only reflective of an ordered 4'-diphosphopantetheine 
moiety.

DOI: 10.1107/S1744309111004349 
PMCID: PMC3169398
PMID: 21904046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

