
1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2011 Oct;17(10):2027-37. doi: 10.1002/ibd.21590. Epub 2010 Dec
22.

Relationship between human intestinal dendritic cells, gut microbiota, and
disease activity in Crohn's disease.

Ng SC(1), Benjamin JL, McCarthy NE, Hedin CR, Koutsoumpas A, Plamondon S, Price
CL, Hart AL, Kamm MA, Forbes A, Knight SC, Lindsay JO, Whelan K, Stagg AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Antigen Presentation Research Group, Imperial College London, St Mark's
Hospital, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Altered intestinal dendritic cell (DC) function underlies
dysregulated T-cell responses to bacteria in Crohn's disease (CD) but it is
unclear whether composition of the intestinal microbiota impacts local DC
function. We assessed the relationship between DC function with disease activity 
and intestinal microbiota in patients with CD.
METHODS: Surface expression of Toll-like receptor (TLR)-2, TLR-4, and spontaneous
intracellular interleukin (IL)-10, IL-12p40, IL-6 production by freshly isolated 
DC were analyzed by multicolor flow cytometry of cells extracted from rectal
tissue of 10 controls and 28 CD patients. Myeloid DC were identified as CD11c(+) 
HLA-DR(+lin-/dim) cells (lin = anti-CD3, CD14, CD16, CD19, CD34). Intestinal
microbiota were analyzed by fluorescent in situ hybridization of fecal samples
with oligonucleotide probes targeting 16S rRNA of bifidobacteria,
bacteroides-prevotella, C. coccoides-E. rectale, and Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii.
RESULTS: DC from CD produced higher amounts of IL-12p40 and IL-6 than control DC.
IL-6(+) DC were associated with the CD Activity Index (r = 0.425; P = 0.024) and 
serum C-reactive protein (CRP) (r = 0.643; P = 0.004). DC expression of TLR-4
correlated with disease activity. IL-12p40(+) DC correlated with ratio of
bacteroides: bifidobacteria (r = 0.535, P = 0.003). IL-10(+) DC correlated with
bifidobacteria, and IL-6(+) DC correlated negatively with F. prausnitzii (r =
-0.50; P = 0.008). The amount of TLR-4 on DC correlated negatively with the
concentration of F. prausnitzii.
CONCLUSIONS: IL-6 production by intestinal DC is increased in CD and correlates
with disease activity and CRP. Bacterially driven local IL-6 production by
intestinal DC may overcome regulatory activity, resulting in unopposed effector
function and tissue damage. Intestinal DC function may be influenced by the
composition of the commensal microbiota.

Copyright Â© 2010 Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ibd.21590 
PMID: 21910165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

