
1. Infect Immun. 2011 Nov;79(11):4578-87. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05586-11. Epub 2011 Sep
12.

Fusobacterium nucleatum and human beta-defensins modulate the release of
antimicrobial chemokine CCL20/macrophage inflammatory protein 3α.

Ghosh SK(1), Gupta S, Jiang B, Weinberg A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, School of Dental Medicine, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4905, USA.

Cells of the innate immune system regulate immune responses through the
production of antimicrobial peptides, chemokines, and cytokines, including human 
beta-defensins (hBDs) and CCL20. In this study, we examined the kinetics of
primary human oral epithelial cell (HOEC) production of CCL20 and hBDs in
response to Fusobacterium nucleatum, a commensal bacterium of the oral cavity,
which we previously showed promotes HOEC induction of hBDs. HOECs secrete maximal
levels of CCL20 at 6 h, following stimulation by F. nucleatum cell wall (FnCW).
The kinetics of CCL20 release is distinct from that of hBD-2 and -3, which peaks 
after 24 h and 48 h of FnCW stimulation, respectively. FnCW-induced release of
CCL20 by HOECs requires both transcriptional and translational activation.
Release of CCL20 by HOECs is inhibited by brefeldin A, suggesting that it is
secreted through a vesicle transport pathway. Other epithelium-derived agents
that FnCW induces, such as hBD-2, hBD-3, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and 
interleukin-1β (IL-1β), are also able to release CCL20. By focusing on
mitogen-activated protein kinases, we show that both extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and p38, but not JNK, are required for hBD-, TNF-α-, 
and IL-1β-induced secretion of CCL20 by HOECs. The ability of FnCW and its
induced hBDs to produce proinflammatory cytokines and CCL20 suggests the broad
role of F. nucleatum and human antimicrobial peptides in primary immune responses
elicited by oral epithelium.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.05586-11 
PMCID: PMC3257922
PMID: 21911466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

