
1. J Immunol. 2011 Oct 15;187(8):4236-44. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100688. Epub 2011
Sep 12.

Cohesin regulates MHC class II genes through interactions with MHC class II
insulators.

Majumder P(1), Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Cohesin is a multiprotein, ringed complex that is most well-known for its role in
stabilizing the association of sister chromatids between S phase and M. More
recently, cohesin was found to be associated with transcriptional insulators,
elements that are associated with the organization of chromatin into regulatory
domains. The human MHC class II (MHC-II) locus contains 10 intergenic elements,
termed MHC-II insulators, which bind the transcriptional insulator protein
CCCTC-binding factor. MHC-II insulators interact with each other, forming a base 
architecture of discrete loops and potential regulatory domains. When MHC-II
genes are expressed, their proximal promoter regulatory regions reorganize to the
foci established by the interacting MHC-II insulators. MHC-II insulators also
bind cohesin, but the functional role of cohesin in regulating this system is not
known. In this article, we show that the binding of cohesin to MHC-II insulators 
occurred irrespective of MHC-II expression but was required for optimal
expression of the HLA-DR and HLA-DQ genes. In a DNA-dependent manner, cohesin
subunits interacted with CCCTC-binding factor and the MHC-II-specific
transcription factors regulatory factor X and CIITA. Intriguingly, cohesin
subunits were important for DNA looping interactions between the HLA-DRA promoter
region and a 5' MHC-II insulator but were not required for interactions between
the MHC-II insulators themselves. This latter observation introduces cohesin as a
regulator of MHC-II expression by initiating or stabilizing MHC-II promoter
regulatory element interactions with the MHC-II insulator elements, events that
are required for maximal MHC-II transcription.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100688 
PMCID: PMC3186872
PMID: 21911605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

