
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 4;286(44):38231-38241. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.279554. Epub
2011 Sep 12.

N-Glycans differentially regulate eosinophil and neutrophil recruitment during
allergic airway inflammation.

Bahaie NS(1), Kang BN(1), Frenzel EM(1), Hosseinkhani MR(1), Ge XN(1), Greenberg 
Y(1), Ha SG(1), Demetriou M(2), Rao SP(1), Sriramarao P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases and Inflammation, Department of Veterinary and
Biomedical Sciences, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota 55108.
(2)Department of Neurology, Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Institute for
Immunology, University of California, Irvine, California 92697.
(3)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases and Inflammation, Department of Veterinary and
Biomedical Sciences, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota 55108;
Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455.
Electronic address: psrao@umn.edu.

Allergic airway inflammation, including asthma, is usually characterized by the
predominant recruitment of eosinophils. However, neutrophilia is also prominent
during severe exacerbations. Cell surface-expressed glycans play a role in
leukocyte trafficking and recruitment during inflammation. Here, the involvement 
of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine:α-6-D-mannoside β1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V
(MGAT5)-modified N-glycans in eosinophil and neutrophil recruitment during
allergic airway inflammation was investigated. Allergen-challenged
Mgat5-deficient (Mgat5(-/-)) mice exhibited significantly attenuated airway
eosinophilia and inflammation (decreased Th2 cytokines, mucus production)
compared with WT counterparts, attributable to decreased rolling, adhesion, and
survival of Mgat5(-/-) eosinophils. Interestingly, allergen-challenged Mgat5(-/-)
mice developed airway neutrophilia and increased airway reactivity with
persistent elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-17A, TNFα, IFNγ)).
This increased neutrophil recruitment was also observed in LPS- and
thioglycollate (TG)-induced inflammation in Mgat5(-/-) mice. Furthermore, there
was significantly increased recruitment of infused Mgat5(-/-) neutrophils
compared with WT neutrophils in the peritoneal cavity of TG-exposed WT mice.
Mgat5(-/-) neutrophils demonstrated enhanced adhesion to P-selectin as well as
increased migration toward keratinocyte-derived chemokine compared with WT
neutrophils in vitro along with increased calcium mobilization upon activation
and expression of elevated levels of CXCR2, which may contribute to the increased
neutrophil recruitment. These data indicate an important role for MGAT5-modified 
N-glycans in differential regulation of eosinophil and neutrophil recruitment
during allergic airway inflammation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.279554 
PMCID: PMC3207438
PMID: 21911487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

