
1. Platelets. 2012;23(3):217-23. doi: 10.3109/09537104.2011.610908. Epub 2011 Sep
13.

Platelets display potent antimicrobial activity and release human beta-defensin
2.

Tohidnezhad M(1), Varoga D, Wruck CJ, Podschun R, Sachweh BH, Bornemann J, Bovi
M, Sönmez TT, Slowik A, Houben A, Seekamp A, Brandenburg LO, Pufe T, Lippross S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, RWTH Aachen University, Wendlingweg 2 
D-52074, Aachen, Germany.

Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) is a potent agent that improves soft tissue and bone
healing. By the release of growth factors and cytokines, PRP is believed to
locally boost physiologic healing processes. Recently, antimicrobial activity of 
PRP has been demonstrated against S. aureus strains. Major scientific effort is
being put into the understanding and prevention of infections i.e. by delivery of
antimicrobial substances. In previous studies we showed the ideal antibacterial
activity-profile of the human beta-defensin 2 (hBD-2) for orthopaedic infections 
and therefore hypothesized that hBD-2 may be the effector of antimicrobial
platelet action. Platelet concentrates were produced from human platelet phresis 
obtained from a hospital blood bank. They were screened by immunohistochemistry, 
Western Blot and ELISA for the human beta defensin-2. In vitro susceptibility to 
PRP was investigated by a standard disc diffusion test with or without
pre-incubation of PRP with anti-hBD-2 antibody. SPSS statistical software was
used for statistical analysis. PRP contains hBD-2 470 pg/10(9) platelets or
1786 pg/ml, respectively, (ELISA), which was confirmed by immunohistochemistry
and Western Blot. In antimicrobial testing, PRP demonstrates effective inhibition
of E. coli, B. megaterium, P. aeruginosa, E. faecalis and P. mirabilis. With this
study we confirm the previously reported antimicrobial action of platelet
concentrates i.e. PRP. In opposition to previously reported effects against gram 
positive bacteria our study focuses on gram negative and less common gram
positive bacteria that do frequently cause clinical complications. We provide a
possible molecular mechanism at least for E. coli and P. mirabilis for this
effect by the detection of an antimicrobial peptide (hBD-2). This study may
advocate the clinical use of PRP by highlighting a new aspect of platelet action.

DOI: 10.3109/09537104.2011.610908 
PMID: 21913811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

