
1. Biochem J. 2012 Jan 1;441(1):189-98. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111318.

Vitamin E isoforms directly bind PKCα and differentially regulate activation of
PKCα.

McCary CA(1), Yoon Y, Panagabko C, Cho W, Atkinson J, Cook-Mills JM.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy-Immunology Division, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Vitamin E isoforms have opposing regulatory effects on leucocyte recruitment
during inflammation. Furthermore, in vitro, vitamin E isoforms have opposing
effects on leucocyte migration across endothelial cells by regulating VCAM
(vascular cell-adhesion molecule)-1 activation of endothelial cell PKCα (protein 
kinase Cα). However, it is not known whether tocopherols directly regulate
cofactor-dependent or oxidative activation of PKCα. We report in the present
paper that cofactor-dependent activation of recombinant PKCα was increased by
γ-tocopherol and was inhibited by α-tocopherol. Oxidative activation of PKCα was 
inhibited by α-tocopherol at a 10-fold lower concentration than γ-tocopherol. In 
binding studies, NBD (7-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazole)-tagged α-tocopherol directly
bound to full-length PKCα or the PKCα-C1a domain, but not PKCζ. NBD-tagged
α-tocopherol binding to PKCα or the PKCα-C1a domain was blocked by
diacylglycerol, α-tocopherol, γ-tocopherol and retinol, but not by cholesterol or
PS (phosphatidylserine). Tocopherols enhanced PKCα-C2 domain binding to
PS-containing lipid vesicles. In contrast, the PKCα-C2 domain did not bind to
lipid vesicles containing tocopherol without PS. The PKCα-C1b domain did not bind
to vesicles containing tocopherol and PS. In summary, α-tocopherol and
γ-tocopherol bind the diacylglycerol-binding site on PKCα-C1a and can enhance
PKCα-C2 binding to PS-containing vesicles. Thus the tocopherols can function as
agonists or antagonists for differential regulation of PKCα.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20111318 
PMCID: PMC3271793
PMID: 21933153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

