
1. PLoS Biol. 2011 Sep;9(9):e1001149. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001149. Epub 2011
Sep 13.

Binding of superantigen toxins into the CD28 homodimer interface is essential for
induction of cytokine genes that mediate lethal shock.

Arad G(1), Levy R, Nasie I, Hillman D, Rotfogel Z, Barash U, Supper E, Shpilka T,
Minis A, Kaempfer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Medical
Research Israel-Canada, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem,
Israel.

Erratum in
    PLoS Biol. 2015 Aug;13(8):e1002237.

Bacterial superantigens, a diverse family of toxins, induce an inflammatory
cytokine storm that can lead to lethal shock. CD28 is a homodimer expressed on T 
cells that functions as the principal costimulatory ligand in the immune response
through an interaction with its B7 coligands, yet we show here that to elicit
inflammatory cytokine gene expression and toxicity, superantigens must bind
directly into the dimer interface of CD28. Preventing access of the superantigen 
to CD28 suffices to block its lethality. Mice were protected from lethal
superantigen challenge by short peptide mimetics of the CD28 dimer interface and 
by peptides selected to compete with the superantigen for its binding site in
CD28. Superantigens use a conserved β-strand/hinge/α-helix domain of hitherto
unknown function to engage CD28. Mutation of this superantigen domain abolished
inflammatory cytokine gene induction and lethality. Structural analysis showed
that when a superantigen binds to the T cell receptor on the T cell and major
histocompatibility class II molecule on the antigen-presenting cell, CD28 can be 
accommodated readily as third superantigen receptor in the quaternary complex,
with the CD28 dimer interface oriented towards the β-strand/hinge/α-helix domain 
in the superantigen. Our findings identify the CD28 homodimer interface as a
critical receptor target for superantigens. The novel role of CD28 as receptor
for a class of microbial pathogens, the superantigen toxins, broadens the scope
of pathogen recognition mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001149 
PMCID: PMC3172200
PMID: 21931534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

