
1. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2011 Oct;67(Pt 10):831-8. doi:
10.1107/S0907444911028010. Epub 2011 Sep 8.

A novel mechanism of sulfur transfer catalyzed by O-acetylhomoserine
sulfhydrylase in the methionine-biosynthetic pathway of Wolinella succinogenes.

Tran TH(1), Krishnamoorthy K, Begley TP, Ealick SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York 14853-1301, USA.

O-Acetylhomoserine sulfhydrylase (OAHS) is a pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP)
dependent sulfide-utilizing enzyme in the L-cysteine and L-methionine
biosynthetic pathways of various enteric bacteria and fungi. OAHS catalyzes the
conversion of O-acetylhomoserine to homocysteine using sulfide in a process known
as direct sulfhydrylation. However, the source of the sulfur has not been
identified and no structures of OAHS have been reported in the literature. Here, 
the crystal structure of Wolinella succinogenes OAHS (MetY) determined at 2.2 Å
resolution is reported. MetY crystallized in space group C2 with two monomers in 
the asymmetric unit. Size-exclusion chromatography, dynamic light scattering and 
crystal packing indicate that the biological unit is a tetramer in solution. This
is further supported by the crystal structure, in which a tetramer is formed
using a combination of noncrystallographic and crystallographic twofold axes. A
search for structurally homologous proteins revealed that MetY has the same fold 
as cystathionine γ-lyase and methionine γ-lyase. The active sites of these
enzymes, which are also PLP-dependent, share a high degree of structural
similarity, suggesting that MetY belongs to the γ-elimination subclass of the
Cys/Met metabolism PLP-dependent family of enzymes. The structure of MetY,
together with biochemical data, provides insight into the mechanism of sulfur
transfer to a small molecule via a protein thiocarboxylate intermediate.

DOI: 10.1107/S0907444911028010 
PMCID: PMC3176619
PMID: 21931214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

