
1. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Jun 10;21(9):1449-54. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0451. Epub 2011 
Oct 27.

DEK regulates hematopoietic stem engraftment and progenitor cell proliferation.

Broxmeyer HE(1), Kappes F, Mor-Vaknin N, Legendre M, Kinzfogl J, Cooper S, Hangoc
G, Markovitz DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5181, USA. hbroxmey@iupui.edu

DEK is a biochemically distinct protein that is generally found in the nucleus,
where it is vital to global heterochromatin integrity. However, DEK is also
secreted by cells (eg, macrophages) and influences other adjacent cells (eg, acts
as a chemoattractant for certain mature blood cells). We hypothesized that DEK
may modulate functions of hematopoietic stem (HSCs) and progenitor (HPCs) cells. 
C57Bl/6 mice were used to demonstrate that absolute numbers and cycling status of
HPCs (colony forming unit-granulocyte macrophage [CFU-GM], burst forming
unit-erythroid [BFU-E], and colony forming unit-granulocyte erythroid macrophage 
megakaryocyte [CFU-GEMM]) in bone marrow (BM) and spleen were significantly
enhanced in DEK -/- as compared with wild-type (WT) control mice. Moreover,
purified recombinant DEK protein inhibited colony formation in vitro by CFU-GM,
BFU-E, and CFU-GEMM from WT BM cells and human cord blood (CB) cells in a
dose-dependent fashion, demonstrating that DEK plays a negative role in HPC
proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Suppression was direct acting as determined
by inhibition of proliferation of single isolated CD34(+) CB cells in vitro. In
contrast, DEK -/- BM cells significantly demonstrated reduced long term
competitive and secondary mouse repopulating HSC capacity compared with WT BM
cells, demonstrating that DEK positively regulates engrafting capability of
self-renewing HSCs. This demonstrates that DEK has potent effects on HSCs, HPCs, 
and hematopoiesis, information of biological and potential clinical interest.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.2011.0451 
PMCID: PMC3359622
PMID: 21943234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

