
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24543. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024543. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

The plant pathogen Phytophthora andina emerged via hybridization of an unknown
Phytophthora species and the Irish potato famine pathogen, P. infestans.

Goss EM(1), Cardenas ME, Myers K, Forbes GA, Fry WE, Restrepo S, Gr√ºnwald NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Horticultural Crops Research Laboratory, Agricultural Research Service, United
States Department of Agriculture, Corvallis, Oregon, United States of America.
emgoss@ufl.edu

Emerging plant pathogens have largely been a consequence of the movement of
pathogens to new geographic regions. Another documented mechanism for the
emergence of plant pathogens is hybridization between individuals of different
species or subspecies, which may allow rapid evolution and adaptation to new
hosts or environments. Hybrid plant pathogens have traditionally been difficult
to detect or confirm, but the increasing ease of cloning and sequencing PCR
products now makes the identification of species that consistently have genes or 
alleles with phylogenetically divergent origins relatively straightforward. We
investigated the genetic origin of Phytophthora andina, an increasingly common
pathogen of Andean crops Solanum betaceum, S. muricatum, S. quitoense, and
several wild Solanum spp. It has been hypothesized that P. andina is a hybrid
between the potato late blight pathogen P. infestans and another Phytophthora
species. We tested this hypothesis by cloning four nuclear loci to obtain
haplotypes and using these loci to infer the phylogenetic relationships of P.
andina to P. infestans and other related species. Sequencing of cloned PCR
products in every case revealed two distinct haplotypes for each locus in P.
andina, such that each isolate had one allele derived from a P. infestans parent 
and a second divergent allele derived from an unknown species that is closely
related but distinct from P. infestans, P. mirabilis, and P. ipomoeae. To the
best of our knowledge, the unknown parent has not yet been collected. We also
observed sequence polymorphism among P. andina isolates at three of the four
loci, many of which segregate between previously described P. andina clonal
lineages. These results provide strong support that P. andina emerged via
hybridization between P. infestans and another unknown Phytophthora species also 
belonging to Phytophthora clade 1c.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024543 
PMCID: PMC3174952
PMID: 21949727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

