
1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2011 Dec 1;516(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2011.09.004. Epub
2011 Sep 17.

The N-terminal β-barrel domain of mammalian lipoxygenases including mouse
5-lipoxygenase is not essential for catalytic activity and membrane binding but
exhibits regulatory functions.

Walther M(1), Hofheinz K, Vogel R, Roffeis J, Kühn H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, University Medicine Berlin - Charité, Germany.

Mammalian lipoxygenases (LOXs) have been implicated in cell differentiation and
in the pathogenesis of inflammatory and hyperproliferative diseases. The
available structural information indicated that lipoxygenases constitute single
polypeptide chain enzymes consisting of a small N-terminal β-barrel domain and a 
larger C-terminal subunit that harbors the catalytic non-heme iron. Because of
its structural similarity to C2-domains of lipases the N-terminal β-barrel domain
of lipoxygenases, which comprises about 110 amino acids, has been implicated in
membrane binding and activity regulation. To explore the functional relevance of 
the C2-domain in more detail and to develop a more comprehensive hypothesis on
the biological role of this structural subunit we performed gene technical
truncation on various mammalian LOX isoforms (12/15-LOXs of various species,
human 15-LOX2, mouse 5-LOX) and quantified catalytic activity and membrane
binding properties of the truncated recombinant enzyme species. We found that the
C2-domain is not essential for catalytic activity and does hardly impact reaction
specificity. Truncated enzyme species exhibit impaired membrane binding
properties and altered reaction kinetics. Taken together, our data suggests a
regulatory importance of the N-terminal β-barrel domain for mammalian
lipoxygenase isoforms.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2011.09.004 
PMID: 21951814  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

