
1. Cell Prolif. 2011 Oct;44(5):401-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2011.00766.x.

3-O-methylfunicone, from Penicillium pinophilum, is a selective inhibitor of
breast cancer stem cells.

Buommino E(1), Tirino V, De Filippis A, Silvestri F, Nicoletti R, Ciavatta ML,
Pirozzi G, Tufano MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Microbiology and Clinical
Microbiology, SUN, Naples, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Cancer stem cells make up a subpopulation of cells within tumours
that drive tumour initiation, growth and recurrence. They are resistant to many
current types of cancer treatment, causing failure of such therapeutic
approaches, including chemotherapy and radiotherapy. In the study described here,
anti-proliferative effects of 3-O-methylfunicone (OMF), a metabolite from
Penicillium pinophilum, were investigated on human breast cancer MCF-7 cells and 
cancer stem cells selected as mammospheres derived from MCF-7s.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Stemness markers were analysed on isolated mammospheres
showing positive expression of CD24, CD29, CD44, CD133, CD184 and CD338. Cell
proliferation and apoptosis were analysed by flow cytometry and RT-PCR. Cell
colony formation assays were performed to evaluate colony formation of
mammospheres.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: OMF treatment affected both MCF-7 and mammosphere growth,
inducing apoptosis. In addition, OMF strongly reduced stemness markers and
survivin, hTERT and Nanog-1 gene expression. Growth of colonies in soft-agar was 
significantly affected by OMF treatment, too. Lastly, we tested ability of MCF-7 
cells to form mammospheres after treatment with OMF or cisplatin, demonstrating
that OMF treatment resulted in drastic reduction in number of mammospheres. These
results introduce OMF as an effective molecule in suppressing breast cancer stem 
cells.

Â© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2011.00766.x 
PMCID: PMC6495666
PMID: 21951283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

