
1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 25;286(47):40452-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.277764. Epub
2011 Sep 28.

CcmI subunit of CcmFHI heme ligation complex functions as an apocytochrome c
chaperone during c-type cytochrome maturation.

Verissimo AF(1), Yang H, Wu X, Sanders C, Daldal F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19014-6019, USA.

Cytochrome c maturation (Ccm) is a sophisticated post-translational process. It
occurs after translocation of apocytochromes c to the p side of energy
transducing membranes and forms stereo-specific thioether bonds between the vinyl
groups of heme b (protoporphyrin IX-Fe) and the thiol groups of cysteines at
their conserved heme binding sites. In many organisms this process involves up to
10 (CcmABCDEFGHI and CcdA) membrane proteins. One of these proteins is CcmI,
which has an N-terminal membrane-embedded domain with two transmembrane helices
and a large C-terminal periplasmic domain with protein-protein interaction
motifs. Together with CcmF and CcmH, CcmI forms a multisubunit heme ligation
complex. How the CcmFHI complex recognizes its apocytochrome c substrates
remained unknown. In this study, using Rhodobacter capsulatus apocytochrome c(2) 
as a Ccm substrate, we demonstrate for the first time that CcmI binds
apocytochrome c(2) but not holocytochrome c(2). Mainly the C-terminal portions of
both CcmI and apocytochrome c(2) mediate this binding. Other physical
interactions via the conserved structural elements in apocytochrome c(2), like
the heme ligating cysteines or heme iron axial ligands, are less crucial.
Furthermore, we show that the N-terminal domain of CcmI can also weakly bind
apocytochrome c(2), but this interaction requires a free thiol group at
apocytochrome c(2) heme binding site. We conclude that the CcmI subunit of the
CcmFHI complex functions as an apocytochrome c chaperone during the Ccm process
used by proteobacteria, archaea, mitochondria of plants and red algae.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.277764 
PMCID: PMC3220492
PMID: 21956106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

