
1. Exp Gerontol. 2011 Dec;46(12):1000-2. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2011.09.004. Epub 2011
Sep 22.

IL-7 concentration is increased in nonagenarians but is not associated with
markers of T cell immunosenescence.

Marttila S(1), Jylhävä J, Pesu M, Hämäläinen S, Jylhä M, Hervonen A, Hurme M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
Tampere, Finland. saara.marttila@uta.fi

Interleukin-7 is a homeostatic cytokine that contributes to the maintenance of
the T cell pool. It also has proinflammatory effects and is involved in the
pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. Due to its homeostatic effects, IL-7 has
been proposed as a potential rejuvenation factor for the elderly immune system.
We analyzed the correlation of plasma IL-7 concentrations and the proportions of 
different T cell populations in nonagenarians (n=163) participating in the
Vitality 90+ study. Young individuals (n=35, aged 19-30years) were used as
controls. The numbers of CD3+, CD14+, CD4+ and CD8+ cells and the expression of
the CD28 costimulatory molecule on CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocyte subsets were analyzed
using flow cytometry. The plasma IL-7 levels were significantly higher in the
nonagenarians compared to the controls (7.86 vs. 5.74pg/ml, p=0.004). In the
nonagenarians, plasma IL-7 levels correlated inversely with the proportion of
CD3+ T cells and directly with the proportion of CD14+ monocytes and plasma
C-reactive protein. No correlation was observed between plasma IL-7 levels and
the proportions of CD4+CD28- or CD8+CD28- subsets. These results suggest that the
IL-7 levels in nonagenarians do not have an inhibitory effect on the development 
of immunosenescence; rather they are associated with increased inflammation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2011.09.004 
PMID: 21964236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

