
1. BMC Genomics. 2011 Sep 30;12:479. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-479.

Single-nucleotide resolution analysis of the transcriptome structure of
Clostridium beijerinckii NCIMB 8052 using RNA-Seq.

Wang Y(1), Li X, Mao Y, Blaschek HP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

BACKGROUND: Clostridium beijerinckii is an important solvent producing
microorganism. The genome of C. beijerinckii NCIMB 8052 has recently been
sequenced. Although transcriptome structure is important in order to reveal the
functional and regulatory architecture of the genome, the physical structure of
transcriptome for this strain, such as the operon linkages and transcript
boundaries are not well understood.
RESULTS: In this study, we conducted a single-nucleotide resolution analysis of
the C. beijerinckii NCIMB 8052 transcriptome using high-throughput RNA-Seq
technology. We identified the transcription start sites and operon structure
throughout the genome. We confirmed the structure of important gene operons
involved in metabolic pathways for acid and solvent production in C. beijerinckii
8052, including pta-ack, ptb-buk, hbd-etfA-etfB-crt (bcs) and ald-ctfA-ctfB-adc
(sol) operons; we also defined important operons related to chemotaxis/motility, 
transcriptional regulation, stress response and fatty acids biosynthesis along
with others. We discovered 20 previously non-annotated regions with significant
transcriptional activities and 15 genes whose translation start codons were
likely mis-annotated. As a consequence, the accuracy of existing genome
annotation was significantly enhanced. Furthermore, we identified 78 putative
silent genes and 177 putative housekeeping genes based on normalized
transcription measurement with the sequence data. We also observed that more than
30% of pseudogenes had significant transcriptional activities during the
fermentation process. Strong correlations exist between the expression values
derived from RNA-Seq analysis and microarray data or qRT-PCR results.
CONCLUSIONS: Transcriptome structural profiling in this research provided
important supplemental information on the accuracy of genome annotation, and
revealed additional gene functions and regulation in C. beijerinckii.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-479 
PMCID: PMC3271303
PMID: 21962126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

