
1. Biochimie. 2012 Feb;94(2):566-73. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2011.09.006. Epub 2011
Sep 25.

α-Crystallin protects human arginosuccinate lyase activity under freeze-thaw
conditions.

Wei YY(1), Huang CW, Chou WY, Lee HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, National Defense Medical Center, No. 161, Sec. 6, 
MinChuan E. Rd., Neihu, Taipei, Taiwan.

Argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) catalyzes the conversion of argininosuccinate into 
arginine and fumarate, a key step in the biosynthesis of urea and arginine. ASL
is a tetrameric enzyme but it dissociates into inactive dimers under low
temperature conditions. This study investigates the inactivation process under
low temperature conditions. Inactivation was caused by dissociation of tetrameric
ASL into dimers, with increased exposure of hydrophobic areas without disturbance
of the secondary structure or the microenvironment surrounding the key tryptophan
residues. Most activity was retained when temperatures were changed at a rate of 
>1 °C/min, whilst freezing or thawing more slowly resulted in greater loss of
activity. Inactivation was reduced by inclusion of α-crystallin, a structural
protein found in ocular lenses and a member of the small heat-shock protein
family, by stabilization of the ASL quaternary structure. In addition,
α-crystallin was able to restore the function of ASL that had been inactivated by
slow freezing and thawing. The effect of α-crystallin was similar to that of
bovine serum albumin, suggesting that both proteins exerted their effects by
hydrophobic interactions. α-Crystallin therefore acts as a cryo-preservative that
protects ASL activity during freezing and thawing.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2011.09.006 
PMID: 21963434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

