
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Oct 25;108(43):E934-42. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1109831108. Epub 2011 Oct 10.

Requirement for complement in antibody responses is not explained by the classic 
pathway activator IgM.

Rutemark C(1), Alicot E, Bergman A, Ma M, Getahun A, Ellmerich S, Carroll MC,
Heyman B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, BMC, 
SE-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden.

Animals lacking complement factors C1q, C2, C3, or C4 have severely impaired Ab
responses, suggesting a major role for the classic pathway. The classic pathway
is primarily initiated by antigen-Ab complexes. Therefore, its role for primary
Ab responses seems paradoxical because only low amounts of specific Abs are
present in naive animals. A possible explanation could be that the classic
pathway is initiated by IgM from naive mice, binding with sufficient avidity to
the antigen. To test this hypothesis, a knock-in mouse strain, Cμ13, with a point
mutation in the gene encoding the third constant domain of the μ-heavy chain was 
constructed. These mice produce IgM in which proline in position 436 is
substituted with serine, a mutation previously shown to abrogate the ability of
mouse IgM to activate complement. Unexpectedly, the Ab response to sheep
erythrocytes and keyhole limpet hemocyanin in Cμ13 mice was similar to that in WT
mice. Thus, although secreted IgM and the classic pathway activation are both
required for the normal primary Ab response, this does not require that IgM
activate C. This led us to test Ab responses in animals lacking one of three
other endogenous activators of the classic pathway: specific intracellular
adhesion molecule-grabbing nonintegrin R1, serum amyloid P component, and
C-reactive protein. Ab responses were also normal in these animals.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1109831108 
PMCID: PMC3203774
PMID: 21987785  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

