
1. J Immunother. 2011 Nov-Dec;34(9):629-40. doi: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e3182281381.

Wildtype p53-specific antibody and T-cell responses in cancer patients.

Pedersen AE(1), Stryhn A, Justesen S, Harndahl M, Rasmussen S, Donskov F,
Claesson MH, Pedersen JW, Wandall HH, Svane IM, Buus S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of International Health, Immunology and Microbiology, The Panum
Institute, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. elmpedersen@sund.ku.dk

Mutation in the p53 gene based on single amino acid substitutions is a frequent
event in human cancer. Accumulated mutant p53 protein is released to antigen
presenting cells of the immune system and anti-p53 immune responses even against 
wt p53 is induced and observed in a number of human cancer patients. Detection of
antibodies against wt p53 protein has been used as a diagnostic and prognostic
marker and discovery of new T-cell epitopes has enabled design of cancer
vaccination protocols with promising results. Here, we identified wt p53-specific
antibodies in various cancer patients and identified a broad range of responses
against wt p53 protein and 15-mer peptides using a novel print array technology. 
Likewise, using bioinformatic tools in silico, we identified CD8 T-cell
specificity or reactivity against HLA-A*02:01 binding peptides wt p53(65-73), wt 
p53(187-197), and wt p53(264-272) in breast cancer patients and against
HLA-A*01:01 binding peptide wt p53(226-234) and HLA-B*07:02 binding peptide wt
p53(74-82) in renal cell cancer and breast cancer patients, respectively.
Finally, we analyzed antibody and T-cell responses against wt p53 15-mer peptides
in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma who were alive with no evidence 
of disease after a follow-up period of minimum 5 years after treatment with IL-2 
± IFN-α ± histamine containing immunotherapy to identify novel epitopes for use
in immunotherapy and for potential response biomarkers. However, none of the wt
p53 reactivity observed justified use of 15-mer or was related to survival in
this rare patient population.

DOI: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e3182281381 
PMID: 21989411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

