
1. Autophagy. 2011 Nov;7(11):1359-70. doi: 10.4161/auto.7.11.17660. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Autophagy stimulation by rapamycin suppresses lung inflammation and infection by 
Burkholderia cenocepacia in a model of cystic fibrosis.

Abdulrahman BA(1), Khweek AA, Akhter A, Caution K, Kotrange S, Abdelaziz DH,
Newland C, Rosales-Reyes R, Kopp B, McCoy K, Montione R, Schlesinger LS, Gavrilin
MA, Wewers MD, Valvano MA, Amer AO.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Microbial Interface Biology, Department of Microbial Infection,
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.

Comment in
    Autophagy. 2011 Nov;7(11):1269-70.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common inherited lethal disease of Caucasians
which results in multi organ dysfunction. However, 85% of the deaths are due to
pulmonary infections. Infection by Burkholderia cenocepacia (B. cepacia) is a
particularly lethal threat to CF patients because it causes severe and persistent
lung inflammation and is resistant to nearly all available antibiotics. In CFTR
ΔF508 mouse macrophages, B. cepacia persists in vacuoles that do not fuse with
the lysosomes and mediates increased production of IL-1β. It is believed that
intracellular bacterial survival contributes to the persistence of the bacterium.
Here we show for the first time that in wild-type macrophages but not in ΔF508
macrophages, many B. cepacia reside in autophagosomes that fuse with lysosomes at
later stages of infection. Accordingly, association and intracellular survival of
B. cepacia are higher in CFTR-ΔF508 (ΔF508) macrophages than in WT macrophages.
An autophagosome is a compartment that engulfs non-functional organelles and
parts of the cytoplasm then delivers them to the lysosome for degradation to
produce nutrients during periods of starvation or stress. Furthermore, we show
that B. cepacia downregulates autophagy genes in WT and ΔF508 macrophages.
However, autophagy dysfunction is more pronounced in ΔF508 macrophages since they
already have compromised autophagy activity. We demonstrate that the
autophagy-stimulating agent, rapamycin markedly decreases B. cepacia infection in
vitro by enhancing the clearance of B. cepacia via induced autophagy. In vivo,
Rapamycin decreases bacterial burden in the lungs of CF mice and drastically
reduces signs of lung inflammation. Together, our studies reveal that if
efficiently activated, autophagy can control B. cepacia infection and ameliorate 
the associated inflammation. Therefore, autophagy is a novel target for new drug 
development for CF patients to control B. cepacia infection and accompanying
inflammation.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.7.11.17660 
PMCID: PMC3359483
PMID: 21997369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

