
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012 Jan;56(1):420-7. doi: 10.1128/AAC.05036-11.
Epub 2011 Oct 17.

Nosocomial outbreak of VIM-1-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates of
multilocus sequence type 15: molecular basis, clinical risk factors, and outcome.

Sánchez-Romero I(1), Asensio A, Oteo J, Muñoz-Algarra M, Isidoro B, Vindel A,
Alvarez-Avello J, Balandín-Moreno B, Cuevas O, Fernández-Romero S, Azañedo L,
Sáez D, Campos J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Microbiología, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro
Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain.

We study the epidemiology, molecular basis, clinical risk factors, and outcome
involved in the clonal dissemination of VIM-1-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae
isolates in the hospital setting. All patients infected/colonized by
carbapenem-nonsusceptible K. pneumoniae (CNSKP) in 2009 were included. Molecular 
epidemiology was studied by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and
multilocus sequence typing (MLST). Antibiotic resistance genes were analyzed by
PCR and sequencing. Plasmids were studied by PFGE with S1 nuclease digestion and 
for incompatibility group by a PCR-based replicon typing scheme. Risk factors
associated with CNSKP colonization/infection were assessed by an observational
case-control study. All 55 patients studied were infected (n = 28) or colonized
(n = 27) by VIM-1-producing K. pneumoniae. All but one acquired isolates of a
single clone (PFGE cluster 1 [C1], sequence type 15 [ST15]), while another clone 
(PFGE C2, ST340) was detected in four patients. C1 isolates also produced the new
extended-spectrum β-lactamase SHV-134. bla(VIM-1) was carried in a class 1
integron and an untypeable plasmid of ∼50 bp. The number of days that the patient
received mechanical ventilation, the use of parenteral nutrition, previous
treatment with linezolid, and treatment with extended-spectrum cephalosporins for
more than 7 days were detected to be independent risk factors for CNSKP
acquisition. The VIM-1-producing K. pneumoniae ST15 clone has a high capacity to 
spread among intensive care unit patients with severe underlying conditions. A
high rate of associated mortality and great difficulty in controlling the spread 
of this clone, without permanent behavioral changes in the personnel, were
observed.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.05036-11 
PMCID: PMC3256054
PMID: 22005997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

