
1. Genes Dev. 2011 Oct 15;25(20):2158-72. doi: 10.1101/gad.16962311.

The Cyclin K/Cdk12 complex maintains genomic stability via regulation of
expression of DNA damage response genes.

Blazek D(1), Kohoutek J, Bartholomeeusen K, Johansen E, Hulinkova P, Luo Z,
Cimermancic P, Ule J, Peterlin BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Microbiology, and Immunology, Rosalind Russell Medical
Research Center, University of California at San Francisco (UCSF), USA.
dblazek@med.muni.cz

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Mar 15;11(6):1049-50.

Various cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) complexes have been implicated in the
regulation of transcription. In this study, we identified a 70-kDa Cyclin K
(CycK) that binds Cdk12 and Cdk13 to form two different complexes (CycK/Cdk12 or 
CycK/Cdk13) in human cells. The CycK/Cdk12 complex regulates phosphorylation of
Ser2 in the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II and expression of a small
subset of human genes, as revealed in expression microarrays. Depletion of
CycK/Cdk12 results in decreased expression of predominantly long genes with high 
numbers of exons. The most prominent group of down-regulated genes are the DNA
damage response genes, including the critical regulators of genomic stability:
BRCA1 (breast and ovarian cancer type 1 susceptibility protein 1), ATR (ataxia
telangiectasia and Rad3-related), FANCI, and FANCD2. We show that CycK/Cdk12,
rather than CycK/Cdk13, is necessary for their expression. Nuclear run-on assays 
and chromatin immunoprecipitations with RNA polymerase II on the BRCA1 and FANCI 
genes suggest a transcriptional defect in the absence of CycK/Cdk12. Consistent
with these findings, cells without CycK/Cdk12 induce spontaneous DNA damage and
are sensitive to a variety of DNA damage agents. We conclude that through
regulation of expression of DNA damage response genes, CycK/Cdk12 protects cells 
from genomic instability. The essential role of CycK for organisms in vivo is
further supported by the result that genetic inactivation of CycK in mice causes 
early embryonic lethality.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.16962311 
PMCID: PMC3205586
PMID: 22012619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

