
1. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Feb;29(2):141-5. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.819. Epub 2011 Oct
20.

RNA-binding activity of the rat calmodulin-binding PEP-19 protein and of the long
PEP-19 isoform.

Saladino P(1), Di Liegro CM, Proia P, Sala A, Schiera G, Lo Cicero A, Di Liegro
I.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimenti di Scienze e Tecnologie Molecolari e Biomolecolari, Università
degli Studi di Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Synthesis of H1˚ histone protein, in the developing rat brain, seems to be
regulated mainly at the post-transcriptional level. Since regulation of RNA
metabolism depends on a series of RNA-binding proteins, we have been searching
for RNA-binding proteins involved in the post-transcriptional regulation of the
H1˚ gene. We recently reported isolation, from a cDNA expression library, of an
insert encoding a novel protein, the C-terminal half of which is identical to
that of PEP-19, a brain-specific protein involved in calcium metabolism. The
novel protein was called long PEP-19 isoform (LPI). Herein we show that LPI, as
well as PEP-19, can bind H1˚ RNA. Moreover, in order to improve production of
functional LPI/PEP-19, we modified the protocol normally adopted for preparing
histidine tagged-proteins from bacteria, by adding an additional purification
step. We also found that both LPI and PEP can compete for H1˚ RNA binding with
PIPPin (CSD-C2), another RNA-binding protein previously discovered in our
laboratory. Since PEP19/LPI contain a calmodulin binding domain, we finally
investigated whether their ability to bind RNA is affected by calmodulin. Our
results show that calmodulin interferes with binding of H1˚ RNA to both PEP-19
and LPI, while it is not able to bind RNA on its own. This finding suggests that 
calcium/calmodulin may have a role in controlling H1˚ mRNA metabolism in the
developing brain.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.819 
PMID: 22020791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

