
1. Apoptosis. 2012 Feb;17(2):154-63. doi: 10.1007/s10495-011-0666-1.

HepG2 cells infected with Klebsiella pneumoniae show DNA laddering at apoptotic
and necrotic stages.

Yang PY(1), Chen WX, Chang FY, Chen HW, Lin CH, Hsu YC, Wu JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, 259 Wen Hua 1 Road, Kwei San, Tao Yuan, 333, Taiwan.

Virulent Klebasiella pneumoniae (KP) inflicts severe liver abscesses in infected 
patients. This study investigated how the bacterial infection affected cell
survival at the molecular level, in a cultured cell model. A strain of KP highly 
virulent in mice was isolated from a patient with liver abscess, and was used to 
infect HepG2 cells. The infected cells were examined for their viability, DNA
fragmentation, and proteins involved in apoptosis or necrosis. We found that the 
infection decreased the viability of HepG2 cells at 4 hours (h) to 12 h post
infection (pi). DNA ladders appeared 6-16 h pi and flow cytometry analysis showed
apoptosis at 3-5 h pi, secondary necrosis at 6-9 h pi and primary necrosis at
8-9 h pi. Cleavages of Caspase 7, Caspase 9, α-Fodrin, and PARP were evident at
2-4 h pi. At 7 h pi, we observed the following: increased nuclear AIF, the
release from mitochondria of cytosolic Apaf-1 and Cyt c, increased DFF40
expression, decreased DFF45, decreased BcL-xL and the release of Endo G from
mitochondria to nucleus. Cellular ATP concentration decreased at 4-8 h pi,
accompanied by increased Calpain-2 expression. In summary, infected HepG2 cells
underwent apoptosis early after infection and progressed to secondary necrosis
and primary necrosis. Nuclear fragmentation corresponded to Caspase 7 activation 
and the appearance of Endo G and DFF40 in the nucleus, with a concomitant
decrease in DFF45. Mitochondrial release of Cyt c together with activation of
Caspase 9 and Apaf-1 in cytosol was also observed. Early-hour cleavage of
poly(ATP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) followed by the later activation of PARP
corresponded to the appearance of DNA laddering, and the depletion of cellular
ATP was associated with the appearance of necrosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s10495-011-0666-1 
PMID: 22038342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

