
1. J Biomol NMR. 2011 Dec;51(4):505-17. doi: 10.1007/s10858-011-9581-6. Epub 2011
Oct 30.

Asymmetry of (13)C labeled 3-pyruvate affords improved site specific labeling of 
RNA for NMR spectroscopy.

Thakur CS(1), Dayie TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Center for Biomolecular Structure & 
Organization, University of Maryland, College Park, USA.

Selective isotopic labeling provides an unparalleled window within which to study
the structure and dynamics of RNAs by high resolution NMR spectroscopy. Unlike
commonly used carbon sources, the asymmetry of (13)C-labeled pyruvate provides
selective labeling in both the ribose and base moieties of nucleotides using E.
coli variants, that until now were not feasible. Here we show that an E. coli
mutant strain that lacks succinate and malate dehydrogenases (DL323) and grown on
[3-(13)C]-pyruvate affords ribonucleotides with site specific labeling at C5'
(~95%) and C1' (~42%) and minimal enrichment elsewhere in the ribose ring.
Enrichment is also achieved at purine C2 and C8 (~95%) and pyrimidine C5 (~100%) 
positions with minimal labeling at pyrimidine C6 and purine C5 positions. These
labeling patterns contrast with those obtained with DL323 E. coli grown on [1,
3-(13)C]-glycerol for which the ribose ring is labeled in all but the C4' carbon 
position, leading to multiplet splitting of the C1', C2' and C3' carbon atoms.
The usefulness of these labeling patterns is demonstrated with a 27-nt RNA
fragment derived from the 30S ribosomal subunit. Removal of the strong magnetic
coupling within the ribose and base leads to increased sensitivity, substantial
simplification of NMR spectra, and more precise and accurate dynamic parameters
derived from NMR relaxation measurements. Thus these new labels offer valuable
probes for characterizing the structure and dynamics of RNA that were previously 
limited by the constraint of uniformly labeled nucleotides.

DOI: 10.1007/s10858-011-9581-6 
PMCID: PMC3222825
PMID: 22038649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

