
1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Nov 25;52(12):9188-94. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-7658.

A novel mechanism of increased infections in contact lens wearers.

Gordon GM(1), Moradshahi N, Jeong S, Lane C, Fini ME.

Author information: 
(1)University of Southern California Institute for Genetic Medicine, Keck School 
of Medicine of USC, University of Southern California, 1975 Zonal Avenue, Los
Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

PURPOSE: It is well documented that contact lens wearers have much higher
incidences of corneal infections compared with those of non-contact lens wearers,
although the exact cause(s) of this increased susceptibility has not been
identified. A distinct subset of mucins (MUCs) is present on the ocular surface, 
acting to protect the integrity of the corneal epithelium. This study was
performed to determine whether multipurpose contact lens solutions (MPCLSs) can
cause increased infections in the cornea by destroying the protective cell-bound 
mucin layer.
METHODS: An immortalized human corneal limbal epithelial cell line was treated in
the presence of four commonly used MPCLSs or PBS and the expression and release
of MUC-16 was assessed. Cells were also cultured with Pseudomonas aeruginosa
after MPCLS treatment and internalization of bacteria was assessed by
quantitative genomic PCR. Loss of MUC-16 was then correlated with infection
rates.
RESULTS: Each of the four commonly used MPCLSs examined in this study
differentially affected mucin release. The relative effect was correlated with an
increase in infection of corneal epithelial cells by P. aeruginosa.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study are consistent with the hypothesis that
MPCLSs cause increased infections in the cornea by destroying the protective
cell-bound mucin layer.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.11-7658 
PMCID: PMC3253543
PMID: 22039229  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

