
1. Helicobacter. 2011 Dec;16(6):452-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1523-5378.2011.00866.x.

Protease-activated receptor-2 (PAR2) in human gastric mucosa as mediator of
proinflammatory effects in Helicobacter pylori infection.

Kandulski A(1), Kuester D, Mönkemüller K, Fry L, Malfertheiner P, Wex T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases,
Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Leipziger Str. 44, 39120 Magdeburg,
Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Protease-activated receptors (PAR) are seven transmembrane
receptors that are expressed throughout the gastrointestinal tract. In vitro
experiments using gastric tumor cell lines, murine models and one clinical study 
provided evidence for a potential role of PAR2 in Helicobacter pylori-induced
gastritis.
AIM: To investigate PAR2 expression in H. pylori-infected patients and
correlation with proinflammatory IL-8, IL-1β as well as histologic changes of the
mucosa. Furthermore, PAR2 expression was studied in context to mucosal amounts of
secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor (SLPI), a putative regulator of PAR2.
METHODS: Twenty-two H. pylori-infected patients and 72 H. pylori-negative
subjects underwent upper GI endoscopy. In antrum-derived mucosal biopsies, PAR2, 
IL-1β, IL-8, and SLPI expression was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR, and in part
by ELISA and immunohistochemistry. Histopathologic evaluation of gastritis was
performed according to the updated Sydney classification.
RESULTS: IL-8 gene expression was 5-fold increased in the mucosa of H.
pylori-infected patients compared with non-infected (p < .0001), whereas no
differences for PAR2 and IL-1β mRNA amounts were observed between both groups.
PAR2 gene expression correlated positively with transcript levels of IL-8, IL-1β 
as well mucosal SLPI levels in H. pylori-infected patients (r: 0.47-0.84; p <
.0001), whereas no correlation was found with the degree of gastritis.
CONCLUSIONS: PAR2 represents an additive pathway of IL-8 secretion and
proinflammatory effects in H. pylori-induced gastritis. Reduced SLPI levels
leading to higher serine protease activities in the mucosa of infected subjects
might regulate PAR2 activation.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1523-5378.2011.00866.x 
PMID: 22059396  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

