
1. J Biomol Screen. 2012 Mar;17(3):327-38. doi: 10.1177/1087057111425188. Epub 2011 
Nov 7.

A homogeneous, high-throughput-compatible, fluorescence intensity-based assay for
UDP-N-acetylenolpyruvylglucosamine reductase (MurB) with nanomolar product
detection.

Shapiro AB(1), Livchak S, Gao N, Whiteaker J, Thresher J, JahiÄ‡ H, Huang J, Gu
RF.

Author information: 
(1)Bioscience Department, Infection Innovative Medicines, AstraZeneca R&D Boston,
Waltham, MA 02451, USA. adam.shapiro@astrazeneca.com

A novel assay for the NADPH-dependent bacterial enzyme
UDP-N-acetylenolpyruvylglucosamine reductase (MurB) is described that has
nanomolar sensitivity for product formation and is suitable for high-throughput
applications. MurB catalyzes an essential cytoplasmic step in the synthesis of
peptidoglycan for the bacterial cell wall, reduction of
UDP-N-acetylenolpyruvylglucosamine to UDP-N-acetylmuramic acid (UNAM).
Interruption of this biosynthetic pathway leads to cell death, making MurB an
attractive target for antibacterial drug discovery. In the new assay, the UNAM
product of the MurB reaction is ligated to L-alanine by the next enzyme in the
peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway, MurC, resulting in hydrolysis of adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) to adenosine diphosphate (ADP). The ADP is detected with
nanomolar sensitivity by converting it to oligomeric RNA with polynucleotide
phosphorylase and detecting the oligomeric RNA with a fluorescent dye. The
product sensitivity of the new assay is 1000-fold greater than that of the
standard assay that follows the absorbance decrease resulting from the conversion
of NADPH to NADP(+). This sensitivity allows inhibitor screening to be performed 
at the low substrate concentrations needed to make the assay sensitive to
competitive inhibition of MurB.

DOI: 10.1177/1087057111425188 
PMID: 22068704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

