
1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2012 Jan;304(1):15-22. doi: 10.1007/s00403-011-1189-x. Epub
2011 Nov 8.

Comparison of bacterial microbiota in skin biopsies from normal and psoriatic
skin.

Fahl√©n A(1), Engstrand L, Baker BS, Powles A, Fry L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute,
Solna, Sweden.

Microorganisms have been implicated in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. Previous
studies of psoriasis and normal skin have used swabs from the surface rather than
skin biopsies. In this study, biopsies were taken from 10 patients with psoriasis
and 12 control subjects from unmatched sites. Samples were analysed with massive 
parallel pyrosequencing on the 454 platform targeting the 16S rRNA gene and the
variable regions V3-V4. The samples grouped into 19 phyla, 265 taxon and 652
operational units (OTUs) at 97% identity. A cut-off abundance level was set at
1%. The three most common phyla in both normal and psoriasis skin were Firmicutes
(39% psoriasis, 43% normal skin), Proteobacteria (38% psoriasis, 27% normal skin)
and Actinobacteria (5% psoriasis, 16% normal skin, p = 0.034). In trunk skin,
Proteobacteria were present at significantly higher levels in psoriasis compared 
to controls (52 vs. 32%, p = 0.0113). The commonest genera were Streptococci in
both psoriasis (32%) and normal skin (26%). Staphylococci were less common in
psoriasis (5%) than in controls (16%), as were Propionibacteria (psoriasis
0.0001669%, controls 0.0254%). Both Staphylococci and Propionibacteria were
significantly lower in psoriasis versus control limb skin (p = 0.051, 0.046,
respectively). This study has shown some differences in microbiota between
psoriasis and normal skin. Whether these are of primary aetiological
significance, or secondary to the altered skin of psoriasis remains to be
determined.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-011-1189-x 
PMID: 22065152  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

