
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2012 Aug;95(3):789-98. doi: 10.1007/s00253-011-3706-4.
Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Biodegradation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons by a halophilic microbial
consortium.

Dastgheib SM(1), Amoozegar MA, Khajeh K, Shavandi M, Ventosa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran,
Iran.

In this study we investigated the phenanthrene degradation by a halophilic
consortium obtained from a saline soil sample. This consortium, named Qphe, could
efficiently utilize phenanthrene in a wide range of NaCl concentrations, from 1% 
to 17% (w/v). Since none of the purified isolates could degrade phenanthrene,
serial dilutions were performed and resulted in a simple polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon (PAH)-degrading culture named Qphe-SubIV which was shown to contain
one culturable Halomonas strain and one unculturable strain belonging to the
genus Marinobacter. Qphe-SubIV was shown to grow on phenanthrene at salinities as
high as 15% NaCl (w/v) and similarly to Qphe, at the optimal NaCl concentration
of 5% (w/v), could degrade more than 90% of the amended phenanthrene in 6Â days.
The comparison of the substrate range of the two consortiums showed that the
simplified culture had lost the ability to degrade chrysene but still could grow 
on other polyaromatic substrates utilized by Qphe. Metabolite analysis by HPLC
and GC-MS showed that 2-hydroxy 1-naphthoic acid and 2-naphthol were among the
major metabolites accumulated in the Qphe-SubIV culture media, indicating that an
initial dioxygenation step might proceed at C1 and C2 positions. By investigating
the growth ability on various substrates along with the detection of catechol
dioxygenase gene, it was postulated that the uncultured Marinobacter strain had
the central role in phenanthrene degradation and the Halomonas strain played an
auxiliary role in the culture by utilizing phenanthrene metabolites whose
accumulation in the media could be toxic.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-011-3706-4 
PMID: 22086071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

