
1. Langmuir. 2012 Jan 10;28(1):701-6. doi: 10.1021/la203795t. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Miscibility behavior and nanostructure of monolayers of the main phospholipids of
Escherichia coli inner membrane.

Picas L(1), Suárez-Germà C, Montero MT, Domènech Ò, Hernández-Borrell J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical-Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy and IN2UB, University of
Barcelona, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.

We report a thermodynamic study of the effect of calcium on the mixing properties
at the air-water interface of two phospholipids that mimic the inner membrane of 
Escherichia coli: 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine and
1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoglycerol. In this study, pure POPE and
POPG monolayers and three mixed monolayers, χ(POPE) = 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75, were
analyzed. We show that for χ(POPE) = 0.75, the values of the Gibbs energy of
mixing were negative, which implies attractive interactions. We used atomic force
microscopy to study the structural properties of Langmuir-Blodgett monolayers
that were transferred onto mica substrate at lateral surface pressures of 25 and 
30 mN m(-1). The topographic images of pure POPE and POPG monolayers exhibited
two domains of differing size and morphology, showing a step height difference
within the range expected for liquid-condensed and liquid-expanded phases. The
images captured for χ(POPE) = 0.25 were featureless, and for χ(POPE) = 0.5 small 
microdomains were observed. The composition that mimics quantitatively the
proportions found in the inner membrane of E. coli , χ(POPE) = 0.75, showed large
liquid condensed domains in the liquid expanded phase. The extension of each
domain was quantitatively analyzed. Because calcium is used in the formation of
supported bilayers of negatively charged phospholipids, the possible influence of
the nanostructure of the apical on the distal monolayer is discussed.

DOI: 10.1021/la203795t 
PMID: 22087507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

