
1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2012 May;35(3):521-30. doi: 10.1007/s10545-011-9416-3. Epub 
2011 Nov 17.

Bile acid-CoA ligase deficiency--a new inborn error of bile acid metabolism.

Chong CP(1), Mills PB, McClean P, Gissen P, Bruce C, Stahlschmidt J, Knisely AS, 
Clayton PT.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical & Molecular Genetics Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, London WC1N
1EH, UK.

Born at 27 weeks gestation, a child of consanguineous parents of Pakistani origin
required prolonged parenteral nutrition. She developed jaundice, with extensive
fibrosis and architectural distortion at liver biopsy; jaundice resolved with
supportive care. Serum Î³-glutamyl transpeptidase values were within normal
ranges. The bile acids in her plasma and urine were >85% unconjugated
(non-amidated). Two genes encoding bile-acid amidation enzymes were sequenced. No
mutations were found in BAAT, encoding bile acid-CoA : aminoacid N-acyl
transferase. The patient was homozygous for the missense mutation c.1012C > T in 
SLC27A5, predicted to alter a highly conserved amino-acid residue (p.H338Y) in
bile acid-CoA ligase (BACL). She also was homozygous for the missense mutation
c.1772A > G in ABCB11, predicted to alter a highly conserved amino-acid residue
(p.N591S) in bile salt export pump (BSEP). BACL is essential for reconjugation of
bile acids deconjugated by gut bacteria, and BSEP is essential for
hepatocyte-canaliculus export of conjugated bile acids. A female sibling born at 
term had the same bile-acid phenotype and SLC27A5 genotype, without clinical
liver disease. She was heterozygous for the c.1772A > G ABCB11 mutation. This is 
the first report of a mutation in SLC27A5. The amidation defect may have
contributed to cholestatic liver disease in the setting of prematurity,
parenteral nutrition, and homozygosity for an ABCB11 mutation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-011-9416-3 
PMID: 22089923  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

