
1. Biochemistry. 2011 Dec 13;50(49):10713-23. doi: 10.1021/bi201383c. Epub 2011 Nov 
14.

Importance of the C2, N7, and C8 positions to the mutagenic potential of
8-Oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine with two A family polymerases.

Hamm ML(1), Crowley KA, Ghio M, Del Giorno L, Gustafson MA, Kindler KE, Ligon CW,
Lindell MA, McFadden EJ, Siekavizza-Robles C, Summers MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Richmond, Gottwald B-100, Richmond,
Virginia 23173, United States. mhamm@richmond.edu

8-Oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine (OdG) is a prominent DNA lesion produced from the
reaction of 2'-deoxyguanosine (dG) with reactive oxygen species. While dG directs
the insertion of only dCTP during replication, OdG can direct the insertion of
either dCTP or dATP, allowing for the production of dG â†’ dT transversions. When
replicated by Klenow fragment-exo (KF-exo), OdG preferentially directs the
incorporation of dCTP over dATP, thus decreasing its mutagenic potential.
However, when replicated by a highly related polymerase, the large fragment of
polymerase I from Bacillus stearothermophilus (BF), dATP incorporation is
preferred, and a higher mutagenic potential results. To gain insight into the
reasons for this opposite preference and the effects of the C2, N7, and C8
positions on OdG mutagenicity, single-nucleotide insertions of dCTP and/or dATP
opposite dG, OdG, and seven of their analogues were examined by steady state
kinetics with both KF-exo and BF. Results from these studies suggest that the two
enzymes behave similarly and are both sensitive not only to steric and electronic
changes within the imidazole ring during both dCTP and dATP incorporation but
also to the presence of the C2-exocyclic amine during dATP incorporation. The
difference in incorporation preference opposite OdG appears to be due to a
somewhat increased sensitivity to structural perturbations during dCTP
incorporation with BF. Single-nucleotide extensions past the resulting base pairs
were also studied and were not only similar between the two enzymes but also
consistent with published ternary crystallographic studies with BF. These results
are analyzed in the context of previous biochemical and structural studies, as
well as stability studies with the resulting base pairs.

DOI: 10.1021/bi201383c 
PMID: 22081979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

