
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Jan 11;134(1):665-72. doi: 10.1021/ja209856x. Epub 2011 Dec
9.

Solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance studies delineate the role of the protein 
in activation of both aromatic rings of thiamin.

Balakrishnan A(1), Paramasivam S, Chakraborty S, Polenova T, Jordan F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Rutgers University, Newark, New Jersey 07102, USA.

Knowledge of the state of ionization and tautomerization of heteroaromatic
cofactors when enzyme-bound is essential for formulating a detailed stepwise
mechanism via proton transfers, the most commonly observed contribution to enzyme
catalysis. In the bifunctional coenzyme, thiamin diphosphate (ThDP), both
aromatic rings participate in catalysis, the thiazolium ring as an electrophilic 
covalent catalyst and the 4'-aminopyrimidine as acid-base catalyst involving its 
1',4'-iminopyrimidine tautomeric form. Two of four ionization and tautomeric
states of ThDP are well characterized via circular dichroism spectral signatures 
on several ThDP superfamily members. Yet, the method is incapable of providing
information about specific proton locations, which in principle may be accessible
via NMR studies. To determine the precise ionization/tautomerization states of
ThDP during various stages of the catalytic cycle, we report the first
application of solid-state NMR spectroscopy to ThDP enzymes, whose large mass
(160,000-250,000 Da) precludes solution NMR approaches. Three de novo synthesized
analogues, [C2,C6'-(13)C(2)]ThDP, [C2-(13)C]ThDP, and [N4'-(15)N]ThDP used with
three enzymes revealed that (a) binding to the enzymes activates both the
4'-aminopyrimidine (via pK(a) elevation) and the thiazolium rings (pK(a)
suppression); (b) detection of a pre-decarboxylation intermediate analogue using 
[C2,C6'-(13)C(2)]ThDP, enables both confirmation of covalent bond formation and
response in 4'-aminopyrimidine ring's tautomeric state to intermediate formation,
supporting the mechanism we postulate; and (c) the chemical shift of bound
[N4'-(15)N]ThDP provides plausible models for the participation of the
1',4'-iminopyrimidine tautomer in the mechanism. Unprecedented detail is achieved
about proton positions on this bifunctional coenzyme on large enzymes in their
active states.

Â© 2011 American Chemical Society

DOI: 10.1021/ja209856x 
PMCID: PMC3257386
PMID: 22092024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

