
1. J Bacteriol. 2012 Feb;194(3):607-16. doi: 10.1128/JB.06173-11. Epub 2011 Nov 18.

Substrate recognition mechanism and substrate-dependent conformational changes of
an ROK family glucokinase from Streptomyces griseus.

Miyazono K(1), Tabei N, Morita S, Ohnishi Y, Horinouchi S, Tanokura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Carbon catabolite repression (CCR) is a widespread phenomenon in many bacteria
that is defined as the repression of catabolic enzyme activities for an
unfavorable carbon source by the presence of a preferable carbon source. In
Streptomyces, secondary metabolite production often is negatively affected by the
carbon source, indicating the involvement of CCR in secondary metabolism.
Although the CCR mechanism in Streptomyces still is unclear, glucokinase is
presumably a central player in CCR. SgGlkA, a glucokinase from S. griseus,
belongs to the ROK family glucokinases, which have two consensus sequence motifs 
(1 and 2). Here, we report the crystal structures of apo-SgGlkA, SgGlkA in
complex with glucose, and SgGlkA in complex with glucose and adenylyl
imidodiphosphate (AMPPNP), which are the first structures of an ROK family
glucokinase. SgGlkA is divided into a small α/β domain and a large α+β domain,
and it forms a dimer-of-dimer tetrameric configuration. SgGlkA binds a β-anomer
of glucose between the two domains, and His157 in consensus sequence 1 plays an
important role in the glucose-binding mechanism and anomer specificity of SgGlkA.
In the structures of SgGlkA, His157 forms an HC3-type zinc finger motif with
three cysteine residues in consensus sequence 2 to bind a zinc ion, and it forms 
two hydrogen bonds with the C1 and C2 hydroxyls of glucose. When the three
structures are compared, the structure of SgGlkA is found to be modified by the
binding of substrates. The substrate-dependent conformational changes of SgGlkA
may be related to the CCR mechanism in Streptomyces.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.06173-11 
PMCID: PMC3264092
PMID: 22101842  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

