
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 2;287(1):757-766. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.305219. Epub 2011
Nov 21.

The ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway is used in place of the glyoxylate cycle by
Methylobacterium extorquens AM1 during growth on acetate.

Schneider K(1), Peyraud R(1), Kiefer P(1), Christen P(1), Delmotte N(1), Massou
S(2), Portais JC(2), Vorholt JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Université de Toulouse, Institut National des Sciences Appliquées, Université 
Paul Sabatier, Institut National Polytechnique de Toulouse, Laboratoire
D'Ingénierie des Systèmes Biologiques et des Procédés, F-31077 Toulouse, France; 
INRA, UMR792, Ingénierie des Systèmes Biologiques et des Procédés, F-31400
Toulouse, France; CNRS, UMR5504, F-31400 Toulouse, France.
(3)Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic
address: vorholt@micro.biol.ethz.ch.

Acetyl-CoA assimilation was extensively studied in organisms harboring the
glyoxylate cycle. In this study, we analyzed the metabolism of the facultative
methylotroph Methylobacterium extorquens AM1, which lacks isocitrate lyase, the
key enzyme in the glyoxylate cycle, during growth on acetate. MS/MS-based
proteomic analysis revealed that the protein repertoire of M. extorquens AM1
grown on acetate is similar to that of cells grown on methanol and includes
enzymes of the ethylmalonyl-CoA (EMC) pathway that were recently shown to operate
during growth on methanol. Dynamic 13C labeling experiments indicate the presence
of distinct entry points for acetate: the EMC pathway and the TCA cycle. 13C
steady-state metabolic flux analysis showed that oxidation of acetyl-CoA occurs
predominantly via the TCA cycle and that assimilation occurs via the EMC pathway.
Furthermore, acetyl-CoA condenses with the EMC pathway product glyoxylate,
resulting in malate formation. The latter, also formed by the TCA cycle, is
converted to phosphoglycerate by a reaction sequence that is reversed with
respect to the serine cycle. Thus, the results obtained in this study reveal the 
utilization of common pathways during the growth of M. extorquens AM1 on C1 and
C2 compounds, but with a major redirection of flux within the central metabolism.
Furthermore, our results indicate that the metabolic flux distribution is highly 
complex in this model methylotroph during growth on acetate and is fundamentally 
different from organisms using the glyoxylate cycle.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.305219 
PMCID: PMC3249130
PMID: 22105076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

