
1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002355. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002355. Epub
2011 Nov 10.

Novel anti-bacterial activities of β-defensin 1 in human platelets: suppression
of pathogen growth and signaling of neutrophil extracellular trap formation.

Kraemer BF(1), Campbell RA, Schwertz H, Cody MJ, Franks Z, Tolley ND, Kahr WH,
Lindemann S, Seizer P, Yost CC, Zimmerman GA, Weyrich AS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Program, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United
States of America.

Human β-defensins (hBD) are antimicrobial peptides that curb microbial activity. 
Although hBD's are primarily expressed by epithelial cells, we show that human
platelets express hBD-1 that has both predicted and novel antibacterial
activities. We observed that activated platelets surround Staphylococcus aureus
(S. aureus), forcing the pathogens into clusters that have a reduced growth rate 
compared to S. aureus alone. Given the microbicidal activity of β-defensins, we
determined whether hBD family members were present in platelets and found mRNA
and protein for hBD-1. We also established that hBD-1 protein resided in
extragranular cytoplasmic compartments of platelets. Consistent with this
localization pattern, agonists that elicit granular secretion by platelets did
not readily induce hBD-1 release. Nevertheless, platelets released hBD-1 when
they were stimulated by α-toxin, a S. aureus product that permeabilizes target
cells. Platelet-derived hBD-1 significantly impaired the growth of clinical
strains of S. aureus. hBD-1 also induced robust neutrophil extracellular trap
(NET) formation by target polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs), which is a novel
antimicrobial function of β-defensins that was not previously identified. Taken
together, these data demonstrate that hBD-1 is a previously-unrecognized
component of platelets that displays classic antimicrobial activity and, in
addition, signals PMNs to extrude DNA lattices that capture and kill bacteria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002355 
PMCID: PMC3213094
PMID: 22102811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

