
1. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2011;28(3):559-70. doi: 10.1159/000335120. Epub 2011 Nov
18.

Pendrin overexpression affects cell volume recovery, intracellular pH and
chloride concentration after hypotonicity-induced cell swelling.

Rodighiero S(1), Bottà G, Bazzini C, Meyer G.

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione Filarete, Milan, Italy. simona.rodighiero@fondazionefilarete.com

The pendrin (SLC26A4 or PDS) gene is responsible, when mutated, for the Pendred
syndrome, a recessive disorder characterized by sensorineural hearing loss often 
accompanied by thyroid dysfunctions. Pendrin protein is an anion exchanger and we
focused on a still unexplored function that it might play in view of its
importance in the inner ear: Cl(-) fluxes regulation during cellular volume
control. We challenged HEK-293 Phoenix cells over-expressing wild type pendrin
(PDS HEK cells) together with the EYFP (Enhanced Yellow Fluorescent Protein) or
over-expressing the EYFP alone (control HEK cells) with hypo-osmolar solutions.
Taking advantage of the confocal optical sectioning we measured the cell volume. 
In addition, we determined the intracellular pH and chloride concentration with
fluorescent probes (EYFP and seminaphthorhodafluor-5F, SNARF-5F). Consequently,
we could estimate simultaneously Cl(-) fluxes, cellular volume and intracellular 
pH variations. Cl(-) movements markedly differed between PDS and control HEK
cells upon hypotonic shock and are accompanied by an attenuation of the swelling 
induced pH drop in PDS HEK cells. The contemporary measurements of the three
variables not yet reported in living cells, allowed to assess a possible
influence of pendrin upregulation in volume homeostasis and evidenced its
participation to Cl(-) fluxes.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000335120 
PMID: 22116371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

