
1. Biofouling. 1996;10(1-3):65-77. doi: 10.1080/08927019609386271.

Comparative studies of bacterial biofilms on steel surfaces using atomic force
microscopy and environmental scanning electron microscopy.

Beech IB(1), Cheung CW, Johnson DB, Smith JR.

Author information: 
(1)a School of Chemistry, Physics and Radiography , University of Portsmouth ,
St. Michael's Building, White Swan Road , Portsmouth , PO1 2DT , UK.

Environmental scanning electron microscopy (ESEM) and atomic force microscopy
(AFM) were compared as tools for the observation of bacterial biofilms developed 
on carbon steel and AISI 316 stainless steel surfaces under stagnant conditions. 
Biofilms were generated in batch cultures of two different isolates of marine
sulphate reducing bacteria (SRB) and in cultures consisting of mixed populations 
of acidophilic bacteria, known as "acid streamers";. Imaging of single SRB cells 
on mica was also carried out to reveal the surface topography of individual
bacterial cells at nanometre resolution. Following the removal of biofilms, the
stainless steel surfaces were profiled using AFM to determine the degree of steel
deterioration. ESEM and AFM studies of bacterial biofilms in-situ, gave both
qualitative and quantitative information on biofilm structure at high resolution.
The use of AFM image analysis software allowed estimation of the width and height
of bacterial cells, the thickness and width of exopolymeric (EPS) capsule and
bacterial flagella, as well as characterisation of the surface roughness of the
steel, including measurements of depth and diameter of individual pits. Exposure 
of stainless steel specimens to acid streamers resulted in a significant increase
in the surface roughness of the steel, compared to specimens placed in sterile
medium.

DOI: 10.1080/08927019609386271 
PMID: 22115103 

