
1. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2011;28(3):407-22. doi: 10.1159/000335104. Epub 2011 Nov
16.

STAS domain structure and function.

Sharma AK(1), Rigby AC, Alper SL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Vascular Medicine Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
aksharma@bidmc.harvard.edu

Pendrin shares with nearly all SLC26/SulP anion transporters a carboxy-terminal
cytoplasmic segment organized around a Sulfate Transporter and Anti-Sigma factor 
antagonist (STAS) domain. STAS domains of divergent amino acid sequence exhibit a
conserved fold of 4 β strands interspersed among 5 α helices. The first STAS
domain proteins studied were single-domain anti-sigma factor antagonists
(anti-anti-σ). These anti-anti-σ indirectly stimulate bacterial RNA polymerase by
inactivating inhibitory anti-σ kinases, liberating σ factors to direct specific
transcription of target genes or operons. Some STAS domains are
nucleotide-binding phosphoproteins or nucleotidases. Others are
interaction/transduction modules within multidomain sensors of light, oxygen and 
other gasotransmitters, cyclic nucleotides, inositol phosphates, and G proteins. 
Additional multidomain STAS protein sequences suggest functions in sensing,
metabolism, or transport of nutrients such as sugars, amino acids, lipids,
anions, vitamins, or hydrocarbons. Still other multidomain STAS polypeptides
include histidine and serine/threonine kinase domains and ligand-activated
transcription factor domains. SulP/SLC26 STAS domains and adjacent sequences
interact with other transporters, cytoskeletal scaffolds, and with enzymes
metabolizing transported anion substrates, forming putative metabolons. STAS
domains are central to membrane targeting of many SulP/SLC26 anion transporters, 
and STAS domain mutations are associated with at least three human recessive
diseases. This review summarizes STAS domain structure and function.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000335104 
PMCID: PMC3709189
PMID: 22116355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

