
1. BMC Pediatr. 2011 Nov 23;11:108. doi: 10.1186/1471-2431-11-108.

Lymphocyte apoptosis in children with central nervous system tuberculosis: a case
control study.

Di Carlo P(1), Casuccio A, Romano A, Spicola D, Titone L, Caccamo N, Dieli F,
Mammina C, Pace E, Gjomarkaj M, Melis M, Tolomeo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sciences for Health Promotion, University of Palermo, Via del
Vespro 133, Palermo I-90127, Italy. paola.dicarlo@unipa.it

BACKGROUND: Studies of the apoptosis mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of
tuberculosis have suggested that Mycobacterium tuberculosis can actively
interfere with the apoptosis of infected cells. In vivo studies have been
performed in adult populations but have not focused on this process in children. 
In the present study, we analyzed spontaneous T lymphocyte (PBT) apoptosis in the
peripheral blood of children with central nervous system tuberculosis (CNS TB),
before and after chemotherapy, and compared the results with healthy controls.
METHODS: A case-control study was conducted from January 2002 to June 2009. It
included 18 children with CNS TB and 17 healthy controls. Spontaneous apoptosis
of PBTs, including CD4+, CD8+ and CD8+/CD28+ T cells, was evaluated after 24 and 
72 h of culture in complete medium, using the Annexin V detection test. Analysis 
was conducted before and after chemotherapy, and expression of the apoptotic
markers CD95 (Fas) and Fas ligand (FasL) was evaluated.
RESULTS: Higher percentages of apoptotic T cells and CD4 lymphocytes were
isolated from children with acute phase CNS TB than from children in the control 
group (p < 0.05). This difference significantly decreased after 60 days of
specific treatment. In children with CNS TB, high levels of Fas ligand expression
were detected in lymphocyte populations, associated with a high percentage of Fas
positive cells, before and after treatment. In contrast to the CD4+ apoptosis
profile, we did not find any significant difference in total CD8+ cell apoptosis 
between children with acute phase disease and the control group. However, the
percentage of apoptotic CD8+/CD28+ T cells was significantly higher in the
children with acute phase disease than in the healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that CNS TB in pediatric patients increases
the sensitivity of CD4 and CD8+/CD28+ T cells to apoptosis, suggesting a
hypoergic status of this infection. This could play a key role in the
immunopathogenesis of this complicated form of TB. Interestingly, specific
chemotherapy is able to normalize both apoptosis sensitivity and T-cell
activation.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2431-11-108 
PMCID: PMC3282674
PMID: 22111973  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

