
1. J Infect. 2012 Jan;64(1):1-18. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2011.11.001. Epub 2011 Nov 17.

Guidelines for prevention and control of group A streptococcal infection in acute
healthcare and maternity settings in the UK.

Steer JA(1), Lamagni T, Healy B, Morgan M, Dryden M, Rao B, Sriskandan S, George 
R, Efstratiou A, Baker F, Baker A, Marsden D, Murphy E, Fry C, Irvine N, Hughes
R, Wade P, Cordery R, Cummins A, Oliver I, Jokinen M, McMenamin J, Kearney J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Derriford Hospital, Plymouth, UK.

Hospital outbreaks of group A streptococcal (GAS) infection can be devastating
and occasionally result in the death of previously well patients. Approximately
one in ten cases of severe GAS infection is healthcare-associated. This guidance,
produced by a multidisciplinary working group, provides an evidence-based
systematic approach to the investigation of single cases or outbreaks of
healthcare-associated GAS infection in acute care or maternity settings. The
guideline recommends that all cases of GAS infection potentially acquired in
hospital or through contact with healthcare or maternity services should be
investigated. Healthcare workers, the environment, and other patients are
possible sources of transmission. Screening of epidemiologically linked
healthcare workers should be considered for healthcare-associated cases of GAS
infection where no alternative source is readily identified. Communal facilities,
such as baths, bidets and showers, should be cleaned and decontaminated between
all patients especially on delivery suites, post-natal wards and other high risk 
areas. Continuous surveillance is required to identify outbreaks which arise over
long periods of time. GAS isolates from in-patients, peri-partum patients,
neonates, and post-operative wounds should be saved for six months to facilitate 
outbreak investigation. These guidelines do not cover diagnosis and treatment of 
GAS infection which should be discussed with an infection specialist.

Crown Copyright Â© 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2011.11.001 
PMID: 22120112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

