
1. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2011 Dec 1;67(Pt 12):1658-61.
doi: 10.1107/S1744309111043740. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

Preliminary X-ray crystallographic studies on acetate kinase (AckA) from
Salmonella typhimurium in two crystal forms.

Chittori S(1), Savithri HS, Murthy MR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka, 
India.

Acetate kinase (AckA) catalyzes the reversible transfer of a phosphate group from
acetyl phosphate to ADP, generating acetate and ATP, and plays a central role in 
carbon metabolism. In the present work, the gene corresponding to AckA from
Salmonella typhimurium (StAckA) was cloned in the IPTG-inducible pRSET C vector, 
resulting in the attachment of a hexahistidine tag to the N-terminus of the
expressed enzyme. The recombinant protein was overexpressed, purified and
crystallized in two different crystal forms using the microbatch-under-oil
method. Form I crystals diffracted to 2.70 Å resolution when examined using
X-rays from a rotating-anode X-ray generator and belonged to the monoclinic space
group C2, with unit-cell parameters a = 283.16, b = 62.17, c = 91.69 Å, β =
93.57°. Form II crystals, which diffracted to a higher resolution of 2.35 Å on
the rotating-anode X-ray generator and to 1.90 Å on beamline BM14 of the ESRF,
Grenoble, also belonged to space group C2 but with smaller unit-cell parameters
(a = 151.01, b = 78.50, c = 97.48 Å, β = 116.37°). Calculation of Matthews
coefficients for the two crystal forms suggested the presence of four and two
protomers of StAckA in the asymmetric units of forms I and II, respectively.
Initial phases for the form I diffraction data were obtained by molecular
replacement using the coordinates of Thermotoga maritima AckA (TmAckA) as the
search model. The form II structure was phased using a monomer of form I as the
phasing model. Inspection of the initial electron-density maps suggests dramatic 
conformational differences between residues 230 and 300 of the two crystal forms 
and warrants further investigation.

DOI: 10.1107/S1744309111043740 
PMCID: PMC3232164
PMID: 22139191  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

