
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2012 Feb 1;153(1-2):106-13. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2011.10.023. Epub 2011 Nov 6.

Identification and characterization of Lactobacillus florum strains isolated from
South African grape and wine samples.

Mtshali PS(1), Divol B, du Toit M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Wine Biotechnology, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South
Africa.

A total of 213 strains of lactic acid bacteria were examined in this study. Among
these, 30 strains previously isolated from South African grape and wine samples
remained unidentified. The identification of these isolates was performed by
BLAST and phylogenetic analyses of 16S rDNA gene sequences, which indicated that 
the isolates belonged to Lactobacillus florum. In this work, we also designed a
discriminative species-specific primer FLOR targeting the 16S rDNA gene of Lb.
florum. The validity and specificity of this primer was confirmed. Of particular 
interest in this study was to further evaluate the identified strains for the
presence of genes encoding enzymes of oenological relevance. Reference strains
included three flower-associated Lb. florum (F9-1(T), F9-2 and F17) and two
Lactobacillus lindneri (AWRI B530 and DSM 20691) strains. Lb. lindneri strains
were incorporated as being the closest relatives of Lb. florum. PCR detection
results revealed that all Lb. florum strains and Lb. lindneri AWRI B530 (grape
isolate) possessed the majority of the tested genes relative to DSM 20691 (beer
isolate); these enzyme-encoding genes included malolactic enzyme, peptidases
(PepC, PepI, PepN), citrate lyase (α- and β-subunits), phenolic acid
decarboxylase and arginine deiminase pathway enzymes (arginine deiminase and
ornithine transcarbamylase). Sequence verification of PCR-generated fragments was
performed by sequencing. The sequence data were used to construct the
phylogenetic trees, which indicated that our Lb. florum isolates cluster with
other Lb. florum strains of flower origin but rather distinct from other LAB
species, with Lb. lindneri being the next closest species.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2011.10.023 
PMID: 22137250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

