
1. J Immunol. 2012 Jan 1;188(1):386-93. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102162. Epub 2011 Nov
30.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa alkaline protease blocks complement activation via the
classical and lectin pathways.

Laarman AJ(1), Bardoel BW, Ruyken M, Fernie J, Milder FJ, van Strijp JA,
Rooijakkers SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The complement system rapidly detects and kills Gram-negative bacteria and
supports bacterial killing by phagocytes. However, bacterial pathogens exploit
several strategies to evade detection by the complement system. The alkaline
protease (AprA) of Pseudomonas aeruginosa has been associated with bacterial
virulence and is known to interfere with complement-mediated lysis of
erythrocytes, but its exact role in bacterial complement escape is unknown. In
this study, we analyzed how AprA interferes with complement activation and
whether it could block complement-dependent neutrophil functions. We found that
AprA potently blocked phagocytosis and killing of Pseudomonas by human
neutrophils. Furthermore, AprA inhibited opsonization of bacteria with C3b and
the formation of the chemotactic agent C5a. AprA specifically blocked C3b
deposition via the classical and lectin pathways, whereas the alternative pathway
was not affected. Serum degradation assays revealed that AprA degrades both human
C1s and C2. However, repletion assays demonstrated that the mechanism of action
for complement inhibition is cleavage of C2. In summary, we showed that P.
aeruginosa AprA interferes with classical and lectin pathway-mediated complement 
activation via cleavage of C2.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102162 
PMID: 22131330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

