
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Dec 20;108(51):20707-12. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1108776109. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Characteristics of Borrelia hermsii infection in human hematopoietic stem
cell-engrafted mice mirror those of human relapsing fever.

Vuyyuru R(1), Liu H, Manser T, Alugupalli KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Rodents are natural reservoirs for a variety of species of Borrelia that cause
relapsing fever (RF) in humans. The murine model of this disease recapitulates
many of the clinical manifestations of the human disease and has revealed that T 
cell-independent antibody responses are required to resolve the bacteremic
episodes. However, it is not clear whether such protective humoral responses are 
mounted in humans. We examined Borrelia hermsii infection in human hematopoietic 
stem cell-engrafted nonobese diabetic/SCID/IL-2RÎ³(null) mice: "human immune
system mice" (HISmice). Infection of these mice, which are severely deficient in 
lymphoid and myeloid compartments, with B. hermsii resulted in persistent
bacteremia. In contrast, this infection in HISmice resulted in recurrent episodes
of bacteremia, the hallmark of RF. The resolution of the primary episode of
bacteremia was concurrent with the generation of B. hermsii-specific human IgM.
Remarkably, HISmice generated antibody responses to the B. hermsii outer-membrane
protein Factor H binding protein A. Sera from humans infected by B. hermsii have 
a similar reactivity, and studies in mice have shown that this response is
generated by the B1b cell subset. HISmice contain several B-cell subsets,
including those with the phenotype CD20(+)CD27(+)CD43(+)CD70(-), a proposed human
equivalent of mouse B1 cells. Reduction of B cells by administration of
anti-human CD20 antibody resulted in diminished anti-B. hermsii responses and
persistent bacteremia in HISmice. These data indicate that analysis of B. hermsii
infection in HISmice will serve as a model in which to study the cellular and
molecular mechanisms involved in controlling human RF.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1108776109 
PMCID: PMC3251092
PMID: 22143787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

