
1. Radiat Res. 2012 Mar;177(3):251-64. Epub 2011 Dec 7.

Low-dose total-body γ irradiation modulates immune response to acute proton
radiation.

Luo-Owen X(1), Pecaut MJ, Rizvi A, Gridley DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Radiation Research Laboratories, Divisions
of Biochemistry and Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, Loma Linda University and 
Medical Center, Loma Linda, California, USA.

Erratum in
    Radiat Res. 2012 Jun;177(6):827.

Health risks due to exposure to low-dose/low-dose-rate radiation alone or when
combined with acute irradiation are not yet clearly defined. This study
quantified the effects of protracted exposure to low-dose/low-dose-rate γ rays
with and without acute exposure to protons on the response of immune and other
cell populations. C57BL/6 mice were irradiated with ⁵⁷Co (0.05 Gy at 0.025
cGy/h); subsets were subsequently exposed to high-dose/high-dose-rate proton
radiation (250 MeV; 2 or 3 Gy at 0.5 Gy/min). Analyses were performed at 4 and 17
days postexposure. Spleen and thymus masses relative to body mass were decreased 
on day 4 after proton irradiation with or without pre-exposure to γ rays; by day 
17, however, the decrease was attenuated by the priming dose. Proton
dose-dependent decreases, either with or without pre-exposure to γ rays, occurred
in white blood cell, lymphocyte and granulocyte counts in blood but not in
spleen. A similar pattern was found for lymphocyte subpopulations, including CD3+
T, CD19+ B, CD4+ T, CD8+ T and NK1.1+ natural killer (NK) cells. Spontaneous DNA 
synthesis by leukocytes after proton irradiation was high in blood on day 4 and
high in spleen on day 17; priming with γ radiation attenuated the effect of 3 Gy 
in both body compartments. Some differences were also noted among groups in
erythrocyte and thrombocyte characteristics. Analysis of splenocytes activated
with anti-CD3/anti-CD28 antibodies showed changes in T-helper 1 (Th1) and Th2
cytokines. Overall, the data demonstrate that pre-exposure of an intact mammal to
low-dose/low-dose-rate γ rays can attenuate the response to acute exposure to
proton radiation with respect to at least some cell populations.

DOI: 10.1667/rr2785.1 
PMID: 22149957  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

