
1. J Immunol. 2012 Jan 15;188(2):569-77. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101446. Epub 2011
Dec 7.

The nature of an in vivo anti-capsular polysaccharide response is markedly
influenced by the composition and/or architecture of the bacterial subcapsular
domain.

Arjunaraja S(1), Massari P, Wetzler LM, Lees A, Colino J, Snapper CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

In vivo anti-polysaccharide Ig responses to isolated polysaccharide (PS) are T
cell independent, rapid, and fail to generate memory. However, little is known
regarding PS-specific Ig responses to intact gram-positive and gram-negative
extracellular bacteria. We previously demonstrated that intact heat-killed
Streptococcus pneumoniae, a gram-positive bacterium, elicited a rapid primary
pneumococcal capsular PS (PPS) response in mice that was dependent on CD4(+) T
cells, B7-dependent costimulation, and CD40-CD40L interactions. However, this
response was ICOS independent and failed to generate a boosted PPS-specific
secondary IgG response. In the current study, we analyzed the murine
meningococcal type C PS (MCPS)-specific Ig response to i.p.-injected intact,
heat-killed Neisseria meningitidis, serogroup C (MenC), a gram-negative
bacterium. In contrast to S. pneumoniae, the IgG anti-MCPS response to MenC
exhibited delayed primary kinetics and was highly boosted after secondary
immunization, whereas the IgG anti-MCPS response to isolated MCPS was rapid,
without secondary boosting, and consisted of only IgG1 and IgG3, as opposed to
all four IgG isotypes in response to intact MenC. The secondary, but not primary,
IgG anti-MCPS response to MenC was dependent on CD4(+) T cells, CD40L, CD28, and 
ICOS. The primary and secondary IgG anti-MCPS responses were lower in
TLR4-defective (C3H/HeJ) but not TLR2(-/-) or MyD88(-/-) mice, but secondary
boosting was still observed. Of interest, coimmunization of S. pneumoniae and
MenC resulted in a boosted secondary IgG anti-PPS response to S. pneumoniae. Our 
data demonstrate that the nature of the in vivo anti-PS response is markedly
influenced by the composition and/or architecture of the bacterial subcapsular
domain.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101446 
PMCID: PMC3253264
PMID: 22156342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

