
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2012 Mar;82(1):174-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2011.11.017. Epub
2011 Dec 8.

Ubiquitin-intein and SUMO2-intein fusion systems for enhanced protein production 
and purification.

Wang Z(1), Li N, Wang Y, Wu Y, Mu T, Zheng Y, Huang L, Fang X.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, PR China.

Erratum in
    Protein Expr Purif. 2012 Nov;86(1):82.

Although most commonly used for protein production, expression of soluble and
functional recombinant protein in Escherichia coli is still a major challenge.
The development and application of fusion tags that can facilitate protein
expression and solubility partly solve this problem, however, under most
circumstance, the fusion tags have to be removed by proteases in order to use the
proteins. Because the tag removal using proteases increases cost and introduces
extra purification steps, it remains a significant problem that must be resolved 
before being widely used in industry production. Ubiquitin and SUMO have been
successfully used to enhance protein expression and solubility. In the last
decades, intein has also been widely used in protein production for its
self-cleavage property, which could help to remove the fusion tag without any
protease. Here, we take the advantages of ubiquitin, SUMO2 and intein in protein 
expression. We constructed tandem ubiquitin-intein and SUMO2-intein fusion tags, 
and chose human MMP13 (amino acid 104-274) and eGFP as the passenger proteins
that fused to the C-terminus of the tags. These constructs were expressed in E.
coli and both MMP13 and eGFP expression and solubility were evaluated. Both tags 
showed the ability to enhance the solubility of MMP13 and eGFP and improve the
expression of eGFP, and the SUMO2-intein having a more significant effect. Both
ubiquitin-intein-eGFP and SUMO2-intein-eGFP were purified using Ni-NTA column
chromatography and self-cleavaged by changing pH. The recombinant un-tagged eGFP 
were released and eluted with high homogeneity. In summary, ubiquitin-intein and 
SUMO2-intein are convenient and useful fusion tags that can enhance the
expression, solubility and improve the purification process of the model
heterologous protein and these tags may have a good prospect in protein
production.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2011.11.017 
PMID: 22178731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

