
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2012 Mar;50(3):735-41. doi: 10.1128/JCM.05872-11. Epub 2011 Dec
14.

Occurrence of putative virulence genes in arcobacter species isolated from humans
and animals.

Douidah L(1), de Zutter L, Bar√© J, De Vos P, Vandamme P, Vandenberg O, Van den
Abeele AM, Houf K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Public Health and Food Safety, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium.

Interest in arcobacters in veterinary and human public health has increased since
the first report of the isolation of arcobacters from food of animal origin.
Since then, studies worldwide have reported the occurrence of arcobacters on food
and in food production animals and have highlighted possible transmission,
especially of Arcobacter butzleri, to the human population. In humans,
arcobacters are associated with enteritis and septicemia. To assess their
clinical relevance for humans and animals, evaluation of potential virulence
factors is required. However, up to now, little has been known about the
mechanisms of pathogenicity. Because of their close phylogenetic affiliation to
the food-borne pathogen Campylobacter and their similar clinical manifestations, 
the presence of nine putative Campylobacter virulence genes (cadF, ciaB, cj1349, 
hecA, hecB, irgA, mviN, pldA, and tlyA) previously identified in the recent
Arcobacter butzleri ATCC 49616 genome sequence was determined in a large set of
human and animal Arcobacter butzleri, Arcobacter cryaerophilus, and Arcobacter
skirrowii strains after the development of rapid and accurate PCR assays and
confirmed by sequencing and dot blot hybridization.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.05872-11 
PMCID: PMC3295157
PMID: 22170914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

