
1. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jan 1;11(1):119-31. doi: 10.4161/cc.11.1.18475. Epub 2012 Jan 1.

The HARE-HTH and associated domains: novel modules in the coordination of
epigenetic DNA and protein modifications.

Aravind L(1), Iyer LM.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. aravind@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov

Human ASXL proteins, orthologs of Drosophila Additional Sex combs, have been
implicated in conjunction with TET2 as a major target for mutations and
translocations leading to a wide range of myeloid leukemias, related
myelodysplastic conditions (ASXL1 and ASXL2) and the Bohring-Opitz syndrome, a
developmental disorder (ASXL1). Using sensitive sequence and structure comparison
methods, we show that most animal ASXL proteins contain a novel N-terminal domain
that is also found in several other eukaryotic chromatin proteins, diverse
restriction endonucleases and DNA glycosylases, the RNA polymerase delta subunit 
of Gram-positive bacteria and certain bacterial proteins that combine features of
the RNA polymerase Î±-subunit and sigma factors. This domain adopts the winged
helix-turn-helix fold and is predicted to bind DNA. Based on its domain
architectural contexts, we present evidence that this domain might play an
important role, both in eukaryotes and bacteria, in the recruitment of diverse
effector activities, including the Polycomb repressive complexes, to DNA,
depending on the state of epigenetic modifications such as 5-methylcytosine and
its oxidized derivatives. In other eukaryotic chromatin proteins, this predicted 
DNA-binding domain is fused to a region with three conserved motifs that are also
found in diverse eukaryotic chromatin proteins, such as the animal BAZ/WAL
proteins, plant HB1 and MBD9, yeast Itc1p and Ioc3, RSF1, CECR2 and NURF1. Based 
on the crystal structure of Ioc3, we establish that these motifs in conjunction
with the DDT motif constitute a structural determinant that is central to
nucleosomal repositioning by the ISWI clade of SWI2/SNF2 ATPases. We also show
that the central domain of the ASXL proteins (ASXH domain) is conserved outside
of animals in fungi and plants, where it is combined with other domains,
suggesting that it might be an ancient module mediating interactions between
chromatin-linked protein complexes and transcription factors via its conserved
LXLLL motif. We present evidence that the C-terminal PHD finger of ASXL protein
has certain peculiar structural modifications that might allow it to recognize
internal modified lysines other than those from the N terminus of histone H3,
making it the mediator of previously unexpected interactions in chromatin.

DOI: 10.4161/cc.11.1.18475 
PMCID: PMC3272235
PMID: 22186017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

