
1. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Feb 15;318(4):336-49. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.12.008. Epub
2011 Dec 17.

Differential effects on cell motility, embryonic stem cell self-renewal and
senescence by diverse Src kinase family inhibitors.

Tamm C(1), Galitó SP, Annerén C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. christoffer.tamm@imbim.uu.se

The Src family of non-receptor tyrosine kinases (SFKs) has been shown to play an 
intricate role in embryonic stem (ES) cell maintenance. In the present study we
have focused on the underlying molecular mechanisms responsible for the vastly
different effects induced by various commonly used SFK inhibitors. We show that
several diverse cell types, including fibroblasts completely lacking SFKs, cannot
undergo mitosis in response to SU6656 and that this is caused by an unselective
inhibition of Aurora kinases. In contrast, PP2 and PD173952 block motility
immediately upon exposure and forces cells to grow in dense colonies. The
subsequent halt in proliferation of fibroblast and epithelial cells in the center
of the colonies approximately 24 h post-treatment appears to be caused by
cell-to-cell contact inhibition rather than a direct effect of SFK kinase
inhibition. Interestingly, in addition to generating more homogenous and dense ES
cell cultures, without any diverse effect on proliferation, PP2 and PD173652 also
promote ES cell self-renewal by reducing the small amount of spontaneous
differentiation typically observed under standard ES cell culture conditions.
These effects could not be mirrored by the use of Gleevec, a potent inhibitor of 
c-Abl and PDGFR kinases that are also inhibited by PP2.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.12.008 
PMID: 22197704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

