
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2012 Dec;18(12):1221-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-0691.2011.03717.x. Epub 2011 Dec 22.

Coagulation and inflammation in scrub typhus and murine typhus--a prospective
comparative study from Laos.

Paris DH(1), Chansamouth V, Nawtaisong P, Löwenberg EC, Phetsouvanh R, Blacksell 
SD, Lee SJ, Dondorp AM, van der Poll T, Newton PN, Levi M, Day NP.

Author information: 
(1)Mahidol-Oxford Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand. parigi@tropmedres.ac

Scrub typhus (caused by Orientia tsutsugamushi) and murine typhus (caused by
Rickettsia typhi) cause up to 28% of febrile episodes in Thailand and Laos. The
current understanding of coagulation and inflammation in the pathogenesis of
these clinically very similar vasculotropic diseases is limited. This study
compared human in vivo changes in 15 coagulation, inflammation and endothelial
activation markers in prospectively collected admission and follow-up samples of 
121 patients (55 scrub typhus, 55 murine typhus, and 11 typhus-like illness) and 
51 healthy controls from Laos. As compared with controls, all but one of the
markers assessed were significantly affected in typhus patients; however, the
activation patterns differed significantly between scrub and murine typhus
patients. The levels of markers of coagulation activation and all inflammatory
cytokines, except for interleukin-12, were significantly higher in patients with 
scrub typhus than in those with murine typhus. In patients with murine typhus,
however, the levels of endothelium-derived markers were significantly higher.
Anticoagulant factors were inhibited in both typhus patient groups. This is the
first study demonstrating that, in scrub typhus, in vivo coagulation activation
is prominent and is related to a strong proinflammatory response, whereas in
murine typhus, changes in coagulant and fibrinolytic pathways are suggestive of
endothelial cell perturbation. These data suggest that, although late-stage
endothelial infection is common in both diseases, the in vivo pathogenic
mechanisms of R. typhi and O. tsutsugamushi could differ in the early phase of
infection and may contribute to disease differentiation.

© 2011 The Authors. Clinical Microbiology and Infection © 2011 European Society
of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2011.03717.x 
PMCID: PMC3533763
PMID: 22192733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

