
1. J Biotechnol. 2012 Jul 31;160(1-2):33-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2011.12.011.
Epub 2011 Dec 22.

Production and characterization of a recombinant single-chain antibody (scFv) for
tracing the σ54 factor of Pseudomonas putida.

Jurado P(1), Fernández LA, de Lorenzo V.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas, Darwin 3, Madrid, Spain.

The number of alternative sigma factor molecules per bacterial cell determines
either stochasticity or evenness of transcription of cognate promoters. An
approach for examining the abundance of sigmas in any sample of bacterial origin 
is explained here which relies on the production of a recombinant highly
specific, high-affinity single-chain variable Fv domain (scFv) targeted towards
unique protein sites of the factor. Purposely, a super-binder scFv recognizing a 
distinct epitope of the less abundant sigma σ(54) of Pseudomonas putida (also
known as σ(N)) was obtained and its properties examined in detail. To this end,
an scFv library was generated from mRNA extracted from lymphocytes of mice
immunized with the purified σ(54) protein of this bacterium. The library was
displayed on a phage system and subjected to various rounds of panning with
purified σ(54) for capturing extreme binders. The resulting high-affinity
anti-σ(54) phage antibody (Phab) clone named C2 strongly attached a small region 
located between positions 172 and 183 of the primary amino acid sequence of σ(54)
that overlaps its core RNA polymerase-binding region. The purified scFv-C2
detected minute amounts of σ(54) in whole cell protein extracts not only of P.
putida but also Escherichia coli cells and putatively in other bacteria as well. 
The affinity constant of the purified antibody was measured by surface plasmon
resonance (SPR) and found to have a K(D) (k(off)/k(on)) in the range of
2×10(-9)M. The considerable affinity and specificity of this recombinant antibody
makes it a tool of choice for quantitative studies on gene expression of
σ(54)-dependent promoters in P. putida and other Gram-negative bacteria.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2011.12.011 
PMID: 22206981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

