
1. J Immunotoxicol. 2012 Jan-Mar;9(1):85-95. doi: 10.3109/1547691X.2011.642103. Epub
2012 Jan 4.

Alterations in T-lymphocyte sub-set profiles and cytokine secretion by PBMC of
systemic lupus erythematosus patients upon in vitro exposure to organochlorine
pesticides.

Dar SA(1), Das S, Ramachandran VG, Bhattacharya SN, Mustafa MD, Banerjee BD,
Verma P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Delhi, India.

Chronic exposure to organochlorine pesticides (OCP) has been suspected of causing
immunoregulatory abnormalities that eventually lead to development and
progression of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), but the role of these
non-genetic stimuli has remained poorly understood. The objectives of the study
were to quantify the levels of different OCP residues in the blood of SLE
patients and to study the effects of in vitro treatment of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) from these patients and healthy controls with OCP.
Levels of different OCP residues in the blood were measured by gas-liquid
chromatography. Isolated PBMC were treated in vitro with hexachlorocyclohexane
(HCH), o,p'-dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), or phytohemagglutinin-M
(PHA-M) for 72 h, then stained with different dye-labeled monoclonal antibodies
to analyze alterations in T-lymphocytes using flow cytometry. Levels of different
T(H)1 and T(H)2 cytokines were also estimated by ELISA. Significantly higher
levels of p,p'-DDE and β-HCH were detected in the blood of SLE patients than in
healthy controls. HCH exposure markedly increased the percentages of CD3(+)CD4(+)
T-lymphocytes and expression of CD45RO(+) on CD4(+) and CD8(+) T-lymphocytes, but
decreased CD4(+)CD25(+) T-lymphocytes in SLE patients. DDT exposure increased the
percentages of CD3(+)CD4(+) T-lymphocytes and decreased those of CD4(+)CD25(+)
T-lymphocytes in SLE patients as compared to healthy controls. No significant
responsiveness of patient PBMC to PHA-M stimulation was observed indicating
suppression of T-lymphocytes by these OCP. Further, both HCH and DDT decreased
the levels of IL-2 and IFNγ but had no effect on IL-4 levels in SLE patients. DDT
also increased significantly the levels of IL-10 in patients. It is likely that
higher levels and prolonged durations of exposure to HCH and DDT may
significantly influence T-lymphocyte sub-sets and cytokine expression in vivo
that could lead to the development or exacerbation of SLE.

DOI: 10.3109/1547691X.2011.642103 
PMID: 22214240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

