
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e29706. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029706. Epub 2011 Dec 28.

Promoting long-term survival of insulin-producing cell grafts that differentiate 
from adipose tissue-derived stem cells to cure type 1 diabetes.

Zhang S(1), Dai H, Wan N, Moore Y, Dai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Biomedical Research,
University of Texas Health Science Center, Tyler, Texas, USA.

BACKGROUND: Insulin-producing cell clusters (IPCCs) have recently been generated 
in vitro from adipose tissue-derived stem cells (ASCs) to circumvent islet
shortage. However, it is unknown how long they can survive upon transplantation, 
whether they are eventually rejected by recipients, and how their long-term
survival can be induced to permanently cure type 1 diabetes. IPCC graft survival 
is critical for their clinical application and this issue must be systematically 
addressed prior to their in-depth clinical trials.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we found that IPCC grafts that
differentiated from murine ASCs in vitro, unlike their freshly isolated islet
counterparts, did not survive long-term in syngeneic mice, suggesting that
ASC-derived IPCCs have intrinsic survival disadvantage over freshly isolated
islets. Indeed, β cells retrieved from IPCC syngrafts underwent faster apoptosis 
than their islet counterparts. However, blocking both Fas and TNF receptor death 
pathways inhibited their apoptosis and restored their long-term survival in
syngeneic recipients. Furthermore, blocking CD40-CD154 costimulation and Fas/TNF 
signaling induced long-term IPCC allograft survival in overwhelming majority of
recipients. Importantly, Fas-deficient IPCC allografts exhibited certain immune
privilege and enjoyed long-term survival in diabetic NOD mice in the presence of 
CD28/CD40 joint blockade while their islet counterparts failed to do so.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Long-term survival of ASC-derived IPCC syngeneic grafts
requires blocking Fas and TNF death pathways, whereas blocking both death
pathways and CD28/CD40 costimulation is needed for long-term IPCC allograft
survival in diabetic NOD mice. Our studies have important clinical implications
for treating type 1 diabetes via ASC-derived IPCC transplantation.

© 2011 Zhang et al.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029706 
PMCID: PMC3247284
PMID: 22216347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

