
1. APMIS. 2012 Feb;120(2):139-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2011.02828.x. Epub 2011
Oct 25.

Streptococcus mitis/human gingival fibroblasts co-culture: the best natural
association in answer to the 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate release.

Di Giulio M(1), D'Ercole S, Zara S, Cataldi A, Cellini L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Sciences, University 'G. d'Annunzio', Chieti-Pescara,
Italy.

One of the major components of dental polymerized resin-based restorative
materials is 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) and its release in monomeric form
interferes with the oral cavity environment. This study aimed to evaluate HEMA
monomeric effects on the co-culture of Streptococcus mitis and human gingival
fibroblasts (HGFs). Streptococcus mitis DS12 and S. mitis ATCC 6249 were
co-cultivated with HGF in the presence of HEMA (3 mM), for 48 and 72 h; the
amount of sessile and planktonic cells, as well as the prokaryotic and eukaryotic
cell viability were analyzed in treated and untreated samples. The treatment of
S. mitis/HGFs with HEMA did not produce significant effects on the bacterial
adhesion and induced an increase in planktonic S. mitis ATCC 6249 population
after 48 and 72 h. HEMA increased significantly the planktonic S. mitis ATCC 6249
viability when co-cultured with HGFs, while a cytotoxic effect on HGFs, without
bacteria, was recorded. An increase of bacterial aggregation on HGFs was also
detected with HEMA. Data obtained in this study suggest that HEMA exhibits a
toxic effect mainly on eukaryotic cells and this effect can be modulated by
co-cultivation with the S. mitis cells which, in the presence of the monomer,
enhance their aggregation rate on HGFs.

© 2011 The Authors. APMIS © 2011 APMIS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2011.02828.x 
PMCID: PMC3443379
PMID: 22229269  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

