
1. Orthopedics. 2012 Jan 16;35(1):e53-60. doi: 10.3928/01477447-20111122-11.

Comparison of the effects of human β-defensin 3, vancomycin, and clindamycin on
Staphylococcus aureus biofilm formation.

Huang Q(1), Yu HJ, Liu GD, Huang XK, Zhang LY, Zhou YG, Chen JY, Lin F, Wang Y,
Fei J.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Trauma of Daping Hospital,Third Military Medical College, Chongqing,
China.

Despite improvements in surgical techniques and implant design in orthopedic
surgery, implantation-associated infections are still a challenging problem for
surgeons. In 2006, trace quantities of human β-defensin 3 (hBD-3) were found in
human bone tissue and bone cells. Human β-defensin 3 is a 45-amino-acid peptide
that is considered the most promising class of defensin antimicrobial peptides
and may help in the prevention and treatment of implantation-associated
infections. Studies of the effectiveness of hBD-3 against Staphylococcus aureus
showed that hBD-3 was more potent at low concentrations than other antibiotics.
The effect of hBD-3 on S aureus biofilms has not been reported. We studied the
effect of hBD-3, vancomycin, and clindamycin on S aureus biofilms and on the
survival of the bacteria in the biofilms.Staphylococcus aureus biofilms were
examined with confocal scanning laser microscopy. Staining with LIVE/DEAD
BacLight viability stain (Molecular Probes Europe BV, Leiden, The Netherlands)
differentiated between live and dead bacteria within the biofilms, and
extracellular polymeric substances (slime) from the biofilms was evaluated after 
staining with calcofluor white (Sigma Chemical Company, Rocky Hill, New Jersey). 
Human β-defensin 3 and clindamycin reduced the S aureus biofilm area. Human
β-defensin 3 was significantly more effective against bacteria from the S aureus 
biofilms than was clindamycin. Vancomycin did not reduce the S aureus biofilm
area.

Copyright 2012, SLACK Incorporated.

DOI: 10.3928/01477447-20111122-11 
PMID: 22229614  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

