
1. Prep Biochem Biotechnol. 2012;42(1):60-76. doi: 10.1080/10826068.2011.563639.

PURIFICATION and characterization of ddt-dehydrohalogenase from Pseudomonas
putida T5.

Rangachary L(1), Rajagopalan RP, Singh TM, Krishnan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fermentation Technology and Bioengineering , Central Food
Technological Research Institute, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 
Mysore, India.

DDT-dehydrohalogenase is involved in the catalytic degradation of p,p'-DDT by
eliminating either HCl or Cl(-) to form DDD/DDE. Isolation, purification and
characterization of DDT-dehydrohalogenase from a bacterial source is reported in 
this manuscript. Ten bacterial cultures belonging to DDT degrading microbial
consortium were screened for the DDT-dehydrohalogenase activity. Among these, the
clarified cell homogenate of Pseudomonas putida T5 showed higher
DDT-dehydrohalogenase activity and enzyme was purified to apparent homogeneity
with 73% overall recovery. The relative molecular mass of the enzyme estimated by
the SDS PAGE method was ∼32 kDa. Native PAGE revealed the presence of a single
band. The purity of the enzyme was confirmed by HPLC and capillary
electrophoresis. The enzyme was stable for 4-5 h at pH 7.0 at the temperature
optima of 37 °C. The K( m ) and V( max ), values for DDT-dehydrohalogenase were
3.7 µM and 6.8 µM min(-1), respectively. The enzyme was a glycoprotein with
mannose forming the backbone. AIG-formed the N-terminus chain. Serine and
tryptophan appeared to be involved at the active site. The enzyme appeared to be 
a metalloprotein containing Zn, Mg, and Ca ions. Monovalent and divalent cations 
(1 mM) inhibited the enzyme strongly. The primary sequence of HPLC purified
enzyme was deduced by LC-MS-MALDI-ESI.

DOI: 10.1080/10826068.2011.563639 
PMID: 22239708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

