
1. J Mol Biol. 2012 Mar 2;416(4):579-97. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.12.054. Epub 2012
Jan 3.

Modifications modulate anticodon loop dynamics and codon recognition of E. coli
tRNA(Arg1,2).

Cantara WA(1), Bilbille Y, Kim J, Kaiser R, Leszczyńska G, Malkiewicz A, Agris
PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA.

Three of six arginine codons are read by two tRNA(Arg) isoacceptors in
Escherichia coli. The anticodon stem and loop of these isoacceptors (ASL(Arg1,2))
differs only in that the position 32 cytidine of tRNA(Arg1) is
posttranscriptionally modified to 2-thiocytidine (s(2)C(32)). The tRNA(Arg1,2)
are also modified at positions 34 (inosine, I(34)) and 37 (2-methyladenosine,
m(2)A(37)). To investigate the roles of modifications in the structure and
function, we analyzed six ASL(Arg1,2) constructs differing in their array of
modifications by spectroscopy and codon binding assays. Thermal denaturation and 
circular dichroism spectroscopy indicated that modifications contribute
thermodynamic and base stacking properties, resulting in more order but less
stability. NMR-derived structures of the ASL(Arg1,2) showed that the solution
structures of the ASLs were nearly identical. Surprisingly, none possessed the
U-turn conformation required for effective codon binding on the ribosome. Yet,
all ASL(Arg1,2) constructs efficiently bound the cognate CGU codon. Three ASLs
with I(34) were able to decode CGC, whereas only the singly modified
ASL(Arg1,2)(ICG) with I(34) was able to decode CGA. The dissociation constants
for all codon bindings were physiologically relevant (0.4-1.4 μM). However, with 
the introduction of s(2)C(32) or m(2)A(37) to ASL(Arg1,2)(ICG), the maximum
amount of ASL bound to CGU and CGC was significantly reduced. These results
suggest that, by allowing loop flexibility, the modifications modulate the
conformation of the ASL(Arg1,2), which takes one structure free in solution and
two others when bound to the cognate arginyl-tRNA synthetase or to codons on the 
ribosome where modifications reduce or restrict binding to specific codons.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.12.054 
PMID: 22240457  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

