
1. J Reprod Immunol. 2012 Jan;93(1):9-16. doi: 10.1016/j.jri.2011.11.005. Epub 2012 
Jan 11.

Effect of experimental genital mycoplasmosis on gene expression in the fetal
brain.

Burton A(1), Kizhner O, Brown MB, Peltier MR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and 
Reproductive Sciences, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, NJ, USA.

Neurodevelopmental disorders may have their origins during intrauterine
development. We used a well-defined animal model to test whether hematogenous
infection with genital mycoplasma would alter the expression of genes associated 
with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). In a preliminary experiment, rats were
exposed at 14 days gestation (GD14) to Mycoplasma pulmonis or sterile broth and
sacrificed at GD18. Infection and inflammation status of the pups was ascertained
by culture and cytokine ELISA. Intra-cardiac injection of 10(6)CFU M. pulmonis
resulted in amniotic infection of 100% of the pups and was accompanied by higher 
levels of IL-1β in amniotic fluids. In a second experiment, animals were infected
in a similar manner but dams and their litters were sacrificed at GD18, GD21 or
postpartum day 3 (PPD3). Expression of proinflammatory cytokines and
neurodevelopmental genes in the fetal brains was evaluated. M. pulmonis infection
significantly increased the expression of IL-1β, TNF-α and COX-2 in fetal and
neonatal brains. Expression of GFAP and CD11b, markers for activation on
astrocytes and microglial cells, respectively, was also increased for infected
animals. M. pulmonis significantly increased SHANK-3 gene expression at GD21 and 
PPD3 and PCP-2 expression at GD21. No effect of M. pulmonis infection on Reelin, 
PTEN, BDNF or HGF was detected. These data suggest that M. pulmonis infection at 
GD14 increases the expression of proinflammatory genes in the perinatal brain.
Further studies with earlier time-points of infection and ones that use
behavioral outcomes are needed to better understand the potential role of genital
mycoplasmosis on pychopathology.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jri.2011.11.005 
PMID: 22244476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

