
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2012 Apr;158(Pt 4):1094-1105. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.056119-0. Epub 2012 Jan 12.

NhaP1 is a K+(Na+)/H+ antiporter required for growth and internal pH homeostasis 
of Vibrio cholerae at low extracellular pH.

Quinn MJ(1)(2), Resch CT(3), Sun J(2), Lind EJ(1), Dibrov P(3), HÃ¤se CC(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Sciences, Oregon
State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3T
2N2, Canada.

Vibrio cholerae has adapted to a wide range of salinity, pH and osmotic
conditions, enabling it to survive passage through the host and persist in the
environment. Among the many proteins responsible for bacterial survival under
these diverse conditions, we have identified Vc-NhaP1 as a K(+)(Na(+))/H(+)
antiporter essential for V. cholerae growth at low environmental pH. Deletion of 
the V. cholerae nhaP1 gene caused growth inhibition when external potassium was
either limited (100 mM and below) or in excess (400 mM and above). This growth
defect was most apparent at mid-exponential phase, after 4-6 h of culture. Using 
a pH-sensitive GFP, cytosolic pH was shown to be dependent on K(+) in acidic
external conditions in a Vc-NhaP1-dependent manner. When functionally expressed
in an antiporterless Escherichia coli strain and assayed in everted membrane
vesicles, Vc-NhaP1 operated as an electroneutral alkali cation/proton antiporter,
exchanging K(+) or Na(+) ions for H(+) within a broad pH range (7.25-9.0). These 
data establish the putative V. cholerae NhaP1 protein as a functional
K(+)(Na(+))/H(+) antiporter of the CPA1 family that is required for bacterial pH 
homeostasis and growth in an acidic environment.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.056119-0 
PMCID: PMC3949420
PMID: 22241048  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

