
1. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2012 Jun;65(1):32-42. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2012.00930.x. Epub 2012 Feb 16.

Modulation of MICA on the surface of Chlamydia trachomatis-infected endocervical 
epithelial cells promotes NK cell-mediated killing.

Ibana JA(1), Aiyar A, Quayle AJ, Schust DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, Louisiana State
University Health Science Center, New Orleans, LA, USA.

Chlamydia trachomatis serovars D-K are obligate intracellular bacteria that have 
tropism for the columnar epithelial cells of the genital tract. Chlamydia
trachomatis infection has been reported to induce modifications in immune cell
ligand expression on epithelial host cells. In this study, we used an in vitro
infection model that resulted in a partial infection of C. trachomatis-exposed
primary-like immortalized endocervical epithelial cells (A2EN). Using this model,
we demonstrated that expression of the natural killer (NK) cell activating
ligand, MHC class I-related protein A (MICA), was upregulated on C.
trachomatis-infected, but not on noninfected bystander cells. MICA upregulation
was concomitant with MHC class I downregulation and impacted the susceptibility
of C. trachomatis-infected cells to NK cell activity. The specificity of MICA
upregulation was reflected by a higher cytolytic activity of an NK cell line
(NK92MI) against C. trachomatis-infected cells compared with uninfected control
cells. Significantly, data also indicated that NK cells exerted a partial, but
incomplete sterilizing effect on C. trachomatis as shown by the reduction in
recoverable inclusion forming units (IFU) when cocultured with C.
trachomatis-infected cells. Taken together, our data suggest that NK cells may
play a significant role in the ability of the host to counter C. trachomatis
infection.

Â© 2012 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2012.00930.x 
PMCID: PMC5029121
PMID: 22251247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

