
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Mar;1824(3):478-87. doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2012.01.003.
Epub 2012 Jan 11.

Solution structure of native and recombinant expressed toxin CssII from the venom
of the scorpion Centruroides suffusus suffusus, and their effects on Nav1.5
sodium channels.

Saucedo AL(1), del Rio-Portilla F, Picco C, Estrada G, Prestipino G, Possani LD, 
Delepierre M, Corzo G.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química de Biomacromoléculas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Ciudad Universitaria, Mexico.

The three-dimensional structures of the long-chain mammalian scorpion β-toxin
CssII from Centruroides suffusus suffusus and of its recombinant form, HisrCssII,
were determined by NMR. The neurotoxin CssII (nCssII) is a 66 amino acid long
peptide with four disulfide bridges; it is the most abundant and deadly toxin
from the venom of this scorpion. Both native and recombinant CssII structures
were determined by nuclear magnetic resonance using a total of 828 sequential
distance constraints derived from the volume integration of the cross peaks
observed in 2D NOESY spectra. Both nCssII and HisrCssII structures display a
mixed α/β fold stabilized by four disulfide bridges formed between pairs of
cysteines: C1-C8, C2-C5, C3-C6, and C4-C7 (the numbers indicate the relative
positions of the cysteine residues in the primary structure), with a distortion
induced by two cis-prolines in its C-terminal part. The native CssII
electrostatic surface was compared to both the recombinant one and to the Cn2
toxin, from the scorpion Centruroides noxius, which is also toxic to mammals.
Structural features such N- and C-terminal differences could influence toxin
specificity and affinity towards isoforms of different sub-types of Na(v)
channels.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2012.01.003 
PMID: 22251893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

