
1. Protein Sci. 2012 Apr;21(4):498-510. doi: 10.1002/pro.2032. Epub 2012 Mar 9.

A structural mechanism for dimeric to tetrameric oligomer conversion in Halomonas
sp. nucleoside diphosphate kinase.

Arai S(1), Yonezawa Y, Okazaki N, Matsumoto F, Tamada T, Tokunaga H, Ishibashi M,
Blaber M, Tokunaga M, Kuroki R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Structural Biology Group, Quantum Beam Science Directorate, Japan
Atomic Energy Agency, 2-4 Shirakata-Shirane, Tokai, Ibaraki 319-1195, Japan.

Nucleoside diphosphate kinase (NDK) is known to form homotetramers or
homohexamers. To clarify the oligomer state of NDK from moderately halophilic
Halomonas sp. 593 (HaNDK), the oligomeric state of HaNDK was characterized by
light scattering followed by X-ray crystallography. The molecular weight of HaNDK
is 33,660, and the X-ray crystal structure determination to 2.3 and 2.7 Å
resolution showed a dimer form which was confirmed in the different space groups 
of R3 and C2 with an independent packing arrangement. This is the first
structural evidence that HaNDK forms a dimeric assembly. Moreover, the inferred
molecular mass of a mutant HaNDK (E134A) indicated 62.1-65.3 kDa, and the
oligomerization state was investigated by X-ray crystallography to 2.3 and 2.5 Å 
resolution with space groups of P2(1) and C2. The assembly form of the E134A
mutant HaNDK was identified as a Type I tetramer as found in Myxococcus NDK. The 
structural comparison between the wild-type and E134A mutant HaNDKs suggests that
the change from dimer to tetramer is due to the removal of negative charge
repulsion caused by the E134 in the wild-type HaNDK. The higher ordered
association of proteins usually contributes to an increase in thermal stability
and substrate affinity. The change in the assembly form by a minimum mutation may
be an effective way for NDK to acquire molecular characteristics suited to
various circumstances.

Copyright © 2012 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.2032 
PMCID: PMC3375750
PMID: 22275000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

