
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2012 Aug;31(8):2017-28. doi:
10.1007/s10096-011-1535-0. Epub 2012 Jan 26.

Application of Legionella pneumophila-specific quantitative real-time PCR
combined with direct amplification and sequence-based typing in the diagnosis and
epidemiological investigation of Legionnaires' disease.

Mentasti M(1), Fry NK, Afshar B, Palepou-Foxley C, Naik FC, Harrison TG.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Systemic Infection Laboratory, Microbiological Services
Division, Health Protection Agency, 61 Colindale Avenue, London, NW9 5EQ, UK.

The detection of Legionella pneumophila DNA in clinical specimens using
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) combined with direct
sequence-based typing (SBT) offers rapid confirmation and timely intervention in 
the investigation of cases of Legionnaires' disease (LD). We assessed the utility
of a specific L. pneumophila qPCR assay targeting the macrophage infectivity
potentiator (mip) gene and internal process control with three clinical specimen 
types from confirmed LD cases. The assay was completely specific for L.
pneumophila, as demonstrated by positive results for 39/39 strains from all
subspecies and 16 serogroups. No cross-reaction was observed with any of the 54
Legionella non-pneumophila (0/69 strains) or 21 non-Legionella (0/58 strains).
All L. pneumophila culture-positive respiratory samples (81/81) were
qPCR-positive. Of 80 culture-negative samples tested, 47 (58.8%) were
qPCR-positive and none were inhibitory. PCR was significantly more sensitive than
culture for samples taken ≤ 2 days of hospitalisation (94.7% vs. 79.6%), with the
difference being even more marked for samples taken between 3 and 14 days (79.3% 
vs. 47.8%). Overall, the sensitivity of the qPCR was ∼30% greater than that of
culture and direct typing on culture-negative PCR-positive samples resulted in
full 7-allele profiles from 23/46, 5 to 6 alleles from 8/46 and ≥ 1 allele from
43/46 strains.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-011-1535-0 
PMID: 22278293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

