
1. Rev Argent Microbiol. 2011 Oct-Dec;43(4):294-310. doi:
10.1590/S0325-75412011000400010.

[Bacillus anthracis: a molecular look at a famous pathogen].

[Article in Spanish]

Pavan ME(1), Pettinari MJ, Cairó F, Pavan EE, Cataldi AA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Biología Molecular, Biochemiq S.A., CABA, C1001AFB.
mpavan@biochemiq.com

Bacillus anthracis, a gram-positive rod belonging to the Bacillus cereus group,
has an extremely monomorphic genome, and presents high structural and
physiological similarity with B. cereus and Bacillus thuringiensis. In this work,
the new molecular methods for the identification and typing of B. anthracis
developed in the last years, based on variable number tandem repeats or on
genetic differences detected through sequencing, are described. The molecular
aspects of traditional virulence factors: capsule, protective antigen, lethal
factor and edema factor are described in depth, together with virulence factors
recently proposed, such as the siderophores petrobactin and bacillibactin, the
S-layer adhesin and the MntA lipoprotein. It is detailed the molecular
organization of megaplasmids pXO1 and pXO2, including the pathogenicity island of
pXO1. The genetic skeleton of these plasmids has been observed in related
species, and this could be attributed to lateral gene transfer. Finally, the two 
anthrax toxin protective antigen receptors, ANTXR1/TEM8 and ANTXR2/CMG2,
essential for the interaction of the pathogen with the host, are presented. The
molecular studies performed in recent years have greatly increased knowledge in
different aspects of this microorganism and its relationship with the host, but
at the same time they have raised new questions about this noted pathogen.

DOI: 10.1590/S0325-75412011000400010 
PMID: 22274828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

