
1. Microb Drug Resist. 2012 Apr;18(2):207-14. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2011.0142. Epub 2012 
Jan 27.

DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV mutations in quinolone-resistant Flavobacterium
psychrophilum isolated from diseased salmonids in Norway.

Shah SQ(1), Nilsen H, Bottolfsen K, Colquhoun DJ, SÃ¸rum H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Safety & Infection Biology, Norwegian School of Veterinary 
Science, Oslo, Norway. syedqaswarali.shah@nvh.no

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the causative agent of the recognized diseases
'bacterial coldwater disease' and 'rainbow trout fry syndrome' and is found in
many farmed freshwater and marine fish species. In Norway, the bacterium has
mainly been isolated from Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.) and brown trout (Salmo
trutta L.). In the present study, 26 isolates from Norwegian farmed salmonids
were examined. All isolates were tested for susceptibility towards various
antibacterial drugs by the disk diffusion method, and minimum inhibitory
concentration values for oxolinic acid and flumequine were established for
selected isolates. All isolates from rainbow trout displayed reduced
susceptibility towards quinolones, while brown trout and Atlantic salmon isolates
were susceptible. The quinolone resistance determining regions (QRDRs) of the
gyrA, gyrB, parC, and parE genes were sequenced. Sequence analysis of the QRDR of
gyrA in quinolone resistant isolates revealed a threonine:arginine amino acid
substitution at position 82 in all 16 isolates from Norwegian rainbow trout and a
single reference strain isolated from rainbow trout in Sweden. No evidence for
plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance was found in any of the isolates.
Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis and phylogenetic analysis of parC and gyrB
sequences indicate a clonal relationship between rainbow trout isolates.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2011.0142 
PMID: 22283604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

