
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 May;40(10):4666-80. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks013. Epub 2012
Jan 31.

Fidelity of tRNA 5'-maturation: a possible basis for the functional dependence of
archaeal and eukaryal RNase P on multiple protein cofactors.

Chen WY(1), Singh D, Lai LB, Stiffler MA, Lai HD, Foster MP, Gopalan V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, and Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

RNase P, which catalyzes tRNA 5'-maturation, typically comprises a catalytic
RNase P RNA (RPR) and a varying number of RNase P proteins (RPPs): 1 in bacteria,
at least 4 in archaea and 9 in eukarya. The four archaeal RPPs have eukaryotic
homologs and function as heterodimers (POP5•RPP30 and RPP21•RPP29). By studying
the archaeal Methanocaldococcus jannaschii RPR's cis cleavage of precursor
tRNA(Gln) (pre-tRNA(Gln)), which lacks certain consensus structures/sequences
needed for substrate recognition, we demonstrate that RPP21•RPP29 and POP5•RPP30 
can rescue the RPR's mis-cleavage tendency independently by 4-fold and together
by 25-fold, suggesting that they operate by distinct mechanisms. This synergistic
and preferential shift toward correct cleavage results from the ability of
archaeal RPPs to selectively increase the RPR's apparent rate of correct cleavage
by 11,140-fold, compared to only 480-fold for mis-cleavage. Moreover, POP5•RPP30,
like the bacterial RPP, helps normalize the RPR's rates of cleavage of
non-consensus and consensus pre-tRNAs. We also show that archaeal and eukaryal
RNase P, compared to their bacterial relatives, exhibit higher fidelity of
5'-maturation of pre-tRNA(Gln) and some of its mutant derivatives. Our results
suggest that protein-rich RNase P variants might have evolved to support
flexibility in substrate recognition while catalyzing efficient, high-fidelity
5'-processing.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks013 
PMCID: PMC3378863
PMID: 22298511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

