
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30498. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030498. Epub 2012 Jan 27.

Patient's origin and lifestyle associated with CTX-M-producing Escherichia coli: 
a case-control-control study.

Nicolas-Chanoine MH(1), Jarlier V, Robert J, Arlet G, Drieux L, Leflon-Guibout V,
Laouénan C, Larroque B, Caro V, Mentré F; Group Coli β.

Collaborators: Akpabie A, Brévannes L, Doit C, Gallah S, Kassis-Chikhani N,
Marcon E, Moissenet D, Podglajen I, Verdet C, Vincent C, Diderot D, Zahar JR.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Microbiologie, Hôpital Beaujon AP-HP, Clichy, France.
mhn.chanoine@bjn.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: Global dissemination of Escherichia coli producing CTX-M
extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBL) is a public health concern. The aim of the 
study was to determine factors associated with CTX-M- producing E. coli
infections among patients hospitalised in the Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de
Paris, the largest hospital system in France (23 000 beds), through a prospective
case-control-control study.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: From November 2008 to June 2009, 152 inpatients with 
a clinical sample positive for CTX-M-producing E. coli (cases), 152 inpatients
with a clinical sample positive for non ESBL-producing E. coli on the day or
within the three days following case detection (controls C1), and 152 inpatients 
with culture-negative clinical samples since the beginning of hospitalisation and
until three days after case detection (controls C2) were included in ten
hospitals of the Paris area. Factors studied were related to patient's origin,
lifestyle and medical history as well as care during hospitalisation. Those
independently associated with CTX-M-producing E. coli were determined. Three
independent factors were common to the two case-control comparisons: birth
outside of Europe (cases vs C1: OR(1) = 2.4; 95%CI = [1.3-4.5] and cases vs C2:
OR(2) = 3.1; 95%CI = [1.4-7.0]), chronic infections (OR(1) = 2.9; 95%CI =
[1.3-6.9] and OR(2) = 8.7; 95%CI = [2.0-39.7]), and antibiotic treatment between 
hospital admission and inclusion (OR(1) = 2.0; 95%CI = [1.0-3.8] and OR(2) = 3.3;
95%CI = [1.5-7.2]). Cases were also more likely to be (i) functionally dependent 
before hospitalisation than C2 (OR(2) = 7.0; 95%CI = [2.1-23.5]) and (ii) living 
in collective housing before hospitalisation than C2 (OR(2) = 15.2; 95%CI =
[1.8-130.7]) when CTX-M-producing E. coli was present at admission.
CONCLUSION: For the first time, patient's origin and lifestyle were demonstrated 
to be independently associated with isolation of CTX-M-producing E. coli, in
addition to health care-related factors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030498 
PMCID: PMC3267726
PMID: 22299043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

