
1. Biochemistry. 2012 Feb 14;51(6):1249-56. doi: 10.1021/bi2016469. Epub 2012 Feb 3.

Binding of filamentous actin to anthrax toxin receptor 1 decreases its
association with protective antigen.

Garlick KM(1), Batty S, Mogridge J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.

ANTXR1 is a type I membrane protein that binds the protective antigen (PA)
component of anthrax toxin. The cytosolic domain of ANTXR1 has a novel
actin-binding region that influences the interaction of the ectodomain with PA.
Here, we have investigated features of the cytosolic domain of ANTXR1 that reduce
the association of the receptor with PA. We mutated a stretch of conserved acidic
amino acids adjacent to the actin-binding region and found that the mutation
increased the affinity for monomeric actin in vitro. ANTXR1 bearing this mutation
exhibited increased association with the cytoskeleton and bound less PA compared 
to the wild-type receptor, confirming the inverse correlation between the two
interactions. To determine whether binding of actin is sufficient to regulate the
ectodomain, we replaced the actin-binding region of ANTXR1 with that from the
yeast protein abp140 and with the WH2 domain of WAVE2. Although both of these
domains bound monomeric actin in vitro, only the sequence from abp140 reduced
binding of PA to a hybrid receptor. The actin binding regions of ANTXR1 and
abp140, but not the WH2 domain, colocalized with actin stress fibers, which
suggested that filamentous actin regulates ANTXR1. Consistent with this notion,
disruption of actin filaments using latrunculin A increased the amount of PA
bound to cells. This work provides evidence that cytoskeletal dynamics regulate
ANTXR1 function.

DOI: 10.1021/bi2016469 
PMCID: PMC3286128
PMID: 22303962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

