
1. J Clin Invest. 2012 Mar;122(3):923-34. doi: 10.1172/JCI59087. Epub 2012 Feb 6.

Essential role of gastric gland mucin in preventing gastric cancer in mice.

Karasawa F(1), Shiota A, Goso Y, Kobayashi M, Sato Y, Masumoto J, Fujiwara M,
Yokosawa S, Muraki T, Miyagawa S, Ueda M, Fukuda MN, Fukuda M, Ishihara K,
Nakayama J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Shinshu University Graduate School of
Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan.

Gastric gland mucin secreted from the lower portion of the gastric mucosa
contains unique O-linked oligosaccharides (O-glycans) having terminal α1,4-linked
N-acetylglucosamine residues (αGlcNAc). Previously, we identified human
α1,4-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (α4GnT), which is responsible for the
O-glycan biosynthesis and characterized αGlcNAc function in suppressing
Helicobacter pylori in vitro. In the present study, we engineered A4gnt(-/-) mice
to better understand its role in vivo. A4gnt(-/-) mice showed complete lack of
αGlcNAc expression in gastric gland mucin. Surprisingly, all the mutant mice
developed gastric adenocarcinoma through a hyperplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma
sequence in the absence of H. pylori infection. Microarray and quantitative
RT-PCR analysis revealed upregulation of genes encoding inflammatory chemokine
ligands, proinflammatory cytokines, and growth factors, such as Ccl2, Il-11, and 
Hgf in the gastric mucosa of A4gnt(-/-) mice. Further supporting an important
role for this O-glycan in cancer progression, we also observed significantly
reduced αGlcNAc in human gastric adenocarcinoma and adenoma. Our results
demonstrate that the absence of αGlcNAc triggers gastric tumorigenesis through
inflammation-associated pathways in vivo. Thus, αGlcNAc-terminated gastric mucin 
plays dual roles in preventing gastric cancer by inhibiting H. pylori infection
and also suppressing tumor-promoting inflammation.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI59087 
PMCID: PMC3287219
PMID: 22307328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

