
1. J Cell Sci. 2012 Jan 15;125(Pt 2):507-15. doi: 10.1242/jcs.094573. Epub 2012 Feb 
2.

Autophagy plays an essential role in the clearance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa by
alveolar macrophages.

Yuan K(1), Huang C, Fox J, Laturnus D, Carlson E, Zhang B, Yin Q, Gao H, Wu M.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory for Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041, China.

Intracellular bacteria have been shown to cause autophagy, which impacts
infectious outcomes, whereas extracellular bacteria have not been reported to
activate autophagy. Here, we demonstrate that Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a
Gram-negative extracellular bacterium, activates autophagy with considerably
increased LC3 punctation in both an alveolar macrophage cell line (MH-S) and
primary alveolar macrophages. Using the LC3 Gly120 mutant, we successfully
demonstrated a hallmark of autophagy, conjugation of LC3 to
phosphatidylethanolamine (PE). The accumulation of typical autophagosomes with
double membranes was identified morphologically by transmission electron
microscopy (TEM). Furthermore, the increase of PE-conjugated LC3 was indeed
induced by infection rather than inhibition of lysosome degradation. P.
aeruginosa induced autophagy through the classical beclin-1-Atg7-Atg5 pathway as 
determined by specific siRNA analysis. Rapamycin and IFN-Î³ (autophagy inducers)
augmented bacterial clearance, whereas beclin-1 and Atg5 knockdown reduced
intracellular bacteria. Thus, P. aeruginosa-induced autophagy represents a host
protective mechanism, providing new insight into the pathogenesis of this
infection.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.094573 
PMCID: PMC3283879
PMID: 22302984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

