
1. Transfusion. 2012 Oct;52(10):2234-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2011.03556.x. Epub
2012 Feb 10.

Characteristics of thawed autologous umbilical cord blood.

Rosenau EH(1), Sugrue MW, Haller M, Fisk D, Kelly SS, Chang M, Hou W, Eldjerou L,
Slayton W, Cogle CR, Wingard JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Florida, and Shands Hospital, University
of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

BACKGROUND: Autologous umbilical cord blood (AutoUCB) has historically been
cryopreserved for potential use in hematopoietic transplantation. Increasingly,
private AutoUCB banking is performed for therapies unavailable today. A Phase I
trial using AutoUCB treatment for early pediatric Type 1 diabetes afforded us an 
opportunity to analyze characteristics of AutoUCBs.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Twenty AutoUCBs from AABB-accredited private cord blood
banks (CBBs) were evaluated for collection, processing, cryopreservation, and
thaw characteristics. Using a standardized thaw-wash method, AutoUCBs were
assessed for viable total nucleated cells (vTNCs), viable CD34+ (vCD34+), and
colony-forming unit-granulocyte-macrophage counts. Postthaw %vTNC recoveries were
compared against processing characteristics and analyzed according to processing 
method, cryopreservation volume, concentration, container, and length of storage.
RESULTS: AutoUCB collection volumes (19.9-170 mL), cryopreserved TNC counts (7.6 
× 10(7) -3.34 × 10(9)), %TNC processing recoveries (39%-100%), postthaw %vTNC
recoveries (58%-100%), and %vCD34+ recoveries (26%-96%) varied widely. Regarding 
cell dose requirements, only 11% of evaluable AutoUCBs achieved the minimum TNC
count of at least 9.0 × 10(8) to meet the National Cord Blood Inventory banking
threshold, and only 50% met the minimum of 5.0 × 10(8) TNC count for Food and
Drug Administration cord blood licensure eligibility. %vTNC recoveries correlated
with %vCD34+ recoveries (R = 0.7; p = 0.03). Length of storage, cryopreservation 
volume, concentration, and container type did not affect postthaw %vTNC
recoveries. CBB processing method, however, was associated with %vTNC
postprocessing recoveries, with unmanipulated and plasma-depleted AutoUCBs having
the highest postthaw %vTNC recovery, followed by RBC-depleted and density
gradient-separated AutoUCBs.
CONCLUSION: The high variability and low counts found in AutoUCB banking suggest 
that further standardization of characterization, collection, and processing
procedures is needed.

© 2012 American Association of Blood Banks.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2011.03556.x 
PMID: 22321210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

