
1. J Anim Sci. 2012 Aug;90(8):2570-80. doi: 10.2527/jas.2011-4112. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

Influence of dietary protein content and source on colonic fermentative activity 
in dogs differing in body size and digestive tolerance.

Nery J(1), Goudez R, Biourge V, Tournier C, Leray V, Martin L, Thorin C, Nguyen
P, Dumon H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nutrition and Endocrinology, Food Science and Engineering,
Nantes-Atlantic National College of Veterinary Medicine, ONIRIS, LUNAM
Universit√©, 44307 Nantes Cedex 3, France.

Low-consistency, high-moisture feces have been observed in large dogs (Canis
lupus familiaris), compared with small dogs, and particularly in sensitive breeds
(e.g., German Shepherd dogs). The aim of this work was to determine if greater
colonic protein fermentation is responsible for poorer fecal quality in large
sensitive dogs. Twenty-seven bitches were allotted to 4 groups based on size and 
digestive sensitivity: small, medium, large tolerant, and large sensitive. Five
experimental diets varying in protein source [highly digestible wheat gluten (WG)
vs. medium digestible poultry meal (PM), and protein concentration from 21.4 to
21.6 (LP) to 38.2 to 39.2% CP (HP)] were tested. Diets were fed for 14 d and
followed by a 12-d transition period. Digestive fermentation by-products were
investigated in fresh stools [ammonia, phenol, indole, and short chain fatty
acids including acetate, propionate, and butyrate (C2 to C4 SCFA), branched-chain
fatty acids (BCFA), and valerate] and in urine (phenol and indole). Bacterial
populations in feces were identified. The PM diets resulted in greater fecal
concentrations of ammonia, BCFA, valerate, indole, and C2 to C4 SCFA than WG
diets (P = 0.002, P < 0.001, P = 0.039, P = 0.003, and P = 0.012, respectively). 
Greater concentrations of ammonia, BCFA, and valerate were found in the feces of 
dogs fed HP compared with LP diets (P < 0.001, P < 0.001, and P = 0.012,
respectively). The concentrations of ammonia, valerate, phenol, and indole in
feces of large sensitive dogs were greater (P < 0.001, P < 0.001, P = 0.002, and 
P = 0.019, respectively) compared with the other groups. The Enterococcus
populations were greater in feces of dogs fed with PMHP rather than WGLP diets (P
= 0.006). Urinary phenol and indole excretion was greater when dogs were fed PM
than WG diets (P < 0.001 and P = 0.038, respectively) and HP than LP diets (P =
0.001 and P = 0.087, respectively). Large sensitive dogs were prone to excrete a 
greater quantity of phenol in urine (P < 0.001). A diet formulated with highly
digestible protein, such as WG, led to reduced concentrations of protein-based
fermentation products in feces together with improved fecal quality in dogs,
especially in large sensitive ones. Poor fecal quality in large sensitive dogs
could be partly related to the pattern of protein fermentation in the hindgut.

DOI: 10.2527/jas.2011-4112 
PMID: 22328724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

