
1. J Immunol. 2012 Mar 15;188(6):2677-86. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101455. Epub 2012
Feb 10.

JAB1 is essential for B cell development and germinal center formation and
inversely regulates Fas ligand and Bcl6 expression.

Sitte S(1), Gl√§sner J, Jellusova J, Weisel F, Panattoni M, Pardi R, Gessner A.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiological Institute-Clinical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene,
University Hospital Erlangen, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Jun activation domain-binding protein 1 (JAB1) regulates ubiquitin-dependent
protein degradation by deneddylation of cullin-based ubiquitin ligases and,
therefore, plays a central role in regulating proliferation and apoptosis.
Because these processes are decisive for B cell development, we investigated JAB1
functions in B cells by establishing a mouse strain with a B cell-specific JAB1
deletion. We show that JAB1 is essential for early B cell development, because
the ablation of JAB1 expression blocks B cell development between the pro-B and
pre-B cell stages. Furthermore, JAB1 deletion leads to aberrant expression of the
apoptosis-triggering protein Fas ligand in pro-B cells. Concomitant B
cell-specific overexpression of the antiapoptotic protein Bcl2 partially reverses
the block in B cell development; rescued JAB1-deficient B cells reach the
periphery and produce protective class-switched Abs after Borrelia burgdorferi
infection. Interestingly, B cell-rescued mice exhibit no germinal centers but a
striking extrafollicular plasma cell accumulation. In addition, JAB1 is essential
for Bcl6 expression, a transcriptional repressor required for germinal center
formation. These findings identify JAB1 as an important factor in checkpoint
control during early B cell development, as well as in fate decisions in mature
Ag-primed B cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101455 
PMID: 22327073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

