
1. J Clin Invest. 2012 Mar;122(3):974-86. doi: 10.1172/JCI60588. Epub 2012 Feb 13.

Cxcr2 and Cxcl5 regulate the IL-17/G-CSF axis and neutrophil homeostasis in mice.

Mei J(1), Liu Y, Dai N, Hoffmann C, Hudock KM, Zhang P, Guttentag SH, Kolls JK,
Oliver PM, Bushman FD, Worthen GS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA. meij@email.chop.edu

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 Mar;12(3):155.

Neutrophils are essential for maintaining innate immune surveillance under normal
conditions, but also represent a major contributor to tissue damage during
inflammation. Neutrophil homeostasis is therefore tightly regulated. Cxcr2 plays 
a critical role in neutrophil homeostasis, as Cxcr2(-/-) mice demonstrate mild
neutrophilia and severe neutrophil hyperplasia in the bone marrow. The mechanisms
underlying these phenotypes, however, are unclear. We report here that Cxcr2 on
murine neutrophils inhibits the IL-17A/G-CSF axis that regulates neutrophil
homeostasis. Furthermore, enterocyte-derived Cxcl5 in the gut regulates
IL-17/G-CSF levels and contributes to Cxcr2-dependent neutrophil homeostasis.
Conversely, G-CSF was required for Cxcl5-dependent regulation of neutrophil
homeostasis, and inhibition of IL-17A reduced plasma G-CSF concentrations and
marrow neutrophil numbers in both Cxcl5(-/-) and Cxcr2(-/-) mice. Cxcr2(-/-) mice
constitutively expressed IL-17A and showed increased numbers of IL-17A-producing 
cells in the lung, terminal ileum, and spleen. Most IL-17-producing splenocytes
were responsive to IL-1β plus IL-23 in vitro. Depletion of commensal microbes by 
antibiotic treatment in Cxcr2(-/-) mice markedly decreased IL-17A and G-CSF
expression, neutrophilia, and marrow myeloid hyperplasia. These data suggest a
critical role for Cxcr2, Cxcl5, and commensal bacteria in regulation of the
IL-17/G-CSF axis and neutrophil homeostasis at mucosal sites and have
implications for the development of treatments for pathologies resulting from
either excessive or ineffective neutrophil responses.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI60588 
PMCID: PMC3287232
PMID: 22326959  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

