
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 6;287(15):11911-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.312918. Epub 2012
Feb 14.

Engineering mammalian mucin-type O-glycosylation in plants.

Yang Z(1), Drew DP, Jørgensen B, Mandel U, Bach SS, Ulvskov P, Levery SB, Bennett
EP, Clausen H, Petersen BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences,
Aarhus University, Flakkebjerg, 4200 Slagelse, Denmark.

Mucin-type O-glycosylation is an important post-translational modification that
confers a variety of biological properties and functions to proteins. This
post-translational modification has a particularly complex and differentially
regulated biosynthesis rendering prediction and control of where O-glycans are
attached to proteins, and which structures are formed, difficult. Because plants 
are devoid of GalNAc-type O-glycosylation, we have assessed requirements for
establishing human GalNAc O-glycosylation de novo in plants with the aim of
developing cell systems with custom-designed O-glycosylation capacity. Transient 
expression of a Pseudomonas aeruginosa Glc(NAc) C4-epimerase and a human
polypeptide GalNAc-transferase in leaves of Nicotiana benthamiana resulted in
GalNAc O-glycosylation of co-expressed human O-glycoprotein substrates. A
chimeric YFP construct containing a 3.5 tandem repeat sequence of MUC1 was
glycosylated with up to three and five GalNAc residues when co-expressed with
GalNAc-T2 and a combination of GalNAc-T2 and GalNAc-T4, respectively, as
determined by mass spectrometry. O-Glycosylation was furthermore demonstrated on 
a tandem repeat of MUC16 and interferon α2b. In plants, prolines in certain
classes of proteins are hydroxylated and further substituted with plant-specific 
O-glycosylation; unsubstituted hydroxyprolines were identified in our MUC1
construct. In summary, this study demonstrates that mammalian type
O-glycosylation can be established in plants and that plants may serve as a host 
cell for production of recombinant O-glycoproteins with custom-designed
O-glycosylation. The observed hydroxyproline modifications, however, call for
additional future engineering efforts.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.312918 
PMCID: PMC3320939
PMID: 22334671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

