
1. Med Mycol. 2012 Aug;50(6):579-84. doi: 10.3109/13693786.2012.660203. Epub 2012
Feb 14.

Inhibition of dermatophytes by the antimicrobial peptides human β-defensin-2,
ribonuclease 7 and psoriasin.

Fritz P(1), Beck-Jendroschek V, Brasch J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospitals of Schleswig-Holstein, Campus 
Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

Previous studies have described some antibacterial effects of antimicrobial
peptides (AMPs) expressed in human skin, but little is known about their possible
activity against dermatophytes. Therefore we have tested the effects of human
β-defensin 2 (hBD-2), ribonuclease 7 (RNase 7) and psoriasin on the in vitro
growth of four dermatophyte species. Germinating conidia of Trichophyton rubrum, 
T. mentagrophytes, Microsporum canis and Epidermophyton floccosum were exposed in
vitro to hBD-2, RNase 7, psoriasin and fluconazole. Subsequent fungal growth was 
measured photometrically over 168 hours. All AMPs significantly inhibited fungal 
growth, with the degree of inhibition dependent on the dermatophyte species and
the specific AMP. E. floccosum was found to be the most susceptible species in
that it was markedly suppressed by all AMPs, whereas M. canis was inhibited only 
by psoriasin. Overall, psoriasin was the most effective AMP and had even stronger
inhibitory effects on some dermatophytes than fluconazole. Our findings show that
AMPs expressed in human skin can, in principal, inhibit the growth of
dermatophytes in vitro. Therefore the question whether AMPs are relevant for
human protection against tineas is justified and should be addressed by
investigating their role in vivo.

DOI: 10.3109/13693786.2012.660203 
PMID: 22332906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

