
1. Org Biomol Chem. 2012 Mar 28;10(12):2453-63. doi: 10.1039/c2ob06924e. Epub 2012
Feb 17.

Studies on the conformational flexibility of α-L-rhamnose-containing
oligosaccharides using 13C-site-specific labeling, NMR spectroscopy and molecular
simulations: implications for the three-dimensional structure of bacterial
rhamnan polysaccharides.

Jonsson KH(1), Säwén E, Widmalm G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, Arrhenius Laboratory, Stockholm University,
S-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden.

Bacterial polysaccharides are comprised of a variety of monosaccharides,
L-rhamnose (6-deoxy-L-mannose) being one of them. This sugar is often part of
α-(1 → 2)- and/or α-(1 → 3)-linkages and we have therefore studied the
disaccharide α-L-Rhap-(1 → 2)-α-L-Rhap-OMe to obtain information on
conformational preferences at this glycosidic linkage. The target disaccharide
was synthesized with (13)C site-specific labeling at C1' and at C2', i.e., in the
terminal group. 2D (1)H,(13)C-HSQC-HECADE and (1)H,(13)C-J-HMBC NMR experiments, 
1D (13)C and (1)H NMR spectra together with total line-shape analysis were used
to extract conformationally dependent hetero- and homonuclear spin-spin coupling 
constants. This resulted in the determination of (2)J(C2',H1'), (3)J(C1',C1),
(3)J(C1',C3), (3)J(C2',C2), (2)J(C1',C2), (1)J(C1',C2'), and (1)J(C1',H1'). These
data together with previously determined J(CH) and (1)H,(1)H NOEs result in
fourteen conformationally dependent NMR parameters that are available for
analysis of glycosidic linkage flexibility and conformational preferences. A 100 
ns molecular dynamics (MD) simulation of the disaccharide with explicit water
molecules as solvent showed a major conformational state at φ(H)≈ 40° and
ψ(H)≈-35°, consistent with experimental NMR data. In addition, MD simulations
were carried out also for α-L-Rhap-(1 → 3)-α-L-Rhap-OMe and a rhamnan
hexasaccharide. The gathered information on the oligosaccharides was used to
address conformational preferences for a larger structure, a 2- and 3-linked
nonasaccharide, with implications for the 3D structure of rhamnan
polysaccharides, which should be regarded as flexible polymers.

DOI: 10.1039/c2ob06924e 
PMID: 22344369  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

