
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2012 May;32(5):779-88. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.01.031.
Epub 2012 Feb 10.

Identification and expression analysis of three c-type lysozymes in Oreochromis
aureus.

Gao FY(1), Qu L, Yu SG, Ye X, Tian YY, Zhang LL, Bai JJ, Lu M.

Author information: 
(1)Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences,
Guangzhou, PR China.

Lysozyme is an important molecule of innate immune system for the defense against
bacterial infections. Three genes encoding chicken-type (c-type) lysozymes, C1-, 
C2-, C3-type, were obtained from tilapia Oreochromis aureus by RT-PCR and the
RACE method. Catalytic and other conserved structure residues required for
functionality were identified. The amino acid sequence identities between C1- and
C2-type, C1- and C3-type, C2- and C3-type were 67.8%, 65.7% and 63.9%,
respectively. Phylogenetic tree analyze indicated the three genes were firstly
grouped to those of higher teleosteans, Pleuronectiformes and Tetraodontiformes
fishes, and then clustered to those of lower teleosteans, Cypriniformes fishes.
Bioinformatic analysis of mature peptide showed that the three genes possess
typical sequence characteristics, secondary and tertiary structure of c-type
lysozymes. The three tilapia c-type lysozymes mRNAs were mainly expressed in
liver and muscle, and C1-type lysozyme also highly expressed in intestine.
C1-type lysozyme mRNA was weakly expressed in stomach, C2- and C3-type mRNAs were
weakly expressed in intestine. After bacterial challenge, up-regulation was
obvious in kidney and spleen for C1-type lysozyme mRNA, while for C2- and C3-type
lysozyme obvious increase were observed in stomach and liver, suggesting that
C1-type lysozyme may mainly play roles in defense, while C2- and C3-type lysozyme
mainly conduct digestive function against bacteria infection. All the three
c-type recombinant lysozymes displayed lytic activity against Gram-negative and
Gram-positive bacteria. These results indicated that three c-type lysozymes play 
important roles in the defense of O. aureus against bacteria infections.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.01.031 
PMID: 22343107  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

