
1. J Endod. 2012 Mar;38(3):351-6. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2011.12.026. Epub 2012 Jan 28.

Antibacterial and neutralizing effect of human β-defensins on Enterococcus
faecalis and Enterococcus faecalis lipoteichoic acid.

Lee SH(1), Baek DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Microbiology and Immunology, College of Dentistry, Dankook 
University, Cheonan, Republic of Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Enterococcus faecalis is frequently found in the root canal of
teeth, is a major microorganism of endodontic therapy failure, and is associated 
with chronic apical periodontitis. Human β-defensins (HBDs) are known to play
critical roles in defending the host against infectious microbes and producing
dental pulp in healthy and patients. The purpose of the present study was to
investigate the bactericidal and neutralizing effects of HBDs on E. faecalis and 
E. faecalis lipoteichoic acid (Ef LTA) as a major virulence factor of E.
faecalis.
METHODS: HBD-1, -2, -3, and -4 were synthesized and investigated the
susceptibility against E. faecalis. Also, the neutralizing effects of HBDs on
cytokine and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) expression by activity of
E. faecalis and Ef LTA were analyzed using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and 
flow cytometry.
RESULTS: HBD-1 and -2 were weakly susceptible, and HBD-3 and HBD-4 were strongly 
susceptible to E. faecalis. All of the HBDs exhibited neutralizing effects on the
activity of Ef LTA, and HBD-3 strongly neutralized the activity of E. faecalis in
tumor necrosis factor-α, interleukin-8, and ICAM-1 expression. The neutralizing
effects of HBDs were to inhibit E. faecalis or Ef LTA binding to the host cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the induction of HBDs might have great
potential as endodontic therapeutic agents.

Crown Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joen.2011.12.026 
PMID: 22341073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

