
1. J Basic Microbiol. 2012 Dec;52(6):653-60. doi: 10.1002/jobm.201100428. Epub 2012 
Feb 23.

Purification and characterization of a highly thermostable esterase from the
actinobacterium Geodermatophilus obscurus strain G20.

Jaouani A(1), Neifar M, Hamza A, Chaabouni S, Martinez MJ, Gtari M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Microorganismes et Biomolécules Actives, Campus Universitaire,
Tunis, Tunisia. atef.jaouani@issbat.rnu.tn

Intracellular thermostable esterase produced by the extremophilic
Geodermatophilus obscurus G20 was purified to homogeneity by a heat treatment,
followed by an anion-exchange chromatography, and then characterized. The
molecular weight of the purified enzyme determined by sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was shown to be
approximatively 55 kDa. The enzyme showed an optimal activity between pH 8.0 and 
9.0 and was stable in the pH range 7.0-10.0. Moreover, it is highly thermostable,
with a residual activity greater than 90% after incubation at 80 °C for more than
10 h. The enzyme showed preference for esters of p -nitrophenol with short chain 
fatty acid. When the p -nitrophenyl acetate (C2) was used as substrate, the
Michaelis-Menten constant (K(m) ) and maximum velocity for the reaction (V(max) )
of esterase were 400 μM and 2500 U/mg protein, respectively. The effect of
phenylmethanesulphonyl fluoride (PMSF), a serine-specific inhibitor, on the
enzyme activity suggested that the thermostable esterase belong to the serine
hydrolase group. Because of its high thermostability, activity at alkaline pH,
tolerance to methanol and various metal ions and specificity for short chain
fatty acids, this enzyme showed high potential for use in biocatalysis. (© 2012
WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.201100428 
PMID: 22359317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

