
1. Immunogenetics. 2012 Jul;64(7):507-23. doi: 10.1007/s00251-012-0606-4. Epub 2012 
Feb 24.

Breadth of the CD4+ T cell response to Anaplasma marginale VirB9-1, VirB9-2 and
VirB10 and MHC class II DR and DQ restriction elements.

Morse K(1), Norimine J, Hope JC, Brown WC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Vector-Borne Diseases, Department of Veterinary Microbiology and
Pathology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-7040, USA.

MHC class II molecules influence antigen-specific CD4+ T lymphocyte responses
primed by immunization and infection. CD4+ T cell responses are important for
controlling infection by many bacterial pathogens including Anaplasma marginale
and are observed in cattle immunized with the protective A. marginale outer
membrane (OM) vaccine. Immunogenic proteins that comprise the protective OM
vaccine include type IV secretion system (T4SS) proteins VirB9-1, VirB9-2 and
VirB10, candidates for inclusion in a multiepitope vaccine. Our goal was to
determine the breadth of the VirB9-1, VirB9-2 and VirB10 T cell response and MHC 
class II restriction elements in six cattle with different MHC class II
haplotypes defined by DRB3, DQA and DQB allele combinations for each animal.
Overlapping peptides spanning each T4SS protein were tested in T cell
proliferation assays with autologous antigen-presenting cells (APC) and
artificial APC expressing combinations of bovine DR and DQ molecules. Twenty
immunostimulatory peptides were identified; three representing two or more
epitopes in VirB9-1, ten representing eight or more epitopes in VirB9-2 and seven
representing seven or more epitopes in VirB10. Of the eight DRA/DRB3 molecules,
four presented 15 peptides, which was biased as DRA/DRB3*1201 presented ten and
DRA/DRB3*1101 presented four peptides. Four DQA/DQB molecules composed of two
intrahaplotype and two interhaplotype pairs presented seven peptides, of which
five were uniquely presented by DQ molecules. In addition, three functional mixed
isotype (DQA/DRB3) restriction elements were identified. The immunogenicity and
broad MHC class II presentation of multiple VirB9-1, VirB9-2 and VirB10 peptide
epitopes justify their testing as a multiepitope vaccine against A. marginale.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-012-0606-4 
PMCID: PMC3372765
PMID: 22361828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

