
1. J Phys Chem B. 2012 Mar 22;116(11):3619-29. doi: 10.1021/jp210185m. Epub 2012 Mar
7.

The enolization chemistry of a thioester-dependent racemase: the 1.4 Å crystal
structure of a reaction intermediate complex characterized by detailed QM/MM
calculations.

Sharma S(1), Bhaumik P, Schmitz W, Venkatesan R, Hiltunen JK, Conzelmann E,
Juffer AH, Wierenga RK.

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter Oulu and Department of Biochemistry, University of Oulu, P.O. Box
3000, Oulu, FI-90014, Finland.

In the active site of the bacterial α-methylacyl-CoA racemase of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (MCR), the chirality of the 2-methyl branched C2-atom is
interconverted between (S) and (R) isomers. Protein crystallographic data and
quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) computational approaches show that 
this interconversion is achieved via a planar enolate intermediate. The crystal
structure, at 1.4 Å, visualizes the mode of binding of a reaction intermediate
analogue, 2-methylacetoacetyl-CoA, in a well-defined planar enolate form. The
computational studies confirm that in the conversion from (S) to (R), first a
proton is abstracted by Nδ1 (His126), and subsequently the planar enolate form is
reprotonated by Oδ2 (Asp156). The calculations also show that the negatively
charged thioester oxygen of the enolate intermediate is stabilized by an oxyanion
hole formed by N (Asp127), as well as by the side chain atoms of the catalytic
residues, Asp156 and His126, both being protonated simultaneously, at the
intermediate stage of the catalytic cycle. The computational analysis also
reveals that the conversion of the (S)- to (R)- chirality is achieved by a
movement of 1.7 Å of the chiral C2-carbon, with smaller shifts (approximately 1
Å) of the carbon atom of the 2-methyl group, the C3-atom of the fatty acid tail, 
and the C1-carbon and O1-oxygen atoms of the thioester moiety.

DOI: 10.1021/jp210185m 
PMID: 22360758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

