
1. Nutr Cancer. 2012 Apr;64(3):409-18. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2012.655402. Epub 2012 
Feb 27.

Piroxicam and C-phycocyanin mediated apoptosis in 1,2-dimethylhydrazine
dihydrochloride induced colon carcinogenesis: exploring the mitochondrial
pathway.

Saini MK(1), Sanyal SN, Vaiphei K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh, India.

Apoptosis is a synchronized procedure of cell death that is regulated by caspases
and proapoptotic proteins. During apoptosis, translocation of cytochrome c, an
electron carrier, from mitochondria into the cytosol is regulated by Bcl-2 family
members. Cytochrome c in association with an apoptotic protease activating factor
(Apaf), a proapoptotic protein essential for cell differentiation and
procaspase-9 form the apoptosome complex, which consecutively activates effector 
caspase, caspase-3, and coordinate the implementation of apoptosis. In the
current study, an attempt has been made to gain insight into piroxicam, a
traditional nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug and c-phycocyanin, a biliprotein
from Spirulina platensis (cyanobacterium) mediated apoptosis in DMH-induced colon
cancer. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were segregated into 5 groups: control, DMH, DMH
+ piroxicam, DMH + c-phycocyanin, and DMH + piroxicam + c-phycocyanin. Results
illustrated that piroxicam and c-phycocyanin treatments stimulate cytochrome c
release by downregulating the Bcl-2 (an antiapoptotic protein) expression
significantly, while promoting the level of Bax (a proapoptotic protein), thereby
activating caspases (caspases-9 and -3) and Apaf-1. The outcomes of the present
study clearly signify that piroxicam and c-phycocyanin may mediate
mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis in DMH-induced colon cancer. Moreover,
apoptosis induction was more apparent in the combination regimen of piroxicam and
c-phycocyanin than the individual drugs alone.

DOI: 10.1080/01635581.2012.655402 
PMID: 22369161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

