
1. J Clin Immunol. 2012 Aug;32(4):721-8. doi: 10.1007/s10875-012-9665-4. Epub 2012
Feb 29.

Evaluation of the reactivity of sera from patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus against the human MCP1.

Bronze-da-Rocha E(1), Nóvoa A, Teixeira N, Vasconcelos CS, Cerveira C, Castro e
Melo J, Carvalho MC.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Laboratório de Bioquímica, Faculdade de
Farmácia, Universidade do Porto, Rua Aníbal Cunha, 164, 4050-047, Porto,
Portugal. elsa.rocha@ff.up.pt

This study evaluates metaphase chromosome protein 1 (MCP1), a nuclear antigen, as
a diagnostic marker for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Reactivity of sera
from 114 Portuguese patients with autoimmune rheumatic disease or from healthy
blood donors (HBD), against MCP1, produced in bacteria (bact-MCP1) or in its
native form (native-MCP1), was determined by immunoblotting. Predictive and
discriminative power of MCP1 reactivity for SLE diagnosis in disease-control
groups was evaluated by logistic regression, its diagnostic value determined by
receiver-operating characteristic analysis and compared with similar analysis of 
antinuclear antibody and double-stranded DNA (dsDNA). We demonstrated that
native-MCP1, in contrast to bact-MCP1, reacts with SLE sera with significant
predictive and discriminative power versus other autoimmune diseases (odds ratio 
[OR] ≤3.537 and ≥3.265; area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve
[AUC] ≤0.643 and ≥0.636) or versus HBD (OR = 5.006; AUC = 0.671), showing a good 
diagnostic power with high specificity (82.1% versus HBD) and low sensitivity for
SLE, similar to those of dsDNA. The reactivity of SLE sera with native-MCP1 was
shown to be dependent on the presence of phosphorylated residues. Native-MCP1 was
shown to have diagnostic value as a specific marker for SLE diagnosis and,
therefore, is a suitable substrate for a new antibody test. The widely reported
importance of phosphorylated epitopes as targets for autoantibodies in SLE could 
also be confirmed for native-MCP1.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-012-9665-4 
PMID: 22371290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

