
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 20;287(17):13666-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.344028. Epub
2012 Feb 29.

Biosynthesis of threonylcarbamoyl adenosine (t6A), a universal tRNA nucleoside.

Deutsch C(1), El Yacoubi B, de Cr√©cy-Lagard V, Iwata-Reuyl D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Portland State University, Portland, Oregon 97207,
USA.

The anticodon stem-loop (ASL) of transfer RNAs (tRNAs) drives decoding by
interacting directly with the mRNA through codon/anticodon pairing. Chemically
complex nucleoside modifications found in the ASL at positions 34 or 37 are known
to be required for accurate decoding. Although over 100 distinct modifications
have been structurally characterized in tRNAs, only a few are universally
conserved, among them threonylcarbamoyl adenosine (t(6)A), found at position 37
in the anticodon loop of a subset of tRNA. Structural studies predict an
important role for t(6)A in translational fidelity, and in vivo work supports
this prediction. Although pioneering work in the 1970s identified the fundamental
substrates for t(6)A biosynthesis, the enzymes responsible for its biosynthesis
have remained an enigma. We report here the discovery that in bacteria four
proteins (YgjD, YrdC, YjeE, and YeaZ) are both necessary and sufficient for t(6)A
biosynthesis in vitro. Notably, YrdC and YgjD are members of universally
conserved families that were ranked among the top 10 proteins of unknown function
in need of functional characterization, while YeaZ and YjeE are specific to
bacteria. This latter observation, coupled with the essentiality of all four
proteins in bacteria, establishes this pathway as a compelling new target for
antimicrobial development.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.344028 
PMCID: PMC3340167
PMID: 22378793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

