
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 May;1818(5):1386-94. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2012.02.016. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Binding of peptides corresponding to the carboxy-terminal region of
human-β-defensins-1-3 with model membranes investigated by isothermal titration
calorimetry.

Krishnakumari V(1), Nagaraj R.

Author information: 
(1)CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Uppal Road, Hyderabad 500 007,
India. krishnak@ccmb.res.in

Human-β-defensins HBD-1-3 are important components of the innate immune system.
Synthetic peptides Phd-1-3 with a single disulphide bond, spanning the cationic
C-terminal region of HBD-1-3, have antimicrobial activity. The interaction of
Phd-1-3 with model membranes was investigated using isothermal titration
calorimetry (ITC) and steady-state fluorescence polarization to understand the
biophysical basis for the mechanism of antimicrobial action. Calorimetric
titration of POPE:POPG (7:3) vesicles with peptides at 25°C and 37°C showed
complex profiles with two distinct regions of heat changes. The data indicate
binding of Phd-1-3 at 37°C to both negative and zwitterionic lipid vesicles is
exothermic with low enthalpy values (ΔH~-1.3 to -2.8kcal/mol) as compared to
amphipathic helical antibacterial peptides. The adsorption of peptides to
negatively charged lipid membranes is modulated by electrostatic interactions
that are described by surface partition equilibrium model using Gouy-Chapman
theory. However, this model could not explain the isotherms of peptide binding to
zwitterionic lipid vesicles. Fluorescence polarization of TMA-DPH
(1-[4-(trimethylammonio) phenyl]-6-phenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene) and DPH
(1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene) located in the head group and acyl chain region
respectively, indicates that the peptides interact with interfacial region of
negatively charged membranes. Based on the results obtained, we conclude that
adsorption of cationic peptides Phd-1-3 on lipid surface do not result in
conformational change or pore formation. It is proposed that interaction of
Phd-1-3 with the negatively charged lipid head group causes membrane
destabilization, which in turn affects the efficient functioning of cytoplasmic
membrane proteins in bacteria, resulting in cell death.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2012.02.016 
PMID: 22386945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

