
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2012 Sep;90(8):796-801. doi: 10.1038/icb.2012.3. Epub 2012 Mar
6.

Impaired ability of burn patient neutrophils to stimulate β-defensin production
by keratinocytes.

Kawasaki T(1), Nakamura K, Jeschke MG, Kogiso M, Kobayashi M, Herndon DN, Suzuki 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX 77555-0435, USA.

Immunosuppressive neutrophils (PMN-II) appearing in association with burn injury 
have a role on the increased susceptibility of burn patients to various
infections. In the present study, the role of PMN-II on the production of human
β-defensins (HBDs), important molecules on host antimicrobial innate immunities, 
by human keratinocytes was studied. Normal human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEKs) 
were cultured with neutrophils (PMNs) isolated from burn patients or healthy
volunteers in dual-chamber transwells. Culture fluids harvested 24 h after
cultivation were assayed for HBDs using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Also, 
these culture fluids were assayed for their antimicrobial activities by a
standard colony-counting method using Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In the results,
PMNs isolated from peripheral blood of burn patients were confirmed as PMN-II,
because these cells produced CC-chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2), but not interleukin
(IL)-12 and CC-chemokine ligand 3 (CCL3). Culture fluids of NHEK
transwell-cultured with healthy PMNs exhibited strong killing activities against 
P. aeruginosa (96% inhibition), however, the growth of bacteria was not
dramatically inhibited by the culture fluids of NHEK transwell-cultured with
burn-patient PMNs (36% inhibition). IL-12 and CCL3 containing culture fluids of
healthy PMNs stimulated with the bacterial antigen or rCCL3 and rIL-12 enhanced
the production of HBD2 and HBD3 by NHEK, whereas CCL2 containing culture fluids
of burn-patient PMN stimulated with the antigen or rCCL2 inhibited the HBD
production by NHEK. These results indicate that PMN-II appearing in association
with burn injury contribute to the decreased production of HBDs in thermally
injured patients.

DOI: 10.1038/icb.2012.3 
PMID: 22391815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

