
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Jan;97(2):693-704. doi:
10.1007/s00253-012-3962-y. Epub 2012 Mar 6.

Amino acid substitutions in naphthalene dioxygenase from Pseudomonas sp. strain
NCIB 9816-4 result in regio- and stereo-specific hydroxylation of flavanone and
isoflavanone.

Seo J(1), Ryu JY, Han J, Ahn JH, Sadowsky MJ, Hur HG, Chong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, Gwangju Institute of
Science and Technology, Gwangju 500-712, Korea.

Wild-type naphthalene dioxygenase (NDO) from Pseudomonas sp. strain NCIB 9816-4
transforms relatively planar flavone and isoflavone to cis-dihydrodiols. However,
this enzyme cannot catalyze the transformation of flavanone and isoflavanone in
which a phenyl group bonds to the stereogenic C2 or C3 of the C-ring. Protein
modeling suggested that Phe224 in the substrate binding site of NDO may play a
key role in substrate specificity toward flavanone and isoflavanone.
Site-directed mutants of NDO with substitution of Phe224 with Tyr biotransformed 
only the (S)-stereoisomers of flavanone and isoflavanone, producing an 8-OH group
on the A-ring. In contrast, the Phe224Cys and Phe224Gln substitutions, which used
(2S)-flavanone as a substrate, and Phe224Lys, which transformed (2S)-flavanone
and (3S)-isoflavanone, each showed lower activity than the Phe224Tyr
substitution. The remainder of the tested mutants had no activity with flavanone 
and isoflavanone. Protein docking studies of flavanone and isoflavanone to the
modeled mutant enzyme structures revealed that an expanded substrate binding
site, due to mutation at 224, as well as appropriate hydrophobic interaction with
the residue at 224, are critical for successful binding of the substrates.
Results of this study also suggested that in addition to the previously known
Phe352, the Phe224 site of NDO appears to be important site for expanding the
substrate range of NDO and bringing regiospecific and stereospecific
hydroxylation reactions to C8 of the flavanone and isoflavanone A-rings.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-012-3962-y 
PMID: 22391970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

