
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32041. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032041. Epub 2012 Mar 2.

Isolation and characterization of EstC, a new cold-active esterase from
Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2).

Brault G(1), Shareck F, Hurtubise Y, Lépine F, Doucet N.

Author information: 
(1)INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier, Université du Québec, Laval, Québec, Canada.

The genome sequence of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) contains more than 50 genes 
coding for putative lipolytic enzymes. Many studies have shown the capacity of
this actinomycete to store important reserves of intracellular triacylglycerols
in nutrient depletion situations. In the present study, we used genome mining of 
S. coelicolor to identify genes coding for putative, non-secreted
esterases/lipases. Two genes were cloned and successfully overexpressed in E.
coli as His-tagged fusion proteins. One of the recombinant enzymes, EstC, showed 
interesting cold-active esterase activity with a strong potential for the
production of valuable esters. The purified enzyme displayed optimal activity at 
35°C and was cold-active with retention of 25% relative activity at 10°C. Its
optimal pH was 8.5-9 but the enzyme kept more than 75% of its maximal activity
between pH 7.5 and 10. EstC also showed remarkable tolerance over a wide range of
pH values, retaining almost full residual activity between pH 6-11. The enzyme
was active toward short-chain p-nitrophenyl esters (C2-C12), displaying optimal
activity with the valerate (C5) ester (k(cat)/K(m) = 737±77 s(-1) mM(-1)). The
enzyme was also very active toward short chain triglycerides such as triacetin
(C2:0) and tributyrin (C4:0), in addition to showing good primary alcohol and
organic solvent tolerance, suggesting it could function as an interesting
candidate for organic synthesis of short-chain esters such as flavors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032041 
PMCID: PMC3292560
PMID: 22396747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

