
1. Int Immunol. 2012 Apr;24(4):243-52. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxs045. Epub 2012 Mar 7.

Induction of human humoral immune responses in a novel HLA-DR-expressing
transgenic NOD/Shi-scid/γcnull mouse.

Suzuki M(1), Takahashi T, Katano I, Ito R, Ito M, Harigae H, Ishii N, Sugamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-cho, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Mounting evidence has demonstrated that NOD-Shi/scid/γc(null) (NOG) mice are one 
of the most suitable mouse strains for humanized mouse technologies, in which
various human cells or tissues can be engrafted without rejection and
autonomously maintained. We have characterized and analyzed various features of
the human immune system reconstituted in NOG mice by transplanting human
hematopoietic stem cells (hu-HSC). One of the problems of the quasi-immune system
in these hu-HSC NOG mice is that the quality of immune responses is not always
sufficient, as demonstrated by the lack of IgG production in response to antigen 
challenge. In this study, we established a novel transgenic NOG sub-strain of
mice bearing the HLA-DRA and HLA-DRB1:0405 genes, which specifically expresses
HLA-DR4 molecules in MHC II-positive cells. This mouse strain enabled us to match
the haplotype of HLA-DR between the recipient mice and human donor HSC. We
demonstrated that T-cell homeostasis was differentially regulated in HLA-matched 
hu-HSC NOG mice compared with HLA-mismatched control mice, and antibody class
switching was induced after immunization with exogenous antigens in HLA-matched
mice. This novel mouse strain improves the reconstituted human immune systems
that develop in humanized mice and will contribute to future studies of human
humoral immune responses.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxs045 
PMID: 22402880  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

