
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32421. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032421. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

Differential contribution of the repeats to heparin binding of HBHA, a major
adhesin of Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Lebrun P(1), Raze D, Fritzinger B, Wieruszeski JM, Biet F, Dose A, Carpentier M, 
Schwarzer D, Allain F, Lippens G, Locht C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1019, Lille, France.

BACKGROUND: Tuberculosis remains one of the most important causes of global
mortality and morbidity, and the molecular mechanisms of the pathogenesis are
still incompletely understood. Only few virulence factors of the causative agent 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis are known. One of them is the heparin-binding
haemagglutinin (HBHA), an important adhesin for epithelial cells and an
extrapulmonary dissemination factor. HBHA mediates mycobacterial adherence to
epithelial cells via the interactions of its C-terminal, lysine rich repeat
domain with sulfated glycoconjugates on the surface of epithelial cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using defined heparin sulfate (HS) analogs, we
determined the minimal heparin fragment length for HBHA binding and structural
adaptations of the HBHA heparin-binding domain (HBD) upon binding to heparin. The
NMR studies show significant shifts of all residues in the HBD upon interaction
with heparin, with stronger shifts in the last repeats compared to the upstream
repeats, and indicated that the HS fragments with 14 sugar units cover the entire
C-terminal lysine-rich domain of HBHA. The differential implication of the
repeats is determined by the relative position of prolines and lysines within
each repeat, and may contribute to binding specificity. GAG binding induces a
non-homogeneous structural rearrangement in the HBD, with stabilization of a
nascent Î±-helix only in the last penta-repeats.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Mycobacterial HBHA undergoes structural adaptation upon 
interaction with GAGs, which is likely involved in binding specificities of the
adhesin, and mycobacterial pathogens may use HBD polymorphisms for host or organ 
specificity. Further studies will aim at decoding the complementarity between HBD
repeats and HS sequence.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032421 
PMCID: PMC3293801
PMID: 22403657  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

