
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32093. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032093. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

Spatial scales of bacterial diversity in cold-water coral reef ecosystems.

Sch√∂ttner S(1), Wild C, Hoffmann F, Boetius A, Ramette A.

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Joint Research Group on Deep-Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck
Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Cold-water coral reef ecosystems are recognized as biodiversity
hotspots in the deep sea, but insights into their associated bacterial
communities are still limited. Deciphering principle patterns of bacterial
community variation over multiple spatial scales may however prove critical for a
better understanding of factors contributing to cold-water coral reef stability
and functioning.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Bacterial community structure, as determined by
Automated Ribosomal Intergenic Spacer Analysis (ARISA), was investigated with
respect to (i) microbial habitat type and (ii) coral species and color, as well
as the three spatial components (iii) geomorphologic reef zoning, (iv) reef
boundary, and (v) reef location. Communities revealed fundamental differences
between coral-generated (branch surface, mucus) and ambient microbial habitats
(seawater, sediments). This habitat specificity appeared pivotal for determining 
bacterial community shifts over all other study levels investigated.
Coral-derived surfaces showed species-specific patterns, differing significantly 
between Lophelia pertusa and Madrepora oculata, but not between L. pertusa color 
types. Within the reef center, no community distinction corresponded to
geomorphologic reef zoning for both coral-generated and ambient microbial
habitats. Beyond the reef center, however, bacterial communities varied
considerably from local to regional scales, with marked shifts toward the reef
periphery as well as between different in- and offshore reef sites, suggesting
significant biogeographic imprinting but weak microbe-host specificity.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study presents the first multi-scale survey of
bacterial diversity in cold-water coral reefs, spanning a total of five
observational levels including three spatial scales. It demonstrates that
bacterial communities in cold-water coral reefs are structured by multiple
factors acting at different spatial scales, which has fundamental implications
for the monitoring of microbial diversity and function in those ecosystems.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032093 
PMCID: PMC3293894
PMID: 22403625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

