
1. Clin Exp Allergy. 2012 Apr;42(4):540-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2011.03941.x.

Probiotic effects on T-cell maturation in infants during weaning.

West CE(1), Hernell O, Andersson Y, Sjöstedt M, Hammarström ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Pediatrics, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: We previously reported that feeding the probiotic Lactobacillus
paracasei ssp. paracasei F19 (LF19) during weaning reduced the cumulative
incidence of eczema.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the impact of feeding LF19 on T-cell maturation.
METHODS: One hundred and seventy-nine healthy, term infants with no prior
allergic manifestations were randomized to daily intake of cereals with (n = 89) 
or without (n = 90) the addition of LF19 10(8 ) colony forming units per serving 
from 4 to 13 months of age. Venous blood was drawn at 5.5 and 13 months of age.
We used the cytokine response to polyclonal T-cell stimulation by anti-CD3 plus
anti-CD28 monoclonal antibodies, and in vitro stimulation with the vaccine
tetanus toxoid (TT) as measures of global adaptive immunity and capacity to raise
a specific T-cell response, respectively. Expression levels of IL-2, IFN-γ, IL-4,
IL-17A and IL-10 messenger RNAs (mRNAs) were used as proxies for general T-cell
stimulation and naive Th0 cells, Th1-, Th2-, Th17- and T regulatory lineages.
RESULTS: There was no difference between the two groups at 5.5 months of age. At 
13 months, the polyclonal IL-2 response was higher in the placebo group
(P < 0.05), whereas the IFN-γ/IL-2 (P < 0.01) and IL-17A/IL-2 (P < 0.05) ratios
after polyclonal stimulation were higher in the probiotic group, as was the
TT-specific IL17-A response (P < 0.001). In both groups, the IFN-γ and IL-4
responses increased from 5.5 to 13 months upon both polyclonal and specific
stimulation (P < 0.01), whereas the IL-10 response remained low (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Our findings suggest modest effects by
probiotics on T-cell maturation following 9 months of probiotic intake. Future
studies should address if specific probiotics may drive immune development with
possible preventive effects on the development of allergic disease.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.2011.03941.x 
PMID: 22417212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

