
1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Apr 6;53(4):1928-35. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-7668.

Multigene methylation analysis of ocular adnexal MALT lymphoma and their
relationship to Chlamydophila psittaci infection and clinical characteristics in 
South Korea.

Choung HK(1), Kim YA, Lee MJ, Kim N, Khwarg SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Seoul National University Boramae Hospital,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: We investigated the aberrant promoter methylation status of known or
suspected tumor suppressor genes in ocular adnexal lymphoma (OAL) and the
possible association with clinical characteristics and Chlamydophila psittaci
infection.
METHODS: Thirty-five cases of ocular adnexal mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
(MALT) lymphoma cases were examined for the methylation status of nine genes
using methylation-specific PCR and for the detection of C. psittaci DNA using
PCR. The medical records were reviewed retrospectively. Patient demographics,
clinical characteristics including the response of the lymphoma to the therapy,
and C. psittaci infection status were evaluated for possible association with
methylation frequencies.
RESULTS: CpG island methylation in nine genes was variously found as follows;
DAPK (94.3%), ECAD (77.1%), MT1G (48.6%), THBS1 (37.1%), RAR-Î² (31.4%), p16
(20%), MGMT (5.7%), p14 (0%), and RASSF1A (0%). Methylation was not observed in
any of 13 control cases. C. psittaci DNA was observed in 25 (75.8%) of 33
patients with available tumor tissues, and ECAD hypermethylation was
significantly higher in C. psittaci-positive cases (P = 0.041). Promoter
hypermethylation status was not correlated with clinical characteristics.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant CpG island methylation of tumor suppressor genes is a
frequent event in ocular adnexal MALT lymphoma. In particular, high frequencies
of DAPK and ECAD methylation may be strongly correlated with ocular adnexal MALT 
lymphomagenesis in South Korea. Furthermore, ECAD hypermethylation is closely
associated with C. psittaci infection, which may shed light on the mechanisms of 
bacterium-induced oncogenesis.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.11-7668 
PMID: 22410569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

