
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32418. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032418. Epub 2012 Mar 7.

A metalloproteinase secreted by Streptococcus pneumoniae removes membrane mucin
MUC16 from the epithelial glycocalyx barrier.

Govindarajan B(1), Menon BB, Spurr-Michaud S, Rastogi K, Gilmore MS, Arg√ºeso P,
Gipson IK.

Author information: 
(1)Schepens Eye Research Institute, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

The majority of bacterial infections occur across wet-surfaced mucosal epithelia,
including those that cover the eye, respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract and
genitourinary tract. The apical surface of all these mucosal epithelia is covered
by a heavily glycosylated glycocalyx, a major component of which are
membrane-associated mucins (MAMs). MAMs form a barrier that serves as one of the 
first lines of defense against invading bacteria. While opportunistic bacteria
rely on pre-existing defects or wounds to gain entry to epithelia, non
opportunistic bacteria, especially the epidemic disease-causing ones, gain access
to epithelial cells without evidence of predisposing injury. The molecular
mechanisms employed by these non opportunistic pathogens to breach the MAM
barrier remain unknown. To test the hypothesis that disease-causing non
opportunistic bacteria gain access to the epithelium by removal of MAMs, corneal,
conjunctival, and tracheobronchial epithelial cells, cultured to differentiate to
express the MAMs, MUCs 1, 4, and 16, were exposed to a non encapsulated, non
typeable strain of Streptococcus pneumoniae (SP168), which causes epidemic
conjunctivitis. The ability of strain SP168 to induce MAM ectodomain release from
epithelia was compared to that of other strains of S. pneumoniae, as well as the 
opportunistic pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. The experiments reported herein
demonstrate that the epidemic disease-causing S. pneumoniae species secretes a
metalloproteinase, ZmpC, which selectively induces ectodomain shedding of the MAM
MUC16. Furthermore, ZmpC-induced removal of MUC16 from the epithelium leads to
loss of the glycocalyx barrier function and enhanced internalization of the
bacterium. These data suggest that removal of MAMs by bacterial enzymes may be an
important virulence mechanism employed by disease-causing non opportunistic
bacteria to gain access to epithelial cells to cause infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032418 
PMCID: PMC3296694
PMID: 22412870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

