
1. Proteins. 2012 Jun;80(6):1545-59. doi: 10.1002/prot.24041. Epub 2012 Mar 13.

Functional and structural characterization of a thermostable acetyl esterase from
Thermotoga maritima.

Levisson M(1), Han GW, Deller MC, Xu Q, Biely P, Hendriks S, Ten Eyck LF,
Flensburg C, Roversi P, Miller MD, McMullan D, von Delft F, Kreusch A, Deacon AM,
van der Oost J, Lesley SA, Elsliger MA, Kengen SW, Wilson IA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University, Dreijenplein 10, 6703 HB,
Wageningen, The Netherlands.

TM0077 from Thermotoga maritima is a member of the carbohydrate esterase family 7
and is active on a variety of acetylated compounds, including cephalosporin C.
TM0077 esterase activity is confined to short-chain acyl esters (C2-C3), and is
optimal around 100°C and pH 7.5. The positional specificity of TM0077 was
investigated using 4-nitrophenyl-β-D-xylopyranoside monoacetates as substrates in
a β-xylosidase-coupled assay. TM0077 hydrolyzes acetate at positions 2, 3, and 4 
with equal efficiency. No activity was detected on xylan or acetylated xylan,
which implies that TM0077 is an acetyl esterase and not an acetyl xylan esterase 
as currently annotated. Selenomethionine-substituted and native structures of
TM0077 were determined at 2.1 and 2.5 Å resolution, respectively, revealing a
classic α/β-hydrolase fold. TM0077 assembles into a doughnut-shaped hexamer with 
small tunnels on either side leading to an inner cavity, which contains the six
catalytic centers. Structures of TM0077 with covalently bound
phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and paraoxon were determined to 2.4 and 2.1 Å,
respectively, and confirmed that both inhibitors bind covalently to the catalytic
serine (Ser188). Upon binding of inhibitor, the catalytic serine adopts an
altered conformation, as observed in other esterase and lipases, and supports a
previously proposed catalytic mechanism in which Ser hydroxyl rotation prevents
reversal of the reaction and allows access of a water molecule for completion of 
the reaction.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.24041 
PMCID: PMC3348966
PMID: 22411095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

