
1. Sci Transl Med. 2012 Mar 14;4(125):125ra30. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3003481.

A model for personalized in vivo analysis of human immune responsiveness.

Kalscheuer H(1), Danzl N, Onoe T, Faust T, Winchester R, Goland R, Greenberg E,
Spitzer TR, Savage DG, Tahara H, Choi G, Yang YG, Sykes M.

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation Biology Research Center, Department of Surgery, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02129, USA.

Studies of human immune diseases are generally limited to the analysis of
peripheral blood lymphocytes of heterogeneous patient populations. Improved
models are needed to allow analysis of fundamental immunologic abnormalities
predisposing to disease and in which to assess immunotherapies. Immunodeficient
mice receiving human fetal thymus grafts and fetal CD34(+) cells intravenously
produce robust human immune systems, allowing analysis of human T cell
development and function. However, to use humanized mice to study human
immune-mediated disorders, immune systems must be generated from adult
hematopoietic cells. Here, we demonstrated robust immune reconstitution in mice
with hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) aspirated from bone marrow of adults with
type 1 diabetes (T1D) and healthy control volunteers. In these humanized mice,
cryopreservation of human leukocyte antigen allele-matched fetal thymic tissue
prevented allogeneic adult HSC rejection. Newly generated T cells, which included
regulatory T cells (T(regs)), were functional and self-tolerant and had a diverse
repertoire. The immune recognition of these mice mimicked that of the adult
CD34(+) cell donor, but the T cell phenotypes were more predominantly "na√Øve"
than those of the adult donors. HSCs from T1D and control donors generated
similar numbers of natural T(regs) intrathymically; however, peripheral T cells
from T1D subjects showed increased proportions of activated or memory cells
compared to controls, suggesting possible HSC-intrinsic differences in T cell
homeostasis that might underlie immune pathology in T1D. This "personalized
immune" mouse provides a new model for individualized analysis of human immune
responses that may provide new insights into not only T1D but also other forms of
immune function and dysfunction as well.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3003481 
PMCID: PMC3697150
PMID: 22422991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

