
1. Microb Ecol. 2012 Aug;64(2):320-33. doi: 10.1007/s00248-012-0038-6. Epub 2012 Mar
22.

Distribution of mycosporine-like amino acids along a surface water meridional
transect of the Atlantic.

Llewellyn CA(1), White DA, Martinez-Vincente V, Tarran G, Smyth TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, The Hoe, Plymouth, PL1 3DH, Devon,
UK. call@pml.ac.uk

The composition and abundance of mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs) were
investigated in the surface waters along a 13,000-km meridional transect (52° N
to 45° S) in the Atlantic Ocean (Atlantic Meridional Transect programme: Cruise
AMT 18: 4/10/2008-10/11/2008). MAAs were ubiquitous along the transect, although 
the composition of the MAAs was variable. Highest concentrations were in the far 
south (below 40° S; MAA >1 μg L(-1)) and in north subtropical equatorial region
(NER: 0-25° N; MAA up to 0.8 μg L(-1)). Highest MAA relative to chlorophyll-a
occurred in the NER (MAA/chl-a ratio between 2 and 5). MAA/chl-a significantly
correlated with the preceding month's mean daily UV dose and with UV-B/UV-A. In
the far south, high MAA concentrations coincided with high phytoplankton biomass,
high nutrients and a deep mixed layer associated with the austral spring. Here,
the phytoplankton community was dominated by micro- and nano-eukaryotes. At the
NER, the high MAA/chl-a coincided with low nutrient concentrations, a shallow
mixed layer depth (20-70 m) and to a lesser extent to a shallow nitracline (40-90
m). Here, the phytoplankton consisted primarily of picophytoplankton (0-0.2 μm), 
dominated by the pico-cyanobacteria Synechococcus sp. and Prochlorococcus sp. and
by the nitrogen fixing filamentous cyanobacterium Trichodesmium. The low nitrate 
concentrations (<0.1 μmol L(-1)) at the NER suggest that nitrogen fixation was
required for MAA production. Specific MAAs could not easily be assigned to
particular groups of phytoplankton and we could not rule out the possibility that
MAAs were associated with symbiotic cyanobacteria contained within heterotrophic 
dinoflagellates or diatoms.

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-012-0038-6 
PMID: 22438039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

