
1. Cell Microbiol. 2012 Aug;14(8):1206-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2012.01789.x.
Epub 2012 Apr 12.

Sec24 interaction is essential for localization and virulence-associated function
of the bacterial effector protein NleA.

Thanabalasuriar A(1), Bergeron J, Gillingham A, Mimee M, Thomassin JL, Strynadka 
N, Kim J, Gruenheid S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, 3649 Promenade
Sir William Osler, Montreal, Quebec, H3G 0B1, Canada.

Enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EPEC and EHEC) are
food-borne pathogens that cause severe diarrhoeal disease in humans. Citrobacter 
rodentium is a related mouse pathogen that serves as a small animal model for
EPEC and EHEC infections. EPEC, EHEC and C. rodentium translocate bacterial
virulence proteins directly into host cells via a type III secretion system
(T3SS). Non-LEE-encoded effector A (NleA) is a T3SS effector that is common to
EPEC, EHEC and C. rodentium and is required for bacterial virulence. NleA
localizes to the host cell secretory pathway and inhibits vesicle trafficking by 
interacting with the Sec24 subunit of mammalian coatamer protein II complex
(COPII). Mammalian cells express four paralogues of Sec24 (Sec24A-D), which
mediate selection of cargo proteins for transport and possess distinct, but
overlapping cargo specificities. Here, we show that NleA binds Sec24A-D with two 
distinct mechanisms. An NleA protein variant with greatly diminished interaction 
with all Sec24 paralogues does not properly localize, does not inhibit
COPII-mediated vesicle budding, and does not confer virulence in the mouse
infection model. Together, this work provides strong evidence that the
interaction and inhibition of COPII by NleA is an important aspect of EPEC- and
EHEC-mediated disease.

Â© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2012.01789.x 
PMID: 22432415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

