
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 11;287(20):16132-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.310102. Epub
2012 Mar 23.

TRAF6 protein couples Toll-like receptor 4 signaling to Src family kinase
activation and opening of paracellular pathway in human lung microvascular
endothelia.

Liu A(1), Gong P, Hyun SW, Wang KZ, Cates EA, Perkins D, Bannerman DD, Puché AC, 
Toshchakov VY, Fang S, Auron PE, Vogel SN, Goldblum SE.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Biology Research Center, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland
21201, USA.

Gram-negative bacteria release lipopolysaccharide (LPS) into the bloodstream.
Here, it engages Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 expressed in human lung microvascular
endothelia (HMVEC-Ls) to open the paracellular pathway through Src family kinase 
(SFK) activation. The signaling molecules that couple TLR4 to the SFK-driven
barrier disruption are unknown. In HMVEC-Ls, siRNA-induced silencing of TIRAP/Mal
and overexpression of dominant-negative TIRAP/Mal each blocked LPS-induced SFK
activation and increases in transendothelial [(14)C]albumin flux, implicating the
MyD88-dependent pathway. LPS increased TRAF6 autoubiquitination and binding to
IRAK1. Silencing of TRAF6, TRAF6-dominant-negative overexpression, or
preincubation of HMVEC-Ls with a cell-permeable TRAF6 decoy peptide decreased
both LPS-induced SFK activation and barrier disruption. LPS increased binding of 
both c-Src and Fyn to GST-TRAF6 but not to a GST-TRAF6 mutant in which the three 
prolines in the putative Src homology 3 domain-binding motif (amino acids
461-469) were substituted with alanines. A cell-permeable decoy peptide
corresponding to the same proline-rich motif reduced SFK binding to WT GST-TRAF6 
compared with the Pro → Ala-substituted peptide. Finally, LPS increased binding
of activated Tyr(P)(416)-SFK to GST-TRAF6, and preincubation of HMVEC-Ls with
SFK-selective tyrosine kinase inhibitors, PP2 and SU6656, diminished TRAF6
binding to c-Src and Fyn. During the TRAF6-SFK association, TRAF6 catalyzed
Lys(63)-linked ubiquitination of c-Src and Fyn, whereas SFK activation increased 
tyrosine phosphorylation of TRAF6. The TRAF6 decoy peptide blocked both
LPS-induced SFK ubiquitination and TRAF6 phosphorylation. Together, these data
indicate that the proline-rich Src homology 3 domain-binding motif in TRAF6
interacts directly with activated SFKs to couple LPS engagement of TLR4 to SFK
activation and loss of barrier integrity in HMVEC-Ls.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.310102 
PMCID: PMC3351307
PMID: 22447928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

