
1. Biochimie. 2012 Jun;94(6):1382-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2012.02.034. Epub 2012
Mar 15.

Inhibition of heat shock protein (Hsp) 27 potentiates the suppressive effect of
Hsp90 inhibitors in targeting breast cancer stem-like cells.

Lee CH(1), Hong HM, Chang YY, Chang WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Heat shock protein (Hsp) 90 is an ATP-dependent chaperone and its expression has 
been reported to be associated with poor prognosis of breast cancer. Cancer stem 
cells (CSCs) are particular subtypes of cells in cancer which have been
demonstrated to be important to tumor initiation, drug resistance and metastasis.
In breast cancer, breast CSCs (BCSCs) are identified as CD24-CD44 + cells or
cells with high intracellular aldehyde dehydrogenase activity (ALDH+). Although
the clinical trials of Hsp90 inhibitors in breast cancer therapy are ongoing, the
BCSC targeting effect of them remains unclear. In the present study, we
discovered that the expression of Hsp90α was increased in ALDH + human breast
cancer cells. Geldanamycin (GA), a Hsp90 inhibitor, could suppress ALDH + breast 
cancer cells in a dose dependent manner. We are interesting in the insufficiently
inhibitory effect of low dose GA treatment. It was correlated with the
upregulation of Hsp27 and Hsp70. By co-treatment with HSP inhibitors, quercetin
or KNK437 potentiated BCSCs, which determined with ALDH+ population or
mammosphere cells, toward GA inhibition, as well as anti-proliferation and
anti-migration effects of GA. With siRNA mediated gene silencing, we found that
knockdown of Hsp27 could mimic the effect of HSP inhibitors to potentiate the
BCSC targeting effect of GA. In conclusion, combination of HSP inhibitors with
Hsp90 inhibitors could serve as a potential solution to prevent the drug
resistance and avoid the toxicity of high dose of Hsp90 inhibitors in clinical
application. Furthermore, Hsp27 may play a role in chemoresistant character of
BCSCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2012.02.034 
PMID: 22445681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

