
1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2012 Oct;132(1-2):57-65. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2012.03.002. Epub 2012 Mar 16.

Human aldosterone synthase: recombinant expression in E. coli and purification
enables a detailed biochemical analysis of the protein on the molecular level.

Hobler A(1), Kagawa N, Hutter MC, Hartmann MF, Wudy SA, Hannemann F, Bernhardt R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saarland University, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.

Aldosterone, the most important human mineralocorticoid, is involved in the
regulation of the blood pressure and has been reported to play a key role in the 
formation of arterial hypertension, heart failure and myocardial fibrosis.
Aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2) catalyzes the biosynthesis of aldosterone by
successive 11β- and 18-hydroxylation followed by an 18-oxidation of
11-deoxycorticosterone and thus comprises an important drug target. For more than
20 years, all attempts to purify recombinant human CYP11B2 in significant amounts
for detailed analysis failed due to its hydrophobic nature as a membrane protein.
Here, we present the successful expression of the protein in E. coli yielding
approx. 90 nmol/l culture, its purification and detailed enzymatic
characterization. Biochemical analyses have been performed using in vitro
conversion assays which revelead a V(max) of 238±8 nmol products/nmol
hCYP11B2/min and a K(m) of 103±8 μM 11-deoxycorticosterone. Furthermore, binding 
analyses indicated a very loose binding of the first intermediate of the
reaction, corticosterone with a K(d) value of 115±6 μM whereas for
11-deoxycorticosterone a K(d) of 1.34±0.13 μM was estimated. Upon substrate
conversion of 11-deoxycorticosterone, new intermediates have been identified as
19- and 18-hydroxylated products not described before for the human enzyme. To
understand the differences in substrate conversion, we constructed a new homology
model based on the 3D structure of CYP11A1, performed docking studies and
calculated the activation energy for hydrogen abstraction of the different
ligands. The data demonstrated that the 11β-hydroxylation requires much less
abstraction energy than hydroxylation at C18 and C19. However, the C18 and C19
hydroxylated products might be of clinical importance. Finally, purified CYP11B2 
represents a suitable tool for the investigation of potential inhibitors of this 
protein for the development of novel drugs against hypertension and heart failure
as was shown using ketoconazole.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2012.03.002 
PMID: 22446688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

