
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 18;287(21):17598-17607. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.338970. Epub 
2012 Mar 30.

Novel cyclotides and uncyclotides with highly shortened precursors from Chassalia
chartacea and effects of methionine oxidation on bioactivities.

Nguyen GKT(1), Lim WH(1), Nguyen PQT(1), Tam JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
637551.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
637551. Electronic address: jptam@ntu.edu.sg.

Cyclotides are a new class of plant biologics that display a diverse range of
bioactivities with therapeutic potentials. They possess an unusual end-to-end
cyclic backbone combined with a cystine knot arrangement, making them
exceptionally stable to heat, chemical and enzymatic degradation. Currently, >200
cyclotides have been discovered but only three naturally occurring linear
variants (also known as uncyclotides) have been isolated. In this study, we
report the discovery of 18 novel peptides, chassatides C1 to C18, composed of 14 
new cyclotides and four uncyclotides from Chassalia chartacea (Rubiaceae family).
Thus far, this is the largest number of uncyclotides being reported in a single
species. Activity testing showed that the uncyclotides not only retain the
effectiveness but also are the most potent chassatides in the assays for
antimicrobial, cytotoxic, and hemolytic activities. Genetic characterization of
novel chassatides revealed that they have the shortest precursors of all known
cyclotides hitherto isolated, which represents a new class of cyclotide
precursors. This is the first report of cyclotide genes in a second genus, the
Chassalia, other than the Hedyotis (Oldenlandia) of the Rubiaceae family. In
addition, we also report the characterization of two Met-oxidized derivatives of 
chassatides C2 and C11. The oxidation of Met residue causes loss of
bioactivities, strengthening the importance of the hydrophobic patch for membrane
interaction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.338970 
PMCID: PMC3366795
PMID: 22467870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

