
1. Cell Microbiol. 2012 Aug;14(8):1257-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2012.01796.x.
Epub 2012 Apr 22.

Interferon-gamma signals via an ERK1/2-ARF6 pathway to promote bacterial
internalization by gut epithelia.

Smyth D(1), McKay CM, Gulbransen BD, Phan VC, Wang A, McKay DM.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Research Group, Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, The 
Calvin, Phoebe and Joan Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada.

The barrier function of the epithelium lining the intestine is essential for
health by preventing the free passage of colonic bacteria into the mucosa.
Epithelia treated with interferon (IFN)-γ display increased bacteria
transcytosis. Much is known of how IFNγ affects the tight junction and
paracellular permeability, yet its role in modifying transcellular traffic of
commensal bacteria remains poorly understood. Using immunoblotting, ELISA and
immunolocalization, IFNγ was found to activate extracellular regulated kinase
(ERK)1/2 in the human colon-like T84 epithelial cell line. Pharmacological
inhibition of MEK/ERK1/2 signalling with U0126 significantly inhibited
IFNγ-induced increases in the transcytosis of non-invasive Escherichia coli
(strain HB101). IFNγ treatment enhanced epithelial internalization of E. coli,
some of which subsequently escaped the enterocyte. Molecular analyses revealed
that ERK1/2 inhibition prevented activation of the ADP-ribosylation factor
(ARF)-6, a protein associated with endocytosis, and that siRNA knock-down of ARF6
expression reduced IFNγ-induced E. coli internalization into T84 cells. None of
these interventions affected the drop in transepithelial resistance caused by
IFNγ. Thus, increased transcellular passage may be a major component of
IFNγ-induced increases in epithelial permeability, and ERK1/2 and ARF6 are
presented as important molecules in IFNγ-evoked transcytosis of bacteria across
gut epithelia.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2012.01796.x 
PMID: 22463716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

