
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33478. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033478. Epub 2012 Mar 30.

LILRA2 selectively modulates LPS-mediated cytokine production and inhibits
phagocytosis by monocytes.

Lu HK(1), Mitchell A, Endoh Y, Hampartzoumian T, Huynh O, Borges L, Geczy C,
Bryant K, Tedla N.

Author information: 
(1)Inflammation and Infection Research Centre, School of Medical Sciences,
Department of Pathology, University of New South Wales, Australia. [corrected].

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(8). doi:
10.1371/annotation/f4475cbd-3518-46cd-bb6b-a326008af388.

The activating immunoglobulin-like receptor, subfamily A, member 2 (LILRA2) is
primarily expressed on the surface of cells of the innate immunity including
monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, basophils and eosinophils but not on
lymphocytes and NK cells. LILRA2 cross-linking on monocytes induces
pro-inflammatory cytokines while inhibiting dendritic cell differentiation and
antigen presentation. A similar activating receptor, LILRA4, has been shown to
modulate functions of TLR7/9 in dendritic cells. These suggest a selective immune
regulatory role for LILRAs during innate immune responses. However, whether
LILRA2 has functions distinct from other receptors of the innate immunity
including Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 and FcγRI remains unknown. Moreover, the
effects of LILRA2 on TLR4 and FcγRI-mediated monocyte functions are not
elucidated. Here, we show activation of monocytes via LILRA2 cross-linking
selectively increased GM-CSF production but failed to induce IL-12 and MCP-1
production that were strongly up-regulated by LPS, suggesting functions distinct 
from TLR4. Interestingly, LILRA2 cross-linking on monocytes induced similar
amounts of IL-6, IL-8, G-CSF and MIP-1α but lower levels of TNFα, IL-1β, IL-10
and IFNγ compared to those stimulated with LPS. Furthermore, cross-linking of
LILRA2 on monocytes significantly decreased phagocytosis of IgG-coated
micro-beads and serum opsonized Escherichia coli but had limited effect on
phagocytosis of non-opsonized bacteria. Simultaneous co-stimulation of monocytes 
through LILRA2 and LPS or sequential activation of monocytes through LILRA2
followed by LPS led lower levels of TNFα, IL-1β and IL-12 production compared to 
LPS alone, but had additive effect on levels of IL-10 and IFNγ but not on IL-6.
Interestingly, LILRA2 cross-linking on monocytes caused significant inhibition of
TLR4 mRNA and protein, suggesting LILRA2-mediated suppression of LPS responses
might be partly via regulation of this receptor. Taken together, we provide
evidence that LILRA2-mediated activation of monocytes is significantly different 
to LPS and that LILRA2 selectively modulates LPS-mediated monocyte activation and
FcγRI-dependent phagocytosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033478 
PMCID: PMC3316576
PMID: 22479404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

