
1. Phys Biol. 2012;9(2):021001. doi: 10.1088/1478-3975/9/2/021001. Epub 2012 Apr 3.

Single-molecule studies of DNA transcription using atomic force microscopy.

Billingsley DJ(1), Bonass WA, Crampton N, Kirkham J, Thomson NH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Leeds, Woodhouse Lane, Leeds,
West Yorkshire LS2 9JT, UK.

Atomic force microscopy (AFM) can detect single biomacromolecules with a high
signal-to-noise ratio on atomically flat biocompatible support surfaces, such as 
mica. Contrast arises from the innate forces and therefore AFM does not require
imaging contrast agents, leading to sample preparation that is relatively
straightforward. The ability of AFM to operate in hydrated environments,
including humid air and aqueous buffers, allows structure and function of
biological and biomolecular systems to be retained. These traits of the AFM are
ensuring that it is being increasingly used to study deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) 
structure and DNA-protein interactions down to the secondary structure level.
This report focuses in particular on reviewing the applications of AFM to the
study of DNA transcription in reductionist single-molecule bottom-up approaches. 
The technique has allowed new insights into the interactions between ribonucleic 
acid (RNA) polymerase to be gained and enabled quantification of some aspects of 
the transcription process, such as promoter location, DNA wrapping and
elongation. More recently, the trend is towards studying the interactions of more
than one enzyme operating on a single DNA template. These methods begin to reveal
the mechanics of gene expression at the single-molecule level and will enable us 
to gain greater understanding of how the genome is transcribed and translated
into the proteome.

DOI: 10.1088/1478-3975/9/2/021001 
PMID: 22473059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

