
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 1;287(23):19725-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.309799. Epub 2012
Apr 3.

Vav1 oncogenic mutation inhibits T cell receptor-induced calcium mobilization
through inhibition of phospholipase Cγ1 activation.

Knyazhitsky M(1), Moas E, Shaginov E, Luria A, Braiman A.

Author information: 
(1)Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel.

Robust elevation of the cytosolic calcium concentration is a crucial early step
for T cell activation triggered by the T cell antigen receptor. Vav1 is a
proto-oncogene expressed in hematopoietic cells that is indispensable for
transducing the calcium-mobilizing signal. Following T cell receptor stimulation,
Vav1 facilitates formation of signaling microclusters through multiple
interactions with other proteins participating in the signaling cascade.
Truncation of the N terminus of Vav1 produces its oncogenic version, which is
unable to support normal calcium flux following T cell activation. We show here
that truncation of the N-terminal region of Vav1 alters the fine structure of
protein complexes in the signaling clusters, affecting the interaction of Vav1
with phospholipase Cγ1 (PLCγ1). This alteration is accompanied by a decrease in
PLCγ1 phosphorylation and inhibition of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate production. 
We suggest that the structural integrity of the N-terminal region of Vav1 is
important for the proper formation of the Vav1-associated signaling complexes.
The oncogenic truncation of this region elicits conformational changes that
interfere with the Vav1-mediated activation of PLCγ1 and that inhibit calcium
mobilization.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.309799 
PMCID: PMC3366006
PMID: 22474331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

