
1. Microbes Infect. 2012 Aug;14(9):748-55. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2012.03.001. Epub
2012 Mar 21.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor type I may contribute to transient, non-specific 
changes in immunity in the subacute phase of murine tuberculosis.

Kager LM(1), van der Windt GJ, Wieland CW, Florquin S, van 't Veer C, van der
Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam-CINIMA, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
l.m.kager@amc.uva.nl

Tuberculosis, caused by Mycobacterium (M.) tuberculosis, is a devastating
infectious disease causing many deaths worldwide. Non-specific host defense
mechanisms such as the coagulation and fibrinolytic system may give insight in
possible new therapeutic targets. Plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1),
an important regulator of inflammation and fibrinolysis, might be of interest as 
tuberculosis patients have elevated plasma levels of PAI-1. In this study we set 
out to investigate the role of PAI-1 during tuberculosis in vivo. Wildtype (WT)
and PAI-1 deficient (PAI-1⁻/⁻) mice were intranasally infected with M.
tuberculosis H37rv and sacrificed after 2, 5 and 29 weeks. Five weeks
post-infection, bacterial loads in lungs of PAI-1⁻/⁻ mice were significantly
higher compared to WT mice, while no differences were seen 2 and 29 weeks
post-infection. At two weeks post-infection increased influx of macrophages and
lymphocytes was observed. PAI-1 deficiency was associated with a reduced cytokine
response in the lungs; however, upon stimulation with tuberculin purified protein
derivative (PPD), PAI-1⁻/⁻ splenocytes released increased levels of IFN-γ
compared to WT. No clear differences were found between PAI-1⁻/⁻ and WT mice at
29 weeks after infection. In conclusion, these data suggest that PAI-1
contributes to transient, non-specific changes in immunity during the early phase
of murine tuberculosis.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2012.03.001 
PMID: 22484384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

