
1. Epigenetics. 2012 May;7(5):502-13. doi: 10.4161/epi.19801. Epub 2012 May 1.

Genetic and epigenetic analysis of non-small cell lung cancer with
NotI-microarrays.

Dmitriev AA(1), Kashuba VI, Haraldson K, Senchenko VN, Pavlova TV, Kudryavtseva
AV, Anedchenko EA, Krasnov GS, Pronina IV, Loginov VI, Kondratieva TT, Kazubskaya
TP, Braga EA, Yenamandra SP, Ignatjev I, Ernberg I, Klein G, Lerman MI,
Zabarovsky ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden.

This study aimed to clarify genetic and epigenetic alterations that occur during 
lung carcinogenesis and to design perspective sets of newly identified
biomarkers. The original method includes chromosome 3 specific NotI-microarrays
containing 180 NotI clones associated with genes for hybridization with 40 paired
normal/tumor DNA samples of primary lung tumors: 28 squamous cell carcinomas
(SCC) and 12 adenocarcinomas (ADC). The NotI-microarray data were confirmed by
qPCR and bisulfite sequencing analyses. Forty-four genes showed methylation
and/or deletions in more than 15% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) samples. 
In general, SCC samples were more frequently methylated/deleted than ADC.
Moreover, the SCC alterations were observed already at stage I of tumor
development, whereas in ADC many genes showed tumor progression specific
methylation/deletions. Among genes frequently methylated/deleted in NSCLC, only a
few were already known tumor suppressor genes: RBSP3 (CTDSPL), VHL and THRB. The 
RPL32, LOC285205, FGD5 and other genes were previously not shown to be involved
in lung carcinogenesis. Ten methylated genes, i.e., IQSEC1, RBSP3, ITGA 9, FOXP1,
LRRN1, GNAI2, VHL, FGD5, ALDH1L1 and BCL6 were tested for expression by qPCR and 
were found downregulated in the majority of cases. Three genes (RBSP3, FBLN2 and 
ITGA9) demonstrated strong cell growth inhibition activity. A comprehensive
statistical analysis suggested the set of 19 gene markers, ANKRD28, BHLHE40,
CGGBP1, RBSP3, EPHB1, FGD5, FOXP1, GORASP1/TTC21, IQSEC1, ITGA9, LOC285375,
LRRC3B, LRRN1, MITF, NKIRAS1/RPL15, TRH, UBE2E2, VHL, WNT7A, to allow early
detection, tumor progression, metastases and to discriminate between SCC and ADC 
with sensitivity and specificity of 80-100%.

DOI: 10.4161/epi.19801 
PMID: 22491060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

