
1. J Infect Dis. 2012 Jun 15;205(12):1849-57. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jis290. Epub 2012 
Apr 5.

Interleukin 1 receptor-associated kinase m impairs host defense during
pneumococcal pneumonia.

van der Windt GJ(1), Blok DC, Hoogerwerf JJ, Lammers AJ, de Vos AF, Van't Veer C,
Florquin S, Kobayashi KS, Flavell RA, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND:  Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common causative organism in
community-acquired pneumonia. Pneumococci that try to invade the lower airways
are recognized by innate immune cells through pattern recognition receptors,
including Toll-like receptors 2, 4, and 9. Interleukin 1 (IL-1)
receptor-associated kinase (IRAK)-M is a proximal inhibitor of Toll-like receptor
signaling.
METHODS: To determine the role of IRAK-M in host defense during pneumococcal
pneumonia, IRAK-M- deficient and wild-type mice were intranasally infected with
S. pneumoniae.
RESULTS: IRAK-M-deficient mice demonstrated a reduced lethality after infection
with S. pneumoniae via the airways. Whereas bacterial burdens were similar in
IRAK-M-deficient and wild-type mice early (3 hours) after infection, from 24
hours onward the number of pneumococci recovered from lungs and distant body
sites were 10-100-fold lower in the former mouse strain. The diminished bacterial
growth and dissemination in IRAK-M-deficient mice were preceded by an increased
early influx of neutrophils into lung tissue and elevated pulmonary levels of
IL-1β and CXCL1. IRAK-M deficiency did not influence bacterial growth after
intravenous administration of S. pneumoniae.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that IRAK-M impairs host defense during
pneumococcal pneumonia at the primary site of infection at least in part by
inhibiting the early immune response.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jis290 
PMID: 22492852  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

