
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34395. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034395. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

Identification of new hematopoietic cell subsets with a polyclonal antibody
library specific for neglected proteins.

Moro M(1), Crosti M, Creo P, Gallina P, Curti S, Sugliano E, Scavelli R, Cattaneo
D, Canidio E, Marconi M, Rebulla P, Sarmientos P, Viale G, Pagani M, Abrignani S.

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione Istituto Nazionale di Genetica Molecolare, INGM, Milan, Italy.

The identification of new markers, the expression of which defines new
phenotipically and functionally distinct cell subsets, is a main objective in
cell biology. We have addressed the issue of identifying new cell specific
markers with a reverse proteomic approach whereby approximately 1700 human open
reading frames encoding proteins predicted to be transmembrane or secreted have
been selected in silico for being poorly known, cloned and expressed in bacteria.
These proteins have been purified and used to immunize mice with the aim of
obtaining polyclonal antisera mostly specific for linear epitopes. Such a
library, made of about 1600 different polyclonal antisera, has been obtained and 
screened by flow cytometry on cord blood derived CD34+CD45dim cells and on
peripheral blood derived mature lymphocytes (PBLs). We identified three new
proteins expressed by fractions of CD34+CD45dim cells and eight new proteins
expressed by fractions of PBLs. Remarkably, we identified proteins the presence
of which had not been demonstrated previously by transcriptomic analysis. From
the functional point of view, looking at new proteins expressed on CD34+CD45dim
cells, we identified one cell surface protein (MOSC-1) the expression of which on
a minority of CD34+ progenitors marks those CD34+CD45dim cells that will go
toward monocyte/granulocyte differentiation. In conclusion, we show a new way of 
looking at the membranome by assessing expression of generally neglected proteins
with a library of polyclonal antisera, and in so doing we have identified new
potential subsets of hematopoietic progenitors and of mature PBLs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034395 
PMCID: PMC3319577
PMID: 22496798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

