
1. Environ Microbiol. 2012 Jun;14(6):1517-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2012.02739.x.
Epub 2012 Apr 13.

Assessing sub-seafloor microbial activity by combined stable isotope probing with
deuterated water and 13C-bicarbonate.

Wegener G(1), Bausch M, Holler T, Thang NM, Prieto Mollar X, Kellermann MY,
Hinrichs KU, Boetius A.

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred Wegener Institute
for Polar and Marine Research, Am Handelshafen 12, Bremerhaven, Germany.
gwegener@mpi-bremen.de

Sub-seafloor sediments are populated by large numbers of microbial cells but not 
much is known about their metabolic activities, growth rates and carbon
assimilation pathways. Here we introduce a new method enabling the sensitive
detection of microbial lipid production and the distinction of auto- and
heterotrophic carbon assimilation. Application of this approach to anoxic
sediments from a Swedish fjord allowed to compare the activity of different
functional groups, the growth and turnover times of the bacterial and archaeal
communities. The assay involves dual stable isotope probing (SIP) with deuterated
water (D(2) O) and (13) C(DIC) (dissolved inorganic carbon). Culture experiments 
confirmed that the D content in newly synthesized lipids is in equilibrium with
the D content in labelled water, independent of whether the culture grew hetero- 
or autotrophically. The ratio of (13) C(DIC) to D(2) O incorporation enables
distinction between these two carbon pathways in studies of microbial cultures
and in environmental communities. Furthermore, D(2) O-SIP is sufficiently
sensitive to detect the formation of few hundred cells per day in a gram of
sediment. In anoxic sediments from a Swedish fjord, we found that > 99% of newly 
formed lipids were attributed to predominantly heterotrophic bacteria. The
production rate of bacterial lipids was highest in the top 5 cm and decreased
60-fold below this depth while the production rate of archaeal lipids was rather 
low throughout the top meter of seabed. The contrasting patterns in the rates of 
archaeal and bacterial lipid formation indicate that the factors controlling the 
presence of these two lipid groups must differ fundamentally.

© 2012 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2012.02739.x 
PMID: 22498240  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

