
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 8;109(19):E1143-52. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1200498109. Epub 2012 Apr 9.

Activation of invariant natural killer T cells by lipid excess promotes tissue
inflammation, insulin resistance, and hepatic steatosis in obese mice.

Wu L(1), Parekh VV, Gabriel CL, Bracy DP, Marks-Shulman PA, Tamboli RA, Kim S,
Mendez-Fernandez YV, Besra GS, Lomenick JP, Williams B, Wasserman DH, Van Kaer L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. lan.wu@vanderbilt.edu

Obesity triggers a low-grade systemic inflammation, which plays an important role
in the development of obesity-associated metabolic diseases. In searching for
links between lipid accumulation and chronic inflammation, we examined invariant 
natural killer T (iNKT) cells, a subset of T lymphocytes that react with lipids
and regulate inflammatory responses. We show that iNKT cells respond to dietary
lipid excess and become activated before or at the time of tissue recruitment of 
inflammatory leukocytes, and that these cells progressively increase
proinflammatory cytokine production in obese mice. Such iNKT cells skew other
leukocytes toward proinflammatory cytokine production and induce an imbalanced
proinflammatory cytokine environment in multiple tissues. Further, iNKT cell
deficiency ameliorates tissue inflammation and provides protection against
obesity-induced insulin resistance and hepatic steatosis. Conversely, chronic
iNKT cell stimulation using a canonical iNKT cell agonist exacerbates tissue
inflammation and obesity-associated metabolic disease. These findings place iNKT 
cells into the complex network linking lipid excess to inflammation in obesity
and suggest new therapeutic avenues for obesity-associated metabolic disorders.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1200498109 
PMCID: PMC3358828
PMID: 22493234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

