
1. J Nutr. 2012 Jul;142(7):1336-42. doi: 10.3945/jn.111.154732. Epub 2012 Apr 11.

Supplementation with galacto-oligosaccharides increases the percentage of NK
cells and reduces colitis severity in Smad3-deficient mice.

Gopalakrishnan A(1), Clinthorne JF, Rondini EA, McCaskey SJ, Gurzell EA, Langohr 
IM, Gardner EM, Fenton JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI, USA.

Comment in
    J Nutr. 2012 Jul;142(7):1189-90.

The gut microbiota plays an essential role in intestinal immunity. Prebiotics,
including galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS), are fermentable fibers that
beneficially affect the host by stimulating the growth of specific microbial
populations. We investigated the effect of GOS on colitis development and on
immune variables in Smad3-deficient mice treated with the pathogen Helicobacter
hepaticus. Mice were supplemented daily with 5000 mg GOS/kg body weight 2 wk
prior to infection and 4 wk postinfection, a time period during which colitis
severity peaks in this model. Mice (n = 4-8/treatment at each time) were killed
preinfection (0 d) and at 3, 7, and 28 d postinfection to evaluate immune
variables in the spleen and in mesenteric lymph nodes (MsLN) by flow cytometry.
Colon and cecum samples were collected for histopathologic analysis. Fecal
pellets (n = 8-9/treatment) were collected prior to infection to measure relative
changes in Bifidobacterium ssp. and Lactobacillum ssp. by real-time PCR. GOS
significantly reduced colitis severity in response to H. hepaticus (P < 0.0001). 
This was associated with a significant increase in the percentage of NK cells in 
the spleen (P < 0.001) and in MsLN (P < 0.001) at 3 d postinfection and a
1.5-fold increase in fecal Bifidobacterium ssp. (P = 0.003). GOS stimulated NK
expression of CCR9, a chemokine receptor involved in lymphocyte trafficking to
the gut preinfection (0 d) in the blood (P = 0.02), spleen (P = 0.033), and MsLN 
(P = 0.017). In addition, GOS stimulated colonic IL-15 production 3 d
postinfection (P < 0.001). These data suggest that GOS reduces colitis by
modulating the function and trafficking of NK cells and may provide a novel
therapeutic strategy for individuals with inflammatory bowel disease.

DOI: 10.3945/jn.111.154732 
PMID: 22496400  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

