
1. Clin Chim Acta. 2012 Aug 16;413(15-16):1211-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2012.03.020.
Epub 2012 Apr 3.

Diagnostic and clinical utility of antibodies against the nuclear body
promyelocytic leukaemia and Sp100 antigens in patients with primary biliary
cirrhosis.

Mytilinaiou MG(1), Meyer W, Scheper T, Rigopoulou EI, Probst C, Koutsoumpas AL,
Abeles D, Burroughs AK, Komorowski L, Vergani D, Bogdanos DP.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Immunopathology, Institute of Liver Studies, King's College London
School of Medicine at King's College Hospital, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: The lack of an immunoassay that detects antibodies to promyelocytic
leukaemia (PML) protein, the primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC)-specific multiple
nuclear dot (MND) antigen, has prompted us to develop a line immunoassay (LIA)
for the simultaneous detection of PML and Sp100 MND-specific autoantibodies.
METHODS: PML and Sp100 were expressed in Escherichia coli, and analysed by
SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting using a monoclonal antibody and MALDI-ToF
fingerprinting. A quantitative PML and Sp100 LIA were developed and testing was
performed in 150 anti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA) positive, 20 AMA-PBCs and 130 
controls.
RESULTS: Thirty-five (23%) of 150 AMA+ PBCs (18 anti-MND+) were anti-PML+ (12%)
or anti-Sp100+ (20%), 10 being anti-PML+/Sp100+, 5 single anti-PML+ and 20 single
anti-Sp100+. Six (30%, 5 anti-MND+) AMA-PBCs were anti-PML+ or Sp100+. Only 2
(1.7%) pathological controls were anti-PML+ and/or anti-Sp100+. Levels of
anti-PML correlated with those of anti-Sp100 (R=0.64, p<0.0001). The autoantibody
profile largely remained unchanged over a 10year-follow up (52 patients, 352
samples). Anti-PML, Sp100 or MND-reactive PBCs were younger and had longer
disease duration than the seronegative (p=0.06, for both). Anti-Sp100 levels
correlated with the Mayo risk score (r=0.63, p=0.01). Anti-PML+/Sp100+ patients
had more advanced disease compared to patients negative for anti-PML/Sp100
(p=0.04).
CONCLUSION: The new line immunoassay offers a robust and accurate method for the 
detection of clinically-relevant PBC-specific anti-MND antibodies.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2012.03.020 
PMID: 22503841  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

