
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2012 Jul;50(7):2366-72. doi: 10.1128/JCM.06581-11. Epub 2012
Apr 18.

Antimicrobial resistance, toxinotype, and genotypic profiling of Clostridium
difficile isolates of swine origin.

Fry PR(1), Thakur S, Abley M, Gebreyes WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Preventive Medicine, Infectious Diseases Molecular
Epidemiology Laboratory, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

The occurrence of Clostridium difficile infections in patients that do not
fulfill the classical risk factors prompted us to investigate new risk factors of
disease. The goal of this study was to characterize strains and associated
antimicrobial resistance determinants of C. difficile isolated from swine raised 
in Ohio and North Carolina. Genotypic approaches used include PCR detection,
toxinotyping, DNA sequencing, and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) DNA
fingerprinting. Thirty-one percent (37/119) of isolates carried both tetM and
tetW genes. The ermB gene was found in 91% of isolates that were resistant to
erythromycin (68/75). Eighty-five percent (521/609) of isolates were toxin gene
tcdB and tcdA positive. A total of 81% (494/609) of isolates were positive for
cdtB and carry a tcdC gene (a toxin gene negative regulator) with a 39-bp
deletion. Overall, 88% (196/223) of pigs carry a single C. difficile strain,
while 12% (27/223) of pigs carried multiple strains. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first report of individual pigs found to carry more than
one strain type of C. difficile. A significant difference in toxinotype profiles 
in the two geographic locations was noted, with a significantly (P < 0.001)
higher prevalence of toxinotype V found in North Carolina (84%; 189/224) than in 
Ohio (55%; 99/181). Overall, the study findings indicate that significant
proportions of C. difficile in swine are toxigenic and often are associated with 
antimicrobial resistance genes, although they are not resistant to drugs that are
used to treat C. difficile infections.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.06581-11 
PMCID: PMC3405606
PMID: 22518873  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

