
1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2012 Oct;304(8):619-25. doi: 10.1007/s00403-012-1237-1. Epub
2012 Apr 21.

Patented natural avocado sugar modulates the HBD-2 and HBD-3 expression in human 
keratinocytes through toll-like receptor-2 and ERK/MAPK activation.

Paoletti I(1), Buommino E, Fusco A, Baudouin C, Msika P, Tufano MA, Baroni A,
Donnarumma G.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Microbiology and Clinical Microbiology, Department of Experimental 
Medicine, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

Keratinocytes stimulated by microbial organisms secrete not only a variety of
cytokines, chemokines and growth factors, but also antimicrobial peptides such as
beta-defensins (HBDs) such as HBD-2 and HBD-3. AV119, a patented blend of avocado
sugar, triggers the up-regulation of HBD-2 in skin epithelia upon contact with
AV119, but the signalling mechanisms involved are not completely understood. The 
purpose of this study was to determine if AV119 was able to induce also the
expression of HBD-3 in human keratinocytes. In addition, the receptor and
intracellular pathways involved in the AV119 up-regulation of HBD-2 and HBD-3
were investigated. Our results demonstrated that AV119 induces a significantly
increase of the expression of HBD-3. In addition, the HBD-2 and HBD-3
AV119-induced gene expression and release are TLR-2 dependent. Finally, we
demonstrated that AV119 induced ERK/MAPK phosphorylation in human keratinocytes, 
thus providing evidence that HBD-2 and HBD-3 secretion is through the same
transductional pathway. The ability of AV119 to induce also HBD-3 may amplify its
therapeutic potential against a broader spectrum of bacterial and yeast strains
responsible for human skin disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-012-1237-1 
PMID: 22526324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

