
1. Hum Pathol. 2012 Oct;43(10):1745-54. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.12.024. Epub
2012 Apr 20.

Assessment of desmosomal components (desmoglein 1-3, plakoglobin) in cardia
mucosa in relation to gastroesophageal reflux disease and Helicobacter pylori
infection.

Wex T(1), Kuester D, Mönkemüller K, Stahr A, Fry LC, Kandulski A, Kropf S,
Roessner A, Malfertheiner P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases,
Otto-von-Guericke University, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany. thomas.wex@med.ovgu.de

Gastroesophageal reflux disease is associated with impaired epithelial barrier
function and abnormal expression of proteins forming cell-cell contacts by tight 
junctions and desmosomes in distal esophageal squamous mucosa. Although
gastroesophageal reflux disease and Helicobacter pylori are both associated with 
chronic inflammation of the adjacent cardia mucosa, it is not known whether these
lead to derangements of the desmosomal complexes. Here, we assessed the
expression of 4 proteins (plakoglobin and desmoglein 1, 2, and 3) forming
epithelial desmosomal complexes by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase 
chain reaction and immunohistochemistry in biopsies from 67 patients with
gastroesophageal reflux disease and 23 gastroesophageal reflux disease-negative
controls. Plakoglobin and desmoglein 2 were ubiquitously expressed in all
samples, whereas desmoglein 1 and 3 were not expressed in cardia mucosa.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease was specifically associated with elevated
transcript levels of desmoglein 2 and plakoglobin. These were significantly
increased from 2.0- to 2.7-fold in patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease 
compared with controls (P < .01), and significantly increased immunohistochemical
scores for both proteins were observed (P < .05) as well. The combined presence
of gastroesophageal reflux disease and Helicobacter pylori infection had no
additional effect on desmosomal gene expression. Taken together, the
up-regulation of plakoglobin and desmoglein 2 in cardia mucosa of patients with
gastroesophageal reflux disease supports the concept that the "transition zone"
between distal esophagus and proximal stomach is affected by gastroesophageal
reflux disease as well, and architectural and molecular changes in the desmosomal
compartment contribute to the pathogenesis of gastroesophageal reflux disease in 
the cardia mucosa.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.12.024 
PMID: 22521077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

