
1. J Bacteriol. 2012 Jul;194(13):3426-36. doi: 10.1128/JB.00041-12. Epub 2012 Apr
20.

Centromere binding and evolution of chromosomal partition systems in the
Burkholderiales.

Passot FM(1), Calderon V, Fichant G, Lane D, Pasta F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie et Génétique Moléculaires, UMR 5100
CNRS/Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France.

How split genomes arise and evolve in bacteria is poorly understood. Since each
replicon of such genomes encodes a specific partition (Par) system, the evolution
of Par systems could shed light on their evolution. The cystic fibrosis pathogen 
Burkholderia cenocepacia has three chromosomes (c1, c2, and c3) and one plasmid
(pBC), whose compatibility depends on strictly specific interactions of the
centromere sequences (parS) with their cognate binding proteins (ParB). However, 
the Par systems of B. cenocepacia c2, c3, and pBC share many features, suggesting
that they arose within an extended family. Database searching revealed seven
subfamilies of Par systems like those of B. cenocepacia. All are from plasmids
and secondary chromosomes of the Burkholderiales, which reinforces the proposal
of an extended family. The subfamily of the Par system of B. cenocepacia c3
includes plasmid variants with parS sequences divergent from that of c3. Using
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), we found that ParB-c3 binds
specifically to centromeres of these variants, despite high DNA sequence
divergence. We suggest that the Par system of B. cenocepacia c3 has preserved the
features of an ancestral system. In contrast, these features have diverged
variably in the plasmid descendants. One such descendant is found both in
Ralstonia pickettii 12D, on a free plasmid, and in Ralstonia pickettii 12J, on a 
plasmid integrated into the main chromosome. These observations suggest that we
are witnessing a plasmid-chromosome interaction from which a third chromosome
will emerge in a two-chromosome species.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00041-12 
PMCID: PMC3434744
PMID: 22522899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

