
1. J Immunol. 2012 Jun 1;188(11):5766-75. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102930. Epub 2012
Apr 25.

Beyond HLA-A*0201: new HLA-transgenic nonobese diabetic mouse models of type 1
diabetes identify the insulin C-peptide as a rich source of CD8+ T cell epitopes.

Antal Z(1), Baker JC, Smith C, Jarchum I, Babad J, Mukherjee G, Yang Y, Sidney J,
Sette A, Santamaria P, DiLorenzo TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease characterized by T cell responses to β
cell Ags, including insulin. Investigations employing the NOD mouse model of the 
disease have revealed an essential role for β cell-specific CD8(+) T cells in the
pathogenic process. As CD8(+) T cells specific for β cell Ags are also present in
patients, these reactivities have the potential to serve as therapeutic targets
or markers for autoimmune activity. NOD mice transgenic for human class I MHC
molecules have previously been employed to identify T cell epitopes having
important relevance to the human disease. However, most studies have focused
exclusively on HLA-A*0201. To broaden the reach of epitope-based monitoring and
therapeutic strategies, we have looked beyond this allele and developed NOD mice 
expressing human β(2)-microglobulin and HLA-A*1101 or HLA-B*0702, which are
representative members of the A3 and B7 HLA supertypes, respectively. We have
used islet-infiltrating T cells spontaneously arising in these strains to
identify β cell peptides recognized in the context of the transgenic HLA
molecules. This work has identified the insulin C-peptide as an abundant source
of CD8(+) T cell epitopes. Responses to these epitopes should be of considerable 
utility for immune monitoring, as they cannot reflect an immune reaction to
exogenously administered insulin, which lacks the C-peptide. Because the peptides
bound by one supertype member were found to bind certain other members also, the 
epitopes identified in this study have the potential to result in therapeutic and
monitoring tools applicable to large numbers of patients and at-risk individuals.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102930 
PMCID: PMC3358524
PMID: 22539795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

