
1. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Jul;39(7):7215-20. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1526-y. Epub 2012
Apr 25.

Association between BoLA-DRB3 and somatic cell count in Holstein cattle from
Argentina.

Baltian LR(1), Ripoli MV, Sanfilippo S, Takeshima SN, Aida Y, Giovambattista G.

Author information: 
(1)Dpto de Producci√≥n, FCV, UNLPam, Calle 116 esq 5, 6360 General Pico, LP,
Argentina.

Different studies have proved that the resistance/susceptibility to mastitis is
genetically determined. The major histocompatibility complex in cows is known as 
bovine lymphocyte antigen (BoLA). Genes from the BoLA have been associated with
the occurrence of infectious diseases such as mastitis and leukosis, especially
the BoLA-DRB gene. The object of the present study was to detect associations
between BoLA-DRB3 alleles and somatic cell count (SCC), as an indicator of
resistance/susceptibility to mastitis in Holstein cattle (N = 123) from La Pampa,
Argentina. Fisher's exact test and Woolf-Haldane odds ratio were applied to study
the association between SCC and BoLA-DRB3 allele frequencies. Significant
association was noted between BoLA-DRB3.2*23 and *27 alleles (p < 0.05) and
protective or susceptibility effects, respectively. In addition, alleles
BoLA-DRB3.2*20 and *25 exhibit suggestive association with high SCC (p < 0.1).
These results were partially in agreement with data reported from Japanese
Holstein cattle, but differed from those published by other authors. A possible
explanation for the contrasting results could be that the mastitis is a
multifactor disease caused by different pathogens. Moreover, most of the studies 
were carried out using PCR-RFLP method, which has less resolution than PCR-SBT
because PCR-RFLP defined alleles included more than one sequenced alleles.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-012-1526-y 
PMID: 22531932  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

