
1. J Immunol. 2012 Jun 1;188(11):5655-64. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102330. Epub 2012
Apr 27.

CRTH2 is a critical regulator of neutrophil migration and resistance to
polymicrobial sepsis.

Ishii M(1), Asano K, Namkoong H, Tasaka S, Mizoguchi K, Asami T, Kamata H,
Kimizuka Y, Fujiwara H, Funatsu Y, Kagawa S, Miyata J, Ishii K, Nakamura M, Hirai
H, Nagata K, Kunkel SL, Hasegawa N, Betsuyaku T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Keio University School
of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. ishii@z6.keio.jp

Although arachidonic acid cascade has been shown to be involved in sepsis, little
is known about the role of PGD(2) and its newly found receptor, chemoattractant
receptor-homologous molecule expressed on Th2 cells (CRTH2), on the septic
response. Severe sepsis is associated with the failure of neutrophil migration.
To investigate whether CRTH2 influences neutrophil recruitment and the lethality 
during sepsis, sepsis was induced by cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) surgery in
mice. CRTH2 knockout (CRTH2(-/-)) mice were highly resistant to CLP-induced
sepsis, which was associated with lower bacterial load and lower production of
TNF-Î±, IL-6, and CCL3. IL-10, an anti-inflammatory cytokine, was higher in
CRTH2(-/-) mice, blunting CLP-induced lethality in CRTH2(-/-) mice. Neutrophil
accumulation in the peritoneum was more pronounced after CLP in CRTH2(-/-) mice, 
which was associated with higher CXCR2 levels in circulating neutrophils.
Furthermore, sepsis caused a decrease in the level of acetylation of histone H3, 
an activation mark, at the CXCR2 promoter in wild-type neutrophils, suggesting
that CXCR2 expression levels are epigenetically regulated. Finally, both
pharmacological depletion of neutrophils and inhibition of CXCR2 abrogated the
survival benefit in CRTH2(-/-) mice. These results demonstrate that genetic
ablation of CRTH2 improved impaired neutrophil migration and survival during
severe sepsis, which was mechanistically associated with epigenetic-mediated
CXCR2 expression. Thus, CRTH2 is a potential therapeutic target for polymicrobial
sepsis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102330 
PMCID: PMC3498953
PMID: 22544936  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

