
1. Eur Spine J. 2013 Jun;22 Suppl 4:624-33. doi: 10.1007/s00586-012-2335-7. Epub
2012 May 8.

Tuberculosis of spine: neurological deficit.

Jain AK(1), Kumar J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital, University College of
Medical Sciences, Dilshad Garden, Delhi, India. dranilkjain@gmail.com

The most dreaded neurological complications in TB spine occur in active stage of 
disease by mechanical compression, instability and inflammation changes, while in
healed disease, these occur due to intrinsic changes in spinal cord secondary to 
internal salient in long standing kyphotic deformity. A judicious combination of 
conservative therapy and operative decompression when needed should form a
comprehensive integrated course of treatment for TB spine with neurological
complications. The patients showing relatively preserved cord with evidence of
edema/myelitis with predominantly fluid collection in extradural space on MRI
resolve on non-operative treatment, while the patients with extradural
compression of mixed or granulomatous nature showing entrapment of spinal cord
should be undertaken for early surgical decompression. The disease focus should
be debrided with removal of pus caseous tissue and sequestra. The viable bone
should only be removed to decompress the spinal cord and resultant gap should be 
bridged by bone graft. The preserved volume of spinal cord with edema/myelitis
and wet lesion on MRI usually would show good neural recovery. The spinal cord
showing myelomalacia with reduced cord volume and dry lesion likely to show a
poor neural recovery. The internal kyphectomy is indicated for paraplegia with
healed disease. These cases are bad risk for surgery and neural recovery. The
best form of treatment of late onset paraplegia is the prevention of development 
of severe kyphosis in initial active stage of disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00586-012-2335-7 
PMCID: PMC3691413
PMID: 22565802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

