
1. Indian J Med Res. 2012 Mar;135:359-64.

Phenotypic & molecular characterization of AmpC β-lactamases among Escherichia
coli, Klebsiella spp. & Enterobacter spp. from five Indian Medical Centers.

Manoharan A(1), Sugumar M, Kumar A, Jose H, Mathai D, Khilnani GC, Kapil A,
Francis G, Radhakrishnan K, Dutta TK, Parija SC, Narang R, Mendiratta DK, Deotale
V, Baronia AK, Prasad KN.

Author information: 
(1)Prof Benjamin M Pulimood Laboratories for Infection, Immunity & Inflammation, 
Medicine Unit I & Infectious Diseases, Christian Medical College, Vellore, India.

Comment in
    Indian J Med Res. 2013 Jan;137(1):216-7.
    Indian J Med Res. 2013 Jan;137(1):217-8.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: AmpC β-lactamases which are often plasmid mediated
hydrolyze all β-lactam antibiotics except cefepime and carbapenems. We evaluated 
the presence of AmpC β-lactamases among Enterobacteriaceae strains recovered
prospectively from patients at five Indian tertiary care centres.
METHODS: The study included 909 consecutive Gram-negative isolates recovered from
clinically significant specimens during June 2007 - May 2008 as part of an
ICMR-ESBL study. Among the study isolates, 312 were found to be cefoxitin
resistant by disc diffusion test (DDT). Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)
determination by E test was done against amikacin, levofloxacin, impinem,
meropenem, ertapenem, tigecycline and piperacillin-tazobactam. Combined DDT using
phenyl boronic acid as inhibitor with cefoxitin was used for phenotypic
confirmation of AmpC phenotype. The common Amp C genotypes ACC, FOX, MOX, DHA,
CIT and EBC were detected by multiplex PCR.
RESULTS: Plasmid mediated Amp C phenotype was confirmed in 114 of the 312 (36.5%)
cefoxitin resistant isolates with 255 (81.7%) showing multidrug resistance.
Susceptibility to tigecycline was highest (99%) followed by imipenem, meropenem
(97%), ertapenem (89%), amikacin (85%), and piperacillin-tazobactam (74.6%).
Levofloxacin resistance was 82 per cent. ESBL co carriage was observed among 92
per cent of Amp C producers. Among 114 Amp C producers, 48 could be assigned a
genotype, this included CIT- FOX (n = 25), EBC (n = 10), FOX (n = 4), CIT (n =
3), EBC-ACC (n = 2) and one each of DHA, EBC-DHA, FOX -DHA and FOX-EBC-DHA.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSIONS: Overall, AmpC phenotypes were found in 12.5 per
cent isolates, multidrug resistance and ESBL co-carriage among them was high
suggesting plasmid mediated spread. The study results have implications in
rational antimicrobial therapy and continued surveillance of mechanisms of
resistance among nosocomial pathogens.


PMCID: PMC3361873
PMID: 22561623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

