
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 22;109(21):8133-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1204844109. Epub 2012 May 7.

Depolymerization dynamics of individual filaments of bacterial cytoskeletal
protein FtsZ.

Mateos-Gil P(1), Paez A, Hörger I, Rivas G, Vicente M, Tarazona P, Vélez M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales Nicolás Cabrera, C-8, Universidad Autónoma 
de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

We report observation and analysis of the depolymerization filaments of the
bacterial cytoskeletal protein FtsZ (filament temperature-sensitive Z) formed on 
a mica surface. At low concentration, proteins adsorbed on the surface polymerize
forming curved filaments that close into rings that remain stable for some time
before opening irreversibly and fully depolymerizing. The distribution of ring
lifetimes (T) as a function of length (N), shows that the rate of ring aperture
correlates with filament length. If this ring lifetime is expressed as a bond
survival time, (T(b) ≡ NT), this correlation is abolished, indicating that these 
rupture events occur randomly and independently at each monomer interface. After 
rings open irreversibly, depolymerization of the remaining filaments is fast, but
can be slowed down and followed using a nonhydrolyzing GTP analogue. The
histogram of depolymerization velocities of individual filaments has an
asymmetric distribution that can be fit with a computer model that assumes two
rupture rates, a slow one similar to the one observed for ring aperture,
affecting monomers in the central part of the filaments, and a faster one
affecting monomers closer to the open ends. From the quantitative analysis, we
conclude that the depolymerization rate is affected both by nucleotide hydrolysis
rate and by its exchange along the filament, that all monomer interfaces are
equally competent for hydrolysis, although depolymerization is faster at the open
ends than in central filament regions, and that all monomer-monomer interactions,
regardless of the nucleotide present, can adopt a curved configuration.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1204844109 
PMCID: PMC3361441
PMID: 22566654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

