
1. Poult Sci. 2012 Jun;91(6):1335-41. doi: 10.3382/ps.2011-02062.

Quantitative analyses of genes associated with mucin synthesis of broiler
chickens with induced necrotic enteritis.

Forder RE(1), Nattrass GS, Geier MS, Hughes RJ, Hynd PI.

Author information: 
(1)School of Animal and Veterinary Sciences, The University of Adelaide,
Roseworthy, South Australia 5371. bec.forder@adelaide.edu.au

Clostridial infection of the intestine can result in necrotic enteritis (NE),
compromising production and health of poultry. Mucins play a major role in
protecting the intestinal epithelium from infection. The relative roles of
different mucins in gut pathology following bacterial challenge are unclear. This
study was designed to quantify the expression of mucin and mucin-related genes,
using intestinal samples from an NE challenge trial where birds were fed diets
with or without in-feed antimicrobials. A method for quantifying mucin gene
expression was established using a suite of reference genes to normalize
expression data. This method was then used to quantify the expression of 11
candidate genes involved in mucin, inflammatory cytokine, or growth factor
biosynthesis (IL-18, KGF, TLR4, TFF2, TNF-Î±, MUC2, MUC4, MUC5ac, MUC5b, MUC13,
and MUC16). The only genes that were differentially expressed in the intestine
among treatment groups were MUC2, MUC13, and MUC5ac. Expression of MUC2 and MUC13
was depressed by co-challenge with Eimeria spp. and Clostridium perfringens.
Antimicrobial treatment prevented an NE-induced decrease in MUC2 expression but
did not affect MUC13. The expression of MUC5ac was elevated in birds challenged
with Eimeria spp./C. perfringens compared with unchallenged controls and
antimicrobial treatment. Changes to MUC gene expression in challenged birds is
most likely a consequence of severe necrosis of the jejunal mucosa.

DOI: 10.3382/ps.2011-02062 
PMID: 22582290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

