
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2012 Aug;33(2):229-42. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.04.016.
Epub 2012 May 11.

Insulin-like growth factor binding protein 7, a member of insulin-like growth
factor signal pathway, involved in immune response of small abalone Haliotis
diversicolor.

Li N(1), Zhang Z, Zhang L, Wang S, Zou Z, Wang G, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for East China Sea, Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries College, Jimei University, Jimei, Xiamen, China.

Insulin-like growth factor binding protein 7 (IGFBP7), the only member of the
IGFBP superfamily that binds strongly to insulin, may have different functions
from other IGFBPs. Unlike other IGFBPs, there is no knowledge available on
aquatic invertebrate IGFBP7. In this study, a molluscan IGFBP7 gene, saIGFBP7,
was cloned for the first time from the small abalone Haliotis diversicolor. Its
full-length cDNA sequence is 1812 bp, with a 720 bp open reading frame encoding a
protein of 239 aa. The molecular mass of the deduced protein is approximately
25.37 kDa with an estimated pI of 5.00, and it shares highest 41% identity to
IGFBP7 of Amblyomma americanum. Analysis of conserved domains revealed the
presence of an IGFBP N-terminal domain (IB), a kazal-type serine proteinase
inhibitor domain (KI), and an immunoglobulin-like C2 domain (IgC2) in saIGFBP7.
Furthermore, the 12 cysteine residues and the signature amino acid motif
'xCGCCxxC' which are characterized by the amino terminus region of the IGFBP
superfamily are all presented in saIGFBP7. Quantitative real-time PCR and western
blot were employed to investigate the tissue distribution of saIGFBP7, and its
expression under bacterial challenge. The saIGFBP7 mRNA and protein could be
detected in all examined tissues, with the highest expression level in hemocytes,
higher expression level in gills, and was up-regulated in hemocytes and gills
after bacterial injection. In addition, saIGFBP7 mRNA transcripts were observed
in a subset of the branchial epithelium and the nucleus of hemocytes using the in
situ hybridization method. Interestingly, saIGFBP7 was detected mainly in the
goblet-like cell of the branchial epithelium by immunohistochemistry. These
results suggested that saIGFBP7 was likely to be involved in a function
associated with pathogenic infection and may play an important role in the adult 
abalone immune system.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.04.016 
PMID: 22584203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

