
1. Med Hypotheses. 2012 Aug;79(2):178-80. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2012.04.028. Epub 2012
May 16.

A postulated role of p130 in telomere maintenance by human papillomavirus
oncoprotein E7.

Zhang W(1), Tian Y, Chen JJ, Zhao W, Yu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenic Microbiology, Shandong University School of Medicine,
Jinan, Shandong 250012, China. zhangweifang@sdu.edu.cn

High-risk human papillomaviruses (HR-HPVs) infections is highly associated with
the development of cervical cancer. It is now recognized that telomere length
maintenance or extension is indispensable for carcinogenesis. The early
oncoproteins E6 and E7 are the main malignant transformation factors of HR-HPVs
and they maintain telomeres by different mechanisms, of which E6 protein
activating telomerase is well documented. Reports showed that E7 protein utilized
an alternative lengthen of telomere (ALT) mechanism to restore telomere length,
yet the underlying molecular basis remains largely unknown. We propose that
degradation of tumor suppressor pRb family member p130 plays an essential role in
E7-regulated telomere extension by ALT. ALT is a mechanism based on homologous
recombination (HR) between telomere sister chromatids, and a number of proteins
involved in the HR pathway, such as MRN [MRE11 (meiotic recombination
11)-Rad50-NBS1 (Nijmegen breakage syndrome 1)] complex are required for the ALT
pathway. Rb family member p130 could inhibit ALT by interacting with Rad50, while
HPV E7 could activate ALT by degrading p130. We will make E7 mutants which are
defective in p130 degradation to test whether these cells have a limited life
span. Besides, immunofluorescence assay will show an ALT-related promyelocytic
leukemia (PML) body (APBs) in E7-expressing cells. Although cervical cancer
usually has high telomerase activities since the expressing of HPV E6, the
anti-telomerase therapy will be unavailable for cervical cancer since it may
activate E7-induced ALT. Our hypothesis not only enrich the knowledge of the
regulation of ALT, but also indicate that p130 may serve as a potential
suppressor of ALT, and gene therapy of p130 may be used in cervical cancers.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2012.04.028 
PMID: 22595804  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

