
1. J Fish Dis. 2012 Jul;35(7):529-39. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2012.01378.x. Epub
2012 May 18.

Comparative proteomic analysis of virulent and rifampicin-attenuated
Flavobacterium psychrophilum.

Gliniewicz K(1), Plant KP, LaPatra SE, LaFrentz BR, Cain K, Snekvik KR, Call DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA 99164-7040, USA.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is the aetiologic agent of bacterial coldwater
disease and rainbow trout fry syndrome. In this study, we compared a wild-type
strain (CSF 259-93) with a rifampicin-resistant strain and virulence-attenuated
strain of F. psychrophilum (CSF 259-93B.17). The attenuated strain harboured a
mutation in the rpoB gene consistent with resistance to rifampicin.
Two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) and mass
spectrometry demonstrated an altered proteome with eight proteins characteristic 
for the parent strain and six that were unique to the attenuated strain.
Immunoblotting with a diagnostic monoclonal antibody (FL-43) identified a
putative antigen (FP1493) that was subsequently cloned, expressed as a
recombinant protein and confirmed as recognized by FL-43. 2D-PAGE, immunoblotting
with rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss (Walbaum), convalescent antisera and mass
spectrometry of bacterial whole-cell lysates revealed several uniquely expressed 
immunoreactive proteins including FP1493. An FP1493 recombinant subunit vaccine
was tested, but did not provide protection against challenge with the CSF259-93
strain. While the exact mechanism responsible for altered protein synthesis and
attenuation of CSF 259-93B.17 is still unknown, the differentially expressed
immunoreactive proteins are a valuable resource to develop subunit vaccines and
to identify proteins that are potentially involved in disease.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2761.2012.01378.x 
PMID: 22607560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

