
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36783. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036783. Epub 2012 May 7.

Microbe-specific C3b deposition in the horseshoe crab complement system in a
C2/factor B-dependent or -independent manner.

Tagawa K(1), Yoshihara T, Shibata T, Kitazaki K, Endo Y, Fujita T, Koshiba T,
Kawabata S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Systems Life Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Complement C3 plays an essential role in the opsonization of pathogens in the
mammalian complement system, whereas the molecular mechanism underlying C3
activation in invertebrates remains unknown. To understand the molecular
mechanism of C3b deposition on microbes, we characterized two types of C2/factor 
B homologs (designated TtC2/Bf-1 and TtC2/Bf-2) identified from the horseshoe
crab Tachypleus tridentatus. Although the domain architectures of TtC2/Bf-1 and
TtC2/Bf-2 were identical to those of mammalian homologs, they contained
five-repeated and seven-repeated complement control protein domains at their
N-terminal regions, respectively. TtC2/Bf-1 and TtC2/Bf-2 were synthesized and
glycosylated in hemocytes and secreted to hemolymph plasma, which existed in a
complex with C3 (TtC3), and their activation by microbes was absolutely
Mg(2+)-dependent. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that TtC3b deposition was
Mg(2+)-dependent on Gram-positive bacteria or fungi, but not on Gram-negative
bacteria. Moreover, this analysis demonstrated that Ca(2+)-dependent lectins
(C-reactive protein-1 and tachylectin-5A) were required for TtC3b deposition on
Gram-positive bacteria, and that a Ca(2+)-independent lectin (Tachypleus plasma
lectin-1) was definitely indispensable for TtC3b deposition on fungi. In
contrast, a horseshoe crab lipopolysaccharide-sensitive protease factor C was
necessary and sufficient to deposit TtC3b on Gram-negative bacteria. We conclude 
that plasma lectins and factor C play key roles in microbe-specific TtC3b
deposition in a C2/factor B-dependent or -independent manner.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036783 
PMCID: PMC3351276
PMID: 22611464  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

