
1. J Immunol. 2012 Jun 15;188(12):6399-406. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102903. Epub 2012
May 18.

CXCL17 is a mucosal chemokine elevated in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis that
exhibits broad antimicrobial activity.

Burkhardt AM(1), Tai KP, Flores-Guiterrez JP, Vilches-Cisneros N, Kamdar K,
Barbosa-Quintana O, Valle-Rios R, Hevezi PA, Zu√±iga J, Selman M, Ouellette AJ,
Zlotnik A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, School of Medicine, University of
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

The mucosal immune network is a crucial barrier preventing pathogens from
entering the body. The network of immune cells that mediates the defensive
mechanisms in the mucosa is likely shaped by chemokines, which attract a wide
range of immune cells to specific sites of the body. Chemokines have been divided
into homeostatic or inflammatory depending upon their expression patterns.
Additionally, several chemokines mediate direct killing of invading pathogens, as
exemplified by CCL28, a mucosa-associated chemokine that exhibits antimicrobial
activity against a range of pathogens. CXCL17 was the last chemokine ligand to be
described and is the 17th member of the CXC chemokine family. Its expression
pattern in 105 human tissues and cells indicates that CXCL17 is a homeostatic,
mucosa-associated chemokine. Its strategic expression in mucosal tissues suggests
that it is involved in innate immunity and/or sterility of the mucosa. To test
the latter hypothesis, we tested CXCL17 for possible antibacterial activity
against a panel of pathogenic and opportunistic bacteria. Our results indicate
that CXCL17 has potent antimicrobial activities and that its mechanism of
antimicrobial action involves peptide-mediated bacterial membrane disruption.
Because CXCL17 is strongly expressed in bronchi, we measured it in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluids and observed that it is strongly upregulated in
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. We conclude that CXCL17 is an antimicrobial
mucosal chemokine that may play a role in the pathogenesis of interstitial lung
diseases.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102903 
PMCID: PMC3370106
PMID: 22611239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

