
1. Brain Behav Immun. 2012 Aug;26(6):972-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.05.008. Epub
2012 May 18.

Opioid maintenance therapy restores CD4+ T cell function by normalizing
CD4+CD25(high) regulatory T cell frequencies in heroin user.

Riss GL(1), Chang DI, Wevers C, Westendorf AM, Buer J, Scherbaum N, Hansen W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, University Hospital Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

There is an increasing body of evidence that heroin addiction is associated with 
severe alterations in immune function, which might contribute to an increased
risk to contract infectious diseases like hepatitis B and C or HIV. However, the 
impact of heroin consumption on the CD4(+) T cell compartment is not well
understood. Therefore, we analyzed the frequency and functional phenotype of
CD4(+) T cells as well as immune-suppressive CD4(+)CD25(high) regulatory T cells 
(Tregs) isolated from the peripheral blood of opiate addicts currently abusing
heroin (n=27) in comparison to healthy controls (n=25) and opiate addicts
currently in opioid maintenance treatment (OMT; n=27). Interestingly, we detected
a significant increase in the percentage of CD4(+)CD25(high) Tregs in the
peripheral blood of heroin addicted patients in contrast to patients in OMT. The 
proliferative response of CD4(+) T cells upon stimulation with anti-CD3 and
anti-CD28 antibodies was significantly decreased in heroin users, but could be
restored by depletion of CD25(high) regulatory T cells from CD4(+) T cells to
similar values as observed from healthy controls and patients in OMT. These
results suggest that impaired immune responses observed in heroin users are
related to the expansion of CD4(+)CD25(high) Tregs and more importantly, can be
restored by OMT.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.05.008 
PMID: 22613171  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

