
1. Blood. 2012 Jul 5;120(1):86-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-04-420604. Epub 2012 May
18.

On the role of FAN1 in Fanconi anemia.

Trujillo JP(1), Mina LB, Pujol R, Bogliolo M, Andrieux J, Holder M, Schuster B,
Schindler D, Surrallés J.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Instability and DNA Repair Group, Department of Genetics and
Microbiology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare bone marrow failure disorder with defective DNA
interstrand crosslink repair. Still, there are FA patients without mutations in
any of the 15 genes individually underlying the disease. A candidate protein for 
those patients, FA nuclease 1 (FAN1), whose gene is located at chromosome
15q13.3, is recruited to stalled replication forks by binding to
monoubiquitinated FANCD2 and is required for interstrand crosslink repair,
suggesting that mutation of FAN1 may cause FA. Here we studied clinical,
cellular, and genetic features in 4 patients carrying a homozygous 15q13.3
micro-deletion, including FAN1 and 6 additional genes. Biallelic deletion of the 
entire FAN1 gene was confirmed by failure of 3'- and 5'-PCR amplification.
Western blot analysis failed to show FAN1 protein in the patients' cell lines.
Chromosome fragility was normal in all 4 FAN1-deficient patients, although their 
cells showed mild sensitivity to mitomycin C in terms of cell survival and G(2)
phase arrest, dissimilar in degree to FA cells. Clinically, there were no
symptoms pointing the way to FA. Our results suggest that FAN1 has a minor role
in interstrand crosslink repair compared with true FA genes and exclude FAN1 as a
novel FA gene.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2012-04-420604 
PMID: 22611161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

