
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 5;109(23):9113-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1202641109. Epub 2012 May 21.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein δ facilitates bacterial dissemination during
pneumococcal pneumonia in a platelet-activating factor receptor-dependent manner.

Duitman J(1), Schouten M, Groot AP, Borensztajn KS, Daalhuisen JB, Florquin S,
van der Poll T, Spek CA.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Medical Center, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
j.w.duitman@amc.uva.nl

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Sep 10;110(37):15163. Borensztajn, Keren S
[added].

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein δ (C/EBPδ) recently emerged as an essential player
in the inflammatory response to bacterial infections. C/EBPδ levels increase
rapidly after a proinflammatory stimulus, and increasing C/EBPδ levels seem to be
indispensable for amplification of the inflammatory response. Here we aimed to
elucidate the role of C/EBPδ in host defense in community-acquired pneumococcal
pneumonia. We show that C/EBPδ(-/-) mice are relatively resistant to pneumococcal
pneumonia, as indicated by delayed and reduced mortality, diminished outgrowth of
pneumococci in lungs, and reduced dissemination of the infection. Moreover,
expression of platelet-activating factor receptor (PAFR), which is known to
potentiate bacterial translocation of gram-positive bacteria, was significantly
reduced during infection in C/EBPδ(-/-) mice compared with WT controls.
Importantly, cell stimulation experiments revealed that C/EBPδ potentiates PAFR
expression induced by lipoteichoic acid and pneumococci. Thus, C/EBPδ exaggerates
bacterial dissemination during Streptococcus pneumoniae-induced pulmonary
infection, suggesting an important role for PAFR-dependent bacterial
translocation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1202641109 
PMCID: PMC3384171
PMID: 22615380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

