
1. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2012 Sep;64(1):61-72. doi: 10.1007/s12013-012-9366-x.

Structural aspects and chaperone activity of human HspB3: role of the "C-terminal
extension".

Asthana A(1), Raman B, Ramakrishna T, Rao ChM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR), Uppal Road, Hyderabad 500 007, India.

HspB3, an as yet uncharacterized sHsp, is present in muscle, brain, heart, and in
fetal tissues. A point mutation correlates with the development of axonal motor
neuropathy. We purified recombinant human HspB3. Circular dichroism studies
indicate that it exhibits β-sheet structure. Gel filtration and sedimentation
velocity experiments show that HspB3 exhibits polydisperse populations with
predominantly trimeric species. HspB3 exhibits molecular chaperone-like activity 
in preventing the heat-induced aggregation of alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH). It
exhibits moderate chaperone-like activity towards heat-induced aggregation of
citrate synthase. However, it does not prevent the DTT-induced aggregation of
insulin, indicating that it exhibits target protein-dependent molecular
chaperone-like activity. Unlike other sHsps, it has a very short C-terminal
extension. Fusion of the C-terminal extension of αB-crystallin results in altered
tertiary and quaternary structure, and increase in polydispersity of the chimeric
protein, HspB3αB-CT. The chimeric protein shows comparable chaperone-like
activity towards heat-induced aggregation of ADH and citrate synthase. However,
it shows enhanced activity towards DTT-induced aggregation of insulin. Our study,
for the first time, provides the structural and chaperone functional
characterization of HspB3 and also sheds light on the role of the C-terminal
extension of sHsps.

DOI: 10.1007/s12013-012-9366-x 
PMID: 22610661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

