
1. J Immunol. 2012 Jul 1;189(1):191-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200802. Epub 2012 May 
25.

Constitutive plasmacytoid dendritic cell migration to the splenic white pulp is
cooperatively regulated by CCR7- and CXCR4-mediated signaling.

Umemoto E(1), Otani K, Ikeno T, Verjan Garcia N, Hayasaka H, Bai Z, Jang MH,
Tanaka T, Nagasawa T, Ueda K, Miyasaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunodynamics, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita 565-0871, Japan.

Although the spleen plays an important role in host defense against infection,
the mechanism underlying the migration of the innate immune cells, plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (pDCs), into the spleen remains ill defined. In this article, we 
report that pDCs constitutively migrate into the splenic white pulp (WP) in a
manner dependent on the chemokine receptors CCR7 and CXCR4. In CCR7-deficient
mice and CCR7 ligand-deficient mice, compared with wild-type (WT) mice,
substantially fewer pDCs were found in the periarteriolar lymphoid sheath of the 
splenic WP under steady-state conditions. In addition, the migration of
adoptively transferred CCR7-deficient pDCs into the WP was significantly worse
than that of WT pDCs, supporting the idea that pDC trafficking to the splenic WP 
requires CCR7 signaling. WT pDCs responded to a CCR7 ligand with modest
chemotaxis and ICAM-1 binding in vitro, and priming with the CCR7 ligand enabled 
the pDCs to migrate efficiently toward low concentrations of CXCL12 in a
CXCR4-dependent manner, raising the possibility that CCR7 signaling enhances
CXCR4-mediated pDC migration. In agreement with this hypothesis, CCL21 and CXCL12
were colocalized on fibroblastic reticular cells in the T cell zone and in the
marginal zone bridging channels, through which pDCs appeared to enter the WP.
Furthermore, functional blockage of CCR7 and CXCR4 abrogated pDC trafficking into
the WP. Collectively, these results strongly suggest that pDCs employ both CCR7
and CXCR4 as critical chemokine receptors to migrate into the WP under
steady-state conditions.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200802 
PMID: 22634622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

