
1. Prev Vet Med. 2012 Oct 1;106(3-4):266-74. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2012.04.008.
Epub 2012 May 26.

Patterns of delayed detection and persistence of bovine tuberculosis in confirmed
and unconfirmed herd breakdowns in cattle and cattle herds in Great Britain.

Green LE(1), Carrique-Mas JJ, Mason SA, Medley GF.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.
laura.green@warwick.ac.uk

Approximately 1500/6000 cattle farms that were depopulated during the foot and
mouth epidemic in GB in 2001 had been repopulated and subjected to two
unrestricted (herd considered free from bovine tuberculosis (bTB)) herd tests.
Factors associated with herd breakdown(s) (HBD) and individual cattle reactor
status at the second test were investigated. There were 96 HBD in total, with a
3-fold increased risk of HBD in herds that had had a HBD at the first test after 
restocking. Two mixed effect models were used to investigate factors associated
with 324/246,060 reactor cattle at the second bTB test; 228 reactors were at
confirmed HBD and 96 at unconfirmed HBD; 253 (79%) reactors at the second test
were present and test negative at the first test. In confirmed HBD, the odds of
cattle reacting were higher if the restocked farm had a history of bTB before
2001 and if the source and restocked farms were high frequency tested (HFT) farms
(routine bTB tests at ≥1 per 2 years). Reacting cattle were more likely to have
been born on the restocked farm before the first test after FMD and less likely
to have been purchased from a low frequency tested (LFT) farm (routine bTB tests 
at 3-4 year intervals) after the first test compared with a baseline of cattle
purchased from a LFT farm before the first test. Unconfirmed HBD at the second
test was more likely when the first test was a confirmed HBD and when there was a
history of bTB in the restocked farm. In contrast to confirmed HBD, cattle
purchased from a LFT farm after the first test were at increased risk of reacting
at an unconfirmed HBD at the second test. We conclude that a farm history of bTB 
suggests persistence of bTB on the farm. Confirmed tests indicate exposure to bTB
for some time indicated by the increased risk from HFT source and restocked farms
and a farm history of bTB. The risks for reactors are related to the farm and
herd and duration of exposure to these risks. Therefore, the spread of bTB to
naïve herds would be reduced if farmers only introduced cattle known not to have 
been in herds and on farms exposed to bTB. Management of bTB on farms with bTB is
complicated because there is undisclosed infection in cattle and environmental
contamination.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2012.04.008 
PMID: 22633738  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

