
1. Age (Dordr). 2013 Aug;35(4):1311-26. doi: 10.1007/s11357-012-9434-6. Epub 2012
May 30.

Oral supplementation with Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus 8481
enhances systemic immunity in elderly subjects.

Moro-García MA(1), Alonso-Arias R, Baltadjieva M, Fernández Benítez C, Fernández 
Barrial MA, Díaz Ruisánchez E, Alonso Santos R, Alvarez Sánchez M, Saavedra Miján
J, López-Larrea C.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Department, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, 33006,
Oviedo, Spain.

Throughout life, there is an aging of the immune system that causes impairment of
its defense capability. Prevention or delay of this deterioration is considered
crucial to maintain general health and increase longevity. We evaluated whether
dietary supplementation with Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus 8481
could enhance the immune response in the elderly. This multi-center,
double-blind, and placebo controlled study enrolled 61 elderly volunteers who
were randomly assigned to receive either placebo or probiotics. Each capsule of
probiotics contained at least 3 × 10(7)  L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus 8481.
Individuals in the study were administered three capsules per day for 6 months.
Blood samples were obtained at baseline (time 0), end of month 3, and month 6. We
characterized cell subpopulations, measured cytokines by flow cytometry,
quantified T cell receptor excision circle (TREC) by real-time PCR (RT-PCR), and 
determined human β-defensin-2 (hBD-2) concentrations and human cytomegalovirus
(CMV) titers by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Elderly responded to
the intake of probiotic with an increase in the percentage of NK cells, an
improvement in the parameters defining the immune risk profile (IRP), and an
increase in the T cell subsets that are less differentiated. The probiotic group 
also showed decreased concentrations of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-8 but
increased antimicrobial peptide hBD-2. These effects disappeared within 6 months 
of stopping the probiotic intake. Immunomodulation induced by L. delbrueckii
subsp. bulgaricus 8481 could favor the maintenance of an adequate immune
response, mainly by slowing the aging of the T cell subpopulations and increasing
the number of immature T cells which are potential responders to new antigens.

DOI: 10.1007/s11357-012-9434-6 
PMCID: PMC3705123
PMID: 22645023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

