
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2012 Dec;57(12):1609-14. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2012.04.018. 
Epub 2012 May 29.

Human β-defensin 2 and protease activated receptor-2 expression in patients with 
chronic periodontitis.

Pereira AL(1), Holzhausen M, Franco GC, Cortelli SC, Cortelli JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, University of Taubaté, SP, Brazil.
alupe@terra.com.br

OBJECTIVE: Some previous studies have shown that gingipains, trypsin-like
proteases produced by Porphyromonas gingivalis, up-regulate human β defensin-2
(HBD-2) mRNA expression through protease-activated receptor-2 (PAR(2)) in
gingival epithelial cells. This study aimed at investigating salivary HBD-2
levels and crevicular PAR(2) mRNA expression in human chronic periodontitis and
evaluating whether periodontal treatment affected this process.
METHODS: Salivary and gingival crevicular fluid (GCF) samples were collected from
periodontally healthy (control) and chronic periodontitis patients at baseline
and 50 days after non-surgical periodontal treatment. Salivary HBD-2, and GCF
TNF-α levels were analysed by ELISA, and PAR(2) mRNA at the GCF was evaluated by 
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: P. gingivalis was significantly (p<0.05) more prevalent in patients with
chronic periodontitis when compared to controls. This prevalence decreased after 
periodontal therapy (p<0.0001). The control group showed statistically
significant lower levels of HBD-2, TNF-α, and PAR(2) expression when compared to 
the chronic periodontitis group. In addition, periodontal treatment significantly
reduced PAR(2) expression and HBD-2 levels in chronic periodontitis patients
(p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that salivary HBD-2 levels and PAR(2) mRNA
expression from GCF are higher in subjects with chronic periodontitis than in
healthy subjects, and that periodontal treatment decreases both HBD-2 levels and 
PAR(2) expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2012.04.018 
PMID: 22647427  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

