
1. J Clin Rheumatol. 2012 Jun;18(4):212-6. doi: 10.1097/RHU.0b013e31825826c3.

Basic science for the clinician 56: inducible T-cell costimulator--the world of
costimulation gets more complicatedâ€¦and interesting.

Sigal LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Connective Tissue Research, Departments of
Medicine, Pediatrics, and Molecular Genetics & Microbiology, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New
Brunswick, NJ, USA. lensigal@gmail.com

They say that nothing is assured in this world but change. And this applies in a 
cynical way to immunology: nothing is assured--we can never rest with an
assumption that we know it all because there are always more apparent
complications when analyzing immune mechanisms (someday, perhaps we will arrive
on a "grand scheme" that elegantly explains it all, just as our brethren in
particle physics seek the Higgs boson and the completion of a better model--I am 
not holding my breath awaiting completion of our task!). In a recent article in
this series, we explored CTLA4 as a counterregulator of the CD28-CD80/86
costimulatory pathway. However, treatment with CTLA4 does not entirely shutdown
the immune system; engineering animals so that the CD28-CD80/86 pathway no longer
functions does not prevent functional protective immune responses. Thus, there
must be yet another pathway. And there is--an "inducible T-cell costimulator"
(ICOS) is found on T cells (activated, not naive), which has a single ligand on
antigen-presenting cells (ICOS ligand, B7-RP-1). The rapid induction of ICOS
speaks to its importance in T-cell function; however, ICOS is more relevant to
the stimulation of effector and memory T cells than is CD28 signaling. There are 
similarities and differences, interactions, and overlaps between the 2 pathways, 
some of which are very useful in understanding the immunopathogenesis of immune
diseases.

DOI: 10.1097/RHU.0b013e31825826c3 
PMID: 22647859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

