
1. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jul 15;18(14):3772-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0292.
Epub 2012 May 30.

Defective epidermal innate immunity and resultant superficial dermatophytosis in 
adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma.

Sawada Y(1), Nakamura M, Kabashima-Kubo R, Shimauchi T, Kobayashi M, Tokura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Occupational and Environmental
Health, Kitakyushu, Japan. long-ago@med.uoeh-u.ac.jp

PURPOSE: Superficial dermatophytosis is quite commonly seen in patients with
adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL), as approximately 50% of the patients
develop cutaneous mycotic infections. Because superficially infected fungi in the
stratum corneum of the epidermis cannot directly contact with T cells
infiltrating in the upper dermis, some perturbation of epidermal innate immunity 
has been postulated. Interleukin (IL)-17-producing helper T cells (Th17) can
induce the keratinocyte production of antimicrobial peptides such as human β
defensin (HBD)-2 and LL-37, which play an essential role in cutaneous innate
immunity.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We investigated the frequency of circulating Th17 cells,
serum levels of cytokines, and epidermal expression of HBD-1, 2, 3, and LL-37 in 
ATLL patients with or without superficial dermatophytosis.
RESULTS: The frequency of peripheral Th17 cells and the serum level of IL-17 was 
significantly decreased in ATLL patients, whereas the serum IL-10 and TGF-β1
levels were increased as compared with healthy controls. Furthermore, ATLL
patients with dermatophytosis had higher IL-10 and TGF-β1 levels and lower IL-17 
levels than did those without dermatophytosis. Immunohistochemical study revealed
that the epidermal expression of both HBD-2 and LL-37 were significantly lower in
ATLL patients with dermatophytosis than in non-ATLL patients with
dermatophytosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these results suggest that the keratinocyte
production of antimicrobial peptides promoted by Th17 cells is reduced in ATLL
patients, leading to the perturbed innate immunity and the frequent occurrence of
superficial dermatophytosis.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0292 
PMID: 22648272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

