
1. Front Immunol. 2012 May 28;3:133. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00133. eCollection
2012.

Regulation of the PKCθ-NF-κB Axis in T Lymphocytes by the Tumor Necrosis Factor
Receptor Family Member OX40.

So T(1), Croft M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine Sendai, Japan.

Antigen primed T lymphocytes need to expand and persist to promote adaptive
immunity. The growth and survival signals that control this are in large part
provided by the NF-κB pathway in activated or effector/memory T cells. Although
several membrane receptors impact NF-κB activation, signaling from OX40 (CD134,
TNFRSF4), a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) superfamily, has 
proven to be important for T cell immunity and a strong contributor to NF-κB
activity. PKCθ directs the T cell receptor (TCR) and CD28-dependent assembly of a
CBM complex (CARMA1, BCL10, and MALT1) for efficient activation of NF-κB, raising
the question of whether other membrane bound receptors that activate NF-κB also
require this PKCθ-CBM axis to control TCR-independent T cell activity. We discuss
here our recent data demonstrating that after ligation by OX40L (CD252, TNFSF4)
expressed on antigen-presenting cells, OX40 translocates into detergent-insoluble
membrane lipid microdomains (DIM or lipid rafts) in T cells irrespective of TCR
signals, and assembles into a signaling complex containing PKCθ, together with
TRAF2, RIP1, the CBM complex, and the IKKα/β/Γ complex. PKCθ is required for
optimal NF-κB activation mediated by OX40 and thus works as an essential
component of this OX40 signalosome. We also discuss the likelihood that other
TNFR superfamily molecules might complex with PKCθ in T cells, and whether PKC
isoforms may be critical to the function of TNFR molecules in general.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00133 
PMCID: PMC3361009
PMID: 22654884 

