
1. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2012 Aug;167(7):2039-53. doi: 10.1007/s12010-012-9674-z.
Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Thermal stabilization of an endoglucanase by cyclization.

van Lieshout JF(1), Pérez Gutiérrez ON, Vroom W, Planas A, de Vos WM, van der
Oost J, Koutsopoulos S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University, Dreijenplein 10, 6703 HB
Wageningen, The Netherlands.

An intein-driven protein splicing approach allowed for the covalent linkage
between the N- and C-termini of a polypeptide chain to create circular variants
of the endo-β-1,3-1,4-glucanase, LicA, from Bacillus licheniformis. Two circular 
variants, LicA-C1 and LicA-C2, which have connecting loops of 20 and 14 amino
acids, respectively, showed catalytic activities that are approximately two and
three times higher, respectively, compared to that of the linear LicA (LicA-L1). 
The thermal stability of the circular variants was significantly increased
compared to the linear form. Whereas the linear glucanase lost half of its
activity after 3 min at 65 °C, the two circular variants have 6-fold (LicA-C1)
and 16-fold (LicA-C2) increased half-life time of inactivation. In agreement with
this, fluorescence spectroscopy and differential scanning calorimetry studies
revealed that circular enzymes undergo structural changes at higher temperatures 
compared to that of the linear form. The effect of calcium on the conformational 
stability and function of the circular LicAs was also investigated, and we
observed that the presence of calcium ions results in increased thermal
stability. The impact of the length of the designed loops on thermal stability of
the circular proteins is discussed, and it is suggested that cyclization may be
an efficient strategy for the increased stability of proteins.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-012-9674-z 
PMCID: PMC3416981
PMID: 22653681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

