
1. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2012 Nov;66(2):177-90. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2012.00998.x. Epub 2012 Jul 4.

Identification of key proteins of cultured human intestinal cells involved in
interaction with enteroaggregative Escherichia coli.

Konar M(1), Sachin O, Priya A, Ghosh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine & Biotechnology, Post Graduate Institute
of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh, India.

Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli (EAEC) adherence to human intestinal tissue is
known to be mediated by aggregative adherence fimbriae (AAF). However, the host
cell molecules involved in EAEC adherence remain uncharacterized. In the present 
study, four key membrane glycoproteins of cultured human intestinal epithelial
cells (INT-407) were found to be involved in the interaction with the T8 strain
of EAEC. Nine membrane proteins of INT-407 cells were found to interact with
EAEC-T8, of which four were identified as fibronectin, epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR), Thrombospondin-1 (TSP1) and glucose-regulated protein (GRP-94). 
Our findings were validated by Western blot using antibody against each
identified protein. The adherence of EAEC-T8 to INT-407 cells was reduced to c.
26, 29, 37 and 76% in the presence of the antibody against GRP-94, EGFR,
fibronectin and TSP-1, respectively. These findings were further substantiated by
flow cytometry, where the final mean fluorescence intensity value of the INT-407 
cells (c. 1075) resulting from adherent-labelled bacteria was found to be reduced
to c. 26, 132, 228 and 597 in the presence of antibody against GRP-94, EGFR,
fibronectin and TSP-1. We propose that GRP-94, EGFR, fibronectin and TSP-1 are
involved in the aggregative adherence of EAEC-T8 to INT-407 cells.

Â© 2012 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2012.00998.x 
PMID: 22672426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

