
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2012 Aug;78(16):5831-8. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01147-12. Epub
2012 Jun 8.

Development and application of an arabinose-inducible expression system by
facilitating inducer uptake in Corynebacterium glutamicum.

Zhang Y(1), Shang X, Lai S, Zhang G, Liang Y, Wen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Corynebacterium glutamicum is currently used for the industrial production of a
variety of biological materials. Many available inducible expression systems in
this species use lac-derived promoters from Escherichia coli that exhibit much
lower levels of inducible expression and leaky basal expression. We developed an 
arabinose-inducible expression system that contains the L-arabinose regulator
AraC, the P(BAD) promoter from the araBAD operon, and the L-arabinose transporter
AraE, all of which are derived from E. coli. The level of inducible P(BAD)-based 
expression could be modulated over a wide concentration range from 0.001 to 0.4% 
L-arabinose. This system tightly controlled the expression of the uracil
phosphoribosyltransferase without leaky expression. When the gene encoding green 
fluorescent protein (GFP) was under the control of P(BAD) promoter, flow
cytometry analysis showed that GFP was expressed in a highly homogeneous profile 
throughout the cell population. In contrast to the case in E. coli, P(BAD)
induction was not significantly affected in the presence of different carbon
sources in C. glutamicum, which makes it useful in fermentation applications. We 
used this system to regulate the expression of the odhI gene from C. glutamicum, 
which encodes an inhibitor of Î±-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase, resulting in high
levels of glutamate production (up to 13.7 mM) under biotin nonlimiting
conditions. This system provides an efficient tool available for molecular
biology and metabolic engineering of C. glutamicum.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01147-12 
PMCID: PMC3406113
PMID: 22685153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

