
1. Scand J Immunol. 2012 Oct;76(4):354-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2012.02741.x.

Expression of genes associated with H factor in fibroblasts infected with
Borrelia spirochaetes.

Gęca A(1), Gola J, Dudek S, Jasik K, Muc-Wierzgoń M, Nowakowska-Zajdel E,
Niedworok E, Mazurek U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Silesian Medical University, Bytom, Poland.

Infection with Borrelia spirochaetes leads to the launch of specific and
non-specific immunological response in humans. Activation of the complement
system is one of the first defence mechanisms against penetrating pathogens. The 
aim of this study was to select genes related to the alternative pathway of the
complement system [including complement factor H (CFH)], differentiating the type
of infection in the system model, that is, a culture of normal human diploid
fibroblasts infected with three different spirochaete genospecies: Borrelia
afzelii, Borrelia garinii and Borrelia burgdorferii sensu stricto, by comparing
the infected fibroblast culture with the control fibroblast one. With the use of 
oligonucleotide microarrays HGU-133A, the differences in the expression of genes 
selected on the basis of a scientific database Affymetrix were studied by
comparing transcriptomes from the four cultures of fibroblasts. In the result of 
infection of fibroblast cultivation with a specific Borrelia genospecies, a
variable expression of certain CFH and complement system-associated genes,
specific for one genospecies only, B. afzelii- C1QBP, CD59, C2, CD46 and FHL1; B.
garinii - C1S and CLU; Borrelia burgeforii- CFB, A2M and VSIG4, was observed. CFH
differentiates infections induced by B. afzelii and B. garinii from infections
induced by B. burgdorferii sensu stricto.

© 2012 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology © 2012 Blackwell
Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2012.02741.x 
PMID: 22686626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

