
1. J Immunol Methods. 2012 Aug 31;382(1-2):150-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2012.05.019.
Epub 2012 Jun 7.

Ex-vivo α-galactosylceramide activation of NKT cells in humans and macaques.

Fernandez CS(1), Cameron G, Godfrey DI, Kent SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
VIC 3010, Australia.

NKT cells are key mediators of antiviral and anticancer immunity. Experiments in 
mice have demonstrated that activation of NKT cells in vivo induces the
expression of multiple effector molecules critical to successful immunity. Human 
clinical trials have shown similar responses, although in vivo activation of NKT 
cells in humans or primate models are far more limited in number and scope.
Measuring ex vivo activation of NKT cells by the CD1d-restricted glycolipid
ligand α-Galactosylceramide (α-GalCer) through cytokine expression profiles is a 
useful marker of NKT cell function, but for reasons that are unclear, this
approach does not appear to work as well in humans and non-human primate macaque 
models in comparison to mice. We performed a series of experiments on human and
macaque (Macaca nemestrina) fresh whole blood samples to define optimal
conditions to detect NKT cell cytokine (TNF, IFNγ, IL-2) and degranulation marker
(CD107a) expression by flow cytometry. We found that conditions previously
described for mouse splenocyte NKT cell activation were suboptimal on human or
macaque blood NKT cells. In contrast, a 6h incubation with brefeldin A added for 
the last 4h, in a 96-well plate based assay, and using an α-GalCer concentration 
of 1 μg/ml were optimal methods to stimulate NKT cells in fresh blood from both
humans and macaques. Unexpectedly, we noted that blood NKT cells from macaques
infected with SIV were more readily activated by α-GalCer than NKT cells from
uninfected macaques, suggesting that SIV infection may have primed the NKT cells.
In conclusion, we describe optimized methods for the ex vivo antigen-specific
activation of human and macaque blood NKT cells. These assays should be useful in
monitoring NKT cells in disease and in immunotherapy studies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2012.05.019 
PMID: 22683545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

