
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2012 Aug;78(16):5746-52. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01034-12. Epub 
2012 Jun 8.

Microbial lithotrophic oxidation of structural Fe(II) in biotite.

Shelobolina E(1), Xu H, Konishi H, Kukkadapu R, Wu T, Blöthe M, Roden E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geoscience, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin,
USA. shelobolina@wisc.edu

Microorganisms are known to participate in the weathering of primary
phyllosilicate minerals through the production of organic ligands and acids and
through the uptake of products of weathering. Here we show that the lithotrophic 
Fe(II)-oxidizing, nitrate-reducing enrichment culture described by Straub et al. 
(K. L. Straub, M. Benz, B. Schink, and F. Widdel, Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
62:1458-1460, 1996) can grow via oxidation of structural Fe(II) in biotite, a
Fe(II)-rich trioctahedral mica found in granitic rocks. Oxidation of
silt/clay-sized biotite particles was detected by a decrease in extractable
Fe(II) content and simultaneous nitrate reduction. Mössbauer spectroscopy
confirmed structural Fe(II) oxidation. Approximately 1.5 × 10(7) cells were
produced per μmol of Fe(II) oxidized, in agreement with previous estimates of the
growth yield of lithoautotrophic circumneutral-pH Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria.
Microbial oxidation of structural Fe(II) resulted in biotite alterations similar 
to those found in nature, including a decrease in the unit cell b dimension
toward dioctahedral levels and Fe and K release. Structural Fe(II) oxidation may 
involve either direct enzymatic oxidation, followed by solid-state mineral
transformation, or indirect oxidation as a result of the formation of aqueous Fe,
followed by electron transfer from Fe(II) in the mineral to Fe(III) in solution. 
Although it is not possible to distinguish between these two mechanisms with
available data, the complete absence of aqueous Fe in oxidation experiments
favors the former alternative. The demonstration of microbial oxidation of
structural Fe(II) suggests that microorganisms are directly responsible for the
initial step in the weathering of biotite in granitic aquifers and the plant
rhizosphere.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01034-12 
PMCID: PMC3406116
PMID: 22685132  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

