
1. Mol Immunol. 2012 Oct;52(3-4):183-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2012.05.014. Epub 2012
Jun 13.

Receptor for advanced glycation end products is protective during murine
tuberculosis.

van Zoelen MA(1), Wieland CW, van der Windt GJ, Florquin S, Nawroth PP, Bierhaus 
A, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. M.A.vanZoelen@amc.uva.nl

The development of active tuberculosis after infection with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis is almost invariably associated with a persistent or transient state
of relative immunodeficiency. The receptor for advanced glycation end products
(RAGE) is a promiscuous receptor that is involved in pulmonary inflammation and
infection. To investigate the role of RAGE in tuberculosis, we intranasally
infected wild-type (Wt) and RAGE deficient (RAGE(-/-)) mice with live virulent M.
tuberculosis. While lungs of uninfected Wt mice expressed RAGE, in particular on 
endothelium, M. tuberculosis pneumonia was associated with an enhanced pulmonary 
expression of RAGE. Lung inflammation was increased in RAGE(-/-) mice, as
indicated by histopathology, percentage of inflamed area, lung weight and
cytokine and chemokine levels. In addition, lung lymphocyte and neutrophil
numbers were increased in the RAGE(-/-) mice. RAGE(-/-) mice had modestly higher 
mycobacterial loads in the lungs after 3 weeks but not after 6 weeks of
infection. Moreover, RAGE(-/-) mice displayed more body weight loss and enhanced 
mortality. In summary, pulmonary RAGE expression is increased during
tuberculosis. In addition, these data suggest that RAGE plays a beneficial role
in the host response to pulmonary tuberculosis.

Crown Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2012.05.014 
PMID: 22698798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

