
1. Mol Med. 2012 Sep 25;18:1086-95. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2012.00033.

R-roscovitine reduces lung inflammation induced by lipoteichoic acid and
Streptococcus pneumoniae.

Hoogendijk AJ(1), Roelofs JJ, Duitman J, van Lieshout MH, Blok DC, van der Poll
T, Wieland CW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
a.j.hoogendijk@amc.uva.nl

Bacterial pneumonia remains associated with high morbidity and mortality. The
gram-positive pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common cause of
community-acquired pneumonia. Lipoteichoic acid (LTA) is an important
proinflammatory component of the gram-positive bacterial cell wall.
R-roscovitine, a purine analog, is a potent cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)-1, -2, 
-5 and -7 inhibitor that has the ability to inhibit the cell cycle and to induce 
polymorphonuclear cell (PMN) apoptosis. We sought to investigate the effect of
R-roscovitine on LTA-induced activation of cell lines with relevance for lung
inflammation in vitro and on lung inflammation elicited by either LTA or viable
S. pneumoniae in vivo. In vitro R-roscovitine enhanced apoptosis in PMNs and
reduced tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-Î± and keratinocyte chemoattractant (KC)
production in MH-S (alveolar macrophage) and MLE-12/MLE-15 (respiratory
epithelial) cell lines. In vivo R-roscovitine treatment reduced PMN numbers in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid during LTA-induced lung inflammation; this effect
was reversed by inhibiting apoptosis. Postponed treatment with R-roscovitine (24 
and 72 h) diminished PMN numbers in lung tissue during gram-positive pneumonia;
this step was associated with a transient increase in pulmonary bacterial loads. 
R-roscovitine inhibits proinflammatory responses induced by the gram-positive
stimuli LTA and S. pneumoniae. R-roscovitine reduces PMN numbers in lungs upon
LTA administration by enhancing apoptosis. The reduction in PMN numbers caused by
R-roscovitine during S. pneumoniae pneumonia may hamper antibacterial defense.

DOI: 10.2119/molmed.2012.00033 
PMCID: PMC3475337
PMID: 22692577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

