
1. Blood. 2012 Jul 26;120(4):847-57. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-388496. Epub 2012
Jun 12.

The arsenic-based cure of acute promyelocytic leukemia promotes cytoplasmic
sequestration of PML and PML/RARA through inhibition of PML body recycling.

Lång E(1), Grudic A, Pankiv S, Bruserud O, Simonsen A, Bjerkvig R, Bjørås M, Bøe 
SO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Centre of
Molecular Biology and Neuroscience, Oslo University Hospital and University of
Oslo, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway.

Arsenic in the form of arsenic trioxide (ATO) is used as a therapeutic drug for
treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). The mechanism by which this
agent cures this disease was previously shown to involve direct interactions
between ATO and the promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML), as well as accelerated 
degradation of the APL-associated fusion oncoprotein PML/retinoic acid receptor α
(RARA). Here we investigated the fate of PML-generated nuclear structures called 
PML bodies in ATO-treated cells. We found that ATO inhibits formation of progeny 
PML bodies while it stabilizes cytoplasmic precursor compartments, referred to as
cytoplasmic assemblies of PML and nucleoporins (CyPNs), after cell division. This
block in PML body recycling is readily detected at pharmacologic relevant ATO
concentrations (0.02-0.5μM) that do not cause detectable cell-cycle defects, and 
it does not require modification of PML by SUMOylation. In addition, PML and
PML/RARA carrying mutations previously identified in ATO-resistant APL patients
are impeded in their ability to become sequestered within CyPNs. Thus, ATO may
inhibit nuclear activities of PML and PML/RARA in postmitotic cells through
CyPN-dependent cytoplasmic sequestration.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-388496 
PMID: 22692509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

