
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2012;30(4):488-502. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2012.682213. Epub 
2012 Jun 12.

Substitution of asparagine 76 by a tyrosine residue induces domain swapping in
Helicobacter pylori phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase.

Cheng CS(1), Chen WT, Chen YW, Chen CH, Luo YC, Lyu PC, Yin HS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology, and College of Life
Sciences, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, 300, Taiwan.

Phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT) catalyses the penultimate step in
coenzyme A biosynthesis in bacteria and is therefore a candidate target for
antibacterial drug development. We randomly mutated the residues in the
Helicobacter pylori PPAT sequence to identify those that govern protein folding
and ligand binding, and we describe the crystal structure of one of these mutants
(I4V/N76Y) that contains the mutations I4 → V and N76 → Y. Unlike other PPATs,
which are homohexamers, I4V/N76Y is a domain-swapped homotetramer. The protomer
structure of this mutant is an open conformation in which the 65 C-terminal
residues are intertwined with those of a neighbouring protomer. Despite
structural differences between wild-type PPAT and IV4/N76Y, they had similar
ligand-binding properties. ATP binding to these two proteins was enthalpically
driven, whereas that for Escherichia coli PPAT is entropically driven. The
structural packing of the subunits may affect the thermal denaturation of
wild-type PPAT and I4V/N76Y. Mutations in hinge regions often induce domain
swapping, i.e. the spatial exchange of portions of adjacent protomers, but
residues 4 and 76 of H. pylori PPAT are not located in or near to the hinge
region. However, one or both of these residues is responsible for the large
conformational change in the C-terminal region of each protomer. To identify the 
residue(s) responsible, we constructed the single-site mutant, N76Y, and found a 
large displacement of α-helix 4, which indicated that its flexibility allowed the
domain swap to occur.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2012.682213 
PMID: 22694317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

