
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jul 27;287(31):26388-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.346775. Epub
2012 Jun 14.

The human selenoprotein VCP-interacting membrane protein (VIMP) is non-globular
and harbors a reductase function in an intrinsically disordered region.

Christensen LC(1), Jensen NW, Vala A, Kamarauskaite J, Johansson L, Winther JR,
Hofmann K, Teilum K, Ellgaard L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200
Copenhagen N., Denmark.

The human selenoprotein VIMP (VCP-interacting membrane protein)/SelS
(selenoprotein S) localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane and is
involved in the process of ER-associated degradation (ERAD). To date, little is
known about the presumed redox activity of VIMP, its structure and how these
features might relate to the function of the protein in ERAD. Here, we use the
recombinantly expressed cytosolic region of VIMP where the selenocysteine (Sec)
in position 188 is replaced with a cysteine (a construct named cVIMP-Cys) to
characterize redox and structural properties of the protein. We show that Cys-188
in cVIMP-Cys forms a disulfide bond with Cys-174, consistent with the presence of
a Cys174-Sec188 selenosulfide bond in the native sequence. For the disulfide bond
in cVIMP-Cys we determined the reduction potential to -200 mV, and showed it to
be a good substrate of thioredoxin. Based on a biochemical and structural
characterization of cVIMP-Cys using analytical gel filtration, CD and NMR
spectroscopy in conjunction with bioinformatics, we propose a comprehensive
overall structural model for the cytosolic region of VIMP. The data clearly
indicate the N-terminal half to be comprised of two extended α-helices followed
by a C-terminal region that is intrinsically disordered. Redox-dependent
conformational changes in cVIMP-Cys were observed only in the vicinity of the two
Cys residues. Overall, the redox properties observed for cVIMP-Cys are compatible
with a function as a reductase, and we speculate that the plasticity of the
intrinsically disordered C-terminal region allows the protein to access many
different and structurally diverse substrates.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.346775 
PMCID: PMC3406722
PMID: 22700979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

