
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37554. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037554. Epub 2012 May 31.

Multiple histone methyl and acetyltransferase complex components bind the HLA-DRA
gene.

Choi NM(1), Boss JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.

Major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) genes are fundamental
components that contribute to adaptive immune responses. While characterization
of the chromatin features at the core promoter region of these genes has been
studied, the scope of histone modifications and the modifying factors responsible
for activation of these genes are less well defined. Using the MHC-II gene
HLA-DRA as a model, the extent and distribution of major histone modifications
associated with active expression were defined in interferon-Î³ induced epithelial
cells, B cells, and B-cell mutants for MHC-II expression. With active
transcription, nucleosome density around the proximal regulatory region was
diminished and histone acetylation and methylation modifications were distributed
throughout the gene in distinct patterns that were dependent on the modification 
examined. Irrespective of the location, the majority of these modifications were 
dependent on the binding of either the X-box binding factor RFX or the class II
transactivator (CIITA) to the proximal regulatory region. Importantly, once
established, the modifications were stable through multiple cell divisions after 
the activating stimulus was removed, suggesting that activation of this system
resulted in an epigenetic state. A dual crosslinking chromatin
immunoprecipitation method was used to detect histone modifying protein
components that interacted across the gene. Components of the MLL
methyltransferase and GCN5 acetyltransferase complexes were identified. Some MLL 
complex components were found to be CIITA independent, including MLL1, ASH2L and 
RbBP5. Likewise, GCN5 containing acetyltransferase complex components belonging
to the ATAC and STAGA complexes were also identified. These results suggest that 
multiple complexes are either used or are assembled as the gene is activated for 
expression. Together the results define and illustrate a complex network of
histone modifying proteins and multisubunit complexes participating in MHC-II
transcription.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037554 
PMCID: PMC3365104
PMID: 22701520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

