
1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2012 Aug;22(8):1066-76.

Construction, and in vitro and in vivo analyses of tetravalent immunoadhesins.

Cho H(1), Chung YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul
133-791, Korea.

Previous observations demonstrated that various immunosuppressive agents and
their combination therapies can increase allograft survival rates. However, these
treatments may have serious side effects and cannot substantially improve or
prolong graft survival in acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). To improve the 
therapeutic potency of divalent immunoadhesins, we have constructed and produced 
several tetravalent forms of immunoadhesins comprising each of cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated antigen-4 (CTLA4), CD2, and lymphocyte activation gene-3 
(LAG3). Flow cytometric and T cell proliferation analyses displayed that
tetravalent immunoadhesins have a higher binding affinity and more potent
efficacy than divalent immunoadhesins. Although all tetravalent immunoadhesins
possess better efficacies, tetravalent forms of CTLA4-Ig and LAG3-Ig revealed
higher inhibitory effects on T cell proliferation than tetravalent forms of
TNFR2-Ig and CD2-Ig. In vitro mixed lymphocytes reaction (MLR) showed that
combined treatment with tetravalent CTLA4-Ig and tetravalent LAG3-Ig was highly
effective for inhibiting T cell proliferation in both human and murine allogeneic
stimulation. In addition, both single tetravalent-form and combination treatments
can prevent the lethality of murine acute GVHD. The results of this study
demonstrated that co-blockade of the major histocompatibility complex class
(MHC)II:T cell receptor (TCR) and CD28:B7 pathways by using tetravalent human
LAG3-Ig and CTLA4-Ig synergistically prevented murine acute GVHD.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1201.01026 
PMID: 22713982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

