
1. Environ Microbiol. 2013 May;15(5):1464-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2012.02809.x.
Epub 2012 Jun 19.

Diversity of cyanobacterial biomarker genes from the stromatolites of Shark Bay, 
Western Australia.

Garby TJ(1), Walter MR, Larkum AW, Neilan BA.

Author information: 
(1)Australian Centre for Astrobiology and School of Biotechnology and
Biomolecular Sciences, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052,
Australia.

Families of closely related chemical compounds, which are relatively resistant to
degradation, are often used as biomarkers to help trace the evolutionary history 
of early groups of organisms and the environments in which they lived. Biomarkers
derived from hopanoid variations are particularly useful in determining bacterial
community compositions. 2-Methylhopananoids have been thought to be diagnostic
for cyanobacteria, and 2-methylhopanes in the geological record are taken as
evidence for the presence of cyanobacteria-containing communities at the time of 
sediment deposition. Recently, however, doubt has been cast on the validity of
2-methylhopanes as cyanobacterial biomarkers, since non-cyanobacterial species
have been shown to produce significant amounts of 2-methylhopanoids. This study
examines the diversity of hpnP, the hopanoid biosynthesis gene coding for the
enzyme that methylates hopanoids at the C2 position. Genomic DNA isolated from
stromatolite-associated pustular and smooth microbial mat samples from Shark Bay,
Western Australia, was analysed for bacterial diversity, and used to construct an
hpnP clone library. A total of 117 partial hpnP clones were sequenced,
representing 12 operational taxonomic units (OTUs). Phylogenetic analysis showed 
that 11 of these OTUs, representing 115 sequences, cluster within the
cyanobacterial clade. We conclude that the dominant types of microorganisms with 
the detected capability of producing 2-methylhopanoids within pustular and smooth
microbial mats in Shark Bay are cyanobacteria.

Â© 2012 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2012.02809.x 
PMID: 22712472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

