
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38757. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038757. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins: the influence of nitrogen versus phosphorus.

Dolman AM(1), RÃ¼cker J, Pick FR, Fastner J, Rohrlack T, Mischke U, Wiedner C.

Author information: 
(1)Freshwater Conservation, Brandenburg University of Technology, Bad Saarow,
Germany. andrew.dolman@tu-cottbus.de

The importance of nitrogen (N) versus phosphorus (P) in explaining total
cyanobacterial biovolume, the biovolume of specific cyanobacterial taxa, and the 
incidence of cyanotoxins was determined for 102 north German lakes, using methods
to separate the effects of joint variation in N and P concentration from those of
differential variation in N versus P. While the positive relationship between
total cyanobacteria biovolume and P concentration disappeared at high P
concentrations, cyanobacteria biovolume increased continually with N
concentration, indicating potential N limitation in highly P enriched lakes. The 
biovolumes of all cyanobacterial taxa were higher in lakes with above average
joint NP concentrations, although the relative biovolumes of some Nostocales were
higher in less enriched lakes. Taxa were found to have diverse responses to
differential N versus P concentration, and the differences between taxa were not 
consistent with the hypothesis that potentially N(2)-fixing Nostocales taxa would
be favoured in low N relative to P conditions. In particular Aphanizomenon
gracile and the subtropical invasive species Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii often
reached their highest biovolumes in lakes with high nitrogen relative to
phosphorus concentration. Concentrations of all cyanotoxin groups increased with 
increasing TP and TN, congruent with the biovolumes of their likely producers.
Microcystin concentration was strongly correlated with the biovolume of
Planktothrix agardhii but concentrations of anatoxin, cylindrospermopsin and
paralytic shellfish poison were not strongly related to any individual taxa.
Cyanobacteria should not be treated as a single group when considering the
potential effects of changes in nutrient loading on phytoplankton community
structure and neither should the N(2)-fixing Nostocales. This is of particular
importance when considering the occurrence of cyanotoxins, as the two most
abundant potentially toxin producing Nostocales in our study were found in lakes 
with high N relative to P enrichment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038757 
PMCID: PMC3376147
PMID: 22719937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

