
1. J Dairy Sci. 2012 Jul;95(7):3593-608. doi: 10.3168/jds.2011-5255.

Novel conjugative plasmids from the natural isolate Lactococcus lactis subspecies
cremoris DPC3758: a repository of genes for the potential improvement of dairy
starters.

Fallico V(1), Ross RP, Fitzgerald GF, McAuliffe O.

Author information: 
(1)Teagasc, Moorepark Food Research Centre, Fermoy, County Cork, Ireland.

A collection of 17 natural lactococcal isolates from raw milk cheeses were
studied in terms of their plasmid distribution, content, and diversity. All
strains in the collection harbored an abundance of plasmids, including
Lactococcus lactis ssp. cremoris DPC3758, whose 8-plasmid complement was selected
for sequencing. The complete sequences of pAF22 (22,388 kb), pAF14 (14,419 kb),
pAF12 (12,067 kb), pAF07 (7,435 kb), and pAF04 (3,801 kb) were obtained, whereas 
gene functions of technological interest were mapped to pAF65 (65 kb) and pAF45
(45 kb) by PCR. The plasmids of L. lactis DPC3758 were found to encode many genes
with the potential to improve the technological properties of dairy starters.
These included 3 anti-phage restriction/modification (R/M) systems (1 of type I
and 2 of type II) and genes for immunity/resistance to nisin, lacticin 481,
cadmium, and copper. Regions encoding conjugative/mobilization functions were
present in 6 of the 8 plasmids, including those containing the R/M systems, thus 
enabling the food-grade transfer of these mechanisms to industrial strains. Using
cadmium selection, the sequential stacking of the R/M plasmids into a
plasmid-free host provided the recipient with increased protection against 936-
and c2-type phages. The association of food-grade selectable markers and
mobilization functions on L. lactis DPC3758 plasmids will facilitate their
exploitation to obtain industrial strains with enhanced phage protection and
robustness. These natural plasmids also provide another example of the major role
of plasmids in contributing to host fitness and preservation within its
ecological niche.

Copyright Â© 2012 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2011-5255 
PMID: 22720917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

