
1. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Sep;42(9):2459-70. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242375. Epub 2012 Jul 
25.

Receptor modulation and functional activation of human CD34+ Lin- -derived
immature NK cells in vitro by Mycobacterium bovis Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG).

Marras F(1), Bozzano F, Bentivoglio G, Ugolotti E, Biassoni R, Moretta L, De
Maria A.

Author information: 
(1)G. Gaslini Istitute, Genova, Italy.

It is not yet clear whether immature NK (iNK) cells are bystanders to or rather
participate in immune responses to pathogens that may colocalize in areas of
NK-cell maturation such as bone marrow or lymph nodes. Mycobacteria, including
Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG), have been shown to interact with peripheral NK
cells and in vivo may colocalize in areas of iNK-cell development. We studied
infection with BCG of human cord blood CD34(+) Lin(-)-derived cultures containing
myelomonocytes and iNK cells in vitro. Increased iNK-cell DNAM-1 expression,
transient natural cytotoxicity receptor modulation, and production of IFN-γ were 
observed. Transcriptional receptor modulation was associated to BCG challenge,
which determined increased iNK-cell cytotoxic activity against tumor cell lines
and also increased killing of immature dendritic cells (iDCs). No requirement for
cell contact was recorded for BCG-induced iNK-cell activation, while cytokine
production including IL-18, IL-10, GM-CSF, and TGF-β contributed to the observed 
effects. Thus, iNK cells are affected by mycobacteria in vitro and may contribute
to shaping of adaptive mature innate responses through iDC-iNK cross-talk. In
addition, iNK-cell activation by BCG may represent a novel additional mechanism
contributing to the effects observed upon BCG administration in vivo.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201242375 
PMID: 22736333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

