
1. J Immunol. 2012 Aug 1;189(3):1459-66. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200484. Epub 2012
Jun 25.

Helminth infection impairs autophagy-mediated killing of bacterial
enteropathogens by macrophages.

Su CW(1), Cao Y, Zhang M, Kaplan J, Su L, Fu Y, Walker WA, Xavier R, Cherayil BJ,
Shi HN.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunology Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Autophagy is an important mechanism used by macrophages to kill intracellular
pathogens. The results reported in this study demonstrate that autophagy is also 
involved in the macrophage killing of the extracellular enteropathogen
Citrobacter rodentium after phagocytosis. The process was significantly impaired 
in macrophages isolated from mice chronically infected with the helminth parasite
Heligmosomoides polygyrus. The H. polygyrus-mediated inhibition of autophagy was 
Th2 dependent because it was not observed in macrophages isolated from
helminth-infected STAT6-deficient mice. Moreover, autophagy of Citrobacter was
inhibited by treating macrophages with IL-4 and IL-13. The effect of H. polygyrus
on autophagy was associated with decreased expression and processing of L chain
protein 3 (LC3), a key component of the autophagic machinery. The
helminth-induced inhibition of LC3 expression and processing was STAT6 dependent 
and could be recapitulated by treatment of macrophages with IL-4 and IL-13.
Knockdown of LC3 significantly inhibited autophagic killing of Citrobacter,
attesting to the functional importance of the H. polygyrus-mediated
downregulation of this process. These observations reveal a new aspect of the
immunosuppressive effects of helminth infection and provide mechanistic insights 
into our earlier finding that H. polygyrus significantly worsens the in vivo
course of Citrobacter infection.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200484 
PMCID: PMC3423331
PMID: 22732589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

