
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2012 Sep 21;7(9):1496-501. Epub 2012 Jul 5.

Identification of small-molecule antagonists of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
transcriptional regulator PqsR: biophysically guided hit discovery and
optimization.

Klein T(1), Henn C, de Jong JC, Zimmer C, Kirsch B, Maurer CK, Pistorius D,
Müller R, Steinbach A, Hartmann RW.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Campus C2.3, 
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.

The Gram-negative pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa produces an intercellular alkyl
quinolone signaling molecule, the Pseudomonas quinolone signal. The pqs quorum
sensing communication system that is characteristic for P. aeruginosa regulates
the production of virulence factors. Therefore, we consider the pqs system a
novel target to limit P. aeruginosa pathogenicity. Here, we present small
molecules targeting a key player of the pqs system, PqsR. A rational design
strategy in combination with surface plasmon resonance biosensor analysis led to 
the identification of PqsR binders. Determination of thermodynamic binding
signatures and functional characterization in E. coli guided the hit
optimization, resulting in the potent hydroxamic acid derived PqsR antagonist 11 
(IC(50) = 12.5 μM). Remarkably it displayed a comparable potency in P. aeruginosa
(IC(50) = 23.6 μM) and reduced the production of the virulence factor pyocyanin. 
Beyond this, site-directed mutagenesis together with thermodynamic analysis
provided insights into the energetic characteristics of protein-ligand
interactions. Thus the identified PqsR antagonists are promising scaffolds for
further drug design efforts against this important pathogen.

DOI: 10.1021/cb300208g 
PMID: 22765028  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

