
1. Nature. 2012 Jul 4;487(7405):109-13. doi: 10.1038/nature11130.

Reduced airway surface pH impairs bacterial killing in the porcine cystic
fibrosis lung.

Pezzulo AA(1), Tang XX, Hoegger MJ, Abou Alaiwa MH, Ramachandran S, Moninger TO, 
Karp PH, Wohlford-Lenane CL, Haagsman HP, van Eijk M, BÃ¡nfi B, Horswill AR,
Stoltz DA, McCray PB Jr, Welsh MJ, Zabner J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a life-shortening disease caused by mutations in the
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. Although
bacterial lung infection and the resulting inflammation cause most of the
morbidity and mortality, how the loss of CFTR function first disrupts airway host
defence has remained uncertain. To investigate the abnormalities that impair
elimination when a bacterium lands on the pristine surface of a newborn CF
airway, we interrogated the viability of individual bacteria immobilized on solid
grids and placed onto the airway surface. As a model, we studied CF pigs, which
spontaneously develop hallmark features of CF lung disease. At birth, their lungs
lack infection and inflammation, but have a reduced ability to eradicate
bacteria. Here we show that in newborn wild-type pigs, the thin layer of airway
surface liquid (ASL) rapidly kills bacteria in vivo, when removed from the lung
and in primary epithelial cultures. Lack of CFTR reduces bacterial killing. We
found that the ASL pH was more acidic in CF pigs, and reducing pH inhibited the
antimicrobial activity of ASL. Reducing ASL pH diminished bacterial killing in
wild-type pigs, and, conversely, increasing ASL pH rescued killing in CF pigs.
These results directly link the initial host defence defect to the loss of CFTR, 
an anion channel that facilitates HCO(3)(-) transport. Without CFTR, airway
epithelial HCO(3)(-) secretion is defective, the ASL pH falls and inhibits
antimicrobial function, and thereby impairs the killing of bacteria that enter
the newborn lung. These findings suggest that increasing ASL pH might prevent the
initial infection in patients with CF, and that assaying bacterial killing could 
report on the benefit of therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.1038/nature11130 
PMCID: PMC3390761
PMID: 22763554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

