
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39908. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039908. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Extracellular IgC2 constant domains of CEACAMs mediate PI3K sensitivity during
uptake of pathogens.

Voges M(1), Bachmann V, Naujoks J, Kopp K, Hauck CR.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl Zellbiologie, Universit√§t Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Several pathogenic bacteria utilize receptors of the CEACAM family to
attach to human cells. Binding to different members of this receptor family can
result in uptake of the bacteria. Uptake of Neisseria gonorrhoeae, a
gram-negative human pathogen, via CEACAMs found on epithelial cells, such as
CEACAM1, CEA or CEACAM6, differs mechanistically from phagocytosis mediated by
CEACAM3, a CEACAM family member expressed selectively by human granulocytes.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We find that CEACAM1- as well as CEACAM3-mediated bacterial
internalization are accompanied by a rapid increase in phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5
phosphate (PI(3,4,5)P) at the site of bacterial entry. However, pharmacological
inhibition of phosphatidylinositol-3' kinase (PI3K) selectively affects
CEACAM1-mediated uptake of Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Accordingly, overexpression of 
the PI(3,4,5)P phosphatase SHIP diminishes and expression of a constitutive
active PI3K increases CEACAM1-mediated internalization of gonococci, without
influencing uptake by CEACAM3. Furthermore, bacterial uptake by GPI-linked
members of the CEACAM family (CEA and CEACAM6) and CEACAM1-mediated
internalization of N. meningitidis by endothelial cells require PI3K activity.
Sensitivity of CEACAM1-mediated uptake toward PI3K inhibition is independent of
receptor localization in cholesterol-rich membrane microdomains and does not
require the cytoplasmic or the transmembrane domain of CEACAM1. However, PI3K
inhibitor sensitivity requires the Ig(C2)-like domains of CEACAM1, which are also
present in CEA and CEACAM6, but which are absent from CEACAM3. Accordingly,
overexpression of CEACAM1 Ig(C2) domains blocks CEACAM1-mediated internalization.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide novel mechanistic insight into CEACAM1-mediated 
endocytosis and suggest that epithelial CEACAMs associate in cis with other
membrane receptor(s) via their extracellular domains to trigger bacterial uptake 
in a PI3K-dependent manner.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039908 
PMCID: PMC3386982
PMID: 22768164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

