
1. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2012 Aug;39(8):1101-7. doi:
10.1007/s10295-012-1151-8. Epub 2012 Jul 10.

Engineering a homobutanol fermentation pathway in Escherichia coli EG03.

Garza E(1), Zhao J, Wang Y, Wang J, Iverson A, Manow R, Finan C, Zhou S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), College of
Bioengineering, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan, 430068, People's Republic 
of China.

A homobutanol fermentation pathway was engineered in a derivative of Escherichia 
coli B (glucose [glycolysis] => 2 pyruvate + 2 NADH; pyruvate [pyruvate
dehydrogenase] => acetyl-CoA + NADH; 2 acetyl-CoA [butanol pathway enzymes] + 4
NADH => butanol; summary stoichiometry: glucose => butanol). Initially, the
native fermentation pathways were eliminated from E. coli B by deleting the genes
encoding for lactate dehydrogenase (ldhA), acetate kinase (ackA), fumarate
reductase (frdABCD), pyruvate formate lyase (pflB), and alcohol dehydrogenase
(adhE), and the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (aceEF-lpd) was anaerobically
expressed through promoter replacement. The resulting strain, E. coli EG03
(ΔfrdABCD ΔldhA ΔackA ΔpflB Δ adhE ΔpdhR ::pflBp6-aceEF-lpd ΔmgsA), could
generate 4 NADH for every glucose oxidized to two acetyl-CoA through glycolysis
and the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. However, EG03 lost its ability for
anaerobic growth due to the lack of NADH oxidation pathways. When the butanol
pathway genes that encode for acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase (thiL),
3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (hbd), crotonase (crt), butyryl-CoA
dehydrogenase (bcd, etfA, etfB), and butyraldehyde dehydrogenase (adheII) were
cloned from Clostridium acetobutylicum ATCC 824, and expressed in E. coli EG03, a
balanced NADH oxidation pathway was established for homobutanol fermentation
(glucose => 4 NADH + 2 acetyl-CoA => butanol). This strain was able to convert
glucose to butanol (1,254 mg l(-1)) under anaerobic condition.

DOI: 10.1007/s10295-012-1151-8 
PMID: 22776992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

