
1. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Nov;42(11):2851-60. doi: 10.1002/eji.201142350. Epub 2012 Aug
22.

Identification of novel glycolipid ligands activating a sulfatide-reactive,
CD1d-restricted, type II natural killer T lymphocyte.

Rhost S(1), Löfbom L, Rynmark BM, Pei B, Månsson JE, Teneberg S, Blomqvist M,
Cardell SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Sulfatide-reactive CD1d-restricted natural killer T (NKT) lymphocytes belong to
the type II NKT cell subset with diverse TCRs, and have been found to regulate
experimental auto-immune encephalomyelitis, tumor immunity, and experimental
hepatitis in murine models. NKT cells can be activated by self-lipids presented
by CD1d, manifested as autoreactivity. The identity of most of these self-lipids 
remains unknown. By isolating lipids from a CD1d-expressing, highly stimulatory
antigen presenting cell, we identified isoforms of β-glucosylceramide (GlcCer),
with sphingosine and fatty acid chain lengths of C24:0 and C16:0, that activated 
a sulfatide-reactive type II NKT cell hybridoma. A screen of structurally related
glycosphingolipids demonstrated β-galactosylceramide (GalCer) as another ligand, 
and further, that the lysoforms were the most potent isoform of the
glycosphingo-lipid ligands, followed by isoforms with a long fatty acid chain of 
C24. Thus, the same type II NKT cell was activated by several ligands, namely
sulfatide, GlcCer, and GalCer. However, CD1d-dependent reactivity to antigen
presenting cells lacking all GlcCer-based glycosphingolipids, or all
glycosphingolipids, was maintained. This suggests that other endogenous,
nonglycosphingolipid, lipid ligands contribute to steady-state autoreactivity by 
type II NKT cells.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201142350 
PMID: 22777932  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

