
1. Immunol Lett. 2012 Sep;147(1-2):75-9. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2012.06.006. Epub 2012
Jul 4.

CCR9+ macrophages are required for eradication of peritoneal bacterial infections
and prevention of polymicrobial sepsis.

Mizukami T(1), Kanai T, Mikami Y, Hayashi A, Doi T, Handa T, Matsumoto A, Jun L, 
Matsuoka K, Sato T, Hisamatsu T, Hibi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Sepsis is a systemic inflammatory response to infection associated with multiple 
organ dysfunction syndrome and a high mortality rate. In septic shock induced by 
severe peritonitis, early response of peritoneal macrophages against infected
microbes is vital in preventing the spread of infection. We found that the
mucosal homing receptor CCR9, is induced in peritoneal macrophages in response to
inflammatory stimulation. We used a cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) model of
sepsis to determine the role of CCR9 with respect to peritoneal macrophages, and 
controlling peritoneal infection and systemic inflammation. CCR9(-/-) mice showed
aggravated septic shock with higher mortality rates compared with wild-type (WT) 
mice. Six hours after CLP, CCR9(-/-) mice demonstrated a greater inflammatory
response. This was associated with higher production of inflammatory cytokines,
such as IL-6, TNF and IP-10 in peritoneal lavage compared with WT mice. Although 
the numbers of peritoneal bacteria were elevated in CCR9(-/-) mice subjected to
CLP compared with WT mice, this was normalized in CCR9(-/-) mice subjected to CLP
through the adoptive transfer of WT peritoneal macrophages. We conclude that CCR9
is required for recruitment of peritoneal macrophages in the steady state to
control systemic sepsis during early phases of peritoneal infection.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2012.06.006 
PMID: 22771342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

