
1. J Immunol. 2012 Aug 15;189(4):2054-62. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201097. Epub 2012
Jul 13.

Chronic exposure to staphylococcal superantigen elicits a systemic inflammatory
disease mimicking lupus.

Chowdhary VR(1), Tilahun AY, Clark CR, Grande JP, Rajagopalan G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA. chowdhary.vaidehi@mayo.edu

Chronic nasal and skin colonization with superantigen (SAg)-producing
Staphylococcus aureus is well documented in humans. Given that trans-mucosal and 
trans-cutaneous absorption of SAgs can occur, we determined whether chronic
exposure to small amounts of SAg per se could activate autoreactive CD4(+) and
CD8(+) T cells and precipitate any autoimmune disease without further external
autoantigenic stimulation. Because HLA class II molecules present SAg more
efficiently than do mouse MHC class II molecules, HLA-DQ8 transgenic mice were
implanted s.c. with mini-osmotic pumps capable of continuously delivering the
SAg, staphylococcal enterotoxin B (total of 10 μg/mouse), or PBS over 4 wk.
Chronic exposure to staphylococcal enterotoxin B resulted in a multisystem
autoimmune inflammatory disease with features similar to systemic lupus
erythematosus. The disease was characterized by mononuclear cell infiltration of 
lungs, liver, and kidneys, accompanied by the production of anti-nuclear Abs and 
deposition of immune complexes in the renal glomeruli. The inflammatory
infiltrates in various organs predominantly consisted of CD4(+) T cells bearing
TCR Vβ8. The extent of immunopathology was markedly reduced in mice lacking
CD4(+) T cells and CD28, indicating that the disease is CD4(+) T cell mediated
and CD28 dependent. The absence of disease in STAT4-deficient, as well as
IFN-γ-deficient, HLA-DQ8 mice suggested the pathogenic role of Th1-type
cytokines, IL-12 and IFN-γ. In conclusion, our study suggests that chronic
exposure to extremely small amounts of bacterial SAg could be an etiological
factor for systemic lupus erythematosus.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201097 
PMCID: PMC3462343
PMID: 22798666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

