
1. J Immunol. 2012 Aug 15;189(4):1689-98. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101484. Epub 2012
Jul 13.

Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton by Rho kinase controls antigen presentation 
by CD1d.

Gallo RM(1), Khan MA, Shi J, Kapur R, Wei L, Bailey JC, Liu J, Brutkiewicz RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

CD1d molecules are MHC class I-like molecules that present lipid Ags to NKT
cells. Although we have previously shown that several different cell signaling
molecules can play a role in the control of Ag presentation by CD1d, a defined
mechanism by which a cell signaling pathway regulates CD1d function has been
unclear. In the current study, we have found that the Rho kinases,
Rho-associated, coiled-coil containing protein kinase (ROCK)1 and ROCK2,
negatively regulate both human and mouse CD1d-mediated Ag presentation.
Inhibition of ROCK pharmacologically, through specific ROCK1 and ROCK2 short
hairpin RNA, or by using dendritic cells generated from ROCK1-deficient mice all 
resulted in enhanced CD1d-mediated Ag presentation compared with controls. ROCK
regulates the actin cytoskeleton by phosphorylating LIM kinase, which, in turn,
phosphorylates cofilin, prohibiting actin fiber depolymerization. Treatment of
APCs with the actin filament depolymerizing agent, cytochalasin D, as well as
knockdown of LIM kinase by short hairpin RNA, resulted in enhanced Ag
presentation to NKT cells by CD1d, consistent with our ROCK inhibition data.
Therefore, our overall results reveal a model whereby CD1d-mediated Ag
presentation is negatively regulated by ROCK via its effects on the actin
cytoskeleton.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101484 
PMCID: PMC3411863
PMID: 22798677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

