
1. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2012 May-Jun;33 Suppl 1:64-66. doi:
10.2500/aap.2012.33.3552.

Chapter 19: Hypersensitivity pneumonitis.

Blatman KH, Grammer LC.

Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP), also referred to as extrinsic allergic
alveolitis, is characterized by non-IgE-mediated inflammation of the parenchyma, 
alveoli, and terminal airways of the lung initiated by inhaled antigens in a
susceptible host. Etiologic agents of HP are either organic high molecular weight
compounds such as bacteria, fungi, amoebae, plant, and animal proteins or
inorganic low molecular weight haptens such as isocyanate and drugs including
amiodarone, nitrofurantoin, and minocycline. Six significant predictors have been
identified that provide âˆ¼95% diagnostic accuracy. These six predictors are (1)
exposure to a known offending allergen, (2) positive precipitating antibodies to 
the offending antigen, (3) recurrent episodes of symptoms, (4) inspiratory
crackles on lung auscultation, (5) symptoms occurring 4-8 hours after exposure,
and (6) weight loss. HP is staged into acute, subacute, and chronic. In the acute
stage after direct exposure to the antigen, there is fever, chills, nonproductive
cough, dyspnea, malaise, and myalgias, all resembling influenza. However, if
obtained, a chest radiograph shows nodular infiltrates, and pulmonary function
testing is restrictive (unless the cause is avian in which obstruction or
obstruction with restriction is present). In the chronic stage, fever and chills 
are absent, but weight loss can occur. The immunologic response includes
activated macrophages and CD8(+) cytotoxic lymphocytes, and bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid reveals marked lymphocytosis with a ratio of CD4(+) cells to CD8(+) 
cells <1. Activated macrophages have increased expression of CD80/CD86, and T
cells have increased expression of its counter-ligand CD28, evidence for
heightened antigen presentation.

DOI: 10.2500/aap.2012.33.3552 
PMID: 22794692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

