
1. Biochemistry. 2012 Aug 7;51(31):6039-46. Epub 2012 Jul 23.

Novel B(12)-dependent acyl-CoA mutases and their biotechnological potential.

Cracan V(1), Banerjee R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-0600, USA.

The recent spate of discoveries of novel acyl-CoA mutases has engendered a
growing appreciation for the diversity of 5'-deoxyadenosylcobalamin-dependent
rearrangement reactions. The prototype of the reaction catalyzed by these enzymes
is the 1,2 interchange of a hydrogen atom with a thioester group leading to a
change in the degree of carbon skeleton branching. These enzymes are predicted to
share common architectural elements: a Rossman fold and a triose phosphate
isomerase (TIM)-barrel domain for binding cofactor and substrate, respectively.
Within this family, methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MCM) is the best studied and is the
only member found in organisms ranging from bacteria to man. MCM interconverts
(2R)-methylmalonyl-CoA and succinyl-CoA. The more recently discovered family
members include isobutyryl-CoA mutase (ICM), which interconverts isobutyryl-CoA
and n-butyryl-CoA; ethylmalonyl-CoA mutase, which interconverts
(2R)-ethylmalonyl-CoA and (2S)-methylsuccinyl-CoA; and 2-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA
mutase, which interconverts 2-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA and (3S)-hydroxybutyryl-CoA. 
A variant in which the two subunits of ICM are fused to a G-protein chaperone,
IcmF, has been described recently. In addition to its ICM activity, IcmF also
catalyzes the interconversion of isovaleryl-CoA and pivalyl-CoA. This review
focuses on the involvement of acyl-CoA mutases in central carbon and secondary
bacterial metabolism and on their biotechnological potential for applications
ranging from bioremediation to stereospecific synthesis of C2-C5 carboxylic acids
and alcohols, and for production of potential commodity and specialty chemicals.

DOI: 10.1021/bi300827v 
PMCID: PMC3448797
PMID: 22803641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

