
1. World J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2012 Jan;28(1):135-43. doi:
10.1007/s11274-011-0802-7. Epub 2011 Jun 10.

Rapid qualitative characterization of bacterial community in eutrophicated
wastewater stabilization plant by T-RFLP method based on 16S rRNA genes.

Belila A(1), Snoussi M, Hassan A.

Author information: 
(1)Water Researches and Technologies Centre of Bordj-Cedria, Water Treatment and 
Reuse Laboratory, BP. 273, 8020, Soliman, Tunisia. belilaziz@yahoo.com

Waste stabilization ponds are a simple, low-cost extensive process for treating
wastewater, and well adapted to low socio-economic conditions in developing
countries where the microbial populations in these systems are not well
characterized. The phylogenetic bacterial community structure within a Tunisian
wastewater stabilization plant treating domestic wastewater was assessed by
Terminal Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism method targeting 16S rRNA genes
and by the APLAUS+ software of the Microbial Community Analysis (MiCA) web based 
tool. The dimeric enzymatic digestion with HaeIII and HinfI restriction enzymes
revealed high bacterial diversity within the plant where 11 bacterial phyla were 
identified. The total bacterial community structure includes bacteria catalysing 
nitrogen and phosphorus removal and bacteria involved in the sulfur cycle. The
bacterial community was characterized by the dominance of Proteobacteria which
was the most populous phylum (60%) followed by the Actinobacteria (20%), the
Firmicutes (10.3%), the Bacteroidetes (2.3%), the Nitrospira (2.2%). Minor
bacterial phyla groups occupied smaller fractions such as Chloroflexi,
Deferribacteres and Verrumicrobia. T-RFLP analysis revealed also that The
Proteobacteria phylum was characterized by the dominance of bacteria of The
Gammaproteobacteria class.

DOI: 10.1007/s11274-011-0802-7 
PMID: 22806789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

