
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 31;109(31):12811-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1200330109. Epub 2012 Jul 16.

Identification of olivetolic acid cyclase from Cannabis sativa reveals a unique
catalytic route to plant polyketides.

Gagne SJ(1), Stout JM, Liu E, Boubakir Z, Clark SM, Page JE.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Council-Plant Biotechnology Institute, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
S7N 0W9.

Δ(9)-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and other cannabinoids are responsible for the
psychoactive and medicinal properties of Cannabis sativa L. (marijuana). The
first intermediate in the cannabinoid biosynthetic pathway is proposed to be
olivetolic acid (OA), an alkylresorcinolic acid that forms the polyketide nucleus
of the cannabinoids. OA has been postulated to be synthesized by a type III
polyketide synthase (PKS) enzyme, but so far type III PKSs from cannabis have
been shown to produce catalytic byproducts instead of OA. We analyzed the
transcriptome of glandular trichomes from female cannabis flowers, which are the 
primary site of cannabinoid biosynthesis, and searched for polyketide
cyclase-like enzymes that could assist in OA cyclization. Here, we show that a
type III PKS (tetraketide synthase) from cannabis trichomes requires the presence
of a polyketide cyclase enzyme, olivetolic acid cyclase (OAC), which catalyzes a 
C2-C7 intramolecular aldol condensation with carboxylate retention to form OA.
OAC is a dimeric α+β barrel (DABB) protein that is structurally similar to
polyketide cyclases from Streptomyces species. OAC transcript is present at high 
levels in glandular trichomes, an expression profile that parallels other
cannabinoid pathway enzymes. Our identification of OAC both clarifies the
cannabinoid pathway and demonstrates unexpected evolutionary parallels between
polyketide biosynthesis in plants and bacteria. In addition, the widespread
occurrence of DABB proteins in plants suggests that polyketide cyclases may play 
an overlooked role in generating plant chemical diversity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1200330109 
PMCID: PMC3411943
PMID: 22802619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

