
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40614. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040614. Epub 2012 Jul 11.

Thrombospondin-1 interacts with Trypanosoma cruzi surface calreticulin to enhance
cellular infection.

Johnson CA(1), Kleshchenko YY, Ikejiani AO, Udoko AN, Cardenas TC, Pratap S,
Duquette MA, Lima MF, Lawler J, Villalta F, Nde PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Meharry Medical College, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America.

Trypanosoma cruzi causes Chagas disease, which is a neglected tropical disease
that produces severe pathology and mortality. The mechanisms by which the
parasite invades cells are not well elucidated. We recently reported that T.
cruzi up-regulates the expression of thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) to enhance the
process of cellular invasion. Here we characterize a novel TSP-1 interaction with
T. cruzi that enhances cellular infection. We show that labeled TSP-1 interacts
specifically with the surface of T. cruzi trypomastigotes. We used TSP-1 to pull 
down interacting parasite surface proteins that were identified by mass
spectrometry. We also show that full length TSP-1 and the N-terminal domain of
TSP-1 (NTSP) interact with T. cruzi surface calreticulin (TcCRT) and other
surface proteins. Pre-exposure of recombinant NTSP or TSP-1 to T. cruzi
significantly enhances cellular infection of wild type mouse embryo fibroblasts
(MEF) compared to the C-terminal domain of TSP-1, E3T3C1. In addition, blocking
TcCRT with antibodies significantly inhibits the enhancement of cellular
infection mediated by the TcCRT-TSP-1 interaction. Taken together, our findings
indicate that TSP-1 interacts with TcCRT on the surface of T. cruzi through the
NTSP domain and that this interaction enhances cellular infection. Thus surface
TcCRT is a virulent factor that enhances the pathogenesis of T. cruzi infection
through TSP-1, which is up-regulated by the parasite.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040614 
PMCID: PMC3394756
PMID: 22808206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

