
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41066. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041066. Epub 2012 Jul 16.

Transcriptional response of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from cattle
infected with Mycobacterium bovis.

Blanco FC(1), Soria M, Bianco MV, Bigi F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de BiotecnologÃ­a-CICVyA, Instituto Nacional de TecnologÃ­a
Agropecuaria, Hurlingham, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Mycobacterium bovis is the causative agent of most cases of bovine tuberculosis. 
The identification of bTB biomarkers in specific stages of the disease will
contribute to a better understanding of the immunopathology associated with
tuberculosis and will enable their use in disease diagnosis and prognosis. The
aim of this study was to evaluate the gene expression profile induced after
specific stimulation of bovine peripheral blood mononuclear cells from cattle
infected with M. bovis using the AffymetrixÂ® GeneChipÂ® Bovine Genome Array. A
total of 172 genes showed differential expression profile that was statistically 
significant with log2-fold change >2.5 and <-2.5. Twenty-four out of these genes 
were upregulated and 148 were downregulated in bovine peripheral blood
mononuclear cells of M. bovis-infected cattle. The highest
differentially-expressed genes were related to immune and inflammatory responses,
apoptosis, endocytosis, cellular trafficking and genes encoding proteins involved
in cellular matrix degradation. Microarray results were confirmed in another
group of infected cattle by RT-qPCR for the CD14, IL-1R, THBS1, MMP9 and FYVE
genes. This study confirms previous findings that have shown that M. bovis
infection in cattle results in the downregulation of immune response-related
genes. Moreover, it validates the use of microarray platforms in combination with
RT-qPCR to identify biomarkers of bovine tuberculosis. In addition, we propose
CD14, IL-1R, THBS1, MMP9 and FYVE as potential biomarkers of bovine tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041066 
PMCID: PMC3397951
PMID: 22815916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

