
1. J Immunol Methods. 2012 Oct 31;384(1-2):157-63. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2012.07.002.
Epub 2012 Jul 16.

Isolating, immunophenotyping and ex vivo stimulation of CD4+ and CD8+ gastric
lymphocytes during murine Helicobacter pylori infection.

Ruiz VE(1), Sachdev M, Zhang S, Wen S, Moss SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Rhode Island Hospital
and Brown University, Providence, RI 02903, USA. Victoria_ruiz@brown.edu

Helicobacter pylori infection is associated with severe chronic inflammation, yet
the host immune response is rarely able to clear the bacterium. Thymus derived
lymphocyte populations such as T helper 1, T helper 17, and T regulatory cells
are known to play important roles in the chronicity of H. pylori infection as
well as contributing to ongoing gastric pathology. It is yet to be established
how these immune cell populations interact in the gastric environment during H.
pylori infection. Mouse models of infection offer an opportunity to investigate
these interactions in detail. Flow cytometric analysis provides excellent
lymphocyte characterization due to its high specificity, sensitivity and
potential to perform multiple simultaneous measurements. However, this requires a
viable enriched single cell suspension after adequate tissue dissociation, which 
poses a challenge due to the heterogeneity of gastric tissue. We have evaluated
several isolation techniques and have optimized a protocol to isolate and enrich 
lymphocytes from the H. pylori-infected murine stomach. EDTA/DTT followed by
Collagenase IV digestion successfully dissociates an average of 1 × 10⁷ cells per
mouse. Further enrichment using Lympholyte M gradient yields on average 4 × 106
CD45+ lymphocytes per stomach. Following isolation we compared lymphocyte
stimulation by CD3/CD28, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and ionomycin or
H. pylori lysate and determined that CD3/CD28 effectively induces stimulation of 
IFNγ and IL 17A, but impairs Foxp3 expression. Using an optimized protocol we
observed a 2-fold increase of CD8+ IFNγ-expressing lymphocytes localized
specifically to the gastric compartment during H. pylori infection. The
mechanisms of H. pylori immunopathogenesis are still considered enigmatic,
therefore this optimized protocol can help delineate further novel immune cell
targets that mediate H. pylori-induced pathology and identify the correlates of
immunity for vaccine development.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2012.07.002 
PMCID: PMC3432732
PMID: 22814402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

