
1. Microb Pathog. 2012 Sep;53(3-4):162-7. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2012.07.002. Epub
2012 Jul 20.

Weak binder for MHC molecule is a potent Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific CTL 
epitope in the context of HLA-A24 allele.

Wang Y(1), Sun M, He M, Cui H, Zhang J, Shi L, Wang W, Xu W, Gao B, Ding J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Nanjing Center for Disease Prevention and Control,
Zizhulin 2, Nanjing 210003, China.

Erratum in
    Microb Pathog. 2013 Mar;56:60.

Tuberculosis causes serious health problem for the world population. Antigenic
peptides selected by pathogen-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) are
presented by major histocompatibility complex (MHC; or human leukocyte antigen
[HLA] in humans) molecules, and HLA-A restricted responses may be of interest for
vaccine development and the understanding of cellular immunity. A series of
peptides derived from the 10-KDa culture filtrate protein (CFP10) and the 6 kDa
early secretory antigenic target (ESAT-6) in the Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)
have been screened and a CTL epitope restricted by the human leukocyte antigen
HLA-A24, a common HLA allele in Asian people, has been identified. In this study,
we studied a panel of CFP10 and ESAT-6-derived peptides to identify those with
binding motifs for HLA-A24 molecules. The antigenicity of candidate peptides was 
assessed with in vitro refolding tests and an enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT) 
assay, and by tetramer staining to determine the capacity to stimulate CTLs from 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of HLA-A24-positive TB Patients. We
report that one novel candidate peptide at positions 5-14 of ESAT-6 of Mtb could 
induce peptide-specific CTLs from PBMCs of HLA-A24-positive patients, but not
from HLA-A24-negative patients and HLA-A24-positive healthy controls. Identified 
epitope is a weak binder for HLA-A24 molecule in a mini MHC refolding assay.
Since the peptide is presented by a common HLA class I molecule, it may be useful
for immunotherapy against Mtb infection and vaccine development in the large
population of Mtb-infected patients.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2012.07.002 
PMCID: PMC7127545
PMID: 22819798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

