
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 7;287(37):31515-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.396895. Epub 2012
Jul 22.

Identifying key juxtamembrane interactions in cell membranes using AraC-based
transcriptional reporter assay (AraTM).

Su PC(1), Berger BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania
18015, USA.

Dimerization is a key regulatory mechanism in activation of transmembrane (TM)
receptors during signal transduction. This process involves a coordinated
interplay between extracellular (EX), TM, and cytoplasmic (CYTO) regions to form 
a specific interface required for both ligand binding and intracellular signaling
to occur. While several transcriptional activator-based methods exist for
investigating TM interactions in bacterial membranes, expression of TM chimera in
these methods occurs in a reverse orientation, and are limited to only TM domains
for proper membrane trafficking and integration. We therefore developed a new,
AraC-based transcriptional reporter assay (AraTM) that expresses EX-TM-CYTO
chimera in their native orientation, thereby enabling membrane trafficking to
occur independent of the TM chimera used as well as permitting analysis of
EX-TM-CYTO interactions in biological membranes. Using integrin Î±(IIb) TM-CYTO as
a model, we observe a large increase in homodimerization for the constitutively
active TM mutant L980A relative to wild-type in the TM-CYTO construct
(A963-E1008). We also characterized the receptor for advanced glycation
endproducts (RAGE), whose homooligomeric state is critical in ligand recognition,
and find the specific juxtamembrane region within the CYTO (A375-P394) mediates
homodimerization, and is dominant over effects observed when the extracellular C2
domain is included. Furthermore, we find good agreement between our AraTM
measurements in bacterial membranes and BRET measurements made on corresponding
RAGE constructs expressed in transfected HEK293 cells. Overall, the AraTM assay
provides a new approach to identify specific interactions between receptor
EX-TM-CYTO domains in biological membranes that are important in regulation of
signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.396895 
PMCID: PMC3438984
PMID: 22822084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

