
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2012 Nov;92(5):1083-91. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0112046. Epub 2012 Jul
26.

Membrane damage and repair in primary monocytes exposed to human Î²-defensin-3.

Lioi AB(1), Rodriguez AL, Funderburg NT, Feng Z, Weinberg A, Sieg SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Division of Infectious
Diseases, Center for AIDS Research, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
OH 44106, USA.

Interactions of AMPs with plasma membranes of primary human immune cells are
poorly characterized. Analysis of PI exclusion as a measure of membrane integrity
indicated that hBD-3 caused membrane perturbations in monocytes but not T or B
cells at concentrations typically used to kill bacteria or to induce activation
of APCs. Bleb-like structures were observed in monocytes exposed to hBD-3. These 
cells also increased surface expression of LAMP1, a membrane repair marker after 
exposure to hBD-3. Furthermore, cell death was enhanced by adding an inhibitor of
membrane repair. Removal of cholesterol from membranes resulted in greater
susceptibility of cells to hBD-3, but cholesterol content was not different
between the cell types, as assessed by filipin staining. Freshly isolated
monocytes expressed higher levels of the negatively charged phospholipid, PS, on 
their outer leaflet compared with B or T cells. Preincubation of monocytes with
molecules that bind PS protected these cells from hBD-3-induced membrane damage, 
suggesting that outer-membrane PS expression can at least partially explain
monocyte susceptibility to hBD-3. The potential for membrane disruption caused by
AMPs should be evaluated in various cell types when considering these molecules
for therapeutic applications in humans.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0112046 
PMCID: PMC4050522
PMID: 22837529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

