
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Aug 28;109(35):E2343-52. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1206701109. Epub 2012 Jul 25.

Functional genetic screen of human diversity reveals that a methionine salvage
enzyme regulates inflammatory cell death.

Ko DC(1), Gamazon ER, Shukla KP, Pfuetzner RA, Whittington D, Holden TD,
Brittnacher MJ, Fong C, Radey M, Ogohara C, Stark AL, Akey JM, Dolan ME, Wurfel
MM, Miller SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Aug 28;109(35):13886-7.

Genome-wide association studies can identify common differences that contribute
to human phenotypic diversity and disease. When genome-wide association studies
are combined with approaches that test how variants alter physiology, biological 
insights can emerge. Here, we used such an approach to reveal regulation of cell 
death by the methionine salvage pathway. A common SNP associated with reduced
expression of a putative methionine salvage pathway dehydratase, apoptotic
protease activating factor 1 (APAF1)-interacting protein (APIP), was associated
with increased caspase-1-mediated cell death in response to Salmonella. The role 
of APIP in methionine salvage was confirmed by growth assays with
methionine-deficient media and quantitation of the methionine salvage substrate, 
5'-methylthioadenosine. Reducing expression of APIP or exogenous addition of
5'-methylthioadenosine increased Salmonellae-induced cell death. Consistent with 
APIP originally being identified as an inhibitor of caspase-9-dependent
apoptosis, the same allele was also associated with increased sensitivity to the 
chemotherapeutic agent carboplatin. Our results show that common human variation 
affecting expression of a single gene can alter susceptibility to two distinct
cell death programs. Furthermore, the same allele that promotes cell death is
associated with improved survival of individuals with systemic inflammatory
response syndrome, suggesting a possible evolutionary pressure that may explain
the geographic pattern observed for the frequency of this SNP. Our study shows
that in vitro association screens of disease-related traits can not only reveal
human genetic differences that contribute to disease but also provide unexpected 
insights into cell biology.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1206701109 
PMCID: PMC3435171
PMID: 22837397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

