
1. DNA Cell Biol. 2012 Oct;31(10):1541-8. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Expression and characterization of recombinant interleukin-21 receptor and its
targeting single-chain variable fragment antibodies selected from a human phage
display library.

Wu Q(1), Zhang J, Luo C, Zhang T, Wang T, Wang M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science & Technology, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing,
P.R. China.

Interleukin-21 receptor (IL-21R) is widely expressed in lymphocytes, and plays an
important role in immunological cell proliferation and cytokine production. The
present study aims to express a recombinant extracellular domain of human IL-21R 
(rhIL-21R-ECD) with high yield, and to screen the anti-IL-21R single-chain
variable fragments (scFvs) from a synthetic human phage display library. The
rhIL-21R-ECD, being expressed mainly as insoluble inclusion bodies in Escherichia
coli BL21 (DE3), was purified and refolded. ELISA analysis showed that the
refolded rhIL-21R-ECD bound to its ligand IL-21 in a concentration-dependent
manner. Using a phage display technique, anti-IL-21R scFvs were screened from a
na√Øve human phage display library by biopanning. After four rounds of panning,
positive clones were isolated, sequenced, and characterized. The clone with
highest activity was designated as C2. Flow cytometry analysis showed that the
scFv C2 could recognize IL-21R on Jurkat cells. Furthermore, proliferation assay 
revealed a concentration-dependent inhibitory effect of C2 on the Jurkat cell,
with fifty percent inhibitory concentration (IC(50)) of 78 nM. A human scFv
antibody C2 with a high binding specificity to IL-21R was isolated and
characterized. The antibody showed a concentration-dependent inhibitory effect on
Jurkat cell proliferation.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.2012.1728 
PMID: 22849297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

