
1. Biomed Sci Instrum. 2012;48:268-74.

Human gingival fibroblast cell response to gox/cat.

Long MJ(1), Tucci MA, Benghuzzi HA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Mississippi Medical Center.

Hydrogen peroxide kills bacteria; however, control of a specific dose limited
control over cellular response and function. In this study, the GOX/CAT system
was used to independently provide and control the amount of H2O2 and oxygen in
cell culture. The GOX/CAT system is composed of glucose oxidase (GOX) and
catalase (CAT). Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is molecules on the outer membrane of
gram-negative bacteria. LPS elicits an inflammatory stimulus which can activate
macrophages to produce pro-inflammatory cytokines, TNF-a, and specific mediators 
of inflammation including NO and prostaglandins. Macrophages are known to provide
a prominent defense against bacteria. The aim of this experiment was to determine
if GOX/CAT (10µMH2O2) plus conditioned media from LPS challenged macrophage cells
will alter fibroblast cell numbers, viability and morphology after 24, 48, 78
hours. Human gingival fibroblast (HGF) CRL-2014 were treated with conditioned
media from RAW 264.7 cells with 4µg/mL LPS, GOX/CAT (10µMH2O2) and 4µg/mL LPS +
GOX/CAT (10µMH2O2) at 24, 48 and 72 hours. Cell protein, MDA and GSH levels and
cell morphology were determined after each incubation periods. The results showed
no significant difference in protein levels and MDA levels throughout the
experiment. Reduced glutathione concentration in treated cells was statistically 
lower than control suggesting the possibility of intracellular damage. Overall,
cell response to H2O2 did not alter cell proliferation and viability of LPS
conditioned media treated fibroblast. Morphological results indicated a trend in 
possible adaptive response to LPS after 48 and 72 hours. Additional experiments
are needed to determine chronic exposure on HGF.


PMID: 22846293 

