
1. Biodegradation. 2013 Apr;24(2):215-25. doi: 10.1007/s10532-012-9578-1. Epub 2012 
Jul 31.

Biodegradation of DDT by stimulation of indigenous microbial populations in soil 
with cosubstrates.

Ortíz I(1), Velasco A, Le Borgne S, Revah S.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Procesos y Tecnología, Universidad Autónoma
Metropolitana-Cuajimalpa, Artificios 40, Col. Hidalgo, Delegación Álvaro Obregón,
01120, Mexico, DF, Mexico. irmene@correo.cua.uam.mx

Stimulation of native microbial populations in soil by the addition of small
amounts of secondary carbon sources (cosubstrates) and its effect on the
degradation and theoretical mineralization of DDT
[l,l,l-trichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane] and its main metabolites, DDD and
DDE, were evaluated. Microbial activity in soil polluted with DDT, DDE and DDD
was increased by the presence of phenol, hexane and toluene as cosubstrates. The 
consumption of DDT was increased from 23 % in a control (without cosubstrate) to 
67, 59 and 56 % in the presence of phenol, hexane and toluene, respectively. DDE 
was completely removed in all cases, and DDD removal was enhanced from 67 % in
the control to ~86 % with all substrates tested, except for acetic acid and
glucose substrates. In the latter cases, DDD removal was either inhibited or
unchanged from the control. The optimal amount of added cosubstrate was observed 
to be between 0.64 and 2.6 mg C [Formula: see text]. The CO2 produced was higher 
than the theoretical amount for complete cosubstrate mineralization indicating
possible mineralization of DDT and its metabolites. Bacterial communities were
evaluated by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, which indicated that native
soil and the untreated control presented a low bacterial diversity. The detected 
bacteria were related to soil microorganisms and microorganisms with known
biodegradative potential. In the presence of toluene a bacterium related to
Azoarcus, a genus that includes species capable of growing at the expense of
aromatic compounds such as toluene and halobenzoates under denitrifying
conditions, was detected.

DOI: 10.1007/s10532-012-9578-1 
PMID: 22847399  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

