
1. EMBO J. 2012 Aug 29;31(17):3607-19. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.212. Epub 2012 Jul
31.

Staphylococcus aureus Staphopain A inhibits CXCR2-dependent neutrophil activation
and chemotaxis.

Laarman AJ(1), Mijnheer G, Mootz JM, van Rooijen WJ, Ruyken M, Malone CL, Heezius
EC, Ward R, Milligan G, van Strijp JA, de Haas CJ, Horswill AR, van Kessel KP,
Rooijakkers SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The CXC chemokine receptor 2 (CXCR2) on neutrophils, which recognizes chemokines 
produced at the site of infection, plays an important role in antimicrobial host 
defenses such as neutrophil activation and chemotaxis. Staphylococcus aureus is a
successful human pathogen secreting a number of proteolytic enzymes, but their
influence on the host immune system is not well understood. Here, we identify the
cysteine protease Staphopain A as a chemokine receptor blocker. Neutrophils
treated with Staphopain A are unresponsive to activation by all unique CXCR2
chemokines due to cleavage of the N-terminal domain, which can be neutralized by 
specific protease inhibitors. Moreover, Staphopain A inhibits neutrophil
migration towards CXCR2 chemokines. By comparing a methicillin-resistant S.
aureus (MRSA) strain with an isogenic Staphopain A mutant, we demonstrate that
Staphopain A is the only secreted protease with activity towards CXCR2. Although 
the inability to cleave murine CXCR2 limits in-vivo studies, our data indicate
that Staphopain A is an important immunomodulatory protein that blocks neutrophil
recruitment by specific cleavage of the N-terminal domain of human CXCR2.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2012.212 
PMCID: PMC3433787
PMID: 22850671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

