
1. J Immunol. 2012 Sep 1;189(5):2290-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103495. Epub 2012 Jul
30.

An NKp30-based chimeric antigen receptor promotes T cell effector functions and
antitumor efficacy in vivo.

Zhang T(1), Wu MR, Sentman CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

NKp30 is a natural cytotoxicity receptor that is expressed on NK cells and
recognizes B7-H6, which is expressed on several types of tumors but few normal
cells. To target effector T cells against B7-H6+ tumors, we developed several
chimeric AgRs (CARs) based on NKp30, which contain the CD28- and/or
CD3ζ-signaling domains with the transmembrane domains from CD3ζ, CD28, or CD8α.
The data show that chimeric NKp30-expressing T cells responded to B7-H6+ tumor
cells. The NKp30 CAR-expressing T cells produced IFN-γ and killed B7-H6
ligand-expressing tumor cells; this response was dependent upon ligand expression
on target cells but not on MHC expression. PBMC-derived dendritic cells also
express NKp30 ligands, including immature dendritic cells, and they can stimulate
NKp30 CAR-bearing T cells to produce IFN-γ, but to a lesser extent. The addition 
of a CD28-signaling domain significantly enhanced the activity of the NKp30 CAR
in a PI3K-dependent manner. Adoptive transfer of T cells expressing a chimeric
NKp30 receptor containing a CD28-signaling domain inhibited the growth of a
B7-H6-expressing murine lymphoma (RMA/B7-H6) in vivo. Moreover, mice that
remained tumor-free were resistant to a subsequent challenge with the wild-type
RMA tumor cells, suggesting the generation of immunity against other tumor Ags.
Overall, this study demonstrates the specificity and therapeutic potential of
adoptive immunotherapy with NKp30 CAR-expressing T cells against B7-H6+ tumor
cells in vivo.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103495 
PMCID: PMC3633481
PMID: 22851709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

