
1. FEBS J. 2012 Oct;279(19):3727-3737. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.08734.x. Epub
2012 Aug 31.

Requirement of lid2 for interfacial activation of a family I.3 lipase with unique
two lid structures.

Cheng M(1), Angkawidjaja C(1)(2), Koga Y(1), Kanaya S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Material and Life Science, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka
University, Japan.
(2)International College, Osaka University, Japan.

A family I.3 lipase from Pseudomonas sp. MIS38 (PML) is characterized by the
presence of two lids (lid1 and lid2) that greatly change conformation upon
substrate binding. While lid1 represents the commonly known lid in lipases, lid2 
is unique to PML and other family I.3 lipases. To clarify the role of lid2 in
PML, a lid2 deletion mutant (ΔL2-PML) was constructed by deleting residues 35-64 
of PML. ΔL2-PML requires calcium ions for both lipase and esterase activities as 
does PML, suggesting that it exhibits activity only when lid1 is fully open and
anchored by the catalytically essential calcium ion, as does PML. However, when
the enzymatic activity was determined using triacetin, the activity of PML
exponentially increased as the substrate concentration reached and increased
beyond the critical micellar concentration, while that of ΔL2-PML did not. These 
results indicate that PML undergoes interfacial activation, while ΔL2-PML does
not. The activities of ΔL2-PML for long-chain triglycerides significantly
decreased while its activity for fatty acid ethyl esters increased, compared with
those of PML. Comparison of the tertiary models of ΔL2-PML in a closed and open
conformation, which are optimized by molecular dynamics simulation, with the
crystal structures of PML suggests that the hydrophobic surface area provided by 
lid1 and lid2 in an open conformation is considerably decreased by the deletion
of lid2. We propose that the hydrophobic surface area provided by these lids is
necessary to hold the micellar substrates firmly to the active site and therefore
lid2 is required for interfacial activation of PML.

© 2012 The Authors Journal compilation © 2012 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.08734.x 
PMID: 22863357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

