
1. J Hazard Mater. 2012 Oct 15;235-236:144-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2012.07.033.
Epub 2012 Jul 24.

Bioremediation of Cd-DDT co-contaminated soil using the Cd-hyperaccumulator Sedum
alfredii and DDT-degrading microbes.

Zhu ZQ(1), Yang XE, Wang K, Huang HG, Zhang X, Fang H, Li TQ, Alva AK, He ZL.

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Environment Remediation and Ecosystem Health, College of
Environmental and Resources Science, Zhejiang University, Zijingang Campus,
Hangzhou 310058, China.

The development of an integrated strategy for the remediation of soil
co-contaminated by heavy metals and persistent organic pollutants is a major
research priority for the decontamination of soil slated for use in agricultural 
production. The objective of this study was to develop a bioremediation strategy 
for fields co-contaminated with cadmium (Cd), dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane
(DDT), and its metabolites 1, 1-dichloro-2, 2-bis (4-chlorophenyl) ethylene (DDE)
and 1, 1-dichloro-2, 2-bis (4-chlorophenyl) ethane (DDD) (DDT, DDE, and DDD are
collectively called DDs) using an identified Cd-hyperaccumulator plant Sedum
alfredii (SA) and DDT-degrading microbes (DDT-1). Initially, inoculation with
DDT-1 was shown to increase SA root biomass in a pot experiment. When SA was
applied together with DDT-1, the levels of Cd and DDs in the co-contaminated soil
decreased by 32.1-40.3% and 33.9-37.6%, respectively, in a pot experiment over 18
months compared to 3.25% and 3.76% decreases in soil Cd and DDs, respectively, in
unplanted, untreated controls. A subsequent field study (18-month duration) in
which the levels of Cd and DDs decreased by 31.1% and 53.6%, respectively,
confirmed the beneficial results of this approach. This study demonstrates that
the integrated bioremediation strategy is effective for the remediation of Cd-DDs
co-contaminated soils.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2012.07.033 
PMID: 22868749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

