
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2012 Sep;169(3):253-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2012.04621.x.

X chromosome gene methylation in peripheral lymphocytes from monozygotic twins
discordant for scleroderma.

Selmi C(1), Feghali-Bostwick CA, Lleo A, Lombardi SA, De Santis M, Cavaciocchi F,
Zammataro L, Mitchell MM, Lasalle JM, Medsger T Jr, Gershwin ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Clinical Immunology Medical
Microbiology and Immunology, Genome Center and MIND Institute, University of
California, Davis, CA, USA. carlo.selmi@unimi.it

Scleroderma (SSc) is a rare connective tissue disease characterized by fibrosis, 
microvasculopathy and autoimmune features. The role of genetics is limited in
SSc, as suggested by similar concordance rates in monozygotic and dizygotic twin 
pairs, while environmental factors may act through epigenetic changes, as
demonstrated for specific genes. Further, sex chromosome changes have been
reported in SSc and may explain the female preponderance. In the present study we
compared the methylation profile of all X chromosome genes in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from monozygotic twins discordant (n=7) and concordant (n=1)
for SSc. Methylated DNA immunoprecipitations from each discordant twin pair were 
hybridized to a custom-designed array included 998 sites encompassing promoters
of all X chromosome genes and randomly chosen autosomal genes. Biostatistical
tools identified sites with an elevated probability to be consistently
hypermethylated (n=18) or hypomethylated (n=25) in affected twins. Identified
genes include transcription factors (ARX, HSFX1, ZBED1, ZNF41) and surface
antigens (IL1RAPL2, PGRMC1), and pathway analysis suggests their involvement in
cell proliferation (PGK1, SMS, UTP14A, SSR4), apoptosis (MTM1), inflammation
(ARAF) and oxidative stress (ENOX2). In conclusion, we propose that X chromosome 
genes with different methylation profiles in monozygotic twin pairs may
constitute candidates for SSc susceptibility.

© 2012 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Immunology © 2012 British Society
for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2012.04621.x 
PMCID: PMC3445002
PMID: 22861365  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

