
1. J Infect Dis. 2013 Jan 1;207(1):18-29. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jis499. Epub 2012 Aug 
7.

Distinct phases of blood gene expression pattern through tuberculosis treatment
reflect modulation of the humoral immune response.

Cliff JM(1), Lee JS, Constantinou N, Cho JE, Clark TG, Ronacher K, King EC, Lukey
PT, Duncan K, Van Helden PD, Walzl G, Dockrell HM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Infection Department, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, United Kingdom. jackie.cliff@lshtm.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Accurate assessment of treatment efficacy would facilitate clinical
trials of new antituberculosis drugs. We hypothesized that early alterations in
peripheral immunity could be measured by gene expression profiling in
tuberculosis patients undergoing successful conventional combination treatment.
METHODS: Ex vivo blood samples from 27 pulmonary tuberculosis patients were
assayed at diagnosis and during treatment. RNA was processed and hybridized to
Affymetrix GeneChips, to determine expression of over 47,000 transcripts.
RESULTS: There were significant â‰¥ 2-fold changes in expression of >4000 genes
during treatment. Rapid, large-scale changes were detected, with down-regulated
expression of 1261 genes within the first week, including inflammatory markers
such as complement components C1q and C2. This was followed by slower changes in 
expression of different networks of genes, including a later increase in
expression of B-cell markers, transcription factors, and signaling molecules.
CONCLUSIONS: The fast initial down-regulation of expression of inflammatory
mediators coincided with rapid killing of actively dividing bacilli, whereas
slower delayed changes occurred as drugs acted on dormant bacilli and coincided
with lung pathology resolution. Measurement of biosignatures during clinical
trials of new drugs could be useful predictors of rapid bactericidal or
sterilizing drug activity, and would expedite the licensing of new treatment
regimens.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jis499 
PMID: 22872737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

