
1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2012 Nov;336(1):64-72. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2012.02657.x. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Functional analysis of an S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase homolog of chestnut
blight fungus.

Liao S(1), Li R, Shi L, Wang J, Shang J, Zhu P, Chen B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical
Agro-bioresources, Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and Technology,
Guangxi University, Nanning, China.

S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), formed after donation of the methyl group of
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) to a methyl acceptor, is reversibly hydrolyzed to
adenosine (ADO) and homocysteine (HCY) by S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase
(SAHH). In chestnut blight fungus (Cryphonectria parasitica), sahh, a
hypovirus-regulated gene that encodes a deduced SAHH protein was shown to have an
SAHH enzymatic activity in vitro. Deletion of sahh resulted in the increased
accumulation of intracellular SAH and SAM but decreased ADO, and a remarkably
increased accumulation of transcripts that encode adenosine kinase, methionine
adenosyltransferase, and an O-methyltransferase, key components of the
methylation pathway. The Δsahh knockout mutants showed a phenotype of slower
growth rate, fewer aerial hyphae, loss of orange pigment, absence of asexual
fruiting bodies and conidia, and a significant reduction in virulence. Deletion
of sahh significantly reduced the accumulation level of transcripts of the cyp1
that encodes cyclophilin A as well as genes of the heterotrimeric G-protein
signaling pathways including cpga1, cpgb1, and cpgc1 and ste12, a target
activated by the MAP kinase cascade. Taken together, we demonstrated that SAHH is
required for virulence and multiple traits of phenotype in C. parasitica, by
regulation of the expression of genes involved in key process of the cell.

© 2012 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2012.02657.x 
PMID: 22889301  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

