
1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 May 15;92(18):1253-8.

[Value of CD8(+) T lymphocyte subgroups for the predication of pulmonary invasive
fungal infections in immunocompromised critically ill patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Cui N(1), Liu DW, Wang H, Long Y, Liu Y, Ding X, Zhou X, Rui X.

Author information: 
(1)Intensive Care Unit, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the predictive ability of CD8(+) T-cell counts and the
expressions of CD28, CD38, HLA-DR on CD8(+) T cells in immunocompromised
critically ill (ICCI) patients with pulmonary invasive fungal infections (PIFI).
METHODS: The evolution of CD8(+) T-lymphocyte subgroups (CD8(+), CD8(+)CD28(+),
CD8(+)CD38(+), CD8(+)HLA-DR(+)) were measured in the peripheral blood of 80 ICCI 
patients with pulmonary infection on day 1 (D1), 3 (D3) and 7 (D7) of intensive
care unit (ICU) admission by quantitative flow cytometry. Forty immunocompetent, 
uninfected critically ill patients were analyzed as control subjects at the time 
of admission. Immunocompromised risk factors and PIFI was diagnosed according to 
European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer-Mycoses Study Group
(EORTC-MSG) 2008 definitions.
RESULTS: PIFI were diagnosed in 71.3% of the ICCI patients (57/80) and included
22 molds infections, 22 Candida infections and 13 mixed infections. Among the 80 
ICCI patients, CD8(+), CD8(+)CD28(+), and CD8(+)CD38(+) T-cell counts were
significantly lower (P < 0.01) and CD8(+)HLA-DR(+) T-cell counts were
significantly higher (P < 0.01) than in the control subjects during the
monitoring period, while CD8(+), CD8(+)CD28(+), and CD8(+)CD38(+) T cells
demonstrated an additional significant decrease in PIFI patients compared with
non-PIFI patients (P < 0.01). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis
for discrimination of the 28-day mortality revealed area under the curve (AUC)
values of 0.83, 0.84 and 0.87 for the CD8(+)CD28(+) T-cell counts (D1, D3 and D7,
respectively). Cutoff values of D1 < 64 cells/mm(3), D3 < 75 cells/mm(3), and D7 
< 88 cells/mm(3) had sensitivities of 0.73 (95%CI: 0.61 - 0.85), 0.74 (95%CI:
0.62 - 0.85), and 0.71 (95%CI: 0.58 - 0.84), specificities of 0.90 (95%CI: 0.77 -
1.00), 0.91(95%CI: 0.78 - 1.00), and 0.95 (95%CI: 0.85 - 1.00), and efficiencies 
of 77.8%, 79.5% and 78.5% respectively. The time interval between ICU admission
and CD8(+)CD28(+) positive 1.7 days (range: 1.0 - 7.0) was significantly shorter 
than the time to diagnosis of IFI by radiological 4.1 days (range: 1.0 - 21.0)
and microbiological 7.5 days (range: 3.0 - 17.0) criteria (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: An extreme distribution of CD8(+) T-lymphocyte subgroups in ICCI
patients was closely related to PIFI. The measurement of CD8(+)CD28(+) T-cell
counts may be an early predictor of PIFI in ICCI patients.


PMID: 22883063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

