
1. Anal Chem. 2012 Aug 7;84(15):6672-8. doi: 10.1021/ac301077d. Epub 2012 Jul 11.

Polyaniline-based highly sensitive microbial biosensor for selective detection of
lindane.

Anu Prathap MU(1), Chaurasia AK, Sawant SN, Apte SK.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai-400085, India.

A highly sensitive, selective, and rapid, whole-cell-based electrochemical
biosensor was developed for detection of the persistent organochlorine pesticide 
γ-hexachlorocyclohexane (γ-HCH), commonly known as lindane. The gene linA2
encoding the enzyme γ-hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH) dehydrochlorinase (LinA2),
involved in the initial steps of lindane (γ-HCH) biotransformation, was cloned
and overexpressed in Escherichia coli . The lindane-biodegrading E. coli cells
were immobilized on polyaniline film. The rapid and selective degradation of
lindane and concomitant generation of hydrochloric acid by the recombinant E.
coli cells in the microenvironment of polyaniline led to a change in its
conductivity, which was monitored by pulsed amperometry. The biosensor could
detect lindane in the part-per-trillion concentration range with a linear
response from 2 to 45 ppt. The sensor was found to be selective to all the
isomers of hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH) and to pentachlorocyclohexane (PCCH) but
did not respond to other aliphatic and aromatic chlorides or to the end product
of lindane degradation, i.e., trichlorobenzene (TCB). The sensor also did not
respond to other commonly used organochlorine pesticides like DDT and DDE. On the
basis of experimental results, a rationale has been proposed for the excellent
sensitivity of polyaniline as a pH sensor for detection of H(+) ions released in 
its microenvironment.

DOI: 10.1021/ac301077d 
PMID: 22881401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

