
1. BMC Immunol. 2012 Aug 16;13:46. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-13-46.

Regulation of in vitro human T cell development through interleukin-7 deprivation
and anti-CD3 stimulation.

Patel ES(1), Okada S, Hachey K, Yang LJ, Durum SK, Moreb JS, Chang LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

BACKGROUND: The role of IL-7 and pre-TCR signaling during T cell development has 
been well characterized in murine but not in human system. We and others have
reported that human BM hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) display poor
proliferation, inefficient double negative (DN) to double positive (DP)
transition and no functional maturation in the in vitro OP9-Delta-like 1 (DL1)
culture system.
RESULTS: In this study, we investigated the importance of optimal IL-7 and
pre-TCR signaling during adult human T cell development. Using a modified OP9-DL1
culture ectopically expressing IL-7 and Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand
(Flt3L), we demonstrated enhanced T cell precursor expansion. IL-7 removal at
various time points during T cell development promoted a slight increase of DP
cells; however, these cells did not differentiate further and underwent cell
death. As pre-TCR signaling rescues DN cells from programmed cell death, we
treated the culture with anti-CD3 antibody. Upon pre-TCR stimulation, the IL-7
deprived T precursors differentiated into CD3+TCRαβ+DP cells and further matured 
into functional CD4 T cells, albeit displayed a skewed TCR Vβ repertoire.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study establishes for the first time a critical control for
differentiation and maturation of adult human T cells from HPCs by concomitant
regulation of IL-7 and pre-TCR signaling.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2172-13-46 
PMCID: PMC3496569
PMID: 22897934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

