
1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Oct 15;303(8):G915-26. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00068.2012. Epub 2012 Aug 16.

CD24 is expressed in gastric parietal cells and regulates apoptosis and the
response to Helicobacter felis infection in the murine stomach.

Duckworth CA(1), Clyde D, Pritchard DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Institute of Translational Medicine,
University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3GE, United Kingdom.

CD24 is expressed in the putative stem cells within several tissues and is
overexpressed in gastric and colonic adenocarcinomas. Perturbed CD24 expression
may therefore alter the response of gastrointestinal epithelia to damage-inducing
stimuli that induce cancer. We have investigated the effects of CD24 deletion on 
gastric responses to Helicobacter felis infection and γ-irradiation using
CD24-null mice. Gastric CD24 expression was determined by immunohistochemistry in
C57BL/6 mice. Female CD24-null and C57BL/6 mice were infected with H. felis for 6
wk, and inflammation, proliferation, apoptosis, and parietal cell numbers were
assessed in gastric tissue sections. Apoptosis and proliferation were analyzed on
a cell-positional basis in stomach, small intestine, and colon of CD24-null and
C57BL/6 mice following γ-irradiation. Apoptosis was also assessed in HT29 cells
following CD24 siRNA transfection. Of CD24-positive cells in the gastric corpus, 
98% were H(+)-K(+)-ATPase-expressing parietal cells. CD24-null mice showed more
prominent gastric H. felis colonization than C57BL/6 mice but displayed a marked 
reduction in corpus inflammation, reduced Ki67 labeling, and less gastric atrophy
6 wk following infection. Corpus apoptosis was elevated in CD24-null mice, but
this did not increase further with H. felis infection as observed in C57BL/6
mice. More apoptotic cells were found following γ-irradiation in the stomach,
small intestine, and colon of CD24-null mice and following CD24 knockdown in
vitro. In conclusion, CD24 is expressed in gastric parietal cells, where it
modulates gastric responses to H. felis and γ-radiation. CD24 also regulates
susceptibility to apoptosis in the distal murine gastrointestinal tract.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00068.2012 
PMID: 22899822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

