
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2012 Nov;92(5):1093-102. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0212082. Epub 2012 Aug
16.

Magnitude of stimulation dictates the cannabinoid-mediated differential T cell
response to HIVgp120.

Chen W(1), Kaplan BL, Pike ST, Topper LA, Lichorobiec NR, Simmons SO, Ramabhadran
R, Kaminski NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

Approximately 25% of immunocompromised HIV patients smoke marijuana for its
putative therapeutic benefit. The goal of these studies was to test the
hypothesis that marijuana-derived cannabinoids have immunomodulatory effects on
HIV antigen-specific T cell effector function. A surrogate mouse model to induce 
polyclonal T cell responses against HIV(gp120) was established. THC, a
marijuana-derived cannabinoid, suppressed or enhanced mouse CD8(+) T cell
proliferation and the gp120-specific CTL response depending on the magnitude of
the IFN-γ response. To determine the molecular mechanisms by which cannabinoids
differentially modulate T cell responses, P/I or anti-CD3/CD28 antibodies were
used for stimulation, and another marijuana-derived cannabinoid, CBD, was also
investigated. THC or CBD suppressed or enhanced IFN-γ and IL-2 production by
mouse splenocytes under optimal or suboptimal stimulation, respectively. Similar 
differential effects of cannabinoids on cytokine production were also observed on
nuclear translocation of NFAT and with human PBMCs in response to P/I
stimulation. However, THC and CBD elevated intracellular calcium, regardless of
the stimulation level with P/I, suggesting that the cannabinoid-induced calcium
increase provides an appropriate signal for activation in suboptimally stimulated
T cells but an anergic-like signal as a result of excessive calcium in optimally 
stimulated T cells. Overall, these data demonstrate differential modulation by
cannabinoids of a HIV antigen-specific response and identify a possible mechanism
responsible for this effect.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0212082 
PMCID: PMC3476243
PMID: 22899554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

