
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2012 Dec;113(6):1491-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2012.05433.x. 
Epub 2012 Sep 12.

Effect of human defensins on lactobacilli and liposomes.

Hugo AA(1), Tymczyszyn EE, Gómez-Zavaglia A, Pérez PF.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Criotecnología de Alimentos, Conicet
La Plata, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La Plata, Argentina.

AIMS: To study the effect of human β-defensins (HBD-1 and HBD-2) on lactobacilli 
membranes as well as on liposomes prepared from purified bacterial lipids.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus CIDCA 331 and
Lact. delbrueckii subsp. lactis CIDCA 133 were grown in Man, Rogosa, Sharpe broth
for 16 h at 37 °C. After being washed, micro-organisms were treated with 0.1-10
μg ml(-1) of HBD-1 and HBD-2 (30 min, 37 °C). Bacterial damage was determined by 
flow cytometry after propidium iodide staining. In parallel experiments, release 
of carboxyfluorescein from liposomes prepared from bacterial lipids was
determined fluorometrically (excitation 485/20 nm, emission 528/20 nm) in the
presence of HBD-1, HBD-2 or Nisin. Exposure of lactobacilli to HBD-2 resulted in 
a significant membrane permeabilization being Lact. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus
CIDCA 331 the most susceptible strain. Liposomes prepared with lipids from strain
CIDCA 133 were destabilized neither by HBD-1 nor by HBD-2, whereas liposomes
derived from strain CIDCA 331 were susceptible to HBD-2 but not to HBD-1. Effect 
of defensins was strongly inhibited in the presence of NaCl, and the activity
increased in water.
CONCLUSIONS: Results reported in the presented work indicate that lipid
composition of bacterial membranes lead to a different interaction with cationic 
peptides such as defensins.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The results represent an advance in the
understanding of the differential effect of HBDs on micro-organisms. Differences 
in susceptibility to anti-microbial peptides could modify the fate of
micro-organisms after the interaction with host's cells.

© 2012 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2012.05433.x 
PMID: 22905671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

