
1. Int J Phytoremediation. 2012 Aug;14(7):656-68.

Phytoremediation of trichloroethylene and
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane-polluted water using transgenic Sesbania
grandiflora and Arabidopsis thaliana plants harboring rabbit cytochrome p450 2E1.

Mouhamad R(1), Ghanem I, AlOrfi M, Ibrahim K, Ali N, Al-Daoude A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Atomic Energy Commission,
Damascus, Syria.

Sesbania grandiflora (L.) pers (Fabaceae) and Arabidopsis thaliana (L.)
(Brassicaceae) were genetically engineered to constitutively express the rabbit
cytochrome p450 2E1 enzyme aiming at increasing their activity toward
trichloroethylene (TCE) and dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) removal
Successful generation of Sesbania and Arabidopsis transgenic plants was verified 
using p450 2E1 specific PCR and confirmed by western blot analysis. Gas
chromatography (GC) analysis revealed that small cuttings of Sesbania and third
generation (F3) Arabidopsis transgenic plants exposed to TCE and DDT in small
hydroponics' vessels accumulated more TCE and DDT compared to plants transformed 
with the empty vector. Furthermore, both transgenic plants were more effective in
breaking down TCE and DDT with a 2-fold increase in TCE metabolism. Two
independent Arabidopsis lines showed that DDT was metabolized about 4-fold higher
than that detected in non transformed plants. Similarly, S. grandiflora cuttings 
removed 51 to 90% of the added DDT compared with only 3% removal in controls
transformed with the null vector. Notably, stability of rabbit cytochrome p450
2E1 was confirmed using third generation Arabidopsis plants that displayed higher
potential for the removal of two important pollutants, TCE and DDT compared with 
the controls.

DOI: 10.1080/15226514.2011.619232 
PMID: 22908634  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

