
1. J Immunol. 2012 Sep 15;189(6):3092-103. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200573. Epub 2012 
Aug 17.

Early secreted antigenic target of 6-kDa protein of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
primes dendritic cells to stimulate Th17 and inhibit Th1 immune responses.

Wang X(1), Barnes PF, Huang F, Alvarez IB, Neuenschwander PF, Sherman DR, Samten 
B.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pulmonary and Infectious Disease Control, University of Texas
Health Science Center, Tyler, TX 75708, USA.

Early secreted antigenic target of 6 kDa (ESAT-6) of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
is a T cell Ag that is a potential vaccine candidate, but it is also a virulence 
factor that mediates pathogenicity. To better understand the effects of ESAT-6 on
the immune response, we studied the effect of ESAT-6 on human dendritic cells
(DCs). Peripheral blood monocytes were treated with GM-CSF and IL-4 to yield
immature DCs, which were matured by addition of LPS and CD40 ligand (CD40L), with
or without ESAT-6. ESAT-6 inhibited LPS/CD40L-induced DC expression of
costimulatory molecules, reduced DC-stimulated allogeneic T cell proliferation
and IL-2 and IFN-γ production, and enhanced IL-17 production. ESAT-6-treated DCs 
also increased IL-17 and reduced IFN-γ production by M. tuberculosis-specific
autologous T cells. ESAT-6 inhibited LPS/CD40L-induced DC production of IL-12 and
enhanced that of IL-23 and IL-1β, without affecting secretion of TNF-α, IL-6, or 
IL-8 through specific interaction with immature DCs. The effects of ESAT-6 were
not mediated through cAMP or p38 MAPK. Medium from ESAT-6-conditioned DCs
increased IL-17 and reduced IFN-γ production by T cells stimulated with anti-CD3 
plus anti-CD28, and ESAT-6-induced IL-17 production was blocked by neutralizing
both IL-23 and IL-1β. ESAT-6 reduced LPS/CD40L-stimulated transcription of
IL-12p35 and enhanced that of IL-23p19 through inhibition of IFN regulatory
factor-1 and upregulation of activating transcription factor-2 and c-Jun,
transcriptional regulators of IL-12p35 and IL-23p19, respectively. We conclude
that ESAT-6 increases DC production of IL-23 and IL-1β while inhibiting that of
IL-12, thus enhancing Th17 at the expense of protective Th1 responses.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200573 
PMCID: PMC3436987
PMID: 22904313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

