
1. Poult Sci. 2012 Sep;91(9):2386-9. doi: 10.3382/ps.2012-02268.

Salmonella collected from nest run cart shelves in commercial shell egg
processing facilities.

Musgrove MT(1), Shaw JD, Harrison MA.

Author information: 
(1)Egg Safety and Quality Research Unit, USDA-ARS, Athens, GA 30604, USA.
mike.musgrove@ars.usda.gov

Salmonella, a member of the bacterial family Enterobacteriaceae, may be recovered
from foods and processing facilities. High levels of Enterobacteriaceae in the
processing plant environment can be an indication of inadequate sanitation. This 
experiment was designed to determine if nest run egg carts serve as reservoirs
for Salmonella. Eggs that are produced by hens not housed in buildings connected 
to the processing plant are referred to as nest run. Many of these eggs are
transported to a central processing facility before they are washed, graded, and 
packed. Two plants in the Southeastern United States were sampled; one was a
mixed operation and the other was an off-line operation. On each of 3 visits, 5
shelves on each of 5 carts were sampled (n = 25/visit). A 12 × 12 cm area on each
shelf was swabbed with a sterile gauze pad moistened with PBS and transported on 
ice back to the laboratory. Each swab was preenriched in buffered peptone at 37°C
for 24 h, selectively enriched using TT and Rappaport-Vassiliadis broth at 42°C
overnight, then plated onto brilliant green sulfa and XLT-4 incubated at 37°C for
24 h. Presumptive colonies were transferred to lysine iron agar and triple sugar 
iron slants for 24 h at 37°C. Isolates with presumptive reactions were confirmed 
using commercial polyclonal antisera. After initial confirmation, serogrouping
was performed using commercial antisera. Mixed-operation swab samples were 12%
positive for Salmonella, whereas off-line samples were 36% positive for
Salmonella; isolates were confirmed as serogroups B, C1, and C2. Kauffman-White
serotyping was performed by a contract laboratory. Serotypes (n = 30) recovered
were Anatum, Heidelberg, Infantis, Kentucky, Mbandanka, and Typhimurium. This
work demonstrated that nest run egg carts may serve as reservoirs for Salmonella 
in the shell egg processing environment.

DOI: 10.3382/ps.2012-02268 
PMID: 22912478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

