
1. J Med Microbiol. 2012 Dec;61(Pt 12):1662-1668. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.049585-0. Epub 
2012 Aug 23.

Direct molecular typing of Bordetella pertussis from clinical specimens submitted
for diagnostic quantitative (real-time) PCR.

Litt DJ(1), Jauneikaite E(1), Tchipeva D(2)(1), Harrison TG(1), Fry NK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Systemic Infection Laboratory, Health Protection Agency, 61
Colindale Avenue, London NW9 5EQ, UK.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of
Westminster, London W1W 6UW, UK.

Molecular typing of Bordetella pertussis is routinely performed on bacterial
isolates, but not on DNA extracted from nasopharyngeal aspirates or pernasal
swabs submitted for diagnostic real-time PCR (qPCR). We investigated whether
these DNA extracts were suitable for multilocus variable-number tandem repeat
analysis (MLVA) and DNA sequence-based typing. We analysed all the available
qPCR-positive samples received by our laboratory from patients <1 year of age
between January 2008 and August 2010. Eighty-one per cent (106/131) of these
generated a complete MLVA profile. This rose to 92 % (105/114) if only samples
positive for both of the two targets used for the B. pertussis PCR (insertion
element IS481 and pertussis toxin promoter ptxP) were analysed. Sequence-based
typing of the pertactin, pertussis toxin S1 subunit and pertussis promoter
regions (prn, ptxA and ptxP) was attempted on 89 of the DNA extracts that had
generated a full MLVA profile. Eighty-three (93 %) of these produced complete
sequences for all three targets. Comparison of molecular typing data from the 89 
extracts with those from 111 contemporary bacterial isolates showed that the two 
sources yielded the same picture of the B. pertussis population [dominated by the
MLVA-27 prn(2) ptxA(1) ptxP(3) clonal type]. There was no significant difference 
in MLVA type distribution or diversity between the two sample sets. This suggests
that clinical extracts can be used in place of, or to complement, bacterial
cultures for typing purposes (at least, in this age group). With small
modifications to methodology, generating MLVA and sequence-based typing data from
qPCR-positive clinical DNA extracts is likely to generate a complete dataset in
the majority of samples from the <1 year age group. Its success with samples from
older subjects remains to be seen. However, our data suggest that it is suitable 
for inclusion in molecular epidemiological studies of the B. pertussis population
or as a tool in outbreak investigations.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.049585-0 
PMID: 22918864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

