
1. BMC Biotechnol. 2012 Aug 27;12:57. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-12-57.

Enhanced itaconic acid production in Aspergillus niger using genetic modification
and medium optimization.

Li A(1), Pfelzer N, Zuijderwijk R, Punt P.

Author information: 
(1)TNO Microbiology and Systems biology, PO Box 360, 3700 AJ Zeist, The
Netherlands. an.li@tno.nl

BACKGROUND: Aspergillus niger was selected as a host for producing itaconic acid 
due to its versatile and tolerant character in various growth environments, and
its extremely high capacity of accumulating the precursor of itaconic acid:
citric acid. Expressing the CAD gene from Aspergillus terreus opened the
metabolic pathway towards itaconic acid in A. niger. In order to increase the
production level, we continued by modifying its genome and optimizing cultivation
media.
RESULTS: Based on the results of previous transcriptomics studies and research
from other groups, two genes : gpdA encoding the glyceraldehyde -3-dehydrogenase 
(GPD) and hbd1 encoding a flavohemoglobin domain (HBD) were overexpressed in A.
niger. Besides, new media were designed based on a reference medium for A.
terreus. To analyze large numbers of cultures, we developed an approach for
screening both fungal transformants and various media in 96-well micro-titer
plates. The hbd1 transformants (HBD 2.2/2.5) did not improve itaconic acid titer 
while the gpdA transformant (GPD 4.3) decreased the itaconic acid production.
Using 20 different media, copper was discovered to have a positive influence on
itaconic acid production. Effects observed in the micro-titer plate screening
were confirmed in controlled batch fermentation.
CONCLUSIONS: The performance of gpdA and hbd1 transformants was found not to be
beneficial for itaconic acid production using the tested cultivation conditions. 
Medium optimization showed that, copper was positively correlated with improved
itaconic acid production. Interestingly, the optimal conditions for itaconic acid
clearly differ from conditions optimal for citric- and oxalic acid production.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6750-12-57 
PMCID: PMC3472327
PMID: 22925689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

