
1. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Nov;33(11):2301-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs270. Epub 2012 Aug
26.

Cancer-associated variants and a common polymorphism of MUTYH exhibit reduced
repair of oxidative DNA damage using a GFP-based assay in mammalian cells.

Raetz AG(1), Xie Y, Kundu S, Brinkmeyer MK, Chang C, David SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Biallelic germline mutations in the base excision repair enzyme gene MUTYH lead
to multiple colorectal adenomas and carcinomas referred to as MUTYH-associated
polyposis. MUTYH removes adenine misincorporated opposite the DNA oxidation
product, 8-oxoguanine (OG), thereby preventing accumulation of G:C to T:A
transversion mutations. The most common cancer-associated MUTYH variant proteins 
when expressed in bacteria exhibit reduced OG:A mismatch affinity and adenine
removal activity. However, direct evaluation of OG:A mismatch repair efficiency
in mammalian cells has not been assessed due to the lack of an appropriate assay.
To address this, we developed a novel fluorescence-based assay of OG:A repair and
measured the repair capacity of MUTYH-associated polyposis variants expressed in 
Mutyh-/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). The repair of a single site-specific
synthetic lesion in a green fluorescent protein reporter leads to green
fluorescent protein expression with co-expression of a red fluorescent protein
serving as the transfection control. Cell lines that stably express the
MUTYH-associated polyposis variants G382D and Y165C have significantly lower OG:A
repair versus wild-type MEFs and MEFs expressing human wild-type MUTYH. The MUTYH
allele that encodes the Q324H variant is found at a frequency above 40% in
samples from different ethnic groups and has long been considered phenotypically 
silent but has recently been associated with increased cancer risk in several
clinical studies. In vitro analysis of Q324H MUTYH expressed in insect cells
showed that it has reduced enzyme activity similar to that of the known cancer
variant G382D. Moreover, we find that OG:A repair in MEFs expressing Q324H was
significantly lower than wild-type controls, establishing that Q324H is
functionally impaired and providing further evidence that this common variant may
lead to increased cancer risk.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgs270 
PMCID: PMC3483017
PMID: 22926731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

