
1. J Innate Immun. 2013;5(1):24-38. doi: 10.1159/000339961. Epub 2012 Aug 22.

Extracellular DNA within a nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae-induced biofilm
binds human beta defensin-3 and reduces its antimicrobial activity.

Jones EA(1), McGillivary G, Bakaletz LO.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Microbial Pathogenesis, The Research Institute at Nationwide
Children's Hospital, The Ohio State University, College of Medicine, Columbus,
Ohio 43205, USA.

Biofilms formed by nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHI) are associated with 
multiple chronic infections of the airway, including otitis media. Extracellular 
DNA (eDNA) is part of the biofilm matrix and serves as a structural component.
Human β-defensin-3 (hBD-3) is a cationic antimicrobial host defense protein (AMP)
critical to the protection of the middle ear. We hypothesized that anionic eDNA
could interact with and bind hBD-3 and thus shield NTHI in biofilms from its
antimicrobial activity. We demonstrated that recombinant hBD-3 [(r)hBD-3] bound
eDNA in vitro and that eDNA in biofilms produced by NTHI in the chinchilla middle
ear co-localized with the orthologue of this AMP. Incubation of physiological
concentrations of (r)hBD-3 with NTHI genomic DNA abrogated the ability of this
innate immune effector to prevent NTHI from forming robust biofilms in vitro.
Establishment of NTHI biofilms in the presence of both DNase I and (r)hBD-3
resulted in a marked reduction in the overall height and thickness of the
biofilms and rescued the antimicrobial activity of the AMP. Our results
demonstrated that eDNA in NTHI biofilms sequestered hBD-3 and thus diminished the
biological activity of an important effector of innate immunity. Our observations
have important implications for chronicity of NTHI-induced diseases.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000339961 
PMCID: PMC3640559
PMID: 22922323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

