
1. J Biosci Bioeng. 2013 Jan;115(1):27-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2012.07.015. Epub
2012 Aug 24.

Effects of flow field on the metabolic characteristics of Streptomyces
lincolnensis in the industrial fermentation of lincomycin.

Li X(1), Zhang J, Tan YL, Li ZH, Yu XF, Xia JY, Chu J, Ge YQ.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry and Biology Science, China Three Gorges University,
Yichang 443003, China. lx_6910@163.com

In this work, the flow field in the existing fermentor with radial-flow impellers
(C1) was studied using the computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software package
Fluent, then the fermentor with radial-axial flow impellers (C2) was constructed 
and was compared with the C1 fermentor by CFD and experimental research. The
simulation results revealed that the flow field in C2 fermentor had
characteristics such as higher turbulent kinetic energy, gas holdup and shear
rates. Metabolic variables of Streptomyces lincolnensis in the two fermentors
such as carbon and nitrogen source consumption rates, specific growth rates (μ), 
hyphae morphologies, and lincomycin productivities were further explored. The
correlation analysis between the experimental measurements and the simulation
results indicated that the hyphae clustering and dry cell weight (DCW) decreasing
at production stage were eliminated in C2 fermentor, which had higher gas
volumetric mass transfer coefficient (K(L)a), dissolved oxygen (DO) concentration
and consumption rates of nutrient materials. When C2 was employed in the
fermentor, the specific growth rate of S. lincolnensis at growth stage was
higher, and the maintenance metabolism together with secondary metabolism at
production stage was kept at higher levels. As a result, the yield of lincomycin 
was achieved 7039 μg ml(-1) when the 60 m(3) industrial fermentor was equipped
with C2, which was increased by 46% compared to that obtained in the C1
fermentor.

Copyright © 2012 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2012.07.015 
PMID: 22921660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

