
1. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2012 Jul 20;66:501-6.

[The role of complement factor H in the pathogenesis of Borrelia infection].

[Article in Polish]

Gęca A(1), Mazurek U, Muc-Wierzgoń M, Nowakowska-Zajdel E, Niedworok E, Ziółko E,
Kokot T.

Author information: 
(1)Katedra Biologii Molekularnej Śląskiego Uniwersytetu Medycznego.

Complement factor H (CFH) is one of the most important negative regulators of the
alternative pathway of the complement system. It is a glycoprotein belonging to
the protein H family, which is synthesized mainly in the liver and is composed
into a globular protein consisting of 60 amino acid domains in the serum. It
shows specificity for C3b molecule of the complement system present in the serum 
or bound to the cell surface. It inhibits the steady formation of C3 convertase
enzymes and the binding of C2 to C4b and factor B to C3b. It accelerates the
decomposition of C2a into C4b and the displacement of Bb from C3b. The present
paper discusses the composition, properties and functions of the complement
factor and the family it belongs to. The paper focuses in particular on its role 
in the pathogenesis of an infection caused by the spirochetes of the Borrelia
genus. Through binding CFH and other related proteins, bacteria of the Borrelia
species inhibit the key effect of the alternative pathway of the complement
system - the lysis of spirochete cells dependent on the complement's activation. 
The mechanism enables pathogens to spread in the host organism and facilitates
the evolution of the disease. Discovering the immune mechanisms of the infection 
caused by the spirochetes of the Borrelia genus may allow for implementing a
therapy blocking the binding of complement factor H early enough, apart from the 
standard treatment of the disease.

DOI: 10.5604/17322693.1004077 
PMID: 22922150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

