
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2012 Dec;14(4):538-45. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2012.07.021.
Epub 2012 Aug 25.

Bradykinin promotes Toll like receptor-4 expression in human gingival
fibroblasts.

Gutiérrez-Venegas G(1), Arreguín-Cano JA, Hernández-Bermúdez C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Bioquímica, División de Estudios de Posgrado e Investigación,
Facultad de Odontología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad de
México, Mexico. gloriafoodntounam@gmail.com

Bacterial infections are a potent mechanism for enzymatic generation of kinins
such as bradykinin (BK), a universal mediator for inducing inflammatory reaction 
by associating with the B2 receptor and stimulating liberation of arachidonic
acid and synthesis of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). In this study we evaluate the role
of bradykinin in regulating the expression of TLR4 receptor in human gingival
fibroblasts. We examine the ability of bradykinin to modulate inflammatory
response of human gingival fibroblasts to Gram-negative components and evaluated 
the role of Toll-like receptors (TLR)-4 in the co-operation between bradykinin
and bacterial pathogens. We show that treatment with bradykinin promotes TLR4
receptor expression in human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) and amplifies
inflammatory responses to the bacterial components of Gram-negative bacteria. The
TLR4 expression induced by bradykinin was blocked with Hoe 140, a B2R antagonist.
When HGF cells were incubated with BK resulted of an increased in
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression and prostaglandin E2 synthesis. Bradykinin
and lipopolysaccharide, a specific TLR4 ligand stimulated COX-2 expression. In
other series of experiments we found that ERK, phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase,
protein kinase C and NFkB are involved in BK promoted-increased in TLR4
expression. The results demonstrate that bradykinin up-regulates the expression
of TLR4 and promotes an additive increase in inflammatory responses to
lipopolysaccharides.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2012.07.021 
PMID: 22929539  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

