
1. Eur Respir J. 2013 Apr;41(4):935-42. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00015212. Epub 2012
Aug 30.

The lectin-like domain of thrombomodulin hampers host defence in pneumococcal
pneumonia.

Schouten M(1), de Boer JD, van 't Veer C, Roelofs JJ, Meijers JC, Levi M, Conway 
EM, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine,Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The lectin-like domain of thrombomodulin (TM) plays an important regulatory role 
in sterile inflammatory conditions, but its role in severe Gram-positive
infectious disease is unknown. Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common cause 
of community-acquired pneumonia. The aim of this study was to determine the role 
of the lectin-like domain of TM in murine pneumococcal pneumonia. Wild-type (WT) 
mice and mice lacking the lectin-like domain of TM (TM(LeD/LeD)) were infected
intranasally with viable S. pneumoniae and either observed in a survival study or
euthanised 6, 24 or 48 h after infection. TM(LeD/LeD) mice had a markedly better 
survival in pneumococcal pneumonia when compared with WT mice. At 48 h
post-infection with S. pneumoniae, TM(LeD/LeD) mice had lower bacterial loads in 
blood and liver, and exhibited less pulmonary inflammation, as shown by having
less lung histopathology, less neutrophil influx and lower cytokine and chemokine
levels. Plasma levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines were also reduced in
TM(LeD/LeD) mice after exposure to the infection. Deletion of the lectin-like
domain of TM improves the host defence in pneumococcal pneumonia. The lectin-like
domain of TM may have a differential role in response to Gram-positive or
Gram-negative bacteria.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00015212 
PMID: 22936703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

