
1. J Chem Ecol. 2012 Aug;38(8):966-74. doi: 10.1007/s10886-012-0171-1. Epub 2012 Aug
30.

Induction of chlamydospore formation in fusarium by cyclic lipopeptide
antibiotics from Bacillus subtilis C2.

Li L(1), Ma M, Huang R, Qu Q, Li G, Zhou J, Zhang K, Lu K, Niu X, Luo J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources and Key
Laboratory for Microbial Resources of the Ministry of Education, Yunnan
University, Kunming 650091, People's Republic of China. leelei58@yahoo.cn

The culture filtrate of Bacillus subtilis strain C2 showed strong activity
against the pathogenic fungus Fusarium solani f. sp. radicicola. A partially
purified fraction (PPF) from the extract induced chlamydospore formation in
Fusarium. Reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography yielded 8
different fractions, six of which had chlamydospore-inducing activity. Mass
spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance analyses identified the main active
constituent as C(17) fengycin A (FA17), a cyclic lipopeptide. The effect of FA17 
on morphology and physiology of two Fusarium species was dependent on the
lipopeptide concentration. When challenged with FA17 at concentrations (0.5, 8,
64 μg ml(-1)) below the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) (128 μg ml(-1)),
two species of Fusarium formed chlamydospores from hyphae, germ tubes, or inside 
the conidia within 2 days. At concentrations close to the MIC, FA17 caused
Fusarium to form sparse and swollen hyphae or lysed conidia. The other five
fractions were identified as fengycin A homologues. The homologues could also
induce chlamydospore-like structures in 17 species of filamentous fungi including
some specimens that do not normally produce chlamydospores, according to their
taxonomic descriptions. Like other chlamydospores, these structures contained
nuclei and lipid bodies as revealed by DAPI and Nile Red staining, and could
germinate. This is the first study to demonstrate that under laboratory
conditions fengycin, an antifungal lipopeptide produced by B. subtilis, can
induce chlamydospore formation in Fusarium and chlamydospore-like structures in
many filamentous fungi.

DOI: 10.1007/s10886-012-0171-1 
PMID: 22932866  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

