
1. Mod Pathol. 2013 Feb;26(2):182-94. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.134. Epub 2012 Aug
31.

Chemokine receptors in gastric MALT lymphoma: loss of CXCR4 and upregulation of
CXCR7 is associated with progression to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Deutsch AJ(1), Steinbauer E, Hofmann NA, Strunk D, Gerlza T, Beham-Schmid C,
Schaider H, Neumeister P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University
Graz, Graz, Austria. alexander.deutsch@medunigraz.at

Chemokine receptors have a crucial role in the development and progression of
lymphoid neoplasms. To determine the chemokine receptor expression profile in
gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma, we performed an
expression analysis of 19 chemokine receptors at mRNA levels by using real-time
RT-PCR, as well as of five chemokine receptors--CCR8, CCR9, CXCR4, CXCR6 and
CXCR7--by immunohistochemistry on human tissue samples of Helicobacter
pylori-associated gastritis, gastric MALT lymphoma and gastric extranodal diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma originating from MALT lymphoma (transformed MALT lymphoma).
Following malignant transformation from H. pylori-associated gastritis to MALT
lymphoma, an upregulation of CCR7, CXCR3 and CXCR7, and a loss of CXCR4 were
detected. The transformation of gastric MALT lymphomas to gastric extranodal
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma was accompanied by upregulation of CCR1, CCR5,
CCR7, CCR8, CCR9, CXCR3, CXCR6, CXCR7 and XCR1. Remarkably, CXCR4 expression was 
exclusively found in nodal marginal B-cell lymphomas and nodal diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas but not at extranodal manifestation sites, ie, in gastric MALT
lymphomas or gastric extranodal diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Furthermore, the 
incidence of bone marrow infiltration (16/51 with bone marrow involvement vs
35/51 with bone marrow involvement; Spearman œÅ=0467 P<0.001) positively
correlated with CXCR4 expression. CXCL12, the ligand of CXCR4 and CXCR7, was
expressed by epithelial, endothelial and inflammatory cells, MALT lymphoma cells 
and was most strongly expressed by extranodal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
cells, suggesting at least in part an autocrine signaling pathway. Our data
indicate that CXCR4 expression is associated with nodal manifestation and a more 
advanced stage of lymphomas and hence, might serve as useful clinical prognostic 
marker.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.134 
PMID: 22936065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

