
1. Biochemistry. 2012 Oct 9;51(40):7908-16. doi: 10.1021/bi300912n. Epub 2012 Sep
24.

Evidence for only oxygenative cleavage of aldehydes to alk(a/e)nes and formate by
cyanobacterial aldehyde decarbonylases.

Li N(1), Chang WC, Warui DM, Booker SJ, Krebs C, Bollinger JM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Cyanobacterial aldehyde decarbonylases (ADs) catalyze the conversion of C(n)
fatty aldehydes to formate (HCO(2)(-)) and the corresponding C(n-1) alk(a/e)nes. 
Previous studies of the Nostoc punctiforme (Np) AD produced in Escherichia coli
(Ec) showed that this apparently hydrolytic reaction is actually a cryptically
redox oxygenation process, in which one O-atom is incorporated from O(2) into
formate and a protein-based reducing system (NADPH, ferredoxin, and ferredoxin
reductase; N/F/FR) provides all four electrons needed for the complete reduction 
of O(2). Two subsequent publications by Marsh and co-workers [ Das, et al. ( 2011
) Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 50 , 7148 - 7152 ; Eser, et al. ( 2011 ) Biochemistry 50 
, 10743 - 10750 ] reported that their Ec-expressed Np and Prochlorococcus marinus
(Pm) AD preparations transform aldehydes to the same products more rapidly by an 
O(2)-independent, truly hydrolytic process, which they suggested proceeded by
transient substrate reduction with obligatory participation by the reducing
system (they used a chemical system, NADH and phenazine methosulfate; N/PMS). To 
resolve this discrepancy, we re-examined our preparations of both AD orthologues 
by a combination of (i) activity assays in the presence and absence of O(2) and
(ii) (18)O(2) and H(2)(18)O isotope-tracer experiments with direct
mass-spectrometric detection of the HCO(2)(-) product. For multiple combinations 
of the AD orthologue (Np and Pm), reducing system (protein-based and chemical),
and substrate (n-heptanal and n-octadecanal), our preparations strictly require
O(2) for activity and do not support detectable hydrolytic formate production,
despite having catalytic activities similar to or greater than those reported by 
Marsh and co-workers. Our results, especially of the (18)O-tracer experiments,
suggest that the activity observed by Marsh and co-workers could have arisen from
contaminating O(2) in their assays. The definitive reaffirmation of the
oxygenative nature of the reaction implies that the enzyme, initially designated 
as aldehyde decarbonylase when the C1-derived coproduct was thought to be carbon 
monoxide rather than formate, should be redesignated as aldehyde-deformylating
oxygenase (ADO).

DOI: 10.1021/bi300912n 
PMID: 22947199  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

