
1. Biol Chem. 2012 Jul;393(7):631-40. doi: 10.1515/hsz-2012-0106.

Functional characterization of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis zinc
metallopeptidase Zmp1 and identification of potential substrates.

Petrera A(1), Amstutz B, Gioia M, HÃ¤hnlein J, Baici A, Selchow P, Ferraris DM,
Rizzi M, Sbardella D, Marini S, Coletta M, Sander P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, University of Zurich, Gloriastrasse,
Zurich, Switzerland.

Zinc metallopeptidases of bacterial pathogens are widely distributed virulence
factors and represent promising pharmacological targets. In this work, we have
characterized Zmp1, a zinc metallopeptidase identified as a virulence factor of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and belonging to the neprilysin (NEP; M13) family,
whose X-ray structure has been recently solved. Interestingly, this enzyme shows 
an optimum activity toward a fluorogenic substrate at moderately acidic pH values
(i.e., 6.3), which corresponds to those reported for the Mtb phagosome where this
enzyme should exert its pathological activity. Substrate specificity of Zmp1 was 
investigated by screening a peptide library. Several sequences derived from
biologically relevant proteins were identified as possible substrates, including 
the neuropeptides bradykinin, neurotensin, and neuropeptide FF. Further,
subsequences of other small bioactive peptides were found among most frequently
cleaved sites, e.g., apelin-13 and substance P. We determined the specific
cleavage site within neuropeptides by mass spectrometry, observing that
hydrophobic amino acids, mainly phenylalanine and isoleucine, are overrepresented
at position P1'. In addition, the enzymatic mechanism of Zmp1 toward these
neuropeptides has been characterized, displaying some differences with respect to
the synthetic fluorogenic substrate and indicating that the enzyme adapts its
enzymatic action to different substrates.

DOI: 10.1515/hsz-2012-0106 
PMID: 22944667  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

