
1. APMIS. 2012 Oct;120(10):828-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2012.02911.x. Epub 2012 
May 7.

Human leukocyte antigen-C and killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptor gene
polymorphisms among patients with syphilis in a Chinese Han population.

Zhuang YL(1), Ren GJ, Tian KL, Li XY, Zhu YB, Liu JL, Si GL, Li P, Zhang Y, Wang 
L, Zhang WJ, Wang DJ, Zhu CF.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Center of Shandong Province, Jinan, China.

Syphilis is a sexually transmitted infection caused by the Treponema pallidum
subspecies pallidum spirochete bacterium. The killer cell immunoglobulin-like
receptors (KIR), interacting with human leukocyte antigens (HLA), regulate the
activations of natural killer (NK) cells and certain T-cell subsets in response
to microbe infection. The objective of this study was to explore whether KIR and 
HLA-C gene polymorphisms were associated with syphilis in a Chinese Han
population. Polymerase chain reaction with sequence-specific primers (PCR-SSP)
method was used to genotype KIR and HLA-C genes in 231 syphilis patients and 247 
healthy controls. Framework genes KIR2DL4, KIR3DL2, KIR3DL3 and KIR3DP1 were
present in all individuals. The frequencies of KIR2DS3 and KIR3DS1 were higher in
syphilis patients than in healthy controls (p = 0.030 and p = 0.038,
respectively), while the frequency of KIR2DS5 was higher in healthy controls than
in syphilis patients (p = 0.015; OR = 0.575). The homozygote for HLA-C1 allele
(HLA-C1C1) was more common in controls compared with syphilis patients (p =
0.030; OR = 0.667). The frequency of individuals with HLA-C1C1 and KIR2DL3
genotype was higher in control group relative to syphilis patient group (p =
0.018; OR = 0.647). These data indicated that KIR2DS3 and KIR3DS1 were more
prevalent in syphilis patients than in controls, and that KIR2DS5, HLA-C1C1 and
HLA-C1C1-KIR2DL3 were more prevalent in controls than in syphilis patients,
respectively. These will require further investigation using functional studies.

© 2012 The Authors APMIS © 2012 APMIS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2012.02911.x 
PMID: 22958291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

