
1. J Immunol. 2012 Oct 15;189(8):3957-69. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201736. Epub 2012
Sep 10.

Mannan-binding lectin-associated serine protease (MASP)-1 is crucial for lectin
pathway activation in human serum, whereas neither MASP-1 nor MASP-3 is required 
for alternative pathway function.

Degn SE(1), Jensen L, Hansen AG, Duman D, Tekin M, Jensenius JC, Thiel S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark.
sdegn@microbiology.au.dk

Comment in
    J Immunol. 2013 Mar 15;190(6):2477.
    J Immunol. 2013 Mar 15;190(6):2477-8.
    J Immunol. 2014 Jun 15;192(12):5447-8.
    J Immunol. 2014 Jun 15;192(12):5448-9.

The lectin pathway of complement is an important component of innate immunity.
Its activation has been thought to occur via recognition of pathogens by
mannan-binding lectin (MBL) or ficolins in complex with MBL-associated serine
protease (MASP)-2, followed by MASP-2 autoactivation and cleavage of C4 and C2
generating the C3 convertase. MASP-1 and MASP-3 are related proteases found in
similar complexes. MASP-1 has been shown to aid MASP-2 convertase generation by
auxiliary C2 cleavage. In mice, MASP-1 and MASP-3 have been reported to be
central also to alternative pathway function through activation of profactor D
and factor B. In this study, we present functional studies based on a patient
harboring a nonsense mutation in the common part of the MASP1 gene and hence
deficient in both MASP-1 and MASP-3. Surprisingly, we find that the alternative
pathway in this patient functions normally, and is unaffected by reconstitution
with MASP-1 and MASP-3. Conversely, we find that the patient has a nonfunctional 
lectin pathway, which can be restored by MASP-1, implying that this component is 
crucial for complement activation. We show that, although MASP-2 is able to
autoactivate under artificial conditions, MASP-1 dramatically increases lectin
pathway activity at physiological conditions through direct activation of MASP-2.
We further demonstrate that MASP-1 and MASP-2 can associate in the same MBL
complex, and that such cocomplexes are found in serum, providing a scenario for
transactivation of MASP-2. Hence, in functional terms, it appears that MASP-1 and
MASP-2 act in a manner analogous to that of C1r and C1s of the classical pathway.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201736 
PMID: 22966085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

