
1. Int J Cancer. 2013 Apr 1;132(7):1624-32. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27838. Epub 2012 Oct
11.

Single cell molecular recognition of migrating and invading tumor cells using a
targeted fluorescent probe to receptor PTPmu.

Burden-Gulley SM(1), Qutaish MQ, Sullivant KE, Tan M, Craig SE, Basilion JP, Lu
ZR, Wilson DL, Brady-Kalnay SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH, USA. susann.brady-kalnay@case.edu

Detection of an extracellular cleaved fragment of a cell-cell adhesion molecule
represents a new paradigm in molecular recognition and imaging of tumors. We
previously demonstrated that probes that recognize the cleaved extracellular
domain of receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase mu (PTPmu) label human
glioblastoma brain tumor sections and the main tumor mass of intracranial
xenograft gliomas. In this article, we examine whether one of these probes, SBK2,
can label dispersed glioma cells that are no longer connected to the main tumor
mass. Live mice with highly dispersive glioma tumors were injected intravenously 
with the fluorescent PTPmu probe to test the ability of the probe to label the
dispersive glioma cells in vivo. Analysis was performed using a unique
three-dimensional (3D) cryo-imaging technique to reveal highly migratory and
invasive glioma cell dispersal within the brain and the extent of colabeling by
the PTPmu probe. The PTPmu probe labeled the main tumor site and dispersed cells 
up to 3.5 mm away. The cryo-images of tumors labeled with the PTPmu probe provide
a novel, high-resolution view of molecular tumor recognition, with excellent 3D
detail regarding the pathways of tumor cell migration. Our data demonstrate that 
the PTPmu probe recognizes distant tumor cells even in parts of the brain where
the blood-brain barrier is likely intact. The PTPmu probe has potential
translational significance for recognizing tumor cells to facilitate molecular
imaging, a more complete tumor resection and to serve as a molecular targeting
agent to deliver chemotherapeutics to the main tumor mass and distant dispersive 
tumor cells.

Copyright Â© 2012 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.27838 
PMCID: PMC3558593
PMID: 22987116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

