
1. J Endod. 2012 Oct;38(10):1376-9. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2012.06.035. Epub 2012 Aug
11.

Effectiveness of endodontic disinfecting solutions against young and old
Enterococcus faecalis biofilms in dentin canals.

Wang Z(1), Shen Y, Haapasalo M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endodontics, Department of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Enterococcus faecalis is a species commonly isolated from
persistent root canal infections. The purpose of this study was to compare the
antibacterial effects of different disinfecting solutions on young and old E.
faecalis biofilms in dentin canals using a novel dentin infection model and
confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM).
METHODS: The bacteria were introduced into the dentinal tubules by
centrifugation. After 1 day and 3 weeks of incubation, 40 infected dentin
specimens were subjected to 1 and 3 minutes of exposure to disinfecting
solutions, which included 2% sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) (EMD Chemicals Inc,
Darmstadt, Germany), 6% NaOCl, 2% chlorhexidine (CHX) (Sigma Chemical Co, St
Louis, MO), and QMiX (Dentsply Tulsa Dental, Tulsa, OK). The proportions of dead 
and live bacteria inside the dentinal tubules after exposure to these
disinfectants were assessed by CLSM using a LIVE/DEAD bacterial viability stain.
RESULTS: Significantly fewer bacteria were killed in the 3-week-old dentin
biofilm than in the 1-day-old biofilm. Three minutes of exposure resulted in more
dead bacteria than 1 minute of exposure for both biofilms in all experimental
groups (P < .05). Six percent NaOCl and QMiX were the most effective disinfecting
solutions against the young biofilm, whereas against the 3-week-old biofilm, 6%
NaOCl was the most effective followed by QMiX. Two percent NaOCl was equally
effective as 2% CHX. All the disinfecting agents killed significantly more
bacteria than the sterile water used as a negative control (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: Within dentin canals, bacteria in established biofilms are less
easily killed by endodontic medicaments than bacteria in young biofilms.

Copyright © 2012 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joen.2012.06.035 
PMID: 22980181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

