
1. Clin Immunol. 2012 Nov;145(2):102-7. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2012.07.016. Epub 2012
Aug 7.

Hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency (VODI): first reported case 
in the U.S. and identification of a unique mutation in Sp110.

Wang T(1), Ong P, Roscioli T, Cliffe ST, Church JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School
of Medicine, University Southern California, 4650 West Sunset Boulevard, Los
Angeles, CA 90027, USA.

Familial hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency (VODI, OMIM:
235550), a rare form of severe combined immune deficiency, was first described in
Australian Lebanese patients as being associated with homozygous mutations in
SP110, a gene encoding a PML nuclear body-associated protein. We present the
first case of confirmed VODI in the United States, and identify the first novel
missense mutation in SP110. The 3-year-old daughter of Hispanic parents without
known consanguinity presented at age 5 months with fever, hepatomegaly, and
pancytopenia. Her brother died at age 3 months from hepatic failure of
undetermined etiology. Initial T- and B-cell counts were low, but eventually
normalized. Serum IgG and IgM levels were low for age. Lymphoproliferation to
mitogens and allogenic B-cells was normal, but absent to tetanus and candida
antigens. Serum antibody levels against pneumococcal, Hib and tetanus antigens
were low. Liver biopsies at ages 5 and 9 months were consistent with hepatic
veno-occlusive disease or hVOD (also known as sinusoidal obstruction syndrome or 
SOS) and broncho-alveolar lavage detected Pneumocystis jiroveci. The patient
recovered from her acute disease and has been clinically stable on immunoglobulin
replacement therapy and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis. T-Cell
receptor excision circle (TREC) analysis suggests that VODI will not be detected 
by newborn screening for severe combined immunodeficiency that relies on this
assay. DNA was obtained from the patient, 4 siblings, and both parents, and SP110
was sequenced. The first missense mutation, a homozygous deletion/insertion
variation in exon 2 (NM_080424.2 (SP110):c.78_79delinsAT) was detected in the
patient. This novel mutation segregated in the heterozygous state in other living
unaffected family members. The mechanism by which this SP110 mutation associates 
with VODI is consistent with the normal length mutated SP110 protein being
subject to enhanced proteosome degradation resulting in marked reductions in
SP110 protein.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2012.07.016 
PMID: 22982295  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

