
1. Lab Invest. 2012 Dec;92(12):1726-37. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2012.122. Epub 2012
Sep 17.

Lack of hepatic c-Met and gp130 expression is associated with an impaired
antibacterial response and higher lethality after bile duct ligation.

Giebeler A(1), Brandenburg LO, Kaldenbach M, Erschfeld S, Wasmuth H, Wruck C,
Trautwein C, Streetz KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, University Hospital, Aachen, Germany.

The prognosis of liver failure is often determined by infectious and cholestatic 
complications. As HGF/c-Met and interleukin (IL)-6/gp130 control hepatic
cytoprotective pathways, we here investigated their cooperative role during the
onset of cholestatic liver injury. Conditional hepatocyte-specific ((Δhepa))
c-Met, gp130 and c-Met/gp130 knockout mice (Cre-loxP system) were subjected to
bile duct ligation (BDL) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation. gp130(Δhepa)
and c-Met/gp130(Δhepa) mice displayed increased lethality associated with severe 
bacteraemia early after BDL, whereas c-Met(Δhepa) and wild-type mice showed
normal survival. Analysis of the innate immune response and the regulation of
hepatic antibacterial pathways showed that the LPS-triggered hepatocellular
response via the Toll-like receptor-4 pathway was regulated differentially by
HGF/c-Met and IL-6/gp130. Activation of p38MAPK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase and
signalling transducer and activator of transcription-3 was impaired in gp130(Δ)
and c-Met(Δhepa) livers. In addition, the acute-phase response (APR) was reduced 
in c-Met(Δhepa) livers, whereas gp130(Δhepa) displayed a completely abolished
APR. In contrast, TNF-α-dependent NF-κB activation was enhanced in gp130(Δhepa)
and c-Met(Δhepa) mice and it was associated with a higher rate of apoptosis and
inflammation. Moreover, expression of the neutrophil produced and secreted
cathelin-related antimicrobial peptide and of genes related to the inflammasome
complex correlated with the strength of the bacterial infection and with TNF-α
expression. In conclusion, Gp130 and c-Met are involved in the hepatic
antibacterial and innate immune response, control the APR and thus prevent sepsis
and liver injury during cholestatic conditions.

DOI: 10.1038/labinvest.2012.122 
PMID: 22986785  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

