
1. Circulation. 2012 Oct 16;126(16):1983-92. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.112912.
Epub 2012 Sep 19.

Dietary nitrate supplementation improves revascularization in chronic ischemia.

Hendgen-Cotta UB(1), Luedike P, Totzeck M, Kropp M, Schicho A, Stock P, Rammos C,
Niessen M, Heiss C, Lundberg JO, Weitzberg E, Kelm M, Rassaf T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Pulmonology and Vascular Medicine, Medical Faculty,
University Hospital Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2012 Oct 16;126(16):1939-40.

BACKGROUND: Revascularization is an adaptive repair mechanism that restores blood
flow to undersupplied ischemic tissue. Nitric oxide plays an important role in
this process. Whether dietary nitrate, serially reduced to nitrite by commensal
bacteria in the oral cavity and subsequently to nitric oxide and other nitrogen
oxides, enhances ischemia-induced remodeling of the vascular network is not
known.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Mice were treated with either nitrate (1 g/L sodium nitrate 
in drinking water) or sodium chloride (control) for 14 days. At day 7, unilateral
hind-limb surgery with excision of the left femoral artery was conducted. Blood
flow was determined by laser Doppler. Capillary density, myoblast apoptosis,
mobilization of CD34(+)/Flk-1(+), migration of bone marrow-derived
CD31(+)/CD45(-), plasma S-nitrosothiols, nitrite, and skeletal tissue cGMP levels
were assessed. Enhanced green fluorescence protein transgenic mice were used for 
bone marrow transplantation. Dietary nitrate increased plasma S-nitrosothiols and
nitrite, enhanced revascularization, increased mobilization of CD34(+)/Flk-1(+)
and migration of bone marrow-derived CD31(+)/CD45(-) cells to the site of
ischemia, and attenuated apoptosis of potentially regenerative myoblasts in
chronically ischemic tissue. The regenerative effects of nitrate treatment were
abolished by eradication of the nitrate-reducing bacteria in the oral cavity
through the use of an antiseptic mouthwash.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term dietary nitrate supplementation may represent a novel
nutrition-based strategy to enhance ischemia-induced revascularization.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.112912 
PMID: 22992322  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

