
1. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces. 2013 Feb 1;102:139-45. doi:
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2012.07.024. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Surface modified and medicated polyurethane materials capable of controlling
microorganisms causing foot skin infection in athletes.

Gnanasundaram S(1), Ranganathan M, Das BN, Mandal AB.

Author information: 
(1)Shoe Design and Development Centre, CSIR-Central Leather Research Institute,
Adyar, Chennai 600020, India. saraswathyg@clri.res.in

Foot odor and foot infection are major problems of athletes and persons with
hyperhidrosis. Many shoes especially sports shoes have removable cushion
insoles/foot beds for foot comfort. Polyurethane (PU) foam and elastomer have
been used as cushion insole in shoes. In the present work, new insole materials
based on porous viscoelastic PU sheets having hydrophilic property and
antimicrobial drug coating to control foot infection and odor were developed.
Bacteria and fungus that are causing infection and bad odor of the foot of
athletes were isolated by microbial cell culturing of foot sweat. The surface of 
porous viscoelastic PU sheets was modified using hydrophilic polymers and coated 
with antimicrobial agent, silver sulfadiazine (SS). The surface modified PU
sheets were characterized using ATR-FTIR, TGA, DSC, SEM, contact angle
measurement and water absorption study. Results had shown that modified PU sheets
have hydrophilicity greater than that of original PU sheet. FTIR spectra and SEM 
pictures confirmed modification of PU surface with hydrophilic polymers and
coating with SS. Minimum inhibitory concentration studies indicated that SS has
activity on all isolated bacteria of athletic foot sweat. The maximum inhibition 
was found for Pseudomonas (20mm) followed by Micrococci (17 mm), Diphtheroids (16
mm) and Staphylococci (12 mm). During perspiration of foot the hydrophilic
polymers on PU surface will swell and release SS. Future work will confirm the
application of these materials as inserts in athletic shoes.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2012.07.024 
PMID: 23006559  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

