
1. J Immunol. 2012 Nov 1;189(9):4247-57. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201371. Epub 2012
Sep 21.

Exposure to ionizing radiation induces the migration of cutaneous dendritic cells
by a CCR7-dependent mechanism.

Cummings RJ(1), Gerber SA, Judge JL, Ryan JL, Pentland AP, Lord EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

In the event of a deliberate or accidental radiological emergency, the skin would
likely receive substantial ionizing radiation (IR) poisoning, which could
negatively impact cellular proliferation, communication, and immune regulation
within the cutaneous microenvironment. Indeed, as we have previously shown, local
IR exposure to the murine ear causes a reduction of two types of cutaneous
dendritic cells (cDC), including interstitial dendritic cells of the dermis and
Langerhans cells of the epidermis, in a dose- and time-dependent manner. These
APCs are critical regulators of skin homeostasis, immunosurveillance, and the
induction of T and B cell-mediated immunity, as previously demonstrated using
conditional cDC knockout mice. To mimic a radiological emergency, we developed a 
murine model of sublethal total body irradiation (TBI). Our data would suggest
that TBI results in the reduction of cDC from the murine ear that was not due to 
a systemic response to IR, as a loss was not observed in shielded ears. We
further determined that this reduction was due, in part, to the upregulation of
the chemoattractant CCL21 on lymphatic vessels as well as CCR7 expressed on cDC. 
Migration as a potential mechanism was confirmed using CCR7(-/-) mice in which
cDC were not depleted following TBI. Finally, we demonstrated that the loss of
cDC following TBI results in an impaired contact hypersensitivity response to
hapten by using a modified contact hypersensitivity protocol. Taken together,
these data suggest that IR exposure may result in diminished immunosurveillance
in the skin, which could render the host more susceptible to pathogens.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201371 
PMCID: PMC3478420
PMID: 23002435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

