
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2012 Nov;33(5):1167-73. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.09.008.
Epub 2012 Sep 18.

Molecular characterization and expression of a novel big defensin (Sb-BDef1) from
ark shell, Scapharca broughtonii.

Li M(1), Zhu L, Zhou CY, Sun S, Fan YJ, Zhuang ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Sustainable Development of Marine Fisheries, Ministry of
Agriculture, Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery 
Sciences, Qingdao 266071, PR China.

Big defensins, endogenous cysteine-rich antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) with
antimicrobial activity and immunomodulatory property, play crucial roles in host 
defense against various microbial pathogens. A novel big defensin (Sb-BDef1) of
ark shell Scapharca broughtonii was identified by expressed sequence tag (EST)
and RACE techniques. The Sb-BDef1 cDNA contained an open reading frame (ORF) of
336-bp encoding a polypeptide of 111 amino acids with a putative signal peptide
of 21 amino acid residues, followed by a putative propeptide of 11 residues and a
putative mature peptide of 79 residues. The mature peptide shared the common
features of big defensins, including a high hydrophobic residues region (59%) in 
the N-terminus, a defensin domain in the C-terminus, which perfectly corresponds 
to the six conserved disulfide-bonded cysteine residues involved in the formation
of the internal disulfide bridges (C1-C5, C2-C4 and C3-C6) in all big defensins
from mollusk, horseshoe crab and amphioxus. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis
revealed that the expression of Sb-BDef1 transcript was detected in all the
tissues examined from normal ark shells, and the temporal expression of Sb-BDef1 
mRNA was remarkably up-regulated at 8, 16 h in hemocytes, and at 16, 24 h in
hepatopancreas after Vibrio anguillarum-challenge, respectively. These results
suggested that Sb-BDef1 was a constitutive and inducible acute-phase protein and 
should be involved in immune response of Gram-negative microbial infection in ark
shell S. broughtonii.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.09.008 
PMID: 23000749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

