
1. J Immunol. 2012 Nov 1;189(9):4582-91. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200205. Epub 2012
Sep 26.

Insulin modulates the inflammatory granulocyte response to streptococci via
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase.

Kenzel S(1), Mergen M, von Süßkind-Schwendi J, Wennekamp J, Deshmukh SD, Haeffner
M, Triantafyllopoulou A, Fuchs S, Farmand S, Santos-Sierra S, Seufert J, van den 
Berg TK, Kuijpers TW, Henneke P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, University of Freiburg, 79106
Freiburg, Germany.

Group B streptococci (GBS; Streptococcus agalactiae) are a major cause of
invasive infections in newborn infants and in patients with type 2 diabetes. Both
patient groups exhibit peripheral insulin resistance and alterations in
polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PML) function. In this investigation, we studied the
PML response repertoire to GBS with a focus on TLR signaling and the modulation
of this response by insulin in mice and humans. We found that GBS-induced,
MyD88-dependent chemokine formation of PML was specifically downmodulated by
insulin via insulin receptor-mediated induction of PI3K. PI3K inhibited
transcription of chemokine genes on the level of NF-κB activation and binding.
Insulin specifically modulated the chemokine response of PML to whole bacteria,
but affected neither activation by purified TLR agonists nor antimicrobial
properties, such as migration, phagocytosis, bacterial killing, and formation of 
reactive oxygen species. The targeted modulation of bacteria-induced chemokine
formation by insulin via PI3K may form a basis for the development of novel
targets of adjunctive sepsis therapy.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200205 
PMCID: PMC5417076
PMID: 23018458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

