
1. J Gastrointestin Liver Dis. 2012 Sep;21(3):243-9.

Association of genetic polymorphisms in IL17A and IL17F with gastro-duodenal
diseases.

Hayashi R(1), Tahara T, Shiroeda H, Matsue Y, Minato T, Nomura T, Yamada H, Saito
T, Matsunaga K, Fukuyama T, Hayashi N, Otsuka T, Fukumura A, Nakamura M, Tsutsumi
M, Shibata T, Arisawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIM: The important role of IL-17 in inflammatory response to
Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) colonization has been indicated. We investigated 
the associations between gastro-duodenal diseases and polymorphisms of IL17A
(rs2275913 G>A) and IL17F (rs763780 T>C).
METHODS: The study was performed in 548 subjects (363 controls and 185 peptic
ulcer cases). The multiplex PCR-SSCP method was used to detect gene
polymorphisms.
RESULTS: Overall, number of rs2275913 A allele was significantly associated with 
an increased risk for peptic ulcer (OR, 1.50; 95%CI, 1.11-2.01; p=0.0082). The
frequency of rs2275913 GA+AA genotype was also significantly higher in ulcer
cases than controls (OR, 1.72; 95%CI, 1.09-2.72; p=0.020). The rs2275913 GA+AA
genotype conferred an increased risk for the severity of gastric mucosal atrophy 
in subjects younger than 60 years (OR, 2.83; 95%CI, 1.14-7.04; p=0.025). Both
atrophy and metaplasia were increased with age in rs2275913 GA+AA genotype. In
NSAIDs/aspirin users, number of rs2275913 A allele was associated with an
increased risk for a peptic ulcer (OR, 3.98; 95%CI, 1.48-10.7; p=0.0061). There
was no association of rs763780 with the development of peptic ulcer.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide the evidence that rs2275913 is associated with
an increased risk for peptic ulcer and the severity of the gastric mucosal
atrophy in comparatively younger subjects. In addition, this allele is also
associated with the increased risk for peptic ulcer in NSAIDs/aspirin users.


PMID: 23012664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

