
1. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2012 Oct 1;68(Pt 10):1204-8.
doi: 10.1107/S174430911203518X. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Cloning, purification, crystallization and preliminary X-ray analysis of two
low-molecular-weight protein tyrosine phosphatases from Vibrio cholerae.

Nath S(1), Banerjee R, Khamrui S, Sen U.

Author information: 
(1)Crystallography and Molecular Biology Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear
Physics, 1/AF Bidhan Nagar, Kolkata 700 064, India.

Low-molecular-weight protein tyrosine phosphatases (LMWPTPs) are small
cytoplasmic enzymes of molecular weight ∼18 kDa that belong to the large family
of protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs). Despite their wide distribution in both 
prokaryotes and eukaryotes, their exact biological role in bacterial systems is
not yet clear. Two low-molecular-weight protein tyrosine phosphatases (VcLMWPTP-1
and VcLMWPTP-2) from the Gram-negative bacterium Vibrio cholerae have been
cloned, overexpressed, purified by Ni(2+)-NTA affinity chromatography followed by
gel filtration and used for crystallization. Crystals of VcLMWPTP-1 were grown in
the presence of ammonium sulfate and glycerol and diffracted to a resolution of
1.6 Å. VcLMWPTP-2 crystals were grown in PEG 4000 and diffracted to a resolution 
of 2.7 Å. Analysis of the diffraction data showed that the VcLMWPTP-1 crystals
had symmetry consistent with space group P3(1) and that the VcLMWPTP-2 crystals
had the symmetry of space group C2. Assuming the presence of four molecules in
the asymmetric unit, the Matthews coefficient for the VcLMWPTP-1 crystals was
estimated to be 1.97 Å(3) Da(-1), corresponding to a solvent content of 37.4%.
The corresponding values for the VcLMWPTP-2 crystals, assuming the presence of
two molecules in the asymmetric unit, were 2.77 Å(3) Da(-1) and 55.62%,
respectively.

DOI: 10.1107/S174430911203518X 
PMCID: PMC3497980
PMID: 23027748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

