
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44944. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044944. Epub 2012 Sep 13.

Different patterns of cytokines and chemokines combined with IFN-γ production
reflect Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection and disease.

Yu Y(1), Zhang Y, Hu S, Jin D, Chen X, Jin Q, Liu H.

Author information: 
(1)MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, Institute of Pathogen
Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: IFN-γ is presently the only soluble immunological marker used to help
diagnose latent Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M.tb) infection. However, IFN-γ is
not available to distinguish latent from active TB infection. Moreover,
extrapulmonary tuberculosis, such as tuberculous pleurisy, cannot be properly
diagnosed by IFN-γ release assay. As a result, other disease- or
infection-related immunological biomarkers that would be more effective need to
be screened and identified.
METHODOLOGY: A panel of 41 soluble immunological molecules (17 cytokines and 24
chemokines) was tested using Luminex liquid array-based multiplexed immunoassays.
Samples, including plasma and pleural effusions, from healthy donors (HD, n = 12)
or patients with latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI, n = 20), pulmonary
tuberculosis (TB, n = 12), tuberculous pleurisy (TP, n = 15) or lung cancer (LC, 
n = 15) were collected and screened for soluble markers. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and pleural fluid mononuclear cells (PFMCs) were also
isolated to investigate antigen-specific immune factors.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: For the 41 examined factors, our results indicated that three
patterns were closely associated with infection and disease. (1) Significantly
elevated plasma levels of IL-2, IP-10, CXCL11 and CXCL12 were present in both
patients with tuberculosis and in a sub-group participant with latent
tuberculosis infection who showed a higher level of IFN-γ producing cells by
ELISPOT assay compared with other latently infected individuals. (2) IL-6 and
IL-9 were only significantly increased in plasma from active TB patients, and the
two factors were consistently highly secreted after M.tb antigen stimulation. (3)
When patients developed tuberculous pleurisy, CCL1, CCL21 and IL-6 were
specifically increased in the pleural effusions. In particular, these three
factors were consistently highly secreted by pleural fluid mononuclear cells
following M.tb-specific antigen stimulation. In conclusion, our data imply that
the specific secretion of soluble immunological factors, in addition to IFN-γ,
may be used to evaluate M.tb infection and tuberculosis disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044944 
PMCID: PMC3441719
PMID: 23028695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

