
1. Cell Biol Int. 2012;36(12):1267-74. doi: 10.1042/CBI20110634.

Mesenchymal stem cells restore CCl4-induced liver injury by an antioxidative
process.

Cho KA(1), Woo SY, Seoh JY, Han HS, Ryu KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Ewha
Medical Research Center, Seoul, Korea.

We have investigated BM (bone marrow)-derived MSCs (mesenchymal stem cells) for
the treatment of liver injury. It was hypothesized that MSC-mediated resolution
of liver injury could occur through an antioxidative process. After being
injected with CCl4 (carbon tetrachloride), mice were injected with syngenic
BM-derived MSCs or normal saline. Oxidative stress activity of the MSCs was
determined by the analysis of ROS (reactive oxygen species) and SOD (superoxide
dismutase) activity. In addition, cytoprotective genes of the liver tissue were
assessed by real-time PCR and ARE (antioxidant-response element) reporter assay. 
Up-regulated ROS of CCl4-treated liver cells was attenuated by co-culturing with 
MSCs. Suppression of SOD by adding an SOD inhibitor decreased the effect of MSCs 
on injured liver cells. MSCs significantly increased SOD activity and inhibited
ROS production in the injured liver. The gene expression levels of Hmox-1 (haem
oxygenase-1), BI-1 (Bax inhibitor-1), HGF (hepatocyte growth factor), GST
(glutathione transferase) and Nrf2 (nuclear factor-erythoid 2 p45 subunit-related
factor 20), attenuated by CCl4, were increased up to basal levels after MSC
transplantation. In addition, MSCs induced an ARE, shown by luciferase activity, 
which represented a cytoprotective response in the injured liver. Evidence of a
new cytoprotective effect is shown in which MSCs promote an antioxidant response 
and supports the potential of using MSC transplantation as an effective treatment
modality for liver disease.

DOI: 10.1042/CBI20110634 
PMID: 23035905  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

