
1. J Anim Sci. 2012 Dec;90(13):4788-94. doi: 10.2527/jas.2011-4705. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Correlation of rectal temperature and peripheral temperature from implantable
radio-frequency microchips in Holstein steers challenged with lipopolysaccharide 
under thermoneutral and high ambient temperatures.

Reid ED(1), Fried K, Velasco JM, Dahl GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana 61801, USA.

Early detection of disease can speed treatment, slow spread of disease in a herd,
and improve health status of animals. Immune stimulation increases rectal
temperature (RT). Injectable radio-frequency implants (RFI) can provide
temperature at the site of implantation. The fidelity of peripheral site
temperature, determined by RFI, relative to RT is unknown in cattle. We
hypothesized that during lipopolysaccharide (LPS) challenge, temperature at 3
peripheral sites would be similar to RT in steers (n = 4; BW 77 ± 2.1 kg). The 3 
sites were 1) subcutaneous (SC) at the base of the ear (ET); 2) SC posterior to
the poll (PT); and 3) SC beneath the umbilical fold (UT). Steers were housed in
controlled temperature (CT) rooms (between 18 and 21°C; n = 2/room). Rectal
temperature, ET, PT, and UT were recorded every 8 h daily. On d 7, 21, 22, 36,
and 37, RT and RFI were taken every 5 min for 6 h, every 15 min for 3 h, and
every 30 min for 15 h. To test RFI during a simulated immune challenge, LPS (E.
coli 055:B5) was injected intravenously (i.v.) at 1000 h on d 22 and 37. Basal
temperatures (°C) were RT (38.7 ± 0.20), ET (37.1 ± 0.86), PT (36.7 ± 0.57), and 
UT (36.3 ± 0.97). Rectal temperature increased to 39.9 ± 0.30°C after LPS, but
ET, PT, and UT decreased. Heat stress also increases RT, which makes it difficult
to identify sick animals using RT. The second hypothesis tested was that ET
positively correlates to RT and negatively correlates to RT during LPS under heat
stress. Four steers (127 ± 7.3 kg) were housed in CT chambers (n = 2/chamber),
implanted with a RFI, and allowed 2 wk to acclimate. One chamber remained at
20°C, the other was increased to 34°C starting at 0800 h for a period of 48 h.
The LPS was administered i.v. to all steers at 1000 h on d 2. After a 2-wk
recovery at 20°C, the temperature was increased in the other chamber, resulting
in a crossover design with each steer serving as its own control. Pearson's
correlation coefficients for ET and RT were 0.30 (P < 0.01) during heat stress,
0.20 (P < 0.05) during heat stress with LPS challenge, 0.34 (P < 0.01) during
thermoneutrality, and -0.42 (P < 0.01) during thermoneutrality with LPS. These
data refute the hypothesis that RT and peripheral temperature move in synchrony
after LPS challenge. These data suggest that individual response be considered
when identifying models for use of ET, but these RFI have potential for use in
the early detection of diseases that alter basal temperature.

DOI: 10.2527/jas.2011-4705 
PMID: 23048156  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

