
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e43608. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043608. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

A new zearalenone biodegradation strategy using non-pathogenic Rhodococcus
pyridinivorans K408 strain.

Kriszt R(1), Krifaton C, Szoboszlay S, Cserháti M, Kriszt B, Kukolya J, Czéh A,
Fehér-Tóth S, Török L, Szőke Z, Kovács KJ, Barna T, Ferenczi S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuroendocrinology, Institute of Experimental
Medicine, Budapest, Hungary.

Zearalenone (hereafter referred to as ZEA) is a nonsteroidal estrogenic mycotoxin
produced by several Fusarium spp. on cereal grains. ZEA is one of the most
hazardous natural endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDC) which induces hyper
estrogenic responses in mammals. This can result in reproductive disorders in
farm animals as well as in humans. Consequently, detoxification strategies for
contaminated crops are crucial for food safety. In this study we have developed a
bacterial based detoxification system using a non-pathogen Rhodococcus
pyridinivorans K408 strain. Following 5 days treatment of ZEA with R.
pyridinivorans K408 strain HPLC analyses showed an 87.21% ZEA-degradation
efficiency of the bacterial enzyme systems. In another approach, the strain
biotransformation ability has also been confirmed by a bioluminescent version of 
the yeast estrogen screening system (BLYES), which detected an 81.75% of
biodegradability of ZEA, in a good agreement with the chemical analyses.
Furthermore, the capacity of R. pyridinivorans to eliminate the estrogenic
effects of ZEA was tested by using an immature uterotrophic assay. Prepubertal
female rats were treated with vehicle (olive oil), 17β-estradiol, ZEA (0.1-1-5-10
mg/kg body weight) and LB broth containing 500 mg/l ZEA that has already been
incubated with or without Rhodococcus pyridinivorans K408 strain. Uterine weights
were measured and the mRNA level changes relating to apelin, aquaporin 5,
complement component 2, and calbindin-3 genes were measured by qRT-PCR. These
genes represent the major pathways that are affected by estromimetic compounds.
Zearalenone feeding significantly increased the uterus weight in a dose dependent
manner and at the same time upregulated complement component 2 and calbindin-3
expression as well as decreased apelin and aquaporin 5 mRNA levels comparable to 
that seen in 17β-estradiol exposed rats. In contrast, LB broth in which ZEA was
incubated with Rhodococcus pyridinivorans K408 prior to the feeding did not
display any estrogenic effect neither on uterine weight nor on the expression of 
estrogen-regulated genes. Consequently, the identification of Rhodococcus
pyridinivorans K408 strain in ZEA biodegradation proved to be a very efficient
biological tool that is able to eliminate the complete estrogenic effects of ZEA.
It is also remarkable that this biotransformation pathway of ZEA did not result
in any residual estrogenic effects.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043608 
PMCID: PMC3458049
PMID: 23049739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

