
1. Leukemia. 2013 Mar;27(3):629-34. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.294. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

BCR-ABL1 kinase inhibits uracil DNA glycosylase UNG2 to enhance oxidative DNA
damage and stimulate genomic instability.

Slupianek A(1), Falinski R, Znojek P, Stoklosa T, Flis S, Doneddu V, Pytel D,
Synowiec E, Blasiak J, Bellacosa A, Skorski T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University, Philadelphia,
PA, USA. aslupian@temple.edu

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) revolutionized the treatment of chronic myeloid
leukemia in chronic phase (CML-CP). Unfortunately, 25% of TKI-naive patients and 
50-90% of patients developing TKI-resistance carry CML clones expressing
TKI-resistant BCR-ABL1 kinase mutants. We reported that CML-CP leukemia stem and 
progenitor cell populations accumulate high amounts of reactive oxygen species,
which may result in accumulation of uracil derivatives in genomic DNA. Unfaithful
and/or inefficient repair of these lesions generates TKI-resistant point
mutations in BCR-ABL1 kinase. Using an array of specific substrates and
inhibitors/blocking antibodies we found that uracil DNA glycosylase UNG2 were
inhibited in BCR-ABL1-transformed cell lines and CD34(+) CML cells. The
inhibitory effect was not accompanied by downregulation of nuclear expression
and/or chromatin association of UNG2. The effect was BCR-ABL1 kinase-specific
because several other fusion tyrosine kinases did not reduce UNG2 activity. Using
UNG2-specific inhibitor UGI, we found that reduction of UNG2 activity increased
the number of uracil derivatives in genomic DNA detected by modified comet assay 
and facilitated accumulation of ouabain-resistant point mutations in reporter
gene Na(+)/K(+)ATPase. In conclusion, we postulate that BCR-ABL1 kinase-mediated 
inhibition of UNG2 contributes to accumulation of point mutations responsible for
TKI resistance causing the disease relapse, and perhaps also other point
mutations facilitating malignant progression of CML.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2012.294 
PMCID: PMC3598941
PMID: 23047475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

