
1. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Mar;10(3):965-71.

Two DNA-binding proteins discriminate between the promoters of different members 
of the major histocompatibility complex class II multigene family.

Kobr M(1), Reith W, Herrero-Sanchez C, Mach B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Geneva Medical School, Switzerland.

The regulation of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II gene expression
is a key feature of the control of normal and abnormal immune responses. In
humans, class II alpha - and beta-chain genes are organized in a multigene family
with three distinct subregions, HLA-DR, -DQ, and -DP. The regulation of these
genes is generally coordinated, and their promoters contain highly conserved
motifs, in particular the X and Y boxes. We have identified five distinct
proteins that bind to specific DNA sequences within the first 145 base pairs of
the HLA-DR promoter, a segment known to be functionally essential for class II
gene regulation. Among these, RF-X is of special interest, since mutants affected
in the regulation of MHC class II gene expression have a specific defect in RF-X 
binding. Unexpectedly, RF-X displays a characteristic gradient of binding
affinities for the X boxes of three alpha-chain genes (DRA greater than DPA much 
greater than DQA). The same observation was made with recombinant RF-X. We also
describe a novel factor, NF-S, which bound to the spacer region between the X and
Y boxes of class II promoters. NF-S exhibited a reverse gradient of affinity
compared with RF-X (DQA greater than DPA much greater than DRA). As expected,
RF-X bound well to the mouse IE alpha promoter, while NF-S bound well to IA
alpha. The drastic differences in the binding of RF-X and NF-S to different MHC
class II promoters contrasts with the coordinate regulation of HLA-DR, -DQ, and
-DP genes.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.10.3.965 
PMCID: PMC360945
PMID: 2304471  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

