
1. Chem Phys Lipids. 2012 Oct;165(7):787-93. doi: 10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2012.09.005.
Epub 2012 Oct 8.

New cardiolipin analogs synthesized by phospholipase D-catalyzed
transphosphatidylation.

Müller AO(1), Mrestani-Klaus C, Schmidt J, Ulbrich-Hofmann R, Dippe M.

Author information: 
(1)Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Institute of Biochemistry and
Biotechnology, Kurt-Mothes-Str. 3, D-06120 Halle, Germany.

Cardiolipin (CL) and related diphosphatidyl lipids are hardly accessible because 
of the complexity of their chemical synthesis. In the present paper, the
transphosphatidylation reaction catalyzed by phospholipase D (PLD) from
Streptomyces sp. has been proven as an alternative enzyme-assisted strategy for
the synthesis of new CL analogs. The formation of this type of compounds from
phosphatidylcholine was compared for a series of N- and C2-substituted
ethanolamine derivatives as well as non-charged alcohols such as glycerol and
ethylene glycol. The rapid exchange of the choline head group by ethanolamine
derivatives having a low molecular volume (diethanolamine and serinol) gave rise 
to an efficient production of the corresponding CL analogs. In contrast, the
yields were comparably low in the reaction with bulky nitrogenous acceptor
alcohols (triethanolamine, tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane,
tetrakis(hydroxyethyl)ammonium) or the non-charged alcohols. Therefore, a strong 
dependence of the conversion of the monophosphatidyl to the diphosphatidyl
compound on steric parameters and the head group charge was concluded. The
enzyme-assisted strategy was used for the preparation of purified
diphosphatidyldiethanolamine and diphosphatidylserinol.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2012.09.005 
PMID: 23059117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

