
1. Biochemistry. 2012 Nov 6;51(44):8743-54. doi: 10.1021/bi301114x. Epub 2012 Oct
29.

Substrate-mediated oxygen activation by homoprotocatechuate 2,3-dioxygenase:
intermediates formed by a tyrosine 257 variant.

Mbughuni MM(1), Meier KK, Münck E, Lipscomb JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics and Center for
Metals in Biocatalysis, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455,
United States.

Homoprotocatechuate (HPCA; 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetate or 4-carboxymethyl
catechol) and O(2) bind in adjacent ligand sites of the active site Fe(II) of
homoprotocatechuate 2,3-dioxygenase (FeHPCD). We have proposed that electron
transfer from the chelated aromatic substrate through the Fe(II) to O(2) gives
both substrates radical character. This would promote reaction between the
substrates to form an alkylperoxo intermediate as the first step in aromatic ring
cleavage. Several active site amino acids are thought to promote these reactions 
through acid/base chemistry, hydrogen bonding, and electrostatic interactions.
Here the role of Tyr257 is explored by using the Tyr257Phe (Y257F) variant, which
decreases k(cat) by about 75%. The crystal structure of the FeHPCD-HPCA complex
has shown that Tyr257 hydrogen bonds to the deprotonated C2-hydroxyl of HPCA.
Stopped-flow studies show that at least two reaction intermediates, termed
Y257F(Int1)(HPCA) and Y257F(Int2)(HPCA), accumulate during the Y257F-HPCA + O(2) 
reaction prior to formation of the ring-cleaved product. Y257F(Int1)(HPCA) is
colorless and is formed as O(2) binds reversibly to the HPCA−enzyme complex.
Y257F(Int2)(HPCA) forms spontaneously from Y257F(Int1)(HPCA) and displays a
chromophore at 425 nm (ε(425) = 10 500 M(−1) cm(−1)). Mössbauer spectra of the
intermediates trapped by rapid freeze quench show that both intermediates contain
Fe(II). The lack of a chromophore characteristic of a quinone or semiquinone form
of HPCA, the presence of Fe(II), and the low O(2) affinity suggest that
Y257F(Int1)(HPCA) is an HPCA-Fe(II)-O(2) complex with little electron
delocalization onto the O(2). In contrast, the intense spectrum of
Y257F(Int2)(HPCA) suggests the intermediate is most likely an HPCA
quinone-Fe(II)-(hydro)peroxo species. Steady-state and transient kinetic analyses
show that steps of the catalytic cycle are slowed by as much as 100-fold by the
mutation. These effects can be rationalized by a failure of Y257F to facilitate
the observed distortion of the bound HPCA that is proposed to promote transfer of
one electron to O(2).

DOI: 10.1021/bi301114x 
PMCID: PMC3513391
PMID: 23066705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

