
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2013 Mar 15;152(1-2):176-82. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2012.09.011. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Experimental infection of gnotobiotic piglets with Escherichia coli strains
positive for EAST1 and AIDA.

Zajacova ZS(1), Faldyna M, Kulich P, Kummer V, Maskova J, Alexa P.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Research Institute, Hudcova 70, 621 00 Brno, Czech Republic.
sramkova@vri.cz

The virulence factors EAST1 and AIDA are often detected in ETEC/VTEC strains
isolated from pigs and their role in diarrhoeal infections is discussed. In order
to elucidate the pathogenesis of AIDA, the colonisation patterns of F4 positive
and AIDA positive strains were investigated. Two wild-type Escherichia coli
strains AIDA/EAST1 and F4/EAST1 isolated from diarrhoeal piglets were used for
animal experiment to evaluate the ability of the EAST1 toxin to be involved in
induction of diarrhoea. Gnotobiotic piglets were supplemented with normal porcine
serum and orally inoculated with the strains. Faecal bacterial shedding of the
challenge strains was observed during the experiment. Light microscopy and
scanning electron microscopy were used to detect the colonisation pattern of both
challenge strains. Although bacterial isolation demonstrated shedding of the
challenge strains until the end of the experiment, diarrhoea did not develop in
any piglet. Based on histological examination, piglets were more heavily
colonised in the case of infection with E. coli O149/F4/EAST1 strain. Scanning
electron microscopy showed bacterial cells of F4/EAST1 E. coli adhering to
enterocytes, in contrast to AIDA/EAST1 which were poorly present on the
intestinal surface. The EAST1 toxin alone was not able to induce diarrhoea in
animals. Therefore our results demonstrate that the function/role of EAST1 and
AIDA in colibacillosis of pigs remains to be elucidated.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2012.09.011 
PMID: 23068274  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

