
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2012 Aug;9(8):2758-71. doi:
10.3390/ijerph9082758. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

Microbiological surveillance and state of the art technological strategies for
the prevention of dialysis water pollution.

Bolasco P(1), Contu A, Meloni P, Vacca D, Galfr√® A.

Author information: 
(1)Territorial Department of Nephrology and Dialysis, ASL, Quartu Sant'Elena,
Cagliari, Italy. dialisi.territorio@asl8cagliari.it

METHODS: The present report attempts to illustrate the positive impact on the
microbiological quality of dialysis patients over a 15-year period through the
progressive implementation of state-of-the-art technological strategies and the
optimization of microbiological surveillance procedures in five dialysis units in
Sardinia.
RESULTS: Following on better microbiological, quality controls of dialysis water 
and improvement of procedures and equipment, a drastic improvement of
microbiological water quality was observed in a total of 945 samples. The main
aim was to introduce the use of microbiological culture methods as recommended by
the most important guidelines. The microbiological results obtained have led to a
progressive refining of controls and introduction of new materials and equipment,
including two-stage osmosis and piping distribution rings featuring a greater
capacity to prevent biofilm adhesion. The actions undertaken have resulted in
unexpected quality improvements.
CONCLUSIONS: Dialysis water should be viewed by the nephrologist as a medicinal
product exerting a demonstrable positive impact on microinflammation in dialysis 
patients. A synergic effort between nephrologists and microbiologists undoubtedly
constitutes the most effective means of preventing dialysis infections.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph9082758 
PMCID: PMC3447585
PMID: 23066395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

