
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47219. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047219. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Induction of HCA587-specific antitumor immunity with HCA587 protein formulated
with CpG and ISCOM in mice.

Chen J(1), Zhang L, Wen W, Hao J, Zeng P, Qian X, Zhang Y, Yin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, and Key Laboratory
of Medical Immunology of Ministry of Health, Peking University Health Science
Center, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

HCA587 (also known as MAGE-C2) is a "cancer-testis" antigen highly expressed in a
number of malignancies with unique immunological properties, making it a
promising target for tumor immunotherapy. In this report, we demonstrated that
HCA587 protein, when formulated with adjuvants CpG-containing
oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG ODN) and ISCOM, was capable of inducing a potent
cellular and humoral immune response as indicated by the presence of a large
number of HCA587-specific, IFN-γ-producing CD4(+) T cells and high levels of
HCA587-specific antibodies. More importantly, vaccination with HCA587 conferred
protection against challenge with HCA587-expressing B16 melanoma in prophylactic 
and therapeutic settings. In analysis of the mechanisms underlying the protective
effect, we showed that the vaccination was followed by enhanced accumulation of
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) with enrichment of conventional CD4(+) T
cells but reduced representation of Treg cells. Further, the antitumor effect was
largely abrogated in mice either depleted of CD4(+) T cells or deficient for
IFN-γ. These results indicate that HCA587 protein vaccine possesses evident
antitumor activity in a mouse model and holds promise for treatment of human
cancers.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047219 
PMCID: PMC3469506
PMID: 23071764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

