
1. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Mar 15;22(6):998-1006. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0478. Epub 2012
Dec 16.

Hematopoietic colony formation from human growth factor-dependent TF1 cells and
human cord blood myeloid progenitor cells depends on SHP2 phosphatase function.

Broxmeyer HE(1), Etienne-Julan M, Gotoh A, Braun SE, Lu L, Cooper S, Feng GS, Li 
XJ, Chan RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5181, USA. hbroxmey@iupui.edu

The protein tyrosine phosphatase, SHP2, is widely expressed; however, previous
studies demonstrated that hematopoietic cell development more stringently
requires Shp2 expression compared to other tissues. Furthermore, somatic
gain-of-function SHP2 mutants are commonly found in human myeloid leukemias.
Given that pharmacologic inhibitors to SHP2 phosphatase activity are currently in
development as putative antileukemic agents, we conducted a series of experiments
examining the necessity of SHP2 phosphatase activity for human hematopoiesis.
Anti-sense oligonucleotides to human SHP2 coding sequences reduced human cord
blood- and human cell line, TF1-derived colony formation. Expression of truncated
SHP2 bearing its Src homology 2 (SH2) domains, but lacking the phosphatase domain
similarly reduced human cord blood- and TF1-derived colony formation.
Mechanistically, expression of truncated SHP2 reduced the interaction between
endogenous, full-length SHP2 with the adapter protein, Grb2. To verify the role
of SHP2 phosphatase function in human hematopoietic cell development, human cord 
blood CD34+ cells were transduced with a leukemia-associated phosphatase
gain-of-function SHP2 mutant or with a phosphatase dead SHP2 mutant, which
indicated that increased phosphatase function enhanced, while decreased SHP2
phosphatase function reduced, human cord blood-derived colonies. Collectively,
these findings indicate that SHP2 phosphatase function regulates human
hematopoietic cell development and imply that the phosphatase component of SHP2
may serve as a pharmacologic target in human leukemias bearing increased SHP2
phosphatase activity.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.2012.0478 
PMCID: PMC3585482
PMID: 23082805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

