
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Nov 14;134(45):18644-55. doi: 10.1021/ja3062375. Epub 2012
Nov 2.

Determination of pre-steady-state rate constants on the Escherichia coli pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex reveals that loop movement controls the rate-limiting step.

Balakrishnan A(1), Nemeria NS, Chakraborty S, Kakalis L, Jordan F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Rutgers the State University, Newark, New Jersey
07102, United States.

Spectroscopic identification and characterization of covalent and noncovalent
intermediates on large enzyme complexes is an exciting and challenging area of
modern enzymology. The Escherichia coli pyruvate dehydrogenase multienzyme
complex (PDHc), consisting of multiple copies of enzymic components and
coenzymes, performs the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA and
is central to carbon metabolism linking glycolysis to the Krebs cycle. On the
basis of earlier studies, we hypothesized that the dynamic regions of the E1p
component, which undergo a disorder-order transition upon substrate binding to
thiamin diphosphate (ThDP), play a critical role in modulation of the catalytic
cycle of PDHc. To test our hypothesis, we kinetically characterized ThDP-bound
covalent intermediates on the E1p component, and the lipoamide-bound covalent
intermediate on the E2p component in PDHc and in its variants with disrupted
active-site loops. Our results suggest that formation of the first covalent
predecarboxylation intermediate, C2Î±-lactylthiamin diphosphate (LThDP), is rate
limiting for the series of steps culminating in acetyl-CoA formation.
Substitutions in the active center loops produced variants with up to 900-fold
lower rates of formation of the LThDP, demonstrating that these perturbations
directly affected covalent catalysis. This rate was rescued by up to 5-fold upon 
assembly to PDHc of the E401K variant. The E1p loop dynamics control covalent
catalysis with ThDP and are modulated by PDHc assembly, presumably by selection
of catalytically competent loop conformations. This mechanism could be a general 
feature of 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase complexes because such interfacial dynamic
regions are highly conserved.

DOI: 10.1021/ja3062375 
PMCID: PMC3498582
PMID: 23088422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

