
1. Acta Gastroenterol Belg. 2012 Sep;75(3):300-9.

Halitosis--a common medical and social problem. A review on pathology, diagnosis 
and treatment.

Zalewska A(1), Zatoński M, Jabłonka-Strom A, Paradowska A, Kawala B, Litwin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University Hospital (ASK), Wroclaw, Poland.
missdoc@poczta.onet.pl

Bad breath is a condition that has health and social implications. This paper
provides a comprehensive review of the classification of halitosis, it's
etiology, it's prevalence, diagnosis and treatment strategies for the condition. 
Halitosis is affecting about 25-30% of world's population. It includes categories
of genuine halitosis, pseudo-halitosis and halitophobia. It is believed that in
80-90% of cases halitosis origins in the oral cavity and the most common causes
are: gingival pathologies, caries and poor oral hygiene. Extraoral sources of
halitosis are responsible for 10-20% of all cases and are caused by poor diet,
alcohol abuse, tobacco smoking, certain drugs and diseases of other parts of
digestive tract as well as some systemic conditions. Diagnostics of halitosis
includes subjective methods (examiner's sense of smell) and objective methods
(instrumental analysis). Simple, subjective examination is considered a "golden
standard" in clinical practice. In case of pathological halitosis identifying the
direct cause of halitosis is essential. After excluding, or after successful
treatment, of all oral pathologies, in case of remaining fetor ex ore
identification and treatment of halitosis often requires multidisciplinary
approach. Many unknowns remain in causes and mechanisms of halitosis. It can
significantly impair quality of life, social interactions, lead directly to
depression,low self-esteem or other mood disorders, therefore it is important to 
properly identify, treat and continue research on halitosis.


PMID: 23082699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

