
1. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2012 Nov;25(11):715-23. doi: 10.1093/protein/gzs086. Epub
2012 Oct 18.

An efficient method for enzyme immobilization evidenced by atomic force
microscopy.

Marcuello C(1), de Miguel R, Gómez-Moreno C, Martínez-Júlvez M, Lostao A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Microscopías Avanzadas, Instituto de Nanociencia de Aragón,
Universidad de Zaragoza, Zaragoza 50018, Spain.

Immobilization of proteins in a functionally active form and proper orientation
is fundamental for effective surface-based protein analysis. A new method is
presented for the controlled and oriented immobilization of ordered monolayers of
enzymes whose interaction site had been protected using the protein ligand. The
utility of this method was demonstrated by analyzing the interactions between the
enzyme ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase (FNR) and its redox partner ferredoxin (Fd).
The quality of the procedure was deeply evaluated through enzymatic assays and
atomic force microscopy. Single-molecule force spectroscopy revealed that
site-specifically targeted FNR samples increased the ratio of recognition events 
4-fold with regard to the standard randomly modified FNR samples. The results
were corroborated using the cytochrome c reductase activity that gave an increase
on surface between 6 and 12 times for the site-specifically targeted FNR samples.
The activity in solution for the enzyme labeled from the complex was similar to
that exhibited by wild-type FNR while FNR randomly tagged showed a 3-fold
decrease. This indicates that random targeting protocols affect not only the
efficiency of immobilized proteins to recognize their ligands but also their
general functionality. The present methodology is expected to find wide
applications in surface-based protein-protein interactions biosensors,
single-molecule analysis, bioelectronics or drug screening.

DOI: 10.1093/protein/gzs086 
PMID: 23081837  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

