
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Jan;1834(1):240-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2012.10.010. 
Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Expression and characterization of PhzE from P. aeruginosa PAO1:
aminodeoxyisochorismate synthase involved in pyocyanin and
phenazine-1-carboxylate production.

Culbertson JE(1), Toney MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616,
USA.

PhzE from Pseudomonas aeruginosa catalyzes the first step in the biosynthesis of 
phenazine-1-carboxylic acid, pyocyanin, and other phenazines, which are virulence
factors for Pseudomonas species. The reaction catalyzed converts chorismate into 
aminodeoxyisochorismate using ammonia supplied by a glutamine amidotransferase
domain. It has structural and sequence homology to other chorismate-utilizing
enzymes such as anthranilate synthase, isochorismate synthase,
aminodeoxychorismate synthase, and salicylate synthase. Like these enzymes, it is
Mg(2+) dependent and catalyzes a similar S(N)2" nucleophilic substitution
reaction. PhzE catalyzes the addition of ammonia to C2 of chorismate, as does
anthranilate synthase, yet unlike anthranilate synthase it does not catalyze
elimination of pyruvate from enzyme-bound aminodeoxyisochorismate. Herein, the
cloning of the phzE gene, high level expression of active enzyme in E. coli,
purification, and kinetic characterization of the enzyme is presented, including 
temperature and pH dependence. Steady-state kinetics give K(chorismate)=20±4μM,
K(Mg)(2+)=294±22μM, K(L-gln)=11±1mM, and k(cat)=2.2±0.2s(-1) for a random kinetic
mechanism. PhzE can use NH(4)(+) as an alternative nucleophile, while Co(2+) and 
Mn(2+) are alternative divalent metals.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2012.10.010 
PMID: 23099261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

