
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2012 Nov 14;60(45):11238-44. doi: 10.1021/jf303610w. Epub 2012
Nov 5.

Enhanced biotransformation of DDTs by an iron- and humic-reducing bacteria
Aeromonas hydrophila HS01 upon addition of goethite and
anthraquinone-2,6-disulphonic disodium salt (AQDS).

Cao F(1), Liu TX, Wu CY, Li FB, Li XM, Yu HY, Tong H, Chen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Agricultural Environment Pollution Integrated
Control, Guangdong Institute of Eco-Environmental and Soil Sciences, Guangzhou
510650, China.

A fermentative facultative anaerobe, strain HS01 isolated from subterranean
sediment, was identified as Aeromonas hydrophila by 16S rRNA sequence analysis.
The biotransformation of 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl) ethane (DDT),
1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl) ethylene (DDD), and 1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis
(4-chlorophenyl) ethane (DDE) by HS01 was investigated in the presence of
goethite and anthraquinone-2,6-disulphonic disodium salt (AQDS). The results
demonstrated that HS01 was capable of reducing DDTs, goethite and AQDS. And
goethite can significantly enhance the reduction of DDT, DDD and DDE to some
extent, while the addition of AQDS can further accelerate the reduction of
Fe(III) and DDTs. The products of DDT transformation were identified as a large
amount of dominant DDD, and small amounts of
1-chloro-2,2-bis-(p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDMU),
unsym-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-ethylene (DDNU), and 4,4'-dichlorobenzophenone (DBP).
The results of cyclic voltammetry suggested that AQDS could increase the amounts 
of reactive biogenic Fe(II), resulting in the enhanced transformation of DDTs.
This investigation gives some new insight in the fate of DDTs related to iron-
and humic-reducing bacteria.

DOI: 10.1021/jf303610w 
PMID: 23095105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

