
1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Dec 7;287(50):42389-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.390336. Epub 2012
Oct 23.

Metabolic mechanism of mannan in a ruminal bacterium, Ruminococcus albus,
involving two mannoside phosphorylases and cellobiose 2-epimerase: discovery of a
new carbohydrate phosphorylase, β-1,4-mannooligosaccharide phosphorylase.

Kawahara R(1), Saburi W, Odaka R, Taguchi H, Ito S, Mori H, Matsui H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Faculty of Agriculture, Hokkaido University, N-9, W-9, Sapporo
060-8589, Japan.

Ruminococcus albus is a typical ruminal bacterium digesting cellulose and
hemicellulose. Cellobiose 2-epimerase (CE; EC 5.1.3.11), which converts
cellobiose to 4-O-β-D-glucosyl-D-mannose, is a particularly unique enzyme in R.
albus, but its physiological function is unclear. Recently, a new metabolic
pathway of mannan involving CE was postulated for another CE-producing bacterium,
Bacteroides fragilis. In this pathway, β-1,4-mannobiose is epimerized to
4-O-β-D-mannosyl-D-glucose (Man-Glc) by CE, and Man-Glc is phosphorolyzed to
α-D-mannosyl 1-phosphate (Man1P) and D-glucose by Man-Glc phosphorylase (MP; EC
2.4.1.281). Ruminococcus albus NE1 showed intracellular MP activity, and two MP
isozymes, RaMP1 and RaMP2, were obtained from the cell-free extract. These
enzymes were highly specific for the mannosyl residue at the non-reducing end of 
the substrate and catalyzed the phosphorolysis and synthesis of Man-Glc through a
sequential Bi Bi mechanism. In a synthetic reaction, RaMP1 showed high activity
only toward D-glucose and 6-deoxy-D-glucose in the presence of Man1P, whereas
RaMP2 showed acceptor specificity significantly different from RaMP1. RaMP2 acted
on D-glucose derivatives at the C2- and C3-positions, including deoxy- and
deoxyfluoro-analogues and epimers, but not on those substituted at the
C6-position. Furthermore, RaMP2 had high synthetic activity toward the following 
oligosaccharides: β-linked glucobioses, maltose, N,N'-diacetylchitobiose, and
β-1,4-mannooligosaccharides. Particularly, β-1,4-mannooligosaccharides served as 
significantly better acceptor substrates for RaMP2 than D-glucose. In the
phosphorolytic reactions, RaMP2 had weak activity toward β-1,4-mannobiose but
efficiently degraded β-1,4-mannooligosaccharides longer than β-1,4-mannobiose.
Consequently, RaMP2 is thought to catalyze the phosphorolysis of
β-1,4-mannooligosaccharides longer than β-1,4-mannobiose to produce Man1P and
β-1,4-mannobiose.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.390336 
PMCID: PMC3516782
PMID: 23093406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

