
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 13;109(46):18767-72. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1203853109. Epub 2012 Oct 29.

DNA damage and eIF4G1 in breast cancer cells reprogram translation for survival
and DNA repair mRNAs.

Badura M(1), Braunstein S, Zavadil J, Schneider RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
NY 10016, USA.

The cellular response to DNA damage is mediated through multiple pathways that
regulate and coordinate DNA repair, cell cycle arrest, and cell death. We show
that the DNA damage response (DDR) induced by ionizing radiation (IR) is
coordinated in breast cancer cells by selective mRNA translation mediated by high
levels of translation initiation factor eIF4G1 (eukaryotic initiation factor
4γ1). Increased expression of eIF4G1, common in breast cancers, was found to
selectively increase translation of mRNAs involved in cell survival and the DDR, 
preventing autophagy and apoptosis [Survivin, hypoxia inducible factor 1α
(HIF1α), X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP)], promoting cell cycle arrest
[growth arrest and DNA damage protein 45a (GADD45a), protein 53 (p53),
ATR-interacting protein (ATRIP), Check point kinase 1 (Chk1)] and DNA repair [p53
binding protein 1 (53BP1), breast cancer associated proteins 1, 2 (BRCA1/2),
Poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP), replication factor c2-5 (Rfc2-5), ataxia
telangiectasia mutated gene 1 (ATM), meiotic recombination protein 11 (MRE-11),
and others]. Reduced expression of eIF4G1, but not its homolog eIF4G2, greatly
sensitizes cells to DNA damage by IR, induces cell death by both apoptosis and
autophagy, and significantly delays resolution of DNA damage foci with little
reduction of overall protein synthesis. Although some mRNAs selectively
translated by higher levels of eIF4G1 were found to use internal ribosome entry
site (IRES)-mediated alternate translation, most do not. The latter group shows
significantly reduced dependence on eIF4E for translation, facilitated by an
enhanced requirement for eIF4G1. Increased expression of eIF4G1 therefore
promotes specialized translation of survival, growth arrest, and DDR mRNAs that
are important in cell survival and DNA repair following genotoxic DNA damage.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1203853109 
PMCID: PMC3503184
PMID: 23112151  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

