
1. Toxicol Pathol. 2013 Jul;41(5):709-21. doi: 10.1177/0192623312464309. Epub 2012
Nov 2.

Evaluation of expression profiles of hematopoietic stem cell, endothelial cell,
and myeloid cell antigens in spontaneous and chemically induced hemangiosarcomas 
and hemangiomas in mice.

Kakiuchi-Kiyota S(1), Crabbs TA, Arnold LL, Pennington KL, Cook JC, Malarkey DE, 
Cohen SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.

It is unclear whether the process of spontaneous and chemically induced
hemangiosarcoma and hemangioma formation in mice involves the transformation of
differentiated endothelial cells (ECs) or recruitment of multipotential bone
marrow-derived hematopoietic stem cells or endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs),
which show some degree of endothelial differentiation. In the present study,
immunohistochemical staining for hematopoietic stem cell markers (CD45 and CD34),
EC markers (vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 [VEGFR2], CD31, and
factor VIII-related antigen), and a myeloid lineage marker (CD14) was employed to
better define the origin of hemangiosarcomas and hemangiomas in mice. Staining
was negative for CD45, factor VIII-related antigen, and CD14 and positive for
CD34, VEGFR2, and CD31, indicating that mouse hemangiosarcomas and hemangiomas
are composed of cells derived from EPCs expressing CD34, VEGFR2, and CD31 but not
factor VIII-related antigen. The lack of CD45 expression suggests that mouse
vascular tumors may arise from EPCs that are at a stage later than hematopoietic 
stem cells. Since factor VIII-related antigen expression is known to occur later 
than CD31 expression in EPCs, our observations may indicate that these tumor
cells are arrested at a stage prior to complete differentiation.Â  In addition,
myeloid lineage cells do not appear to contribute to hemangiosarcoma and
hemangioma formation in mice.

DOI: 10.1177/0192623312464309 
PMID: 23125116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

