
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1834(10):2195-204. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2012.10.012. Epub 2012 Oct 31.

Structural basis of MET receptor dimerization by the bacterial invasion protein
InlB and the HGF/SF splice variant NK1.

Niemann HH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Center for Biotechnology (CeBiTec), Bielefeld
University, 33501 Bielefeld, Germany. Electronic address:
Hartmut.Niemann@uni-bielefeld.de.

The structural basis of ligand-induced dimerization of the receptor tyrosine
kinase MET by its natural ligand hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF)
is not well understood. However, interesting insight into the molecular mechanism
of MET dimerization has emerged from crystal structures of MET in complex with a 
bacterial agonist, the invasion protein internalin B (InlB) from pathogenic
Listeria monocytogenes. MET activation by InlB promotes uptake of bacteria into
host cells. Structural and biophysical data suggest that InlB is monomeric on its
own but dimerizes upon binding to the membrane-anchored MET receptor promoting
the formation of a signaling active 2:2 complex. The dimerization interface is
small and unusually located on the convex side of the curved InlB leucine-rich
repeat (LRR) domain. As InlB does not dimerize in solution, the dimerization site
could only be identified by studying packing contacts of InlB in various crystal 
forms and had to be proven by scrutinizing its biological relevance in cellular
assays. InlB dimerization is thus an example of a low-affinity contact that
appears irrelevant in solution but becomes physiologically significant in the
context of 2-dimensional diffusion restricted to the membrane plane. The
resulting 2:2 InlB:MET complex has an InlB dimer at its center with one MET
molecule bound peripherally to each InlB. This model of ligand-mediated MET
dimerization may serve as a blue-print to understand MET activation by NK1, a
naturally occurring HGF/SF splice variant and MET agonist. Crystal structures of 
NK1 repeatedly show a NK1 dimer, in which residues implicated in MET-binding are 
located on the outside. Thus, MET dimerization by NK1 may also be ligand-mediated
with a NK1 dimer at the center of the 2:2 complex with one MET molecule bound
peripherally to each NK1. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled:
Emerging recognition and activation mechanisms of receptor tyrosine kinases.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2012.10.012 
PMID: 23123275  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

