
1. Mol Immunol. 2013 Sep;55(2):182-5. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2012.10.019. Epub 2012
Nov 3.

Diverse antigen presentation by the Group 1 CD1 molecule, CD1c.

Adams EJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, United States. ejadams@uchicago.edu

CD1 molecules are Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class I-like proteins
that present diverse lipid antigens to T cells. Most of our understanding of CD1 
lipid presentation and T cell recognition has come from study of the invariant
Natural Killer T cell recognition of CD1d. However, in addition to CD1d, humans
possess three additional CD1 molecules: CD1a, CD1b and CD1c, referred to as the
Group 1 CD1s. The lack of an appropriate murine molecule to probe the function
and disease relevance of these molecules has hindered understanding their precise
immunological role, despite their pivotal role in human immunity. In this
perspective, we discuss the progress of functional and molecular studies of CD1c.
CD1c has been shown to specifically present lipids from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis and other related pathogenic mycobacteria. αβ T cells reactive to
these lipids presented in the context of CD1c have been characterized and upon
stimulation secrete IFN-γ, an important cytokine in tuberculosis disease
clearance. Other ligands characterized for CD1c include PI and PC, a lipopeptide 
with a dodecameric peptide moiety and sulfatides. These structurally and
chemically diverse ligands suggest that CD1c has the capacity to present a wide
repertoire of antigens to reactive T cells. Indeed, a substantial percentage
(∼2%) of the circulating αβ T cell population is reactive to CD1c presenting
endogenous antigens, suggesting that this particular Group 1 molecule may play an
important role in the human immune response.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2012.10.019 
PMCID: PMC3612385
PMID: 23127489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

