
1. J Periodontol. 2013 Sep;84(9):1353-60. doi: 10.1902/jop.2012.120496. Epub 2012
Nov 8.

MyD88 or TRAM knockdown regulates interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, and CXCL12 mRNA
expression in human gingival and periodontal ligament fibroblasts.

Morandini AC(1), Chaves Souza PP, Ramos-Junior ES, Souza Costa CA, Santos CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Bauru School of Dentistry, University of
São Paulo, Bauru, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: In a previous report, it was shown that Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2
knockdown modulates interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-8 but not the chemokine CXCL12, an 
important mediator with inflammatory and proangiogenic effects, in human gingival
fibroblasts (HGF) and human periodontal ligament fibroblasts (HPDLF). This study 
investigates whether knocking down two important TLR adaptor molecules, such as
myeloid differentiation protein 88 (MyD88) and TRIF-related adaptor molecule
(TRAM), could affect mRNA expression of IL-6, IL-8, and CXCL12 in HGF and HPDLF.
METHODS: After small interfering (si) RNA-mediated silencing of MyD88 or TRAM,
HGF and HPDLF were stimulated with Porphyromonas gingivalis (Pg)
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or two synthetic ligands of TLR2 (Pam2CSK4 and Pam3CSK4)
for 6 hours. IL-6, IL-8, and CXCL12 mRNAs were evaluated by quantitative
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Knockdown of MyD88 or TRAM partially impaired the IL-8 mRNA upregulation
in both fibroblast subpopulations. Similarly, IL-6 upregulation was partially
prevented by siMyD88 or siTRAM in HGF stimulated with Pg LPS, as well as in both 
fibroblast subtypes challenged with Pam2CSK4. Conversely, constitutive CXCL12
mRNA levels were upregulated by MyD88 or TRAM knockdown in non-stimulated cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that TLR adaptor molecules knockdown, such as 
MyD88 or TRAM, can decrease IL-6 and IL-8 mRNA and increase CXCL12 mRNA
expression in HGF and HPDLF. This can be an important step for better
understanding the mechanisms that control the inflammatory cytokine and chemokine
expression, which in turn contributes to periodontal pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2012.120496 
PMID: 23136947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

