
1. Front Immunol. 2012 Nov 6;3:337. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00337. eCollection 2012.

Regulation and use of the extracellular matrix by Trypanosoma cruzi during early 
infection.

Nde PN(1), Lima MF, Johnson CA, Pratap S, Villalta F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Meharry Medical
College Nashville, TN, USA.

Chagas disease, which was once thought to be confined to endemic regions of Latin
America, has now gone global becoming a new worldwide challenge. For more than a 
century since its discovery, it has remained neglected with no effective drugs or
vaccines. The mechanisms by which Trypanosoma cruzi regulates and uses the
extracellular matrix (ECM) to invade cells and cause disease are just beginning
to be understood. Here we critically review and discuss the regulation of the ECM
interactome by T. cruzi, the use of the ECM by T. cruzi and analyze the molecular
ECM/T. cruzi interphase during the early process of infection. It has been shown 
that invasive trypomastigote forms of T. cruzi use and modulate components of the
ECM during the initial process of infection. Infective trypomastigotes
up-regulate the expression of laminin Î³-1 (LAMC1) and thrombospondin (THBS1) to
facilitate the recruitment of trypomastigotes to enhance cellular infection.
Silencing the expression of LAMC1 and THBS1 by stable RNAi dramatically reduces
trypanosome infection. T. cruzi gp83, a ligand that mediates the attachment of
trypanosomes to cells to initiate infection, up-regulates LAMC1 expression to
enhance cellular infection. Infective trypomastigotes use Tc85 to interact with
laminin, p45 mucin to interact with LAMC1 through galectin-3 (LGALS3), a human
lectin, and calreticulin (TcCRT) to interact with TSB1 to enhance cellular
infection. Silencing the expression of LGALS3 also reduces cellular infection.
Despite the role of the ECM in T. cruzi infection, almost nothing is known about 
the ECM interactome networks operating in the process of T. cruzi infection and
its ligands. Here, we present the first elucidation of the human ECM interactome 
network regulated by T. cruzi and its gp83 ligand that facilitates cellular
infection. The elucidation of the human ECM interactome regulated by T. cruzi and
the dissection of the molecular ECM/T. cruzi interphase using systems biology
approaches are not only critically important for the understanding of the
molecular pathogenesis of T. cruzi infection but also for developing novel
approaches of intervention in Chagas disease.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2012.00337 
PMCID: PMC3490126
PMID: 23133440 

