
1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(10):e1002987. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002987. Epub 2012
Oct 25.

Myeloid-related protein-14 contributes to protective immunity in gram-negative
pneumonia derived sepsis.

Achouiti A(1), Vogl T, Urban CF, RÃ¶hm M, Hommes TJ, van Zoelen MA, Florquin S,
Roth J, van 't Veer C, de Vos AF, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. a.achouiti@amc.nl

Klebsiella (K.) pneumoniae is a common cause of pneumonia-derived sepsis. Myeloid
related protein 8 (MRP8, S100A8) and MRP14 (S100A9) are the most abundant
cytoplasmic proteins in neutrophils. They can form MRP8/14 heterodimers that are 
released upon cell stress stimuli. MRP8/14 reportedly exerts antimicrobial
activity, but in acute fulminant sepsis models MRP8/14 has been found to
contribute to organ damage and death. We here determined the role of MRP8/14 in
K. pneumoniae sepsis originating from the lungs, using an established model
characterized by gradual growth of bacteria with subsequent dissemination.
Infection resulted in gradually increasing MRP8/14 levels in lungs and plasma.
Mrp14 deficient (mrp14(-/-)) mice, unable to form MRP8/14 heterodimers, showed
enhanced bacterial dissemination accompanied by increased organ damage and a
reduced survival. Mrp14(-/-) macrophages were reduced in their capacity to
phagocytose Klebsiella. In addition, recombinant MRP8/14 heterodimers, but not
MRP8 or MRP14 alone, prevented growth of Klebsiella in vitro through chelation of
divalent cations. Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) prepared from wildtype
but not from mrp14(-/-) neutrophils inhibited Klebsiella growth; in accordance,
the capacity of human NETs to kill Klebsiella was strongly impaired by an
anti-MRP14 antibody or the addition of zinc. These results identify MRP8/14 as
key player in protective innate immunity during Klebsiella pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002987 
PMCID: PMC3486918
PMID: 23133376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

