
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jan 18;288(3):2049-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.411728. Epub 2012 
Nov 12.

Depletion of the ubiquitin-binding adaptor molecule SQSTM1/p62 from macrophages
harboring cftr ΔF508 mutation improves the delivery of Burkholderia cenocepacia
to the autophagic machinery.

Abdulrahman BA(1), Khweek AA, Akhter A, Caution K, Tazi M, Hassan H, Zhang Y,
Rowland PD, Malhotra S, Aeffner F, Davis IC, Valvano MA, Amer AO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Cystic fibrosis is the most common inherited lethal disease in Caucasians. It is 
caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
(CFTR), of which the cftr ΔF508 mutation is the most common. ΔF508 macrophages
are intrinsically defective in autophagy because of the sequestration of
essential autophagy molecules within unprocessed CFTR aggregates. Defective
autophagy allows Burkholderia cenocepacia (B. cepacia) to survive and replicate
in ΔF508 macrophages. Infection by B. cepacia poses a great risk to cystic
fibrosis patients because it causes accelerated lung inflammation and, in some
cases, a lethal necrotizing pneumonia. Autophagy is a cell survival mechanism
whereby an autophagosome engulfs non-functional organelles and delivers them to
the lysosome for degradation. The ubiquitin binding adaptor protein SQSTM1/p62 is
required for the delivery of several ubiquitinated cargos to the autophagosome.
In WT macrophages, p62 depletion and overexpression lead to increased and
decreased bacterial intracellular survival, respectively. In contrast, depletion 
of p62 in ΔF508 macrophages results in decreased bacterial survival, whereas
overexpression of p62 leads to increased B. cepacia intracellular growth.
Interestingly, the depletion of p62 from ΔF508 macrophages results in the release
of the autophagy molecule beclin1 (BECN1) from the mutant CFTR aggregates and
allows its redistribution and recruitment to the B. cepacia vacuole, mediating
the acquisition of the autophagy marker LC3 and bacterial clearance via
autophagy. These data demonstrate that p62 differentially dictates the fate of B.
cepacia infection in WT and ΔF508 macrophages.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.411728 
PMCID: PMC3548511
PMID: 23148214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

