
1. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2012 Dec;68(Pt 12):1660-70. doi:
10.1107/S0907444912040206. Epub 2012 Nov 9.

X-ray study of the conformational changes in the molecule of phosphopantetheine
adenylyltransferase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis during the catalyzed
reaction.

Timofeev V(1), Smirnova E, Chupova L, Esipov R, Kuranova I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of X-ray Analysis Methods and Synchrotron Radiation, Shubnikov
Institute of Crystallography, Russian Academy of Sciences, Leninsky Prospect 59, 
Moscow, Russian Federation. tostars@mail.ru

Structures of recombinant phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT) from
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (PPATMt) in the apo form and in complex with the
substrate ATP were determined at 1.62 and 1.70 Å resolution, respectively, using 
crystals grown in microgravity by the counter-diffusion method. The ATP molecule 
of the PPATMt-ATP complex was located with full occupancy in the active-site
cavity. Comparison of the solved structures with previously determined structures
of PPATMt complexed with the reaction product dephosphocoenzyme A (dPCoA) and the
feedback inhibitor coenzyme A (CoA) was performed using superposition on C(α)
atoms. The peculiarities of the arrangement of the ligands in the active-site
cavity of PPATMt are described. The conformational states of the PPAT molecule in
the consequent steps of the catalyzed reaction in the apo enzyme and the
enzyme-substrate and enzyme-product complexes are characterized. It is shown that
the binding of ATP and dPCoA induces the rearrangement of a short part of the
polypeptide chain restricting the active-site cavity in the subunits of the
hexameric enzyme molecule. The changes in the quaternary structure caused by this
rearrangement are accompanied by a variation of the size of the inner
water-filled channel which crosses the PPAT molecule along the threefold axis of 
the hexamer. The molecular mechanism of the observed changes is described.

DOI: 10.1107/S0907444912040206 
PMID: 23151631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

