
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Feb;33(3):514-25. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01093-12. Epub 2012 Nov
19.

Link of NTR-mediated spliceosome disassembly with DEAH-box ATPases Prp2, Prp16,
and Prp22.

Chen HC(1), Tseng CK, Tsai RT, Chung CS, Cheng SC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

The DEAH-box ATPase Prp43 is required for disassembly of the spliceosome after
the completion of splicing or after the discard of the spliceosome due to a
splicing defect. Prp43 associates with Ntr1 and Ntr2 to form the NTR complex and 
is recruited to the spliceosome via the interaction of Ntr2 and U5 component
Brr2. Ntr2 alone can bind to U5 and to the spliceosome. To understand how NTR
might mediate the disassembly of spliceosome intermediates, we arrested the
spliceosome at various stages of the assembly pathway and assessed its
susceptibility to disassembly. We found that NTR could catalyze the disassembly
of affinity-purified spliceosomes arrested specifically after the ATP-dependent
action of DEAH-box ATPase Prp2, Prp16, or Prp22 but not at steps before the
action of these ATPases or upon their binding to the spliceosome. These results
link spliceosome disassembly to the functioning of splicing ATPases. Analysis of 
the binding of Ntr2 to each splicing complex has revealed that the presence of
Prp16 and Slu7, which also interact with Brr2, has a negative impact on Ntr2
binding. Our study provides insights into the mechanism by which NTR can be
recruited to the spliceosome to mediate the disassembly of spliceosome
intermediates when the spliceosome pathway is retarded, while disassembly is
prevented in normal reactions.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01093-12 
PMCID: PMC3554207
PMID: 23166295  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

