
1. J Endocrinol. 2013 Jan 2;216(1):T1-T15. doi: 10.1530/JOE-12-0498. Print 2013 Jan.

Adipokine inflammation and insulin resistance: the role of glucose, lipids and
endotoxin.

Piya MK(1), McTernan PG, Kumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolic and Vascular Health, Clinical Sciences Research
Laboratories, Warwick Medical School, University Hospital Site, University of
Warwick, Coventry CV2 2DX, UK. m.k.piya@warwick.ac.uk

Adipose tissue is an active endocrine organ, and our knowledge of this secretory 
tissue, in recent years, has led us to completely rethink how our body functions 
and becomes dysregulated with weight gain. Human adipose tissue appears to act as
a multifunctional secretory organ with the capacity to control energy
homoeostasis through peripheral and central regulation of energy homoeostasis. It
also plays an important role in innate immunity. However, the capability to more 
than double its original mass to cope with positive energy balance in obesity
leads to many pathogenic changes. These changes arise within the adipose tissue
as well as inducing secondary detrimental effects on other organs like muscle and
liver, including chronic low-grade inflammation mediated by adipocytokines
(adipokine inflammation). This inflammation is modulated by dietary factors and
nutrients including glucose and lipids, as well as gut bacteria in the form of
endotoxin or LPS. The aim of this current review is to consider the impact of
nutrients such as glucose and lipids on inflammatory pathways, specifically
within adipose tissue. Furthermore, how nutrients such as these can influence
adipokine inflammation and consequently insulin resistance directly through their
effects on secretion of adipocytokines (TNFÎ±, IL6 and resistin) as well as
indirectly through increases in endotoxin is discussed.

DOI: 10.1530/JOE-12-0498 
PMID: 23160966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

