
1. World J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Feb;29(2):257-65. doi:
10.1007/s11274-012-1177-0. Epub 2012 Nov 18.

Probiotics in the intestinal tract of juvenile whiteleg shrimp Litopenaeus
vannamei: modulation of the bacterial community.

Luis-Villaseñor IE(1), Castellanos-Cervantes T, Gomez-Gil B, Carrillo-García AE, 
Campa-Córdova AI, Ascencio F.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas del Noroeste (CIBNOR), Instituto
Politécnico Nacional 195, Col. Playa Palo de Santa Rita, 23096 La Paz, B.C.S.,
Mexico.

Molecular analysis of the 16S rDNA of the intestinal microbiota of whiteleg
shrimp Litopenaeus vannamei was examined to investigate the effect of a Bacillus 
mix (Bacillus endophyticus YC3-b, Bacillus endophyticus C2-2, Bacillus
tequilensisYC5-2) and the commercial probiotic (Alibio(®)) on intestinal
bacterial communities and resistance to Vibrio infection. PCR and single strain
conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analyses were then performed on DNA extracted
directly from guts. Injection of shrimp with V. parahaemolyticus at 2.5 × 10(5)
CFU g(-1) per shrimp followed 168 h after inoculation with Bacillus mix or the
Alibio probiotic or the positive control. Diversity analyses showed that the
bacterial community resulting from the Bacillus mix had the highest diversity and
evenness and the bacterial community of the control had the lowest diversity. The
bacterial community treated with probiotics mainly consisted of α- and
γ-proteobacteria, fusobacteria, sphingobacteria, and flavobacteria, while the
control mainly consisted of α-proteobacteria and flavobacteria. Differences were 
grouped using principal component analyses of PCR-SSCP of the microbiota,
according to the time of inoculation. In Vibrio parahaemolyticus-infected shrimp,
the Bacillus mix (~33 %) induced a significant increase in survival compared to
Alibio (~21 %) and the control (~9 %). We conclude that administration of the
Bacillus mix induced modulation of the intestinal microbiota of L. vannamei and
increased its resistance to V. parahaemolyticus.

DOI: 10.1007/s11274-012-1177-0 
PMID: 23161451  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

