
1. Microb Pathog. 2013 Mar;56:35-9. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2012.11.005. Epub 2012
Nov 20.

Selective induction of antimicrobial peptides from keratinocytes by
staphylococcal bacteria.

Ommori R(1), Ouji N, Mizuno F, Kita E, Ikada Y, Asada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Nara Medical University, Kashihara, Nara 634-8522, 
Japan.

Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) is one of the most clinically important
inflammation-inducing pathogens, while Staphylococcus epidermidis (S.
epidermidis) is nonpathogenic and hardly causes inflammation on skin.
β-defensins, antimicrobial peptides, are secreted from keratinocytes
constitutively or upon induction by various microorganisms. However, the
difference between S. aureus and S. epidermidis is still unclear in terms of
their influences on the production of β-defensins. In this study, we focused on
the influences of S. aureus and S. epidermidis on the keratinocyte innate immune 
response. Pathogenic S. aureus mainly induced human β-defensin (hBD) 1 and hBD3, 
but not hBD2, and nonpathogenic S. epidermidis mainly induced hBD2 from human
keratinocytes. Molecular weight fractions of >10 kDa prepared from S. aureus
supernatants induced the production of hBD1 and hBD3. On the other hand,
molecular weight fraction of >100 kDa prepared from S. epidermidis supernatants
induced the production of hBD2.Furthermore, the secreted products of S.
epidermidis used the toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 pathway in the induction of hBD2 
production. The secreted products of S. aureus and S. epidermidis differentially 
induced subtypes of hBD through different receptors, which may be associated with
the difference in virulence between these two bacteria.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2012.11.005 
PMID: 23178253  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

