
1. J Periodontol. 2013 Oct;84(10):1445-53. doi: 10.1902/jop.2012.120321. Epub 2012
Nov 23.

Influence of periodontal status and periodontopathogens on levels of oral human
β-defensin-2 in saliva.

Pereira AL(1), Franco GC, Cortelli SC, Aquino DR, Costa FO, Raslan SA, Cortelli
JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, University of Taubaté, Taubaté, São Paulo,
Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Expression patterns of human β-defensin-2 (HBD-2) mRNA or HBD-2
protein concentration and periodontal diseases have been a focus of scientific
research. This study compares the salivary levels of HBD-2 protein concentration 
of healthy patients and patients with gingivitis and chronic periodontitis (CP)
and correlates these levels with the presence of periodontopathogens.
METHODS: A total of 89 patients were enrolled in this study: 31 periodontally
healthy, 27 with gingivitis, and 31 with CP. Plaque and gingival indices, probing
depth, and clinical attachment level were measured. The presence of Campylobacter
rectus, Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, Porphyromonas gingivalis,
Tannerella forsythia, Treponema denticola, and Prevotella intermedia was
evaluated qualitatively by conventional polymerase chain reaction. HBD-2
quantification in saliva was performed using an immune enzymatic assay. Frequency
of periodontopathogens and HBD-2 protein concentration was assessed. Association 
between HBD-2 protein concentration (≥100 pg/mL) and the simultaneous presence of
one to two, three to four, or five to six periodontopathogens was tested.
RESULTS: Although periodontally healthy individuals and patients with gingivitis 
showed similar HBD-2 levels, the CP group displayed an increased level of HBD-2. 
P. gingivalis, P. intermedia, T. forsythia, and T. denticola were more prevalent 
in CP; however, their mere presence was not related to the increased levels of
HBD-2 (Pearson correlation and multinomial logistic regression model).
CONCLUSIONS: Salivary HBD-2 protein concentration was higher in patients with CP 
compared with healthy individuals or patients with gingivitis. These different
protein concentrations were not related to the frequency of periodontopathogens. 
Clinical inflammatory profile had a higher impact on salivary HBD-2 levels than
bacteria.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2012.120321 
PMID: 23173827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

