
1. J Invest Dermatol. 2013 Apr;133(4):999-1007. doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.418. Epub 2012
Nov 29.

Streptococcus induces circulating CLA(+) memory T-cell-dependent epidermal cell
activation in psoriasis.

Ferran M(1), Galván AB, Rincón C, Romeu ER, Sacrista M, Barboza E, Giménez-Arnau 
A, Celada A, Pujol RM, Santamaria-Babí LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain.

Streptococcal throat infection is associated with a specific variant of psoriasis
and with HLA-Cw6 expression. In this study, activation of circulating psoriatic
cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen (CLA)(+) memory T cells cultured together
with epidermal cells occurred only when streptococcal throat extracts were added.
This triggered the production of Th1, Th17, and Th22 cytokines, as well as
epidermal cell mediators (CXCL8, CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11). Streptococcal
extracts (SEs) did not induce any activation with either CLA(-) cells or memory T
cells cultured together with epidermal cells from healthy subjects. Intradermal
injection of activated culture supernatants into mouse skin induced epidermal
hyperplasia. SEs also induced activation when we used epidermal cells from
nonlesional skin of psoriatic patients with CLA(+) memory T cells. Significant
correlations were found between SE induced upregulation of mRNA expression for
ifn-γ, il-17, il-22, ip-10, and serum level of antistreptolysin O in psoriatic
patients. This study demonstrates the direct involvement of streptococcal
infection in pathological mechanisms of psoriasis, such as IL-17 production and
epidermal cell activation.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2012.418 
PMID: 23190888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

