
1. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2013 Jun;56(6):389-400. doi: 10.1111/lam.12029. Epub 2013
Mar 25.

Genetic differentiation in Pyrenophora teres f. teres populations from Syria and 
Tunisia as assessed by AFLP markers.

Bouajila A(1), Zoghlami N, Murad S, Baum M, Ghorbel A, Nazari K.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biotechnologie de Borj-Cédria, Hammam-Lif 2050, Tunisia.
y.aida@yahoo.fr

To investigate the level of genetic differentiation and diversity among
Pyrenophora teres isolate populations originating from different agro-ecological 
areas of Syria and Tunisia and to determine the potential of AFLP profiling in
genotyping Pyrenophora teres f. teres. In this study, AFLP markers have been
employed to identify patterns of population structure in 20 Pyrenophora teres f. 
teres populations from Syria and Tunisia. Ninety-four isolates were studied by
the use of a protocol that involved stringent PCR amplification of fragments
derived from digestion of genomic DNA with restriction enzymes EcoRI and MesI.
Based on 401 amplified polymorphic DNA markers (AFLP), variance analyses
indicated that most of the variation was partitioned within rather than between
populations. Genotypic diversity (GD) was high for populations from Rihane, local
landraces and different agro-ecological zones (GD = 0·75-0·86). There was high
genetic differentiation among pathogen populations from different host
populations in Syria (Gst  = 0·31, ht = 0·190) and Tunisia (Gst  = 0·39,
ht = 0·263), which may be partly explained by the low gene flow around the areas 
sampled. A phenetic tree revealed three groups with high bootstrap values (55,
68, 76) and reflected the grouping of isolates based on host, or agro-ecological 
areas. AFLP profiling is an effective method for typing the genetically diverse
pathogen Pyrenophora teres f. teres.SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The
study represents a comparative analysis of the genetic diversity in P. teres
isolates from two countries spanning two continents and also shows that several
distinct P. teres genotypes may be found in a given environment. The implications
of these findings for Pyrenophora teres f. teres evolutionary potential and net
blotch-resistance breeding in Syria and Tunisia were also discussed.

© 2012 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.12029 
PMID: 23198974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

