
1. Plant Biol (Stuttg). 2013 Jul;15(4):639-47. doi:
10.1111/j.1438-8677.2012.00677.x. Epub 2012 Nov 30.

Evolution of the biochemistry of the photorespiratory C2 cycle.

Hagemann M(1), Fernie AR, Espie GS, Kern R, Eisenhut M, Reumann S, Bauwe H, Weber
AP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences, Plant Physiology, University of Rostock, Rostock,
Germany. martin.hagemann@uni-rostock.de

Oxygenic photosynthesis would not be possible without photorespiration in the
present day O2 -rich atmosphere. It is now generally accepted that
cyanobacteria-like prokaryotes first evolved oxygenic photosynthesis, which was
later conveyed via endosymbiosis into a eukaryotic host, which then gave rise to 
the different groups of algae and streptophytes. For photosynthetic CO2 fixation,
all these organisms use RubisCO, which catalyses both the carboxylation and the
oxygenation of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate. One of the reaction products of the
oxygenase reaction, 2-phosphoglycolate (2PG), represents the starting point of
the photorespiratory C2 cycle, which is considered largely responsible for
recapturing organic carbon via conversion to the Calvin-Benson cycle (CBC)
intermediate 3-phosphoglycerate, thereby detoxifying critical intermediates. Here
we discuss possible scenarios for the evolution of this process toward the
well-defined 2PG metabolism in extant plants. While the origin of the C2 cycle
core enzymes can be clearly dated back towards the different endosymbiotic
events, the evolutionary scenario that allowed the compartmentalised high flux
photorespiratory cycle is uncertain, but probably occurred early during the algal
radiation. The change in atmospheric CO2 /O2 ratios promoting the acquisition of 
different modes for inorganic carbon concentration mechanisms, as well as the
evolutionary specialisation of peroxisomes, clearly had a dramatic impact on
further aspects of land plant photorespiration.

Â© 2012 German Botanical Society and The Royal Botanical Society of the
Netherlands.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1438-8677.2012.00677.x 
PMID: 23198988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

