
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2012 Dec 26;60(51):12443-50. doi: 10.1021/jf303940r. Epub 2012
Dec 13.

Human gut flora-fermented nondigestible fraction from cooked bean ( Phaseolus
vulgaris L.) modifies protein expression associated with apoptosis, cell cycle
arrest, and proliferation in human adenocarcinoma colon cancer cells.

Campos-Vega R(1), García-Gasca T, Guevara-Gonzalez R, Ramos-Gomez M, Oomah BD,
Loarca-Piña G.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Posgrado en Alimentos del Centro de la República (PROPAC),
Research and Graduate Studies in Food Science, School of Chemistry, Querétaro
State University , Qro 76010 Mexico.

Metabolism of the nondigested fraction (NDF) from common bean ( Phaseolus
vulgaris L.) by the human gut flora (hgf) produces short-chain fatty acids
(SCFAs) that may benefit cancer by reducing colorectal tumor risks. This paper
reports the effect of fermentation products (FP) by hgf (FP-hgf) from NDF of
cooked beans on survival and protein expression associated with apoptosis, cell
cycle arrest, and proliferation in human adenocarcinoma colon cancer cells.
FP-hgf was the only inoculum eliciting butyrate production after 24 h of NDF
fermentation using different bacterial sources. FP-hgf inhibited HT-29 cell
growth and modulated protein expression associated with apoptosis, cell cycle
arrest, and proliferation, as well as morphological changes linked to apoptosis
evaluated by TUNEL and hematoxylin and eosin stains, confirming previous results 
on gene expression. The current results suggest that fermentation of NDF from
common beans can elicit beneficial chemoprotective effects in colon cancer by
modulating protein expression in HT-29 cells.

DOI: 10.1021/jf303940r 
PMID: 23194196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

