
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2013 Mar 15;8(3):568-77. doi: 10.1021/cb300493s. Epub 2012 Dec 6.

Mechanistic basis of the inhibition of type II dehydroquinase by (2S)- and
(2R)-2-benzyl-3-dehydroquinic acids.

Lence E(1), Tizón L, Otero JM, Peón A, Prazeres VF, Llamas-Saiz AL, Fox GC, van
Raaij MJ, Lamb H, Hawkins AR, González-Bello C.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Singular de Investigación en Química Biológica y Materiales Moleculares
(CIQUS), Edificio CACTUS, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, 15782 Santiago
de Compostela, Spain.

The structural changes caused by the substitution of the aromatic moiety in
(2S)-2-benzyl-3-dehydroquinic acids and its epimers in C2 by electron-withdrawing
or electron-donating groups in type II dehydroquinase enzyme from M. tuberculosis
and H. pylori has been investigated by structural and computational studies. Both
compounds are reversible competitive inhibitors of this enzyme, which is
essential in these pathogenic bacteria. The crystal structures of M. tuberculosis
and H. pylori in complex with (2S)-2-(4-methoxy)benzyl- and
(2S)-2-perfluorobenzyl-3-dehydroquinic acids have been solved at 2.0, 2.3, 2.0,
and 1.9 Å, respectively. The crystal structure of M. tuberculosis in complex with
(2R)-2-(benzothiophen-5-yl)methyl-3-dehydroquinic acid is also reported at 1.55
Å. These crystal structures reveal key differences in the conformation of the
flexible loop of the two enzymes, a difference that depends on the presence of
electron-withdrawing or electron-donating groups in the aromatic moiety of the
inhibitors. This loop closes over the active site after substrate binding, and
its flexibility is essential for the function of the enzyme. These differences
have also been investigated by molecular dynamics simulations in an effort to
understand the significant inhibition potency differences observed between some
of these compounds and also to obtain more information about the possible
movements of the loop. These computational studies have also allowed us to
identify key structural factors of the H. pylori loop that could explain its
reduced flexibility in comparison to the M. tuberculosis loop, specifically by
the formation of a key salt bridge between the side chains of residues Asp18 and 
Arg20.

DOI: 10.1021/cb300493s 
PMID: 23198883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

