
1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2013 Jan;77(1):79-84. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2012.09.037. Epub 2012 Nov 30.

A novel model of spontaneous otitis media with effusion (OME) in the Oxgr1
knock-out mouse.

Kerschner JE(1), Hong W, Taylor SR, Kerschner JA, Khampang P, Wrege KC, North PE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology, 9000 West Wisconsin Avenue, Milwaukee,
WI 53226, United States. kersch@mcw.edu

OBJECTIVE: A novel mouse model with a specific genetic mutation in a G protein
coupled receptor (GPCR) encoded by the Oxgr1 gene results in a predisposition to 
spontaneous otitis media with effusion. As a primary component of interest in
OME, mucin expression was examined in this model to assess expression as compared
to wild type animals and suitability as a murine model of OME.
METHOD: Mutant (Oxgr1(-/-)) and wild-type (Oxgr1(+/+)) mice between ages of 2 and
5 months were examined by otoscopy and auditory brainstem response (ABR).
Histology changes in the middle ear were evaluated. Expression of mucin genes in 
the middle ear epithelium was determined using RT-PCR and quantitative PCR.
RESULT: Otoscopic exam showed signs of inflammation in 82% of mutant mice.
Significant elevated ABR thresholds were detected in mutant mice indicating
hearing loss. Histology analysis of the middle ears demonstrated the presence of 
inflammatory cells, changes in the mucosal epithelium, and middle ear fluid. RT
PCR using universal primers for bacterial 18s rRNA suggested the absence of
bacteria in the middle ear. The knockout mice demonstrated expression of Muc1,
Muc2, Muc3, Muc4, Muc5AC, Muc5B, Muc9, Muc10, Muc13, Muc15, Muc16, Muc18, Muc19
and Muc20. There was a trend of increase in Muc5B and Muc19 expression in the
middle ear of the knockout mice compared to that of wild-type. There was no
significant change in the level of Muc2, and Muc5AC was expressed at a level
below the detection limit of quantification.
CONCLUSION: Development of a murine model with genetic defect has several
attractive features. The rate of OME in these animals is high at 82%. It is clear
that this OME is related to histopathologic changes in the middle ear epithelium 
of these knock-out mice. Induction of mucus effusion is evident though the
viation in dysregulation of GFM does exist in this non-challenge study condition.
The underlying cause of these differences between individual animal requires
further investigation. Given this, the Oxgr1(-/-) model is likely to be an ideal 
model to examine mucin regulation in MEE and potentially develop novel
GPCR-specific targeted interventions to regulate these processes.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2012.09.037 
PMCID: PMC3535456
PMID: 23200873  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

