
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013 Jan;34(1):339-47. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.11.025.
Epub 2012 Dec 1.

In vivo effects of Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide on regulation of immune
response and protein expression in striped catfish (Pangasianodon hypophthalmus).

Hang BT(1), Milla S, Gillardin V, Phuong NT, Kestemont P.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit in Environmental and Evolutionary Biology, NARILIS, University
of Namur, Namur, Belgium. btbhang@ctu.edu.vn

Lipolysaccharide (LPS), a component of outer membrane protein of gram-negative
bacteria, reportedly stimulates fish immune system. However, mechanisms driving
this immunomodulatory effect are yet unknown. To determine effects of Escherichia
coli lipopolysaccharide on regulation of immune response and protein expression
of striped catfish (Pangasianodon hypophthalmus), juvenile fish (20-25 g) were
injected with 3, 15 or 45 mg E.coli LPS/kg and challenged with Edwardsiella
ictaluri. Plasma cortisol and glucose were rather low and did not differ (p<0.05)
among treatments. All LPS treatments differed regarding blood cell count and
immune variables such as plasma and spleen lysozyme, complement activity and
antibody titer, 3mg LPS/kg yielding best results; red blood cell count was not
affected by LPS treatment. Accumulated mortalities after bacterial challenge were
23.4, 32.8, 37.7 and 52.5% for treatment 3, 15, 45 mg LPS/kg fish and control
respectively. Proteomic analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)
confirmed that LPS induced differentially over-expressed immune proteins such as 
complement component C3 and lysozyme C2 precursor. Regulation of other proteins
such as Wap65, alpha-2 macroglobulin-3 and transferrin precursor was also
demonstrated. Striped catfish injected with E.coli LPS enhanced innate immune
responses.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.11.025 
PMID: 23207480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

