
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Mar;14:46-57. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2012.10.014. Epub
2012 Nov 28.

Identification of epitopes in Leptospira borgpetersenii leucine-rich repeat
proteins.

Nitipan S(1), Sritrakul T, Kunjantarachot A, Prapong S.

Author information: 
(1)The Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Genetic Engineering, The Graduate
School, Kasetsart University, Bangkok 10900, Thailand.

Leptospirosis is considered to be a re-emerging disease that has impacts on
public health both globally and in and Thailand. The leptospires outbreak in
Thailand during 1999 was largely due to the etiologic agent Leptospira
borgpetersenii serogroup Sejroe. This had a related immunity profile in cows from
Thailand, which serovars Tarassovi and Sejroe were prevalent. Development of a
vaccine protecting against leptospiral infection in livestock has been
considered. One family of proteins being targeted as candidates for vaccine
development are leucine-rich repeats (LRRs), which have diverse functions such as
bacterial host-pathogen interactions, membrane anchoring, invasion and
stimulating host defense mechanisms. Identifying leptospiral LRR proteins
containing immunogenic epitopes is important for Leptospirosis vaccine
development. In this study, we searched LRR genes from L. borgpetersenii serovar 
Hardjo-bovis strain L550 and LB179 genomic databases in an attempt to find
appropriate LRR proteins for vaccine candidates covering the common genospecies
detected in Thailand. The in silico analysis, LRR protein secondary and tertiary 
structures by 3D modeling, and T cell epitope prediction & analysis were
performed. In conclusion, we have found seven pairs of conserved LRR genes in L. 
borpetersenii serovars Hardjo-bovis strains JB197 and L550. Only the LBJ_2271
gene was predicted to be LRR motif subfamily membrane protein with an N-terminal 
signal sequence, 2 transmembrane domains and an N-glycosylated site. The LRR
consensus sequence LXXLXLXXNXL was classified in a typical LRR subfamily. The
LBJ_2271 gene sequence has highly homology to genes in other pathogenic
Leptospira interrogans serovars; LA_1324, LIC_12401, JX26069, JX26070, JX26071
and JX06072. The LBJ_2271 protein was predicted to containin 14 T cell epitopes, 
8 of which are predicted T cell epitopes for Major-Histo-Compatability (MHC)
alleles HLA-A(∗)0101, A(∗)0202, A(∗)0203, A(∗)1101, A(∗)3101, A(∗)6802, and
HLA-DRB(∗)0401 and DRB(∗)0701, with IC50 values of 0.90-32.28nM, residing outside
of the transmembrane domains. At least 5 promising predicted T cell epitopes for 
alleles HLA-A0202, -A0203, -A1101, -DRB0401 and -DRB0701 had their IC50 lower -
equal to IC50 values for the same allele epitopes of known antigenic proteins
LigA, LipL32, OMPL1 and LipL36. This study has successfully identified LBJ_2271
as a protein candidate for further study of antigenic immune stimulation for
vaccine development.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2012.10.014 
PMID: 23201041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

