
1. Fungal Genet Biol. 2013 Jan;50:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2012.11.003. Epub 2012
Nov 28.

Ylpex5 mutation partially suppresses the defective hyphal growth of a Yarrowia
lipolytica ceramide synthase mutant, Yllac1, by recovering lipid raft
polarization and vacuole morphogenesis.

Bal J(1), Lee HJ, Cheon SA, Lee KJ, Oh DB, Kim JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, College of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

Sphingolipids are involved in cell differentiation and morphogenesis in
eukaryotic cells. In this study, YlLac1p, a ceramide synthase required for
glucosylceramide (GlcCer) synthesis, was found to be essential for hyphal growth 
in Yarrowia lipolytica. Y. lipolytica GlcCer was shown to be composed of a C16:0 
fatty acid, which is hydroxylated at C2, and a C18:2 long chain base, which is
unsaturated at both C4 and C8 and methylated at C9. Domain swapping analysis
revealed that the entire TRAM/Lag1/CLN8 (TLC) domain, not the Lag1 motif, is
crucial for the function of YlLac1p. YlDes1p, the C4 desaturase of the ceramide
synthesized by YlLac1p, was also required for Y. lipolytica morphogenesis. Both
Yllac1Δ and Yldes1Δ mutants neither polarize lipid rafts nor form normal
vacuoles. Interestingly, mutation in YlPEX5, which encode a peroxisomal targeting
signal receptor, partially suppressed the defective hyphal growth of Yllac1Δ. The
Yllac1ΔYlpex5Δ mutant restored the ability to polarize lipid rafts and to form
normal vacuoles, although it could not synthesize GlcCer. Taken together, our
results suggest that GlcCer or GlcCer derivatives may be involved in hyphal
morphogenesis in Y. lipolytica, at least in part, by affecting polarization of
lipid rafts and vacuole morphogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fgb.2012.11.003 
PMID: 23200743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

