
1. Ticks Tick Borne Dis. 2013 Feb;4(1-2):26-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2012.10.039.
Epub 2012 Nov 10.

Complement regulator-acquiring surface proteins of Borrelia burgdorferi:
Structure, function and regulation of gene expression.

Kraiczy P(1), Stevenson B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, Frankfurt University 
Hospital, Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 40, 6 Frankfurt, Germany.
Kraiczy@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Borrelia burgdorferi, the etiological agent of Lyme disease, exploits an array of
strategies to establish infection and to overcome host innate and adaptive immune
responses. One key borrelial immune escape mechanism involves the inactivation of
host complement attack through acquisition of human immune regulators factor H
(CFH), factor H-like protein 1 (FHL1), factor H-related protein 1 (CFHR1), CFHR2,
and/or CFHR5. Binding of these host proteins is primarily mediated by bacterial
surface-exposed proteins that have been collectively referred to as complement
regulator-acquiring surface proteins, or CRASPs. Different strains of B.
burgdorferi produce as many as 5 different CRASP molecules that comprise 3
distinct, genetically unrelated groups. Depending on bacterial genetic
composition, different combinations of these proteins can be found on the
borrelial outer surface. The 3 groups differ in their gene location, gene
regulatory mechanisms, expression patterns during the tick-mammal infection
cycle, protein sequence and structure as well as binding affinity for complement 
regulators and other serum proteins. These attributes influence the proteins'
abilities to contribute to complement resistance of this emerging human pathogen.
In this review, we focus on the current knowledge on structure, function, and
gene regulation of these B. burgdorferi infection-associated proteins.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2012.10.039 
PMCID: PMC3610323
PMID: 23219363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

