
1. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol. 2013 Apr;64(3):399-409. doi:
10.1007/s00244-012-9852-6. Epub 2012 Dec 11.

Impact of pesticide contamination on aquatic microorganism populations in the
littoral zone.

Lew S(1), Lew M, Biedunkiewicz A, Szarek J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, University of Warmia and Mazury in
Olsztyn, Oczapowskiego 1A, Olsztyn, Poland. sylwia.lew@uwm.edu.pl

The effect of pesticide contamination of the littoral zone on the population of
bacteria and fungi was analyzed using the example of a eutrophic water reservoir 
exposed for >30Â years to the influence of expired crop-protection chemicals,
mainly DDT. For three consecutive years, quantity analyses of bacteria and fungi 
were conducted and the composition of the microorganism population analyzed
against seasonal dynamics. Mold and yeast-like fungi were also isolated and
identified. Within the Bacteria domain, in addition to the large groups of
microorganisms (Alphaprotobacteria, Betaprobacteria, and Gammaproteobacteria,
Actinobacteria, and Cytophaga-Flavobacterium), the analysis also involved the
presence of bacteria predisposed to degraded pesticides in natural environments: 
Pseudomonas spp. and Alcaligenes spp. The quantity dynamics of aquatic
microorganisms indicated that bacteria and fungi under the influence of long-term
exposure to DDT can adapt to the presence of this pesticide in water. No
modifying effect of DDT was observed on the quantity of microorganisms or the
pattern of seasonal relationships in the eutrophic lake. Changes were shown in
the percentage share of large groups of bacteria in the community of
microorganisms as was an effect of contamination on the species diversity of
fungi. The data show the effectiveness of aquatic microorganism-community
analyses as a tool for indicating changes in the water environment caused by
pesticide contamination.

DOI: 10.1007/s00244-012-9852-6 
PMCID: PMC3602639
PMID: 23229198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

