
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Sep;97(17):7679-88. doi:
10.1007/s00253-012-4595-x. Epub 2012 Dec 8.

Affinity purification and characterization of a biodegradable plastic-degrading
enzyme from a yeast isolated from the larval midgut of a stag beetle, Aegus
laevicollis.

Suzuki K(1), Sakamoto H, Shinozaki Y, Tabata J, Watanabe T, Mochizuki A,
Koitabashi M, Fujii T, Tsushima S, Kitamoto HK.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Agro-Environmental Sciences (NIAES), 3-1-3 Kannondai,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8604, Japan.

Two yeast strains, which have the ability to degrade biodegradable plastic films,
were isolated from the larval midgut of a stag beetle, Aegus laevicollis. Both of
them are most closely related to Cryptococcus magnus and could degrade
biodegradable plastic (BP) films made of poly(butylene succinate) (PBS) and
poly(butylene succinate-co-adipate) (PBSA) effectively. A BP-degrading enzyme was
purified from the culture broth of one of the isolated strains employing a newly 
developed affinity purification method based on the binding action of the enzyme 
to the substrate (emulsified PBSA) and its subsequent degradative action toward
the substrate. Partial amino acid sequences of this enzyme suggested that it
belongs to the cutinase family, and thus, the enzyme was named CmCut1. It has a
molecular mass of 21 kDa and a degradative activity for emulsified PBSA which was
significantly enhanced by the simultaneous presence of Ca(2+) or Mg(2+) at a
concentration of about 2.5 mM. Its optimal pH was 7.5, and the optimal
temperature was 40 °C. It showed a broad substrate specificity for p-nitrophenyl 
(pNP)-fatty acid esters ranging from pNP-acetate (C2) to pNP-stearate (C18) and
films of PBSA, PBS, poly(ε-caprolactone), and poly(lactic acid).

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-012-4595-x 
PMID: 23224497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

