
1. Analyst. 2013 Feb 21;138(3):907-15. doi: 10.1039/c2an36153a.

Real-time electrochemical detection of pathogen DNA using electrostatic
interaction of a redox probe.

Ahmed MU(1), Nahar S, Safavieh M, Zourob M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS) - Énergie Matériaux
Télécommunications (EMT), 1650 Boulevard Lionel-Boulet, Varennes, J3X 1S2,
Quebec, Canada. minhaz.ahmed@ubd.edu.bn

Electrostatic redox probes interaction has been widely rendered for DNA
quantification. We have established a proof-of-principle by using the ruthenium
hexaamine molecule [Ru(NH(3))(6)](3+). We have applied this method for real-time 
electrochemical monitoring of a loop mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP)
amplicon of target genes of Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus by square 
wave voltammetry (SWV). Ruthenium hexaamine interaction with free DNAs in
solution without being immobilized onto the biochip surface enabled us to discard
the time-consuming overnight probe immobilization step in DNA quantification. We 
have measured the changes in the cathodic current signals using screen printed
low-cost biochips both in the presence and the absence of LAMP amplicons of
target DNAs in the solution-phase. By using this novel probe, we successfully
carried out the real-time isothermal amplification and detection in less than 30 
min for S. aureus and E. coli with a sensitivity up to 30 copies μL(-1) and 20
copies μL(-1), respectively. The cathode peak height of the current was related
to the extent of amplicon formation and the amount of introduced template genomic
DNA. Importantly, since laborious probe immobilization is not necessary at all,
and both the in vitro amplification and real-time monitoring are performed in a
single polypropylene tube using a single biochip, this novel approach could avoid
all potential cross-contamination in the whole procedure.

DOI: 10.1039/c2an36153a 
PMID: 23230566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

