
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 1;288(5):2952-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.441063. Epub 2012
Dec 13.

Hyperactivation of the mammalian degenerin MDEG promotes caspase-8 activation and
apoptosis.

Pan JA(1), Fan Y, Gandhirajan RK, Madesh M, Zong WX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA.

Intracellular calcium overload plays a critical role in numerous pathological
syndromes such as heart failure, brain ischemia, and stroke. Hyperactivation of
the acid-sensing ion channels including degenerin/epithelial amiloride-sensitive 
sodium (DEG/ENaC) channels has been shown to elevate intracellular calcium and
cause subsequent neuronal cell death that is independent of the canonical
Egl-1/Ced-9/Ced-4/Ced-3 apoptotic pathway in Caenorhabditis elegans. In mammalian
cells, hyperactivation of the DEG/ENaC channels can also lead to cell death,
although the underlying mechanism remains largely unknown. Here, we use a
tetracycline-inducible system to express the hyperactivation mutant of a
mammalian DEG/ENaC channel protein, MDEG G430F, in murine kidney epithelial cells
deficient in the key mitochondrial apoptotic proteins Bax and Bak. Remarkably,
expression of MDEG G430F induces increased intracellular calcium, reactive oxygen
species (ROS) production, and cell death. The MDEG G430F-induced cell death is
blocked by the intracellular calcium chelator
1,2-bis(o-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic acid (acetoxymethyl ester),
ROS scavengers, and the caspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk (where z and fmk are
benzyloxycarbonyl and fluoromethyl ketone). Mechanistically, the intracellular
calcium overload and ROS increase lead to the inhibition of proteasomal and
autophagic protein degradation, which promotes the accumulation of protein
aggregates containing caspase-8 and subsequent caspase-8 activation. As protein
aggregation upon the inhibition of proteasomal and autophagic degradation
pathways is mediated by the ubiquitin-binding protein SQSTM1/p62 and the
autophagy-related protein LC3, silencing of p62 and LC3 protects cells from MDEG 
G430F-induced cell death. Our results uncover a new mechanism of
caspase-8-mediated apoptosis induced by intracellular calcium overload that is
dependent on the autophagy-related proteins LC3 and p62 upon hyperactivation of
DEG/ENaC channels.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.441063 
PMCID: PMC3561519
PMID: 23239879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

