
1. Aging Cell. 2013 Apr;12(2):177-83. doi: 10.1111/acel.12036. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Deletion of p66Shc in mice increases the frequency of size-change mutations in
the lacZ transgene.

Beltrami E(1), Ruggiero A, Busuttil R, Migliaccio E, Pelicci PG, Vijg J, Giorgio 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Via
Adamello 16, Milan, 20139, Italy.

Upon oxidative challenge the genome accumulates adducts and breaks that activate 
the DNA damage response to repair, arrest, or eliminate the damaged cell. Thus,
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated by endogenous oxygen metabolism are
thought to affect mutation frequency. However, few studies determined the
mutation frequency when oxidative stress is reduced. To test whether in vivo
spontaneous mutation frequency is altered in mice with reduced oxidative stress
and cell death rate, we crossed p66Shc knockout (p66KO) mice, characterized by
reduced intracellular concentration of ROS and by impaired apoptosis, with a
transgenic line harboring multiple copies of the lacZ mutation reporter gene as
part of a plasmid that can be recovered from organs into Escherichia coli to
measure mutation rate. Liver and small intestine from 2- to 24-month-old, lacZ
(p66Shc+/+) and lacZp66KO mice, were investigated revealing no difference in
overall mutation frequency but a significant increase in the frequency of
size-change mutations in the intestine of lacZp66KO mice. This difference was
further increased upon irradiation of mice with X-ray. In addition, we found that
knocking down cyclophilin D, a gene that facilitates mitochondrial apoptosis
acting downstream of p66Shc, increased the size-change mutation frequency in
small intestine. Size-change mutations also accumulated in death-resistant
embryonic fibroblasts from lacZp66KO mice treated with H2 O2 . These results
indicate that p66Shc plays a role in the accumulation of DNA rearrangements and
suggest that p66Shc functions to clear damaged cells rather than affect DNA
metabolism.

© 2012 The Authors Aging Cell © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society 
of Great Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.12036 
PMCID: PMC4141878
PMID: 23237310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

