
1. Ecotoxicology. 2013 Mar;22(2):363-76. doi: 10.1007/s10646-012-1031-z. Epub 2012
Dec 14.

Characterization of arsenic resistant bacteria from arsenic rich groundwater of
West Bengal, India.

Sarkar A(1), Kazy SK, Sar P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India.

Sixty-four arsenic (As) resistant bacteria isolated from an arsenic rich
groundwater sample of West Bengal were characterized to investigate their
potential role in subsurface arsenic mobilization. Among the isolated strains
predominance of genera Agrobacterium/Rhizobium, Ochrobactrum and Achromobacter
which could grow chemolitrophically and utilize arsenic as electron donor were
detected. Higher tolerance to As(3+) [maximum tolerable concentration (MTC): ≥10 
mM], As(5+) (MTC: ≥100 mM) and other heavy metals like Cu(2+), Cr(2+), Ni(2+)
etc. (MTC: ≥10 mM), presence of arsenate reductase and siderophore was frequently
observed among the isolates. Ability to produce arsenite oxidase and phosphatase 
enzyme was detected in 50 and 34 % of the isolates, respectively. Although no
direct correlation among taxonomic identity of bacterial strains and their
metabolic abilities as mentioned above was apparent, several isolates affiliated 
to genera Ochrobactrum, Achromobacter and unclassified Rhizobiaceae members were 
found to be highly resistant to As(3+) and As(5+) and positive for all the test
properties. Arsenate reductase activity was found to be conferred by arsC gene,
which in many strains was coupled with arsenite efflux gene arsB as well.
Phylogenetic incongruence between the 16S rRNA and ars genes lineages indicated
possible incidence of horizontal gene transfer for ars genes. Based on the
results we propose that under the prevailing low nutrient condition inhabitant
bacteria capable of using inorganic electron donors play a synergistic role
wherein siderophores and phosphatase activities facilitate the release of
sediment bound As(5+), which is subsequently reduced by arsenate reductase
resulting into the mobilization of As(3+) in groundwater.

DOI: 10.1007/s10646-012-1031-z 
PMID: 23238642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

