
1. Biosecur Bioterror. 2012 Dec;10(4):401-11. doi: 10.1089/bsp.2012.0041.

Public response to an anthrax attack: a multiethnic perspective.

Steelfisher GK(1), Blendon RJ, Brul√© AS, Ben-Porath EN, Ross LJ, Atkins BM.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Opinion Research Program, Department of Health Policy and Management, 
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. gsteel@hsph.harvard.edu

The 2001 anthrax attacks emphasized the need to develop outreach that would more 
effectively support racial/ethnic minority populations during a bioterrorism
incident. Given the importance of antibiotic prophylaxis in a future anthrax
attack, it should be a priority to better support racial/ethnic minorities in
mass dispensing programs. To examine the needs and perspectives of racial/ethnic 
minorities, this study used a nationally representative poll of 1,852 adults,
including 1,240 whites, 261 African Americans, and 282 Hispanics. The poll
examined public reactions to a ''worst-case scenario'' in which cases of
inhalation anthrax are discovered without an identified source and the entire
population of a city or town is asked to receive antibiotic prophylaxis within 48
hours. Findings suggest willingness across all racial/ethnic groups to comply
with recommendations to seek prophylaxis at dispensing sites. However, findings
also indicate possible barriers for racial/ethnic minorities, including greater
concern about pill safety and multiple attacks as well as lesser knowledge about 
inhalation anthrax. Across all racial/ethnic groups, roughly half would prefer to
receive antibiotics at mass dispensing sites rather than through the US Postal
Service. People in racial/ethnic minority groups were more likely to say this
preference stems from a desire to speak with staff or to exchange medication
formulation or type. Findings suggest the need for tailored outreach to
racial/ethnic minorities through, for example, emphasis on key messages and
enhanced understandability in communications, increased staff for answering
questions in relevant dispensing sites, and long-term trust building with
racial/ethnic minority communities.

DOI: 10.1089/bsp.2012.0041 
PMCID: PMC4751406
PMID: 23244501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

