
1. Biochimie. 2013 Apr;95(4):824-32. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2012.11.019. Epub 2012
Dec 12.

Discrimination based on Gly and Arg/Ser at position 673 between
dipeptidyl-peptidase (DPP) 7 and DPP11, widely distributed DPPs in pathogenic and
environmental gram-negative bacteria.

Rouf SM(1), Ohara-Nemoto Y, Hoshino T, Fujiwara T, Ono T, Nemoto TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Molecular Biology, Course of Medical and Dental of
Sciences, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-7-1
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8588, Japan.

Porphyromonas gingivalis, an asaccharolytic gram-negative rod-shaped bacterium,
expresses the novel Asp/Glu-specific dipeptidyl-peptidase (DPP) 11 (Ohara-Nemoto,
Y. et al. (2011) J. Biol. Chem. 286, 38115-38127), which has been categorized as 
a member of the S46/DPP7 family that is preferential for hydrophobic residues at 
the P1 position. From that finding, 129 gene products constituting five clusters 
from the phylum Bacteroidetes have been newly annotated to either DPP7 or DPP11, 
whereas the remaining 135 members, mainly from the largest phylum Proteobacteria,
have yet to be assigned. In this study, the substrate specificities of the five
clusters and an unassigned group were determined with recombinant DPPs from
typical species, i.e., P. gingivalis, Capnocytophaga gingivalis, Flavobacterium
psychrophilum, Bacteroides fragilis, Bacteroides vulgatus, and Shewanella
putrefaciens. Consequently, clusters 1, 3, and 5 were found to be DPP7 with
rather broad substrate specificity, and clusters 2 and 4 were DPP11. An
unassigned S. putrefaciens DPP carrying Ser(673) exhibited Asp/Glu-specificity
more preferable to Glu, in contrast to the Asp preference of DPP11 with Arg(673) 
from Bacteroidetes species. Mutagenesis experiments revealed that
Arg(673)/Ser(673) were indispensable for the Asp/Glu-specificity of DPP11, and
that the broad specificity of DPP7 was mediated by Gly(673). Taken together with 
the distribution of the two genes, all 264 members of the S46 family could be
attributed to either DPP7 or DPP11 by an amino acid at position 673. A more
compelling phylogenic tree based on the conserved C-terminal region suggested two
gene duplication events in the phylum Bacteroidetes, one causing the development 
of DPP7 and DPP11 with altered substrate specificities, and the other producing
an additional DPP7 in the genus Bacteroides.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2012.11.019 
PMID: 23246913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

