
1. Respirology. 2013 May;18(4):643-51. doi: 10.1111/resp.12034.

Increased claudin-3, -4 and -18 levels in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid reflect
severity of acute lung injury.

Jin W(1), Rong L, Liu Y, Song Y, Li Y, Pan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Acute lung injury (ALI) is characterized by disruption 
of lung epithelial and endothelial cells, leading to increased membrane
permeability and loss of barrier function. Claudins are key components of tight
junctions (TJ) that regulate paracellular permeability, and play an important
role in alveolar epithelial barrier function and fluid clearance. However,
whether claudin-3, -4, -18 or -5 expression changes in Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(PA)-induced ALI and the clinical significance of such change is unknown.
METHODS: Rats underwent intratracheal instillation of PA, and samples were
collected prior to and 3, 9 and 24 h after instillation. Lung injury was
evaluated by bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) total protein, arterial blood
gas analysis, lung injury score, and expression of surfactant protein and von
Willebrand factor. Claudin expression in lung was measured with quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction and western blotting, and in BALF by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The relationship between claudins in BALF and 
lung injury grade were analysed with Spearman's rank correlation. Alveolar
epithelium, endothelium and TJ ultrastructure were observed with electron
microscopy.
RESULTS: Claudin-4, -18 and -5 mRNA levels increased significantly 24 h after PA 
instillation in the most severe lung injury cases, whereas there was no
significant change in protein levels. Claudin-3, -4 and -18 levels in BALF
increased most 24 h after PA instillation; this paralleled alveolar epithelial
disruption and lung injury severity.
CONCLUSIONS: Claudin-3, -4 and -18 released into the alveolar compartment is
highly associated with barrier function loss caused by alveolar epithelial
injury.

© 2012 The Authors. Respirology © 2012 Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1111/resp.12034 
PMID: 23253121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

