
1. Environ Microbiol. 2013 Jun;15(6):1717-33. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.12060. Epub
2012 Dec 18.

Partaking of Archaea to biogeochemical cycling in oxygen-deficient zones of
meromictic saline Lake Faro (Messina, Italy).

La Cono V(1), La Spada G, Arcadi E, Placenti F, Smedile F, Ruggeri G, Michaud L, 
Raffa C, De Domenico E, Sprovieri M, Mazzola S, Genovese L, Giuliano L, Slepak
VZ, Yakimov MM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Coastal Marine Environment, CNR, Spianata S.Raineri 86, 98122
Messina, Italy.

We used a combination of molecular and microbiological approaches to determine
the activity, abundance and diversity of archaeal populations inhabiting
meromictic saline Lake Faro (Messina, Italy). Analysis of archaeal 16S rRNA,
amoA, accA and hbd genes and transcripts revealed that sub- and anoxic layers of 
Lake Faro are primarily inhabited by the organisms related to the clusters of
Marine Group I.1a of Thaumarchaeota frequently recovered from oxygen-depleted
marine ecosystems. These organisms dominated the metabolically active archaea
down to the bottom of the lake, indicating their adaptation to recurrent changes 
in the levels of water column hypoxia. The upper microaerobic layer of Lake Faro 
redoxcline has the maximal rates of dark primary production much lower than those
of other previously studied pelagic redoxclines, but comparable to the values of 
meso- and bathypelagic areas of Mediterranean Sea. Application of bacterial
inhibitors, especially azide, significantly declined the CO2 fixation rates in
the low interface and monimolimnion, whereas archaea-specific inhibitor had
effect only in upper part of the redoxcline. Based on these findings, we
hypothesize that dark bicarbonate fixation in suboxic zone of Lake Faro results
mainly from archaeal activity which is affected by the predicted lack in oxygen
in lower layers.

Â© 2012 Society for Applied Microbiology and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.12060 
PMID: 23253149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

