
1. J Surg Res. 2013 Jul;183(1):204-13. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2012.11.048. Epub 2012 Dec
20.

Human β-defensin 3 inhibits antibiotic-resistant Staphylococcus biofilm
formation.

Zhu C(1), Tan H, Cheng T, Shen H, Shao J, Guo Y, Shi S, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Comment in
    J Surg Res. 2014 Jan;186(1):99-100.

BACKGROUND: Implantation-associated infections have increased significantly with 
the recent widespread use of medical implants. Treatments for these infections
are not always successful because these infections are sometimes caused by
multiantibiotic-resistant organisms. It is therefore particularly urgent to
provide doctors with more effective antimicrobial agents against these
antibiotic-resistant organisms. Human β-defensin 3 (hBD-3) has been shown to have
strong broad-spectrum antibacterial activity. However, its effect on
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis (MRSE) and methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in medical implant biofilm formation has not been
reported.
METHODS: In this study, we evaluated the effects of hBD-3 on S epidermidis ATCC
35984 (methicillin-resistant strain), MRSE287, and MRSA (ATCC43300) by evaluating
bacterial adhesion, biofilm formation, and maturation. In addition, we used the
spread plate method, confocal laser scanning microscopy, scanning electron
microscopy, and real-time polymerase chain reaction to evaluate the effect of
hBD-3.
RESULTS: After evaluating biofilm adhesion and formation, we found that the
number of each strain on the titanium surface was decreased in those groups
exposed to 1MIC (minimum inhibitory concentration) of hBD-3 and was significantly
lower than the number of colonies of the control. In the initial maturation of
the biofilm, the numbers of each strain on the titanium surface from the 2MIC to 
6MIC groups were significantly lower than the control. When the concentrations
were further increased, hBD-3 was significantly effective against drug-resistant 
bacteria from the biofilms.
CONCLUSIONS: HBD-3 has the potential to eliminate the biofilm formation of
Staphylococcus, especially antibiotic-resistant strains, effectively.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2012.11.048 
PMID: 23273885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

