
1. J Immunol. 2013 Feb 1;190(3):1076-84. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202659. Epub 2012
Dec 31.

TNFR2 is critical for the stabilization of the CD4+Foxp3+ regulatory T. cell
phenotype in the inflammatory environment.

Chen X(1), Wu X, Zhou Q, Howard OM, Netea MG, Oppenheim JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Science Program, Science Applications International
Corporation-Frederick, National Cancer Institute-Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702, 
USA. chenxin@mail.nih.gov

Several lines of evidence indicate the instability of CD4(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T
cells (Tregs). We have therefore investigated means of promoting the stability of
Tregs. In this study, we found that the proportion of Tregs in mouse strains
deficient in TNFR2 or its ligands was reduced in the thymus and peripheral
lymphoid tissues, suggesting a potential role of TNFR2 in promoting the sustained
expression of Foxp3. We observed that upon in vitro activation with plate-bound
anti-CD3 Ab and soluble anti-CD28 Ab, Foxp3 expression by highly purified mouse
Tregs was markedly downregulated. Importantly, TNF partially abrogated this
effect of TCR stimulation and stabilized Foxp3 expression. This effect of TNF was
blocked by anti-TNFR2 Ab, but not by anti-TNFR1 Ab. Furthermore, TNF was not able
to maintain Foxp3 expression by TNFR2-deficient Tregs. In a mouse colitis model
induced by transfer of naive CD4 cells into Rag1(-/-) mice, the disease could be 
inhibited by cotransfer of wild-type Tregs, but not by cotransfer of
TNFR2-deficient Tregs. Furthermore, in the lamina propria of the colitis model,
most wild-type Tregs maintained Foxp3 expression. In contrast, an increased
number of TNFR2-deficient Tregs lost Foxp3 expression. Thus, our data clearly
show that TNFR2 is critical for the phenotypic and functional stability of Tregs 
in the inflammatory environment. This effect of TNF should be taken into account 
when designing future therapy of autoimmunity and graft-versus-host disease by
using TNF inhibitors.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202659 
PMCID: PMC3552130
PMID: 23277487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

