
1. Transpl Infect Dis. 2013 Apr;15(2):187-94. doi: 10.1111/tid.12037. Epub 2012 Dec 
20.

Microbiologically documented infections in patients undergoing high-dose
melphalan and autologous stem cell transplantation for the treatment of light
chain amyloidosis.

Taimur S(1), Nader C, Lloyd-Travaglini C, Seldin DC, Sanchorawala V.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases, Boston Medical Center, Boston University
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND: Immunoglobulin light chain (AL) amyloidosis can be treated with
high-dose melphalan and autologous stem cell transplantation (HDM/SCT). Risk
factors for infections may include hyposplenism, hypogammaglobulinemia,
treatment-related neutropenia, melphalan-induced mucositis, and nosocomial
exposures.
METHODS AND DESIGN: A review of 493 patients with AL amyloidosis undergoing
treatment with HDM/SCT from August 1994 to August 2009 was performed. The
objectives were to determine the rate and types of infections following HDM/SCT, 
to identify factors associated with microbiologically documented infections, and 
to assess the contribution of infections to all-cause treatment-related mortality
(TRM; defined as deaths within 100 days of SCT).
RESULTS: Microbiologically documented infections after HDM/SCT occurred in 24%
(n = 119) of patients. TRM was 10% (n = 48) overall, and 21% (n = 25) in patients
who had a documented infection. Thus, the relative risk of TRM in a patient with 
a documented infection was 3.42 (95% confidence interval [CI] 2.02-5.79).
Infections were caused by gram-positive bacteria in 51%, anaerobic bacteria in
16%, gram-negative bacteria in 13%, and fungi in 9% of cases. Serum creatinine
>2 mg/dL was associated with increased risk of post-SCT infection (38% vs. 21%,
P = 0.0007) with an odds ratio of 2.27 (95% CI 1.40-3.68). No significant
association for infection was found for age, gender, cardiac involvement, prior
steroid therapy, dose of melphalan, multiorgan involvement, days to neutrophil
engraftment, or dose of CD34 +  cells infused.
CONCLUSION: Serum creatinine >2 mg/dL is a risk factor for infections in patients
with AL amyloidosis undergoing HDM/SCT. The relative risk of TRM in a patient
with a documented infection was increased >3-fold. A broad spectrum of
infections, similar to that in other SCT patients, is seen in this population in 
the early post-SCT period.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/tid.12037 
PMID: 23279695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

