
1. Vet Microbiol. 2013 Apr 12;163(1-2):90-6. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.12.001. Epub
2012 Dec 8.

Innate immune response in human keratinocytes infected by a feline isolate of
Malassezia pachydermatis.

Buommino E(1), De Filippis A, Parisi A, Nizza S, Martano M, Iovane G, Donnarumma 
G, Tufano MA, De Martino L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Microbiology and Clinical
Microbiology, Second University of Naples, Via Luigi de Crecchio n. 7, 80138
Naples, Italy.

Malassezia pachydermatis is a normal inhabitant of canine and feline skin that
can spread to other pets. The outer layer or epidermis is made up primarily of
keratinocytes, which are capable of releasing various factors and expressing
receptors that are significantly involved in the immune regulation. Little is
known about the mechanism by which M. pachydermatis overcomes the natural barrier
of the skin. The aim of this study was to evaluate the direct in vitro
interaction between human keratinocytes and a clinical strain of live M.
pachydermatis isolated as a pure culture from an otitic cat. Human keratinocytes 
(HaCat) were infected with M. pachydermatis to analyse the modulation of the
innate immune response. Gene expression was analysed by real-time PCR. We
demonstrated that M. pachydermatis invaded HaCat cells and modulated the
expression of TLR2 after 24h infection, while HBD-2, IL-1β TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-8
were modulated both at 24 and 48 h. Thus, our results demonstrated that M.
pachydermatis is able to stimulate the innate immune response in infected human
keratinocytes indicating a possible role of this yeast as a human opportunistic
pathogen.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.12.001 
PMID: 23273837  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

