
1. J Clin Invest. 2013 Feb;123(2):580-93. doi: 10.1172/JCI65013. Epub 2013 Jan 2.

An obligate cell-intrinsic function for CD28 in Tregs.

Zhang R(1), Huynh A, Whitcher G, Chang J, Maltzman JS, Turka LA.

Author information: 
(1)Transplant Institute, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Tregs expressing the transcription factor FOXP3 are critical for immune
homeostasis. The costimulatory molecule CD28 is required for optimal activation
and function of naive T cells; however, its role in Treg function has been
difficult to dissect, as CD28 is required for thymic Treg development, and
blockade of CD28-ligand interactions has confounding effects in trans on
nonregulatory cells. To address this question, we created Treg-specific Cd28
conditional knockout mice. Despite the presence of normal numbers of FOXP3+
cells, these animals accumulated large numbers of activated T cells, developed
severe autoimmunity that primarily affected the skin and lungs, and failed to
appropriately resolve induced experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. This in
vivo functional impairment was accompanied by dampened expression of CTLA-4,
PD-1, and CCR6. Disease occurrence was not due to subversion of Cd28-deficient
Tregs into pathogenic cells, as complementation with normal Tregs prevented
disease occurrence. Interestingly, in these "competitive" environments,
Cd28-deficient Tregs exhibited a pronounced proliferative/survival disadvantage. 
These data demonstrate clear postmaturational roles for CD28 in FOXP3+ Tregs and 
provide mechanisms which we believe to be novel to explain how interruption of
CD28-ligand interactions may enhance immune responses independent of effects on
thymic development or on other cell types.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI65013 
PMCID: PMC3561819
PMID: 23281398  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

