
1. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2012 Dec;107 Suppl 1:167-73.

Differential expression of the costimulatory molecules CD86, CD28, CD152 and PD-1
correlates with the host-parasite outcome in leprosy.

Palermo Mde L(1), Trindade MÂ, Duarte AJ, Cacere CR, Benard G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Investigação Médica, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, 
Brasil.

Leprosy is a spectral disease exhibiting two polar sides, namely, lepromatous
leprosy (LL) characterised by impaired T-cell responses and tuberculoid leprosy
in which T-cell responses are strong. Proper T-cell activation requires
signalling through costimulatory molecules expressed by antigen presenting cells 
and their ligands on T-cells. We studied the influence of costimulatory molecules
on the immune responses of subjects along the leprosy spectrum. The expression of
the costimulatory molecules was evaluated in in vitro-stimulated peripheral blood
mononuclear cells of lepromatous and tuberculoid patients and healthy exposed
individuals (contacts). We show that LL patients have defective monocyte CD86
expression, which likely contributes to the impairment of the antigen
presentation process and to patients anergy. Accordingly, CD86 but not CD80
blockade inhibited the lymphoproliferative response to Mycobacterium leprae.
Consistent with the LL anergy, there was reduced expression of the positive
signalling costimulatory molecules CD28 and CD86 on the T-cells in these
patients. In contrast, tuberculoid leprosy patients displayed increased
expression of the negative signalling molecules CD152 and programmed death-1
(PD-1), which represents a probable means of modulating an exacerbated immune
response and avoiding immunopathology. Notably, the contacts exhibited proper
CD86 and CD28 expression but not exacerbated CD152 or PD-1 expression, suggesting
that they tend to develop a balanced immunity without requiring immunosuppressive
costimulatory signalling.

DOI: 10.1590/s0074-02762012000900024 
PMID: 23283468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

