
1. Rev Chilena Infectol. 2012 Sep;29 Suppl 1:S11-8. doi:
10.4067/S0716-10182012000500002.

[Prophylaxis against fungal infections in solid organ and hematopoietic stem
cells transplantation].

[Article in Spanish]

Rabagliati R(1), Santolaya ME.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Escuela de Medicina, Pontificia
Universidad Cat√≥lica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. rabagliati@med.puc.cl

Invasive fungal infections are an important cause of morbidity and mortality in
SOT and HSCT recipients. The main species involved are Candida spp. and
Aspergillus spp, less frequently Cryptococcus spp., causal agents of mucormycosis
and Fusarium spp. Usually occur within the first six months post-transplant, but 
they do it later, especially during episodes of rejection, which maintains the
state of immune system involvement. Prophylaxis recommendations are specific to
each type of transplant. In liver transplantation use of fluconazole is
recommended only in selected cases by high risk factor for invasive fungal
infections (A1). If the patient has a high risk of aspergillosis, there are some 
suggestions for adults population to use amphotericin B-deoxycholate, liposomal
amphotericin B or caspofungin (C2) without being validated none of these
recommendations in pediatric population. In adult lung transplant patients where 
the risk of aspergillosis is higher than in other locations, we recommend
universal prophylaxis with itraconazole 200 mg/day, nebulised liposomal
amphotericin B or voriconazole (C2), no validated recommendations for pediatrics.
In HSCT, universal prophylaxis is recommended only in allogeneic and autologous
selected cases. The most accepted indication is fluconazole (A1), and
posaconazole (A1) or micafungin (A1) in selected cases with high risk of
aspergillosis.

DOI: 10.4067/S0716-10182012000500002 
PMID: 23282550  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

