
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013 Mar;34(3):819-31. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.12.017.
Epub 2013 Jan 2.

Dietary β-glucan stimulate complement and C-reactive protein acute phase
responses in common carp (Cyprinus carpio) during an Aeromonas salmonicida
infection.

Pionnier N(1), Falco A, Miest J, Frost P, Irnazarow I, Shrive A, Hoole D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Science and Technology in Medicine, School of Life Sciences,
Keele University, ST5 5BG Keele, United Kingdom.

The effect of β-glucans as feed additive on the profile of C-reactive protein
(CRP) and complement acute phase responses was studied in common carp Cyprinus
carpio after exposition to a bacterial infection with Aeromonas salmonicida. Carp
were orally administered with β-glucan (MacroGard®) for 14 days with a daily
β-glucan intake of 6 mg per kg body weight. Fish were then intraperitoneally
injected with either PBS or 1 × 10⁸ bacteria per fish and sampled at time 0, 6,
12, 24, 48, 72, 96 and 120 h post-injection (p.i.) for serum and head kidney,
liver and mid-gut tissues. CRP levels and complement activity were determined in 
the serum samples whilst the gene expression profiles of CRP and complement
related genes (crp1, crp2, c1r/s, bf/c2, c3 and masp2) were analysed in the
tissues by quantitative PCR. Results obtained showed that oral administration of 
β-glucan for 14 days significantly increased serum CRP levels up to 2 fold and
serum alternative complement activity (ACP) up to 35 fold. The bacterial
infection on its own (i.e. not combined with a β-glucan feeding) did have
significant effects on complement response whilst CRP was not detectably induced 
during the carp acute phase reaction. However, the combination of the infection
and the β-glucan feeding did show significant effects on both CRP and complement 
profiles with higher serum CRP levels and serum ACP activity in the β-glucan fed 
fish than in the control fed fish. In addition, a distinct organ and time
dependent expression profile pattern was detected for all the selected genes: a
peak of gene expression first occurred in the head kidney tissue (6 h p.i. or 12 
h p.i.), then an up-regulation in the liver several hours later (24 h p.i.) and
finally up- or down-regulations in the mid-gut at 24 h p.i. and 72 h p.i. In
conclusion, the results of this study suggest that MacroGard® stimulated CRP and 
complement responses to A. salmonicida infection in common carp.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.12.017 
PMID: 23291104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

