
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Mar;1834(3):665-76. doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2012.12.013.
Epub 2013 Jan 3.

Detection of a quaternary organization into dimer of trimers of Corynebacterium
ammoniagenes FAD synthetase at the single-molecule level and at the in cell
level.

Marcuello C(1), Arilla-Luna S, Medina M, Lostao A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Microscopías Avanzadas (LMA), Instituto de Nanociencia de
Aragón (INA), Universidad de Zaragoza, Spain.

Biochemical characterization of Corynebacterium ammoniagenes FADS (CaFADS)
pointed to certain confusion about the stoichiometry of this bifunctional enzyme 
involved in the production of FMN and FAD in prokaryotes. Resolution of its
crystal structure suggested that it might produce a hexameric ensemble formed by 
a dimer of trimers. We used atomic force microscopy (AFM) to direct imaging
single CaFADS molecules bound to mica surfaces, while preserving their catalytic 
properties. AFM allowed solving individual CaFADS monomers, for which it was even
possible to distinguish their sub-molecular individual N- and C-terminal modules 
in the elongated enzyme. Differences between monomers and higher stoichiometries 
were easily imaged, enabling us to detect formation of oligomeric species induced
by ligand binding. The presence of ATP:Mg(2+) particularly induced the appearance
of the hexameric assembly whose mean molecular volume resembles the
crystallographic dimer of trimers. Finally, the AFM results are confirmed in
cross-linking solution, and the presence of such oligomeric CaFADS species
detected in cell extracts. All these results are consistent with the formation of
a dimer of trimers during the enzyme catalytic cycle that might bear biological
relevance.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2012.12.013 
PMID: 23291469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

