
1. Exp Gerontol. 2013 Mar;48(3):305-12. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2012.12.010. Epub 2013 
Jan 2.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV)-dependent and -independent changes in the aging of the
human immune system: a transcriptomic analysis.

Kuparinen T(1), Marttila S, Jylhävä J, Tserel L, Peterson P, Jylhä M, Hervonen A,
Hurme M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, 33014
University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland. taru.kuparinen@uta.fi

Aging is associated with a profound reduction of the immune capacity (i.e.,
immunosenescence), which is manifested as increased morbidity and mortality due
to infectious diseases in the elderly. The association of cytomegalovirus (CMV)
with several aging-associated phenomena has been extensively characterized, e.g.,
the accumulation of CD8+ nonproliferative, apoptosis-resistant memory cells that 
have lost the expression of the costimulatory molecule CD28. However, as the CMV 
seroprevalence is notably high in elderly individuals, the role of
CMV-independent changes has been difficult to analyze. To address this question, 
we performed a transcriptomic analysis (Illumina Human HT12 microarray) of the
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in a cohort of 90-year-old individuals
(CMV seronegative, n=6; CMV seropositive, n=140) using the PBMCs of young
CMV-seronegative individuals (n=11) as the controls. The cell type distribution
(CD3, CD4, CD8, CD28 and CD14) was analyzed using FACS. The data showed that the 
gene expression profiles of the CMV+ and CMV- nonagenarians were different
compared to the CMV- controls. Compared to the CMV- controls, 667 genes showed
altered expression in the CMV- nonagenarians, and 559 genes were altered in the
CMV+ nonagenarians. Of these, 337 genes were common. An analysis of the canonical
pathways revealed that the number of affected pathways was also different (42 in 
CMV-, 13 in CMV+; of these, 9 were common). Taken together, these results
indicate that the CMV-dependent and CMV-independent changes in the aging of the
immune system are fundamentally different.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2012.12.010 
PMID: 23291591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

