
1. J Vis Exp. 2012 Dec 29;(70). pii: 4333. doi: 10.3791/4333.

Artificial antigen presenting cell (aAPC) mediated activation and expansion of
natural killer T cells.

East JE(1), Sun W, Webb TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland, Maryland,
USA.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are a unique subset of T cells that display markers 
characteristic of both natural killer (NK) cells and T cells(1). Unlike classical
T cells, NKT cells recognize lipid antigen in the context of CD1 molecules(2).
NKT cells express an invariant TCRα chain rearrangement: Vα14Jα18 in mice and
Vα24Jα18 in humans, which is associated with Vβ chains of limited diversity(3-6),
and are referred to as canonical or invariant NKT (iNKT) cells. Similar to
conventional T cells, NKT cells develop from CD4-CD8- thymic precursor T cells
following the appropriate signaling by CD1d (7). The potential to utilize NKT
cells for therapeutic purposes has significantly increased with the ability to
stimulate and expand human NKT cells with α-Galactosylceramide (α-GalCer) and a
variety of cytokines(8). Importantly, these cells retained their original
phenotype, secreted cytokines, and displayed cytotoxic function against tumor
cell lines. Thus, ex vivo expanded NKT cells remain functional and can be used
for adoptive immunotherapy. However, NKT cell based-immunotherapy has been
limited by the use of autologous antigen presenting cells and the quantity and
quality of these stimulator cells can vary substantially. Monocyte-derived DC
from cancer patients have been reported to express reduced levels of
costimulatory molecules and produce less inflammatory cytokines(9,10). In fact,
murine DC rather than autologous APC have been used to test the function of NKT
cells from CML patients(11). However, this system can only be used for in vitro
testing since NKT cells cannot be expanded by murine DC and then used for
adoptive immunotherapy. Thus, a standardized system that relies on artificial
Antigen Presenting Cells (aAPC) could produce the stimulating effects of DC
without the pitfalls of allo- or xenogeneic cells(12, 13). Herein, we describe a 
method for generating CD1d-based aAPC. Since the engagement of the T cell
receptor (TCR) by CD1d-antigen complexes is a fundamental requirement of NKT cell
activation, antigen: CD1d-Ig complexes provide a reliable method to isolate,
activate, and expand effector NKT cell populations.

DOI: 10.3791/4333 
PMCID: PMC3577866
PMID: 23299308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

