
1. Zh Mikrobiol Epidemiol Immunobiol. 2012 Nov-Dec;(6):76-80.

[Humoral immune response in patients with angina and soft tissue infections of
group a streptococci etiology].

[Article in Russian]

KleÄ­menov DA, Glushkova EV, Dmitrieva NF, Eshchina AS, Timofeev IuM, Malyshev NA,
Briko NI.

AIM: Evaluate informativity of simultaneous determination of antibodies (AB)
against extracellular (AB against streptolysin-O-ASL-O) and cellular (IgM against
A-polysaccharide - A-PSC) antigens in patients with angina and soft tissue
infections caused by serogroup A streptococci (SGA) and identify features of
humoral immune response to SGA infection according to infectious process
localization. MATERIALS AND METHODS. 2 groups of patients with bacteriologically 
confirmed SGA infection (50 cases of angina - group 1 and 51 case of soft tissue 
infection - group 2) were examined for the presence of ASL-O by using Architect
ci8200 analyzer (Abbott, USA) and IgM against SGA A-PSC by EIA. RESULTS. In group
1, 23 (46%) individuals were recognized as positive by ASL-O level, and in group 
2 - 20 (39%; p>0.05); conditionally significant exceeding of normal values (more 
than 1.5 times) was detected in 25% of patients of each group. Increased level of
antibodies against SGA A-PSC was detected in 43 (86%) patients of group 1, and in
30 (59%) of patients of group 2 (p<0.05). In group 1 exceeding of normal values
of anti-A-PSC IgM was noted mostly by 1.5 +/- 0.5 times (74%). In group 2 in 43% 
of patients the level of anti-A-PSC IgM was above normal more than 2 times and in
most cases in uncomplicated variants of disease course. In 45% of patients with
severe form of soft tissue infection this parameter did not exceed normal values 
(p<0.05). CONCLUSION. In acute period of disease with simultaneous determination 
of ASL-O and IgM against A-PSC sensitivity of serologic diagnostics of SGA
etiology angina and SGA infection of soft tissues was established to reach 92%
and 72%, respectively, and humoral immune response to cellular AG in each form of
SGA has its features.


PMID: 23297637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

