
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jan 29;110(5):1827-32. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1220601110. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Recognition of microbial and mammalian phospholipid antigens by NKT cells with
diverse TCRs.

Tatituri RV(1), Watts GF, Bhowruth V, Barton N, Rothchild A, Hsu FF, Almeida CF, 
Cox LR, Eggeling L, Cardell S, Rossjohn J, Godfrey DI, Behar SM, Besra GS,
Brenner MB, Brigl M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

CD1d-restricted natural killer T (NKT) cells include two major subgroups. The
most widely studied are Vα14Jα18(+) invariant NKT (iNKT) cells that recognize the
prototypical α-galactosylceramide antigen, whereas the other major group uses
diverse T-cell receptor (TCR) α-and β-chains, does not recognize
α-galactosylceramide, and is referred to as diverse NKT (dNKT) cells. dNKT cells 
play important roles during infection and autoimmunity, but the antigens they
recognize remain poorly understood. Here, we identified phosphatidylglycerol
(PG), diphosphatidylglycerol (DPG, or cardiolipin), and phosphatidylinositol from
Mycobacterium tuberculosis or Corynebacterium glutamicum as microbial antigens
that stimulated various dNKT, but not iNKT, hybridomas. dNKT hybridomas showed
distinct reactivities for diverse antigens. Stimulation of dNKT hybridomas by
microbial PG was independent of Toll-like receptor-mediated signaling by
antigen-presenting cells and required lipid uptake and/or processing.
Furthermore, microbial PG bound to CD1d molecules and plate-bound PG/CD1d
complexes stimulated dNKT hybridomas, indicating direct recognition by the dNKT
cell TCR. Interestingly, despite structural differences in acyl chain composition
between microbial and mammalian PG and DPG, lipids from both sources stimulated
dNKT hybridomas, suggesting that presentation of microbial lipids and enhanced
availability of stimulatory self-lipids may both contribute to dNKT cell
activation during infection.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1220601110 
PMCID: PMC3562825
PMID: 23307809  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

