
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53300. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053300. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

RasGRP1, but not RasGRP3, is required for efficient thymic β-selection and ERK
activation downstream of CXCR4.

Golec DP(1), Dower NA, Stone JC, Baldwin TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

T cell development is a highly dynamic process that is driven by interactions
between developing thymocytes and the thymic microenvironment. Upon entering the 
thymus, the earliest thymic progenitors, called CD4(-)CD8(-) 'double negative'
(DN) thymocytes, pass through a checkpoint termed "β-selection" before maturing
into CD4(+)CD8(+) 'double positive' (DP) thymocytes. β-selection is an important 
developmental checkpoint during thymopoiesis where developing DN thymocytes that 
successfully express the pre-T cell receptor (TCR) undergo extensive
proliferation and differentiation towards the DP stage. Signals transduced
through the pre-TCR, chemokine receptor CXCR4 and Notch are thought to drive
β-selection. Additionally, it has long been known that ERK is activated during
β-selection; however the pathways regulating ERK activation remain unknown. Here,
we performed a detailed analysis of the β-selection events in mice lacking
RasGRP1, RasGRP3 and RasGRP1 and 3. We report that RasGRP1 KO and RasGRP1/3 DKO
deficient thymi show a partial developmental block at the early DN3 stage of
development. Furthermore, DN3 thymocytes from RasGRP1 and RasGRP1/3 double
knock-out thymi show significantly reduced proliferation, despite expression of
the TCRβ chain. As a result of impaired β-selection, the pool of TCRβ(+) DN4 is
significantly diminished, resulting in inefficient DN to DP development. Also, we
report that RasGRP1 is required for ERK activation downstream of CXCR4 signaling,
which we hypothesize represents a potential mechanism of RasGRP1 regulation of
β-selection. Our results demonstrate that RasGRP1 is an important regulator of
proliferation and differentiation at the β-selection checkpoint and functions
downstream of CXCR4 to activate the Ras/MAPK pathway.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053300 
PMCID: PMC3538756
PMID: 23308188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

