
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Feb 1;41(4):2328-39. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1442. Epub 2013 
Jan 8.

Rev3, the catalytic subunit of Polζ, is required for maintaining fragile site
stability in human cells.

Bhat A(1), Andersen PL, Qin Z, Xiao W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Canada S7N 5E5 and College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal
University, Beijing, China 100048.

It has been long speculated that mammalian Rev3 plays an important, yet unknown
role(s) during mammalian development, as deletion of Rev3 causes embryonic
lethality in mice, whereas no other translesion DNA synthesis polymerases studied
to date are required for mouse embryo development. Here, we report that both
subunits of Polζ (Rev3 and Rev7) show an unexpected increase in expression during
G(2)/M phase, but they localize independently in mitotic cells. Experimental
depletion of Rev3 results in a significant increase in anaphase bridges,
chromosomal breaks/gaps and common fragile site (CFS) expression, whereas Rev7
depletion primarily causes lagging chromosome defect with no sign of CFS
expression. The genomic instability induced by Rev3 depletion seems to be related
to replication stress, as it is further enhanced on aphidicolin treatment and
results in increased metaphase-specific Fanconi anemia complementation group D
type 2 (FANCD2) foci formation, as well as FANCD2-positive anaphase bridges.
Indeed, a long-term depletion of Rev3 in cultured human cells results in massive 
genomic instability and severe cell cycle arrest. The aforementioned observations
collectively support a notion that Rev3 is required for the efficient replication
of CFSs during G(2)/M phase, and that the resulting fragile site instability in
Rev3 knockout mice may trigger cell death during embryonic development.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks1442 
PMCID: PMC3575803
PMID: 23303771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

