
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52614. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052614. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Whole cigarette smoke increased the expression of TLRs, HBDs, and proinflammory
cytokines by human gingival epithelial cells through different signaling
pathways.

Semlali A(1), Witoled C, Alanazi M, Rouabhia M.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Recherche en Écologie Buccale, Département de Stomatologie, Faculté 
de Médecine Dentaire, Université Laval, Québec, Québec, Canada.

The gingival epithelium is becoming known as a regulator of the oral innate
immune responses to a variety of insults such as bacteria and chemicals,
including those chemicals found in cigarette smoke. We investigated the effects
of whole cigarette smoke on cell-surface-expressed Toll-like receptors (TLR)-2,
-4 and -6, human β-defensin (HBD) and proinflammatory cytokine expression and
production in primary human gingival epithelial cells. Whole cigarette smoke was 
shown to increase TLR2, TLR4 and TLR6 expression. Cigarette smoke led to ERK1/2, 
p38 and JNK phosphorylation in conjunction with nuclear factor-κB (NFκB)
translocation into the nucleus. TLR expression following cigarette smoke exposure
was down regulated by the use of ERK1/2, p38, JNK MAP kinases, and NFκB
inhibitors, suggesting the involvement of these signaling pathways in the
cellular response against cigarette smoke. Cigarette smoke also promoted HBD2,
HBD3, IL-1β, and IL-6 expression through the ERK1/2 and NFκB pathways.
Interestingly, the modulation of TLR, HBD, and cytokine expression was maintained
long after the gingival epithelial cells were exposed to smoke. By promoting TLR,
HBDs, and proinflammatory cytokine expression and production, cigarette smoke may
contribute to innate immunity dysregulation, which may have a negative effect on 
human health.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052614 
PMCID: PMC3532503
PMID: 23300722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

