
1. Poult Sci. 2013 Feb;92(2):346-51. doi: 10.3382/ps.2012-02652.

Occurrence of vancomycin-resistant enterococci in turkey flocks.

Sting R(1), Richter A, Popp C, Hafez HM.

Author information: 
(1)Chemisches und Veterin√§runtersuchungsamt Stuttgart, Chemical and Veterinary
Investigation Office Stuttgart, Schaflandstr. 3/3, 70736 Fellbach, Germany.
Reinhard.Sting@cvuas.bwl.de

In the present study, the prevalence of vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) in
turkeys in the southwest of Germany was investigated. For this purpose, 200
cloacal swab samples and 5 environmental dust samples (tested as a pooled sample)
of each of the 20 flocks (10 female and 10 male flocks) included in this study
were examined. The VRE could be isolated by means of a procedure combining
bacterial cultivation in an enrichment broth and on a selective solid media.
Enterococci were identified biochemically and subsequently tested on the presence
of the vancomycin resistance genes vanA, vanB (B1/B2/B3), and vanC (C1/C2/C3)
using real-time PCR assays. In 54 (27%) turkeys originating from 11 (55%) flocks 
and in 14 (70%) of the dust samples, exclusively vanA and vanC1 genes could be
detected. Of the turkeys examined, 46 were colonized with VRE bearing the
resistance gene vanC1 and 8 vanA, originating from 9 and 2 flocks, respectively. 
None of the birds carried vanB, vanC2, or vanC3 positive VRE. The results
obtained from the birds are largely confirmed by the dust samples originating
from 4 vanA and 10 vanC1 positive flocks. However, one flock housing animals
colonized with vanC1 positive VRE could not be confirmed by the dust samples that
revealed vanA bearing VRE. However, in one case vanA and in 3 cases vanC1
carrying VRE could be detected in dust samples of the turkey houses, but not in
the turkeys of the associated flock. In 5 flocks the turkeys as well as the dust 
samples were free of VRE.

DOI: 10.3382/ps.2012-02652 
PMID: 23300299  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

