
1. PPAR Res. 2012;2012:607141. doi: 10.1155/2012/607141. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Signaling Crosstalk between PPARγ and BMP2 in Mesenchymal Stem Cells.

Takada I(1), Yogiashi Y, Kato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Tissue Biology, School of Medicine, Keio University,
Tokyo 160-8582, Japan ; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of
Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Recent studies have revealed that PPARγ's transactivation function is regulated
by extracellular signals. In particular, cytokines and Wnt family proteins
suppress the ligand-inducible transactivation function of PPARγ and attenuate
adipogenesis/osteoblastogenesis switching in mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). For
example, Wnt5a suppresses PPARγ transcriptional activity through the
NLK/SETDB1/CHD7 pathway. Among these factors, BMP2 strongly induces bone
formation, but the effect of BMP2 on PPARγ function remains unclear. We examined 
the effect of BMP2 and PPARγ in ST2 cells and found that PPARγ activation
affected BMP2's signaling pathway through epigenetic regulation. Although BMP2
did not interfere with PPARγ-mediated adipogenesis, BMP2 increased mRNA
expression levels of PPARγ target genes (such as Fabp4 and Nr1h3) when cells were
first treated with troglitazone (TRO). Moreover, PPARγ activation affected BMP2
through enhancement of histone activation markers (acetylated histone H3 and
trimethylated Lys4 of histone H3) on the Runx2 promoter. After TRO treatment for 
three hours, BMP2 enhanced the levels of active histone marks on the promoter of 
a PPARγ target gene. These results suggest that the order of treatment with BMP2 
and a PPARγ ligand is critical for adipogenesis and osteoblastogenesis switching 
in MSCs.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/607141 
PMCID: PMC3539391
PMID: 23316218 

