
1. FEBS J. 2013 Mar;280(6):1475-90. doi: 10.1111/febs.12143. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

Recombinant purine nucleoside phosphorylases from thermophiles: preparation,
properties and activity towards purine and pyrimidine nucleosides.

Zhou X(1), Szeker K, Janocha B, Böhme T, Albrecht D, Mikhailopulo IA, Neubauer P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bioprocess Engineering, Department of Biotechnology, Technische 
Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Thermostable nucleoside phosphorylases are attractive biocatalysts for the
synthesis of modified nucleosides. Hence we report on the recombinant expression 
of three 'high molecular mass' purine nucleoside phosphorylases (PNPs) derived
from the thermophilic bacteria Deinococcus geothermalis, Geobacillus
thermoglucosidasius and from the hyperthermophilic archaeon Aeropyrum pernix
(5'-methythioadenosine phosphorylase; ApMTAP). Thermostability studies, kinetic
analysis and substrate specificities are reported. The PNPs were stable at their 
optimal temperatures (DgPNP, 55 °C; GtPNP, 70 °C; ApMTAP, activity rising to 99
°C). Substrate properties were investigated for natural purine nucleosides
[adenosine, inosine and their C2'-deoxy counterparts (activity within 50-500
U·mg(-1))], analogues with 2'-amino modified 2'-deoxy-adenosine and -inosine
(within 0.1-3 U·mg(-1)) as well as 2'-deoxy-2'-fluoroadenosine (9) and its
C2'-arabino diastereomer (10, within 0.01-0.03 U·mg(-1)). Our results reveal that
the structure of the heterocyclic base (e.g. adenine or hypoxanthine) can play a 
critical role in the phosphorolysis reaction. The implications of this finding
may be helpful for reaction mechanism studies or optimization of reaction
conditions. Unexpectedly, the diastereomeric 2'-deoxyfluoro adenine ribo- and
arabino-nucleosides displayed similar substrate properties. Moreover, cytidine
and 2'-deoxycytidine were found to be moderate substrates of the prepared PNPs,
with substrate activities in a range similar to those determined for
2'-deoxyfluoro adenine nucleosides 9 and 10. C2'-modified nucleosides are
accepted as substrates by all recombinant enzymes studied, making these enzymes
promising biocatalysts for the synthesis of modified nucleosides. Indeed, the
prepared PNPs performed well in preliminary transglycosylation reactions
resulting in the synthesis of 2'-deoxyfluoro adenine ribo- and arabino-
nucleosides in moderate yield (24%).

© 2013 The Authors Journal compilation © 2013 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.12143 
PMID: 23332162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

