
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2013 Apr 19;8(4):758-66. doi: 10.1021/cb3005758. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

Peptide-based investigation of the Escherichia coli RNA polymerase σ(70):core
interface as target site.

Hüsecken K(1), Negri M, Fruth M, Boettcher S, Hartmann RW, Haupenthal J.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Department of
Drug Design and Optimization, Saarland University, Campus C2_3, D-66123
Saarbrücken, Germany.

The number of bacterial strains that are resistant against antibiotics increased 
dramatically during the past decades. This fact stresses the urgent need for the 
development of new antibacterial agents with novel modes of action targeting
essential enzymes such as RNA polymerase (RNAP). Bacterial RNAP is a large
multi-subunit complex consisting of a core enzyme (subunits: α(2)ββ'ω) and a
dissociable sigma factor (σ(70); holo enzyme: α(2)ββ'ωσ(70)) that is responsible 
for promoter recognition and transcription initiation. The interface between core
RNAP and σ(70) represents a promising binding site. Nevertheless, detailed
studies investigating its druggability are rare. Compounds binding to this region
could inhibit this protein-protein interaction and thus holo enzyme formation,
resulting in inhibition of transcription initiation. Sixteen peptides covering
different regions of the Escherichia coli σ(70):core interface were designed;
some of them-all derived from σ(70) 2.2 region-led to a strong RNAP inhibition.
Indeed, an ELISA-based experiment confirmed the most active peptide P07 to
inhibit the σ(70):core interaction. Furthermore, an abortive transcription assay 
revealed that P07 impedes transcription initiation. In order to study the
mechanism of action of P07 in more detail, molecular dynamics simulations and a
rational amino acid replacement study were performed, leading to the conclusion
that P07 binds to the coiled-coil region in β' and that its flexible N-terminus
inhibits the enzyme by interaction with the β' lid-rudder-system (LRS). This work
revisits the β' coiled-coil as a hot spot for the protein-protein interaction
inhibition and expands it by introduction of the LRS as target site.

DOI: 10.1021/cb3005758 
PMID: 23330640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

