
1. Open Dent J. 2012;6:255-61. doi: 10.2174/1874210601206010255. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Metagenomic analysis of subgingival microbiota following non-surgical periodontal
therapy: a pilot study.

Laksmana T(1), Kittichotirat W, Huang Y, Chen W, Jorgensen M, Bumgarner R, Chen
C.

Author information: 
(1)Ostrow School of Dentistry of USC, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

This study tested the feasibility of a high throughput metagenomic approach to
analyze the pre- and posttreatment of subgingival plaque in two subjects with
aggressive periodontitis. DNA was extracted from subgingival samples and
subjected to PCR amplification of the c2-c4 regions of the 16S rDNA using primers
with bar codes to identify individual samples. The PCR products were pooled and
sequenced for the v4 region of the 16S rDNA using the 454 FLX standard platform. 
The results were analyzed for species/phylotypes in the Human Oral Microbiome
Database (HOMD) and Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) database. The sequencing of 
the amplicons resulted in 24,673 reads and identified 208 species/phylotypes. Of 
those, 129 species/phylotypes were identified in both patients but their
proportions varied. While >120 species/phylotypes were identified in all samples,
28-42 species/phylotypes cumulatively represent 90% of all subgingival bacteria
in each sample. The remaining species/phylotypes each constituted â‰¤0.2% of the
total subgingival bacteria. In conclusion, the subgingival microbiota are
characterized by high species richness dominated by a few species/ phylotypes.
The microbiota changed after periodontal therapy. High throughput metagenomic
analysis is applicable to assess the complexity and changes of the subgingival
microbiota.

DOI: 10.2174/1874210601206010255 
PMCID: PMC3547359
PMID: 23341849 

