
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Nov;97(21):9579-88. doi:
10.1007/s00253-012-4678-8. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Metagenomic exploration reveals high levels of microbial arsenic metabolism genes
in activated sludge and coastal sediments.

Cai L(1), Yu K, Yang Y, Chen BW, Li XD, Zhang T.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Biotechnology Laboratory, Department of Civil Engineering, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Arsenic contamination in a water system is an urgent environmental problem that
has caused severe endemic arsenicosis in south and southeast Asian countries. It 
is well known that microbially mediated arsenic metabolism can enhance arsenic
mobility, bioavailability, and toxicity. Here, for the first time, we applied the
Illumina high-throughput metagenomic and metatranscriptomic approaches to study
the distribution, diversity, abundance, and expression of microbial arsenic
metabolism genes in activated sludge and five coastal sediments. An average depth
of ~2.6 Gb clean data for each sample was finally obtained for BLAST analysis
after quality filtration and normalization. The results revealed that: (1) highly
diverse arsenic metabolism-like genes were found and the overall abundance varied
from 0.18 % to 0.26 % in the six metagenomic data sets; (2) arsenic
metabolism-like genes were expressed with extremely low levels or no expression
at all in activated sludge; and (3) the distribution, diversity, and abundance of
aioA-like, arrA-like, arsB-like, ACR3-like, and arsM-like genes varied
significantly in the six surveyed environments. This study provided a novel
perspective on understanding the ecology of arsenic metabolism in different water
environments using high-throughput sequencing technique.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-012-4678-8 
PMID: 23340578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

