
1. J Exp Biol. 2013 Apr 15;216(Pt 8):1516-21. doi: 10.1242/jeb.079509. Epub 2013 Jan
24.

Bat flight with bad wings: is flight metabolism affected by damaged wings?

Voigt CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research, Alfred-Kowalke-Strasse 17,
10315 Berlin, Germany. voigt@izw-berlin.de

Infection of North American bats with the keratin-digesting fungus Geomyces
destructans often results in holes and ruptures of wing membranes, yet it is
unknown whether flight performance and metabolism of bats are altered by such
injuries. I conducted flight experiments in a circular flight arena with Myotis
albescens and M. nigricans individuals with an intact or ruptured trailing edge
of one of the plagiopatagial membranes. In both species, individuals with damaged
wings were lighter, had a higher aspect ratio (squared wing span divided by wing 
area) and an increased wing loading (weight divided by wing area) than
conspecifics with intact wings. Bats with an asymmetric reduction of the wing
area flew at similar speeds to conspecifics with intact wings but performed fewer
flight manoeuvres. Individuals with damaged wings showed lower metabolic rates
during flight than conspecifics with intact wings, even when controlling for body
mass differences; the difference in mass-specific metabolic rate may be
attributable to the lower number of flight manoeuvres (U-turns) by bats with
damaged wings compared with conspecifics with intact wings. Possibly, bats
compensated for an asymmetric reduction in wing area by lowering their body mass 
and avoiding flight manoeuvres. In conclusion, it may be that bats suffer from
moderate wing damage not directly, by experiencing increased metabolic rate, but 
indirectly, by a reduced manoeuvrability and foraging success. This could impede 
a bat's ability to gain sufficient body mass before hibernation.

DOI: 10.1242/jeb.079509 
PMID: 23348945  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

