
1. Syst Appl Microbiol. 2013 May;36(3):148-54. doi: 10.1016/j.syapm.2012.12.001.
Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Methyloligella halotolerans gen. nov., sp. nov. and Methyloligella solikamskensis
sp. nov., two non-pigmented halotolerant obligately methylotrophic bacteria
isolated from the Ural saline environments.

Doronina NV(1), Poroshina MN, Kaparullina EN, Ezhov VA, Trotsenko YA.

Author information: 
(1)G.K. Skryabin Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Microorganisms,
Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow Region 142290, Russia.
doronina@ibpm.pushchino.ru

Two newly isolated halotolerant obligately methylotrophic bacteria (strains C2(T)
and SK12(T)) with the serine pathway of C1 assimilation are described. The
isolates are strictly aerobic, Gram negative, asporogenous, non-motile rods,
forming rosettes, multiplying by binary fission. Mesophilic and neutrophilic,
accumulate intracellularly compatible solute ectoine and poly-β-hydroxybutyrate. 
The novel strains are able to grow at 0 up to 16% NaCl (w/v), optimally at 3-5%
NaCl. The major cellular fatty acids are C18:1ω7c and C19:0cyc and the prevailing
quinone is Q-10. The predominant phospholipids are phosphatidylcholine,
phosphatidylglycerol, phosphatidyldimethylethanolamine and
phosphatidylethanolamine. Assimilate NH4(+) by glutamate dehydrogenase and via
the glutamate cycle (glutamine synthetase and glutamate synthase). The DNA G+C
contents of strains C2(T) and SK12(T) are 60.9 and 60.5 mol% (Tm), respectively. 
16S rRNA gene sequence similarity between the two new isolates are 99% but below 
94% with other members of the Alphaproteobacteria thus indicating that they can
be assigned to a novel genus Methyloligella. Rather low level of DNA-DNA
relatedness (53%) between the strains C2(T) and SK12(T) indicates that they
represent two separate species of the new genus, for which the names
Methyloligella halotolerans gen. nov., sp. nov. and Methyloligella solikamskensis
sp. nov. are proposed. The type strain of Methyloligella halotolerans is C2(T)
(=VKM B-2706(T)=CCUG 61687(T)=DSM 25045(T)) and the type strain of Methyloligella
solikamskensis is SK12(T) (=VKM B-2707(T)=CCUG 61697(T)=DSM 25212(T)).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.syapm.2012.12.001 
PMID: 23351489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

