
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Mar 1;41(5):3386-97. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt008. Epub 2013
Jan 29.

Characterization of MicA interactions suggests a potential novel means of gene
regulation by small non-coding RNAs.

Henderson CA(1), Vincent HA, Stone CM, Phillips JO, Cary PD, Gowers DM, Callaghan
AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biophysics Laboratories, School of Biological Sciences, Institute of
Biomedical and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth PO1
2DT, UK.

MicA is a small non-coding RNA that regulates ompA mRNA translation in
Escherichia coli. MicA has an inhibitory function, base pairing to the
translation initiation region of target mRNAs through short sequences of
complementarity, blocking their ribosome-binding sites. The MicA structure
contains two stem loops, which impede its interaction with target mRNAs, and it
is thought that the RNA chaperone protein Hfq, known to be involved in MicA
regulation of ompA, may structurally remodel MicA to reveal the ompA-binding site
for cognate pairing. To further characterize these interactions, we undertook
biochemical and biophysical studies using native MicA and a 'stabilized' version,
modified to mimic the conformational state of MicA where the ompA-binding site is
exposed. Our data corroborate two proposed roles for Hfq: first, to bring both
MicA and ompA into close proximity, and second, to restructure MicA to allow
exposure of the ompA-binding site for pairing, thereby demonstrating the RNA
chaperone function of Hfq. Additionally, at accumulated MicA levels, we
identified a Mg(2+)-dependent self-association that occludes the ompA-recognition
region. We discuss the potential contribution of an Mg(2+)-mediated
conformational switch of MicA for the regulation of MicA function.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt008 
PMCID: PMC3597676
PMID: 23361466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

