
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55320. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055320. Epub 2013 Feb 1.

The PE16 (Rv1430) of Mycobacterium tuberculosis is an esterase belonging to
serine hydrolase superfamily of proteins.

Sultana R(1), Vemula MH, Banerjee S, Guruprasad L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India.

The PE and PPE multigene families, first discovered during the sequencing of M.
tuberculosis H37Rv genome are responsible for antigenic variation and have been
shown to induce increased humoral and cell mediated immune response in the host. 
Using the bioinformatics tools, we had earlier reported that the 225 amino acid
residue PE-PPE domain (Pfam: PF08237) common to some PE and PPE proteins has a
"serine α/β hydrolase" fold and conserved Ser, Asp and His catalytic triad
characteristic of lipase, esterase and cutinase activities. In order to prove
experimentally that PE-PPE domain is indeed a serine hydrolase, we have cloned
the full-length Rv1430 and its PE-PPE domain into pET-28a vector, expressed the
proteins in E. coli and purified to homogeneity. The activity assays of both
purified proteins were carried out using p-nitrophenyl esters of aliphatic
carboxylic acids with varying chain length (C2-C16) to study the substrate
specificity. To characterize the active site of the PE-PPE domain, we mutated the
Ser199 to Ala. The activity of the protein in the presence of serine protease
inhibitor- PMSF and the mutant protein were measured. Our results reveal that
Rv1430 and its PE-PPE domain possess esterase activity and hydrolyse short to
medium chain fatty acid esters with the highest specific activity for pNPC6 at
37°C, 38°C and pH 7.0, 8.0. The details of this work and the observed results are
reported in this manuscript.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055320 
PMCID: PMC3562317
PMID: 23383323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

