
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e52835. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052835. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

Chaperone-usher fimbriae of Escherichia coli.

Wurpel DJ(1), Beatson SA, Totsika M, Petty NK, Schembri MA.

Author information: 
(1)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, School of Chemistry and
Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia.

Chaperone-usher (CU) fimbriae are adhesive surface organelles common to many
Gram-negative bacteria. Escherichia coli genomes contain a large variety of
characterised and putative CU fimbrial operons, however, the classification and
annotation of individual loci remains problematic. Here we describe a
classification model based on usher phylogeny and genomic locus position to
categorise the CU fimbrial types of E. coli. Using the BLASTp algorithm, an
iterative usher protein search was performed to identify CU fimbrial operons from
35 E. coli (and one Escherichia fergusonnii) genomes representing different
pathogenic and phylogenic lineages, as well as 132 Escherichia spp. plasmids. A
total of 458 CU fimbrial operons were identified, which represent 38 distinct
fimbrial types based on genomic locus position and usher phylogeny. The majority 
of fimbrial operon types occupied a specific locus position on the E. coli
chromosome; exceptions were associated with mobile genetic elements. A group of
core-associated E. coli CU fimbriae were defined and include the Type 1, Yad,
Yeh, Yfc, Mat, F9 and Ybg fimbriae. These genes were present as intact or
disrupted operons at the same genetic locus in almost all genomes examined.
Evaluation of the distribution and prevalence of CU fimbrial types among
different pathogenic and phylogenic groups provides an overview of group specific
fimbrial profiles and insight into the ancestry and evolution of CU fimbriae in
E. coli.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052835 
PMCID: PMC3559732
PMID: 23382825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

