
1. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2013 May;19(5):720-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbmt.2013.01.022. Epub 2013 Feb 1.

Defining incidence, risk factors, and impact on survival of central
line-associated blood stream infections following hematopoietic cell
transplantation in acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome.

Lukenbill J(1), Rybicki L, Sekeres MA, Zaman MO, Copelan A, Haddad H, Fraser T,
DiGiorgio MJ, Hanna R, Duong H, Hill B, Kalaycio M, Sobecks R, Bolwell B, Copelan
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematologic Oncology and Blood Disorders, Taussig Cancer
Institute, Cleveland, OH, USA. lukenbj@ccf.org

Central line-associated blood stream infections (CLABSI) commonly complicate the 
care of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS) after allogeneic stem cell transplantation (HCT). We developed a modified
CLABSI (MCLABSI) definition that attempts to exclude pathogens usually acquired
because of disruption of mucosal barriers during the vulnerable neutropenic
period following HCT that are generally included under the original definition
(OCLABSI). We conducted a retrospective study of all AML and MDS patients
undergoing HCT between August 2009 and December 2011 at the Cleveland Clinic
(N = 73), identifying both OCLABSI and MCLABSI incidence. The median age at
transplantation was 52 years (range, 16 to 70); 34 had a high (≥3) HCT
comorbidity index (HCT-CI); 34 received bone marrow (BM), 24 received peripheral 
stem cells (PSC), and 15 received umbilical cord blood cells (UCB). Among these
73 patients, 23 (31.5%) developed OCLABSI, of whom 16 (69.6%) died, and 8 (11%)
developed MCLABSI, of whom 7 (87.5%) died. OCLABSI was diagnosed a median of 9
days from HCT: 5 days (range, 2 to 12) for UCB and 78 days (range, 7 to 211) for 
BM/PSC (P < .001). MCLABSI occurred a median of 12 days from HCT, with similar
earlier UCB and later BM/PSC diagnosis (P = .030). Risk factors for OCLABSI in
univariate analysis included CBC (P < .001), human leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-mismatch (P = .005), low CD34(+) count (P = .007), low total nucleated cell
dose (P = .016), and non-Caucasian race (P = .017). Risk factors for OCLABSI in
multivariable analysis were UCB (P < .001) and high HCT-CI (P = .002). There was 
a significant increase in mortality for both OCLABSI (hazard ratio, 7.14; CI,
3.31 to 15.37; P < .001) and MCLABSI (hazard ratio, 6.44; CI, 2.28 to 18.18;
P < .001). CLABSI is common and associated with high mortality in AML and MDS
patients undergoing HCT, especially in UCB recipients and those with high HCT-CI.
We propose the MCLABSI definition to replace the OCLABSI definition, given its
greater precision for identifying preventable infection in HCT patients.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbmt.2013.01.022 
PMID: 23380342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

