
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55505. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055505. Epub 2013 Feb 5.

Relationships between host phylogeny, host type and bacterial community diversity
in cold-water coral reef sponges.

Schöttner S(1), Hoffmann F, Cárdenas P, Rapp HT, Boetius A, Ramette A.

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for
Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.

Cold-water coral reefs are known to locally enhance the diversity of deep-sea
fauna as well as of microbes. Sponges are among the most diverse faunal groups in
these ecosystems, and many of them host large abundances of microbes in their
tissues. In this study, twelve sponge species from three cold-water coral reefs
off Norway were investigated for the relationship between sponge phylogenetic
classification (species and family level), as well as sponge type (high versus
low microbial abundance), and the diversity of sponge-associated bacterial
communities, taking also geographic location and water depth into account.
Community analysis by Automated Ribosomal Intergenic Spacer Analysis (ARISA)
showed that as many as 345 (79%) of the 437 different bacterial operational
taxonomic units (OTUs) detected in the dataset were shared between sponges and
sediments, while only 70 (16%) appeared purely sponge-associated. Furthermore,
changes in bacterial community structure were significantly related to sponge
species (63% of explained community variation), sponge family (52%) or sponge
type (30%), whereas mesoscale geographic distances and water depth showed
comparatively small effects (<5% each). In addition, a highly significant,
positive relationship between bacterial community dissimilarity and sponge
phylogenetic distance was observed within the ancient family of the Geodiidae.
Overall, the high diversity of sponges in cold-water coral reefs, combined with
the observed sponge-related variation in bacterial community structure, support
the idea that sponges represent heterogeneous, yet structured microbial habitats 
that contribute significantly to enhancing bacterial diversity in deep-sea
ecosystems.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055505 
PMCID: PMC3564759
PMID: 23393586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

