
1. Res Microbiol. 2013 Jun;164(5):457-65. doi: 10.1016/j.resmic.2013.01.012. Epub
2013 Feb 6.

Arsenite-induced changes in abundance and expression of arsenite transporter and 
arsenite oxidase genes of a soil microbial community.

Poirel J(1), Joulian C, Leyval C, Billard P.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lorraine, Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire des Environnements
Continentaux, UMR 7360, 54506 Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France.
jessica.poirel@univ-lorraine.fr

We describe a real-time PCR assay for the quantitative detection of arsB and
ACR3(1) arsenite transporter gene families, two ubiquitous and key determinants
of arsenic resistance in prokaryotes. The assay was applied in batch growth
experiments using a wasteland soil bacterial community as an inoculum to
investigate the effect of increasing arsenite [As(III)] concentrations on genes
and transcript abundances. The aioA gene encoding the large subunit of arsenite
oxidase was monitored in parallel. Results showed that arsB and ACR3(1) gene
abundances correlated positively with the As(III) concentration. Both genes
showed similar transcription patterns and strong upregulation by arsenic.
Microbial As(III) oxidation occurred in As(III) spiked cultures and was
associated with expression of the aioA gene in most cases. However, aioA was also
expressed in several non-amended culture replicates. Analysis of cDNA clone
libraries revealed that Pseudomonas was the dominant metabolically active genus
whatever the As(III) concentration. Expressed arsB and ACR3(1) gene sequences
were also affiliated with those from Pseudomonas, while expressed aioA sequences 
were more taxonomically diverse. The study suggests that arsenite transporter
genes are appropriate biomarkers of arsenic stress that may be suitable for
further exploring the adaptive response of bacterial communities to arsenic in
contaminated environments.

Copyright © 2013 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.resmic.2013.01.012 
PMID: 23396038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

