
1. J Periodontol. 2013 Dec;84(12):1838-46. doi: 10.1902/jop.2013.120388. Epub 2013
Feb 11.

Effects of resolvin D1 on cell survival and cytokine expression of human gingival
fibroblasts.

Khaled M(1), Shibani NA, Labban N, Batarseh G, Song F, Ruby J, Windsor LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics and Allied Sciences, Indiana University School of
Dentistry, Indianapolis, IN.

BACKGROUND: Tissue breakdown in periodontitis is initiated by bacteria, such as
Porphyromonas gingivalis, and is caused largely by host responses. Resolvins
protect the host against acute inflammation by blocking the migration of
polymorphonuclear neutrophils to initiate resolution. The effects of resolvins on
human gingival fibroblasts (HGFs) are unknown. This study examines the effects of
resolvin D1 on HGF survival and cytokine expression when treated with or without 
P. gingivalis supernatant.
METHODS: Cytotoxicity of resolvin D1 on HGFs with or without a toxic level of P. 
gingivalis supernatant was measured with lactate dehydrogenase assays. Cytokine
arrays were performed on HGF-conditioned media treated with or without resolvin
D1 and with or without P. gingivalis supernatant.
RESULTS: Resolvin D1 had no cytotoxic effects on HGFs at concentrations between 1
and 1,000 nM (all P > 0.05). Resolvin D1 (1,000 nM) significantly inhibited the
toxic effects of 13.5% (v/v) P. gingivalis supernatant on HGFs (P = 0.002).
Resolvin D1 significantly reduced the expression of interleukin (IL)-6 (P =
0.010) and monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1 (P = 0.04) in untreated
fibroblasts. P. gingivalis (10%) supernatant significantly increased the
expression levels of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (CSF),
granulocyte CSF, growth-regulated oncogene (GRO), IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-10, 
MCP-1, MCP-2, MCP-3, and monokine induced by γ-interferon. Resolvin D1
significantly reduced the expression of GRO (P = 0.04), marginally reduced the
levels of MCP-1 (P = 0.10), and marginally increased the levels of transforming
growth factor (TGF)-β1 (P = 0.07) from HGFs treated with P. gingivalis
supernatant.
CONCLUSIONS: Resolvin D1 altered the cytotoxicity of P. gingivalis supernatant on
HGFs. Resolvin D1 significantly reduced GRO, marginally reduced MCP-1, and
marginally increased TGF-β1 from P. gingivalis-treated HGFs, which could alter
the ability of P. gingivalis to induce inflammation.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2013.120388 
PMID: 23398023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

