
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2013 Mar 6;61(9):2224-33. doi: 10.1021/jf305029p. Epub 2013
Feb 22.

Anaerobic transformation of DDT related to iron(III) reduction and microbial
community structure in paddy soils.

Chen M(1), Cao F, Li F, Liu C, Tong H, Wu W, Hu M.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Agricultural Environment Pollution Integrated
Control, Guangdong Institute of Eco-Environmental and Soil Sciences , Guangzhou
510650, P.R. China.

We studied the mechanisms of microbial transformation in functional bacteria on
1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDT) in two different field soils,
Haiyan (HY) and Chenghai (CH). The results showed that microbial activities had a
steady dechlorination effect on DDT and its metabolites (DDx). Adding lactate or 
glucose as carbon sources increased the amount of Desulfuromonas,
Sedimentibacter, and Clostridium bacteria, which led to an increase in adsorbed
Fe(II) and resulted in increased DDT transformation rates. The electron shuttle
of anthraquinone-2,6-disulfonic disodium salt resulted in an increase in the
negative potential of soil by mediating the electron transfer from the bacteria
to the DDT. Moreover, the DDT-degrading bacteria in the CH soil were more
abundant than those in the HY soil, which led to higher DDT transformation rates 
in the CH soil. The most stable compound of DDx was
1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chloro-phenyl)ethane, which also was the major
dechlorination metabolite of DDT, and 1-chloro-2,2-bis-(p-chlorophenyl)ethane and
4,4'-dichlorobenzo-phenone were found to be the terminal metabolites in the
anaerobic soils.

DOI: 10.1021/jf305029p 
PMID: 23402620  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

