
1. J Autoimmun. 2013 May;42:94-104. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2013.01.003. Epub 2013 Feb
12.

Complement C2 siRNA mediated therapy of myasthenia gravis in mice.

Huda R(1), Tüzün E, Christadoss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX 77555-1070, USA.

Activation of complement components is crucial in the progression and severity of
myasthenia gravis and experimental autoimmune myasthenia gravis (EAMG). Mice
deficient in complement component C4 or treated with monoclonal antibody to C1q
are resistant to EAMG. In this study, we show that inhibition of complement
cascade activation by suppressing the expression of a critical low-abundant
protein, C2, in the classical complement pathway, significantly improved clinical
and immunopathological manifestations of EAMG. Two weeks after a second booster
immunization with acetylcholine receptor, when mice exhibit muscle weakness, i.p.
injection of C2 siRNA significantly suppressed C2 mRNA in the blood cells and
liver of EAMG mice. Treatment of EAMG mice with C2 siRNA, once a week for 5
weeks, significantly improved muscle strength, which was further evidenced by
functional AChR preservation in muscle, reduction in number of C3 and
membrane-attack complexes at neuro-muscular junctions in forelimb muscle
sections, and a transient decrease in serum IgG2b levels. Our study shows for the
first time that siRNA-mediated suppression of C2, a component of the classical
complement system, following established disease, can effectively contribute to
the remission of EAMG. Therefore, C2 siRNA mediated therapy can be applied in all
complement mediated autoimmune diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2013.01.003 
PMID: 23410585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

