
1. Syst Appl Microbiol. 2013 Feb;36(1):69-73. doi: 10.1016/j.syapm.2012.12.006. Epub
2013 Feb 11.

Sequencing orphan species initiative (SOS): Filling the gaps in the 16S rRNA gene
sequence database for all species with validly published names.

Yarza P(1), Spröer C, Swiderski J, Mrotzek N, Spring S, Tindall BJ, Gronow S,
Pukall R, Klenk HP, Lang E, Verbarg S, Crouch A, Lilburn T, Beck B, Unosson C,
Cardew S, Moore ER, Gomila M, Nakagawa Y, Janssens D, De Vos P, Peiren J, Suttels
T, Clermont D, Bizet C, Sakamoto M, Iida T, Kudo T, Kosako Y, Oshida Y, Ohkuma M,
R Arahal D, Spieck E, Pommerening Roeser A, Figge M, Park D, Buchanan P,
Cifuentes A, Munoz R, Euzéby JP, Schleifer KH, Ludwig W, Amann R, Glöckner FO,
Rosselló-Móra R.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Microbiology Group, Department of Ecology and Marine Resources,
Institut Mediterráni d'Estudis Avançats, C/Miquel Marqués 21, E-07190 Esporles,
Illes Balears, Spain. pyarza@ribocon.com

High quality 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequences from the type strains of all
species with validly published names, as defined by the International Code of
Nomenclature of Bacteria, are a prerequisite for their accurate affiliations
within the global genealogical classification and for the recognition of
potential new taxa. During the last few years, the Living Tree Project (LTP) has 
taken care to create a high quality, aligned 16S and 23S rRNA gene sequence
database of all type strains. However, the manual curation of the sequence
dataset and type strain information revealed that a total of 552 "orphan" species
(about 5.7% of the currently classified species) had to be excluded from the
reference trees. Among them, 322 type strains were not represented by an SSU
entry in the public sequence repositories. The remaining 230 type strains had to 
be discarded due to bad sequence quality. Since 2010, the LTP team has
coordinated a network of researchers and culture collections in order to improve 
the situation by (re)-sequencing the type strains of these "orphan" species. As a
result, we can now report 351 16S rRNA gene sequences of type strains.
Nevertheless, 201 species could not be sequenced because cultivable type strains 
were not available (121), the cultures had either been lost or were never
deposited in the first place (66), or it was not possible due to other
constraints (14). The International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria provides a
number of mechanisms to deal with the problem of missing type strains and we
recommend that due consideration be given to the appropriate mechanisms in order 
to help solve some of these issues.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.syapm.2012.12.006 
PMID: 23410935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

