
1. Int J Oncol. 2013 Apr;42(4):1482-92. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1834. Epub 2013 Feb
20.

Two novel squamous cell carcinoma antigen-derived HLA-A*0201-binding peptides
induce in vitro and in vivo CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses.

Duan ZL(1), Wang ZB, Guo JL, Liu WQ, Hu J, Li J, Wang SN, Li Q, Wen JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou
325000, P.R. China.

Squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCCA) is overexpressed in many squamous cell
cancers and SCCA‑derived peptide-specific CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes can
display cytotoxicity against tumor cells. In the present study, we screened the
SCCA amino acid sequence for potential HLA-A*0201-binding CD8(+) T‑cell epitopes 
using two predictive computational algorithms. Seven epitope candidates were
selected of which SCCA(246-254)(llpneidgl), SCCA(223-231)(sledvqakv),
SCCA(328‑336)(vlhkafvev) and SCCA(324‑332)(vlsgvlhka) significantly stabilized
HLA-A*0201 molecules on T2 cells. Both SCCA(328‑336) and SCCA(324-332) induced
CD8(+) IFN-γ(+) T‑cell responses in HLA-A*0201-positive peripheral blood
mononuclear cells as assessed by intracellular cytokine staining. Consistent with
this, immunization with either SCCA(328-336) or SCCA(324‑332) effectively
elicited CD8(+) IFN-γ(+) T cells in HLA-A*0201 transgenic mice as visualized by
IFN-γ ELISPOT assay and intracellular cytokine staining. Furthermore, CD8(+) T
cells induced in vitro or in vivo by SCCA(328-336) or SCCA(324-332) demonstrated 
in vitro cytotoxicity against peptide-pulsed T2 cells and splenocytes,
respectively. These novel SCCA‑derived CD8(+) T‑cell epitopes described, herein, 
may be potentially important components for diagnostic reagents and
immunotherapeutic vaccines for the treatment of squamous cell carcinomas.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1834 
PMID: 23426430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

