
1. Plant Cell. 2013 Feb;25(2):762-76. doi: 10.1105/tpc.113.109116. Epub 2013 Feb 22.

The Arabidopsis elongator complex subunit2 epigenetically regulates plant immune 
responses.

Wang Y(1), An C, Zhang X, Yao J, Zhang Y, Sun Y, Yu F, Amador DM, Mou Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida 32611, USA.

The Arabidopsis thaliana Elongator complex subunit2 (ELP2) genetically interacts 
with NONEXPRESSOR OF PATHOGENESIS-RELATED GENES1 (NPR1), a key transcription
coactivator of plant immunity, and regulates the induction kinetics of defense
genes. However, the mechanistic relationship between ELP2 and NPR1 and how ELP2
regulates the kinetics of defense gene induction are unclear. Here, we
demonstrate that ELP2 is an epigenetic regulator required for pathogen-induced
rapid transcriptome reprogramming. We show that ELP2 functions in a
transcriptional feed-forward loop regulating both NPR1 and its target genes. An
elp2 mutation increases the total methylcytosine number, reduces the average
methylation levels of methylcytosines, and alters (increases or decreases)
methylation levels of specific methylcytosines. Interestingly, infection of
plants with the avirulent bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato
DC3000/avrRpt2 induces biphasic changes in DNA methylation levels of NPR1 and
PHYTOALEXIN DEFICIENT4 (PAD4), which encodes another key regulator of plant
immunity. These dynamic changes are blocked by the elp2 mutation, which is
correlated with delayed induction of NPR1 and PAD4. The elp2 mutation also
reduces basal histone acetylation levels in the coding regions of several defense
genes. Together, our data demonstrate a new role for Elongator in somatic DNA
demethylation/methylation and suggest a function for Elongator-mediated chromatin
regulation in pathogen-induced transcriptome reprogramming.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.113.109116 
PMCID: PMC3608791
PMID: 23435660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

