
1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2013 May;20(5):673-82. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00762-12. Epub 2013
Feb 27.

Lsr2 of Mycobacterium leprae and its synthetic peptides elicit restitution of T
cell responses in erythema nodosum leprosum and reversal reactions in patients
with lepromatous leprosy.

Saini C(1), Prasad HK, Rani R, Murtaza A, Misra N, Shanker Narayan NP, Nath I.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Pathology, Safdarjung Hospital Campus, New Delhi, India.

The Lsr2 protein of Mycobacterium leprae and its synthetic peptides have been
shown to elicit lymphoproliferation and gamma interferon (IFN-γ) release by
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of patients with lepromatous leprosy
(M. Chaduvula, A. Murtaza, N. Misra, N. P. Narayan, V. Ramesh, H. K. Prasad, R.
Rani, R. K. Chinnadurai, I. Nath, Infect. Immun. 80:742-752, 2012). PBMCs from 16
patients with lepromatous leprosy who were undergoing erythema nodosum leprosum
(ENL) (type 2) and 5 patients with reversal reactions (RR) (type 1) were
stimulated with M. leprae, recombinant Lsr2, and six end-to-end synthetic
peptides (A through F) spanning the Lsr2 sequence. During the reaction all
patients with ENL showed lymphoproliferation (stimulation index, >2) in response 
to peptides A and F, with other peptides eliciting responses in 75 to 88% of the 
subjects. In PBMC cultures, both lymphoproliferation and IFN-γ release for
peptide E were significantly higher than for peptides B and C and recombinant
Lsr2 (P < 0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). Five patients with RR also showed
enhanced lymphoproliferative responses and IFN-γ release in response to Lsr2, M. 
leprae, and peptide E. Six months postreaction, 14 patients with ENL continued to
exhibit responses to Lsr2 and its peptides, with the highest responses being
elicited by peptide E. However, 5 subjects showed no lymphoproliferation and had 
reduced IFN-γ release in response to Lsr2 peptides (P < 0.001, Kruskal-Wallis
test) but responded to recombinant Lsr2. Six patients with ENL had HLA-A*68.01,
which the STFPEITHI program showed to have high peptide-binding scores of 20 to
21 for peptides E, B, and C. Eleven patients had HLA-DRB1*1501 and HLA-DRB1*1502,
which had high binding scores for peptides C and E. Thus, Lsr2 and its peptides
are recognized in leprosy reactions during and well after the subsidence of
clinical signs.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00762-12 
PMCID: PMC3647763
PMID: 23446220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

