
1. Bosn J Basic Med Sci. 2013 Feb;13(1):57-62.

Distribution of human leukocyte antigen alleles in systemic lupus erythematosus
patients with angiotensin converting enzyme insertion/deletion polymorphism.

Hussain N(1), Jaffery G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Quaid-e-Azam Campus,
University of the Punjab, 818-R Model Town, Lahore, Pakistan.
Nageen1704@hotmail.com

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus is one of the classic examples of autoimmune
diseases among human beings and is a rare disease in Pakistani population.
Clinically it is a quite diverse and complicated autoimmune disease in a sense
that it involves multiple organs of the body and mimics with other diseases as
well. This study focused on the distribution of HLA alleles in SLE patients with 
ACE I/D Polymorphism. A total of 122 individuals were enrolled in this study, 61 
were the SLE patients who fulfilled revised ACR criteria and 61 were the healthy 
controls. Mean age of SLE patients at diagnosis was 30.35 Â± 1.687 years (Range:
12-68 years). ACE gene I/D polymorphism was performed by nested PCR and DNA based
HLA typing technique was used. ACE gene I/D polymorphism of Intron16 was studied 
and found to be involved in the activity of SLE. There is high frequency of
HLA-A*01, HLA-B*40, HLA-DRB1*01 alleles in SLE patients with ACE DD genotype. The
distribution of HLA-A, -B, -DRB1 alleles was analyzed in SLE patients with
various disease phenotypes. HLA-A*01 and HLA-B*40 was the most common allele
found in SLE patients with the involvement of skin. HLA-A*01, -A*03, HLA-B*13 and
-B*46 were common in SLE patients with arthritis while HLA-A*26 and -A*69 were
commonly found in Lupus nephritis cases. SLE patients involving both skin and
kidney had an allele HLA-DRB1*01 common in them.

DOI: 10.17305/bjbms.2013.2420 
PMCID: PMC4333918
PMID: 23448612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

