
1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 Jun;12(6):1632-43. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M112.026161. Epub
2013 Mar 3.

Global impact of Salmonella pathogenicity island 2-secreted effectors on the host
phosphoproteome.

Imami K(1), Bhavsar AP, Yu H, Brown NF, Rogers LD, Finlay BB, Foster LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for High-Throughput Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6T 1Z4, Canada.

During the late stages of infection, Salmonella secretes numerous effectors
through a type III secretion system that is encoded within Salmonella
pathogenicity island 2 (SPI2). Despite the importance of SPI2 as a major
virulence factor leading to the systemic spread of the bacteria and diseases, a
global view of its effects on host responses is still lacking. Here, we measured 
global impacts of SPI2 effectors on the host phosphorylation and protein
expression levels in RAW264.7 and in HeLa cells, as macrophage and nonphagocytic 
models of infection. We observe that SPI2 effectors differentially modulate the
host phosphoproteome and cellular processes (e.g. protein trafficking,
cytoskeletal regulation, and immune signaling) in a host cell-dependent manner.
Our unbiased approach reveals the involvement of many previously unrecognized
proteins, including E3 ligases (HERC4, RanBP2, and RAD18), kinases (CDK, SIK3,
and WNK1), and histones (H2B1F, H4, and H15), in late stages of Salmonella
infection. Furthermore, from this phosphoproteome analysis and other quantitative
screens, we identified HSP27 as a direct in vitro and in vivo molecular target of
the only type III secreted kinase, SteC. Using biochemical and cell biological
assays, we demonstrate that SteC phosphorylates multiple sites in HSP27 and
induces actin rearrangement through this protein. Together, these results provide
a broader landscape of host players contributing to specific processes/pathways
mediated by SPI2 effectors than was previously appreciated.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M112.026161 
PMCID: PMC3675819
PMID: 23459991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

