
1. Med Microbiol Immunol. 2013 Aug;202(4):267-76. doi: 10.1007/s00430-013-0290-5.
Epub 2013 Mar 2.

TLR4, IL10RA, and NOD2 mutation in paediatric Crohn's disease patients: an
association with Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis and TLR4 and
IL10RA expression.

Wagner J(1), Skinner NA, Catto-Smith AG, Cameron DJ, Michalski WP, Visvanathan K,
Kirkwood CD.

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Flemington
Road, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia. josef.wagner@mcri.edu.au

Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis (MAP) has been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of Crohn's disease (CD). The role of CD susceptibility genes in
association with these microbes is not known. Sixty-two early onset paediatric CD
patients and 46 controls with known MAP status were analysed for an association
with 34 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from 18 CD susceptibility genes.
Functional studies on peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were conducted
on 17 CD patients with known CD mutations to assess IL-6, IL-10, and TNF-α
expression upon stimulation with MAP precipitated protein derivative (PPD) and
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). In addition, surface expression of IL10R and TLR4 on
resting B cells, NK cells, T cells, and monocytes was assessed. A mutation in
TLR4 (rs4986790) and IL10RA (rs22291130) was significantly associated with
MAP-positive CD patients compared to MAP-negative CD patients (27.6 vs. 6.1 %,
p = 0.021, and 62.1 vs. 33.3 %, p = 0.024, respectively). PPD and LPS
significantly increased IL-6, IL-10, and TNF-α production in PBMCs. IL-10 and
TNF-α production were significantly lower in a subgroup of CD patients (5/12)
with a known NOD2 mutation. Receptor for IL-10 was significantly higher expressed
on NK cells (CD56low) and on NK T cells harbouring a NOD2 mutations compared to
wildtype cells (p = 0.031 and 0.005, respectively). TLR4 was significantly higher
expressed on NK cells (CD56high) harbouring a NOD2 mutations compared to wildtype
cells (p = 0.038).

DOI: 10.1007/s00430-013-0290-5 
PMID: 23455702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

