
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57235. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057235. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Oxygen relieves the CO2 and acetate dependency of Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC
533.

Hertzberger RY(1), Pridmore RD, Gysler C, Kleerebezem M, Teixeira de Mattos MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Microbial Physiology, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences,
University of Amsterdam, Science Park, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Oxygen relieves the CO2 and acetate dependency of Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC
533. The probiotic Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC 533 is relatively sensitive to
oxidative stress; the presence of oxygen causes a lower biomass yield due to
early growth stagnation. We show however that oxygen can also be beneficial to
this organism as it relieves the requirement for acetate and CO2 during growth.
Both on agar- and liquid-media, anaerobic growth of L. johnsonii NCC 533 requires
CO2 supplementation of the gas phase. Switching off the CO2 supply induces growth
arrest and cell death. The presence of molecular oxygen overcomes the CO2
dependency. Analogously, L. johnsonii NCC 533 strictly requires media with
acetate to sustain anaerobic growth, although supplementation at a level that is 
100-fold lower (120 microM) than the concentration in regular growth medium for
lactobacilli already suffices for normal growth. Analogous to the CO2
requirement, oxygen supply relieves this acetate-dependency for growth. The L.
johnsonii NCC 533 genome indicates that this organism lacks genes coding for
pyruvate formate lyase (PFL) and pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), both CO2 and
acetyl-CoA producing systems. Therefore, C1- and C2- compound production is
predicted to largely depend on pyruvate oxidase activity (POX). This proposed
role of POX in C2/C1-generation is corroborated by the observation that in a POX 
deficient mutant of L. johnsonii NCC 533, oxygen is not able to overcome acetate 
dependency nor does it relieve the CO2 dependency.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057235 
PMCID: PMC3582564
PMID: 23468944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

