
1. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2013 Jun;139(6):971-80. doi: 10.1007/s00432-013-1398-0. 
Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Delivery of the co-expression plasmid pEndo-Si-Stat3 by attenuated Salmonella
serovar typhimurium for prostate cancer treatment.

Li X(1), Li Y, Wang B, Ji K, Liang Z, Guo B, Hu J, Yin D, Du Y, Kopecko DJ,
Kalvakolanu DV, Zhao X, Xu D, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Prostate Diseases Prevention and Treatment
Research Center, Norman Bethune Medical School, Jilin University, Xinmin Street, 
Changchun, 130021, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the therapeutic utility of an attenuated bacterium
carrying a plasmid that co-expresses Endostatin, an inhibitor of tumor
neovasculogenesis, and a shRNA that targets Stat3 to suppress prostate cancer
growth.
METHODS: Plasmid pEndo-Si-Stat3 was constructed and introduced into an attenuated
strain of Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium. The resultant recombinant
bacterium was used as a vector to deliver the plasmid to tumor cells growing in
vivo. Tumor-associated gene and protein expression changes were measured by using
RT-PCR and Western blot analyses. Expression of Endostatin in tumor tissue was
detected by ELISA. The presence of vector bacteria in tissues was monitored and
tumor destruction was assessed by using TUNEL and H&E staining assays.
RESULTS: Bacterially delivered pEndo-Si-Stat3 decreased Stat3 levels and
increased Endostatin expression in mouse tumors, resulting in a significant
suppression of tumor growth (P < 0.01). Expression of Bcl-2 and PCNA was
down-regulated and Caspase3 expression was up-regulated to promote apoptosis of
tumor cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Successful delivery by attenuated Salmonella of the combination
therapeutic plasmid simultaneously knocked down the expression of Stat3 and
resulted in over-expression of Endostatin, which synergistically inhibited
prostate cancer growth.

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-013-1398-0 
PMCID: PMC3874139
PMID: 23463096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

