
1. Toxicon. 2013 Jul;69:240-9. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2013.02.009. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

Pro-inflammatory properties and neutrophil activation by Helicobacter pylori
urease.

Uberti AF(1), Olivera-Severo D, Wassermann GE, Scopel-Guerra A, Moraes JA,
Barcellos-de-Souza P, Barja-Fidalgo C, Carlini CR.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center of Biotechnology,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.

The gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori produces large amounts of urease, whose 
enzyme activity enables the bacterium to survive in the stomach. We have
previously shown that ureases display enzyme-independent effects in mammalian
models, most through lipoxygenases-mediated pathways. Here, we evaluated
potential pro-inflammatory properties of H. pylori urease (HPU). Mouse paw edema 
and activation of human neutrophils were tested using a purified, cell-free,
recombinant HPU. rHPU induced paw edema with intense neutrophil infiltration.
In vitro 100 nM rHPU was chemotactic to human neutrophils, inducing production of
reactive oxygen species. rHPU-activated neutrophils showed increased lifespan,
with inhibition of apoptosis accompanied by alterations of Bcl-XL and Bad
contents. These effects of rHPU persisted in the absence of enzyme activity.
rHPU-induced paw edema, neutrophil chemotaxis and apoptosis inhibition reverted
in the presence of the lipoxygenase inhibitors esculetin or AA861. Neutrophils
exposed to rHPU showed increased content of lipoxygenase(s) and no alteration of 
cyclooxygenase(s). Altogether, our data indicate that HPU, besides allowing the
bacterial survival in the stomach, could play an important role in the
pathogenesis of the gastrointestinal inflammatory disease caused by H. pylori.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2013.02.009 
PMID: 23466444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

