
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2013 May;43(5):455-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2013.02.003. 
Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Soluble and membrane-bound Drosophila melanogaster CYP6G1 expressed in
Escherichia coli: purification, activity, and binding properties toward multiple 
pesticides.

Cheesman MJ(1), Traylor MJ, Hilton ME, Richards KE, Taylor MC, Daborn PJ, Russell
RJ, Gillam EM, Oakeshott JG.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Ecosystem Sciences, GPO Box 1700, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory
2601, Australia. m.cheesman@uq.edu.au

Cytochrome P450 CYP6G1 has been implicated in the resistance of Drosophila
melanogaster to numerous pesticides. While in vivo and in vitro studies have
provided insight to the diverse functions of this enzyme, direct studies on the
isolated CYP6G1 enzyme have not been possible due to the need for a source of
recombinant enzyme. In the current study, the Cyp6g1 gene was isolated from D.
melanogaster and re-engineered for heterologous expression in Escherichia coli.
Approximately 460 nmol L⁻¹ of P450 holoenzyme were obtained in 500 mL cultures.
The recombinant enzyme was located predominantly within the bacterial cytosol. A 
two-step purification protocol using Ni-chelate affinity chromatography followed 
by removal of detergent on a hydroxyapatite column produced essentially
homogenous enzyme from both soluble and membrane fractions. Recombinant CYP6G1
exhibited p-nitroanisole O-dealkylation activity but was not active against
eleven other typical P450 marker substrates. Substrate-induced binding spectra
and IC₅₀ values for inhibition of p-nitroanisole O-dealkylation were obtained for
a wide selection of pesticides, namely DDT, imidacloprid, chlorfenvinphos,
malathion, endosulfan, dieldrin, dicyclanil, lufenuron and carbaryl, supporting
previous in vivo and in vitro studies on Drosophila that have suggested that the 
enzyme is involved in multi-pesticide resistance in insects.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2013.02.003 
PMID: 23470655  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

