
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2013 Jul;85(1):143-57. doi: 10.1111/1574-6941.12106. Epub
2013 Apr 5.

Contrasting relationships between biogeochemistry and prokaryotic diversity depth
profiles along an estuarine sediment gradient.

O'Sullivan LA(1), Sass AM, Webster G, Fry JC, Parkes RJ, Weightman AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales, UK.
osullivanla@Cardiff.ac.uk

Detailed depth profiles of sediment geochemistry, prokaryotic diversity and
activity (sulphate reduction and methanogenesis) were obtained along an estuarine
gradient from brackish to marine, at three sites on the Colne estuary (UK).
Distinct changes in prokaryotic populations [Archaea, Bacteria, sulphate-reducing
bacteria (SRB) and methanogenic archaea (MA)] occurred with depth at the two
marine sites, despite limited changes in sulphate and methane profiles. In
contrast, the brackish site exhibited distinct geochemical zones (sulphidic and
methanic) yet prokaryotic depth profiles were broadly homogenous. Sulphate
reduction rates decreased with depth at the marine sites, despite nonlimiting
sulphate concentrations, and hydrogenotrophic methanogenic rates peaked in the
subsurface. Sulphate was depleted with depth at the brackish site, and
acetotrophic methanogenesis was stimulated. Surprisingly, sulphate reduction was 
also stimulated in the brackish subsurface; potentially reflecting previous
subsurface seawater incursions, anaerobic sulphide oxidation and/or anaerobic
oxidation of methane coupled to sulphate reduction. Desulfobulbaceae,
Desulfobacteraceae, Methanococcoides and members of the Methanomicrobiales were
the dominant SRB and MA. Methylotrophic Methanococcoides often co-existed with
SRB, likely utilising noncompetitive C1-substrates. Clear differences were found 
in SRB and MA phylotype distribution along the estuary, with only SRB2-a
(Desulfobulbus) being ubiquitous. Results indicate a highly dynamic estuarine
environment with a more complex relationship between prokaryotic diversity and
sediment geochemistry, than previously suggested.

Â© 2013 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/1574-6941.12106 
PMID: 23480711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

