
1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2013 Apr;72(4):351-66. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e31828bfc60.

Transforming growth factor-β1 may be a key mediator of the fibrogenic properties 
of neural cells in leprosy.

Petito RB(1), Amadeu TP, Pascarelli BM, Jardim MR, Vital RT, Antunes SL, Sarno
EN.

Author information: 
(1)Leprosy Laboratory, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Fluminense Federal University,
Niterói (RTV), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Fibrosis is the main cause of irreversible nerve damage in leprosy. Phenotypic
changes in Mycobacterium leprae (ML)-infected Schwann cells (SCs) have been
suggested to mediate this process. We found that SC line cultures stimulated with
ML upregulated transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1), and that TGF-β1 or ML
induced increased numbers of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA)-positive cells with
characteristic stress fibers. Mycobacterium leprae and TGF-β1 also induced
increased type I collagen and fibronectin mRNA and secretion and augmented mRNA
levels of SOX9 and ZEB1, which are involved in the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition. These effects could be inhibited by the TGF-β1 type I receptor (ALK5)
inhibitor, SB-431542. In nerve biopsies from leprosy-infected patients with
varying grades of fibrosis (n = 11), type I and III collagen and fibronectin were
found in the endoneurium and perineurium, α-SMA-positive cells filled the
fibrotic perineurium but not the endoneurium, and CD34-positive fibroblasts
predominated in the endoneurium. Results of transcriptional studies of 3 leprosy 
nerves and 5 controls were consistent with these data, but α-SMA and other mRNA
levels were not different from those in the control samples. Our findings suggest
that TGF-β1 may orchestrate events, including reprogramming of the SC phenotype, 
leading to transdifferentiation, connective tissue cell expansion, and
fibrogenesis in the evolution of leprosy nerve lesions during some evolutionary
stages.

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e31828bfc60 
PMID: 23481710  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

