
1. Cytokine. 2013 Apr;62(1):123-30. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2013.02.005. Epub 2013 Mar
13.

The effects of IL-17 upon human natural killer cells.

Al Omar S(1), Flanagan BF, Almehmadi M, Christmas SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Infection, Microbiology & Immunology, Institute of
Infection & Global Health, University of Liverpool, 8 West Derby St., Liverpool
L69 7BE, UK.

These experiments were designed to investigate the effects of IL-17 upon the
phenotype and function of human Natural Killer (NK) cells. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from healthy subjects were cultured in the presence or absence 
of different combinations of IL-17s and changes in relative numbers and cell
surface phenotype of NK cells and CD56+CD3+ cells measured by flow cytometry.
Real time PCR was used to measure changes in expression of the
cytotoxicity-related genes perforin A and granzymes A and B and IL-17 receptors. 
A chromium release assay was used to measure cytotoxic function against K562
tumour cells. IL-17D, IL-17A, IL-17F or the combination of both of the latter had
little effect upon NK cell surface expression of Killer Immunoglobulin-like
Receptors, although IL-17A modestly increased NK cell numbers. Slight but not
significant increases in expression of perforin and granzymes were induced by
IL-17A and/or IL-17F. Both IL-17A and D significantly increased cytotoxic
function of NK cells at some E:T ratios. Similarly, numbers of NK cells induced
to express CD107a after interaction with K562 cells were increased, but not
significantly, by all combinations of IL-17s tested. IL-17RC was not found at the
NK cell surface but was expressed at the message level and the protein detected
intracellularly. NK cells are known to produce IL-17 but here we report that
there is little response to this cytokine although some isoforms may moderately
enhance cytotoxic function. There may therefore be some enhancement of NK cell
function resulting from Th17 cell activation.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2013.02.005 
PMID: 23490420  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

