
1. Mol Aspects Med. 2013 Apr-Jun;34(2-3):494-515. doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2012.07.009.

The SLC26 gene family of anion transporters and channels.

Alper SL(1), Sharma AK.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division and Division of Molecular and Vascular Medicine, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 02215, USA. salper@bidmc.harvard.edu

The phylogenetically ancient SLC26 gene family encodes multifunctional anion
exchangers and anion channels transporting a broad range of substrates, including
Cl(-), HCO3(-), sulfate, oxalate, I(-), and formate. SLC26 polypeptides are
characterized by N-terminal cytoplasmic domains, 10-14 hydrophobic transmembrane 
spans, and C-terminal cytoplasmic STAS domains, and appear to be homo-oligomeric.
SLC26-related SulP proteins of marine bacteria likely transport HCO3(-) as part
of oceanic carbon fixation. SulP genes present in antibiotic operons may provide 
sulfate for antibiotic biosynthetic pathways. SLC26-related Sultr proteins
transport sulfate in unicellular eukaryotes and in plants. Mutations in three
human SLC26 genes are associated with congenital or early onset Mendelian
diseases: chondrodysplasias for SLC26A2, chloride diarrhea for SLC26A3, and
deafness with enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct for SLC26A4. Additional
disease phenotypes evident only in mouse knockout models include oxalate
urolithiasis for Slc26a6 and Slc26a1, non-syndromic deafness for Slc26a5, gastric
hypochlorhydria for Slc26a7 and Slc26a9, distal renal tubular acidosis for
Slc26a7, and male infertility for Slc26a8. STAS domains are required for cell
surface expression of SLC26 proteins, and contribute to regulation of the cystic 
fibrosis transmembrane regulator in complex, cell- and tissue-specific ways. The 
protein interactomes of SLC26 polypeptides are under active investigation.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mam.2012.07.009 
PMCID: PMC3602804
PMID: 23506885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

