
1. J Environ Sci (China). 2012;24(6):1036-46.

Combined remediation of DDT congeners and cadmium in soil by Sphingobacterium sp.
D-6 and Sedum alfredii Hance.

Fang H(1), Zhou W, Cao Z, Tang F, Wang D, Liu K, Wu X, Yang X, Sun Y, Yu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Protection, College of Agriculture & Biotechnology,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. agri@zju.edu.cn

Combined pollution of 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis (4-chlorophenyl) ethane (DDT) and
cadmium (Cd) in agricultural soils is of great concern because they present
serious risk to food security and human health. In order to develop a
cost-effective and safe method for the removal of DDTs and Cd in soil, combined
remediation of DDTs and Cd in soil by Sphingobacterium sp. D-6 and the
hyperaccumulator, Sedum alfredii Hance was investigated. After treatment for 210 
days, the degradation half-lives of DDTs in soils treated by strain D-6 decreased
by 8.1% to 68.0% compared with those in the controls. The inoculation of strain
D-6 into soil decreased the uptake of DDTs by pak choi and S. alfredii. The
shoots/roots ratios of S. alfredii for the Cd accumulation ranged from 12.32 to
21.75. The Cd concentration in soil decreased to 65.8%-71.8% for S. alfredii
treatment and 14.1%-58.2% for S. alfredii and strain D-6 combined treatment,
respectively, compared with that in the control. The population size of the
DDTs-degrading strain, Simpson index (1/D) and soil respiratory rate decreased in
the early stage of treatment and then gradually increased, ultimately recovering 
to or exceeding the initial level. The results indicated that synchronous
incorporation of strain D-6 and S. alfredii into soil was found to significantly 
(p < or = 0.05) enhance the degradation of DDTs in soil and the hyperaccumulation
of Cd in S. alfredii. It was concluded that strain D-6 and S. alfredii could be
used successfully to control DDTs and Cd in contaminated soil.

DOI: 10.1016/s1001-0742(11)60895-4 
PMID: 23505871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

