
1. Mol Ecol. 2013 May;22(9):2588-602. doi: 10.1111/mec.12273. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Investigating a possible role for the bacterial signal molecules N-acylhomoserine
lactones in Balanus improvisus cyprid settlement.

Tait K(1), Havenhand J.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Plymouth, UK. ktait@pml.ac.uk

Increased settlement on bacterial biofilms has been demonstrated for a number of 
marine invertebrate larvae, but the nature of the cue(s) responsible is not well 
understood. We tested the hypothesis that the bay barnacle Balanus improvisus
utilizes the bacterial signal molecules N-acylhomoserine lactones (AHLs) as a cue
for the selection of sites for permanent attachment. Single species biofilms of
the AHL-producing bacteria Vibrio anguillarum, Aeromonas hydrophila and
Sulfitobacter sp. BR1 were attractive to settling cypris larvae of B. improvisus.
However, when AHL production was inactivated, either by mutation of the AHL
synthetic genes or by expression of an AHL-degrading gene (aiiA), the ability of 
the bacteria to attract cyprids was abolished. In addition, cyprids actively
explored biofilms of E. coli expressing the recombinant AHL synthase genes luxI
from Vibrio fischeri (3-oxo-C6-HSL), rhlI from Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(C4-HSL/C6-HSL), vanI from V. anguillarum (3-oxo-C10-HSL) and sulI from
Sulfitobacter sp. BR1 (C4-HSL, 3-hydroxy-C6-HSL, C8-HSL and 3-hydroxy-C10-HSL),
but not E. coli that did not produce AHLs. Finally, synthetic AHLs (C8-HSL,
3-oxo-C10-HSL and C12-HSL) at concentrations similar to those found within
natural biofilms (5 μm) resulted in increased cyprid settlement. Thus, B.
improvisus cypris exploration of and settlement on biofilms appears to be
mediated by AHL-signalling bacteria in the laboratory. This adds to our
understanding of how quorum sensing inhibition may be used as for biofouling
control. Nonetheless, the significance of our results for larvae settling
naturally in the field, and the mechanisms that underlay the observed responses
to AHLs, is as yet unknown.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.12273 
PMID: 23506419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

