
1. Plant Biol (Stuttg). 2013 Jul;15(4):723-36. doi:
10.1111/j.1438-8677.2012.00723.x. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

The emerging role of photorespiration and non-photorespiratory peroxisomal
metabolism in pathogen defence.

Sørhagen K(1), Laxa M, Peterhänsel C, Reumann S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Organelle Research, University of Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway.

Photorespiration represents one of the major highways of primary plant metabolism
and is the most prominent example of metabolic cell organelle integration, since 
the pathway requires the concerted action of plastidial, peroxisomal,
mitochondrial and cytosolic enzymes and organellar transport proteins.
Oxygenation of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate by Rubisco leads to the formation of
large amounts of 2-phosphoglycolate, which are recycled to 3-phosphoglycerate by 
the photorespiratory C2 cycle, concomitant with stoichiometric production rates
of H2 O2 in peroxisomes. Apart from its significance for agricultural
productivity, a secondary function of photorespiration in pathogen defence has
emerged only recently. Here, we summarise literature data supporting the
crosstalk between photorespiration and pathogen defence and perform a
meta-expression analysis of photorespiratory genes during pathogen attack.
Moreover, we screened Arabidopsis proteins newly predicted using machine learning
methods to be targeted to peroxisomes, the central H2 O2 -producing organelle of 
photorespiration, for homologues of known pathogen defence proteins and analysed 
their expression during pathogen infection. The analyses further support the idea
that photorespiration and non-photorespiratory peroxisomal metabolism play
multi-faceted roles in pathogen defence beyond metabolism of reactive oxygen
species.

© 2013 German Botanical Society and The Royal Botanical Society of the
Netherlands.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1438-8677.2012.00723.x 
PMID: 23506300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

