
1. Photosynth Res. 2014 May;120(1-2):169-80. doi: 10.1007/s11120-013-9812-7. Epub
2013 Mar 29.

Nano-mechanical mapping of the interactions between surface-bound RC-LH1-PufX
core complexes and cytochrome c 2 attached to an AFM probe.

Vasilev C(1), Brindley AA, Olsen JD, Saer RG, Beatty JT, Hunter CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, S10 2TN, UK, c.vasilev@sheffield.ac.uk.

Electron transfer pathways in photosynthesis involve interactions between
membrane-bound complexes such as reaction centres with an extrinsic partner. In
this study, the biological specificity of electron transfer between the reaction 
centre-light-harvesting 1-PufX complex and its extrinsic electron donor,
cytochrome c 2, formed the basis for mapping the location of surface-attached
RC-LH1-PufX complexes using atomic force microscopy (AFM). This nano-mechanical
mapping method used an AFM probe functionalised with cyt c 2 molecules to
quantify the interaction forces involved, at the single-molecule level under
native conditions. With surface-bound RC-His12-LH1-PufX complexes in the
photo-oxidised state, the mean interaction force with cyt c 2 is approximately
480 pN with an interaction frequency of around 66 %. The latter value lowered
5.5-fold when chemically reduced RC-His12-LH1-PufX complexes are imaged in the
dark to abolish electron transfer from cyt c 2 to the RC. The correspondence
between topographic and adhesion images recorded over the same area of the sample
shows that affinity-based AFM methods are a useful tool when topology alone is
insufficient for spatially locating proteins at the surface of photosynthetic
membranes.

DOI: 10.1007/s11120-013-9812-7 
PMCID: PMC4104003
PMID: 23539360  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

