
1. J Exp Med. 2013 Apr 8;210(4):683-97. doi: 10.1084/jem.20121798. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Specific Notch receptor-ligand interactions control human TCR-αβ/γδ development
by inducing differential Notch signal strength.

Van de Walle I(1), Waegemans E, De Medts J, De Smet G, De Smedt M, Snauwaert S,
Vandekerckhove B, Kerre T, Leclercq G, Plum J, Gridley T, Wang T, Koch U, Radtke 
F, Taghon T.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent University Hospital, 9000
Ghent, Belgium.

In humans, high Notch activation promotes γδ T cell development, whereas lower
levels promote αβ-lineage differentiation. How these different Notch signals are 
generated has remained unclear. We show that differential Notch receptor-ligand
interactions mediate this process. Whereas Delta-like 4 supports both TCR-αβ and 
-γδ development, Jagged1 induces mainly αβ-lineage differentiation. In contrast, 
Jagged2-mediated Notch activation primarily results in γδ T cell development and 
represses αβ-lineage differentiation by inhibiting TCR-β formation. Consistently,
TCR-αβ T cell development is rescued through transduction of a TCR-β transgene.
Jagged2 induces the strongest Notch signal through interactions with both Notch1 
and Notch3, whereas Delta-like 4 primarily binds Notch1. In agreement, Notch3 is 
a stronger Notch activator and only supports γδ T cell development, whereas
Notch1 is a weaker activator supporting both TCR-αβ and -γδ development. Fetal
thymus organ cultures in JAG2-deficient thymic lobes or with Notch3-blocking
antibodies confirm the importance of Jagged2/Notch3 signaling in human TCR-γδ
differentiation. Our findings reveal that differential Notch receptor-ligand
interactions mediate human TCR-αβ and -γδ T cell differentiation and provide a
mechanistic insight into the high Notch dependency of human γδ T cell
development.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20121798 
PMCID: PMC3620353
PMID: 23530123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

