
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 17;288(20):14098-14113. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.429423. Epub 
2013 Mar 25.

Purification and characterization of AsES protein: a subtilisin secreted by
Acremonium strictum is a novel plant defense elicitor.

Chalfoun NR(1), Grellet-Bournonville CF(1), Martínez-Zamora MG(1), Díaz-Perales
A(2), Castagnaro AP(3), Díaz-Ricci JC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Superior de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, and Instituto de Química Biológica "Dr.
Bernabé Bloj," Facultad de Bioquímica, Química y Farmacia, Universidad Nacional
de Tucumán, T4000ILJ San Miguel de Tucumán, Argentina.
(2)Unidad de Química y Bioquímica, Departamento de Biotecnología, Escuela Técnica
Superior de Ingenieros Agrónomos, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 28040
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Sección Biotecnología, Estación Experimental Agroindustrial Obispo Colombres, 
T4101XAC Las Talitas, Tucumán, Argentina.
(4)Instituto Superior de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, and Instituto de Química Biológica "Dr.
Bernabé Bloj," Facultad de Bioquímica, Química y Farmacia, Universidad Nacional
de Tucumán, T4000ILJ San Miguel de Tucumán, Argentina. Electronic address:
juan@fbqf.unt.edu.ar.

In this work, the purification and characterization of an extracellular elicitor 
protein, designated AsES, produced by an avirulent isolate of the strawberry
pathogen Acremonium strictum, are reported. The defense eliciting activity
present in culture filtrates was recovered and purified by ultrafiltration
(cutoff, 30 kDa), anionic exchange (Q-Sepharose, pH 7.5), and hydrophobic
interaction (phenyl-Sepharose) chromatographies. Two-dimensional SDS-PAGE of the 
purified active fraction revealed a single spot of 34 kDa and pI 8.8. HPLC
(C2/C18) and MS/MS analysis confirmed purification to homogeneity. Foliar spray
with AsES provided a total systemic protection against anthracnose disease in
strawberry, accompanied by the expression of defense-related genes (i.e. PR1 and 
Chi2-1). Accumulation of reactive oxygen species (e.g. H2O2 and O2(˙)) and
callose was also observed in Arabidopsis. By using degenerate primers designed
from the partial amino acid sequences and rapid amplification reactions of cDNA
ends, the complete AsES-coding cDNA of 1167 nucleotides was obtained. The deduced
amino acid sequence showed significant identity with fungal serine proteinases of
the subtilisin family, indicating that AsES is synthesized as a larger precursor 
containing a 15-residue secretory signal peptide and a 90-residue peptidase
inhibitor I9 domain in addition to the 283-residue mature protein. AsES exhibited
proteolytic activity in vitro, and its resistance eliciting activity was
eliminated when inhibited with PMSF, suggesting that its proteolytic activity is 
required to induce the defense response. This is, to our knowledge, the first
report of a fungal subtilisin that shows eliciting activity in plants. This
finding could contribute to develop disease biocontrol strategies in plants by
activating its innate immunity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.429423 
PMCID: PMC3656267
PMID: 23530047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

