
1. J Proteome Res. 2013 May 3;12(5):2022-33. doi: 10.1021/pr301153z. Epub 2013 Apr
10.

Quantitative analysis of the human AKR family members in cancer cell lines using 
the mTRAQ/MRM approach.

Zhang S(1), Wen B, Zhou B, Yang L, Cha C, Xu S, Qiu X, Wang Q, Sun H, Lou X, Zi
J, Zhang Y, Lin L, Liu S.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 101318,
China.

Erratum in
    J Proteome Res. 2013 Sep 6;12(9):4255.

Members of human aldo-keto reductase (AKR) superfamily have been reported to be
involved in cancer progression, whereas the final conclusion is not generally
accepted. Herein, we propose a quantitative method to measure human AKR proteins 
in cells using mTRAQ-based multiple reaction monitoring (MRM). AKR peptides with 
multiple transitions were carefully selected upon tryptic digestion of the
recombinant AKR proteins, while AKR proteins were identified by SDS-PAGE
fractionation coupled with LC-MS/MS. Utilizing mTRAQ triplex labeling to produce 
the derivative peptides, calibration curves were generated using the mixed lysate
as background, and no significantly different quantification of AKRs was elicited
from the two sets of calibration curves under the mixed and single lysate as
background. We employed this approach to quantitatively determine the 6 AKR
proteins, AKR1A1, AKR1B1, AKR1B10, AKR1C1/C2, AKR1C3, and AKR1C4, in 7 different 
cancer cell lines and for the first time to obtain the absolute quantities of all
the AKR proteins in each cell. The cluster plot revealed that AKR1A and AKR1B
were widely distributed in most cancer cells with relatively stable abundances,
whereas AKR1Cs were unevenly detected among these cells with diverse dynamic
abundances. The AKR quantitative distribution in different cancer cells,
therefore, may assist further exploration toward how the AKR proteins are
involved in tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1021/pr301153z 
PMID: 23544749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

