
1. J Bacteriol. 2013 Jun;195(11):2518-29. doi: 10.1128/JB.02300-12. Epub 2013 Mar
29.

A critical role for the cccA gene product, cytochrome c2, in diverting electrons 
from aerobic respiration to denitrification in Neisseria gonorrhoeae.

Hopper AC(1), Li Y, Cole JA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Neisseria gonorrhoeae is a microaerophile that, when oxygen availability is
limited, supplements aerobic respiration with a truncated denitrification
pathway, nitrite reduction to nitrous oxide. We demonstrate that the cccA gene of
Neisseria gonorrhoeae strain F62 (accession number NG0292) is expressed, but the 
product, cytochrome c2, accumulates to only low levels. Nevertheless, a cccA
mutant reduced nitrite at about half the rate of the parent strain. We previously
reported that cytochromes c4 and c5 transfer electrons to cytochrome oxidase cbb3
by two independent pathways and that the CcoP subunit of cytochrome oxidase cbb3 
transfers electrons to nitrite. We show that mutants defective in either
cytochrome c4 or c5 also reduce nitrite more slowly than the parent. By combining
mutations in cccA (Δc2), cycA (Δc4), cycB (Δc5), and ccoP (ccoP-C368A), we
demonstrate that cytochrome c2 is required for electron transfer from cytochrome 
c4 via the third heme group of CcoP to the nitrite reductase, AniA, and that
cytochrome c5 transfers electrons to nitrite reductase by an independent pathway.
We propose that cytochrome c2 forms a complex with cytochrome oxidase. If so, the
redox state of cytochrome c2 might regulate electron transfer to nitrite or
oxygen. However, our data are more consistent with a mechanism in which
cytochrome c2 and the CcoQ subunit of cytochrome oxidase form alternative
complexes that preferentially catalyze nitrite and oxygen reduction,
respectively. Comparison with the much simpler electron transfer pathway for
nitrite reduction in the meningococcus provides fascinating insights into niche
adaptation within the pathogenic neisseriae.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.02300-12 
PMCID: PMC3676072
PMID: 23543713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

