
1. Cell Microbiol. 2013 Oct;15(10):1722-34. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12146. Epub 2013 Apr
29.

Regulation of ICAM-1 expression in gingival fibroblasts infected with
high-glucose-treated P. gingivalis.

Chang LC(1), Kuo HC, Chang SF, Chen HJ, Lee KF, Lin TH, Huang TY, Choe CS, Lin
LT, Chen CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan.

Porphyromonas gingivalis is a major pathogen in the initiation and progression of
periodontal disease, which is recognized as a common complication of diabetes.
ICAM-1 expression by human gingival fibroblasts (HGFs) is crucial for regulating 
local inflammatory responses in inflamed periodontal tissues. However, the effect
of P. gingivalis in a high-glucose situation in regulating HGF function is not
understood. The P. gingivalis strain CCUG25226 was used to study the mechanisms
underlying the modulation of HGF ICAM-1 expression by invasion of
high-glucose-treated P. gingivalis (HGPg). A high-glucose condition upregulated
fimA mRNA expression in P. gingivalis and increased its invasion ability in HGFs.
HGF invasion with HGPg induced increases in the expression of ICAM-1. By using
specific inhibitors and short hairpin RNA (shRNA), we have demonstrated that the 
activation of p38 MAPK and Akt pathways is critical for HGPg-induced ICAM-1
expression. Luciferase reporters and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays suggest
that HGPg invasion increases NF-κB- and Sp1-DNA-binding activities in HGFs.
Inhibition of NF-κB and Sp1 activations blocked the HGPg-induced ICAM-1 promoter 
activity and expression. The effect of HGPg on HGF signalling and ICAM-1
expression is mediated by CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4). Our findings identify
the molecular pathways underlying HGPg-dependent ICAM-1 expression in HGFs,
providing insight into the effect of P. gingivalis invasion in HGFs.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12146 
PMID: 23551616  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

