
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58309. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058309. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

A broad profile of co-dominant epitopes shapes the peripheral Mycobacterium
tuberculosis specific CD8+ T-cell immune response in South African patients with 
active tuberculosis.

Axelsson-Robertson R(1), Loxton AG, Walzl G, Ehlers MM, Kock MM, Zumla A, Maeurer
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden.

We studied major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I peptide-presentation
and nature of the antigen-specific CD8+ T-cell response from South African
tuberculosis (TB) patients with active TB. 361 MHC class I binding epitopes were 
identified from three immunogenic TB proteins (ESAT-6 [Rv3875], Ag85B [Rv1886c], 
and TB10.4 [Rv0288], including amino acid variations for Rv0288, i.e., A10T,
G13D, S27N, and A71S for MHC allotypes common in a South African population
(e.g., human leukocyte antigen [HLA]-A*30, B*58, and C*07). Inter-allelic
differences were identified regarding the broadness of the peptide-binding
capacity. Mapping of frequencies of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tb)
antigen-specific CD8+ T-cells using 48 different multimers, including the newly
constructed recombinant MHC class I alleles HLA-B*58:01 and C*0701, revealed a
low frequency of CD8+ T-cell responses directed against a broad panel of
co-dominant M. tb epitopes in the peripheral circulation of most patients. The
antigen-specific responses were dominated by CD8+ T-cells with a precursor-like
phenotype (CD45RA+CCR7+). The data show that the CD8+ T-cell response from
patients with pulmonary TB (prior to treatment) is directed against subdominant
epitopes derived from secreted and non-secreted M. tb antigens and that variant, 
natural occurring M. tb Rv0288 ligands, have a profound impact on T-cell
recognition.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058309 
PMCID: PMC3608651
PMID: 23555576  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

