
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59531. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059531. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

IL-17A and IFN-γ synergistically induce RNase 7 expression via STAT3 in primary
keratinocytes.

Simanski M(1), Rademacher F, Schröder L, Schumacher HM, Gläser R, Harder J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel,
Germany.

Human keratinocytes produce several antimicrobial peptides and proteins (AMP)
which contribute to the protection of human skin against infection. RNase 7 is a 
major AMP involved in cutaneous defense with a high expression in keratinocytes
and a broad spectrum of antimicrobial activity. The cytokine IL-17A has been
recently identified as a potent inducer of several AMP in keratinocytes. Since
the role of IL-17A to induce RNase 7 expression is unknown we analyzed IL-17A
alone and in combination with other cytokines to induce RNase 7 expression in
keratinocytes. Whereas IL-17A alone only weakly induced RNase 7 expression, the
synergistic combination of IL-17A and IFN-γ (IL-17A/IFN-γ) was identified as a
potent inducer of RNase 7 expression. This combination was more effective in
inducing RNase 7 than the combination of IL-17A/TNF-α, a combination previously
identified as a strong inducer of psoriasis-related immune response genes
including several AMP. IFN-γ and IL-17A both have been reported to activate the
transcription factor STAT3 (Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3). 
Therefore we investigated the influence of STAT3 on the IL-17A/IFN-γ -mediated
RNase 7 induction. The use of a STAT3 inhibitor as well as siRNA-mediated
downregulation of STAT3 resulted in a diminished IL-17A/IFN-γ -mediated RNase 7
induction in keratinocytes indicating that STAT3 is involved in this process.
Similarly as seen with RNase 7, treatment of keratinocytes with IL-17A/IFN-γ
revealed also a synergistic induction of gene expression of the AMP human
beta-defensin (hBD)-2 and -3 as well as the S100 protein psoriasin (S100A7)
indicating that the combination of IL-17A/IFN-γ is a potent inducer of various
AMP classes in general. This was also reflected by an increase of the
Staphylococcus aureus-killing activity of IL-17A/IFN-γ -treated keratinocytes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059531 
PMCID: PMC3605401
PMID: 23555696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

