
1. Acta Histochem Cytochem. 2013 Feb 28;46(1):25-34. doi: 10.1267/ahc.12033. Epub
2013 Jan 11.

Induction of β-Defensin Expression by Porphyromonas gingivalis-Infected Human
Gingival Graft Transplanted in nu/nu Mouse Subdermis.

To M(1), Kamata Y, Saruta J, Shimizu T, Sato T, Kondo Y, Hayashi T, Hamada N,
Tsukinoki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Pathology and Research Institute of Salivary Gland
Health Medicine, Kanagawa Dental College Postgraduate School, 82 Inaoka-cho,
Yokosuka, Kanagawa 238-8580, Japan.

It is important to understand the onset of periodontal disease in terms of
bacterial infection and host factors. Host-bacteria interactions can be elicited 
in human cultured cells and animal models, but these models provide only limited 
biological information about human host reactions against bacterial attacks.
Development of an in vivo model using human gingival tissue is needed. We
established an in vivo model using nu/nu mice and evaluated host defense
following bacterial infection in human gingiva. Human gingival samples were
collected from periodontitis patients and transplanted in nu/nu mouse subdermis. 
After 2 weeks, human characteristics were confirmed by positive
immunohistochemical reactions for human-specific markers. We used this model to
investigate human β-defensin-2 (hBD-2), an antimicrobial peptide that contributes
to initial defense against bacterial invasion. Using real-time polymerase chain
reaction, in situ hybridization, and immunohistochemistry, we investigated
whether hBD-2 expression was induced in human gingiva as a response to
Porphyromonas gingivalis as a periodontal pathogen. Two hours after infection
with bacteria, we detected increased expression of hBD-2 mRNA, which was
localized in the epithelium of human gingiva. Using our in vivo model, we
concluded that increased hBD-2 may play an important role in early defense from
bacterial infection in human gingival epithelium.

DOI: 10.1267/ahc.12033 
PMCID: PMC3596604
PMID: 23554537 

