
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59927. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059927. Epub 2013 Mar 29.

Pyrosequencing reveals high-temperature cellulolytic microbial consortia in Great
Boiling Spring after in situ lignocellulose enrichment.

Peacock JP(1), Cole JK, Murugapiran SK, Dodsworth JA, Fisher JC, Moser DP,
Hedlund BP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Nevada, United
States of America.

To characterize high-temperature cellulolytic microbial communities, two
lignocellulosic substrates, ammonia fiber-explosion-treated corn stover and aspen
shavings, were incubated at average temperatures of 77 and 85Â°C in the sediment
and water column of Great Boiling Spring, Nevada. Comparison of 109,941
quality-filtered 16S rRNA gene pyrosequences (pyrotags) from eight enrichments to
37,057 quality-filtered pyrotags from corresponding natural samples revealed
distinct enriched communities dominated by phylotypes related to cellulolytic and
hemicellulolytic Thermotoga and Dictyoglomus, cellulolytic and sugar-fermenting
Desulfurococcales, and sugar-fermenting and hydrogenotrophic Archaeoglobales.
Minor enriched populations included close relatives of hydrogenotrophic
Thermodesulfobacteria, the candidate bacterial phylum OP9, and candidate archaeal
groups C2 and DHVE3. Enrichment temperature was the major factor influencing
community composition, with a negative correlation between temperature and
richness, followed by lignocellulosic substrate composition. This study
establishes the importance of these groups in the natural degradation of
lignocellulose at high temperatures and suggests that a substantial portion of
the diversity of thermophiles contributing to consortial cellulolysis may be
contained within lineages that have representatives in pure culture.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059927 
PMCID: PMC3612082
PMID: 23555835  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

