
1. Biophys J. 2013 Apr 2;104(7):1615-22. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.02.043.

A model of H-NS mediated compaction of bacterial DNA.

Joyeux M(1), Vreede J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire de Physique, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique UMR5588, Université Joseph Fourier Grenoble 1, St. Martin d'Hères,
France. marc.joyeux@ujf-grenoble.fr

The histone-like nucleoid structuring protein (H-NS) is a nucleoid-associated
protein, which is involved in both gene regulation and DNA compaction. H-NS can
bind to DNA in two different ways: in trans, by binding to two separate DNA
duplexes, or in cis, by binding to different sites on the same duplex. Based on
scanning force microscopy imaging and optical trap-driven unzipping assays, it
has recently been suggested that DNA compaction may result from the antagonistic 
effects of H-NS binding to DNA in trans and cis configurations. To get more
insight into the compaction mechanism, we constructed a coarse-grained model
description of the compaction of bacterial DNA by H-NS. These simulations
highlight the fact that DNA compaction indeed results from the subtle equilibrium
between several competing factors, which include the deformation dynamics of the 
plasmid and the several binding modes of protein dimers to DNA, i.e., dangling
configurations, cis- and trans-binding. In particular, the degree of compaction
is extremely sensitive to the difference in binding energies of the cis and trans
configurations. Our simulations also point out that the conformations of the
DNA-protein complexes are significantly different in bulk and in planar
conditions, suggesting that conformations observed on mica surfaces may differ
significantly from those that prevail in living cells.

Copyright © 2013 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.02.043 
PMCID: PMC3617430
PMID: 23561538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

