
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2013 Oct;86(1):85-100. doi: 10.1111/1574-6941.12131. Epub
2013 May 2.

Succession of bacterial and fungal 4-chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic acid degraders 
at the soil-litter interface.

Ditterich F(1), Poll C, Pagel H, Babin D, Smalla K, Horn MA, Streck T, Kandeler
E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Soil Science and Land Evaluation, Soil Biology Section,
University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany.

Phenoxyacetic acids can be degraded by diverse soil microorganisms. Nevertheless,
we miss information about the succession of 4-chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic acid
(MCPA) degraders in micro-environments of soils as well as specific functions of 
different microbial groups during MCPA degradation. We studied MCPA degradation
at the soil-litter interface in a microcosm experiment and followed the
succession of different degrader populations by quantifying the abundance of 16S 
rRNA genes as well as, the fungal ITS fragment and the functional genes tfdA (in 
total and divided into three classes) and cadA. Adjacent to the litter layer, a
dynamic depletion zone of MCPA indicated that the litter effect on MCPA
degradation depends on substrate availability and the affected soil volume. The
increase of the tfdA class III and cadA genes was linked to MCPA mineralisation. 
Total abundance of tfdA genes was dominated by class I MCPA degraders and did not
reflect MCPA degradation potential of the soil. Litter addition induced the
development of pioneer and late-stage fungal communities, which were probably
both involved in MCPA degradation. The results underline the importance of the
ecological behaviour of different degrader populations for the understanding of
herbicide degradation in soils.

Â© 2013 Federation of European Microbiological Societies Published by John Wiley &
sons Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/1574-6941.12131 
PMID: 23560662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

