
1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Apr;23(4):499-510.

Characterization of homocysteine γ-lyase from submerged and solid cultures of
Aspergillus fumigatus ASH (JX006238).

El-Sayed AS(1), Khalaf SA, Aziz HA.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Department, Faculty of Science, Zagazig University, Egypt.
ash.elsayed@gmail.com

Among 25 isolates, Aspergillus fumigatus ASH (JX006238) was identified as a
potent producer of homocysteine gamma- lyase. The nutritional requirements to
maximize the enzyme yield were optimized under submerged (SF) and solid-state
fermentation (SSF) conditions, resulting in a 5.2- and 2.3-fold increase,
respectively, after the last purification step. The enzyme exhibited a single
homogenous band of 50 kDa on SDS-PAGE, along with an optimum pH of 7.8 and pH
stability range of 6.5 to 7.8. It also showed a pI of 5.0, as detected by pH
precipitation with no glycosyl residues. The highest enzyme activity was obtained
at 37-40 degrees C, with a Tm value of 70.1 degrees C. The enzyme showed clear
catalytic and thermal stability below 40 degrees C, with T1/2 values of 18.1,
9.9, 5.9, 3.3, and 1.9 h at 30 degrees C, 35 degrees C, 40 degrees C, 50 degrees 
C, and 60 degrees C, respectively. Additionally, the enzyme Kr values were 0.002,
0.054, 0.097, 0.184, and 0.341 S-1 at 30 degrees C, 35 degrees C, 40 degrees C,
50 degrees C, and 60 degrees C, respectively. The enzyme displayed a strong
affinity to homocysteine, followed by methionine and cysteine when compared with 
non-S amino acids, confirming its potency against homocysteinuriarelated
diseases, and as an anti-cardiovascular agent and a specific biosensor for
homocysteinuria. The enzyme showed its maximum affinity for homocysteine (Km 2.46
mM, Kcat 1.39 × 10(-3) s(-1)), methionine (Km 4.1 mM, Kcat 0.97 × 10(-3) s(-1)), 
and cysteine (Km 4.9 m M, Kcat 0.77 × 10(-3) s(-1)). The enzyme was also strongly
inhibited by hydroxylamine and DDT, confirming its pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP)
identity, yet not inhibited by EDTA. In vivo, using Swiss Albino mice, the enzyme
showed no detectable negative effects on platelet aggregation, the RBC number,
aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, or creatinine titer when
compared with negative controls.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1208.08070 
PMID: 23568204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

