
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2013 May 15;163(2-3):184-92. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.03.002. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Exploitation of the health-promoting and sensory properties of organic
pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) juice through lactic acid fermentation.

Filannino P(1), Azzi L, Cavoski I, Vincentini O, Rizzello CG, Gobbetti M, Di
Cagno R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soil, Plant and Food Science, University of Bari Aldo Moro,
70126 Bari, Italy.

Two strains (POM1 and C2) or LP09 of Lactobacillus plantarum, which were
previously isolated from tomatoes and carrots, and another commercial strain of
L. plantarum (LP09), were selected to singly ferment (30 °C for 120 h)
pomegranate juice (PJ) under standardized protocol. PJs were further stored at 4 
°C for 30 days. Filtered PJ, not added of starters (unstarted PJ), was used as
the control. After fermentation, all starters grew to ca. 9.0 Log CFU/mL. Viable 
cells of strain LP09 sharply decreased during storage. The other two strains
survived to ca. 7.0 and 8.0 Log CFU/mL. Lactic acid bacteria consumed glucose,
fructose, malic acid, and branched chain and aromatic amino acids. The
concentration of free fatty acids increased for all started PJs. Compared to
unstarted PJ, color and browning indexes of fermented PJs were preferable. The
concentration of total polyphenolic compounds and antioxidant activity were the
highest for started PJs, with some differences that depended on the starter used.
Fermentation increased the concentration of ellagic acid, and enhanced the
antimicrobial activity. Fermented PJs scavenged the reactive oxygen species
generated by H2O2 and modulated the synthesis of immune-mediators from peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Unstarted and fermented PJs inhibited the growth 
of K562 tumor cells. The sensory attributes of fermented PJs were preferred. The 
fermentation of pomegranate juice would represent a novel technology option,
which joins health-promoting, sensory and preservative features to exploit the
potential of pomegranate fruits.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.03.002 
PMID: 23562695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

