
1. Scand J Immunol. 2013 Jun;77(6):460-9. doi: 10.1111/sji.12052.

Interaction of Mycobacterium tuberculosis cell wall components with the human
natural killer cell receptors NKp44 and Toll-like receptor 2.

Esin S(1), Counoupas C, Aulicino A, Brancatisano FL, Maisetta G, Bottai D, Di
Luca M, Florio W, Campa M, Batoni G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and
Surgery, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. semih.esin@med.unipi.it

We have previously demonstrated that a soluble form of the human NK cell natural 
cytotoxicity receptor NKp44, binds to the surface of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(MTB). Herein, we investigated the interaction of MTB cell wall components (CWC) 
with NKp44 or with Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) and the role of NKp44 and TLR2 in 
the direct activation of NK cells upon stimulation with MTB CWC. By using several
purified bacterial CWC in an ELISA, we demonstrated that NKp44 was able to bind
to the MTB cell wall core mycolyl-arabinogalactan-peptidoglycan (mAGP) as well as
to mycolic acids (MA) and arabinogalactan (AG), while soluble TLR2 bound to MTB
peptidoglycan (PG), but not to MA or AG. The mAGP complex induced NK cell
expression of CD25, CD69, NKp44 and IFN-γ production at levels comparable to M.
bovis Bacillus Calmette-Guérin-stimulated (BCG) cells. While AG and MA used alone
failed to induce NK cell activation, mycobacterial PG-exhibited NK cell
stimulatory capacity. Activation of resting NK cells by mAGP and IFN-γ production
were inhibited by anti-TLR2 MAb, but not by anti-NKp44 MAb. Differently,
anti-NKp44 MAb partially inhibited CD69 expression on NK cells pre-activated with
IL-2 and then stimulated with mAGP or whole BCG. Overall, these results provide
evidence that components abundant in mycobacterial cell wall are able to interact
with NKp44 (AG, MA) and TLR-2 (PG), respectively. While interaction of TLR2 with 
mycobacterial cell wall promotes activation of resting NK cells and IFN-γ
production, NKp44 interaction with its putative ligands could play a secondary
role in maintaining cell activation.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/sji.12052 
PMID: 23578092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

