
1. J Dent Res. 2013 Jun;92(6):518-23. doi: 10.1177/0022034513486807. Epub 2013 Apr
10.

Cell junction remodeling in gingival tissue exposed to a microbial toxin.

Damek-Poprawa M(1), Korostoff J, Gill R, DiRienzo JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The gingival epithelium plays a key role in protecting the supporting structures 
of the teeth from bacteria and their products. In ex vivo experiments, we
recently showed that the cytolethal distending toxin (Cdt) from the periodontal
pathogen Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans causes extensive damage to
gingival tissue. Morphological changes included detachment of the keratinized
outer layer, distention of spinous and basal cells in the oral epithelium,
disruption of rete pegs, and apparent dissolution of cell junctions. Adherens
junctions (zonula adherens) are essential for maintaining barrier function and
integrity of gingival epithelium. Therefore, immunohistochemical and RT-PCR
analyses of human gingival explants (HGX) and human gingival epithelial cells
(HGEC) were utilized for a closer examination of the effects of the Cdt on
E-cadherin, the key membrane component of adherens junctions. Although there was 
some variability among tissue donors, exposure of gingival tissue or isolated
epithelial cells to the toxin generally resulted in a pronounced increase in the 
expression and cytosolic distribution of E-cadherin, accompanied by an increase
in levels of the intracellular scaffolding proteins β-catenin and β-actin. These 
results indicate that the Cdt induced substantial remodeling of adherens
junctions, with a potential impact on the barrier function of gingival
epithelium.ABBREVIATIONS: cytolethal distending toxin (Cdt),
4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), human gingival epithelial cells (HGEC),
human gingival explants (HGX), human gingival fibroblasts (HGF), transepithelial 
resistance (TER).

DOI: 10.1177/0022034513486807 
PMCID: PMC3654757
PMID: 23576426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

