
1. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60645. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060645. Epub 2013 Apr 5.

A novel alkaliphilic bacillus esterase belongs to the 13(th) bacterial lipolytic 
enzyme family.

Rao L(1), Xue Y, Zheng Y, Lu JR, Ma Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Microbial derived lipolytic hydrolysts are an important class of
biocatalysts because of their huge abundance and ability to display bioactivities
under extreme conditions. In spite of recent advances, our understanding of these
enzymes remains rudimentary. The aim of our research is to advance our
understanding by seeking for more unusual lipid hydrolysts and revealing their
molecular structure and bioactivities.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Bacillus. pseudofirmus OF4 is an extreme
alkaliphile with tolerance of pH up to 11. In this work we successfully undertook
a heterologous expression of a gene estof4 from the alkaliphilic B. pseudofirmus 
sp OF4. The recombinant protein called EstOF4 was purified into a homologous
product by Ni-NTA affinity and gel filtration. The purified EstOF4 was active as 
dimer with the molecular weight of 64 KDa. It hydrolyzed a wide range of
substrates including p-nitrophenyl esters (C2-C12) and triglycerides (C2-C6). Its
optimal performance occurred at pH 8.5 and 50°C towards p-nitrophenyl caproate
and triacetin. Sequence alignment revealed that EstOF4 shared 71% identity to
esterase Est30 from Geobacillus stearothermophilus with a typical lipase
pentapeptide motif G91LS93LG95. A structural model developed from homology
modeling revealed that EstOF4 possessed a typical esterase 6α/7β hydrolase fold
and a cap domain. Site-directed mutagenesis and inhibition studies confirmed the 
putative catalytic triad Ser93, Asp190 and His220.
CONCLUSION: EstOF4 is a new bacterial esterase with a preference to short chain
ester substrates. With a high sequence identity towards esterase Est30 and
several others, EstOF4 was classified into the same bacterial lipolytic family,
Family XIII. All the members in this family originate from the same bacterial
genus, bacillus and display optimal activities from neutral pH to alkaline
conditions with short and middle chain length substrates. However, with roughly
70% sequence identity, these enzymes showed hugely different thermal stabilities,
indicating their diverse thermal adaptations via just changing a few amino acid
residues.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060645 
PMCID: PMC3618048
PMID: 23577139  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

