
1. Infect Immun. 2013 Jul;81(7):2327-33. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00056-13. Epub 2013 Apr
15.

Changes in macrophage phenotype after infection of pigs with Haemophilus parasuis
strains with different levels of virulence.

Costa-Hurtado M(1), Olvera A, Martinez-Moliner V, Galofré-Milà N, Martínez P,
Dominguez J, Aragon V.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recerca en Sanitat Animal, UAB-IRTA, Campus de la Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain.

Haemophilus parasuis is a colonizer of healthy piglets and the etiological agent 
of Glässer's disease. Differences in virulence among strains of H. parasuis have 
been widely observed. In order to explore the host-pathogen interaction,
snatch-farrowed colostrum-deprived piglets were intranasally infected with 4
strains of H. parasuis: reference virulent strain Nagasaki, reference nonvirulent
strain SW114, field strain IT29205 (from a systemic lesion and virulent in a
previous challenge), and field strain F9 (from the nasal cavity of a healthy
piglet). At different times after infection, two animals of each group were
euthanized and alveolar macrophages were analyzed for the expression of CD163,
CD172a, SLA I (swine histocompatibility leukocyte antigen I), SLA II,
sialoadhesin (or CD169), and CD14. At 1 day postinfection (dpi), virulent strains
induced reduced expression of CD163, SLA II, and CD172a on the surfaces of the
macrophages, while nonvirulent strains induced increased expression of CD163,
both compared to noninfected controls. At 2 dpi, the pattern switched into a
strong expression of CD172a, CD163, and sialoadhesin by the virulent strains,
which was followed by a steep increase in interleukin 8 (IL-8) and soluble CD163 
in serum at 3 to 4 dpi. The early increase in surface expression of CD163 induced
by nonvirulent strains went along with higher levels of IL-8 in serum than those 
induced by virulent strains in the first 2 days of infection. Alpha interferon
(IFN-α) induction was observed only in animals infected with nonvirulent strains.
Overall, these results are compatible with a delay in macrophage activation by
virulent strains, which may be critical for disease production.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00056-13 
PMCID: PMC3697589
PMID: 23589574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

