
1. Int J Mol Med. 2013 Jun;31(6):1484-94. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1346. Epub 2013 Apr
15.

Staphylococcus aureus supernatant induces the release of mouse β-defensin-14 from
osteoblasts via the p38 MAPK and NF-κB pathways.

Zhu C(1), Qin H, Cheng T, Tan HL, Guo YY, Shi SF, Chen DS, Zhang XL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Mammalian β-defensins are small cationic peptides of approximately 2-6 kDa that
have been implicated in mediating innate immune defenses against microbial
infection. Previous studies have reported that mouse β-defensin-14 (MBD‑14),
based on structural and functional similarities, appears to be an ortholog of
human β-defensin-3 (HBD-3). The aim of this study was to identify the signaling
pathways that contribute to the expression of MBD-14 in mouse osteoblasts (OBs)
upon contact with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus)
supernatant (SAS) to provide a theoretical basis for the use of MDB-14 as a
therapeutic agent in the treatment of intramedullary infection with S. aureus in 
vivo. The bacterial exoproducts released by S. aureus mainly include a large
amount of enterotoxins. Using mouse OBs, the release and regulation of MBD-14 was
evaluated by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and enzyme‑linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) following exposure to SAS. The activation of the p38 
mitogen‑activated protein kinase (MAPK), extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) and nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) pathways was determined by western blot
analysis. OBs treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) were used as the positive
control. The results revealed that SAS significantly promoted the phosphorylation
of p38 MAPK, NF-κB and the inhibitory subunit of NF-κBα (IκBα) in a
time-dependent manner. The treatment of OBs with SB203580 (an inhibitor of p38
MAPK) and pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC, an inhibitor of NF-κB) prior to
stimulation with SAS significantly inhibited the phosphorylation and mRNA
expression of p38 MAPK and NF-κB p65, simultaneously reducing the release of
MBD-14. Our findings suggest that the release of MBD-14 is mediated at least in
part through the activation of p38 MAPK and NF-κB in response to S.
aureus‑secreted bacterial exoproducts. Moreover, our data demonstrate the innate 
immune capacity of OBs under conditions of bacterial challenge to enhance the
local expression of this MBD-14, a peptide with anti‑staphylococcal activity.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1346 
PMID: 23588388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

