
1. Oncogene. 2014 Mar 20;33(12):1485-94. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.105. Epub 2013 Apr
15.

Oncostatin-M promotes phenotypic changes associated with mesenchymal and stem
cell-like differentiation in breast cancer.

West NR(1), Murray JI(2), Watson PH(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Deeley Research Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Victoria, British
Columbia, Canada [2] Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of
Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Deeley Research Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Victoria, British
Columbia, Canada.
(3)1] Deeley Research Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Victoria, British
Columbia, Canada [2] Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of
Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada [3] Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada.

Cancer stem cell (CSC) biology and the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
are thought to be mechanistically linked and may be key components of cancer
development and progression. However, stimuli that induce EMT and CSC-like
features ('stemness') are poorly defined. We and others have shown that the
inflammatory cytokine oncostatin-M (OSM) mediates phenotypic changes in breast
cancer that are consistent with EMT and dedifferentiation, including enhanced
migration and loss of hormone receptors. In this study, we have expanded on these
prior observations to determine whether OSM is a cell-extrinsic driver of EMT
and/or stemness. OSM stimulation of the luminal breast cancer cell lines MCF7 and
T47D induced EMT features including loss of membranous E-cadherin and induction
of snail and slug expression. OSM treatment markedly enhanced the formation of
mammospheres (up to 20-fold, P<0.001), which displayed high expression of the
pluripotency factor SOX2. The proportion of cells with a CD44(high)CD24(-/low)
phenotype was similarly increased by OSM (P<0.001). OSM-induced mammosphere
formation and CD44(high)CD24(-/low) induction was dependent on PI3K signalling.
In silico analysis of human breast tumours (from a publicly available data set,
n=322) confirmed that co-expression of a PI3K transcriptional signature, but not 
MAPK or STAT3 signatures, was necessary to detect an association between OSMR and
poor prognosis. Assessment of a second in silico data set (n=241 breast tumours) 
confirmed a significant relationship between OSMR, markers of EMT and CSCs, and
chemotherapy resistance. Direct analysis of mRNA expression by RT-PCR in a third 
cohort (n=72 breast tumours) demonstrated that high expression of OSM is
associated positively with indicators of EMT (SNAI1, P<0.001) and stemness (SOX2,
P<0.05). Our data suggest for the first time that OSM may promote a clinically
relevant EMT/CSC-like phenotype in human breast cancer via a PI3K-dependent
mechanism.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2013.105 
PMID: 23584474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

