
1. Mutat Res. 2013 Jun 14;754(1-2):32-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mrgentox.2013.04.001. Epub
2013 Apr 9.

Translesion DNA synthesis across various DNA adducts produced by
3-nitrobenzanthrone in Escherichia coli.

Kawanishi M(1), Kanno T, Nishida H, Takamura-Enya T, Yagi T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Science and Radiation Research Center, Osaka Prefecture
University, 1-2 Gakuen-cho, Sakai, Osaka 599-8570, Japan.

To analyze translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) across lesions derived from the air
pollutant 3-nitrobenzanthrone in Escherichia coli, we constructed
site-specifically modified plasmids containing single molecule adducts derived
from 3-nitrobenzanthrone. For this experiment, we adopted a modified version of
the method developed by Fuchs et al. [29]. Each plasmid contained one of the
following lesions in its LacZ' gene:
N-(2'-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-3-aminobenzanthrone (dG-C8-N-ABA);
2-(2'-deoxyguanosin-N(2)-yl)-3-aminobenzanthrone (dG-N(2)-C2-ABA);
2-(2'-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-3-aminobenzanthrone (dG-C8-C2-ABA);
2-(2'-deoxyadenosin-N(6)-yl)-3-aminobenzanthrone (dA-N(6)-C2-ABA);
N-(2'-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-3-acetylaminobenzanthrone (dG-C8-N-AcABA); or
2-(2'-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-3-acetylaminobenzanthrone (dG-C8-C2-AcABA). All of the 
adducts inhibited DNA synthesis by replicative DNA polymerases in E. coli;
however, the extent of the inhibition varied among the adducts. All five
dG-adducts strongly blocked replication by replicative DNA polymerases; however, 
the dA-adduct only weakly blocked DNA replication. The induction of the SOS
response increased the frequency of TLS, which was higher for the dG-C8-C2-ABA,
dG-C8-N-AcABA and dG-C8-C2-AcABA adducts than for the other adducts. In our
previous study, dG-C8-N-ABA blocked DNA replication more strongly and induced
mutations more frequently than dG-N(2)-C2-ABA in human cells. In contrast, in E. 
coli the frequency of TLS over dG-N(2)-C2-ABA was markedly reduced, even under
the SOS(+) conditions, and dG-N(2)-C2-ABA induced G to T mutations. All of the
other adducts were bypassed in a less mutagenic manner. In addition, using E.
coli strains that lacked particular DNA polymerases we found that DNA polymerase 
V was responsible for TLS over dG-C8-N-AcABA and dG-C8-C2-AcABA adducts.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrgentox.2013.04.001 
PMID: 23583687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

