
1. Autophagy. 2013 Jul;9(7):985-95. doi: 10.4161/auto.24406. Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Host and bacterial factors that regulate LC3 recruitment to Listeria
monocytogenes during the early stages of macrophage infection.

Lam GY(1), Cemma M, Muise AM, Higgins DE, Brumell JH.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program; Hospital for Sick Children; Toronto, ON Canada;
Institute of Medical Science; University of Toronto; Toronto, ON Canada.

Listeria monocytogenes is a bacterial pathogen that can escape the phagosome and 
replicate in the cytosol of host cells during infection. We previously observed
that a population (up to 35%) of L. monocytogenes strain 10403S colocalize with
the macroautophagy marker LC3 at 1 h postinfection. This is thought to give rise 
to spacious Listeria-containing phagosomes (SLAPs), a membrane-bound compartment 
harboring slow-growing bacteria that is associated with persistent infection.
Here, we examined the host and bacterial factors that mediate LC3 recruitment to 
bacteria at 1 h postinfection. At this early time point, LC3(+) bacteria were
present within single-membrane phagosomes that are LAMP1(+). Protein
ubiquitination is known to play a role in targeting cytosolic L. monocytogenes to
macroautophagy. However, we found that neither protein ubiquitination nor the
ubiquitin-binding adaptor SQSTM1/p62 are associated with LC3(+) bacteria at 1 h
postinfection. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) production by the CYBB/NOX2 NADPH
oxidase was also required for LC3 recruitment to bacteria at 1 h postinfection
and for subsequent SLAP formation. Diacylglycerol is an upstream activator of the
CYBB/NOX2 NADPH oxidase, and its production by both bacterial and host
phospholipases was required for LC3 recruitment to bacteria. Our data suggest
that the LC3-associated phagocytosis (LAP) pathway, which is distinct from
macroautophagy, targets L. monocytogenes during the early stage of infection
within host macrophages and allows establishment of an intracellular niche
(SLAPs) associated with persistent infection.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.24406 
PMCID: PMC3722333
PMID: 23584039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

