
1. Cancer Gene Ther. 2013 May;20(5):276-81. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2013.17. Epub 2013 Apr 
19.

Expression of β-glucuronidase on the surface of bacteria enhances activation of
glucuronide prodrugs.

Cheng CM(1), Chen FM, Lu YL, Tzou SC, Wang JY, Kao CH, Liao KW, Cheng TC, Chuang 
CH, Chen BM, Roffler S, Cheng TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquaculture, National Kaohsiung Marine University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.

Extracellular activation of hydrophilic glucuronide prodrugs by β-glucuronidase
(βG) was examined to increase the therapeutic efficacy of bacteria-directed
enzyme prodrug therapy (BDEPT). βG was expressed on the surface of Escherichia
coli by fusion to either the bacterial autotransporter protein Adhesin (membrane 
βG (mβG)/AIDA) or the lipoprotein (lpp) outermembrane protein A (mβG/lpp). Both
mβG/AIDA and mβG/lpp were expressed on the bacterial surface, but only mβG/AIDA
displayed enzymatic activity. The rate of substrate hydrolysis by
mβG/AIDA-BL21cells was 2.6-fold greater than by pβG-BL21 cells, which express
periplasmic βG. Human colon cancer HCT116 cells that were incubated with
mβG/AIDA-BL21 bacteria were sensitive to a glucuronide prodrug (p-hydroxy aniline
mustard β-D-glucuronide, HAMG) with an half maximal inhibitory concentration
(IC50) value of 226.53±45.4 μM, similar to the IC50 value of the active drug
(p-hydroxy aniline mustard, pHAM; 70.6±6.75 μM), indicating that mβG/AIDA on BL21
bacteria could rapidly and efficiently convert HAMG to an active anticancer
agent. These results suggest that surface display of functional βG on bacteria
can enhance the hydrolysis of glucuronide prodrugs and may increase the
effectiveness of BDEPT.

DOI: 10.1038/cgt.2013.17 
PMID: 23598434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

