
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2013 Jun;16(2):178-83. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.04.004.
Epub 2013 Apr 17.

Brazilian propolis ameliorates trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid-induced colitis in
mice by inhibiting Th1 differentiation.

Okamoto Y(1), Hara T, Ebato T, Fukui T, Masuzawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Chiba
Institute of Science, 3 Shiomi-cho, Choshi, Chiba 288-0025, Japan.
yokamoto@cis.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Propolis is a resinous substance collected by honeybees from leaf
buds and cracks in the bark of various plants. We previously demonstrated the
inhibitory activity of Brazilian propolis ethanolic extract against the
differentiation process of Th17 cells and pathogenesis of collagen-induced
arthritis, which is an experimental animal model of rheumatoid arthritis. Th1
cells are also involved in several autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, such as 
inflammatory bowel disease. In the present study, we demonstrated for the first
time that Brazilian propolis significantly inhibited the generation of Th1 cells.
Furthermore, we hypothesized that the administration of propolis to a murine
model of colitis would suppress Th1 cell differentiation and ultimately
ameliorate colitis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: CD4 T cells were stimulated under Th1-polarizing
conditions (immobilized anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies with IL-12 plus an
anti-IL-4 monoclonal antibody for 5days) with or without the propolis ethanolic
extract. Cells were characterized for helper T cell subsets by flow cytometric
analysis. Furthermore, we investigated the effects of propolis on
2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS)-induced colitis in a mouse model.
RESULTS: Propolis dose-dependently reduced the frequency of IFNγ-producing CD4 T 
cells under Th1-polarizing conditions. Furthermore, the inhibitory effect of
propolis on Th1 differentiation was demonstrated in vivo. The severity of colitis
in mice fed propolis was significantly lower than that of mice fed the control
diet.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that the suppressive effect of Brazilian
propolis on Th1 differentiation may be useful in controlling unbalanced cytokine 
networks in autoimmune diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2013.04.004 
PMID: 23602915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

