
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 May 22;135(20):7496-502. doi: 10.1021/ja311078s. Epub 2013
May 13.

Mechanistic insights into the bifunctional non-heme iron oxygenase carbapenem
synthase by active site saturation mutagenesis.

Phelan RM(1), Townsend CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 North Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA.

The carbapenem class of β-lactam antibiotics is known for its remarkable potency,
antibacterial spectrum, and resistance to β-lactamase-mediated inactivation.
While the biosynthesis of structurally "complex" carbapenems, such as
thienamycin, share initial biochemical steps with carbapenem-3-carboxylate
("simple" carbapenem), the requisite inversion at C5 and formation of the
characteristic α,β-unsaturated carboxylate are different in origin between the
two groups. Here, we consider carbapenem synthase, a mechanistically distinct
bifunctional non-heme iron α-ketoglutarate-dependent enzyme responsible for the
terminal reactions, C5 epimerization and desaturation, in simple carbapenem
production. Interestingly, this enzyme accepts two stereoisomeric substrates and 
transforms each to a common active antibiotic. Owing both to enzyme and product
instability, resorting to saturation mutagenesis of active site and selected
second-sphere residues gave clearly differing profiles of CarC tolerance to
structural modification. Guided by a crystal structure and the mutational data,
in silico docking was used to suggest the positioning of each disastereomeric
substrate in the active site. The two orientations relative to the reactive
iron-oxo center are manifest in the two distinct reactions, C5-epimerization and 
C2/3-desaturation. These observations favor a two-step reaction scheme involving 
two complete oxidative cycles as opposed to a single catalytic cycle in which an 
active site tyrosine, Tyr67, after hydrogen donation to achieve bicyclic ring
inversion, is further hypothesized to serve as a radical carrier.

DOI: 10.1021/ja311078s 
PMCID: PMC3683866
PMID: 23611403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

