
1. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 19;8(4):e61761. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061761. Print 2013.

CBAP functions as a novel component in chemokine-induced ZAP70-mediated T-cell
adhesion and migration.

Chiang YJ(1), Ho KC, Sun CT, Chiu JJ, Lee FJ, Liao F, Yang-Yen HF, Yen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Activated chemokine receptor initiates inside-out signaling to transiently
trigger activation of integrins, a process involving multiple components that
have not been fully characterized. Here we report that GM-CSF/IL-3/IL-5 receptor 
common beta-chain-associated protein (CBAP) is required to optimize this
inside-out signaling and activation of integrins. First, knockdown of CBAP
expression in human Jurkat T cells caused attenuated CXC chemokine ligand-12
(CXCL12)-induced cell migration and integrin α4β1- and αLβ2-mediated cell
adhesion in vitro, which could be rescued sufficiently upon expression of murine 
CBAP proteins. Freshly isolated CBAP-deficient primary T cells also exhibited
diminution of chemotaxis toward CC chemokine ligand-21 (CCL21) and CXCL12, and
these chemokines-induced T-cell adhesions in vitro. Adoptive transfer of isolated
naive T cells demonstrated that CBAP deficiency significantly reduced lymph node 
homing ability in vivo. Finally, migration of T cell-receptor-activated T cells
induced by inflammatory chemokines was also attenuated in CBAP-deficient cells.
Further analyses revealed that CBAP constitutively associated with both integrin 
β1 and ZAP70 and that CBAP is required for chemokine-induced initial binding of
the talin-Vav1 complex to integrin β1 and to facilitate subsequent ZAP70-mediated
dissociation of the talin-Vav1 complex and Vav1 phosphorylation. Within such an
integrin signaling complex, CBAP likely functions as an adaptor and ultimately
leads to activation of both integrin α4β1 and Rac1. Taken together, our data
suggest that CBAP indeed can function as a novel signaling component within the
ZAP70/Vav1/talin complex and plays an important role in regulating
chemokine-promoted T-cell trafficking.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061761 
PMCID: PMC3631140
PMID: 23620790  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

