
1. J Immunol. 2013 Jun 1;190(11):5516-25. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202298. Epub 2013
Apr 29.

OX40L/Jagged1 cosignaling by GM-CSF-induced bone marrow-derived dendritic cells
is required for the expansion of functional regulatory T cells.

Gopisetty A(1), Bhattacharya P, Haddad C, Bruno JC Jr, Vasu C, Miele L, Prabhakar
BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Earlier, we had demonstrated that treatment with low dose of GM-CSF can prevent
the development of experimental autoimmune thyroiditis (EAT), experimental
autoimmune myasthenia gravis, and type 1 diabetes, and could also reverse ongoing
EAT and experimental autoimmune myasthenia gravis. The protective effect was
mediated through the induction of tolerogenic CD11C(+)CD8Î±(-) dendritic cells
(DCs) and consequent expansion of Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells (Tregs).
Subsequently, we showed that GM-CSF acted specifically on bone marrow precursors 
and facilitated their differentiation into tolerogenic dendritic cells (DCs;
GM-CSF-induced bone marrow-derived DCs [GM-BMDCs]), which directed Treg expansion
in a contact-dependent manner. This novel mechanism of Treg expansion was
independent of TCR-mediated signaling but required exogenous IL-2 and cosignaling
from DC-bound OX40L. In this study, we observed that OX40L-mediated signaling by 
GM-BMDCs, although necessary, was not sufficient for Treg expansion and required 
signaling by Jagged1. Concurrent signaling induced by OX40L and Jagged1 via OX40 
and Notch3 receptors expressed on Tregs was essential for the Treg expansion with
sustained FoxP3 expression. Adoptive transfer of only OX40L(+)Jagged1(+) BMDCs
led to Treg expansion, increased production of IL-4 and IL-10, and suppression of
EAT in the recipient mice. These results showed a critical role for OX40L- and
Jagged1-induced cosignaling in GM-BMDC-induced Treg expansion.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202298 
PMCID: PMC3660466
PMID: 23630352  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

