
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 14;288(24):17559-68. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.453605. Epub
2013 Apr 30.

Isolation, characterization, and aggregation of a structured bacterial matrix
precursor.

Chai L(1), Romero D, Kayatekin C, Akabayov B, Vlamakis H, Losick R, Kolter R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Biofilms are surface-associated groups of microbial cells that are embedded in an
extracellular matrix (ECM). The ECM is a network of biopolymers, mainly
polysaccharides, proteins, and nucleic acids. ECM proteins serve a variety of
structural roles and often form amyloid-like fibers. Despite the extensive study 
of the formation of amyloid fibers from their constituent subunits in humans,
much less is known about the assembly of bacterial functional amyloid-like
precursors into fibers. Using dynamic light scattering, atomic force microscopy, 
circular dichroism, and infrared spectroscopy, we show that our unique
purification method of a Bacillus subtilis major matrix protein component results
in stable oligomers that retain their native α-helical structure. The stability
of these oligomers enabled us to control the external conditions that triggered
their aggregation. In particular, we show that stretched fibers are formed on a
hydrophobic surface, whereas plaque-like aggregates are formed in solution under 
acidic pH conditions. TasA is also shown to change conformation upon aggregation 
and gain some β-sheet structure. Our studies of the aggregation of a bacterial
matrix protein from its subunits shed new light on assembly processes of the ECM 
within bacterial biofilms.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.453605 
PMCID: PMC3682555
PMID: 23632024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

