
1. Infect Immun. 2013 Jul;81(7):2584-91. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00269-13. Epub 2013 May 6.

Human leukocyte antigens and cellular immune responses to anthrax vaccine
adsorbed.

Ovsyannikova IG(1), Pankratz VS, Vierkant RA, Pajewski NM, Quinn CP, Kaslow RA,
Jacobson RM, Poland GA.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic Vaccine Research Group, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Interindividual variations in vaccine-induced immune responses are in part due to
host genetic polymorphisms in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) and other gene
families. This study examined associations between HLA genotypes, haplotypes, and
homozygosity and protective antigen (PA)-specific cellular immune responses in
healthy subjects following immunization with Anthrax Vaccine Adsorbed (AVA).
While limited associations were observed between individual HLA alleles or
haplotypes and variable lymphocyte proliferative (LP) responses to AVA, analyses 
of homozygosity supported the hypothesis of a "heterozygote advantage."
Individuals who were homozygous for any HLA locus demonstrated significantly
lower PA-specific LP than subjects who were heterozygous at all eight loci
(median stimulation indices [SI], 1.84 versus 2.95, P = 0.009). Similarly, we
found that class I (HLA-A) and class II (HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQB1) homozygosity was 
significantly associated with an overall decrease in LP compared with
heterozygosity at those three loci. Specifically, individuals who were homozygous
at these loci had significantly lower PA-specific LP than subjects heterozygous
for HLA-A (median SI, 1.48 versus 2.13, P = 0.005), HLA-DQA1 (median SI, 1.75
versus 2.11, P = 0.007), and HLA-DQB1 (median SI, 1.48 versus 2.13, P = 0.002)
loci, respectively. Finally, homozygosity at an increasing number (â‰¥ 4) of HLA
loci was significantly correlated with a reduction in LP response (P < 0.001) in 
a dose-dependent manner. Additional studies are needed to reproduce these
findings and determine whether HLA-heterozygous individuals generate stronger
cellular immune response to other virulence factors (Bacillus anthracis LF and
EF) than HLA-homozygous subjects.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00269-13 
PMCID: PMC3697592
PMID: 23649091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

