
1. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 30;8(4):e62265. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062265. Print 2013.

Dynamics of peripheral blood lymphocyte subpopulations in the acute and subacute 
phase of Legionnaires' disease.

de Jager CP(1), Gemen EF, Leuvenink J, Hilbink M, Laheij RJ, van der Poll T,
Wever PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine and Intensive Care, Jeroen Bosch Hospital,
's-Hertogenbosch, The Netherlands. p.de.jager@jbz.nl

STUDY OBJECTIVE: Absolute lymphocytopenia is recognised as an important hallmark 
of the immune response to severe infection and observed in patients with
Legionnaires' disease. To explore the immune response, we studied the dynamics of
peripheral blood lymphocyte subpopulations in the acute and subacute phase of LD.
METHODS AND RESULTS: EDTA-anticoagulated blood was obtained from eight patients
on the day the diagnosis was made through detection of L. pneumophila serogroup 1
antigen in urine. A second blood sample was obtained in the subacute phase.
Multiparametric flow cytometry was used to calculate lymphocyte counts and values
for B-cells, T-cells, NK cells, CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells. Expression of activation
markers was analysed. The values obtained in the subacute phase were compared
with an age and gender matched control group. Absolute lymphocyte count (×10⁹/l, 
median and range) significantly increased from 0.8 (0.4-1.6) in the acute phase
to 1.4 (0.8-3.4) in the subacute phase. B-cell count showed no significant
change, while T-cell count (×10⁶/l, median and range) significantly increased in 
the subacute phase (495 (182-1024) versus 979 (507-2708), p = 0.012) as a result 
of significant increases in both CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell counts (374 (146-629)
versus 763 (400-1507), p = 0.012 and 119 (29-328) versus 224 (107-862),
p = 0.012). In the subacute phase of LD, significant increases were observed in
absolute counts of activated CD4+ T-cells, naïve CD4+ T-cells and memory CD4+
T-cells. In the CD8+ T-cell compartment, activated CD8+ T-cells, naïve CD8+
T-cell and memory CD8+ T-cells were significantly increased (p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The acute phase of LD is characterized by absolute lymphocytopenia,
which recovers in the subacute phase with an increase in absolute T-cells and
re-emergence of activated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. These observations are in line
with the suggested role for T-cell activation in the immune response to LD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062265 
PMCID: PMC3640018
PMID: 23646123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

