
1. J Biotechnol. 2013 Jun 20;166(1-2):25-33. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2013.04.013.
Epub 2013 May 4.

Engineering Clostridium acetobutylicum for alcohol production.

Hou X(1), Peng W, Xiong L, Huang C, Chen X, Chen X, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology, Ministry of Education, School 
of Biotechnology, JiangNan University, 1800# Lihu Road, Wuxi, JiangSu Province
214122, People's Republic of China. houxiaohu828@163.com

While Clostridium acetobutylicum has been used for large-scale butanol production
(ABE fermentation), its by-product acetone cannot be used as a biofuel. In this
study, C. acetobutylicum was engineered for alcohol titers (butanol plus
ethanol). The adc gene was inactivated to eliminate acetone production, and
glutathione biosynthetic capability was introduced into C. acetobutylicum to
improve the strain's robustness by expressing Escherichia coli's gshAB genes in
the adc locus. Acetone production was reduced from 2.64±0.22 g/L to 0.15±0.08 g/L
in the engineered strain 824adc::gsh, whereas butanol production was increased
from 5.17±0.26 g/L to 8.27±0.27 g/L. To further improve the alcohol titers, the
metabolic flux in the alcohol biosynthesis pathways was enhanced. Overlapping PCR
was used to generate expression cassette EC, which expresses the hbd, thl, crt,
and bcd genes, and the Sol operon was amplified to express the adhE and ctfAB
genes. Butanol and alcohol production reached 14.86±0.26 g/L and 18.11±0.66 g/L, 
respectively, in 824adc::gsh Sol-EC. Furthermore, the butanol and alcohol yields 
were 0.336 g/g and 0.409 g/g, respectively, in 824adc::gsh Sol-EC. This study
provided a combined strategy for enhancing alcohol production in C.
acetobutylicum.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2013.04.013 
PMID: 23651949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

