
1. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2013 Aug;33(8):459-66. doi: 10.1089/jir.2012.0116.
Epub 2013 May 9.

Rapid interferon-gamma release from natural killer cells induced by a
streptococcal commensal.

Bouwer AL(1), Saunderson SC, Dunn AC, Lester KL, Crowley LR, Jack RW, McLellan
AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Otago School of Medical Sciences,
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.

Interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) is a critical cytokine for the initiation of immune
responses against a variety of infectious agents and malignancies. We found that 
a range of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria stimulated the rapid release 
(<24 h) of IFN-γ from murine leukocytes. Using fluorescence activated cell
sorting and cd1d(-/-) and rag1(-/-) mice, we determined that dendritic cells
(DCs) and natural killer (NK) cells were primarily responsible for IFN-γ release 
by Streptococcus salivarius, a Gram-positive commensal, previously noted to
possess potent interleukin-12 (IL-12)-inducing potential. IFN-γ release from NK
cells required DC:NK membrane contact and IL-12/IL-18 expression, but was
independent of lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1-mediated interactions.
IFN-γ release in response to bacteria was maintained in mice deficient for
Toll-like receptor (TLR)-2 and TLR-4, suggesting that bacteria activate
antigen-presenting cells via multiple, redundant pathways. Together, our results 
suggest that Gram-positive bacteria may be useful in driving NK cell activation
and T helper 1 polarization and have the potential for development as effective
adjuvants.

DOI: 10.1089/jir.2012.0116 
PMID: 23659669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

