
1. J Dairy Sci. 2013 Jul;96(7):4160-72. doi: 10.3168/jds.2012-6287. Epub 2013 May 9.

Descriptive analysis and early-stage consumer acceptance of yogurts fermented
with carrot juice.

Cliff MA(1), Fan L, Sanford K, Stanich K, Doucette C, Raymond N.

Author information: 
(1)Pacific Agri-Food Research Centre, Summerland, BC, V0H 1Z0, Canada.
Margaret.Cliff@agr.gc.ca

This research explored the sensory characteristics and consumer acceptance of
novel probiotic unsweetened yogurts. Yogurts were made with 4 carrot juice levels
(8, 16, 24, and 32%), 2 firmness levels (regular, 45g/L milk solids; firm, 90g/L 
milk solids), and 2 starter cultures (C1, C2). The sensory profile characterized 
the color intensity (before and after stirring), carrot flavor, sourness, and 7
texture/mouth-feel attributes (astringency, chalkiness, mouth-coating, thickness,
smoothness, creaminess, and graininess). The influence of carrot juice level and 
firmness level were evaluated using ANOVA, polynomial contrasts, and principal
component analysis. Mean scores and standard errors were calculated. Consumer
acceptance panels in Wolfville, Nova Scotia (n=56), and in Vancouver, British
Columbia (Asian n=72, non-Asian n=72), evaluated the hedonic responses to the C1 
and C2 formulations, respectively. We observed increases in color intensity,
carrot flavor, creaminess, mouth-coating, and chalkiness with increasing carrot
juice levels, as well as increases in color intensity, carrot flavor, creaminess,
mouth-coating, thickness, and astringency with increasing milk solids
concentrations of the C1 and C2 yogurts. Mean hedonic scores for color,
appearance, and texture/mouth-feel were greater than hedonic scores for aroma,
flavor/taste, and overall liking. This research identified the sensory qualities 
that need further development and demonstrated the importance of early-stage
consumer acceptance research for directing new product development.

Copyright Â© 2013 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2012-6287 
PMID: 23664338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

