
1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Jun 28;23(6):779-84.

Chemogenomics profiling of drug targets of peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway in 
Leptospira interrogans by virtual screening approaches.

Bhattacharjee B(1), Simon RM, Gangadharaiah C, Karunakar P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, PES Institute of Technology, Bangalore, India.
biplabbhattacharjee2010@gmail.com

Leptospirosis is a worldwide zoonosis of global concern caused by Leptospira
interrogans. The availability of ligand libraries has facilitated the search for 
novel drug targets using chemogenomics approaches, compared with the traditional 
method of drug discovery, which is time consuming and yields few leads with
little intracellular information for guiding target selection. Recent subtractive
genomics studies have revealed the putative drug targets in peptidoglycan
biosynthesis pathways in Leptospira interrogans. Aligand library for the murD
ligase enzyme in the peptidoglycan pathway has also been identified. Our approach
in this research involves screening of the pre-existing ligand library of murD
with related protein family members in the putative drug target assembly in the
peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway. A chemogenomics approach has been implemented
here, which involves screening of known ligands of a protein family having
analogous domain architecture for identification of leads for existing druggable 
protein family members. By means of this approach, one murC and one murF
inhibitor were identified, providing a platform for developing an
antileptospirosis drug targeting the peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway. Given
that the peptidoglycan biosynthesis pathway is exclusive to bacteria, the in
silico identified mur ligase inhibitors are expected to be broad-spectrum
Gram-negative inhibitors if synthesized and tested in in vitro and in vivo
assays.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1206.06050 
PMID: 23676922  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

