
1. PLoS One. 2013 May 9;8(5):e63178. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063178. Print 2013.

γδ T cells acquire effector fates in the thymus and differentiate into
cytokine-producing effectors in a Listeria model of infection independently of
CD28 costimulation.

Laird RM(1), Wolf BJ, Princiotta MF, Hayes SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, State University of New York,
Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York, USA.

Both antigen recognition and CD28 costimulation are required for the activation
of naïve αβ T cells and their subsequent differentiation into cytokine-producing 
or cytotoxic effectors. Notably, this two-signal paradigm holds true for all αβ T
cell subsets, regardless of whether they acquire their effector function in the
periphery or the thymus. Because of contradictory results, however, it remains
unresolved as to whether CD28 costimulation is necessary for γδ T cell activation
and differentiation. Given that γδ T cells have been recently shown to acquire
their effector fates in the thymus, it is conceivable that the contradictory
results may be explained, in part, by a differential requirement for CD28
costimulation in the development or differentiation of each γδ T cell effector
subset. To test this, we examined the role of CD28 in γδ T cell effector fate
determination and function. We report that, although IFNγ-producing γδ T
(γδ-IFNγ) cells express higher levels of CD28 than IL-17-producing γδ T (γδ-17)
cells, CD28-deficiency had no effect on the thymic development of either subset. 
Also, following Listeria infection, we found that the expansion and
differentiation of γδ-17 and γδ-IFNγ effectors were comparable between CD28(+/+) 
and CD28(-/-) mice. To understand why CD28 costimulation is dispensable for γδ T 
cell activation and differentiation, we assessed glucose uptake and utilization
by γδ T cells, as CD28 costimulation is known to promote glycolysis in αβ T
cells. Importantly, we found that γδ T cells express higher surface levels of
glucose transporters than αβ T cells and, when activated, exhibit effector
functions over a broader range of glucose concentrations than activated αβ T
cells. Together, these data not only demonstrate an enhanced glucose metabolism
in γδ T cells but also provide an explanation for why γδ T cells are less
dependent on CD28 costimulation than αβ T cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063178 
PMCID: PMC3650071
PMID: 23671671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

