
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Aug;57(8):3614-9. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02468-12.
Epub 2013 May 20.

Isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide plasma concentrations in relation to
treatment response in Indonesian pulmonary tuberculosis patients.

Burhan E(1), Ruesen C, Ruslami R, Ginanjar A, Mangunnegoro H, Ascobat P, Donders 
R, van Crevel R, Aarnoutse R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology and Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia.

Comment in
    Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014;58(1):628.
    Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014;58(1):629-30.

Numerous studies have reported low concentrations of antituberculosis drugs in
tuberculosis (TB) patients, but few studies have examined whether low drug
concentrations affect TB treatment response. We examined steady-state plasma
concentrations of isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide at 2 h after the
administration of drugs (C(2 h)) among 181 patients with pulmonary tuberculosis
in Indonesia and related these to bacteriological response during treatment. C(2 
h) values below reference values for either isoniazid, rifampin, or pyrazinamide 
were found in 91% of patients; 60% had at least two low C(2 h) concentrations.
The isoniazid C2 h was noticeably lower in fast versus slow acetylators (0.9
mg/liter versus 2.2 mg/liter, P < 0.001). At the end of treatment, 82% of the
patients were cured, whereas 30 patients (17%) had dropped out during the study, 
and 2 patients (1%) failed treatment. No association was found between C(2 h)
concentrations and sputum culture results at 8 weeks of treatment. Post hoc
analysis showed that patients with low pyrazinamide C2 h (P = 0.01) and patients 
with large extensive lung lesions (P = 0.01) were at risk of at least one
positive culture at week 4, 8, or 24/32. Antituberculosis drug concentrations
were often low, but treatment response was nevertheless good. No association was 
found between drug concentrations and 8 weeks culture conversion, but low
pyrazinamide drug concentrations may be associated with a less favorable
bacteriological response. The use of higher doses of pyrazinamide may warrant
further investigation.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02468-12 
PMCID: PMC3719785
PMID: 23689725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

