
1. Brain Behav Immun. 2014 Jul;39:142-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2013.05.003. Epub 2013 
May 15.

The effects of age and latent cytomegalovirus infection on the redeployment of
CD8+ T cell subsets in response to acute exercise in humans.

Spielmann G(1), Bollard CM(2), Bigley AB(1), Hanley PJ(2), Blaney JW(2), LaVoy
EC(1), Pircher H(3), Simpson RJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Integrated Physiology, Department of Health and Human
Performance, University of Houston, 3855 Holman Street, Houston, TX 77204, USA.
(2)Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX,
USA.
(3)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Department of Immunology,
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Laboratory of Integrated Physiology, Department of Health and Human
Performance, University of Houston, 3855 Holman Street, Houston, TX 77204, USA.
Electronic address: rjsimpson@uh.edu.

Dynamic exercise evokes a rapid redeployment of cytotoxic T cell subsets with
high expression of β2 adrenergic receptors, presumably to enhance
immunosurveillance during acute stress. As this response is affected by age and
infection history, this study examined latent CMV infection as a potential
confounder to age-related differences in blood CD8+ T-cell responses to exercise.
Healthy young (n=16) and older (n=16) humans counterbalanced by CMV IgG
serostatus (positive or negative) exercised for 30-min at ∼80% peak cycling
power. Those with CMV redeployed ∼2-times more CD8+ T-cells and ∼6-times more
KLRG1+/CD28- and CD45RA+/CCR7- CD8+ subsets than non-infected exercisers.
Seronegative older exercisers had an impaired redeployment of total CD8+ T-cells,
CD45RA+/CCR7+ and KLRG1-/CD28+ CD8+ subsets compared to young. Redeployed CD8+
T-cell numbers were similar between infected young and old. CMVpp65 specific CD8+
cells in HLA/A2(∗) subjects increased ∼2.7-fold after exercise, a response that
was driven by the KLRG1+/CD28-/CD8+ subset. Stimulating PBMCs before and after
exercise with CMVpp65 and CMV IE-1 antigens and overlapping peptide pools
revealed a 2.1 and 4.4-fold increases in CMVpp65 and CMV IE-1 IFN-γ secreting
cells respectively. The breadth of the T cell response was maintained after
exercise with the magnitude of the response being amplified across the entire
epitope repertoire. To conclude, latent CMV infection overrides age-related
impairments in CD8+ T-cell redeployment with exercise. We also show for the first
time that many T-cells redeployed with exercise are specific to CMVpp65 and CMV
IE-1 antigens, have broad epitope specificity, and are mostly of a
high-differentiated effector memory phenotype.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2013.05.003 
PMID: 23684819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

