
1. Transfusion. 2014 Jan;54(1):211-23. doi: 10.1111/trf.12239. Epub 2013 May 21.

Successful short-term cryopreservation of volume-reduced cord blood units in a
cryogenic mechanical freezer: effects on cell recovery, viability, and clonogenic
potential.

Anagnostakis I(1), Papassavas AC, Michalopoulos E, Chatzistamatiou T,
Andriopoulou S, Tsakris A, Stavropoulos-Giokas C.

Author information: 
(1)Hellenic Cord Blood Bank, Foundation for Biomedical Research, Academy of
Athens; Department of Immunology and National Tissue Typing Center, "G.
Gennimatas" General Hospital; Department of Microbiology, Medical School,
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Cord blood (CB) units are stored from weeks to years in liquid- or
vapor-phase nitrogen until they are used for transplantation. We examined the
effects of cryostorage in a mechanical freezer at -150°C on critical quality
control variables of CB collections to investigate the possible use of mechanical
freezers at -150°C as an alternative to storage in liquid- (or vapor-) phase
nitrogen.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 105 CB units were thawed and washed at
different time intervals (6, 12, 24, and 36 months). For every thawed CB unit,
samples were removed and cell enumeration (total nucleated cells [TNCs],
mononuclear cells [MNCs], CD34+, CD133+) was performed. In addition, viability
was obtained with the use of flow cytometry, and recoveries were calculated.
Also, total absolute colony-forming unit counts were performed and progenitor
cell recoveries were studied by clonogenic assays.
RESULTS: Significant differences (p < 0.05) were observed in certain variables
(TNCs, MNC numbers, viability) when they were examined in relation with time
intervals, while others (CD34+, CD133+) were relatively insensitive (p = NS) to
the duration of time interval the CB units were kept in cryostorage condition.
CONCLUSIONS: The data presented suggest that cryopreservation of CB units in a
mechanical freezer at -150°C may represent an alternative cryostorage condition
for CB cryopreservation.

© 2013 American Association of Blood Banks.

DOI: 10.1111/trf.12239 
PMID: 23692393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

