
1. Chemosphere. 2013 Aug;92(7):811-20. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.04.025. Epub 
2013 May 22.

Impact of addition of amendments on the degradation of DDT and its residues
partitioned on soil.

Singh SP(1), Bose P, Guha S, Gurjar SK, Bhalekar S.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Engineering and Management Programme, Department of Civil
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208 016, India.

Market-grade DDT used for mosquito control and other purposes is a mixture of
4,4-DDT, 2,4-DDT and smaller amounts of 4,4-DDD, 2,4-DDD, 4,4-DDE and 4,4-DDMU.
All above components (together known as DDTr) are strongly hydrophobic and hence 
are present in the environment predominantly in the soil/sediment phases. The
persistence of DDTr and the feasibility of attenuation of DDTr concentration in
soil matrix through addition of amendments is a subject of ongoing interest. The 
objective of this study was to compare the decline of soil-partitioned DDTr
concentration through, (1) the natural attenuation process, (2) enhanced aerobic 
and anaerobic biodegradation processes involving addition of acclimatized seed
and co-metabolites and (3) Nanoscale Zero Valent Iron (NZVI) addition. The extent
of decline in soil DDTr concentration in control experiments, where
biodegradation and photolysis were excluded, was around 10-15% in ∼100d. Extent
of DDTr decline in natural attenuation experiments was 25-30% and 15-20% under
aerobic and anaerobic conditions respectively. In enhanced biodegradation
experiments, addition of acclimatized seed and/or co-metabolites did not enhance 
the extent of DDTr attenuation over and above the natural attenuation rates both 
in aerobic and anaerobic conditions. It thus appeared that biodegradation of DDTr
adsorbed on soil was severely limited and controlled by desorption and consequent
bioavailability of DDTr in the aqueous phase. In case of NZVI addition, the rate 
of DDTr degradation was much faster, with 40% decrease in DDTr concentration
within 28h of NZVI addition. Here, the faster DDTr degradation may be through
direct electron transfer between NZVI particles and DDTr molecules adsorbed on
soil. Increase in the concentration of 4,4-DDD and 2,4-DDD during NZVI addition
suggest that these compounds are either intermediate or end products of DDT
degradation process.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.04.025 
PMID: 23706893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

