
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 11;110(24):9879-84. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1303524110. Epub 2013 May 28.

HHLA2 is a member of the B7 family and inhibits human CD4 and CD8 T-cell
function.

Zhao R(1), Chinai JM, Buhl S, Scandiuzzi L, Ray A, Jeon H, Ohaegbulam KC, Ghosh
K, Zhao A, Scharff MD, Zang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

T-cell costimulation and coinhibition generated by engagement of the B7 family
and their receptor CD28 family are of central importance in regulating the T-cell
response, making these pathways very attractive therapeutic targets. Here we
describe HERV-H LTR-associating protein 2 (HHLA2) as a member of the B7 family
that shares 10-18% amino acid identity and 23-33% similarity to other human B7
proteins and phylogenetically forms a subfamily with B7x and B7-H3 within the
family. HHLA2 is expressed in humans but not in mice, which is unique within the 
B7 and CD28 families. HHLA2 protein is constitutively expressed on the surface of
human monocytes and is induced on B cells after stimulation with LPS and IFN-γ.
HHLA2 does not interact with other known members of the CD28 family or the B7
family, but does bind a putative receptor that is constitutively expressed not
only on resting and activated CD4 and CD8 T cells but also on antigen-presenting 
cells. HHLA2 inhibits proliferation of both CD4 and CD8 T cells in the presence
of T-cell receptor signaling. In addition, HHLA2 significantly reduces cytokine
production by T cells including IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-5, IL-10, IL-13, IL-17A, and
IL-22. Thus, we have identified a unique B7 pathway that is able to inhibit human
CD4 and CD8 T-cell proliferation and cytokine production. This unique human
T-cell coinhibitory pathway may afford unique strategies for the treatment of
human cancers, autoimmune disorders, infection, and transplant rejection and may 
help to design better vaccines.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1303524110 
PMCID: PMC3683785
PMID: 23716685  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

