
1. Am J Chin Med. 2013;41(3):531-44. doi: 10.1142/S0192415X13500389.

Identification of Magnolia officinalis L. bark extract as the most potent
anti-inflammatory of four plant extracts.

Walker JM(1), Maitra A, Walker J, Ehrnhoefer-Ressler MM, Inui T, Somoza V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional and Physiological Chemistry, University of Vienna,
Althanstrasse 14, 1090, Vienna, Austria.

This study was designed to compare the anti-inflammatory potential of a Magnolia 
officinalis L. bark extract solely or in combination with extracts prepared from 
either Polygonum aviculare L., Sambucus nigra L., or Isodon japonicus L. in
bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulated human gingival fibroblasts (HGF-1) 
and human U-937 monocytes, as cell models of periodontal disease. HGF-1 and U-937
cells were incubated with LPS from either Porphyromonas gingivalis or Escherichia
coli together with the four plant extracts alone or in combination. Secretion of 
anti-inflammatory cytokines from HGF-1 and U-937 cells was measured by means of a
multiplexed bead assay system. Magnolia officinalis L. bark extract, at
concentrations of 1 μg/mL and 10 μg/mL, reduced interleukin 6 (IL-6) and
interleukin-8 (IL-8) secretion from HGF-1 cells to 72.5 ± 28.6% and reduced
matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2) and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9)
secretion from U-937 cells to 8.87 ± 7.97% compared to LPS-treated cells (100%). 
The other three extracts also reduced secretion of these inflammatory markers but
were not as effective. Combination of 9 μg/mL Magnolia officinalis L. extract
with 1 μg/mL of each of the other extracts maintained the anti-inflammatory
effect of Magnolia officinalis L. extract. Combination of 5 μg/mL Magnolia
officinalis L. extract with 5 μg/mL Isodon japonicus L. extract also maintained
the anti-inflammatory potential of the Magnolia officinalis L. extract, whereas
increasing concentrations of any of the other plant extracts in the combination
experiments reduced the Magnolia officinalis L. extract efficacy in U-937 cells.

DOI: 10.1142/S0192415X13500389 
PMID: 23711140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

