
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 5;288(27):19715-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.449652. Epub 2013
May 17.

Phosphorylation of minichromosome maintenance protein 7 (MCM7) by
cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase affects its function in cell cycle regulation.

Wei Q(1), Li J, Liu T, Tong X, Ye X.

Author information: 
(1)Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and
Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100101, China.

MCM7 is one of the subunits of the MCM2-7 complex that plays a critical role in
DNA replication initiation and cell proliferation of eukaryotic cells. After
forming the pre-replication complex (pre-RC) with other components, the MCM2-7
complex is activated by DDK/cyclin-dependent kinase to initiate DNA replication. 
Each subunit of the MCM2-7 complex functions differently under regulation of
various kinases on the specific site, which needs to be investigated in detail.
In this study, we demonstrated that MCM7 is a substrate of cyclin E/Cdk2 and can 
be phosphorylated on Ser-121. We found that the distribution of MCM7-S121A is
different from wild-type MCM7 and that the MCM7-S121A mutant is much less
efficient to form a pre-RC complex with MCM3/MCM5/cdc45 compared with wild-type
MCM7. By using the Tet-On inducible HeLa cell line, we revealed that
overexpression of wild-type MCM7 but not MCM7-S121A can block S phase entry,
suggesting that an excess of the pre-RC complex may activate the cell cycle
checkpoint. Further analysis indicates that the Chk1 pathway is activated in
MCM7-overexpressed cells in a p53-dependent manner. We performed experiments with
the human normal cell line HL-7702 and also observed that overexpression of MCM7 
can cause S phase block through checkpoint activation. In addition, we found that
MCM7 could also be phosphorylated by cyclin B/Cdk1 on Ser-121 both in vitro and
in vivo. Furthermore, overexpression of MCM7-S121A causes an obvious M phase exit
delay, which suggests that phosphorylation of MCM7 on Ser-121 in M phase is very 
important for a proper mitotic exit. These data suggest that the phosphorylation 
of MCM7 on Ser-121 by cyclin/Cdks is involved in preventing DNA rereplication as 
well as in regulation of the mitotic exit.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.449652 
PMCID: PMC3707676
PMID: 23720738  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

