
1. ISRN Microbiol. 2012 Mar 27;2012:345791. doi: 10.5402/2012/345791. Print 2012.

Modulation of neutrophil apoptosis by antimicrobial peptides.

Nagaoka I(1), Suzuki K, Niyonsaba F, Tamura H, Hirata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Host Defense and Biochemical Research, Juntendo University,
Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.

Peptide antibiotics possess the potent antimicrobial activities against invading 
microorganisms and contribute to the innate host defense. Human antimicrobial
peptides, α-defensins (human neutrophil peptides, HNPs), human β-defensins
(hBDs), and cathelicidin (LL-37) not only exhibit potent bactericidal activities 
against Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria, but also function as
immunomodulatory molecules by inducing cytokine and chemokine production, and
inflammatory and immune cell activation. Neutrophil is a critical effector cell
in host defense against microbial infection, and its lifespan is regulated by
various pathogen- and host-derived substances. Here, we provided the evidence
that HNP-1, hBD-3, and LL-37 cannot only destroy bacteria but also potently
modulate (suppress) neutrophil apoptosis, accompanied with the phosphorylation of
ERK-1/-2, the downregulation of tBid (an proapoptotic protein) and upregulation
of Bcl-xL (an antiapoptotic protein), and the inhibition of mitochondrial
membrane potential change and caspase 3 activity, possibly via the actions on the
distinct receptors, the P2Y6 nucleotide receptor, the chemokine receptor CCR6,
and the low-affinity formyl-peptide receptor FPRL1/the nucleotide receptor P2X7, 
respectively. Suppression of neutrophil apoptosis results in the prolongation of 
their lifespan and may be advantageous for the host defense against bacterial
invasion.

DOI: 10.5402/2012/345791 
PMCID: PMC3658579
PMID: 23724322 

