
1. Transl Oncol. 2013 Jun 1;6(3):329-37. Print 2013 Jun.

Molecular Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Tumors with a PTPµ Targeted Contrast
Agent.

Burden-Gulley SM(1), Zhou Z, Craig SE, Lu ZR, Brady-Kalnay SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, School of Medicine, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH.

Molecular magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of tumors improves the specificity of 
MRI by using targeted probes conjugated to contrast-generating metals. The
limitation of this approach is in the identification of a target molecule present
in sufficient concentration for visualization and the development of a labeling
reagent that can penetrate tumor tissue with the fast kinetics required for use
in a clinical setting. The receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPµ is a
transmembrane protein that is continuously proteolyzed in the tumor
microenvironment to generate a high concentration of extracellular fragment that 
can be recognized by the SBK2 probe. We conjugated the SBK2 peptide to a
gadolinium chelate [SBK2-Tris-(Gd-DOTA)3] to test whether the SBK2 probe could be
developed as an MR molecular imaging probe. When intravenously injected into mice
bearing flank tumors of human glioma cells, SBK2-Tris-(Gd-DOTA)3 labeled the
tumors within 5 minutes with a high level of contrast for up to 2 hours
post-injection. The contrast enhancement of SBK2-Tris-(Gd-DOTA)3 was
significantly higher than that observed with a current MRI macrocyclic gadolinium
chelate (Gadoteridol, ProHance) alone or a scrambled control. These results
demonstrate that SBK2-Tris-(Gd-DOTA)3 labeling of the PTPµ extracellular fragment
is a more specific MR molecular imaging probe than ProHance or a scrambled
control. Consequently, the SBK2 probe may be more useful than the current gold
standard reagent for MRI to identify tumors and to co-register tumor borders
during surgical resection.

DOI: 10.1593/tlo.12490 
PMCID: PMC3660802
PMID: 23730413 

