
1. J Innate Immun. 2013;5(6):625-38. doi: 10.1159/000350515. Epub 2013 May 28.

Intestinal epithelium-derived galectin-9 is involved in the immunomodulating
effects of nondigestible oligosaccharides.

de Kivit S(1), Kraneveld AD, Knippels LM, van Kooyk Y, Garssen J, Willemsen LE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Utrecht Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Dietary intervention using nondigestible oligosaccharides, short-chain
galacto-oligosaccharides (scGOS)/long-chain fructo-oligosaccharides (lcFOS), in
combination with Bifidobacterium breve M-16V prevents allergic disease involving 
galectin-9. In addition, apical TLR9 signaling contributes to intestinal
homeostasis. We studied the contribution of galectin-9 secreted by intestinal
epithelial cells (IEC; HT-29 and T84) in Th1 and regulatory T-cell (Treg)
polarization in vitro. IEC were grown in transwell filters, cocultured with
CD3/CD28-activated human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and apically
exposed to genomic DNA derived from B. breve M-16V or synthetic TLR9 ligand in
the absence or presence of scGOS/lcFOS. Cytokine production and T-cell phenotype 
were determined and galectin expression by IEC was assessed. Galectin-9 was
neutralized using lactose or a TIM-3-Fc fusion protein. IEC exposed to DNA from
B. breve M-16V or TLR9 ligand in the presence of scGOS/lcFOS enhanced IFN-γ
secretion by PBMC and increased the percentage of Th1 and Treg cells. Expression 
and secretion of galectin-9 by IEC was increased and neutralization of galectin-9
prevented the induction of IFN-γ secretion and also suppressed the production of 
IL-10 by PBMC. Furthermore, we show that galectin-9 induces Treg and Th1
polarization through interaction with antigen-presenting cells. Our findings show
that galectin-9 secreted by IEC apically exposed to TLR9 ligand in the presence
of scGOS/lcFOS is involved in Th1 and Treg polarization and may be a promising
target to prevent or treat allergic disease.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000350515 
PMCID: PMC6741535
PMID: 23735749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

