
1. J Immunol. 2013 Jul 1;191(1):448-55. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203061. Epub 2013 Jun
3.

Role of high endothelial venule-expressed heparan sulfate in chemokine
presentation and lymphocyte homing.

Tsuboi K(1), Hirakawa J, Seki E, Imai Y, Yamaguchi Y, Fukuda M, Kawashima H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan.

Lymphocyte homing to peripheral lymph nodes (PLNs) is mediated by multistep
interactions between lymphocytes and high endothelial venules (HEVs). Heparan
sulfate (HS) has been implicated in the presentation of chemokines on the surface
of HEVs during this process. However, it remains unclear whether this cell
surface presentation is a prerequisite for lymphocyte homing. In this study, we
generated conditional knockout (cKO) mice lacking Ext1, which encodes a
glycosyltransferase essential for HS synthesis, by crossing Ext1(flox/flox) mice 
with GlcNAc6ST-2-Cre transgenic mice expressing Cre recombinase in HEVs.
Immunohistochemical studies indicated that HS expression was specifically
eliminated in PLN HEVs but retained in other blood vessels in the cKO mice. The
accumulation of a major secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine, CCL21, on HEVs was
also abrogated without affecting CCL21 mRNA levels, indicating that HS presents
CCL21 on HEVs in vivo. Notably, a short-term lymphocyte homing assay indicated
that lymphocyte homing to PLNs was diminished in the cKO mice by 30-40%.
Consistent with this result, contact hypersensitivity responses were also
diminished in the cKO mice. The residual lymphocyte homing to PLNs in the cKO
mice was dependent on pertussis toxin-sensitive Gi protein signaling, in which
lysophosphatidic acid-mediated signaling was partly involved. These results
suggest that chemokine presentation by HS on the surface of HEVs facilitates but 
is not absolutely required for lymphocyte homing.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203061 
PMCID: PMC3694755
PMID: 23733868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

