
1. Food Chem Toxicol. 2013 Sep;59:177-86. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2013.05.041. Epub 2013 
Jun 6.

Change in kidney damage biomarkers after 13 weeks of exposing rats to the complex
of Paecilomyces sinclairii and its host Bombyx mori larvae.

Jeong M(1), Kim YW, Min JR, Kwon M, Han BS, Kim JG, Jeong SH.

Author information: 
(1)Agro-Material Safety Evaluating Division, National Academy of Agricultural
Science, Rural Development Administration, Suwon 441-707, Republic of Korea.

Complex of Paecilomyces sinclairii and host larvae, Bombyx mori, is a well known 
health food; however, concerns about nephrotoxicity have been raised. Kidney
toxicity was investigated after 13 weeks of administering the complex orally to
rats with parameters including blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, and kidney 
damage biomarkers, beta-2-microglobulin (β2m), glutathione S-transferase alpha
(GST-α), kidney injury molecule 1 (KIM-1), tissue inhibitor of matrix
metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP-1), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
calbindin, clusterin, cystatin C, neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin
(NGAL), and osteopontin. Dose-dependent kidney cell karyomegaly and tubular
hypertrophy were observed, with higher severity in males. There was a
dose-dependent increase in KIM-1 and TIMP-1 levels in kidney and urinary KIM-1,
cystatin C, β2m, and osteopontin levels. KIM-1 and TIMP-1 increased in male
kidneys had not recovered by 2 weeks after stopping exposure. Cystatin C in
kidney was significantly lowered in all treatment groups at 13 weeks of
administration. All the changes were more noticeable in males. These data
indicate that the complex damage renal tubule cells with histopathological
lesions and changes in biomarker levels. Kidney and urinary KIM-1 and cystatin C 
were the most markedly affected and early increased indicators among biomarkers
tested, whereas BUN and creatinine were not affected.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fct.2013.05.041 
PMID: 23747716  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

