
1. APMIS. 2013 Sep;121(9):806-13. doi: 10.1111/apm.12120. Epub 2013 Jun 12.

Immunophenotype of peripheral blood natural killer cells and IL-10 serum levels
in relation to Helicobacter pylori status.

Rudnicka K(1), Matusiak A, Miszczyk E, Rudnicka W, Tenderenda M, Chmiela M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gastroimmunology, Department of Immunology and Infectious
Biology, Faculty of Biology and Environmental Protection, University of Lodz,
Lodz, Poland.

Recent findings suggest that NK (Natural Killer) cells may directly modulate the 
antimicrobial immune responses. In this study, we performed immunophenotypic
analysis of peripheral blood NK cells with regard to CD56, CD16, Nkp46, and CD25 
markers, as well as IL-10 levels quantification in the sera samples of
asymptomatic, H. pylori (Hp)-infected or uninfected individuals, and combined
these results with our previous findings on lymphocyte cytotoxic activity. Twenty
healthy volunteers [10 Hp(-);10 Hp(+)] were included in the study. The
percentages of classic lymphocytes (CD3(+) ) and NK cells (CD3(-) CD56(+) ,
CD3(-) Nkp46(+) , CD3(-) CD16(+) ) with or without CD25 receptor were evaluated
by fluorochrome-conjugated monoclonal antibody staining and flow cytometry
analysis. IL-10 quantification was performed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay-ELISA. Our study showed elevated levels of IL-10 and higher NK cell numbers
of both CD3(-) CD56(+) CD25(+) and CD3(-) Nkp46(+) CD25(+) phenotypes, as well as
CD3(+) CD25(+) classic lymphocytes in Hp(+) compared with Hp(-) individuals. No
differences between Hp(-) and Hp(+) individuals were found either in total number
of classic lymphocytes or NK cell subtypes. Our data suggest that in Hp(+)
donors, there is a domination of lymphocytes and NK cells co-expressing CD25
marker, which might be influenced by the regulatory IL-10. This phenomenon may be
a result of H. pylori adaptation to a changing environment in vivo leading to a
chronic infection and lack of severe gastric pathologies.

Â© 2013 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/apm.12120 
PMID: 23758061  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

