
1. Front Immunol. 2013 Jun 7;4:139. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00139. eCollection 2013.

Regulation of PI-3-Kinase and Akt Signaling in T Lymphocytes and Other Cells by
TNFR Family Molecules.

So T(1), Croft M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University Graduate School
of Medicine , Sendai , Japan.

Activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and Akt (protein kinase B) is a
common response triggered by a range of membrane-bound receptors on many cell
types. In T lymphocytes, the PI3K-Akt pathway promotes clonal expansion,
differentiation, and survival of effector cells and suppresses the generation of 
regulatory T cells. PI3K activation is tightly controlled by signals through the 
T cell receptor (TCR) and the co-stimulatory receptor CD28, however sustained and
periodic signals from additional co-receptors are now being recognized as
critical contributors to the activation of this pathway. Accumulating evidence
suggests that many members of the Tumor Necrosis Factor receptor (TNFR)
superfamily, TNFR2 (TNFRSF1B), OX40 (TNFRSF4), 4-1BB (TNFRSF9), HVEM (TNFRSF14), 
and DR3 (TNFRSF25), that are constitutive or inducible on T cells, can directly
or indirectly promote activity in the PI3K-Akt pathway. We discuss recent data
which suggests that ligation of one TNFR family molecule organizes a signalosome,
via TNFR-associated factor (TRAF) adapter proteins in T cell membrane lipid
microdomains, that results in the subsequent accumulation of highly concentrated 
depots of PI3K and Akt in close proximity to TCR signaling units. We propose this
may be a generalizable mechanism applicable to other TNFR family molecules that
will result in a quantitative contribution of these signalosomes to enhancing and
sustaining PI3K and Akt activation triggered by the TCR. We also review data that
other TNFR molecules, such as CD40 (TNFRSF5), RANK (TNFRSF11A), FN14 (TNFRSF12A),
TACI (TNFRSF13B), BAFFR (TNFRSF13C), and NGFR (TNFRSF16), contribute to the
activation of this pathway in diverse cell types through a similar ability to
recruit PI3K or Akt into their signaling complexes.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00139 
PMCID: PMC3675380
PMID: 23760533 

