
1. FEBS Open Bio. 2013 Mar 28;3:177-83. doi: 10.1016/j.fob.2013.03.004. Print 2013.

Phenylalanine 664 of dipeptidyl peptidase (DPP) 7 and Phenylalanine 671 of DPP11 
mediate preference for P2-position hydrophobic residues of a substrate.

Rouf SM(1), Ohara-Nemoto Y, Ono T, Shimoyama Y, Kimura S, Nemoto TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Molecular Biology, Course of Medical and Dental Sciences,
Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-7-1 Sakamoto,
Nagasaki 852-8588, Japan.

Dipeptidyl peptidases (DPPs) are crucial for the energy metabolism in
Porphyromonas gingivalis, a Gram-negative proteolytic and asaccharolytic
anaerobic rod causing chronic periodontitis. Three DPPs, DPPIV specific for Pro, 
DPP7 for hydrophobic residues and DPP11 for Asp/Glu at the P1 position, are
expressed in the bacterium. Like DPP7, DPP11 belongs to the S46 protease family, 
and they share 38.7% sequence identity. Although DPP11 is preferential for
hydrophobic residues at the P2 position, it has been reported that DPP7 has no
preference at the P2 position. In the present study, we defined the detailed P2
substrate preference of DPP7 and the amino acid residue responsible for the
specificity. DPP7 most efficiently hydrolyzed
Met-Leu-dipeptidyl-4-methylcoumaryl-7-amide (MCA) carrying hydrophobic residues
at the P1 position with k cat/Km of 10.62 ± 2.51 μM(-1) s(-1), while it
unexpectedly cleaved substrates with hydrophilic (Gln, Asn) or charged (Asp, Arg)
residues. Examination with 21 dipeptidyl MCA demonstrated that DPP7-peptidase
activity was dependent on hydrophobicity of the P2- as well as P1-position
residue, thus it correlated best with the sum of the hydrophobicity index of P1- 
and P2-amino acid residues. Hydrophobicity of the P1 and P2 positions ensured
efficient enzyme catalysis by increasing k cat and lowering Km values,
respectively. Substitution of hydrophobic residues conserved in the S46
DPP7/DPP11 family to Ala revealed that Phe664 of DPP7 and Phe671 of DPP11
primarily afforded hydrophobic P2 preference. A modeling study suggested that
Phe664 and Gly666 of DPP7 and Phe671 and Arg673 of DPP11 being associated with
the P2- and P1-position residues, respectively, are located adjacent to the
catalytic Ser648/Ser655. The present results expand the substrate repertoire of
DPP7, which ensures efficient degradation of oligopeptides in asaccharolytic
bacteria.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fob.2013.03.004 
PMCID: PMC3668534
PMID: 23772391 

