
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2013 Aug;79(16):4951-7. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01073-13. Epub
2013 Jun 14.

Adherence to and invasion of human intestinal cells by Arcobacter species and
their virulence genotypes.

Levican A(1), Alkeskas A, Günter C, Forsythe SJ, Figueras MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Microbiologia, Departament de Ciències Mediques Bàsiques, Facultat
de Medicina i Ciències de la Salut, IISPV, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Reus,
Spain.

The genus Arcobacter is composed of 17 species which have been isolated from
various sources. Of particular interest are A. butzleri, A. cryaerophilus, and A.
skirrowii, as these have been associated with human cases of diarrhea, the
probable transmission routes being through the ingestion of contaminated drinking
water and food. To date, only limited studies of virulence traits in this genus
have been undertaken. The present study used 60 Arcobacter strains isolated from 
different sources, representing 16 of the 17 species of the genus, to investigate
their ability to adhere to and invade the human intestinal cell line Caco-2. In
addition, the presence of five putative virulence genes (ciaB, cadF, cj1349,
hecA, and irgA) was screened for in these strains by PCR. All Arcobacter species 
except A. bivalviorum and Arcobacter sp. strain W63 adhered to Caco-2 cells, and 
most species (10/16) were invasive. The most invasive species were A. skirrowii, 
A. cryaerophilus, A. butzleri, and A. defluvii. All invasive strains were
positive for ciaB (encoding a putative invasion protein). Other putative
virulence genes were present in other species, i.e., A. butzleri (cadF, cj1349,
irgA, and hecA), A. trophiarum (cj1349), A. ellisii (cj1349), and A. defluvii
(irgA). No virulence genes were detected in strains which showed little or no
invasion of Caco-2 cells. These results indicate that many Arcobacter species are
potential pathogens of humans and animals.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01073-13 
PMCID: PMC3754706
PMID: 23770897  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

