
1. Pathog Dis. 2013 Aug;68(3):96-104. doi: 10.1111/2049-632X.12055. Epub 2013 Jul 8.

The role of Serpine-1 and Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase type-1 in early
host responses to Staphylococcus aureus intracutaneous infection of mice.

Harslund J(1), Frees D, Leifsson PS, Offenberg H, Rømer MU, Brünner N, Olsen JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Disease Biology, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg C, Denmark.

Staphylococcus aureus is a common cause of skin and soft tissue infections in
animal and humans. In the current study, we hypothesized that early host
responses to S. aureus infection leading to the recruitment of neutrophils and
control of the bacterium at the site of infection depend on the expression of
Serpine-1 and Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase type-1, two important
endogenous proteinase inhibitors that possess regulatory properties on a variety 
of pathophysiological conditions. Using a mouse model of skin infection and
single-gene and double-gene knockout mice, however, our observations showed that 
Serpine-1 and Tissue inhibitor of metalloprotease type-1 did not impact the
number of bacteria accumulating at the site of infection. Double-gene knockout
mice further had the same volume of accumulating host cells at the site of
infection, while single Tissue inhibitor of metalloprotease type-1 knockout mice 
showed a decreased number of cells. Follow-up studies demonstrated changes in
Serpine-1, Tissue inhibitor of metalloprotease type-1 and IL-6 plasma levels
following challenge. In addition, double-gene knockout mice did not differ from
wild-type mice in white blood cell, granulocyte and leucocyte counts, while
single-gene genotypes differed in these phenotypes.

© 2013 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by John Wiley 
& Sons Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/2049-632X.12055 
PMID: 23776165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

