
1. Thromb Haemost. 2013 Sep;110(3):582-92. doi: 10.1160/TH13-01-0052. Epub 2013 Jun 
20.

Protease activated receptor 4 limits bacterial growth and lung pathology during
late stage Streptococcus pneumoniae induced pneumonia in mice.

de Stoppelaar SF(1), Van't Veer C, van den Boogaard FE, Nieuwland R, Hoogendijk
AJ, de Boer OJ, Roelofs JJ, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Sacha F. de Stoppelaar, MD, Academic Medical Center, Center for Experimental
and Molecular Medicine, Meibergdreef 9, Room G2-130, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, the
Netherlands, Tel.: +31 20 5666378, Fax: +31 20 6977192, E-mail:
s.f.destoppelaar@amc.uva.nl.

Streptococcus pneumoniae is a common causative pathogen of pneumonia and sepsis. 
Pneumonia and sepsis are associated with enhanced activation of coagulation,
resulting in the production of several host-derived proteases at the primary site
of infection and in the circulation. Serine proteases cleave protease activated
receptors (PARs), which form a molecular link between coagulation and
inflammation. PAR4 is one of four subtypes of PARs and is widely expressed by
multiple cell types in the respiratory tract implicated in pulmonary
inflammation, by immune cells and by platelets. In mice, mouse (m)PAR4 is the
only thrombin receptor expressed by platelets. We here sought to determine the
contribution of mPAR4 to the host response during pneumococcal pneumonia.
Pneumonia was induced by intranasal inoculation with S. pneumoniae in
mPAR4-deficient (par4-/-) and wild-type mice. Mice were sacrificed after 6, 24 or
48 hours (h). Blood, lungs, liver and spleen were collected for analyses. Ex vivo
stimulation assays were performed with S. pneumoniae and mPAR4 activating
peptides. At 48 h after infection, higher bacterial loads were found in the lungs
and blood of par4-/- mice (p < 0.05), accompanied by higher histopathology scores
and increased cytokine levels (p < 0.05) in the lungs. Ex vivo, co-stimulation
with mPAR4 activating peptide enhanced the whole blood cytokine response to S.
pneumoniae. Thrombin inhibition resulted in decreased cytokine release after S.
pneumoniae stimulation in human whole blood. Our findings suggest that mPAR4
contributes to antibacterial defence during murine pneumococcal pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1160/TH13-01-0052 
PMID: 23783078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

