
1. Braz Oral Res. 2013 Jul-Aug;27(4):369-75. doi: 10.1590/S1806-83242013005000020.

Influence of substratum position and acquired pellicle on Candida albicans
biofilm.

Cavalcanti IM(1), Silva WJ, Lucena SC, Pousa CC, Del Bel Cury AA.

Author information: 
(1)Univ of Campinas-UNICAMP, Piracicaba Dental School, Department of
Prosthodontics and Periodontology, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the influence of the substratum
position and the saliva acquired pellicle (AP) on Candida albicans biofilm
development. Poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) disks were fabricated and randomly
allocated to experimental groups: HNP (disks placed in a horizontal position and 
uncoated by pellicle), VNP (disks placed in a vertical position and uncoated by
pellicle), HCP (disks placed in a horizontal position and coated by pellicle),
and VCP (disks placed in a vertical position and coated by pellicle). Disks were 
placed in a 24-well plate and a suspension of 107 cells/mL of Candida albicans
was added to each well for biofilm development. The plates were aerobically
incubated at 35Â°C. The biofilms were evaluated at 1.5 (adhesion time point), 24, 
48, 72, and 96 hours. The number of viable cells was quantified in terms of the
colony-forming units per milliliter (CFU/mL). Metabolic activity was measured by 
the XTT assay. The biofilm structure was analyzed by scanning electron
microscopy. The data were analyzed by three-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's test,
with significance set at 5%. The vertical groups showed less biofilm formation
and lower metabolic activity than the horizontal groups (p<0.05). Significant
differences in cell viability and metabolic activity were observed between the
adhesion and other time points (p<0.05), but these variables were not affected by
the presence of the pellicle (p>0.05). It can be concluded that the substratum
position influenced biofilm development.

DOI: 10.1590/S1806-83242013005000020 
PMID: 23780496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

