
1. J Immunol. 2013 Aug 1;191(3):1334-45. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300780. Epub 2013
Jun 19.

Co-complexes of MASP-1 and MASP-2 associated with the soluble pattern-recognition
molecules drive lectin pathway activation in a manner inhibitable by MAp44.

Degn SE(1), Jensen L, Olszowski T, Jensenius JC, Thiel S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark.
sdegn@microbiology.au.dk

The lectin pathway of complement is an integral component of innate immunity. It 
is activated upon binding of mannan-binding lectin (MBL) or ficolins (H-, L-, and
M-ficolin) to suitable ligand patterns on microorganisms. MBL and ficolins are
polydisperse homo-oligomeric molecules, found in complexes with MBL-associated
serine proteases (MASP-1, -2, and -3) and MBL-associated proteins (MAp19 and
MAp44). This scenario is far more complex than the well-defined activation
complex of the classical pathway, C1qC1r(2)C1s(2), and the composition of the
activating complexes of the lectin pathway is ill defined. We and other
investigators recently demonstrated that both MASP-1 and MASP-2 are crucial to
lectin pathway activation. MASP-1 transactivates MASP-2 and, although MASP-1 also
cleaves C2, MASP-2 cleaves both C4 and C2, allowing formation of the C3
convertase, C4bC2a. Juxtaposition of MASP-1 and MASP-2 during activation must be 
required for transactivation. We previously presented a possible scenario, which 
parallels that of the classical pathway, in which MASP-1 and MASP-2 are found
together in the same MBL or ficolin complex. In this study, we demonstrate that, 
although MASPs do not directly form heterodimers, the addition of MBL or ficolins
allows the formation of MASP-1-MASP-2 co-complexes. We find that such
co-complexes have a functional role in activating complement and are present in
serum at varying levels, impacting on the degree of complement activation. This
raises the novel possibility that MAp44 may inhibit complement, not simply by
brute force displacement of MASP-2 from MBL or ficolins, but by disruption of
co-complexes, hence impairing transactivation. We present support for this
contention.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300780 
PMID: 23785123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

