
1. Phytochemistry. 2013 Oct;94:45-52. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2013.05.016. Epub
2013 Jun 26.

Abolishing activity against ascorbate in a cytosolic ascorbate peroxidase from
switchgrass.

Kovacs FA(1), Sarath G, Woodworth K, Twigg P, Tobias CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Nebraska at Kearney, Kearney, NE 68849,
USA. kovacsfa@unk.edu

Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum L.) is being developed as a bioenergy species.
Recently an early version of its genome has been released permitting a route to
the cloning and analysis of key proteins. Ascorbate peroxidases (APx) are an
important part of the antioxidant defense system of plant cells and present a
well studied model to understand structure-function relationships. Analysis of
the genome indicates that switchgrass encodes several cytosolic ascorbate
peroxidases with apparent varying levels of tissue expression. A major cytosolic 
ascorbate peroxidase was thus selected for further studies. This gene was cloned 
and expressed in Escherichia coli cells to obtain purified active protein. Full
heme incorporation of the enzyme was achieved utilizing slow growth and
supplementing the media with 5-aminolevulinic acid. The enzyme was observed to be
monomeric in solution via size exclusion chromatography. Activity toward
ascorbate was observed that was non-Michaelis-Menten in nature. A site-directed
mutant, R172S, was made in an attempt to differentiate activity against ascorbate
versus other substrates. The R172S protein exhibited negligible ascorbate
peroxidase activity, but showed near wild type activity toward other aromatic
substrates.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2013.05.016 
PMID: 23809633  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

