
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2013 Oct 1;167(1):67-73. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.05.013. Epub 2013 May 22.

Surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) with biopolymer encapsulated silver
nanosubstrates for rapid detection of foodborne pathogens.

Sundaram J(1), Park B, Kwon Y, Lawrence KC.

Author information: 
(1)United Stated Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service,
Russell Research Center, Athens, GA 30605, USA.

A biopolymer encapsulated with silver nanoparticles was prepared using silver
nitrate, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) solution, and trisodium citrate. It was
deposited on a mica sheet to use as SERS substrate. Fresh cultures of Salmonella 
Typhimurium, Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus and Listeria innocua were
washed from chicken rinse and suspended in 10 ml of sterile deionized water.
Approximately 5 Î¼l of the bacterial suspensions was placed on the substrate
individually and exposed to 785 nm HeNe laser excitation. SERS spectral data were
recorded over the Raman shift between 400 and 1800 cm(-1) from 15 different spots
on the substrate for each sample; and three replicates were done on each bacteria
type. Principal component analysis (PCA) model was developed to classify
foodborne bacteria types. PC1 identified 96% of the variation among the given
bacteria specimen, and PC2 identified 3%, resulted in a total of 99%
classification accuracy. Soft Independent Modeling of Class Analogies (SIMCA) of 
validation set gave an overall correct classification of 97%. Comparison of the
SERS spectra of different types of gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria
indicated that all of them have similar cell walls and cell membrane structures. 
Conversely, major differences were noted around the nucleic acid and amino acid
structure information between 1200 cm(-1) and 1700 cm(-1) and at the finger print
region between 400 cm(-1) and 700 cm(-1). Silver biopolymer nanoparticle
substrate could be a promising SERS tool for pathogen detection. Also this study 
indicates that SERS technology could be used for reliable and rapid detection and
classification of food borne pathogens.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.05.013 
PMID: 23806291  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

