
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2013 Sep;51(9):2884-92. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00845-13. Epub 2013
Jun 26.

Intestinal dysbiosis and depletion of butyrogenic bacteria in Clostridium
difficile infection and nosocomial diarrhea.

Antharam VC(1), Li EC, Ishmael A, Sharma A, Mai V, Rand KH, Wang GP.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) causes nearly half a million cases of
diarrhea and colitis in the United States each year. Although the importance of
the gut microbiota in C. difficile pathogenesis is well recognized, components of
the human gut flora critical for colonization resistance are not known.
Culture-independent high-density Roche 454 pyrosequencing was used to survey the 
distal gut microbiota for 39 individuals with CDI, 36 subjects with C.
difficile-negative nosocomial diarrhea (CDN), and 40 healthy control subjects. A 
total of 526,071 partial 16S rRNA sequence reads of the V1 to V3 regions were
aligned with 16S databases, identifying 3,531 bacterial phylotypes from 115 fecal
samples. Genomic analysis revealed significant alterations of organism lineages
in both the CDI and CDN groups, which were accompanied by marked decreases in
microbial diversity and species richness driven primarily by a paucity of
phylotypes within the Firmicutes phylum. Normally abundant gut commensal
organisms, including the Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae families and
butyrate-producing C2 to C4 anaerobic fermenters, were significantly depleted in 
the CDI and CDN groups. These data demonstrate associations between the depletion
of Ruminococcaceae, Lachnospiraceae, and butyrogenic bacteria in the gut
microbiota and nosocomial diarrhea, including C. difficile infection. Mechanistic
studies focusing on the functional roles of these organisms in diarrheal diseases
and resistance against C. difficile colonization are warranted.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00845-13 
PMCID: PMC3754663
PMID: 23804381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

