
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2013 Dec;41(4):631-43. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2013.06.015. Epub
2013 Jun 29.

Characterization of the CCR3 and CCR9 genes in miiuy croaker and different
selection pressures imposed on different domains between mammals and teleosts.

Zhu Z(1), Wang R, Ren L, Xu T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Marine Living Resources and Molecular Engineering, College of
Marine Science, Zhejiang Ocean University, Zhoushan, PR China.

The innate immune system can recognize non-self through pattern recognition
receptors and provides a first line of antimicrobial host defense. Thus innate
immunity plays a very important role in resistance against major bacterial
disease in vertebrates. In the innate immune responses, the chemokine receptors
act as the main receptors of chemokines which are released at the sites of
infection, inflammation and injury. In this study, the Miichthys miiuy CCR3 and
CCR9 genes were cloned and characterized, showing that MIMI-CCR3 possesses a
highly conserved DRYLA motif similar to that of other fishes. MIMI-CCR3 and CCR9 
were ubiquitously expressed in all tested tissues and the expressions were
significantly up-regulated after infection with Vibrio anguillarum except that of
CCR9 in spleen. Evolutionary analysis showed that all the ancestral lineages of
CCR3 and CCR9 in mammals and teleosts underwent positive selection, indicating
that the ancestor of terrestrial animals further evolved to adapt to terrestrial 
environments and the continuous intrusion of microbes stimulated the evolution of
CCR genes in the ancestor of teleost. Multiple ML methods were used to detect the
robust candidates for sites under positive selection. In total, 11 and 8
positively selected sites were found in the subsets of current mammal and teleost
CCR3 genes, and 3 and 2 sites were detected in the subsets of current mammals and
teleosts in CCR9. Interestingly, for mammal CCR3 and CCR9 genes, the robust
candidates of positively selected sites were mainly located in the extracellular 
domains which were the ligand binding and pathogen interaction regions. For
teleost CCR3 and CCR9 genes, the positively selected sites were not only located 
in the extracellular domains but also in the C-terminal and intracellular
domains, indicating mammals and teleosts experienced different selection
pressures upon their N-terminus, C-terminus and intracellular loops of CCRs.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2013.06.015 
PMID: 23817141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

