
1. J Immunol. 2013 Aug 1;191(3):1373-82. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202907. Epub 2013
Jul 1.

Histamine h2 receptor signaling in the pathogenesis of sepsis: studies in a
murine diabetes model.

Carlos D(1), Spiller F, Souto FO, Trevelin SC, Borges VF, de Freitas A,
Alves-Filho JC, Silva JS, Ryffel B, Cunha FQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine of Ribeir達o Preto, University
of S達o Paulo, 14049-900 Ribeir達o Preto, S達o Paulo, Brazil.

Type 1 diabetes enhances susceptibility to infection and favors the sepsis
development. In addition, diabetic mice produced higher levels of histamine in
several tissues and in the blood after LPS stimulation than nondiabetic mice. In 
this study, we aimed to explore the role of mast cells (MCs) and histamine in
neutrophil migration and, consequently, infection control in diabetic mice with
mild sepsis (MS) induced by cecum ligation and puncture. We used female BALB/c,
MC-sufficient (WB/B6), MC-deficient (W/W(v)), and NOD mice. Diabetic mice given
MS displayed 100% mortality within 24 h, whereas all nondiabetic mice survived
for at least 5 d. The mortality rate of diabetic mice was reduced to 57% after
the depletion of MC granules with compound 48/80. Moreover, this pretreatment
increased neutrophil migration to the focus of infection, which reduced systemic 
inflammatory response and bacteremia. The downregulation of CXCR2 and
upregulation of G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 in neutrophils was prevented 
by pretreatment of diabetic mice given MS with compound 48/80. In addition,
blocking the histamine H2 receptor restored neutrophil migration, enhanced CXCR2 
expression, decreased bacteremia, and improved sepsis survival in alloxan-induced
diabetic and spontaneous NOD mice. Finally, diabetic W/W(v) mice had neutrophil
migration to the peritoneal cavity, increased CXCR2 expression, and reduced
bacteremia compared with diabetic WB/B6 mice. These results demonstrate that
histamine released by MCs reduces diabetic host resistance to septic peritonitis 
in mice.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202907 
PMID: 23817413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

