
1. Nutr Hosp. 2013 Mar-Apr;28(2):464-73. doi: 10.3305/nh.2013.28.2.6310.

Influence of early environmental factors on lymphocyte subsets and gut microbiota
in infants at risk of celiac disease; the PROFICEL study.

Pozo-Rubio T(1), de Palma G, Mujico JR, Olivares M, Marcos A, Acuña MD, Polanco
I, Sanz Y, Nova E.

Author information: 
(1)Immunonutrition Group, Department of Metabolism and Nutrition, Institute of
Food Science, Technology and Nutrition (ICTAN), Spanish National Research Council
(CSIC), Madrid, Spain. tpozo@ictan.csic.es

INTRODUCTION: It is known that the HLA genotype can explain about a 40% of the
genetic risk of celiac disease (CD), thus, other genetic predisposing factors as 
well as factors that subtly modulate T cell activation and differentiation need
to be studied. This includes environmental factors that are currently believed to
impact on the immune system and gut microbiota development.
AIM: To assess the associations between early environmental factors (EEF),
lymphocyte subsets, and intestinal microbiota composition in infants at familial 
risk for CD.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective observational study.
SUBJECTS: Fifty-five 4 month-old infants with at least a first-degree relative
suffering CD. Infants were classified according to type of delivery, mother's
antibiotic intake during pregnancy and during labor, milk-feeding practices,
early infections and antibiotic intake, rotavirus vaccine administration, and
allergy incidence within the first 18 months of life.
METHODS: Lymphocyte subsets and gut microbiota composition were studied at the
age of 4 months.
RESULTS: Formula feeding and infant's infections were associated with higher
CD3+, CD4+, CD4+CD38+, CD4+CD28+ and CD3+CD4+CD45RO+ counts (P0.01). Infant s
infections were also associated with higher CD4+CD25+, CD4+HLA-DR+ and NK cell
counts (P0.01). Cesarean delivery and rotavirus vaccine administration were
associated with lower percentage of CD4+CD25+ cells. Infant's antibiotic intake
was associated and correlated with lower counts of Bifidobacterium longum and
higher counts of Bacteroides fragilis group.
CONCLUSIONS: Infant s infections and antibiotic intake in the first 4 months of
life are the EEF more strongly and/or frequently associated to lymphocyte
subpopulations and microbiota composition, respectively, in infants at risk of
CD.

Publisher: Introducción: Es bien sabido que el genotipo HLA puede explicar un 40%
del riesgo genético de enfermedad celíaca, por lo que otros factores de
predisposición genéticos así como factores que sutilmente modulen la activación y
diferenciación de células T necesitan ser estudiados. Esto incluye factores
ambientales, de los que se cree actualmente que ejercen un efecto sobre el
desarrollo del sistema inmune y la microbiota intestinal. Objetivo: Evaluar las
asociaciones entre factores ambientales tempranos, las subpoblaciones de
linfocitos y la composición de la microbiota intestinal en niños con riesgo
familiar de enfermedad celíaca. Diseño del estudio: Estudio prospectivo
observacional Sujetos: 55 niños de 4 meses de edad con al menos un familiar
celíaco de primer grado. Los niños fueron clasificados de acuerdo al tipo de
parto, ingesta materna de antibióticos durante el embarazo y durante el parto,
tipo de lactancia, infecciones tempranas y toma de antibióticos, administración
de la vacuna de rotavirus, y incidencia de alergias dentro de los 18 primeros
meses de vida. Métodos: Las subpoblaciones de linfocitos y la composición de la
microbiota intestinal fueron estudiadas a la edad de 4 meses. Resultados: La
lactancia de fórmula y las infecciones tempranas se asociaron con un mayor número
absoluto de células CD3+, CD4+, CD4+CD38+, CD4+CD28+ y CD3+CD4+CD45RO+ (P0.01).
El parto por cesárea y la administración de la vacuna de rotavirus se asociaron a
un menor porcentaje de células CD4+CD25+. La toma temprana de antibióticos se
asoció y correlacionó con menor número de Bifidobacterium longum y mayor número
de Bacteroides fragilis. Conclusiones: Las infecciones y la toma de antibióticos 
en los primeros 4 meses de edad son los factores ambientales tempranos más
fuertemente y/o frecuentemente asociados a las subpoblaciones de linfocitos y la 
composición de la microbiota, respectivamente, en niños con riesgo de enfermedad 
celíaca.
Copyright © AULA MEDICA EDICIONES 2013. Published by AULA MEDICA. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.3305/nh.2013.28.2.6310 
PMID: 23822699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

