
1. Blood. 2013 Aug 15;122(7):1293-304. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-05-501072. Epub 2013 
Jul 8.

Personalized synthetic lethality induced by targeting RAD52 in leukemias
identified by gene mutation and expression profile.

Cramer-Morales K(1), Nieborowska-Skorska M, Scheibner K, Padget M, Irvine DA,
Sliwinski T, Haas K, Lee J, Geng H, Roy D, Slupianek A, Rassool FV, Wasik MA,
Childers W, Copland M, MÃ¼schen M, Civin CI, Skorski T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

Homologous recombination repair (HRR) protects cells from the lethal effect of
spontaneous and therapy-induced DNA double-stand breaks. HRR usually depends on
BRCA1/2-RAD51, and RAD52-RAD51 serves as back-up. To target HRR in tumor cells, a
phenomenon called "synthetic lethality" was applied, which relies on the
addiction of cancer cells to a single DNA repair pathway, whereas normal cells
operate 2 or more mechanisms. Using mutagenesis and a peptide aptamer approach,
we pinpointed phenylalanine 79 in RAD52 DNA binding domain I (RAD52-phenylalanine
79 [F79]) as a valid target to induce synthetic lethality in BRCA1- and/or
BRCA2-deficient leukemias and carcinomas without affecting normal cells and
tissues. Targeting RAD52-F79 disrupts the RAD52-DNA interaction, resulting in the
accumulation of toxic DNA double-stand breaks in malignant cells, but not in
normal counterparts. In addition, abrogation of RAD52-DNA interaction enhanced
the antileukemia effect of already-approved drugs. BRCA-deficient status
predisposing to RAD52-dependent synthetic lethality could be predicted by genetic
abnormalities such as oncogenes BCR-ABL1 and PML-RAR, mutations in BRCA1 and/or
BRCA2 genes, and gene expression profiles identifying leukemias displaying low
levels of BRCA1 and/or BRCA2. We believe this work may initiate a personalized
therapeutic approach in numerous patients with tumors displaying encoded and
functional BRCA deficiency.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2013-05-501072 
PMCID: PMC3744994
PMID: 23836560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

