
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2013 Oct;159(Pt 10):2169-2179. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.069542-0. Epub 2013 Jul 11.

CdpC2PT, a reverse prenyltransferase from Neosartorya fischeri with a distinct
substrate preference from known C2-prenyltransferases.

Mundt K(1)(2), Li SM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Synthetische Mikrobiologie, Philipps-Universität Marburg, 35032
Marburg, Germany.
(2)Institut für Pharmazeutische Biologie und Biotechnologie, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Deutschhausstrasse 17A, 35037 Marburg, Germany.

A putative prenyltransferase gene, NFIA_043650, was amplified from Neosartorya
fischeri NRRL 181 and cloned into the expression vector pQE60. The deduced
polypeptide consisting of 445 amino acids with a molecular mass of 51 kDa was
overproduced in Escherichia coli and purified as His6-tagged protein to near
homogeneity. The purified soluble protein was subsequently assayed with potential
aromatic substrates in the presence of dimethylallyl diphosphate. HPLC analysis
of the reaction mixtures revealed acceptance of all tested tryptophan-containing 
cyclic dipeptides. Isolation and structural elucidation of enzyme products of
five selected substrates indicated a reverse C2-prenylation on the indole
nucleus, proving the enzyme to be a cyclic dipeptide C2-prenyltransferase
(CdpC2PT). Differing significantly from two known brevianamide F reverse
C2-prenyltransferases NotF and BrePT which use cyclo-l-Trp-l-Pro as their
preferred substrate, CdpC2PT showed a clear substrate preference for
(S)-benzodiazepinedinone and cyclo-l-Trp-l-Trp with KM values of 84.1 and 165.2
µM and turnover numbers at 0.63 and 0.30 s(-1), respectively. A possible role of 
CdpC2PT in the biosynthesis of fellutanines is discussed.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.069542-0 
PMID: 23845975  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

