
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2013 Sep;79(18):5670-81. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01483-13. Epub 
2013 Jul 12.

Core fluxome and metafluxome of lactic acid bacteria under simulated cocoa pulp
fermentation conditions.

Adler P(1), Bolten CJ, Dohnt K, Hansen CE, Wittmann C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemical Engineering, Technische Universit√§t Braunschweig,
Braunschweig, Germany.

In the present work, simulated cocoa fermentation was investigated at the level
of metabolic pathway fluxes (fluxome) of lactic acid bacteria (LAB), which are
typically found in the microbial consortium known to convert nutrients from the
cocoa pulp into organic acids. A comprehensive (13)C labeling approach allowed to
quantify carbon fluxes during simulated cocoa fermentation by (i) parallel (13)C 
studies with [(13)C6]glucose, [1,2-(13)C2]glucose, and [(13)C6]fructose,
respectively, (ii) gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC/MS) analysis of
secreted acetate and lactate, (iii) stoichiometric profiling, and (iv) isotopomer
modeling for flux calculation. The study of several strains of L. fermentum and
L. plantarum revealed major differences in their fluxes. The L. fermentum strains
channeled only a small amount (4 to 6%) of fructose into central metabolism,
i.e., the phosphoketolase pathway, whereas only L. fermentum NCC 575 used
fructose to form mannitol. In contrast, L. plantarum strains exhibited a high
glycolytic flux. All strains differed in acetate flux, which originated from
fractions of citrate (25 to 80%) and corresponding amounts of glucose and
fructose. Subsequent, metafluxome studies with consortia of different L.
fermentum and L. plantarum strains indicated a dominant (96%) contribution of L. 
fermentum NCC 575 to the overall flux in the microbial community, a scenario that
was not observed for the other strains. This highlights the idea that individual 
LAB strains vary in their metabolic contribution to the overall fermentation
process and opens up new routes toward streamlined starter cultures. L. fermentum
NCC 575 might be one candidate due to its superior performance in flux activity.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01483-13 
PMCID: PMC3754185
PMID: 23851099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

