
1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014 Mar;71(5):933-48. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1422-1. Epub
2013 Jul 18.

Acyl-CoA thioesterase 9 (ACOT9) in mouse may provide a novel link between fatty
acid and amino acid metabolism in mitochondria.

Tillander V(1), Arvidsson Nordstr√∂m E, Reilly J, Strozyk M, Van Veldhoven PP,
Hunt MC, Alexson SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical Chemistry, Karolinska 
Institutet, C1-74, Karolinska University Hospital, SE-141 86, Stockholm, Sweden.

Acyl-CoA thioesterase (ACOT) activities are found in prokaryotes and in several
compartments of eukaryotes where they hydrolyze a wide range of acyl-CoA
substrates and thereby regulate intracellular acyl-CoA/CoA/fatty acid levels.
ACOT9 is a mitochondrial ACOT with homologous genes found from bacteria to humans
and in this study we have carried out an in-depth kinetic characterization of
ACOT9 to determine its possible physiological function. ACOT9 showed unusual
kinetic properties with activity peaks for short-, medium-, and saturated
long-chain acyl-CoAs with highest V max with propionyl-CoA and (iso) butyryl-CoA 
while K cat/K m was highest with saturated long-chain acyl-CoAs. Further
characterization of the short-chain acyl-CoA activity revealed that ACOT9 also
hydrolyzes a number of short-chain acyl-CoAs and short-chain methyl-branched CoA 
esters that suggest a role for ACOT9 in regulation also of amino acid metabolism.
In spite of markedly different K ms, ACOT9 can hydrolyze both short- and
long-chain acyl-CoAs simultaneously, indicating that ACOT9 may provide a novel
regulatory link between fatty acid and amino acid metabolism in mitochondria.
Based on similar acyl-CoA chain-length specificities of recombinant ACOT9 and
ACOT activity in mouse brown adipose tissue and kidney mitochondria, we conclude 
that ACOT9 is the major mitochondrial ACOT hydrolyzing saturated C2-C20-CoA in
these tissues. Finally, ACOT9 activity is strongly regulated by NADH and CoA,
suggesting that mitochondrial metabolic state regulates the function of ACOT9.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-013-1422-1 
PMID: 23864032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

