
1. Extremophiles. 2013 Sep;17(5):809-19. doi: 10.1007/s00792-013-0562-4. Epub 2013
Jul 19.

Characterization of a cold-adapted and salt-tolerant esterase from a
psychrotrophic bacterium Psychrobacter pacificensis.

Wu G(1), Wu G, Zhan T, Shao Z, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Life Science and
Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, People's Republic of
China.

An esterase gene, est10, was identified from the genomic library of a deep-sea
psychrotrophic bacterium Psychrobacter pacificensis. The esterase exhibited the
optimal activity around 25 °C and pH 7.5, and maintained as high as 55.0 % of its
maximum activity at 0 °C, indicating its cold adaptation. Est10 was fairly stable
under room temperatures, retaining more than 80 % of its original activity after 
incubation at 40 °C for 2 h. The highest activity was observed against the
short-chain substrate p-nitrophenyl butyrate (C4) among the tested p-nitrophenyl 
esters (C2-C16). It was slightly activated at a low concentration (1 mM) of
Zn(2+), Mg(2+), Ba(2+), Ca(2+), Cu(2+), Fe(3+), urea and EDTA, but was inhibited 
by DTT and totally inactivated by PMSF. Interestingly, increased salinity
considerably stimulated Est10 activity (up to 143.2 % of original activity at 2 M
NaCl) and stability (up to 126.4 % after incubation with 5 M NaCl for 6.5 h),
proving its salt tolerance. 0.05 and 0.1 % Tween 20, Tween 80, Triton X-100 and
CHAPS increased the activity and stability of Est10 while SDS, CTAB had the
opposite effect. Est10 was quite active after incubation with several 30 %
organic solvents (methanol, DMSO, ethanediol) but exhibited little activity with 
30 % isopropanol, ethanol, n-butanol and acetonitrile.

DOI: 10.1007/s00792-013-0562-4 
PMID: 23868329  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

