
1. Phytomedicine. 2013 Oct 15;20(13):1203-10. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2013.06.001.
Epub 2013 Jul 16.

Berberine's effect on periodontal tissue degradation by matrix
metalloproteinases: an in vitro and in vivo experiment.

Tu HP(1), Fu MM, Kuo PJ, Chin YT, Chiang CY, Chung CL, Fu E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, National Defense Medical
Center and Tri-Service General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Department of
Dental Hygiene, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC.

Periodontal disease involves tissue destruction caused by interactions among
bacterial antigens and inflammatory mediators including matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs). Berberine, an isoquinoline alkaloid isolated from medicinal herbs, can
inhibit the degradative action of extracellular MMPs. The effect of berberine on 
the periodontal expression of MMPs was examined in vitro and in vivo.
Gelatinolytic activity of pro-MMP-2, MMP-2, and MMP-9 in the human gingival
fibroblast and/or U-937 was compared after treatment with Porphyromonas
gingivalis lipopolysaccharide (P.g. LPS) in four medias containing 0, 1, 10 and
100μM of berberine each. Twelve animals were divided into three groups for the
study: (A) non-ligation, (B) ligation, and (C) ligation-plus-berberine (75mg/kg
berberine by gastric lavage daily); and the effect of berberine on periodontal
destruction was evaluated in the ligature-induced periodontitis in rats for 8
days by micro computerized tomography (micro-CT), histology and
immunohistochemistry (IHC). An enhancing effect of P.g. LPS on MMP activities was
identified, with a greater effect on fibroblasts/U937 co-culture than on either
culture alone. When berberine was added to the LPS-treated cultures, the
activities of MMPs were significantly reduced in dose-dependent manner. In the
animals, the trends of the following parameters were compared. 1. Micro-CT
distances between cemento-enamel junction (CEJ) and dental alveolar bone crest:
B>C>A. 2. Histometrically measured crest bone levels: B>C>A. 3. Amount of
collagen deposited in tissue areas: A>C>B. 4. Attachment loss: B>C≈A. 5.
Connective tissue (CT) attachment: B>either A or C. 6. Expression of cells
stained positive for MMP-2 and -9 by IHC: B>C>A. In conclusion, berberine
demonstrated in vitro an inhibitory effect on P.g. LPS-enhanced MMP activities of
HGF and U937 macrophages, reducing in vivo gingival tissue degradation in
periodontitic rats. We thus propose that berberine may slow periodontal
degradation through the regulation of MMPs in periodontitis induced by bacterial 
plaque.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phymed.2013.06.001 
PMID: 23867651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

