
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1827(10):1235-44. doi:
10.1016/j.bbabio.2013.07.004. Epub 2013 Jul 16.

Comparison of the physical characteristics of chlorosomes from three different
phyla of green phototrophic bacteria.

Adams PG(1), Cadby AJ, Robinson B, Tsukatani Y, Tank M, Wen J, Blankenship RE,
Bryant DA, Hunter CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

Chlorosomes, the major antenna complexes in green sulphur bacteria, filamentous
anoxygenic phototrophs, and phototrophic acidobacteria, are attached to the
cytoplasmic side of the inner cell membrane and contain thousands of
bacteriochlorophyll (BChl) molecules that harvest light and channel the energy to
membrane-bound reaction centres. Chlorosomes from phototrophs representing three 
different phyla, Chloroflexus (Cfx.) aurantiacus, Chlorobaculum (Cba.) tepidum
and the newly discovered "Candidatus (Ca.) Chloracidobacterium (Cab.)
thermophilum" were analysed using PeakForce Tapping atomic force microscopy
(PFT-AFM). Gentle PFT-AFM imaging in buffered solutions that maintained the
chlorosomes in a near-native state revealed ellipsoids of variable size, with
surface bumps and undulations that differ between individual chlorosomes. Cba.
tepidum chlorosomes were the largest (133×57×36nm; 141,000nm(3) volume), compared
with chlorosomes from Cfx. aurantiacus (120×44×30nm; 84,000nm(3)) and Ca. Cab.
thermophilum (99×40×31nm; 65,000nm(3)). Reflecting the contributions of thousands
of pigment-pigment stacking interactions to the stability of these supramolecular
assemblies, analysis by nanomechanical mapping shows that chlorosomes are highly 
stable and that their integrity is disrupted only by very strong forces of
1000-2000pN. AFM topographs of Ca. Cab. thermophilum chlorosomes that had
retained their attachment to the cytoplasmic membrane showed that this membrane
dynamically changes shape and is composed of protrusions of up to 30nm wide and
6nm above the mica support, possibly representing different protein domains.
Spectral imaging revealed significant heterogeneity in the fluorescence emission 
of individual chlorosomes, likely reflecting the variations in BChl c homolog
composition and internal arrangements of the stacked BChls within each
chlorosome.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2013.07.004 
PMID: 23867748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

