
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 5;8(7):e67979. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067979. Print 2013.

Cysteine methylation controls radical generation in the Cfr radical AdoMet rRNA
methyltransferase.

Challand MR(1), Salvadori E, Driesener RC, Kay CW, Roach PL, Spencer J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol Medical
Sciences Building, Bristol, United Kingdom.

The 'radical S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet)' enzyme Cfr methylates adenosine
2503 of the 23S rRNA in the peptidyltransferase centre (P-site) of the bacterial 
ribosome. This modification protects host bacteria, notably methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), from numerous antibiotics, including agents (e.g.
linezolid, retapamulin) that were developed to treat such organisms. Cfr contains
a single [4Fe-4S] cluster that binds two separate molecules of AdoMet during the 
reaction cycle. These are used sequentially to first methylate a cysteine
residue, Cys338; and subsequently generate an oxidative radical intermediate that
facilitates methyl transfer to the unreactive C8 (and/or C2) carbon centres of
adenosine 2503. How the Cfr active site, with its single [4Fe-4S] cluster,
catalyses these two distinct activities that each utilise AdoMet as a substrate
remains to be established. Here, we use absorbance and electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) spectroscopy to investigate the interactions of AdoMet with the
[4Fe-4S] clusters of wild-type Cfr and a Cys338 Ala mutant, which is unable to
accept a methyl group. Cfr binds AdoMet with high (∼ 10 µM) affinity
notwithstanding the absence of the RNA cosubstrate. In wild-type Cfr, where
Cys338 is methylated, AdoMet binding leads to rapid oxidation of the [4Fe-4S]
cluster and production of 5'-deoxyadenosine (DOA). In contrast, while Cys338 Ala 
Cfr binds AdoMet with equivalent affinity, oxidation of the [4Fe-4S] cluster is
not observed. Our results indicate that the presence of a methyl group on Cfr
Cys338 is a key determinant of the activity of the enzyme towards AdoMet, thus
enabling a single active site to support two distinct modes of AdoMet cleavage.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067979 
PMCID: PMC3702613
PMID: 23861844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

