
1. J Phys Chem B. 2013 Aug 15;117(32):9354-61. doi: 10.1021/jp404948c. Epub 2013 Aug
2.

Concerted proton transfer mechanism of Clostridium thermocellum
ribose-5-phosphate isomerase.

Wang J(1), Yang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708, USA.

Ribose-5-phosphate isomerase (Rpi) catalyzes the interconversion of
D-ribose-5-phosphate and D-ribulose-5-phosphate and plays an essential role in
the pentose phosphate pathway and the Calvin cycle of photosynthesis. RpiB, one
of the two isoforms of Rpi, is also a potential drug target for some pathogenic
bacteria. Clostridium thermocellum ribose-5-phosphate isomerase (CtRpi),
belonging to the RpiB family, has recently been employed in the industrial
production of rare sugars because of its fast reaction kinetics and narrow
substrate specificity. It is known that this enzyme adopts a proton transfer
mechanism. It was suggested that the deprotonated Cys65 attracts the proton at C2
of the substrate to initiate the isomerization reaction, and this step is the
rate-limiting step. However the elaborate catalytic mechanism is still unclear.
We have performed quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical simulations of this
rate-limiting step of the reaction catalyzed by CtRpi with the substrate
D-ribose. Our results demonstrate that the deprotonated Cys65 is not a stable
reactant. Instead, our calculations revealed a concerted proton-transfer
mechanism: Asp8, a highly conserved residue in the RpiB family, performs as the
base to abstract the proton at Cys65 and Cys65 in turn abstracting the proton of 
the D-ribose simultaneously. Moreover, we found Thr67 cannot catalyze the proton 
transfer from O2 to O1 of the D-ribose alone. Water molecule(s) may assist this
proton transfer with Thr67. Our findings lead to a clear understanding of the
catalysis mechanism of the RpiB family and should guide experiments to increase
the catalysis efficiency. This study also highlights the importance of initial
protonation states of cysteines.

DOI: 10.1021/jp404948c 
PMCID: PMC3772085
PMID: 23875675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

