
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 15;8(7):e68864. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068864. Print 2013.

Natural killer cell cytokine response to M. bovis BCG Is associated with
inhibited proliferation, increased apoptosis and ultimate depletion of
NKp44(+)CD56(bright) cells.

Portevin D(1), Young D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mycobacterial Research, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London, United Kingdom. damien.portevin@unibas.ch

Mycobacterium bovis BCG, a live attenuated strain of M. bovis initially developed
as a vaccine against tuberculosis, is also used as an adjuvant for immunotherapy 
of cancers and for treatment of parasitic infections. The underlying mechanisms
are thought to rely on its immunomodulatory properties including the recruitment 
of natural killer (NK) cells. In that context, we aimed to study the impact of M.
bovis BCG on NK cell functions. We looked at cytotoxicity, cytokine production,
proliferation and cell survival of purified human NK cells following exposure to 
single live particles of mycobacteria. We found that M. bovis BCG mediates
apoptosis of NK cells only in the context of IL-2 stimulation during which
CD56(bright) NK cells are releasing IFN-γ in response to mycobacteria. We found
that the presence of mycobacteria prevented the IL-2 induced proliferation and
surface expression of NKp44 receptor by the CD56(bright) population. In summary, 
we observed that M. bovis BCG is modulating the functions of CD56(bright) NK
cells to drive this subset to produce IFN-γ before subsequent programmed cell
death. Therefore, IFN-γ production by CD56(bright) cells constitutes the main
effector mechanism of NK cells that would contribute to the benefits observed for
M. bovis BCG as an immunotherapeutic agent.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068864 
PMCID: PMC3715299
PMID: 23874793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

