
1. PLoS Biol. 2013 Jul;11(7):e1001610. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001610. Epub 2013 
Jul 16.

Production of α-galactosylceramide by a prominent member of the human gut
microbiota.

Wieland Brown LC(1), Penaranda C, Kashyap PC, Williams BB, Clardy J, Kronenberg
M, Sonnenburg JL, Comstock LE, Bluestone JA, Fischbach MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences and the California
Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University of California, San Francisco, 
California, United States of America.

While the human gut microbiota are suspected to produce diffusible small
molecules that modulate host signaling pathways, few of these molecules have been
identified. Species of Bacteroides and their relatives, which often comprise >50%
of the gut community, are unusual among bacteria in that their membrane is rich
in sphingolipids, a class of signaling molecules that play a key role in inducing
apoptosis and modulating the host immune response. Although known for more than
three decades, the full repertoire of Bacteroides sphingolipids has not been
defined. Here, we use a combination of genetics and chemistry to identify the
sphingolipids produced by Bacteroides fragilis NCTC 9343. We constructed a
deletion mutant of BF2461, a putative serine palmitoyltransferase whose yeast
homolog catalyzes the committed step in sphingolipid biosynthesis. We show that
the Δ2461 mutant is sphingolipid deficient, enabling us to purify and solve the
structures of three alkaline-stable lipids present in the wild-type strain but
absent from the mutant. The first compound was the known sphingolipid ceramide
phosphorylethanolamine, and the second was its corresponding dihydroceramide
base. Unexpectedly, the third compound was the glycosphingolipid
α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer(Bf)), which is structurally related to a
sponge-derived sphingolipid (α-GalCer, KRN7000) that is the prototypical agonist 
of CD1d-restricted natural killer T (iNKT) cells. We demonstrate that
α-GalCer(Bf) has similar immunological properties to KRN7000: it binds to CD1d
and activates both mouse and human iNKT cells both in vitro and in vivo. Thus,
our study reveals BF2461 as the first known member of the Bacteroides
sphingolipid pathway, and it indicates that the committed steps of the
Bacteroides and eukaryotic sphingolipid pathways are identical. Moreover, our
data suggest that some Bacteroides sphingolipids might influence host immune
homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001610 
PMCID: PMC3712910
PMID: 23874157  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

