
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 18;8(7):e69306. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069306. Print 2013.

Genetics and evolution of the Salmonella galactose-initiated set of o antigens.

Reeves PR(1), Cunneen MM, Liu B, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
peter.reeves@sydney.edu.au

This paper covers eight Salmonella serogroups, that are defined by O antigens
with related structures and gene clusters. They include the serovars that are now
most frequently isolated. Serogroups A, B1, B2, C2-C3, D1, D2, D3 and E have O
antigens that are distinguished by having galactose as first sugar, and not
N-acetyl glucosamine or N-acetyl galactosamine as in the other 38 serogroups, and
indeed in most Enterobacteriaceae. The gene clusters for these
galactose-initiated appear to have entered S. enterica since its divergence from 
E. coli, but sequence comparisons show that much of the diversification occurred 
long before this. We conclude that the gene clusters must have entered S.
enterica in a series of parallel events. The individual gene clusters are
discussed, followed by analysis of the divergence for those genes shared by two
or more gene clusters, and a putative phylogenic tree for the gene clusters is
presented. This set of O antigens provides a rare case where it is possible to
examine in detail the relationships of a significant number of O antigens. In
contrast the more common pattern of O-antigen diversity within a species is for
there to be only a few cases of strains having related gene clusters, suggesting 
that diversity arose through gain of individual O-antigen gene clusters by
lateral gene transfer, and under these circumstances the evolution of the
diversity is not accessible. This paper on the galactose-initiated set of gene
clusters gives new insights into the origins of O-antigen diversity generally.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069306 
PMCID: PMC3715488
PMID: 23874940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

