
1. APMIS. 2013 Sep;121(9):814-26. doi: 10.1111/apm.12138. Epub 2013 Jul 24.

Modulation of ENaC, CFTR, and iNOS expression in bronchial epithelial cells after
stimulation with Staphylococcus epidermidis (94B080) and Staphylococcus aureus
(90B083).

Hussain R(1), Oliynyk I, Roomans GM, Björkqvist M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health and Medical Sciences, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden.
rashida.hussain@oru.se

Bacteria affect the respiratory epithelium, which is covered by airway surface
liquid (ASL) and mucus. Ion concentrations in the ASL are determined by the
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) and the epithelial
Na(+) channel (ENaC). Neonatal sepsis is a major risk factor for subsequent
pulmonary disease in preterm newborns. Predominating are coagulase-negative
staphylococci (e.g., Staphylococccus epidermidis and Staphylococccus aureus). The
aim of this study was to investigate modulation of CFTR, ENaC, mucins,
proinflammatory cytokines, and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) in
respiratory epithelial cells after S. epidermidis 94B080 and S. aureus 90B083
exposure. Bronchial epithelial cells were incubated with S. epidermidis 94B080
and S. aureus 90B083 (neonatal blood isolates) for 1-36 h. Expression of CFTR,
ENaC, iNOS, and mucins was analyzed by real-time PCR and Western blotting.
Release of cytokines was analyzed by ELISA, and production of NO by the Griess
assay. Expression of CFTR significantly decreased after 36 h incubation with S.
epidermidis and more prominently with S. aureus, whereas S. epidermidis caused a 
significant increase in the expression of β- and γ-ENaC. Expression of iNOS
increased, but NO was not detected. Both staphylococci caused a decrease in the
intracellular Ca(2+) concentration. S. aureus induced increased secretion of
IL-6, IL-8, and transforming nuclear factor (TNF)-α in a time-dependent manner as
compared with S. epidermidis. In conclusion, expression of ENaC, CFTR, and iNOS
is modulated by exposure to S. aureus 90B083 and S. epidermidis 94B080. S. aureus
is more potent in causing release of IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α by bronchial
epithelial cells as compared with S. epidermidis. The mRNA expression for the
mucus proteins MUC2, MUC5AC, and MUC5B could not be measured, neither in the
presence nor in the absence of bacteria.

© 2013 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/apm.12138 
PMID: 23879620  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

