
1. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2013 Aug;69(Pt 8):925-9. doi:
10.1107/S174430911301943X. Epub 2013 Jul 27.

Cloning, overexpression, crystallization and preliminary X-ray crystallographic
analysis of a slow-processing mutant of penicillin G acylase from Kluyvera
citrophila.

Varshney NK(1), Ramasamy S, Brannigan JA, Wilkinson AJ, Suresh CG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemical Sciences, CSIR - National Chemical Laboratory, Pune
411 008, Maharashtra, India.

Kluyvera citrophila penicillin G acylase (KcPGA) has recently attracted increased
attention relative to the well studied and commonly used Escherichia coli PGA
(EcPGA) because KcPGA is more resilient to harsh conditions and is easier to
immobilize for the industrial hydrolysis of natural penicillins to generate the
6-aminopenicillin (6-APA) nucleus, which is the starting material for
semi-synthetic antibiotic production. Like other penicillin acylases, KcPGA is
synthesized as a single-chain inactive pro-PGA, which upon autocatalytic
processing becomes an active heterodimer of α and β chains. Here, the cloning of 
the pac gene encoding KcPGA and the preparation of a slow-processing mutant
precursor are reported. The purification, crystallization and preliminary X-ray
analysis of crystals of this precursor protein are described. The protein
crystallized in two different space groups, P1, with unit-cell parameters a =
54.0, b = 124.6, c = 135.1 Å, α = 104.1, β = 101.4, γ = 96.5°, and C2, with
unit-cell parameters a = 265.1, b = 54.0, c = 249.2 Å, β = 104.4°, using the
sitting-drop vapour-diffusion method. Diffraction data were collected at 100 K
and the phases were determined using the molecular-replacement method. The
initial maps revealed electron density for the spacer peptide.

DOI: 10.1107/S174430911301943X 
PMCID: PMC3729176
PMID: 23908045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

