
1. Biochemistry. 2013 Sep 10;52(36):6182-96. doi: 10.1021/bi4000832. Epub 2013 Aug
27.

Peroxide-shunt substrate-specificity for the Salmonella typhimurium O2-dependent 
tRNA modifying monooxygenase (MiaE).

Corder AL(1), Subedi BP, Zhang S, Dark AM, Foss FW Jr, Pierce BS.

Author information: 
(1)Biophysical/Bioinorganic Group and â€¡Synthetic Organic Group, Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, College of Science, The University of Texas at
Arlington , Arlington, Texas 76019, United States.

Post-transcriptional modifications of tRNA are made to structurally diversify
tRNA. These modifications alter noncovalent interactions within the ribosomal
machinery, resulting in phenotypic changes related to cell metabolism, growth,
and virulence. MiaE is a carboxylate bridged, nonheme diiron monooxygenase, which
catalyzes the O2-dependent hydroxylation of a hypermodified-tRNA nucleoside at
position 37 (2-methylthio-N(6)-isopentenyl-adenosine(37)-tRNA) [designated
ms(2)i(6)A37]. In this work, recombinant MiaE was cloned from Salmonella
typhimurium , purified to homogeneity, and characterized by UV-visible and
dual-mode X-band EPR spectroscopy for comparison to other nonheme diiron enzymes.
Additionally, three nucleoside substrate-surrogates (i(6)A, Cl(2)i(6)A, and
ms(2)i(6)A) and their corresponding hydroxylated products (io(6)A, Cl(2)io(6)A,
and ms(2)io(6)A) were synthesized to investigate the chemo- and stereospecificity
of this enzyme. In the absence of the native electron transport chain, the
peroxide-shunt was utilized to monitor the rate of substrate hydroxylation.
Remarkably, regardless of the substrate (i(6)A, Cl(2)i(6)A, and ms(2)i(6)A) used 
in peroxide-shunt assays, hydroxylation of the terminal isopentenyl-C4-position
was observed with >97% E-stereoselectivity. No other nonspecific hydroxylation
products were observed in enzymatic assays. Steady-state kinetic experiments also
demonstrate that the initial rate of MiaE hydroxylation is highly influenced by
the substituent at the C2-position of the nucleoside base (v0/[E] for ms(2)i(6)A 
> i(6)A > Cl(2)i(6)A). Indeed, the >3-fold rate enhancement exhibited by MiaE for
the hydroxylation of the free ms(2)i(6)A nucleoside relative to i(6)A is
consistent with previous whole cell assays reporting the ms(2)io(6)A and io(6)A
product distribution within native tRNA-substrates. This observation suggests
that the nucleoside C2-substituent is a key point of interaction regulating MiaE 
substrate specificity.

DOI: 10.1021/bi4000832 
PMID: 23906247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

