
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Jul 28;19(28):4590-5. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i28.4590.

Increased expression of matrix metalloproteinase-9 associated with gastric ulcer 
recurrence.

Li SL(1), Zhao JR, Ren XY, Xie JP, Ma QZ, Rong QH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Liaocheng People's Hospital, Liaocheng 252000,
Shandong Province, China.

AIM: To compare matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 and tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 in gastric ulcer (GU) and chronic superficial
gastritis (CSG).
METHODS: This study enrolled 63 patients with GU and 25 patients with CSG. During
upper gastroduodenal endoscopy, we took samples of gastric mucosa from the antrum
and ulcer site from patients with GU, and samples of antral mucosa from patients 
with CSG. Mucosal biopsy tissues were cultured for 24 h, and the culture
supernatant was measured for levels of MMP-9 and TIMP-1. After receiving
eradication therapy for Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) and 8 wk proton-pump
inhibitor therapy for GU, follow-up endoscopy examination was performed after 6
mo and whenever severe symptoms occurred.
RESULTS: Levels of MMP-9 and TIMP-1 at the ulcer site or in the antrum were
significantly higher in GU than CSG patients. MMP-9 levels at the ulcer site were
significantly higher than in the antrum in GU patients, and had a significantly
positive correlation with TIMP-1. MMP-9 levels were significantly higher in H.
pylori-positive than H. pylori-negative GU and CSG patients. Levels of MMP-9 or
TIMP-1 at the ulcer site were associated with the histological severity of
activity and inflammation. About 57 GU patients were followed up, and seven had
GU recurrence. H. pyloriinfection and MMP-9 levels were risk factors for the
recurrence of GU adjusted for age and sex by multiple logistic regression
analysis.
CONCLUSION: MMP-9 may perform an important function in gastric ulcer formation
and recurrence.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i28.4590 
PMCID: PMC3725386
PMID: 23901237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

