
1. Infect Immun. 2013 Oct;81(10):3912-22. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00533-13. Epub 2013 Aug
5.

Requirement and redundancy of the Src family kinases Fyn and Lyn in
perforin-dependent killing of Cryptococcus neoformans by NK cells.

Oykhman P(1), Timm-McCann M, Xiang RF, Islam A, Li SS, Stack D, Huston SM, Ma LL,
Mody CH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectious Diseases.

Natural killer (NK) cells directly recognize and kill fungi, such as the
pathogenic fungus Cryptococcus neoformans, via cytolytic mechanisms. However, the
precise signaling pathways governing this NK cell microbicidal activity and the
implications for fungal recognition are still unknown. Previously, it was
reported that NK cell anticryptococcal activity is mediated through a conserved
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
(PI3K-ERK1/2) pathway. Using YT (a human NK-like cell line) and primary human NK 
cells, we sought to identify the upstream, receptor-proximal signaling elements
that led to fungal cytolysis. We demonstrate that Src family kinases were
activated in response to C. neoformans. Furthermore, pharmacologic inhibition
with an Src kinase inhibitor blocked C. neoformans-induced downstream activation 
of PI3K and ERK1/2 and abrogated cryptococcal killing. At the same time, the
inhibitor disrupted the polarization of perforin-containing granules toward the
NK cell-cryptococcal synapse but had no effect on conjugate formation between the
organism and the NK cell. Finally, small interfering RNA (siRNA) double (but not 
single) knockdown of two Src family kinases, Fyn and Lyn, blocked cryptococcal
killing. Together these data demonstrate a mechanism whereby the Src family
kinases, Fyn and Lyn, redundantly mediate anticryptococcal activity through the
activation of PI3K and ERK1/2, which in turn facilitates killing by inducing the 
polarization of perforin-containing granules to the NK cell-cryptococcal synapse.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00533-13 
PMCID: PMC3811764
PMID: 23918783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

