
1. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2013 Nov-Dec;16(6):425-31. doi: 10.2350/13-06-1353-CR.1. Epub
2013 Aug 6.

Myxoinflammatory fibroblastic sarcoma in children and adolescents:
clinicopathologic aspects of a rare neoplasm.

Weiss VL(1), Antonescu CR, Alaggio R, Cates JM, Gaskin D, Stefanovici C, Coffin
CM.

Author information: 
(1)1â€‰ Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, TN, USA.

Myxoinflammatory fibroblastic sarcoma (MIFS), originally described as a low-grade
malignant soft-tissue tumor in adults, has recently been reported in children and
in non-acral sites. This report describes the clinicopathologic features of a
series of 5 MIFS in children and adolescents (3 males, 2 females), ranging in age
from 5 to 17 years (mean, 13 years). These tumors presented as small,
superficial, slowly growing soft-tissues masses of the scalp, neck, middle
finger, forearm, and thigh. Histologically, the tumors were composed of spindled 
and plump polygonal cells with prominent nuclear pleomorphism, nuclear
pseudoinclusions; large eosinophilic nucleoli; myxoid foci intermingled with
spindled foci; and an accompanying inflammatory infiltrate of lymphocytes, plasma
cells, and variable neutrophils. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed variable
reactivity for CD34 and smooth muscle actin in the tumor cells. Genetic analysis 
in 3 cases showed no rearrangements of TGFBR3 or MGEA5. Follow up in 4 cases
revealed no recurrence or metastasis. These 5 cases of childhood and adolescent
MIFS demonstrate an expanded age range and topographic distribution and a
favorable outcome. The differential diagnosis and importance of recognizing this 
rare neoplasm in young patients are discussed.

DOI: 10.2350/13-06-1353-CR.1 
PMID: 23919754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

