
1. J Med Chem. 2013 Sep 12;56(17):6761-74. doi: 10.1021/jm400830r. Epub 2013 Aug 21.

Discovery and biophysical characterization of 2-amino-oxadiazoles as novel
antagonists of PqsR, an important regulator of Pseudomonas aeruginosa virulence.

Zender M(1), Klein T, Henn C, Kirsch B, Maurer CK, Kail D, Ritter C, Dolezal O,
Steinbach A, Hartmann RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Design and Optimization, Helmholtz-Institute for
Pharmaceutical Research Saarland , Campus C2.3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.

The human pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa employs alkyl quinolones for
cell-to-cell communication. The Pseudomonas quinolone signal (PQS) regulates
various virulence factors via interaction with the transcriptional regulator
PqsR. Therefore, we consider the development of PqsR antagonists a novel strategy
to limit the pathogenicity of P. aeruginosa. A fragment identification approach
using surface plasmon resonance screening led to the discovery of chemically
diverse PqsR ligands. The optimization of the most promising hit (5) resulted in 
the oxadiazole-2-amine 37 showing pure antagonistic activity in Escherichia coli 
(EC50 = 7.5 μM) and P. aeruginosa (EC50 = 38.5 μM) reporter gene assays. 37 was
able to diminish the production of the PQS precursor HHQ in a PqsH-deficient P.
aeruginosa mutant. The level of the major virulence factor pyocyanin was
significantly reduced in wild-type P. aeruginosa. In addition, site-directed
mutagenesis in combination with isothermal titration calorimetry and NMR INPHARMA
experiments revealed that the identified ligands bind to the same site of PqsR by
adopting different binding modes. These findings will be utilized in a future
fragment-growing approach aiming at novel therapeutic options for the treatment
of P. aeruginosa infections.

DOI: 10.1021/jm400830r 
PMID: 23919758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

