
1. Folia Microbiol (Praha). 2014 Mar;59(2):99-105. doi: 10.1007/s12223-013-0268-0.
Epub 2013 Aug 3.

Enzymes involved in vinyl acetate decomposition by Pseudomonas fluorescens PCM
2123 strain.

Szczyrba E(1), Greń I, Bartelmus G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Engineering, Polish Academy of Sciences, Bałtycka 5,
44-100, Gliwice, Poland.

Esterases are widely used in food processing industry, but there is little
information concerning enzymes involved in decompositions of esters contributing 
to pollution of environment. Vinyl acetate (an ester of vinyl alcohol and acetic 
acid) is a representative of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in decomposition, 
of which hydrolyses and oxidoreductases are mainly involved. Their activities
under periodically changing conditions of environment are essential for the
removal of dangerous VOCs. Esterase and alcohol/aldehyde dehydrogenase activities
were determined in crude cell extract from Pseudomonas fluorescens PMC 2123 after
vinyl acetate induction. All examined enzymes exhibit their highest activity at
30-35 °C and pH 7.0-7.5. Esterase preferably hydrolyzed ester bonds with short
fatty chains without plain differences for C2 or C4. Comparison of Km values for 
alcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenases for acetaldehyde suggested that this
metabolite was preferentially oxidized than reduced. Activity of alcohol
dehydrogenase reducing acetaldehyde to ethanol suggested that one mechanism of
defense against the elevated concentration of toxic acetaldehyde could be its
temporary reduction to ethanol. Esterase activity was inhibited by
phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, while β-mercaptoethanol, dithiothreitol, and
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid had no inhibitor effect. From among metal ions,
only Mg(2+) and Fe(2+) stimulated the cleavage of ester bond.

DOI: 10.1007/s12223-013-0268-0 
PMCID: PMC3936133
PMID: 23913099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

