
1. Hum Immunol. 2013 Oct;74(10):1267-70. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2013.07.010. Epub
2013 Jul 31.

Vaccination against Streptococcus pneumoniae does not induce antibodies against
HLA or MICA in clinically stable kidney transplant recipients.

Lindemann M(1), Heinemann FM, Horn PA, Witzke O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Transfusion Medicine, University Hospital Essen, 45122 Essen,
Germany. Electronic address: monika.lindemann@uk-essen.de.

There are concerns in the community that immune activation after vaccination
could lead to (subclinical) rejection. Our aim was to define if pneumococcal
vaccination induced HLA antibodies using highly sensitive methods. Forty-nine
kidney transplant recipients were immunized with Pneumovax 23. The median
interval between transplantation and vaccination was 6.5 years, the median serum 
creatinine concentration 1.3, 1.3 and 1.4 mg/dL pre-vaccination, at month 1 and
15 post-vaccination, respectively. In none of the patients biopsy-proven acute
rejection was diagnosed within three years post-vaccination. Pneumococcal, HLA
class I and II and major histocompatibility class I-related chain A (MICA)
antibodies were determined by Luminex™ technology (xMAP™ Pneumococcal Immunity
Panel and LABScreen™ Mixed beads, respectively) and HLA antibodies also by ELISA 
(Lambda Antigen Tray™). While pneumococcal antibodies were significantly higher
at month 1 and 15 post- vs. pre-vaccination (p<0.0001 each), HLA/MICA antibodies 
remained unchanged as determined by Luminex™ and ELISA. Positive Luminex™
reactions were present in 63%, 67% and 63% (HLA class I), 47%, 47% and 55% (HLA
class II) and 29%, 29% and 29% (MICA) pre-vaccination, at month 1 and 15,
respectively. In clinically stable kidney transplant recipients there is no
evidence for an increase in HLA antibodies after pneumococcal vaccination.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2013.07.010 
PMID: 23911739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

