
1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 29;8(7):e70320. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070320. Print 2013.

Partial restoration of macrophage alteration from diet-induced obesity in
response to Porphyromonas gingivalis infection.

Richard G(1), Trivedi N, Belta C, Amar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, United
States of America.

Obesity is a chronic inflammatory disease that weakens macrophage innate immune
response to infections. Since M1 polarization is crucial during acute infectious 
diseases, we hypothesized that diet-induced obesity inhibits M1 polarization of
macrophages in the response to bacterial infections. Bone marrow macrophages
(BMMΦ) from lean and obese mice were exposed to live Porphyromonas gingivalis (P.
gingivalis) for three incubation times (1 h, 4 h and 24 h). Flow cytometry
analysis revealed that the M1 polarization was inhibited after P. gingivalis
exposure in BMMΦ from obese mice when compared with BMMΦ from lean counterparts. 
Using a computational approach in conjunction with microarray data, we identified
switching genes that may differentially control the behavior of response pathways
in macrophages from lean and obese mice. The two most prominent switching genes
were thrombospondin 1 and arginase 1. Protein expression levels of both genes
were higher in obese BMMΦ than in lean BMMΦ after exposure to P. gingivalis.
Inhibition of either thrombospondin 1 or arginase 1 by specific inhibitors
recovered the M1 polarization of BMMΦ from obese mice after P. gingivalis
exposure. These data indicate that thrombospondin 1 and arginase 1 are important 
bacterial response genes, whose regulation is altered in macrophages from obese
mice.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070320 
PMCID: PMC3726386
PMID: 23922979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

