
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Sep 20;288(38):27208-27219. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.469221. Epub 
2013 Aug 7.

CSN5/JAB1 interacts with the centromeric components CENP-T and CENP-W and
regulates their proteasome-mediated degradation.

Chun Y(1), Lee M(1), Park B(1), Lee S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Chungnam National
University, Daejeon 305-764, Korea.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Chungnam National
University, Daejeon 305-764, Korea. Electronic address: leesoojin@cnu.ac.kr.

The CENP-T路CENP-W complex is a recently identified inner centromere component
that plays crucial roles in the formation of a functional kinetochore involved in
cell division during mitosis. Using yeast two-hybrid screening, we identified an 
interaction between CENP-T and CSN5, the fifth component of the COP9 signalosome 
and a key modulator of the cell cycle and cancer. Co-immunoprecipitation revealed
that CSN5 directly interacts with both CENP-T and CENP-W. Ectopically expressed
CSN5 promoted the ubiquitin- and proteasome-dependent degradation of
CENP-T路CENP-W. The formation of a CENP-T路CENP-W complex greatly enhanced the
stabilities of the respective proteins, possibly by blocking CSN5-mediated
degradation. Furthermore, dysregulation of CSN5 induced severe defects in the
recruitment of CENP-T路CENP-W to the kinetochore during the prophase stage of
mitosis. Thus, our results indicate that CSN5 regulates the stability of the
inner kinetochore components CENP-T and CENP-W, providing the first direct link
between CSN5 and the mitotic apparatus, highlighting the role of CSN5 as a
multifunctional cell cycle regulator.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.469221 
PMCID: PMC3779718
PMID: 23926101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

