
1. J Invest Dermatol. 2014 Feb;134(2):441-451. doi: 10.1038/jid.2013.340. Epub 2013 
Aug 9.

Transcription factor/microRNA axis blocks melanoma invasion program by miR-211
targeting NUAK1.

Bell RE(1), Khaled M(2), Netanely D(3), Schubert S(4), Golan T(1), Buxbaum A(1), 
Janas MM(4), Postolsky B(1), Goldberg MS(4), Shamir R(3), Levy C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine,
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA; Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(4)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and
Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Department of Human Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine,
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Electronic address:
carmitlevy@post.tau.ac.il.

Melanoma is one of the deadliest human cancers, responsible for approximately 80%
of skin cancer mortalities. The aggressiveness of melanoma is due to its capacity
to proliferate and rapidly invade surrounding tissues, leading to metastases. A
recent model suggests melanoma progresses by reversibly switching between
proliferation and invasion transcriptional signatures. Recent studies show that
cancer cells are more sensitive to microRNA (miRNA) perturbation than are
non-cancer cells; however, the roles of miRNAs in melanoma plasticity remain
unexplored. Here, we use the gene expression profiles of melanoma and normal
melanocytes to characterize the transcription factor-miRNA relationship that
modulates the proliferative and invasive programs of melanoma. We identified two 
sets of miRNAs that likely regulate these programs. Interestingly, one of the
miRNAs involved in melanoma invasion is miR-211, a known target of the master
regulator microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF). We demonstrate
that miR-211 contributes to melanoma adhesion by directly targeting a gene,
NUAK1. Inhibition of miR-211 increases NUAK1 expression and decreases melanoma
adhesion, whereas upregulation of miR-211 restores adhesion through NUAK1
repression. This study defines the MITF/miR-211 axis that inhibits the invasive
program by blocking adhesion. Furthermore, we have identified NUAK1 as a
potential target for the treatment of metastatic melanoma.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2013.340 
PMID: 23934065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

