
1. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2013 Nov;25(11):872-e699. doi: 10.1111/nmo.12204. Epub 
2013 Aug 12.

Intestinal recruiting and activation profiles in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells in response to pathogen-associated molecular patterns stimulation in
patients with IBS.

Rodríguez-Fandiño O(1), Hernández-Ruíz J, López-Vidal Y, Charúa L,
Bandeh-Moghaddam H, Minzoni A, Guzmán C, Schmulson M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Hígado, Páncreas y Motilidad (HIPAM), Departamento de Medicina 
Experimental, Facultad de Medicina-Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México
(UNAM), Hospital General de México, México Distrito Federal, México.

BACKGROUND: Immune activation, increased Toll-like Receptors (TLR) expression,
and gut epithelial diffusion of bacterial molecules have been reported in
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Thus, we sought to relate these factors by
analyzing gut homing (integrin α4β7), intestinal recruiting (CCR5) and activation
(CD28) phenotypes, and the cytokines and chemokines concentration in peripheral
blood T-lymphocytes stimulated with TLR-ligands.
METHODS: Twenty-one IBS-Rome II (1 PI-IBS) patients and 19 controls were studied.
Isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cells were cultured with and without
Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS), Staphylococcus aureus peptidoglycan
(PGN), and unmethylated cytosine-phosphate-guanine motifs (CpG). Phenotypes were 
investigated by flow cytometry and supernatant cytokines and chemokines were also
measured.
KEY RESULTS: After LPS, CCR5 expression in CD4⁺ α4β7⁺ cells remained unchanged in
IBS, but decreased in controls (p = 0.002), to lower levels than in IBS (Mean
fluorescence intensity [MFI]: 1590 ± 126.9 vs 2417 ± 88.4, p < 0.001). There were
less CD8(+) α4β7⁺ CCR5⁺ cells (85.7 ± 1.5 vs 90.8 ± 0.9%, p = 0.006) after LPS
and CD3⁺ α4β7⁺ CCR5⁺ (40.0 ± 1.7 vs 51.2 ± 4.3%, p = 0.006) after PGN in
controls. Also, after LPS, CD28 decreased in CD4⁺ α4β7⁺ CCR5⁺ in IBS (MFI: 2337 ±
47.2 vs 1779 ± 179.2, p < 0.001), but not in controls. Cytokines and chemokines
were similar, except for lower IL8/CXCL8 in the unstimulated condition in IBS
(4.18, 95% CI: 3.94-4.42 vs 3.77, 3.59-3.95; p = 0.006).
CONCLUSIONS & INFERENCES: Pathogen-associated molecular patterns stimulation of
peripheral blood T cells expressing gut homing marker in IBS compared with
controls resulted in an unsuccessful down-regulation of the co-expression of
intestinal recruiting/residence phenotype and a state of activation. These
findings support an interaction between an innate immune predisposition and
microbial triggers, which may unleash or exacerbate IBS.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/nmo.12204 
PMID: 23937411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

