
1. Metab Eng. 2013 Sep;19:116-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2013.06.004. Epub 2013 Aug
16.

A reverse glyoxylate shunt to build a non-native route from C4 to C2 in
Escherichia coli.

Mainguet SE(1), Gronenberg LS, Wong SS, Liao JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Most central metabolic pathways such as glycolysis, fatty acid synthesis, and the
TCA cycle have complementary pathways that run in the reverse direction to allow 
flexible storage and utilization of resources. However, the glyoxylate shunt,
which allows for the synthesis of four-carbon TCA cycle intermediates from
acetyl-CoA, has not been found to be reversible to date. As a result, glucose can
only be converted to acetyl-CoA via the decarboxylation of the three-carbon
molecule pyruvate in heterotrophs. A reverse glyoxylate shunt (rGS) could be
extended into a pathway that converts C4 carboxylates into two molecules of
acetyl-CoA without loss of CO2. Here, as a proof of concept, we engineered in
Escherichia coli such a pathway to convert malate and succinate to oxaloacetate
and two molecules of acetyl-CoA. We introduced ATP-coupled heterologous enzymes
at the thermodynamically unfavorable steps to drive the pathway in the desired
direction. This synthetic pathway in essence reverses the glyoxylate shunt at the
expense of ATP. When integrated with central metabolism, this pathway has the
potential to increase the carbon yield of acetate and biofuels from many carbon
sources in heterotrophic microorganisms, and could be the basis of novel carbon
fixation cycles.

Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2013.06.004 
PMID: 23938029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

