
1. Cancer Res. 2013 Oct 15;73(20):6299-309. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4082. Epub
2013 Aug 13.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition and tumor suppression are controlled by a
reciprocal feedback loop between ZEB1 and Grainyhead-like-2.

Cieply B(1), Farris J, Denvir J, Ford HL, Frisch SM.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center and Department of
Biochemistry, West Virginia University, Morgantown; Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia; and Departments
of Biochemistry/Molecular Genetics and Obstetrics/Gynecology, University of
Colorado, Denver, Colorado.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in carcinoma cells enhances malignant
progression by promoting invasion and survival. EMT is induced by
microenvironmental factors, including TGF-β and Wnt agonists, and by the
E-box-binding transcription factors Twist, Snail, and ZEB. Grainyhead-like-2
(GRHL2), a member of the mammalian Grainyhead family of wound-healing regulatory 
transcription factors, suppresses EMT and restores sensitivity to anoikis by
repressing ZEB1 expression and inhibiting TGF-β signaling. In this study, we
elucidate the functional relationship between GRHL2 and ZEB1 in EMT/MET and tumor
biology. At least three homeodomain proteins, Six1, LBX1, and HoxA5,
transactivated the ZEB1 promoter, in the case of Six1, through direct
protein-promoter interaction. GRHL2 altered the Six1-DNA complex, inhibiting this
transactivation. Correspondingly, GRHL2 expression prevented tumor initiation in 
xenograft assays, sensitized breast cancer cells to paclitaxel, and suppressed
the emergence of CD44(high)CD24(low) cells (defining the cancer stem cell
phenotype in the cell type studied). GRHL2 was downregulated in recurrent mouse
tumors that had evolved to an oncogene-independent, EMT-like state, supporting a 
role for GRHL2 downregulation in this phenotypic transition, modeling disease
recurrence. The combination of TGF-β and Wnt activation repressed GRHL2
expression by direct interaction of ZEB1 with the GRHL2 promoter, inducing EMT.
Together, our observations indicate that a reciprocal feedback loop between GRHL2
and ZEB1 controls epithelial versus mesenchymal phenotypes and EMT-driven tumor
progression.

©2013 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4082 
PMCID: PMC3806457
PMID: 23943797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

