
1. J Food Sci. 2013 Aug;78(8):M1201-7. doi: 10.1111/1750-3841.12182.

Frequency and correlation of some enteric indicator bacteria and Salmonella in
ready-to-eat raw vegetable salads from Mexican restaurants.

Gómez-Aldapa CA(1), Rangel-Vargas E, Castro-Rosas J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Químicas. Instituto de Ciencias Básicas e
Ingeniería, Univ. Autónoma del Estado de Hidalgo, Ciudad del Conocimiento,
Carretera Pachuca-Tulancingo Km. 4.5, 42183 Mineral de la Reforma, Hidalgo,
Mexico.

Data about Salmonella presence in ready-to-eat raw vegetable salads (REVS)
consumed in restaurants or sold as REVS in México is not available. The objective
of the study was to measure the frequency of coliform bacteria (CB), fecal
coliform (FC), Escherichia coli, and Salmonella in REVS from different types of
restaurants and determine the correlations of CB, FC, and E. coli versus
Salmonella from frequencies and concentration data. The REVS were purchased from 
3 types of restaurants: national chain restaurants (A1 , A2 ); local restaurants 
(B1 , B2 ); and small restaurants in local markets (C1 , C2 , C3 ). Two
restaurants for each A and B, and 3 for C, were included. Forty REVS were
purchased at each A and B restaurant, and 20 at each C restaurant. CB were tested
by plate count using violet red bile agar, FC and E. coli were detected by the
most probable number method and E. coli confirmed using IMViC test; conventional 
method of culture was used for Salmonella. Of 220 analyzed samples, 100% had CB, 
95.5% had FC, 83.2% had E. coli, and 6.8% had Salmonella. E. coli frequency was
equal to or exceeded 75% in all the cases: 75% (A1 , C1 , C2 ), 80% (B2 ), 85%
(B1 , C3 ), and 100% (A2 ). Salmonella frequency was equal to or exceeded 2.5% in
all cases: 2.5% (A1 ), 5% (B2 , C2 ), 7.5% (B1 ), and 10% (A2 , C1 , C3 ). No
correlation was observed between FC or E. coli versus Salmonella in the analyzed 
salads. All the tested salads were of poor quality microbiologically, and
microbiological quality did not differ between the restaurants types.

© 2013 Institute of Food Technologists®

DOI: 10.1111/1750-3841.12182 
PMID: 23957408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

