
1. Chembiochem. 2013 Sep 2;14(13):1573-80. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201300140. Epub 2013
Aug 19.

Discovery and biological activity of new chondramides from Chondromyces sp.

Herrmann J(1), Hüttel S, Müller R.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Natural Products (MINS), Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical
Research Saarland (HIPS), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI) and
Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Saarland University, Campus C2.3,
66123 Saarbrücken (Germany).

Myxobacteria have proven to be highly valuable sources of natural products, as
they produce a variety of secondary metabolites with unique structures and often 
new modes of action. In this study, high-content screening is demonstrated to be 
a convenient tool for bioactivity-guided isolation of natural products from crude
bacterial extracts. By the application of focused, image-based screens we were
able to identify over 30 novel chondramide derivatives from Chondromyces sp.
MSr9030, some of which were present in only minute amounts. These cyclic
depsipeptides were shown to target actin filaments with a similar binding mode to
that of the mushroom toxin phalloidin. Fermentations of the myxobacterial strain 
were carried out under improved cultivation conditions, and supplementation of
the culture broth with potassium bromide afforded the production of brominated
analogues that are superior (in terms of biological activity) to all chondramides
described to date. Initial biological profiling of 11 new derivatives in
comparison to the reference compounds (chondramides A-C) showed that
bromo-chondramide C3 and propionyl-bromo-chondramide C3 are the most active in
cell-based studies, with GI₅₀ values on human cancer cell lines in the low
nanomolar range. Given that these brominated C3 analogues were also less potent
on noncancerous human cells (by a factor of 2 to 4 in comparison to cancer cell
lines), our results can aid further structure-activity relationship-guided
development of chondramides, either as molecular probes or pharmaceutical agents.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201300140 
PMID: 23959765  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

