
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2013 Aug 7;10(8):3453-64. doi:
10.3390/ijerph10083453.

Arsenic resistance and prevalence of arsenic resistance genes in Campylobacter
jejuni and Campylobacter coli isolated from retail meats.

Noormohamed A(1), Fakhr MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, The University of Tulsa, Tulsa, OK 74104,
USA. aneesa-noormohamed@utulsa.edu

Studies that investigate arsenic resistance in the foodborne bacterium
Campylobacter are limited. A total of 552 Campylobacter isolates (281
Campylobacter jejuni and 271 Campylobacter coli) isolated from retail meat
samples were subjected to arsenic resistance profiling using the following
arsenic compounds: arsanilic acid (4-2,048 μg/mL), roxarsone (4-2048 μg/mL),
arsenate (16-8,192 μg/mL) and arsenite (4-2,048 μg/mL). A total of 223 of these
isolates (114 Campylobacter jejuni and 109 Campylobacter coli) were further
analyzed for the presence of five arsenic resistance genes (arsP, arsR, arsC,
acr3, and arsB) by PCR. Most of the 552 Campylobacter isolates were able to
survive at higher concentrations of arsanilic acid (512-2,048 μg/mL), roxarsone
(512-2,048 μg/mL), and arsenate (128-1,024 μg/mL), but at lower concentrations
for arsenite (4-16 μg/mL). Ninety seven percent of the isolates tested by PCR
showed the presence of arsP and arsR genes. While 95% of the Campylobacter coli
isolates contained a larger arsenic resistance operon that has all of the four
genes (arsP, arsR, arsC and acr3), 85% of the Campylobacter jejuni isolates
carried the short operon (arsP, and arsR). The presence of arsC and acr3 did not 
significantly increase arsenic resistance with the exception of conferring
resistance to higher concentrations of arsenate to some Campylobacter isolates.
arsB was prevalent in 98% of the tested Campylobacter jejuni isolates, regardless
of the presence or absence of arsC and acr3, but was completely absent in
Campylobacter coli. To our knowledge, this is the first study to determine
arsenic resistance and the prevalence of arsenic resistance genes in such a large
number of Campylobacter isolates.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph10083453 
PMCID: PMC3774448
PMID: 23965921  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

