
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Dec;94(6):1325-36. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0313144. Epub 2013 Aug
20.

Distinct development and functions of resident and recruited liver Kupffer
cells/macrophages.

Ikarashi M(1), Nakashima H, Kinoshita M, Sato A, Nakashima M, Miyazaki H,
Nishiyama K, Yamamoto J, Seki S.

Author information: 
(1)1.National Defense Medical College, 3-2 Namiki, Tokorozawa, Saitama, 359-8513 
Japan. btraums@ndmc.ac.jp.

Although mouse liver F4/80(+) Kupffer cells consist of cytokine-producing
CD11b(+) cells and phagocytic CD68(+) cells, an undefined CD11b(-) CD68(-) subset
(30%) also exists. We herein demonstrate a more fundamental classification by
adding CD32 (FcγRII), which covers most liver F4/80(+) cells and the distinct
functions of them. Among the F4/80(+) cells, 50%, 40%, and 30% of cells were
CD32(+), CD68(+), and CD11b(+), respectively, and one-half of the CD68(+) cells
coexpressed CD32. CD68(+) and CD32(+) cells, but not CD11b(+) cells, expressed a 
phagocytosis-related CRIg. Gy (6) irradiation depleted liver CD11b(+) cells and
those in the spleen, bone marrow, and peripheral blood but not liver CD32/CD68(+)
cells. Transfer of bone marrow cells into the irradiated mice reconstituted liver
CD11b(+) cells. Conversely, clodronate pretreatment depleted only liver
CD32/CD68(+) cells but not liver CD11b(+) cells and peripheral blood or spleen
CD11b(+) monocytes/macrophages. Moreover, the CD32(+) cells might be precursors
of CD68(+) cells, as a large proportion of CD32(+) cells expressed the c-kit
(CD117), and CD34 and CD32(+) cells acquired CD68 immediately after bacteria
administration. CD32/CD68(+) cells, but not CD11b(+) cells, expressed resident
macrophage-specific MerTK and CD64 (FcγRI). Challenge with Staphylococcus aureus 
or liver metastatic EL-4 tumor cells indicated that the CD68(+) subset is engaged
in systemic bactericidal activity, whereas the CD11b(+) subset is pivotal for
liver antitumor immunity. Human liver CD14(+) Kupffer cells could also be
classified into three similar subsets. These results suggest that liver CD68(+)
Kupffer cells and CD11b(+) Kupffer cells/macrophages are developmentally and
functionally distinct subsets.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.0313144 
PMID: 23964119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

