
1. J Exp Med. 2013 Aug 26;210(9):1871-88. doi: 10.1084/jem.20122762. Epub 2013 Aug
19.

Lung dendritic cells induce migration of protective T cells to the
gastrointestinal tract.

Ruane D(1), Brane L, Reis BS, Cheong C, Poles J, Do Y, Zhu H, Velinzon K, Choi
JH, Studt N, Mayer L, Lavelle EC, Steinman RM, Mucida D, Mehandru S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Immunology and Physiology and 2 Laboratory of Mucosal
Immunology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2014 Mar;146(3):854-5.

Developing efficacious vaccines against enteric diseases is a global challenge
that requires a better understanding of cellular recruitment dynamics at the
mucosal surfaces. The current paradigm of T cell homing to the gastrointestinal
(GI) tract involves the induction of α4β7 and CCR9 by Peyer's patch and
mesenteric lymph node (MLN) dendritic cells (DCs) in a retinoic acid-dependent
manner. This paradigm, however, cannot be reconciled with reports of GI T cell
responses after intranasal (i.n.) delivery of antigens that do not directly
target the GI lymphoid tissue. To explore alternative pathways of cellular
migration, we have investigated the ability of DCs from mucosal and nonmucosal
tissues to recruit lymphocytes to the GI tract. Unexpectedly, we found that lung 
DCs, like CD103(+) MLN DCs, up-regulate the gut-homing integrin α4β7 in vitro and
in vivo, and induce T cell migration to the GI tract in vivo. Consistent with a
role for this pathway in generating mucosal immune responses, lung DC targeting
by i.n. immunization induced protective immunity against enteric challenge with a
highly pathogenic strain of Salmonella. The present report demonstrates novel
functional evidence of mucosal cross talk mediated by DCs, which has the
potential to inform the design of novel vaccines against mucosal pathogens.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20122762 
PMCID: PMC3754860
PMID: 23960190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

