
1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 14;8(8):e70852. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070852. eCollection
2013.

Comparative genomic analysis of Brucella melitensis vaccine strain M5 provides
insights into virulence attenuation.

Jiang H(1), Du P, Zhang W, Wang H, Zhao H, Piao D, Tian G, Chen C, Cui B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Infectious Disease Prevention and Control,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, National Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention,
Beijing, China.

The Brucella melitensis vaccine strain M5 is widely used to prevent and control
brucellosis in animals. In this study, we determined the whole-genome sequence of
M5, and conducted a comprehensive comparative analysis against the whole-genome
sequence of the virulent strain 16 M and other reference strains. This analysis
revealed 11 regions of deletion (RDs) and 2 regions of insertion (RIs) within the
M5 genome. Among these regions, the sequences encompassed in 5 RDs and 1 RI
showed consistent variation, with a large deletion between the M5 and the 16 M
genomes. RD4 and RD5 showed the large diversity among all Brucella genomes, both 
in RD length and RD copy number. Thus, RD4 and RD5 are potential sites for typing
different Brucella strains. Other RD and RI regions exhibited multiple single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). In addition, a genome fragment with a 56 kb
rearrangement was determined to be consistent with previous studies. Comparative 
genomic analysis indicated that genomic island inversion in Brucella was widely
present. With the genetic pattern common among all strains analyzed, these 2 RDs,
1 RI, and one inversion region are potential sites for detection of genomic
differences. Several SNPs of important virulence-related genes (motB, dhbC, sfuB,
dsbAB, aidA, aroC, and lysR) were also detected, and may be used to determine the
mechanism of virulence attenuation. Collectively, this study reveals that
comparative analysis between wild-type and vaccine strains can provide resources 
for the study of virulence and microevolution of Brucella.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070852 
PMCID: PMC3743847
PMID: 23967122  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

