
1. Gastroenterology. 2013 Dec;145(6):1347-57. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.08.035.
Epub 2013 Aug 21.

Atg16l1 is required for autophagy in intestinal epithelial cells and protection
of mice from Salmonella infection.

Conway KL(1), Kuballa P, Song JH, Patel KK, Castoreno AB, Yilmaz OH, Jijon HB,
Zhang M, Aldrich LN, Villablanca EJ, Peloquin JM, Goel G, Lee IA, Mizoguchi E,
Shi HN, Bhan AK, Shaw SY, Schreiber SL, Virgin HW, Shamji AF, Stappenbeck TS,
Reinecker HC, Xavier RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit and Center for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts;
Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts; Center for Computational and Integrative Biology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Intestinal epithelial cells aid in mucosal defense by
providing a physical barrier against entry of pathogenic bacteria and secreting
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). Autophagy is an important component of immune
homeostasis. However, little is known about its role in specific cell types
during bacterial infection in vivo. We investigated the role of autophagy in the 
response of intestinal epithelial and antigen-presenting cells to Salmonella
infection in mice.
METHODS: We generated mice deficient in Atg16l1 in epithelial cells (Atg16l1(f/f)
× Villin-cre) or CD11c(+) cells (Atg16l1(f/f) × CD11c-cre); these mice were used 
to assess cell type-specific antibacterial autophagy. All responses were compared
with Atg16l1(f/f) mice (controls). Mice were infected with Salmonella enterica
serovar typhimurium; cecum and small-intestine tissues were collected for
immunofluorescence, histology, and quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase 
chain reaction analyses of cytokines and AMPs. Modulators of autophagy were
screened to evaluate their effects on antibacterial responses in human epithelial
cells.
RESULTS: Autophagy was induced in small intestine and cecum after infection with 
S typhimurium, and required Atg16l1. S typhimurium colocalized with
microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3β (Map1lc3b or LC3) in the
intestinal epithelium of control mice but not in Atg16l1(f/f) × Villin-cre mice. 
Atg16l1(f/f) × Villin-cre mice also had fewer Paneth cells and abnormal granule
morphology, leading to reduced expression of AMPs. Consistent with these
defective immune responses, Atg16l1(f/f) × Villin-cre mice had increased
inflammation and systemic translocation of bacteria compared with control mice.
In contrast, we observed few differences between Atg16l1(f/f) × CD11c-cre and
control mice. Trifluoperazine promoted autophagy and bacterial clearance in HeLa 
cells; these effects were reduced upon knockdown of ATG16L1.
CONCLUSIONS: Atg16l1 regulates autophagy in intestinal epithelial cells and is
required for bacterial clearance. It also is required to prevent systemic
infection of mice with enteric bacteria.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.08.035 
PMCID: PMC3840157
PMID: 23973919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

