
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Nov;57(11):5492-9. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01590-13.
Epub 2013 Aug 26.

A novel C5a-derived immunobiotic peptide reduces Streptococcus agalactiae
colonization through targeted bacterial killing.

Cavaco CK(1), Patras KA, Zlamal JE, Thoman ML, Morgan EL, Sanderson SD, Doran KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Microbial Sciences, San Diego State
University, San Diego, California, USA.

Streptococcus agalactiae (group B Streptococcus [GBS]) is a Gram-positive
bacterium that colonizes the cervicovaginal tract in approximately 25% of healthy
women. Although colonization is asymptomatic, GBS can be vertically transmitted
to newborns peripartum, causing severe disease such as pneumonia and meningitis. 
Current prophylaxis, consisting of late gestation screening and intrapartum
antibiotics, has failed to completely prevent transmission, and GBS remains a
leading cause of neonatal sepsis and meningitis in the United States. Lack of an 
effective vaccine and emerging antibiotic resistance necessitate exploring novel 
therapeutic strategies. We have employed a host-directed immunomodulatory therapy
using a novel peptide, known as EP67, derived from the C-terminal region of human
complement component C5a. Previously, we have demonstrated in vivo that EP67
engagement of the C5a receptor (CD88) effectively limits staphylococcal infection
by promoting cytokine release and neutrophil infiltration. Here, using our
established mouse model of GBS vaginal colonization, we observed that EP67
treatment results in rapid clearance of GBS from the murine vagina. However, this
was not dependent on functional neutrophil recruitment or CD88 signaling, as EP67
treatment reduced the vaginal bacterial load in mice lacking CD88 or the major
neutrophil receptor CXCr2. Interestingly, we found that EP67 inhibits GBS growth 
in vitro and in vivo and that antibacterial activity was specific to
Streptococcus species. Our work establishes that EP67-mediated clearance of GBS
is likely due to direct bacterial killing rather than to enhanced immune
stimulation. We conclude that EP67 may have potential as a therapeutic to control
GBS vaginal colonization.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01590-13 
PMCID: PMC3811312
PMID: 23979760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

