
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2013 Jul;47(3):442-60.

[Salmonella serovars isolated in Turkey up to the end of year 2011].

[Article in Turkish]

Töreci K(1), Erdem B, Ongen B.

Author information: 
(1)Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Microbiology,
Ankara, Turkey. birselerdem@yahoo.com.

Bacteria in Salmonella genus are separated into more than 2600 serovars. It is
important that the isolated serovars and their sources are known in a certain
country. This will help the identification of new Salmonella serovars that will
be isolated later on. Since there is no Salmonella reference center in Turkey,
Salmonella serovars isolated in Turkey were mainly reported by the articles of
Aksoycan's manuscripts in various years, and in the list of Töreci and Anğ in
1991. The aim of this meta-analysis was to detect and prepare a list for all the 
Salmonella serovars isolated from human and non-human samples in Turkey up to the
end of 2011. In creating this serovar list, libraries, personal and institutional
archives, theses, publication lists, books published after scientific meetings
and congresses, and international and local periodicals have been explored, and
members of Turkish Microbiology Society are communicated via the web site of the 
society and personal e-mail addresses, and their publications regarding
Salmonella serovars were requested. The list also includes the modifications on
the names and antigenic formulae of the serovars that were carried out in recent 
years. The number of serovars isolated in Turkey up to the end of 2011 is 129.
Fifty three of them were isolated from humans, 38 from humans and non-human
samples, and 38 from non-human samples. The total number of serovars isolated
from humans is 91. Twenty seven serovars from serogrup 0:4 (B); 23 serovars from 
serogrup 0:7 (C1); 25 serovars from serogrup 0:8 (C2-C3); 16 serovars from
serogrup 0:9 (D1); 8 serovars from serogrup 0:3,10 (E1) and 5 serovars from
serogrup 0:28 (M) have been reported. Only two of the more than 2600 serovars
known were isolated firstly in Turkey: S. Istanbul (8:z10: e,n,x) in 1969 and S. 
Adana (43:z10:1,5) in 1977. Previously, serovars containing 1 and 25 O antigen of
S. Boecker ([1],6,14,[25]) were isolated in 1967 and 1971 for the first time in
Turkey. In 1967, a serovar containing T1 antigen that appears during S-R
alteration in Salmonella, with (T1: b: e,n,x) antigen formula has been isolated
from non-human samples and was reported to be a probable S-R alteration of
Salmonella Benfica. Furthermore, non-motile isolates of Salmonella enterica subsp
enterica serogrup 0:7 (C1) and serogrup 0:9 (D) were reported as well. While
reporting a new Salmonella isolation in a country one should not be content with 
only giving the name of the serovar, but also emphasize the antigenic structure
and the identification method clearly.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.5564 
PMID: 23971922  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

