
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013 Nov;35(5):1663-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.08.014.
Epub 2013 Aug 24.

Characterization of two negative regulators of the Toll-like receptor pathway in 
Apostichopus japonicus: inhibitor of NF-κB and Toll-interacting protein.

Lu Y(1), Li C, Wang D, Su X, Jin C, Li Y, Li T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Marine Sciences, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang Province
315211, PR China.

The Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling cascade plays a central role in host cell 
recognition and responses to microbial pathogens via the specific recognition of 
distinct pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). However, no negative
regulators of the TLR-signaling cascade have been described in sea cucumber
(Apostichopus japonicus). In the present study, two negative regulators known as 
the inhibitor of NF-κB (IκB) and Toll-interacting protein (Tollip) have been
identified in coelomocytes of this species using transcriptome sequencing and
RACE (denoted as AjIκB and AjTollip, respectively). Both of these factors share a
remarkably high degree of structural conservation with their mammalian orthologs,
such as a central ankyrin repeat domain (ARD) for the deduced amino acids of
AjIκB and the C2 and CUE domains for AjTollip. Constitutive expression patterns
with differential expression levels were observed for these two genes. Moreover, 
mRNA transcript expression for AjIκB and AjTollip was highest in the tentacle and
abundant in the muscle, respectively. Vibrio splendidus challenge study revealed 
that the expression level of these two genes was decreased within the first 48 h 
with 0.53-fold and 0.61-fold decrease compared with that in the control group for
AjIκB and AjTollip, respectively. Taken together, these results indicated that
AjIκB and AjTollip functioned as negative regulators in the TLR cascade in
response to a V. splendidus challenge.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.08.014 
PMID: 23978566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

