
1. Cancer Sci. 2013 Nov;104(11):1508-14. doi: 10.1111/cas.12268. Epub 2013 Oct 20.

Lactobacillus casei Shirota enhances the preventive efficacy of soymilk in
chemically induced breast cancer.

Kaga C(1), Takagi A, Kano M, Kado S, Kato I, Sakai M, Miyazaki K, Nanno M,
Ishikawa F, Ohashi Y, Toi M.

Author information: 
(1)Yakult Central Institute for Microbiological Research, Tokyo, Japan.

Soy foods are known to be effective for breast cancer prevention. The habitual
consumption of soy isoflavones in combination with the probiotic Lactobacillus
casei Shirota (LcS) was shown to decrease the risk of breast cancer occurrence in
our previous population-based case-controlled study among Japanese women. The
present study aimed to elucidate the cooperative prevention mechanism of soymilk 
and LcS using an animal carcinogenic model. Female Sprague-Dawley rats received a
high-fat, AIN-76A diet containing soymilk, LcS, both soymilk and LcS, or none and
were orally exposed to 2-amino-1-methyl-6-penylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine at a dose
of 85 mg/kg bodyweight eight times for 2 weeks. The development of palpable
mammary tumors was monitored for 17 weeks. Tumor tissues were
immunohistochemically examined for estrogen receptor (ER)-α, Ki-67 and CD34.
Compared with the control group, the incidence and multiplicity of mammary tumors
were reduced by soymilk alone and soymilk in combination with LcS, while tumor
volume was decreased by LcS alone and LcS in combination with soymilk. An
immunohistochemical analysis revealed that soymilk in combination with LcS more
effectively reduced the numbers of ER-α-positive and Ki-67-positive cells in
tumors than soymilk alone and that both soymilk and LcS inhibited tumor
angiogenesis. These results demonstrated that soymilk prevents the development of
mammary tumors and that LcS suppresses tumor growth, potentially enhancing the
preventive efficacy of soymilk. The habitual consumption of LcS in combination
with soymilk might be a beneficial dietary style for breast cancer prevention.

© 2013 Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12268 
PMCID: PMC7656532
PMID: 23992486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

