
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2013 Sep 3;105(3):203-10. doi: 10.3354/dao02609.

Molecular epidemiology of Flavobacterium psychrophilum from Swiss fish farms.

Strepparava N(1), Nicolas P, Wahli T, Segner H, Petrini O.

Author information: 
(1)Cantonal Institute of Microbiology, Via Mirasole 22a, 6500 Bellinzona,
Switzerland.

Bacterial cold water disease (BCWD) and rainbow trout fry syndrome (RTFS) caused 
by Flavobacterium psychrophilum are 2 of the major diseases causing high fish
mortality in salmonid fish farms. The molecular epidemiology of F. psychrophilum 
is still largely unknown. Multilocus sequence typing (MLST) has been previously
used for this pathogen and underscored a correlation between clonal complexes and
host fish species. Here we used MLST to study the relationships among 112 F.
psychrophilum isolates from rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss and brown trout
Salmo trutta fario and S. t. lacustris in Swiss fish farms between 1993 and 2012.
The isolates belonged to 27 different sequence types (STs). Most of the Swiss
outbreaks were associated with strains belonging to clonal complexes CC-ST2 and
CC-ST90, found in both rainbow trout and brown trout and represented by several
STs. Eight ST singletons could not be connected to any known clonal complex.
Already reported from other parts of Europe and North America, CC-ST2 was the
most frequent clonal complex observed, and it caused the majority of outbreaks in
Switzerland, with CC-ST90 being the second most important type. In the tightly
interconnected Swiss fish farms, no association between clonal complex and host
fish was detected, but a temporal evolution of the frequency of some STs was
observed. The occurrence of sporadic STs suggests high F. psychrophilum diversity
and may reflect the presence of different sequence types in the environment.

DOI: 10.3354/dao02609 
PMID: 23999704  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

