
1. Ann Vasc Surg. 2013 Oct;27(7):964-71. doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2013.02.012.

Correlation of bacterial coinfection versus matrix metalloproteinase 9 and tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 expression in aortic aneurysm and
atherosclerosis.

Roggério A(1), Sambiase NV, Palomino SA, de Castro MA, da Silva ES, Stolf NG, de 
Lourdes Higuchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Inflammation Laboratory, Heart Institute of Clinical Hospital, Medical School,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: We searched for any relationship between Chlamydophila pneumoniae,
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9), and tissue inhibitor
of metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP-1) in aneurysmatic atherosclerotic lesions, and
whether this relationship differed from that in atherosclerotic nonaneurysmatic
lesions.
METHODS: Twenty-eight tissue samples paired by age and sex were grouped as
follows: group 1 included 14 nonaneurysmal atherosclerotic fragments obtained
from abdominal aortas collected from necropsies; group 2 included 14 aneurysmatic
atherosclerotic aortic fragments obtained from patients during corrective
surgery. Immunohistochemistry reactions were evaluated for C pneumoniae, M
pneumoniae, MMP-9, and TIMP-1 antigens. Both groups were compared using the
Mann-Whitney test, and the correlations among variables were obtained using the
Spearman correlation test. P ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS: C pneumoniae and M pneumoniae antigens were detected in 100% of cases. A
higher amount of C pneumoniae (P = 0.005), M pneumoniae (P = 0.002), and MMP-9 (P
= 0.021) was found in adventitia of group 2 with aneurysm. A positive correlation
was found in the aneurysm group, as follows: intima C pneumoniae versus
adventitia thickness (r = 0.70; P = 0.01), media C pneumoniae versus adventitia C
pneumoniae (r = 0.75; P = 0.002), intima C pneumoniae versus media C pneumoniae
(r = 0.8; P = 0.00), and adventitia C pneumoniae versus intima M pneumoniae (r = 
0.54; P = 0.05); negative correlations were as follows: adventitia thickness and 
adventitia M pneumoniae (r = -0.65; P = 0.01), media MMP-9 and media thickness (r
= -0.55; P = 0.04), TIMP-1 media versus adventitia C pneumoniae (r = -0.86; P =
0.00), and TIMP-1 media versus M pneumoniae intima (r = -0.67; P = 0.03).
Nonaneurysmal atherosclerotic group 1 results are as follows: adventitia C
pneumoniae versus TIMP-1 media (r = 0.75; P = 0.01) and media C pneumoniae and
adventitia C pneumoniae (r = 0.59; P = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: The present work favors a role for coinfection of both M pneumoniae 
and C pneumoniae in the development of aortic atherosclerotic aneurysm, with
increased adventitial inflammation, inhibition of TIMP-1 activity, and increased 
collagen degradation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2013.02.012 
PMID: 23993112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

