
1. Environ Microbiol. 2013 Nov;15(11):2951-65. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.12229. Epub
2013 Aug 29.

Identification and characterization of two novel toxins expressed by the lethal
honey bee pathogen Paenibacillus larvae, the causative agent of American
foulbrood.

Fünfhaus A(1), Poppinga L(2), Genersch E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Bee Diseases, Institute for Bee
Research, Friedrich-Engels-Str 32, 16540 Hohen Neuendorf, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Bee Diseases, Institute for Bee
Research, Friedrich-Engels-Str. 32, 16540, Hohen Neuendorf, Germany.

Paenibacillus larvae is a Gram-positive bacterial pathogen causing the epizootic 
American foulbrood in honey bee larvae. Four so-called enterobacterial repetitive
intergenic consensus (ERIC) genotypes of P. larvae exist with P. larvae genotypes
ERIC I and ERIC II being responsible for disease outbreaks all over the world.
Very few molecular data on the pathogen, on pathogenesis or on virulence factors 
exist. We now identified two genomic loci in P. larvae ERIC I coding for two
binary AB toxins, Plx1 and Plx2. In silico analyses revealed that Plx1 is the
third member of an enigmatic family of AB toxins so far only comprising MTX1 of
Lysinibacillus sphaericus and pierisin-like toxins expressed by several
butterflies. Plx2 is also remarkable because the A-domain is highly similar to C3
exoenzymes, which normally are single domain proteins, while the B-domain is
homologous to B-domains of C2-toxins. We constructed P. larvae mutants lacking
expression of Plx1, Plx2 or both toxins and demonstrated that these toxins are
important virulence factors for P. larvae ERIC I.

© 2013 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.12229 
PMID: 23992535  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

