
1. Nat Protoc. 2013 Oct;8(10):1870-89. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2013.113. Epub 2013 Sep 5.

Synthesis of orthogonally protected bacterial, rare-sugar and D-glycosamine
building blocks.

Emmadi M(1), Kulkarni SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India.

Bacterial glycoconjugates comprise atypical deoxy amino sugars that are not
present on the human cell surface, making them good targets for drug discovery
and carbohydrate-based vaccine development. Unfortunately, they cannot be
isolated with sufficient purity in acceptable amounts, and therefore chemical
synthesis is a crucial step toward the development of these products. Here we
describe a detailed protocol for the synthesis of orthogonally protected
bacterial deoxy amino hexopyranoside (2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxyhexose
(DATDH), D-bacillosamine, D-fucosamine, and
2-acetamido-4-amino-2,4,6-trideoxy-D-galactose (AAT)), D-glucosamine and
D-galactosamine building blocks starting from β-D-thiophenylmannoside. Readily
available β-D-thiophenylmannoside was first converted into the corresponding
2,4-diols via deoxygenation or silylation at C6, followed by O3 acylation. The
2,4-diols were converted into 2,4-bis-trifluoromethanesulfonates, which underwent
highly regioselective, one-pot, double-serial and double-parallel displacements
by azide, phthalimide, acetate and nitrite ions as nucleophiles. Thus,
D-rhamnosyl- and D-mannosyl 2,4-diols can be efficiently transformed into various
rare sugars and D-galactosamine, respectively, as orthogonally protected
thioglycoside building blocks on a gram scale in 1-2 d, in 54-85% overall yields,
after a single chromatographic purification. This would otherwise take 1-2 weeks.
D-Glucosamine building blocks can be prepared from β-D-thiophenylmannoside in
four steps via C2 displacement of triflates by azide in 2 d and in 66-70% overall
yields. These procedures have been applied to the synthesis of L-serine-linked
trisaccharide of Neisseria meningitidis and a rare disaccharide fragment of the
zwitterionic polysaccharide (ZPS) A1 (ZPS A1) of Bacteroides fragilis.

DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2013.113 
PMID: 24008382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

