
1. J Basic Microbiol. 2014 Sep;54(9):984-95. doi: 10.1002/jobm.201300434. Epub 2013 
Sep 3.

Thermostable lipases from extremely radioresistant bacterium Deinococcus
radiodurans: cloning, expression, and biochemical characterization.

Shao H(1), Xu L, Yan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education, College
of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, P. R. China.

A search for lipases was conducted in the radiophile of Deinococcus radiodurans
R1. Four putative lipase genes, encoding DR0334, DR2078, DR1485, and DR2522, were
cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli. The recombinant enzymes were
subsequently purified and characterized. The results showed DR0334 and DR2078 had
the ability to hydrolyze long-chain length p-nitrophenyl esters (C12-C16), while 
DR1485 and DR2522 hydrolyzed short- and medium-chain length p-nitrophenyl esters 
(C2-C10). DR0334, DR1485, DR2078, and DR2522 showed optimum pH at 8.5, and
optimum temperature at 40, 50, 60, and 60 °C, respectively. DR0334 almost lost
its whole activity after 60 min pretreatment at 60 °C, while DR1485, DR2078, and 
DR2522 retained more than 70% of their original activities after 6 h incubation
at 80 °C. The activities of DR2078, DR1485, and DR2522 were enhanced by Mg(2+) , 
Ba(2+) , and Mn(2+) , but strongly inhibited by EDTA. Nevertheless, DR2078,
DR1485, and DR2522 showed moderate stability in organic solvents and detergents. 
Phylogenetic analysis revealed that DR0334 and DR2078, respectively belong to
family IV and family IX, while each of DR1485 and DR2522 forms a new separate
branch. The unique properties of DR2078, DR1485, and DR2522, thermostability and 
organic solvent tolerance, make them useful in industrial applications.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.201300434 
PMID: 24002979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

