
1. Tumour Biol. 2014 Feb;35(2):1107-11. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1148-6. Epub 2013
Sep 7.

Association of COX2 gene hypomethylation with intestinal type gastric cancer in
samples of patients from northern Brazil.

de Melo CF(1), Gigek CO, da Silva JN, Cardoso Smith Mde A, de Araújo RM, Burbano 
RR, Lima EM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology and Laboratory of
Structural Molecular Biology and Oncogenetics-LBMEO, Department of Molecular
Biology, Federal University of Paraíba UFPB, 58051-900, João Pessoa, PB, Brazil.

To verify the methylation status of THBS1, GPX3, and COX2 genes and to evaluate
their association with Helicobacter pylori in gastric adenocarcinomas.
Methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme PCR assay was performed in 16 diffuse
type gastric cancer samples, 23 intestinal type, and 15 normal stomach tissue.
The presence of H. pylori was performed by amplification of the fragment of the
16S rRNA. Statistical analyses were performed using Fisher's exact test. The
hypermethylation of GPX3, THBS1, and COX2 occurred in 18 (n = 7), 5 (n = 2), and 
36 % (n = 14) of gastric cancer samples, respectively, whereas in normal samples,
it was found in 13, 7, and 67 %. The presence of H. pylori was detected in 67 %
of gastric cancer samples and 67 % in normal gastric samples. The methylation of 
THBS1 and GPX3 was not significantly different between the types of tumors,
normal sample, the presence of H. pylori, or clinicopathological variables
studied (P > 0.05). However, the methylation status of the gene COX2 is
significantly different between normal tissue and intestinal type gastric cancer 
(P = 0.02). Therefore, our results suggest that the methylation status of the
gene COX2 is associated with the intestinal type of gastric cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-013-1148-6 
PMID: 24014049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

