
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 25;288(43):30862-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.496869. Epub
2013 Sep 9.

The power of two: arginine 51 and arginine 239* from a neighboring subunit are
essential for catalysis in α-amino-β-carboxymuconate-epsilon-semialdehyde
decarboxylase.

Huo L(1), Davis I, Chen L, Liu A.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Chemistry and Center for Diagnostics and Therapeutics, 
Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia 30303.

Although the crystal structure of α-amino-β-carboxymuconate-ε-semialdehyde
decarboxylase from Pseudomonas fluorescens was solved as a dimer, this enzyme is 
a mixture of monomer, dimer, and higher order structures in solution. In this
work, we found that the dimeric state, not the monomeric state, is the
functionally active form. Two conserved arginine residues are present in the
active site: Arg-51 and an intruding Arg-239* from the neighboring subunit. In
this study, they were each mutated to alanine and lysine, and all four mutants
were catalytically inactive. The mutants were also incapable of accommodating
pyridine-2,6-dicarboxylic acid, a competitive inhibitor of the native enzyme,
suggesting that the two Arg residues are involved in substrate binding. It was
also observed that the decarboxylase activity was partially recovered in a
heterodimer hybridization experiment when inactive R51(A/K) and R239(A/K) mutants
were mixed together. Of the 20 crystal structures obtained from mixing inactive
R51A and R239A homodimers that diffracted to a resolution lower than 3.00 Å, two 
structures are clearly R51A/R239A heterodimers and belong to the C2 space group. 
They were refined to 1.80 and 2.00 Å resolutions, respectively. Four of the
remaining crystals are apparently single mutants and belong to the P42212 space
group. In the heterodimer structures, one active site is shown to contain dual
mutation of Ala-51 and Ala-239*, whereas the other contains the native Arg-51 and
Arg-239* residues, identical to the wild-type structure. Thus, these observations
provide the foundation for a molecular mechanism by which the oligomerization
state of α-amino-β-carboxymuconate-ε-semialdehyde decarboxylase could regulate
the enzyme activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.496869 
PMCID: PMC3829401
PMID: 24019523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

