
1. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2013 Nov;17(11):794-8. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2013.0173.
Epub 2013 Sep 6.

Helicobacter pylori infection and MDM2 SNP309 association with gastric cancer
susceptibility.

Moradi MT(1), Salehi Z, Asl SF, Aminian K, Hashtchin AR.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Guilan , Rasht,
Iran .

AIMS: MDM2 is a negative regulator of p53, and has also been implicated in
carcinogenesis. The aim of this study was to define the causal association of
Helicobacter pylori infection and the MDM2 SNP309 among northern Iranian patients
with gastric cancer (GC). Two hundred and eight patients with GC and 200
cancer-free controls were genotyped for MDM2 SNP309 using the polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism method. The ureC (glmM) gene
was used for detection of H. pylori in this study.
RESULTS: The G allele was found more frequently among patients with GC (55%) than
among controls (37%). The risk of GC for MDM2 309G/G genotypes was considerably
increased when compared with TT genotypes (odds ratio [OR]=15.93, 95% confidence 
interval [CI]=4.17-60.84). Among H. pylori-infected subjects, a significantly
increased risk of GC associated with the GG genotype was quite clear (OR=14.66,
95% CI=3.54-60).
CONCLUSIONS: The GG genotype was associated with an increased risk of gastric
carcinoma. We also found that there is a joint effect of MDM2 SNP309G/G genotype 
and H. pylori infection for the development of gastric carcinoma. However, the
findings need to be verified in large population-based prospective studies for
more rigorous analyses of subgroups and gene-environment and gene-gene
interactions.

DOI: 10.1089/gtmb.2013.0173 
PMID: 24010568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

