
1. Stem Cells Int. 2013;2013:909812. doi: 10.1155/2013/909812. Epub 2013 Aug 20.

Wnt1 Accelerates an Ex Vivo Expansion of Human Cord Blood CD34(+)CD38(-) Cells.

Chotinantakul K(1), Prasajak P, Leeanansaksiri W.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Therapy and Transplantation Research Group, Suranaree University of 
Technology, Nakhon Ratchasima 30000, Thailand ; School of Microbiology, Institute
of Science, Suranaree University of Technology, Nakhon Ratchasima 30000,
Thailand.

Cord blood hematopoietic stem cells (CB-HSCs) transplantation has been increasing
gradually with facing the limitation of insufficient quantity of HSCs in each CB 
unit. Therefore, efficient expansion methods which can maintain stem cell
characteristics are needed. In this study, umbilical CB-CD34(+) cells were
cultured in two different cytokine cocktails: 4 factors (4F = Flt3-L, SCF, IL-6, 
and TPO) and 5 factors (5F = Wnt1 + 4F) in both serum and serum-free media. The
data revealed that the best condition to accelerate an expansion of
CD34(+)CD38(-) cells was serum-free culture condition supplemented with 5F (5F
KSR). This condition yielded 24.3 ± 2.1 folds increase of CD34(+)CD38(-) cells.
The expanded cells exhibited CD34(+) CD38(-) CD133(+) CD71(low) CD33(low) CD3(-) 
CD19(-) markers, expressed nanog, oct3/4, c-myc, and sox2 genes, and maintained
differentiation potential into lymphoid, erythroid and myeloid lineages. The
achievement of CD34(+)CD38(-) cells expansion may overcome an insufficient
quantity of the cells leading to the improvement of the stem cell
transplantation. Altogether, our findings highlight the role of Wnt1 and the new 
culture condition in stimulating hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells expansion
which may offer a new therapeutic avenue for cord blood transplantation,
regenerative medicine, stem cell bank applications, and other clinical
applications in the future.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/909812 
PMCID: PMC3760094
PMID: 24023545 

