
1. Cell Microbiol. 2014 Jan;16(1):146-59. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12213. Epub 2013 Oct 9.

Coxiella burnetii exploits host cAMP-dependent protein kinase signalling to
promote macrophage survival.

Macdonald LJ(1), Graham JG, Kurten RC, Voth DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA.

Intracellular bacterial pathogens often subvert apoptosis signalling to regulate 
survival of their host cell, allowing propagation of the bacterial population.
Coxiella burnetii, the intracellular agent of human Q fever, inhibits host cell
apoptosis through several mechanisms, including prevention of mitochondrial
cytochrome c release, triggering of an anti-apoptotic transcriptional programme, 
and activation of pro-survival kinases. To control host cell survival,
C. burnetii delivers effector proteins to the eukaryotic cytosol using a
specialized Dot/Icm type IV secretion system (T4SS). Effectors are predicted to
regulate activity of pro-survival host signalling proteins, such as Akt and
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), to control infection. Here, we show that
host PKA activity is required for C. burnetii inhibition of macrophage apoptosis.
PKA is activated during infection and inhibits activity of the pro-apoptotic
protein Bad via phosphorylation. Bad is also phosphorylated at an Akt-specific
residue, indicating C. burnetii uses two kinases to fully inactivate Bad.
Additionally, Bad and the tethering protein 14-3-3β colocalize at the C. burnetii
parasitophorous vacuole (PV) membrane during infection, an event predicted to
alter Bad promotion of apoptosis. Inhibiting PKA activity prevents Bad
recruitment to the PV, but the protein is retained at the membrane during
induction of apoptosis. Finally, PKA regulatory subunit I (RI) traffics to the PV
membrane in a T4SS-dependent manner, suggesting a C. burnetii effector(s)
regulates PKA-dependent activities. This study is the first to demonstrate
subversion of host PKA activity by an intracellular bacterial pathogen to prevent
apoptosis and survive within macrophages.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12213 
PMCID: PMC3954966
PMID: 24028560  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

