
1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 2;8(9):e72779. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072779. eCollection 
2013.

Biogeography of Deep-sea benthic bacteria at regional scale (LTER HAUSGARTEN,
Fram Strait, Arctic).

Jacob M(1), Soltwedel T, Boetius A, Ramette A.

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Research Group for Deep-Sea Ecology and Technology,
Alfred-Wegener-Institut Helmholtz-Zentrum für Polar- und Meeresforschung,
Bremerhaven, Germany ; Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen,
Germany.

Knowledge on spatial scales of the distribution of deep-sea life is still sparse,
but highly relevant to the understanding of dispersal, habitat ranges and
ecological processes. We examined regional spatial distribution patterns of the
benthic bacterial community and covarying environmental parameters such as water 
depth, biomass and energy availability at the Arctic Long-Term Ecological
Research (LTER) site HAUSGARTEN (Eastern Fram Strait). Samples from 13 stations
were retrieved from a bathymetric (1,284-3,535 m water depth, 54 km in length)
and a latitudinal transect (∼ 2,500 m water depth; 123 km in length). 454
massively parallel tag sequencing (MPTS) and automated ribosomal intergenic
spacer analysis (ARISA) were combined to describe both abundant and rare types
shaping the bacterial community. This spatial sampling scheme allowed detection
of up to 99% of the estimated richness on phylum and class levels. At the
resolution of operational taxonomic units (97% sequence identity; OTU3%) only 36%
of the Chao1 estimated richness was recovered, indicating a high diversity,
mostly due to rare types (62% of all OTU3%). Accordingly, a high turnover of the 
bacterial community was also observed between any two sampling stations (average 
replacement of 79% of OTU3%), yet no direct correlation with spatial distance was
observed within the region. Bacterial community composition and structure
differed significantly with increasing water depth along the bathymetric
transect. The relative sequence abundance of Verrucomicrobia and Planctomycetes
decreased significantly with water depth, and that of Deferribacteres increased. 
Energy availability, estimated from phytodetrital pigment concentrations in the
sediments, partly explained the variation in community structure. Overall, this
study indicates a high proportion of unique bacterial types on relatively small
spatial scales (tens of kilometers), and supports the sampling design of the LTER
site HAUSGARTEN to study bacterial community shifts in this rapidly changing area
of the world's oceans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072779 
PMCID: PMC3759371
PMID: 24023770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

