
1. Phytochemistry. 2013 Nov;95:322-32. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2013.08.003. Epub
2013 Sep 8.

An unexpectedly lichenase-stable hexasaccharide from cereal, horsetail and lichen
mixed-linkage β-glucans (MLGs): implications for MLG subunit distribution.

Simmons TJ(1), Uhrín D, Gregson T, Murray L, Sadler IH, Fry SC.

Author information: 
(1)The Edinburgh Cell Wall Group, Institute of Molecular Plant Sciences, The
University of Edinburgh, The King's Buildings, Edinburgh EH9 3JH, UK.

Mixed-linkage (1→3),(1→4)-β-d-glucan (MLG) is a biologically and technologically 
important hemicellulose, known to occur in three widely separated lineages: the
Poales (including grasses and cereals), Equisetum (fern-allies), and some lichens
e.g. Iceland moss (Cetraria islandica). Lichenase (E.C. 3.2.1.73) is widely
assumed to hydrolyse all (1→4) bonds that immediately follow (1→3) bonds in MLG, 
generating predominantly the tetrasaccharide
β-d-Glcp-(1→4)-β-d-Glcp-(1→4)-β-d-Glcp-(1→3)-d-Glc (G4G4G3G; MLG4), the
corresponding trisaccharide (G4G3G; MLG3), and sometimes also laminaribiose (G3G;
MLG2). The ratio of the oligosaccharides produced characterises each
polysaccharide. We report here that digestion of MLG from barley (Hordeum
vulgare), Equisetum arvense and C. islandica by Bacillus subtilis lichenase also 
yields the unexpectedly stable hexasaccharide,
β-d-Glcp-(1→3)-β-d-Glcp-(1→4)-β-d-Glcp-(1→4)-β-d-Glcp-(1→4)-β-d-Glcp-(1→3)-d-Glc 
(G3G4G4G4G3G, i.e. MLG2-MLG4), identified by thin-layer chromatography,
gel-permeation chromatography, HPLC (HPAEC), β-glucosidase digestion,
(1)H/(13)C-NMR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry. On HPLC, G3G4G4G4G3G is the
major constituent of a peak previously ascribed solely to the nonasaccharide
G4G4G4G4G4G4G4G3G. Because it was widely presumed that lichenase would cleave
G3G4G4G4G3G to MLG2+MLG4, our data both redefine the substrate specificity of
Bacillus lichenase and show previous attempts to characterise MLGs by HPLC of
lichenase-digests to be flawed. MLG2 subunits are particularly underestimated;
often reported as negligible, they are here shown to be an appreciable
constituent of MLGs from all three lineages. We also show that there is no
appreciable yield of water-soluble lichenase products with DP>9; potential
identities of products previously labelled DP>9 are suggested. Finally, this
discovery also provides a opportunity to investigate the spatial distribution of 
subunits along the MLG chain. We show that MLG2 subunits in barley and Cetraria
MLG are not randomly distributed, but predominantly found at the non-reducing end
of MLG4 subunits.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2013.08.003 
PMID: 24025426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

