
1. Braz J Microbiol. 2010 Apr;41(2):431-8. doi: 10.1590/S1517-838220100002000025.
Epub 2010 Jun 1.

Co-metabolism of DDT by the newly isolated bacterium, Pseudoxanthomonas sp. wax.

Wang G(1), Zhang J, Wang L, Liang B, Chen K, Li S, Jiang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Key Lab of Microbiological Engineering of
Agricultural Environment, Ministry of Agriculture, College of Life Sciences,
Nanjing Agricultural University , 210095, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province , China.

Microbial degradation of 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDT) is
the most promising way to clean up DDT residues found in the environment. In this
paper, a bacterium designated as wax, which was capable of co-metabolizing DDT
with other carbon sources, was isolated from a long-term DDT-contaminated soil
sample by an enrichment culture technique. The new isolate was identified as a
member of the Pseudoxanthomonas sp., based on its morphological, physiological
and biochemical properties, as well as by 16S rRNA gene analysis. In the presence
of 100 mg l(-1) glucose, the wax strain could degrade over 95% of the total DDT, 
at a concentration of 20 mg l(-1), in 72 hours, and could degrade over 60% of the
total DDT, at a concentration of 100 mg l(-1), in 144 hours. The wax strain had
the highest degradation efficiency among all of the documented DDT-degrading
bacteria. The wax strain could efficiently degrade DDT at temperatures ranging
from 20 to 37Â°C, and with initial pH values ranging from 7 to 9. The bacterium
could also simultaneously co-metabolize
1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDD),
2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-1,1-dichlorethylene (DDE), and other organochlorine
compounds. The wax strain could also completely remove 20 mg kg(-1) of DDT from
both sterile and non-sterile soils in 20 days. This study demonstrates the
significant potential use of Pseudoxanthomonas sp. wax for the bioremediation of 
DDT in the environment.

DOI: 10.1590/S1517-838220100002000025 
PMCID: PMC3768685
PMID: 24031514 

