
1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 6;8(9):e72413. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072413. eCollection 
2013.

Glycan elongation beyond the mucin associated Tn antigen protects tumor cells
from immune-mediated killing.

Madsen CB(1), Lavrsen K, Steentoft C, Vester-Christensen MB, Clausen H, Wandall
HH, Pedersen AE.

Author information: 
(1)Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark ; Department of International Health, Immunology and
Microbiology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(10).
doi:10.1371/annotation/81b54c99-e47f-4128-8aeb-b6b3e8c02562.

Membrane bound mucins are up-regulated and aberrantly glycosylated during
malignant transformation in many cancer cells. This results in a negatively
charged glycoprotein coat which may protect cancer cells from immune
surveillance. However, only limited data have so far demonstrated the critical
steps in glycan elongation that make aberrantly glycosylated mucins affect the
interaction between cancer cells and cytotoxic effector cells of the immune
system. Tn (GalNAc-Ser/Thr), STn (NeuAcα2-6GalNAc-Ser/Thr), T
(Galβ1-3GalNAc-Ser/Thr), and ST (NeuAcα2-6Galβ1-3GalNAc-Ser/Thr) antigens are
recognized as cancer associated truncated glycans, and are expressed in many
adenocarcinomas, e.g. breast- and pancreatic cancer cells. To investigate the
role of the cancer associated glycan truncations in immune-mediated killing we
created glyco-engineered breast- and pancreatic cancer cells expressing only the 
shortest possible mucin-like glycans (Tn and STn). Glyco-engineering was
performed by zinc finger nuclease (ZFN) knockout (KO) of the Core 1 enzyme
chaperone COSMC, thereby preventing glycan elongation beyond the initial GalNAc
residue in O-linked glycans. We find that COSMC KO in the breast and pancreatic
cancer cell lines T47D and Capan-1 increases sensitivity to both NK cell mediated
antibody-dependent cellular-cytotoxicity (ADCC) and cytotoxic T lymphocyte
(CTL)-mediated killing. In addition, we investigated the association between
total cell surface expression of MUC1/MUC16 and NK or CTL mediated killing, and
observed an inverse correlation between MUC16/MUC1 expression and the sensitivity
to ADCC and CTL-mediated killing. Together, these data suggest that up-regulation
of membrane bound mucins protects cells from immune mediated killing, and that
particular glycosylation steps, as demonstrated for glycan elongation beyond Tn
and STn, can be important for fine tuning of the immune escape mechanisms in
cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072413 
PMCID: PMC3765166
PMID: 24039759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

