
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2013 Sep 16;166(3):471-8. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.08.006. Epub 2013 Aug 19.

Use of quantitative microbial risk assessment when investigating foodborne
illness outbreaks: the example of a monophasic Salmonella Typhimurium 4,5,12:i:- 
outbreak implicating beef burgers.

Guillier L(1), Danan C, Bergis H, Delignette-Muller ML, Granier S, Rudelle S,
Beaufort A, Brisabois A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de sécurité des aliments, ANSES, F-94000, Maisons-Alfort, France. 
Electronic address: laurent.guillier@anses.fr.

A major community outbreak of salmonellosis occurred in France in October 2010.
Classical epidemiological investigations led to the identification of beef
burgers as the cause of the outbreak and the presence of the emerging monophasic 
Salmonella Typhimurium 4,5,12:i:-. The objective of this study was to understand 
the events that led to this large outbreak, that is to say, what are the
contributing factors associated with consumer exposure to Salmonella. To this
end, intensive microbiological investigations on several beef burgers were
conducted and a risk assessment model was built. The microbiological results
confirm the presence of Salmonella in all analysed frozen burgers at high levels 
of contamination above 1000 MPN/g. These results in frozen burgers combined with 
a model of thermal destruction were used to estimate the dose ingested by the
exposed persons. Most people that consumed cooked beef burgers were exposed from 
1.6 to 3.1 log₁₀ (MPN). The number of sick people predicted with a dose-response 
relationship for Salmonella is consistent with the observed number of
salmonellosis cases. The very high initial contamination level in frozen beef
burgers is the primary cause of this large outbreak rather than bad cooking
practices. Intensive investigations, modelling of the initial contamination and
quantitative exposure and risk assessments are complementary to epidemiological
investigation. They can be valuable elements for the assessment of missing
information or the identification of the primary causes of outbreaks.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.08.006 
PMID: 24036262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

