
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2013 Oct 1;155(4):276-83. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2013.08.009. Epub 2013 Aug 27.

Increasing the ex vivo antigen-specific IFN-γ production in subpopulations of T
cells and NKp46+ cells by anti-CD28, anti-CD49d and recombinant IL-12
costimulation in cattle vaccinated with recombinant proteins from Mycobacterium
avium subspecies paratuberculosis.

Thakur A(1), Riber U, Davis WC, Jungersen G.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Immunology and Vaccinology, National Veterinary Institute,
Technical University of Denmark, Bülowsvej 27, 1870 Frederiksberg C, Denmark.

T cells, which encounter specific antigen (Ag), require additional signals to
mount a functional immune response. Here, we demonstrate activation of signal 2, 
by anti-CD28 mAb (aCD28) and other costimulatory molecules (aCD49d, aCD5), and
signal 3, by recombinant IL-12, enhance Ag-specific IFN-γ secretion by CD4, CD8, 
γδ T cells and NK cells. Age matched male jersey calves, experimentally infected 
with Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP), were vaccinated with a
cocktail of recombinant MAP proteins or left unvaccinated. Vaccine induced ex
vivo recall responses were measured through Ag-specific IFN-γ production by ELISA
and flow cytometry. There was a significant increase in production of IFN-γ by T 
cell subsets or NKp46+ cells cultured in the presence of Ag and aCD28/aCD49d. The
increase was accompanied by an increase in the integrated median fluorescence
intensity (iMFI) of activated T cells. Addition of rIL-12 induced a significant
additive effect leading to a maximum increase in responder frequency of
Ag-specific T cell subsets or NKp46+ cells with a heavy bias toward IFN-γ
production by CD4 T cells. We provide the first description of using aCD28/aCD49d
costimulation to potentiate an Ag-specific increase in the production of IFN-γ in
bovine immunology. The study also shows the degree of signaling in T cells is
regulated by the costimulatory environment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2013.08.009 
PMID: 24034934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

