
1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 5;8(9):e72952. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072952. eCollection 
2013.

Altitudinal gradient of microbial biomass phosphorus and its relationship with
microbial biomass carbon, nitrogen, and rhizosphere soil phosphorus on the
eastern slope of Gongga Mountain, SW China.

Sun H(1), Wu Y, Yu D, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Mountain Surface Processes and Ecological Regulation,
Chengdu Institute of Mountain Hazards and Environment, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Chengdu, China ; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Microbial biomass phosphorus (MBP) is one of the most active forms of phosphorus 
(P) in soils. MBP plays an important role in the biogeochemical P cycle. To
explore MBP distribution and its relationship with other factors, the MBP and
rhizosphere soil P concentrations and fractions in six vegetation zones on the
eastern slope of Gongga Mountain in SW China were investigated. The MBP
distribution followed a parabolic pattern with altitude and the concentration was
highest in the subalpine dark coniferous forest (SDC) zone, which was
approximately 3500 m above sea level (asl). Below 3500 m asl, the MBP
distribution was controlled by precipitation and vegetation type. In addition,
temperature, precipitation and vegetation type controlled the MBP distribution at
elevations above 3500 m asl. No specific distribution pattern was determined
regarding rhizosphere soil P fractions. However, MBP was significantly correlated
with the unavailable P fraction in the rhizosphere rather than with the available
P fraction. This result suggests that the relationships between the rhizosphere
soil P fractions and the MBP depend on time. The microbial biomass element ratios
were relatively consistent on the eastern slope of Gongga Mountain. However,
variations in the microbial biomass element rations were observed in six of the
vegetation zones. The mean C:N:P ratio was 9.0∶1.3∶1. Overall, vegetation type
resulted in the observed fluctuations of the microbial biomass element ratio.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072952 
PMCID: PMC3764187
PMID: 24039830  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

