
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Dec;57(12):6005-15. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01661-13. 
Epub 2013 Sep 16.

Discovery of inhibitors of 4'-phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT) to
validate PPAT as a target for antibacterial therapy.

de Jonge BL(1), Walkup GK, Lahiri SD, Huynh H, Neckermann G, Utley L, Nash TJ,
Brock J, San Martin M, Kutschke A, Johnstone M, Laganas V, Hajec L, Gu RF, Ni H, 
Chen B, Hutchings K, Holt E, McKinney D, Gao N, Livchak S, Thresher J.

Author information: 
(1)Infection Bioscience, AstraZeneca R&D Boston, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA.

Inhibitors of 4'-phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT) were identified
through high-throughput screening of the AstraZeneca compound library. One
series, cycloalkyl pyrimidines, showed inhibition of PPAT isozymes from several
species, with the most potent inhibition of enzymes from Gram-positive species.
Mode-of-inhibition studies with Streptococcus pneumoniae and Staphylococcus
aureus PPAT demonstrated representatives of this series to be reversible
inhibitors competitive with phosphopantetheine and uncompetitive with ATP,
binding to the enzyme-ATP complex. The potency of this series was optimized using
structure-based design, and inhibition of cell growth of Gram-positive species
was achieved. Mode-of-action studies, using generation of resistant mutants with 
targeted sequencing as well as constructs that overexpress PPAT, demonstrated
that growth suppression was due to inhibition of PPAT. An effect on bacterial
burden was demonstrated in mouse lung and thigh infection models, but further
optimization of dosing requirements and compound properties is needed before
these compounds can be considered for progress into clinical development. These
studies validated PPAT as a novel target for antibacterial therapy.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01661-13 
PMCID: PMC3837906
PMID: 24041904  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

