
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Oct 1;110(40):15973-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1311999110. Epub 2013 Sep 16.

Molecular basis for pH-dependent mucosal dehydration in cystic fibrosis airways.

Garland AL(1), Walton WG, Coakley RD, Tan CD, Gilmore RC, Hobbs CA, Tripathy A,
Clunes LA, Bencharit S, Stutts MJ, Betts L, Redinbo MR, Tarran R.

Author information: 
(1)Cystic Fibrosis/Pulmonary Research and Treatment Center, Department of
Chemistry, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Departments of
Prosthodontics and Pharmacology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599.

The ability to maintain proper airway surface liquid (ASL) volume homeostasis is 
vital for mucus hydration and clearance, which are essential aspects of the
mammalian lung's innate defense system. In cystic fibrosis (CF), one of the most 
common life-threatening genetic disorders, ASL dehydration leads to mucus
accumulation and chronic infection. In normal airways, the secreted protein short
palate lung and nasal epithelial clone 1 (SPLUNC1) effectively inhibits
epithelial Na(+) channel (ENaC)-dependent Na(+) absorption and preserves ASL
volume. In CF airways, it has been hypothesized that increased ENaC-dependent
Na(+) absorption contributes to ASL depletion, and hence increased disease.
However, this theory is controversial, and the mechanism for abnormal ENaC
regulation in CF airways has remained elusive. Here, we show that SPLUNC1 is a
pH-sensitive regulator of ENaC and is unable to inhibit ENaC in the acidic CF
airway environment. Alkalinization of CF airway cultures prevented CF ASL
hyperabsorption, and this effect was abolished when SPLUNC1 was stably knocked
down. Accordingly, we resolved the crystal structure of SPLUNC1 to 2.8 Ã….
Notably, this structure revealed two pH-sensitive salt bridges that, when
removed, rendered SPLUNC1 pH-insensitive and able to regulate ASL volume in
acidic ASL. Thus, we conclude that ENaC hyperactivity is secondary to reduced CF 
ASL pH. Together, these data provide molecular insights into the mucosal
dehydration associated with a range of pulmonary diseases, including CF, and
suggest that future therapy be directed toward alkalinizing the pH of CF airways.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1311999110 
PMCID: PMC3791714
PMID: 24043776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

