
1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 6;8(9):e73618. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073618. eCollection 
2013.

New structural variants of aeruginosin produced by the toxic bloom forming
cyanobacterium Nodularia spumigena.

Fewer DP(1), Jokela J, Paukku E, Ã–sterholm J, Wahlsten M, Permi P, Aitio O,
Rouhiainen L, Gomez-Saez GV, Sivonen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Environmental Sciences, Division of Microbiology and
Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Nodularia spumigena is a filamentous diazotrophic cyanobacterium that forms
blooms in brackish water bodies. This cyanobacterium produces linear and cyclic
peptide protease inhibitors which are thought to be part of a chemical defense
against grazers. Here we show that N. spumigena produces structurally novel
members of the aeruginosin family of serine protease inhibitors. Extensive
chemical analyses including NMR demonstrated that the aeruginosins are comprised 
of an N-terminal short fatty acid chain, L-Tyr, L-Choi and L-argininal and in
some cases pentose sugar. The genome of N. spumigena CCY9414 contains a compact
18-kb aeruginosin gene cluster encoding a peptide synthetase with a reductive
release mechanism which offloads the aeruginosins as reactive peptide aldehydes. 
Analysis of the aeruginosin and spumigin gene clusters revealed two different
strategies for the incorporation of N-terminal protecting carboxylic acids. These
results demonstrate that strains of N. spumigena produce aeruginosins and
spumigins, two families of structurally similar linear peptide aldehydes using
separate peptide synthetases. The aeruginosins were chemically diverse and we
found 11 structural variants in 16 strains from the Baltic Sea and Australia. Our
findings broaden the known structural diversity of the aeruginosin peptide family
to include peptides with rare N-terminal short chain (C2-C10) fatty acid
moieties.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073618 
PMCID: PMC3765200
PMID: 24040002  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

