
1. Infect Immun. 2013 Dec;81(12):4399-407. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01107-13. Epub 2013 Sep 
16.

Periodontal treatment downregulates protease-activated receptor 2 in human
gingival crevicular fluid cells.

Euzebio Alves VT(1), Bueno da Silva HA, de França BN, Eichler RS, Saraiva L, de
Carvalho MH, Holzhausen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Periodontics, Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Erratum in
    Infect Immun. 2014 Mar;82(3):1354.

Protease-activated receptor 2 (PAR2) is implicated in the pathogenesis of chronic
inflammatory diseases, including periodontitis; it can be activated by gingipain 
and produced by Porphyromonas gingivalis and by neutrophil protease 3 (P3). PAR2 
activation plays a relevant role in inflammatory processes by inducing the
release of important inflammatory mediators associated with periodontal
breakdown. The effects of periodontal treatment on PAR2 expression and its
association with levels of proinflammatory mediators and activating proteases
were investigated in chronic periodontitis patients. Positive staining for PAR2
was observed in gingival crevicular fluid cells and was reflective of tissue
destruction. Overexpression of PAR2 was positively associated with inflammatory
clinical parameters and with the levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-8, tumor
necrosis factor alpha, matrix metalloprotease 2 (MMP-2), MMP-8, hepatocyte growth
factor, and vascular endothelial growth factor. Elevated levels of gingipain and 
P3 and decreased levels of dentilisin and the protease inhibitors secretory
leukocyte protease inhibitor and elafin were also associated with PAR2
overexpression. Healthy periodontal sites from individuals with chronic
periodontitis showed diminished expression of PAR2 mRNA and the PAR2 protein (P <
0.05). Furthermore, periodontal treatment resulted in decreased PAR2 expression
and correlated with decreased expression of inflammatory mediators and activating
proteases. We concluded that periodontal treatment resulted in decreased levels
of proteases and that proinflammatory mediators are associated with decreased
PAR2 expression, suggesting that PAR2 expression is influenced by the presence of
periodontal infection and is not a constitutive characteristic favoring
periodontal inflammation.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01107-13 
PMCID: PMC3837994
PMID: 24042113  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

