
1. Int J Legal Med. 2014 Jan;128(1):33-41. doi: 10.1007/s00414-013-0918-4. Epub 2013
Sep 20.

Body fluid identification by integrated analysis of DNA methylation and body
fluid-specific microbial DNA.

Choi A(1), Shin KJ, Yang WI, Lee HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine and Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical
Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu,
Seoul, 120-752, South Korea.

Identification of body fluids found at crime scenes provides important
information that can support a link between sample donors and actual criminal
acts. Previous studies have reported that DNA methylation analysis at several
tissue-specific differentially methylated regions (tDMRs) enables successful
identification of semen, and the detection of certain bacterial DNA can allow for
identification of saliva and vaginal fluid. In the present study, a method for
detecting bacterial DNA was integrated into a previously reported multiplex
methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme-polymerase chain reaction. The developed
multiplex PCR was modified by the addition of a new semen-specific marker and by 
including amplicons for the 16S ribosomal RNA gene of saliva- and vaginal
fluid-specific bacteria to improve the efficacy to detect a specific type of body
fluid. Using the developed multiplex system, semen was distinguishable by
unmethylation at the USP49, DACT1, and PFN3 tDMRs and by hypermethylation at
L81528, and saliva could be identified by detection of saliva-specific bacteria, 
Veillonella atypica and/or Streptococcus salivarius. Additionally, vaginal fluid 
and menstrual blood were differentiated from other body fluids by hypomethylation
at the PFN3 tDMR and the presence of vaginal fluid-specific bacteria,
Lactobacillus crispatus and/or Lactobacillus gasseri. Because the developed
multiplex system uses the same biological source of DNA for individual
identification profiling and simultaneously analyses various types of body fluid 
in one PCR reaction, this method will facilitate more efficient body fluid
identification in forensic casework.

DOI: 10.1007/s00414-013-0918-4 
PMID: 24052059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

