
1. Hum Pathol. 2013 Oct;44(10):2302-11. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.05.012.

Pathogenesis of human hemangiosarcomas and hemangiomas.

Liu L(1), Kakiuchi-Kiyota S, Arnold LL, Johansson SL, Wert D, Cohen SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, 983135 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-3135, USA.

Hemangiosarcomas are uncommon aggressive vascular tumors that have recently
become the focus of attention because several chemicals and pharmaceuticals
increase their incidence in mice. The relevance of these mouse vascular tumors to
humans is unclear. In the present study, we semiquantitatively evaluated the
expression profiles of hematopoietic stem cell markers (CD117 [c-kit], CD133,
CD34, and CD45), endothelial cell markers (vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 2, CD31, and factor VIII-related antigen), and a myeloid lineage cell
marker (CD14) in human hemangiosarcoma (n = 12) and hemangioma (n = 10) specimens
using immunohistochemistry. CD133 was completely negative in almost all cases of 
hemangiosarcomas and hemangiomas. Most hemangiosarcomas, but not hemangiomas,
stained for CD117 and CD45. Both groups diffusely expressed CD34, vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor 2, and factor VIII-related antigen; however,
hemangiomas had more intense and diffuse CD34 and factor VIII-related antigen
expression compared with hemangiosarcomas, whereas CD31 was positive in all
hemangiosarcomas but only half of the hemangiomas. CD14 staining was negative in 
most hemangiosarcoma and hemangioma cases. Our results indicate that
multipotential bone marrow-derived hematopoietic stem cells or early endothelial 
progenitor cells (EPCs) expressing CD117, CD34, and CD45 are involved in
hemangiosarcoma formation, whereas hemangiomas originate from late EPCs or
differentiated endothelial cells, which have lost the expression of most
hematopoietic stem cell markers. This contrasts with our previous results that
demonstrated that both hemangiosarcomas and hemangiomas in mice may be derived
from early EPCs that are not completely differentiated.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.05.012 
PMID: 24054722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

