
1. J Struct Biol. 2013 Nov;184(2):375-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2013.09.009. Epub 2013
Sep 21.

Metal-mediated crystallization of the xylose transporter XylE from Escherichia
coli in three different crystal forms.

Quistgaard EM(1), Löw C, Moberg P, Nordlund P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet,
SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: esben.quistgard@ki.se.

XylE is a major facilitator (MFS) xylose transporter, which is homologous to the 
mammalian glucose transporters (GLUT family). We have previously reported the
structure of XylE in fully inward open and partially occluded inward open
conformations in space groups P61 and C2, respectively. Here we present the
crystallization of a third crystal form, P212121 (~4 Å resolution), also
representing an inward facing conformation, and analyze all three forms in terms 
of crystallization conditions and packing. The crystallization conditions were
generally very similar with only slight changes needed to favor one form over
another, e.g. the presence of lanthanide ions greatly favors C2 over P212121
under otherwise identical conditions. Cadmium was essential for crystallization
of all three forms, which indeed all contain a Cd(2+) ion in a crystal packing
interface, though surprisingly in different positions. Cadmium was also found to 
bind to XylE in solution. The diffraction data were highly anisotropic for all
forms, reflecting a lack of ordered crystal contacts along one or two of the cell
axes. The best diffracting directions thus consistently correlate with the
presence of ordered contacts, most of which are metal-mediated. The data
presented here highlight the utility of metal ions in membrane protein
crystallization and suggest that metal site engineering may be a productive path 
towards obtaining additional crystal forms of XylE and other membrane proteins.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsb.2013.09.009 
PMID: 24060988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

