
1. Innate Immun. 2014 Jul;20(5):540-51. doi: 10.1177/1753425913501914. Epub 2013 Sep
23.

MicroRNAs responsive to Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans and Porphyromonas
gingivalis LPS modulate expression of genes regulating innate immunity in human
macrophages.

Naqvi AR(1), Fordham JB(1), Khan A(2), Nares S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA Currently at Department of Periodontics, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Endodontics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Periodontology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA Currently at Department of Periodontics, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA snares@uic.edu.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small, noncoding RNAs that regulate
post-transcriptional expression of their respective target genes and are
responsive to various stimuli, including LPS. Here we examined the early (4 h)
miRNA responses of THP1-differentiated macrophages challenged with LPS derived
from the periodontal pathogens, Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans,
Porphyromonas gingivalis or environmentally-modified LPS obtained from P.
gingivalis grown in cigarette smoke extract. Predicted miRNA-gene target
interactions for LPS-responsive miR-29b and let-7f were confirmed using
dual-luciferase assays and by transfection experiments using miRNA mimics and
inhibitors. Convergent and divergent miRNA profiles were observed in treated
samples where differences in miRNA levels related to the type, concentration and 
incubation times of LPS challenge. Dual-luciferase experiments revealed miR-29b
targeting of interleukin-6 receptorα (IL-6Rα) and IFN-γ inducible protein 30 and 
let-7f targeting of suppressor of cytokine signaling 4 and thrombospondin-1.
Transfection experiments confirmed miR-29b and let-7f modulation of IL-6Rα and
SOCS4 protein expression levels, respectively. Thus, we have demonstrated
convergent/divergent miRNA responses to wild type LPS and its
environmentally-modified LPS, and demonstrate miRNA targeting of key genes linked
to inflammation and immunity. Our data indicate that these LPS-responsive miRNAs 
may play a key role in fine-tuning the host response to periodontal pathogens.

© The Author(s) 2013 Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav.

DOI: 10.1177/1753425913501914 
PMCID: PMC3962801
PMID: 24062196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

