
1. J Biosci Bioeng. 2014 Feb;117(2):222-228. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2013.07.015. Epub
2013 Oct 1.

Batch fermentative hydrogen production by enriched mixed culture: Combination
strategy and their microbial composition.

Sivagurunathan P(1), Sen B(2), Lin CY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Engineering and Science, Feng Chia University,
Taichung 40724, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Environmental Engineering and Science, Feng Chia University,
Taichung 40724, Taiwan; Green Energy Development Center, Feng Chia University,
Taichung 40724, Taiwan; Master Program of Green Energy Science and Technology,
Feng Chia University, Taichung 40724, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Environmental Engineering and Science, Feng Chia University,
Taichung 40724, Taiwan; Green Energy Development Center, Feng Chia University,
Taichung 40724, Taiwan; Master Program of Green Energy Science and Technology,
Feng Chia University, Taichung 40724, Taiwan. Electronic address:
cylin@fcu.edu.tw.

The effect of individual and combined mixed culture on dark fermentative hydrogen
production performance was investigated. Mixed cultures from cow dung (C1),
sewage sludge (C2), and pig slurry (C3) were enriched under strict anaerobic
conditions at 37°C with glucose as the sole carbon source. Biochemical hydrogen
production test in peptone-yeast-glucose (PYG) and basal medium was performed for
individual mixed cultures (C1, C2 and C3) and their combinations (C1-C2, C2-C3,
C1-C3 and C1-C2-C3) at a glucose concentration of 10 g/L, 37°C and initial pH 7. 
Maximum hydrogen yields (HY) of 2.0 and 1.86 [Formula: see text] by C2, and 1.98 
and 1.95 mol(H2)/mol(glucose) by C2-C3 were obtained in PYG and basal medium,
respectively. Butyrate and acetate were the major soluble metabolites produced by
all the cultures, and the ratio of butyrate to acetate was ∼2 fold higher in
basal medium than PYG medium, indicating strong influence of media formulation on
glucose catabolism. The major hydrogen-producing bacterial strains, observed in
all mixed cultures, belonged to Clostridium butyricum, C. saccharobutylicum, C.
tertium and C. perfringens. The hydrogen production performance of the combined
mixed culture (C2-C3) was further evaluated on beverage wastewater (10 g/L) at pH
7 and 37°C. The results showed an HY of 1.92 mol(H2)/mol(glucose-equivalent).
Experimental evidence suggests that hydrogen fermentation by mixed culture
combination could be a novel strategy to improve the HY from industrial
wastewater.

Copyright © 2013 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2013.07.015 
PMID: 24095211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

