
1. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2014 Mar 20;20(9):1524-30. doi: 10.1089/ars.2013.5617.
Epub 2013 Dec 14.

Can recombinant human glutathione peroxidase 1 with high activity be efficiently 
produced in Escherichia coli ?

Guo X(1), Song J, Yu Y, Wei J.

Author information: 
(1)1 College of Pharmaceutical Science, Jilin University , Changchun, China .

Cellular glutathione peroxidase 1 (GPx1) is an important antioxidant
selenoenzyme. Due to the presence of selenocysteine (Sec) encoded by UGA,
normally recognized as a stop codon, the expression of mammalian GPx with
traditional recombinant DNA technology is extremely difficult. In this study, a
series of human GPx1 (hGPx1) mutants with significantly high catalytic activities
were produced for the first time in an Escherichia coli BL21(DE3)cys auxotrophic 
strain using the single-protein production system. Cys residues in hGPx1 were
mutated to Ser in turn because untargeted substitution of Sec in place of Cys
resulted in the decline of recombinant selenoenzyme activity. The results of this
work showed that the catalytic activities of the mutants increased progressively 
with decreasing number of noncatalytic Sec residues.
Seleno-hGPx1-C2/78/115/156/202S with all Cys residues changed to Ser showed the
highest activity (21,268 U/μmol), which was more than 10-fold higher than bovine 
liver GPx. This increase could be explained by structural analysis of hGPx1
mutants based on homology modeling and binding site analysis. These results lead 
to the hypothesis that the conversion of noncatalytic Sec residues to Ser may
optimize the structure of seleno-GPx in this expression system and consequently
increase the catalytic efficiency.

DOI: 10.1089/ars.2013.5617 
PMID: 24093966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

