
1. ChemMedChem. 2013 Dec;8(12):1954-62. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201300323. Epub 2013 Sep
17.

Amythiamicin D and related thiopeptides as inhibitors of the bacterial elongation
factor EF-Tu: modification of the amino acid at carbon atom C2 of ring C
dramatically influences activity.

Gross S(1), Nguyen F, Bierschenk M, Sohmen D, Menzel T, Antes I, Wilson DN, Bach 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Organische Chemie I, Technische Universität München,
Lichtenbergstr. 4, 85747 Garching (Germany).

Three analogues of amythiamicin D, which differ in the substitution pattern at
the methine group adjacent to C2 of the thiazole ring C, were prepared by de novo
total synthesis. In amythiamicin D, this carbon atom is (S)-isopropyl
substituted. Two of the new analogues carry a hydroxymethyl in place of the
isopropyl group, one at an S- (compound 3 a) and the other at an R-configured
stereogenic center (3 b). The third analogue, 3 c, contains a benzyloxymethyl
group at an S-configured stereogenic center. Compounds 3 b and 3 c showed no
inhibitory effect toward various bacterial strains, nor did they influence the
translation of firefly luciferase. In stark contrast, compound 3 a inhibited the 
growth of Gram-positive bacteria Staphylococcus aureus (strains NCTC and Mu50)
and Listeria monocytogenes EGD. In the firefly luciferase assay it proved more
potent than amythiamicin D, and rescue experiments provided evidence that
translation inhibition is due to binding to the bacterial elongation factor Tu
(EF-Tu). The results were rationalized by structural investigations and by
molecular dynamics simulations of the free compounds in solution and bound to the
EF-Tu binding site. The low affinity of compound 3 b was attributed to the
absence of a critical hydrogen bond, which stabilizes the conformation required
for binding to EF-Tu. Compound 3 c was shown not to comply with the binding
properties of the binding site.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cmdc.201300323 
PMID: 24106106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

