
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 22;288(47):34146-34157. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.487272. Epub 
2013 Oct 7.

Structural basis for cyclization specificity of two Azotobacter type III
polyketide synthases: a single amino acid substitution reverses their cyclization
specificity.

Satou R(1), Miyanaga A(1), Ozawa H(1), Funa N(1), Katsuyama Y(1), Miyazono KI(2),
Tanokura M(2), Ohnishi Y(3), Horinouchi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.
(2)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-8657, Japan.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.
Electronic address: ayasuo@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Type III polyketide synthases (PKSs) show diverse cyclization specificity. We
previously characterized two Azotobacter type III PKSs (ArsB and ArsC) with
different cyclization specificity. ArsB and ArsC, which share a high sequence
identity (71%), produce alkylresorcinols and alkylpyrones through aldol
condensation and lactonization of the same polyketomethylene intermediate,
respectively. Here we identified a key amino acid residue for the cyclization
specificity of each enzyme by site-directed mutagenesis. Trp-281 of ArsB
corresponded to Gly-284 of ArsC in the amino acid sequence alignment. The ArsB
W281G mutant synthesized alkylpyrone but not alkylresorcinol. In contrast, the
ArsC G284W mutant synthesized alkylresorcinol with a small amount of alkylpyrone.
These results indicate that this amino acid residue (Trp-281 of ArsB or Gly-284
of ArsC) should occupy a critical position for the cyclization specificity of
each enzyme. We then determined crystal structures of the wild-type and G284W
ArsC proteins at resolutions of 1.76 and 1.99 Ã…, respectively. Comparison of
these two ArsC structures indicates that the G284W substitution brings a steric
wall to the active site cavity, resulting in a significant reduction of the
cavity volume. We postulate that the polyketomethylene intermediate can be folded
to a suitable form for aldol condensation only in such a relatively narrow cavity
of ArsC G284W (and presumably ArsB). This is the first report on the alteration
of cyclization specificity from lactonization to aldol condensation for a type
III PKS. The ArsC G284W structure is significant as it is the first reported
structure of a microbial resorcinol synthase.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.487272 
PMCID: PMC3837156
PMID: 24100027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

