
1. Haemophilia. 2014 Mar;20(2):176-84. doi: 10.1111/hae.12276. Epub 2013 Oct 14.

In silico calculated affinity of FVIII-derived peptides for HLA class II alleles 
predicts inhibitor development in haemophilia A patients with missense mutations 
in the F8 gene.

Pashov AD(1), Calvez T, Gilardin L, Maillère B, Repessé Y, Oldenburg J, Pavlova
A, Kaveri SV, Lacroix-Desmazes S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche des Cordeliers, INSERM, UMR S 872, Paris, France; Centre
de Recherche des Cordeliers, Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris6, UMR S 872, 
Paris, France; Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Université Paris Descartes,
UMR S 872, Paris, France; Department of Immunology, Institute of Microbiology,
BAS, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Comment in
    Haemophilia. 2014 Mar;20(2):155-7.

Forty per cent of haemophilia A (HA) patients have missense mutations in the F8
gene. Yet, all patients with identical mutations are not at the same risk of
developing factor VIII (FVIII) inhibitors. In severe HA patients, human leucocyte
antigen (HLA) haplotype was identified as a risk factor for onset of FVIII
inhibitors. We hypothesized that missense mutations in endogenous FVIII alter the
affinity of the mutated peptides for HLA class II, thus skewing FVIII-specific
T-cell tolerance and increasing the risk that the corresponding wild-type
FVIII-derived peptides induce an anti-FVIII immune response during replacement
therapy. Here, we investigated whether affinity for HLA class II of wild-type
FVIII-derived peptides that correspond to missense mutations described in the
Haemophilia A Mutation, Structure, Test and Resource database is associated with 
inhibitor development. We predicted the mean affinity for 10 major HLA class II
alleles of wild-type FVIII-derived peptides that corresponded to 1456 reported
cases of missense mutations. Linear regression analysis confirmed a significant
association between the predicted mean peptide affinity and the mutation
inhibitory status (P = 0.006). Significance was lost after adjustment on mutation
position on FVIII domains. Although analysis of the A1-A2-A3-C1 domains yielded a
positive correlation between predicted HLA-binding affinity and inhibitory status
(OR = 0.29 [95% CI: 0.14-0.60] for the high affinity tertile, P = 0.002), the C2 
domain-restricted analysis indicated an inverse correlation (OR = 3.56
[1.10-11.52], P = 0.03). Our data validate the importance of the affinity of
FVIII peptides for HLA alleles to the immunogenicity of therapeutic FVIII in
patients with missense mutations.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/hae.12276 
PMID: 24118514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

