
1. J Chem Inf Model. 2013 Sep 23;53(9):2349-59. doi: 10.1021/ci400244x. Epub 2013
Sep 6.

Flooding enzymes: quantifying the contributions of interstitial water and cavity 
shape to ligand binding using extended linear response free energy calculations.

Whalen KL(1), Spies MA.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Division of Medicinal and Natural Products Chemistry, and
â€¡Carver College of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, The University of Iowa ,
Iowa City, Iowa 52242, United States.

Glutamate racemase (GR) is a cofactor independent amino acid racemase that has
recently garnered increasing attention as an antimicrobial drug target. There are
numerous high resolution crystal structures of GR, yet these are invariably bound
to either D-glutamate or very weakly bound oxygen-based salts. Recent in silico
screens have identified a number of new competitive inhibitor scaffolds, which
are not based on D-Glu, but exploit many of the same hydrogen bond donor
positions. In silico studies on 1-H-benzimidazole-2-sulfonic acid (BISA) show
that the sulfonic acid points to the back of the GR active site, in the most
buried region, analogous to the C2-carboxylate binding position in the
GR-d-glutamate complex. Furthermore, BISA has been shown to be the strongest
nonamino acid competitive inhibitor. Previously published computational studies
have suggested that a portion of this binding strength is derived from
complexation with a more closed active site, relative to weaker ligands, and in
which the internal water network is more isolated from the bulk solvent. In order
to validate key contacts between the buried sulfonate moiety of BISA and moieties
in the back of the enzyme active site, as well as to probe the energetic
importance of the potentially large number of interstitial waters contacted by
the BISA scaffold, we have designed several mutants of Asn75. GR-N75A removes a
key hydrogen bond donor to the sulfonate of BISA, but also serves to introduce an
additional interstitial water, due to the newly created space of the mutation.
GR- N75L should also show the loss of a hydrogen bond donor to the sulfonate of
BISA, but does not (a priori) seem to permit an additional interstitial water
contact. In order to investigate the dynamics, structure, and energies of this
water-mediated complexation, we have employed the extended linear response (ELR) 
approach for the calculation of binding free energies to GR, using the YASARA2
knowledge based force field on a set of ten GR complexes, and yielding an
R-squared value of 0.85 and a RMSE of 2.0 kJ/mol. Surprisingly, the inhibitor set
produces a uniformly large interstitial water contribution to the electrostatic
interaction energy (<V(el)>), ranging from 30 to >50%, except for the natural
substrate (D-glutamate), which has only a 7% contribution of <V(el)> from water. 
The broader implications for predicting and exploiting significant interstitial
water contacts in ligand-enzyme complexation are discussed.

DOI: 10.1021/ci400244x 
PMCID: PMC3782002
PMID: 24111836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

