
1. Int J Cancer. 2014 Apr 1;134(7):1605-16. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28496. Epub 2013 Oct 8.

Obesity induced a leptin-Notch signaling axis in breast cancer.

Battle M(1), Gillespie C, Quarshie A, Lanier V, Harmon T, Wilson K,
Torroella-Kouri M, Gonzalez-Perez RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry & Immunology, Morehouse School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA.

To investigate whether obesity induces a leptin-Notch signaling axis in breast
cancer (BC), leptin-induced Notch was determined in human MCF-7 and MDA-MB231 and
mouse E0771 cells and in E0771-BC hosted by syngeneic lean and diet-induced
obesity (DIO) C57BL/6J female mice. Lean and DIO mice were treated for 3 weeks
with leptin inhibitor (PEG-LPrA2) 1 week after the inoculation of E0771 cells.
Leptin induced Notch1, 3 and 4 in BC cells, but Notch2 expression showed opposite
pattern in MCF-7 compared to MDA-MB231 cells. Notch loss-of-function (DAPT and
dominant negative [R218H] RBP-Jk [CSL/CBF1]) showed that a functional
leptin-Notch signaling axis was involved in the proliferation and migration of
E0771 cells. E0771-BC onset was affected by obesity (lean mice7/10 [70%] vs. DIO 
mice: 11/12 [92%]; Pearson χ(2) : p = 0.06]). PEG-LPrA2 significantly reduced BC 
growth (untreated: 19/42; [45%] vs. treated: 8/42 [19%]; Pearson χ(2) : p =
0.008). PEG-LPrA2 did not influence the caloric intake of mice but increased
carcass and/or body weights of lean and DIO mice inoculated with E0771 cells,
which could be related to the improvement of health conditions (less aggressive
disease). Importantly, BC from obese mice had higher levels of Notch3, JAG1 and
survivin than lean mice. Inhibition of leptin signaling reduced protein levels of
Notch (NICD1, NICD4, Notch3, JAG1 and survivin) and significantly decreased mRNA 
expression of Notch receptors, ligands and targets. PEG-LPrA's effects were more 
prominent in DIO mice. Present data suggest that leptin induces Notch, which
could be involved in the reported higher incidence and aggressiveness and, poor
prognosis of BC in obese patients.

© 2013 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28496 
PMCID: PMC3947126
PMID: 24114531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

