
1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 4;8(10):e52094. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052094. eCollection
2013.

A Ham1p-dependent mechanism and modulation of the pyrimidine biosynthetic pathway
can both confer resistance to 5-fluorouracil in yeast.

Carlsson M(1), Gustavsson M, Hu GZ, Mur√©n E, Ronne H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences,
Uppsala, Sweden.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(11).
doi:10.1371/annotation/fe863e39-ab49-40e2-b262-0219428de65e.

5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) is an anticancer drug and pyrimidine analogue. A problem in
5-FU therapy is acquired resistance to the drug. To find out more about the
mechanisms of resistance, we screened a plasmid library in yeast for genes that
confer 5-FU resistance when overexpressed. We cloned five genes: CPA1, CPA2,
HMS1, HAM1 and YJL055W. CPA1 and CPA2 encode a carbamoyl phosphate synthase
involved in arginine biosynthesis and HMS1 a helix-loop-helix transcription
factor. Our results suggest that CPA1, CPA2, and HMS1 confer 5-FU resistance by
stimulating pyrimidine biosynthesis. Thus, they are unable to confer 5-FU
resistance in a ura2 mutant, and inhibit the uptake and incorporation into RNA of
both uracil and 5-FU. In contrast, HAM1 and YJL055W confer 5-FU resistance in a
ura2 mutant, and selectively inhibit incorporation into RNA of 5-FU but not
uracil. HAM1 is the strongest resistance gene, but it partially depends on
YJL055W for its function. This suggests that HAM1 and YJL055W function together
in mediating resistance to 5-FU. Ham1p encodes an inosine triphosphate
pyrophosphatase that has been implicated in resistance to purine analogues. Our
results suggest that Ham1p could have a broader specificity that includes 5-FUTP 
and other pyrimidine analogoue triphosphates.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052094 
PMCID: PMC3792807
PMID: 24124444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

