
1. Mol Microbiol. 2013 Dec;90(6):1216-32. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12428. Epub 2013 Nov 8.

The EAL-like protein STM1697 regulates virulence phenotypes, motility and biofilm
formation in Salmonella typhimurium.

Ahmad I(1), Wigren E, Le Guyon S, Vekkeli S, Blanka A, El Mouali Y, Anwar N,
Chuah ML, Lünsdorf H, Frank R, Rhen M, Liang ZX, Lindqvist Y, Römling U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
17177, Stockholm, Sweden.

The ubiquitous second messenger c-di-GMP regulates the switching of bacterial
lifestyles from motility to sessility and acute to chronic virulence to adjust
bacterial fitness to altered environmental conditions. Conventionally, EAL
proteins being c-di-GMP phosphodiesterases promote motility and acute virulence
phenotypes such as invasion into epithelial cells and inhibit biofilm formation. 
We report here that in contradiction, the EAL-like protein STM1697 of Salmonella 
typhimurium suppresses motility, invasion into HT-29 epithelial cell line and
secretion of the type three secretion system 1 effector protein SipA, whereas it 
promotes rdar biofilm formation and CsgD expression. STM1697 can, however,
functionally replace the EAL-like protein STM1344 and vice versa, whereby both
proteins neither degrade nor bind c-di-GMP. Like STM1344, STM1697 suppresses the 
transcription of class 2 and class 3 flagella regulon genes by binding to FlhD, a
component of the master regulator of the flagella regulon FlhD4 C2 and act
additively under numerous conditions. Interestingly, the interaction interface of
STM1697 with FlhD2 is distinct from its paralogue STM1344. We predict that the
stand alone EAL domain proteins STM1697 and STM1344 belong to a subclass of EAL
domain proteins in S. typhimurium, which are all involved in motility, biofilm
and virulence regulation through interaction with proteins that regulate flagella
function.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12428 
PMID: 24127899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

