
1. J Basic Microbiol. 2014 Sep;54(9):962-8. doi: 10.1002/jobm.201300052. Epub 2013
Oct 4.

Oral vaccination with inhibin DNA delivered using attenuated Salmonella
choleraesuis for improving reproductive traits in mice.

Han L(1), Zhen YH, Liang AX, Zhang J, Riaz H, Xiong JJ, Guo AZ, Yang LG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Infectious Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Agricultural
Microbiology, College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, China; College of Animal Science and
Technology and College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.

The objective of this study was to examine the efficacy and safety of a novel
inhibin vaccine containing inhibin α (1-32) fragments in mice. A recombinant
plasmid pVAX-asd-IS was constructed by inserting recombinant inhibin α (1-32) and
the hepatitis B surface antigen S into the plasmid in which the asd gene, rather 
than the kanamycin gene, was a selection marker. Ninety Kuming mice were divided 
into six groups consisting of 15 mice each. First group was (C1) injected with
200 µl of PBS, second (C2) received 1 × 10(10) CFU of crp(-) /asd(-)
C500/pVAX-asd and served as vector control, third did not receive any treatment
(C3), while fourth, fifth, and sixth group received 1 × 10(10) , 1 × 10(9) ,
1 × 10(8) CFU of the recombinant inhibin vaccine crp(-) /asd(-) C500/pVAX-asd-IS 
(group T1, T2, T3), respectively. Western blotting demonstrated that recombinant 
expressed inhibin protein possessed immune function and that this plasmid could
replicate for up to 40 generations stably. Vaccination with this strain at a dose
of 1 × 10(10) CFU/200 µl per mouse induced high anti-inhibin antibody levels,
significantly increased large-follicle production in T1 group (p < 0.05) and
average litter size (p > 0.05) compared with control groups. Integration studies 
showed no evidence of inhibin fusion gene integrated into mice's genome 2-month
after immunization. These results suggest that the vaccine described in the
present study may provide a safe method to improve reproductive traits in
animals. A trend towards increased litter size and significant increase in large 
follicle population depict that this vaccine may have direct application in large
animal industry.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.201300052 
PMID: 24123188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

