
1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2013 Dec;305(12):G900-10. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00265.2013. Epub 2013 Oct 17.

Gut-derived short-chain fatty acids are vividly assimilated into host
carbohydrates and lipids.

den Besten G(1), Lange K, Havinga R, van Dijk TH, Gerding A, van Eunen K, MÃ¼ller 
M, Groen AK, Hooiveld GJ, Bakker BM, Reijngoud DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ Groningen, The Netherlands. D.J.Reijngoud01@umcg.nl.

Acetate, propionate, and butyrate are the main short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs)
that arise from the fermentation of fibers by the colonic microbiota. While many 
studies focus on the regulatory role of SCFAs, their quantitative role as a
catabolic or anabolic substrate for the host has received relatively little
attention. To investigate this aspect, we infused conscious mice with
physiological quantities of stable isotopes [1-(13)C]acetate,
[2-(13)C]propionate, or [2,4-(13)C2]butyrate directly in the cecum, which is the 
natural production site in mice, and analyzed their interconversion by the
microbiota as well as their metabolism by the host. Cecal interconversion,
pointing to microbial cross-feeding, was high between acetate and butyrate, low
between butyrate and propionate, and almost absent between acetate and
propionate. As much as 62% of infused propionate was used in whole body glucose
production, in line with its role as gluconeogenic substrate. Conversely, glucose
synthesis from propionate accounted for 69% of total glucose production. The
synthesis of palmitate and cholesterol in the liver was high from cecal acetate
(2.8 and 0.7%, respectively) and butyrate (2.7 and 0.9%, respectively) as
substrates, but low or absent from propionate (0.6 and 0.0%, respectively). Label
incorporation due to chain elongation of stearate was approximately eightfold
higher than de novo synthesis of stearate. Microarray data suggested that SCFAs
exert a mild regulatory effect on the expression of genes involved in hepatic
metabolic pathways during the 6-h infusion period. Altogether, gut-derived
acetate, propionate, and butyrate play important roles as substrates for glucose,
cholesterol, and lipid metabolism.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00265.2013 
PMID: 24136789  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

