
1. Thromb Haemost. 2014 Feb;111(2):345-53. doi: 10.1160/TH13-08-0719. Epub 2013 Oct 
17.

The thrombomodulin lectin-like domain does not change host responses to
tuberculosis.

Kager LM(1), de Vos AF, Roelofs JJ, van der Loos CM, de Boer OJ, van't Veer C,
Conway EM, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Liesbeth M. Kager, MD, Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), 
Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Room G2-130, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, Tel.: +31 20 566 5910, Fax: +31 20 697 7192, E-mail:
l.m.kager@amc.uva.nl.

Tuberculosis (TB), caused by Mycobacterium (M.) tuberculosis, is a devastating
infectious disease causing many deaths world-wide. Thrombomodulin (TM) is a
multidomain glycoprotein expressed on all vascular endothelial cells. We here
studied the role of the lectin-like domain of TM, responsible for a variety of
anti-inflammatory properties of TM, during TB. We compared the extent of
TM-expression in human lung tissue of TB and control patients. The, the role of
the lectin-like domain of TM was investigated by comparing mice lacking this
domain (TMLeD/LeD mice) with wild-type (WT) mice during experimental lung TB
induced by infection with M. tuberculosis via the airways. Lungs were harvested
for analyses at two, six and 29 weeks after infection. Lung TM-expression was
downregulated in TB patients, which was not related to changes in the amount of
endothelium in infected lungs. TMLeD/LeD mice showed unaltered mycobacterial
loads in lungs, liver and spleen during experimental TB. Additionally, lung
histopathology and cytokine concentrations were largely similar in TMLeD/LeD and 
WT mice, while total leukocyte counts were increased in lungs of TMLeD/LeD mice
after 29 weeks of infection. Mortality did not occur in either group. The
lectin-like domain of TM does not play an important role in the host response to 
M. tuberculosis infection in mice.

DOI: 10.1160/TH13-08-0719 
PMID: 24136651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

