
1. Immunol Lett. 2013 Nov-Dec;156(1-2):132-9. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2013.10.002. Epub
2013 Oct 19.

Tumor cells loaded with α-galactosylceramide promote therapeutic NKT-dependent
anti-tumor immunity in multiple myeloma.

Hong S(1), Lee H, Jung K, Lee SM, Lee SJ, Jun HJ, Kim Y, Song H, Bogen B, Choi I.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Research Center for Multiple Myeloma, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Inje University College of Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea.

Tumor cells have been used as the tumor antigen sources for developing cancer
vaccines. Due to their low immunogenicity, tumor antigens are combined with
various adjuvants to enhance immunogenicity of cancer vaccines. Among them, a
natural killer T cell (NKT)-ligand, α-galactosylceramide (αGC) has been reported 
as a powerful adjuvant showing therapeutic effects in solid tumors as well as
hematological malignancies including lymphoma. In this study, we applied
αGC-based tumor cell vaccine in mouse multiple myeloma model. The αGC-loaded
MOPC315BM myeloma cell vaccine efficiently retarded tumor growth, induced
regression of established tumors, and protected surviving mice from tumor
rechallenge. Therapeutic responses were associated with induction of strong
humoral immune responses, including myeloma-specific antibodies, and cellular
immune responses, including myeloma-specific CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes and
memory T cells. In addition, regulatory T cells were significantly decreased in
mice that received the αGC-loaded myeloma cell vaccine. Thus, our results
demonstrated that αGC-loaded myeloma vaccine efficiently promoted NKT-dependent
anti-tumor immunity in a mouse model. These findings are informative for
improving the efficacy of tumor-cell-based immunotherapy for patients with MM and
other CD1d-expressing tumors.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2013.10.002 
PMID: 24148970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

