
1. Microbes Infect. 2014 Jan;16(1):17-27. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2013.10.006. Epub
2013 Oct 16.

Porphyromonas gingivalis modulates Pseudomonas aeruginosa-induced apoptosis of
respiratory epithelial cells through the STAT3 signaling pathway.

Li Q(1), Pan C(1), Teng D(1), Lin L(1), Kou Y(1), Haase EM(2), Scannapieco FA(2),
Pan Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology and Periodontics, School of Stomatology, China
Medical University, Nanjing North St. 117, Shenyang 110002, Liaoning Province,
China.
(2)Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, 109 Foster Hall,
University at Buffalo, State University of New York, 3435 Main St., Buffalo, NY
14214-3092, USA.
(3)Department of Oral Biology and Periodontics, School of Stomatology, China
Medical University, Nanjing North St. 117, Shenyang 110002, Liaoning Province,
China; Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, 109 Foster Hall,
University at Buffalo, State University of New York, 3435 Main St., Buffalo, NY
14214-3092, USA. Electronic address: yppan@mail.cmu.edu.cn.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an important opportunistic bacterial pathogen, causing 
infections of respiratory and other organ systems in immunocompromised hosts that
may invade and proliferate in mucosal epithelial cells to induce apoptosis.
Previous studies suggest that oral bacteria, especially gram-negative periodontal
pathogens, may enhance P. aeruginosa invasion into respiratory epithelial cells
to augment tissue destruction. In this study, we investigated the effect of the
periodontopathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis on P. aeruginosa-induced epithelial
cell apoptosis. P. gingivalis invasion transiently inhibited P.
aeruginosa-induced apoptosis in respiratory epithelial cells via the signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling pathway. The
activated STAT3 up-regulated the downstream anti-apoptotic moleculars survivin
and B-cell leukemia-2 (bcl-2). This process was accompanied by down-regulation of
pro-apoptosis molecular Bcl-2-associated death promoter (bad) and caspase-3
activity inhibition. In addition, the activation of the STAT3 pathway was
affected by P. gingivalis in a dose-dependent manner. Finally, co-invasion of P. 
aeruginosa and P. gingivalis led to greater cell death compared with P.
aeruginosa challenge alone. These results suggest that regulation of P.
aeruginosa-induced apoptosis by P. gingivalis contributes to the pathogenesis of 
respiratory disease. Interference with this process may provide a potential
therapeutic strategy for the treatment and prevention of respiratory disease.

Copyright Â© 2013 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2013.10.006 
PMID: 24140557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

