
1. Environ Microbiol. 2014 Sep;16(9):2672-81. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.12308. Epub
2013 Nov 14.

Ecological coherence of diversity patterns derived from classical fingerprinting 
and Next Generation Sequencing techniques.

Gobet A(1), Boetius A, Ramette A.

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for
Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany; Jacobs University Bremen GmbH, Bremen,
Germany. angelique.gobet@sb-roscoff.fr.

Changes in richness and bacterial community structure obtained via 454 Massively 
Parallel Tag Sequencing (MPTS) and Automated Ribosomal Intergenic Analysis
(ARISA) were systematically compared to determine whether and how the ecological 
knowledge obtained from both molecular techniques could be combined. We evaluated
community changes over time and depth in marine coastal sands at different levels
of taxonomic resolutions, sequence corrections and sequence abundances. Although 
richness over depth layers or sampling dates greatly varied [∼ 30% and 70-80% new
operational taxonomic units (OTU) between two samples with ARISA and MPTS
respectively], overall patterns of community variations were similar with both
approaches. Alpha-diversity estimated by ARISA-derived OTU was most similar to
that obtained from MPTS-derived OTU defined at the order level. Similar patterns 
of OTU replacement were also found with MPTS at the family level and with 20-25% 
rare types removed. Using ARISA or MPTS datasets with lower resolution, such as
those containing only resident OTU, yielded a similar set of significant
contextual variables explaining bacterial community changes. Hence, ARISA as a
rapid and low-cost fingerprinting technique represents a valid starting point for
more in-depth exploration of community composition when complemented by the
detailed taxonomic description offered by MPTS.

© 2013 The Authors. Environmental Microbiology published by Society for Applied
Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.12308 
PMCID: PMC4262003
PMID: 24147993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

