
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2014 Feb;64(Pt 2):594-598. doi:
10.1099/ijs.0.054460-0. Epub 2013 Oct 24.

Novosphingobium arabidopsis sp. nov., a DDT-resistant bacterium isolated from the
rhizosphere of Arabidopsis thaliana.

Lin SY(1), Hameed A(1), Liu YC(1), Hsu YH(1), Lai WA(2)(1), Huang HI(1), Young
CC(2)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soil and Environmental Sciences, College of Agriculture and
Natural Resources, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC.
(2)Agricultural Biotechnology Center, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, 
Taiwan, ROC.

An aerobic, Gram-stain-negative, rod-shaped, DDT-resistant bacterium, designated 
strain CC-ALB-2(T), was isolated from the Arabidopsis thaliana rhizosphere.
Strain CC-ALB-2(T) was able to grow at 25-37 °C, at pH 5.0-8.0, with 1.0% (w/v)
NaCl and tolerate up to 200 mg l(-1) DDT. 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis of
strain CC-ALB-2(T) showed highest sequence similarity to Novosphingobium stygium 
KCTC 2891(T) (97.1%) and Novosphingobium soli DSM 22821(T) (96.8%), and lower
levels of similarity (<97.0%) to other species of the genus Novosphingobium. The 
major fatty acid profile consisted of C14 : 0 2-OH (13.1%), C16 : 0 (10.0%), C(15
: 0) iso 3-OH (5.8%), C(16: 1)ω7c/C(16 :1)ω6c (summed feature 3, 24.7%) and C(18 
: 1)ω7c/C(18 : 1)ω6c (summed feature 8, 42.4%). The polar lipid profile
constitutes sphingoglycolipid, glycolipid, diphosphatidylglycerol,
phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidyldimethylethanolamine, phosphatidylglycerol 
and phosphatidylcholine. The polyamine pattern showed a predominance of
spermidine as the major polyamine. The predominant quinone system was ubiquinone 
(Q-10). The DNA G+C content was 68.9 ± 0.1 mol%. Based on the phylogenetic,
phenotypic and chemotaxonomic features, strain CC-ALB-2(T) is proposed to
represent a novel species of the genus Novosphingobium for which the name
Novosphingobium arabidopsis sp. nov. is proposed. The type strain is CC-ALB-2(T) 
( = BCRC 80571(T) = JCM 18896(T)).

DOI: 10.1099/ijs.0.054460-0 
PMID: 24158946  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

