
1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Dec 6;288(49):35559-68. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.522771. Epub 2013
Oct 28.

Crystal structure and site-directed mutagenesis of 3-ketosteroid Δ1-dehydrogenase
from Rhodococcus erythropolis SQ1 explain its catalytic mechanism.

Rohman A(1), van Oosterwijk N, Thunnissen AM, Dijkstra BW.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Sciences and Technology and.

3-Ketosteroid Δ(1)-dehydrogenases are FAD-dependent enzymes that catalyze the
1,2-desaturation of 3-ketosteroid substrates to initiate degradation of the
steroid nucleus. Here we report the 2.0 Å resolution crystal structure of the
56-kDa enzyme from Rhodococcus erythropolis SQ1 (Δ(1)-KSTD1). The enzyme contains
two domains: an FAD-binding domain and a catalytic domain, between which the
active site is situated as evidenced by the 2.3 Å resolution structure of
Δ(1)-KSTD1 in complex with the reaction product 1,4-androstadiene-3,17-dione. The
active site contains four key residues: Tyr(119), Tyr(318), Tyr(487), and
Gly(491). Modeling of the substrate 4-androstene-3,17-dione at the position of
the product revealed its interactions with these residues and the FAD. The C1 and
C2 atoms of the substrate are at reaction distance to the N5 atom of the
isoalloxazine ring of FAD and the hydroxyl group of Tyr(318), respectively,
whereas the C3 carbonyl group is at hydrogen bonding distance from the hydroxyl
group of Tyr(487) and the backbone amide of Gly(491). Site-directed mutagenesis
of the tyrosines to phenylalanines confirmed their importance for catalysis. The 
structural features and the kinetic properties of the mutants suggest a catalytic
mechanism in which Tyr(487) and Gly(491) work in tandem to promote keto-enol
tautomerization and increase the acidity of the C2 hydrogen atoms of the
substrate. With assistance of Tyr(119), the general base Tyr(318) abstracts the
axial β-hydrogen from C2 as a proton, whereas the FAD accepts the axial
α-hydrogen from the C1 atom of the substrate as a hydride ion.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.522771 
PMCID: PMC3853301
PMID: 24165124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

