
1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2014 Apr;50(4):699-712. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2013-0015OC.

NLRP3 and ASC differentially affect the lung transcriptome during pneumococcal
pneumonia.

van Lieshout MH(1), Scicluna BP, Florquin S, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)1 Center of Infection and Immunity, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; and.

Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most frequently isolated causative pathogen of
community-acquired pneumonia, a leading cause of mortality worldwide.
Inflammasomes are multiprotein complexes that play crucial roles in the
regulation of inflammation. Nod-like receptor family, pyrin domain containing
(NLRP) 3 is a sensor that functions in a single inflammasome, whereas adaptor
apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase activation and
recruitment domain (ASC) is a common adaptor of several inflammasomes. We
investigated the role of NLRP3 and ASC during S. pneumoniae pneumonia by
comparing bacterial growth and spreading, and host innate immune responses in
wild-type mice and mice deficient for either NLRP3 (Nlrp3(-/-)) or ASC
(Asc(-/-)). Asc(-/-) mice had increased bacterial dissemination and lethality
compared with Nlrp3(-/-) mice, although the cytokine response was impaired in
both mouse strains. By detailed analysis of the early inflammatory response in
the lung by whole-genome transcriptional profiling, we identified several
mediators that were differentially expressed between Nlrp3(-/-) and Asc(-/-)
mice. Of these, IL-17, granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and
integrin-Î±M were significantly attenuated in Asc(-/-) relative to Nlrp3(-/-)
mice, as well as a number of genes involved in the adaptive immune response.
These differences may explain the increased susceptibility of Asc(-/ -) mice
during S. pneumoniae infection, and suggest that either ASC-dependent
NLRP3-independent inflammasomes or inflammasome-independent ASC functions may be 
involved.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2013-0015OC 
PMID: 24164497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

