
1. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:878956. doi: 10.1155/2013/878956. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

Characteristics of clinical Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli isolated from 
British Columbia.

Allen KJ(1), Laing CR, Cancarevic A, Zhang Y, Mesak LR, Xu H, Paccagnella A,
Gannon VP, Hoang L.

Author information: 
(1)Food, Nutrition and Health Program, Faculty of Land and Food Systems,
University of British Columbia, 218-2205 East Mall, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T
1Z4.

Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) are significant public health
threats. Although STEC O157 are recognized foodborne pathogens, non-O157 STEC are
also important causes of human disease. We characterized 10 O157:H7 and 15
non-O157 clinical STEC derived from British Columbia (BC). Eae, hlyA, and stx
were more frequently observed in STEC O157, and 80 and 100% of isolates possessed
stx₁ and stx₂, respectively. In contrast, stx₁ and stx₂ occurred in 80 and 40% of
non-O157 STEC, respectively. Comparative genomic fingerprinting (CGF) revealed
three distinct clusters (C). STEC O157 was identified as lineage I (LI; LSPA-6
111111) and clustered as a single group (C1). The cdi gene previously observed
only in LII was seen in two LI O157 isolates. CGF C2 strains consisted of diverse
non-O157 STEC while C3 included only O103:H25, O118, and O165 serogroup isolates.
With the exception of O121 and O165 isolates which were similar in virulence gene
complement to STEC O157, C1 O157 STEC produced more Stx2 than non-O157 STEC.
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) screening revealed resistance or reduced
sensitivity in all strains, with higher levels occurring in non-O157 STEC. One
STEC O157 isolate possessed a mobile bla(CMY-2) gene transferrable across genre
via conjugation.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/878956 
PMCID: PMC3807556
PMID: 24199201  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

