
1. Stem Cells Cloning. 2011 Feb 27;4:11-22. doi: 10.2147/SCCAA.S6713. eCollection
2011.

Increased mobilization and yield of stem cells using plerixafor in combination
with granulocyte-colony stimulating factor for the treatment of non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma and multiple myeloma.

Pelus LM(1), Farag SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana.

Multiple myeloma and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma remain the most common indications
for high-dose chemotherapy and autologous peripheral blood stem cell rescue.
While a CD34+ cell dose of 1 × 10(6)/kg is considered the minimum required for
engraftment, higher CD34+ doses correlate with improved outcome. Numerous
studies, however, support targeting a minimum CD34+ cell dose of 2.0 × 10(6)/kg, 
and an "optimal" dose of 4 to 6 × 10(6)/kg for a single transplant.
Unfortunately, up to 40% of patients fail to mobilize an optimal CD34+ cell dose 
using myeloid growth factors alone. Plerixafor is a novel reversible inhibitor of
CXCR4 that significantly increases the mobilization and collection of higher
numbers of hematopoietic progenitor cells. Two randomized multi-center clinical
trials in patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and multiple myeloma have
demonstrated that the addition of plerixafor to granulocyte-colony stimulating
factor increases the mobilization and yield of CD34+ cells in fewer apheresis
days, which results in durable engraftment. This review summarizes the
pharmacology and evidence for the clinical efficacy of plerixafor in mobilizing
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, and discusses potential ways to utilize 
plerixafor in a cost-effective manner in patients with these diseases.

DOI: 10.2147/SCCAA.S6713 
PMCID: PMC3781755
PMID: 24198526 

