
1. Immunogenetics. 2014 Jan;66(1):33-42. doi: 10.1007/s00251-013-0741-6. Epub 2013
Nov 7.

The equine CD1 gene family is the largest and most diverse yet identified.

Dossa RG(1), Alperin DC, Hines MT, Hines SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, P.O. Box 647040, Pullman, WA, 99164-7040, 
USA.

The CD1 family is a group of non-polymorphic MHC class I-like molecules that
present lipid-based antigens to T cells. Previous work in our laboratory
demonstrated that cytotoxic T lymphocytes from immune adult horses recognize
lipids from the cell wall of an important equine pathogen, Rhodococcus equi.
These findings suggest an important role for the equine CD1 antigen presentation 
system in protective immune responses to microbial pathogens in the horse. In
this study, we characterized and mapped the equine CD1 gene cluster. The equine
genome was found to contain 13 complete CD1 genes; seven genes were classified as
homologues of human CD1a, two CD1b, one CD1c, one CD1d, and two CD1e, making it
the largest CD1 family to date. All but one of the eqCD1 molecules were expressed
in all antigen-presenting cells investigated. The major amino acid differences
between equine CD1 isoforms are located in the predicted antigen binding site,
suggesting that a variety of lipid antigens can be presented. R. equi survives
and replicates within professional phagocytes by arresting phagosome maturation
between the early endosome and late phagosome. Based on the absence of a tyrosine
sorting motif in all eqCD1a, CD1a molecules are predicted to co-localize with R. 
equi in the early endosome. Here, they could acquire lipid antigen and present it
to T lymphocytes. The extraordinarily large number of CD1 molecules in the horse 
may reflect their crucial role in immunity to R. equi.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-013-0741-6 
PMID: 24196432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

