
1. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2014 Jan;105(1):229-35. doi: 10.1007/s10482-013-0069-0. 
Epub 2013 Nov 5.

Deinococcus radiotolerans sp. nov., a gamma-radiation-resistant bacterium
isolated from gamma ray-irradiated soil.

Cha S(1), Srinivasan S, Seo T, Kim MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Dongguk University-Seoul, Seoul, 100-715, Republic
of Korea.

Two gamma-radiation-resistant bacterial strains, designated C1(T) and C2, were
isolated from a soil sample collected at Jeongeup-Si, South Korea. These strains 
were observed to be Gram-negative, non-motile, rod-shaped, and to form pink
colonies. Phylogenetic analysis based on 16S rRNA gene sequences revealed that
these strains belong to the genus Deinococcus in the family Deinococcaceae.
Strains C1(T) and C2 have the highest sequence similarities with Deinococcus
daejeonensis MJ27(T) (97.56 %) and Deinococcus grandis DSM 39663(T) (97.50 %).
Like other members of the genus Deinococcus, the novel isolates showed resistance
to gamma-radiation with a D10 value in excess of 8 kGy. The isolates were found
to have menaquinone MK-8 as the predominant respiratory quinone and an
unidentified phosphoglycolipid as major polar lipid. In addition, the most
abundant fatty acids of strain C1(T) were identified as C15:1 ω6c (25.5 %), C16:1
ω7c (18.7 %) and C15:0 (9.7 %). Genomic analysis results showed that the DNA G+C 
contents of strain C1(T) and C2 are 68.59 and 68.57 %, respectively. Taken
together, the polyphasic taxonomic data support the proposal that the isolates
C1(T) and C2 represent a novel species of the genus Deinococcus, for which the
name Deinococcus radiotolerans sp. nov. is proposed. The type strain is a strain 
C1(T) (=KCTC 33150(T) = JCM 19173(T)).

DOI: 10.1007/s10482-013-0069-0 
PMID: 24190343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

