
1. Neoplasia. 2013 Oct;15(10):1172-83.

Combination of the PI3K inhibitor ZSTK474 with a PSMA-targeted immunotoxin
accelerates apoptosis and regression of prostate cancer.

Baiz D(1), Hassan S, Choi YA, Flores A, Karpova Y, Yancey D, Pullikuth A, Sui G, 
Sadelain M, Debinski W, Kulik G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wake Forest
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC.

The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway is activated in most advanced
prostate cancers, yet so far treatments with PI3K inhibitors have been at best
tumorostatic in preclinical cancer models and do not show significant antitumor
efficacy in clinical trials. Results from tissue culture experiments in prostate 
cancer cells suggest that PI3K inhibitors should be combined with other cytotoxic
agents; however, the general toxicity of such combinations prevents translating
these experimental data into preclinical and clinical models. We investigated the
emerging concept of tumor-targeted synthetic lethality in prostate cancer cells
by using the pan-PI3K inhibitor ZSTK474 and the immunotoxin J591PE, a protein
chimera between the single-chain variable fragment of the monoclonal antibody
J591 against the prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) and the truncated form
of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin A (PE38QQR). The combination of ZSTK474
and J591PE increased apoptosis within 6 hours and cell death (monitored at 24-48 
hours) in the PSMA-expressing cells LNCaP, C4-2, and C4-2Luc but not in control
cells that do not express PSMA (PC3 and BT549 cells). Mechanistic analysis
suggested that induction of apoptosis requires Bcl-2-associated death promoter
(BAD) dephosphorylation and decreased expression of myeloid leukemia cell
differentiation protein 1 (MCL-1). A single injection of ZSTK474 and J591PE into 
engrafted prostate cancer C4-2Luc cells led to consistent and stable reduction of
luminescence within 6 days. These results suggest that the combination of a PI3K 
inhibitor and a PSMA-targeted protein synthesis inhibitor toxin represents a
promising novel strategy for advanced prostate cancer therapy that should be
further investigated.

DOI: 10.1593/neo.13986 
PMCID: PMC3819633
PMID: 24204196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

