
1. Water Res. 2013 Dec 1;47(19):6992-7005. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2013.08.044. Epub
2013 Oct 23.

Identification and characterization of metabolic properties of bacterial
populations recovered from arsenic contaminated ground water of North East India 
(Assam).

Ghosh S(1), Sar P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 721302 
West Bengal, India.

Diversity of culturable bacterial populations within the Arsenic (As)
contaminated groundwater of North Eastern state (Assam) of India is studied. From
nine As contaminated samples 89 bacterial strains are isolated. 16S rRNA gene
sequence analysis reveals predominance of Brevundimonas (35%) and Acidovorax
(23%) along with Acinetobacter (10%), Pseudomonas (9%) and relatively less
abundant (<5%) Undibacterium, Herbaspirillum, Rhodococcus, Staphylococcus, Bosea,
Bacillus, Ralstonia, Caulobacter and Rhizobiales members. High As(III) resistance
(MTC 10-50 mM) is observed for the isolates obtained from As(III) enrichment,
particularly for 3 isolates of genus Brevundimonas (MTC 50 mM). In contrast, high
resistance to As(V) (MTC as high as 550 mM) is present as a ubiquitous property, 
irrespective of isolates' enrichment condition. Bacterial genera affiliated to
other groups showed relatively lower degree of As resistance [MTCs of 15-20 mM
As(III) and 250-350 mM As(V)]. As(V) reductase activity is detected in strains
with high As(V) as well as As(III) resistance. A strong correlation could be
established among isolates capable of reductase activity and siderophore
production as well as As(III) tolerance. A large number of isolates (nearly 50%) 
is capable of anaerobic respiration using alternate inorganic electron acceptors 
[As(V), Se(VI), Fe(III), [NO(3)(2), SO(4)(2), S(2)O(3)(2). Ability to utilize
different carbon sources ranging from C2-C6 compounds along with some complex
sugars is also observed. Particularly, a number of strains is found to possess
ability to grow chemolithotrophically using As(III) as the electron donor. The
study reports for the first time the identity and metabolic abilities of bacteria
in As contaminated ground water of North East India, useful to elucidate the
microbial role in influencing mobilization of As in the region.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2013.08.044 
PMID: 24210546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

