
1. J Biomed Mater Res A. 2014 Oct;102(10):3459-69. doi: 10.1002/jbm.a.35024. Epub
2013 Nov 12.

Facile and highly efficient approach for the fabrication of multifunctional silk 
nanofibers containing hydroxyapatite and silver nanoparticles.

Sheikh FA(1), Ju HW, Moon BM, Park HJ, Kim JH, Lee OJ, Park CH.

Author information: 
(1)Nano-Bio Regenerative Medical Institute, College of Medicine, Hallym
University, Chuncheon, 200-702, South Korea; Department of Chemistry, University 
of Texas-Pan American, Edinburg, Texas, 78539.

In this study, a good combination consisting of electrospun silk fibroin
nanofibers incorporated with high-purity hydroxyapatite (HAp) nanoparticles (NPs)
and silver NPs is introduced as antimicrobial for tissue engineering
applications. The variable pressure field emission scanning electron microscope
results confirmed randomly placed nanofibers are produced with highly dispersed
HAp and silver NPs in nanofibers after electrospinning. The X-ray diffraction
results demonstrated crystalline features of each of the three components used
for electrospinning. Moreover, the TEM-EDS analysis confirmed the presence and
chemical nature of each component over individual silk nanofiber. The FT-IR
analyses was used confirm the different vibration modes caused due to functional 
groups present in silk fibroin, Hap, and silver NPs. The obtained nanofibers were
checked for antimicrobial activity by using two model organisms Escherichia coli 
and Staphylococcus aureus. Subsequently, the antimicrobial tests have indicated
that prepared nanofibers do possess good bactericidal activity. The ability of
N,N-dimethylformamide and silk fibroin used to reduce silver nitrate into silver 
metal was evaluated using MTT assay. The nanofibers were grown in presence of NIH
3T3 fibroblasts, which revealed toxic behavior to fibroblasts at higher
concentrations of silver nitrate used in this study. Furthermore, cell attachment
studies on nanofibers for 3 and 12 days of incubation time were minutely observed
and correlated with the results of MTT assay. The reported results confirmed the 
high amounts of silver nitrate can lead to toxic effects on viability of
fibroblasts and had bad effect in cell attachment.

Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.35024 
PMID: 24222437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

