
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2013 Nov 27;61(47):11550-9. doi: 10.1021/jf4037062. Epub 2013 
Nov 18.

An essential esterase (BroH) for the mineralization of bromoxynil octanoate by a 
natural consortium of Sphingopyxis sp. strain OB-3 and Comamonas sp. strain 7D-2.

Chen K(1), Liu Y, Mao DM, Liu XM, Li SP, Jiang JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Key Lab of Microbiological Engineering of
Agricultural Environment, Ministry of Agriculture, College of Life Sciences,
Nanjing Agricultural University , 210095 Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

A natural consortium of two bacterial strains ( Sphingopyxis sp. OB-3 and
Comamonas sp. 7D-2) was capable of utilizing bromoxynil octanoate as the sole
source of carbon for its growth. Strain OB-3 was able to convert bromoxynil
octanoate to bromoxynil but could not use the eight-carbon side chain as its sole
carbon source. Strain 7D-2 could not degrade bromoxynil octanoate, although it
was able to mineralize bromoxynil. An esterase (BroH) that is involved in the
conversion of bromoxynil octanoate into bromoxynil and is essential for the
mineralization of bromoxynil octanoate by the consortium was isolated from strain
OB-3 and molecularly characterized. BroH encodes 304 amino acids and resembles
α/β-hydrolase fold proteins. Recombinant BroH was overexpressed in Escherichia
coli BL21 (DE3) and purified by Ni-NTA affinity chromatography. BroH was able to 
transform p-nitrophenyl esters (C2-C14) and showed the highest activity toward
p-nitrophenyl caproate (C6) on the basis of the catalytic efficiency value
(Vmax/Km). Additionally, BroH activity decreased when the aliphatic chain length 
increased. The optimal temperature and pH for BroH activity was found to be 35 °C
and 7.5, respectively. On the basis of a phylogenetic analysis, BroH belongs to
subfamily V of bacterial lipolytic enzymes.

DOI: 10.1021/jf4037062 
PMID: 24224769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

