
1. Sci Total Environ. 2014 Feb 1;470-471:983-92. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.10.076. Epub 2013 Nov 14.

Metagenomic analysis reveals potential biodegradation pathways of persistent
pesticides in freshwater and marine sediments.

Fang H(1), Cai L(2), Yang Y(2), Ju F(2), Li X(3), Yu Y(4), Zhang T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Biotechnology Laboratory, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam 
Road, Hong Kong; Institute of Pesticide and Environmental Toxicology, College of 
Agriculture and Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.
(2)Environmental Biotechnology Laboratory, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam 
Road, Hong Kong.
(3)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong.
(4)Institute of Pesticide and Environmental Toxicology, College of Agriculture
and Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.
(5)Environmental Biotechnology Laboratory, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam 
Road, Hong Kong. Electronic address: zhangt@hku.hk.

The abundance and diversity of biodegradation genes (BDGs) and potential
degradation pathways of dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT),
hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH), and atrazine (ATZ) in freshwater and marine
sediments were investigated by metagenomic analysis using 6 datasets (16Gb in
total). The datasets were derived using Illumina high-throughput sequencing and
were based on BLAST against self-established databases of BDGs, DDT degradation
genes (DDGs), HCH degradation genes (HDGs), and ATZ degradation genes (ADGs). The
results showed that the abundance and diversity of BDGs, DDGs, HDGs, and ADGs
varied with sample source and locations. The lip and mnp genes, which encode for 
peroxidase, and the carA gene, which encodes for laccase, were detected as the
dominant genes for degradation of organic pollutants. The hdt, hdg, and atzB
genes, which encode for hydratase, dehalogenase, and ethylaminohydrolase, were
found to be the most abundant genes involved in DDT, HCH, and ATZ degradation,
respectively. The identified 69 genera capable of degrading organic pollutants
were mostly affiliated with Proteobacteria (49.3%) and Actinobacteria (21.7%).
Four genera, including Plesiocystis, Anaerolinea, Jannaschia, and Mycobacterium, 
were the major biodegradation populations in all sediments. In this study, the
nearly complete biodegradation pathways of DDT and ATZ were found, and the
partial degradation pathway of HCH was detected in all sediments.

Â© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.10.076 
PMID: 24239819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

