
1. Microbiol Immunol. 2014 Jan;58(1):61-7. doi: 10.1111/1348-0421.12116.

Lipopolysaccharide induces cell volume increase and migration of dendritic cells.

Gröbner S(1), Lukowski R, Autenrieth IB, Ruth P.

Author information: 
(1)Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine, University of
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Migration of dendritic cells (DCs) plays an important role in T-cell-mediated
adaptive immune responses. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) sensed by Toll-like receptor 
4 (TLR4) serves as a signal for DC migration. We analyzed LPS-induced DC volume
changes preceding the directed movement towards chemoattractants. Treatment with 
LPS resulted in rapid, prolonged cell swelling in wild-type (WT), but not in
TLR4(-/-) bone marrow-derived (BM) DCs indicating that TLR4 signaling is
essential for LPS-induced swelling. As a consequence, LPS-treatment enhanced the 
migratory activity along a chemokine (CCL21)-gradient in WT, but not in
TLR4-deficient BMDCs suggesting that the LPS/TLR4-induced swelling response
facilitates DC migration. Moreover, the role of calcium-activated potassium
channels (K(Ca) 3.1) as putative regulators of immune cell volume regulation and 
migration was analyzed in LPS-challenged BMDCs. We found that the LPS-induced
swelling of K(Ca) 3.1-deficient DCs was impaired when compared to WT DCs.
Accordingly, the LPS-induced increase in [Ca(2+)](i) detected in WT DCs was
reduced in K(Ca) 3.1-deficient DCs. Finally, directed migration of LPS-challenged
K(Ca) 3.1-deficient DCs was low compared to WT DCs indicating that activation of 
K(Ca) 3.1 is involved in LPS-induced DC migration. These findings suggest that
both TLR4 and K(Ca) 3.1 contribute to the migration of LPS-activated DCs as an
important feature of the adaptive immune response.

© 2013 The Societies and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1348-0421.12116 
PMID: 24236732  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

