
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2014 Jul;20(7):O435-41. doi: 10.1111/1469-0691.12459. Epub
2013 Dec 12.

Extension of the Legionella pneumophila sequence-based typing scheme to include
strains carrying a variant of the N-acylneuraminate cytidylyltransferase gene.

Mentasti M(1), Underwood A, Lück C, Kozak-Muiznieks NA, Harrison TG, Fry NK.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Reference Unit, London, UK.

Sequence-based typing (SBT) combined with monoclonal antibody subgrouping of
Legionella pneumophila isolates is at present considered to be the reference
standard during epidemiological investigation of Legionnaires' disease outbreaks.
In some isolates of L. pneumophila, the seventh allele of the standard SBT
scheme, neuA, is not amplified, because a homologue that is refractory to
amplification with the standard neuA primers is present. Consequently, a complete
seven-allele profile, and hence a sequence type, cannot be obtained.
Subsequently, primers were designed to amplify both neuA and the homologue, but
these yielded suboptimal sequencing results. In this study, novel primers
specific for the neuA homologue were designed and internationally validated by
members of the ESCMID Study Group for Legionella Infections at national and
regional Legionella reference laboratories with a modified version of the online 
L. pneumophila sequence quality tool. To date, the addition of the neuAh target
to the SBT protocol has allowed full typing data to be obtained for 108 isolates 
of 11 different serogroups, namely 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 13, and 14, which 
could not previously be typed with the standard SBT neuA primers. Further studies
are necessary to determine why it is still not possible to obtain either a neuA
or a neuAh allele from three serogroup 11 isolates.

© 2013 The Authors Clinical Microbiology and Infection © 2013 European Society of
Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/1469-0691.12459 
PMID: 24245827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

