
1. Dig Dis. 2013;31(3-4):286-92. doi: 10.1159/000354680. Epub 2013 Nov 14.

The host and the flora.

Nuding S(1), Antoni L, Stange EF.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

To prevent bacterial overgrowth, colonization of the epithelium and subsequent
translocation, the gastrointestinal tract maintains an effective mucosal barrier.
Besides mucus the most important components of this protective system are
epithelial antimicrobial peptides such as defensins, the cathelicidin LL-37,
lysozyme, phospholipase A, and proteins with additional antimicrobial properties 
such as ubiquicidin, ribosomal proteins or histones. Commensal species may
tolerate intestinal antimicrobial peptides, for example Bacteroides ssp. or
Parabacteroides ssp. as major species in the human colon were highly resistant to
the constitutive defensin HBD-1 and only susceptible to the inducible defensin
HBD-3. Reduction of disulfide bonds is an important mechanism activating HBD-1.
As several studies show, alterations in the expression of antimicrobial peptides 
directly influence the composition of the intestinal flora. Correspondingly, an
increased production of defensins or inhibition of the processing of mouse
defensins to their active form led to a quantitative shift of luminal and mucosal
bacterial species. On the other hand, microorganisms also modulate the synthesis 
of host defensins by induction or inhibition of specific peptides. Lactobacilli, 
the probiotic strain Escherichia coli Nissle and Salmonella enteritica stimulate 
HBD-2 expression, whereas Shigella flexneri downregulates the synthesis of HBD-1,
HBD-3 and LL-37. Thus, the proper balance between the luminal flora and the
mucosa is a permanently dynamic, sensitive and host-specific relationship.

DOI: 10.1159/000354680 
PMID: 24246976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

