
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;92(2):170-80. doi: 10.1038/icb.2013.78. Epub 2013 Nov
19.

Loss of GADD34 induces early age-dependent deviation to the myeloid lineage.

Nishio N(1), Ito S(1), Isobe K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

Comment in
    Immunol Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;92(2):102-4.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) generate all known hematopoietic lineages and are
capable of self-renewal. Upon aging, myeloid-biased HSCs are maintained, whereas 
lymphoid-biased HSCs are lost. GADD34 protein is expressed in myeloid-lineage
cells and has been cloned from them. However, the function of GADD34 in the
myeloid lineage has not yet been elucidated. Here, we show that early
age-dependent deviation to the myeloid lineage occurs in GADD34-deficient mice.
Early increases of GR-1(int)CD11b(+) and GR-1(high)CD11b(+) neutrophils were
observed in the spleen, bone marrow (BM) and blood of GADD34-deficient mice. We
found that BM Lin(-) c-Kit(+) Sca1(+) and Lin(-) c-Kit(+) Sca1(-)cells expressed 
GADD34 protein without stimulation and increased GADD34 expression following
intravenous injection of Staphylococcus aureus (S.aureus). These cell populations
were high in GADD34-deficient BM and were increased by the injection of S.
aureus. Because of the increase in granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) 
induced by S. aureus injection, we examined the signaling pathway from the G-CSF 
receptor (G-CSFR). We found that phosphorylation of signal transducer and
activator of transcription factor 3 was highly increased in GADD34-deficient
Lin(-) BM cells by the stimulation of G-CSF. These results indicate that GADD34
binds to Lyn and inhibit G-CSFR signaling. We show here that GADD34 works to
inhibit the proliferation and differentiation of HSCs or myeloid precursor cells 
and maintains homeostatic differentiation of neutrophil-lineage cells to avoid
early immunological senescence.

DOI: 10.1038/icb.2013.78 
PMID: 24247289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

