
1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 14;8(11):e79072. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079072.
eCollection 2013.

Increased frequency of CD4 and CD8 regulatory T cells in individuals under 15
years with multibacillary leprosy.

Fernandes C(1), Gonçalves HS, Cabral PB, Pinto HC, Pinto MI, Câmara LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Legal Medicine, Medical Laboratory Immunology,
Federal University of Ceará, Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Leprosy is a chronic disease, caused by Mycobacterium leprae, which
poses a serious public health problem worldwide. Its high incidence in people
under 15 years old in Ceará state, Brazil, reflects the difficulty of its
control. The spectrum of clinical manifestations is associated with the immune
response developed, with the Th1 and Th2 responses being related to the
paucibacillary and multibacillary forms, respectively. Regulatory T cells (Treg),
which can suppress Th1 and Th2 response, have received special attention in the
literature and have been associated with development of chronic infections.
However, their role in leprosy in individuals under 15 years old has not yet been
elucidated. We evaluated the frequency of CD4(+)/CD8(+)CD25(high)FOXP3(+) and
CD4(+)/CD8(+)CD25(high)FOXP3(high) cells in leprosy patients and household
contacts, in both cases under 15 years old.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: PBMC from 12 patients and 17 contacts were
cultured for 72 hours with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 (activators) or with activators
associated with total sonicated fraction of M. leprae. After culture, the
frequency of CD4(+)/CD8(+) Treg was identified by flow cytometry. Cells
stimulated by activators and antigen from multibacillary patients showed Treg
frequencies almost two times that of the contacts: CD4(+)FOXP3(+) (21.93±8.43 vs.
13.79±8.19%, p = 0.0500), CD4(+)FOXP3(high) (10.33±5.69 vs. 5.57±4.03%,
p = 0.0362), CD8(+)FOXP3(+) (13.88±9.19 vs. 6.18±5.56%, p = 0.0230) and
CD8(+)FOXP3(high) (5.36±4.17 vs. 2.23±2.68%, p = 0.0461). Furthermore, the mean
fluorescence intensity of FOXP3 in Treg was higher in multibacillary patients
than in the contacts. Interestingly, there was a positive correlation of the
bacillary index and number of lesions with the frequency of all Treg evaluated in
patients.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We have demonstrated for the first time that
multibacillary leprosy patients under 15 years old have greater CD4(+) and CD8(+)
Treg frequencies and these correlate with clinical and laboratorial aspects of
disease. These findings suggest the involvement of these cells in the
perpetuation of M. leprae infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079072 
PMCID: PMC3828331
PMID: 24244424  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

