
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014;58(2):782-8. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01549-13. Epub
2013 Nov 18.

Plasma drug activity in patients on treatment for multidrug-resistant
tuberculosis.

Mpagama SG(1), Ndusilo N, Stroup S, Kumburu H, Peloquin CA, Gratz J, Houpt ER,
Kibiki GS, Heysell SK.

Author information: 
(1)Kibong'oto National Tuberculosis Hospital, Kilimanjaro, Tanzania.

Little is known about plasma drug concentrations relative to quantitative
susceptibility in patients with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB). We
previously described a TB drug activity (TDA) assay that determines the ratio of 
the time to detection of plasma-cocultured Mycobacterium tuberculosis versus
control growth in a Bactec MGIT system. Here, we assess the activity of
individual drugs in a typical MDR-TB regimen using the TDA assay. We also
examined the relationship of the TDA to the drug concentration at 2 h (C2) and
the MICs among adults on a MDR-TB regimen in Tanzania. These parameters were also
compared to the treatment outcome of sputum culture conversion. Individually,
moxifloxacin yielded superior TDA results versus ofloxacin, and only moxifloxacin
and amikacin yielded TDAs equivalent to a -2-log killing. In the 25 patients
enrolled on a regimen of kanamycin, levofloxacin, ethionamide, pyrazinamide, and 
cycloserine, the C2 values were found to be below the expected range for
levofloxacin in 13 (52%) and kanamycin in 10 (40%). Three subjects with the
lowest TDA result (<1.5, a finding indicative of poor killing) had significantly 
lower kanamycin C2/MIC ratios than subjects with a TDA of ≥1.5 (9.8 ± 8.7 versus 
27.0 ± 19.1; P = 0.04). The mean TDAs were 2.52 ± 0.76 in subjects converting to 
negative in ≤2 months and 1.88 ± 0.57 in subjects converting to negative in >2
months (P = 0.08). In Tanzania, MDR-TB drug concentrations were frequently low,
and a wide concentration/MIC range was observed that affected plasma drug
activity ex vivo. An opportunity exists for pharmacokinetic optimization in
current MDR-TB regimens, which may improve treatment response.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01549-13 
PMCID: PMC3910816
PMID: 24247125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

