
1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 11;8(11):e80062. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080062.
eCollection 2013.

Streptococcus pneumoniae serine protease HtrA, but not SFP or PrtA, is a major
virulence factor in pneumonia.

de Stoppelaar SF(1), Bootsma HJ, Zomer A, Roelofs JJ, Hermans PW, van 't Veer C, 
van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands ; Center for Experimental and
Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Streptococcus (S.) pneumoniae is a common causative pathogen in pneumonia. Serine
protease orthologs expressed by a variety of bacteria have been found of
importance for virulence. Previous studies have identified two serine proteases
in S. pneumoniae, HtrA (high-temperature requirement A) and PrtA (cell
wall-associated serine protease A), that contributed to virulence in models of
pneumonia and intraperitoneal infection respectively. We here sought to identify 
additional S. pneumoniae serine proteases and determine their role in virulence. 
The S. pneumoniae D39 genome contains five putative serine proteases, of which
HtrA, Subtilase Family Protein (SFP) and PrtA were selected for insertional
mutagenesis because they are predicted to be secreted and surface exposed. Mutant
D39 strains lacking serine proteases were constructed by in-frame insertion
deletion mutagenesis. Pneumonia was induced by intranasal infection of mice with 
wild-type or mutant D39. After high dose infection, only D39ΔhtrA showed reduced 
virulence, as reflected by strongly reduced bacterial loads, diminished
dissemination and decreased lung inflammation. D39ΔprtA induced significantly
less lung inflammation together with smaller infiltrated lung surface, but
without influencing bacterial loads. After low dose infection, D39ΔhtrA again
showed strongly reduced bacterial loads; notably, pneumococcal burdens were also 
modestly lower in lungs after infection with D39Δsfp. These data confirm the
important role for HtrA in S. pneumoniae virulence. PrtA contributes to lung
damage in high dose pneumonia; it does not however contribute to bacterial
outgrowth in pneumococcal pneumonia. SFP may facilitate S. pneumoniae growth
after low dose infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080062 
PMCID: PMC3823867
PMID: 24244609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

