
1. Biochemistry. 2013 Dec 23;52(51):9358-66. doi: 10.1021/bi4010446. Epub 2013 Nov
22.

Structure of MurNAc 6-phosphate hydrolase (MurQ) from Haemophilus influenzae with
a bound inhibitor.

Hadi T(1), Hazra S, Tanner ME, Blanchard JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine , 1300 Morris 
Park Avenue, Bronx, New York 10461, United States.

The breakdown and recycling of peptidoglycan, an essential polymeric cell
structure, occur in a number of bacterial species. A key enzyme in the recycling 
pathway of one of the components of the peptidoglycan layer, N-acetylmuramic acid
(MurNAc), is MurNAc 6-phosphate hydrolase (MurQ). This enzyme catalyzes the
cofactor-independent cleavage of a relatively nonlabile ether bond and presents
an interesting target for mechanistic studies. Open chain product and substrate
analogues were synthesized and tested as competitive inhibitors (K(is) values of 
1.1 ± 0.3 and 0.23 ± 0.02 mM, respectively) of the MurNAc 6P hydrolase from
Escherichia coli (MurQ-EC). To identify the roles of active site residues that
are important for catalysis, the substrate analogue was cocrystallized with the
MurNAc 6P hydrolase from Haemophilus influenzae (MurQ-HI) that was amenable to
crystallographic studies. The cocrystal structure of MurQ-HI with the substrate
analogue showed that Glu89 was located in the proximity of both the C2 atom and
the oxygen at the C3 position of the bound inhibitor and that no other potential 
acid/base residue that could act as an active site acid/base was located in the
vicinity. The conserved residues Glu120 and Lys239 were found within hydrogen
bonding distance of the C5 hydroxyl group and C6 phosphate group, suggesting that
they play a role in substrate binding and ring opening. Combining these results
with previous biochemical data, we propose a one-base mechanism of action in
which Glu89 functions to both deprotonate at the C2 position and assist in the
departure of the lactyl ether at the C3 position. This same residue would serve
to deprotonate the incoming water and reprotonate the enolate in the second half 
of the catalytic cycle.

DOI: 10.1021/bi4010446 
PMCID: PMC3898461
PMID: 24251551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

