
1. BMC Genomics. 2013 Nov 20;14:808. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-808.

Growth rate-coordinated transcriptome reorganization in bacteria.

Matsumoto Y, Murakami Y, Tsuru S, Ying BW, Yomo T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University, 1-5
Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. yomo@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Cell growth rate reflects an organism's physiological state and
largely relies on the ability of gene expression to respond to the environment.
The relationship between cellular growth rate and gene expression remains
unknown.
RESULTS: Growth rate-coordinated changes in gene expression were discovered by
analyzing exponentially growing Escherichia coli cells cultured under multiple
defined environments, in which osmotic pressure, temperature and starvation
status were varied. Gene expression analyses showed that all 3,740 genes in the
genome could be simply divided into three clusters (C1, C2 and C3), which were
accompanied by a generic trend in the growth rate that was coordinated with
transcriptional changes. The direction of transcriptional change in C1 indicated 
environmental specificity, whereas those in C2 and C3 were correlated negatively 
and positively with growth rates, respectively. The three clusters exhibited
differentiated gene functions and gene regulation task division.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified three gene clusters, exhibiting differential gene
functions and distinct directions in their correlations with growth rates.
Reverses in the direction of the growth rate correlated transcriptional changes
and the distinguished duties of the three clusters indicated how transcriptome
homeostasis is maintained to balance the total expression cost for sustaining
life in new habitats.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-808 
PMCID: PMC3840594
PMID: 24252326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

