
1. J Nutr. 2014 Jan;144(1):98-105. doi: 10.3945/jn.113.185165. Epub 2013 Nov 20.

Dietary supplementation with white button mushrooms augments the protective
immune response to Salmonella vaccine in mice.

Wang J(1), Niu X, Du X, Smith D, Meydani SN, Wu D.

Author information: 
(1)Nutritional Immunology Laboratory, and.

We previously showed that dietary white button mushrooms (WBMs) enhanced natural 
killer cell activity and that in vitro WBM supplementation promotes maturation
and function of dendritic cells (DCs). The current study investigated whether WBM
consumption would enhance pathogen-specific immune response using a Salmonella
vaccination and infection animal model. C57BL/6 mice were fed diets containing
0%, 2%, or 5% WBM for 4 wk before oral vaccination with live attenuated
Salmonella typhimurium SL1479. Four weeks after immunization, mice were orally
infected with virulent Salmonella typhimurium SL1344. Immunization increased
animal survival and, among immunized mice, the 2% WBM group had a higher survival
rate than the other groups. Next, we fed mice 2% WBMs to determine the
immunological mechanism underlying the WBM-potentiated protective effect. We
found that WBM supplementation increased Salmonella-specific blood immunoglobulin
(Ig) G and fecal IgA concentrations. WBM-fed mice also had a higher IgG2a and
unchanged IgG1 production, leading to an elevated IgG2a:IgG1 ratio and indicating
an enhanced T helper 1 response. Consistent with these results, WBM-fed mice had 
higher interferon-γ, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, and interleukin (IL)-17A
production and unchanged IL-4 production in their splenocytes after polyclonal
(anti-CD3/CD28) or antigen-specific stimulation. Furthermore, WBM-fed mice had
more DCs in the spleen, and these DCs expressed higher levels of activation
markers CD40 and major histocompatibility complex-II. These mice also produced
more IL-12 and TNF-α postimmunization. Together, these results suggest that WBMs 
may improve Salmonella vaccine efficacy through an enhanced adaptive immune
response.

DOI: 10.3945/jn.113.185165 
PMID: 24259557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

