
1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 15;8(11):e80310. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080310.
eCollection 2013.

Profiling antibody responses to infections by Chlamydia abortus enables
identification of potential virulence factors and candidates for serodiagnosis.

Forsbach-Birk V(1), Foddis C, Simnacher U, Wilkat M, Longbottom D, Walder G,
Benesch C, Ganter M, Sachse K, Essig A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Hospital, Ulm,
Germany.

Enzootic abortion of ewes (EAE) due to infection with the obligate intracellular 
pathogen Chlamydia (C.) abortus is an important zoonosis leading to considerable 
economic loss to agriculture worldwide. The pathogen can be transmitted to humans
and may lead to serious infection in pregnant women. Knowledge about
epidemiology, clinical course and transmission to humans is hampered by the lack 
of reliable diagnostic tools. Immunoreactive proteins, which are expressed in
infected animals and humans, may serve as novel candidates for diagnostic marker 
proteins and represent putative virulence factors. In order to broaden the
spectrum of immunogenic C. abortus proteins we applied 2D immunoblot analysis and
screening of an expression library using human and animal sera. We have
identified 48 immunoreactive proteins representing potential diagnostic markers
and also putative virulence factors, such as CAB080 (homologue of the "macrophage
infectivity potentiator", MIP), CAB167 (homologue of the "translocated actin
recruitment protein", TARP), CAB712 (homologue of the "chlamydial protease-like
activity factor", CPAF), CAB776 (homologue of the "Polymorphic membrane protein
D", PmpD), and the "hypothetical proteins" CAB063, CAB408 and CAB821, which are
predicted to be type III secreted. We selected two putative virulence factors for
further characterization, i.e. CAB080 (cMIP) and CAB063, and studied their
expression profiles at transcript and protein levels. Analysis of the subcellular
localization of both proteins throughout the developmental cycle revealed CAB063 
being the first C. abortus protein shown to be translocated to the host cell
nucleus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080310 
PMCID: PMC3829881
PMID: 24260366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

