
1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 18;8(11):e80368. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080368.
eCollection 2013.

Polar lipids of Burkholderia pseudomallei induce different host immune responses.

Gonzalez-Juarrero M(1), Mima N, Trunck LA, Schweizer HP, Bowen RA, Dascher K,
Mwangi W, Eckstein TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology Immunology and Pathology, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, Colorado, United State of America.

Melioidosis is a disease in tropical and subtropical regions of the world that is
caused by Burkholderia pseudomallei. In endemic regions the disease occurs
primarily in humans and goats. In the present study, we used the goat as a model 
to dissect the polar lipids of B. pseudomallei to identify lipid molecules that
could be used for adjuvants/vaccines or as diagnostic tools. We showed that the
lipidome of B. pseudomallei and its fractions contain several polar lipids with
the capacity to elicit different immune responses in goats, namely rhamnolipids
and ornithine lipids which induced IFN-γ, whereas phospholipids and an undefined 
polar lipid induced strong IL-10 secretion in CD4(+) T cells. Autologous T cells 
co-cultured with caprine dendritic cells (cDCs) and polar lipids of B.
pseudomallei proliferated and up-regulated the expression of CD25 (IL-2 receptor)
molecules. Furthermore, we demonstrated that polar lipids were able to
up-regulate CD1w2 antigen expression in cDCs derived from peripheral blood
monocytes. Interestingly, the same polar lipids had only little effect on the
expression of MHC class II DR antigens in the same caprine dendritic cells.
Finally, antibody blocking of the CD1w2 molecules on cDCs resulted in decreased
expression for IFN-γ by CD4(+) T cells. Altogether, these results showed that
polar lipids of B. pseudomallei are recognized by the caprine immune system and
that their recognition is primarily mediated by the CD1 antigen cluster.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080368 
PMCID: PMC3832426
PMID: 24260378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

