
1. Biochemistry. 2013 Dec 23;52(51):9286-93. doi: 10.1021/bi4013319. Epub 2013 Nov
26.

Solvent isotope-induced equilibrium perturbation for isocitrate lyase.

Quartararo CE(1), Hadi T, Cahill SM, Blanchard JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine , 1300 Morris 
Park Avenue, Bronx, New York 10461, United States.

Isocitrate lyase (ICL) catalyzes the reversible retro-aldol cleavage of
isocitrate to generate glyoxylate and succinate. ICL is the first enzyme of the
glyoxylate shunt, which allows for the anaplerosis of citric acid cycle
intermediates under nutrient limiting conditions. In Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 
the source of ICL for these studies, ICL is vital for the persistence phase of
the bacterium's life cycle. Solvent kinetic isotope effects (KIEs) in the
direction of isocitrate cleavage ((D₂O)V = 2.0 ± 0.1, and (D₂O)[V/K(isocitrate)] 
= 2.2 ± 0.3) arise from the initial deprotonation of the C2 hydroxyl group of
isocitrate or the protonation of the aci-acid of the succinate product of the
isocitrate aldol cleavage by a solvent-derived proton. This KIE suggested that an
equilibrium mixture of all protiated isocitrate, glyoxylate, and succinate
prepared in D₂O would undergo transient changes in equilibrium concentrations as 
a result of the solvent KIE and solvent-derived deuterium incorporation into both
succinate and isocitrate. No change in the isotopic composition of glyoxylate was
expected or observed. We have directly monitored the changing concentrations of
all isotopic species of all reactants and products using a combination of nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and mass spectrometry. Continuous
monitoring of glyoxylate by ¹H NMR spectroscopy shows a clear equilibrium
perturbation in D₂O. The final equilibrium isotopic composition of reactants in
D₂O revealed dideuterated succinate, protiated glyoxylate, and monodeuterated
isocitrate, with the transient appearance and disappearance of monodeuterated
succinate. A model for the equilibrium perturbation of substrate species and
their time-dependent isotopic composition is presented.

DOI: 10.1021/bi4013319 
PMCID: PMC3905770
PMID: 24261638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

