
1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 20;8(11):e80739. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080739.
eCollection 2013.

Glycosylation of the Escherichia coli TibA self-associating autotransporter
influences the conformation and the functionality of the protein.

Côté JP(1), Charbonneau MÈ, Mourez M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, Université de Montréal, Saint-Hyacinthe,
Québec, Canada.

The self-associating autotransporters (SAATs) are multifunctional secreted
proteins of Escherichia coli, comprising the AIDA-I, TibA and Ag43 proteins. One 
of their characteristics is that they can be glycosylated. Glycosylation of
AIDA-I and Ag43 have been investigated, but not that of TibA. It is still not
clear whether glycosylation of the SAATs affect their structure or their
functionality. Therefore, we have looked at the effects of glycosylation on the
TibA adhesin/invasin. TibA is glycosylated by TibC, a specific
glycosyltransferase, and the two genes are encoded in an operon. In this study,
we have found that the glycosylation of TibA is not limited to the extracellular 
functional domain, as previously observed with AIDA-I and Ag43. We have
determined that unglycosylated TibA is not able to promote the adhesion of
bacteria on cultured epithelial cell, even though it is still able to promote
invasion, biofilm formation and autoaggregation of bacteria. We have purified the
glycosylated and unglycosylated forms of TibA, and determined that TibA is less
stable when not glycosylated. We finally observed that glycosylation affects the 
oligomerisation of TibA and that unglycosylated TibA is locked in a conformation 
that is not suited for adhesion. Our results suggest that the effect of
glycosylation on the functionality of TibA is indirect.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080739 
PMCID: PMC3835316
PMID: 24278316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

