
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 Feb;80(3):986-93. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03396-13. Epub
2013 Nov 22.

3-Hydroxybutyrate oligomer hydrolase and 3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase
participate in intracellular polyhydroxybutyrate and polyhydroxyvalerate
degradation in Paracoccus denitrificans.

Lu J(1), Takahashi A, Ueda S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Faculty of Agriculture, Utsunomiya
University, Utsunomiya, Japan.

Genes encoding 3-hydroxybutyrate oligomer hydrolase (PhaZc) and 3-hydroxybutyrate
dehydrogenase (Hbd) were isolated from Paracoccus denitrificans. PhaZc and Hbd
were overproduced as His-tagged proteins in Escherichia coli and purified by
affinity and gel filtration chromatography. Purified His-tagged proteins had
molecular masses of 31 kDa and 120 kDa (a tetramer of 29-kDa subunits). The
His-tagged PhaZc hydrolyzed not only 3-hydroxybutyrate oligomers but also
3-hydroxyvalerate oligomers. The His-tagged Hbd catalyzed the dehydrogenation of 
3-hydroxyvalerate as well as 3-hydroxybutyrate. When both enzymes were included
in the same enzymatic reaction system with 3-hydroxyvalerate dimer, sequential
reactions occurred, suggesting that PhaZc and Hbd play an important role in the
intracellular degradation of poly(3-hydroxyvalerate). When the phaZc gene was
disrupted in P. denitrificans by insertional inactivation, the mutant strain lost
PhaZc activity. When the phaZc-disrupted P. denitrificans was complemented with
phaZc, PhaZc activity was restored. These results suggest that P. denitrificans
carries a single phaZc gene. Disruption of the phaZc gene in P. denitrificans
affected the degradation rate of PHA.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03396-13 
PMCID: PMC3911200
PMID: 24271169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

