
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1986 Jun;12(1-4):93-105.

The ontogeny of humoral immunity in rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri.

Tatner MF.

The ontogeny of the humoral immune response to a 'thymus dependent' and a 'thymus
independent' antigen, human gamma globulin (HGG) and Aeromonas salmonicida (AS)
respectively, was investigated in the fry of rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri, by
direct immersion vaccination in the antigens (dose 5 mg/L HGG; 10(8) cells/ml AS;
30 minutes) at known ages/weights from 7 days post hatch, and at 1, 2, 3, and 4
months post hatch. Half the fry in each group were tested for antibodies 4 weeks 
after vaccination, the remainder were reimmunised and tested again after a
further 4 weeks. Appropriate controls to test for tolerance induction and memory 
responses were included. The results indicate that fry are capable of mounting a 
humoral immune response very early in ontogeny. There is a period of
'unresponsiveness' which persists for longer against HGG, than against AS, though
it was not thought to be tolerance as such. Memory could be detected to HGG in
fry given a first immunisation at 2 months. The results are compared with
preliminary experiments in which fry were first thymectomised 4 weeks before the 
first immunisation. In fry thymectomised at 1 month post hatch, and tested for
primary and secondary responses at 2 and 3 months, the primary response to HGG is
unaltered, but the secondary response is reduced. Both the primary and secondary 
response to AS is unaltered. When thymectomy is performed later, the effect on
the secondary response to HGG is no longer apparent, but the primary response to 
AS is slightly reduced.

DOI: 10.1016/0165-2427(86)90114-5 
PMID: 2429433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

