
1. Cell Microbiol. 2014 Jun;16(6):896-911. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12247. Epub 2014 Jan 6.

Mycoplasma superantigen initiates a TLR4-dependent Th17 cascade that enhances
arthritis after blocking B7-1 in Mycoplasma arthritidis-infected mice.

Mu HH(1), Nourian MM, Jiang HH, Tran JW, Cole BC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, 30 North 1900 East, Salt Lake City, UT, 84132, USA.

Mycoplasma arthritidis is a natural pathogen of rodents causing arthritis, toxic 
shock and necrotizing fasciitis. It secretes a potent superantigen (SAg), MAM,
that differentially affects the immune system depending upon presence or absence 
of TLR4, thus potentially influencing disease outcomes. Here, we establish that
antibody to co-stimulatory molecule B7-1(CD80) enhances arthritis in wild-type
C3H/HeSnJ (TLR2+4+) mice but suppresses arthritis in TLR4-defect C3H/HeJ
(TLR2+4-) mice. Also, blockade of the B7-1/CD28 co-stimulatory pathway in
C3H/HeSnJ mice resulted in a marked increase in an alternative co-stimulatory
pathway ICOS/ICOSL that was associated with elevation of the IL-17/Th17cascade
with enhanced IL-23, IL-6, and the RORγt and STAT3 transcriptional factors on
CD4+ T cells. Anti- B7-1 also increased inflammatory chemokines and the stress
protein HMGB1 that promotes cellular infiltration to joints. Using a
MAM-deficient strain of M. arthritidis, a monoclonal antibody to TLR4 and a
TLR4-defective mouse strain, we established that both MAM and TLR4 are required
for the systemic and local joint triggering of the Th17/IL-17 cascade in mice
treated with anti-B7-1 antibody. Importantly, blocking of IL-17 with anti-IL-17
antibody suppressed the elevated arthritis in M. arthritidis-infected mice
treated with anti-B7-1 antibody. Thus, this unique model of arthritis illustrates
how microbial agonists can bridgeinnate and adaptive immune responses to redirect
signalling pathways, thus promoting chronic inflammatory and autoimmune disease.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12247 
PMID: 24298898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

