
1. Microbiol Immunol. 2014 Feb;58(2):135-41. doi: 10.1111/1348-0421.12119.

Investigation of CTLA-4 and CD86 gene polymorphisms in Iranian patients with
brucellosis infection.

Eskandari-Nasab E(1), Moghadampour M, Najibi H, Hadadi-Fishani M.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic of Non-Communicable Disease Research Center; Department of Clinical
Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan

The protective immune response against Brucella involves T-cell-mediated
immunity. T-lymphocyte receptors, CD28 and cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated
protein-4 (CTLA-4), bind the same ligands, CD80 (B7-1) and CD86 (B7-2) on
antigen-presenting cells and regulate T cell activation. CD28 delivers
stimulatory signals whereas CTLA-4 provides inhibitory signals for T cell
activation. Here, we investigated the association of four polymorphisms in CTLA4 
(+49A/G [rs231775] and -318 C/T [rs5742909]) and its ligand CD86 (+1057 G/A
[rs1129055] and +2379G/C [rs17281995]) with brucellosis infection. The study
included 153 Iranian patients with active brucellosis and 128 healthy individuals
as the control group. Genotyping of the CTLA4 and CD86 variants was performed
using tetra amplification refractory mutation system-polymerase chain reaction
(T-ARMS-PCR) and PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis,
respectively. It was found that the CTLA4 -318 CT genotype and T allele were
present more frequently in cases than in controls and are therefore associated
with an increased risk for brucellosis (-318 TT genotype; OR = 2.544, P = 0.002).
Likewise, the CD86 +1057 GA and AA genotypes and A allele were associated with an
increased risk of brucellosis (+1057 AA genotype; OR = 3.81, P = 0.001). However,
no statistically significant difference between brucellosis patients and controls
in the allele and genotype distributions of CTLA4, +49A/G (P = 0.859) and CD86,
+2379G/C (P = 0.476) was found. In conclusion, CTLA4 -318 CT genotype and T
allele and the CD86 +057 GA and AA genotypes and A allele play roles as risk
factors for developing brucellosis infection in Iran.

Â© 2013 The Societies and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1348-0421.12119 
PMID: 24298899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

