
1. Chembiochem. 2014 Jan 3;15(1):108-16. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201300610. Epub 2013 Dec 
2.

AstPT catalyses both reverse N1- and regular C2 prenylation of a methylated
bisindolyl benzoquinone.

Tarcz S(1), Ludwig L, Li SM.

Author information: 
(1)Philipps-Universität Marburg, Institut für Pharmazeutische Biologie und
Biotechnologie, Deutschhausstrasse 17 A, 35037 Marburg (Germany).

Prenylated bisindolyl benzoquinones exhibit interesting biological activities,
such as antidiabetic or anti-HIV activities. A number of these compounds,
including asterriquinones, have been isolated from Aspergillus terreus. In this
study, we identified two putative genes by genome mining, ATEG_09980 and
ATEG_00702, which share high sequence similarity with the known bisindolyl
benzoquinone prenyltransferase TdiB from Aspergillus nidulans. The coding
sequences were cloned and overexpressed in E. coli. The overproduced recombinant 
proteins were purified to near homogeneity and used for enzyme assays with
asterriquinone D in the presence of dimethylallyl diphosphate. HPLC analysis
showed that product formation was only detected in enzyme assays with EAU29429
encoded by ATEG_09980, not in those with EAU39348 encoded by ATEG_00702. Product 
isolation and structure elucidation by NMR and MS analyses led to identification 
of N1-reversely and C2-regularly monoprenylated derivatives, as well as
N1',N1''reversely, N1'-reversely, C2''-regularly diprenylated derivatives. This
proved that EAU29429 functions as an asterriquinone prenyltransferase (AstPT) and
indicated the involvement of EAU29429 rather than EAU39348 in the biosynthesis of
methylated asterriquinones. Furthermore, incubation of monoprenylated enzyme
products with AstPT resulted in the formation of the diprenylated derivatives.

Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201300610 
PMID: 24302698  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

