
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jan 10;443(2):524-30. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.11.119. Epub 2013 Dec 6.

Murine T cell activation is regulated by surfen
(bis-2-methyl-4-amino-quinolyl-6-carbamide).

Warford J(1), Doucette CD(2), Hoskin DW(3), Easton AS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Tupper Building, 5850 College
Street, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada. Electronic address:
jordan.warford@dal.ca.
(2)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Dalhousie University, Tupper
Building, 5850 College Street, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada. Electronic
address: carolyn.doucette@dal.ca.
(3)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Tupper Building, 5850 College
Street, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada; Department of Microbiology &
Immunology, Dalhousie University, Tupper Building, 5850 College Street, Halifax, 
Nova Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada. Electronic address: d.w.hoskin@dal.ca.
(4)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Tupper Building, 5850 College
Street, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada; Department of Microbiology &
Immunology, Dalhousie University, Tupper Building, 5850 College Street, Halifax, 
Nova Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada; Department of Surgery (Neurosurgery), Dalhousie
University, Tupper Building, 5850 College Street, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4R2,
Canada. Electronic address: alexander.easton@dal.ca.

Surfen (bis-2-methyl-4-amino-quinolyl-6-carbamide) binds to glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs) and has been shown to influence their function, and the function of
proteoglycans (complexes of GAGs linked to a core protein). T cells synthesize,
secrete and express GAGs and proteoglycans which are involved in several aspects 
of T cell function. However, there are as yet no studies on the effect of
GAG-binding agents such as surfen on T cell function. In this study, surfen was
found to influence murine T cell activation. Doses between 2.5 and 20 μM produced
a graduated reduction in the proliferation of T cells activated with
anti-CD3/CD28 antibody-coated T cell expander beads. Surfen (20 mg/kg) was also
administered to mice treated with anti-CD3 antibody to activate T cells in vivo. 
Lymphocytes from surfen-treated mice also showed reduced proliferation and lymph 
node cell counts were reduced. Surfen reduced labeling with a cell viability
marker (7-ADD) but to a much lower extent than its effect on proliferation.
Surfen also reduced CD25 (the α-subunit of the interleukin (IL)-2 receptor)
expression with no effect on CD69 expression in T cells treated in vivo but not
in vitro. When receptor activation was bypassed by treating T cells in vitro with
phorbyl myristate acetate (10 ng/ml) and ionomycin (100 ng/ml), surfen treatment 
either increased proliferation (10 μM) or had no effect (2.5, 5 and 20 μM). In
vitro treatment of T cells with surfen had no effect on IL-2 or interferon-γ
synthesis and did not alter proliferation of the IL-2 dependent cell line CTLL-2.
The effect of surfen was antagonized dose-dependently by co-treatment with
heparin sulfate. We conclude that surfen inhibits T cell proliferation in vitro
and in vivo. When T cell receptor-driven activation is bypassed surfen had a
neutral or stimulatory effect on T cell proliferation. The results imply that
endogenous GAGs and proteoglycans play a complex role in promoting or inhibiting 
different aspects of T cell activation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.11.119 
PMID: 24315874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

