
1. J Bacteriol. 2014 Feb;196(4):850-8. doi: 10.1128/JB.00843-13. Epub 2013 Dec 6.

Nonredundant roles for cytochrome c2 and two high-potential iron-sulfur proteins 
in the photoferrotroph Rhodopseudomonas palustris TIE-1.

Bird LJ(1), Saraiva IH, Park S, Cal√ßada EO, Salgueiro CA, Nitschke W, Louro RO,
Newman DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA.

The purple bacterium Rhodopseudomonas palustris TIE-1 expresses multiple small
high-potential redox proteins during photoautotrophic growth, including two
high-potential iron-sulfur proteins (HiPIPs) (PioC and Rpal_4085) and a
cytochrome c2. We evaluated the role of these proteins in TIE-1 through genetic, 
physiological, and biochemical analyses. Deleting the gene encoding cytochrome c2
resulted in a loss of photosynthetic ability by TIE-1, indicating that this
protein cannot be replaced by either HiPIP in cyclic electron flow. PioC was
previously implicated in photoferrotrophy, an unusual form of photosynthesis in
which reducing power is provided through ferrous iron oxidation. Using cyclic
voltammetry (CV), electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy, and
flash-induced spectrometry, we show that PioC has a midpoint potential of 450 mV,
contains all the typical features of a HiPIP, and can reduce the reaction centers
of membrane suspensions in a light-dependent manner at a much lower rate than
cytochrome c2. These data support the hypothesis that PioC linearly transfers
electrons from iron, while cytochrome c2 is required for cyclic electron flow.
Rpal_4085, despite having spectroscopic characteristics and a reduction potential
similar to those of PioC, is unable to reduce the reaction center. Rpal_4085 is
upregulated by the divalent metals Fe(II), Ni(II), and Co(II), suggesting that it
might play a role in sensing or oxidizing metals in the periplasm. Taken
together, our results suggest that these three small electron transfer proteins
perform different functions in the cell.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00843-13 
PMCID: PMC3911180
PMID: 24317397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

