
1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014 Feb 15;189(4):463-74. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201310-1905OC.

Glutaredoxin-1 attenuates S-glutathionylation of the death receptor fas and
decreases resolution of Pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia.

Anathy V(1), Aesif SW, Hoffman SM, Bement JL, Guala AS, Lahue KG, Leclair LW,
Suratt BT, Cool CD, Wargo MJ, Janssen-Heininger YM.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pathology.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014 Feb 15;189(4):386-9.

RATIONALE: The death receptor Fas is critical for bacterial clearance and
survival of mice after Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection.
OBJECTIVES: Fas ligand (FasL)-induced apoptosis is augmented by
S-glutathionylation of Fas (Fas-SSG), which can be reversed by glutaredoxin-1
(Grx1). Therefore, the objective of this study was to investigate the interplay
between Grx1 and Fas in regulating the clearance of P. aeruginosa infection.
METHODS: Lung samples from patients with bronchopneumonia were analyzed by
immunofluorescence. Primary tracheal epithelial cells, mice lacking the gene for 
Grx1 (Glrx1(-/-)), Glrx1(-/-) mice treated with caspase inhibitor, or transgenic 
mice overexpressing Grx1 in the airway epithelium were analyzed after infection
with P. aeruginosa.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Patient lung samples positive for P. aeruginosa
infection demonstrated increased Fas-SSG compared with normal lung samples.
Compared with wild-type primary lung epithelial cells, infection of Glrx1(-/-)
cells with P. aeruginosa showed enhanced caspase 8 and 3 activities and cell
death in association with increases in Fas-SSG. Infection of Glrx1(-/-) mice with
P. aeruginosa resulted in enhanced caspase activity and increased Fas-SSG as
compared with wild-type littermates. Absence of Glrx1 significantly enhanced
bacterial clearance, and decreased mortality postinfection with P. aeruginosa.
Inhibition of caspases significantly decreased bacterial clearance postinfection 
with P. aeruginosa, in association with decreased Fas-SSG. In contrast,
transgenic mice that overexpress Grx1 in lung epithelial cells had significantly 
higher lung bacterial loads, enhanced mortality, decreased caspase activation,
and Fas-SSG in the lung after infection with P. aeruginosa, compared with
wild-type control animals.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that S-glutathionylation of Fas within the
lung epithelium enhances epithelial apoptosis and promotes clearance of P.
aeruginosa and that glutaredoxin-1 impairs bacterial clearance and increases the 
severity of pneumonia in association with deglutathionylation of Fas.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201310-1905OC 
PMCID: PMC3977722
PMID: 24325366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

