
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2014 Mar;98(6):2565-72. doi:
10.1007/s00253-013-5420-x. Epub 2013 Dec 11.

A new synthetic ligand that activates QscR and blocks antibiotic-tolerant biofilm
formation in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Weng LX(1), Yang YX, Zhang YQ, Wang LH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Geography and Biological Information, Nanjing University of Posts
and Telecommunications, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210046, People's Republic of China,
lxweng@njupt.edu.cn.

Quorum sensing (QS) has been recognized to play an important role in many
pathogenic bacteria and has become a novel target for the treatment of infectious
disease. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is highly resistant to antibiotic treatment,
largely due to its ability to form biofilms, and QS was found to be essential for
the creation of mature, differentiated biofilms in this organism. A novel QS
inhibitor, C2 (N-decanoyl-L-homoserine benzyl ester), can attenuate not only
total protease and elastase activity, but also swarming motility and biofilm
formation in the P. aeruginosa strain PAO1. We demonstrated that C2 showed a
significant inhibitory effect on biofilm formation in a dose-dependent manner.
Data from cDNA microarray showed that expression of 382 genes (∼6.4 %) was
significantly different with C2 treatment, including downregulation of 215 genes 
(∼3.6 %) and upregulation of 167 genes (∼2.8 %). Real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) showed that the gene qscR, which
encodes the LuxR-type receptor QscR (quorum sensing control repressor), was
significantly upregulated by 375.4 % during C2 treatment. The mechanism by which 
C2 inhibits biofilm formation may be through repression of Las and Rhl systems by
QscR. C2 was shown to reduce biofilm formation; in combination with antibiotics, 
it abolishes biofilm formation completely. This result may pave the way for new
treatments for biofilm-related infections and may be exploited for the general
prevention of biofilm formation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-013-5420-x 
PMID: 24327212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

