
1. Immunol Lett. 2014 Mar-Apr;158(1-2):88-94. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2013.12.007. Epub
2013 Dec 15.

Immunotherapeutic potential of recombinant ESAT-6 protein in mouse model of
experimental tuberculosis.

Mir SA(1), Verma I(2), Sharma S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education &
Research, Chandigarh 160012, India. Electronic address: mirshabir@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education &
Research, Chandigarh 160012, India.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education &
Research, Chandigarh 160012, India. Electronic address: sadhnabiochem@gmail.com.

Recent understanding of the pathogenesis of tuberculosis allows the possible
application of immunotherapy for the treatment of tuberculosis. Therapies that
would upregulate the host antimycobacterial immune response and/or attenuate
T-cell suppressive and macrophage-deactivating cytokines may prove to be useful
in the treatment of tuberculosis. ESAT6, 6-kDa early secreted antigenic target,
is a potent protective antigen and is considered as major target for long-lived
memory cells. In the present study the immunotherapeutic potential of ESAT-6 has 
been evaluated in mouse model of experimental tuberculosis. In the present study 
the ESAT-6 protein was cloned in Escherichia coli using pET23a(+) plasmid and
purified by Ni(2+)-NTA chromatography. Further, the immunotherapeutic potential
of the recombinant ESAT-6 (in terms of CFU enumeration in the target organs and
histopathological analysis of lungs) was evaluated against experimental
tuberculosis. The recombinant ESAT-6 with C-terminal histidine-tag and free
N-terminus mimics the natural form of ESAT-6 has been successfully cloned and
purified. The recombinant ESAT-6 protein adjuvanted with dimethyl
dioctadecylammonium bromide (DDA) moderately reduced the bacterial load in the
target organs of infected mice. Further, the formulation (ESAT-6-DDA) was able to
act synergistically when given in combination with antituberculosis drugs. This
recombinant ESAT-6 showed good immunotherapeutic potential against experimental
tuberculosis and can be used as an adjunct to the conventional antituberculosis
chemotherapy.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2013.12.007 
PMID: 24345702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

