
1. Carbohydr Res. 2014 Jan 30;384:37-45. doi: 10.1016/j.carres.2013.11.003. Epub
2013 Nov 18.

Examination of the influence of C5-hydroxymethyl group and configurations of
hydroxyl groups at C2, C3, and C4 stereocentres on the N-glycosidic torsion:
synthesis and X-ray crystallographic investigation of
N-(D-ribopyranosyl)alkanamides as N-glycoprotein linkage region analogs.

Srivastava A(1), Mathiselvam M(2), Varghese B(3), Loganathan D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai
600036, India. Electronic address: amrisriv9@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai
600036, India.
(3)Sophisticated Analytical Instrumentation Facility, Indian Institute of
Technology Madras, Chennai 600036, India.

N-Linked glycosylation is not only present in eukaryotes but also occurs in
archaea and bacteria and is mainly characterized by the β-glucosylamine linkage
to the asparagine (GlcNAcβAsn). Earlier crystallographic studies aimed at
understanding the structural significance of the linkage region constituents
revealed that N-glycosidic torsion, ϕN is influenced considerably by variation in
the glycan part as compared to the aglycon moiety. The ϕN value observed for
XylβNHAc deviated maximum as compared to that of the model compound, GlcNAcβNHAc.
The present work was undertaken to assess the influence of ribose on the
N-glycosidic torsions and molecular assembly. Several ribopyranosyl alkanamides
have been synthesized and crystal structures of three of them have been solved. A
comprehensive crystal structure analysis of ribosyl alkanamides along with
xylosyl and arabinosyl alkanamides showed the wide range of deviations in their
ϕN values as compared to the negligible deviation shown by hexopyranosyl
alkanamides. This study revealed the importance of C5-hydroxymethyl group and
hydroxyl group configurations at C2, C3, and C4 stereocentres in controlling the 
N-glycosidic torsions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.carres.2013.11.003 
PMID: 24342348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

