
1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 13;8(12):e83065. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083065.
eCollection 2013.

Proteomic profiling of Burkholderia cenocepacia clonal isolates with different
virulence potential retrieved from a cystic fibrosis patient during chronic lung 
infection.

Madeira A(1), dos Santos SC(1), Santos PM(1), Coutinho CP(1), Tyrrell J(2),
McClean S(2), Callaghan M(2), Sá-Correia I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Centre for Biological and
Chemical Engineering, Department of Bioengineering, Instituto Superior Técnico,
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Centre of Microbial Host Interactions, Department of Science, ITT-Dublin,
Dublin, Ireland.

Respiratory infections with Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc) bacteria in cystic
fibrosis (CF) are associated with a worse prognosis and increased risk of death. 
In this work, we assessed the virulence potential of three B. cenocepacia clonal 
isolates obtained from a CF patient between the onset of infection (isolate
IST439) and before death with cepacia syndrome 3.5 years later (isolate IST4113
followed by IST4134), based on their ability to invade epithelial cells and
compromise epithelial monolayer integrity. The two clonal isolates retrieved
during late-stage disease were significantly more virulent than IST439. Proteomic
profiling by 2-D DIGE of the last isolate recovered before the patient's death,
IST4134, and clonal isolate IST439, was performed and compared with a prior
analysis of IST4113 vs. IST439. The cytoplasmic and membrane-associated enriched 
fractions were examined and 52 proteins were found to be similarly altered in the
two last isolates compared with IST439. These proteins are involved in metabolic 
functions, nucleotide synthesis, translation and protein folding, cell envelope
biogenesis and iron homeostasis. Results are suggestive of the important role
played by metabolic reprogramming in the virulence potential and persistence of
B. cenocepacia, in particular regarding bacterial adaptation to microaerophilic
conditions. Also, the content of the virulence determinant AidA was higher in the
last 2 isolates. Significant levels of siderophores were found to be secreted by 
the three clonal isolates in an iron-depleted environment, but the two late
isolates were more tolerant to low iron concentrations than IST439, consistent
with the relative abundance of proteins involved in iron uptake.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083065 
PMCID: PMC3862766
PMID: 24349432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

