
1. Clin Oral Investig. 2014 Sep;18(7):1835-43. doi: 10.1007/s00784-013-1162-5. Epub 
2013 Dec 19.

T helper cells from aggressive periodontitis patients produce higher levels of
interleukin-1 beta and interleukin-6 in interaction with Porphyromonas
gingivalis.

Gonzales JR(1), Groeger S, Johansson A, Meyle J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Justus-Liebig University of Giessen,
Schlangenzahl 14, 35392, Giessen, Germany,
Jose.Gonzales@dentist.med.uni-giessen.de.

OBJECTIVE: In this study, we analyzed the production of Interleukin-1 beta
(IL-1β) and IL-6 by activated CD4+ cells obtained from aggressive periodontitis
(AgP) patients in comparison with healthy subjects (HC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: CD4+ cells were automatically separated from lymphocytes
obtained from peripheral blood of patients with AgP and healthy controls. Cells
were activated for 4, 8, and 24 h with three different stimuli:
anti-CD3/anti-CD28, phytohemagglutinin (PHA), and Porphyromonas gingivalis (P.
gingivalis) outer membrane protein (OMP). Protein levels were measured in
supernatants of activated CD4+ cells by a bead-based immunoassay (CBA). In
addition, serum antibodies against P. gingivalis were determined. Data were
analyzed using U test (p < 0.05).
RESULTS: T helper cells of AgP patients activated with P. gingivalis OMP produced
higher levels of IL-1β and IL-6 in comparison with healthy controls (p < 0.05).
Neither the activation with anti-CD3/anti-CD28 nor the activation with PHA showed
significantly different production of IL-1β and IL-6 by the cells 25 % of
patients and 17 % of controls presented with high serum reactivity to P.
gingivalis.
CONCLUSION: In view of these results, it is possible to conclude that P.
gingivalis contributes to the pathogenesis of AgP by inducing high levels of
pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β and IL-6 by peripheral CD4+ T helper
cells.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: In accordance with the clinical parameters and the
immunological data, we suggest that full-mouth disinfection with adjunctive
systemic antibiotics might be the anti-infectious non-surgical periodontal
treatment of choice in this type of patients. Microbiological analyses at the
beginning and at the end of the periodontal treatment are recommended. However,
it is necessary to verify these data in longitudinal clinical studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00784-013-1162-5 
PMID: 24352581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

