
1. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Feb;25(4):481-94. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-10-0571. Epub 2013 Dec
19.

Mutations that disrupt Ca²⁺-binding activity endow Doc2β with novel functional
properties during synaptic transmission.

Gaffaney JD(1), Xue R, Chapman ER.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Neuroscience, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706.

Double C2-domain protein (Doc2) is a Ca(2+)-binding protein implicated in
asynchronous and spontaneous neurotransmitter release. Here we demonstrate that
each of its C2 domains senses Ca(2+); moreover, the tethered tandem C2 domains
display properties distinct from the isolated domains. We confirm that
overexpression of a mutant form of Doc2β, in which two acidic Ca(2+) ligands in
the C2A domain and two in the C2B domain have been neutralized, results in
markedly enhanced asynchronous release in synaptotagmin 1-knockout neurons.
Unlike wild-type (wt) Doc2β, which translocates to the plasma membrane in
response to increases in [Ca(2+)](i), the quadruple Ca(2+)-ligand mutant does not
bind Ca(2+) but is constitutively associated with the plasma membrane; this
effect is due to substitution of Ca(2+) ligands in the C2A domain. When
overexpressed in wt neurons, Doc2β affects only asynchronous release; in
contrast, Doc2β Ca(2+)-ligand mutants that constitutively localize to the plasma 
membrane enhance both the fast and slow components of synaptic transmission by
increasing the readily releasable vesicle pool size; these mutants also increase 
the frequency of spontaneous release events. Thus, mutations in the C2A domain of
Doc2β that were intended to disrupt Ca(2+) binding result in an anomalous
enhancement of constitutive membrane-binding activity and endow Doc2β with novel 
functional properties.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E13-10-0571 
PMCID: PMC3923640
PMID: 24356452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

