
1. Mov Disord. 2014 Jul;29(8):991-8. doi: 10.1002/mds.25779. Epub 2013 Dec 18.

Alpha-synuclein in the appendiceal mucosa of neurologically intact subjects.

Gray MT(1), Munoz DG, Gray DA, Schlossmacher MG, Woulfe JM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Parkinson's disease is characterized by the pathological aggregation of
Alpha-synuclein. The dual-hit hypothesis proposed by Braak implicates the enteric
nervous system as an initial site of α-synuclein aggregation with subsequent
spread to the central nervous system. Regional variations in the spatial pattern 
or levels of α-synuclein along the enteric nervous system could have implications
for identifying sites of onset of this pathogenic cascade. We performed
immunohistochemical staining for α-synuclein on gastrointestinal tissue from
patients with no history of neurological disease using the established LB509
antibody and a new clone, MJFR1, characterized for immunohistochemistry here. We 
demonstrate that the vermiform appendix is particularly enriched in
α-synuclein-containing axonal varicosities, concentrated in its mucosal plexus
rather than the classical submucosal and myenteric plexuses. Unexpectedly,
intralysosomal accumulations of α-synuclein were detected within mucosal
macrophages of the appendix. The abundance and accumulation of α-synuclein in the
vermiform appendix implicate it as a candidate anatomical locus for the
initiation of enteric α-synuclein aggregation and permits the generation of
testable hypotheses for Parkinson's disease pathogenesis.

© 2013 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25779 
PMID: 24352892  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

