
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Mar;42(5):e37. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1339. Epub 2013 Dec
24.

Improved seamless mutagenesis by recombineering using ccdB for counterselection.

Wang H(1), Bian X, Xia L, Ding X, Müller R, Zhang Y, Fu J, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory for Microbial Molecular Biology-State Key
Laboratory Breeding Base of Microbial Molecular Biology, College of Life Science,
Hunan Normal University, 410081 Changsha, People's Republic of China, Department 
of Genomics, Dresden University of Technology, BioInnovations-Zentrum, Tatzberg
47-51, 01307 Dresden, Germany, Shandong University-Helmholtz Joint Institute of
Biotechnology, State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University,
Shanda Nanlu 27, 250100 Jinan, People's Republic of China, Helmholtz Institute
for Pharmaceutical Research, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research and
Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Saarland University, PO Box 151150,
66041 Saarbrücken, Germany and Gene Bridges GmbH, Building C2.3, Saarland
University, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.

Recombineering, which is the use of homologous recombination for DNA engineering 
in Escherichia coli, usually uses antibiotic selection to identify the intended
recombinant. When combined in a second step with counterselection using a small
molecule toxin, seamless products can be obtained. Here, we report the advantages
of a genetic strategy using CcdB as the counterselectable agent. Expression of
CcdB is toxic to E. coli in the absence of the CcdA antidote so counterselection 
is initiated by the removal of CcdA expression. CcdB counterselection is robust
and does not require titrations or experiment-to-experiment optimization. Because
counterselection strategies necessarily differ according to the copy number of
the target, we describe two variations. For multi-copy targets, we use two E.
coli hosts so that counterselection is exerted by the transformation step that is
needed to separate the recombined and unrecombined plasmids. For single copy
targets, we put the ccdA gene onto the temperature-sensitive pSC101 Red
expression plasmid so that counterselection is exerted by the standard
temperature shift to remove the expression plasmid. To reduce unwanted
intramolecular recombination, we also combined CcdB counterselection with Redα
omission. These options improve the use of counterselection in recombineering
with BACs, plasmids and the E. coli chromosome.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt1339 
PMCID: PMC3950717
PMID: 24369425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

