
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 7;289(6):3405-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.531251. Epub 2013
Dec 20.

Structural insights into the epimerization of β-1,4-linked oligosaccharides
catalyzed by cellobiose 2-epimerase, the sole enzyme epimerizing non-anomeric
hydroxyl groups of unmodified sugars.

Fujiwara T(1), Saburi W, Matsui H, Mori H, Yao M.

Author information: 
(1)From the Faculty of Advanced Life Science, Hokkaido University, Kita-10,
Nishi-8, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0810 and.

Cellobiose 2-epimerase (CE) reversibly converts d-glucose residues into d-mannose
residues at the reducing end of unmodified β1,4-linked oligosaccharides,
including β-1,4-mannobiose, cellobiose, and lactose. CE is responsible for
conversion of β1,4-mannobiose to 4-O-β-d-mannosyl-d-glucose in mannan metabolism.
However, the detailed catalytic mechanism of CE is unclear due to the lack of
structural data in complex with ligands. We determined the crystal structures of 
halothermophile Rhodothermus marinus CE (RmCE) in complex with
substrates/products or intermediate analogs, and its apo form. The structures in 
complex with the substrates/products indicated that the residues in the β5-β6
loop as well as those in the inner six helices form the catalytic site. Trp-322
and Trp-385 interact with reducing and non-reducing end parts of these ligands,
respectively, by stacking interactions. The architecture of the catalytic site
also provided insights into the mechanism of reversible epimerization. His-259
abstracts the H2 proton of the d-mannose residue at the reducing end, and
consistently forms the cis-enediol intermediate by facilitated depolarization of 
the 2-OH group mediated by hydrogen bonding interaction with His-200. His-390
subsequently donates the proton to the C2 atom of the intermediate to form a
d-glucose residue. The reverse reaction is mediated by these three histidines
with the inverse roles of acid/base catalysts. The conformation of cellobiitol
demonstrated that the deprotonation/reprotonation step is coupled with rotation
of the C2-C3 bond of the open form of the ligand. Moreover, it is postulated that
His-390 is closely related to ring opening/closure by transferring a proton
between the O5 and O1 atoms of the ligand.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.531251 
PMCID: PMC3916543
PMID: 24362032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

