
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Mar;82(3):1173-80. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01335-13. Epub 2013 Dec
30.

The adaptor CARD9 is required for adaptive but not innate immunity to oral
mucosal Candida albicans infections.

Bishu S(1), Hernández-Santos N, Simpson-Abelson MR, Huppler AR, Conti HR,
Ghilardi N, Mamo AJ, Gaffen SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Oropharyngeal candidiasis (OPC [thrush]) is an opportunistic infection caused by 
the commensal fungus Candida albicans. OPC is common in individuals with
HIV/AIDS, infants, patients on chemotherapy, and individuals with congenital
immune defects. Immunity to OPC is strongly dependent on the interleukin-23
(IL-23)/IL-17R axis, as mice and humans with defects in IL-17R signaling (IL17F, 
ACT1, IL-17RA) or in genes that direct Th17 differentiation (STAT3, STAT1, CARD9)
are prone to mucocutaneous candidiasis. Conventional Th17 cells are induced in
response to C. albicans infection via signals from C-type lectin receptors, which
signal through the adaptor CARD9, leading to production of Th17-inducing
cytokines such as IL-6, IL-1β, and IL-23. Recent data indicate that IL-17 can
also be made by numerous innate cell subsets. These innate "type 17" cells
resemble conventional Th17 cells, but they can be activated without need for
prior antigen exposure. Because C. albicans is not a commensal organism in
rodents and mice are thus naive to this fungus, we had the opportunity to assess 
the role of CARD9 in innate versus adaptive responses using an OPC infection
model. As expected, CARD9(-/-) mice failed to mount an adaptive Th17 response
following oral Candida infection. Surprisingly, however, CARD9(-/-) mice had
preserved innate IL-17-dependent responses to Candida and were almost fully
resistant to OPC. Thus, CARD9 is important primarily for adaptive immunity to C. 
albicans, whereas alternate recognition systems appear to be needed for effective
innate responses.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01335-13 
PMCID: PMC3958019
PMID: 24379290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

