
1. Cell Microbiol. 2014 Jul;16(7):1034-52. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12256. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Functional analysis of novel Rab GTPases identified in the proteome of purified
Legionella-containing vacuoles from macrophages.

Hoffmann C(1), Finsel I, Otto A, Pfaffinger G, Rothmeier E, Hecker M, Becher D,
Hilbi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Max von Pettenkofer Institute, Ludwig-Maximilians
University Munich, Munich, 80336, Germany.

The opportunistic pathogen Legionella pneumophila employs the Icm/Dot type IV
secretion system and ∼300 different effector proteins to replicate in macrophages
and amoebae in a distinct 'Legionella-containing vacuole' (LCV). LCVs from
infected RAW 264.7 macrophages were enriched by immuno-affinity separation and
density gradient centrifugation, using an antibody against the L. pneumophila
effector SidC, which specifically binds to the phosphoinositide PtdIns(4)P on the
pathogen vacuole membrane. The proteome of purified LCVs was determined by mass
spectro-metry (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000647).
The proteomics analysis revealed more than 1150 host proteins, including 13 small
GTPases of the Rab family. Using fluorescence microscopy, 6 novel Rab proteins
were confirmed to localize on pathogen vacuoles harbouring wild-type but not
ΔicmT mutant L. pneumophila. Individual depletion of 20 GTPases by RNA
interference indicated that endocytic GTPases (Rab5a, Rab14 and Rab21) restrict
intracellular growth of L. pneumophila, whereas secretory GTPases (Rab8a, Rab10
and Rab32) implicated in Golgi-endosome trafficking promote bacterial
replication. Upon silencing of Rab21 or Rab32, fewer LCVs stained positive for
Rab4 or Rab9, implicated in secretory or retrograde trafficking respectively.
Moreover, depletion of Rab8a, Rab14 or Rab21 significantly decreased the number
of SidC-positive LCVs, suggesting that PtdIns(4)P is reduced under these
conditions. L. pneumophila proteins identified in purified LCVs included proteins
putatively implicated in phosphorus metabolism and as many as 60
Icm/Dot-translocated effectors, which are likely required early during infection.
Taken together, the phagocyte and Legionella proteomes of purified LCVs lay the
foundation for further hypothesis-driven investigations of the complex process of
pathogen vacuole formation.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12256 
PMID: 24373249  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

