
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 14;289(7):4070-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.521229. Epub 2013 
Dec 26.

Repeating structures of the major staphylococcal autolysin are essential for the 
interaction with human thrombospondin 1 and vitronectin.

Kohler TP(1), Gisch N, Binsker U, Schlag M, Darm K, Völker U, Zähringer U,
Hammerschmidt S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Genetics of Microorganisms and.

Human thrombospondin 1 (hTSP-1) is a matricellular glycoprotein facilitating
bacterial adherence to and invasion into eukaryotic cells. However, the bacterial
adhesin(s) remain elusive. In this study, we show a dose-dependent binding of
soluble hTSP-1 to Gram-positive but not Gram-negative bacteria. Diminished
binding of soluble hTSP-1 to proteolytically pretreated staphylococci suggested a
proteinaceous nature of potential bacterial adhesin(s) for hTSP-1. A combination 
of separation of staphylococcal surface proteins by two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis with a ligand overlay assay with hTSP-1 and identification of the
target protein by mass spectrometry revealed the major staphylococcal autolysin
Atl as a bacterial binding protein for hTSP-1. Binding experiments with
heterologously expressed repeats of the AtlE amidase from Staphylococcus
epidermidis suggest that the repeating sequences (R1ab-R2ab) of the
N-acetyl-muramoyl-L-alanine amidase of Atl are essential for binding of hTSP-1.
Atl has also been identified previously as a staphylococcal vitronectin
(Vn)-binding protein. Similar to the interaction with hTSP-1, the R1ab-R2ab
repeats of Atl are shown here to be crucial for the interaction of Atl with the
complement inhibition and matrix protein Vn. Competition assays with hTSP-1 and
Vn revealed the R1ab-R2ab repeats of AtlE as the common binding domain for both
host proteins. Furthermore, Vn competes with hTSP-1 for binding to Atl repeats
and vice versa. In conclusion, this study identifies the Atl repeats as bacterial
adhesive structures interacting with the human glycoproteins hTSP-1 and Vn.
Finally, this study provides insight into the molecular interplay between hTSP-1 
and Vn, respectively, and a bacterial autolysin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.521229 
PMCID: PMC3924273
PMID: 24371140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

