
1. Int Immunol. 2014 May;26(5):291-303. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxt061. Epub 2013 Dec
27.

Manipulation of EAT-2 expression promotes induction of multiple beneficial
regulatory and effector functions of the human innate immune system as a novel
immunomodulatory strategy.

Aldhamen YA(1), Seregin SS, Aylsworth CF, Godbehere S, Amalfitano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

The signaling lymphocytic activation molecule (SLAM) receptor-associated adaptor 
Ewing's sarcoma-associated transcript-2 (EAT-2) is primarily expressed in innate 
immune cells including dendritic cells (DCs), macrophages and NK cells. A recent 
human HIV vaccine study confirmed that EAT-2 expression was associated with the
enhanced immunogenicity induced by the MRKAd5/HIV vaccine. We previously
harnessed the capability of EAT-2 to modulate signaling mediated by SLAM
receptors and demonstrated that by incorporating EAT-2 expression into vaccines, 
one could enhance innate and adaptive immune responses in mice, even in the face 
of pre-existing immunity to the vaccine vectors. Herein, we investigated the
innate immune responses of human cells exposed to EAT-2-over-expressing vaccines.
Our results demonstrate that EAT-2 over-expression can significantly alter the
kinetics of critical pro-inflammatory cytokine and chemokine responses elaborated
by human PBMCs. In addition, enhanced DC maturation and increased monocyte
phagocytosis were observed in EAT-2-transduced human cells. We also found that
EAT-2 over-expression improved antigen presentation by human cells. Moreover,
EAT-2 over-expression increased the anti-tumor activity of human NK cells against
K562 tumor cell targets. Many of these responses were extinguished with use of an
EAT-2 variant carrying a mutant SH2 domain (R31Q), suggesting a critical role for
the interaction between EAT-2 and SLAM receptors in mediating these responses. In
conclusion, these results provide evidence that EAT-2 interacts with key
components of multiple arms of the human innate immune system, and that this role
highlights the potential for targeting EAT-2 functions so as to improve a number 
of human immunotherapeutic approaches, including vaccine development.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxt061 
PMCID: PMC4055832
PMID: 24374770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

