
1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 23;8(12):e86017. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086017.
eCollection 2013.

Autophagy adaptor protein p62/SQSTM1 and autophagy-related gene Atg5 mediate
autophagosome formation in response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in
dendritic cells.

Seto S(1), Tsujimura K(1), Horii T(1), Koide Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis is an intracellular pathogen that can survive within
phagocytic cells by inhibiting phagolysosome biogenesis. However, host cells can 
control the intracellular M. tuberculosis burden by the induction of autophagy.
The mechanism of autophagosome formation to M. tuberculosis has been well studied
in macrophages, but remains unclear in dendritic cells. We therefore
characterized autophagosome formation in response to M. tuberculosis infection in
dendritic cells. Autophagy marker protein LC3, autophagy adaptor protein
p62/SQSTM1 (p62) and ubiquitin co-localized to M. tuberculosis in dendritic
cells. Mycobacterial autophagosomes fused with lysosomes during infection, and
major histcompatibility complex class II molecules (MHC II) also localized to
mycobacterial autophagosomes. The proteins p62 and Atg5 function in the
initiation and progression of autophagosome formation to M. tuberculosis,
respectively; p62 mediates ubiquitination of M. tuberculosis and Atg5 is involved
in the trafficking of degradative vesicles and MHC II to mycobacterial
autophagosomes. These results imply that the autophagosome formation to M.
tuberculosis in dendritic cells promotes the antigen presentation of
mycobacterial peptides to CD4(+) T lymphocytes via MHC II.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086017 
PMCID: PMC3871604
PMID: 24376899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

