
1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Sep 24;93(36):2884-9.

[Terminal-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis of diversity of
mucosa-associated microbiota in patients with Crohn's disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Ran WB(1), Ouyang Q(2), Shi W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610031, China.
(2)Email: qin.ouyang@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the differences of colonic mucosal-associate bacterial
diversity between the patients with Crohn's disease (CD) and healthy controls.
METHODS: Eight CD patients and 23 healthy controls were recruited from September 
2010 to December 2011 at West China Hospital. One biopsy were taken from cecum of
every patient with CD and healthy control by endoscopic examination. The
diversity of colonic mucosa-associated microbiota was detected by
terminal-restriction fragment length polymorphism (T-RFLP) . Hierarchical cluster
analysis were performed to compare the similarity of microbial communities
between CD patients and healthy controls. Differences of bacterial diversity
between two groups were also evaluated. The difference of predominant
terminal-restrict fragments (T-RF) were analyzed and the bacterium predicted by
predominant T-RFs were identified according to MiCA database.
RESULTS: Hierarchical cluster analysis showed that the mucosal microbial
community of CD patients differed from healthy controls. And there were more
similarities in the samples of same group than that of different groups. Compared
with healthy control group, the richness of mucosal microbiota in CD patients was
lower (HaeIII:7 ± 4 vs 10 ± 8, P = 0.048; MspI+HaeIII:20 ± 10 vs 24 ± 12, P =
0.036). Shannon-Wiener index of CD patients was lower than healthy control (1.7 ±
0.7 vs 2.0 ± 0.5, P = 0.220) with no significant difference. Species evenness and
Simpson index of CD patients were significantly greater than healthy controls
(0.84 ± 0.14 vs 0.77 ± 0.13, P = 0.045; 0.25 ± 0.16 vs 0.22 ± 0.15, P = 0.038) . 
The T-RF of 37, 40 and 66 bp digested with MspI enzyme predominated in CD
patients. Relative quantitative analysis showed 35 bp T-RF digested with MspI was
significantly higher in CD patients than that in healthy controls (36.8% (23.0%, 
55.4%) vs 14.3% (9.5%, 19.5%), P = 0.001), and 74, 141, 486, 490 bp T-RFs were
all significantly lower than healthy controls (3.2% (1.3%, 5.1%) vs 10.2% (5.4%, 
17.3%), P = 0.001; 4.5% (1.7%, 7.1%) vs 10.8% (5.9%, 21.1%), P = 0.007; 4.2%
(1.6%, 5.3%) vs 7.6% (5.9%, 9.3%), P = 0.022; 3.6% (2.4%, 6.1%) vs 18.3% (9.9%,
43.2%), P = 0.008). The mucosal bacterial community composition in CD patients
was predominated by Firmicutes, Proteobacterium and Actinobacterium. Compare with
healthy control, Bacteroides were significantly reduced in CD patients while
Firmicutes (e.g. Enterobacter sp.) and Actinomycetaceae significantly increased.
CONCLUSIONS: Dysbiosis of mucosal microbiota occurs in CD with decreases of
richness and biodiversity. Increased Enterobacter sp., Actinobacterium and
decreased Bacteroides may play an important role in the pathogenesis of CD.


PMID: 24373401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

