
1. Drug Metab Dispos. 2014 Apr;42(4):596-602. doi: 10.1124/dmd.113.055525. Epub 2013
Dec 30.

Selective and cytokine-dependent regulation of hepatic transporters and bile acid
homeostasis during infectious colitis in mice.

Merrell MD(1), Nyagode BA, Clarke JD, Cherrington NJ, Morgan ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia (M.D.M., B.A.N., E.T.M.); Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona (J.D.C, N.J.C.).

Various disease models have been shown to alter hepatic drug-metabolizing enzyme 
(DME) and transporter expression and to induce cholestasis through altered enzyme
and transporter expression. Previously, we detailed the regulation of hepatic
DMEs during infectious colitis caused by Citrobacter rodentium infection. We
hypothesized that this infection would also modulate hepatic drug transporter
expression and key genes of bile acid (BA) synthesis and transport. Mice lacking 
Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), interleukin-6 (IL-6), or interferon-gamma (IFNγ) and
appropriate wild-type animals were orally infected with C. rodentium and
sacrificed 7 days later. In two wild-type strains, drug transporter mRNA
expression was significantly decreased by infection for Slc22a4, Slco1a1,
Slco1a4, Slco2b1, and Abcc6, whereas the downregulation of Abcc2, Abcc3, and
Abcc4 were strain-dependent. In contrast, mRNA expressions of Slco3a1 and Abcb1b 
were increased in a strain-dependent manner. Expression of Abcb11, Slc10a1, the
two major hepatic BA transporters, and Cyp7a1, the rate-limiting enzyme of BA
synthesis, was also significantly decreased in infected animals. None of the
above effects were caused by bacterial lipopolysaccharide, since they still
occurred in the absence of functional TLR4. The downregulation of Slc22a4 and
Cyp7a1 was absent in IFNγ-null mice, and the downregulation of Slco1a1 was
abrogated in IL-6-null mice, indicating in vivo roles for these cytokines in
transporter regulation. These data indicate that C. rodentium infection modulates
hepatic drug processing through alteration of transporter expression as well as
DMEs. Furthermore, this infection downregulates important genes of BA synthesis
and transport and may increase the risk for cholestasis.

DOI: 10.1124/dmd.113.055525 
PMCID: PMC3965897
PMID: 24378326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

