
1. Anal Chem. 2014 Jan 21;86(2):967-72. doi: 10.1021/ac403753r. Epub 2014 Jan 6.

Visualizing and quantifying protein polySUMOylation at the single-molecule level.

Yang Y(1), Zhang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Single-molecule Detection and Imaging Laboratory, Shenzhen Institutes of
Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences , Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055,
China.

Protein polySUMOylation, the attachment of small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)
chains to the target protein, is associated with a variety of physiological
processes. However, the analysis of protein polySUMOylation is often complicated 
by the heterogeneity of SUMO-target conjugates. Here, we develop a new strategy
to visualize and quantify polySUMOylation at the single-molecule level by
integrating the tetracysteine (TC) tag labeling technology and total internal
reflection fluorescence (TIRF)-based single-molecule imaging. As a
proof-of-concept, we employ the human SUMO-2 as the model. The addition of TC tag
to SUMO-2 can specifically translate the SUMO-mediated modification into visible 
fluorescence signal without disturbing the function of SUMO-2. The SUMO monomers 
display homogeneous fluorescence spots at the single-molecule level, whereas the 
mixed SUMO chains exhibit nonuniform fluorescence spots with a wide range of
intensities. Analysis of the number and the brightness of fluorescence spots
enable quantitative measurement of the polySUMOylation degree inside the cells
under different physiological conditions. Due to the frequent occurrence of
posttranslational modification by polymeric chains in cells, this single-molecule
strategy has the potential to be broadly applied for studying protein
posttranslational modification in normal cellular physiology and disease
etiology.

DOI: 10.1021/ac403753r 
PMID: 24383460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

