
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 28;289(9):5436-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.527333. Epub 2014 
Jan 7.

Identification and characterization of prokaryotic dipeptidyl-peptidase 5 from
Porphyromonas gingivalis.

Ohara-Nemoto Y(1), Rouf SM, Naito M, Yanase A, Tetsuo F, Ono T, Kobayakawa T,
Shimoyama Y, Kimura S, Nakayama K, Saiki K, Konishi K, Nemoto TK.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Oral Molecular Biology, Course of Medical and Dental
Sciences, and.

Porphyromonas gingivalis, a Gram-negative asaccharolytic anaerobe, is a major
causative organism of chronic periodontitis. Because the bacterium utilizes amino
acids as energy and carbon sources and incorporates them mainly as dipeptides, a 
wide variety of dipeptide production processes mediated by dipeptidyl-peptidases 
(DPPs) should be beneficial for the organism. In the present study, we identified
the fourth P. gingivalis enzyme, DPP5. In a dpp4-7-11-disrupted P. gingivalis
ATCC 33277, a DPP7-like activity still remained. PGN_0756 possessed an activity
indistinguishable from that of the mutant, and was identified as a bacterial
orthologue of fungal DPP5, because of its substrate specificity and 28.5% amino
acid sequence identity with an Aspergillus fumigatus entity. P. gingivalis DPP5
was composed of 684 amino acids with a molecular mass of 77,453, and existed as a
dimer while migrating at 66 kDa on SDS-PAGE. It preferred Ala and hydrophobic
residues, had no activity toward Pro at the P1 position, and no preference for
hydrophobic P2 residues, showed an optimal pH of 6.7 in the presence of NaCl,
demonstrated Km and kcat/Km values for Lys-Ala-MCA of 688 μM and 11.02 μM(-1)
s(-1), respectively, and was localized in the periplasm. DPP5 elaborately
complemented DPP7 in liberation of dipeptides with hydrophobic P1 residues.
Examinations of DPP- and gingipain gene-disrupted mutants indicated that DPP4,
DPP5, DPP7, and DPP11 together with Arg- and Lys-gingipains cooperatively
liberate most dipeptides from nutrient oligopeptides. This is the first study to 
report that DPP5 is expressed not only in eukaryotes, but also widely distributed
in bacteria and archaea.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.527333 
PMCID: PMC3937620
PMID: 24398682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

