
1. Br J Biomed Sci. 2013;70(4):156-60.

Emergence of carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter in a temperate north Indian
State.

Bali NK(1), Fomda BA(1), Bashir H(1), Zahoor D(1), Lone S(1), Koul PA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Sher-i-Kashmir Institute of Medical
Sciences, Srinagar, India.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Sher-i-Kashmir Institute of Medical Sciences,
Srinagar, India.

This study aims to determine drug sensitivity, metallo-beta-lactamase (MBL)
production and elaboration of bla(OXA)-type carbapenemases in Acinetobacter spp. 
in a temperate climate area in north India with a heavy influx of tourists.
Antimicrobial sensitivity of 165 isolates was performed. Imipenem-resistant
isolates were subjected to combined disk (CDT) and double-disk diffusion tests
(DDT) for MBL detection. Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and MBL
production were tested by Etest. A multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was 
performed for the detection of genes encoding bla(OXA)-23 like, bla(OXA-24) like,
bla(OXA-51) like and bla(OXA-58) like genes. Ninety-nine (60%) isolates were
imipenem-resistant (MICs 2-96 microg/mL). Fifty (50.5%) of the 99
carbapenem-resistant isolates were MBL producers by CDT and 26 (26.3%) by DDT.
The majority (77%) of the isolates elaborated bla(OXA-23) and bla(OXA-51) like
genes. Forty seven of the 50 MBL-positive isolates harboured bla(OXA-23) like and
bla(OXA-51) like genes. MBL-producing Acinetobacter has emerged as a major
pathogen in Kashmir with elaboration of bla(OXA-23) and bla(OXA-51) related
carbapenemases. This poses a significant challenge for healthcare professionals
and policy planners, and needs to be addressed immediately. Primary care
physicians treating visitors to Kashmir need to be aware of the situation.

DOI: 10.1080/09674845.2013.11669950 
PMID: 24400427  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

