
1. Thromb Haemost. 2014 May 5;111(5):970-80. doi: 10.1160/TH13-10-0859. Epub 2014
Jan 9.

The endothelial protein C receptor impairs the antibacterial response in murine
pneumococcal pneumonia and sepsis.

Schouten M(1), de Boer JD, Kager LM, Roelofs JJ, Meijers JC, Esmon CT, Levi M,
van 't Veer C, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Marcel Schouten, MD, Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM),
Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA), Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Room G2-130, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, Tel.: +31 20 566 5910, Fax: +31 20 697 7192, E-mail:
m.schouten@amc.uva.nl.

Pneumococcal pneumonia is a frequent cause of gram-positive sepsis and has a high
mortality. The endothelial protein C receptor (EPCR) has been implicated in both 
the activation of protein C (PC) and the anti-inflammatory actions of activated
(A)PC. The aim of this study was to determine the role of the EPCR in murine
pneumococcal pneumonia and sepsis. Wild-type (WT), EPCR knockout (KO) and
Tie2-EPCR mice, which overexpress EPCR on the endothelium, were infected
intranasally (pneumonia) or intravenously (sepsis) with viable Streptococcus
pneumoniae and euthanised at 24 or 48 hours after initiation of the infection for
analyses. Pneumonia did not alter constitutive EPCR expression on pulmonary
endothelium but was associated with an influx of EPCR positive neutrophils into
lung tissue. In pneumococcal pneumonia EPCR KO mice demonstrated diminished
bacterial growth in the lungs and dissemination to spleen and liver, reduced
neutrophil recruitment to the lungs and a mitigated inflammatory response.
Moreover, EPCR KO mice displayed enhanced activation of coagulation in the early 
phase of disease. Correspondingly, in pneumococcal sepsis EPCR KO mice showed
reduced bacterial growth in lung and liver and attenuated cytokine release.
Conversely, EPCR-overexpressing mice displayed higher bacterial outgrowth in
lung, blood, spleen and liver in pneumococcal sepsis. In conclusion, EPCR impairs
antibacterial defense in both pneumococcal pneumonia and sepsis, which is
associated with an enhanced pro-inflammatory response.

DOI: 10.1160/TH13-10-0859 
PMID: 24401906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

