
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2014;32(6):876-89. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2013.795871. Epub
2013 Jun 19.

Genome-based approaches to develop epitope-driven subunit vaccines against
pathogens of infective endocarditis.

Priyadarshini V(1), Pradhan D, Munikumar M, Swargam S, Umamaheswari A, Rajasekhar
D.

Author information: 
(1)a SVIMS Bioinformatics Centre, SVIMS University , Tirupati , Andhra Pradesh , 
517507 , India .

Infective endocarditis (IE) has emerged as a public health problem due to changes
in the etiologic spectrum and due to involvement of resistant bacterial strains
with increased virulence. Developing potent vaccine is an important strategy to
tackle IE. Complete genome sequences of eight selected pathogens of IE paved the 
way to design common T-cell driven subunit vaccines. Comparative genomics and
subtractive genomic analysis were applied to identify adinosine tri phosphate
(ATP)-binding cassette (ABC) transporter ATP-binding protein from Streptococcus
mitis (reference organism) as common vaccine target. Reverse vaccinology
technique was implemented using computational tools such as ProPred, SYFPEITHI,
and Immune epitope database. Twenty-one T-cell epitopes were predicted from ABC
transporter ATP-binding protein. Multiple sequence alignment of ABC transporter
ATP-binding protein from eight selected IE pathogens was performed to identify
six conserved T-cell epitopes. The six selected T-cell epitopes were further
evaluated at structure level for HLA-DRB binding through homology modeling and
molecular docking analysis using Maestro v9.2. The proposed six T-cell epitopes
showed better binding affinity with the selected HLA-DRB alleles. Subsequently,
the docking complexes of T-cell epitope and HLA-DRBs were ranked based on XP
Gscore. The T-cell epitope (208-LNYITPDVV-216)-HLA-DRB1(∗)0101 (1T5 W) complex
having the best XP Gscore (-13.25 kcal/mol) was assessed for conformational
stability and interaction stability through molecular dynamic simulation for
10 ns using Desmond v3.2. The simulation results revealed that the
HLA-DRB-epitope complex was stable throughout the simulation time. Thus, the
epitope would be ideal candidate for T-cell driven subunit vaccine design against
infective endocarditis.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2013.795871 
PMID: 24404767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

