
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2014 Mar 3;173:81-8. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.12.019. Epub 2013 Dec 28.

Purification and characterization of antimicrobial peptides from fish isolate
Carnobacterium maltaromaticum C2: Carnobacteriocin X and carnolysins A1 and A2.

Tulini FL(1), Lohans CT(2), Bordon KC(3), Zheng J(2), Arantes EC(3), Vederas
JC(2), De Martinis EC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Ciências Farmacêuticas de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São
Paulo, Avenida do Café, s/n, 14040-903 Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.
Electronic address: fabricio_tulini@yahoo.com.br.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2G2,
Canada.
(3)Faculdade de Ciências Farmacêuticas de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São
Paulo, Avenida do Café, s/n, 14040-903 Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.

Carnobacterium maltaromaticum C2, isolated from Brazilian smoked fish (Surubim,
Pseudoplatystoma sp.), was found to exert antimicrobial activity against Listeria
monocytogenes, an important foodborne pathogen. In this study, the bacteriocins
produced by C. maltaromaticum C2 were purified via an extraction with XAD-16
resin, a C18 solid phase extraction, followed by reversed-phase fast protein
liquid chromatography. The purified active fractions were characterized using
tandem mass spectrometry, permitting the identification of multiple bacteriocins.
Carnobacteriocins BM1, B1, and a variant of carnobacteriocin B2 were all found,
providing much of the antilisterial activity. Additionally, we herein report the 
first isolation of the previously predicted antimicrobial peptide
carnobacteriocin X. Moreover, C. maltaromaticum C2 produces a novel two-component
lantibiotic, termed carnolysin, homologous to enterococcal cytolysin. This
lantibiotic is antimicrobially inactive when tested against the
non-bacteriocinogenic strain C. maltaromaticum A9b-, likely requiring an
additional proteolytic cleavage to reach maturity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.12.019 
PMID: 24412962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

