
1. Malar J. 2014 Jan 14;13:21. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-21.

Entomological and parasitological impacts of indoor residual spraying with DDT,
alphacypermethrin and deltamethrin in the western foothill area of Madagascar.

Ratovonjato J(1), Randrianarivelojosia M, Rakotondrainibe ME, Raharimanga V,
Andrianaivolambo L, Le Goff G, Rogier C, Ariey F, Boyer S, Robert V.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur de Madagascar, Ambatofotsikely, Antananarivo 101, BP 1274,
Madagascar. ratov@pasteur.mg.

BACKGROUND: In Madagascar, indoor residual spraying (IRS) with insecticide was
part of the national malaria control programme since the middle of the twentieth 
century. It was mainly employed in the highlands and the foothill areas, which
are prone to malaria epidemics. Prior to a policy change foreseeing a shift from 
DDT to pyrethroids, a study was carried out to assess the entomological and
parasitological impacts of IRS in areas with DDT or pyrethroids and in areas
without IRS.
METHODS: The study was carried out from October 2002 to February 2005 in three
communes of the western foothill area of Madagascar. Two communes received IRS
with DDT in February 2003, then IRS with pyrethroids (alphacypermethrin or
deltamethrin) in February 2004. The third commune remained untreated. Mosquitoes 
were collected at night using human landing catches and early in the morning in
resting places. Blood smears were obtained from schoolchildren and
microscopically examined for Plasmodium presence.
RESULTS: In total, 18,168 human landing mosquitoes and 12,932 resting anophelines
were collected. The Anopheles species caught comprised 10 species. The main and
most abundant malaria vector was Anopheles funestus (72.3% of human-seeking
malaria vectors caught indoors). After IRS had taken place, this species
exhibited a lower human biting rate and a lower sporozoite index. Overall, 5,174 
blood smears were examined with a mean plasmodic index of 19.9%. A total of four 
Plasmodium species were detected. Amongst tested school children the highest
plasmodial index was 54.6% in the untreated commune, compared to 19.9% in the
commune sprayed with DDT and 11.9% in the commune sprayed with pyrethroid. The
highest prevalence of clinical malaria attacks in children present at school the 
day of the survey was 33% in the untreated commune compared to 8% in the areas
which received IRS.
CONCLUSION: In terms of public health, the present study shows (1) a high
efficacy of IRS with insecticide, (2) a similar efficacy of DDT and pyrethroid
and (3) a similar efficacy of alphacypermethrin and deltamethrin. The use of IRS 
with DDT and pyrethroid greatly decreased the vector-human contact, with an
associated decrease of the plasmodial index. However malaria transmission did not
reach zero, probably due to the exophilic host-seeking and resting behaviours of 
the malaria vectors, thus avoiding contact with insecticide-treated surfaces
indoors. The study highlights the strengths and weaknesses of the IRS
implementation and the need for complementary tools for an optimal vector control
in Madagascar.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-21 
PMCID: PMC3906765
PMID: 24423246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

