
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2014 Mar;160(Pt 3):567-575. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.072926-0. 
Epub 2014 Jan 13.

In vivo-induced argininosuccinate lyase plays a role in the replication of
Brucella abortus in RAW264.7 cells.

Han X(1), Sun X(1), Shan X(1), Zhang M(1), Song J(1), Tian M(1), Fan G(1), Wang
S(1), Tong Y(1), Ding C(1), Yu S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences (CAAS), 518 Ziyue Road, Shanghai 200241, PR China.

Brucellosis caused by Brucella species is a zoonotic disease with a serious
impact on public health and the livestock industry. To better understand the
pathogenesis of the disease, in vivo-induced antigen technology (IVIAT) was used 
to investigate the in vivo-induced antigens of Brucella abortus in this study. A 
genomic expression library of B. abortus was constructed and screened using
pooled bovine B. abortus-positive sera by IVIAT. In total, 33 antigens were
identified. Five antigens were further expressed and tested for their
seroreactivity against 33 individual bovine B. abortus-positive sera by Western
blot analysis. The results showed a highest positive rate of 32/33 for
argininosuccinate lyase (ASL), indicating that ASL may be used as a candidate
marker for serodiagnosis of brucellosis. Furthermore, an asl gene-deleted mutant 
strain S2308ΔASL was constructed, and the intracellular survival and replication 
of the mutant strain in RAW264.7 cells were investigated. Interestingly, the
numbers of bacteria recovered from cells infected with mutant strain S2308ΔASL
were similar at all time points observed from 0 h to 96 h post-infection,
suggesting the asl gene plays an important role in the bacterial replication in
RAW264.7 cells. Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis showed that the mRNA
levels in S2308ΔASL were decreased for BvrR, BvrS and virB5 when compared with
those in S2308 (P<0.05). Our results not only expand the knowledge of Brucella
intracellular replication but also expand the list of candidates for
serodiagnostic markers of brucellosis.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.072926-0 
PMID: 24421405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

