
1. J Nutr. 1987 Sep;117(9):1629-37.

Immunologically mediated growth depression in chicks: influence of feed intake,
corticosterone and interleukin-1.

Klasing KC(1), Laurin DE, Peng RK, Fry DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Avian Sciences, University of California, Davis 95616.

The effects of an immune response on growth and feed efficiency in chicks and the
role of interleukin-1 (IL-1) and corticosterone (Cort) as mediators of the
response were investigated. Daily injections of either sheep red blood cells or
the inflammatory agent Sephadex resulted in significantly (P less than 0.05)
lower rates of weight gain, feed intake and efficiency of feed utilization than
controls fed ad libitum, indicating an immunologically mediated stress. Feeding
control chicks the same amount of diet as that consumed by immunologically
challenged chicks did not completely equalize rates of weight gain. Injections of
a crude preparation of IL-1, but not Cort, resulted in weight gain, feed intake
and efficiency of feed utilization that were similar to those of immunologically 
challenged chicks. The concentrations of IL-1 and Cort, measured by bioassay and 
radioimmunoassay, respectively, in serum from immunologically challenged chicks
were significantly higher than in nonchallenged chicks. To determine the
influence of IL-1 and Cort on protein accretion in skeletal muscles, the extensor
digiti communus and ulnaris lateralis were incubated in the presence of these two
hormones at concentrations similar to that seen in serum after an immunologic
challenge. Cort did not affect the rate of protein degradation but resulted in
rates of protein synthesis that were significantly lower than controls. IL-1 did 
not affect the rate of protein synthesis but resulted in rates of protein
degradation that were about 24% greater than controls.

DOI: 10.1093/jn/117.9.1629 
PMID: 2443625  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

