
1. Nucleic Acid Ther. 2014 Apr;24(2):149-59. doi: 10.1089/nat.2013.0467. Epub 2014
Jan 20.

Multiple microRNAs derived from chemically synthesized precursors regulate
thrombospondin 1 expression.

Dogar AM(1), Semplicio G, Guennewig B, Hall J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences , Department of Chemistry and Applied
Biosciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland .

Thrombospondin 1 (THBS1) is a secreted protein with a variety of biological
functions, including a potent anti-angiogenic activity and activation of latent
transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β). In many human cancers it is expressed at
low levels, although mutations in the THBS1 gene have been rarely reported.
Instead, the loss of THBS1 expression has been proposed to be due to
transcriptional and post-transcriptional deregulations. In a systematic screen of
predicted microRNA (miRNA) binding sites in the THBS1 3' untranslated region
(UTR) we employed chemically synthesized pre-miRNAs-a new class of pre-miRNA
mimics-to show that several miRNAs (let-7a, miR-18a, miR-29b, miR-194, and
miR-221) can modulate THBS1 expression at the post-transcriptional level.
Sequence-specific downregulation of THBS1 by let-7a, miR-18a or by a small
interfering RNA induced TGF-β1 and SMAD4 transcript levels. Ectopic expression of
latent TGF-β1 reduced THBS1 protein expression and was associated with increased 
expression of let-7a, let-7-b, and miR-18a in cells. These data suggest an
inverse correlation of THBS1 and latent TGF-β1 expression levels possibly
involving miRNAs.

DOI: 10.1089/nat.2013.0467 
PMCID: PMC3962651
PMID: 24444023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

