
1. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 15;192(4):1577-86. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300960. Epub 2014
Jan 17.

A genetic defect in mice that impairs missing self recognition despite evidence
for normal maturation and MHC class I-dependent education of NK cells.

Wickström SL(1), Öberg L, Kärre K, Johansson MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
S-17177 Stockholm, Sweden.

In studies of a CD1d1-deficient mouse strain, we unexpectedly observed a severely
impaired capacity for NK cell-mediated rejection of MHC class I-deficient (spleen
or tumor) cells. Studies of another CD1-defective strain, as well as intercrosses
with C57BL/6 mice, indicated that the impaired missing self rejection (IMSR) NK
cell defect was a recessive trait, independent from the targeted CD1 locus.
Studies with mixed bone marrow chimeras indicated that the defect is intrinsic to
NK cells. The IMSR mice had normal proportions of NK cells, displaying a typical 
cell surface phenotype, as evaluated using a panel of Abs to developmental
markers and known receptors. The impaired missing self recognition could not be
overcome through cytokine stimulation. There was also an impaired capacity with
respect to NKG2D-dependent cytotoxicity, whereas the mice exhibited normal
Ly49D/DAP12-dependent responses in vivo and in vitro. The NK cell system of IMSR 
mice showed two hallmarks of MHC-dependent education: skewing of the Ly49
receptor repertoire and differential in vitro responsiveness between NK cells
with and without inhibitory receptors for self-MHC ("licensing"). We conclude
that these mice have a recessive trait that perturbs the missing self reaction,
as well as NKG2D-dependent responses, whereas other aspects of the NK system,
such as development, capacity to sense MHC molecules during education, and
Ly49D/DAP12-dependent responses, are largely intact.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300960 
PMID: 24442431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

