
1. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 15;192(4):1745-52. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302265. Epub 2014
Jan 17.

Role of neutrophils in IL-17-dependent immunity to mucosal candidiasis.

Huppler AR(1), Conti HR, Hern√°ndez-Santos N, Darville T, Biswas PS, Gaffen SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC,
Pittsburgh, PA 15224.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2015 Feb 1;194(3):1382.

Oropharyngeal candidiasis (OPC), caused by the commensal fungus Candida albicans,
is an opportunistic infection associated with infancy, AIDS, and IL-17-related
primary immunodeficiencies. The Th17-associated cytokines IL-23 and IL-17 are
crucial for immunity to OPC, but the mechanisms by which they mediate immunity
are poorly defined. IL-17RA-deficient humans and mice are strongly susceptible to
OPC, with reduced levels of CXC chemokines and concomitantly impaired neutrophil 
recruitment to the oral mucosa. Paradoxically, humans with isolated neutropenia
are typically not susceptible to candidiasis. To determine whether immunity to
OPC is mediated via neutrophil recruitment, mice lacking CXCR2 were subjected to 
OPC and were found to be highly susceptible, although there was no dissemination 
of fungi to peripheral organs. To assess whether the entire neutrophil response
is IL-17 dependent, IL-17RA(-/-) and IL-23(-/-) mice were administered
neutrophil-depleting Abs and subjected to OPC. These mice displayed increased
oral fungal burdens compared with IL-17RA(-/-) or IL-23(-/-) mice alone,
indicating that additional IL-17-independent signals contribute to the neutrophil
response. WT mice treated with anti-Gr-1 Abs exhibited a robust infiltrate of
CD11b(+)Ly-6G(low)F4/80(-) cells to the oral mucosa but were nonetheless highly
susceptible to OPC, indicating that this monocytic influx is insufficient for
host defense. Surprisingly, Ly-6G Ab treatment did not induce the same strong
susceptibility to OPC in WT mice. Thus, CXCR2(+) and Gr-1(+) neutrophils play a
vital role in host defense against OPC. Moreover, defects in the IL-23/17 axis
cause a potent but incomplete deficiency in the neutrophil response to oral
candidiasis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302265 
PMCID: PMC3946223
PMID: 24442441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

