
1. J Exp Med. 2014 Feb 10;211(2):263-80. doi: 10.1084/jem.20111741. Epub 2014 Jan
20.

Reduced BMPR2 expression induces GM-CSF translation and macrophage recruitment in
humans and mice to exacerbate pulmonary hypertension.

Sawada H(1), Saito T, Nickel NP, Alastalo TP, Glotzbach JP, Chan R, Haghighat L, 
Fuchs G, Januszyk M, Cao A, Lai YJ, Perez Vde J, Kim YM, Wang L, Chen PI,
Spiekerkoetter E, Mitani Y, Gurtner GC, Sarnow P, Rabinovitch M.

Author information: 
(1)The Vera Moulton Wall Center for Pulmonary Vascular Disease, 2 Department of
Pediatrics, 3 Department of Surgery, 4 Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
5 Department of Medicine, and 6 Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305.

Idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH [IPAH]) is an insidious and
potentially fatal disease linked to a mutation or reduced expression of bone
morphogenetic protein receptor 2 (BMPR2). Because intravascular inflammatory
cells are recruited in IPAH pathogenesis, we hypothesized that reduced BMPR2
enhances production of the potent chemokine granulocyte macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) in response to an inflammatory perturbation.
When human pulmonary artery (PA) endothelial cells deficient in BMPR2 were
stimulated with tumor necrosis factor (TNF), a twofold increase in GM-CSF was
observed and related to enhanced messenger RNA (mRNA) translation. The mechanism 
was associated with disruption of stress granule formation. Specifically, loss of
BMPR2 induced prolonged phospho-p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) in
response to TNF, and this increased GADD34-PP1 phosphatase activity,
dephosphorylating eukaryotic translation initiation factor (eIF2α), and
derepressing GM-CSF mRNA translation. Lungs from IPAH patients versus unused
donor controls revealed heightened PA expression of GM-CSF co-distributing with
increased TNF and expanded populations of hematopoietic and endothelial GM-CSF
receptor α (GM-CSFRα)-positive cells. Moreover, a 3-wk infusion of GM-CSF in mice
increased hypoxia-induced PAH, in association with increased perivascular
macrophages and muscularized distal arteries, whereas blockade of GM-CSF
repressed these features. Thus, reduced BMPR2 can subvert a stress granule
response, heighten GM-CSF mRNA translation, increase inflammatory cell
recruitment, and exacerbate PAH.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20111741 
PMCID: PMC3920564
PMID: 24446489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

