
1. Cancer Res. 1987 Nov 1;47(21):5752-7.

Morphological transformation, focus formation, and anchorage independence induced
in diploid human fibroblasts by expression of a transfected H-ras oncogene.

Hurlin PJ(1), Fry DG, Maher VM, McCormick JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing
48824-1316.

In an attempt to determine how normal human fibroblasts respond to high
expression of the T24 H-ras oncogene, we tranfected such cells with the plasmid
vector pHO6T1 (D. A. Spandidos and N. M. Wilkie, Nature (Lond.), 310:469-475,
1984), containing the T24 H-ras oncogene with 5' and 3' enhancer sequences, and
the aminoglycoside phosphotransferase gene which confers resistance to the drug, 
G418. Approximately 1.5% of the G418-resistant colonies obtained after
transfection and selection consisted of cells exhibiting obvious morphological
transformation; i.e., they were highly refractile and more rounded than normal
fibroblasts. DNA hybridization analysis showed that the morphologically
transformed cells contained the transfected T24 H-ras oncogene, and
radioimmunoprecipitation analysis showed that they were expressing the T24 H-ras 
protein product, M, 21,000 protein. Morphologically transformed cells formed
colonies in soft agar at a frequency at least 60 times higher than that of cells 
that had been transfected with the control plasmid containing the normal cellular
H-ras gene. Cells transfected with plasmid pHO6T1 could also be identified by
their ability to form distinct foci when grown to confluence in nonselective
medium following transfection. This study demonstrates that normal diploid human 
fibroblasts in culture can be transformed by transfection with a H-ras oncogene, 
and that such transformation correlates with expression of the mutant Mr 21,000
protein.


PMID: 2444334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

