
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Apr;82(4):1572-8. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01393-13. Epub 2014 Jan 22.

Role of urinary cathelicidin LL-37 and human β-defensin 1 in uncomplicated
Escherichia coli urinary tract infections.

Nielsen KL(1), Dynesen P, Larsen P, Jakobsen L, Andersen PS, Frimodt-Møller N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, Statens Serum Institut,
Copenhagen S, Denmark.

Cathelicidin (LL-37) and human β-defensin 1 (hBD-1) are important components of
the innate defense in the urinary tract. The aim of this study was to
characterize whether these peptides are important for developing uncomplicated
Escherichia coli urinary tract infections (UTIs). This was investigated by
comparing urinary peptide levels of UTI patients during and after infection to
those of controls, as well as characterizing the fecal flora of participants with
respect to susceptibility to LL-37 and in vivo virulence. Forty-seven UTI
patients and 50 controls who had never had a UTI were included. Participants were
otherwise healthy, premenopausal, adult women. LL-37 MIC levels were compared for
fecal E. coli clones from patients and controls and were also compared based on
phylotypes (A, B1, B2, and D). In vivo virulence was investigated in the murine
UTI model by use of selected fecal isolates from patients and controls. On
average, UTI patients had significantly more LL-37 in urine during infection than
postinfection, and patient LL-37 levels postinfection were significantly lower
than those of controls. hBD-1 showed similar urine levels for UTI patients and
controls. Fecal E. coli isolates from controls had higher LL-37 susceptibility
than fecal and UTI E. coli isolates from UTI patients. In vivo studies showed a
high level of virulence of fecal E. coli isolates from both patients and controls
and showed no difference in virulence correlated with the LL-37 MIC level. The
results indicate that the concentration of LL-37 in the urinary tract and low
susceptibility to LL-37 may increase the likelihood of UTI in a complex interplay
between host and pathogen attributes.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01393-13 
PMCID: PMC3993379
PMID: 24452682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

