
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Apr;82(4):1579-90. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01458-13. Epub 2014 Jan
22.

Neutrophils select hypervirulent CovRS mutants of M1T1 group A Streptococcus
during subcutaneous infection of mice.

Li J(1), Liu G, Feng W, Zhou Y, Liu M, Wiley JA, Lei B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Montana State University, Bozeman, 
Montana, USA.

Pathogen mutants arise during infections. Mechanisms of selection for pathogen
variants are poorly understood. We tested whether neutrophils select mutations in
the two-component regulatory system CovRS of group A Streptococcus (GAS) during
infection using the lack of production of the protease SpeB (SpeB activity
negative [SpeB(A-)]) as a marker. Depletion of neutrophils by antibodies RB6-8C5 
and 1A8 reduced the percentage of SpeB(A-) variants (SpeB(A-)%) recovered from
mice infected with GAS strain MGAS2221 by >76%. Neutrophil recruitment and
SpeB(A-)% among recovered GAS were reduced by 95% and 92%, respectively, in
subcutaneous MGAS2221 infection of CXCR2(-/-) mice compared with control mice. In
air sac infection with MGAS2221, levels of neutrophils and macrophages in lavage 
fluid were reduced by 49% and increased by 287%, respectively, in CXCR2(-/-) mice
compared with control mice, implying that macrophages play an insignificant role 
in the reduction of selection for SpeB(A-) variants in CXCR2(-/-) mice. One
randomly chosen SpeB(A-) mutant outcompeted MGAS2221 in normal mice but was
outcompeted by MGAS2221 in neutropenic mice and had enhancements in expression of
virulence factors, innate immune evasion, skin invasion, and virulence. This and 
nine other SpeB(A-) variants from a mouse all had nonsynonymous covRS mutations
that resulted in the SpeB(A-) phenotype and enhanced expression of the
CovRS-controlled secreted streptococcal esterase (SsE). Our findings are
consistent with a model that neutrophils select spontaneous covRS mutations that 
maximize the potential of GAS to evade neutrophil responses, resulting in
variants with enhanced survival and virulence. To our knowledge, this is the
first report of the critical contribution of neutrophils to the selection of
pathogen variants.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01458-13 
PMCID: PMC3993395
PMID: 24452689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

