
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 15;9(1):e85070. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085070. eCollection
2014.

Bacteria and fungi respond differently to multifactorial climate change in a
temperate heathland, traced with 13C-glycine and FACE CO2.

Andresen LC(1), Dungait JA(2), Bol R(3), Selsted MB(4), Ambus P(4), Michelsen
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Sustainable Soils and Grassland Systems Department, Rothamsted Research-North 
Wyke, Okehampton, United Kingdom.
(3)Sustainable Soils and Grassland Systems Department, Rothamsted Research-North 
Wyke, Okehampton, United Kingdom ; Institute of Bio- and Geosciences,
Forschungszentrum Jülich, Jülich, Germany.
(4)Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens
Lyngby, Denmark.

It is vital to understand responses of soil microorganisms to predicted climate
changes, as these directly control soil carbon (C) dynamics. The rate of turnover
of soil organic carbon is mediated by soil microorganisms whose activity may be
affected by climate change. After one year of multifactorial climate change
treatments, at an undisturbed temperate heathland, soil microbial community
dynamics were investigated by injection of a very small concentration (5.12 µg C 
g(-1) soil) of (13)C-labeled glycine ((13)C2, 99 atom %) to soils in situ. Plots 
were treated with elevated temperature (+1°C, T), summer drought (D) and elevated
atmospheric carbon dioxide (510 ppm [CO2]), as well as combined treatments (TD,
TCO2, DCO2 and TDCO2). The (13)C enrichment of respired CO2 and of phospholipid
fatty acids (PLFAs) was determined after 24 h. (13)C-glycine incorporation into
the biomarker PLFAs for specific microbial groups (Gram positive bacteria, Gram
negative bacteria, actinobacteria and fungi) was quantified using gas
chromatography-combustion-stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry (GC-C-IRMS).
Gram positive bacteria opportunistically utilized the freshly added glycine
substrate, i.e. incorporated (13)C in all treatments, whereas fungi had minor or 
no glycine derived (13)C-enrichment, hence slowly reacting to a new substrate.
The effects of elevated CO2 did suggest increased direct incorporation of glycine
in microbial biomass, in particular in G(+) bacteria, in an ecosystem subjected
to elevated CO2. Warming decreased the concentration of PLFAs in general. The
FACE CO2 was (13)C-depleted (δ(13)C = 12.2‰) compared to ambient (δ(13)C = ∼-8‰),
and this enabled observation of the integrated longer term responses of soil
microorganisms to the FACE over one year. All together, the bacterial (and not
fungal) utilization of glycine indicates substrate preference and resource
partitioning in the microbial community, and therefore suggests a diversified
response pattern to future changes in substrate availability and climatic
factors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085070 
PMCID: PMC3893180
PMID: 24454793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

