
1. Health Technol Assess. 2014 Jan;18(6):vii-xxv, 1-101. doi: 10.3310/hta18060.

PRImary care Streptococcal Management (PRISM) study: in vitro study, diagnostic
cohorts and a pragmatic adaptive randomised controlled trial with nested
qualitative study and cost-effectiveness study.

Little P(1), Hobbs FD(2), Moore M(1), Mant D(3), Williamson I(1), McNulty C(4),
Lasseter G(4), Cheng MY(1), Leydon G(1), McDermott L(1), Turner D(1),
Pinedo-Villanueva R(1), Raftery J(1), Glasziou P(3), Mullee M(1); PRISM
investigators.

Collaborators: Meer-Baloch R, Kelly J, Barnett J, Lambton T, Cooper R, Henderson 
H, Hawtin P, Middleton K, Smith S, Selwood M, Coulson D.

Author information: 
(1)Primary Care and Population Sciences Unit, University of Southampton,
Southampton, UK.
(2)Primary Care Clinical Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(3)Department of Primary Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)Public Health England, Primary Care Unit, Microbiology Laboratory,
Gloucestershire Royal Hospital, Gloucester, UK.

Erratum in
    Health Technol Assess. 2018 Oct;18(6):103-104.

BACKGROUND: Antibiotics are still prescribed to most patients attending primary
care with acute sore throat, despite evidence that there is modest benefit
overall from antibiotics. Targeting antibiotics using either clinical scoring
methods or rapid antigen detection tests (RADTs) could help. However, there is
debate about which groups of streptococci are important (particularly Lancefield 
groups C and G), and uncertainty about the variables that most clearly predict
the presence of streptococci.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to compare clinical scores or RADTs with delayed
antibiotic prescribing.
DESIGN: The study comprised a RADT in vitro study; two diagnostic cohorts to
develop streptococcal scores (score 1; score 2); and, finally, an open pragmatic 
randomised controlled trial with nested qualitative and cost-effectiveness
studies.
SETTING: The setting was UK primary care general practices.
PARTICIPANTS: Participants were patients aged ≥ 3 years with acute sore throat.
INTERVENTIONS: An internet program randomised patients to targeted antibiotic use
according to (1) delayed antibiotics (control group), (2) clinical score or (3)
RADT used according to clinical score.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The main outcome measures were self-reported antibiotic
use and symptom duration and severity on seven-point Likert scales (primary
outcome: mean sore throat/difficulty swallowing score in the first 2-4 days).
RESULTS: The IMI TestPack Plus Strep A (Inverness Medical, Bedford, UK) was
sensitive, specific and easy to use. Lancefield group A/C/G streptococci were
found in 40% of cohort 2 and 34% of cohort 1. A five-point score predicting the
presence of A/C/G streptococci [FeverPAIN: Fever; Purulence; Attend rapidly (≤ 3 
days); severe Inflammation; and No cough or coryza] had moderate predictive value
(bootstrapped estimates of area under receiver operating characteristic curve:
0.73 cohort 1, 0.71 cohort 2) and identified a substantial number of participants
at low risk of streptococcal infection. In total, 38% of cohort 1 and 36% of
cohort 2 scored ≤ 1 for FeverPAIN, associated with streptococcal percentages of
13% and 18%, respectively. In an adaptive trial design, the preliminary score
(score 1; n = 1129) was replaced by FeverPAIN (n = 631). For score 1, there were 
no significant differences between groups. For FeverPAIN, symptom severity was
documented in 80% of patients, and was lower in the clinical score group than in 
the delayed prescribing group (-0.33; 95% confidence interval -0.64 to -0.02;
p = 0.039; equivalent to one in three rating sore throat a slight rather than
moderately bad problem), and a similar reduction was observed for the RADT group 
(-0.30; -0.61 to 0.00; p = 0.053). Moderately bad or worse symptoms resolved
significantly faster (30%) in the clinical score group (hazard ratio 1.30; 1.03
to 1.63) but not the RADT group (1.11; 0.88 to 1.40). In the delayed group,
75/164 (46%) used antibiotics, and 29% fewer used antibiotics in the clinical
score group (risk ratio 0.71; 0.50 to 0.95; p = 0.018) and 27% fewer in the RADT 
group (0.73; 0.52 to 0.98; p = 0.033). No significant differences in
complications or reconsultations were found. The clinical score group dominated
both other groups for both the cost/quality-adjusted life-years and cost/change
in symptom severity analyses, being both less costly and more effective, and
cost-effectiveness acceptability curves indicated the clinical score to be the
most likely to be cost-effective from an NHS perspective. Patients were positive 
about RADTs. Health professionals' concerns about test validity, the time the
test took and medicalising self-limiting illness lessened after using the tests. 
For both RADTs and clinical scores, there were tensions with established clinical
experience.
CONCLUSIONS: Targeting antibiotics using a clinical score (FeverPAIN) efficiently
improves symptoms and reduces antibiotic use. RADTs used in combination with
FeverPAIN provide no clear advantages over FeverPAIN alone, and RADTs are
unlikely to be incorporated into practice until health professionals' concerns
are met and they have experience of using them. Clinical scores also face
barriers related to clinicians' perceptions of their utility in the face of
experience. This study has demonstrated the limitation of using one data set to
develop a clinical score. FeverPAIN, derived from two data sets, appears to be
valid and its use improves outcomes, but diagnostic studies to confirm the
validity of FeverPAIN in other data sets and settings are needed. Experienced
clinicians need to identify barriers to the use of clinical scoring methods.
Implementation studies that address perceived barriers in the use of FeverPAIN
are needed.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN32027234.
SOURCE OF FUNDING: This project was funded by the NIHR Health Technology
Assessment programme and will be published in full in Health Technology
Assessment; Vol. 18, No. 6. See the NIHR Journals Library website for further
project information.

DOI: 10.3310/hta18060 
PMCID: PMC4781545
PMID: 24467988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

