
1. Mol Ecol. 2014 Feb;23(4):954-64. doi: 10.1111/mec.12640. Epub 2014 Jan 25.

Bacterial taxa-area and distance-decay relationships in marine environments.

Zinger L(1), Boetius A, Ramette A.

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Joint Research Group on Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck
Institute for Marine Microbiology, Celsiusstrasse 1, Bremen, D-28359, Germany;
CNRS, Université Paul Sabatier, UMR5174 EDB, 118 route de Narbonne, Toulouse,
F-31062, France.

The taxa-area relationship (TAR) and the distance-decay relationship (DDR) both
describe spatial turnover of taxa and are central patterns of biodiversity. Here,
we compared TAR and DDR of bacterial communities across different marine realms
and ecosystems at the global scale. To obtain reliable global estimates for both 
relationships, we quantified the poorly assessed effects of sequencing depth,
rare taxa removal and number of sampling sites. Slope coefficients of bacterial
TARs were within the range of those of plants and animals, whereas slope
coefficients of bacterial DDR were much lower. Slope coefficients were mostly
affected by removing rare taxa and by the number of sampling sites considered in 
the calculations. TAR and DDR slope coefficients were overestimated at sequencing
depth <4000 sequences per sample. Noticeably, bacterial TAR and DDR patterns did 
not correlate with each other both within and across ecosystem types, suggesting 
that (i) TAR cannot be directly derived from DDR and (ii) TAR and DDR may be
influenced by different ecological factors. Nevertheless, we found marine
bacterial TAR and DDR to be steeper in ecosystems associated with high
environmental heterogeneity or spatial isolation, namely marine sediments and
coastal environments compared with pelagic ecosystems. Hence, our study provides 
information on macroecological patterns of marine bacteria, as well as
methodological and conceptual insights, at a time when biodiversity surveys
increasingly make use of high-throughput sequencing technologies.

© 2013 The Authors. Molecular Ecology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.12640 
PMCID: PMC4230465
PMID: 24460915  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

