
1. FEBS J. 2014 Mar;281(6):1642-58. doi: 10.1111/febs.12730. Epub 2014 Feb 20.

Structural and kinetic studies on adenylosuccinate lyase from
Mycobacterium smegmatis and Mycobacterium tuberculosis provide new insights on
the catalytic residues of the enzyme.

Banerjee S(1), Agrawal MJ, Mishra D, Sharan S, Balaram H, Savithri HS, Murthy MR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.

Adenylosuccinate lyase (ASL), an enzyme involved in purine biosynthesis, has been
recognized as a drug target against microbial infections. In the present study,
ASL from Mycobacterium smegmatis (MsASL) and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MtbASL) 
were cloned, purified and crystallized. The X-ray crystal structure of MsASL was 
determined at a resolution of 2.16 Å. It is the first report of an apo-ASL
structure with a partially ordered active site C3 loop. Diffracting crystals of
MtbASL could not be obtained and a model for its structure was derived using
MsASL as a template. These structures suggest that His149 and either Lys285 or
Ser279 of MsASL are the residues most likely to function as the catalytic acid
and base, respectively. Most of the active site residues were found to be
conserved, with the exception of Ser148 and Gly319 of MsASL. Ser148 is
structurally equivalent to a threonine in most other ASLs. Gly319 is replaced by 
an arginine residue in most ASLs. The two enzymes were catalytically much less
active compared to ASLs from other organisms. Arg319Gly substitution and reduced 
flexibility of the C3 loop might account for the low catalytic activity of
mycobacterial ASLs. The low activity is consistent with the slow growth rate of
Mycobacteria and their high GC containing genomes, as well as their dependence on
other salvage pathways for the supply of purine nucleotides.STRUCTURED DIGITAL
ABSTRACT: purB and purB bind by x-ray crystallography (View interaction).

© 2014 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.12730 
PMID: 24479855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

