
1. Cell Mol Immunol. 2014 Mar;11(2):184-96. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2013.64. Epub 2014 Feb 
3.

Attenuated Listeria monocytogenes as a cancer vaccine vector for the delivery of 
CD24, a biomarker for hepatic cancer stem cells.

Yang Y(1), Hou J(1), Lin Z(2), Zhuo H(1), Chen D(1), Zhang X(1), Chen Y(2), Sun
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Transplantation Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, China.

Attenuated Listeria monocytogenes (LM) is a promising candidate vector for the
delivery of cancer vaccines. After phagocytosis by antigen-presenting cells, this
bacterium stimulates the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-I and MHC-II
pathways and induces the proliferation of antigen-specific T lymphocytes. A new
strategy involving genetic modification of the replication-deficient LM strain
ΔdalΔdat (Lmdd) to express and secrete human CD24 protein has been developed.
CD24 is a hepatic cancer stem cell biomarker that is closely associated with
apoptosis, metastasis and recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). After
intravenous administration in mice, Lmdd-CD24 was distributed primarily in the
spleen and liver and did not cause severe organ injury. Lmdd-CD24 effectively
increased the number of interferon (IFN)-γ-producing CD8(+) T cells and IFN-γ
secretion. Lmdd-CD24 also enhanced the number of IL-4- and IL-10-producing T
helper 2 cells. The efficacy of the Lmdd-CD24 vaccine was further investigated
against Hepa1-6-CD24 tumors, which were inguinally inoculated into mice.
Lmdd-CD24 significantly reduced the tumor size in mice and increased their
survival. Notably, a reduction of T regulatory cell (Treg) numbers and an
enhancement of specific CD8(+) T-cell activity were observed in the
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). These results suggest a potential
application of the Lmdd-CD24 vaccine against HCC.

DOI: 10.1038/cmi.2013.64 
PMCID: PMC4003383
PMID: 24488178  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

