
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 Apr;80(7):2293-8. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03678-13. Epub
2014 Jan 31.

Surface expression of ω-transaminase in Escherichia coli.

Gustavsson M(1), Muraleedharan MN, Larsson G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Industrial Biotechnology, School of Biotechnology, Royal Institute
of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden.

Chiral amines are important for the chemical and pharmaceutical industries, and
there is rapidly growing interest to use transaminases for their synthesis. Since
the cost of the enzyme is an important factor for process economy, the use of
whole-cell biocatalysts is attractive, since expensive purification and
immobilization steps can be avoided. Display of the protein on the cell surface
provides a possible way to reduce the mass transfer limitations of such
biocatalysts. However, transaminases need to dimerize in order to become active, 
and furthermore, they require the cofactor pyridoxal phosphate; consequently,
successful transaminase surface expression has not been reported thus far. In
this work, we produced an Arthrobacter citreus ω-transaminase in Escherichia coli
using a surface display vector based on the autotransporter adhesin involved in
diffuse adherence (AIDA-I), which has previously been used for display of dimeric
proteins. The correct localization of the transaminase in the E. coli outer
membrane and its orientation toward the cell exterior were verified. Furthermore,
transaminase activity was detected exclusively in the outer membrane protein
fraction, showing that successful dimerization had occurred. The transaminase was
found to be present in both full-length and proteolytically degraded forms. The
removal of this proteolysis is considered to be the main obstacle to achieving
sufficient whole-cell transaminase activity.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03678-13 
PMCID: PMC3993154
PMID: 24487538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

