
1. J Immunol. 2014 Mar 1;192(5):2495-504. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301332. Epub 2014
Feb 3.

Candida-elicited murine Th17 cells express high Ctla-4 compared with Th1 cells
and are resistant to costimulation blockade.

Krummey SM(1), Floyd TL, Liu D, Wagener ME, Song M, Ford ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Emory Transplant Center, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322.

Effector and memory T cells may cross-react with allogeneic Ags to mediate graft 
rejection. Whereas the costimulation properties of Th1 cells are well studied,
relatively little is known about the costimulation requirements of
microbe-elicited Th17 cells. The costimulation blocker CTLA-4 Ig has been
ineffective in the treatment of several Th17-driven autoimmune diseases and is
associated with severe acute rejection following renal transplantation, leading
us to investigate whether Th17 cells play a role in CD28/CTLA-4
blockade-resistant alloreactivity. We established an Ag-specific model in which
Th1 and Th17 cells were elicited via Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Candida
albicans immunization, respectively. C. albicans immunization elicited a higher
frequency of Th17 cells and conferred resistance to costimulation blockade
following transplantation. Compared with the M. tuberculosis group, C.
albicans-elicited Th17 cells contained a higher frequency of IL-17(+)IFN-Î³(+)
producers and a lower frequency of IL-10(+) and IL-10(+)IL-17(+) cells.
Importantly, Th17 cells differentially regulated the CD28/CTLA-4 pathway,
expressing similarly high CD28 but significantly greater amounts of CTLA-4
compared with Th1 cells. Ex vivo blockade experiments demonstrated that Th17
cells are more sensitive to CTLA-4 coinhibition and therefore less susceptible to
CTLA-4 Ig. These novel insights into the differential regulation of CTLA-4
coinhibition on CD4(+) T cells have implications for the immunomodulation of
pathologic T cell responses during transplantation and autoimmunity.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301332 
PMCID: PMC4071624
PMID: 24493820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

