
1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 5;9(2):e87979. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087979. eCollection 
2014.

Response of breast cancer cells and cancer stem cells to metformin and
hyperthermia alone or combined.

Lee H(1), Park HJ(1), Park CS(2), Oh ET(1), Choi BH(1), Williams B(3), Lee CK(3),
Song CW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Inha University, Incheon,
Korea.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Inha University, Incheon,
Korea.
(3)Department of Therapeutic Radiology-Radiation Oncology, University of
Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America.

Metformin, the most widely prescribed drug for treatment of type 2 diabetes, has 
been shown to exert significant anticancer effects. Hyperthermia has been known
to kill cancer cells and enhance the efficacy of various anti-cancer drugs and
radiotherapy. We investigated the combined effects of metformin and hyperthermia 
against MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cell, and MIA PaCa-2 human
pancreatic cancer cells. Incubation of breast cancer cells with 0.5-10 mM
metformin for 48 h caused significant clonogenic cell death. Culturing breast
cancer cells with 30 µM metformin, clinically relevant plasma concentration of
metformin, significantly reduced the survival of cancer cells. Importantly,
metformin was preferentially cytotoxic to CD44(high)/CD24(low) cells of MCF-7
cells and, CD44(high)/CD24(high) cells of MIA PaCa-2 cells, which are known to be
cancer stem cells (CSCs) of MCF-7 cells and MIA PaCa-2 cells, respectively.
Heating at 42°C for 1 h was slightly toxic to both cancer cells and CSCs, and it 
markedly enhanced the efficacy of metformin to kill cancer cells and CSCs.
Metformin has been reported to activate AMPK, thereby suppressing mTOR, which
plays an important role for protein synthesis, cell cycle progression, and cell
survival. For the first time, we show that hyperthermia activates AMPK and
inactivates mTOR and its downstream effector S6K. Furthermore, hyperthermia
potentiated the effect of metformin to activate AMPK and inactivate mTOR and S6K.
Cell proliferation was markedly suppressed by metformin or combination of
metformin and hyperthermia, which could be attributed to activation of AMPK
leading to inactivation of mTOR. It is conclude that the effects of metformin
against cancer cells including CSCs can be markedly enhanced by hyperthermia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087979 
PMCID: PMC3914884
PMID: 24505341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

