
1. J Clin Invest. 2014 Mar;124(3):1268-82. doi: 10.1172/JCI72030. Epub 2014 Feb 10.

CXCL5-secreting pulmonary epithelial cells drive destructive neutrophilic
inflammation in tuberculosis.

Nouailles G, Dorhoi A, Koch M, Zerrahn J, Weiner J 3rd, Faé KC, Arrey F, Kuhlmann
S, Bandermann S, Loewe D, Mollenkopf HJ, Vogelzang A, Meyer-Schwesinger C,
Mittrücker HW, McEwen G, Kaufmann SH.

Successful host defense against numerous pulmonary infections depends on
bacterial clearance by polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs); however, excessive
PMN accumulation can result in life-threatening lung injury. Local expression of 
CXC chemokines is critical for PMN recruitment. The impact of chemokine-dependent
PMN recruitment during pulmonary Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection is not
fully understood. Here, we analyzed expression of genes encoding CXC chemokines
in M. tuberculosis-infected murine lung tissue and found that M. tuberculosis
infection promotes upregulation of Cxcr2 and its ligand Cxcl5. To determine the
contribution of CXCL5 in pulmonary PMN recruitment, we generated Cxcl5(-/-) mice 
and analyzed their immune response against M. tuberculosis. Both Cxcr2(-/-) mice 
and Cxcl5(-/-) mice, which are deficient for only one of numerous CXCR2 ligands, 
exhibited enhanced survival compared with that of WT mice following high-dose M. 
tuberculosis infection. The resistance of Cxcl5(-/-) mice to M. tuberculosis
infection was not due to heightened M. tuberculosis clearance but was the result 
of impaired PMN recruitment, which reduced pulmonary inflammation. Lung
epithelial cells were the main source of CXCL5 upon M. tuberculosis infection,
and secretion of CXCL5 was reduced by blocking TLR2 signaling. Together, our data
indicate that TLR2-induced epithelial-derived CXCL5 is critical for PMN-driven
destructive inflammation in pulmonary tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI72030 
PMCID: PMC3934185
PMID: 24509076  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

