
1. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Jul 15;325(2):130-7. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.12.006. Epub
2014 Feb 3.

Lymphatic function and responses in periodontal disease.

Berggreen E(1), Wiig H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Jonas Lies vei 91, 5009
Bergen, Norway. Electronic address: ellen.berggreen@biomed.uib.no.
(2)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Jonas Lies vei 91, 5009
Bergen, Norway.

Extravasated fluid, proteins and cells are returned into the circulation by
lymphatic vessels that are also important in immune cell trafficking. Lymphatic
vessels in gingiva are located in lamina propria, and traverse the external
surface of the alveolar bone. Lack of gingival lymphatics has been shown to
increase the interstitial fluid pressure and fluid volume, thus showing that
lymphatics are important for fluid drainage also in this tissue. Gingival
lymphatic vessels require continuous signaling by the growth factors VEGF-C and D
via their receptor VEGFR-3 for their maintenance, factors that are expressed in
the gingival epithelium and also in immune cells in lamina propria. VEGF-C seems 
to be of critical importance for lymphangiogeneses induced during periodontal
disease development. Mice are protected against periodontitis by lymphatics
clearing bacteria and bacterial products and promoting humoral immune responses. 
CCL21, a ligand important for dendritic cell migration, has been found to be
downregulated in lymphatics from patients with periodontitis. Such patients may
have impaired gingival lymphatic function due to high enzymatic activity and thus
loss of structural components in the interstitium. At present there are few
studies on the role of lymphatic vessels in periodontal disease making this a
rather unexplored field.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.12.006 
PMID: 24503053  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

