
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 Apr;80(8):2417-28. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03378-13. Epub
2014 Feb 7.

Deciphering the regulon of Streptomyces coelicolor AbrC3, a positive response
regulator of antibiotic production.

Rico S(1), Santamaría RI, Yepes A, Rodríguez H, Laing E, Bucca G, Smith CP, Díaz 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Funcional y Genómica (IBFG)/Departamento de
Microbiología y Genética, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas
(CSIC)/Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.

The atypical two-component system (TCS) AbrC1/C2/C3 (encoded by SCO4598, SCO4597,
and SCO4596), comprising two histidine kinases (HKs) and a response regulator
(RR), is crucial for antibiotic production in Streptomyces coelicolor and for
morphological differentiation under certain nutritional conditions. In this
study, we demonstrate that deletion of the RR-encoding gene, abrC3 (SCO4596),
results in a dramatic decrease in actinorhodin (ACT) and undecylprodiginine (RED)
production and delays morphological development. In contrast, the overexpression 
of abrC3 in the parent strain leads to a 33% increase in ACT production in liquid
medium. Transcriptomic analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation with microarray
technology (ChIP-chip) analysis of the ΔabrC3 mutant and the parent strain
revealed that AbrC3 directly controls ACT production by binding to the actII-ORF4
promoter region; this was independently verified by in vitro DNA-binding assays. 
This binding is dependent on the sequence 5'-GAASGSGRMS-3'. In contrast, the
regulation of RED production is not due to direct binding of AbrC3 to either the 
redZ or redD promoter region. This study also revealed other members of the AbrC3
regulon: AbrC3 is a positive autoregulator which also binds to the promoter
regions of SCO0736, bdtA (SCO3328), absR1 (SCO6992), and SCO6809. The direct
targets share the 10-base consensus binding sequence and may be responsible for
some of the phenotypes of the ΔabrC3 mutant. The identification of the AbrC3
regulon as part of the complex regulatory network governing antibiotic production
widens our knowledge regarding TCS involvement in control of antibiotic synthesis
and may contribute to the rational design of new hyperproducer host strains
through genetic manipulation of such systems.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03378-13 
PMCID: PMC3993177
PMID: 24509929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

