
1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Mar;38(3):394-401. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000104.

Fibrous hamartoma of infancy: a clinicopathologic analysis of 60 cases.

Saab ST(1), McClain CM, Coffin CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN.

Fibrous hamartoma of infancy is a benign soft tissue tumor with a characteristic 
triphasic organoid histologic appearance. It typically occurs within the first 2 
years of life. The usual anatomic locations include the upper extremities,
axilla, and upper back. Diagnostic challenges occur when this tumor arises in
older children, outside of the usual anatomic sites, or when unusual histologic
features are encountered. This study reports 60 cases of fibrous hamartoma of
infancy from institutional and consultation files. All had a triphasic organoid
histologic pattern, but half also displayed an unusual pseudoangiomatous
histologic pattern. The male to female ratio was 2.0 (40 boys, 20 girls), with a 
mean age of 1.5 years (range, 16 d to 8 y) at diagnosis. Tumor size ranged from
0.5 to 9 cm, with a mean of 3.7 cm. Sites included the trunk (40 cases),
extremities (17 cases), and head and neck (3 cases). All cases had triphasic
elements of mature fibrous tissue, mature adipose tissue, and immature
mesenchymal tissue in varying proportions, with the additional pseudoangiomatous 
pattern in 32 cases. Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated reactivity for
smooth muscle actin and CD34 in the mature fibrous tissue, S100 protein in the
mature adipose tissue, and variable CD34 reactivity in immature mesenchymal and
pseudoangiomatous foci. Ki-67 proliferative activity was noted in the immature
mesenchymal and pseudoangiomatous foci, and Bcl-2 reactivity was restricted to
mesenchymal and pseudoangiomatous foci. Follow-up information in 12 cases
revealed no evidence of recurrence in 10 patients and local recurrence in 2
patients, each at 3.5 years after primary excision. This study demonstrates an
expanded age range (up to 8 y) and anatomic distribution (30 cases outside of the
classic locations of the upper extremities, axilla, and upper back) of fibrous
hamartoma of infancy. The pseudoangiomatous morphologic variation can lead to
challenges in diagnosis and may reflect a maturational phenomenon from the
immature mesenchymal component.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000104 
PMID: 24525510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

