
1. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:682010. doi: 10.1155/2014/682010. Epub 2014 Jan 2.

SEA antagonizes the imatinib-meditated inhibitory effects on T cell activation
via the TCR signaling pathway.

Wang G(1), Yan Y(2), Chen X(2), Lin C(2), Li Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical College, Jinan University, 
Guangzhou 510632, China ; Quanzhou Medical college, Quanzhou 362000, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical College, Jinan University, 
Guangzhou 510632, China.
(3)Institute of Hematology, Medical College, Jinan university, Guangzhou 510632, 
China ; Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of Ministry of Education,
Guangzhou 510632, China.

The BCR-ABL kinase inhibitor imatinib is highly effective in the treatment of
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). However, long-term imatinib treatment induces
immunosuppression, which is mainly due to T cell dysfunction. Imatinib can reduce
TCR-triggered T cell activation by inhibiting the phosphorylation of tyrosine
kinases such as Lck, ZAP70, LAT, and PLC γ 1 early in the TCR signaling pathway. 
The purpose of this study was to investigate whether the superantigen SEA, a
potent T cell stimulator, can block the immunosuppressive effects of imatinib on 
T cells. Our data show that the exposure of primary human T cells and Jurkat
cells to SEA for 24 h leads to the upregulation of the Lck and ZAP70 proteins in 
a dose-dependent manner. T cells treated with SEA prior to TCR binding had
increased the tyrosine phosphorylation of Lck, ZAP70, and PLC γ 1. Pretreatment
with SEA prevents the inhibitory effects of imatinib on TCR signaling, which
leads to T cell proliferation and IL-2 production. It is conceivable that SEA
antagonizes the imatinib-mediated inhibition of T cell activation and
proliferation through the TCR signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/682010 
PMCID: PMC3909973
PMID: 24524084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

