
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2014 May;100:8-16. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2014.02.006. Epub
2014 Feb 16.

Primer pairs for the specific environmental detection and T-RFLP analysis of the 
ubiquitous flagellate taxa Chrysophyceae and Kinetoplastea.

Glaser K(1), Kuppardt A(1), Krohn S(1), Heidtmann A(1), Harms H(1), Chatzinotas
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Department of Environmental
Microbiology, Permoserstrasse 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Department of Environmental
Microbiology, Permoserstrasse 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany. Electronic address:
antonis.chatzinotas@ufz.de.

Bacterivorous protists play a key role in microbial soil food webs, however due
to the lack of specific PCR protocols targeting selected protist taxa, knowledge 
on the diversity and dynamics of these groups is scarce. We developed specific
PCR primers in combination with a T-RFLP protocol for the cultivation-independent
analysis of two important taxa of bacterivorous flagellates, the Chrysophyceae
and Kinetoplastea, in soil samples. Sequence analysis of clone libraries
originating from two soils in temperate regions demonstrated the specificity of
the respective primer pairs. Clone sequences affiliating to the Chrysophyceae
mainly clustered within the clade C2, which has been known so far for its
presence mainly in cold climatic regions, whereas Kinetoplastea sequences were
mainly related to the Neobodonid clade. Based on an in silico restriction
analysis of database sequence entries, suitable restriction enzymes for a T-RFLP 
approach were selected. This in silico approach revealed the necessity to use a
combination of two restriction enzymes for T-RFLP analysis of the Chrysophyceae. 
Soil T-RFLP profiles reflected all T-RFs of the clone library sequences obtained 
from the same soils and allowed to distinguish flagellate communities from
different sites. We propose to use these primer pairs for PCR detection and rapid
fingerprint screening in environmental samples and envisage their use also for
quantitative PCR or next generation sequencing approaches.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2014.02.006 
PMID: 24548896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

