
1. J Innate Immun. 2014;6(4):542-52. doi: 10.1159/000358239. Epub 2014 Feb 14.

Single immunoglobulin interleukin-1 receptor-related molecule impairs host
defense during pneumonia and sepsis caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae.

Blok DC(1), van Lieshout MH, Hoogendijk AJ, Florquin S, de Boer OJ, Garlanda C,
Mantovani A, van't Veer C, de Vos AF, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Center of Infection and
Immunity, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Streptococcus pneumoniae is a common cause of pneumonia and sepsis. Toll-like
receptors (TLRs) play a pivotal role in the host defense against infection. In
this study, we sought to determine the role of single immunoglobulin
interleukin-1 receptor-related molecule (SIGIRR a.k.a. TIR8), a negative
regulator of TLR signaling, in pneumococcal pneumonia and sepsis. Wild-type and
SIGIRR-deficient (sigirr-/-) mice were infected intranasally (to induce
pneumonia) or intravenously (to induce primary sepsis) with S. pneumoniae and
euthanized after 6, 24, or 48 h for analyses. Additionally, survival studies were
performed. sigirr-/- mice showed delayed mortality during lethal pneumococcal
pneumonia. Accordingly, sigirr-/- mice displayed lower bacterial loads in lungs
and less dissemination of the infection 24 h after the induction of pneumonia.
SIGIRR deficiency was associated with increased interstitial and perivascular
inflammation in lung tissue early after infection, with no impact on neutrophil
recruitment or cytokine production. sigirr-/- mice also demonstrated reduced
bacterial burdens at multiple body sites during S. pneumoniae sepsis. sigirr-/-
alveolar macrophages and neutrophils exhibited an increased capacity to
phagocytose viable pneumococci. These results suggest that SIGIRR impairs the
antibacterial host defense during pneumonia and sepsis caused by S. pneumoniae.

Â© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000358239 
PMCID: PMC6741518
PMID: 24556793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

