
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Mar 4;111(9):3466-71. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1319911111. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Analysis of the tumor-initiating and metastatic capacity of PDX1-positive cells
from the adult pancreas.

Ischenko I(1), Petrenko O, Hayman MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and Pathology, Stony Brook 
University, Stony Brook, NY 11794.

Pancreatic cancer is one of the deadliest human malignancies. A striking feature 
of pancreatic cancer is that activating Kras mutations are found in âˆ¼90% of
cases. However, apart from a restricted population of cells expressing pancreatic
and duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1), most pancreatic cells are refractory to
Kras-driven transformation. In the present study, we sought to determine which
subsets of PDX1+ cells may be responsible for tumor growth. Using the
Lox-Stop-Lox-KrasG12D genetic mouse model of pancreatic carcinogenesis, we
isolated a population of KrasG12D-expressing PDX1+ cells with an inherent
capacity to metastasize. This population of cells bears the surface phenotype of 
EpCAM+CD24+CD44+CD133-SCA1- and is closer in its properties to stem-like cells
than to more mature cell types. We further demonstrate that the tumorigenic
capacity of PDX1+ cells is limited, becoming progressively lost as the cells
acquire a mature phenotype. These data are consistent with the hypothesis that
the adult pancreas harbors a dormant progenitor cell population that is capable
of initiating tumor growth under conditions of oncogenic stimulation. We present 
evidence that constitutive activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK/ERK) signaling and stabilization of the MYC protein are the two main
driving forces behind the development of pancreatic cancer cells with
stem-cell-like properties and high metastatic potential. Our results suggest that
pancreatic cells bearing Kras mutation can be induced to differentiate into
quasi-normal cells with suppressed tumorigenicity by selective inhibition of the 
MAPK/ERK/MYC signaling cascade.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1319911111 
PMCID: PMC3948305
PMID: 24550494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

