
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Feb 18;111(7):2674-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1323845111. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

Polyclonal type II natural killer T cells require PLZF and SAP for their
development and contribute to CpG-mediated antitumor response.

Zhao J(1), Weng X, Bagchi S, Wang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611.

CD1d-restricted natural killer T (NKT) cells are innate-like T cells with potent 
immunomodulatory function via rapid production of both Th1 and Th2 cytokines. NKT
cells comprise well-characterized type I NKT cells, which can be detected by
α-galactosylceramide-loaded CD1d tetramers, and less-studied type II NKT cells,
which do not recognize α-galactosylceramide. Here we characterized type II NKT
cells on a polyclonal level by using a Jα18-deficient IL-4 reporter mouse model. 
This model allows us to track type II NTK cells by the GFP(+)TCRβ(+) phenotype in
the thymus and liver. We found type II NKT cells, like type I NKT cells, exhibit 
an activated phenotype and are dependent on the transcriptional regulator
promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger (PLZF) and the adaptor molecule signaling
lymphocyte activation molecule-associated protein (SAP) for their development.
Type II NKT cells are potently activated by β-D-glucopyranosylceramide (β-GlcCer)
but not sulfatide or phospholipids in a CD1d-dependent manner, with the
stimulatory capacity of β-GlcCer influenced by acyl chain length. Compared with
type I NKT cells, type II NKT cells produce lower levels of IFN-γ but comparable 
amounts of IL-13 in response to polyclonal T-cell receptor stimulation,
suggesting they may play different roles in regulating immune responses.
Furthermore, type II NKT cells can be activated by CpG oligodeoxynucletides to
produce IFN-γ, but not IL-4 or IL-13. Importantly, CpG-activated type II NKT
cells contribute to the antitumor effect of CpG in the B16 melanoma model. Taken 
together, our data reveal the characteristics of polyclonal type II NKT cells and
their potential role in antitumor immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1323845111 
PMCID: PMC3932886
PMID: 24550295  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

