
1. Mar Biotechnol (NY). 2014 Oct;16(5):513-21. doi: 10.1007/s10126-014-9569-9. Epub 
2014 Feb 23.

A genome scan for quantitative trait loci associated with Vibrio anguillarum
infection resistance in Japanese flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus) by bulked
segregant analysis.

Wang L(1), Fan C, Liu Y, Zhang Y, Liu S, Sun D, Deng H, Xu Y, Tian Y, Liao X, Xie
M, Li W, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)College of Marine Life Science, Ocean University of China, 266003, Qingdao,
The People's Republic of China.

A recent genetic linkage map was employed to detect quantitative trait loci
(QTLs) associated with Vibrio anguillarum resistance in Japanese flounder. An F1 
family established and challenged with V. anguillarum in 2009 was used for QTL
mapping. Of the 221 simple sequence repeat (SSR) markers used to detect
polymorphisms in the parents of F1, 170 were confirmed to be polymorphic. The
average distance between the markers was 10.6 cM. Equal amounts of genomic DNA
from 15 fry that died early and from 15 survivors were pooled separately to
constitute susceptible bulk and resistance bulk DNA. Bulked segregant analysis
and QTL mapping were combined to detect candidate SSR markers and regions
associated with the disease. A genome scan identified four polymorphic SSR
markers, two of which were significantly different between susceptible and
resistance bulk (P=0.008). These two markers were located in linkage group (LG)
7; therefore, all the SSR markers in LG7 were genotyped in all the challenged fry
by single marker analysis. Using two different models, 11-17 SSR markers were
detected with different levels of significance. To confirm the associations of
these markers with the disease, composite interval mapping was employed to
genotype all the challenged individuals. One and three QTLs, which explained more
than 60 % of the phenotypic variance, were detected by the two models. Two of the
QTLs were located at 48.6 cM. The common QTL may therefore be a major candidate
region for disease resistance against V. anguillarum infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s10126-014-9569-9 
PMID: 24562474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

