
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2014 May;97:23-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2014.02.007. Epub 2014
Feb 25.

Expression, purification, and characterization of mouse glycine N-acyltransferase
in Escherichia coli.

Dempsey DR(1), Bond JD(1), Carpenter AM(1), Rodriguez Ospina S(1), Merkler DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, USA.
Electronic address: merkler@usf.edu.

Glycine N-acyltransferase (GLYAT) is a phase II metabolic detoxification enzyme
for exogenous (xenobiotic) and endogenous carboxylic acids; consisting of fatty
acids, benzoic acid, and salicylic acid. GLYAT catalyzes the formation of
hippurate (N-benzoylglycine) from the corresponding glycine and benzoyl-CoA.
Herein, we report the successful expression, purification, and characterization
of recombinant mouse GLYAT (mGLYAT). A 34kDa mGLYAT protein was expressed in
Escherichia coli and purified to homogeneity by nickel affinity chromatography to
a final yield of 2.5mg/L culture. Characterization for both amino donors and
amino acceptors were completed, with glycine serving as the best amino donor
substrate, (kcat/Km)app=(5.2±0.20)×10(2)M(-1)s(-1), and benzoyl-CoA serving as
the best the amino acceptor substrate, (kcat/Km)app=(4.5±0.27)×10(5)M(-1)s(-1).
Our data demonstrate that mGLYAT will catalyzed the chain length specific (C2-C6)
formation of N-acylglycines. The steady-state kinetic constants determined for
recombinant mGLYAT for the substrates benzoyl-CoA and glycine, were shown to be
consistent with other reported species (rat, human, bovine, ovine, and rhesus
monkey). The successful recombinant expression and purification of mGLYAT can
lead to solve unanswered questions associated with this enzyme, consisting of
what is the chemical mechanism and what catalytic residues are essential for the 
how this phase II metabolic detoxification enzyme conjugates glycine to
xenobiotic and endogenous carboxylic acids.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2014.02.007 
PMCID: PMC3985065
PMID: 24576660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

