
1. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014 Jan 16;2014:649197. doi: 10.1155/2014/649197.
eCollection 2014.

Facile and promising method for michael addition of indole and pyrrole to
electron-deficient trans-β-nitroolefins catalyzed by a hydrogen bond donor
catalyst Feist's acid and preliminary study of antimicrobial activity.

Al Majid AM(1), Islam MS(1), Barakat A(2), Al-Agamy MH(3), Naushad M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, King Saud University, P.O. Box
2455, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, King Saud University, P.O. Box
2455, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia ; Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science,
Alexandria University, P.O. Box 426, Ibrahimia, Alexandria 21321, Egypt.
(3)Division of Microbiology, Pharmaceutics Department, College of Pharmacy, King 
Saud University, P.O. Box 2457, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.

The importance of cooperative hydrogen-bonding effects has been demonstrated
using novel 3-methylenecyclopropane-1,2-dicarboxylic acid (Feist's acid (FA)) as 
hydrogen bond donor catalysts for the addition of indole and pyrrole to
trans-β-nitrostyrene derivatives. Because of the hydrogen bond donor (HBD)
ability, Feist's acid (FA) has been introduced as a new class of hydrogen bond
donor catalysts for the activation of nitroolefin towards nucleophilic
substitution reaction. It has effectively catalyzed the Michael addition of
indoles and pyrrole to β-nitroolefins under optimum reaction condition to furnish
the corresponding Michael adducts in good to excellent yields (up to 98%). The
method is general, atom-economical, convenient, and eco-friendly and could
provide excellent yields and regioselectivities. Some newly synthesized compounds
were for examined in vitro antimicrobial activity and their preliminary results
are reported.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/649197 
PMCID: PMC3915498
PMID: 24574906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

