
1. Infect Immun. 1988 Oct;56(10):2587-93.

Protective monoclonal antibodies recognize heat-labile epitopes on surface
proteins of spotted fever group rickettsiae.

Li H(1), Lenz B, Walker DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston 77550.

Thirty-eight monoclonal antibodies that have not been reported previously were
developed from mice immunized with Rickettsia rickettsii, R. conorii, and R.
sibirica. Western immunoblotting showed that these monoclonal antibodies are
directed against heat-sensitive epitopes which are located on two major surface
polypeptides with molecular sizes ranging from 115 to 150 kilodaltons. The
detection of the two bands did not depend on the presence of 2-mercaptoethanol.
Both bands were destroyed by treatment with proteinase K. Monoclonal antibodies
examined by immunofluorescence assay reacted with epitopes that are species
specific, group reactive, or shared among a smaller subset of species of spotted 
fever group rickettsiae. Nine of the monoclonal antibodies were evaluated for
their ability to neutralize rickettsial infection and thus protect animals
against disease caused by homologous species of rickettsiae. Treatment of
rickettsiae with monoclonal antibodies F3-12, F3-14, and F3-36 completely
protected guinea pigs against illness caused by the homologous organism R.
rickettsii. Monoclonal antibodies F9-5G11 and F15-5B12, derived from mice
immunized with R. sibirica, conferred partial protection by delaying the onset
and shortening the duration of fever in guinea pigs inoculated with R. sibirica. 
Monoclonal antibodies F2-15, F2-31, F2-53, and F3-12 protected mice from a lethal
infection with R. conorii. Heat-labile epitopes of spotted fever group
rickettsial surface proteins are important candidate antigens for development of 
vaccines to confer protective immunity.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.56.10.2587-2593.1988 
PMCID: PMC259616
PMID: 2458318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

