
1. Toxicon. 2014 May;82:76-82. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2014.02.009. Epub 2014 Feb 26.

Intracellular trafficking of Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin.

Nagahama M(1), Takahashi C(2), Aoyanagi K(2), Tashiro R(2), Kobayashi K(2),
Sakaguchi Y(3), Ishidoh K(4), Sakurai J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokushima
Bunri University, Yamashiro-cho, Tokushima 770-8514, Japan. Electronic address:
nagahama@ph.bunri-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokushima
Bunri University, Yamashiro-cho, Tokushima 770-8514, Japan.
(3)Interdisciplinary Research Organization, Miyazaki University, Miyazaki
889-2192, Japan.
(4)Division of Molecular Biology, Institute for Health Sciences, Tokushima Bunri 
University, Yamashiro, Tokushima 770-8514, Japan.

Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin is a binary toxin composed of an enzymatic
component (C2I) and binding component (C2II). The activated binding component
(C2IIa) forms heptamers and the oligomer with C2I is taken up by
receptor-mediated endocytosis. We investigated the intracellular trafficking of
C2 toxin. When MDCK cells were incubated with C2I and C2IIa at 37 °C, C2I
colocalized with C2IIa in cytoplasmic vesicles at 5 min, and C2I then disappeared
(15 min incubation and later), and C2IIa was observed in the vesicles.
Internalized C2I and C2IIa were transported to early endosomes. Some of both
components were returned to the plasma membrane through recycling endosomes,
whereas the rest of C2IIa was transported to late endosomes and lysosomes for
degradation. Bafilomycin A1, an endosomal acidification inhibitor, caused the
accumulation of C2IIa in endosomes, and both nocodazole and colchicine,
microtubule-disrupting agents, restricted C2IIa's movement in the cytosol. These 
results indicated that an internalized C2I and C2IIa complex was delivered to
early endosomes, and that subsequent delivery of C2I to the cytoplasm occurred in
early endosomes. C2IIa was either sent back to the plasma membranes through
recycling endosomes or transported to late endosomes and lysosomes for
degradation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2014.02.009 
PMID: 24582943  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

