
1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 28;9(2):e89144. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089144. eCollection
2014.

Biochemical characterization of a haloalkane dehalogenase DadB from Alcanivorax
dieselolei B-5.

Li A(1), Shao Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China ; Key Laboratory of 
Marine Biogenetic Resources-State Key Laboratory Breeding Base, Third Institute
of Oceanography, State Oceanic Administration, Collaborative Innovation Center of
Deep Sea Biology; Key Laboratory of Marine Biogenetic Resources of Fujian
Province, Xiamen, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Marine Biogenetic Resources-State Key Laboratory Breeding
Base, Third Institute of Oceanography, State Oceanic Administration,
Collaborative Innovation Center of Deep Sea Biology; Key Laboratory of Marine
Biogenetic Resources of Fujian Province, Xiamen, China.

Recently, we found that Alcanivorax bacteria from various marine environments
were capable of degrading halogenated alkanes. Genome sequencing of A. dieselolei
B-5 revealed two putative haloalkane dehalogenase (HLD) genes, which were
supposed to be involved in degradation of halogenated compounds. In this report, 
we confirm for the first time that the Alcanivorax bacterium encodes a truly
functional HLD named DadB. An activity assay with 46 halogenated substrates
indicated that DadB possesses broad substrate range and has the highest overall
activity among the identified HLDs. DadB prefers brominated substrates;
chlorinated alkenes; and the C2-C3 substrates, including the persistent
pollutants of 1,2-dichloroethane, 1,2-dichloropropane and 1,2,3-trichloropropane.
As DadB displays no detectable activity toward long-chain haloalkanes such as
1-chlorohexadecane and 1-chlorooctadecane, the degradation of them in A.
dieselolei B-5 might be attributed to other enzymes. Kinetic constants were
determined with 6 substrates. DadB has highest affinity and largest k cat/K m
value toward 1,3-dibromopropane (K(m) = 0.82 mM, k(cat)/K(m) = 16.43 mM(-1) ·
s(-1)). DadB aggregates fast in the buffers with pH ≤ 7.0, while keeps stable in 
monomer form when pH ≥ 7.5. According to homology modeling, DadB has an open
active cavity with a large access tunnel, which is supposed important for larger 
molecules as opposed to C2-C3 substrates. Combined with the results for other
HLDs, we deduce that residue I247 plays an important role in substrate selection.
These results suggest that DadB and its host, A. dieselolei B-5, are of potential
use for biocatalysis and bioremediation applications.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089144 
PMCID: PMC3938430
PMID: 24586552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

