
1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 24;9(2):e89263. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089263. eCollection
2014.

T cell receptor signaling can directly enhance the avidity of CD28 ligand
binding.

Sanchez-Lockhart M(1), Rojas AV(2), Fettis MM(1), Bauserman R(3), Higa TR(1),
Miao H(2), Waugh RE(3), Miller J(1).

Author information: 
(1)David H Smith Center for Vaccine Biology and Immunology and Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York, United
States of America.
(2)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, University of
Rochester, Rochester, New York, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Rochester, Rochester, New 
York, United States of America.

T cell activation takes place in the context of a spatial and kinetic
reorganization of cell surface proteins and signaling molecules at the contact
site with an antigen presenting cell, termed the immunological synapse.
Coordination of the activation, recruitment, and signaling from T cell receptor
(TCR) in conjunction with adhesion and costimulatory receptors regulates both the
initiation and duration of signaling that is required for T cell activation. The 
costimulatory receptor, CD28, is an essential signaling molecule that determines 
the quality and quantity of T cell immune responses. Although the functional
consequences of CD28 engagement are well described, the molecular mechanisms that
regulate CD28 function are largely unknown. Using a micropipet adhesion frequency
assay, we show that TCR signaling enhances the direct binding between CD28 and
its ligand, CD80. Although CD28 is expressed as a homodimer, soluble recombinant 
CD28 can only bind ligand monovalently. Our data suggest that the increase in
CD28-CD28 binding is mediated through a change in CD28 valency. Molecular dynamic
simulations and in vitro mutagenesis indicate that mutations at the base of the
CD28 homodimer interface, distal to the ligand-binding site, can induce a change 
in the orientation of the dimer that allows for bivalent ligand binding. When
expressed in T cells, this mutation allows for high avidity CD28-CD80
interactions without TCR signaling. Molecular dynamic simulations also suggest
that wild type CD28 can stably adopt a bivalent conformation. These results
support a model whereby inside-out signaling from the TCR can enhance CD28 ligand
interactions by inducing a change in the CD28 dimer interface to allow for
bivalent ligand binding and ultimately the transduction of CD28 costimulatory
signals that are required for T cell activation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089263 
PMCID: PMC3933428
PMID: 24586641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

