
1. J Clin Invest. 2014 Apr;124(4):1636-45. doi: 10.1172/JCI71545. Epub 2014 Mar 3.

SOX2 and p63 colocalize at genetic loci in squamous cell carcinomas.

Watanabe H, Ma Q, Peng S, Adelmant G, Swain D, Song W, Fox C, Francis JM,
Pedamallu CS, DeLuca DS, Brooks AN, Wang S, Que J, Rustgi AK, Wong KK, Ligon KL, 
Liu XS, Marto JA, Meyerson M, Bass AJ.

The transcription factor SOX2 is an essential regulator of pluripotent stem cells
and promotes development and maintenance of squamous epithelia. We previously
reported that SOX2 is an oncogene and subject to highly recurrent genomic
amplification in squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). Here, we have further
characterized the function of SOX2 in SCC. Using ChIP-seq analysis, we compared
SOX2-regulated gene profiles in multiple SCC cell lines to ES cell profiles and
determined that SOX2 binds to distinct genomic loci in SCCs. In SCCs, SOX2
preferentially interacts with the transcription factor p63, as opposed to the
transcription factor OCT4, which is the preferred SOX2 binding partner in ES
cells. SOX2 and p63 exhibited overlapping genomic occupancy at a large number of 
loci in SCCs; however, coordinate binding of SOX2 and p63 was absent in ES cells.
We further demonstrated that SOX2 and p63 jointly regulate gene expression,
including the oncogene ETV4, which was essential for SOX2-amplified SCC cell
survival. Together, these findings demonstrate that the action of SOX2 in SCC
differs substantially from its role in pluripotency. The identification of the
SCC-associated interaction between SOX2 and p63 will enable deeper
characterization the downstream targets of this interaction in SCC and normal
squamous epithelial physiology.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI71545 
PMCID: PMC3973117
PMID: 24590290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

