
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2014 Sep;111(9):1801-8. doi: 10.1002/bit.25229. Epub 2014 May 
13.

Integrating kinetics with thermodynamics to study the alkaline extraction of
protein from Caragana korshinskii Kom.

Zhong C(1), Zhou Z, Zhang YM, Jia SR, Sun Z, Dale BE.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Fermentation Microbiology, (Ministry of
Education), Tianjin University of Science and Technology, Tianjin, 300457, P.R.
China; School of Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science and Technology,
Tianjin, 300457, P.R. China. czhong@tust.edu.cn, jiashiru@tust.edu.cn.

Extraction and recovery of protein from abundant plant biomass is one potential
way to improve the economic feasibility of biorefineries. However, valorization
of the protein fraction is challenging due to its low yield (kg protein
extraction/kg biomass). In order to reveal the limiting operation parameters, the
alkaline extraction process of protein from Caragana korshinskii Kom. was
investigated by an integrative analysis of kinetics and thermodynamics. Both a
two-site kinetic extraction model and a second-order model indicated that
particle size is the most pivotal factor affecting protein extraction yield. In a
two-site model, most proteins are extracted quickly from broken cells, while
protein removal from the intact cells takes much longer; these are the faster and
slower processes, respectively. A decrease of particle size from 20-40 to 60-80
mesh resulted in a decrease of C2 (protein yield in the slower process) from
14.02 to 7.32 mg g(-1), but a great increase of C1 (protein yield in the faster
process) from 20.61 to 59.07 mg g(-1) . However, the protein yield was dominated 
by the faster process when the average particle size is under 80 mesh. The
maximum initial extraction rate was 72.20 mg g(-1) min(-1) with the particle size
of 60-80 mesh, almost ninefold of that with 20-40 mesh. Thermodynamic analysis
revealed that the enthalpy change (ΔH) and entropy change (ΔS) in the protein
extraction process were calculated as 21.08 kJ mol(-1) and 84.76 J K(-1),
respectively. The standard free energy (ΔG) had a magnitude from -3.77 to -5.46, 
suggesting that the extraction process was spontaneous and physically feasible.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.25229 
PMID: 24595802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

