
1. J Immunol. 1988 Oct 1;141(7):2519-25.

Identification by site-directed mutagenesis of amino acid residues contributing
to serologic and CTL-defined epitope differences between HLA-A2.1 and HLA-A2.3.

Hogan KT(1), Clayberger C, Bernhard EJ, Walk SF, Ridge JP, Parham P, Krensky AM, 
Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virigina, Charlottesville 22908.

Site-directed mutagenesis of HLA-A2.1 has been used to identify the amino acid
substitutions in HLA-A2.3 that are responsible for the lack of recognition of the
latter molecule by the HLA-A2/A28 specific antibody, CR11-351, and by HLA-A2.1
specific CTL. Three genes were constructed that encoded HLA-A2 derivatives
containing one of the amino acids known to occur in HLA-A2.3: Thr for Ala149, Glu
for Val152, and Trp for Leu156. Three additional genes were constructed that
encoded the different possible combinations of two amino acid substitutions at
these residues. Finally, a gene encoding all three substitutions and equivalent
to HLA-A2.3 was constructed. These genes were transfected into the class I
negative, human cell line Hmy2.C1R. Analysis of this panel of cells revealed that
recognition by the antibody CR11-351 was completely lost when Thr was substituted
for Ala149, whereas substitutions at amino acids 152 and 156, either singly or in
combination, had no effect on the binding of this antibody. The epitopes
recognized by the allogeneic and xenogeneic HLA-A2.1 specific CTL clones used in 
this study were all affected by either one or two amino acid substitutions. Of
those epitopes sensitive to single amino acid changes, none were affected by the 
substitution of Thr for Ala149, whereas all of them were affected by at least one
of the substitutions of Glu for Val 152 or Trp for Leu156. Overall, amino acid
residue 152 exerted a stronger effect on the epitopes recognized by HLA-A2.1
specific CTL than did residue 156. Of those epitopes affected only by multiple
amino acid substitutions, double substitutions at residues 149 and 152 or at 152 
and 156 resulted in a loss of recognition, whereas a mutant with substitutions at
residues 149 and 156 was recognized normally. This reemphasizes the importance of
residue 152 and indicates that residue 149 can affect epitope formation in
conjunction with another amino acid substitution. These results are discussed in 
the context of current models for the recognition of alloantigens and in light of
the recently published three-dimensional structure of the HLA-A2.1 molecule.


PMID: 2459215  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

