
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2015 Mar;65(Pt 3):745-753. doi:
10.1099/ijs.0.061176-0. Epub 2014 Mar 3.

Aggregicoccus edonensis gen. nov., sp. nov., an unusually aggregating
myxobacterium isolated from a soil sample.

Sood S(1)(2), Awal RP(3)(4), Wink J(2), Mohr KI(2), Rohde M(5), Stadler M(2),
Kämpfer P(6), Glaeser SP(6), Schumann P(7), Garcia R(4), Müller R(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Genomic and Applied Microbiology, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics,
Georg-August University, Grisebachstraße 8, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Microbial Drugs, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), 
Inhoffenstraße 7, D-38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Saarland University, Campus C2 3, 
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
(4)Department of Microbial Natural Products, Helmholtz Institute for
Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS) - Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research
(HZI), Saarland University, Campus C2 3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, Central Facility for Microscopy, Helmholtz
Centre for Infection Research (HZI), Inhoffenstraße 7, D-38124 Braunschweig,
Germany.
(6)Department of Applied Microbiology, Justus Liebig University Gießen,
Heinrich-Buff-Ring 26, D-35392 Gießen, Germany.
(7)Central Services, Leibniz Institute DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms
and Cell Cultures, Inhoffenstraße 7B, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.

A novel myxobacterium, MCy1366(T) (Ar1733), was isolated in 1981 from a soil
sample collected from a region near Tokyo, Japan. It displayed general
myxobacterial features like Gram-negative-staining, rod-shaped vegetative cells, 
gliding on solid surfaces, microbial lytic activity, fruiting-body-like
aggregates and myxospore-like structures. The strain was mesophilic, aerobic and 
showed a chemoheterotrophic mode of nutrition. It was resistant to many
antibiotics such as cephalosporin C, kanamycin, gentamicin, hygromycin B,
polymyxin and bacitracin, and the key fatty acids of whole cell hydrolysates were
iso-C15 : 0, iso-C17 : 0 and iso-C17 : 0 2-OH. The genomic DNA G+C content of the
novel strain was 65.6 mol%. The 16S rRNA gene sequence showed highest similarity 
(97.60 %) to 'Stigmatella koreensis' strain KYC-1019 (GenBank accession no.
EF112185). Phylogenetic analysis based on 16S rRNA gene sequences and MALDI-TOF
MS data revealed a novel branch in the family Myxococcaceae. DNA-DNA
hybridization showed only 28 % relatedness between the novel strain and the
closest recognized species, Corallococcus exiguus DSM 14696(T) (97 % 16S rRNA
gene sequence similarity). A recent isolate from a soil sample collected in
Switzerland, MCy10622, displayed 99.9 % 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity with
strain MCy1366(T) and showed almost the same characteristics. Since some
morphological features like fruiting-body-like aggregates were barely
reproducible in the type strain, the newly isolated strain, MCy10622, was also
intensively studied. On the basis of a comprehensive taxonomic study, we propose 
a novel genus and species, Aggregicoccus edonensis gen. nov., sp. nov., for
strains MCy1366(T) and MCy10622. The type strain of the type species is
MCy1366(T) ( = DSM 27872(T) = NCCB 100468(T)).

© 2015 Prof. Dr. Rolf Muller, Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology,
Saarland University, Campus C2 3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.

DOI: 10.1099/ijs.0.061176-0 
PMID: 24591423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

