
1. Semin Cancer Biol. 2014 Oct;28:24-30. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2014.02.010. Epub 
2014 Mar 3.

Cancer exosomes and NKG2D receptor-ligand interactions: impairing NKG2D-mediated 
cytotoxicity and anti-tumour immune surveillance.

Mincheva-Nilsson L(1), Baranov V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Division of Clinical Immunology, Umeå
University, S-90187 Umeå, Sweden. Electronic address:
lucia.mincheva-nilsson@climi.umu.se.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Division of Clinical Immunology, Umeå
University, S-90187 Umeå, Sweden.

Human cancers constitutively produce and release endosome-derived nanometer-sized
vesicles called exosomes that carry biologically active proteins, messenger and
micro RNAs and serve as vehicles of intercellular communication. The tumour
exosomes are present in the blood, urine and various malignant effusions such as 
peritoneal and pleural fluid of cancer patients and can modulate immune cells and
responses thus deranging the immune system of cancer patients and giving
advantage to the cancer to establish and spread itself. Here, the role of
exosomes in the NKG2D receptor-ligand system's interactions is discussed. The
activating NK cell receptor NKG2D and its multiple ligands, the MHC class
I-related chain (MIC) A/B and the retinoic acid transcript-1/UL-16 binding
proteins (RAET1/ULBP) 1-6 comprise a powerful stress-inducible danger detector
system that targets infected, inflamed and malignantly transformed cells and
plays a decisive role in anti-tumour immune surveillance. Mounting evidence
reveals that the MIC- and RAET1/ULBP ligand family members are enriched in the
endosomal compartment of various tumour cells and expressed and released into the
intercellular space and bodily fluids on exosomes thus preserving their entire
molecule, three-dimensional protein structure and biologic activity. The NKG2D
ligand-expressing exosomes serve as decoys with a powerful ability to down
regulate the cognate receptor and impair the cytotoxic function of NK-, NKT-,
gamma/delta- and cytotoxic T cells. This review summarizes recent findings
concerning the role of NKG2D receptor-ligand system in cancer with emphasis on
regulation of NKG2D ligand expression and the immunosuppressive role of
exosomally expressed NKG2D ligands.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2014.02.010 
PMID: 24602822  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

