
1. Microvasc Res. 2014 May;93:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mvr.2014.02.007. Epub 2014 Mar 3.

Semaphorin 4D expression is associated with a poor clinical outcome in cervical
cancer patients.

Liu H(1), Yang Y(2), Xiao J(1), Yang S(1), Liu Y(3), Kang W(4), Li X(1), Zhang
F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Harbin Medical University, 194 Xuefu Road, 150081
Harbin, China.
(2)Cancer Institute, Harbin Medical University, 150 Harping Road, 150081 Harbin, 
China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Mudanjiang First Hospital, 4 Jianwei Road,
157011 Mudanjiang, China.
(4)Department of Radiotherapy, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, 150 Harping Road, 150081 Harbin, China.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, Heilongjiang Province Key Laboratory for
Immunity and Infection, Harbin Medical University, 194 Xuefu Road, 150081 Harbin,
China. Electronic address: fengminzhang2013@163.com.

Lymphangiogenesis is thought to be essential for cancer progression, making it an
important target in cancer therapy. Lymphangiogenic factors (VEGF-C and VEGF-D)
are upregulated in various tumors/cancers, and play an important role in
lymphangiogenesis and lymph node metastasis. Similarly, semaphorin 4D (Sema4D) is
a potent inducer of angiogenesis, and its overexpression is associated with tumor
progression and poor prognosis in a variety of malignancies. However, little is
known regarding the functional relationship between Sema4D and VEGF-C/VEGF-D and 
in the mediation of lymphangiogenesis and lymph node metastasis and clinical
outcome. The current study aimed to evaluate the effect of Sema4D expression on
outcome in patients with cervical cancer, and to explore the molecular mechanism 
of Sema4D in tumor progression. We evaluated Sema4D expression, density of
lymphatic vessels, and invasion of lymphatic vessels with immunohistochemical
methods in 232 human cervical cancers with long-term follow-up. Sema4D expression
was correlated with patho-clinical parameters and patients' outcome. A cervical
cancer cell line was used to investigate the contribution of sema4D to tumor
progression by studying the role of Sema4D in VEGF-C/-D and cell migration using 
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting. We observed
that Sema4D expression was higher in metastatic cervical cancer than in
nonmetastatic cervical cancer (P<0.001). CD34-positive or D2-40-positive
lymphatic vessel density was significantly increased in cases with lymph node
metastasis compared with those without lymph node metastasis. The increased
Sema4D expression was associated with VEGF-C/-D, the presence of lymphatic
invasion, the occurrence of lymph node metastasis, and FIGO stage. We also
observed a novel association between Sema4D upregulation and poor prognosis in
cervical cancer. In vitro, the Sema4D inhibitory antibody and Sema4D-shRNA
suppressed VEGF-C and VEGF-D in the human cervical carcinoma cell lines HeLa,
Siha, and Caski cells. Invasiveness assay demonstrated that Sema4D could augment 
the invasive potential of the tumor cells in the cervical cancer lines and
induction of cellular invasiveness by Sema4D stimulation could be inhibited by
knockdown of plexinB1 by siRNA. Further mechanistic investigations of tumor cell 
invasiveness showed that Sema4D could induce activation of GTPase Ras homolog
gene family, member A (RhoA), MAPK and AKT. In addition, plexinB1 knockdown by
siRNA could suppress the Sema4D signal transmitted to MAPK and Akt. Taken
together, these results suggest that Sema4D autocrine within tumor cells
contributes to enhanced invasion and tumor progression through increased motility
of cervical cancer and VEGF-C/-D-mediated lymphangiogenesis. Sema4D might be
useful as a molecular marker of poor prognosis in cervical cancer.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mvr.2014.02.007 
PMID: 24603190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

