
1. J Immunol. 1988 Dec 1;141(11):4005-11.

Cytotoxic T lymphocyte-defined epitope differences between HLA-A2.1 and HLA-A2.2 
map to two distinct regions of the molecule.

Hogan KT(1), Clayberger C, Le AX, Walk SF, Ridge JP, Parham P, Krensky AM,
Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville 22908.

Hemi-exon shuffling and site-directed mutagenesis have been used to determine
which amino acid differences between HLA-A2.1 and HLA-A2.2 alter the CTL-defined 
epitopes on these two molecules. Two genes were constructed that encode novel
molecules in which the effect of amino acid differences at residues 9, 43, and
95, or at residue 156 could be separately evaluated. Using both human and murine 
CTL that were specific for either HLA-A2.1 or HLA-A2.2, four types of epitopes
were identified: 1) epitopes that were insensitive to substitutions at either
residues 9, 43, and 95, or residue 156 but were lost when all four positions were
changed; 2) epitopes that were dependent on the residues 9, 43, 95, but not
residue 156; 3) epitopes that were dependent on residue 156, but not amino acid
residues 9, 43, and 95; and 4) epitopes that were dependent on residues 9, 43,
and 95, as well as amino acid residue 156. Overall, there was a roughly equal
distribution of clones recognizing each of these types of epitopes. Additional
molecules were constructed by hemi-exon shuffling between the HLA-A2.2 and
HLA-A2.3 genes, and by site-directed mutagenesis, to analyze the epitopes
recognized by two HLA-A2.2/A2.1 cross-reactive murine CTL that do not recognize
HLA-A2.3. Although the epitopes recognized by these CTL were unaffected by
changes occurring at residues 9, 43, and 95, or at residues 149, 152, and 156
alone, simultaneous changes in both of these regions acted in concert to destroy 
the epitopes. Both of the CTL recognized epitopes that were lost when
substitutions were made at residues 9, 43, 95, 149, and 152. The epitope
recognized by one of the CTL was also destroyed by the substitution of residues
9, 43, 95, 152, and 156. Overall, these results indicate that residues 9, 43, and
95, as well as residues in the alpha-helical region of the molecule, are all
capable of contributing to the definition of the epitopes recognized by HLA-A2.1-
and HLA-A2.2-specific CTL. They further indicate that some epitopes can be mapped
to a particular region of the molecule, whereas other epitopes are formed through
a complex interaction of residues in distant regions of the molecule.


PMID: 2460555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

