
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2014 Jun;88(3):495-502. doi: 10.1111/1574-6941.12316. Epub
2014 Mar 24.

Cycloheximide prevents the de novo polypeptide synthesis required to recover from
acetylene inhibition in Nitrosopumilus maritimus.

Vajrala N(1), Bottomley PJ, Stahl DA, Arp DJ, Sayavedra-Soto LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, 
OR, USA.

Developing methods to differentiate the relative contributions of
ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA) and ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB) to ammonia
(NH3) oxidation has been challenging due to the lack of compounds that
selectively inhibit AOA. In this study, we investigated the effects of specific
bacteria- and eukaryote-selective protein synthesis inhibitors on the recovery of
acetylene (C2H2)-inactivated NH3 oxidation in the marine AOA Nitrosopumilus
maritimus and compared the results with recovery of the AOB Nitrosomonas
europaea. C2 H2 irreversibly inhibited N. maritimus NH3 oxidation in a similar
manner to what was observed previously with N. europaea. However, cycloheximide
(CHX), a widely used eukaryotic protein synthesis inhibitor, but not
bacteria-specific protein synthesis inhibitors (kanamycin and gentamycin),
inhibited the recovery of NH3-oxidizing activity in N. maritimus. CHX prevented
the incorporation of (14)CO2 -labeling into cellular proteins, providing further 
evidence that CHX acts as a protein synthesis inhibitor in N. maritimus. If the
effect of CHX on protein synthesis can be confirmed among other isolates of AOA, 
the combination of C2H2 inactivation followed by recovery of NH3 oxidation either
in the presence of bacteria-selective protein synthesis inhibitors or CHX might
be used to estimate the relative contributions of AOB and AOA to NH3 oxidation in
natural environments.

Â© 2014 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by John Wiley 
& Sons Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/1574-6941.12316 
PMID: 24606542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

