
1. Vet Microbiol. 2014 Jun 4;170(3-4):430-7. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2014.01.011. Epub
2014 Feb 3.

Time course Haemophilus parasuis infection reveals pathological differences
between virulent and non-virulent strains in the respiratory tract.

Bello-Orti B(1), Costa-Hurtado M(1), Martinez-Moliner V(1), Segalés J(2), Aragon 
V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recerca en Sanitat Animal (CReSA), UAB-IRTA, Campus de la
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra (Cerdanyola del Vallès),
Spain.
(2)Centre de Recerca en Sanitat Animal (CReSA), UAB-IRTA, Campus de la
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra (Cerdanyola del Vallès),
Spain; Departament de Sanitat i Anatomia Animals, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra (Cerdanyola del Vallès), Spain.
(3)Centre de Recerca en Sanitat Animal (CReSA), UAB-IRTA, Campus de la
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra (Cerdanyola del Vallès),
Spain; Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentàries (IRTA), Barcelona,
Spain. Electronic address: virginia.aragon@cresa.uab.es.

Haemophilus parasuis is a common inhabitant of the upper respiratory tract of
pigs and the etiological agent of Glässer's disease. However, the host-pathogen
interaction remains to be well understood. In this work, 33 colostrum-deprived
pigs were divided in 4 groups and each group was inoculated intranasally with a
different H. parasuis strain (non-virulent strains SW114 and F9, and virulent
strains Nagasaki and IT29755). Animals were necropsied at different times in
order to determine the location of the bacteria in the respiratory tract of the
host during infection. An immunohistochemistry method was developed to detect H. 
parasuis in nasal turbinates, trachea and lung. Also, the co-localization of H.
parasuis with macrophages or neutrophils was examined by double
immunohistochemistry and double immunofluorescence. Virulent strains showed a
biofilm-like growth in nasal turbinates and trachea and were found easily in
lung. Some virulent bacteria were detected in association with macrophages and
neutrophils, but also inside pneumocyte-like cells. On the other hand,
non-virulent strains were seldom detected in nasal turbinates and trachea, where 
they showed a microcolony pattern. Non-virulent strains were essentially not
detected in lung. In conclusion, this work presents data showing differential
localization of H. parasuis bacteria depending on their virulence. Interestingly,
the intracellular location of virulent H. parasuis bacteria in non-phagocytic
cells in lung could allow the persistence of the bacteria and constitute a
virulence mechanism.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2014.01.011 
PMID: 24613292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

