
1. Langmuir. 2014 Apr 1;30(12):3557-66. doi: 10.1021/la4047512. Epub 2014 Mar 21.

Heterofunctional hydrophilic-hydrophobic porous silica as support for multipoint 
covalent immobilization of lipases: application to lactulose palmitate synthesis.

Bernal C(1), Illanes A, Wilson L.

Author information: 
(1)Escuela de Ingeniería Bioquímica, Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Valparaíso , Avenida Brasil 2147, Valparaíso, Chile.

Lipase-catalyzed synthesis of sugar esters, as lactulose palmitate, requires
harsh conditions, making it necessary to immobilize the enzyme. Therefore, a
study was conducted to evaluate the effect of different chemical surfaces of
hierarchical meso-macroporous silica in the immobilization of two lipases from
Pseudomonas stutzeri (PsL) and Alcaligenes sp. (AsL), which exhibit esterase
activity. Porosity and chemical surface of silica supports, before and after
functionalization and after immobilization, were characterized by gas adsorption 
and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. PsL and AsL were immobilized 
in octyl (OS), glyoxyl (GS), and octyl-glyoxyl silica (OGS). Hydrolytic activity,
thermal and solvent stability, and sugar ester synthesis were evaluated with
those catalysts. The best support in terms of expressed activity was OS in the
case of PsL (100 IU g(-1)), while OS and OGS were the best for AsL with quite
similar expressed activities (60 and 58 IU g(-1), respectively). At 60 °C in
aqueous media the more stable biocatalysts were GS-PsL and OGS-AsL (half-lives of
566 and 248 h, respectively), showing the advantage of a heterofunctional support
in the latter case. Lactulose palmitate synthesis was carried out in acetone
medium (with 4% of equilibrium moisture) at 40 °C obtaining palmitic acid
conversions higher than 20% for all biocatalysts, being the highest of those
obtained with OGS-AsL and OS-PsL. Therefore, screening of different chemical
surfaces on porous silica used as supports for lipase immobilization allowed
obtaining active and stable biocatalyst to be employed in the novel synthesis of 
lactulose palmitate.

DOI: 10.1021/la4047512 
PMID: 24621332  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

