
1. Blood. 2014 May 8;123(19):2915-23. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-11-536359. Epub 2014
Mar 14.

Gene expression signatures delineate biological and prognostic subgroups in
peripheral T-cell lymphoma.

Iqbal J(1), Wright G, Wang C, Rosenwald A, Gascoyne RD, Weisenburger DD, Greiner 
TC, Smith L, Guo S, Wilcox RA, Teh BT, Lim ST, Tan SY, Rimsza LM, Jaffe ES, Campo
E, Martinez A, Delabie J, Braziel RM, Cook JR, Tubbs RR, Ott G, Geissinger E,
Gaulard P, Piccaluga PP, Pileri SA, Au WY, Nakamura S, Seto M, Berger F, de Leval
L, Connors JM, Armitage J, Vose J, Chan WC, Staudt LM; Lymphoma Leukemia
Molecular Profiling Project and the International Peripheral T-cell Lymphoma
Project.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE;

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 May 8;123(19):2909-10.

Peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) encompasses a heterogeneous group of neoplasms 
with generally poor clinical outcome. Currently 50% of PTCL cases are not
classifiable: PTCL-not otherwise specified (NOS). Gene-expression profiles on 372
PTCL cases were analyzed and robust molecular classifiers and oncogenic pathways 
that reflect the pathobiology of tumor cells and their microenvironment were
identified for major PTCL-entities, including 114 angioimmunoblastic T-cell
lymphoma (AITL), 31 anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-positive and 48 ALK-negative
anaplastic large cell lymphoma, 14 adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma and 44
extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma that were further separated into NK-cell and
gdT-cell lymphomas. Thirty-seven percent of morphologically diagnosed PTCL-NOS
cases were reclassified into other specific subtypes by molecular signatures.
Reexamination, immunohistochemistry, and IDH2 mutation analysis in reclassified
cases supported the validity of the reclassification. Two major molecular
subgroups can be identified in the remaining PTCL-NOS cases characterized by high
expression of either GATA3 (33%; 40/121) or TBX21 (49%; 59/121). The GATA3
subgroup was significantly associated with poor overall survival (P = .01). High 
expression of cytotoxic gene-signature within the TBX21 subgroup also showed poor
clinical outcome (P = .05). In AITL, high expression of several signatures
associated with the tumor microenvironment was significantly associated with
outcome. A combined prognostic score was predictive of survival in an independent
cohort (P = .004).

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2013-11-536359 
PMCID: PMC4014836
PMID: 24632715  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

