
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2014 Feb;70(Pt 2):200-2. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X13034286. Epub 2014 Jan 21.

Purification, crystallization and X-ray crystallographic studies of flagellin
from Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Song WS(1), Hong M(2), Yoon SI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Immunology and Institute of Antibody Research, College
of Biomedical Science, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon 200-701, Republic
of Korea.
(2)Division of Biological Science and Technology, Yonsei University, Wonju
220-710, Republic of Korea.

Flagellin constitutes the whip-like structure of the bacterial flagellum that is 
required for locomotion. Upon bacterial invasion into a host, flagellin functions
as a pathogen-associated molecular pattern that is recognized by immune
receptors, such as Toll-like receptor 5 (TLR5) and NAIP5/NLRC4, and activates
host innate immunity against pathogens. Structural and biophysical studies of
flagellins have been limited to those of Salmonella species. To better understand
the functions of flagellin, it is necessary to study flagellins from other
species. In this study, the overexpression, purification and crystallization of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa flagellin that lacks the D0 domain (paflagellin-ΔD0) are
reported. paflagellin-ΔD0 crystals diffracted to 2.15 Å resolution and belonged
to space group C2, with one protein molecule in the asymmetric unit. Future
structure-based functional studies of paflagellin would extend the knowledge of
the TLR5 or NAIP5/NLRC4 activation mechanisms of flagellin and would make a
significant contribution to the design of flagellin vaccines and antiradiation
therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X13034286 
PMCID: PMC3936442
PMID: 24637756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

