
1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Jul;52:130-5. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.03.002.
Epub 2014 Mar 13.

Mammalian short palate lung and nasal epithelial clone 1 (SPLUNC1) in
pH-dependent airway hydration.

Tarran R(1), Redinbo MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cystic Fibrosis/Pulmonary Research and Treatment Center, Department of Cell
Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
Electronic address: robert_tarran@med.unc.edu.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, 
USA; Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. Electronic address:
redinbo@unc.edu.

The epithelia that line the conducting airways are the lung's first point of
contact with inhaled pathogens and toxicants. As such, they are known to play an 
important role in the lung's innate defense system, which includes (i) the
production of airway surface liquid (ASL) that helps cleanse the airways through 
the physical removal of pathogens and toxicants on the mucociliary escalator and 
(ii) the secretion of anti-microbial proteins into the ASL to kill inhaled
pathogens. Interestingly, the recently crystallized short palate lung and nasal
epithelial clone 1 (SPLUNC1) protein appears to be a multi-functional protein.
That is, it not only acts as an anti-microbial agent, but also modulates ASL
homeostasis by acting as an endogenous inhibitor of the epithelial Na(+) channel 
(ENaC). This review will focus on the latter function of SPLUNC1, and will
discuss new structural and physiological data regarding SPLUNC1's failure to
function as a regulator of ASL hydration in CF airways.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.03.002 
PMCID: PMC4048990
PMID: 24631954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

