
1. Panminerva Med. 2014 Mar;56(1):57-61.

Decreasing efficacy of the standard seven-day triple therapy containing
amoxycillin and clarithromycin in curing Helicobacter pylori infection in
clinical setting in Italy: a 10-year follow-up study.

Tursi A(1), Elisei W, Giorgetti G, Picchio M, Brandimarte G.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Service, ASL BAT, Andria, Barletta-Andria-Trani, Italy -
antotursi@tiscali.it.

Comment in
    Panminerva Med. 2015 Sep;57(3):145-6.

AIM: The aim of the present study was to assess the efficacy of the standard
triple therapy containing PPI plus amoxycillin and clarithromycin in curing
Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection during a long-term period.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted on 1497 consecutive dyspeptic
patients with proven H. pylori infection and enrolled from 1996 to 2006. Patients
received a standard triple therapy with proton pump inhibitor (PPI) plus
amoxicillin 1 g and clarithromycin 500 mg for 7 days (all twice daily) plus PPI
every day for further 4 weeks in case of active peptic ulcer or severe gastritis 
detected at endoscopy. One month after conclusion of therapy, endoscopy was
performed in those patients for whom the examinations were clinically relevant.
The remaining patients were checked by ¹³C-urea breath test.
RESULTS: The overall H. pylori eradication rate was 70.41% (on intention-to-treat
analysis). However, it decreased significantly during the observation period,
ranging from 90% (95% CI 87.14% to 93.91%) in 1996 to 51.11% (95% CI 48.14% to
55.91%) in 2006 (on i-t-t analysis) (P=0.001). No difference in eradicating the
was found infection between Puglia and Lazio (1996: P=0.39; 2006: P=0.64).
CONCLUSION: Standard triple therapy does not appear anymore a valid therapeutic
strategy for the management of H. pylori infection in clinical practice.


PMID: 24637473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

