
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2014 Feb;70(Pt 2):196-9. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X13033967. Epub 2014 Jan 21.

Preliminary X-ray diffraction analysis of CfaA, a molecular chaperone essential
for the assembly of CFA/I fimbriae of human enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli.

Bao R(1), Esser L(1), Poole S(2), McVeigh A(2), Chen YX(3), Savarino SJ(2), Xia
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-4256, USA.
(2)Enteric Diseases Department, Infectious Diseases Directorate, Naval Medical
Research Center, Silver Spring, MD 20895-7500, USA.
(3)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and School of
Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui
230026, People's Republic of China.

Understanding of pilus bioassembly in Gram-negative bacteria stems mainly from
studies of P pili and type 1 fimbriae of uropathogenic Escherichia coli, which
are mediated by the classic chaperone-usher pathway (CUP). However, CFA/I
fimbriae, a class 5 fimbria and intestinal colonization factor for
enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC), are proposed to assemble via the alternate
chaperone pathway (ACP). Both CUP and ACP fimbrial bioassembly pathways require
the function of a periplasmic chaperone, but their corresponding proteins share
very low similarity in primary sequence. Here, the crystallization of the CFA/I
periplasmic chaperone CfaA by the hanging-drop vapor-diffusion method is
reported. X-ray diffraction data sets were collected from a native CfaA crystal
to 2 Å resolution and to 1.8 and 2.8 Å resolution, respectively, from a lead and 
a platinum derivative. These crystals displayed the symmetry of space group C2,
with unit-cell parameters a = 103.6, b = 28.68, c = 90.60 Å, β = 119.7°. Initial 
phases were derived from multiple isomorphous replacement with anomalous
scattering experiments using the data from the platinum and lead derivatives.
This resulted in an interpretable electron-density map showing one CfaA molecule 
in an asymmetric unit. Sequence assignments were aided by anomalous signals from 
the heavy-atom derivatives. Refinement of the atomic model of CfaA is ongoing,
which is expected to further understanding of the essential aspects and allowable
variations in tertiary structure of the greater family of chaperones involved in 
chaperone-usher mediated bioassembly.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X13033967 
PMCID: PMC3936439
PMID: 24637755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

