
1. Langmuir. 2014 Apr 15;30(14):4019-25. doi: 10.1021/la404673q. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

Single-cell force spectroscopy of bacteria enabled by naturally derived proteins.

Zeng G(1), MÃ¼ller T, Meyer RL.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center (iNANO), Faculty of Science and
Technology, Aarhus University , Aarhus 8000, Denmark.

Bringing the study of bacterial adhesion down to a single-cell level is critical 
for understanding the molecular mechanisms involved in initial bacterial
attachment. We have developed a simple and versatile method for making
single-cell bacterial probes to study the adhesion of single bacterial cells by
atomic force microscopy (AFM). A single-cell probe was made by picking up a
bacterial cell from a glass surface using a tipless AFM cantilever coated with a 
commercial cell adhesive Cell-Tak. The method was applied to four different
bacterial strains, and single-cell adhesion was measured on three surfaces (fresh
glass, hydrophilic glass, and mica). Attachment to the cantilever was stable
during the AFM force measurements that were conducted for 2 h, and viability was 
confirmed by Live/Dead fluorescence staining at the end of each experiment. The
adhesion force and final rupture length were dependent on bacterial strains,
surfaces properties, and contact time. The single-cell probe offers control of
cell immobilization and thus holds advantages over the commonly used multicell
probes with which random immobilization is obtained by submerging the cantilever 
in a bacterial suspension. The reported method provides a general platform for
investigating single-cell interactions of bacteria with different surfaces and
other cells by AFM force spectroscopy, thus improving our understanding of the
mechanisms of bacterial attachment.

DOI: 10.1021/la404673q 
PMID: 24654836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

