
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 Jun;80(11):3442-52. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03880-13. Epub 
2014 Mar 21.

Anoxic androgen degradation by the denitrifying bacterium Sterolibacterium
denitrificans via the 2,3-seco pathway.

Wang PH(1), Yu CP, Lee TH, Lin CW, Ismail W, Wey SP, Kuo AT, Chiang YR.

Author information: 
(1)Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

The biodegradation of steroids is a crucial biochemical process mediated
exclusively by bacteria. So far, information concerning the anoxic catabolic
pathways of androgens is largely unknown, which has prevented many environmental 
investigations. In this work, we show that Sterolibacterium denitrificans DSMZ
13999 can anaerobically mineralize testosterone and some C19 androgens. By using 
a (13)C-metabolomics approach and monitoring the sequential appearance of the
intermediates, we demonstrated that S. denitrificans uses the 2,3-seco pathway to
degrade testosterone under anoxic conditions. Furthermore, based on the
identification of a C17 intermediate, we propose that the A-ring cleavage may be 
followed by the removal of a C2 side chain at C-5 of
17-hydroxy-1-oxo-2,3-seco-androstan-3-oic acid (the A-ring cleavage product) via 
retro-aldol reaction. The androgenic activities of the bacterial culture and the 
identified intermediates were assessed using the lacZ-based yeast androgen assay.
The androgenic activity in the testosterone-grown S. denitrificans culture
decreased significantly over time, indicating its ability to eliminate androgens.
The A-ring cleavage intermediate (≤ 500 μM) did not exhibit androgenic activity, 
whereas the sterane-containing intermediates did. So far, only two
androgen-degrading anaerobes (Sterolibacterium denitrificans DSMZ 13999 [a
betaproteobacterium] and Steroidobacter denitrificans DSMZ 18526 [a
gammaproteobacterium]) have been isolated and characterized, and both of them use
the 2,3-seco pathway to anaerobically degrade androgens. The key intermediate
2,3-seco-androstan-3-oic acid can be used as a signature intermediate for
culture-independent environmental investigations of anaerobic degradation of C19 
androgens.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03880-13 
PMCID: PMC4018845
PMID: 24657867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

