
1. J Immunol. 1989 Mar 15;142(6):2097-104.

A panel of unique HLA-A2 mutant molecules define epitopes recognized by
HLA-A2-specific antibodies and cytotoxic T lymphocytes.

Hogan KT(1), Clayberger C, Bernhard EJ, Walk SF, Ridge JP, Parham P, Krensky AM, 
Engelhard VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville 22908.

HLA-A2.1 and HLA-A2.3, which differ from one another at residues 149, 152, and
156, can be distinguished by the mAb CR11-351 and many allogeneic and xenogeneic 
CTL. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to incorporate several different amino
acid substitutions at each of these positions in HLA-A2.1 to evaluate their
relative importance to serologic and CTL-defined epitopes. Recognition by mAb
CR11-351 was completely lost when Thr but not Pro was substituted for Ala149. A
model to explain this result based on the 3-dimensional structure of HLA-A2.1 is 
presented. In screening eight other mAb, only the substitutions of Pro for Val152
or Gly for Leu156 led to the loss of mAb binding. Because other non-conservative 
substitutions at these same positions had no effect, these results suggest that
the loss of serologic epitopes is in many cases due to a more indirect effect on 
molecular conformation. Specificity analysis using 28 HLA-A2.1-specific
alloreactive and xenoreactive CTL clones showed 19 distinct patterns of
recognition. The epitopes recognized by alloreactive CTL clones demonstrated a
pronounced effect by all substitutions at residue 152, including the very
conservation substitution of Ala for Val. Overall, the most disruptive
substitution at amino acid residue 152 was Pro, followed by Glu, Gln, and then
Ala. In contrast, substitutions at 156 had little or no effect on allogeneic CTL 
recognition, and most clones tolerated either Gly, Ser, or Trp at this position. 
Similar results were seen using a panel of murine HLA-A2.1-specific CTL clones,
except that substitutions at position 156 had a greater effect. The most
disruptive substitution was Trp, followed by Ser and then Gly. In addition, when 
assessed on the entire panel of CTL, the effects of Glu and Gln substitutions at 
position 152 demonstrated that the introduction of a charge difference is no more
disruptive than a comparable change in side chain structure that does not alter
charge. Taken together, these results indicate that the effect of amino acid
replacements at positions 152 and 156 on CTL-defined epitopes depends strongly on
the nature of the substitution. Thus, considerable caution must be exercised in
evaluating the significance of particular positions on the basis of single
mutations. Nonetheless, the more extensive analysis conducted here indicates that
there are differences among residues in the class I Ag "binding pocket," with
residue 152 playing a relatively more important role in formation of allogeneic
CTL-defined epitopes than residue 156.


PMID: 2466083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

