
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2014 Jul;117(1):126-38. doi: 10.1111/jam.12510. Epub 2014 May
15.

Identification and assessment of the effects of yeast decarboxylases expressed in
Escherichia coli for producing higher alcohols.

Su H(1), Zhao Y, Zhao H, Wang M, Li Q, Jiang J, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Bio-resources and Eco-environment of Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

AIMS: To contribute to the improvement of methods for the regulation and
production of higher alcohols using micro-organisms, we assessed the yields
achieved using 10 decarboxylase genes from three different yeast species
(Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Candida tropicalis and Pichia pastoris) by cloning
them into vectors and overexpressing them in Escherichia coli hosts of different 
genotypes. Genes that produced the greatest yields in higher alcohol production
were further assessed for the catalytic effects of the decarboxylase enzymes in
the different E. coli hosts.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A major metabolic pathway is structured via overexpressing a
series of five genes, to detect the effect of decarboxylase on the production of 
higher alcohols. Results suggested that these genes can facilitate production of 
specific types of higher alcohols by diverse types of E. coli. We also showed
that they play direct roles in the metabolic pathways that lead to production of 
higher alcohols in E. coli. The gene ARO10 from S. cerevisiae produced the
highest yields for producing isobutanol and isopentanol in the host JM109.
Significant differences were found in the types of higher alcohols and yields
produced within the same host, for the genes PAD1, GAD1, SPE1 from S. cerevisiae.
Similar results were observed for the genes ODC1 and gadB from Candida tropicalis
and P. pastoris, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Investigation of these genes for identification of the key enzymatic
steps or regulatory pathways involved in the Ehrlich metabolic network to produce
higher alcohols is paramount for producing biofuels. The selected genes are
promising targets for the development of improved production strains.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This is the first published assessment of
the effects of decarboxylases from different yeast species that were expressed in
E. coli, for the production of higher alcohols. Our results provide guidance for 
future studies about the use of yeast enzymes for transforming or constructing a 
new metabolic pathway utilizing E. coli for the production of target higher
alcohols.

Â© 2014 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.12510 
PMID: 24690097  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

