
1. Cells. 2012 May 7;1(2):89-99. doi: 10.3390/cells1020089.

Distinguishing Latent from Active Mycobacterium tuberculosis Infection Using
Elispot Assays: Looking Beyond Interferon-gamma.

Tincati C(1), Cappione Iii AJ(2), Snyder-Cappione JE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Surgery, and Dentistry, Clinic of Infectious Diseases 
and Tropical Medicine, San Paolo Hospital, University of Milan, 20142 Milan,
Italy. camilla.tincati@unimi.it.
(2)EMD Millipore Corporation, 17 Cherry Hill Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA.
amedeo.cappione@merckgroup.com.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Flow Cytometry Core Facility, Boston University
School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA. cappione@bu.edu.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) is a global heath epidemic, its threat amplified
by HIV infection and the emergence of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB). 
Interferon (IFN)-gamma release assays (IGRAs) have improved the accuracy of
detection of MTB exposure in some subject groups as compared to the Tuberculin
Skin Test (TST). However, as IFN-gamma is produced by both fully rested and more 
recently activated populations of memory T cells, it is not surprising that the
measurement of this cytokine alone cannot accurately distinguish Latent TB
Infected (LTBI) subjects from those with active (infectious) disease. Accurate
and rapid diagnosis of infectious individuals would allow medication to be
properly allocated and other actions taken to more effectively curtail MTB
spread. Analysis of multi-cytokine profiles ex vivo after stimulation of PBMCs
from LTBI and active MTB subjects indicate the real possibility of successfully
discerning these two disease states within 24 hours of a subject's blood draw.
Due to the unparalleled sensitivity, low cost, and ease of use of Elispot assays,
we propose that via a multiplex Elispot platform the accurate distinction of LTBI
from active MTB-infected individuals is within reach.

DOI: 10.3390/cells1020089 
PMCID: PMC3901089
PMID: 24710416 

