
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Aug;96(2):295-303. doi: 10.1189/jlb.3A0513-242R. Epub 2014
Apr 8.

Induction of immunomodulatory monocytes by human mesenchymal stem cell-derived
hepatocyte growth factor through ERK1/2.

Chen PM(1), Liu KJ(2), Hsu PJ(1), Wei CF(1), Bai CH(3), Ho LJ(4), Sytwu HK(5),
Yen BL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Medicine and.
(2)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes,
Zhunan, Taiwan; School of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology and.
(3)Department of Public Health, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei, Taiwan;
(4)Gerontology Research Groups, Institute of Cellular and System Medicine, and.
(5)Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Defense Medical
Center, Taipei, Taiwan; and.
(6)Regenerative Medicine and Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology, Cathay General 
Hospital Shiji, Taipei, Taiwan blyen@nhri.org.tw.

Monocytes are a population of leukocytes that terminally differentiate into
macrophages and DCs. Whereas these differentiated progeny have inflammatory and
resident--which are more immunomodulatory--phenotypes, less has been reported on 
the plasticity of monocytes themselves. We found that MSCs, a population of
somatic stem cells, can rapidly induce human and murine monocytes through
secretion of HGF to acquire an immunomodulatory phenotype to suppress T cell
effector function. MSCs are multilineage postnatal progenitor cells with strong
immunomodulatory effects toward T lymphocytes, NK lymphocytes, and DCs, but less 
is known regarding their interactions with monocytes. We found that CD14(+) human
monocytes express c-Met, the receptor for HGF, and both depletion of HGF-treated 
CD14(+) monocytes and knockdown of HGF secretion in MSCs abrogate the suppression
of anti-CD3/28-activated T cell proliferation. HGF-treated monocytes remain
undifferentiated and can alter activated T cell cytokine expression from a Th1
toward Th2 profile. Moreover, monocytes cocultured with MSCs or treated with HGF 
alone can produce high levels of IL-10, a potent immunomodulatory cytokine.
Injection of HGF to WT mice also results in an increase in IL-10(+)-expressing
monocytes from the spleen, a known reservoir for circulating monocytes.
Mechanistically, HGFs modulate IL-10 production in monocytes through the ERK1/2
pathway. Our data demonstrate further the pleomorphic nature of MSC
immunomodulation, as well as highlight the important role of immunomodulatory
monocytes in altering T cell effector function.

Â© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.3A0513-242R 
PMID: 24714552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

