
1. J Immunol. 2014 May 15;192(10):4887-96. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1303481. Epub 2014 
Apr 11.

ATM increases activation-induced cytidine deaminase activity at downstream S
regions during class-switch recombination.

Khair L(1), Guikema JE, Linehan EK, Ucher AJ, Leus NG, Ogilvie C, Lou Z, Schrader
CE, Stavnezer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605.

Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) initiates Ab class-switch
recombination (CSR) in activated B cells resulting in exchanging the IgH C region
and improved Ab effector function. During CSR, AID instigates DNA double-strand
break (DSB) formation in switch (S) regions located upstream of C region genes.
DSBs are necessary for CSR, but improper regulation of DSBs can lead to
chromosomal translocations that can result in B cell lymphoma. The protein kinase
ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is an important proximal regulator of the DNA
damage response (DDR), and translocations involving S regions are increased in
its absence. ATM phosphorylates H2AX, which recruits other DNA damage response
(DDR) proteins, including mediator of DNA damage checkpoint 1 (Mdc1) and p53
binding protein 1 (53BP1), to sites of DNA damage. As these DDR proteins all
function to promote repair and recombination of DSBs during CSR, we examined
whether mouse splenic B cells deficient in these proteins would show alterations 
in S region DSBs when undergoing CSR. We find that in atm(-/-) cells Sμ DSBs are 
increased, whereas DSBs in downstream Sγ regions are decreased. We also find that
mutations in the unrearranged Sγ3 segment are reduced in atm(-/-) cells. Our data
suggest that ATM increases AID targeting and activity at downstream acceptor S
regions during CSR and that in atm(-/-) cells Sμ DSBs accumulate as they lack a
recombination partner.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1303481 
PMCID: PMC4049217
PMID: 24729610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

