
1. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Jul;44(7):2025-35. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343937. Epub 2014 May 
2.

IFN-γ-producing NKT cells exacerbate sepsis by enhancing C5a generation via
IL-10-mediated inhibition of CD55 expression on neutrophils.

Kim JH(1), Oh SJ, Ahn S, Chung DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea; Laboratory of Immune Regulation, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul 
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Ji Hyung Kim, Program in
Cellular and Molecular Medicine at Children's Hospital, Department of
Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

A role for NKT cells has been implicated in sepsis, but the mechanism by which
NKT cells contribute to sepsis remains unclear. Here, we examined WT and
NKT-cell-deficient mice of C57BL/6 background during cecal ligation and
puncture-induced sepsis. The levels of C5a, IFN-γ, and IL-10 were higher in the
serum and peritoneal fluid of WT mice than in those of CD1d(-/-) mice, while the 
mortality rate was lower in CD1d(-/-) mice than in WT mice. C5a blockade
decreased mortality of WT mice during sepsis, whereas it did not alter that of
CD1d(-/-) mice. As assessed by intracellular staining, NKT cells expressed IFN-γ,
while neutrophils expressed IL-10. Upon coculture, IL-10-deficient NKT cells
enhanced IL-10 production by WT, but not IFN-γR-deficient, neutrophils.
Meanwhile, CD1d(-/-) mice exhibited high CD55 expression on neutrophils during
sepsis, whereas those cells from WT mice expressed minimal levels of CD55.
Recombinant IL-10 administration into CD1d(-/-) mice reduced CD55 expression on
neutrophils. Furthermore, adoptive transfer of sorted WT, but not
IFN-γ-deficient, NKT cells into CD1d(-/-) mice suppressed CD55 expression on
neutrophils, but increased IL-10 and C5a levels. Taken together, IFN-γ-producing 
NKT cells enhance C5a generation via IL-10-mediated inhibition of CD55 expression
on neutrophils, thereby exacerbating sepsis.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201343937 
PMID: 24723363  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

