
1. Animal. 2014 Jun;8(6):859-66. doi: 10.1017/S1751731114000779. Epub 2014 Apr 11.

Inheritance of porcine receptors for enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli with
fimbriae F4ad and their relation to other F4 receptors.

Rampoldi A(1), Bertschinger HU(1), Bürgi E(2), Dolf G(3), Sidler X(2), Bratus
A(1), Vögeli P(1), Neuenschwander S(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Institute of Agricultural Sciences, ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)2 Department of Farm Animals, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich, 8057
Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)3 Institute of Genetics, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Berne, 3012 Berne,
Switzerland.

Enteric Escherichia coli infections are a highly relevant cause of disease and
death in young pigs. Breeding genetically resistant pigs is an economical and
sustainable method of prevention. Resistant pigs are protected against
colonization of the intestine through the absence of receptors for the bacterial 
fimbriae, which mediate adhesion to the intestinal surface. The present work
aimed at elucidation of the mode of inheritance of the F4ad receptor which
according to former investigations appeared quite confusing. Intestines of 489
pigs of an experimental herd were examined by a microscopic adhesion test
modified in such a manner that four small intestinal sites instead of one were
tested for adhesion of the fimbrial variant F4ad. Segregation analysis revealed
that the mixed inheritance model explained our data best. The heritability of the
F4ad phenotype was estimated to be 0.7±0.1. There are no relations to the strong 
receptors for variants F4ab and F4ac. Targeted matings allowed the discrimination
between two F4ad receptors, that is, a fully adhesive receptor (F4adRFA)
expressed on all enterocytes and at all small intestinal sites, and a partially
adhesive receptor (F4adRPA) variably expressed at different sites and often
leading to partial bacterial adhesion. In pigs with both F4ad receptors, the
F4adRPA receptor is masked by the F4adRFA. The hypothesis that F4adRFA must be
encoded by at least two complementary or epistatic dominant genes is supported by
the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium statistics. The F4adRPA receptor is inherited as a
monogenetic dominant trait. A comparable partially adhesive receptor for variant 
F4ab (F4abRPA) was also observed but the limited data did not allow a prediction 
of the mode of inheritance. Pigs were therefore classified into one of eight
receptor phenotypes: A1 (F4abRFA/F4acR+/F4adRFA); A2 (F4abRFA/F4acR+/F4adRPA); B 
(F4abRFA/F4acR+/F4adR-); C1 (F4abRPA/F4acR-/F4adRFA); C2
(F4abRPA/F4acR-/F4adRPA); D1 (F4abR-/F4acR-/F4adRFA); D2 (F4abR-/F4acR-/F4adRPA);
E (F4abR-/F4acR-/F4adR-).

DOI: 10.1017/S1751731114000779 
PMID: 24725922  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

