
1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Jun;13(6):1503-13. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0722. Epub
2014 Apr 10.

Immunotherapy for hepatoma using a dual-function vector with both
immunostimulatory and pim-3-silencing effects.

Guo Q(1), Lan P(2), Yu X(2), Han Q(2), Zhang J(2), Tian Z(1), Zhang C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Institute of Immunopharmacology & Immunotherapy, School
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan; Department of Pharmacy,
The Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Qingdao University, Qingdao,
Shandong; and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Life Sciences,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, ChinaAuthors'
Affiliations: Institute of Immunopharmacology & Immunotherapy, School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan; Department of Pharmacy, The 
Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Qingdao University, Qingdao, Shandong;
and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Life Sciences,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China.
(2)Authors' Affiliations: Institute of Immunopharmacology & Immunotherapy, School
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan; Department of Pharmacy,
The Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Qingdao University, Qingdao,
Shandong; and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Life Sciences,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China.
(3)Authors' Affiliations: Institute of Immunopharmacology & Immunotherapy, School
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan; Department of Pharmacy,
The Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Qingdao University, Qingdao,
Shandong; and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Life Sciences,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China
caizhangsd@sdu.edu.cn.

Tumorigenesis is an immortalization process in which the growth of normal cells
is uncontrolled and programmed cell death is suppressed. Molecular biologic and
immunologic studies have revealed that the aberrant expression of some
proto-oncogenes boosts proliferation and inhibits apoptosis, which is vital for
tumor development. The hypofunction of the host immune system also drives the
development and metastasis of malignant tumors. Pim-3, a member of the Pim
family, is aberrantly expressed in several cancers. Data suggest that Pim-3
inhibits apoptosis by phosphorylating the proapoptotic BH3-only protein Bad.
Here, we constructed a dual-function small hairpin RNA (shRNA) vector containing 
an shRNA targeting Pim-3 and a TLR7-stimulating ssRNA. Stimulation with this
bi-functional vector in vitro promoted significant apoptosis of Hepa1-6 cells by 
regulating the expression of apoptosis-related proteins and induced secretion of 
type I IFNs. Most importantly, this bi-functional vector more effectively
inhibited subcutaneous Hepa1-6 cell growth than did single shRNA and ssRNA
treatment in vivo. Natural killer (NK), CD4(+) T, and CD8(+) T cells and
macrophages were required for effective tumor suppression, and CD4(+) T cells
were shown to play a helper role in the activation of NK cells, possibly by
regulating the secretion of Th1 or Th2 cytokines. This ssRNA-shRNA bi-functional 
vector may represent a promising approach for tumor therapy.

Â©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0722 
PMID: 24723452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

