
1. J Immunol. 2014 May 15;192(10):4581-91. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300774. Epub 2014 
Apr 14.

The human immune system recognizes neopeptides derived from mitochondrial DNA
deletions.

Duvvuri B(1), Duvvuri VR, Wang C, Chen L, Wagar LE, Jamnik V, Wu J, Yeung RS,
Grigull J, Watts TH, Wu GE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York University, Toronto, Ontario
M3J 1P3, Canada;

Mutations in mitochondrial (mt) DNA accumulate with age and can result in the
generation of neopeptides. Immune surveillance of such neopeptides may allow
suboptimal mitochondria to be eliminated, thereby avoiding mt-related diseases,
but may also contribute to autoimmunity in susceptible individuals. To date, the 
direct recognition of neo-mtpeptides by the adaptive immune system has not been
demonstrated. In this study we used bioinformatics approaches to predict MHC
binding of neopeptides identified from known deletions in mtDNA. Six such
peptides were confirmed experimentally to bind to HLA-A*02. Pre-existing human
CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells from healthy donors were shown to recognize and respond
to these neopeptides. One remarkably promiscuous immunodominant peptide (P9)
could be presented by diverse MHC molecules to CD4(+) and/or CD8(+) T cells from 
75% of the healthy donors tested. The common soil microbe, Bacillus pumilus,
encodes a 9-mer that differs by one amino acid from P9. Similarly, the ATP
synthase F0 subunit 6 from normal human mitochondria encodes a 9-mer with a
single amino acid difference from P9 with 89% homology to P9. T cells expanded
from human PBMCs using the B. pumilus or self-mt peptide bound to P9/HLA-A2
tetramers, arguing for cross-reactivity between T cells with specificity for self
and foreign homologs of the altered mt peptide. These findings provide proof of
principal that the immune system can recognize peptides arising from spontaneous 
somatic mutations and that such responses might be primed by foreign peptides
and/or be cross-reactive with self.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300774 
PMID: 24733843  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

