
1. Eur J Med Chem. 2014 May 22;79:173-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2014.04.016. Epub
2014 Apr 5.

Optimization of anti-virulence PqsR antagonists regarding aqueous solubility and 
biological properties resulting in new insights in structure-activity
relationships.

Lu C(1), Kirsch B(1), Maurer CK(1), de Jong JC(1), Braunshausen A(1), Steinbach
A(1), Hartmann RW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Campus C2.3, 66123
Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Campus C2.3, 66123
Saarbrücken, Germany; Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Saarland
University, Campus C2.3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address:
rolf.hartmann@helmholtz-hzi.de.

Increasing antibiotic resistance urgently requires novel therapeutic options to
combat bacterial infections. The anti-virulence therapy selectively intervening
with pathogenicity without affecting bacterial viability is such a strategy to
overcome resistance. We consider the virulence regulator PqsR as an attractive
target in the human pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and recently discovered the 
first PqsR antagonists, which, however, suffered from poor aqueous solubility. In
this work, the antagonists were structurally modified to become more soluble, and
their structure-activity as well as structure-property relationships were
studied. A novel promising compound with improved solubility and enhanced
anti-virulence activity was discovered (IC50: 3.8 μM, pyocyanin). Our findings
emphasize the crucial role of substituents at the 3-position and the carbonyl
group at the 4-position for ligand-receptor interactions, and illuminate the way 
for further optimization of PqsR antagonists as anti-virulence agents.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2014.04.016 
PMID: 24735643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

