
1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 18;9(4):e93941. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093941. eCollection
2014.

Infection of keratinocytes with Trichophytum rubrum induces epidermal growth
factor-dependent RNase 7 and human beta-defensin-3 expression.

Firat YH(1), Simanski M(1), Rademacher F(1), Schröder L(1), Brasch J(1), Harder
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein,
Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

Human keratinocytes are able to express various antimicrobial peptides (AMP) to
protect the skin from exaggerated microbial colonization and infection. Recently,
in vitro growth-inhibiting activity of the skin-derived AMP psoriasin, RNase 7
and human beta-defensin (hBD)-2 against dermatophytes such as Trichophyton (T.)
rubrum have been reported. To evaluate whether keratinocytes are able to respond 
to T. rubrum infection by an induced expression of AMP we exposed primary
keratinocytes to living conidia of T. rubrum. This led to conidia germination and
mycelial growth which was paralleled by a strong gene induction of the
skin-derived AMP RNase 7 and hBD-3. Gene expression of the AMP psoriasin (S100A7)
and hBD-2 were only slightly induced. The T. rubrum-mediated RNase 7 gene
induction was accompanied by increased secretion of RNase 7. Parallel treatment
of the keratinocytes with T. rubrum and the cytokine combination IL-17A/IFN-γ
resulted in synergistic induction of RNase 7 and hBD-3 expression. Since patients
receiving therapy by inhibition of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
more often suffer from dermatophytoses we investigated whether EGFR may be
involved in the T. rubrum-mediated RNase 7 and hBD-3 induction. Primary
keratinocytes incubated with an EGFR blocking antibody as well as with the EGFR
antagonist AG1478 showed a significantly diminished RNase 7 and hBD-3 induction
upon exposure of the keratinocytes to T. rubrum indicating that EGFR is involved 
in the T. rubrum-mediated induction of RNase 7 and hBD-3. The growth of T. rubrum
in vitro was inhibited by hBD-3 in a dose-dependent manner suggesting that hBD-3 
may contribute to cutaneous innate defense against T. rubrum. Taken together our 
data indicate that keratinocytes are able to initiate a fast defense response
towards T. rubrum by the increased expression of AMP active against T. rubrum. A 
dysregulation of AMP may contribute to chronic and recurring dermatophytoses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093941 
PMCID: PMC3991580
PMID: 24747887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

