
1. J Exp Med. 2014 May 5;211(5):929-42. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131379. Epub 2014 Apr 21.

Leucine-rich repeat containing 8A (LRRC8A) is essential for T lymphocyte
development and function.

Kumar L(1), Chou J, Yee CS, Borzutzky A, Vollmann EH, von Andrian UH, Park SY,
Hollander G, Manis JP, Poliani PL, Geha RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and 2 Joint Program in Transfusion Medicine, Division
of Laboratory Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital; and 3 Department of
Pediatrics, 4 Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, and 5 Department of
Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2014 May 5;211(5):746-7.

Lrrc8a is a ubiquitously expressed gene that encodes a leucine-rich repeat
(LRR)-containing protein detected at higher levels on the surface of thymocytes
than on other immune cells. We generated Lrrc8a(-/-) mice to investigate the role
of LRRC8A in lymphocyte development and function. Lrrc8a(-/-) mice had increased 
prenatal and postnatal mortality, growth retardation, and multiple tissue
abnormalities. Lrrc8a(-/-) mice displayed a modest block in B cell development
but intact intrinsic B cell function. In contrast, both Lrrc8a(-/-) mice and
Lrrc8a(-/-)â†’Rag2(-/-) bone marrow chimeras exhibited a severe cell-intrinsic
block in early thymic development, with decreased proliferation and increased
apoptosis of thymocytes, and impaired peripheral T cell function. Thymic
epithelial cells expressed an LRRC8A ligand that was critical for double-negative
to double-positive thymocyte differentiation and survival in vitro. LRRC8A
constitutively associated with the GRB2-GAB2 complex and lymphocyte-specific
protein tyrosine kinase (LCK) in thymocytes. LRRC8A ligation activated AKT via
the LCK-ZAP-70-GAB2-PI3K pathway, and AKT phosphorylation was markedly reduced in
the thymus of Lrrc8a(-/-) mice. These findings reveal an essential role for
LRRC8A in T cell development, survival, and function.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20131379 
PMCID: PMC4010910
PMID: 24752297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

