
1. Folia Microbiol (Praha). 2014 Sep;59(5):439-45. doi: 10.1007/s12223-014-0318-2.
Epub 2014 Apr 25.

Partial characterization of a crude cold-active lipase from Rhodococcus
cercidiphylli BZ22.

Yu D(1), Margesin R.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology and Engineering of Ministry of
Education, College of Life Science, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street,
Changchun, 130012, People's Republic of China.

Cold-active lipase production by the psychrophilic strain Rhodococcus
cercidiphylli BZ22 isolated from hydrocarbon-contaminated alpine soil was
investigated. Depending on the medium composition, high cell densities were
observed at a temperature range of 1-10 °C in Luria-Bertani (LB) broth or 1-30 °C
in Reasoner's 2A (R2A). Maximum enzyme production was achieved at a cultivation
temperature of 1-10 °C in LB medium. About 70-80% of the secreted enzyme was
bound to the cell and was highly active as a cell-immobilized lipase which
exhibited good reusability; more than 60% of the initial lipase activity was
retained after five-fold reuse. The properties of the lipase produced by the
investigated strain were compared with those of a mesophilic porcine pancreatic
lipase (PPL). The thermal stability of the cell-immobilized bacterial lipase was 
higher than that of the extracellular enzyme. Highest activity was detected at 30
°C for the cell-immobilized enzyme and for PPL, while the extracellular enzyme
displayed highest activity at 10-20 °C. The bacterial lipase hydrolyzed
p-nitrophenyl (p-NP) esters with different acyl chain lengths (C2-C18). The
highest hydrolytic activity was obtained with p-NP-butyrate (C4) as substrate,
while the highest substrate affinity was obtained with p-NP-dodecanoate (C12) as 
substrate, indicating a clear preference of the enzyme for medium acyl chain
lengths.

DOI: 10.1007/s12223-014-0318-2 
PMID: 24764019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

