
1. J Org Chem. 2014 May 16;79(10):4615-34. doi: 10.1021/jo500640n. Epub 2014 May 2.

Intramolecular aglycon delivery enables the synthesis of
6-deoxy-β-D-manno-heptosides as fragments of Burkholderia pseudomallei and
Burkholderia mallei capsular polysaccharide.

Tamigney Kenfack M(1), Blériot Y, Gauthier C.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Poitiers, Institut de Chimie IC2MP, UMR-CNRS 7285, Équipe
Synthèse Organique , 4 rue Michel Brunet, 86073 Poitiers, France.

Burkholderia pseudomallei and Burkholderia mallei are potential bioterrorism
agents. They express the same capsular polysaccharide (CPS), a homopolymer
featuring an unusual [→3)-2-O-acetyl-6-deoxy-β-D-manno-heptopyranosyl-(1→] as the
repeating unit. This CPS is known to be one of the main targets of the adaptive
immune response in humans and therefore represents a crucial subunit candidate
for vaccine development. Herein, the stereoselective synthesis of mono- and
disaccharidic fragments of the B. pseudomallei and B. mallei CPS repeating unit
is reported. The synthesis of 6-deoxy-β-D-manno-heptosides was investigated using
both inter- and intramolecular glycosylation strategies from thio-manno-heptose
that was modified with 2-naphthylmethyl (NAP) at C2. We show here that
NAP-mediated intramolecular aglycon delivery (IAD) represents a suitable approach
for the stereocontrolled synthesis of 6-deoxy-β-D-manno-heptosides without the
need for rigid 4,6-O-cyclic protection of the sugar skeleton. The IAD strategy is
highly modular, as it can be applied to structurally diverse acceptors with
complete control of stereoselectivity. Problematic hydrogenation of the
acetylated disaccharides was overcome by using a microfluidic continuous flow
reactor.

DOI: 10.1021/jo500640n 
PMID: 24786555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

