
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2014 Jul;52(7):2472-8. doi: 10.1128/JCM.03329-13. Epub 2014 Apr
30.

Development and application of a multilocus sequence typing scheme for
Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus.

Dumke J(1), Hinse D(1), Vollmer T(1), Knabbe C(1), Dreier J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Laboratoriums- und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bad
Oeynhausen, Germany.
(2)Institut für Laboratoriums- und Transfusionsmedizin, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Universitätsklinik der Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bad
Oeynhausen, Germany jdreier@hdz-nrw.de.

Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus (formerly known as S. bovis
biotype I) is a commensal of the gastrointestinal tract in animals and in up to
15% of healthy humans. Furthermore, it is a facultative pathogen that can cause
infectious endocarditis, mastitis, and septicemia. The number of infections is
increasing, but the transmission routes and zoonotic potential remain unknown. To
assess the zoonotic potential and characterize the epidemiological structure of
S. gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus, we established a multilocus sequence typing 
(MLST) scheme. We amplified and sequenced internal fragments of seven
housekeeping genes. The resulting sequences were analyzed with BioNumerics
software 6.6 by using the unweighted-pair group method using average linkages
algorithm. A total of 101 S. gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus strains isolated
from animals, humans, and environmental samples were analyzed and divided into 50
sequence types. Our first results highlight the importance of this MLST scheme
for investigating the epidemiology, transmission patterns, and infection chains
of S. gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.03329-13 
PMCID: PMC4097760
PMID: 24789199  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

