
1. GM Crops Food. 2014 Apr-Jun;5(2):120-31. doi: 10.4161/gmcr.28942. Epub 2014 May
2.

Metabolomic shifts in Brassica napus lines with enhanced BnPLC2 expression impact
their response to low temperature stress and plant pathogens.

Nokhrina K(1), Ray H(1), Bock C(1), Georges F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biotechnology Institute; National Research Council Canada; Saskatoon, SK
Canada.
(2)Plant Biotechnology Institute; National Research Council Canada; Saskatoon, SK
Canada; Department of Biochemistry; College of Medicine; University of
Saskatchewan; Saskatoon, SK Canada.

Phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C2 (PLC2) is a signaling enzyme with 
hydrolytic activity against membrane-bound phosphoinositides. It catalyzes the
cleavage of phosphatidylinositol(4,5)bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P 2) into two
initial second messengers, myo-inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP 3) and
diacylglycerol (DAG). The former, as well as its fully phosphorylated derivative,
myo-inositol-1,2,3,4,5,6-hexakisphosphate (InsP 6), play a major role in calcium 
signaling events within the cell, while DAG may be used in the regeneration of
phospholipids or as a precursor for phosphatidic acid (PA) biosynthesis, an
important signaling molecule involved in both biotic and abiotic types of stress 
tolerance. Overexpression of the gene for Brassica napus phospholipase C2
(BnPLC2) in Brassica napus has been shown to enhance drought tolerance, modulate 
multiple genes involved in different processes and favorably affect hormonal
levels in different tissues. We, therefore, undertook the current study with a
view to examining, at the metabolome level, its effect on both abiotic (low
temperature) and biotic (stem white rot disease) types of stress in canola. Thus,
while transgenic plants exhibited a significant rise in maltose levels and a
concomitant elevation in some unsaturated free fatty acids (FFAs), glycerol, and 
glycerol 3-phosphate under subzero temperatures, they accumulated high levels of 
raffinose, stachyose and other sugars as well as some flavonoids under
acclimatization conditions. Collectively, overexpression of BnPLC2 appears to
have triggered different metabolite patterns consistent with its abiotic and, to 
a limited extent, biotic stress tolerance phenotypes.

DOI: 10.4161/gmcr.28942 
PMCID: PMC5033168
PMID: 24787279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

