
1. Molecules. 2014 Apr 30;19(5):5570-98. doi: 10.3390/molecules19055570.

Fatty acids as a tool to understand microbial diversity and their role in food
webs of Mediterranean temporary ponds.

de Carvalho CC(1), Caramujo MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)IBB-Institute for Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Centre for Biological and 
Chemical Engineering, Department of Bioengineering, Instituto Superior TÃ©cnico,
Universidade de Lisboa, Av. Rovisco Pais, Lisbon 1049-001, Portugal.
ccarvalho@ist.utl.pt.
(2)Centre for Environmental Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Universidade de Lisboa,
Campo Grande C2, Lisbon 1749-016, Portugal. mariajose.caramujo@iss.it.

Temporary Mediterranean ponds are complex ecosystems which support a high
diversity of organisms that include heterotrophic microorganisms, algae,
crustaceans, amphibians and higher plants, and have the potential to supply food 
and a resting place to migratory birds. The role of heterotrophs at the base of
the food web in providing energy to the higher trophic levels was studied in
temporary ponds in Central and Southern Portugal. The relative quantification of 
the hetero and autotrophic biomass at the base of the food web in each pond was
derived from the polar fatty acid (PLFA) composition of seston through the
application of the matrix factorization program CHEMTAX that used specific PLFA
and their relative proportion as markers for e.g., classes of bacteria, algae and
fungi. The species composition of the culturable microbial communities was
identified through their fatty acid profiles. The biomass in the lower trophic
level of some ponds presented an even proportion of auto to heterotrophic
organisms whilst either bacteria or algae dominated in others. In a selected
subset of ponds, the incorporation of bacterial fatty acids was observed to occur
in potentially herbivorous zooplankton crustacean. Zooplankton consumed and
incorporated bacterial fatty acids into their body tissues, including into their 
phospholipids, which indicates that energy of heterotrophic origin contributes to
the aquatic food webs of temporary ponds.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules19055570 
PMCID: PMC6271346
PMID: 24786844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

