
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Apr 28;20(16):4586-96. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i16.4586.

Inflammation-related factors predicting prognosis of gastric cancer.

Chang WJ(1), Du Y(1), Zhao X(1), Ma LY(1), Cao GW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wen-Jun Chang, Yan Du, Guang-Wen Cao, Department of Epidemiology, Second
Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China.

Gastric cancer (GC), which is mainly induced by Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori)
infection, is one of the leading causes of cancer-related death in the developing
world. Active inflammation initiated by H. pylori infection and maintained by
inherent immune disorders promotes carcinogenesis and postoperative recurrence.
However, the presence with H. pylori in tumors has been linked to a better
prognosis, possibly due to the induction of antitumor immunity. Tumor
infiltrations of tumor-associated macrophages, myeloid-derived suppressor cells, 
neutrophils, Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells are correlated with poor prognosis.
Tumor infiltrating CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes, dendritic cells, and CD45RO T 
cells are generally associated with good prognosis of GC, although some subsets
of these immune cells have inverse prognosis prediction values. High ratios of
Foxp3(+)/CD4(+) and Foxp3(+)/CD8(+) in tumors are associated with a poor
prognosis; whereas high Th1/Th2 ratio in tumors predicts a good prognosis. High
levels of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-10, IL-32, and chemokine C-C motif ligands
(CCL)7 and CCL21 in circulation, high expression of CXC chemokine receptor 4,
chemokine C-C motif receptor (CCR)3, CCR4, CCR5, CCR7, hypoxia-inducible
factor-1Î±, signal transducer activator of transcription-3, cyclooxygenase-2, and 
orphan nuclear receptor 4A2 in tumors are associated with an unfavorable
prognosis. Increased serum levels of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-3, MMP-7,
and MMP-11 and increased levels of MMP-9, MMP-12, and MMP-21 in tumors are
consistently associated with poor survival of GC. Further emphasis should be put 
on the integration of these biomarkers and validation in large cohorts for
personalized prediction of GC postoperative prognosis.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i16.4586 
PMCID: PMC4000495
PMID: 24782611  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

