
1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014 Dec;71(23):4665-73. doi: 10.1007/s00018-014-1635-y. Epub 
2014 May 9.

Fructose transport-deficient Staphylococcus aureus reveals important role of
epithelial glucose transporters in limiting sugar-driven bacterial growth in
airway surface liquid.

Garnett JP(1), Braun D, McCarthy AJ, Farrant MR, Baker EH, Lindsay JA, Baines DL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Infection and Immunity, St George's, University of London,
Tooting, London, SW17 0RE, UK.

Hyperglycaemia as a result of diabetes mellitus or acute illness is associated
with increased susceptibility to respiratory infection with Staphylococcus
aureus. Hyperglycaemia increases the concentration of glucose in airway surface
liquid (ASL) and promotes the growth of S. aureus in vitro and in vivo. Whether
elevation of other sugars in the blood, such as fructose, also results in
increased concentrations in ASL is unknown and whether sugars in ASL are directly
utilised by S. aureus for growth has not been investigated. We obtained mutant S.
aureus JE2 strains with transposon disrupted sugar transport genes. NE768(fruA)
exhibited restricted growth in 10 mM fructose. In H441 airway
epithelial-bacterial co-culture, elevation of basolateral sugar concentration
(5-20 mM) increased the apical growth of JE2. However, sugar-induced growth of
NE768(fruA) was significantly less when basolateral fructose rather than glucose 
was elevated. This is the first experimental evidence to show that S. aureus
directly utilises sugars present in the ASL for growth. Interestingly, JE2 growth
was promoted less by glucose than fructose. Net transepithelial flux of D-glucose
was lower than D-fructose. However, uptake of D-glucose was higher than
D-fructose across both apical and basolateral membranes consistent with the
presence of GLUT1/10 in the airway epithelium. Therefore, we propose that the
preferential uptake of glucose (compared to fructose) limits its accumulation in 
ASL. Pre-treatment with metformin increased transepithelial resistance and
reduced the sugar-dependent growth of S. aureus. Thus, epithelial paracellular
permeability and glucose transport mechanisms are vital to maintain low glucose
concentration in ASL and limit bacterial nutrient sources as a defence against
infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-014-1635-y 
PMCID: PMC4232747
PMID: 24810961  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

