
1. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 8;5:e1210. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.180.

Pigment epithelium-derived factor expression prolongs survival and enhances the
cytotoxicity of low-dose chemotherapy in castration-refractory prostate cancer.

Nelius T(1), Martinez-Marin D(1), Hirsch J(1), Miller B(2), Rinard K(1), Lopez
J(1), de Riese W(1), Filleur S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Texas Tech University-Health Sciences Center, 3601 4th 
Street, Lubbock, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Texas Tech University-Health Sciences Center, 3601
4th Street, Lubbock, TX, USA.
(3)1] Department of Urology, Texas Tech University-Health Sciences Center, 3601
4th Street, Lubbock, TX, USA [2] Department of Immunology and Molecular
Microbiology, Texas Tech University-Health Sciences Center, 3601 4th Street,
Lubbock, TX, USA.

There is currently no cure for advanced castration-refractory prostate cancer
(CRPC) despite the recent approval of several new therapeutic agents. We report
here the anti-tumor effect of the angio-inhibitory pigment epithelium-derived
factor (PEDF) in the metastatic LNCaP-derivative CRPC CL1 model and explore PEDF 
anti-neoplasic efficacy in combination with low-dose chemotherapy.
Androgen-sensitive LNCaP and CRPC PC3 cell lines were examined as comparison.
Using a retroviral expression system, we showed that PEDF limited the
proliferation of all prostatic cell lines tested; an effect attributed to
interleukin 8 (IL8)-CXCR1/IL8RA inhibition. PEDF also reduced the number and size
of 3D tumor spheroids in vitro, but only induced cell differentiation in CRPC
spheroids. Similarly, PEDF inhibited the migration of CRPC cells suggesting both 
anti-proliferative and anti-migratory functions. In vivo, PEDF decreased by 85%
and 65% the growth of subcutaneous (s.c.) PC3 and CL1 tumors, respectively. In
the CL1 orthotopic model, tumor intake with lethal metastases was found in all
animals; nevertheless, PEDF prolonged the median survival of tumor-bearing mice
(95% confidence interval: 53 ± 0.001 to 57 ± 1 days). Accordingly, PEDF delayed
the emergence of skeletal-related event in intra-tibial xenografts. Next, we
evaluated low-dose docetaxel (DTX; 5, 1, 0.5 mg/kg) or cyclophosphamide (CTX;
10-20 mg/kg) on established s.c. PC3 tumors that conditionally express PEDF
anti-tumoral epitope/NT3. Although NT3-DTX-5 mg/kg combination was inefficient,
NT3-DTX-1 mg/kg and -0.5 mg/kg inhibited by 95% and 87.8%, respectively, tumor
growth compared with control and induced tumor stasis. Both NT3-CTX combinations 
were advantageous. Inversely, PEDF-DTX-5 mg/kg and PEDF-CTX-10 mg/kg delayed the 
most CL1 tumor growth (15, 11 and 5 days for PEDF-DTX-5 mg/kg, PEDF-CTX-10 mg/kg 
and single treatments, respectively) with elevated apoptosis and serum
thrombospondin-1 as possible mechanism and marker, respectively. As well, both
PEDF-CTX-10 mg/kg and PEDF-DTX-5 mg/kg prolonged significantly the survival of
tumor-bearing mice compared with single treatments. Metastases were reduced in
PEDF-DTX-5 mg/kg compared with other treatments, suggesting that PEDF-DTX delayed
metastases formation. Our results advocate that PEDF/low-dose chemotherapy may
represent a new therapeutic alternative for CRPC.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2014.180 
PMCID: PMC4047872
PMID: 24810046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

