
1. J Periodontal Res. 2015 Feb;50(1):113-22. doi: 10.1111/jre.12187. Epub 2014 May
12.

Relationship between expression of human gingival beta-defensins and levels of
periodontopathogens in subgingival plaque.

Wang P(1), Duan D, Zhou X, Li X, Yang J, Deng M, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Chengdu, China; Department of Applied
Oral Sciences, Center for Periodontology, The Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, MA,
USA.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Human beta-defensins (hBDs) are a group of
antimicrobial peptides important in epithelial innate immunity, and their
differential expression is associated with periodontal diseases. The aim of this 
study was to explore relationships among hBDs, total subgingival bacteria and
periodontopathogens in healthy subjects and in patients with chronic
periodontitis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The periodontal clinical parameters of 29 healthy subjects 
and 25 patients with chronic periodontitis were recorded. The relative expression
of hBD1, hBD2 and hBD3 genes in gingival biopsies was measured using real-time
PCR. The numbers of total bacteria and of Treponema denticola, Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Fusobacterium nucleatum and
Tannerella forsythia in subgingival plaque were quantified by real-time PCR. Data
were analyzed using the Mann-Whitney U-test and Spearman's rank correlation test.
RESULTS: No significant differences in expression of the hBD genes were found
between the group of healthy subjects and the group of patients with chronic
periodontitis. Total bacteria and T. denticola were detected in all participants.
F. nucleatum and T. forsythia were detected in all patients with chronic
periodontitis and in 86.21% and 51.72%, respectively, of healthy volunteers.
P. gingivalis and A. actinomycetemcomitans were detected in 24.14% and 17.24%,
respectively, of the healthy group and in 84.00% and 12.00%, respectively, of the
chronic periodontitis group. The prevalence of all bacteria, except
A. actinomycetemcomitans, was significantly higher in the group of patients with 
chronic periodontitis than in the group of healthy subjects (p < 0.05). A
significant, negative correlation was observed between total bacteria and hBD-2
(r = -0.384, p = 0.011). Upon analyzing the data in different groups, total
bacteria and hBD-2 were significantly correlated (r = -0.492, p = 0.026) only in 
the group of healthy subjects.
CONCLUSION: The negative correlations between hBD-2 and total bacteria,
especially in the group of healthy subjects, indicate that hBDs may play an
important role by limiting an increase of bacterial load at the initial stage of 
periodontitis.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jre.12187 
PMID: 24814979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

