
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Aug;82(8):3098-112. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01778-14. Epub 2014 May
12.

Deficiency of lymph node-resident dendritic cells (DCs) and dysregulation of DC
chemoattractants in a malnourished mouse model of Leishmania donovani infection.

Ibrahim MK(1), Barnes JL(2), Osorio EY(3), Anstead GM(2), Jimenez F(2),
Osterholzer JJ(4), Travi BL(5), Ahuja SS(2), White AC Jr(3), Melby PC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Health Science 
Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA South Texas Veterans Health Care
System, San Antonio, Texas, USA Department of Microbial Biotechnology, Genetic
Engineering Division, National Research Center, Giza, Egypt.
(2)South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, Texas, USA Department of
Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, 
Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine and Center for Tropical Diseases, University
of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, and the VA Ann Arbor 
Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine and Center for Tropical Diseases, University
of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas,
USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Health Science 
Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA Department of Internal Medicine
and Center for Tropical Diseases, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas, USA Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical
Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA Department of Pathology, University of
Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA pcmelby@utmb.edu.

Malnutrition is thought to contribute to more than one-third of all childhood
deaths via increased susceptibility to infection. Malnutrition is a significant
risk factor for the development of visceral leishmaniasis, which results from
skin inoculation of the intracellular protozoan Leishmania donovani. We
previously established a murine model of childhood malnutrition and found that
malnutrition decreased the lymph node barrier function and increased the early
dissemination of L. donovani. In the present study, we found reduced numbers of
resident dendritic cells (conventional and monocyte derived) but not migratory
dermal dendritic cells in the skin-draining lymph nodes of L. donovani-infected
malnourished mice. Expression of chemokines and their receptors involved in
trafficking of dendritic cells and their progenitors to the lymph nodes was
dysregulated. C-C chemokine receptor type 2 (CCR2) and its ligands (CCL2 and
CCL7) were reduced in the lymph nodes of infected malnourished mice, as were
CCR2-bearing monocytes/macrophages and monocyte-derived dendritic cells. However,
CCR7 and its ligands (CCL19 and CCL21) were increased in the lymph node and CCR7 
was increased in lymph node macrophages and dendritic cells. CCR2-deficient mice 
recapitulated the profound reduction in the number of resident (but not migratory
dermal) dendritic cells in the lymph node but showed no alteration in the
expression of CCL19 and CCL21. Collectively, these results suggest that the
malnutrition-related reduction in the lymph node barrier to dissemination of L.
donovani is related to insufficient numbers of lymph node-resident but not
migratory dermal dendritic cells. This is likely driven by the altered activity
of the CCR2 and CCR7 chemoattractant pathways.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01778-14 
PMCID: PMC4136237
PMID: 24818662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

