
1. J Phys Chem B. 2014 Jun 19;118(24):6634-43. doi: 10.1021/jp503339g. Epub 2014 Jun
5.

Molecular organization of cytochrome c2 near the binding domain of cytochrome bc1
studied by electron spin-lattice relaxation enhancement.

Pietras R(1), Sarewicz M, Osyczka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University , 30-387 Kraków, Poland.

Measurements of specific interactions between proteins are challenging. In redox 
systems, interactions involve surfaces near the attachment sites of cofactors
engaged in interprotein electron transfer (ET). Here we analyzed binding of
cytochrome c2 to cytochrome bc1 by measuring paramagnetic relaxation enhancement 
(PRE) of spin label (SL) attached to cytochrome c2. PRE was exclusively induced
by the iron atom of heme c1 of cytochrome bc1, which guaranteed that only the
configurations with SL to heme c1 distances up to ∼30 Å were detected. Changes in
PRE were used to qualitatively and quantitatively characterize the binding. Our
data suggest that at low ionic strength and under an excess of cytochrome c2 over
cytochrome bc1, several cytochrome c2 molecules gather near the binding domain
forming a "cloud" of molecules. When the cytochrome bc1 concentration increases, 
the cloud disperses to populate additional available binding domains. An increase
in ionic strength weakens the attractive forces and the average distance between 
cytochrome c2 and cytochrome bc1 increases. The spatial arrangement of the
protein complex at various ionic strengths is different. Above 150 mM NaCl the
lifetime of the complexes becomes so short that they are undetectable. All
together the results indicate that cytochrome c2 molecules, over the range of
salt concentration encompassing physiological ionic strength, do not form stable,
long-lived complexes but rather constantly collide with the surface of cytochrome
bc1 and ET takes place coincidentally with one of these collisions.

DOI: 10.1021/jp503339g 
PMCID: PMC4065165
PMID: 24845964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

