
1. Proc Biol Sci. 2014 Jul 7;281(1786). pii: 20140389. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2014.0389.

Insecticide exposure impacts vector-parasite interactions in
insecticide-resistant malaria vectors.

Alout H(1), Djègbè I(2), Chandre F(3), Djogbénou LS(4), Dabiré RK(5), Corbel
V(6), Cohuet A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), Maladies Infectieuses et
Vecteurs, Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle (MIVEGEC), UM1-UM2-CNRS 5290
IRD 224, Montpellier, France Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé
(IRSS), 01 BP 545 Bobo-Dioulasso 01, Burkina Faso haoues.alout@colostate.edu.
(2)Centre de Recherche Entomologique de Cotonou, Université d'Abomey-Calavi, 06
BP 2604 Cotonou, Bénin.
(3)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), Maladies Infectieuses et
Vecteurs, Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle (MIVEGEC), UM1-UM2-CNRS 5290
IRD 224, Montpellier, France.
(4)Institut Régional de Santé Publique, Université d'Abomey-Calavi, 01 BP 918
Cotonou, Bénin.
(5)Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé (IRSS), 01 BP 545 Bobo-Dioulasso
01, Burkina Faso.
(6)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), Maladies Infectieuses et
Vecteurs, Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle (MIVEGEC), UM1-UM2-CNRS 5290
IRD 224, Montpellier, France Department of Entomology, Faculty of Agriculture,
Kasetsart University, Bangkok 10900, Thailand.
(7)Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), Maladies Infectieuses et
Vecteurs, Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle (MIVEGEC), UM1-UM2-CNRS 5290
IRD 224, Montpellier, France Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la Santé
(IRSS), 01 BP 545 Bobo-Dioulasso 01, Burkina Faso.

Currently, there is a strong trend towards increasing insecticide-based vector
control coverage in malaria endemic countries. The ecological consequence of
insecticide applications has been mainly studied regarding the selection of
resistance mechanisms; however, little is known about their impact on vector
competence in mosquitoes responsible for malaria transmission. As they have
limited toxicity to mosquitoes owing to the selection of resistance mechanisms,
insecticides may also interact with pathogens developing in mosquitoes. In this
study, we explored the impact of insecticide exposure on Plasmodium falciparum
development in insecticide-resistant colonies of Anopheles gambiae s.s.,
homozygous for the ace-1 G119S mutation (Acerkis) or the kdr L1014F mutation
(Kdrkis). Exposure to bendiocarb insecticide reduced the prevalence and intensity
of P. falciparum oocysts developing in the infected midgut of the Acerkis strain,
whereas exposure to dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane reduced only the prevalence
of P. falciparum infection in the Kdrkis strain. Thus, insecticide resistance
leads to a selective pressure of insecticides on Plasmodium parasites, providing,
to our knowledge, the first evidence of genotype by environment interactions on
vector competence in a natural Anopheles-Plasmodium combination. Insecticide
applications would affect the transmission of malaria in spite of resistance and 
would reduce to some degree the impact of insecticide resistance on malaria
control interventions.

© 2014 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2014.0389 
PMCID: PMC4046407
PMID: 24850924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

