
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 4;289(27):19031-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.574913. Epub 2014
May 27.

Structural basis for dimerization and catalysis of a novel esterase from the
GTSAG motif subfamily of the bacterial hormone-sensitive lipase family.

Li PY(1), Ji P(1), Li CY(1), Zhang Y(1), Wang GL(1), Zhang XY(2), Xie BB(2), Qin 
QL(2), Chen XL(2), Zhou BC(1), Zhang YZ(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Marine Biotechnology
Research Center.
(2)From the State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Marine Biotechnology
Research Center, Collaborative Innovation Center of Deep Sea Biology, Shandong
University, Jinan 250100, China.
(3)From the State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Marine Biotechnology
Research Center, Collaborative Innovation Center of Deep Sea Biology, Shandong
University, Jinan 250100, China zhangyz@sdu.edu.cn.

Hormone-sensitive lipases (HSLs) are widely distributed in microorganisms,
plants, and animals. Microbial HSLs are classified into two subfamilies, an
unnamed new subfamily and the GDSAG motif subfamily. Due to the lack of
structural information, the detailed catalytic mechanism of the new subfamily is 
not yet clarified. Based on sequence analysis, we propose to name the new
subfamily as the GTSAG motif subfamily. We identified a novel HSL esterase E25, a
member of the GTSAG motif subfamily, by functional metagenomic screening, and
resolved its structure at 2.05 Å. E25 is mesophilic (optimum temperature at 50
°C), salt-tolerant, slightly alkaline (optimum pH at 8.5) for its activity, and
capable of hydrolyzing short chain monoesters (C2-C10). E25 tends to form dimers 
both in the crystal and in solution. An E25 monomer contains an N-terminal CAP
domain, and a classical α/β hydrolase-fold domain. Residues Ser(186), Asp(282),
and His(312) comprise the catalytic triad. Structural and mutational analyses
indicated that E25 adopts a dimerization pattern distinct from other HSLs. E25
dimer is mainly stabilized by an N-terminal loop intersection from the CAP
domains and hydrogen bonds and salt bridges involving seven highly conserved
hydrophilic residues from the catalytic domains. Further analysis indicated that 
E25 also has some catalytic profiles different from other HSLs. Dimerization is
essential for E25 to exert its catalytic activity by keeping the accurate
orientation of the catalytic Asp(282) within the catalytic triad. Our results
reveal the structural basis for dimerization and catalysis of an esterase from
the GTSAG motif subfamily of the HSL family.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.574913 
PMCID: PMC4081941
PMID: 24867954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

