
1. PLoS One. 2014 May 27;9(5):e98269. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098269. eCollection
2014.

Copy number variation of the beta defensin gene cluster on chromosome 8p
influences the bacterial microbiota within the nasopharynx of otitis-prone
children.

Jones EA(1), Kananurak A(2), Bevins CL(2), Hollox EJ(3), Bakaletz LO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Microbial Pathogenesis, Department of Pediatrics, College of
Medicine, The Research Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
California Davis, Davis, California, United States of America.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom.

As there is increasing evidence that aberrant defensin expression is related to
susceptibility for infectious disease and inflammatory disorders, we sought to
determine if copy number of the beta-defensin gene cluster located on chromosome 
8p23.1 (DEFB107, 106, 105, 104, 103, DEFB4 and SPAG11), that shows copy number
variation as a block, was associated with susceptibility to otitis media (OM).
The gene DEFB103 within this complex encodes human beta defensin-3 (hBD-3), an
antimicrobial peptide (AP) expressed by epithelial cells that line the mammalian 
airway, important for defense of mucosal surfaces and previously shown to have
bactericidal activity in vitro against multiple human pathogens, including the
three that predominate in OM. To this end, we conducted a retrospective
case-control study of 113 OM prone children and 267 controls aged five to sixty
months. We identified the copy number of the above defined beta-defensin gene
cluster (DEFB-CN) in each study subject by paralogue ratio assays. The mean
DEFB-CN was indistinguishable between subjects classified as OM prone based on a 
recent history of multiple episodes of OM and control subjects who had no history
of OM (4.4 ± 0.96 versus 4.4 ± 1.08, respectively: Odds Ratio [OR]: 1.16 (95% CI:
0.61, 2.20). Despite a lack of direct association, we observed a statistically
significant correlation between DEFB-CN and nasopharyngeal bacterial colonization
patterns. Collectively, our findings suggested that susceptibility to OM might be
mediated by genetic variation among individuals, wherein a DEFB-CN less than 4
exerts a marked influence on the microbiota of the nasopharynx, specifically with
regard to colonization by the three predominant bacterial pathogens of OM.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098269 
PMCID: PMC4035277
PMID: 24867293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

