
1. J Dairy Sci. 2014;97(8):4772-9. doi: 10.3168/jds.2014-8041. Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Lactobacillus helveticus SBT2171, a cheese starter, regulates proliferation and
cytokine production of immune cells.

Yamashita M(1), Ukibe K(1), Uenishi H(1), Hosoya T(1), Sakai F(1), Kadooka Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Milk Science Research Institute, Megmilk Snow Brand Co. Ltd., 1-1-2 Minamidai,
Kawagoe, Saitama, 350-1165, Japan.
(2)Milk Science Research Institute, Megmilk Snow Brand Co. Ltd., 1-1-2 Minamidai,
Kawagoe, Saitama, 350-1165, Japan. Electronic address: y-kadooka@meg-snow.com.

Consumption of a Lactobacillus helveticus SBT2171 (LH2171)-containing cheese has 
been reported to exhibit immunoregulatory actions, including an increase in
regulatory T cell population and reduction in proinflammatory cytokine production
in mice. We examined the in vitro effects of LH2171 cells per se on immune cell
function, specifically proliferation and cytokine production, which are primary
reactions of the immune response. Immune cell fractions were prepared by
mechanical disruption of mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN), Peyer's patches (PP), and 
spleens (SP) of mice. The cell fractions were dispensed into a culture plate and 
stimulated with anti-CD3/CD28 antibody beads in place of antigen-presenting cells
or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in the presence or absence of heat-treated LH2171
cells and other bacterial strains for comparison. After incubation,
proliferation, cytokine production, and cell viability of the immune cells were
determined. The LH2171 significantly inhibited the proliferation of MLN immune
cells stimulated with anti-CD3/CD28 compared with other bacterial strains. The
antiproliferative potency of LH2171 was effective not only on MLN but also on PP 
and SP stimulated with anti-CD3/CD28 or LPS. The LH2171 also decreased
LPS-stimulated IL-6 production from MLN, PP, and SP, and IL-1β production from
SP, but LH2171 did not affect the viability of immune cells. The LH2171 inhibited
immune cell proliferation and proinflammatory cytokine (IL-6 and IL-1β)
production. The inhibitory actions were not due to cytotoxicity to immune cells, 
suggesting that LH2171 is a dairy Lactobacillus strain with beneficial
immunoregulatory properties.

Copyright © 2014 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2014-8041 
PMID: 24881786  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

