
1. Immunogenetics. 2014 Oct;66(9-10):513-23. doi: 10.1007/s00251-014-0781-6. Epub
2014 Jun 5.

A prominent role for invariant T cells in the amphibian Xenopus laevis tadpoles.

Robert J(1), Edholm ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, NY, 14642, USA, Jacques_Robert@urmc.rochester.edu.

Invariant T (iT) cells expressing an invariant or semi-invariant T cell receptor 
(TCR) repertoire have gained attention in recent years because of their potential
as specialized regulators of immune function. These iT cells are typically
restricted by nonclassical MHC class I molecules (e.g., CD1d and MR1) and undergo
differentiation pathways distinct from conventional T cells. While the benefit of
a limited TCR repertoire may appear counterintuitive in regard to the advantage
of the diversified repertoire of conventional T cells allowing for exquisite
specificity to antigens, the full biological importance and evolutionary
conservation of iT cells are just starting to emerge. It is generally considered 
that iT cells are specialized to recognize conserved antigens equivalent to
pathogen-associated molecular pattern. Until recently, little was known about the
evolution of iT cells. The identification of class Ib and class I-like genes in
nonmammalian vertebrates, despite the heterogeneity and variable numbers of these
genes among species, suggests that iT cells are also present in ectothermic
vertebrates. Indeed, recent studies in the amphibian Xenopus have revealed a
drastic overrepresentation of several invariant TCRs in tadpoles and identified a
prominent nonclassical MHC class I-restricted iT cell subset critical for tadpole
antiviral immunity. This suggests an important and perhaps even dominant role of 
multiple nonclassical MHC class I-restricted iT cell populations in tadpoles and,
by extension, other aquatic vertebrates with rapid external development that are 
under pressure to produce a functional lymphocyte repertoire with small numbers
of cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-014-0781-6 
PMID: 24898512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

