
1. J Phys Chem B. 2014 Jul 3;118(26):7221-32. doi: 10.1021/jp500539w. Epub 2014 Jun 
20.

Triplet excited state energies and phosphorescence spectra of
(bacterio)chlorophylls.

Hartzler DA(1), Niedzwiedzki DM, Bryant DA, Blankenship RE, Pushkar Y, Savikhin
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Purdue University , 525 Northwestern Avenue, West
Lafayette, Indiana 47907, United States.

(Bacterio)Chlorophyll ((B)Chl) molecules play a major role in photosynthetic
light-harvesting proteins, and the knowledge of their triplet state energies is
essential to understand the mechanisms of photodamage and photoprotection, as the
triplet excitation energy of (B)Chl molecules can readily generate highly
reactive singlet oxygen. The triplet state energies of 10 natural chlorophyll
(Chl a, b, c2, d) and bacteriochlorophyll (BChl a, b, c, d, e, g) molecules and
one bacteriopheophytin (BPheo g) have been directly determined via their
phosphorescence spectra. Phosphorescence of four molecules (Chl c2, BChl e and g,
BPheo g) was characterized for the first time. Additionally, the relative
phosphorescence to fluorescence quantum yield for each molecule was determined.
The measurements were performed at 77K using solvents providing a six-coordinate 
environment of the Mg(2+) ion, which allows direct comparison of these (B)Chls.
Density functional calculations of the triplet state energies show good
correlation with the experimentally determined energies. The correlation
determined computationally was used to predict the triplet energies of three
additional (B)Chl molecules: Chl c1, Chl f, and BChl f.

DOI: 10.1021/jp500539w 
PMID: 24896677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

