
1. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:195290. doi: 10.1155/2014/195290. Epub 2014 May 6.

Blockade of ICAM-1 improves the outcome of polymicrobial sepsis via modulating
neutrophil migration and reversing immunosuppression.

Zhao YJ(1), Yi WJ(2), Wan XJ(2), Wang J(2), Tao TZ(2), Li JB(2), Wang JF(2), Deng
XM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, Changhai Hospital, Second
Military Medical University, 168 Changhai Road, Shanghai 200433, China ;
Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, Shanghai Ninth People's
Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, 639 Zhizaoju Road, Shanghai 200011,
China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, Changhai Hospital, Second
Military Medical University, 168 Changhai Road, Shanghai 200433, China.

Intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) is a key adhesion molecule mediating
neutrophil migration and infiltration during sepsis. But its role in the outcome 
of sepsis remains contradictory. The current study was performed to investigate
the role of anti-ICAM-1 antibody in the outcome of polymicrobial sepsis and
sepsis-induced immune disturbance. Effect of anti-ICAM-1 antibody on outcome of
sepsis induced by cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) was evaluated by the survival
analysis, bacterial clearance, and lung injury. Its influence on neutrophil
migration and infiltration, as well as lymphocyte status, in thymus and spleen
was also investigated. The results demonstrated that ICAM-1 mRNA was upregulated 
in lung, thymus, and spleen of CLP mice. Anti-ICAM-1 antibody improved survival
and bacterial clearance in CLP mice and attenuated lung injury. Migration of
neutrophils to peritoneal cavity was enhanced while their infiltration into lung,
thymus, and spleen was hampered by ICAM-1 blockade. Anti-ICAM-1 antibody also
prevented sepsis-induced apoptosis in thymus and spleen. Positive costimulatory
molecules including CD28, CD80, and CD86 were upregulated, while negative
costimulatory molecules including PD-1 and PD-L1 were downregulated following
anti-ICAM-1 antibody administration. In conclusion, ICAM-1 blockade may improve
outcome of sepsis. The rationale may include the modulated neutrophil migration
and the reversed immunosuppression.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/195290 
PMCID: PMC4033397
PMID: 24891762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

