
1. Immunology. 2014 Nov;143(3):478-89. doi: 10.1111/imm.12328.

miR-155 deficiency protects mice from experimental colitis by reducing T helper
type 1/type 17 responses.

Singh UP(1), Murphy AE, Enos RT, Shamran HA, Singh NP, Guan H, Hegde VL, Fan D,
Price RL, Taub DD, Mishra MK, Nagarkatti M, Nagarkatti PS.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), a chronic intestinal inflammatory condition
that affects millions of people worldwide, results in high morbidity and
exorbitant health-care costs. The critical features of both innate and adaptive
immunity are to control inflammation and dysfunction in this equilibrium is
believed to be the reason for the development of IBD. miR-155, a microRNA, is
up-regulated in various inflammatory disease states, including IBD, and is a
positive regulator of T-cell responses. To date, no reports have defined a
function for miR-155 with regard to cellular responses in IBD. Using an acute
experimental colitis model, we found that miR-155(-/-) mice, as compared to
wild-type control mice, have decreased clinical scores, a reversal of
colitis-associated pathogenesis, and reduced systemic and mucosal inflammatory
cytokines. The increased frequency of CD4+ lymphocytes in the spleen and lamina
propria with dextran sodium sulphate induction was decreased in miR-155(-/-)
mice. Similarly, miR-155 deficiency abrogated the increased numbers of
interferon-Î³ expressing CD4+ T cells typically observed in wild-type mice in this
model. The frequency of systemic and mucosal T helper type 17-, CCR9-expressing
CD4+ T cells was also reduced in miR-155(-/-) mice compared with control mice.
These findings strongly support a role for miR-155 in facilitating
pro-inflammatory cellular responses in this model of IBD. Loss of miR-155 also
results in decreases in T helper type 1/type 17, CD11b+) and CD11c+ cells, which 
correlated with reduced clinical scores and severity of disease. miR-155 may
serve as a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of IBD.

Published 2014. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.12328 
PMCID: PMC4212960
PMID: 24891206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

