
1. Cancer Lett. 2015 Jan 28;356(2 Pt A):315-9. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.05.015.
Epub 2014 Jun 5.

Cancer cell metabolism and developmental homeodomain/POU domain transcription
factors: a connecting link.

Purkayastha BP(1), Roy JK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Assam University, Assam 788011, India.
(2)Cytogenetics Laboratory, Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi 221005, India. Electronic address: jkroy@bhu.ac.in.

The human race is afflicted with more than 100 types of cancer with diversified
underlying genetic events. Still, altered metabolism (known as 'Warburg effect') 
and unrestrained cellular proliferation are precise traits of all cancers, being 
governed by the expression of genes. The obligatory energy for the proliferating 
neoplastic cells is endowed through the glycolytic pathway, albeit, lesser ATP is
generated in this metabolic process. So, some perceptible cancer cell specific
signalling is at the base of the transformed metabolism. Concurrently, the
regulators of gene expression, transcription factors, have been observed to be
one of the driving forces for tumourigenesis through transcriptional activation
of genes involved not only in proliferation, growth and survival signalling, but 
also in glycolysis. This may be exemplified by the extensively studied metabolic 
functions of the transcriptional regulator, hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF1),
which transactivates genes of the major enzymes of glycolysis. Preliminary
investigation of a vital group of transcription factors, homeodomain
transcription factors, revealed association with the process of development of an
organism. The homeodomain transcription factors are, however, also found to be
involved in the tumourigenesis process, with little or no information on their
involvement in cancer cell metabolism. So, this is a review of the existing
knowledge on homeodomain transcription factor/s for deciphering their involvement
in neoplastic metabolism and it emerges that homeodomain transcription factors
influence the transformed metabolic pathway in a circuitous manner.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.05.015 
PMID: 24909495  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

