
1. FEBS Open Bio. 2014 Mar 12;4:283-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fob.2014.02.012. eCollection
2014.

Structure of the C-terminal domain of AspA (antigen I/II-family) protein from
Streptococcus pyogenes.

Hall M(1), Nylander S(2), Jenkinson HF(3), Persson K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Department of Odontology, Division of Oral Microbiology, Umeå University,
SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
(3)School of Oral and Dental Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol BS1 2LY,
UK.

The pathogenic bacteria Streptococcus pyogenes can cause an array of diseases in 
humans, including moderate infections such as pharyngitis (strep throat) as well 
as life threatening conditions such as necrotizing fasciitis and puerperal fever.
The antigen I/II family proteins are cell wall anchored adhesin proteins found on
the surfaces of most oral streptococci and are involved in host colonization and 
biofilm formation. In the present study we have determined the crystal structure 
of the C2-3-domain of the antigen I/II type protein AspA from S. pyogenes M type 
28. The structure was solved to 1.8 Å resolution and shows that the C2-3-domain
is comprised of two structurally similar DEv-IgG motifs, designated C2 and C3,
both containing a stabilizing covalent isopeptide bond. Furthermore a metal
binding site is identified, containing a bound calcium ion. Despite relatively
low sequence identity, interestingly, the overall structure shares high
similarity to the C2-3-domains of antigen I/II proteins from Streptococcus
gordonii and Streptococcus mutans, although certain parts of the structure
exhibit distinct features. In summary this work constitutes the first step in the
full structure determination of the AspA protein from S. pyogenes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fob.2014.02.012 
PMCID: PMC4048849
PMID: 24918040 

