
1. BMC Microbiol. 2014 Jun 9;14:150. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-14-150.

A novel multi-locus sequence typing (MLST) protocol for Leuconostoc lactis
isolates from traditional dairy products in China and Mongolia.

Dan T, Liu W, Sun Z, Lv Q, Xu H, Song Y, Zhang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Education Ministry of
P, R, China, Department of Food Science and Engineering, Inner Mongolia
Agricultural University, Hohhot 010018, P, R, China. hepingdd@vip.sina.com.

BACKGROUND: Economically, Leuconostoc lactis is one of the most important species
in the genus Leuconostoc. It plays an important role in the food industry
including the production of dextrans and bacteriocins. Currently, traditional
molecular typing approaches for characterisation of this species at the isolate
level are either unavailable or are not sufficiently reliable for practical use. 
Multilocus sequence typing (MLST) is a robust and reliable method for
characterising bacterial and fungal species at the molecular level. In this
study, a novel MLST protocol was developed for 50 L. lactis isolates from
Mongolia and China.
RESULTS: Sequences from eight targeted genes (groEL, carB, recA, pheS, murC,
pyrG, rpoB and uvrC) were obtained. Sequence analysis indicated 20 different
sequence types (STs), with 13 of them being represented by a single isolate.
Phylogenetic analysis based on the sequences of eight MLST loci indicated that
the isolates belonged to two major groups, A (34 isolates) and B (16 isolates).
Linkage disequilibrium analyses indicated that recombination occurred at a low
frequency in L. lactis, indicating a clonal population structure.
Split-decomposition analysis indicated that intraspecies recombination played a
role in generating genotypic diversity amongst isolates.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicated that MLST is a valuable tool for typing L.
lactis isolates that can be used for further monitoring of evolutionary changes
and population genetics.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-14-150 
PMCID: PMC4063691
PMID: 24912963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

