
1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2014 Oct;306(8):689-700. doi: 10.1007/s00403-014-1477-3. Epub 
2014 Jun 11.

Isotretinoin therapy changes the expression of antimicrobial peptides in acne
vulgaris.

Borovaya A(1), Dombrowski Y, Zwicker S, Olisova O, Ruzicka T, Wolf R, Schauber J,
Sárdy M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Ludwig Maximilian University
Munich, Frauenlobstr. 9-11, 80337, Munich, Germany.

In acne vulgaris, antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) could play a dual role; i.e.,
protective by acting against Propionibacterium acnes, pro-inflammatory by acting 
as signalling molecules. The cutaneous expression of 15 different AMPs was
investigated in acne patients; furthermore, the impact of isotretinoin therapy on
AMP expression was analysed in skin biopsies from 13 patients with acne vulgaris 
taken before, during and after a 6-month treatment cycle with isotretinoin using 
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. Cutaneous expression of the
AMPs cathelicidin, human β-defensin-2 (HBD-2), lactoferrin, lysozyme, psoriasin
(S100A7), koebnerisin (S100A15), and RNase 7 was upregulated in untreated acne
vulgaris, whereas α-defensin-1 (HNP-1) was downregulated compared to controls.
While relative expression levels of cathelicidin, HBD-2, lactoferrin, psoriasin
(S100A7), and koebnerisin (S100A15) decreased during isotretinoin treatment, only
those of cathelicidin and koebnerisin returned to normal after 6 months of
isotretinoin therapy. The increased expression of lysozyme and RNase 7 remained
unaffected by isotretinoin treatment. The levels of granulysin, RANTES (CCL5),
perforin, CXCL9, substance P, chromogranin B, and dermcidin were not regulated in
untreated acne patients and isotretinoin had no effect on these AMPs. In
conclusion, the expression of various AMPs is altered in acne vulgaris.
Isotretinoin therapy normalizes the cutaneous production of distinct AMPs while
the expression of others is still increased in healing acne. Considering the
antimicrobial and pro-inflammatory role of AMPs, these molecules could serve as
specific targets for acne therapy and maintenance of clinical remission.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-014-1477-3 
PMID: 24916439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

