
1. J Environ Health Sci Eng. 2014 May 12;12:85. doi: 10.1186/2052-336X-12-85.
eCollection 2014.

Biodegradation of cyanide by a new isolated strain under alkaline conditions and 
optimization by response surface methodology (RSM).

Mirizadeh S(1), Yaghmaei S(1), Ghobadi Nejad Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, Biotechnology Research
Center, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Biodegradation of free cyanide from industrial wastewaters has been
proven as a viable and robust method for treatment of wastewaters containing
cyanide.
RESULTS: Cyanide degrading bacteria were isolated from a wastewater treatment
plant for coke-oven-gas condensate by enrichment culture technique. Five strains 
were able to use cyanide as the sole nitrogen source under alkaline conditions
and among them; one strain (C2) was selected for further studies on the basis of 
the higher efficiency of cyanide degradation. The bacterium was able to tolerate 
free cyanide at concentrations of up to 500 ppm which makes it a good potentially
candidate for the biological treatment of cyanide contaminated residues. Cyanide 
degradation corresponded with growth and reached a maximum level 96% during the
exponential phase. The highest growth rate (1.23 × 10(8)) was obtained on day 4
of the incubation time. Both glucose and fructose were suitable carbon sources
for cyanotrophic growth. No growth was detected in media with cyanide as the sole
carbon source. Four control factors including, pH, temperature, agitation speed
and glucose concentration were optimized according to central composite design in
response surface method. Cyanide degradation was optimum at 34.2°C, pH 10.3 and
glucose concentration 0.44 (g/l).
CONCLUSIONS: Bacterial species degrade cyanide into less toxic products as they
are able to use the cyanide as a nitrogen source, forming ammonia and carbon
dioxide as end products. Alkaliphilic bacterial strains screened in this study
evidentially showed the potential to possess degradative activities that can be
harnessed to remediate cyanide wastes.

DOI: 10.1186/2052-336X-12-85 
PMCID: PMC4036835
PMID: 24921051 

