
1. J Pept Sci. 2014 Sep;20(9):725-35. doi: 10.1002/psc.2663. Epub 2014 Jun 12.

Synthesis of lucifensin by native chemical ligation and characteristics of its
isomer having different disulfide bridge pattern.

Stanchev S(1), Zawada Z, Monincová L, Bednárová L, Slaninová J, Fučík V, Čeřovský
V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Sciences,
Flemingovo nam. 2, 16610, Prague, Czech Republic.

The antimicrobial 40-amino-acid-peptide lucifensin was synthesized by native
chemical ligation (NCL) using N-acylbenzimidazolinone (Nbz) as a linker group.
NCL is a method in which a peptide bond between two discreet peptide chains is
created. This method has been applied to the synthesis of long peptides and
proteins when solid-phase synthesis is imcompatible. Two models of ligation were 
developed: [15+25] Ala-Cys and [19+21] His-Cys. The [19+21] His-Cys method gives 
lower yield because of the lower stability of 18-peptide-His-Nbz-CONH2 peptide,
as suggested by density functional theory calculation.
Acetamidomethyl-deprotection and subsequent oxidation of the ligated linear
lucifensin gave a mixture of lucifensin isomers, which differed in the location
of their disulfide bridges only. The dominant isomer showed unnatural pairing of 
cysteines [C1-6], [C3-5], and [C2-4], which limits its ability to form α-helical 
structure. The activity of isomeric lucifensin toward Bacillus subtilis,
Staphylococcus aureus, and Micrococcus luteus was lower than that of the natural 
lucifensin. The desired product native lucifensin was prepared from this isomer
using a one-pot reduction with dithiotreitol and subsequent air oxidation in
slightly alkaline medium.

Copyright © 2014 European Peptide Society and John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/psc.2663 
PMID: 24920043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

