
1. Integr Zool. 2015 Jan;10(1):102-10. doi: 10.1111/1749-4877.12100.

Functional C1q is present in the skin mucus of Siberian sturgeon (Acipenser
baerii).

Fan C(1), Wang J, Zhang X, Song J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Marine Biosystem and Neuroscience, International Center for
Marine Studies, Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, China; Key Laboratory of
Exploration and Utilization of Aquatic Genetic Resources, Shanghai Ocean
University, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China.

The skin mucus of fish acts as the first line of self-protection against
pathogens in the aquatic environment and comprises a number of innate immune
components. However, the presence of the critical classical complement component 
C1q, which links the innate and adaptive immune systems of mammalians, has not
been explored in a primitive actinopterygian fish. In this study, we report that 
C1q is present in the skin mucus of the Siberian sturgeon (Acipenser baerii). The
skin mucus was able to inhibit the growth of Escherichia coli. The bacteriostatic
activity of the skin mucus was reduced by heating and by pre-incubation with EDTA
or mouse anti-human C1q antibody. We also detected C1q protein in skin mucus
using the western blot procedure and isolated a cDNA that encodes the Siberian
sturgeon C1qC, which had 44.7-51.4% identity with C1qCs in teleosts and
tetrapods. A phylogenetic analysis revealed that Siberian sturgeon C1qC lies at
the root of the actinopterygian branch and is separate from the tetrapod branch. 
The C1qC transcript was expressed in many tissues as well as in skin. Our data
indicate that C1q is present in the skin mucus of the Siberian sturgeon to
protect against water-borne bacteria, and the C1qC found in the sturgeon may
represent the primitive form of teleost and tetrapod C1qCs.

Â© 2014 International Society of Zoological Sciences, Institute of Zoology/Chinese
Academy of Sciences and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1749-4877.12100 
PMID: 24920077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

