
1. Proteins. 2014 Oct;82(10):2643-56. doi: 10.1002/prot.24628. Epub 2014 Jun 26.

Cytotoxicity of the Vibrio vulnificus MARTX toxin effector DUF5 is linked to the 
C2A subdomain.

Antic I(1), Biancucci M, Satchell KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University, Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, 60611.

The multifunctional-autoprocessing repeats-in-toxin (MARTX) toxins are bacterial 
protein toxins that serve as delivery platforms for cytotoxic effector domains.
The domain of unknown function in position 5 (DUF5) effector domain is present in
at least six different species' MARTX toxins and as a hypothetical protein in
Photorhabdus spp. Its presence increases the potency of the Vibrio vulnificus
MARTX toxin in mouse virulence studies, indicating DUF5 directly contributes to
pathogenesis. In this work, DUF5 is shown to be cytotoxic when transiently
expressed in HeLa cells. DUF5 localized to the plasma membrane dependent upon its
C1 domain and the cells become rounded dependent upon its C2 domain. Both
full-length DUF5 and the C2 domain caused growth inhibition when expressed in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. A structural model of DUF5 was generated based on the
structure of Pasteurella multocida toxin facilitating localization of the
cytotoxic activity to a 186 amino acid subdomain termed C2A. Within this
subdomain, an alanine scanning mutagenesis revealed aspartate-3721 and
arginine-3841 as residues critical for cytotoxicity. These residues were also
essential for HeLa cell intoxication when purified DUF5 fused to anthrax toxin
lethal factor was delivered cytosolically. Thermal shift experiments indicated
that these conserved residues are important to maintain protein structure, rather
than for catalysis. The Aeromonas hydrophila MARTX toxin DUF5(Ah) domain was also
cytotoxic, while the weakly conserved C1-C2 domains from P. multocida toxin were 
not. Overall, this study is the first demonstration that DUF5 as found in MARTX
toxins has cytotoxic activity that depends on conserved residues in the C2A
subdomain.

Â© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.24628 
PMCID: PMC4177264
PMID: 24935440  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

