
1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2014 Sep;350(3):563-77. doi: 10.1124/jpet.114.215673. Epub 
2014 Jun 17.

RhoA/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B/mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling after growth arrest-specific protein 6/mer receptor tyrosine
kinase engagement promotes epithelial cell growth and wound repair via
upregulation of hepatocyte growth factor in macrophages.

Lee YJ(1), Park HJ(1), Woo SY(1), Park EM(1), Kang JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology (Y.-J.L., H.-J.P, S.-Y.W., J.L.K.), Department of
Pharmacology (E.-M.P.), Department of Microbiology A (S.-Y.W.), and Tissue Injury
Defense Research Center (H.-J.P., S.-Y.W., E.-M.P., J.L.K.), Global Top5 Research
Program (J.L.K.), School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Physiology (Y.-J.L., H.-J.P, S.-Y.W., J.L.K.), Department of
Pharmacology (E.-M.P.), Department of Microbiology A (S.-Y.W.), and Tissue Injury
Defense Research Center (H.-J.P., S.-Y.W., E.-M.P., J.L.K.), Global Top5 Research
Program (J.L.K.), School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea
jihee@ewha.ac.kr.

Growth arrest-specific protein 6 (Gas6)/Mer receptor tyrosine kinase (Mer)
signaling modulates cytokine secretion and helps to regulate the immune response 
and apoptotic cell clearance. Signaling pathways that activate an epithelial
growth program in macrophages are still poorly defined. We report that
Gas6/Mer/RhoA signaling can induce the production of epithelial growth factor
hepatic growth factor (HGF) in macrophages, which ultimately promotes epithelial 
cell proliferation and wound repair. The RhoA/protein kinase B
(Akt)/mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, including p38 MAP kinase,
extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase, and Jun NH2-terminal kinase axis
in RAW 264.7 cells, was identified as Gas6/Mer downstream signaling pathway for
the upregulation of HGF mRNA and protein. Conditioned medium from RAW 264.7 cells
that had been exposed to Gas6 or apoptotic cells enhanced epithelial cell
proliferation of the epithelial cell line LA-4 and wound closure. Cotreatment
with an HGF receptor-blocking antibody or c-Met antagonist downregulated this
enhancement. Inhibition of Mer with small interfering RNA (siRNA) or the RhoA/Rho
kinase pathway by RhoA siRNA or Rho kinase pharmacologic inhibitor suppressed
Gas6-induced HGF mRNA and protein expression in macrophages and blocked
epithelial cell proliferation and wound closure induced by the conditioned
medium. Our data provide evidence that macrophages can be reprogrammed by Gas6 to
promote epithelial proliferation and wound repair via HGF, which is induced by
the Mer/RhoA/Akt/MAP kinase pathway. Thus, defects in Gas6/Mer/RhoA signaling in 
macrophages may delay tissue repair after injury to the alveolar epithelium.

Copyright Â© 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.114.215673 
PMID: 24939420  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

