
1. Niger J Physiol Sci. 2013 Dec 20;28(2):121-5.

Cellular and mucosal immune responses in the respiratory tract of Nigerian goats 
following intranasal administration of inactivated Recombinant Mannheimia
hemolytica bacterine.

Tenuche O(1), Emikpe BO, Sabri MY.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Veterinary Pathology, University of Abuja, Abuja.
bo.emikpe@mailui.edu.ng.

This experiment was conducted to evaluate the cellular and mucosal responses in
the respiratory tract of Nigerian goats vaccinated intranasally with recombinant 
Mannheimia hemolytica bacterine. Twenty one goats were divided into five groups, 
five goats each in three vaccinated groups while three goats each in two other
groups serve as positive and negative control. Group A was vaccinated once; group
B was vaccinated twice at one week interval, and group D at twice at two weeks
interval. Group C1 were the unvaccinated and challenged, while group C2 were
unvaccinated and unchallenged. The bronchoalveolar lavage differential counts and
bronchial associated lymphoid tissue (BALT) responses were measured using Giemsa 
stained thin smear of the cell fraction of the lavage and histomorphometry. ANOVA
were employed and significance was at p&gt;0.05. The post-challenge macrophage to
neutrophil (M:N) ratio values of group B goats was the highest and the ratio
differed from other groups which had much lower M:N values. The exposure in group
B resulted in significant increase in number and size of BALTs as well as the
number of lymphocytes in BALT than those of the other groups. This study showed
that intranasal vaccination of the recombinant Mannheimia hemolytica bacterine
twice at a week interval was more efficient in inducing strong mucosal and
defensive cellular responses in the respiratory tract.


PMID: 24937385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

