
1. Epigenetics. 2014 Aug;9(8):1138-48. doi: 10.4161/epi.29499. Epub 2014 Jun 17.

Development of a multiplex methylation specific PCR suitable for (early)
detection of non-small cell lung cancer.

Nawaz I(1), Qiu X(2), Wu H(2), Li Y(2), Fan Y(2), Hu LF(3), Zhou Q(2), Ernberg
I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology; Tumor and Cell Biology; Karolinska Institute;
Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Microbiology; Faculty of Life Sciences;
University of Balochistan; Quetta, Pakistan.
(2)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Lung Cancer Metastasis and Tumor Microenvironment;
Tianjin Lung Cancer Institute; Tianjin Medical University General Hospital;
Tianjin, PR China.
(3)Department of Microbiology; Tumor and Cell Biology; Karolinska Institute;
Stockholm, Sweden.

Lung cancer is a worldwide health problem and a leading cause of cancer-related
deaths. Silencing of potential tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) by aberrant promoter
methylation is an early event in the initiation and development of cancer. Thus, 
methylated cancer type-specific TSGs in DNA can serve as useful biomarkers for
early cancer detection. We have now developed a "Multiplex Methylation Specific
PCR" (MMSP) assay for analysis of the methylation status of multiple potential
TSGs by a single PCR reaction. This method will be useful for early diagnosis and
treatment outcome studies of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Genome-wide CpG 
methylation and expression microarrays were performed on lung cancer tissues and 
matched distant non-cancerous tissues from three NSCLC patients from China.
Thirty-eight potential TSGs were selected and analyzed by methylation PCR on
bisulfite treated DNA. On the basis of sensitivity and specificity, six marker
genes, HOXA9, TBX5, PITX2, CALCA, RASSF1A, and DLEC1, were selected to establish 
the MMSP assay. This assay was then used to analyze lung cancer tissues and
matched distant non-cancerous tissues from 70 patients with NSCLC, as well as 24 
patients with benign pulmonary lesion as controls. The sensitivity of the assay
was 99% (69/70). HOXA9 and TBX5 were the 2 most sensitive marker genes: 87%
(61/70) and 84% (59/70), respectively. RASSF1A and DLEC1 showed the highest
specificity at 99% (69/70). Using the criterion of identifying at least any two
methylated marker genes, 61/70 cancer samples were positive, corresponding to a
sensitivity of 87% and a specificity of 94%. Early stage I or II NSCLC could even
be detected with a 100% specificity and 86% sensitivity. In conclusion, MMSP has 
the potential to be developed into a population-based screening tool and can be
useful for early diagnosis of NSCLC. It might also be suitable for monitoring
treatment outcome and recurrence.

DOI: 10.4161/epi.29499 
PMCID: PMC4164499
PMID: 24937636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

