
1. J Dairy Sci. 2014;97(8):4876-85. doi: 10.3168/jds.2013-7657. Epub 2014 Jun 13.

Association of coagulase-negative staphylococcal species, mammary quarter milk
somatic cell count, and persistence of intramammary infection in dairy cattle.

Fry PR(1), Middleton JR(2), Dufour S(3), Perry J(4), Scholl D(3), Dohoo I(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, University of Missouri,
Columbia 65211.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, University of Missouri,
Columbia 65211. Electronic address: middletonjr@missouri.edu.
(3)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Montreal, Quebec,
Canada J2S 7C6.
(4)Production Animal Health Centre, University of Adelaide, Australia 5371.
(5)Department of Health Management, University of Prince Edward Island,
Charlottetown CIA 4P3, Canada.

This study was conducted to evaluate the association between subclinical
intramammary infection (IMI) with coagulase-negative staphylococci (CNS), mammary
quarter milk somatic cell count (SCC), and persistence of IMI in dairy cattle.
Convenience samples of CNS isolates harvested from milk samples of subclinically 
infected mammary quarters collected between 4 and 2wk before drying-off, between 
2wk before drying-off and the day of drying-off, within 24h after calving,
between 1 and 2wk after calving, and during lactation were evaluated. Isolates
were obtained from the Canadian Bovine Mastitis Research Network culture bank and
were identified to the species level using rpoB gene sequencing. Cow and
quarter-level data were obtained from the Canadian Bovine Mastitis Research
Network database and used for statistical analyses. In addition, for mammary
quarters that had more than one isolation of the same CNS species at different
time points, the isolates were evaluated using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis
to identify persistent IMI. Milk SCC was compared between mammary quarters
infected with different CNS species and to a cohort of uninfected mammary
quarters. A total of 877 isolates from 643 mammary quarters of 555 cows on 89
Canadian dairy farms were identified to the species level. Twenty different
species were identified, with Staphylococcus chromogenes being the most common
species identified (48% of isolates), followed by Staphylococcus simulans (19%)
and Staphylococcus xylosus (10%). Of the 20 species identified, only 9 species
were found in persistently infected quarters. Milk SCC was significantly higher
in the CNS-infected mammary quarters than in the uninfected control quarters for 
8 of the 20 species studied. Also, mean SCC differed significantly between
mammary quarters infected with different CNS species. Within a given species, a
high degree of variability was noted in milk SCC. These data corroborate recent
data from Europe with regard to the predominance of certain species of CNS (e.g.,
Staph. chromogenes). In addition, some species of CNS appear to have a greater
effect on milk SCC. Finally, some CNS species are associated with persistent IMI 
suggesting that some species (e.g., Staph. chromogenes and Staph. simulans) are
better host-adapted, whereas others may have an environmental reservoir.

Copyright Â© 2014 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2013-7657 
PMID: 24931524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

