
1. ILAR J. 2014;55(1):46-58. doi: 10.1093/ilar/ilu015.

Bartonellosis: one health perspectives for an emerging infectious disease.

Breitschwerdt EB.

In recent years, an increasing number of Bartonella species have been identified 
as zoonotic pathogens, transmitted by animal bites, scratches, arthropods and
even by needle sticks. Considering the diversity of newly discovered Bartonella
species and subspecies and the large number and ecologically diverse animal
reservoir hosts and the evolving spectrum of arthropod vectors that can transmit 
these bacteria among animals and humans, the clinical and diagnostic challenges
posed by Bartonella transmission in nature are presumably much more complex than 
is currently appreciated by diagnosticians, vector biologists, ecologists,
physicians, or veterinarians. Historically the term "bartonellosis" was
attributed to infections with Bartonella bacilliformis, transmitted by sandflies 
in the Peruvian Andes. Currently, however, bartonellosis now includes infections 
caused by any Bartonella sp. anywhere in the world. Potentially, because
Bartonella spp. can infect erythrocytes, endothelial cells, pericytes, CD34(+)
progenitor cells, and various macrophage-type cells, including microglial cells, 
dendritic cells, and circulating monocytes in vitro, the clinical and
pathological manifestations of bartonellosis appear to be very diverse in both
sick animals and human patients. Because 75% of emerging infectious diseases are 
zoonoses, many of which are vector-transmitted by an arthropod, a One Health
approach to bartonellosis and other zoonotic infections is needed to properly
address animal health, public health, and environmental factors that influence
the distribution and transmission of these bacteria. The One Health concept
encourages a spirit of cooperation among animal, environmental, and human health 
professionals and promotes developing integrated solutions for complex problems
that impact the health of animals, humans, and the planet. Importantly,
substantial research is needed to define the medical importance of this genus as 
a cause of animal and human illnesses.

Â© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Institute for Laboratory Animal Research. All rights reserved. For permissions,
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ilar/ilu015 
PMID: 24936029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

