
1. DNA Cell Biol. 2014 Sep;33(9):591-8. doi: 10.1089/dna.2014.2385. Epub 2014 Jun
19.

Involvement of gene methylation changes in the differentiation of human amniotic 
epithelial cells into islet-like cell clusters.

Peng L(1), Wang J, Lu G.

Author information: 
(1)1 Institute of Human Reproduction and Stem Cell Engineering, Central South
University , Changsha, People's Republic of China .

Insulin-dependent diabetes results from destruction of the insulin-producing
β-cells of the pancreas. Islet cell transplantation is a promising cure for
diabetes. Here, we induced human amniotic epithelial cells (hAECs) to
differentiate into islet-like cell clusters by nicotinamide plus betacellulin in 
vitro, and further investigated the DNA methylation status by a Nimble MeDIP
microarray before and after cell differentiation to shed light on the molecular
mechanisms of this differentiation. In addition, 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine was used 
to investigate whether the differentiation of hAECs into islet-like cells
occurred through demethylation. Purified hAECs
(CK18(+)/E-cadherin(+)/CD29(+)/CD90(-)/CD34(-)/CD45(-)) were isolated from human 
amnia. After induction, hAECs were found to be insulin positive and sensitive to 
glucose, indicating successful induction to islet-like cells. The methylation
status of cell cytoskeleton-related genes was down-regulated and that of negative
regulation of cell adhesion-related genes was up-regulated. The methylation
status of pancreas development-related genes such as HNF1α and DGAT1 was
decreased in hAECs after induction. After brief demethylation, INS gene
expression was up-regulated in islet-like cell clusters, suggesting that DNA
methylation changes were associated with the differentiation of hAECs into
islet-like cell clusters.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.2014.2385 
PMID: 24945458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

