
1. Afr Health Sci. 2013 Dec;13(4):1007-11. doi: 10.4314/ahs.v13i4.21.

Risk factors for un-investigated dyspepsia among primary care patients in
northern Nigeria.

Solomon OA(1), Ajayi AO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, University Teaching Hospital, Ado Ekiti,
Nigeria.
(2)Department of Medicine, University Teaching Hospital, Ado Ekiti, Nigeria.

BACKGROUND: Many risk factors have been speculated to be associated with
uninvestigated dyspepsia amongst different population groups. Some of which have 
been subjected to epidemiological survey while others remain unevaluated.
OBJECTIVE: We evaluated some of the documented risk factors amongst patient
presenting with uninvestigated dyspepsia and compared with a matched group
without dyspepsia in a primary care setting.
METHODS: The study was a matched case controlled study. 103 consecutive patient
aged between 18 and 50 years that presented with dyspepsia (cases) were enrolled.
These were matched by age and sex with the same number of subjects without
dyspepsia (controls). Data were collated using a structured questionnaire Odds
ratios and p-values were used to determine the significance of documented
categorical risk factors associated with dyspepsia using two by two tables. For
risk factors that were continuous variables the means, standard deviations and
p-values were used. Risk factors with their p-values <0.2 were entered into
logistic regression to identify those independently associated with dyspepsia.
RESULT: H.pylori seropositivity was 22.3% and 13.6% among cases and controls
respectively (p = 0.10). Pepper intake (p <0.0001) and tea intake (p = 0.0002)
and greater years of education (p = 0.0065) were significantly associated with
dyspepsia. H. pylori seropositivity was not related to the risk of developing
dyspepsia.
CONCLUSION: Helicobacter pylori seropositivity was not found to be a significant 
contributor to risk of developing dyspepsia among the studied population contrary
to general belief. Pepper intake, tea intake and greater years of education were 
found to significant contributors to dyspepsia.

DOI: 10.4314/ahs.v13i4.21 
PMCID: PMC4056499
PMID: 24940325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

