
1. Sci Pharm. 2014 Jan 12;82(2):221-32. doi: 10.3797/scipharm.1311-04. Print 2014
Apr-Jun.

Antimicrobial activity of novel c2-substituted 1,4-dihydropyridine analogues.

Olejníková P(1), Svorc L(2), Olšovská D(1), Panáková A(1), Vihonská Z(1),
Kovaryová K(1), Marchalín S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Faculty of Chemical and Food
Technology, Slovak University of Technology, Bratislava, Slovak Republic.
(2)Institute of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemical and Food Technology,
Slovak University of Technology, Bratislava, Slovak Republic.
(3)Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Chemical and Food Technology,
Slovak University of Technology, Bratislava, Slovak Republic.

The antimicrobial activity of 3-methyl-5-isopropyl (or ethyl)
6-methyl-4-nitrophenyl-1,4-dihydropyridine-3,5-dicarboxylate derivatives was
evaluated. Prokaryotes (bacteria) appeared to be more sensitive to their
antimicrobial activity than were eukaryotes (filamentous fungi). The best
antibacterial activity was shown by derivative 33, which was able to inhibit the 
growth of Mycobacterium smegmatis (MIC33 = 9 μg.ml(-1)), Staphylococcus aureus
(MIC33 = 25 μg.ml(-1)), and Escherichia coli (MIC33 = 100 μg.ml(-1)). In
addition, derivative 4 demonstrated its antibacterial power on the acid-fast
bacterial species M. smegmatis and on Gram-positive S. aureus. Focusing on the
structure-activity relationship, it appears that the increase in the substituent 
bulk at the C2 position improved the antibacterial activity of the set of
compounds studied. Derivatives 33 and 4, carrying
2-cyano-3-oxo-3-phenylprop-1-en-1-yl and allyliminomethyl groups, respectively,
showed significantly higher inhibition activities on all tested microorganisms in
comparison with the rest of the derivatives. This enhancement was also in good
correlation with different log P values (lipophilicity parameter).

DOI: 10.3797/scipharm.1311-04 
PMCID: PMC4065119
PMID: 24959401 

