
1. Cell Mol Immunol. 2014 Sep;11(5):467-76. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2014.44. Epub 2014 Jun 
23.

Ly49 receptors activate angiogenic mouse DBA⁺ uterine natural killer cells.

Lima PD(1), Tu MM(2), Rahim MM(2), Peng AR(1), Croy BA(3), Makrigiannis AP(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada [2] Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Queen's
University, Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada.
(3)Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Queen's University, Kingston, ON K7L 3N6,
Canada.

In humans, specific patterns of killer immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIRs)
expressed by uterine natural killer (uNK) cells are linked through HLA-C with
pregnancy complications (infertility, recurrent spontaneous abortion,
intrauterine growth restriction and preeclampsia). To identify mechanisms
underpinning the associations between NK cell activation and pregnancy success,
pregnancies were studied in mice with genetic knockdown (KD) of the MHC-activated
Ly49 receptor gene family. B6.Ly49(KD) pregnancies were compared to normal
control B6.Ly49(129) and C57BL/6 (B6) pregnancies. At mid-pregnancy (gestation
day (gd9.5)), overall uNK cell (TCRβ(-)CD122(+)DBA(+)DX5(-) (DBA(+)DX5(-))) and
TCRβ(-)CD122(+)DBA(-)DX5(+) (DBA(-)DX5(+))) frequencies in pregnant uterus were
similar between genotypes. Ly49(KD) lowered the normal frequencies of Ly49(+) uNK
cells from 90.3% to 47.8% in DBA(-)DX5(+) and 78.8% to 6.3% in DBA(+)DX5(-) uNK
cell subtypes. B6.Ly49(KD) matings frequently resulted in expanded blastocysts
that did not implant (subfertility). B6.Ly49(KD) mice that established pregnancy 
had gestational lengths and litter sizes similar to controls. B6.Ly49(KD)
neonates, however, were heavier than controls. B6.Ly49(KD) implantation sites
lagged in early (gd6.5) decidual angiogenesis and were deficient in mid-pregnancy
(gd10.5) spiral arterial remodelling. Ultrastructural analyses revealed that
B6.Ly49(KD) uNK cells had impaired granulogenesis, while immunocytochemistry
revealed deficient vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGFA) production.
Perforin and IFNG expression were normal in B6.Ly49(KD) uNK cells. Thus, in
normal mouse pregnancies, Ly49 receptor signaling must promote implantation,
early decidual angiogenesis and mid-pregnancy vascular remodelling. Disturbances 
in these functions may underlie the reported genetic associations between human
pregnancy complications and the inability of specific conceptus MHCs to engage
activating KIR on uNK cells.

DOI: 10.1038/cmi.2014.44 
PMCID: PMC4197209
PMID: 24954223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

