
1. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:463524. doi: 10.1155/2014/463524. Epub 2014 May 15.

Interaction of apoptotic cells with macrophages upregulates COX-2/PGE2 and HGF
expression via a positive feedback loop.

Byun JY(1), Youn YS(1), Lee YJ(1), Choi YH(2), Woo SY(3), Kang JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, 911-1
Mok-6-dong, Yangcheon-gu, Seoul 158-710, Republic of Korea ; Tissue Injury
Defense Research Center, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, 911-1
Mok-6-dong, Yangcheon-gu, Seoul 158-710, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, 911-1
Mok-6-dong, Yangcheon-gu, Seoul 158-710, Republic of Korea ; Tissue Injury
Defense Research Center, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, 911-1
Mok-6-dong, Yangcheon-gu, Seoul 158-710, Republic of Korea ; Global Top 5
Research Program, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 158-710, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 
158-710, Republic of Korea.

Recognition of apoptotic cells by macrophages is crucial for resolution of
inflammation, immune tolerance, and tissue repair. Cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2)/prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) play important
roles in the tissue repair process. We investigated the characteristics of
macrophage COX-2 and PGE2 expression mediated by apoptotic cells and then
determined how macrophages exposed to apoptotic cells in vitro and in vivo
orchestrate the interaction between COX-2/PGE2 and HGF signaling pathways.
Exposure of RAW 264.7 cells and primary peritoneal macrophages to apoptotic cells
resulted in induction of COX-2 and PGE2. The COX-2 inhibitor NS-398 suppressed
apoptotic cell-induced PGE2 production. Both NS-398 and COX-2-siRNA, as well as
the PGE2 receptor EP2 antagonist, blocked HGF expression in response to apoptotic
cells. In addition, the HGF receptor antagonist suppressed increases in COX-2 and
PGE2 induction. The in vivo relevance of the interaction between the COX-2/PGE2
and HGF pathways through a positive feedback loop was shown in cultured alveolar 
macrophages following in vivo exposure of bleomycin-stimulated lungs to apoptotic
cells. Our results demonstrate that upregulation of the COX-2/PGE2 and HGF in
macrophages following exposure to apoptotic cells represents a mechanism for
mediating the anti-inflammatory and antifibrotic consequences of apoptotic cell
recognition.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/463524 
PMCID: PMC4052493
PMID: 24959005  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

