
1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2014 Sep;24(9):1260-8.

A novel esterase from Paenibacillus sp. PBS-2 is a new member of the β-lactamase 
belonging to the family VIII lipases/esterases.

Kim YO(1), Park IS, Nam BH, Kim DG, Jee YJ, Lee SJ, An CM.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Division, National Fisheries Research and Development
Institute, Busan 619-705, Republic of Korea.

Screening of a gene library from Paenibacillus sp. PBS-2 generated in Escherichia
coli led to the identification of a clone with lipolytic activity. Sequence
analysis showed an open reading frame encoding a polypeptide of 378 amino acid
residues with a predicted molecular mass of 42 kDa. The esterase displayed 69%
and 42% identity with the putative β-lactamases from Paenibacillus sp. JDR-2 and 
Clostridium sp. BNL1100, respectively. The esterase contained a Serx- x-Lys motif
that is conserved among all β-lactamases found to date. The protein PBS-2 was
produced in both soluble and insoluble forms when E. coli cells harboring the
gene were cultured at 18°C. The enzyme is a serine protein and was active against
p-nitrophenyl esters of C2, C4, C8, and C10. The optimum pH and temperature for
enzyme activity were pH 9.0 and 30°C, respectively. Relative activity of 55%
remained at up to 5°C with an activation energy of 5.84 kcal/mol, which indicates
that the enzyme is cold-adapted. Enzyme activity was inhibited by Cd(2+), Cu(2+),
and Hg(2+) ions. As expected for a serine esterase, activity was inhibited by
phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride. The enzyme was remarkably active and stable in the
presence of commercial detergents and organic solvents. This cold-adapted
esterase has potential as a biocatalyst and detergent additive for use at low
temperatures.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1405.05043 
PMID: 24950880  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

