
1. Int J Oncol. 2014 Sep;45(3):1193-9. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2523. Epub 2014 Jun 25.

Inhibition of Cdk2 kinase activity selectively targets the CD44⁺/CD24⁻/Low
stem-like subpopulation and restores chemosensitivity of SUM149PT triple-negative
breast cancer cells.

Opyrchal M(1), Salisbury JL(2), Iankov I(1), Goetz MP(1), McCubrey J(3), Gambino 
MW(2), Malatino L(4), Puccia G(4), Ingle JN(1), Galanis E(1), D'Assoro AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
MN, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, East Carolina University,
Greenville, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.

Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is an angioinvasive and most aggressive type of 
advanced breast cancer characterized by rapid proliferation, chemoresistance,
early metastatic development and poor prognosis. IBC tumors display a
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) phenotype characterized by centrosome
amplification, high grade of chromosomal instability (CIN) and low levels of
expression of estrogen receptor α (ERα), progesterone receptor (PR) and HER-2
tyrosine kinase receptor. Since the TNBC cells lack these receptors necessary to 
promote tumor growth, common treatments such as endocrine therapy and molecular
targeting of HER-2 receptor are ineffective for this subtype of breast cancer. To
date, not a single targeted therapy has been approved for non-inflammatory and
inflammatory TNBC tumors and combination of conventional cytotoxic
chemotherapeutic agents remains the standard therapy. IBC tumors generally
display activation of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) that is
functionally linked to a CD44+/CD24-/Low stem-like phenotype. Development of EMT 
and consequent activation of stemness programming is responsible for invasion,
tumor self-renewal and drug resistance leading to breast cancer progression,
distant metastases and poor prognosis. In this study, we employed the luminal ER+
MCF-7 and the IBC SUM149PT breast cancer cell lines to establish the extent to
which high grade of CIN and chemoresistance were mechanistically linked to the
enrichment of CD44+/CD24low/- CSCs. Here, we demonstrate that SUM149PT cells
displayed higher CIN than MCF-7 cells characterized by higher percentage of
structural and numerical chromosomal aberrations. Moreover, centrosome
amplification, cyclin E overexpression and phosphorylation of retinoblastoma (Rb)
were restricted to the stem-like CD44+/CD24-/Low subpopulation isolated from
SUM149PT cells. Significantly, CD44+/CD24-/Low CSCs displayed resistance to
conventional chemotherapy but higher sensitivity to SU9516, a specific
cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (Cdk2) inhibitor, demonstrating that aberrant
activation of cyclin E/Cdk2 oncogenic signaling is essential for the maintenance 
and expansion of CD44+/CD24-/Low CSC subpopulation in IBC. In conclusion, our
findings propose a novel therapeutic approach to restore chemosensitivity and
delay recurrence of IBC tumors based on the combination of conventional
chemotherapy with small molecule inhibitors of the Cdk2 cell cycle kinase.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2523 
PMCID: PMC4121417
PMID: 24970653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

