
1. Int J Cancer. 2015 Feb 15;136(4):752-60. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29050. Epub 2014 Jul 7.

A melanin-independent interaction between Mc1r and Met signaling pathways is
required for HGF-dependent melanoma.

Wolnicka-Glubisz A(1), Strickland FM, Wielgus A, Anver M, Merlino G, De Fabo EC, 
Noonan FP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Tropical Medicine, The George
Washington University, Washington, DC; Department of Biophysics, Faculty of
Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow,
Poland.

Melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) signaling stimulates black eumelanin production
through a cAMP-dependent pathway. MC1R polymorphisms can impair this process,
resulting in a predominance of red phaeomelanin. The red hair, fair skin and UV
sensitive phenotype is a well-described melanoma risk factor. MC1R polymorphisms 
also confer melanoma risk independent of pigment. We investigated the effect of
Mc1r deficiency in a mouse model of UV-induced melanoma. C57BL/6-Mc1r+/+-HGF
transgenic mice have a characteristic hyperpigmented black phenotype with
extra-follicular dermal melanocytes located at the dermal/epidermal junction. UVB
induces melanoma, independent of melanin pigmentation, but UVA-induced and
spontaneous melanomas are dependent on black eumelanin. We crossed these mice
with yellow C57BL/6-Mc1re/e animals which have a non-functional Mc1r and produce 
predominantly yellow phaeomelanin. Yellow C57BL/6-Mc1re/e-HGF mice produced no
melanoma in response to UVR or spontaneously even though the HGF transgene and
its receptor Met were expressed. Total melanin was less than in
C57BL/6-Mc1r+/+-HGF mice, hyperpigmentation was not observed and there were few
extra-follicular melanocytes. Thus, functional Mc1r was required for expression
of the transgenic HGF phenotype. Heterozygous C57BL/6-Mc1re/+-HGF mice were black
and hyperpigmented and, although extra-follicular melanocytes and skin melanin
content were similar to C57BL/6-Mc1r+/+-HGF animals, they developed UV-induced
and spontaneous melanomas with significantly less efficiency by all criteria.
Thus, heterozygosity for Mc1r was sufficient to restore the transgenic HGF
phenotype but insufficient to fully restore melanoma. We conclude that a
previously unsuspected melanin-independent interaction between Mc1r and Met
signaling pathways is required for HGF-dependent melanoma and postulate that this
pathway is involved in human melanoma.

2014 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.29050 
PMCID: PMC4262613
PMID: 24975581  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

