
1. Chem Biol. 2014 Jul 17;21(7):855-65. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2014.05.012. Epub
2014 Jun 26.

Biosynthesis of crocacin involves an unusual hydrolytic release domain showing
similarity to condensation domains.

Müller S(1), Rachid S(1), Hoffmann T(1), Surup F(2), Volz C(1), Zaburannyi N(1), 
Müller R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Natural Products, Helmholtz Institute for
Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research and
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Saarland 66123,
Germany.
(2)Department of Microbial Drugs, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research,
Braunschweig, Niedersachsen 38124, Germany.
(3)Department of Microbial Natural Products, Helmholtz Institute for
Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research and
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Saarland 66123,
Germany. Electronic address: rolf.mueller@helmholtz-hzi.de.

The crocacins are potent antifungal and cytotoxic natural compounds from
myxobacteria of the genus Chondromyces. Although total synthesis approaches have 
been reported, the molecular and biochemical basis guiding the formation of the
linear crocacin scaffold has remained unknown. Along with the identification and 
functional analysis of the crocacin biosynthetic gene cluster from Chondromyces
crocatus Cm c5, we here present the identification and biochemical
characterization of an unusual chain termination domain homologous to
condensation domains responsible for hydrolytic release of the product from the
assembly line. In particular, gene inactivation studies and in vitro experiments 
using the heterologously produced domain CroK-C2 confirm this surprising role
giving rise to the linear carboxylic acid. Additionally, we determined the
kinetic parameters of CroK-C2 by monitoring hydrolytic cleavage of the substrate 
mimic N-acetylcysteaminyl-crocacin B using an innovative high-performance liquid 
chromatography mass spectrometry-based assay.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2014.05.012 
PMID: 24981773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

