
1. J Food Prot. 2014 Jul;77(7):1193-7. doi: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-14-006.

Prevalence of salmonella in neck skin and bone of chickens.

Wu D(1), Alali WQ(2), Harrison MA(3), Hofacre CL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Food Safety, University of Georgia, Griffin, Georgia 30223, USA.
(2)Center for Food Safety, University of Georgia, Griffin, Georgia 30223, USA.
walali@uga.edu.
(3)Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Georgia, Athens,
Georgia 30602, USA.
(4)Department of Population Health, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30602,
USA.

Bone-in and boneless parts, such as drumsticks, are used in ground chicken
production. In addition, neck skin is used as a source of fat in ground products.
Contaminated chicken neck skin and bones containing internalized Salmonella are
potential sources of this pathogen in ground chicken. This study determined the
prevalence of Salmonella and serotype distribution in drumstick bones and neck
skin of postchill chicken carcasses. One week prior to slaughter, chicken houses 
(n = 26) at nine farms were tested for the presence of Salmonella, using the boot
sock method. Chicken flocks from these houses originated from Salmonella-positive
breeders. Eight Salmonella-positive chicken flocks and one flock with
undetermined Salmonella status were monitored through processing. Three hundred
postchill drumsticks and 299 neck skin samples were analyzed for Salmonella
prevalence. Skin samples were rinsed and stomached prior to analysis. Bones were 
extracted from the drumsticks, external surfaces were sterilized, and bones were 
crushed for analysis. One Salmonella isolate from each positive sample was
serogrouped. Half of the isolates representing different sample types were
serotyped. Overall, Salmonella was found in 0.8, 21.4, and 80.1% of bone marrow, 
neck skin, and farms, respectively. Prevalence of Salmonella on rinsed skin
samples (2.3%) and stomached skin samples (20.7%) differed significantly (P â‰¤
0.05). Serogroups B, C2, D, and E were found at 23.4, 31.9, 11.7, and 29.8%,
respectively. Six Salmonella serotypes were identified: Liverpool (37.9%),
Kentucky (27.6%), and Typhimurium (27.6%) were isolated most frequently from neck
skin; the two bone isolates were Kentucky; and more than 50% of the farm isolates
were Kentucky and Ouakam. Salmonella-contaminated neck skin might be a more
significant source of this contamination in ground chicken than Salmonella
internalized in bones.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-14-006 
PMID: 24988028  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

