
1. FEBS Lett. 2014 Nov 17;588(22):4188-94. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.06.042. Epub 
2014 Jun 28.

Commensal microbial regulation of natural killer T cells at the frontiers of the 
mucosal immune system.

Zeissig S(1), Blumberg RS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University Medical Center
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany. Electronic address: szeissig@1med.uni-kiel.de.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endoscopy, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address:
rblumberg@partners.org.

The commensal microbiota co-exists in a mutualistic relationship with its human
host. Commensal microbes play critical roles in the regulation of host metabolism
and immunity, while microbial colonization, conversely, is under control of host 
immunity and metabolic pathways. These interactions are of central importance to 
the maintenance of homeostasis at mucosal surfaces and their perturbation can
provide the basis for atopic and chronic inflammatory diseases such as asthma and
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Recent evidence has revealed that natural
killer T (NKT) cells, a subgroup of T cells which recognizes self and microbial
lipid antigens presented by CD1d, are key mediators of host-microbial
interactions. Mucosal and systemic NKT cell development is under control of the
commensal microbiota, while CD1d regulates microbial colonization and influences 
the composition of the intestinal microbiota. Here, we outline the mechanisms of 
bidirectional cross-talk between the microbiota and CD1d-restricted NKT cells and
discuss how a perturbation of these processes can contribute to the pathogenesis 
of immune-mediated disorders at mucosal surfaces.

Copyright Â© 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.06.042 
PMID: 24983499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

