
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2014 Jul;70(Pt 7):911-4. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X14010747. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Crystallization and preliminary crystallographic studies of the complement 1qA
globular domain from zebrafish, Dare-C1qAgD.

Yuan H(1), Chen R(1), Liu Y(1), Tariq M(1), Sun Y(1), Xia C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, People's Republic of China.

Complement 1q (C1q) is the first component of the complement system which can
initiate the classical complement pathway. In human, C1q is composed of 18
polypeptide chains: six C1qA chains, six C1qB chains and six C1qC chains. Each
chain has a signal peptide and is comprised of a collagen-like region and a
C-terminal C1q globular domain (C1qgD), which is organized as a heterotrimer.
C1qgD can recognize antigen-antibody complexes containing IgG and IgM or can bind
directly to the C-reactive protein. Although the classical complement pathway is 
found from fish to mammals, only the human C1qgD structure has been determined.
Compared with that of mammals, fish C1q exhibits similar immune functions and
genome arrangement. In order to illustrate the structure of C1qgD in fish,
zebrafish (Danio rerio) C1qA globular domain (Dare-C1qAgD) was expressed,
purified and crystallized. X-ray diffraction data were collected from a crystal
to a resolution of 2.05 Å; the crystal belonged to the orthorhombic space group
P2₁2₁2₁, with unit-cell parameters a=50.347, b=85.059, c=95.560 Å. It contained
three molecules in the asymmetric unit. The Matthews coefficient value VM was
2.31 Å3 Da(-1), with a calculated solvent content of 46.7%. The data will help to
give insight into the structural basis of C1qA in fish species.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X14010747 
PMCID: PMC4089530
PMID: 25005087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

