
1. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 8;9(7):e101655. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101655. eCollection
2014.

Regulation of T cell motility in vitro and in vivo by LPA and LPA2.

Knowlden SA(1), Capece T(1), Popovic M(1), Chapman TJ(2), Rezaee F(3), Kim M(1), 
Georas SN(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York, United States of America.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York, United States of
America.
(3)Division of Pediatric Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University
of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York, United States of America.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York, United States of America; Division of Pulmonary and 
Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York, United States of America.

Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) and the LPA-generating enzyme autotaxin (ATX) have
been implicated in lymphocyte trafficking and the regulation of lymphocyte entry 
into lymph nodes. High local concentrations of LPA are thought to be present in
lymph node high endothelial venules, suggesting a direct influence of LPA on cell
migration. However, little is known about the mechanism of action of LPA, and
more work is needed to define the expression and function of the six known G
protein-coupled receptors (LPA 1-6) in T cells. We studied the effects of 18∶1
and 16∶0 LPA on naïve CD4+ T cell migration and show that LPA induces CD4+ T cell
chemorepulsion in a Transwell system, and also improves the quality of
non-directed migration on ICAM-1 and CCL21 coated plates. Using intravital
two-photon microscopy, lpa2-/- CD4+ T cells display a striking defect in early
migratory behavior at HEVs and in lymph nodes. However, later homeostatic
recirculation and LPA-directed migration in vitro were unaffected by loss of
lpa2. Taken together, these data highlight a previously unsuspected and
non-redundant role for LPA2 in intranodal T cell motility, and suggest that
specific functions of LPA may be manipulated by targeting T cell LPA receptors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101655 
PMCID: PMC4086949
PMID: 25003200  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

