
1. FASEB J. 2014 Oct;28(10):4183-99. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-257352. Epub 2014 Jul 2.

MUC16: molecular analysis and its functional implications in benign and malignant
conditions.

Haridas D(1), Ponnusamy MP(1), Chugh S(1), Lakshmanan I(1), Seshacharyulu P(1),
Batra SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fred and Pamela Buffett
Cancer Center, Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, and
Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, Nebraska, USA sbatra@unmc.edu.

MUC16 is a high-molecular-weight glycoprotein that is expressed by the various
epithelial cell surfaces of the human body to protect the cell layer from a
myriad of insults. It is the largest mucin known to date, with an ∼22,152 aa
sequence. Structurally, MUC16 is characterized into 3 distinct domains: the amino
terminal, the tandem repeat, and the carboxyl terminal domain, with each domain
having unique attributes. The extracellular portion of MUC16 is shed into the
bloodstream and serves as a biomarker for diagnosing and monitoring patients with
cancer; however, its functional role in cancer is yet to be elucidated. Several
factors contribute to this challenge, which include the large protein size; the
extensive glycosylation that the protein undergoes, which confers functional
heterogeneity; lack of specific antibodies that detect the unique domains of
MUC16; and the existence of splicing variants. Despite these limitations, MUC16
has been established as a molecule of significant application in cancer. Hence,
in this review, we discuss the various aspects of MUC16, which include its
discovery, structure, and biological significance both in benign and malignant
conditions with an attempt to dissect its functional relevance

© FASEB.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.14-257352 
PMID: 25002120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

