
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2014 Jul;70(Pt 7):933-7. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X14011388. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Crystallization and preliminary X-ray analysis of RabX3, a tandem GTPase from
Entamoeba histolytica.

Kumar Srivastava V(1), Chandra M(1), Datta S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and
Research Bhopal, Bhopal 462 023, India.

Ras superfamily GTPases regulate signalling pathways that control multiple
biological processes by modulating the GTP/GDP cycle. Various Rab GTPases, which 
are the key regulators of vesicular trafficking pathways, play a vital role in
the survival and virulence of the enteric parasite Entamoeba histolytica. The Rab
GTPases act as binary molecular switches that utilize the conformational changes 
associated with the GTP/GDP cycle to elicit responses from target proteins and
thereby regulate a broad spectrum of cellular processes including cell
proliferation, cytoskeletal assembly, nuclear transport and intracellular
membrane trafficking in eukaryotes. Entamoeba histolytica RabX3 (EhRabX3) is a
unique GTPase in the amoebic genome, the only member in the eukaryotic Ras
superfamily that harbours tandem G-domains and shares only 8-16% sequence
identity with other GTPases. Recent studies suggested that EhRabX3 binds to a
single guanine nucleotide through its N-terminal G-domain (NTD), while the
C-terminal G-domain (CTD) plays a potential role in binding of the nucleotide to 
the NTD. Thus, understanding the intermolecular regulation between the two GTPase
domains is expected to reveal valuable information on the overall action of
EhRabX3. To provide structural insights into the inclusive action of this unique 
GTPase, EhRabX3 was crystallized by successive micro-seeding using the
vapour-diffusion method. A complete data set was collected to 3.3 Å resolution
using a single native EhRabX3 crystal at 100 K on BM14 at the ESRF, Grenoble,
France. The crystal belonged to monoclinic space group C2, with unit-cell
parameters a=198.6, b=119.3, c=89.2 Å, β=103.1°. Preliminary analysis of the data
using the Matthews Probability Calculator suggested the presence of four to six
molecules in the asymmetric unit.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X14011388 
PMCID: PMC4089535
PMID: 25005092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

