
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2014 Jul;70(Pt 7):884-9. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X1401108X. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Crystallization of dienelactone hydrolase in two space groups: structural changes
caused by crystal packing.

Porter JL(1), Carr PD(1), Collyer CA(2), Ollis DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research School of Chemistry, Australian National University, Building 137,
Sullivans Creek Road, Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia.
(2)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, Biochemistry Building,
Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.

Dienelactone hydrolase (DLH) is a monomeric protein with a simple α/β-hydrolase
fold structure. It readily crystallizes in space group P2₁2₁2₁ from either a
phosphate or ammonium sulfate precipitation buffer. Here, the structure of DLH at
1.85 Å resolution crystallized in space group C2 with two molecules in the
asymmetric unit is reported. When crystallized in space group P2₁2₁2₁ DLH has
either phosphates or sulfates bound to the protein in crucial locations, one of
which is located in the active site, preventing substrate/inhibitor binding.
Another is located on the surface of the enzyme coordinated by side chains from
two different molecules. Crystallization in space group C2 from a sodium citrate 
buffer results in new crystallographic protein-protein interfaces. The protein
backbone is highly similar, but new crystal contacts cause changes in side-chain 
orientations and in loop positioning. In regions not involved in crystal
contacts, there is little change in backbone or side-chain configuration. The
flexibility of surface loops and the adaptability of side chains are important
factors enabling DLH to adapt and form different crystal lattices.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X1401108X 
PMCID: PMC4089525
PMID: 25005082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

