
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 Sep;80(18):5801-6. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01338-14. Epub
2014 Jul 11.

SmoXYB1C1Z of Mycobacterium sp. strain NBB4: a soluble methane monooxygenase
(sMMO)-like enzyme, active on C2 to C4 alkanes and alkenes.

Martin KE(1), Ozsvar J(1), Coleman NV(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(2)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
nicholas.coleman@sydney.edu.au.

Monooxygenase (MO) enzymes initiate the aerobic oxidation of alkanes and alkenes 
in bacteria. A cluster of MO genes (smoXYB1C1Z) of thus-far-unknown function was 
found previously in the genomes of two Mycobacterium strains (NBB3 and NBB4)
which grow on hydrocarbons. The predicted Smo enzymes have only moderate amino
acid identity (30 to 60%) to their closest homologs, the soluble methane and
butane MOs (sMMO and sBMO), and the smo gene cluster has a different organization
from those of sMMO and sBMO. The smoXYB1C1Z genes of NBB4 were cloned into
pMycoFos to make pSmo, which was transformed into Mycobacterium smegmatis
mc(2)-155. Cells of mc(2)-155(pSmo) metabolized C2 to C4 alkanes, alkenes, and
chlorinated hydrocarbons. The activities of mc(2)-155(pSmo) cells were 0.94,
0.57, 0.12, and 0.04 nmol/min/mg of protein with ethene, ethane, propane, and
butane as substrates, respectively. The mc(2)-155(pSmo) cells made epoxides from 
ethene, propene, and 1-butene, confirming that Smo was an oxygenase. Epoxides
were not produced from larger alkenes (1-octene and styrene). Vinyl chloride and 
1,2-dichloroethane were biodegraded by cells expressing Smo, with production of
inorganic chloride. This study shows that Smo is a functional oxygenase which is 
active against small hydrocarbons. M. smegmatis mc(2)-155(pSmo) provides a new
model for studying sMMO-like monooxygenases.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01338-14 
PMCID: PMC4178599
PMID: 25015887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

