
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2014 Oct;64(Pt 10):3390-3394. doi:
10.1099/ijs.0.056507-0. Epub 2014 Jul 10.

Pseudoxanthobacter liyangensis sp. nov., isolated from
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane-contaminated soil.

Liu XM(1), Chen K(1), Meng C(1), Zhang L(1), Zhu JC(1), Huang X(1), Li SP(1),
Jiang JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Key Lab of Microbiological Engineering of
Agricultural Environment, Ministry of Agriculture, College of Life Sciences,
Nanjing Agricultural University, 210095 Nanjing, PR China.

An aerobic, Gram-stain negative, pale, rod-shaped, nitrogen-fixing bacterial
strain, DDT-3(T), was isolated from dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane-contaminated 
soil in Liyang, PR China. Strain DDT-3(T) grew at temperatures ranging from 20 to
40 °C (optimum 30-37 °C) and a pH of between 5.0 and 10.0 (optimum pH 7.0-8.0).
The G+C content of the total DNA was 70.1 mol%. The 16S rRNA gene sequence of
strain DDT-3(T) showed the highest similarity to that of Pseudoxanthobacter soli 
CC4(T) (99.6%), followed by Kaistia dalseonensis B6-8(T) (93.3%), Kaistia soli
5YN9-8(T) (93.0%) and Amorphus orientalis YIM D10(T) (93.0%). Strain DDT-3(T)
showed less than 92.6 % similarity with other species of the family
Xanthobacteraceae. The major cellular fatty acids of strain DDT-3(T) were C19:0
cyclo ω8c (42.6%), C16:0 (33.2%) and C18:1ω7c (10.0%). The only respiratory
quinone was ubiquinone Q-10. The characteristic diamino acid of the peptidoglycan
was meso-diaminopimelic acid. The major polar lipids were glycolipid, lipid,
phosphatidylcholine, aminolipid, phosphatidylmethylethanolamine,
diphosphatidylglycerol and phosphatidylglycerol. The polyamine profile consisted 
of major amounts of putrescine (92.9%) and minor amounts of spermidine (5.0%) and
spermine (2.1%). These chemotaxonomic data support the affiliation of strain
DDT-3(T) with the genus Pseudoxanthobacter. The DNA-DNA hybridization value
between strain DDT-3(T) and strain CC4(T) was 47.8% (reciprocal 44.3%). DNA-DNA
hybridization data as well as the biochemical and physiological characteristics
strongly supported the genotypic and phenotypic differentiation of strain
DDT-3(T) and strain CC4(T). Strain DDT-3(T), therefore, represents a novel
species of the genus Pseudoxanthobacter, for which the name Pseudoxanthobacter
liyangensis sp. nov. is proposed. The type strain is DDT-3(T) ( = KACC 16601(T) =
CCTCC AB 2013167(T)).

© 2014 IUMS.

DOI: 10.1099/ijs.0.056507-0 
PMID: 25013230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

