
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2014 Oct;98(20):8641-55. doi:
10.1007/s00253-014-5918-x. Epub 2014 Jul 12.

Novel and tightly regulated resorcinol and cumate-inducible expression systems
for Streptomyces and other actinobacteria.

Horbal L(1), Fedorenko V, Luzhetskyy A.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Saarland University 
Campus, Building C2 3, 66123, Saarbrücken, Germany.

Inducible expression is a versatile genetic tool for controlling gene
transcription, determining gene functions and other uses. Herein, we describe our
attempts to create several inducible systems based on a cumate or a resorcinol
switch, a hammerhead ribozyme, the LacI repressor, and isopropyl
β-d-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG). We successfully developed a new cumate
(p-isopropylbenzoic acid)-inducible gene switch in actinobacteria that is based
on the CymR regulator, the operator sequence (cmt) from the Pseudomonas putida
cumate degradation operon and P21 synthetic promoter. Resorcinol-inducible
expression system is also functional and is composed of the RolR regulator and
the PA3 promoter fused with the operator (rolO) from the Corynebacterium
glutamicum resorcinol catabolic operon. Using the gusA (β-glucuronidase) gene as 
a reporter, we showed that the newly generated expression systems are tightly
regulated and hyper-inducible. The activity of the uninduced promoters is
negligible in both cases. Whereas the induction factor reaches 45 for
Streptomyces albus in the case of cumate switch and 33 in the case of resorcinol 
toggle. The systems are also dose-dependent, which allows the modulation of gene 
expression even from a single promoter. In addition, the cumate system is
versatile, given that it is functional in different actinomycetes. Finally, these
systems are nontoxic and inexpensive, as these are characteristics of cumate and 
resorcinol, and they are easy to use because inducers are water-soluble and
easily penetrate cells. Therefore, the P21-cmt-CymR and PA3-rolO-RolR systems are
powerful tools for engineering actinobacteria.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-014-5918-x 
PMID: 25012786  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

