
1. ISME J. 2015 Jan;9(1):46-58. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2014.111. Epub 2014 Jul 11.

Early colonizing Escherichia coli elicits remodeling of rat colonic epithelium
shifting toward a new homeostatic state.

Tomas J(1), Reygner J(2), Mayeur C(1), Ducroc R(3), Bouet S(4), Bridonneau C(1), 
Cavin JB(3), Thomas M(1), Langella P(1), Cherbuy C(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] INRA, UMR 1319 MICALIS, F-78350, Jouy-en-Josas, France [2] AgroParisTech,
UMR 1319 MICALIS, F-78350, Jouy-en-Josas, France [3] Commensal and
Probiotics-Host Interactions Laboratory, INRA, UMR 1319 MICALIS, F-78350,
Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(2)1] PERITOX, EA 4285 UMI 01 INERIS, UFR of Medecine-UPJV, Amiens, France [2]
EGEAL team, UPSP 2007-05-137, Institut Polytechnique La Salle Beauvais, Beauvais,
France.
(3)Inserm UMRS1149, UFR de Médecine Paris 7, Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne
Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(4)1] INRA, UMR 1313, Animal Genetics and Integrative Biology, F-78350,
Jouy-en-Josas, France [2] Laboratory of Radiobiology and Genomics Studies, CEA,
DSV, IRCM, SREIT, F-78350, Jouy-en-Josas, France [3] AgroParisTech, UMR 1313,
Animal Genetics and Integrative Biology, F-78350, Jouy-en-Josas, France.

We investigated the effects of early colonizing bacteria on the colonic
epithelium. We isolated dominant bacteria, Escherichia coli, Enterococcus
faecalis, Lactobacillus intestinalis, Clostridium innocuum and a novel
Fusobacterium spp., from the intestinal contents of conventional suckling rats
and transferred them in different combinations into germfree (GF) adult rats.
Animals were investigated after various times up to 21 days. Proliferative cell
markers (Ki67, proliferating cell nuclear antigen, phospho-histone H3, cyclin A) 
were higher in rats monocolonized with E. coli than in GF at all time points, but
not in rats monocolonized with E. faecalis. The mucin content of goblet cells
declined shortly after E. coli administration whereas the mucus layer doubled in 
thickness. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analyses revealed that E. coli
resides in this mucus layer. The epithelial mucin content progressively returned 
to baseline, following an increase in KLF4 and in the cell cycle arrest-related
proteins p21(CIP1) and p27(KIP1). Markers of colonic differentiated cells
involved in electrolyte (carbonic anhydrase II and slc26A3) and water
(aquaglyceroporin3 (aqp3)) transport, and secretory responses to carbachol were
modulated after E. coli inoculation suggesting that ion transport dynamics were
also affected. The colonic responses to simplified microbiotas differed
substantially according to whether or not E. coli was combined with the other
four bacteria. Thus, proliferation markers increased substantially when E. coli
was in the mix, but very much less when it was absent. This work demonstrates
that a pioneer strain of E. coli elicits sequential epithelial remodeling
affecting the structure, mucus layer and ionic movements and suggests this can
result in a microbiota-compliant state.

DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2014.111 
PMCID: PMC4274421
PMID: 25012905  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

