
1. Gene. 2014 Sep 10;548(1):126-33. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.07.032. Epub 2014 Jul
12.

Molecular characterization and expression of CD2BP2 in Nile tilapia (Oreochromis 
niloticus) in response to Streptococcus agalactiae stimulus.

Gan Z(1), Wang B(1), Lu Y(2), Cai S(1), Cai J(1), Jian J(1), Wu Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Fishery, Guangdong Ocean University, Zhanjiang 524025, China;
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Biology and Epidemiology for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Zhanjiang 524025, China; Key Laboratory of Control for 
Disease of Aquatic Animals of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Zhanjiang
524025, China.
(2)College of Fishery, Guangdong Ocean University, Zhanjiang 524025, China;
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Biology and Epidemiology for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Zhanjiang 524025, China; Key Laboratory of Control for 
Disease of Aquatic Animals of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Zhanjiang
524025, China. Electronic address: fishdis@163.com.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Biology and Epidemiology for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Zhanjiang 524025, China; Key Laboratory of Control for 
Disease of Aquatic Animals of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Zhanjiang
524025, China; Zhongkai University of Agriculture and Engineering, Guangzhou
510225, China.

CD2BP2 (CD2 cytoplasmic tail binding protein 2), one of several proteins
interacting with the cytoplasmic tail of CD2, plays a crucial role in
CD2-triggered T cell activation and nuclear splicing. The studies on CD2BP2 have 
tended to be confined to a few mammals, and little information is available to
date regarding fish CD2BP2. In this paper, a CD2BP2 gene (On-CD2BP2) was cloned
from Nile tilapia, Oreochromis niloticus. Sequence analysis showed that the full 
length of On-CD2BP2 cDNA was 1429 bp, containing a 5'untranslated region (UTR) of
111 bp, a 3'-UTR of 193 bp and an open reading frame of 1125 bp which is encoding
374 amino acids. Two important structural features, a GYF domain and a consensus 
motif GPFXXXXMXXWXXXGYF were detected in the deduced amino acid sequence of
On-CD2BP2, and the deduced genomic structure of On-CD2BP2 was similar to the
known CD2BP2. The mRNA expression of On-CD2BP2 in various tissues of Nile tilapia
was analyzed by fluorescent quantitative real-time PCR. In healthy Nile tilapia, 
the On-CD2BP2 transcripts were mainly detected in the head kidney and spleen.
While vaccinated with inactivated Streptococcus agalactiae, the On-CD2BP2 mRNA
expression was significantly up-regulated in the head kidney, spleen and brain 48
h post immunization. Moreover, there was a clear time-dependent expression
pattern of On-CD2BP2 after immunization and the expression reached the highest
level at 24h in the brain and 48 h in the head kidney and spleen. This is the
first report of proving the presence of a CD2BP2 ortholog in fish, and
investigating its tissue distribution and expression profile in response to
bacterial stimulus. These findings indicated that On-CD2BP2 may play an important
role in the immune response to bacteria in Nile tilapia.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.07.032 
PMID: 25020258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

