
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2014 Sep 15;161(1-2):21-31. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2014.06.002. Epub 2014 Jul 1.

Immunophenotype and gene expression profile of mesenchymal stem cells derived
from canine adipose tissue and bone marrow.

Screven R(1), Kenyon E(1), Myers MJ(1), Yancy HF(1), Skasko M(2), Boxer L(2),
Bigley EC 3rd(3), Borjesson DL(4), Zhu M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Office of Research, Center for Veterinary Medicine, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, 8401 Muirkirk Road, Laurel, MD 20708, USA.
(2)Office of New Animal Drug Evaluation, Center for Veterinary Medicine, U.S.
Food and Drug Administration, 7500 Standish Place, Rockville, MD 20855, USA.
(3)Office of Applied Research and Safety Assessment, Center for Food Safety and
Applied Nutrition, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 8301 Muirkirk Road, Laurel,
MD 20708, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(5)Office of Research, Center for Veterinary Medicine, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, 8401 Muirkirk Road, Laurel, MD 20708, USA. Electronic address:
min.zhu@fda.hhs.gov.

Veterinary adult stem cell therapy is an emerging area of basic and clinical
research. Like their human counterparts, veterinary mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
offer many potential therapeutic benefits. The characterization of canine-derived
MSCs, however, is poorly defined compared to human MSCs. Furthermore, little
consensus exists regarding the expression of canine MSC cell surface markers. To 
address this issue, this study investigated characteristics of cultured canine
MSCs derived from both adipose tissue and bone marrow. The canine MSCs were
obtained from donors of various breeds and ages. A panel of cell surface markers 
for canine MSCs was selected based on current human and canine literature and the
availability of canine-reactive antibodies. Using flow cytometry, canine MSCs
were defined to be CD90(+)CD44(+)MHC I(+)CD14(-)CD29(-)CD34(-)MHC II(-). Canine
MSCs were further characterized using real-time RT-PCR as
CD105(+)CD73(+)CD14(+)CD29(+)MHC II(+)CD45(-) at the mRNA level. Among these
markers, canine MSCs differed from canine peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) by the absence of CD45 expression at the mRNA level. A novel
high-throughput canine-specific PCR array was developed and used to identify
changes in the gene expression profiles of canine MSCs. Genes including PTPRC,
TNF, β2M, TGFβ1, and PDGFRβ, were identified as unique to canine MSCs as compared
to canine PBMCs. Our findings will facilitate characterization of canine MSCs for
use in research and clinical trials. Moreover, the high-throughput PCR array is a
novel tool for characterizing canine MSCs isolated from different tissues and
potentially from different laboratories.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2014.06.002 
PMID: 25026887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

