
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2014 Sep;160(Pt 9):2030-2044. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.079251-0. Epub 2014 Jul 15.

Plasticity of fimbrial genotype and serotype within populations of Bordetella
pertussis: analysis by paired flow cytometry and genome sequencing.

Vaughan TE(1), Pratt CB(1), Sealey K(2)(3), Preston A(3), Fry NK(2), Gorringe
AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health England, Porton Down, Salisbury SP4 0JG, UK.
(2)Respiratory and Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Reference Unit, Public Health
England - Microbiology Reference Services, Colindale, 61 Colindale Avenue, London
NW9 5EQ, UK.
(3)Department of Biology & Biochemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath
BA2 7AY, UK.

The fimbriae of Bordetella pertussis are required for colonization of the human
respiratory tract. Two serologically distinct fimbrial subunits, Fim2 and Fim3,
considered important vaccine components for many years, are included in the
Sanofi Pasteur 5-component acellular pertussis vaccine, and the World Health
Organization recommends the inclusion of strains expressing both fimbrial
serotypes in whole-cell pertussis vaccines. Each of the fimbrial major subunit
genes, fim2, fim3, and fimX, has a promoter poly(C) tract upstream of its -10
box. Such monotonic DNA elements are susceptible to changes in length via
slipped-strand mispairing in vitro and in vivo, which potentially causes on/off
switching of genes at every cell division. Here, we have described intra-culture 
variability in poly(C) tract lengths and the resulting fimbrial phenotypes in 22 
recent UK B. pertussis isolates. Owing to the highly plastic nature of fimbrial
promoters, we used the same cultures for both genome sequencing and flow
cytometry. Individual cultures of B. pertussis contained multiple fimbrial
serotypes and multiple different fimbrial promoter poly(C) tract lengths, which
supports earlier serological evidence that B. pertussis expresses both serotypes 
during infection.

Â© 2014 Crown copyright 2014. Reproduced with the permission of the controller of 
Her Majesty's Stationery Office/Queen's Printer for Scotland and Public Health
England.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.079251-0 
PMID: 25028460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

