
1. Malar J. 2014 Jul 18;13:277. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-277.

Production and characterization of specific monoclonal antibodies binding the
Plasmodium falciparum diagnostic biomarker, histidine-rich protein 2.

Leow CH(1), Jones M, Cheng Q, Mahler S, McCarthy J.

Author information: 
(1)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia.
herng.leow@usm.my.

BACKGROUND: Early and accurate diagnosis of Plasmodium falciparum infection is
important for providing appropriate treatment to patients with malaria. However, 
technical limitations of currently available diagnostic tests limit their use in 
control programs. One possible explanation for the vulnerability of current
antibodies used in RDTs is their propensity to degrade at high ambient
temperatures. Isolation of new antibodies with better thermal stability
represents an appealing approach to improve the performance of RDTs.
METHODS: In this study, phage display technology was deployed to isolate novel
binders by screening a human naïve scFv antibody library against recombinant
Plasmodium falciparum histidine rich protein 2 (rPfHRP2). The isolated scFv
clones were reformatted to whole IgG and the recombinant mAbs were produced in a 
mammalian CHO cell expression system. To verify the biological activity of these 
purified recombinant mAbs, range of functional assays were characterized.
RESULTS: Two unique clones (D2 and F9) were isolated after five rounds of
biopanning. The reformatted and expressed antibodies demonstrated high binding
specificity to malaria recombinant PfHRP2 and native proteins. When 5 μg/mL of
mAbs applied, mAb C1-13 had the highest sensitivity, with an OD value of 1, the
detection achieved 5 ng/mL of rPfHRP2, followed by mAbs D2 and F9 at 10 ng/mL and
100 ng/mL of rPfHRP2, respectively. Although the sensitivity of mAbs D2 and F9
was lower than the control, these recombinant human mAbs have shown better
stability compared to mouse mAb C1-13 at various temperatures in DSC and blot
assays. In view of epitope mapping, the predominant motif of rPfHRP2 recognized
by mAb D2 was AHHAADAHHA, whereas mAb F9 was one amino acid shorter, resulting in
AHHAADAHH. mAb F9 had the strongest binding affinity to rPfHRP2 protein, with a
KD value of 4.27 × 10(-11) M, followed by control mAb C1-13 at 1.03 × 10(-10) M
and mAb D2 at 3.05 × 10(-10) M.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the performance of these mAbs showed comparability to
currently available PfHRP2-specific mouse mAb C1-13. The stability of these novel
binders indicate that they merit further work to evaluate their utility in the
development of new generation point of care diagnosis of malaria.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2875-13-277 
PMCID: PMC4120728
PMID: 25037150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

