
1. Dev Biol. 2014 Sep 15;393(2):270-281. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.07.003. Epub 2014
Jul 14.

Dynamics of BMP signaling in limb bud mesenchyme and polydactyly.

Norrie JL(1), Lewandowski JP(1), Bouldin CM(2), Amarnath S(1), Li Q(1), Vokes
MS(1), Ehrlich LIR(1), Harfe BD(2), Vokes SA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, University of Texas at Austin, 2500 Speedway Stop A4800, Austin, TX
78712, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, College of Medicine, UF
Genetics Institute, 2033 Mowry Road, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, University of Texas at Austin, 2500 Speedway Stop A4800, Austin, TX
78712, USA. Electronic address: svokes@austin.utexas.edu.

Mutations in the Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) pathway are associated with a
range of defects in skeletal formation. Genetic analysis of BMP signaling
requirements is complicated by the presence of three partially redundant BMPs
that are required for multiple stages of limb development. We generated an
inducible allele of a BMP inhibitor, Gremlin, which reduces BMP signaling. We
show that BMPs act in a dose and time dependent manner in which early reduction
of BMPs result in digit loss, while inhibiting overall BMP signaling between
E10.5 and E11.5 allows polydactylous digit formation. During this period,
inhibiting BMPs extends the duration of FGF signaling. Sox9 is initially
expressed in normal digit ray domains but at reduced levels that correlate with
the reduction in BMP signaling. The persistence of elevated FGF signaling likely 
promotes cell proliferation and survival, inhibiting the activation of Sox9 and
secondarily, inhibiting the differentiation of Sox9-expressing chondrocytes. Our 
results provide new insights into the timing and clarify the mechanisms
underlying BMP signaling during digit morphogenesis.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.07.003 
PMCID: PMC4143117
PMID: 25034710  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

