
1. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2014 Sep;41(9):1383-90. doi:
10.1007/s10295-014-1479-3. Epub 2014 Jul 17.

Genetic engineering combined with random mutagenesis to enhance G418 production
in Micromonospora echinospora.

Ni X(1), Sun Z, Zhang H, He H, Ji Z, Xia H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biopharmaceutics, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, Shenyang, 110016, Liaoning, China, nixianpu126@126.com.

G418, produced by fermentation of Micromonospora echinospora, is an
aminoglycoside antibiotic commonly used in genetic selection and maintenance of
eukaryotic cells. Besides G418, M. echinospora produces many G418 analogs. As a
result, the G418 product always contains impurities such as gentamicin C1, C1a,
C2, C2a, gentamicin A and gentamicin X2. These impurities are less potent but
more toxic than G418, but the purification of G418 is difficult because it has
similar properties to its impurities. G418 is an intermediate in the gentamicin
biosynthesis pathway. From G418 the pathway proceeds via successive
dehydrogenation and aminotransferation at the C-6' position to generate the
gentamicin C complex, but genes responsible for these steps are still obscure.
Through disruption of gacJ, which is deduced to encode a C-6' dehydrogenase, the 
biosynthetic impurities gentamicin C1, C1a, C2 and C2a were all removed, and G418
became the main product of the gacJ disruption strain. These results demonstrated
that gacJ is in charge of conversion of the 6'-OH of G418 into 6'-NH2. Disruption
of gacJ not only eliminates the impurities seen in the original strain but also
improves G418 titers by 15-fold. G418 production was further improved by 26.6Â %
through traditional random mutagenesis. Through the use of combined traditional
and recombinant genetic techniques, we produced a strain from which most
impurities were removed and G418 production was improved by 19 fold.

DOI: 10.1007/s10295-014-1479-3 
PMID: 25031027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

