
1. Toxins (Basel). 2014 Jul 18;6(7):2127-36. doi: 10.3390/toxins6072127.

Removal of paralytic shellfish toxins by probiotic lactic acid bacteria.

Vasama M(1), Kumar H(2), Salminen S(3), Haskard CA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Foods Forum, University of Turku, 20014 Turku, Finland.
carolyn.haskard@csiro.au.
(2)Functional Foods Forum, University of Turku, 20014 Turku, Finland.
kumhim@utu.fi.
(3)Functional Foods Forum, University of Turku, 20014 Turku, Finland.
sepsal@utu.fi.
(4)Australian Water Quality Centre, Private Mail Bag 3, Salisbury, SA 5108,
Australia. carolyn.haskard@csiro.au.

Paralytic shellfish toxins (PSTs) are non-protein neurotoxins produced by
saltwater dinoflagellates and freshwater cyanobacteria. The ability of
Lactobacillus rhamnosus strains GG and LC-705 (in viable and non-viable forms) to
remove PSTs (saxitoxin (STX), neosaxitoxin (neoSTX), gonyautoxins 2 and 3
(GTX2/3), C-toxins 1 and 2 (C1/2)) from neutral and acidic solution (pH 7.3 and
2) was examined using HPLC. Binding decreased in the order of STX ~ neoSTX > C2 >
GTX3 > GTX2 > C1. Removal of STX and neoSTX (77%-97.2%) was significantly greater
than removal of GTX3 and C2 (33.3%-49.7%). There were no significant differences 
in toxin removal capacity between viable and non-viable forms of lactobacilli,
which suggested that binding rather than metabolism is the mechanism of the
removal of toxins. In general, binding was not affected by the presence of other 
organic molecules in solution. Importantly, this is the first study to
demonstrate the ability of specific probiotic lactic bacteria to remove PSTs,
particularly the most toxic PST-STX, from solution. Further, these results
warrant thorough screening and assessment of safe and beneficial microbes for
their usefulness in the seafood and water industries and their effectiveness in
vivo.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins6072127 
PMCID: PMC4113746
PMID: 25046082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

