
1. Infect Immun. 2014 Oct;82(10):4154-68. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01984-14. Epub 2014 Jul
21.

Ehrlichia chaffeensis exploits host SUMOylation pathways to mediate effector-host
interactions and promote intracellular survival.

Dunphy PS(1), Luo T(1), McBride JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas,
USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas,
USA Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA Center for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious
Diseases, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA Sealy Center 
for Vaccine Development, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas,
USA Institute for Human Infections and Immunity, University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA jemcbrid@utmb.edu.

Ehrlichia chaffeensis is an obligately intracellular Gram-negative bacterium that
selectively infects mononuclear phagocytes. We recently reported that E.
chaffeensis utilizes a type 1 secretion (T1S) system to export tandem repeat
protein (TRP) effectors and demonstrated that these effectors interact with a
functionally diverse array of host proteins. By way of these interactions, TRP
effectors modulate host cell functions; however, the molecular basis of these
interactions and their roles in ehrlichial pathobiology are not well defined. In 
this study, we describe the first bacterial protein posttranslational
modification (PTM) by the small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO). The E.
chaffeensis T1S effector TRP120 is conjugated to SUMO at a carboxy-terminal
canonical consensus SUMO conjugation motif in vitro and in human cells. In human 
cells, TRP120 was selectively conjugated with SUMO2/3 isoforms. Disruption of
TRP120 SUMOylation perturbed interactions with known host proteins, through
predicted SUMO interaction motif-dependent and -independent mechanisms. E.
chaffeensis infection did not result in dramatic changes in the global host
SUMOylated protein profile, but a robust colocalization of predominately SUMO1
with ehrlichial inclusions was observed. Inhibiting the SUMO pathway with a
small-molecule inhibitor had a significant impact on E. chaffeensis replication
and recruitment of the TRP120-interacting protein polycomb group ring finger
protein 5 (PCGF5) to the inclusion, indicating that the SUMO pathway is critical 
for intracellular survival. This study reveals the novel exploitation of the SUMO
pathway by Ehrlichia, which facilitates effector-eukaryote interactions necessary
to usurp the host and create a permissive intracellular niche.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01984-14 
PMCID: PMC4187855
PMID: 25047847  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

