
1. Asian-Australas J Anim Sci. 2013 Aug;26(8):1127-36. doi: 10.5713/ajas.2013.13013.

Effects of plant herb combination supplementation on rumen fermentation and
nutrient digestibility in beef cattle.

Wanapat M(1), Kang S(1), Khejornsart P(1), Wanapat S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen 40002,
Thailand.

Four rumen-fistulated crossbred beef cattle (Brahman native) were randomly
assigned according to a 4Ã—4 Latin square design experiment to be fed plant herb
supplements in their concentrate mixture. The treatments were: without herb
supplementation (Control), lemongrass meal supplementation at 100 g/d (L),
lemongrass meal supplementation at 100 g/d plus peppermint powder at 10 g/d (LP),
and lemongrass meal supplementation at 100 g/d plus peppermint powder at 10 g/d
with garlic powder 40 g/d (LPG), respectively. Based on the present study, the
DMI and apparent digestibility of DM, OM, aNDF and ADF were not affected by
dietary herb supplementation while CP digestibility tended to be decreased by
herb supplement. Moreover, NH3-N and BUN were decreased in all herb supplemented 
treatments and there was a tendency to an increase in ruminal pH in all herb
supplemented groups. While there was no change in TVFA and C4 among lemongrass
treatments, C2 was decreased in all herb supplemented treatments while C3 was
increased. Methane production by calculation was the lowest in the LP and LPG
groups. Population sizes of bacteria and protozoa were decreased in all herb
supplemented groups, but not fungal zoospores. In all supplemented groups, total 
viable and proteolytic bacteria were decreased, while amylolytic and cellulolytic
bacteria were similar. More importantly, in all herb supplemented groups, there
were higher N balances, while there was no difference among treatments on purine 
derivative (PD) excretion or microbial N. Based on the results above, it could be
concluded that there was no negative effect on ruminal fermentation
characteristics and nutrient utilization by plant herb supplement, but protozoal 
population and CH4 production were reduced. Thus, lemongrass alone or in
combination with peppermint and garlic powder could be used as feed additives to 
improve rumen fermentation efficiency.

DOI: 10.5713/ajas.2013.13013 
PMCID: PMC4093230
PMID: 25049893 

