
1. Microb Biotechnol. 2014 Sep;7(5):414-23. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.12099. Epub 2014 
Jul 23.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum vaccine development: a difficult task.

Gómez E(1), Méndez J, Cascales D, Guijarro JA.

Author information: 
(1)Área de Microbiología, Departamento de Biología Funcional, Facultad de
Medicina, IUBA, Universidad de Oviedo, 33006, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain.

Bacterial cold water disease (BCWD) is a globally distributed freshwater fish
disease caused by the Gram-negative bacterium Flavobacterium psychrophilum. It is
a particularly devastating infection in fry salmonids and may lead to high levels
of mortality. In spite of its economic impact on fish farms, neither the biology 
of the bacterium nor the bacterium-host interactions are well understood. This
review provides a synopsis of the major problems related to critical remaining
questions about research into the use of vaccines against F. psychrophilum and
the development of a commercial vaccine against this disease. Studies using sera 
from convalescent rainbow trout have shown the antigenic properties of different 
proteins such as OmpH, OmpA and FspA, as well as low and high molecular mass
lipopolysaccharide of F. psychrophilum, which are potential candidates for
subunit vaccines. Inactivated F. psychrophilum bacterins have been successfully
tested as vaccines under laboratory conditions by both immersion and
intraperitoneal routes. However, the efficacy and the practical usefulness of
these preparations still have to be proved. The use of attenuated and wild-type
strains to immunize fish showed that these systems offer high levels of
protection. Nevertheless, their application clashes with the regulations for
environmental protection in many countries. In conclusion, protective vaccines
against BCWD are theoretically possible, but substantial efforts still have to be
made in order to permit the development of a commercial vaccine.

© 2013 The Authors. Microbial Biotechnology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
and Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/1751-7915.12099 
PMCID: PMC4229322
PMID: 25056179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

