
1. Mol Oral Microbiol. 2014 Dec;29(6):258-69. doi: 10.1111/omi.12070. Epub 2014 Sep 
27.

The role of adipokines in periodontal infection and healing.

Deschner J(1), Eick S, Damanaki A, Nokhbehsaim M.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Dento-Maxillo-Facial Medicine, Center of Dento-Maxillo-Facial
Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Clinical Research Unit 208, Center
of Dento-Maxillo-Facial Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Periodontitis is a chronic inflammatory disease of the periodontium, which is
caused by pathogenic bacteria in combination with other risk factors. The
bacteria induce an immunoinflammatory host response, which can lead to
irreversible matrix degradation and bone resorption. Periodontitis can be
successfully treated. To achieve regenerative periodontal healing, bioactive
molecules, such as enamel matrix derivative (EMD), are applied during periodontal
surgery. Recently, it has been shown that obesity is associated with
periodontitis and compromised healing after periodontal therapy. The mechanisms
underlying these associations are not well understood so far, but adipokines may 
be a pathomechanistic link. Adipokines are bioactive molecules that are secreted 
by the adipose tissue, and that regulate insulin sensitivity and energy
expenditure, but also inflammatory and healing processes. It has also been
demonstrated that visfatin and leptin increase the synthesis of proinflammatory
and proteolytic molecules, whereas adiponectin downregulates the production of
such mediators in periodontal cells. In addition, visfatin and leptin counteract 
the beneficial effects of EMD, whereas adiponectin enhances the actions of EMD on
periodontal cells. Since visfatin and leptin levels are increased and adiponectin
levels are reduced in obesity, these adipokines could be a pathomechanistic link 
whereby obesity and obesity-related diseases enhance the risk for periodontitis
and compromised periodontal healing. Recent studies have also revealed that
adipokines, such as visfatin, leptin and adiponectin, are produced in periodontal
cells and regulated by periodontopathogenic bacteria. Therefore, adipokines may
also represent a mechanism whereby periodontal infections can impact on systemic 
diseases.

Â© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/omi.12070 
PMID: 25052571  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

