
1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014 Sep 15;307(6):G623-31. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00104.2014. Epub 2014 Jul 24.

Lactobacillus acidophilus attenuates downregulation of DRA function and
expression in inflammatory models.

Singh V(1), Kumar A(2), Raheja G(1), Anbazhagan AN(1), Priyamvada S(1), Saksena
S(1), Jhandier MN(1), Gill RK(1), Alrefai WA(1), Borthakur A(1), Dudeja PK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago and Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Chicago, Illinois; and.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago and Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Chicago, Illinois; and Singhania University, Pacheri Bari, Rajasthan,
India.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago and Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Chicago, Illinois; and pkdudeja@uic.edu.

Probiotics, including Lactobacilli, are commensal bacteria that have been used in
clinical trials and experimental models for the prevention and treatment of
diarrheal disorders. Our previous studies have shown that Lactobacillus
acidophilus (LA) and its culture supernatant (CS) stimulated Cl(-)/HCO3 (-)
exchange activity, acutely via an increase in the surface levels of downregulated
in adenoma (DRA, SLC26A3) and in long-term treatments via increasing its
expression involving transcriptional mechanisms. However, the role of LA in
modulating DRA activity under inflammatory conditions is not known. Current in
vitro studies using human intestinal epithelial Caco-2 cells examined the
efficacy of LA or its CS in counteracting the inhibitory effects of interferon-γ 
(IFN-γ) on Cl(-)/HCO3 (-) exchange activity. Pretreatment of cells with LA or
LA-CS for 1 h followed by coincubation with IFN-γ significantly alleviated the
inhibitory effects of IFN-γ on Cl(-)/HCO3 (-) exchange activity. In the in vivo
model of dextran sulfate sodium-induced experimental colitis (3% in drinking
water for 7 days) in C57BL/6J mice, administration of live LA (3 × 10(9)
colony-forming units) via oral gavage attenuated colonic inflammation. LA
administration also counteracted the colitis-induced decrease in DRA mRNA and
protein levels. Efficacy of LA or its secreted soluble factors in alleviating
inflammation and inflammation-associated dysregulation of DRA activity could
justify their therapeutic potential in inflammatory diarrheal diseases.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00104.2014 
PMCID: PMC4166720
PMID: 25059823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

