
1. Chemosphere. 2014 Oct;113:79-86. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.04.020. Epub
2014 May 14.

Identifying changes in dissolved organic matter content and characteristics by
fluorescence spectroscopy coupled with self-organizing map and classification and
regression tree analysis during wastewater treatment.

Yu H(1), Song Y(2), Liu R(1), Pan H(3), Xiang L(1), Qian F(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Criteria and Risk Assessment, Chinese
Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing 100012, China; Department of 
Urban Water Environmental Research, Chinese Research Academy of Environmental
Science, Beijing 100012, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Criteria and Risk Assessment, Chinese
Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing 100012, China; Department of 
Urban Water Environmental Research, Chinese Research Academy of Environmental
Science, Beijing 100012, China. Electronic address: songyh@craes.org.cn.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Criteria and Risk Assessment, Chinese
Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing 100012, China.

The stabilization of latent tracers of dissolved organic matter (DOM) of
wastewater was analyzed by three-dimensional excitation-emission matrix (EEM)
fluorescence spectroscopy coupled with self-organizing map and classification and
regression tree analysis (CART) in wastewater treatment performance. DOM of water
samples collected from primary sedimentation, anaerobic, anoxic, oxic and
secondary sedimentation tanks in a large-scale wastewater treatment plant
contained four fluorescence components: tryptophan-like (C1), tyrosine-like (C2),
microbial humic-like (C3) and fulvic-like (C4) materials extracted by
self-organizing map. These components showed good positive linear correlations
with dissolved organic carbon of DOM. C1 and C2 were representative components in
the wastewater, and they were removed to a higher extent than those of C3 and C4 
in the treatment process. C2 was a latent parameter determined by CART to
differentiate water samples of oxic and secondary sedimentation tanks from the
successive treatment units, indirectly proving that most of tyrosine-like
material was degraded by anaerobic microorganisms. C1 was an accurate parameter
to comprehensively separate the samples of the five treatment units from each
other, indirectly indicating that tryptophan-like material was decomposed by
anaerobic and aerobic bacteria. EEM fluorescence spectroscopy in combination with
self-organizing map and CART analysis can be a nondestructive effective method
for characterizing structural component of DOM fractions and monitoring organic
matter removal in wastewater treatment process.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.04.020 
PMID: 25065793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

