
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2014 Oct;102:27-37. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2014.07.007. Epub 2014
Jul 29.

Improved soluble expression of a single-chain antibody fragment in E. coli for
targeting CA125 in epithelial ovarian cancer.

Sharma SK(1), Suresh MR(2), Wuest FR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada; Department of Oncology, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Canada.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada.
(3)Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada; Department of Oncology, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Canada. Electronic address: wuest@ualberta.ca.

Production of antibody fragments in heterologous hosts such as Escherichiacoli
provides a unique and cost-effective method to develop engineered vectors for
tumor targeting. A single-chain Fragment variable (scFv) of the murine monoclonal
antibody MAb-B43.13 targeting CA125 in epithelial ovarian cancer was previously
developed, expressed, purified and proposed as a functional targeting entity for 
biomedical applications. However, the yields from its soluble expression in
heterologous systems were very low for any practical use in preclinical
translational research; leave alone the defeated objective of convenient and
cost-effective production. In the present work, the anti-CA125 scFv gene was
re-organized and sub-cloned into pET-22b(+) vector to be in frame with the pelB
leader peptide for periplasmic localization and C-terminal hexa-histidine tag to 
facilitate downstream purification. Six variants of the scFv were constructed to 
investigate the impact of variable domain orientations, inter-domain peptide
linker sequences and codon optimization on the soluble expression of the scFv
using Rosetta 2(DE3) as the E. coli host supplemented with tRNAs for rare codons.
Expression in shake flask cultures under the control of an inducible T7 promoter 
and subsequent purification by cobalt based immobilized metal affinity
chromatography yielded differential amounts of high purity scFv for all
constructs. Here, we report up to 14-fold increase in the soluble expression of
the scFv primarily as a result of codon optimization with minor effects from
inter-domain peptide linkers and variable domain orientation in the anti-CA125
scFv molecule. All the scFv constructs expressed and purified were found to be
immunoreactive for in vitro targeting of CA125 antigen.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2014.07.007 
PMID: 25079010  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

