
1. J Coupled Syst Multiscale Dyn. 2013 Dec 1;1(4):459-467.

Predicting mechanism of biphasic growth factor action on tumor growth using a
multi-species model with feedback control.

Konstorum A(1), Sprowl SA(2), Waterman ML(2), Lander AD(3), Lowengrub JS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-3875,
USA ; Center for Complex Biological Systems, University of California, 2620
Biological Sciences III, Irvine, CA 92697-2280, USA.
(2)Center for Complex Biological Systems, University of California, 2620
Biological Sciences III, Irvine, CA 92697-2280, USA ; Department of Microbiology 
and Molecular Genetics, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-4025, USA.
(3)Center for Complex Biological Systems, University of California, 2620
Biological Sciences III, Irvine, CA 92697-2280, USA ; Department of Developmental
and Cell Biology, University of California, 2011 Biological Sciences III, Irvine,
CA 92697-2300, USA.
(4)Department of Mathematics, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-3875,
USA ; Center for Complex Biological Systems, University of California, 2620
Biological Sciences III, Irvine, CA 92697-2280, USA ; Department of Biomedical
Engineering, University of California, 3120 Natural Sciences II, Irvine, CA
92697-2715, USA.

A large number of growth factors and drugs are known to act in a biphasic manner:
at lower concentrations they cause increased division of target cells, whereas at
higher concentrations the mitogenic effect is inhibited. Often, the molecular
details of the mitogenic effect of the growth factor are known, whereas the
inhibitory effect is not. Hepatoctyte Growth Factor, HGF, has recently been
recognized as a strong mitogen that is present in the microenvironment of solid
tumors. Recent evidence suggests that HGF acts in a biphasic manner on tumor
growth. We build a multi-species model of HGF action on tumor cells using
different hypotheses for high dose-HGF activation of a growth inhibitor and show 
that the shape of the dose-response curve is directly related to the mechanism of
inhibitor activation. We thus hypothesize that the shape of a dose-response curve
is informative of the molecular action of the growth factor on the growth
inhibitor.

DOI: 10.1166/jcsmd.2013.1028 
PMCID: PMC4112130
PMID: 25075381 

