
1. J Immunol. 2014 Sep 1;193(5):2096-105. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400155. Epub 2014
Jul 28.

Bcl-xL regulates CD1d-mediated antigen presentation to NKT cells by altering CD1d
trafficking through the endocytic pathway.

Subrahmanyam PB(1), Carey GB(1), Webb TJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine and the Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD
21201.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine and the Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD
21201 twebb@som.umaryland.edu.

NKT cells are a unique subset of T cells that recognize glycolipid Ags presented 
in the context of CD1d molecules. NKT cells mount strong antitumor responses and 
are a major focus in developing effective cancer immunotherapy. It is known that 
CD1d molecules are constantly internalized from the cell surface, recycled
through the endocytic compartments, and re-expressed on the cell surface.
However, little is known about the regulation of CD1d-mediated Ag processing and 
presentation in B cell lymphoma. Prosurvival factors of the Bcl-2 family, such as
Bcl-xL, are often upregulated in B cell lymphomas and are intimately linked to
sphingolipid metabolism, as well as the endocytic compartments. We hypothesized
that Bcl-xL can regulate CD1d-mediated Ag presentation to NKT cells. We found
that overexpression or induction of Bcl-xL led to increased Ag presentation to
NKT cells. Conversely, the inhibition or knockdown of Bcl-xL led to decreased NKT
cell activation. Furthermore, knockdown of Bcl-xL resulted in the loss of CD1d
trafficking to lysosome-associated membrane protein 1(+) compartments. Rab7, a
late endosomal protein, was upregulated and CD1d molecules accumulated in the
Rab7(+) late endosomal compartment. These results demonstrate that Bcl-xL
regulates CD1d-mediated Ag processing and presentation to NKT cells by altering
the late endosomal compartment and changing the intracellular localization of
CD1d.

Copyright Â© 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400155 
PMCID: PMC4169674
PMID: 25070854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

