
1. Caries Res. 2015;49(1):1-8. doi: 10.1159/000360625. Epub 2014 Jul 31.

Caries correlates strongly to salivary levels of matrix metalloproteinase-8.

Hedenbjörk-Lager A(1), Bjørndal L, Gustafsson A, Sorsa T, Tjäderhane L, Åkerman
S, Ericson D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cariology, Centre for Oral Health Sciences, Malmö University,
Malmö, Sweden.

The caries process in dentin involves the degradation of both mineral and organic
matrix. The demineralization has been demonstrated to be caused by bacterial
acids. However, the collagen degradation is considered to be initiated by
endogenous proteolytic enzymes, mainly collagenolytic matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs). This paper aims to relate salivary MMP-8 (or salivary collagenase-2) and 
tissue inhibitor of MMP (TIMP-1) levels to manifest caries in a large number of
subjects. A random sample of 451 adults (aged 18-87 years) living in the south of
Sweden was included in this study. Standard clinical examinations were performed,
and stimulated saliva was collected and analyzed for concentrations of MMP-8,
TIMP-1 and total protein, using an immunofluorometric assay, an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay and the Bradford assay, respectively. Salivary numbers of
mutans streptococci and lactobacilli were determined using a chair-side kit.
Subjects with manifest caries lesions presented with elevated levels of MMP-8 (p 
< 0.001) as well as total protein, MMP-8/TIMP-1 ratio, bleeding on probing and
plaque index (p = 0.05) compared with subjects without manifest caries. Multiple 
linear regression analysis with caries as the dependent variable revealed MMP-8
as the only significant explanatory variable (p < 0.001). TIMP-1 was not
significant in any case. Using MMP-8 as the dependent variable revealed total
protein concentration, caries lesions (p ≤ 0.001) and salivary secretion rate (p 
= 0.05) as explanatory variables. In conclusion, our data reveal that subjects
with manifest caries lesions have elevated levels of salivary MMP-8 relative to
subjects with no caries lesions.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000360625 
PMID: 25096527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

