
1. N Biotechnol. 2015 Jan 25;32(1):26-31. doi: 10.1016/j.nbt.2014.07.003. Epub 2014 
Aug 2.

Organochlorinated pesticide degrading microorganisms isolated from contaminated
soil.

Lovecka P(1), Pacovska I(2), Stursa P(2), Vrchotova B(2), Kochankova L(3),
Demnerova K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Institute of Chemical Technology,
Technická 3, Prague 166 28, Czech Republic. Electronic address:
loveckap@vscht.cz.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Institute of Chemical Technology,
Technická 3, Prague 166 28, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Environmental Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technology,
Technicka 3, Prague 166 28, Czech Republic.

Degradation of selected organochlorinated pesticides (γ-hexachlorocyclohexane -
γ-HCH, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane - DDT, hexachlorobenzene - HCB) by soil
microorganisms was studied. Bacterial strains isolated from contaminated soil
from Klatovy-Luby, Hajek and Neratovice, Czech Republic, capable of growth on the
selected pesticides were isolated and characterised. These isolates were
subjected to characterisation and identification by MS MALDI-TOF of whole cells
and sequence analysis of 16S rRNA genes. The isolates were screened by gas
chromatography for their ability to degrade the selected pesticides. Some
isolates were able to degrade pesticides, and the formation of degradation
products (γ-pentachlorocyclohexane (γ-PCCH), dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene
(DDE) and dichlorodiphenyldichloroethane (DDD)) observed in liquid culture
confirmed their degradation capability. The isolates and DNA samples isolated
from the contaminated soil were also screened for the bphA1 gene (encoding
biphenyl-2,3-dioxygenase, the first enzyme in the PCB degradation pathway) and
its occurrence was demonstrated. The isolates were also screened for the presence
of linA, encoding dehydrochlorinase, the first enzyme of the HCH degradation
pathway. The linA gene could not be found in any of the tested isolates, possibly
due to the high specificity of the primers used. The isolates with the most
effective degradation abilities could be used for further in situ bioremediation 
experiments with contaminated soil.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbt.2014.07.003 
PMID: 25094051  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

