
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Aug 6;136(31):10989-95. doi: 10.1021/ja504125v. Epub 2014 Jul
25.

Multiple complexes of long aliphatic N-acyltransferases lead to synthesis of
2,6-diacylated/2-acyl-substituted glycopeptide antibiotics, effectively killing
vancomycin-resistant enterococcus.

Lyu SY(1), Liu YC, Chang CY, Huang CJ, Chiu YH, Huang CM, Hsu NS, Lin KH, Wu CJ, 
Tsai MD, Li TL.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica , Taipei 115, Taiwan.

Teicoplanin A2-2 (Tei)/A40926 is the last-line antibiotic to treat
multidrug-resistant Gram-positive bacterial infections, e.g.,
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and vancomycin-resistant
enterococcus (VRE). This class of antibiotics is powered by the N-acyltransferase
(NAT) Orf11*/Dbv8 through N-acylation on glucosamine at the central residue of
Tei/A40926 pseudoaglycone. The NAT enzyme possesses enormous value in untapped
applications; its advanced development is hampered largely due to a lack of
structural information. In this report, we present eight high-resolution X-ray
crystallographic unary, binary, and ternary complexes in order to decipher the
molecular basis for NAT's functionality. The enzyme undergoes a multistage
conformational change upon binding of acyl-CoA, thus allowing the uploading of
Tei pseudoaglycone to enable the acyl-transfer reaction to take place in the
occlusion between the N- and C-halves of the protein. The acyl moiety of acyl-CoA
can be bulky or lengthy, allowing a large extent of diversity in new derivatives 
that can be formed upon its transfer. Vancomycin/synthetic acyl-N-acetyl
cysteamine was not expected to be able to serve as a surrogate for an acyl
acceptor/donor, respectively. Most strikingly, NAT can catalyze formation of
2-N,6-O-diacylated or C6â†’C2 acyl-substituted Tei analogues through an unusual
1,4-migration mechanism under stoichiometric/solvational reaction control,
wherein selected representatives showed excellent biological activities,
effectively counteracting major types (VanABC) of VRE.

DOI: 10.1021/ja504125v 
PMID: 25095906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

