
1. J Immunol. 2014 Sep 15;193(6):2919-30. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400980. Epub 2014
Aug 4.

Systemic inflammatory response elicited by superantigen destabilizes T regulatory
cells, rendering them ineffective during toxic shock syndrome.

Tilahun AY(1), Chowdhary VR(2), David CS(1), Rajagopalan G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905;
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905; and.
(3)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905; Division of
Infectious Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
rajagopalan.govindarajan@mayo.edu.

Life-threatening infections caused by Staphylococcus aureus, particularly the
community-acquired methicillin-resistant strains of S. aureus, continue to pose
serious problems. Greater virulence and increased pathogenicity of certain S.
aureus strains are attributed to higher prevalence of exotoxins. Of these
exotoxins, the superantigens (SAg) are likely most pathogenic because of their
ability to rapidly and robustly activate the T cells even in extremely small
quantities. Therefore, countering SAg-mediated T cell activation using T
regulatory cells (Tregs) might be beneficial in diseases such as toxic shock
syndrome (TSS). As the normal numbers of endogenous Tregs in a typical host are
insufficient, we hypothesized that increasing the Treg numbers by administration 
of IL-2/anti-IL-2 Ab immune complexes (IL2C) or by adoptive transfer of ex vivo
expanded Tregs might be more effective in countering SAg-mediated immune
activation. HLA-DR3 transgenic mice that closely recapitulate human TSS were
treated with IL2C to increase endogenous Tregs or received ex vivo expanded
Tregs. Subsequently, they were challenged with SAg to induce TSS. Analyses of
various parameters reflective of TSS (serum cytokine/chemokine levels, multiple
organ pathology, and SAg-induced peripheral T cell expansion) indicated that
increasing the Tregs failed to mitigate TSS. On the contrary, serum IFN-γ levels 
were increased in IL2C-treated mice. Exploration into the reasons behind the lack
of protective effect of Tregs revealed IL-17 and IFN-γ-dependent loss of Tregs
during TSS. In addition, significant upregulation of glucocorticoid-induced TNFR 
family-related receptor on conventional T cells during TSS could render them
resistant to Treg-mediated suppression, contributing to failure of Treg-mediated 
immune regulation.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400980 
PMCID: PMC4157092
PMID: 25092888  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

