
1. Metab Eng. 2014 Sep;25:227-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2014.07.012. Epub 2014 Aug 7.

Toward aldehyde and alkane production by removing aldehyde reductase activity in 
Escherichia coli.

Rodriguez GM(1), Atsumi S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, 
Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, 
Davis, CA 95616, USA. Electronic address: satsumi@ucdavis.edu.

Advances in synthetic biology and metabolic engineering have enabled the
construction of novel biological routes to valuable chemicals using suitable
microbial hosts. Aldehydes serve as chemical feedstocks in the synthesis of
rubbers, plastics, and other larger molecules. Microbial production of alkanes is
dependent on the formation of a fatty aldehyde intermediate which is converted to
an alkane by an aldehyde deformylating oxygenase (ADO). However, microbial hosts 
such as Escherichia coli are plagued by many highly active endogenous aldehyde
reductases (ALRs) that convert aldehydes to alcohols, which greatly complicates
strain engineering for aldehyde and alkane production. It has been shown that the
endogenous ALR activity outcompetes the ADO enzyme for fatty aldehyde substrate. 
The large degree of ALR redundancy coupled with an incomplete database of ALRs
represents a significant obstacle in engineering E. coli for either aldehyde or
alkane production. In this study, we identified 44 ALR candidates encoded in the 
E. coli genome using bioinformatics tools, and undertook a comprehensive
screening by measuring the ability of these enzymes to produce isobutanol. From
the pool of 44 candidates, we found five new ALRs using this screening method
(YahK, DkgA, GldA, YbbO, and YghA). Combined deletions of all 13 known ALRs
resulted in a 90-99% reduction in endogenous ALR activity for a wide range of
aldehyde substrates (C2-C12). Elucidation of the ALRs found in E. coli could
guide one in reducing competing alcohol formation during alkane or aldehyde
production.

Copyright Â© 2014 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2014.07.012 
PMCID: PMC4411948
PMID: 25108218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

