
1. J Biotechnol. 2014 Dec 10;191:54-63. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2014.07.447. Epub
2014 Aug 4.

A highly unusual polyketide synthase directs dawenol polyene biosynthesis in
Stigmatella aurantiaca.

Oßwald C(1), Zaburannyi N(1), Burgard C(1), Hoffmann T(1), Wenzel SC(2), Müller
R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Natural Products, Helmholtz-Institute for
Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research &
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Saarland University, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)Department of Microbial Natural Products, Helmholtz-Institute for
Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research &
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Saarland University, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
Electronic address: s.wenzel@mx.uni-saarland.de.
(3)Department of Microbial Natural Products, Helmholtz-Institute for
Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research &
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Saarland University, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany;
German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Hannover-Braunschweig, 
University Campus Building C2.3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address: 
rom@helmholtz-hzi.de.

Enormous progress in the field of polyketide biosynthesis has led to the
establishment of rules for general text book biosynthetic logic and consequently 
to the assumption that biosynthetic genes can be easily correlated with the
corresponding natural products. However, non-textbook examples of polyketide
assembly continue to be discovered suggesting the gene to product and product to 
gene predictions need improvement, especially as they are increasingly used in
the post-genomic era. Here, we analyzed the genomic blueprint of a myxobacterial 
multi-producer of secondary metabolites, Stigmatella aurantiaca DW4/3-1, for its 
biosynthetic potential by genome-mining. In addition to the five polyketide
synthase and/or nonribosomal peptide synthetase gene clusters of known function
we identified a further 13 genomic regions exemplifying the enormous genetic
potential for the production of additional chemical diversity by this strain. We 
show by gene inactivation and heterologous expression of the newly identified
biosynthetic pathway for dawenol that the biosynthesis of this known polyene does
not follow text book biosynthetic logic. Intriguingly, a genomic locus encoding
an unusual polyketide synthase exhibiting similarity to gene loci involved in the
formation of polyunsaturated fatty acids and secondary lipids was identified.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2014.07.447 
PMID: 25102237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

