
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 10;289(41):28505-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.584177. Epub
2014 Aug 11.

The roles of the RIIβ linker and N-terminal cyclic nucleotide-binding domain in
determining the unique structures of the type IIβ protein kinase A: a small angle
x-ray and neutron scattering study.

Blumenthal DK(1), Copps J(2), Smith-Nguyen EV(2), Zhang P(2), Heller WT(3),
Taylor SS(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, don.blumenthal@pharm.utah.edu.
(2)the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California
92093-0654.
(3)the Biology and Soft Matter Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak
Ridge, Tennessee 37831, and.
(4)the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California
92093-0654, the Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, 
La Jolla, California 92093-0654.

Protein kinase A (PKA) is ubiquitously expressed and is responsible for
regulating many important cellular functions in response to changes in
intracellular cAMP concentrations. The PKA holoenzyme is a tetramer (R2:C2), with
a regulatory subunit homodimer (R2) that binds and inhibits two catalytic (C)
subunits; binding of cAMP to the regulatory subunit homodimer causes activation
of the catalytic subunits. Four different R subunit isoforms exist in mammalian
cells, and these confer different structural features, subcellular localization, 
and biochemical properties upon the PKA holoenzymes they form. The holoenzyme
containing RIIβ is structurally unique in that the type IIβ holoenzyme is much
more compact than the free RIIβ homodimer. We have used small angle x-ray
scattering and small angle neutron scattering to study the solution structure and
subunit organization of a holoenzyme containing an RIIβ C-terminal deletion
mutant (RIIβ(1-280)), which is missing the C-terminal cAMP-binding domain to
better understand the structural organization of the type IIβ holoenzyme and the 
RIIβ domains that contribute to stabilizing the holoenzyme conformation. Our
results demonstrate that compaction of the type IIβ holoenzyme does not require
the C-terminal cAMP-binding domain but rather involves large structural
rearrangements within the linker and N-terminal cyclic nucleotide-binding domain 
of the RIIβ homodimer. The structural rearrangements are significantly greater
than seen previously with RIIα and are likely to be important in mediating short 
range and long range interdomain and intersubunit interactions that uniquely
regulate the activity of the type IIβ isoform of PKA.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.584177 
PMCID: PMC4192500
PMID: 25112875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

