
1. Benef Microbes. 2014 Dec;5(4):483-95. doi: 10.3920/BM2013.0061.

Heat-killed probiotic bacteria differentially regulate colonic epithelial cell
production of human β-defensin-2: dependence on inflammatory cytokines.

Habil N(1), Abate W(2), Beal J(2), Foey AD(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical & Healthcare Sciences, University of Plymouth, Drake
Circus, Plymouth PL4 8AA, United Kingdom Foundation of Technical Education (FTE),
Alnakabat Street, 55555 Baghdad, Iraq.
(2)School of Biomedical & Healthcare Sciences, University of Plymouth, Drake
Circus, Plymouth PL4 8AA, United Kingdom.

The inducible antimicrobial peptide human β-defensin-2 (hBD-2) stimulated by
pro-inflammatory cytokines and bacterial products is essential to antipathogen
responses of gut epithelial cells. Commensal and probiotic bacteria can augment
such mucosal defences. Probiotic use in the treatment of inflammatory bowel
disease, however, may have adverse effects, boosting inflammatory responses. The 
aim of this investigation was to determine the effect of selected probiotic
strains on hBD-2 production by epithelial cells induced by pathologically
relevant pro-inflammatory cytokines and the role of cytokine modulators in
controlling hBD-2. Caco-2 colonic intestinal epithelial cells were pre-incubated 
with heat-killed probiotics, i.e. Lactobacillus casei strain Shirota (LcS) or
Lactobacillus fermentum strain MS15 (LF), followed by stimulation of hBD-2 by
interleukin (IL)-1β and tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) in the absence or
presence of exogenous IL-10 or anti-IL-10 neutralising antibody. Cytokines and
hBD-2 mRNA and protein were analysed by real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. LcS augmented IL-1β-induced
hBD-2, whereas LF enhanced TNF-α- and suppressed IL-1β-induced hBD-2. LF enhanced
TNF-α-induced TNF-α and suppressed IL-10, whereas augmented IL-1β-induced IL-10. 
LcS upregulated IL-1β-induced TNF-α mRNA and suppressed IL-10. Endogenous IL-10
differentially regulated hBD-2; neutralisation of IL-10 augmented TNF-α- and
suppressed IL-1β-induced hBD-2. Exogenous IL-10, however, suppressed both TNF-α- 
and IL-1β-induced hBD-2; LcS partially rescued suppression in TNF-α- and
IL-1β-stimulation, whereas LF further suppressed IL-1β-induced hBD-2. It can be
concluded that probiotic strains differentially regulate hBD-2 mRNA expression
and protein secretion, modulation being dictated by inflammatory stimulus and
resulting cytokine environment.

DOI: 10.3920/BM2013.0061 
PMID: 25116382  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

