
1. Eur J Protistol. 2014 Aug;50(4):345-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ejop.2014.03.006. Epub
2014 Apr 15.

Colonization dynamics of ciliate morphotypes modified by shifting sandy
sediments.

Risse-Buhl U(1), Felsmann K(2), Mutz M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus, Department of Freshwater
Conservation, Seestraße 45, 15526 Bad Saarow, Germany. Electronic address:
ute.risse-buhl@ufz.de.
(2)Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus, Department of Freshwater
Conservation, Seestraße 45, 15526 Bad Saarow, Germany.

Sandy stream-bed sediments colonized by a diverse ciliate community are subject
to various disturbance regimes. In microcosms, we investigated the effect of
sediment shifting on the colonization dynamics of 3 ciliate morphotypes differing
in morphology, behavior and feeding strategy. The dynamics of the ciliate
morphotypes inhabiting sediment pore water and overlying water were observed at 3
sediment shifting frequencies: (1) stable sediments, (2) periodically shifting
sediments such as migrating ripples, and (3) continuously shifting sediments as
occurring during scour events of the uppermost sediment. Sediment shifting
significantly affected the abundance and growth rate of the ciliate morphotypes. 
The free-swimming filter feeder Dexiostoma campylum was vulnerable to washout by 
sediment shifting since significantly higher numbers occurred in the overlying
water than in pore water. Abundance of D. campylum only increased in pore water
of stable sediments. On the contrary, the vagile grasper feeder Chilodonella
uncinata and the sessile filter feeder Vorticella convallaria had positive growth
rates and successfully colonized sediments that shifted periodically and
continuously. Thus, the spatio-temporal pattern of sediment dynamics acts as an
essential factor of impact on the structure, distribution and function of ciliate
communities in sand-bed streams.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejop.2014.03.006 
PMID: 25129834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

