
1. mBio. 2014 Aug 19;5(4). pii: e01278-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01278-14.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis alters the metalloprotease activity of the COP9
signalosome.

Danelishvili L(1), Babrak L, Rose SJ, Everman J, Bermudez LE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon
State University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA Luiz.Bermudez@oregonstate.edu
Lia.Danelishvili@oregonstate.edu.
(2)Luiz.Bermudez@oregonstate.edu Lia.Danelishvili@oregonstate.edu.

Inhibition of apoptotic death of macrophages by Mycobacterium tuberculosis
represents an important mechanism of virulence that results in pathogen survival 
both in vitro and in vivo. To identify M. tuberculosis virulence determinants
involved in the modulation of apoptosis, we previously screened a transposon bank
of mutants in human macrophages, and an M. tuberculosis clone with a
nonfunctional Rv3354 gene was identified as incompetent to suppress apoptosis.
Here, we show that the Rv3354 gene encodes a protein kinase that is secreted
within mononuclear phagocytic cells and is required for M. tuberculosis
virulence. The Rv3354 effector targets the metalloprotease (JAMM) domain within
subunit 5 of the COP9 signalosome (CSN5), resulting in suppression of apoptosis
and in the destabilization of CSN function and regulatory cullin-RING ubiquitin
E3 enzymatic activity. Our observation suggests that alteration of the
metalloprotease activity of CSN by Rv3354 possibly prevents the
ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis of M. tuberculosis-secreted proteins.
IMPORTANCE : Macrophage protein degradation is regulated by a protein complex
called a signalosome. One of the signalosomes associated with activation of
ubiquitin and protein labeling for degradation was found to interact with a
secreted protein from M. tuberculosis, which binds to the complex and inactivates
it. The interference with the ability to inactivate bacterial proteins secreted
in the phagocyte cytosol may have crucial importance for bacterial survival
within the phagocyte.

Copyright © 2014 Danelishvili et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01278-14 
PMCID: PMC4147862
PMID: 25139900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

