
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 2;111(35):12930-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1406414111. Epub 2014 Aug 18.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa triggers CFTR-mediated airway surface liquid secretion in 
swine trachea.

Luan X(1), Campanucci VA(1), Nair M(1), Yilmaz O(1), Belev G(2), Machen TE(3),
Chapman D(4), Ianowski JP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
S7N 5E5;
(2)Canadian Light Source Inc., Saskatoon, SK, Canada S7N 2V3;
(3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA 94720; and.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
SK, Canada S7N 5E5.
(5)Department of Physiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada
S7N 5E5; juan.ianowski@usask.ca.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder caused by
mutations in the gene encoding for the anion channel cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). Several organs are affected in CF,
but most of the morbidity and mortality comes from lung disease. Recent data show
that the initial consequence of CFTR mutation is the failure to eradicate
bacteria before the development of inflammation and airway remodeling. Bacterial 
clearance depends on a layer of airway surface liquid (ASL) consisting of both a 
mucus layer that traps, kills, and inactivates bacteria and a periciliary liquid 
layer that keeps the mucus at an optimum distance from the underlying epithelia, 
to maximize ciliary motility and clearance of bacteria. The airways in CF
patients and animal models of CF demonstrate abnormal ASL secretion and reduced
antimicrobial properties. Thus, it has been proposed that abnormal ASL secretion 
in response to bacteria may facilitate the development of the infection and
inflammation that characterize CF airway disease. Whether the inhalation of
bacteria triggers ASL secretion, and the role of CFTR, have never been tested,
however. We developed a synchrotron-based imaging technique to visualize the ASL 
layer and measure the effect of bacteria on ASL secretion. We show that the
introduction of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and other bacteria into the lumen of
intact isolated swine tracheas triggers CFTR-dependent ASL secretion by the
submucosal glands. This response requires expression of the bacterial protein
flagellin. In patients with CF, the inhalation of bacteria would fail to trigger 
ASL secretion, leading to infection and inflammation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1406414111 
PMCID: PMC4156708
PMID: 25136096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

