
1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2014 Dec 1;563:71-8. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2014.07.033. Epub
2014 Aug 14.

Targeting melanocyte and melanoma stem cells by
8-hydroxy-2-dipropylaminotetralin.

Bonchak JG(1), Eby JM(2), Willenborg KA(2), Chrobak D(2), Henning SW(2), Krzywiec
A(3), Johnson SL(4), Le Poole IC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Radiology, Loyola University Medical Center,
Maywood, IL, USA.
(2)Oncology Research Institute, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL,
USA.
(3)Illinois Mathematics and Science Academy, Aurora, IL, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MA, USA.
(5)Oncology Research Institute, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL,
USA; Departments of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Loyola University
Medical Center, Maywood, IL, USA. Electronic address: ilepool@luc.edu.

Monobenzyl ether of hydroquinone (MBEH) is cytotoxic towards melanocytes. Its
treatment efficacy is limited by an inability to eradicate stem cells. By
contrast, 8-hydroxy-N,N-dipropyl-2-aminotetralin (8-DPAT) affects melanocyte stem
cell survival. MBEH and 8-DPAT were added to melanocytes and melanoma cells to
compare cytotoxicity. Stem cell content among viable cells was determined by
fluorocytometry using markers CD34, Pax3, and CD271. Immunostaining was used to
identify stem cells in skin explants treated with MBEH or 8-DPAT ex vivo. Mice
were exposed to MBEH or 8-DPAT and scanned for depigmentation before harvesting
skin. MBEH exposure prompted a relative increase in stem cells among cultured
melanocytes and melanoma cells, as treatment preferentially eliminated
differentiated cells and spared the stem cells. Viability of this remaining,
enriched stem cell population was however rapidly reduced by exposure to 8-DPAT
within melanocyte and melanoma cell cultures. In human skin explants, the
abundance of melanocyte stem cells was also visibly reduced after 8-DPAT
treatment, in contrast to tissue exposed to MBEH. Meanwhile, significant
depigmentation of the mouse pelage and loss of differentiated melanocytes was
observed in vivo in response to topical application of MBEH, but not 8-DPAT.
Prolonged application of the latter agent instead appeared to effectively reduce 
the abundance of melanocyte stem cells in the dermis. This furthers the idea that
MBEH and 8-DPAT target complementary cell populations. Results indicate that
combination treatment may demonstrate superior therapeutic activity by
eliminating both differentiated and tumor initiating populations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2014.07.033 
PMCID: PMC4221435
PMID: 25132642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

