
1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014 Aug 11;8:228. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00228.
eCollection 2014.

Targeting immune co-stimulatory effects of PD-L1 and PD-L2 might represent an
effective therapeutic strategy in stroke.

Bodhankar S(1), Chen Y(2), Lapato A(1), Vandenbark AA(3), Murphy SJ(2), Offner
H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Research, Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center Portland,
OR, USA ; Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University Portland,
OR, USA.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine, Oregon Health and
Science University Portland, OR, USA.
(3)Neuroimmunology Research, Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center Portland,
OR, USA ; Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University Portland,
OR, USA ; Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health and 
Science University Portland, OR, USA.
(4)Neuroimmunology Research, Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center Portland,
OR, USA ; Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University Portland,
OR, USA ; Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine, Oregon Health 
and Science University Portland, OR, USA.

Stroke outcome is worsened by the infiltration of inflammatory immune cells into 
ischemic brains. Our recent study demonstrated that PD-L1- and to a lesser extent
PD-L2-deficient mice had smaller brain infarcts and fewer brain-infiltrating
cells vs. wild-type (WT) mice, suggesting a pathogenic role for PD-ligands in
experimental stroke. We sought to ascertain PD-L1 and PD-L2-expressing cell types
that affect T-cell activation, post-stroke in the context of other known
co-stimulatory molecules. Thus, cells from male WT and PD-L-deficient mice
undergoing 60 min of middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) followed by 96 h of 
reperfusion were treated with neutralizing antibodies to study co-stimulatory and
co-inhibitory interactions between CD80, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4
(CTLA-4), PD-1, and PD-Ls that regulate CD8(+) and CD4(+) T-cell activation. We
found that antibody neutralization of PD-1 and CTLA-4 signaling post-MCAO
resulted in higher proliferation in WT CD8(+) and CD4(+) T-cells, confirming an
inhibitory role of PD-1 and CTLA-4 on T-cell activation. Also, CD80/CD28
interactions played a prominent regulatory role for the CD8(+) T-cells and the
PD-1/PD-L2 interactions were dominant in controlling the CD4(+) T-cell responses 
in WT mice after stroke. A suppressive phenotype in PD-L1-deficient mice was
attributed to CD80/CTLA-4 and PD-1/PD-L2 interactions. PD-L2 was crucial in
modulating CD4(+) T-cell responses, whereas PD-L1 regulated both CD8(+) and
CD4(+) T-cells. To establish the contribution of PD-L1 and PD-L2 on regulatory
B-cells (Bregs), infarct volumes were evaluated in male PD-L1- and
PD-L2-deficient mice receiving IL-10(+) B-cells 4h post-MCAO. PD-L2- but not
PD-L1-deficient recipients of IL-10(+) B-cells had markedly reduced infarct
volumes, indicating a regulatory role of PD-L2 on Bregs. These results imply that
PD-L1 and PD-L2 differentially control induction of T- and Breg-cell responses
after MCAO, thus suggesting that selective targeting of PD-L1 and PD-L2 might
represent a valuable therapeutic strategy in stroke.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00228 
PMCID: PMC4127946
PMID: 25157219 

