
1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Oct;396(1-2):46-57. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.08.009.
Epub 2014 Aug 20.

Molecular and physiological evidences for the role in appetite regulation of
apelin and its receptor APJ in Ya-fish (Schizothorax prenanti).

Lin F(1), Wu H(1), Chen H(1), Xin Z(1), Yuan D(1), Wang T(1), Liu J(1), Gao Y(1),
Zhang X(1), Zhou C(1), Wei R(1), Chen D(1), Yang S(1), Wang Y(1), Pu Y(1), Li
Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquaculture, College of Animal Science and Technology, Sichuan
Agricultural University, 46# Xinkang Road, Ya'an, China.
(2)Department of Aquaculture, College of Animal Science and Technology, Sichuan
Agricultural University, 46# Xinkang Road, Ya'an, China. Electronic address:
lizhiqiong454@163.com.

Apelin is a recently discovered peptide produced by several tissues with diverse 
physiological actions mediated by its receptor APJ. In order to better understand
the role of apelin in the regulation of appetite in fish, we cloned the cDNAs
encoding apelin and APJ, and investigated their mRNA distributions in Ya-fish
(Schizothorax prenanti) tissues. We also assessed the effects of different
nutritional status on apelin and APJ mRNAs abundance. Apelin and APJ mRNAs were
ubiquitously expressed in all tissues tested, relatively high expression levels
were detected in the heart, spleen, hypothalamus and kidney. Short-term fasting
significant increased APJ mRNA expression, but no significant difference between 
fasted fish and fed control on 5- and 7-day. Meanwhile, apelin mRNA expression
consistently increased during the 7-day food deprivation. In order to further
characterize apelin in fish, we performed intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of
apelin-13 and examined food intake of the injected fish. Apelin injected at a
dose of 100 ng/g body weight induced a significant increase in food intake
compared to saline injected fish. Our results suggest that apelin acts as an
orexigenic factor in Ya-fish. Their widespread distributions also suggest that
apelin and APJ might play multiple physiological regulating roles in fish.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.08.009 
PMID: 25150624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

