
1. Euro Surveill. 2014 Aug 21;19(33). pii: 20881.

Investigations into the emergence of pertactin-deficient Bordetella pertussis
isolates in six European countries, 1996 to 2012.

Zeddeman A(1), van Gent M, Heuvelman CJ, van der Heide HG, Bart MJ, Advani A,
Hallander HO, Wirsing von Konig CH, Riffelman M, Storsaeter J, Vestrheim DF,
Dalby T, Krogfelt KA, Fry NK, Barkoff AM, Mertsola J, He Q, Mooi F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infectious Diseases Research, Diagnostics and Screening (IDS),
Centre for Infectious Diseases Control (CIb), National Institute of Public Health
and the Environment (RIVM), the Netherlands.

Pathogen adaptation has been proposed to contribute to the resurgence of
pertussis. A striking recent example is the emergence of isolates deficient in
the vaccine component pertactin (Prn). This study explores the emergence of such 
Prn-deficient isolates in six European countries. During 2007 to 2009, 0/83
isolates from the Netherlands, 0/18 from the United Kingdom, 0/17 Finland, 0/23
Denmark, 4/99 Sweden and 5/20 from Norway of the isolates collected were
Prn-deficient. In the Netherlands and Sweden, respectively 4/146 and 1/8 were
observed in a later period (2010–12). The Prn-deficient isolates were genetically
diverse and different mutations were found to inactivate the prn gene. These are 
indications that Prn-deficiency is subject to positive selective pressure. We
hypothesise that the switch from whole cell to acellular pertussis vaccines has
affected the balance between ‘costs and benefits’ of Prn production by Bordetella
pertussis to the extent that isolates that do not produce Prn are able to expand.
The absence of Prn-deficient isolates in some countries may point to ways to
prevent or delay the spread of Prn-deficient strains. In order to substantiate
this hypothesis, trends in the European B. pertussis population should be
monitored continuously.

DOI: 10.2807/1560-7917.es2014.19.33.20881 
PMID: 25166348  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

