
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 Nov;80(21):6828-36. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01623-14. Epub 
2014 Aug 29.

Biosynthetic pathway for the cyanide-free production of phenylacetonitrile in
Escherichia coli by utilizing plant cytochrome P450 79A2 and bacterial aldoxime
dehydratase.

Miki Y(1), Asano Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Center and Department of Biotechnology, Toyama
Prefectural University, Kurokawa, Imizu, Toyama, Japan, and Asano Active Enzyme
Molecule Project, ERATO, JST, Kurokawa, Imizu, Toyama, Japan.
(2)Biotechnology Research Center and Department of Biotechnology, Toyama
Prefectural University, Kurokawa, Imizu, Toyama, Japan, and Asano Active Enzyme
Molecule Project, ERATO, JST, Kurokawa, Imizu, Toyama, Japan
asano@pu-toyama.ac.jp.

The biosynthetic pathway for the production of phenylacetonitrile (PAN), which
has a wide variety of uses in chemical and pharmaceutical industries, was
constructed in Escherichia coli utilizing enzymes from the plant
glucosinolate-biosynthetic and bacterial aldoxime-nitrile pathways. First, the
single-step reaction to produce E,Z-phenylacetaldoxime (PAOx) from l-Phe was
constructed in E. coli by introducing the genes encoding cytochrome P450 (CYP)
79A2 and CYP reductase from Arabidopsis thaliana, yielding the E,Z-PAOx-producing
transformant. Second, this step was expanded to the production of PAN by further 
introducing the aldoxime dehydratase (Oxd) gene from Bacillus sp. strain OxB-1,
yielding the PAN-producing transformant. The E,Z-PAOx-producing transformant also
produced phenethyl alcohol and PAN as by-products, which were suggested to be the
metabolites of E,Z-PAOx produced by E. coli enzymes, while the PAN-producing
transformant accumulated only PAN in the culture broth, which suggested that the 
CYP79A2 reaction (the conversion of l-Phe to E,Z-PAOx) was a potential bottleneck
in the PAN production pathway. Expression of active CYP79A2 and concentration of 
biomass were improved by the combination of the autoinduction method,
coexpression of groE, encoding the heat shock protein GroEL/GroES, N-terminal
truncation of CYP79A2, and optimization of the culture conditions, yielding a
>60-fold concentration of E,Z-PAOx (up to 2.9 mM). The concentration of PAN was
4.9 mM under the optimized conditions. These achievements show the potential of
this bioprocess to produce nitriles and nitrile derivatives in the absence of
toxic chemicals.

Copyright Â© 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01623-14 
PMCID: PMC4249030
PMID: 25172862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

