
1. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Dec;44(12):3680-95. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444734. Epub 2014 Oct
30.

An amphioxus gC1q protein binds human IgG and initiates the classical pathway:
Implications for a C1q-mediated complement system in the basal chordate.

Gao Z(1), Li M, Ma J, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Evolution & Development, Institute of Evolution & Marine
Biodiversity and Department of Marine Biology, Ocean University of China,
Qingdao, China.

The origin of the classical complement pathway remains open during chordate
evolution. A C1q-like member, BjC1q, was identified in the basal chordate
amphioxus. It is predominantly expressed in the hepatic caecum, hindgut, and
notochord, and is significantly upregulated following challenge with bacteria or 
lipoteichoic acid and LPS. Recombinant BjC1q and its globular head domain
specifically interact with lipoteichoic acid and LPS, but BjC1q displays little
lectin activity. Moreover, rBjC1q can assemble to form the high molecular weight 
oligomers necessary for binding to proteases C1r/C1s and for complement
activation, and binds human C1r/C1s/mannan-binding lectin-associated serine
protease-2 as well as amphioxus serine proteases involved in the cleavage of
C4/C2, and C3 activation. Importantly, rBjC1q binds with human IgG as well as an 
amphioxus Ig domain containing protein, resulting in the activation of the
classical complement pathway. This is the first report showing that a C1q-like
protein in invertebrates is able to initiate classical pathway, raising the
possibility that amphioxus possesses a C1q-mediated complement system. It also
suggests a new scenario for the emergence of the classical complement pathway, in
contrast to the proposal that the lectin pathway evolved into the classical
pathway.

Â© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201444734 
PMID: 25174509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

