
1. J Vet Diagn Invest. 1989 Apr;1(2):120-3.

Effects of halogenated hydrocarbons on rumen microorganisms.

Willett KL(1), Loerch SC, Willett LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy Science, Ohio State University, Wooster 44691.

Halogenated hydrocarbons such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB's), heptachlor
(HEP), 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-ethane (DDT), and
pentachlorophenol (PCP) are environmental contaminants and, at times, can
bioaccumulate in the food chain. Cattle have been contaminated in a variety of
ways, but generally it is believed that they are only affected by high
concentrations of the chemicals. Rumen microorganisms, however, may be affected
at lower doses, thus possibly affecting the cow's growth and milk production.
Polychlorinated biphenyls, HEP, DDT, and PCP were tested by a 1-stage in vitro
fermentation procedure. Substrate utilization was determined by measuring percent
dry matter disappearance. Four concentrations (0, 10, 50, and 100 ppm) were
studied, and in vitro incubations were conducted for 24 and 48 hr. Samples were
removed from 48-hr incubations to determine if the chlorinated hydrocarbons were 
metabolized during fermentation. Dry matter disappearance proved to be a reliable
method to determine microbial activity in the presence of chemicals. Substrate
dry matter disappearance for controls and all concentrations of PCB's, HEP, and
DDT was approximately 50 and 80% at 24 and 48 hr, respectively. The PCP
significantly (P less than 0.05) depressed the percent dry matter disappearance
in 50- and 100-ppm cultures to 45 and 30% at 24 hr and 70 and 50% at 48 hr,
respectively. Metabolic changes in the test chemicals were not detected by gas
chromatographic analysis.

DOI: 10.1177/104063878900100205 
PMID: 2518692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

