
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014 Nov;58(11):6819-27. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00061-14. 
Epub 2014 Sep 2.

Ramoplanin at bactericidal concentrations induces bacterial membrane
depolarization in Staphylococcus aureus.

Cheng M(1), Huang JX(1), Ramu S(1), Butler MS(1), Cooper MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.
(2)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia m.cooper@uq.edu.au.

Ramoplanin is an actinomycetes-derived antibiotic with broad-spectrum activity
against Gram-positive bacteria that has been evaluated in clinical trials for the
treatment of gastrointestinal vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) and
Clostridium difficile infections. Recent studies have proposed that ramoplanin
binds to bacterial membranes as a C2 symmetrical dimer that can sequester Lipid
II, which causes inhibition of cell wall peptidoglycan biosynthesis and cell
death. In this study, ramoplanin was shown to bind to anionic and zwitterionic
membrane mimetics with a higher affinity for anionic membranes and to induce
membrane depolarization of methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA)
ATCC 25923 at concentrations at or above the minimal bactericidal concentration
(MBC). The ultrastructural effects of ramoplanin on S. aureus were also examined 
by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and this showed dramatic changes to
bacterial cell morphology. The correlation observed between membrane
depolarization and bacterial cell viability suggests that this mechanism may
contribute to the bactericidal activity of ramoplanin.

Copyright Â© 2014 Cheng et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00061-14 
PMCID: PMC4249368
PMID: 25182650  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

