
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014 Nov;58(11):6896-903. doi: 10.1128/AAC.03628-14.
Epub 2014 Sep 8.

Effective control of Salmonella infections by employing combinations of
recombinant antimicrobial human β-defensins hBD-1 and hBD-2.

Maiti S(1), Patro S(1), Purohit S(1), Jain S(1), Senapati S(1), Dey N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Function and Regulation, Institute of Life Sciences,
Department of Biotechnology, Government of India, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India.
(2)Division of Gene Function and Regulation, Institute of Life Sciences,
Department of Biotechnology, Government of India, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
nrisinghad@yahoo.com.

We successfully produced two human β-defensins (hBD-1 and hBD-2) in bacteria as
functional peptides and tested their antibacterial activities against Salmonella 
enterica serovar Typhi, Escherichia coli, and Staphylococcus aureus employing
both spectroscopic and viable CFU count methods. Purified peptides showed
approximately 50% inhibition of the bacterial population when used individually
and up to 90% when used in combination. The 50% lethal doses (LD50) of hBD-1
against S. Typhi, E. coli, and S. aureus were 0.36, 0.40, and 0.69 μg/μl,
respectively, while those for hBD-2 against the same bacteria were 0.38, 0.36,
and 0.66 μg/μl, respectively. Moreover, we observed that bacterium-derived
antimicrobial peptides were also effective in increasing survival time and
decreasing bacterial loads in the peritoneal fluid, liver, and spleen of a mouse 
intraperitoneally infected with S. Typhi. The 1:1 hBD-1/hBD-2 combination showed 
maximum effectiveness in challenging the Salmonella infection in vitro and in
vivo. We also observed less tissue damage and sepsis formation in the livers of
infected mice after treatment with hBD-1 and hBD-2 peptides individually or in
combination. Based on these findings, we conclude that bacterium-derived
recombinant β-defensins (hBD-1 and hBD-2) are promising antimicrobial peptide
(AMP)-based substances for the development of new therapeutics against typhoid
fever.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.03628-14 
PMCID: PMC4249419
PMID: 25199778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

