
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2014 Dec;98(24):10143-52. doi:
10.1007/s00253-014-6055-2. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

Engineered coryneform bacteria as a bio-tool for arsenic remediation.

Villadangos AF(1), Ord칩침ez E, Pedre B, Messens J, Gil JA, Mateos LM.

Author information: 
(1)Departament of Molecular Biology, Area of Microbiology, Faculty of
Biology-Environmental Sciences, University of Le칩n, Le칩n, 24071, Spain.

Despite current remediation efforts, arsenic contamination in water sources is
still a major health problem, highlighting the need for new approaches. In this
work, strains of the nonpathogenic and highly arsenic-resistant bacterium
Corynebacterium glutamicum were used as inexpensive tools to accumulate inorganic
arsenic, either as arsenate (As(V)) or arsenite (As(III)) species. The assays
made use of "resting cells" from these strains, which were assessed under
well-established conditions and compared with C. glutamicum background controls. 
The two mutant As(V)-accumulating strains were those used in a previously
published study: (i) ArsC1/C2, in which the gene/s encoding the
mycothiol-dependent arsenate reductases is/are disrupted, and (ii) MshA/C mutants
unable to produce mycothiol, the low molecular weight thiol essential for
arsenate reduction. The As(III)-accumulating strains were either those lacking
the arsenite permease activities (Acr3-1 and Acr3-2) needed in As(III) release or
recombinant strains overexpressing the aquaglyceroporin genes (glpF) from
Corynebacterium diphtheriae or Streptomyces coelicolor, to improve As(III)
uptake. Both genetically modified strains accumulated 30-fold more As(V) and
15-fold more As(III) than the controls. The arsenic resistance of the modified
strains was inversely proportional to their metal accumulation ability. Our
results provide the basis for investigations into the use of these modified C.
glutamicum strains as a new bio-tool in arsenic remediation efforts.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-014-6055-2 
PMID: 25208910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

