
1. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2014;78(9):1514-21. doi: 10.1080/09168451.2014.930316.
Epub 2014 Jun 26.

Construction of novel chimeric proteins through the truncation of SEC2 and Sak
from Staphylococcus aureus.

Hui J(1), Yu XJ, Cui XJ, Mu T, Lin JS, Ni P, Li H, You S, Hu FQ.

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Life Science and Bio-pharmaceutics , Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University , Shenyang , China.

It is an usual clinical phenomenon that cancer patients are prone to thrombosis. 
Until now, there have been no efficient methods or appropriate drugs to prevent
and cure tumor thrombus. Therefore, the construction of a bifunctional chimeric
protein for the treatment of cancer, complicated with thrombosis, is of great
significance. Utilizing the superantigenic activity of staphylococcal enterotoxin
C2 (SEC2) and the thrombolytic activity of staphylokinase (Sak), Sak-linker-SEC2 
and SEC2-linker-Sak were constructed which had good anti-tumor and thrombolytic
activities at the same time. Due to the intrinsic emetic activity of SEC2 and
high molecular weight (MW) of chimeric proteins (44 kDa), their clinical
applications will be restricted. In this study, novel chimeric proteins including
ΔSEC2-ΔSak and ΔSak-ΔSEC2 were constructed through the truncation of SEC2 and Sak
without 9-Ala linker and His-tag. Compared with the former, both the truncated
proteins preserved nearly the same anti-tumor and thrombolytic activities. In
addition, their MWs were only 29 kDa and their immunoreactivities were slightly
lower than that of Sak-linker-SEC2 and SEC2-linker-Sak, respectively. Therefore, 
the novel chimeric proteins possessed merits and characteristics, such as low MS,
low immunogenicity, and difunctionality which the former had not. It will be of
great interest if the above-mentioned proteins can be used to cure Trousseau
syndrome in clinic.

DOI: 10.1080/09168451.2014.930316 
PMID: 25209498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

