
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2014 Dec;64(Pt 12):3958-3963. doi:
10.1099/ijs.0.064717-0. Epub 2014 Sep 9.

Paenibacillus susongensis sp. nov., a mineral-weathering bacterium.

Guo XQ(1), Gu JY(1), Yu YJ(1), Zhang WB(1), He LY(1), Sheng XF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Environment Microbiology, Ministry of
Agriculture, College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing
210095, PR China.

A Gram-stain-positive, rod-shaped, endospore-forming, aerobic bacterial strain,
designated M327(T), was isolated from the weathered surfaces of rock (mica
schist) from Susong, Anhui Province, PR China. Phylogenetic analysis based on 16S
rRNA gene sequences indicated that strain M327(T) belonged to the genus
Paenibacillus and was related most closely to Paenibacillus terrigena A35(T)
(98.6 % similarity) and Paenibacillus selenitireducens ES3-24(T) (98.3 %). Strain
M327(T) contained meso-diaminopimelic acid in the cell wall and MK-7 as the major
menaquinone. The main fatty acids of strain M327(T) were anteiso-C15 : 0 and
iso-C16 : 0. The polar lipid profile contained diphosphatidylglycerol,
phosphatidylglycerol, phosphatidylethanolamine, three unknown aminophospholipids 
and an unknown lipid. The total DNA G+C content of strain M327(T) was 48.6 mol%. 
Based on the low level of DNA-DNA relatedness (ranging from 26.6 to 33.1 %) to
these type strains of species of the genus Paenibacillus and unique phenotypic
characteristics, it is suggested that strain M327(T) represents a novel species
of the genus Paenibacillus, for which the name Paenibacillus susongensis sp. nov.
is proposed. The type strain is M327(T) ( = CCTCC AB 2014058(T) = LMG
28236(T) = JCM 19951(T)).

© 2014 IUMS.

DOI: 10.1099/ijs.0.064717-0 
PMID: 25205797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

