
1. Clin Oral Investig. 2015 May;19(4):841-9. doi: 10.1007/s00784-014-1304-4. Epub
2014 Sep 9.

NF-kB mediated down-regulation of collagen synthesis upon HEMA (2-hydroxyethyl
methacrylate) treatment of primary human gingival fibroblast/Streptococcus mutans
co-cultured cells.

Grande R(1), Pacella S, Di Giulio M, Rapino M, Di Valerio V, Cellini L, Cataldi
A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Farmacia, Università G. d'Annunzio, Chieti-Pescara, 66100,
Chieti, Italy.

PURPOSE: In vitro studies have evidenced the cytotoxic effect of HEMA
(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate), the most common component of dental resin-based
restorative material, which is released within the oral cavity, on eukaryotic
cells such as gingival fibroblast and epithelial cells. However, since the
presence of microorganisms within the oral cavity cannot be excluded and little
is known about the interactions occurring between eukaryotic cells and the human 
oral microbiota, our attention has been addressed to investigate the effect of
3 mM HEMA on the molecular mechanisms driving the response of human gingival
fibroblasts (HGFs) co-cultured with Streptococcus mutans.
METHODOLOGY: HGF/S. mutans co-culture has been set up in our lab, and upon HEMA
treatment, S.mutans and HGF cells' viability and adhesion along with type I
collagen gene and pro-collagen I, Bax, Bcl2, nuclear factor kB (NF-kB), IkBα,
pIkBα protein expression by PCR, Western blotting and ELISA assays have been
investigated.
RESULTS: HEMA treatment determines a significant decrease of type I collagen
protein production, even in the presence of S. mutans, in parallel to a decrease 
of cell viability and adhesion, which seem to be regulated by NF-kB activation.
In fact, when SN50, NF-kB-specific pharmacological inhibitor, is added to the
culture, cell proliferation along with collagen synthesis is restored.
CONCLUSION: The modulation exerted by S. mutans on the cytotoxic effect of HEMA
suggests that within the oral cavity, the eukaryotic/prokaryotic cell
interactions, maintaining the balance of the environment, allow HEMA to perform
its adhesive and bonding function and that the use of a co-culture system, which 
simulates the oral cavity organization, improves the knowledge concerning the
biocompatibility of this dental material.

DOI: 10.1007/s00784-014-1304-4 
PMCID: PMC4429030
PMID: 25200938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

