
1. Microb Ecol. 2015 Feb;69(2):281-92. doi: 10.1007/s00248-014-0489-z. Epub 2014 Sep
12.

Biodegradation of dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethanes (DDTs) and
hexachlorocyclohexanes (HCHs) with plant and nutrients and their effects on the
microbial ecological kinetics.

Sun G(1), Zhang X, Hu Q, Zhang H, Zhang D, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Simulation and Pollution Control, School
of Environmental Science, Tsinghua University, 100084, Beijing, China,
sungd11@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    Microb Ecol. 2015 Apr;69(3):721-2.

Four pilot-scale test mesocosms were conducted for the remediation of
organochlorine pesticides (OCPs)-contaminated aged soil. The results indicate
that the effects on degradation of hexachlorocyclohexanes (HCHs) and
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethanes (DDTs) were in the following order:
nutrients/plant bioaugmentation (81.18 % for HCHs; 85.4 % for DDTs) > nutrients
bioaugmentation > plant bioaugmentation > only adding water > control, and
nutrients/plant bioaugmentation greatly enhanced the degradation of HCHs (81.18
%) and DDTs (85.4 %). The bacterial community structure, diversity and
composition were assessed by 454-pyrosequencing of 16S recombinant RNA (rRNA),
whereas the abundance of linA gene was determined by quantitative polymerase
chain reaction. Distinct differences in bacterial community composition,
structure, and diversity were a function of remediation procedure. Predictability
of HCH/DDT degradation in soils was also investigated. A positive correlation
between linA gene abundance and the removal ratio of HCHs was indicated by
correlation analyses. A similar relationship was also confirmed between the
degradation of HCHs/DDTs and the abundance of some assemblages
(Gammaproteobacteria and Flavobacteria). Our results offer microbial ecological
insight into the degradation of HCHs and DDTs in aged contaminated soil, which is
helpful for the intensification of bioremediation through modifying plant-microbe
patterns, and cessation of costly and time-consuming assays.

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-014-0489-z 
PMID: 25213654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

