
1. BMC Nephrol. 2014 Sep 12;15:149. doi: 10.1186/1471-2369-15-149.

Diagnostic and prognostic role of peritoneal CA 125 in peritoneal dialysis
patients presenting with acute peritonitis.

Panorchan K, Davenport A(1).

Author information: 
(1)UCL Centre for Nephrology, Royal Free Hospital, University College London
Medical School, Rowland Hill Street, NW3 2PF London, UK. andrewdavenport@nhs.net.

BACKGROUND: Cancer antigen 125 (CA125) is made by peritoneal mesothelial cells
and can be measured in spent dialysate effluent from peritoneal dialysis (PD)
patients. It has been suggested that CA125 is a marker of peritoneal mesothelial 
cell mass and turnover. As PD CA125 increases during peritoneal inflammation, we 
wished to determine whether measuring PD CA125 during peritonitis provided
additional information in determining outcome of peritonitis.
METHODS: We prospectively measured peritoneal CA125 in 127 adult PD patients
presenting with 187 acute episodes of PD peritonitis, measuring peritoneal CA125 
from a sample of dialysate effluent obtained from a 4 hour 2 litre 13.6 g/l
dextrose peritoneal dwell.
RESULTS: Mean patient age 60.8 ± 17.1 years, 62.6% male, 33.7% diabetic and the
median PD vintage was 22 (11-48) months. 127 patients (66.8%) presented with
their first episode of peritonitis, 20% their second episode, 13.2% third or
greater. Gram positive bacteria accounted for 64.7% of all peritonitis episodes
and Gram negative bacteria 21.1%. Treatment was successful for 151 episodes of PD
peritonitis (81.1%). The median PD effluent total WBC was 1240 (430-3660)/ml and 
serum CRP 67 (20-144) mg/l, with a PD CA125 of 38 (20.3-72.3) IU/l on
presentation. There were positive correlations between PD effluent CA125
concentrations and total WBC on presentation (r = 0.41, p =  <0.001) and dialysis
vintage (r =  -0.43, p < 0.001) but not with patient age, diabetic status, or
serum CRP.There was no difference in PD effluent CA125 concentrations between
Gram positive, and Gram negative peritonitis or between those episodes which
responded to treatment, median 38 IU/ml (21-69) vs those with treatment failures 
38 IU/ml (15-94).
CONCLUSION: We did not find any additional diagnostic or prognostic benefit for
measuring effluent CA125 in PD patients presenting with acute peritonitis
compared to standard investigations, including peritoneal WBC and serum CRP. As
such our study would not support the routine measurement of peritoneal CA125
during episodes of peritonitis.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2369-15-149 
PMCID: PMC4169835
PMID: 25217152  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

