
1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2014 Nov;360(2):137-43. doi: 10.1111/1574-6968.12596. Epub
2014 Sep 29.

Health- and disease-associated species clusters in complex natural biofilms
determine the innate immune response in oral epithelial cells during biofilm
maturation.

Langfeldt D(1), Neulinger SC, Stiesch M, Stumpp N, Bang C, Schmitz RA, Eberhard
J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for General Microbiology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

The aim of the present study was to verify our hypothesis concerning the
differential induction of various antimicrobial and immunomodulatory responses in
oral epithelial cells by diverse bacterial species clusters. For this purpose,
oral biofilms between 1 and 14 days of maturation (36 volunteers) were
co-incubated with gingival epithelial cells. Subsequently, human β-defensin
(hBD)-2, hBD-3, LL-37, interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, IL-8 and IL-10 mRNA expression 
profiles were quantified by quantitative reverse transcription PCR. The
correlation between bacterial species and the host innate immune response was
determined by relating these results to existing 16S rRNA phylogenetic analysis
by amplicon sequencing (Langfeldt et al. 2014. PLoS One 9: e87449). Data were
analysed by multiple factor analysis. Transcription of hBD-2 and hBD-3 was
significantly associated with the abundance of species of the Prevotella cluster 
and the absence of species of the Streptococcus cluster. IL-1β, -6, -8 and -10
mRNA syntheses were significant correlated with Leptotrichia species
[Leptotrichia 302H02 (0.448, P < 0.0001), Leptotrichia nbw822e09c1 (0.214, P =
0.008) and Leptotrichia wadei (0.218, P = 0.007)] of the Prevotella cluster. In
the third dimension IL-10 and members of the Prevotella cluster were negatively
correlated, whereas hBD-3 and IL-1β, IL-6 and IL-8 were positive correlated to
axis 3, like members of the Proteobacteria cluster. In conclusion, distinct
species of health- and disease-associated bacterial clusters induce antibacterial
or immunomodulatory reactions in oral epithelial cells during early stages of
bacteria-host interactions.

© 2014 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by John Wiley 
& Sons Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/1574-6968.12596 
PMID: 25212593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

