
1. FEBS J. 2014 Nov;281(22):5063-76. doi: 10.1111/febs.13044. Epub 2014 Oct 4.

Structural and energetic basis of isopropylmalate dehydrogenase enzyme catalysis.

Palló A(1), Oláh J, Gráczer E, Merli A, Závodszky P, Weiss MS, Vas M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry, Research Centre for Natural Sciences,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.

The three-dimensional structure of the enzyme 3-isopropylmalate dehydrogenase
from the bacterium Thermus thermophilus in complex with Mn(2+) , its substrate
isopropylmalate and its co-factor product NADH at 2.0 Å resolution features a
fully closed conformation of the enzyme. Upon closure of the two domains, the
substrate and the co-factor are brought into precise relative orientation and
close proximity, with a distance between the C2 atom of the substrate and the C4N
atom of the pyridine ring of the co-factor of approximately 3.0 Å. The structure 
further shows binding of a K(+) ion close to the active site, and provides an
explanation for its known activating effect. Hence, this structure is an
excellent mimic for the enzymatically competent complex. Using high-level QM/MM
calculations, it may be demonstrated that, in the observed arrangement of the
reactants, transfer of a hydride from the C2 atom of 3-isopropylmalate to the C4N
atom of the pyridine ring of NAD(+) is easily possible, with an activation energy
of approximately 15 kcal·mol(-1) . The activation energy increases by
approximately 4-6 kcal·mol(-1) when the K(+) ion is omitted from the
calculations. In the most plausible scenario, prior to hydride transfer the
ε-amino group of Lys185 acts as a general base in the reaction, aiding the
deprotonation reaction of 3-isopropylmalate prior to hydride transfer by
employing a low-barrier proton shuttle mechanism involving a water
molecule.DATABASE: Structural data have been submitted to the Protein Data Bank
under accession number 4F7I.

© 2014 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.13044 
PMID: 25211160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

