
1. Scand J Immunol. 1989 Feb;29(2):247-55.

Reduced erythrocyte CR1 (CD 35) receptor function and complement opsonization in 
factor I-deficient patients is restored by plasma infusion.

Jepsen HH(1), Teisner B, Rasmussen JM, Svehag SE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Odense University, Denmark.

Erythrocytes (E) from three factor I-deficient patients were investigated for
surface-bound complement factors and CR1 (CD 35) expression and function. The E
were coated with C4b, C3b, and factor H. Following plasma infusion or in vitro
incubation of the patients' E with normal human serum (NHS) or purified factor I,
cell-bound C4b and C3b could no longer be detected. The E now expressed C3d, and 
factor H was unaffected, indicating that factor H was bound to the C3d part of
the C3b molecules, providing the co-factor for effective cleavage of E-bound C3b 
when purified factor I was added. The binding of monoclonal anti-CR1 antibodies
(M710) to the patients' E was markedly reduced compared with control E, and was
not normalized by treatment with NHS, probably because covalently bound
C3d/factor H interfered with the binding of M710. By contrast, the reduced
ability of the patients' E-CR1 to bind complement-opsonized immune complexes (IC)
was normalized after plasma infusion. This shows that the impaired CR1 function
was acquired and emphasizes the importance of performing functional CR1 assays.
Complement opsonization of IC for binding to normal E was severely compromised in
the patients' sera due to consumption of factor B and C3. After plasma infusion
the opsonization capacity of the patients' sera was restored. Thus, two
mechanisms of importance for normal clearance of IC were compromised in factor
I-deficient patients: (1) the opsonization of IC for binding to E-CR1, and (2)
the capacity of E-CR1 to bind opsonized complexes. Both dysfunctions were
temporarily corrected by plasma infusion.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.1989.tb01122.x 
PMID: 2522236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

