
1. Food Funct. 2014 Nov;5(11):2981-8. doi: 10.1039/c4fo00509k.

Pitanga (Eugenia uniflora L.) fruit juice and two major constituents thereof
exhibit anti-inflammatory properties in human gingival and oral gum epithelial
cells.

Josino Soares D(1), Walker J, Pignitter M, Walker JM, Imboeck JM,
Ehrnhoefer-Ressler MM, Montenegro Brasil I, Somoza V.

Author information: 
(1)CAPES Foundation, Ministry of Education of Brazil, Brasília - DF 70040-020,
Brazil. Jessica.Walker@univie.ac.at.

Pitanga, Eugenia uniflora L., is a tropical fruit, which may be consumed as
juice. While beneficial health effects of Eugenia uniflora L. leaf extracts have 
extensively been studied, limited data are available on an anti-inflammatory
potential of pitanga juice. The aim of the presented study was to investigate
anti-inflammatory properties of pitanga juice with regards to a prevention of
inflammation-related periodontal diseases. For this purpose, six healthy
volunteers swirled pitanga juice, containing 35% pitanga pulp, for 10 min.
Thereafter, oral gum epithelial cells were harvested using a sterile brush and
stimulated with lipopolysaccharides from Porphyromonas gingivalis (PG-LPS) for 6 
h. Furthermore, human gingival fibroblasts (HGF-1) were used to elucidate the
anti-inflammatory potential of pitanga juice constituents, cyanidin-3-glucoside
and oxidoselina-1,3,7(11)-trien-8-one, in juice representative concentrations of 
119 μg ml(-1) and 30 μg ml(-1), respectively. For the first time, an
anti-inflammatory impact of pitanga juice on gingival epithelial cells was shown 
by means of an attenuation of IL-8 release by 55 ± 8.2% and 52 ± 11% in
non-stimulated and PG-LPS-stimulated cells, respectively. In addition, both
cyanidin-3-glucoside and oxidoselina-1,3,7(11)-trien-8-one reduced the
LPS-stimulated CXCL8 mRNA expression by 50 ± 15% and 37 ± 18% and IL-8 release by
52 ± 9.9% and 45 ± 3.7% in HGF-1 cells, when concomitantly incubated with 10 μg
ml(-1)PG-LPS for 6 h, revealing an anti-inflammatory potential of the volatile
compound oxidoselina-1,3,7(11)-trien-8-one for the first time.

DOI: 10.1039/c4fo00509k 
PMID: 25228206  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

