
1. Immunity. 2014 Sep 18;41(3):440-450. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.07.013.

S1P-Dependent trafficking of intracellular yersinia pestis through lymph nodes
establishes Buboes and systemic infection.

St John AL(1), Ang WXG(2), Huang MN(3), Kunder CA(4), Chan EW(3), Gunn MD(5),
Abraham SN(6).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-National University of
Singapore, Singapore 169857, Singapore; Department of Pathology, Duke University 
Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. Electronic address:
ashley.st.john@duke-nus.edu.sg.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(3)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.
(5)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA; Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.
(6)Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-National University of
Singapore, Singapore 169857, Singapore; Department of Pathology, Duke University 
Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA; Department of Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA; Department
of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2014 Sep 18;41(3):347-9.

Pathologically swollen lymph nodes (LNs), or buboes, characterize Yersinia pestis
infection, yet how they form and function is unknown. We report that colonization
of the draining LN (dLN) occurred due to trafficking of infected dendritic cells 
and monocytes in temporally distinct waves in response to redundant chemotactic
signals, including through CCR7, CCR2, and sphingosine-1-phospate (S1P)
receptors. Retention of multiple subsets of phagocytes within peripheral LNs
using the S1P receptor agonist FTY720 or S1P1-specific agonist SEW2871 increased 
survival, reduced colonization of downstream LNs, and limited progression to
transmission-associated septicemic or pneumonic disease states. Conditional
deletion of S1P1 in mononuclear phagocytes abolished node-to-node trafficking of 
infected cells. Thus, Y. pestis-orchestrated LN remodeling promoted its
dissemination via host cells through the lymphatic system but can be blocked by
prevention of leukocyte egress from DLNs. These findings define a novel
trafficking route of mononuclear phagocytes and identify S1P as a therapeutic
target during infection.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.07.013 
PMCID: PMC4440548
PMID: 25238098  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

