
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Jan 16;10(1):310-9. doi: 10.1021/cb5006323. Epub 2014 Oct 3.

Identification and structure-function analysis of subfamily selective G
protein-coupled receptor kinase inhibitors.

Homan KT(1), Larimore KM, Elkins JM, Szklarz M, Knapp S, Tesmer JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Institute and the Departments of Pharmacology and Biological
Sciences, University of Michigan , Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, United States.

Selective inhibitors of individual subfamilies of G protein-coupled receptor
kinases (GRKs) would serve as useful chemical probes as well as leads for
therapeutic applications ranging from heart failure to Parkinson's disease. To
identify such inhibitors, differential scanning fluorimetry was used to screen a 
collection of known protein kinase inhibitors that could increase the melting
points of the two most ubiquitously expressed GRKs: GRK2 and GRK5. Enzymatic
assays on 14 of the most stabilizing hits revealed that three exhibit nanomolar
potency of inhibition for individual GRKs, some of which exhibiting orders of
magnitude selectivity. Most of the identified compounds can be clustered into two
chemical classes: indazole/dihydropyrimidine-containing compounds that are
selective for GRK2 and pyrrolopyrimidine-containing compounds that potently
inhibit GRK1 and GRK5 but with more modest selectivity. The two most potent
inhibitors representing each class, GSK180736A and GSK2163632A, were
cocrystallized with GRK2 and GRK1, and their atomic structures were determined to
2.6 and 1.85 Ã… spacings, respectively. GSK180736A, developed as a Rho-associated,
coiled-coil-containing protein kinase inhibitor, binds to GRK2 in a manner
analogous to that of paroxetine, whereas GSK2163632A, developed as an
insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor inhibitor, occupies a novel region of the
GRK active site cleft that could likely be exploited to achieve more selectivity.
However, neither compound inhibits GRKs more potently than their initial targets.
This data provides the foundation for future efforts to rationally design even
more potent and selective GRK inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1021/cb5006323 
PMCID: PMC4301037
PMID: 25238254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

