
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 7;289(45):31224-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.559237. Epub 2014
Sep 17.

Interplay between sumoylation and phosphorylation for protection against
α-synuclein inclusions.

Shahpasandzadeh H(1), Popova B(1), Kleinknecht A(1), Fraser PE(2), Outeiro TF(3),
Braus GH(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Department of Molecular
Microbiology and Genetics, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen, D-37077 Göttingen,
Germany, the Center for Nanoscale Microscopy and Molecular Physiology of the
Brain, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.
(2)the Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases and Department of
Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Ontario M5T 2S8, Canada, and.
(3)the Center for Nanoscale Microscopy and Molecular Physiology of the Brain,
D-37073 Göttingen, Germany, the Department of Neurodegeneration and Restorative
Research, University Medical Center Göttingen, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.
(4)From the Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Department of Molecular
Microbiology and Genetics, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen, D-37077 Göttingen,
Germany, the Center for Nanoscale Microscopy and Molecular Physiology of the
Brain, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany, gbraus@gwdg.de.

Parkinson disease is associated with the progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons
from the substantia nigra. The pathological hallmark of the disease is the
accumulation of intracytoplasmic inclusions known as Lewy bodies that consist
mainly of post-translationally modified forms of α-synuclein. Whereas
phosphorylation is one of the major modifications of α-synuclein in Lewy bodies, 
sumoylation has recently been described. The interplay between α-synuclein
phosphorylation and sumoylation is poorly understood. Here, we examined the
interplay between these modifications as well as their impact on cell growth and 
inclusion formation in yeast. We found that α-synuclein is sumoylated in vivo at 
the same sites in yeast as in human cells. Impaired sumoylation resulted in
reduced yeast growth combined with an increased number of cells with inclusions, 
suggesting that this modification plays a protective role. In addition,
inhibition of sumoylation prevented autophagy-mediated aggregate clearance. A
defect in α-synuclein sumoylation could be suppressed by serine 129
phosphorylation by the human G protein-coupled receptor kinase 5 (GRK5) in yeast.
Phosphorylation reduced foci formation, alleviated yeast growth inhibition, and
partially rescued autophagic α-synuclein degradation along with the promotion of 
proteasomal degradation, resulting in aggregate clearance in the absence of a
small ubiquitin-like modifier. These findings suggest a complex interplay between
sumoylation and phosphorylation in α-synuclein aggregate clearance, which may
open new horizons for the development of therapeutic strategies for Parkinson
disease.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.559237 
PMCID: PMC4223324
PMID: 25231978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

