
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 Dec;80(23):7398-404. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02701-14. Epub
2014 Sep 19.

Activities of Alkyl Hydroperoxide Reductase Subunits C1 and C2 of Vibrio
parahaemolyticus against Different Peroxides.

Chung CH(1), Ma TY(1), Fen SY(1), Wong HC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Soochow University, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of
China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Soochow University, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of
China wonghc@scu.edu.tw.

Alkyl hydroperoxide reductase subunit C gene (ahpC) functions were characterized 
in Vibrio parahaemolyticus, a commonly occurring marine food-borne
enteropathogenic bacterium. Two ahpC genes, ahpC1 (VPA1683) and ahpC2 (VP0580),
encoded putative two-cysteine peroxiredoxins, which are highly similar to the
homologous proteins of Vibrio vulnificus. The responses of deletion mutants of
ahpC genes to various peroxides were compared with and without gene
complementation and at different incubation temperatures. The growth of the ahpC1
mutant and ahpC1 ahpC2 double mutant in liquid medium was significantly inhibited
by organic peroxides, cumene hydroperoxide and tert-butyl hydroperoxide. However,
inhibition was higher at 12°C and 22°C than at 37°C. Inhibiting effects were
prevented by the complementary ahpC1 gene. Inconsistent detoxification of H2O2 by
ahpC genes was demonstrated in an agar medium but not in a liquid medium.
Complementation with an ahpC2 gene partially restored the peroxidase effect in
the double ahpC1 ahpC2 mutant at 22°C. This investigation reveals that ahpC1 is
the chief peroxidase gene that acts against organic peroxides in V.
parahaemolyticus and that the function of the ahpC genes is influenced by
incubation temperature.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02701-14 
PMCID: PMC4249189
PMID: 25239899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

