
1. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Dec;44(12):3646-57. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444848. Epub 2014 Oct
28.

The adaptor protein SAP regulates type II NKT-cell development, cytokine
production, and cytotoxicity against lymphoma.

Weng X(1), Liao CM, Bagchi S, Cardell SL, Stein PL, Wang CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.

CD1d-restricted NKT cells represent a unique lineage of immunoregulatory T cells 
that are divided into two groups, type I and type II, based on their TCR usage.
Because there are no specific tools to identify type II NKT cells, little is
known about their developmental requirements and functional regulation. In our
previous study, we showed that signaling lymphocytic activation molecule
associated protein (SAP) is essential for the development of type II NKT cells.
Here, using a type II NKT-cell TCR transgenic mouse model, we demonstrated that
CD1d-expressing hematopoietic cells, but not thymic epithelial cells, meditate
efficient selection of type II NKT cells. Furthermore, we showed that SAP
regulates type II NKT-cell development by controlling early growth response 2
protein and promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger expression. SAP-deficient 24αβ
transgenic T cells (24αβ T cells) exhibited an immature phenotype with reduced
Th2 cytokine-producing capacity and diminished cytotoxicity to CD1d-expressing
lymphoma cells. The impaired IL-4 production by SAP-deficient 24αβ T cells was
associated with reduced IFN regulatory factor 4 and GATA-3 induction following
TCR stimulation. Collectively, these data suggest that SAP is critical for
regulating type II NKT cell responses. Aberrant responses of these T cells may
contribute to the immune dysregulation observed in X-linked lymphoproliferative
disease caused by mutations in SAP.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201444848 
PMCID: PMC4261009
PMID: 25236978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

