
1. Int Immunol. 2015 Feb;27(2):83-94. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxu086. Epub 2014 Sep 19.

Mucolipin 1 positively regulates TLR7 responses in dendritic cells by
facilitating RNA transportation to lysosomes.

Li X(1), Saitoh S(1), Shibata T(1), Tanimura N(1), Fukui R(1), Miyake K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Innate Immunity, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.
(2)Division of Innate Immunity, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan
Laboratory of Innate Immunity, Center for Experimental Medicine and Systems
Biology, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo
108-8639, Japan kmiyake@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) and TLR9 sense microbial single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) 
and ssDNA in endolysosomes. Nucleic acid (NA)-sensing in endolysosomes is thought
to be important for avoiding TLR7/9 responses to self-derived NAs. Aberrant
self-derived NA transportation to endolysosomes predisposes to autoimmune
diseases. To restrict NA-sensing in endolysosomes, TLR7/9 trafficking is tightly 
controlled by a multiple transmembrane protein Unc93B1. In contrast to TLR7/9
trafficking, little is known about a mechanism underlying NA transportation. We
here show that Mucolipin 1 (Mcoln1), a member of the transient receptor potential
(TRP) cation channel gene family, has an important role in ssRNA trafficking into
lysosomes. Mcoln1(-/-) dendritic cells (DCs) showed impaired TLR7 responses to
ssRNA. A mucolipin agonist specifically enhanced TLR7 responses to ssRNAs. The
channel activity of Mcoln1 is activated by a phospholipid phosphatidylinositol
(3,5) bisphosphate (PtdIns(3,5)P2), which is generated by a class III lipid
kinase PIKfyve. A PIKfyve inhibitor completely inhibited TLR7 responses to ssRNA 
in DCs. Confocal analyses showed that ssRNA transportation to lysosomes in DCs
was impaired by PIKfyve inhibitor as well as by the lack of Mcoln1.
Transportation of TLR9 ligands was also impaired by the PIKfyve inhibitor. These 
results demonstrate that the PtdIns(3,5)P2-Mcoln1 axis has an important role in
ssRNA transportation into lysosomes in DCs.

Â© The Japanese Society for Immunology. 2014. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxu086 
PMID: 25239130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

