
1. J Infect Dis. 2015 Mar 1;211(5):835-45. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu525. Epub 2014 Sep
19.

CD4+ T cells promote the pathogenesis of Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia.

Parker D(1), Ryan CL(1), Alonzo F 3rd(2), Torres VJ(2), Planet PJ(1), Prince
AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University.
(2)Department of Microbiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York.

We postulated that the activation of proinflammatory signaling by
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) strain USA300 is a major
factor in the pathogenesis of severe pneumonia and a target for immunomodulation.
Local activation of T cells in the lung was a conserved feature of multiple
strains of S. aureus, in addition to USA300. The pattern of Vβ chain activation
was consistent with known superantigens, but deletion of SelX or SEK and SEQ was 
not sufficient to prevent T-cell activation, indicating the participation of
multiple genes. Using Rag2(-/-), Cd4(-/-), and Cd28(-/-) mice, we observed
significantly improved clearance of MRSA from the airways and decreased lung
pathology, compared with findings for wild-type controls. The improved outcome
correlated with decreased production of proinflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis
factor, KC, interleukin 6, and interleukin 1β). Our data suggest that
T-cell-mediated hypercytokinemia induced by infection with MRSA strain USA300
contributes to pathogenesis and may be a therapeutic target for improving
outcomes of this common infection in a clinical setting.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiu525 
PMCID: PMC4402374
PMID: 25240171  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

