
1. Amino Acids. 2014 Nov;46(11):2615-25. doi: 10.1007/s00726-014-1805-0. Epub 2014
Sep 21.

The functional role of Cys3-Cys4 loop in hydrophobin HGFI.

Niu B(1), Gong Y, Gao X, Xu H, Qiao M, Li W.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Interface Science and Engineering in Advanced Materials,
College of Materials Science and Engineering, Taiyuan University of Technology,
Ministry of Education, Taiyuan, 030024, People's Republic of China.

Hydrophobins are a large group of low-molecular weight proteins. These proteins
are highly surface-active and can form amphipathic membranes by self-assembling
at hydrophobic-hydrophilic interfaces. Based on physical properties and
hydropathy profiles, hydrophobins are divided into two classes. Upon the analysis
of amino acid sequences and higher structures, some models suggest that the
Cys3-Cys4 loop regions in class I and II hydrophobins can exhibit remarkable
difference in their alignment and conformation, and have a critical role in the
rodlets structure formation. To examine the requirement for the Cys3-Cys4 loop in
class I hydrophobins, we used protein fusion technology to obtain a mutant
protein HGFI-AR by replacing the amino acids between Cys3 and Cys4 of the class I
hydrophobin HGFI from Grifola frondosa with those ones between Cys3 and Cys4 of
the class II hydrophobin HFBI from Trichoderma reesei. The gene of the mutant
protein HGFI-AR was successfully expressed in Pichia pastoris. Water contact
angle (WCA) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements demonstrated 
that the purified HGFI-AR could form amphipathic membranes by self-assembling at 
mica and hydrophobic polystyrene surfaces. This property enabled them to alter
the surface wettabilities of polystyrene and mica and change the elemental
composition of siliconized glass. In comparison to recombinant class I
hydrophobin HGFI (rHGFI), the membranes formed on hydrophobic surfaces by HGFI-AR
were not robust enough to resist 1Â % hot SDS washing. Atomic force microscopy
(AFM) measurements indicated that unlike rHGFI, no rodlet structure was observed 
on the mutant protein HGFI-AR coated mica surface. In addition, when compared to 
rHGFI, no secondary structural change was detected by Circular Dichroism (CD)
spectroscopy after HGFI-AR self-assembled at the water-air interface. HGFI-AR
could not either be deemed responsible for the fluorescence intensity increase of
Thioflavin T (THT) and the Congo Red (CR) absorption spectra shift (after the
THT(CR)/HGFI-AR mixed aqueous solution was drastically vortexed). Remarkably,
replacement of the Cys3-Cys4 loop could impair the rodlet formation of the class 
I hydrophobin HGFI. So, it could be speculated that the Cys3-Cys4 loop plays an
important role in conformation and functionality, when the class I hydrophobin
HGFI self-assembles at hydrophobic-hydrophilic interfaces.

DOI: 10.1007/s00726-014-1805-0 
PMID: 25240738  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

