
1. Sci Rep. 2014 Sep 23;4:6449. doi: 10.1038/srep06449.

The three-way switch operation of Rac1/RhoA GTPase-based circuit controlling
amoeboid-hybrid-mesenchymal transition.

Huang B(1), Lu M(2), Jolly MK(3), Tsarfaty I(4), Onuchic J(5), Ben-Jacob E(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX
77005-1827, USA [2] Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, TX
77005-1827, USA.
(2)Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX
77005-1827, USA.
(3)1] Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX
77005-1827, USA [2] Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, TX
77005-1827, USA.
(4)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler School of
Medicine.
(5)1] Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX
77005-1827, USA [2] Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, TX
77005-1827, USA [3] Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rice University,
Houston, TX 77005-1827, USA [4] Department of Biosciences, Rice University,
Houston, TX 77005-1827, USA.
(6)1] Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX
77005-1827, USA [2] Department of Biosciences, Rice University, Houston, TX
77005-1827, USA [3] School of Physics and Astronomy and The Sagol School of
Neuroscience, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel.

Metastatic carcinoma cells exhibit at least two different phenotypes of motility 
and invasion - amoeboid and mesenchymal. This plasticity poses a major clinical
challenge for treating metastasis, while its underlying mechanisms remain
enigmatic. Transitions between these phenotypes are mediated by the Rac1/RhoA
circuit that responds to external signals such as HGF/SF via c-MET pathway. Using
detailed modeling of GTPase-based regulation to study the Rac1/RhoA circuit's
dynamics, we found that it can operate as a three-way switch. We propose to
associate the circuit's three possible states to the amoeboid, mesenchymal and
amoeboid/mesenchymal hybrid phenotype. In particular, we investigated the range
of existence of, and the transition between, the three states (phenotypes) in
response to Grb2 and Gab1 - two downstream adaptors of c-MET. The results help to
explain the regulation of metastatic cells by c-MET pathway and hence can
contribute to the assessment of possible clinical interventions.

DOI: 10.1038/srep06449 
PMCID: PMC4171704
PMID: 25245029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

