
1. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 24;9(9):e107920. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107920.
eCollection 2014.

Broad spectrum activity of a lectin-like bacterial serine protease family on
human leukocytes.

Ayala-Lujan JL(1), Vijayakumar V(2), Gong M(3), Smith R(3), Santiago AE(3),
Ruiz-Perez F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America; Unidad Academica de Ciencias
Quimicas, Universidad Autonoma de Zacatecas, Zacatecas, Mexico.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America; Department of Immunology and
Microbiology, University of Maryland at Baltimore, Baltimore, Maryland, United
States of America.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America.

The serine protease autotransporter from Enterobacteriaceae (SPATE) family, which
number more than 25 proteases with apparent diverse functions, have been
phylogenetically divided into two distinct classes, designated 1 and 2. We
recently demonstrated that Pic and Tsh, two members of the class-2 SPATE family
produced by intestinal and extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli, were able to
cleave a number of O-glycosylated proteins on neutrophils and lymphocytes
resulting in impaired leukocyte functions. Here we show that most members of the 
class-2 SPATE family have lectin-like properties and exhibit differential
protease activity reliant on glycoprotein type and cell lineage. Protease
activity was seen in virtually all tested O-glycosylated proteins including CD34,
CD55, CD164, TIM1, TIM3, TIM4 and C1-INH. We also show that although SPATE
proteins bound and cleaved glycoproteins more efficiently on granulocytes and
monocytes, they also targeted glycoproteins on B, T and natural killer
lymphocytes. Finally, we found that the characteristic domain-2 of class-2 SPATEs
is not required for glycoprotease activity, but single amino acid mutations in
Pic domain-1 to those residues naturally occurring in domain-1 of SepA, were
sufficient to hamper Pic glycoprotease activity. This study shows that most
class-2 SPATEs have redundant activities and suggest that they may function as
immunomodulators at several levels of the immune system.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107920 
PMCID: PMC4176022
PMID: 25251283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

