
1. Trials. 2014 Oct 1;15:382. doi: 10.1186/1745-6215-15-382.

Update of the Preventive Antibiotics in Stroke Study (PASS): statistical analysis
plan.

Westendorp WF, Vermeij JD, Dippel DW, Dijkgraaf MG, van der Poll T, Prins JM,
Vermeij FH, Roos YB, Brouwer MC, Zwinderman AH, van de Beek D(1), Nederkoorn PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Academic Medical Center, P,O, Box 22660, 1100 DD
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. d.vandebeek@amc.uva.nl.

BACKGROUND: Infections occur in 30% of stroke patients and are associated with
unfavorable outcomes. Preventive antibiotic therapy lowers the infection rate
after stroke, but the effect of preventive antibiotic treatment on functional
outcome in patients with stroke is unknown. The PASS is a multicenter,
prospective, phase three, randomized, open-label, blinded end-point (PROBE) trial
of preventive antibiotic therapy in acute stroke. Patients are randomly assigned 
to either ceftriaxone at a dose of 2 g, given every 24 h intravenously for 4
days, in addition to standard stroke-unit care, or standard stroke-unit care
without preventive antibiotic therapy. The aim of this study is to assess whether
preventive antibiotic treatment improves functional outcome at 3 months by
preventing infections. This paper presents in detail the statistical analysis
plan (SAP) of the Preventive Antibiotics in Stroke Study (PASS) and was submitted
while the investigators were still blinded for all outcomes.
RESULTS: The primary outcome is the score on the modified Rankin Scale (mRS),
assessed by ordinal logistic regression analysis according to a proportional odds
model. Secondary analysis of the primary outcome is the score on the mRS
dichotomized as a favorable outcome (mRS 0 to 2) versus unfavorable outcome (mRS 
3 to 6). Secondary outcome measures are death rate at discharge and 3 months,
infection rate during hospital admission, length of hospital admission, volume of
post-stroke care, use of antibiotics during hospital stay, quality-adjusted life 
years and costs. Complications of treatment, serious adverse events (SAEs) and
suspected unexpected serious adverse reactions (SUSARs) are reported as safety
outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: The data from PASS will establish whether preventive antibiotic
therapy in acute stroke improves functional outcome by preventing infection and
will be analyzed according to this pre-specified SAP.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Current controlled trials; ISRCTN66140176. Date of
registration: 6 April 2010.

DOI: 10.1186/1745-6215-15-382 
PMCID: PMC4195873
PMID: 25269598  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

