
1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 1;9(10):e108907. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108907.
eCollection 2014.

Pre- and postovulatory aging of murine oocytes affect the transcript level and
poly(A) tail length of maternal effect genes.

Dankert D(1), Demond H(2), Trapphoff T(3), Heiligentag M(3), Rademacher K(2),
Eichenlaub-Ritter U(3), Horsthemke B(2), Gr√ºmmer R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy, University Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen,
Essen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Essen, University
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(3)Institute of Gene Technology/Microbiology, University of Bielefeld, Bielefeld,
Germany.

Maternal effect genes code for oocyte proteins that are important for early
embryogenesis. Transcription in oocytes does not take place from the onset of
meiotic progression until zygotic genome activation. During this period, protein 
levels are regulated posttranscriptionally, for example by poly(A) tail length.
Posttranscriptional regulation may be impaired in preovulatory and postovulatory 
aged oocytes, caused by delayed ovulation or delayed fertilization, respectively,
and may lead to developmental defects. We investigated transcript levels and
poly(A) tail length of ten maternal effect genes in in vivo- and in vitro-
(follicle culture) grown oocytes after pre- and postovulatory aging. Quantitative
RT-PCR was performed using random hexamer-primed cDNA to determine total
transcript levels and oligo(dT)16-primed cDNA to analyze poly(A) tail length.
Transcript levels of in vivo preovulatory-aged oocytes remained stable except for
decreases in Brg1 and Tet3. Most genes investigated showed a tendency towards
increased poly(A) content. Polyadenylation of in vitro preovulatory-aged oocytes 
was also increased, along with transcript level declines of Trim28, Nlrp2, Nlrp14
and Zar1. In contrast to preovulatory aging, postovulatory aging of in vivo- and 
in vitro-grown oocytes led to a shortening of poly(A) tails. Postovulatory aging 
of in vivo-grown oocytes resulted in deadenylation of Nlrp5 after 12 h, and
deadenylation of 4 further genes (Tet3, Trim28, Dnmt1, Oct4) after 24 h.
Similarly, transcripts of in vitro-grown oocytes were deadenylated after 12 h of 
postovulatory aging (Tet3, Trim28, Zfp57, Dnmt1, Nlrp5, Zar1). This impact of
aging on poly(A) tail length may affect the timed translation of maternal effect 
gene transcripts and thereby contribute to developmental defects.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108907 
PMCID: PMC4182777
PMID: 25271735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

