
1. J Cell Sci. 2014 Nov 15;127(Pt 22):4883-93. doi: 10.1242/jcs.152371. Epub 2014
Sep 30.

The ubiquitin-like modifier FAT10 decorates autophagy-targeted Salmonella and
contributes to Salmonella resistance in mice.

Spinnenhirn V(1), Farhan H(2), Basler M(3), Aichem A(4), Canaan A(5), Groettrup
M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, D-78457
Konstanz, Germany.
(2)Focal Area Infection Biology, Biozentrum, University of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, 
Switzerland.
(3)Division of Immunology, Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, D-78457
Konstanz, Germany Biotechnology Institute Thurgau at the University of Konstanz, 
CH-8280 Kreuzlingen, Switzerland.
(4)Biotechnology Institute Thurgau at the University of Konstanz, CH-8280
Kreuzlingen, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.
(6)Division of Immunology, Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, D-78457
Konstanz, Germany Biotechnology Institute Thurgau at the University of Konstanz, 
CH-8280 Kreuzlingen, Switzerland Marcus.Groettrup@uni-konstanz.de.

Bacterial invasion of eukaryotic cells is counteracted by cell-autonomous innate 
immune mechanisms including xenophagy. The decoration of cytosolic bacteria by
ubiquitylation and binding of galectin-8 leads to recruitment of autophagy
adaptors like p62 (also known as SQSTM1), NDP52 (also known as CALCOCO2) and
optineurin, which initiate the destruction of bacteria by xenophagy. Here, we
show that the functionally barely characterized IFNγ- and TNFα-inducible
ubiquitin-like modifier FAT10 (also known as ubiquitin D, UBD), which binds to
the autophagy adaptor p62, but has not been shown to associate with pathogens
before, is recruited to cytosolic Salmonella Typhimurium in human cells.
FAT10-decorated S. Typhimurium were simultaneously decorated with ubiquitin, p62,
NDP52 and the autophagy marker LC3B (MAP1LC3B). FAT10 colocalized with
p62-positive microdomains on S. Typhimurium, whereas colocalization with NDP52
was only partial. A kinetic analysis revealed an early, but only transient,
decoration of bacteria by FAT10, which resembled that of p62. Although bacterial 
replication was not detectably altered in FAT10-depleted or overexpressing cells 
in vitro, survival experiments revealed that NRAMP1-transgenic mice that were
FAT10-deficient had a higher susceptibility to orally inoculated S. Typhimurium
bacteria than NRAMP1-transgenic mice that were wild-type for FAT10. Taken
together, our data suggest a role for FAT10 in the intracellular defense against 
bacteria.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.152371 
PMID: 25271057  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

