
1. Gene Ther. 2014 Dec;21(12):1051-7. doi: 10.1038/gt.2014.87. Epub 2014 Oct 2.

Rapid outer-surface protein C DNA tattoo vaccination protects against Borrelia
afzelii infection.

Wagemakers A(1), Mason LM(1), Oei A(2), de Wever B(2), van der Poll T(3), Bins
AD(4), Hovius JW(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Center for Experimental and Molecular
Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(3)1] Department of Internal Medicine, Center for Experimental and Molecular
Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands [2] Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine,
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Division of Medical Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute-Antoni van
Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)1] Department of Internal Medicine, Center for Experimental and Molecular
Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands [2] Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine,
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands [3] Amsterdam
Multidisciplinary Lyme Center, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Borrelia afzelii is the predominant Borrelia species causing Lyme borreliosis in 
Europe. Currently there is no human vaccine against Lyme borreliosis, and most
research focuses on recombinant protein vaccines against Borrelia burgdorferi
sensu stricto. DNA tattooing is a novel vaccination method that can be applied in
a rapid vaccination schedule. We vaccinated C3H/HeN mice with B. afzelii strain
PKo OspC (outer-surface protein C) using a codon-optimized DNA vaccine tattoo and
compared this with recombinant protein vaccination in a 0-2-4 week vaccination
schedule. We also assessed protection by DNA tattoo in a 0-3-6 day schedule. DNA 
tattoo and recombinant OspC vaccination induced comparable total IgG responses,
with a lower IgG1/IgG2a ratio after DNA tattoo. Two weeks after syringe-challenge
with 5 Ã— 10(5) B. afzelii spirochetes most vaccinated mice had negative B.
afzelii tissue DNA loads and all were culture negative. Furthermore, DNA tattoo
vaccination in a 0-3-6 day regimen also resulted in negative Borrelia loads and
cultures after challenge. To conclude, DNA vaccination by tattoo was fully
protective against B. afzelii challenge in mice in a rapid vaccination protocol, 
and induces a favorable humoral immunity compared to recombinant protein
vaccination. Rapid DNA tattoo is a promising vaccination strategy against
spirochetes.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2014.87 
PMID: 25273355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

