
1. Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 1;74(23):6784-95. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0043. Epub
2014 Oct 8.

MHC-restricted phosphopeptides from insulin receptor substrate-2 and CDC25b offer
broad-based immunotherapeutic agents for cancer.

Zarling AL(1), Obeng RC(1), Desch AN(1), Pinczewski J(2), Cummings KL(1), Deacon 
DH(3), Conaway M(4), Slingluff CL Jr(3), Engelhard VH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Carter Immunology Center and Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer
Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.
Human Immune Therapy Center, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.
(3)Human Immune Therapy Center, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Virginia. Department of Surgery, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Virginia.
(4)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Virginia.
(5)Carter Immunology Center and Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer
Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia. vhe@virginia.edu.

Cancer cells display novel phosphopeptides in association with MHC class I and II
molecules. In this study, we evaluated two HLA-A2-restricted phosphopeptides
derived from the insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-2 and the cell-cycle regulator 
CDC25b. These proteins are both broadly expressed in multiple malignancies and
linked to cancer cell survival. Two phosphopeptides, termed pIRS-21097-1105 and
pCDC25b38-46, served as targets of strong and specific CD8 T-cell memory
responses in normal human donors. We cloned T-cell receptor (TCR) cDNAs from
murine CD8 T-cell lines specific for either pIRS-21097-1105 or pCDC25b38-46.
Expression of these TCRs in human CD8 T cells imparted high-avidity
phosphopeptide-specific recognition and cytotoxic and cytokine-secreting effector
activities. Using these cells, we found that endogenously processed
pIRS-21097-1105 was presented on HLA-A2(+) melanomas and breast, ovarian, and
colorectal carcinomas. Presentation was correlated with the level of the
Ser(1100)-phosphorylated IRS-2 protein in metastatic melanoma tissues. The
highest expression of this protein was evident on dividing malignant cells.
Presentation of endogenously processed pCDC25b38-46 was narrower, but still
evident on HLA-A2(+) melanoma, breast carcinoma, and lymphoblastoid cells.
Notably, pIRS-21097-1105-specific and pCDC25b38-46-specific TCR-expressing human 
CD8 T cells markedly slowed tumor outgrowth in vivo. Our results define two new
antigens that may be developed as immunotherapeutic agents for a broad range of
HLA-A2(+) cancers.

Â©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0043 
PMCID: PMC4252710
PMID: 25297629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

