
1. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:542706. doi: 10.1155/2014/542706. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

Comparisons of CVID and IgGSD: referring physicians, autoimmune conditions,
pneumovax reactivity, immunoglobulin levels, blood lymphocyte subsets, and HLA-A 
and -B typing in 432 adult index patients.

Barton JC(1), Bertoli LF(2), Barton JC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brookwood Medical Center, Suite 626, 2022 Brookwood
Medical Center Drive, Birmingham, AL 35209, USA ; Southern Iron Disorders Center,
Birmingham, AL 35209, USA ; Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Brookwood Medical Center, Suite 626, 2022 Brookwood
Medical Center Drive, Birmingham, AL 35209, USA ; Southern Iron Disorders Center,
Birmingham, AL 35209, USA ; Brookwood Biomedical, Birmingham, AL 35209, USA.
(3)Southern Iron Disorders Center, Birmingham, AL 35209, USA.

Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) and immunoglobulin (Ig) G subclass
deficiency (IgGSD) are heterogeneous disorders characterized by respiratory tract
infections, selective Ig isotype deficiencies, and impaired antibody responses to
polysaccharide antigens. Using univariable analyses, we compared observations in 
34 CVID and 398 IgGSD adult index patients (81.9% women) referred to a
hematology/oncology practice. Similarities included specialties of referring
physicians, mean ages, proportions of women, reactivity to Pneumovax, median
serum IgG3 and IgG4 levels, median blood CD56+/CD16+ lymphocyte levels,
positivity for HLA-A and -B types, and frequencies of selected HLA-A, -B
haplotypes. Dissimilarities included greater prevalence of autoimmune conditions,
lower median IgG, IgA, and IgM, and lower median CD19+, CD3+/CD4+, and CD3+/CD8+ 
blood lymphocytes in CVID patients. Prevalence of Sj√∂gren's syndrome and
hypothyroidism was significantly greater in CVID patients. Combined subnormal
IgG1/IgG3 occurred in 59% and 29% of CVID and IgGSD patients, respectively.
Isolated subnormal IgG3 occurred in 121 IgGSD patients (88% women). Logistic
regression on CVID (versus IgGSD) revealed a significant positive association
with autoimmune conditions and significant negative associations with IgG1, IgG3,
and IgA and CD56+/CD16+ lymphocyte levels, but the odds ratio was increased for
autoimmune conditions alone (6.9 (95% CI 1.3, 35.5)).

DOI: 10.1155/2014/542706 
PMCID: PMC4180398
PMID: 25295286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

