
1. Toxicol In Vitro. 2015 Feb;29(1):85-92. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2014.09.011. Epub 2014
Oct 5.

Extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway play distinct role in
acetochlor-mediated toxicity and intrinsic apoptosis in A549 cells.

Zerin T(1), Song HY(1), Kim YS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Soonchunhyang University,
Cheonan, Chungnam 330-090, South Korea.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Soonchunhyang University,
Cheonan, Chungnam 330-090, South Korea. Electronic address: yongsikkim@sch.ac.kr.

Acetochlor (ACETO), a member of the chloroacetanilide family of herbicides, is
widely used globally and is very frequently detected in watersheds of
agricultural lands and fresh water streams. The human health consequences of
environmental exposure to ACETO are unknown. This study was designed to elucidate
the effect and molecular mechanisms of ACETO on human alveolar A549 cells.
Established assays of cell viability and cytotoxicity were performed to detect
the potential effects of ACETO on A549 cells. ACETO generated reactive oxygen
species, which may have been crucial to apoptosis-mediated cytotoxicity.
ACETO-treatment showed a concentration dependent up-regulation of pro-apoptotic
proteins including Bax, Bak, BID and Bad, but a differential level of expression 
of anti-apoptotic proteins were observed, leading to the release of cytochrome c 
from mitochondria to the cytoplasm as well as activation of caspase-3, and
cleavage of caspase-9 and PARP. ACETO also induced activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK). Inhibition of the expression of ERK by PD98059
partially reversed ACETO-induced cytotoxicity, apoptosis and the expression of
caspase-3, -9 and PARP in A549 cells. Comparative evaluation of the results
indicates that the principal mechanism underlying ACETO-mediated cytotoxicity is 
likely to be through ERK-mediated intrinsic pathway of apoptosis.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tiv.2014.09.011 
PMID: 25291404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

