
1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 9;9(10):e108185. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108185.
eCollection 2014.

Metagenomic approach reveals variation of microbes with arsenic and antimony
metabolism genes from highly contaminated soil.

Luo J(1), Bai Y(2), Liang J(1), Qu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Drinking Water Science and Technology, Research Center for
Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's
Republic of China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's
Republic of China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Drinking Water Science and Technology, Research Center for
Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's
Republic of China.

Microbes have great potential for arsenic (As) and antimony (Sb) bioremediation
in heavily contaminated soil because they have the ability to biotransform As and
Sb to species that have less toxicity or are more easily removed. In this study, 
we integrated a metagenomic method with physicochemical characterization to
elucidate the composition of microbial community and functional genes (related to
As and Sb) in a high As (range from 34.11 to 821.23 mg kg-1) and Sb (range from
226.67 to 3923.07 mg kg-1) contaminated mine field. Metagenomic analysis revealed
that microbes from 18 phyla were present in the 5 samples of soil contaminated
with high As and Sb. Moreover, redundancy analysis (RDA) of the relationship
between the 18 phyla and the concentration of As and Sb demonstrated that 5 phyla
of microbes, i.e. Actinobacteria, Firmicutes, Nitrospirae, Tenericutes and
Gemmatimonadetes were positively correlated with As and Sb concentration. The
distribution, diversity and abundance of functional genes (including arsC, arrA, 
aioA, arsB and ACR3) were much higher for the samples containing higher As and Sb
concentrations. Based on correlation analysis, the results showed a positive
relationship between arsC-like (R2 = 0.871) and aioA-like (R2 = 0.675) gene
abundance and As concentration, and indicated that intracellular As(V) reduction 
and As(III) oxidation could be the dominant As detoxification mechanism enabling 
the microbes to survive in the environment. This study provides a direct and
reliable reference on the diversity of microbial community and functional genes
in an extremely high concentration As- and Sb-contaminated environment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108185 
PMCID: PMC4191978
PMID: 25299175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

