
1. Blood. 2014 Dec 11;124(25):3781-90. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-05-573915. Epub 2014 
Oct 9.

Thrombocytopenia impairs host defense in gram-negative pneumonia-derived sepsis
in mice.

de Stoppelaar SF(1), van 't Veer C(1), Claushuis TA(1), Albersen BJ(1), Roelofs
JJ(2), van der Poll T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Center for Experimental and
Molecular Medicine.
(2)Department of Pathology, and.
(3)Center for Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Center for Experimental and
Molecular Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Dec 11;124(25):3670-2.

Thrombocytopenia is a common finding in sepsis and associated with a worse
outcome. We used a mouse model of pneumonia-derived sepsis caused by the human
pathogen Klebsiella pneumoniae to study the role of platelets in host response to
sepsis. Platelet counts (PCs) were reduced to less than a median of 5 × 10(9)/L
or to 5 to 13 × 10(9)/L by administration of a depleting antibody in mice
infected with Klebsiella via the airways. Thrombocytopenia was associated with
strongly impaired survival during pneumonia-derived sepsis proportional to the
extent of platelet depletion. Thrombocytopenic mice demonstrated PC-dependent
enhanced bacterial growth in lungs, blood, and distant organs. Severe
thrombocytopenia resulted in hemorrhage at the primary site of infection, but not
in distant organs. PCs of 5 to 13 × 10(9)/L were sufficient to largely maintain
hemostasis in infected lungs. Thrombocytopenia did not influence lung
inflammation or neutrophil recruitment and did not attenuate local or systemic
activation of coagulation or the vascular endothelium. PCs <5 × 10(9)/L even
resulted in enhanced coagulation and endothelial cell activation, which coincided
with increased proinflammatory cytokine levels. In accordance, low PCs in whole
blood enhanced Klebsiella-induced cytokine release in vitro. These data suggest
that platelets play an important role in host defense to Klebsiella pneumosepsis.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2014-05-573915 
PMCID: PMC4263985
PMID: 25301709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

