
1. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Nov;13(3 Pt A):379-89. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2014.09.007. Epub
2014 Sep 30.

Src-family tyrosine kinase activities are essential for differentiation of human 
embryonic stem cells.

Zhang X(1), Simerly C(2), Hartnett C(2), Schatten G(2), Smithgall TE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, & Reproductive Sciences, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Magee Womens Research Institute, Pittsburgh
Development Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Electronic address: tsmithga@pitt.edu.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells are characterized by pluripotency, defined as the
developmental potential to generate cell lineages derived from all three primary 
germ layers. In the past decade, great progress has been made on the cell culture
conditions, transcription factor programs and intracellular signaling pathways
that control both murine and human ES cell fates. ES cells of mouse vs. human
origin have distinct culture conditions, responding to some tyrosine kinase
signaling pathways in opposite ways. Previous work has implicated the Src family 
of non-receptor protein-tyrosine kinases in mouse ES cell self-renewal and
differentiation. Seven members of the Src kinase family are expressed in mouse ES
cells, and individual family members appear to play distinct roles in regulating 
their developmental fate. Both Hck and c-Yes are important in self-renewal, while
c-Src activity alone is sufficient to induce differentiation. While these
findings implicate Src-family kinase signaling in mouse ES cell renewal and
differentiation, the role of this kinase family in human ES cells is largely
unknown. Here, we explored Src-family kinase expression patterns and signaling in
human ES cells during self-renewal and differentiation. Of the eleven Src-related
kinases in the human genome, Fyn, c-Yes, c-Src, Lyn, Lck and Hck were expressed
in H1, H7 and H9 hES cells, while Fgr, Blk, Srm, Brk, and Frk transcripts were
not detected. Of these, c-Yes, Lyn, and Hck transcript levels remained constant
in self-renewing human ES cells vs. differentiated EBs, while c-Src and Fyn
showed a modest increase in expression as a function of differentiation. In
contrast, Lck expression levels dropped dramatically as a function of EB
differentiation. To assess the role of overall Src-family kinase activity in
human ES cell differentiation, cultures were treated with inhibitors specific for
the Src kinase family. Remarkably, human ES cells maintained in the presence of
the potent Src-family kinase inhibitor A-419259 retained the morphology of domed,
pluripotent colonies and continued to express the self-renewal marker TRA-1-60
despite culture under differentiation conditions. Taken together, these
observations support a role for Src-family kinase signaling in the regulation of 
human ES cell fate, and suggest that the activities of individual Src-family
members are required for the initiation of the differentiation program.

Copyright Â© 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scr.2014.09.007 
PMCID: PMC4252886
PMID: 25305536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

