
1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Oct 10;15:885. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-885.

Complete genome sequence of producer of the glycopeptide antibiotic Aculeximycin 
Kutzneria albida DSM 43870T, a representative of minor genus of
Pseudonocardiaceae.

Rebets Y, Tokovenko B, Lushchyk I, Rückert C, Zaburannyi N, Bechthold A,
Kalinowski J, Luzhetskyy A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Saarland University 
Campus, Building C2,3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
andriy.luzhetskyy@helmholtz-hzi.de.

BACKGROUND: Kutzneria is a representative of a rarely observed genus of the
family Pseudonocardiaceae. Kutzneria species were initially placed in the
Streptosporangiaceae genus and later reconsidered to be an independent genus of
the Pseudonocardiaceae. Kutzneria albida is one of the eight known members of the
genus. This strain is a unique producer of the glycosylated polyole macrolide
aculeximycin which is active against both bacteria and fungi. Kutzneria albida
genome sequencing and analysis allow a deeper understanding of evolution of this 
genus of Pseudonocardiaceae, provide new insight in the phylogeny of the genus,
as well as decipher the hidden secondary metabolic potential of these rare
actinobacteria.
RESULTS: To explore the biosynthetic potential of Kutzneria albida to its full
extent, the complete genome was sequenced. With a size of 9,874,926 bp, coding
for 8,822 genes, it stands alongside other Pseudonocardiaceae with large circular
genomes. Genome analysis revealed 46 gene clusters potentially encoding secondary
metabolite biosynthesis pathways. Two large genomic islands were identified,
containing regions most enriched with secondary metabolism gene clusters. Large
parts of this secondary metabolism "clustome" are dedicated to siderophores
production.
CONCLUSIONS: Kutzneria albida is the first species of the genus Kutzneria with a 
completely sequenced genome. Genome sequencing allowed identifying the gene
cluster responsible for the biosynthesis of aculeximycin, one of the largest
known oligosaccharide-macrolide antibiotics. Moreover, the genome revealed 45
additional putative secondary metabolite gene clusters, suggesting a huge
biosynthetic potential, which makes Kutzneria albida a very rich source of
natural products. Comparison of the Kutzneria albida genome to genomes of other
actinobacteria clearly shows its close relations with Pseudonocardiaceae in line 
with the taxonomic position of the genus.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-885 
PMCID: PMC4210621
PMID: 25301375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

