
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Dec;34(24):4368-78. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00599-14. Epub 2014 Oct 
13.

An endoplasmic reticulum stress-initiated sphingolipid metabolite,
ceramide-1-phosphate, regulates epithelial innate immunity by stimulating
β-defensin production.

Kim YI(1), Park K(1), Kim JY(2), Seo HS(3), Shin KO(4), Lee YM(4), Holleran
WM(1), Elias PM(1), Uchida Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA Department of Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, San Francisco, California, USA Northern California Institute for Research
and Education, San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, California, USA 
Northern California Institute for Research and Education, San Francisco,
California, USA.
(3)Radiation Research Division, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, Jeongeup,
South Korea.
(4)College of Pharmacy, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, South Korea.
(5)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA Department of Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, San Francisco, California, USA Northern California Institute for Research
and Education, San Francisco, California, USA uchiday@derm.ucsf.edu.

Antimicrobial peptides (AMP) are ubiquitous innate immune elements in epithelial 
tissues. We recently discovered that a signaling lipid, the ceramide metabolite
sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), regulates production of a major AMP, cathelicidin 
antimicrobial peptide (CAMP), in response to a subtoxic level of endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress that can be induced by external perturbants in
keratinocytes. We hypothesized that an ER stress-initiated signal could also
regulate production of another major class of AMPs: i.e., the human
beta-defensins 2 (hBD2) and 3 (hBD3). Keratinocytes stimulated with a
pharmacological ER stressor, thapsigargin (Tg), increased hBD2/hBD3 as well as
CAMP mRNA expression. While inhibition of sphingosine-1-phosphate production did 
not alter hBD expression following ER stress, blockade of ceramide-1-phosphate
(C1P) suppressed Tg-induced hBD2/hBD3 but not CAMP expression. Exogenous C1P also
increased hBD2/hBD3 production, indicating that C1P stimulates hBD expression. We
showed further that C1P-induced hBD2/hBD3 expression is regulated by a novel
pathway in which C1P stimulates downstream hBD via a
cPLA2a→15d-PGJ2→PPARα/PPARβ/δ→Src kinase→STAT1/STAT3 transcriptional mechanism.
Finally, conditioned medium from C1P-stimulated keratinocytes showed
antimicrobial activity against Staphylococcus aureus. In summary, our present and
recent studies discovered two new regulatory mechanisms of key epidermal AMP,
hBD2/hBD3 and CAMP. The C1P and S1P pathways both signal to enhance innate
immunity in response to ER stress.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00599-14 
PMCID: PMC4248733
PMID: 25312644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

