
1. Br J Nutr. 2014 Oct 28;112(8):1296-302. doi: 10.1017/S0007114514002037.

Effects of dietary fructo-oligosaccharide supplementation on the growth
performance, haemato-immunological parameters, gut microbiota and stress
resistance of common carp (Cyprinus carpio) fry.

Hoseinifar SH(1), Soleimani N(2), Ringø E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fisheries,Faculty of Fisheries and Environmental Sciences,
Gorgan University of Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources,Gorgan,Iran.
(2)Department of Aquatic Animal Health,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Tehran,Tehran,Iran.
(3)Norwegian College of Fishery Science, Faculty of Biosciences, Fisheries and
Economics, UiT The Arctic University of Norway,NO-9037 Breivika,Norway.

The present study was conducted to investigate the effects of dietary
fructo-oligosaccharide (FOS) (0, 1, 2 and 3%) supplementation on the growth
performance, haemato-immunological parameters, cultivable autochthonous
(non-adherent) intestinal microbiota and stress resistance of common carp
(Cyprinus carpio) fry (3·23 (SEM 0·14) g). These parameters were measured after
feeding the carp fry with the experimental diets for 7 weeks. Dietary FOS
supplementation had no significant effects on the growth performance and food
intake of carp fry compared with the control treatment. It also had no
significant effects on the following haematological parameters: erythrocyte
count; leucocyte counts (WBC); haematocrit; Hb; mean corpuscular volume; mean
corpuscular Hb content; mean corpuscular Hb concentration. However, WBC and
respiratory burst activity were significantly affected by dietary FOS
supplementation. Evaluation of the cultivable autochthonous intestinal microbiota
revealed a significant increase in the levels of total viable heterotrophic
aerobic bacteria and lactic acid bacteria in fish fed diets supplemented with 2
and 3% FOS. Furthermore, dietary FOS supplementation significantly increased the 
survival rate and stress resistance of carp fry compared with the control
treatment. These results encourage conducting further research on the
administration of FOS and other prebiotics in carp fry studies.

DOI: 10.1017/S0007114514002037 
PMID: 25313574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

