
1. J Immunol. 2014 Nov 15;193(10):4790-802. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401689. Epub 2014
Oct 13.

Uncovering the peptide-binding specificities of HLA-C: a general strategy to
determine the specificity of any MHC class I molecule.

Rasmussen M(1), Harndahl M(1), Stryhn A(1), Boucherma R(2), Nielsen LL(1),
Lemonnier FA(2), Nielsen M(3), Buus S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Immunology, Department of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen 2200, Denmark;
(2)INSERM, Unité 1016, Institut Cochin, Equipe Immunologie du Diabète, Groupe
Hospitalier Cochin-Port-Royal, 75014 Paris, France;
(3)Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Technical University of Denmark,
Lyngby 2800, Denmark; and Instituto de Investigaciones Biotecnológicas,
Universidad Nacional de San Martín, 1650 San Martín, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Laboratory of Experimental Immunology, Department of International Health,
Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen 2200, Denmark; sbuus@sund.ku.dk.

MHC class I molecules (HLA-I in humans) present peptides derived from endogenous 
proteins to CTLs. Whereas the peptide-binding specificities of HLA-A and -B
molecules have been studied extensively, little is known about HLA-C
specificities. Combining a positional scanning combinatorial peptide library
approach with a peptide-HLA-I dissociation assay, in this study we present a
general strategy to determine the peptide-binding specificity of any MHC class I 
molecule. We applied this novel strategy to 17 of the most common HLA-C
molecules, and for 16 of these we successfully generated matrices representing
their peptide-binding motifs. The motifs prominently shared a conserved
C-terminal primary anchor with hydrophobic amino acid residues, as well as one or
more diverse primary and auxiliary anchors at P1, P2, P3, and/or P7. Matrices
were used to generate a large panel of HLA-C-specific peptide-binding data and
update our pan-specific NetMHCpan predictor, whose predictive performance was
considerably improved with respect to peptide binding to HLA-C. The updated
predictor was used to assess the specificities of HLA-C molecules, which were
found to cover a more limited sequence space than HLA-A and -B molecules.
Assessing the functional significance of these new tools, HLA-C*07:01 transgenic 
mice were immunized with stable HLA-C*07:01 binders; six of six tested stable
peptide binders were immunogenic. Finally, we generated HLA-C tetramers and
labeled human CD8(+) T cells and NK cells. These new resources should support
future research on the biology of HLA-C molecules. The data are deposited at the 
Immune Epitope Database, and the updated NetMHCpan predictor is available at the 
Center for Biological Sequence Analysis and the Immune Epitope Database.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401689 
PMCID: PMC4226424
PMID: 25311805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

