
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2014 Oct;93(18):e105. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000105.

Listeria monocytogenes-associated biliary tract infections: a study of 12
consecutive cases and review.

Charlier C(1), Fevre C, Travier L, Cazenave B, Bracq-Dieye H, Podevin J, Assomany
D, Guilbert L, Bossard C, Carpentier F, Cales V, Leclercq A, Lecuit M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Biology of Infection Unit (CC, CF, LT, ML); Institut Pasteur
French National Reference Center and WHO Collaborating Center for Listeria (CC,
BC, HBD, AL, ML); Inserm U1117 (CC, CF, LT, ML); Université Paris Descartes,
Sorbonne Paris Cité, Centre d'Infectiologie Necker-Pasteur, Hôpital
Necker-Enfants Malades, Institut Imagine (CC, ML); Service de Chirurgie
viscérale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nantes (JP); Service de Chirurgie 
viscérale et digestive, Centre Hospitalier de Roubaix (DA, LG); Service
d'Anatomopathologie et Cytologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nantes
(CB); Service d'Anatomopathologie et Cytologie, Centre Hospitalier de Roubaix
(FC); and Service d'Anatomopathologie et Cytologie, Centre Hospitalier de Pau
(VC).

At present, little is known regarding Listeria monocytogenes-associated biliary
tract infection, a rare form of listeriosis.In this article, we will study 12
culture-proven cases reported to the French National Reference Center for
Listeria from 1996 to 2013 and review the 8 previously published cases.Twenty
cases were studied: 17 cholecystitis, 2 cholangitis, and 1 biliary cyst
infection. Half were men with a median age of 69 years (32-85). Comorbidities
were present in 80%, including cirrhosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and diabetes.
Five patients received immunosuppressive therapy, including corticosteroids and
anti-tumor necrosis factor biotherapies. Half were afebrile. Blood cultures were 
positive in 60% (3/5). Gallbladder histological lesions were analyzed in 3
patients and evidenced acute, chronic, or necrotic exacerbation of chronic
infection. Genoserogroup of the 12 available strains were IVb (n=6), IIb (n=5),
and IIa (n=1). Their survival in the bile was not enhanced when compared with
isolates from other listeriosis cases. Adverse outcome was reported in 33%
(5/15): 3 deaths, 1 recurrence; 75% of the patients with adverse outcome received
inadequate antimicrobial therapy (P=0.033).Biliary tract listeriosis is a severe 
infection associated with high mortality in patients not treated with appropriate
therapy. This study provides medical relevance to in vitro and animal studies
that had shown Listeria monocytogenes ability to survive in bile and induce overt
biliary infections.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000105 
PMCID: PMC4616294
PMID: 25319439  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

