
1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 19;289(51):35215-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.604272. Epub
2014 Oct 15.

Structural and functional characterization of the Clostridium perfringens
N-acetylmannosamine-6-phosphate 2-epimerase essential for the sialic acid salvage
pathway.

Pélissier MC(1), Sebban-Kreuzer C(2), Guerlesquin F(2), Brannigan JA(3), Bourne
Y(1), Vincent F(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Aix-Marseille University, AFMB UMR7257, 163 avenue de Luminy 13288
Marseille, France, the CNRS, AFMB UMR7257, 163 avenue de Luminy, 13288 Marseille,
France.
(2)the Laboratoire d'Ingénierie des Systèmes Macromoléculaires, CNRS UMR7255,
Aix-Marseille Université, 31 chemin Joseph Aiguier, 13402 Marseille Cedex 20,
France, and.
(3)the Department of Chemistry, Structural Biology Laboratory, University of
York, Heslington, York YO10 5DD, United Kingdom.
(4)From the Aix-Marseille University, AFMB UMR7257, 163 avenue de Luminy 13288
Marseille, France, the CNRS, AFMB UMR7257, 163 avenue de Luminy, 13288 Marseille,
France, florence.vincent@afmb.univ-mrs.fr.

Pathogenic bacteria are endowed with an arsenal of specialized enzymes to convert
nutrient compounds from their cell hosts. The essential
N-acetylmannosamine-6-phosphate 2-epimerase (NanE) belongs to a convergent
glycolytic pathway for utilization of the three amino sugars, GlcNAc, ManNAc, and
sialic acid. The crystal structure of ligand-free NanE from Clostridium
perfringens reveals a modified triose-phosphate isomerase (β/α)8 barrel in which 
a stable dimer is formed by exchanging the C-terminal helix. By retaining
catalytic activity in the crystalline state, the structure of the enzyme bound to
the GlcNAc-6P product identifies the topology of the active site pocket and
points to invariant residues Lys(66) as a putative single catalyst, supported by 
the structure of the catalytically inactive K66A mutant in complex with substrate
ManNAc-6P. (1)H NMR-based time course assays of native NanE and mutated variants 
demonstrate the essential role of Lys(66) for the epimerization reaction with
participation of neighboring Arg(43), Asp(126), and Glu(180) residues. These
findings unveil a one-base catalytic mechanism of C2 deprotonation/reprotonation 
via an enolate intermediate and provide the structural basis for the development 
of new antimicrobial agents against this family of bacterial 2-epimerases.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.604272 
PMCID: PMC4271210
PMID: 25320079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

