
1. Oncogene. 2015 Aug 6;34(32):4219-28. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.353. Epub 2014 Oct 27.

Anti-angiogenic pathway associations of the 3p21.3 mapped BLU gene in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Cheng Y(1), Ho RL(1), Chan KC(1), Kan R(1), Tung E(1), Lung HL(1), Yau WL(2),
Cheung AK(1), Ko JM(1), Zhang ZF(3), Luo DZ(3), Feng ZB(3), Chen S(3), Guan
XY(1), Kwong D(1), Stanbridge EJ(4), Lung ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology/Center for Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Research, 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, Hong Kong.
(2)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, Hong Kong.
(3)Department of Pathology, Guangxi Medical University, Guangxi, People's
Republic of China.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, CA, USA.

Zinc-finger, MYND-type containing 10 (ZMYND10), or more commonly called BLU,
expression is frequently downregulated in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and many
other tumors due to promoter hypermethylation. Functional evidence shows that the
BLU gene inhibits tumor growth in animal assays, but the detailed molecular
mechanism responsible for this is still not well understood. In current studies, 
we find that 93.5% of early-stage primary NPC tumors show downregulated BLU
expression. Using a PCR array, overexpression of the BLU gene was correlated to
the angiogenesis network in NPC cells. Moreover, expression changes of the MMP
family, VEGF and TSP1, were often detected in different stages of NPC, suggesting
the possibility that BLU may be directly involved in the microenvironment and
anti-angiogenic activity in NPC development. Compared with vector-alone control
cells, BLU stable transfectants, derived from poorly-differentiated NPC HONE1
cells, suppress VEGF165, VEGF189 and TSP1 expression at both the RNA and protein 
levels, and significantly reduce the secreted VEGF protein in these cells,
reflecting an unknown regulatory mechanism mediated by the BLU gene in NPC. Cells
expressing BLU inhibited cellular invasion, migration and tube formation. These
in vitro results were further confirmed by in vivo tumor suppression and a
matrigel plug angiogenesis assay in nude mice. Tube-forming ability was clearly
inhibited, when the BLU gene is expressed in these cells. Up to 70-90% of
injected tumor cells expressing increased exogenous BLU underwent cell death in
animal assays. Overexpressed BLU only inhibited VEGF165 expression in
differentiated squamous NPC HK1 cells, but also showed an anti-angiogenic effect 
in the animal assay, revealing a complicated mechanism regulating angiogenesis
and the microenvironment in different NPC cell lines. Results of these studies
indicate that alteration of BLU gene expression influences anti-angiogenesis
pathways and is important for the development of NPC.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2014.353 
PMCID: PMC4761643
PMID: 25347745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

