
1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jan;100(1):E155-63. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-3009.

Novel KCNJ5 mutations in sporadic aldosterone-producing adenoma reduce Kir3.4
membrane abundance.

Cheng CJ(1), Sung CC, Wu ST, Lin YC, Sytwu HK, Huang CL, Lin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (C.-J.C., C.-C.S., S.-H.L.), Division of Nephrology;
Department of Surgery (S.-T.W.), Division of Urology; Deparment of Pathology
(Y.-C.L.), Tri-Service General Hospital; Graduate Institute of Life Science
(C.-C.S., S.-H.L.); and Department and Graduate Institute of Microbiology and
Immunology (H.-K.S.), National Defense Medical Center, Taipei 114, Taiwan; and
Department of Medicine (C.-L.H.), Division of Nephrology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390.

CONTEXT: Aldosterone-producing adenoma (APA) has been linked to mutations in the 
KCNJ5 gene encoding the inward-rectifying potassium (K(+)) Kir3.4 channel. These 
mutations abolish the K(+) selectivity of Kir3.4 and, consequently, cause sodium 
(Na(+)) leak, depolarized membrane potential, and nonsuppressible aldosterone
secretion.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to investigate KCNJ5 mutations in patients with
sporadic APA and the role of endogenous Kir3.4 in human adrenocortical cells.
DESIGN: We screened the KCNJ5 gene from the adrenal adenomas of 69 Chinese
patients with sporadic APA and functionally characterized novel Kir3.4 mutations.
RESULTS: Thirty-seven percent (26 of 69) of our APA patients carried heterozygous
somatic mutations in the KCNJ5 gene. Besides the most common G151R and L168R
mutations, we identified a previously uncharacterized E145Q mutation and 2 novel 
mutations (R115W and E246G) in 6 patients. The E145Q mutant conducted a
barium-insensitive Na(+)-leak current. The R115W and E246G mutants preserved
barium-sensitive, K(+)-selective and Gβγ-activatable Kir3.4 currents, which were 
∼30% and ∼15% of wild-type current, respectively. Biotinylation assays revealed
markedly reduced membrane abundance of R115W and E246G mutants. All Kir3.4
mutants exerted dominant-negative effects on wild-type channels. Kir3.4 protein
expression in APAs with the novel KCNJ5 mutation was significantly lower than
those in APAs with wild-type KCNJ5 or Na(+)-leak KCNJ5 mutations. Inhibition of
endogenous Kir3.4 by tertiapin-Q significantly depolarized membrane potential and
increased CYP11B2 expression in human adrenocortical cells.
CONCLUSION: Besides Na(+)-leak mutations, novel KCNJ5 mutations causing a
reduction of surface and total abundance of Kir3.4 are also associated with
sporadic APA. Basal Kir3.4 current is important to maintaining normal resting
membrane potential and suppressing aldosterone synthesis in human adrenocortical 
cells.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2014-3009 
PMID: 25347571  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

