
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Jan;59(1):217-25. doi: 10.1128/AAC.03901-14.
Epub 2014 Oct 27.

A hybrid cationic peptide composed of human β-defensin-1 and humanized θ-defensin
sequences exhibits salt-resistant antimicrobial activity.

Olli S(1), Nagaraj R(2), Motukupally SR(3).

Author information: 
(1)CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India
sudar1376@gmail.com.
(2)CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.
(3)Jhaveri Microbiology Centre, L. V. Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, India.

We have designed a hybrid peptide by combining sequences of human β-defensin-1
(HBD-1) and θ-defensin, in an attempt to generate a molecule that combines the
diversity in structure and biological activity of two different peptides to yield
a promising therapeutic candidate. HBD-1 was chosen as it is a natural defensin
of humans that is constitutively expressed, but its antibacterial activity is
considerably impaired by elevated ionic strength. θ-Defensins are expressed in
human bone marrow as a pseudogene and are homologous to rhesus monkey circular
minidefensins. Retrocyclins are synthetic human θ-defensins. The cyclic nature of
the θ-defensin peptides makes them salt resistant, nonhemolytic, and virtually
noncytotoxic in vitro. However, a nonhuman circular molecule developed for
clinical use would be less viable than a linear molecule. In this study, we have 
fused the C-terminal region of HBD-1 to the nonapeptide sequence of a synthetic
retrocyclin. Cyclization was achieved by joining the terminal ends of the hybrid 
peptide by a disulfide bridge. The hybrid peptide with or without the disulfide
bridge exhibited enhanced antimicrobial activity against both Gram-negative and
Gram-positive bacteria as well as against fungi, including clinical bacterial
isolates from eye infections. The peptide retained activity in the presence of
NaCl and serum and was nonhemolytic in vitro. Thus, the hybrid peptide generated 
holds potential as a new class of antibiotics.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.03901-14 
PMCID: PMC4291353
PMID: 25348533  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

