
1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 27;9(10):e111455. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111455.
eCollection 2014.

Influence of soil type, cultivar and Verticillium dahliae on the structure of the
root and rhizosphere soil fungal microbiome of strawberry.

Nallanchakravarthula S(1), Mahmood S(1), Alstr√∂m S(1), Finlay RD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Uppsala BioCenter, Department of Forest Mycology and Plant Pathology, Swedish 
University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.

Sustainable management of crop productivity and health necessitates improved
understanding of the ways in which rhizosphere microbial populations interact
with each other, with plant roots and their abiotic environment. In this study we
examined the effects of different soils and cultivars, and the presence of a
soil-borne fungal pathogen, Verticillium dahliae, on the fungal microbiome of the
rhizosphere soil and roots of strawberry plants, using high-throughput
pyrosequencing. Fungal communities of the roots of two cultivars, Honeoye and
Florence, were statistically distinct from those in the rhizosphere soil of the
same plants, with little overlap. Roots of plants growing in two contrasting
field soils had high relative abundance of Leptodontidium sp. C2 BESC 319 g
whereas rhizosphere soil was characterised by high relative abundance of
Trichosporon dulcitum or Cryptococcus terreus, depending upon the soil type.
Differences between different cultivars were not as clear. Inoculation with the
pathogen V. dahliae had a significant influence on community structure, generally
decreasing the number of rhizosphere soil- and root-inhabiting fungi.
Leptodontidium sp. C2 BESC 319 g was the dominant fungus responding positively to
inoculation with V. dahliae. The results suggest that 1) plant roots select
microorganisms from the wider rhizosphere pool, 2) that both rhizosphere soil and
root inhabiting fungal communities are influenced by V. dahliae and 3) that soil 
type has a stronger influence on both of these communities than cultivar.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111455 
PMCID: PMC4210224
PMID: 25347069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

