
1. Glycobiology. 2015 Mar;25(3):319-30. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwu113. Epub 2014 Oct
24.

Structural and biochemical characterization of the β-N-acetylglucosaminidase from
Thermotoga maritima: toward rationalization of mechanistic knowledge in the GH73 
family.

Lipski A(1), Hervé M(2), Lombard V(3), Nurizzo D(4), Mengin-Lecreulx D(2), Bourne
Y(3), Vincent F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Biocrystallography and Structural Biology of Therapeutic
Targets, Molecular and Structural Bases of Infectious Diseases, UMR 5086 CNRS and
University of Lyon, 7 passage du Vercors, F-69367 Lyon Cedex 07, France CNRS,
AFMB UMR7257, 163 avenue de luminy, 13288 Marseille cedex 09, France.
(2)Laboratoire des Enveloppes Bactériennes et Antibiotiques, Institut de
Biochimie et Biophysique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR 8619 CNRS, Université de 
Paris-Sud, 91405 Orsay, France.
(3)CNRS, AFMB UMR7257, 163 avenue de luminy, 13288 Marseille cedex 09, France
Aix-Marseille University, AFMB UMR7257, 163 avenue de luminy, 13288 Marseille
cedex 09, France.
(4)European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Polygone Scientifique Louis Néel, 6
rue Jules Horowitz, 38000 Grenoble, France.
(5)CNRS, AFMB UMR7257, 163 avenue de luminy, 13288 Marseille cedex 09, France
Aix-Marseille University, AFMB UMR7257, 163 avenue de luminy, 13288 Marseille
cedex 09, France florence.vincent@afmb.univ-mrs.fr floyork13@gmail.com.

Members of the GH73 glycosidase family cleave the β-1,4-glycosidic bond between
the N-acetylglucosaminyl (GlcNAc) and N-acetylmuramyl (MurNAc) moieties in
bacterial peptidoglycan. A catalytic mechanism has been proposed for members
FlgJ, Auto, AcmA and Atl(WM) and the structural analysis of FlgJ and Auto
revealed a conserved α/β fold reminiscent of the distantly related GH23 lysozyme.
Comparison of the active site residues reveals variability in the nature of the
catalytic general base suggesting two distinct catalytic mechanisms: an inverting
mechanism involving two distant glutamate residues and a substrate-assisted
mechanism involving anchimeric assistance by the C2-acetamido group of the GlcNAc
moiety. Herein, we present the biochemical characterization and crystal structure
of TM0633 from the hyperthermophilic bacterium Thermotoga maritima. TM0633 adopts
the α/β fold of the family and displays β-N-acetylglucosaminidase activity on
intact peptidoglycan sacculi. Site-directed mutagenesis identifies Glu34, Glu65
and Tyr118 as important residues for catalysis. A thorough bioinformatic analysis
of the GH73 sequences identified five phylogenetic clusters. TM0633, FlgJ and
Auto belong to a group of three clusters that conserve two carboxylate residues
involved in a classical inverting acid-base mechanism. Members of the other two
clusters lack a conserved catalytic general base supporting a substrate-assisted 
mechanism. Molecular modeling of representative members from each cluster
suggests that variability in length of the β-hairpin region above the active site
confers ligand-binding specificity and modulates the catalytic mechanisms within 
the GH73 family.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwu113 
PMID: 25344445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

