
1. Metallomics. 2015 Jan;7(1):39-55. doi: 10.1039/c4mt00222a. Epub 2014 Oct 30.

Therapeutic and analytical applications of arsenic binding to proteins.

Chen B(1), Liu Q, Popowich A, Shen S, Yan X, Zhang Q, Li XF, Weinfeld M, Cullen
WR, Le XC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Analytical and Environmental Toxicology, Department of Laboratory 
Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
xc.le@ualberta.ca.

Arsenic binding to proteins plays a pivotal role in the health effects of
arsenic. Further knowledge of arsenic binding to proteins will advance the
development of bioanalytical techniques and therapeutic drugs. This review
summarizes recent work on arsenic-based drugs, imaging of cellular events,
capture and purification of arsenic-binding proteins, and biosensing of arsenic. 
Binding of arsenic to the promyelocytic leukemia fusion oncoprotein (PML-RARÎ±) is
a plausible mode of action leading to the successful treatment of acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Identification of other oncoproteins critical to
other cancers and the development of various arsenicals and targeted delivery
systems are promising approaches to the treatment of other types of cancers.
Techniques for capture, purification, and identification of arsenic-binding
proteins make use of specific binding between trivalent arsenicals and the thiols
in proteins. Biarsenical probes, such as FlAsH-EDT2 and ReAsH-EDT2, coupled with 
tetracysteine tags that are genetically incorporated into the target proteins,
are used for site-specific fluorescence labelling and imaging of the target
proteins in living cells. These allow protein dynamics and protein-protein
interactions to be studied. Arsenic affinity chromatography is useful for
purification of thiol-containing proteins, and its combination with mass
spectrometry provides a targeted proteomic approach for studying the interactions
between arsenicals and proteins in cells. Arsenic biosensors evolved from the
knowledge of arsenic resistance and arsenic binding to proteins in bacteria, and 
have now been developed into analytical techniques that are suitable for the
detection of arsenic in the field. Examples in the four areas, arsenic-based
drugs, imaging of cellular events, purification of specific proteins, and arsenic
biosensors, demonstrate important therapeutic and analytical applications of
arsenic protein binding.

DOI: 10.1039/c4mt00222a 
PMID: 25356501  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

