
1. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 15;193(12):5894-903. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401752. Epub 2014
Oct 29.

CD28-CD80 interactions control regulatory T cell motility and immunological
synapse formation.

Thauland TJ(1), Koguchi Y(2), Dustin ML(3), Parker DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, OR 97239; parkerd@ohsu.edu thauland@stanford.edu.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, OR 97239;
(3)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 
10016; and Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Nuffield Department of
Orthopaedics, Rheumatology, and Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford,
Oxford OX3 7FY, United Kingdom.

Regulatory T cells (Tregs) are essential for tolerance to self and environmental 
Ags, acting in part by downmodulating costimulatory molecules on the surface of
dendritic cells (DCs) and altering naive CD4 T cell-DC interactions. In this
study, we show that Tregs form stable conjugates with DCs before, but not after, 
they decrease surface expression of the costimulatory molecule CD80 on the DCs.
We use supported planar bilayers to show that Tregs dramatically slow down but
maintain a highly polarized and motile phenotype after recognizing Ag in the
absence of costimulation. These motile cells are characterized by distinct
accumulations of LFA-1-ICAM-1 in the lamella and TCR-MHC in the uropod,
consistent with a motile immunological synapse or "kinapse." However, in the
presence of high, but not low, concentrations of CD80, Tregs form stationary,
symmetrical synapses. Using blocking Abs, we show that, whereas CTLA-4 is
required for CD80 downmodulation, CD28-CD80 interactions are critical for
modulating Treg motility in the presence of Ag. Taken together, these results
support the hypothesis that Tregs are tuned to alter their motility depending on 
costimulatory signals.

Copyright Â© 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401752 
PMCID: PMC4258405
PMID: 25355918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

