
1. RNA. 2014 Dec;20(12):1944-54. doi: 10.1261/rna.046953.114. Epub 2014 Oct 28.

Structural insights into translational recoding by frameshift suppressor
tRNASufJ.

Fagan CE(1), Maehigashi T(1), Dunkle JA(1), Miles SJ(1), Dunham CM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, USA christine.m.dunham@emory.edu.

The three-nucleotide mRNA reading frame is tightly regulated during translation
to ensure accurate protein expression. Translation errors that lead to aberrant
protein production can result from the uncoupled movement of the tRNA in either
the 5' or 3' direction on mRNA. Here, we report the biochemical and structural
characterization of +1 frameshift suppressor tRNA(SufJ), a tRNA known to decode
four, instead of three, nucleotides. Frameshift suppressor tRNA(SufJ) contains an
insertion 5' to its anticodon, expanding the anticodon loop from seven to eight
nucleotides. Our results indicate that the expansion of the anticodon loop of
either ASL(SufJ) or tRNA(SufJ) does not affect its affinity for the A site of the
ribosome. Structural analyses of both ASL(SufJ) and ASL(Thr) bound to the Thermus
thermophilus 70S ribosome demonstrate both ASLs decode in the zero frame.
Although the anticodon loop residues 34-37 are superimposable with canonical
seven-nucleotide ASLs, the single C31.5 insertion between nucleotides 31 and 32
in ASL(SufJ) imposes a conformational change of the anticodon stem, that
repositions and tilts the ASL toward the back of the A site. Further modeling
analyses reveal that this tilting would cause a distortion in full-length A-site 
tRNA(SufJ) during tRNA selection and possibly impede gripping of the anticodon
stem by 16S rRNA nucleotides in the P site. Together, these data implicate tRNA
distortion as a major driver of noncanonical translation events such as
frameshifting.

Â© 2014 Fagan et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the RNA
Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.046953.114 
PMCID: PMC4238358
PMID: 25352689  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

