
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2014 Nov;70(Pt 11):1468-71. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X14020718. Epub 2014 Oct 25.

New crystal structures of adenylate kinase from Streptococcus pneumoniae D39 in
two conformations.

Thach TT(1), Lee S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Sungkyunkwan University, 2066 Seobu-ro,
Suwon, Gyeonggi 440-746, Republic of Korea.

Adenylate kinases (AdKs; EC 2.7.3.4) play a critical role in intercellular
homeostasis by the interconversion of ATP and AMP to two ADP molecules. Crystal
structures of adenylate kinase from Streptococcus pneumoniae D39 (SpAdK) have
recently been determined using ligand-free and inhibitor-bound crystals belonging
to space groups P21 and P1, respectively. Here, new crystal structures of SpAdK
in ligand-free and inhibitor-bound states determined at 1.96 and 1.65 Å
resolution, respectively, are reported. The new ligand-free crystal belonged to
space group C2, with unit-cell parameters a=73.5, b=54.3, c=62.7 Å, β=118.8°. The
new ligand-free structure revealed an open conformation that differed from the
previously determined conformation, with an r.m.s.d on Cα atoms of 1.4 Å. The new
crystal of the complex with the two-substrate-mimicking inhibitor
P1,P5-bis(adenosine-5'-)pentaphosphate (Ap5A) belonged to space group P1, with
unit-cell parameters a=53.9, b=62.3, c=63.0 Å, α=101.9, β=112.6, γ=89.9°. Despite
belonging to the same space group as the previously reported crystal, the new
Ap5A-bound crystal contains four molecules in the asymmetric unit, compared with 
two in the previous crystal, and shows slightly different lattice contacts. These
results demonstrate that SpAdK can crystallize promiscuously in different forms
and that the open structure is flexible in conformation.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X14020718 
PMCID: PMC4231846
PMID: 25372811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

