
1. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2014 Dec;3(12):1435-43. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2014-0151. Epub 
2014 Nov 5.

Concise review: umbilical cord blood transplantation: past, present, and future.

Munoz J(1), Shah N(2), Rezvani K(1), Hosing C(1), Bollard CM(1), Oran B(1), Olson
A(1), Popat U(1), Molldrem J(1), McNiece IK(1), Shpall EJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Banner MD Anderson Cancer Center, Gilbert, 
Arizona, USA; Department of Stem Cell Transplantation and Cellular Therapy, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, Houston, Texas, USA; Program for
Cell Enhancement and Technologies for Immunotherapy, Children's National Hospital
System, and Department of Pediatrics and Department of Microbiology, Immunology
and Tropical Medicine, George Washington University, Washington, D.C., USA.
(2)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Banner MD Anderson Cancer Center, Gilbert, 
Arizona, USA; Department of Stem Cell Transplantation and Cellular Therapy, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, Houston, Texas, USA; Program for
Cell Enhancement and Technologies for Immunotherapy, Children's National Hospital
System, and Department of Pediatrics and Department of Microbiology, Immunology
and Tropical Medicine, George Washington University, Washington, D.C., USA
nshah@mdanderson.org.

Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is an important treatment
option for fit patients with poor-risk hematological malignancies; nevertheless, 
the lack of available fully matched donors limits the extent of its use.
Umbilical cord blood has emerged as an effective alternate source of
hematopoietic stem cell support. Transplantation with cord blood allows for
faster availability of frozen sample and avoids invasive procedures for donors.
In addition, this procedure has demonstrated reduced relapse rates and similar
overall survival when compared with unrelated allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation. The limited dose of CD34-positive stem cells available with
single-unit cord transplantation has been addressed by the development of
double-unit cord transplantation. In combination with improved conditioning
regimens, double-unit cord transplantation has allowed for the treatment of
larger children, as well as adult patients with hematological malignancies.
Current excitement in the field revolves around the development of safer
techniques to improve homing, engraftment, and immune reconstitution after cord
blood transplantation. Here the authors review the past, present, and future of
cord transplantation.

Â©AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.5966/sctm.2014-0151 
PMCID: PMC4250219
PMID: 25378655  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

