
1. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 5;9(11):e112183. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112183.
eCollection 2014.

Live imaging and gene expression analysis in zebrafish identifies a link between 
neutrophils and epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

Freisinger CM(1), Huttenlocher A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University 
of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Chronic inflammation is associated with epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) and cancer progression however the relationship between inflammation and
EMT remains unclear. Here, we have exploited zebrafish to visualize and quantify 
the earliest events during epithelial cell transformation induced by oncogenic
HRas(V12). Live imaging revealed that expression of HRas(V12) in the epidermis
results in EMT and chronic neutrophil and macrophage infiltration. We have
developed an in vivo system to probe and quantify gene expression changes
specifically in transformed cells from chimeric zebrafish expressing oncogenic
HRas(V12) using translating ribosomal affinity purification (TRAP). We found that
the expression of genes associated with EMT, including slug, vimentin and mmp9,
are enriched in HRas(V12) transformed epithelial cells and that this enrichment
requires the presence of neutrophils. An early signal induced by HRas(V12) in
epithelial cells is the expression of il-8 (cxcl8) and we found that the
chemokine receptor, Cxcr2, mediates neutrophil but not macrophage recruitment to 
the transformed cells. Surprisingly, we also found a cell autonomous role for
Cxcr2 signaling in transformed cells for both neutrophil recruitment and EMT
related gene expression associated with Ras transformation. Taken together, these
findings implicate both autocrine and paracrine signaling through Cxcr2 in the
regulation of inflammation and gene expression in transformed epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112183 
PMCID: PMC4221567
PMID: 25372289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

