
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2015 May;180(2):178-88. doi: 10.1111/cei.12483.

Reduced CD5(+) CD24(hi) CD38(hi) and interleukin-10(+) regulatory B cells in
active anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody-associated vasculitis permit
increased circulating autoantibodies.

Aybar LT(1), McGregor JG, Hogan SL, Hu Y, Mendoza CE, Brant EJ, Poulton CJ,
Henderson CD, Falk RJ, Bunch DO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA; UNC Kidney Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA.

Pathogenesis of anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (ANCA)-associated
vasculitis is B cell-dependent, although how particular B cell subsets modulate
immunopathogenesis remains unknown. Although their phenotype remains
controversial, regulatory B cells (Bregs ), play a role in immunological
tolerance via interleukin (IL)-10. Putative CD19(+) CD24(hi) CD38(hi) and CD19(+)
CD24(hi) CD27(+) Bregs were evaluated in addition to their CD5(+) subsets in 69
patients with ANCA-associated vasculitis (AAV). B cell IL-10 was verified by flow
cytometry following culture with CD40 ligand and cytosine-phosphate-guanosine
(CpG) DNA. Patients with active disease had decreased levels of CD5(+) CD24(hi)
CD38(hi) B cells and IL-10(+) B cells compared to patients in remission and
healthy controls (HCs). As IL-10(+) and CD5(+) CD24(hi) CD38(hi) B cells
normalized in remission within an individual, ANCA titres decreased. The CD5(+)
subset of CD24(hi) CD38(hi) B cells decreases in active disease and rebounds
during remission similarly to IL-10-producing B cells. Moreover, CD5(+) B cells
are enriched in the ability to produce IL-10 compared to CD5(neg) B cells.
Together these results suggest that CD5 may identify functional IL-10-producing
Bregs . The malfunction of Bregs during active disease due to reduced IL-10
expression may thus permit ANCA production.

Â© 2014 British Society for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/cei.12483 
PMCID: PMC4408152
PMID: 25376552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

