
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2014 Nov;70(Pt 11):1513-6. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X14021608. Epub 2014 Oct 25.

Cloning, expression, purification, crystallization and preliminary X-ray
characterization of allantoinase from Bacillus licheniformis ATCC 14580.

Conejero-Muriel M(1), Martínez-Gómez AI(2), Martínez-Rodríguez S(3), Gavira
JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Estudios Cristalográficos, IACT, CSIC-Universidad de Granada,
Avenida de las Palmeras 4, 18100 Armilla, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Química-Física, Universidad de Almería, 04120 Almería, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Química-Física, Universidad de Granada, 18071 Granada, Spain.

Allantoinase, a member of the amidohydrolase superfamily, exists in a wide
variety of organisms, including bacteria, fungi, plants and a few animals, such
as fishes and amphibians. Allantoinase catalyzes the reversible hydrolysis of
allantoin into allantoate by hydrolytic cleavage of the N1-C2 amide bond of the
five-membered hydantoin ring. Allantoinase from Bacillus licheniformis (AllBali) 
presents an inverted enantioselectivity towards allantoin (R-enantioselective),
which is a distinguishable feature that is not observed for other allantoinases. 
In this work, B. licheniformis ATCC 14580 allantoinase (AllBali) containing a
C-terminal His6 tag was overproduced in Escherichia coli and purified to
homogeneity. Crystals of AllBali were obtained by the vapour-diffusion method
using 0.1 M potassium thiocyanate, 20%(w/v) polyethylene glycol 3350 as a
crystallization solution. X-ray diffraction data were collected to a resolution
of 3.5 Å with an Rmerge of 29.2% from a crystal belonging to space group P12₁1,
with unit-cell parameters a=54.93, b=164.74, c=106.89 Å, β=98.49°. There are four
molecules in the asymmetric unit with a solvent content of 47% as estimated from 
the Matthews coefficient (VM=2.34 Å3 Da(-1)).

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X14021608 
PMCID: PMC4231854
PMID: 25372819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

