
1. J Thromb Haemost. 2015 Jan;13(1):41-6. doi: 10.1111/jth.12776. Epub 2014 Dec 6.

Diabetes-independent increase of factor VII-activating protease activation in
patients with Gram-negative sepsis (melioidosis).

de Jong HK(1), Koh GC, Bulder I, Stephan F, Wiersinga WJ, Zeerleder SS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Division of
Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The plasma protease factor VII-activating protease (FSAP) can release
nucleosomes from late apoptotic cells. Nucleosomes are markers of cell death, and
extracellular cell-free DNA has been suggested to play an important role in
inflammation and has been demonstrated to correlate with severity and outcome in 
sepsis patients.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate FSAP activation in patients suffering from Burkholderia
pseudomallei infection (melioidosis), an important cause of Gram-negative sepsis 
in Southeast Asia. As diabetes mellitus (DM) is the most important risk factor
for both melioidosis and sepsis, we were also able to examine the role of DM in
FSAP activation in this cohort of patients.
METHODS: In a prospective observational study, complexes of FSAP with α2
-antiplasmin (AP) were assayed in 44 patients with melioidosis, 34 of whom were
classified as diabetic. Eighty-two healthy subjects served as controls (52 with
DM and 30 without).
RESULTS: FSAP-AP complex levels were markedly elevated in patients as compared
with controls. The FSAP level increased by 16.82 AU mL(-1) in patients with
melioidosis after adjustment for the effect of DM in the regression model. As
expected, FSAP activation was correlated with nucleosome release (slope = 0.74). 
No difference in FSAP activation on admission was seen between survivors and
non-survivors, but the extent of FSAP activation correlated with stage of the
disease; repeated testing during convalescence showed a return towards normal
values (day 0 vs. day 28, 4.16 AU mL(-1) , 95% confidence interval
[CI] 1.42-12.22).
CONCLUSION: Patients with Gram-negative sepsis caused by B. pseudomallei have
abundant FSAP activation, which significantly correlates with stage of disease.
The presence of DM, however, does not influence the extent of FSAP activation.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis published by Wiley
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of International Society on Thrombosis and
Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.12776 
PMCID: PMC4309501
PMID: 25370187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

