
1. J Bacteriol. 1989 Mar;171(3):1314-9.

Molecular cloning of gltS and gltP, which encode glutamate carriers of
Escherichia coli B.

Deguchi Y(1), Yamato I, Anraku Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Tokyo, Japan.

Two genes encoding distinct glutamate carrier proteins of Escherichia coli B were
cloned into an E. coli K-12 strain by using a cosmid vector, pHC79. One of them
was the gltS gene coding for a glutamate carrier of an Na+-dependent, binding
protein-independent, and glutamate-specific transport system. The content of the 
glutamate carrier was amplified about 25-fold in the cytoplasmic membranes from a
gltS-amplified strain. The gltS gene was located in a 3.2-kilobase EcoRI-MluI
fragment, and the gene product was identified as a membrane protein with an
apparent Mr of 35,000 in a minicell system. A gene designated gltP was also
cloned. The transport activity of the gltP system in cytoplasmic membrane
vesicles from a gltP-amplified strain was driven by respiratory substrates and
was independent of the concentrations of Na+, K+, and Li+. An uncoupler,
carbonylcyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone, completely inhibited the transport
activities of both systems, whereas an ionophore, monensin, inhibited only that
of the gltS system. The Kt value for glutamate was 11 microM in the gltP system
and 3.5 microM in the gltS system. L-Aspartate inhibited the glutamate transport 
of the gltP system but not that of the gltS system. Aspartate was taken up
actively by membrane vesicles from the gltP-amplified strain, although no
aspartate uptake activity was detected in membrane vesicles from a wild-type E.
coli strain. These results suggest that gltP is a structural gene for a carrier
protein of an Na+-independent, binding protein-independent glutamate-aspartate
transport system.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.171.3.1314-1319.1989 
PMCID: PMC209747
PMID: 2537813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

