
1. Dis Markers. 2014;2014:146974. doi: 10.1155/2014/146974. Epub 2014 Oct 15.

Hepatocyte growth factor levels in the saliva and gingival crevicular fluid in
smokers with periodontitis.

Anil S(1), Vellappally S(2), Preethanath RS(1), Mokeem SA(1), AlMoharib HS(1),
Patil S(3), Chalisserry EP(4), Al Kheraif AA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics and Community Dentistry, College of Dentistry, King
Saud University, P.O. Box 60169, Riyadh 11545, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Dental Biomaterials Research Chair, Dental Health Department, College of
Applied Medical Sciences, King Saud University, Riyadh 11433, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Oral Pathology and Microbiology, Faculty of Dental Sciences, M. 
S. Ramaiah University of Applied Sciences, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
(4)College of Dentistry, King Saud University, P.O. Box 60169, Riyadh 11545,
Saudi Arabia.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) production by oral fibroblasts is enhanced by
various molecules that are induced during inflammatory conditions including
periodontitis. HGF plays an important role in the progression of periodontitis,
by stimulating intense growth of epithelial cells and preventing regeneration of 
connective tissue attachments. Smokers have a greater risk factor in the
pathogenesis and progression of periodontal disease. The objective of the study
was to estimate the level of HGF in saliva and gingival crevicular fluid (GCF) in
smokers with periodontitis and to compare these levels with that of nonsmokers
with periodontitis and healthy controls. The HGF levels were found to be
significantly high in the saliva and GCF of smokers with periodontitis compared
to both never-smokers with periodontitis and the healthy control group. The
elevated levels of HGF in the saliva and GCF in the study population could
explain the intrinsic mechanism triggering the severity of the periodontitis in
smokers. Further studies are necessary to validate the current observations and
to establish a sensitive marker to predict periodontal disease activity.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/146974 
PMCID: PMC4214164
PMID: 25389376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

