
1. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 15;193(12):5951-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302575. Epub 2014
Nov 10.

Chemokine-mediated B cell trafficking during early rabbit GALT development.

Zhai SK(1), Volgina VV(1), Sethupathi P(1), Knight KL(1), Lanning DK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola 
University Chicago, Maywood, IL 60153.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola 
University Chicago, Maywood, IL 60153 dlannin@luc.edu.

Microbial and host cell interactions stimulate rabbit B cells to diversify the
primary Ab repertoire in GALT. B cells at the base of appendix follicles begin
proliferating and diversifying their V-(D)-J genes around 1 wk of age, ∼5 d after
B cells first begin entering appendix follicles. To gain insight into the
microbial and host cell interactions that stimulate B cells to diversify the
primary Ab repertoire, we analyzed B cell trafficking within follicles during the
first week of life. We visualized B cells, as well as chemokines that mediate B
cell homing in lymphoid tissues, by in situ hybridization, and we examined B cell
chemokine receptor expression by flow cytometry. We found that B cells were
activated and began downregulating their BCRs well before a detectable B cell
proliferative region appeared at the follicle base. The proliferative region was 
similar to germinal center dark zones, in that it exhibited elevated CXCL12 mRNA 
expression, and B cells that upregulated CXCR4 mRNA in response to signals
acquired from selected intestinal commensals localized in this region. Our
results suggest that after entering appendix follicles, B cells home sequentially
to the follicle-associated epithelium, the follicular dendritic cell network, the
B cell/T cell boundary, and, ultimately, the base of the follicle, where they
enter a proliferative program and diversify the primary Ab repertoire.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302575 
PMCID: PMC4258424
PMID: 25385821  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

