
1. New Microbiol. 2014 Oct;37(4):509-16. Epub 2014 Oct 1.

Opposite effect of supernatants from selected periopathogens and oral
lactobacilli cultures on ATP levels in human gingival fibroblasts.

Szkaradkiewicz AK(1), Karpin Ski TM, Zeidler A, Szkaradkiewicz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Conservative Dentistry and Periodontology, University of Medical
Sciences in Poznan ?, Poland.

Studies were performed on the effects of supernatants obtained from bacterial
cultures, including cultures of Porphyromonas gingivalis, Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans, Prevotella intermedia and Lactobacillus acidophilus
strains on ATP levels in human gingival fibroblasts (HGF-1) and on their
viability. ATP levels were evaluated using luminescence test and cell viability
was estimated using a fluorescence test. In control cultures mean levels of ATP
in HGF-1 amounted to 4.90±0.32 mln RLU. Supernatants of P. gingivalis and A.
actinomycetemcomitans cultures were found to significantly reduce ATP production 
in HGF-1 (mean levels of ATP amounted to 3.41±0.33 and 3.55±0.3 mln RLU
respectively), which was not accompanied by an increased proportion of dead
fibroblasts. Supernatants of P. intermedia induced no significant alterations in 
ATP level in HGF-1. In turn, supernatants of L. acidophilus H2O2 (+) and H2O2 (-)
cultures significantly increased ATP levels in HGF-1 (the mean levels amounted to
5.94±0.31 mln RLU and 5.88±0.28 mln RLU respectively). The results indicate that 
extracellular products of P. gingivalis and A. actinomycetemcomitans most
probably represent mitochondria-targeted peptides, which reduce synthesis of ATP 
in HGF-1. In turn, extracellular products of L. acidophilus seem to represent
exopolysaccharides (EPS) with pro-oxidant activity, which stimulate synthesis of 
ATP in HGF-1.


PMID: 25387288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

