
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jan;35(2):479-95. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01204-14. Epub 2014 Nov
10.

Human monocyte recognition of adenosine-based cyclic dinucleotides unveils the
A2a Gαs protein-coupled receptor tonic inhibition of mitochondrially induced cell
death.

Tosolini M(1), Pont F(2), Bétous D(1), Ravet E(3), Ligat L(2), Lopez F(2), Poupot
M(1), Poirot M(2), Pérouzel É(3), Tiraby G(3), Verhoeyen E(4), Fournié JJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR1037, Centre Recherches en Cancérologie de Toulouse, Toulouse,
France Université Toulouse III Paul-Sabatier, Toulouse, France ERL 5294 CNRS,
Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France Laboratoire d'Excellence TOUCAN, Toulouse,
France Institut Carnot CALYM, Pierre-Benite, France.
(2)INSERM UMR1037, Centre Recherches en Cancérologie de Toulouse, Toulouse,
France Université Toulouse III Paul-Sabatier, Toulouse, France.
(3)Cayla-InVivoGen, Montaudran, France.
(4)CIRI, EVIR team, INSERM U1111, CNRS UMR5308, Université de Lyon-1, ENS de
Lyon, Lyon, France INSERM U1065, Centre Méditerranéen de Médecine Moléculaire,
Nice, France.
(5)INSERM UMR1037, Centre Recherches en Cancérologie de Toulouse, Toulouse,
France Université Toulouse III Paul-Sabatier, Toulouse, France ERL 5294 CNRS,
Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France Laboratoire d'Excellence TOUCAN, Toulouse,
France Institut Carnot CALYM, Pierre-Benite, France
jean-jacques.fournie@inserm.fr.

Cyclic dinucleotides are important messengers for bacteria and protozoa and are
well-characterized immunity alarmins for infected mammalian cells through
intracellular binding to STING receptors. We sought to investigate their unknown 
extracellular effects by adding cyclic dinucleotides to the culture medium of
freshly isolated human blood cells in vitro. Here we report that
adenosine-containing cyclic dinucleotides induce the selective apoptosis of
monocytes through a novel apoptotic pathway. We demonstrate that these compounds 
are inverse agonist ligands of A2a, a Gαs-coupled adenosine receptor selectively 
expressed by monocytes. Inhibition of monocyte A2a by these ligands induces
apoptosis through a mechanism independent of that of the STING receptors. The
blockade of basal (adenosine-free) signaling from A2a inhibits protein kinase A
(PKA) activity, thereby recruiting cytosolic p53, which opens the mitochondrial
permeability transition pore and impairs mitochondrial respiration, resulting in 
apoptosis. A2a antagonists and inverse agonist ligands induce apoptosis of human 
monocytes, while A2a agonists are antiapoptotic. In vivo, we used a mock
developing human hematopoietic system through NSG mice transplanted with human
CD34(+) cells. Treatment with cyclic di-AMP selectively depleted A2a-expressing
monocytes and their precursors via apoptosis. Thus, monocyte recognition of
cyclic dinucleotides unravels a novel proapoptotic pathway: the A2a Gαs
protein-coupled receptor (GPCR)-driven tonic inhibitory signaling of
mitochondrion-induced cell death.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01204-14 
PMCID: PMC4272430
PMID: 25384972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

