
1. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 15;193(12):5997-6004. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400764. Epub
2014 Nov 7.

Notch3 activation is sufficient but not required for inducing human T-lineage
specification.

Waegemans E(1), Van de Walle I(1), De Medts J(1), De Smedt M(1), Kerre T(1),
Vandekerckhove B(1), Leclercq G(1), Wang T(2), Plum J(1), Taghon T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent University Hospital, B-9000
Ghent, Belgium; and.
(2)Medical Genetics Research Group and Centre for Molecular Medicine, School of
Clinical and Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Human Sciences,
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent University Hospital, B-9000
Ghent, Belgium; and Tom.Taghon@ugent.be.

Although the role for the individual Notch receptors in early hematopoiesis have 
been thoroughly investigated in mouse, studies in human have been mostly limited 
to the use of pan-Notch inhibitors. However, such studies in human are important 
to predict potential side effects of specific Notch receptor blocking reagents
because these are currently being considered as therapeutic tools to treat
various Notch-dependent diseases. In this study, we studied the individual roles 
of Notch1 and Notch3 in early human hematopoietic lineage decisions, particularly
during T-lineage specification. Although this process in mice is solely dependent
on Notch1 activation, we recently reported Notch3 expression in human uncommitted
thymocytes, raising the possibility that Notch3 mediates human T-lineage
specification. Although expression of a constitutive activated form of Notch3
(ICN3) results in the induction of T-lineage specification in human CD34(+)
hematopoietic progenitor cells, similar to ICN1 overexpression, loss-of-function 
studies using blocking Abs reveal that only Notch1, but not Notch3, is critical
in this process. Blocking of Notch1 activation in OP9-DLL4 cocultures resulted in
a complete block in T-lineage specification and induced monocytic and
plasmacytoid dendritic cell differentiation instead. In fetal thymus organ
cultures, impeded Notch1 activation resulted in B and dendritic cell development.
In contrast, Notch3 blocking Abs only marginally affected T-lineage specification
and hematopoietic differentiation with a slight increase in monocyte development.
No induction of B or dendritic cell development was observed. Thus, our results
unambiguously reveal a nonredundant role for Notch1 in human T-lineage
specification, despite the expression of other Notch receptors.

Copyright Â© 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400764 
PMID: 25381438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

