
1. Int J Low Extrem Wounds. 2014 Dec;13(4):241-6. doi: 10.1177/1534734614554282.

Difficult situations managing diabetic foot. Evidences and personal views: is to 
operate on patients with diabetic foot osteomyelitis old-fashioned?

Senneville E(1), Nguyen S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Gustave Dron Hospital, Tourcoing, France esenneville@ch-tourcoing.fr.
(2)Gustave Dron Hospital, Tourcoing, France.

Both medical and surgical approaches have been shown to be effective in the
treatment of patients with diabetic foot osteomyelitis (DFO). In patients with
risk factors of bad outcome such as major bone destruction, concomitant acute
infections requiring drainage, problems in limb perfusion, highly resistant
bacteria, and contraindication for or patient refusal of prolonged antibiotic
therapy, the choice of surgery does not require further discussion. On the
contrary, modest changes of bone on imaging assessment and no limiting factors as
described above make medical treatment an attractive option for patients with DFO
provided the rules of antibiotic treatment of chronic osteomyelitis are
respected. The key question may not be to oppose surgery and medical treatment
but to identify patients who need surgery and those who do not. There is
currently no classification or score system that may allow physician to decide
whether medical or surgical approach is best adapted to a given patient, and so
both experience and skill of the multidisciplinary team appear paramount for
guiding the choice of the best adapted ("tailored") strategy in a given patient. 
In this regard, it would be interesting to compare surgical and medical
approaches for DFO that apparently may benefit from one or another (ie, bone
lesions seen on plain radiographs of the foot but without bone fragmentation or
multiple sites of osteomyelitis, no contraindication to prolonged antibiotic
therapy, and location of bone involvement that may allow conservative surgery).
Given the current available data on the therapeutic options of DFO, it appears
that surgery for those patients is obviously not an old-fashioned option.

Â© The Author(s) 2014.

DOI: 10.1177/1534734614554282 
PMID: 25384914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

