
1. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 15;193(12):6161-6171. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401600. Epub
2014 Nov 7.

The extracellular adherence protein from Staphylococcus aureus inhibits the
classical and lectin pathways of complement by blocking formation of the C3
proconvertase.

Woehl JL(#)(1), Stapels DAC(#)(2), Garcia BL(3), Ramyar KX(1), Keightley A(3),
Ruyken M(2), Syriga M(4), Sfyroera G(4), Weber AB(3), Zolkiewski M(1), Ricklin
D(4), Lambris JD(4), Rooijakkers SHM(2), Geisbrecht BV(3)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biophysics; Kansas State University,
Manhattan, KS, USA.
(2)Medical Microbiology; University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.
(3)School of Biological Sciences; University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas
City, MO, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine; University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

The pathogenic bacterium Staphylococcus aureus actively evades many aspects of
human innate immunity by expressing a series of small inhibitory proteins. A
number of these proteins inhibit the complement system, which labels bacteria for
phagocytosis and generates inflammatory chemoattractants. Although the majority
of staphylococcal complement inhibitors act on the alternative pathway to block
the amplification loop, only a few proteins act on the initial recognition
cascades that constitute the classical pathway (CP) and lectin pathway (LP). We
screened a collection of recombinant, secreted staphylococcal proteins to
determine whether S. aureus produces other molecules that inhibit the CP and/or
LP. Using this approach, we identified the extracellular adherence protein (Eap) 
as a potent, specific inhibitor of both the CP and LP. We found that Eap blocked 
CP/LP-dependent activation of C3, but not C4, and that Eap likewise inhibited
deposition of C3b on the surface of S. aureus cells. In turn, this significantly 
diminished the extent of S. aureus opsonophagocytosis and killing by neutrophils.
This combination of functional properties suggested that Eap acts specifically at
the level of the CP/LP C3 convertase (C4b2a). Indeed, we demonstrated a direct,
nanomolar-affinity interaction of Eap with C4b. Eap binding to C4b inhibited
binding of both full-length C2 and its C2b fragment, which indicated that Eap
disrupts formation of the CP/LP C3 proconvertase (C4b2). As a whole, our results 
demonstrate that S. aureus inhibits two initiation routes of complement by
expression of the Eap protein, and thereby define a novel mechanism of immune
evasion.

Copyright Â© 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401600 
PMCID: PMC4258549
PMID: 25381436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

