
1. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2014 Nov;25(6):1210-6.

Follow-up study of post-infectious glomerulonephritis in adults: analysis of
predictors of poor renal outcome.

Natarajan G, Ramanathan S, Jeyachandran D(1), Balasubramaniyan T, Srinivasa
Prasad ND, Thanigachalam D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Madras Medical College and Rajiv Gandhi Government
General Hospital, Chennai, India.

Post-infectious glomerulonephritis (PIGN) still remains one of the most common
glomerulonephritis in the developing world. We studied the epidemiology and
clinical spectrum of PIGN in adults to identify the clinical, biochemical and
histological factors that would predict renal outcome. Data of 102 adult PIGN
patients treated between 2009 and 2011 with a mean follow-up of 12 months (6-36
months) were analyzed retrospectively. The mean age of the patients was 32.7Â±15
years, with a male to female ratio of 1.2:1. At presentation, 99% of the patients
had edema and oliguria, 73% had hypertension, 55% had macrohematuria and 60% had 
nephrotic range proteinuria. About 14% presented with complications (pulmonary
edema-6%, seizure-1%, dialysis requiring renal failure-7%) and 9% had comorbid
illness. Sixty percent of the patients had serum creatinine>2 mg/dL at
presentation, which was persistent in 30% at the end of one week and 68% had
hypo-complementemia. Renal biopsy revealed diffuse proliferative
glomerulonephritis in 70% of the patients. At 12 months, 2% had persistent
hypertension, 10% had persistent proteinuria and hematuria and 11% had serum
creatinine>1.5 mg/dL. Univariate analysis with the Fischer Exact test revealed
age>40 years, male gender, serum creatinine>2 mg/dL at one week, comorbid
illness, requirement of dialysis, crescents in >30% glomeruli and persistent
proteinuria and microscopic hematuria at 12 months as significant risk factors
for poor renal outcome. Serum creatinine>2 mg/dL at one week and persistent
proteinuria at 12 months were the independent risk factors that predicted poor
renal outcome at one year.

DOI: 10.4103/1319-2442.144254 
PMID: 25394437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

