
1. Biochem Soc Trans. 2014 Dec;42(6):1484-9. doi: 10.1042/BST20140180.

PKCθ-regulated signalling in health and disease.

Nath PR(1), Isakov N(1).

Author information: 
(1)*The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty
of Health Sciences and the Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, P.O. Box 653, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel.

Protein kinase Cθ (PKCθ) is a key enzyme in T-lymphocytes where it plays an
important role in signal transduction downstream of the activated T-cell receptor
(TCR) and the CD28 co-stimulatory receptor. Antigenic stimulation of T-cells
triggers PKCθ translocation to the centre of the immunological synapse (IS) at
the contact site between antigen-specific T-cells and antigen-presenting cells
(APCs). The IS-residing PKCθ phosphorylates and activates effector molecules that
transduce signals into distinct subcellular compartments and activate the
transcription factors, nuclear factor κB (NF-κB), nuclear factor of activated
T-cells (NFAT) and activating protein 1 (AP-1), which are essential for the
induction of T-cell-mediated responses. Besides its major biological role in
T-cells, PKCθ is expressed in several additional cell types and is involved in a 
variety of distinct physiological and pathological phenomena. For example, PKCθ
is expressed at high levels in platelets where it regulates signal transduction
from distinct surface receptors, and is required for optimal platelet activation 
and aggregation, as well as haemostasis. In addition, PKCθ is involved in
physiological processes regulating insulin resistance and susceptibility to
obesity, and is expressed at high levels in gastrointestinal stromal tumours
(GISTs), although the functional importance of PKCθ in these processes and cell
types is not fully clear. The present article briefly reviews selected topics
relevant to the biological roles of PKCθ in health and disease.

DOI: 10.1042/BST20140180 
PMID: 25399558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

