
1. Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Dec;92(6):555-63. doi: 10.1139/bcb-2014-0074. Epub 2014
Sep 18.

Discovery of novel membrane binding structures and functions.

Kufareva I(1), Lenoir M, Dancea F, Sridhar P, Raush E, Bissig C, Gruenberg J,
Abagyan R, Overduin M.

Author information: 
(1)a Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

The function of a protein is determined by its intrinsic activity in the context 
of its subcellular distribution. Membranes localize proteins within cellular
compartments and govern their specific activities. Discovering such
membrane-protein interactions is important for understanding biological
mechanisms and could uncover novel sites for therapeutic intervention. We present
a method for detecting membrane interactive proteins and their exposed residues
that insert into lipid bilayers. Although the development process involved
analysis of how C1b, C2, ENTH, FYVE, Gla, pleckstrin homology (PH), and PX
domains bind membranes, the resulting membrane optimal docking area (MODA) method
yields predictions for a given protein of known three-dimensional structures
without referring to canonical membrane-targeting modules. This approach was
tested on the Arf1 GTPase, ATF2 acetyltransferase, von Willebrand factor A3
domain, and Neisseria gonorrhoeae MsrB protein and further refined with membrane 
interactive and non-interactive FAPP1 and PKD1 pleckstrin homology domains,
respectively. Furthermore we demonstrate how this tool can be used to discover
unprecedented membrane binding functions as illustrated by the Bro1 domain of
Alix, which was revealed to recognize lysobisphosphatidic acid (LBPA). Validation
of novel membrane-protein interactions relies on other techniques such as nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), which was used here to map the sites of
micelle interaction. Together this indicates that genome-wide identification of
known and novel membrane interactive proteins and sites is now feasible and
provides a new tool for functional annotation of the proteome.

DOI: 10.1139/bcb-2014-0074 
PMCID: PMC4267288
PMID: 25394204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

