
1. Immunology. 2015 Apr;144(4):704-16. doi: 10.1111/imm.12425.

The role of Gr-1(+) cells and tumour necrosis factor-α signalling during
Clostridium difficile colitis in mice.

McDermott AJ(1), Higdon KE, Muraglia R, Erb-Downward JR, Falkowski NR, McDonald
RA, Young VB, Huffnagle GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

The host response to Clostridium difficile infection in antibiotic-treated mice
is characterized by robust recruitment of Gr-1(+) cells, increased expression of 
inflammatory cytokines including tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and the
development of severe epithelial damage. To investigate the role of Gr-1(+) cells
and TNF-α during C. difficile colitis, we treated infected mice with monoclonal
antibodies against Gr-1 or TNF-α. Mice were challenged with vegetative cells of
C. difficile strain VPI 10463 following treatment with the third-generation
cephalosporin ceftriaxone. Ceftriaxone treatment alone was associated with
significant changes in cytokine expression within the colonic mucosa but not
overt inflammatory histopathological changes. In comparison, C. difficile
infection following ceftriaxone treatment was associated with increased
expression of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines including Cxcl1, Cxcl2, Il1b,
Il17f and Tnfa, as well as robust recruitment of Ly6C(Mid)  Gr-1(High)
neutrophils and Ly6C(High) Gr-1(Mid) monocytes and the development of severe
colonic histopathology. Anti-Gr-1 antibody treatment resulted in effective
depletion of both Ly6C(Mid) Gr-1(High) neutrophils and Ly6C(High) Gr-1(Mid)
monocytes: however, we observed no protection from the development of severe
pathology or reduction in expression of the pro-inflammatory cytokines Il1b, Il6,
Il33 and Tnfa following anti-Gr-1 treatment. By contrast, anti-TNF-α treatment
did not affect Gr-1(+) cell recruitment, but was associated with increased
expression of Il6 and Il1b. Additionally, Ffar2, Ffar3, Tslp, Tff and Ang4
expression was significantly reduced in anti-TNF-α-treated animals, in
association with marked intestinal histopathology. These studies raise the
possibility that TNF-α may play a role in restraining inflammation and protecting
the epithelium during C. difficile infection.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.12425 
PMCID: PMC4368176
PMID: 25399934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

