
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2014 Nov 3;4:156. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2014.00156.
eCollection 2014.

Analysis of carbon substrates used by Listeria monocytogenes during growth in
J774A.1 macrophages suggests a bipartite intracellular metabolism.

Grubmüller S(1), Schauer K(2), Goebel W(3), Fuchs TM(2), Eisenreich W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Biochemie, Technische Universität München Garching, Germany.
(2)Abteilung Mikrobiologie, Zentralinstitut für Ernährungs- und
Lebensmittelforschung (ZIEL), Technische Universität München Freising, Germany.
(3)Department for Bacteriology, Max von Pettenkofer Institute,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Germany.

Intracellular bacterial pathogens (IBPs) are dependent on various nutrients
provided by the host cells. Different strategies may therefore be necessary to
adapt the intracellular metabolism of IBPs to the host cells. The specific carbon
sources, the catabolic pathways participating in their degradation, and the
biosynthetic performances of IBPs are still poorly understood. In this report, we
have exploited the technique of (13)C-isotopologue profiling to further study the
carbon metabolism of Listeria monocytogenes by using the EGDe wild-type strain
and mutants (defective in the uptake and/or catabolism of various carbon
compounds) replicating in J774A.1 macrophages. For this goal, the infected
macrophages were cultivated in the presence of [1,2-(13)C2]glucose,
[U-(13)C3]glycerol, [U-(13)C3]pyruvate, [U-(13)C3]lactate, or a mix of
[U-(13)C]amino acids. GC/MS-based isotopologue profiling showed efficient
utilization of amino acids, glucose 6-phosphate, glycerol, and (at a low extent) 
also of lactate but not of pyruvate by the IBPs. Most amino acids imported from
the host cells were directly used for bacterial protein biosynthesis and hardly
catabolized. However, Asp was de novo synthesized by the IBPs and not imported
from the host cell. As expected, glycerol was catabolized via the ATP-generating 
lower part of the glycolytic pathway, but apparently not used for
gluconeogenesis. The intermediates generated from glucose 6-phosphate in the
upper part of the glycolytic pathway and the pentose phosphate shunt likely serve
primarily for anabolic purposes (probably for the biosynthesis of cell wall
components and nucleotides). This bipartite bacterial metabolism which involves
at least two major carbon substrates-glycerol mainly for energy supply and
glucose 6-phosphate mainly for indispensible anabolic performances-may put less
nutritional stress on the infected host cells, thereby extending the lifespan of 
the host cells to the benefit of the IBPs.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2014.00156 
PMCID: PMC4217532
PMID: 25405102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

