
1. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Mar;45(3):728-37. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444787. Epub 2014 Dec
16.

BST2/Tetherin is constitutively expressed on human thymocytes with the phenotype 
and function of Treg cells.

Epeldegui M(1), Blom B, Uittenbogaart CH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA, USA; UCLA AIDS Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

In contrast to peripheral plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs), thymic pDCs constitutively
express low levels of IFN-α. This leads to induction of interferon secondary
genes (ISGs) in medullary thymocytes, raising the question whether IFN-α may play
a role in T-cell development. When characterizing further differences between
peripheral and thymic pDCs, we found that thymic pDCs have a phenotype consistent
with an "activated signature" including expression of TNF-α and bone marrow
stromal cell antigen 2 (BST2), but no expression of ILT7. Given that BST2 is
induced by IFN-α, and IFN-α secretion is controlled by interaction between ILT7
and BST2, this regulatory pathway is apparently lost in thymic pDCs. Further, we 
also show that BST2 is constitutively expressed on a subset of medullary
thymocytes at the mRNA and protein level reflecting a history of IFN-α transduced
signals. The majority of BST2(+) thymocytes express CCR5 rendering them prevalent
targets for R5-tropic HIV infection. Moreover, BST2(+) thymocytes express Foxp3
and CD25, consistent with the phenotype of natural Treg cells, and exert
suppressive activity as they impair the proliferation of autologous CD3(+)
thymocytes. Collectively, our results suggest that low levels of IFN-α secreted
by thymic pDCs play an important role in the development of natural Treg cells.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201444787 
PMCID: PMC4361012
PMID: 25408362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

