
1. Transgenic Res. 2015 Apr;24(2):353-64. doi: 10.1007/s11248-014-9847-3. Epub 2014 
Nov 23.

Utilization of plant-derived recombinant human β-defensins (hBD-1 and hBD-2) for 
averting salmonellosis.

Patro S(1), Maiti S, Panda SK, Dey N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Function and Regulation, Department of Biotechnology,
Institute of Life Sciences, Govt. of India, Nalco Square, Chandrasekherpur,
Bhubaneswar, 751 023, Odisha, India.

We describe the use of plant-made β-defensins as effective antimicrobial
substances for controlling salmonellosis, a deadly infection caused by Salmonella
typhimurium (referred to further as S. typhi). Human β-defensin-1 (hBD-1) and -2 
(hBD-2) were expressed under the control of strong constitutive promoters in
tobacco plants, and bio-active β-defensins were successfully extracted. In the in
vitro studies, enriched recombinant plant-derived human β-defensin-1 (phBD-1) and
-2 (phBD-2) obtained from both T1 and T2 transgenic plants showed significant
antimicrobial activity against Escherichia coli and S. typhi when used
individually and in various combinations. The 2:1 peptide combination of
phBD-1:phBD-2 with peptides isolated from T1-and T2-generation plants reduced the
growth of S. typhi by 96 and 85 %, respectively. In vivo studies employing the
mouse model (Balb/c) of Salmonella infection clearly demonstrated that the
administration of plant-derived defensins individually and in different
combinations enhanced the mean survival time of Salmonella-infected animals. When
treatment consisted of the 2:1 phBD-1:phBD-2 combination, approximately 50 % of
the infected mice were still alive at 206 h post-inoculation; the lowest number
of viable S. typhi was observed in the liver and spleen of infected animals. We
conclude that plant-made recombinant β-defensins (phBD-1 and phBD-2) are
promising antimicrobial substances and have the potential to become additional
tools against salmonellosis, particularly when used in combination.

DOI: 10.1007/s11248-014-9847-3 
PMID: 25417183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

