
1. Med Oncol. 2015 Jan;32(1):366. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0366-0. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Prodigiosin isolated from cell wall of Serratia marcescens alters expression of
apoptosis-related genes and increases apoptosis in colorectal cancer cells.

Hassankhani R(1), Sam MR, Esmaeilou M, Ahangar P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Islamic Azad University, Urmia
Branch, Urmia, Iran.

Colorectal cancer remains often refractory to classic therapies. In consequence, 
the search for new anti-tumor agents with minimal toxicity is of particular
interest in colon cancer treatment. Prodigiosin as a secondary metabolite of
Serratia marcescens induces apoptosis in various kinds of cancer cells with low
toxicity on normal cells. In the present study, we evaluated the effect of
prodigiosin on proliferation and expression of apoptotic-related genes in HT-29
cells. Malignant cells were treated to various concentrations of prodigiosin and 
proliferation rate, survivin, Bcl-2, Bax and Bad mRNA levels, caspase 3
activation and apoptosis were evaluated by different cellular and molecular
techniques. Treatment of cells with increasing concentration of prodigiosin
decreased significantly cell proliferation in a dose- and time-dependent manner. 
Following 48-h treatment, growth rate was measured to be 77 ± 6.8, 41.3 ± 3.1 and
46 ± 6.3 % for 100, 400 and 600 nM prodigiosin, respectively, compared to
untreated cells. This molecule induced 61.7, 90 and 89 % decrease in survivin
mRNA level as well as 1.9-, 2.8- and 2.2-fold increase in caspase 3 activation
for indicated concentrations of prodigiosin, respectively. The level of Bcl-2
mRNA was inversely proportional to Bax and Bad mRNA levels. Low mRNA levels of
Bcl-2 combined with high levels of Bax and Bad mRNAs were correlated to higher
apoptosis rate in treated cells. Our data suggest that prodigiosin-induced
apoptosis may ascribe to Bcl-2 and survivin inhibition in HT-29 cells and these
genes may provide promising molecular targets of prodigiosin. Collectively,
prodigiosin may have a great potential for colorectal cancer-directed therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-014-0366-0 
PMID: 25429836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

