
1. BMC Microbiol. 2014 Nov 30;14:275. doi: 10.1186/s12866-014-0275-6.

Differential regulation of interleukin-8 and human beta-defensin 2 in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa-infected intestinal epithelial cells.

Huang FC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, 123, Ta-pei Road, Niao-sung District,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. huang817@cgmh.org.tw.

BACKGROUND: The human opportunistic pathogen, Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P.
aeruginosa) carries the highest case fatality rate of all gram-negative
infections. Unfortunately, antimicrobial therapy has not been demonstrated to
improve clinical outcome and the emergence of multidrug resistant P. aeruginosa
has become a major concern in the hospital setting. Fever and diarrhea are the
two most common initial symptoms in P. aeruginosa sepsis in previously healthy
infants and children. This implies that intestinal epithelial cells in first
contact with the pathogen may play an important role in innate immunity to P.
aeruginosa infection. Human beta-defensins-2 (hBD-2) and interleukin-8 (IL-8) are
crucial for host defense at mucosa but IL-8 may give rise to characteristic
pathology of colitis.
RESULTS: Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain PAO1 was used to infect SW480, an
intestinal epithelial cell. IL-8 and hBD-2 mRNA expression and protein secretion 
were then assessed in SW480 cells using RT-PCR and enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA), respectively. Intracellular signaling pathways and
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD) 1 protein expression were
analyzed by Western blot in SW480 cells in the presence or absence of inhibitors 
or transfected with siRNA. We demonstrate that prolonged infection by P.
aeruginosa results in suppression of IL-8 but enhancement of hBD-2, either
protein secretion and mRNA expression, in SW480 cells. Inhibitors of ERK
suppressed but inhibitor of PI3K enhanced P. aeruginosa-induced IL-8 mRNA
expression in SW480 cells while both signaling had no effect on P.
aeruginosa-induced hBD-2 expression in SW480 cells. On the other hand, NOD 1 was 
illustrated to get involved in P. aeruginosa-induced hBD-2 mRNA expression and
protein production in SW480 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The P. aeruginosa-induced antimicrobial peptide in IECs continuously
protect the host against prolonged infection, while modulation of proinflammatory
responses prevents the host from the detrimental effects of overwhelming
inflammation. Thus, P. aeruginosa-induced innate immunity in IECs represents a
host protective mechanism, which may provide new insight into the pathogenesis of
inflammatory bowel diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-014-0275-6 
PMCID: PMC4261737
PMID: 25433669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

