
1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2015 May;72(9):1825-37. doi: 10.1007/s00018-014-1783-0. Epub
2014 Nov 28.

Topoisomerase II inhibition suppresses the proliferation of telomerase-negative
cancers.

Hsieh MH(1), Tsai CH, Lin CC, Li TK, Hung TW, Chang LT, Hsin LW, Teng SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
No. 1, Sec. 1, Jen-Ai Road, Taipei, 100, Taiwan, cooper777@hotmail.com.

Telomere maintenance is required for chromosome stability, and telomeres are
typically elongated by telomerase following DNA replication. In both tumor and
yeast cells that lack telomerase, telomeres are maintained via an alternative
recombination mechanism. Previous studies have indicated that yeast Sgs1 and Top3
may work together to remove highly negative supercoils that are generated from
recombination. However, the mechanism by which cells eradicate highly positive
supercoils during recombination remains unclear. In the present study, we
demonstrate that TOP2 is involved in telomere-telomere recombination. Disturbance
of telomeric structure by RIF1 or RIF2 deletion alleviates the requirement for
TOP2 in telomere-telomere recombination. In human telomerase-negative alternative
lengthening of telomere (ALT) cells, TOP2α or TOP2β knockdown decreases
ALT-associated PML bodies, increases telomere dysfunction-induced foci and
triggers telomere shortening. Similar results were observed when ALT cells were
treated with ICRF-193, a TOP2 inhibitor. Importantly, ICRF-193 treatment blocks
ALT-associated phenotypes in vitro, causes telomere shortening, and inhibits ALT 
cell proliferation in mice. Taken together, these findings imply that TOP2 is
involved in the ALT pathway, perhaps by resolving the highly positive supercoil
structure at the front of the helicase. Inhibition of topoisomerase II may be a
promising therapeutic approach that can be used to prevent cell proliferation in 
ALT-type cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-014-1783-0 
PMID: 25430478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

