
1. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2015 Mar;7(1):31-7. doi:
10.1007/s12602-014-9180-4.

Effect of a Probiotic Containing Bacillus licheniformis and Bacillus subtilis and
Ferroin Solution on Growth Performance, Body Composition and Haematological
Parameters in Kutum (Rutilus frisii kutum) Fry.

Azarin H(1), Aramli MS, Imanpour MR, Rajabpour M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fisheries, Gorgan University of Agricultural Sciences and
Natural Resources, Gorgan, Iran.

This study aimed to assess the efficacy of BioPlus 2B, a probiotic containing
Bacillus licheniformis and B. subtilis and Ferroin solution on growth
performance, body composition and haematological parameters in kutum, Rutilus
frisii kutum, fry. The fish were fed dry pellets containing various ratios of
probiotics and Ferroin for 60 days after absorption of the yolk sac. At the end
of the trial, growth indices (final weight, weight gain, specific growth rate,
daily growth rate, food conversion ratio and condition factor), body composition 
(crude protein, crude lipid, ash and moisture) and haematological parameters
[haematocrit (Hct), haemoglobin (Hb), red blood cells (RBC), white blood cells
(WBC), neutrophils (NEUTR), lymphocytes (LYM), mean cell volume (MCV), mean cell 
haemoglobin (MCH) and mean cell haemoglobin concentration (MCHC)] were assessed. 
Regarding body composition, total protein levels were higher, and ash, moisture
and lipid levels were lower in fish receiving the probiotic and Ferroin
treatments compared with the control group (P < 0.05). Fish receiving diets
supplemented with probiotics and Ferroin solution showed significantly better
growth than those fed the basal diet (control). RBC, Hct, Hb, MCV, MCH and LYM
were all highest in fish fed probiotic (1.6 Ã— 10(9) CFU/g dry pellet) + Ferroin
solution (7 mg/kg dry pellet) + dry pellets. These results indicate that the
combination of probiotic and Ferroin solution represents an effective dietary
supplement for improving carcass quality, growth performance and haematological
parameters in kutum fry.

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-014-9180-4 
PMID: 25431124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

