
1. Eur J Med Chem. 2015 Jan 27;90:351-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2014.11.055. Epub
2014 Nov 27.

Catechol-based substrates of chalcone synthase as a scaffold for novel inhibitors
of PqsD.

Allegretta G(1), Weidel E(1), Empting M(1), Hartmann RW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Campus C2(3),
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Campus C2(3),
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany; Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Saarland
University, Campus C2(3), 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address:
rolf.hartmann@helmholtz-hzi.de.

A new strategy for treating Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections could be disrupting
the Pseudomonas Quinolone Signal (PQS) quorum sensing (QS) system. The goal is to
impair communication among the cells and, hence, reduce the expression of
virulence factors and the formation of biofilms. PqsD is an essential enzyme for 
the synthesis of PQS and shares some features with chalcone synthase (CHS2), an
enzyme expressed in Medicago sativa. Both proteins are quite similar concerning
the size of the active site, the catalytic residues and the electrostatic surface
potential at the entrance of the substrate tunnel. Hence, we evaluated selected
substrates of the vegetable enzyme as potential inhibitors of the bacterial
protein. This similarity-guided approach led to the identification of a new class
of PqsD inhibitors having a catechol structure as an essential feature for
activity, a saturated linker with two or more carbons and an ester moiety bearing
bulky substituents. The developed compounds showed PqsD inhibition with IC50
values in the single-digit micromolar range. The binding mode of these compounds 
was investigated by Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) experiments revealing that
their interaction with the protein is not influenced by the presence of the
anthranilic acid bound to active site cysteine. Importantly, some compounds
reduced the signal molecule production in cellulo.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2014.11.055 
PMID: 25437621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

