
1. J Biotechnol. 2015 Jan 10;193:108-19. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2014.10.036. Epub
2014 Nov 5.

Comparative proteomics analysis of high n-butanol producing metabolically
engineered Clostridium tyrobutyricum.

Ma C(1), Kojima K(2), Xu N(1), Mobley J(2), Zhou L(2), Yang ST(3), Liu XM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The University of Alabama, 
245 7th Avenue, Tuscaloosa, AL 35401, USA.
(2)Departments of Medicine and Biomedical Engineering, The University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, 703 19th Street South and 1530 3rd Avenue South, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.
(3)William G Lowrie Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The Ohio
State University, 140 West 19th Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Electronic
address: yang.15@osu.edu.
(4)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The University of Alabama, 
245 7th Avenue, Tuscaloosa, AL 35401, USA. Electronic address: mliu@eng.ua.edu.

The acidogenic Clostridium tyrobutyricum has recently been metabolically
engineered to produce n-butanol. The objective of this study was to obtain a
comprehensive understanding as to how butanol production was regulated in C.
tyrobutyricum to guide the engineering of next-generation strains. We performed a
comparative proteomics analysis, covering 78.1% of open reading frames and 95% of
core enzymes, using wild type, ACKKO mutant (Δack) producing 37.30 g/L of
butyrate and ACKKO-adhE2 mutant (Δack-adhE2) producing 16.68 g/L of butanol. In
ACKKO-adhE2, the expression of most glycolytic enzymes was decreased, the
thiolase (thl), acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase (ato), 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA
dehydrogenase (hbd) and crotonase (crt) that convert acetyl-CoA to butyryl-CoA
were increased, and the heterologous bifunctional acetaldehyde/alcohol
dehydrogenase (adhE2) catalyzing butanol formation was highly expressed. The
apparent imbalance of energy and redox was observed due to the downregulation of 
acids production and the addition of butanol synthesis pathway, which also
resulted in increased expression of chaperone proteins and glycerol-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (glpA) and the silence of sporulation transcription factor Spo0A
(spo0A) as the cellular responses to butanol production. This study revealed the 
mechanism of carbon redistribution, and limiting factors and rational metabolic
cell and process engineering strategies to achieve high butanol production in C. 
tyrobutyricum.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2014.10.036 
PMID: 25449011  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

