
1. Metab Eng. 2015 Jan;27:38-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2014.10.006. Epub 2014 Oct 30.

Improved artificial pathway for biosynthesis of
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyhexanoate) with high C6-monomer composition
from fructose in Ralstonia eutropha.

Insomphun C(1), Xie H(1), Mifune J(1), Kawashima Y(1), Orita I(1), Nakamura S(1),
Fukui T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501,
Japan.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501,
Japan. Electronic address: tfukui@bio.titech.ac.jp.

Poly((R)-3-hydroxybutyrate-co-(R)-3-hydroxyhexanoate) [P(3HB-co-3HHx)], a
flexible and practical kind of polyhydroxyalkanoates, is generally produced from 
plant oils and fatty acids by several wild and recombinant bacteria. This study
established an improved artificial pathway for the biosynthesis of P(3HB-co-3HHx)
with high 3HHx composition from structurally unrelated fructose in Ralstonia
eutropha. Depression of (R)-specific reduction of acetoacetyl-CoA by the deletion
of phaB1 was an effective modification for formation of the C6-monomer unit from 
fructose driven by crotonyl-CoA carboxylase/reductase (Ccr). Co-overexpression of
phaJ4a, which encodes medium-chain-length (R)-enoyl-CoA hydratase, with ccr
promoted the incorporation of both 3HB and 3HHx units. Further introduction of
emdMm, a synthetic gene encoding ethylmalonyl-CoA decarboxylase derived from
mouse, was remarkably effective for P(3HB-co-3HHx) biosynthesis, probably by
converting ethylmalonyl-CoA generated by the reductive carboxylase activity of
Ccr back into butyryl-CoA. A high cellular content of P(3HB-co-3HHx) composed of 
22mol% 3HHx could be produced from fructose by the engineered strain of R.
eutropha with ΔphaB1 genotype expressing ccr, phaJ4a, and emd.

Copyright © 2014 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2014.10.006 
PMID: 25446974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

