
1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2015 Jul;151:12-24. doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2014.10.020.
Epub 2014 Nov 3.

Origin of the response to adrenal and sex steroids: Roles of promiscuity and
co-evolution of enzymes and steroid receptors.

Baker ME(1), Nelson DR(2), Studer RA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, 0693, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0693, United States. Electronic address:
mbaker@ucsd.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Biochemistry, 858 Madison Ave.,
Suite G01, University of Tennessee, Memphis, TN 38163, United States. Electronic 
address: dnelson@uthsc.edu.
(3)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute
(EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK.
Electronic address: rstuder@ebi.ac.uk.

Many responses to adrenal and sex steroids are mediated by receptors that belong 
to the nuclear receptor family of transcription factors. We investigated the
co-evolution of these vertebrate steroid receptors and the enzymes that
synthesize adrenal and sex steroids through data mining of genomes from
cephalochordates [amphioxus], cyclostomes [lampreys, hagfish], chondrichthyes
[sharks, rays, skates], actinopterygii [ray-finned fish], sarcopterygii
[coelacanths, lungfishes and terrestrial vertebrates]. An ancestor of the
estrogen receptor and 3-ketosteroid receptors evolved in amphioxus. A corticoid
receptor and a progesterone receptor evolved in cyclostomes, and an androgen
receptor evolved in gnathostomes. Amphioxus contains CYP11, CYP17, CYP19,
3β/Δ5-4-HSD and 17β-HSD14, which suffice for the synthesis of estradiol and
Δ5-androstenediol. Amphioxus also contains CYP27, which catalyzes the synthesis
of 27-hydroxy-cholesterol, another estrogen. Lamprey contains, in addition,
CYP21, which catalyzes the synthesis of 11-deoxycortisol. Chondrichthyes contain,
in addition, CYP11A, CYP11C, CYP17A1, CYP17A2. Coelacanth also contains CYP11C1, 
the current descendent from a common ancestor with modern land vertebrate CYP11B 
genes, which catalyze the synthesis of cortisol, corticosterone and aldosterone. 
Interestingly, CYP11B2, aldosterone synthase, evolved from separate gene
duplications in at least old world monkeys and two suborders of rodents.
Sciurognathi (including mice and rats) and Hystricomorpha (including guinea
pigs). Thus, steroid receptors and steroidogenic enzymes co-evolved at key
transitions in the evolution of vertebrates. Together, this suite of receptors
and enzymes through their roles in transcriptional regulation of reproduction,
development, homeostasis and the response to stress contributed to the
evolutionary diversification of vertebrates. This article is part of a Special
Issue entitled 'Steroid/Sterol signaling'.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2014.10.020 
PMID: 25445914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

