
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2015 Mar;49(1):49-58. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.11.005. Epub 2014
Nov 10.

In contrast to other species, α-Galactosylceramide (α-GalCer) is not an
immunostimulatory NKT cell agonist in horses.

Dossa RG(1), Alperin DC(1), Garzon D(2), Mealey RH(1), Brown WC(1), Jervis PJ(3),
Besra GS(3), Cox LR(4), Hines SA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, College of Veterinary Medicine, P.O. Box 647040, Pullman, WA
99164-7040, USA.
(2)Unilever Centre for Molecular Science Informatics, Department of Chemistry,
University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW, UK.
(3)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham
B15 2TT, UK.
(4)School of Chemistry, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, 
UK.
(5)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, College of Veterinary Medicine, P.O. Box 647040, Pullman, WA
99164-7040, USA. Electronic address: shines@vetmed.wsu.edu.

α-GalCer is a potent immunomodulatory molecule that is presented to NKT cells via
the CD1 antigen-presenting system. We hypothesized that when used as an adjuvant 
α-GalCer would induce protective immune responses against Rhodococcus equi, an
important pathogen of young horses. Here we demonstrate that the equine CD1d
molecule shares most features found in CD1d from other species and has a suitable
lipid-binding groove for presenting glycolipids to NKT cells. However, equine CTL
stimulated with α-GalCer failed to kill cells infected with R. equi, and α-GalCer
did not increase killing by CTL co-stimulated with R. equi antigen. Likewise,
α-GalCer did not induce the lymphoproliferation of equine PBMC or increase the
proliferation of R. equi-stimulated cells. Intradermal injection of α-GalCer in
horses did not increase the recruitment of lymphocytes or cytokine production.
Furthermore, α-GalCer-loaded CD1d tetramers, which have been shown to be broadly 
cross-reactive, did not bind equine lymphocytes. Altogether, our results
demonstrate that in contrast to previously described species, horses are unable
to respond to α-GalCer. This raises questions about the capabilities and function
of NKT cells and other lipid-specific T lymphocytes in horses.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.11.005 
PMID: 25445911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

