
1. Mar Pollut Bull. 2014 Dec 15;89(1-2):191-200. doi:
10.1016/j.marpolbul.2014.10.003. Epub 2014 Oct 23.

Bioremediation potential of microorganisms derived from petroleum reservoirs.

Dellagnezze BM(1), de Sousa GV(2), Martins LL(2), Domingos DF(1), Limache EEG(1),
de Vasconcellos SP(3), da Cruz GF(2), de Oliveira VM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Resources Division, Research Center for Chemistry, Biology and
Agriculture (CPQBA), University of Campinas - UNICAMP, CEP 13148-218, Paulinia,
Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Engineering and Petroleum Exploration, Darcy Ribeiro North
Fluminense State University - LENEP/UENF, POB 119562, 27910-970 Macaé, RJ,
Brazil.
(3)Federal University of São Paulo - UNIFESP, CEP 04021-001, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Microbial Resources Division, Research Center for Chemistry, Biology and
Agriculture (CPQBA), University of Campinas - UNICAMP, CEP 13148-218, Paulinia,
Brazil. Electronic address: vmaia@cpqba.unicamp.br.

Bacterial strains and metagenomic clones, both obtained from petroleum
reservoirs, were evaluated for petroleum degradation abilities either
individually or in pools using seawater microcosms for 21 days. Gas
Chromatography-Flame Ionization Detector (GC-FID) and Gas Chromatography-Mass
Spectrometry (GC-MS) analyses were carried out to evaluate crude oil degradation.
The results showed that metagenomic clones 1A and 2B were able to biodegrade
n-alkanes (C14 to C33) and isoprenoids (phytane and pristane), with rates ranging
from 31% to 47%, respectively. The bacteria Dietzia maris CBMAI 705 and
Micrococcus sp. CBMAI 636 showed higher rates reaching 99% after 21 days. The
metagenomic clone pool biodegraded these compounds at rates ranging from 11% to
45%. Regarding aromatic compound biodegradation, metagenomic clones 2B and 10A
were able to biodegrade up to 94% of phenanthrene and methylphenanthrenes (3-MP, 
2-MP, 9-MP and 1-MP) with rates ranging from 55% to 70% after 21 days, while the 
bacteria Dietzia maris CBMAI 705 and Micrococcus sp. CBMAI 636 were able to
biodegrade 63% and up to 99% of phenanthrene, respectively, and
methylphenanthrenes (3-MP, 2-MP, 9-MP and 1-MP) with rates ranging from 23% to
99% after 21 days. In this work, isolated strains as well as metagenomic clones
were capable of degrading several petroleum compounds, revealing an innovative
strategy and a great potential for further biotechnological and bioremediation
applications.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2014.10.003 
PMID: 25457810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

