
1. Prostate. 2015 Mar 1;75(4):381-9. doi: 10.1002/pros.22924. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Influence of E. coli-induced prostatic inflammation on expression of
androgen-responsive genes and transforming growth factor beta 1 cascade genes in 
rats.

Funahashi Y(1), Wang Z, O'Malley KJ, Tyagi P, DeFranco DB, Gingrich JR, Takahashi
R, Majima T, Gotoh M, Yoshimura N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Department of Urology, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Prostatic inflammation is reportedly associated with the development 
of prostatic hyperplasia. We investigated the effects of prostatic inflammation
on expression levels of androgen-responsive genes and growth factors in the rat
prostate.
METHODS: Prostatic inflammation was induced by Escherichia coli (strain 1677)
injection (0.2 ml of 1 × 10(8) CFU/ml) into the prostatic urethra of male
Sprague-Dawley rats, and ventral lobes of the prostate were harvested on day 84. 
Rats were given 10 mg/kg celecoxib during the last month in the COX-2 inhibitor
treated group. Histopathology and multiplex enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) for inflammation-related proteins were performed. Glandular epithelial
cells and stromal regions were separately isolated using laser-capture
microdissection (LCM). Real-time RT-PCR was performed to examine mRNA levels of
androgen-responsive genes in the epithelium and tumor growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1)
cascade genes in the stroma.
RESULTS: Hematoxylin and eosin staining showed that mild inflammation was
distributed diffusely throughout the prostate. Polymorphonuclear cells
infiltrated the slightly edematous stroma, but no morphological changes were
observed in the epithelium. Immunohistochemically, expression of androgen
receptor and TGF-β1 in addition to IL-6 and cyclooxigenase-2 (COX-2) were
enhanced in the E. coli inoculated rats. All of these factors were suppressed in 
the celecoxib-treated rats. Upregulation of IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6, and RANTES in the
E. coli-inoculated rats was normalized by celecoxib treatment. Significant
upregulation of androgen receptor and androgen-responsive genes such as Eaf2,
ELL2, FKBP5, calreticulin, and ornithine decarboxylase was observed in the
LCM-dissected epithelium. Also TGF-β1 and its downstream cascade genes such as
Hic-5, collagen 1, and fibronectin were upregulated significantly in the
LCM-dissected stroma. The COX-2 inhibitor treatment suppressed upregulation of
these genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Prostatic inflammation changed the expression of androgen-responsive
genes in the epithelium and TGF-β1 cascade genes in the stroma. Activation of
TGF-β1 cascade genes in the inflamed stroma, as well as altered
androgen-responsive gene expression in the epithelium, might be involved in the
development of BPH. Prostate 75:381-389, 2015. © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/pros.22924 
PMCID: PMC4293351
PMID: 25451715  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

