
1. Immunobiology. 2015 Mar;220(3):414-21. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2014.10.006. Epub
2014 Oct 18.

Genetic polymorphisms of innate and adaptive immunity as predictors of outcome in
critically ill patients.

Kompoti M(1), Michopoulos A(2), Michalia M(1), Clouva-Molyvdas PM(1), Germenis
AE(2), Speletas M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Intensive Care Unit, Thriassion General Hospital of Eleusis, Athens, Greece.
(2)Department of Immunology and Histocompatibility, University of Thessaly,
School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Larissa, Greece.
(3)Department of Immunology and Histocompatibility, University of Thessaly,
School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Larissa, Greece. Electronic
address: speletas@gmail.com.

Sepsis and septic shock frequently cause the admission or complicate the clinical
course of critically ill patients admitted in the intensive care units (ICU).
Genetic variations disrupting the immune sensing of infectious organisms, could
affect the ability of the immune system to respond to infection, and may
influence both the genetic predisposition to infection and the diversity of the
clinical presentation of sepsis. The aim of this study was to uncover possible
associations between common functional immune gene polymorphisms (of both innate 
and adaptive immunity) and ICU-acquired sepsis and mortality. The TLR4-D299G
(rs4986790), TLR4-T399I (rs4986791), C2-c.841_849+19del28 (rs9332736), TACI-C104R
(rs34557412), BAFFR-P21R (rs77874543), and BAFFR-H159Y (rs61756766) polymorphisms
were detected in a cohort of 215 critically ill patients, admitted in an 8-bed
medical/surgical ICU. Interestingly, TLR4-D299G, TLR4-T399I and BAFFR-P21R
carriage was associated with a lower risk of ICU-acquired sepsis. This
association applied particularly in medical patients, while in trauma and
surgical patients no significant associations were observed. Moreover, carriers
of TACI-C104R displayed an undiagnosed mild to moderate hypogammaglobulinemia
along with a significantly lower survival rate in the ICU, although lethal events
were not attributed to sepsis. These findings further elucidate the role that
host immune genetic variations may play in the susceptibility to ICU-acquired
sepsis and ICU mortality.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2014.10.006 
PMID: 25454804  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

