
1. Front Microbiol. 2014 Nov 14;5:601. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00601. eCollection
2014.

The R package otu2ot for implementing the entropy decomposition of nucleotide
variation in sequence data.

Ramette A(1), Buttigieg PL(2).

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for
Marine Microbiology Bremen, Germany.
(2)Organic Geochemistry Department, MARUM - Center for Marine Environmental
Sciences Bremen, Germany ; HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology,
Alfred-Wegener-Institut Helmholtz-Zentrum f√ºr Polar- und Meeresforschung
Bremerhaven, Germany.

Oligotyping is a novel, supervised computational method that classifies closely
related sequences into "oligotypes" (OTs) based on subtle nucleotide variation
(Eren et al., 2013). Its application to microbial datasets has helped reveal
ecological patterns which are often hidden by the way sequence data are currently
clustered to define operational taxonomic units (OTUs). Here, we implemented the 
OT entropy decomposition procedure and its unsupervised version, Minimal Entropy 
Decomposition (MED; Eren et al., 2014c), in the statistical programming language 
and environment, R. The aim of this implementation is to facilitate the
integration of computational routines, interactive statistical analyses, and
visualization into a single framework. In addition, two complementary approaches 
are implemented: (1) An analytical method (the broken stick model) is proposed to
help identify OTs of low abundance that could be generated by chance alone and
(2) a one-pass profiling (OP) method, to efficiently identify those OTUs whose
subsequent oligotyping would be most promising to be undertaken. These
enhancements are especially useful for large datasets, where a manual screening
of entropy analysis results and the creation of a full set of OTs may not be
feasible. The package and procedures are illustrated by several tutorials and
examples.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00601 
PMCID: PMC4231947
PMID: 25452747 

