
1. Immunol Lett. 2015 Jan;163(1):84-95. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2014.11.013. Epub 2014 
Nov 29.

Human megakaryocyte progenitors derived from hematopoietic stem cells of normal
individuals are MHC class II-expressing professional APC that enhance Th17 and
Th1/Th17 responses.

Finkielsztein A(1), Schlinker AC(2), Zhang L(1), Miller WM(3), Datta SK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, McCormick School of
Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.
(3)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, McCormick School of
Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA; Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA; Department of
Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic address: skd257@northwestern.edu.

Platelets, like stromal cells, present antigen only via MHC class I, but the
immune potential of their progenitors has not been explored in humans. We derived
CD34(+)CD117(+)CD41(+)CD151(+) megakaryocyte progenitors (MKp) in vitro from
mobilized peripheral blood hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPC) of
normal subjects using culture conditions akin to bone marrow niche, or organs
that support extramedullary hematopoiesis. The MKp expressed MHC Class II in
contrast to platelets and functioned as professional APC before they matured
further. Moreover, MKp constitutively expressed mRNA encoding mediators for human
Th17 expansion, including IL-1, IL-18, IL-6, TGFβ, IL-23, BAFF, and COX2. MKp
also expressed high levels of type I interferon and IRF5 mRNA. In contrast to
platelets, MKp augmented the expansion of Th17, Th1, and potent Th17/Th1
double-positive cells in normal PBMC and CD4 line T cells from normal subjects or
lupus patients. The Th cell augmentation involved pre-committed memory cells, and
was significant although modest, because only non-cognate MKp-T cell interactions
could be studied, under non-polarizing conditions. Importantly, the MKp-mediated 
expansion was observed in the presence or absence of direct MKp-T cell contact.
Furthermore, MKp augmented Th17 responses against Candida albicans, a serious
opportunistic pathogen. These results indicate an immunologic role of MKp in
situations associated with extramedullary hematopoiesis and mobilization of HSPC.

Copyright © 2014 European Federation of Immunological Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2014.11.013 
PMCID: PMC4278953
PMID: 25454068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

