
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2015 Mar;107:29-34. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2014.11.003. Epub 2014
Nov 21.

Expression, refolding, purification and crystallization of the sensory domain of 
the TlpC chemoreceptor from Helicobacter pylori for structural studies.

Liu YC(1), Roujeinikova A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800,
Australia.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800,
Australia; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University,
Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia. Electronic address:
Anna.Roujeinikova@monash.edu.

Helicobacter pylori infections are associated with gastritis, duodenal and
gastric ulcers and gastric adenocarcinoma. Bacterial chemotaxis, mediated by four
different chemoreceptors (also termed transducer-like proteins (Tlp)), plays an
important role in initial colonization and development of disease. Chemoreceptor 
sensory domains of H. pylori share no significant sequence similarity with those 
of Escherichia coli or any other non-Epsilonproteobacteria. The structural basis 
of how chemical signals are recognized by chemoreceptors of H. pylori is poorly
understood mainly due to the lack of a robust procedure to purify their sensory
domains in a soluble form. This study reports a method for extraction of the
periplasmic sensory domain of transducer-like protein C (TlpC) from inclusion
bodies and refolding to yield 5mg pure crystallizable protein per 1l of bacterial
culture. Purified protein was monomeric in solution by size-exclusion
chromatography and folded according to the circular dichroism spectrum. Crystals 
have been grown by the hanging-drop vapor-diffusion method using PEG 4000 as a
precipitating agent. The crystals belonged to space group C2, with unit-cell
parameters a=189.3, b=103.2, c=61.8Å, β=98.3. A complete X-ray diffraction data
set has been collected to 2.2 Å resolution using cryocooling conditions and
synchrotron radiation. Self-rotation function and Matthews coefficient
calculations suggest that the asymmetric unit contains three monomers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2014.11.003 
PMID: 25462804  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

