
1. Anal Chim Acta. 2015 Jan 7;854:86-94. doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2014.11.015. Epub 2014
Nov 15.

An isotope-labeled chemical derivatization method for the quantitation of
short-chain fatty acids in human feces by liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry.

Han J(1), Lin K(1), Sequeira C(1), Borchers CH(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Victoria - Genome BC Proteomics Centre, University of Victoria, 
Vancouver Island Technology Park, 3101-4464 Markham Street, Victoria, BC V8Z 7X8,
Canada.
(2)University of Victoria - Genome BC Proteomics Centre, University of Victoria, 
Vancouver Island Technology Park, 3101-4464 Markham Street, Victoria, BC V8Z 7X8,
Canada; Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria,
Petch Building Room 207, 3800 Finnerty Road, Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada.
Electronic address: christoph@proteincentre.com.

Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) are produced by anaerobic gut microbiota in the
large bowel. Qualitative and quantitative measurements of SCFAs in the intestinal
tract and the fecal samples are important to understand the complex interplay
between diet, gut microbiota and host metabolism homeostasis. To develop a new
LC-MS/MS method for sensitive and reliable analysis of SCFAs in human fecal
samples, 3-nitrophenylhydrazine (3NPH) was employed for pre-analytical
derivatization to convert ten C2-C6 SCFAs to their 3-nitrophenylhydrazones under 
a single set of optimized reaction conditions and without the need of reaction
quenching. The derivatives showed excellent in-solution chemical stability. They 
were separated on a reversed-phase C18 column and quantitated by negative-ion
electrospray ionization - multiple-reaction monitoring (MRM)/MS. To achieve
accurate quantitation, the stable isotope-labeled versions of the derivatives
were synthesized in a single reaction vessel from (13)C6-3NPH, and were used as
internal standard to compensate for the matrix effects in ESI. Method validation 
showed on-column limits of detection and quantitation over the range from low to 
high femtomoles for the ten SCFAs, and the intra-day and inter-day precision for 
determination of nine of the ten SCFAs in human fecal samples was ≤8.8% (n=6).
The quantitation accuracy ranged from 93.1% to 108.4% (CVs≤4.6%, n=6). This
method was used to determine the SCFA concentrations and compositions in six
human fecal samples. One of the six samples, which was collected from a
clinically diagnosed type 2 diabetes patient showed a significantly high molar
ratio of branch-chain SCFAs to straight-chain SCFAs than the others. In summary, 
this work provides a new LC-MS/MS method for precise and accurate quantitation of
SCFAs in human feces.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aca.2014.11.015 
PMID: 25479871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

