
1. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Feb;45(2):584-91. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445114. Epub 2014 Dec
28.

Structural basis for ineffective T-cell responses to MHC anchor residue-improved 
"heteroclitic" peptides.

Madura F(1), Rizkallah PJ, Holland CJ, Fuller A, Bulek A, Godkin AJ, Schauenburg 
AJ, Cole DK, Sewell AK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, Cardiff University School of Medicine,
Heath Park, Cardiff, UK.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2015 Feb;45(2):380-2.

MHC anchor residue-modified "heteroclitic" peptides have been used in many cancer
vaccine trials and often induce greater immune responses than the wild-type
peptide. The best-studied system to date is the decamer MART-1/Melan-A26-35
peptide, EAAGIGILTV, where the natural alanine at position 2 has been modified to
leucine to improve human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A*0201 anchoring. The resulting 
ELAGIGILTV peptide has been used in many studies. We recently showed that T cells
primed with the ELAGIGILTV peptide can fail to recognize the natural
tumor-expressed peptide efficiently, thereby providing a potential molecular
reason for why clinical trials of this peptide have been unsuccessful. Here, we
solved the structure of a TCR in complex with HLA-A*0201-EAAGIGILTV peptide and
compared it with its heteroclitic counterpart , HLA-A*0201-ELAGIGILTV. The data
demonstrate that a suboptimal anchor residue at position 2 enables the TCR to
"pull" the peptide away from the MHC binding groove, facilitating extra contacts 
with both the peptide and MHC surface. These data explain how a TCR can
distinguish between two epitopes that differ by only a single MHC anchor residue 
and demonstrate how weak MHC anchoring can enable an induced-fit interaction with
the TCR. Our findings constitute a novel demonstration of the extreme sensitivity
of the TCR to minor alterations in peptide conformation.

Â© 2014 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201445114 
PMCID: PMC4357396
PMID: 25471691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

