
1. Drug Resist Updat. 2015 Jan;18:36-46. doi: 10.1016/j.drup.2014.11.001. Epub 2014 
Nov 21.

Antibody-targeted drugs and drug resistance--challenges and solutions.

Shefet-Carasso L(1), Benhar I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, The George S. Wise
Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, The George S. Wise
Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel. Electronic
address: benhar@post.tau.ac.il.

Antibody-based therapy of various human malignancies has shown efficacy in the
past 30 years and is now one of the most successful and leading strategies for
targeted treatment of patients harboring hematological malignancies and solid
tumors. Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) aim to take advantage of the affinity and
specificity of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to selectively deliver potent
cytotoxic drugs to antigen-expressing tumor cells. Key parameters for ADC include
choosing the optimal components of the ADC (the antibody, the linker and the
cytotoxic drug) and selecting the suitable cell-surface target antigen. Building 
on the success of recent FDA approval of brentuximab vedotin (Adcetris) and
ado-trastuzumab emtansine (Kadcyla), ADCs are currently a class of drugs with a
robust pipeline with clinical applications that are rapidly expanding. The more
ADCs are being evaluated in preclinical models and clinical trials, the clearer
are becoming the parameters and the challenges required for their therapeutic
success. This rapidly growing knowledge and clinical experience are revealing
novel modalities and mechanisms of resistance to ADCs, hence offering plausible
solutions to such challenges. Here, we review the key parameters for designing a 
powerful ADC, focusing on how ADCs are addressing the challenge of multiple drug 
resistance (MDR) and its rational overcoming.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drup.2014.11.001 
PMID: 25476546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

