
1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 5;9(12):e114722. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114722.
eCollection 2014.

Characterization of biosynthetic genes of ascamycin/dealanylascamycin featuring a
5'-O-sulfonamide moiety in Streptomyces sp. JCM9888.

Zhao C(1), Qi J(1), Tao W(1), He L(1), Xu W(1), Chan J(2), Deng Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Combinatory Biosynthesis and Drug Discovery (Ministry of
Education) and School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wuhan University, 185 East Lake
Road, Wuhan, 430071, PR China.
(2)Department of Chemistry, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong.

Ascamycin (ACM) and dealanylascamycin (DACM) are nucleoside antibiotics
elaborated by Streptomyces sp. JCM9888. The later shows broad spectrum inhibition
activity to various gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, eukaryotic
Trypanosoma and is also toxic to mice, while ascamycin is active against very
limited microorganisms, such as Xanthomonas. Both compounds share an unusual
5'-O-sulfonamide moiety which is attached to an adenosine nucleoside. In this
paper, we first report on the 30 kb gene cluster (23 genes, acmA to acmW)
involved in the biosynthesis of these two antibiotics and a biosynthetic assembly
line was proposed. Of them, six genes (AcmABGKIW) are hypothetical genes involved
in 5'-O-sulfonamide formation. Two flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)-dependent
chlorinase genes acmX and acmY were characterized which are significantly remote 
from acmA-W and postulated to be required for adenine C2-halogenation. Notably
gene disruption of acmE resulted in a mutant which could only produce
dealanylascamycin but was blocked in its ability to biosynthesize ascamycin,
revealing its key role of conversion of dealanylascamycin to ascamycin.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114722 
PMCID: PMC4257720
PMID: 25479601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

