
1. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Dec;30(12):1266-70.

[Mycoplasma genitalium lipid-associated membrane proteins induce endocervical
epithelial cells to express β-defensin-2].

[Article in Chinese]

Xie J(1), You X(2), Zeng Y(2), Li R(2), Chen L(2), Zhu C(2), He J(3), Yu M(2), Wu
Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Obstetrics, Center Hospital of Hengyang, Hengyang 421001,
China.
(2)Institution of Pathogenic Biology, Medical College, Hengyang 421001, China.
(3)Institution of Pathogenic Biology, Medical College, Department of Clinical
Laboratory, Affiliated Nanhua Hospital, University of South China, Hengyang
421001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the expression of human β-defensin-2 (hBD-2) induced by
Mycoplasma genitalium-derived lipid-associated membrane proteins (LAMPs) and its 
potential mechanism.
METHODS: Human endocervical epithelial End1/E6E7 cells were cultured in vitro and
stimulated by different concentrations of LAMPs for 48 hours, and the expressions
of hBD-2 mRNA and protein were detected by real-time RT-PCR and Western blotting,
respectively. Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) and TLR6 neutralizing antibodies for
End1/E6E7 cell cultivation, and dominant negative plasmids for cell transfection 
were used to analyze the roles of TLR2, TLR6 and MyD88 in mediating hBD-2
expression. Nuclear translocation of the nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) p65 subunit,
and its DNA-binding activity were detected by Western blotting and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), respectively. Pyrrolidine
dithiocarbamate (PDTC), an inhibitor of NF-κB, was used to investigate the effect
of NF-κB on hBD-2 expression.
RESULTS: Mycoplasma genitalium-derived LAMPs induced the expressions of hBD-2
mRNA and protein in End1/E6E7 cells. The expressions could be abrogated by TLR2
and TLR6 neutralizing antibodies, or their dominant negative plasmids. In
addition, dominant negative plasmids of MyD88 significantly decreased
LAMPs-induced hBD-2 expression. Western blotting showed that p65 was translocated
to the nucleus, and the DNA binding activity of NF-κB was enhanced after LAMPs
treatment. Furthermore, PDTC treatment decreased LAMPs- induced hBD-2 expression.
CONCLUSION: Mycoplasma genitalium-derived LAMPs can induce End1/E6E7 cells to
express hBD-2, which may be involved in the TLR2, TLR6/Myd88/NF-κB pathways.


PMID: 25481183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

