
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Feb;81(3):1168-76. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03295-14. Epub
2014 Dec 5.

Escherichia coli survival in, and release from, white-tailed deer feces.

Guber AK(1), Fry J(2), Ives RL(2), Rose JB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA akguber@msu.edu.
(2)Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.

White-tailed deer are an important reservoir for pathogens that can contribute a 
large portion of microbial pollution in fragmented agricultural and forest
landscapes. The scarcity of experimental data on survival of microorganisms in
and release from deer feces makes prediction of their fate and transport less
reliable and development of efficient strategies for environment protection more 
difficult. The goal of this study was to estimate parameters for modeling
Escherichia coli survival in and release from deer (Odocoileus virginianus)
feces. Our objectives were as follows: (i) to measure survival of E. coli in deer
pellets at different temperatures, (ii) to measure kinetics of E. coli release
from deer pellets at different rainfall intensities, and (iii) to estimate
parameters of models describing survival and release of microorganisms from deer 
feces. Laboratory experiments were conducted to study E. coli survival in deer
pellets at three temperatures and to estimate parameters of Chick's exponential
model with temperature correction based on the Arrhenius equation. Kinetics of E.
coli release from deer pellets were measured at two rainfall intensities and used
to derive the parameters of Bradford-Schijven model of bacterial release. The
results showed that parameters of the survival and release models obtained for E.
coli in this study substantially differed from those obtained by using other
source materials, e.g., feces of domestic animals and manures. This emphasizes
the necessity of comprehensive studies of survival of naturally occurring
populations of microorganisms in and release from wildlife animal feces in order 
to achieve better predictions of microbial fate and transport in fragmented
agricultural and forest landscapes.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03295-14 
PMCID: PMC4292497
PMID: 25480751  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

