
1. J Aquat Anim Health. 2015 Mar;27(1):1-11. doi: 10.1080/08997659.2014.953265.

Gill infection model for columnaris disease in common carp and rainbow trout.

Declercq AM(1), Chiers K, Haesebrouck F, Van den Broeck W, Dewulf J, Cornelissen 
M, Decostere A.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Morphology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine , Ghent University 
, Salisburylaan 133-9820 , Merelbeke , Belgium.

Challenge models generating gill lesions typical for columnaris disease were
developed for the fry of both Common Carp Cyprinus carpio and Rainbow Trout
Oncorhynchus mykiss by means of an immersion challenge and Flavobacterium
columnare field isolates were characterized regarding virulence. Carp inoculated 
with highly virulent isolates revealed diffuse, whitish discoloration of the
gills affecting all arches, while in trout mostly unilateral focal lesions, which
were restricted to the first two gill arches, occurred. Light microscopic
examination of the gills of carp exposed to highly virulent isolates revealed a
diffuse loss of branchial structures and desquamation and necrosis of gill
epithelium with fusion of filaments and lamellae. In severe cases, large parts of
the filaments were replaced with necrotic debris entangled with massive clusters 
of F. columnare bacterial cells enwrapped in an eosinophilic matrix. In trout,
histopathologic lesions were similar but less extensive and much more focal, and 
well delineated from apparently healthy tissue. Scanning and transmission
electron microscopic observations of the affected gills showed long, slender
bacterial cells contained in an extracellular matrix and in close contact with
the destructed gill tissue. This is the first study to reveal gill lesions
typical for columnaris disease at macroscopic, light microscopic, and
ultrastructural levels in both Common Carp and Rainbow Trout following a
challenge with F. columnare. The results provide a basis for research
opportunities to examine pathogen-gill interactions.

DOI: 10.1080/08997659.2014.953265 
PMID: 25488182  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

