
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2014 Dec 1;70(Pt 12):1688-92. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X14024935. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

Expression, purification and crystallization of two endonuclease III enzymes from
Deinococcus radiodurans.

Sarre A(1), Ökvist M(2), Klar T(2), Moe E(1), Timmins J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Department, NorStruct, UiT The Arctic University of Norway,
Forskningsparken 3, 9037 Tromsø, Norway.
(2)Structural Biology Group, European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, 71 Avenue
des Martyrs, 38043 Grenoble, France.

Endonuclease III is a bifunctional DNA glycosylase that removes a wide range of
oxidized bases in DNA. Deinococcus radiodurans is an extreme radiation-resistant 
and desiccation-resistant bacterium and possesses three genes encoding
endonuclease III enzymes in its genome: DR2438 (EndoIII-1), DR0289 (EndoIII-2)
and DR0982 (EndoIII-3). Here, EndoIII-1 and an N-terminally truncated form of
EndoIII-3 (EndoIII-3Δ76) have been expressed, purified and crystallized, and
preliminary X-ray crystallographic analyses have been performed to 2.15 and
1.31 Å resolution, respectively. The EndoIII-1 crystals belonged to the
monoclinic space group C2, with unit-cell parameters a = 181.38, b = 38.56, c =
37.09 Å, β = 89.34° and one molecule per asymmetric unit. The EndoIII-3Δ76
crystals also belonged to the monoclinic space group C2, but with unit-cell
parameters a = 91.47, b = 40.53, c = 72.47 Å, β = 102.53° and one molecule per
asymmetric unit. The EndoIII-1 structure was determined by molecular replacement,
while the truncated EndoIII-3Δ76 structure was determined by single-wavelength
anomalous dispersion phasing. Refinement of the structures is in progress.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X14024935 
PMCID: PMC4259241
PMID: 25484227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

