
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 Feb;24(2):153-158. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.12.003.
Epub 2014 Dec 11.

Down-regulation of carboxylesterases 1 and 2 plays an important role in prodrug
metabolism in immunological liver injury rats.

Zhang C(1), Xu Y(1), Gao P(2), Lu J(3), Li X(1), Liu D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Wuhan Children's Hospital, Wuhan, 430030,China.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, China.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, China. Electronic address:
ld2069@outlook.com.

Liver plays a central role in xenobiotics metabolism, thus affecting the in vivo 
disposition and therapeutic effects of drugs. Carboxylesterases (CESs), with the 
main isoforms CES1 and CES2, are important in the metabolism of ester-type
prodrugs. However, influences of immunological liver injury on the activity of
CES remain undefined. In the present study, we demonstrated treatment with
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) suppressed the activities of CES1 and CES2. The
decreased activities of CES1 and CES2 were preliminarily assessed by the
hydrolysis assay for their common substrate p-nitrophenyl acetate (PNPA) with rat
hepatic microsomal enzyme. Subsequently, RT-PCR results showed that the levels of
CES1 mRNA and mRNA of CES2 (AB010635) and CES2 (AY034877) in the model group were
significantly lower than those of the normal control group (P<0.05). Western blot
results showed that the expressions of CES1 and CES2 proteins were decreased
(P<0.05). To further clarify the effects of LPS on the metabolic activities of
CESs, pharmacokinetic studies were performed in rats by utilizing imidapril and
irinotecan (CPT-11) as the specific substrates for CES1 and CES2, respectively.
After treatment with LPS, AUC0-∞ and Cmax of imidaprilat were decreased from
2084.86±340.66ng·h(-1)·mL(-1) and 234.66±68.85ng·mL(-1) to
983.87±315.34ng·h(-1)·mL(-1) and 113.1±19.69ng·mL(-1) (P<0.05), respectively.
Moreover, AUC0-∞ and Cmax of SN-38 were decreased from 8100±918.6ng·h(-1)·mL(-1) 
and 144.67±20.28ng·mL(-1) to 3270±500.5ng·h(-1)·mL(-1) and 56.19±10.38ng·mL(-1)
(P<0.05), respectively. In summary, immunological liver injury remarkably
attenuated the expressions and metabolic activities of CES1 and CES2, which may
be associated with the regulatory effects of cytokines under inflammation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.12.003 
PMID: 25499727  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

