
1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 12;9(12):e115107. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115107.
eCollection 2014.

Thrombospondin-1 production is enhanced by Porphyromonas gingivalis
lipopolysaccharide in THP-1 cells.

Gokyu M(1), Kobayashi H(1), Nanbara H(1), Sudo T(1), Ikeda Y(1), Suda T(1), Izumi
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Periodontology, Bio-Matrix Department, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(9):e0139759.

Periodontitis is a chronic inflammatory disease caused by gram-negative anaerobic
bacteria. Monocytes and macrophages stimulated by periodontopathic bacteria
induce inflammatory mediators that cause tooth-supporting structure destruction
and alveolar bone resorption. In this study, using a DNA microarray, we
identified the enhanced gene expression of thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) in human
monocytic cells stimulated by Porphyromonas gingivalis lipopolysaccharide (LPS). 
TSP-1 is a multifunctional extracellular matrix protein that is upregulated
during the inflammatory process. Recent studies have suggested that TSP-1 is
associated with rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes mellitus, and osteoclastogenesis. 
TSP-1 is secreted from neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages, which mediate
immune responses at inflammatory regions. However, TSP-1 expression in
periodontitis and the mechanisms underlying TSP-1 expression in human monocytic
cells remain unknown. Here using real-time RT-PCR, we demonstrated that TSP-1
mRNA expression level was significantly upregulated in inflamed periodontitis
gingival tissues and in P. gingivalis LPS-stimulated human monocytic cell line
THP-1 cells. TSP-1 was expressed via Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 and TLR4
pathways. In P. gingivalis LPS stimulation, TSP-1 expression was dependent upon
TLR2 through the activation of NF-ÎºB signaling. Furthermore, IL-17F
synergistically enhanced P. gingivalis LPS-induced TSP-1 production. These
results suggest that modulation of TSP-1 expression by P. gingivalis plays an
important role in the progression and chronicity of periodontitis. It may also
contribute a new target molecule for periodontal therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115107 
PMCID: PMC4264871
PMID: 25501558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

