
1. Toxins (Basel). 2014 Dec 11;6(12):3326-35. doi: 10.3390/toxins6123326.

Quantitative analysis of cereulide toxin from Bacillus cereus in rice and pasta
using synthetic cereulide standard and 13C6-cereulide standard - a short
validation study.

Zuberovic Muratovic A(1), Tröger R(2), Granelli K(3), Hellenäs KE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Science Department, National Food Agency, Box 622, SE-751 26 Uppsala, Sweden. 
aida.zuberovic.muratovic@slv.se.
(2)Science Department, National Food Agency, Box 622, SE-751 26 Uppsala, Sweden. 
rikard.troger@outlook.com.
(3)Science Department, National Food Agency, Box 622, SE-751 26 Uppsala, Sweden. 
kristina.granelli@slv.se.
(4)Science Department, National Food Agency, Box 622, SE-751 26 Uppsala, Sweden. 
karl-erik.hellenas@slv.se.

A single laboratory validation study of a rapid and sensitive quantitative method
for the analysis of cereulide toxin produced by Bacillus cereus using ultra high 
performance liquid chromatography-electrospray-tandem mass spectrometry is
presented. The analysis of this cyclic peptide toxin was validated for pasta and 
rice samples using a newly presented synthetic cereulide peptide standard,
together with 13C6-cereulide that previously have not been commercially
available. The use of cereulide standard was also compared to the most frequently
used surrogate standard, the antibiotic valinomycin. The performance of the
method was evaluated by analyzing spiked sample pools from different types of
rice and pasta, as well as 21 individual rice and pasta samples from differently 
prepared meals. Inoculation of samples with three cereulide toxin-producing
strains of Bacillus cereus was finally used to mimic naturally contaminated
foods. The quantification range of the method was 1-500 ng/g (R2 = 0.999) and the
limits of detection and quantification were 0.1 and 1 ng/g, respectively. The
precision varied from 3% to 7% relative standard deviation and the trueness from 
-2% to +6% relative bias at different concentration levels in cooked rice and
pasta.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins6123326 
PMCID: PMC4280537
PMID: 25514093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

