
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2015 Apr;34(4):821-30. doi:
10.1007/s10096-014-2297-2. Epub 2014 Dec 20.

Analysis of Bordetella pertussis clinical isolates circulating in European
countries during the period 1998-2012.

van Gent M(1), Heuvelman CJ, van der Heide HG, Hallander HO, Advani A, Guiso N,
Wirsing von Kőnig CH, Vestrheim DF, Dalby T, Fry NK, Pierard D, Detemmerman L,
Zavadilova J, Fabianova K, Logan C, Habington A, Byrne M, Lutyńska A, Mosiej E,
Pelaz C, Gröndahl-Yli-Hannuksela K, Barkoff AM, Mertsola J, Economopoulou A, He
Q, Mooi FR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infectious Disease Control (CIb), National Institute for Public
Health and the Environment (RIVM), P.O. Box 1, 3720 BA, Bilthoven, The
Netherlands, marjolein.van.gent@rivm.nl.

Despite more than 50 years of vaccination, pertussis is still an endemic disease,
with regular epidemic outbreaks. With the exception of Poland, European countries
have replaced whole-cell vaccines (WCVs) by acellular vaccines (ACVs) in the
1990s. Worldwide, antigenic divergence in vaccine antigens has been found between
vaccine strains and circulating strains. In this work, 466 Bordetella pertussis
isolates collected in the period 1998-2012 from 13 European countries were
characterised by multi-locus antigen sequence typing (MAST) of the pertussis
toxin promoter (ptxP) and of the genes coding for proteins used in the ACVs:
pertussis toxin (Ptx), pertactin (Prn), type 2 fimbriae (Fim2) and type 3
fimbriae (Fim3). Isolates were further characterised by fimbrial serotyping,
multi-locus variable-number tandem repeat analysis (MLVA) and pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis (PFGE). The results showed a very similar B. pertussis population
for 12 countries using ACVs, while Poland, which uses a WCV, was quite distinct, 
suggesting that ACVs and WCVs select for different B. pertussis populations. This
study forms a baseline for future studies on the effect of vaccination programmes
on B. pertussis populations.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-014-2297-2 
PMCID: PMC4365279
PMID: 25527446  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

