
1. J Immunol. 2015 Feb 1;194(3):1334-46. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400955. Epub 2014
Dec 19.

IL-2Rβ-dependent signaling and CD103 functionally cooperate to maintain tolerance
in the gut mucosa.

Yuan X(1), Dee MJ(1), Altman NH(2), Malek TR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Miller School of Medicine,
University of Miami, Miami, FL 33101; and.
(2)Department of Pathology, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami,
Miami, FL 33101.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Miller School of Medicine,
University of Miami, Miami, FL 33101; and tmalek@med.miami.edu.

A network of mechanisms operates to maintain tolerance in the gut mucosa.
Although CD103 marks many lymphoid cells within the gut, its direct functional
role in intestinal tolerance is poorly understood. CD103 may be part of a
redundant pathway, as CD103(-/-) mice do not exhibit autoimmunity. To reduce such
redundancy, CD103(-/-) mice were crossed to mice (designated Y3) whose T cells
expressed a mutant IL-2Rβ-chain that lowers IL-2R signaling. Unlike overtly
healthy Y3 mice, all Y3/CD103(-/-) mice rapidly developed severe colitis. The
large intestine of these mice contained an increase in CD4(+) Th1 and Th17
effector cells and a reduced ratio of regulatory T cells (Tregs). Importantly,
colitis was effectively prevented by the transfer of wild-type Tregs into
Y3/CD103(-/-) mice. Impaired intestinal tolerance was not attributed to an
obvious lack of CD103-dependent gene regulation or intestinal homing/retention by
Tregs nor a lack of functional activities typically associated with CD103(+)
dendritic cells, such as peripherally induced Treg development or imprinting CCR9
and α4β7 homing molecules on Tregs and T effector cells. Transcriptome analysis
of Tregs was consistent with altered homeostasis due to impaired IL-2Rβ-dependent
signaling with minimal dysregulation added by the absence of CD103. Rather, the
absence of CD103 functioned to alter the localization of the cells within the gut
microenvironment that may alter Treg homeostasis. Thus, IL-2Rβ-dependent
signaling and CD103 normally cooperate through distinctive processes to promote
Treg homeostasis and immune tolerance.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400955 
PMCID: PMC4297734
PMID: 25527788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

