
1. J Immunol. 2015 Feb 1;194(3):940-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401941. Epub 2014 Dec 
22.

Differential expression of the transcription factor ARID3a in lupus patient
hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Ratliff ML(1), Ward JM(2), Merrill JT(3), James JA(4), Webb CF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104;
(2)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104; Microbiology and Immunology Program,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104;
(3)Clinical Pharmacology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma 
City, OK 73104;
(4)Microbiology and Immunology Program, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104; Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Program,
Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104; Department of
Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104;
and.
(5)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104; Microbiology and Immunology Program,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104;
Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104 carol-webb@omrf.org.

Although hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) are used for
transplantation, characterization of the multiple subsets within this population 
in humans has lagged behind similar studies in mice. We found that expression of 
the DNA-binding protein, ARID3a, in mouse stem cells was important for normal
development of hematopoietic lineages; however, progenitors expressing ARID3a in 
humans have not been defined. We previously showed increased numbers of ARID3a(+)
B cells in nearly half of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients, and total 
numbers of ARID3a(+) B cells were associated with increased disease severity.
Because expression of ARID3a in those SLE patients occurred throughout all B cell
subsets, we hypothesized that ARID3a expression in patient HSPCs might also be
increased relative to expression in healthy controls. Our data now show that
ARID3a expression is not limited to any defined subset of HSPCs in either healthy
controls or SLE patients. Numbers of ARID3a(+) HSPCs in SLE patients were
increased over numbers of ARID3a(+) cells in healthy controls. Although all
SLE-derived HSPCs exhibited poor colony formation in vitro compared with
controls, SLE HSPCs with high numbers of ARID3a(+) cells yielded increased
numbers of cells expressing the early progenitor marker, CD34. SLE HSPCs with
high numbers of ARID3a(+) cells also more readily generated
autoantibody-producing cells than HSPCs with lower levels of ARID3a in a
humanized mouse model. These data reveal new functions for ARID3a in early
hematopoiesis and suggest that knowledge regarding ARID3a levels in HSPCs could
be informative for applications requiring transplantation of those cells.

Copyright Â© 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401941 
PMCID: PMC4297684
PMID: 25535283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

