
1. J Mol Graph Model. 2015 Mar;56:10-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2014.11.014. Epub 2014
Dec 8.

Molecular recognition of CYP26A1 binding pockets and structure-activity
relationship studies for design of potent and selective retinoic acid metabolism 
blocking agents.

Sun B(1), Song S(1), Hao CZ(1), Huang WX(1), Liu CC(1), Xie HL(1), Lin B(1),
Cheng MS(1), Zhao DM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design & Discovery of Ministry of
Education, School of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, 103 Wenhua Road, Shenhe District, Shenyang 110016, PR China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design & Discovery of Ministry of
Education, School of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, 103 Wenhua Road, Shenhe District, Shenyang 110016, PR China.
Electronic address: medchemzhao@163.com.

All-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA), the biologically most active metabolite of
vitamin A, plays a major role in the regulation of cellular differentiation and
proliferation, and it is also an important pharmacological agent particularly
used in the treatment of cancer, skin, neurodegenerative and autoimmune diseases.
However, ATRA is very easy to be metabolized into 4-hydroxyl-RA in vivo by
CYP26A1, an inducible cytochrome P450 enzyme, eventually into more polar
metabolites. Therefore, it is vital to develop specific retinoic acid metabolism 
blocking agents (RAMBAs) to inhibit the metabolic enzyme CYP26A1 in the treatment
of relevant diseases aforementioned. In this study, CYP26A1 and its interactions 
with retinoic acid-competitive metabolism blocking agents were investigated by a 
combined ligand- and structure-based approach. First, since the crystal structure
of CYP26A1 protein has not been determined, we constructed the 3D structure of
CYP26A1 using homology modeling. In order to achieve a deeper insight into the
mode of action of RAMBAs in the active site, the molecular superimposition model 
and the common feature pharmacophore model were constructed, and molecular
docking was performed. The molecular superimposition model is composed of three
features: the main chain groups, side chain groups, and azole groups. The common 
feature pharmacophore model consists of five chemical features: four hydrophobic 
groups and one hydrogen acceptor (HHHHA). The results of molecular docking show
that the characteristic groups of RAMBAs were mapped into three different active 
pockets, respectively. A structure-activity relationship (SAR) was obtained by a 
combination of the molecular superimposition and docking results with the
pharmacophore model. This study gives more insight into the interaction model
inside the CYP26A1 active site and provides guidance for the design of more
potent and possibly more selective RAMBAs.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2014.11.014 
PMID: 25541526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

