
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2014 Dec 31;13:178. doi: 10.1186/s12934-014-0178-0.

Optimization of the recombinant production and purification of a self-assembling 
peptide in Escherichia coli.

Rad-Malekshahi M(1)(2), Flement M(3), Hennink WE(4), Mastrobattista E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences
(UIPS), Utrecht University, 3584 CG, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
m.radmalekshahi@uu.nl.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. m.radmalekshahi@uu.nl.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutics, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences
(UIPS), Utrecht University, 3584 CG, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Matthiasflement@hotmail.com.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutics, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences
(UIPS), Utrecht University, 3584 CG, Utrecht, The Netherlands. W.E.Hennink@uu.nl.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutics, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences
(UIPS), Utrecht University, 3584 CG, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
E.Mastrobattista@uu.nl.

BACKGROUND: Amphiphilic peptides are important building blocks to generate
nanostructured biomaterials for drug delivery and tissue engineering
applications. We have shown that the self-assembling peptide SA2 (Ac-AAVVLLLWEE) 
can be recombinantly produced in E. coli when fused to the small ubiquitin-like
modifier (SUMO) protein. Although this system yielded peptides of high purity
with no residual amino acids after cleavage of the SUMO fusion protein, the yield
after purification was generally low (~1Â mg/L bacterial culture) as compared to
other peptides and proteins produced with the same method and under the same
conditions.
RESULTS: The aim of this study is to understand the underlying mechanisms causing
the low yield of this recombinant peptide in E. coli and to optimize both
production and purification of recombinant SA2 peptides. It was demonstrated that
by simply changing the medium to a well-balanced auto-induction medium the yield 
of recombinant production was augmented (~4 fold). Moreover, it was demonstrated 
that self-assembly of SUMO-SA2 fusion proteins caused the low peptide yields
after purification. By replacing the second IMAC purification step with a
selective precipitation step, peptide yields could be increased approx. 3 fold.
With these optimizations in place the overall yield of purified SA2 peptide
increased with 12-fold.
CONCLUSION: Premature self-assembly of the SUMO-SA2 fusion construct interfered
with proper purification of the SA2 peptide, resulting in low yields of purified 
peptide and this could be prevented by changing the mode of purification. These
findings are important when setting up purification schemes for other
self-assembling peptides with the use of a SUMO fusion construct.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-014-0178-0 
PMCID: PMC4311431
PMID: 25551787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

