
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2015 Mar;118(3):739-52. doi: 10.1111/jam.12742. Epub 2015 Jan
26.

In vitro and in vivo immunostimulatory activity of an exopolysaccharide-enriched 
fraction from Bacillus subtilis.

Jung JY(1), Shin JS, Rhee YK, Cho CW, Lee MK, Hong HD, Lee KT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biochemistry, College of Pharmacy, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical
Science, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

AIMS: The aim of this study was to investigate the immunostimulatory effects of
an exopolysaccharide-enriched fraction obtained from Bacillus subtilis J92
(B-EPS).
METHODS AND RESULTS: To determine the immunostimulatory activities of B-EPS, we
used IFN-γ-primed RAW 264.7 macrophages and CD3/CD28-stimulated splenocytes.
Increases in the levels of NO and many cytokines, such as, TNF-α, IL-6, and
IL-1β, were observed in IFN-γ-primed RAW 264.7 macrophages by Griess reaction and
ELISAs respectively. Using Western blotting and qRT-PCR, we found that B-EPS
increased the protein and mRNA expressions of iNOS and the mRNA expressions of
TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β. A reporter gene assay and EMSA revealed that B-EPS
up-regulated the transcriptional activity of NF-κB by increasing its DNA binding 
and nuclear translocation. Pretreatment with NF-κB inhibitors, that is,
BAY11-7082 and PDTC, decreased NO production in IFN-γ-primed RAW 264.7
macrophages by B-EPS. Furthermore, B-EPS increased the proliferation of and
cytokine (IL-2 and IFN-γ) production by CD3/CD28-stimulated splenocytes. In a
cyclophosphamide-induced immunosuppressed mouse model, B-EPS (5, 15 or 45 mg
kg(-1) , p.o.) restored thymus and spleen indices. B-EPS also inhibited
cyclophosphamide-induced reductions in neutrophil and lymphocyte numbers.
CONCLUSIONS: B-EPS improves immune function by regulating immunological
parameters in IFN-γ-primed macrophages, CD3/CD28-stimulated splenocytes, and in
cyclophosphamide-induced immunosuppressed mice.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This study suggests that the
exopolysaccharides secreted by B. subtilis J92 could be used as immune
stimulants.

© 2015 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.12742 
PMID: 25559412  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

