
1. Immune Netw. 2014 Dec;14(6):265-76. doi: 10.4110/in.2014.14.6.265. Epub 2014 Dec 
22.

The CD28-B7 Family in Anti-Tumor Immunity: Emerging Concepts in Cancer
Immunotherapy.

Leung J(1), Suh WK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Montreal, QC H2W 1R7,
Canada. ; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal,
QC H3A 0G4, Canada.
(2)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Montreal, QC H2W 1R7,
Canada. ; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal,
QC H3A 0G4, Canada. ; Department of Medicine; Department of Microbiology,
Infectiology, and Immunology, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC H3T 1J4,
Canada.

The interactions between B7 molecules and CD28-family receptors are crucial in
the regulation of adaptive cellular immunity. In cancer, the aberrant expression 
of co-inhibitory B7 molecules has been attributed to reduced anti-tumor immunity 
and cancer immune evasion, prompting the development of cancer therapeutics that 
can restore T cell function. Murine tumor models have provided significant
support for the targeting of multiple immune checkpoints involving CTLA-4, PD-1, 
ICOS, B7-H3 and B7-H4 during tumor growth, and clinical studies investigating the
therapeutic effects of CTLA-4 and PD-1 blockade have shown exceptionally
promising results in patients with advanced melanoma and other cancers. The
expression pattern of co-inhibitory B7 ligands in the tumor microenvironment has 
also been largely correlated with poor patient prognosis, and recent evidence
suggests that the presence of several B7 molecules may predict the responsiveness
of immunotherapies that rely on pre-existing tumor-associated immune responses.
While monotherapies blocking T cell co-inhibition have beneficial effects in
reducing tumor burden, combinatorial immunotherapy targeting multiple immune
checkpoints involved in various stages of the anti-tumor response has led to the 
most substantial impact on tumor reduction. In this review, we will examine the
contributions of B7- and CD28-family members in the context of cancer
development, and discuss the implications of current human findings in cancer
immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.4110/in.2014.14.6.265 
PMCID: PMC4275384
PMID: 25550693 

