
1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 20;290(8):5190-5202. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.591610. Epub
2015 Jan 6.

Attenuation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway by
Porphyromonas gingivalis gingipains RgpA, RgpB, and Kgp.

Nakayama M(1), Inoue T(1), Naito M(2), Nakayama K(2), Ohara N(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Oral Microbiology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences and; the Advanced Research Center for Oral 
and Craniofacial Sciences, Dental School, Okayama University, Okayama 700-8558
and.
(2)the Division of Microbiology and Oral Infection, Department of Molecular
Microbiology and Immunology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Nagasaki, 852-8588, Japan.
(3)From the Department of Oral Microbiology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences and; the Advanced Research Center for Oral 
and Craniofacial Sciences, Dental School, Okayama University, Okayama 700-8558
and. Electronic address: oharan@md.okayama-u.ac.jp.

Porphyromonas gingivalis is a major pathogen of periodontal diseases, including
periodontitis. We have investigated the effect of P. gingivalis infection on the 
PI3K/Akt (protein kinase B) signaling pathway in gingival epithelial cells. Here,
we found that live P. gingivalis, but not heat-killed P. gingivalis, reduced Akt 
phosphorylation at both Thr-308 and Ser-473, which implies a decrease in Akt
activity. Actually, PI3K, which is upstream of Akt, was also inactivated by P.
gingivalis. Furthermore, glycogen synthase kinase 3α/β, mammalian target of
rapamycin, and Bad, which are downstream proteins in the PI3K/Akt cascade, were
also dephosphorylated, a phenomenon consistent with Akt inactivation by P.
gingivalis. However, these events did not require direct interaction between
bacteria and host cells and were independent of P. gingivalis invasion into the
cells. The use of gingipain-specific inhibitors and a gingipain-deficient P.
gingivalis mutant KDP136 revealed that the gingipains and their protease
activities were essential for the inactivation of PI3K and Akt. The associations 
between the PI3K regulatory subunit p85α and membrane proteins were disrupted by 
wild-type P. gingivalis. Moreover, PDK1 translocation to the plasma membrane was 
reduced by wild-type P. gingivalis, but not KDP136, indicating little production 
of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate by PI3K. Therefore, it is likely that 
PI3K failed to transmit homeostatic extracellular stimuli to intracellular
signaling pathways by gingipains. Taken together, our findings indicate that P.
gingivalis attenuates the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway via the proteolytic effects 
of gingipains, resulting in the dysregulation of PI3K/Akt-dependent cellular
functions and the destruction of epithelial barriers.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.591610 
PMCID: PMC4335252
PMID: 25564612  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

