
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2015 Mar;65(Pt 3):1031-1037. doi:
10.1099/ijs.0.000059. Epub 2015 Jan 9.

Burkholderia susongensis sp. nov., a mineral-weathering bacterium isolated from
weathered rock surface.

Gu JY(1), Zang SG(1), Sheng XF(1), He LY(1), Huang Z(1), Wang Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Environment Microbiology, Ministry of
Agriculture, College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing
210095, PR China.

A novel type of mineral-weathering bacterium was isolated from the weathered
surface of rock (mica schist) collected from Susong (Anhui, China). Cells of
strain L226(T) were Gram-stain-negative. The strain grew optimally at 30 °C, with
1 % (w/v) NaCl and at pH 7.0 in trypticase soy broth. On the basis of 16S rRNA
gene phylogeny, strain L226(T) was shown to belong to the genus Burkholderia and 
the closest phylogenetic relatives were Burkholderia sprentiae WSM5005(T)
(98.3 %), Burkholderia acidipaludis NBRC 101816(T) (98.2 %), Burkholderia tuberum
STM678(T) (97.2 %) and Burkholderia diazotrophica JPY461(T) (97.1 %). The DNA G+C
content was 63.5 mol% and the respiratory quinone was Q-8. The major fatty acids 
were C16 : 0, C17 : 0 cyclo and C19 : 0 cyclo ω8c. The polar lipid profile of
strain L226(T) consisted of a mixture of phosphatidylethanolamine,
phosphatidylglycerol, diphosphatidylglycerol, unknown lipids and unidentified
aminophospholipids. Based on the low level of DNA-DNA relatedness (ranging from
25.8 % to 34.4 %) to the tested type strains of species of the genus Burkholderia
and unique phenotypic characteristics, it is suggested that strain L226(T)
represents a novel species of the genus Burkholderia, for which the name
Burkholderia susongensis sp. nov., is proposed. The type strain is L226(T)
( = CCTCC AB2014142(T) = JCM 30231(T)).

© 2015 IUMS.

DOI: 10.1099/ijs.0.000059 
PMID: 25575828  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

