
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Mar;81(6):1966-76. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03103-14. Epub
2015 Jan 9.

Metabolism of 2-methylpropene (isobutylene) by the aerobic bacterium
Mycobacterium sp. strain ELW1.

Kottegoda S(1), Waligora E(1), Hyman M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, North Carolina, USA mrhyman@ncsu.edu.

An aerobic bacterium (Mycobacterium sp. strain ELW1) that utilizes
2-methylpropene (isobutylene) as a sole source of carbon and energy was isolated 
and characterized. Strain ELW1 grew on 2-methylpropene (growth rate = 0.05 h(-1))
with a yield of 0.38 mg (dry weight) mg 2-methylpropene(-1). Strain ELW1 also
grew more slowly on both cis- and trans-2-butene but did not grow on any other C2
to C5 straight-chain, branched, or chlorinated alkenes tested. Resting
2-methylpropene-grown cells consumed ethene, propene, and 1-butene without a lag 
phase. Epoxyethane accumulated as the only detected product of ethene oxidation. 
Both alkene consumption and epoxyethane production were fully inhibited in cells 
exposed to 1-octyne, suggesting that alkene oxidation is initiated by an
alkyne-sensitive, epoxide-generating monooxygenase. Kinetic analyses indicated
that 1,2-epoxy-2-methylpropane is rapidly consumed during 2-methylpropene
degradation, while 2-methyl-2-propen-1-ol is not a significant metabolite of
2-methylpropene catabolism. Degradation of 1,2-epoxy-2-methylpropane by
2-methylpropene-grown cells led to the accumulation and further degradation of
2-methyl-1,2-propanediol and 2-hydroxyisobutyrate, two sequential metabolites
previously identified in the aerobic microbial metabolism of methyl tert-butyl
ether (MTBE) and tert-butyl alcohol (TBA). Growth of strain ELW1 on
2-methylpropene, 1,2-epoxy-2-methylpropane, 2-methyl-1,2-propanediol, and
2-hydroxyisobutyrate was fully inhibited when cobalt ions were omitted from the
growth medium, while growth on 3-hydroxybutyrate and other substrates was
unaffected by the absence of added cobalt ions. Our results suggest that, like
aerobic MTBE- and TBA-metabolizing bacteria, strain ELW1 utilizes a
cobalt/cobalamin-dependent mutase to transform 2-hydroxyisobutyrate. Our results 
have been interpreted in terms of their impact on our understanding of the
microbial metabolism of alkenes and ether oxygenates.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03103-14 
PMCID: PMC4345374
PMID: 25576605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

