
1. J Infect Dis. 2015 Jul 1;212(1):106-15. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiv013. Epub 2015 Jan
12.

The Serine Protease Pic From Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli Mediates Immune
Evasion by the Direct Cleavage of Complement Proteins.

Abreu AG(1), Fraga TR(2), Granados Martínez AP(2), Kondo MY(3), Juliano MA(3),
Juliano L(3), Navarro-Garcia F(4), Isaac L(2), Barbosa AS(1), Elias WP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bacteriology, Butantan Institute.
(2)Department of Immunology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São 
Paulo.
(3)Department of Biophysics, Federal University of São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados
del Instituto Politécnico Nacional (CINVESTAV), Mexico City, Mexico.

Enteroaggregative and uropathogenic Escherichia coli, Shigella flexneri 2a, and
the hybrid enteroaggregative/Shiga toxin-producing E. coli strain (O104:H4) are
important pathogens responsible for intestinal and urinary tract infections, as
well as sepsis and hemolytic uremic syndrome. They have in common the production 
of a serine protease called Pic. Several biological roles for Pic have been
described, including protection of E. coli DH5α from complement-mediated killing.
Hereby we showed that Pic significantly reduces complement activation by all 3
pathways. Pic cleaves purified C3/C3b and other proteins from the classic and
lectin pathways, such as C4 and C2. Cleavage fragments of C3, C4, and C2 were
also observed with HB101(pPic1) culture supernatants, and C3 cleavage sites were 
mapped by fluorescence resonance energy transfer peptides. Experiments using
human serum as a source of complement proteins confirmed Pic proteolytic activity
on these proteins. Furthermore, Pic works synergistically with the human
complement regulators factor I and factor H, promoting inactivation of C3b. In
the presence of both regulators, further degradation of C3 α' chain was observed.
Therefore, Pic may contribute to immune evasion of E. coli and S. flexneri,
favoring invasiveness and increasing the severity of the disorders caused by
these pathogens.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiv013 
PMID: 25583166  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

