
1. J Environ Sci Health B. 2015;50(2):99-108. doi: 10.1080/03601234.2015.975605.

Evaluation of hydrocarbons and organochlorine pesticides and their tolerant
microorganisms from an agricultural soil to define its bioremediation
feasibility.

Islas-García A(1), Vega-Loyo L, Aguilar-López R, Xoconostle-Cázares B,
Rodríguez-Vázquez R.

Author information: 
(1)a Departamento de Biotecnología y Bioingeniería , Centro de Investigación y de
Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional , Distrito Federal ,
México.

The concentrations of hydrocarbons and organochlorine pesticides (OCPs),
nutrients and tolerant microorganisms in an agricultural soil from a locality in 
Tepeaca, Puebla, Mexico, were determined to define its feasibility for
bioremediation. The OCPs detected were heptachlor, aldrin, trans-chlordane,
endosulfán I, endosulfán II, 1,1,1-bis-(4-chlorophenyl)-2,2-trichloroethane
(4,4'-DDT), 1,1-bis-(4-chlorophenyl)-2,2-dichloroethene (4,4'-DDE) and endrin
aldehyde, with values of 0.69-30.81 ng g(-1). The concentration of hydrocarbons
in the soil of Middle Hydrocarbons Fraction (MHF), C10 to C28, was 4608-27,748 mg
kg(-1) and 1117-19,610 mg kg(-1) for Heavy Hydrocarbons Fraction (HHF), C28 to
C35, due to an oil spill from the rupture of a pipeline. The soil was deficient
in nitrogen (0.03-0.07%) and phosphorus (0 ppm), and therefore it was advisable
to fertilize to bio-stimulate the native microorganisms of soil. In the soil
samples, hydrocarbonoclast fungi 3.72 × 10(2) to 44.6 × 10(2) CFU g(-1) d.s. and 
hydrocarbonoclast bacteria (0.17 × 10(5) to 8.60 × 10(5) CFU g(-1) d.s.) were
detected, with a tolerance of 30,000 mg kg(-1) of diesel. Moreover,
pesticideclast fungi (5.13 × 10(2) to 42.2 × 10(2) CFU g(-1) d.s.) and
pesticideclast bacteria (0.15 × 10(5) to 9.68 × 10(5) CFU g(-1) d.s.) were
determined with tolerance to 20 mg kg(-1) of OCPs. Fungi and bacteria tolerant to
both pollutants were also quantified. Therefore, native microorganisms had
potential to be stimulated to degrade hydrocarbons and pesticides or both
pollutants. The concentration of pollutants and the microbial activity analyzed
indicated that bioremediation of the soil contaminated with hydrocarbons and
pesticides using bio-stimulation of native microorganisms was feasible.

DOI: 10.1080/03601234.2015.975605 
PMID: 25587779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

