
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2015 Jun;110:14-21. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2014.12.018. Epub 2015
Jan 9.

Expression and purification of the N-terminal regulatory domain of Protein Kinase
C for biophysical studies.

Cole TR(1), Igumenova TI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, 300 Olsen
Boulevard, College Station, TX 77843, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, 300 Olsen
Boulevard, College Station, TX 77843, USA. Electronic address:
tigumenova@tamu.edu.

We report the protocol for heterologous expression and purification of the
N-terminal regulatory region of two Protein Kinase C (PKC)(1) isozymes, one
conventional and one novel. Previous studies of these domains relied almost
exclusively on the fusion constructs with high-molecular-weight solubility fusion
partners such as GST and MBP. We developed experimental procedures that enabled
us to overcome challenges associated with the amphiphilic character of the
regulatory domain and generate sufficient quantities of fusion partner-free
proteins for biophysical work. The key features of the protocol are the identity 
of the cleavable fusion partner, expression conditions, growth medium additives, 
introduction of mutation/solubility tags, and incorporation of osmolytes. The
protein yields are sufficient for cost-effective production of isotopically
enriched proteins for NMR work and biophysical studies in general. Our work opens
up an avenue for the structural studies of these challenging proteins with high
amphiphilic character.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2014.12.018 
PMID: 25582765  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

