
1. J Immunol. 2015 Feb 15;194(4):1665-76. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401728. Epub 2015
Jan 16.

ShcA regulates late stages of T cell development and peripheral CD4+ T cell
numbers.

Buckley MW(1), Trampont PC(1), Arandjelovic S(1), Fond AM(1), Juncadella IJ(1),
Ravichandran KS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Cancer Biology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908; Carter Immunology Center, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908; and Center for Cell Clearance, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Cancer Biology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908; Carter Immunology Center, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908; and Center for Cell Clearance, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908 Ravi@virginia.edu.

T cell development in the thymus is a highly regulated process that critically
depends upon productive signaling via the preTCR at the β-selection stage, as
well as via the TCR for selection from the CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive stage to 
the CD4 or CD8 single-positive stage. ShcA is an adapter protein expressed in
thymocytes, and it is required for productive signaling through the preTCR, with 
impaired signaling via ShcA leading to a developmental block at the β-selection
checkpoint. However, the role of ShcA in subsequent stages of T cell development 
has not been addressed. In this study, we generated transgenic mice
(CD4-Cre/ShcFFF mice) that specifically express a phosphorylation-defective
dominant-negative ShcA mutant (ShcFFF) in late T cell development. Thymocytes in 
CD4-Cre/ShcFFF mice progressed normally through the β-selection checkpoint, but
displayed a significant reduction in the numbers of single-positive CD4(+) and
CD8(+) thymocytes. Furthermore, CD4-Cre/ShcFFF mice, when bred with transgenic
TCR mouse strains, had impaired signaling through the transgenic TCRs. Consistent
with defective progression to the single-positive stage, CD4-Cre/ShcFFF mice also
had significant peripheral lymphopenia. Moreover, these CD4-Cre/ShcFFF mice
develop attenuated disease in CD4(+) T cell-dependent experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis, a mouse model of multiple sclerosis. Collectively, these data 
identify an important role for the adapter protein ShcA in later stages of thymic
T cell development and in peripheral T cell-dependent events.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401728 
PMCID: PMC4381912
PMID: 25595778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

