
1. J Autoimmun. 2015 Apr;58:21-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.12.006. Epub 2015 Jan
13.

Pathogen-expanded CD11b+ invariant NKT cells feedback inhibit T cell
proliferation via membrane-bound TGF-β1.

Han Y(1), Jiang Z(2), Chen Z(3), Gu Y(2), Liu Y(2), Zhang X(2), Cao X(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology & Institute of Immunology,
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China. Electronic address:
hanyanmei@immunol.org.
(2)National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology & Institute of Immunology,
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China.
(3)National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of
Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Beijing 100730, China.
(4)National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology & Institute of Immunology,
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China; National Key
Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of 
Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100730,
China.

Natural killer T cells (NKT cells) are effector cells, but also regulator of
immune response, which either promote or suppress immune response through
production of different cytokines. However, the subsets of NKT cells with
definite phenotype and regulatory function need to be further identified.
Furthermore, the mechanisms for NKT cells to regulate immune response remain to
be fully elucidated. Here we identified CD11b(+) invariant NKT (CD11b(+) iNKT)
cells as a new subset of regulatory NKT cells in mouse models with infection.
αGalCer:CD1d complex(+)TCRβ(+)NK1.1(+) NKT cells could be categorized to CD11b(+)
and CD11b(-) subsets. NKT cells are enriched in liver. During Listeria
monocytogenes infection, hepatic CD11b(+) iNKT cells were significantly induced
and expanded, with peak expansion on day 8. CD11b(+) iNKT cells were also
expanded significantly in spleen and mesenteric lymph nodes. As compared to
CD11b(-) iNKT cells, CD11b(+) iNKT cells expressed higher levels of CD27, FasL,
B7H1, CD69, and particularly higher level of membrane-bound TGF-β1 (mTGF-β1), but
produced less IFN-γ, IL-4, IL-10 and TGF-β1. Hepatic CD11b(+) iNKT cells
suppressed antigen-nonspecific and OVA-specific CD4 and CD8 T cell proliferation 
through mTGF-β1 both in vitro and in vivo, meanwhile, they did not interfere with
activation of CD4 T cells and cytotoxicity of the activated CD8 T cells. Thus, we
have identified a new subset of pathogen-expanded CD11b(+) invariant NKT cells
which can feedback inhibit T cell response through cell-to-cell contact via cell 
surface (membrane-bound) TGF-β1, especially at the late stage of immune response 
against infection. CD11b(+) regulatory iNKT cells may contribute to protect host 
from pathological injure by preventing immune overactivation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.12.006 
PMID: 25592391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

