
1. Infect Immun. 2015 Apr;83(4):1276-85. doi: 10.1128/IAI.03070-14. Epub 2015 Jan
20.

Burkholderia pseudomallei type III secretion system cluster 3 ATPase BsaS, a
chemotherapeutic target for small-molecule ATPase inhibitors.

Gong L(1), Lai SC(2), Treerat P(3), Prescott M(2), Adler B(3), Boyce JD(4),
Devenish RJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Victoria,
Clayton, Australia Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Structural
and Functional Microbial Genomics, Monash University, Victoria, Clayton,
Australia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Victoria,
Clayton, Australia.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Victoria, Clayton, Australia
Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Structural and Functional
Microbial Genomics, Monash University, Victoria, Clayton, Australia.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Victoria, Clayton, Australia
Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Structural and Functional
Microbial Genomics, Monash University, Victoria, Clayton, Australia
john.boyce@monash.edu rod.devenish@monash.edu.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Victoria,
Clayton, Australia Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Structural
and Functional Microbial Genomics, Monash University, Victoria, Clayton,
Australia john.boyce@monash.edu rod.devenish@monash.edu.

Melioidosis is an infectious disease of high mortality for humans and other
animal species; it is prevalent in tropical regions worldwide. The pathogenesis
of melioidosis depends on the ability of its causative agent, the Gram-negative
bacterium Burkholderia pseudomallei, to enter and survive in host cells. B.
pseudomallei can escape from the phagosome into the cytosol of phagocytic cells
where it replicates and acquires actin-mediated motility, avoiding killing by the
autophagy-dependent process, LC3 (microtubule-associated protein light chain
3)-associated phagocytosis (LAP). The type III secretion system cluster 3 (TTSS3)
facilitates bacterial escape from phagosomes, although the mechanism has not been
fully elucidated. Given the recent identification of small-molecule inhibitors of
the TTSS ATPase, we sought to determine the potential of the predicted TTSS3
ATPase, encoded by bsaS, as a target for chemotherapeutic treatment of infection.
A B. pseudomallei bsaS deletion mutant was generated and used as a control
against which to assess the effect of inhibitor treatment. Infection of RAW 264.7
cells with wild-type bacteria and subsequent treatment with the ATPase inhibitor 
compound 939 resulted in reduced intracellular bacterial survival, reduced escape
from phagosomes, and increased colocalization with both LC3 and the lysosomal
marker LAMP1 (lysosome-associated membrane protein 1). These changes were similar
to those observed for infection of RAW 264.7 cells with the bsaS deletion mutant.
We propose that treatment with the ATPase inhibitor compound 939 decreased
intracellular bacterial survival through a reduced ability of bacteria to escape 
from phagosomes and increased killing via LAP. Therefore, small-molecule
inhibitors of the TTSS3 ATPase have potential as therapeutic treatments against
melioidosis.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.03070-14 
PMCID: PMC4363454
PMID: 25605762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

