
1. Blood. 2015 Mar 12;125(11):1803-12. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-07-591453. Epub 2015 
Jan 21.

In vitro culture of stress erythroid progenitors identifies distinct progenitor
populations and analogous human progenitors.

Xiang J(1), Wu DC(2), Chen Y(1), Paulson RF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Molecular, Cellular and Integrative Biosciences.
(2)Graduate Program in Biochemistry, Microbiology and Molecular Biology, and.
(3)Graduate Program in Molecular, Cellular and Integrative Biosciences, Graduate 
Program in Biochemistry, Microbiology and Molecular Biology, and Center for
Molecular Immunology and Infectious Disease, Department of Veterinary and
Biomedical Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA.

Tissue hypoxia induces a systemic response designed to increase oxygen delivery
to tissues. One component of this response is increased erythropoiesis.
Steady-state erythropoiesis is primarily homeostatic, producing new erythrocytes 
to replace old erythrocytes removed from circulation by the spleen. In response
to anemia, the situation is different. New erythrocytes must be rapidly made to
increase hemoglobin levels. At these times, stress erythropoiesis predominates.
Stress erythropoiesis is best characterized in the mouse, where it is
extramedullary and utilizes progenitors and signals that are distinct from
steady-state erythropoiesis. In this report, we use an in vitro culture system
that recapitulates the in vivo development of stress erythroid progenitors. We
identify cell-surface markers that delineate a series of stress erythroid
progenitors with increasing maturity. In addition, we use this in vitro culture
system to expand human stress erythroid progenitor cells that express analogous
cell-surface markers. Consistent with previous suggestions that human stress
erythropoiesis is similar to fetal erythropoiesis, we demonstrate that human
stress erythroid progenitors express fetal hemoglobin upon differentiation. These
data demonstrate that similar to murine bone marrow, human bone marrow contains
cells that can generate BMP4-dependent stress erythroid burst-forming units when 
cultured under stress erythropoiesis conditions.

Â© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2014-07-591453 
PMCID: PMC4357585
PMID: 25608563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

