
1. Front Microbiol. 2015 Jan 5;5:660. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00660. eCollection
2014.

Biogeographic patterns of bacterial microdiversity in Arctic deep-sea sediments
(HAUSGARTEN, Fram Strait).

Buttigieg PL(1), Ramette A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hinrichs Lab, Organic Geochemistry Department, MARUM - Center for Marine
Environmental Sciences Bremen, Germany ; HGF-MPG Bridge-Group for Deep Sea
Ecology and Technology, Alfred-Wegener-Institut, Helmholtz-Zentrum f√ºr Polar- und
Meeresforschung Bremerhaven, Germany.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, HGF-MPG Bridge-Group for Deep
Sea Ecology and Technology Bremen, Germany.

Marine bacteria colonizing deep-sea sediments beneath the Arctic ocean, a rapidly
changing ecosystem, have been shown to exhibit significant biogeographic patterns
along transects spanning tens of kilometers and across water depths of several
thousand meters (Jacob et al., 2013). Jacob et al. (2013) adopted what has become
a classical view of microbial diversity - based on operational taxonomic units
clustered at the 97% sequence identity level of the 16S rRNA gene - and observed 
a very large microbial community replacement at the HAUSGARTEN Long Term
Ecological Research station (Eastern Fram Strait). Here, we revisited these data 
using the oligotyping approach and aimed to obtain new insight into ecological
and biogeographic patterns associated with bacterial microdiversity in marine
sediments. We also assessed the level of concordance of these insights with
previously obtained results. Variation in oligotype dispersal range, relative
abundance, co-occurrence, and taxonomic identity were related to environmental
parameters such as water depth, biomass, and sedimentary pigment concentration.
This study assesses ecological implications of the new microdiversity-based
technique using a well-characterized dataset of high relevance for global change 
biology.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00660 
PMCID: PMC4283448
PMID: 25601856 

