
1. Transplantation. 2015 Apr;99(4):668-77. doi: 10.1097/TP.0000000000000561.

Vascular endothelial growth factor c/vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 
3 signaling regulates chemokine gradients and lymphocyte migration from tissues
to lymphatics.

Iwami D(1), Brinkman CC, Bromberg JS.

Author information: 
(1)1 Center for Vascular and Inflammatory Diseases, University of Maryland School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. 2 Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. 3 Department of
Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.

BACKGROUND: Circulation of leukocytes via blood, tissue and lymph is integral to 
adaptive immunity. Afferent lymphatics form CCL21 gradients to guide dendritic
cells and T cells to lymphatics and then to draining lymph nodes (dLN). Vascular 
endothelial growth factor C and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3
(VEGFR-3) are the major lymphatic growth factor and receptor. We hypothesized
these molecules also regulate chemokine gradients and lymphatic migration.
METHODS: CD4 T cells were injected into the foot pad or ear pinnae, and migration
to afferent lymphatics and dLN quantified by flow cytometry or whole mount
immunohistochemistry. Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 or its
signaling or downstream actions were modified with blocking monoclonal antibodies
(mAbs) or other reagents.
RESULTS: Anti-VEGFR-3 prevented migration of CD4 T cells into lymphatic lumen and
significantly decreased the number that migrated to dLN. Anti-VEGFR-3 abolished
CCL21 gradients around lymphatics, although CCL21 production was not inhibited.
Heparan sulfate (HS), critical to establish CCL21 gradients, was down-regulated
around lymphatics by anti-VEGFR-3 and this was dependent on heparanase-mediated
degradation. Moreover, a Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)α inhibitor disrupted HS
and CCL21 gradients, whereas a PI3K activator prevented the effects of
anti-VEGFR-3. During contact hypersensitivity, VEGFR-3, CCL21, and HS expression 
were all attenuated, and anti-heparanase or PI3K activator reversed these
effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Vascular endothelial growth factor C/VEGFR-3 signaling through PI3Kα
regulates the activity of heparanase, which modifies HS and CCL21 gradients
around lymphatics. The functional and physical linkages of these molecules
regulate lymphatic migration from tissues to dLN. These represent new therapeutic
targets to influence immunity and inflammation.

DOI: 10.1097/TP.0000000000000561 
PMCID: PMC4382428
PMID: 25606800  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

