
1. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol. 2015 Jul;69(1):8-19. doi: 10.1007/s00244-014-0124-5.
Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Response of soil microbial activity and biodiversity in soils polluted with
different concentrations of cypermethrin insecticide.

Tejada M(1), García C, Hernández T, Gómez I.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Investigación Edafología Ambiental, Departamento de Cristalografía,
Mineralogía y Química Agrícola, Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingeniería
Agronómica, Universidad de Sevilla, Crta de Utrera km. 1, 41013, Seville, Spain, 
mtmoral@us.es.

We performed a laboratory study into the effect of cypermethrin insecticide
applied to different concentrations on biological properties in two soils [Typic 
Xerofluvent (soil A) and Xerollic Calciorthid (soil B)]. Two kg of each soil were
polluted with cypermethrin at a rate of 60, 300, 600, and 1,200 g ha(-1) (C1, C2,
C3, and C4 treatments). A nonpolluted soil was used as a control (C0 treatment). 
For all treatments and each experimental soil, soil dehydrogenase, urease,
β-glucosidase, phosphatase, and arylsulphatase activities and soil microbial
community were analysed by phospholipid fatty acids, which were measured at six
incubation times (3, 7, 15, 30, 60, and 90 days). The behavior of the enzymatic
activities and microbial population were dependent on the dose of insecticide
applied to the soil. Compared with the C0 treatment, in soil A, the maximum
inhibition of the enzymatic activities was at 15, 30, 45, and 90 days for the C1,
C2, C3, and C4 treatments, respectively. However, in soil B, the maximum
inhibition occurred at 7, 15, 30, and 45 days for the C1, C2, C3, and C4
treatments, respectively. These results suggest that the cypermethrin insecticide
caused a negative effect on soil enzymatic activities and microbial diversity.
This negative impact was greater when a greater dose of insecticide was used;
this impact was also greater in soil with lower organic matter content. For both 
soils, and from these respective days onward, the enzymatic activities and
microbial populations progressively increased by the end of the experimental
period. This is possibly due to the fact that the insecticide or its breakdown
products and killed microbial cells, subsequently killed by the insecticide, are 
being used as a source of energy or as a carbon source for the surviving
microorganisms for cell proliferation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00244-014-0124-5 
PMID: 25604921  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

