
1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 13;290(11):6844-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.634451. Epub 2015
Jan 25.

Novel exons in the tbx5 gene locus generate protein isoforms with distinct
expression domains and function.

Yamak A(1), Georges RO(2), Sheikh-Hassani M(1), Morin M(2), Komati H(1), Nemer
M(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Cardiac Regeneration, Department
of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario K1N 6N5 and.
(2)the Graduate Program in Molecular Biology, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal (IRCM), Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H2W 1R7, Canada.
(3)From the Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Cardiac Regeneration, Department
of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario K1N 6N5 and the Graduate Program in Molecular Biology, Institut de
Recherches Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec
H2W 1R7, Canada mona.nemer@uottawa.ca.

TBX5 is the gene mutated in Holt-Oram syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder
with complex heart and limb deformities. Its protein product is a member of the
T-box family of transcription factors and an evolutionarily conserved
dosage-sensitive regulator of heart and limb development. Understanding TBX5
regulation is therefore of paramount importance. Here we uncover the existence of
novel exons and provide evidence that TBX5 activity may be extensively regulated 
through alternative splicing to produce protein isoforms with differing N- and
C-terminal domains. These isoforms are also present in human heart, indicative of
an evolutionarily conserved regulatory mechanism. The newly identified isoforms
have different transcriptional properties and can antagonize TBX5a target gene
activation. Droplet Digital PCR as well as immunohistochemistry with
isoform-specific antibodies reveal differential as well as overlapping expression
domains. In particular, we find that the predominant isoform in skeletal
myoblasts is Tbx5c, and we show that it is dramatically up-regulated in
differentiating myotubes and is essential for myotube formation. Mechanistically,
TBX5c antagonizes TBX5a activation of pro-proliferative signals such as IGF-1,
FGF-10, and BMP4. The results provide new insight into Tbx5 regulation and
function that will further our understanding of its role in health and disease.
The finding of new exons in the Tbx5 locus may also be relevant to mutational
screening especially in the 30% of Holt-Oram syndrome patients with no mutations 
in the known TBX5a exons.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.634451 
PMCID: PMC4358110
PMID: 25623069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

