
1. Braz J Infect Dis. 2015 Mar-Apr;19(2):196-205. doi: 10.1016/j.bjid.2014.11.004.
Epub 2015 Jan 27.

Impact of human schistosomiasis in sub-Saharan Africa.

Adenowo AF(1), Oyinloye BE(2), Ogunyinka BI(1), Kappo AP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
(2)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa;
Department of Biochemistry, College of Sciences, Afe Babalola University, Ado
Ekiti, Nigeria.
(3)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
Electronic address: KappoA@unizulu.ac.za.

Schistosomiasis, a neglected tropical disease of poverty ranks second among the
most widespread parasitic disease in various nations in sub-Saharan Africa.
Neglected tropical diseases are causes of about 534,000 deaths annually in
sub-Saharan Africa and an estimated 57 million disability-adjusted life-years are
lost annually due to the neglected tropical diseases. The neglected tropical
diseases exert great health, social and financial burden on economies of
households and governments. Schistosomiasis has profound negative effects on
child development, outcome of pregnancy, and agricultural productivity, thus a
key reason why the "bottom 500 million" inhabitants of sub-Saharan Africa
continue to live in poverty. In 2008, 17.5 million people were treated globally
for schistosomiasis, 11.7 million of those treated were from sub-Saharan Africa. 
This enervating disease has been successfully eradicated in Japan, as well as in 
Tunisia. Morocco and some Caribbean Island countries have made significant
progress on control and management of this disease. Brazil, China and Egypt are
taking steps towards elimination of the disease, while most sub-Saharan countries
are still groaning under the burden of the disease. Various factors are
responsible for the continuous and persistent transmission of schistosomiasis in 
sub-Saharan Africa. These include climatic changes and global warming, proximity 
to water bodies, irrigation and dam construction as well as socio-economic
factors such as occupational activities and poverty. The morbidity and mortality 
caused by this disease cannot be overemphasized. This review is an exposition of 
human schistosomiasis as it affects the inhabitants of various communities in
sub-Sahara African countries. It is hoped this will bring a re-awakening towards 
efforts to combat this impoverishing disease in terms of vaccines development,
alternative drug design, as well as new point-of-care diagnostics.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Editora Ltda. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bjid.2014.11.004 
PMID: 25636189  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

