
1. Microbiol Spectr. 2014;2(2):EHEC00032013.

EHEC Adhesins.

McWilliams BD(1), Torres AG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas, 77555. USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas, 77555. USA. ; Department of Pathology and Sealy Center for
Vaccine Development, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, 77555.
USA.

Adhesins are a group of proteins in enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC)
that are involved in the attachment or colonization of this pathogen to abiotic
(plastic or steel) and biological surfaces, such as those found in bovine and
human intestines. This review provides the most up-to-date information on these
essential adhesion factors, summarizing important historical discoveries and
analyzing the current and future state of this research. In doing so, the
proteins intimin and Tir are discussed in depth, especially regarding their role 
in the development of attaching and effacing lesions and in EHEC virulence.
Further, a series of fimbrial proteins (Lpf1, Lpf2, curli, ECP, F9, ELF, Sfp,
HCP, and type 1 fimbriae) are also described, emphasizing their various
contributions to adherence and colonization of different surfaces and their
potential use as genetic markers in detection and classification of different
EHEC serotypes. This review also discusses the role of several autotransporter
proteins (EhaA-D, EspP, Saa and Sab, and Cah), as well as other proteins
associated with adherence, such as flagella, EibG, Iha, and OmpA. While these
proteins have all been studied to varying degrees, all of the adhesins summarized
in this chapter have been linked to different stages of the EHEC life cycle,
making them good targets for the development of more effective diagnostics and
therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1128/microbiolspec.EHEC-0003-2013 
PMCID: PMC4307604
PMID: 25635238 

