
1. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Feb;50(2):280-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2014.11.017. Epub
2014 Nov 7.

One hundred years of pyloric stenosis in the Royal Hospital for Sick Children
Edinburgh.

Keys C(1), Johnson C(2), Teague W(2), MacKinlay G(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Edinburgh, UK. Electronic address:
charles.keys@uhs.nhs.uk.
(2)The Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Edinburgh, UK.

AIM: Pyloric stenosis was first reported in 1717 and was treatable from the start
of the 1900s. Our hospital opened in 1860. In this study we report the historical
account of the management of pyloric stenosis in Edinburgh from 1910 to 2013.
METHOD: Historic discharge summaries, theatre records, and distinguished
surgeons' operation and lecture notes dating back to 1910 with regard to pyloric 
stenosis were identified and reviewed. We present this history and compare our
contemporary data.
RESULTS: In February 1911, Harold Styles performed a pyloromyotomy, but did not
report it at the time. However, the record of this operation and date were later 
published by Mason Brown in 1956. For the period 1926-1936, we report the
management of 7 patients, of which only 3 survived. For the period 1947-1956, 515
patients were treated, with a mortality rate of 4.08%. Our current series for
1999-2012 has a mortality rate of zero and complication rate of 5.3%.
CONCLUSIONS: During the period 1910 to present day in Edinburgh, pyloric stenosis
has gone from being medically managed with bad outcomes to a condition with 100% 
survival. The only surgical advance has been the development of the Rammstedt
pyloromyotomy. Of interest we document that a pyloromyotomy was performed here in
February 1910. The improved outcome is mainly due to better understanding of the 
physiological disturbance in pyloric stenosis and advances in anaesthetics and
microbiology.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2014.11.017 
PMID: 25638619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

