
1. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2014 Nov;35(11):4298-304.

[Influence of the interaction between iron oxide and electron donor substances on
1,1,1-trichloro- 2, 2-bis (p-chlorophenyl) ethane ( DDT) reductive dechlorination
in hydragric acrisols].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu CY, Xu XH, Wang Z, Yao TY.

The interaction between iron oxide and electron donor substance have significant 
influences on electron transfer and the growth of iron-reducing bacteria, which
may affect the reductive dechlorination of polychlorinated organic compounds in
soil. Anaerobic soil incubation experiment was conducted to study the effect and 
its mechanism of iron oxide (goethite), electron donor substances (butyrate and
ethanol), and their interaction on DDT reductive dechlorination in Hydragric
Acrisols. Results showed that after 6 weeks of anaerobic incubation, the
extractable residues of DDT were between 1.29% and 2.01% of initial DDT amounts
in soils, which was attributed to the dechlorinated degradation of DDT and
formation of bound residues of DDT and its dechlorinated products. The main
product of DDT anaerobic dechlorination was 1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis
(p-chloro-phenyl) ethane (DDD). During the prophase of incubation, the
application of butyrate or ethanol led to the decreased pH and increased Eh for
reaction system, thus inhibited DDT dechlorination. The applications of only
goethite or goethite and electron donor substances resulted in the increased soil
pH, decreased soil Eh and increased Fe( II ) contents, thus accelerated DDT
dechlorination. There was no significant interaction between butyrate and iron
oxide on DDT dechlorination, whereas there was antagonistic action between
ethanol and iron oxide on DDT dechlorination. The results will be of great
significance for developing efficient and in-situ remediation technology of DDT
contaminated soil.


PMID: 25639109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

