
1. Benef Microbes. 2015;6(4):441-9. doi: 10.3920/BM2014.0108. Epub 2015 Feb 12.

Heat-killed Lactobacillus gasseri can enhance immunity in the elderly in a
double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical study.

Miyazawa K(1), Kawase M, Kubota A, Yoda K, Harata G, Hosoda M, He F.

Author information: 
(1)1 Technical Research Laboratory, Takanashi Milk Products Co., Ltd., Yokohama, 
Kanagawa 241-0023, Japan.

This double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial was conducted to test
whether Lactobacillus gasseri TMC0356 (TMC0356) can modify the immune response in
the elderly. Heat-killed TMC0356 or placebo was orally administered to 28 healthy
subjects aged 50-70 years old for 4 weeks at a dosage of 1.0Ã—10(9) cfu/day.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were collected from the subjects
before and after the study completion, together with general health and blood
examination records. Isolated PBMCs were examined for the number of T cells,
CD8(+)CD28(+) cells, native T cells, B cells, natural killer (NK) cells and the
ratios of CD4/CD8 T cells and native/memory T cells. NK cell activation and
concanavalin A-induced lymphocyte transformation of the isolated PBMCs were also 
examined. The number of CD8(+) T cells significantly increased in the subjects
after TMC0356 oral administration (P<0.05). Furthermore, the population of
CD8(+)CD28(+) T cells and the amount of lymphocyte transformation both
significantly decreased in PBMCs from the placebo group (P<0.05). However, such
changes were not observed in the subjects exposed to TMC0356. These results
suggest that TMC0356 can increase the number of CD8(+) T cells and reduce CD28
expression loss in CD8(+) T cells of the elderly. The effect of TMC0356 on immune
responses in the elderly may enhance their natural defence mechanisms against
pathogenic infections.

DOI: 10.3920/BM2014.0108 
PMID: 25653155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

