
1. Vaccine. 2015 Apr 8;33(15):1839-45. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.02.025. Epub 2015
Feb 21.

Immune responses following meningococcal serogroups A, C, Y and W polysaccharide 
vaccination in C2-deficient persons: evidence for increased levels of serum
bactericidal antibodies.

Brodszki N(1), Skattum L(2), Bai X(3), Findlow H(3), Borrow R(3), Jönsson G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine Section of Microbiology, Immunology and
Glycobiology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Vaccine Evaluation Unit, Public Health England, Manchester Royal Infirmary,
Manchester, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
Electronic address: goran.b.jonsson@skane.se.

Complement C2 deficiency (C2D) is associated with immunological diseases and
increased susceptibility to invasive infections caused by encapsulated bacteria
such as Neisseria menigitidis. In this study we evaluate the immunogenicity of
vaccination against N. menigitidis in C2D. C2D patients (n=22) and controls
(n=52) were given a tetravalent meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine. Serum
bactericidal antibody (SBA) titres (serogroups A, C, Y and W) were analysed using
a rabbit complement source. Levels of IgG, IgM, and IgA, factor B, and factor H, 
polymorphisms of MBL and Fc-gamma receptors were determined. The C2D patients
responded with an increased SBA titre to all four serogroups (p<0.001). The
response rates define as SBA titres ≥8 were found to be between 85.7% and 92.5%. 
The post-vaccination titres for serogroups C, Y and W were equal to healthy
controls. C2D patients with a history of invasive infection had a lower
post-vaccination SBA titres both compared to healthy C2D persons (p=0.03) and
compared to controls (p<0.0001). We found that the G2M*n/G2M*n genotype were
associated with a higher SBA titres after immunization (p=0.03). None of the
other investigated immunological factors appear to be important in influencing
the vaccine responses. Autoimmune diseases in C2D did not affect the vaccine
response. In general, vaccination against meningococci gave rise to antibody
responses in the C2D patients that equal healthy controls. The response rate was 
lower to serogroup A and among C2D patients with history of invasive infections. 
The presence of G2M*n/G2M*n genotype was associated with higher SBA titres after 
immunization.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.02.025 
PMID: 25707694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

