
1. Autophagy. 2015;11(1):166-82. doi: 10.4161/15548627.2014.981915.

Mitochondrial damage contributes to Pseudomonas aeruginosa activation of the
inflammasome and is downregulated by autophagy.

Jabir MS(1), Hopkins L, Ritchie ND, Ullah I, Bayes HK, Li D, Tourlomousis P,
Lupton A, Puleston D, Simon AK, Bryant C, Evans TJ.

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Immunity, Infection and Inflammation ; University of Glasgow ; 
UK.

The nucleotide-binding domain, leucine-rich repeat containing family caspase
recruitment domain containing 4 (NLRC4) inflammasome can be activated by
pathogenic bacteria via products translocated through the microbial type III
secretion apparatus (T3SS). Recent work has shown that activation of the NLRP3
inflammasome is downregulated by autophagy, but the influence of autophagy on
NLRC4 activation is unclear. We set out to determine how autophagy might
influence this process, using the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which
activates the NLRC4 inflammasome via its T3SS. Infection resulted in
T3SS-dependent mitochondrial damage with increased production of reactive oxygen 
intermediates and release of mitochondrial DNA. Inhibiting mitochondrial reactive
oxygen release or degrading intracellular mitochondrial DNA abrogated NLRC4
inflammasome activation. Moreover, macrophages lacking mitochondria failed to
activate NLRC4 following infection. Removal of damaged mitochondria by autophagy 
significantly attenuated NLRC4 inflammasome activation. Mitochondrial DNA bound
specifically to NLRC4 immunoprecipitates and transfection of mitochondrial DNA
directly activated the NLRC4 inflammasome; oxidation of the DNA enhanced this
effect. Manipulation of autophagy altered the degree of inflammasome activation
and inflammation in an in vivo model of P. aeruginosa infection. Our results
reveal a novel mechanism contributing to NLRC4 activation by P. aeruginosa via
mitochondrial damage and release of mitochondrial DNA triggered by the bacterial 
T3SS that is downregulated by autophagy.

DOI: 10.4161/15548627.2014.981915 
PMCID: PMC4502769
PMID: 25700738  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

