
1. Int Immunol. 2015 May;27(5):253-63. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxv007. Epub 2015 Feb 20.

CD1d-dependent expansion of NKT follicular helper cells in vivo and in vitro is a
product of cellular proliferation and differentiation.

Rampuria P(1), Lang ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA mark-lang@ouhsc.edu.

NKT follicular helper cells (NKTfh cells) are a recently discovered functional
subset of CD1d-restricted NKT cells. Given the potential for NKTfh cells to
promote specific antibody responses and germinal center reactions, there is much 
interest in determining the conditions under which NKTfh cells proliferate and/or
differentiate in vivo and in vitro. We confirm that NKTfh cells expressing the
canonical semi-invariant Vα14 TCR were CXCR5(+)/ICOS(+)/PD-1(+)/Bcl6(+) and
increased in number following administration of the CD1d-binding glycolipid
α-galactosylceramide (α-GC) to C57Bl/6 mice. We show that the α-GC-stimulated
increase in NKTfh cells was CD1d-dependent since the effect was diminished by
reduced CD1d expression. In vivo and in vitro treatment with α-GC, singly or in
combination with IL-2, showed that NKTfh cells increased in number to a greater
extent than total NKT cells, but proliferation was near-identical in both
populations. Acquisition of the NKTfh phenotype from an adoptively transferred
PD-1-depleted cell population was also evident, showing that peripheral NKT cells
differentiated into NKTfh cells. Therefore, the α-GC-stimulated, CD1d-dependent
increase in peripheral NKTfh cells is a result of cellular proliferation and
differentiation. These findings advance our understanding of the immune response 
following immunization with CD1d-binding glycolipids.

© The Japanese Society for Immunology. 2015. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxv007 
PMCID: PMC4406267
PMID: 25710490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

