
1. Immune Netw. 2015 Feb;15(1):37-43. doi: 10.4110/in.2015.15.1.37. Epub 2015 Feb
17.

Lactoferrin Combined with Retinoic Acid Stimulates B1 Cells to Express IgA
Isotype and Gut-homing Molecules.

Kang SH(1), Jin BR(1), Kim HJ(1), Seo GY(1), Jang YS(1), Kim SJ(1), An SJ(1),
Park SR(2), Kim WS(3), Kim PH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Bioscience, School of Biomedical Science, Kangwon
National University, Chuncheon 200-701, Korea.
(2)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Konyang University, Daejeon
302-718, Korea.
(3)Department of Animal Life and Environmental Science, College of Agriculture
and Life Science, Hankyong National University, Anseong 456-749, Korea.

It is well established that TGF-β1 and retinoic acid (RA) cause IgA isotype
switching in mice. We recently found that lactoferrin (LF) also has an activity
of IgA isotype switching in spleen B cells. The present study explored the effect
of LF on the Ig production by mouse peritoneal B cells. LF, like TGF-β1,
substantially increased IgA production in peritoneal B1 cells but little in
peritoneal B2 cells. In contrast, LF increased IgG2b production in peritoneal B2 
cells much more strongly than in peritoneal B1 cells. LF in combination with RA
further enhanced the IgA production and, interestingly, this enhancement was
restricted to IgA isotype and B1 cells. Similarly, the combination of the two
molecules also led to expression of gut homing molecules α4β7 and CCR9 on
peritoneal B1 cells, but not on peritoneal B2 cells. Thus, these results indicate
that LF and RA can contribute to gut IgA response through stimulating IgA isotype
switching and expression of gut-homing molecules in peritoneal B1 cells.

DOI: 10.4110/in.2015.15.1.37 
PMCID: PMC4338266
PMID: 25713507 

