
1. Cancer Immunol Res. 2015 Jun;3(6):650-60. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0236-T.
Epub 2015 Feb 20.

Mass cytometry analysis shows that a novel memory phenotype B cell is expanded in
multiple myeloma.

Hansmann L(1), Blum L(2), Ju CH(2), Liedtke M(3), Robinson WH(2), Davis MM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford,
California.
(2)Division of Immunology and Rheumatology, Stanford University, Stanford,
California.
(3)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford,
California.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford,
California. Institute for Immunity, Transplantation, and Infection, Stanford
University, Stanford, California. The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford
University, Stanford, California. mmdavis@stanford.edu.

It would be very beneficial if the status of cancers could be determined from a
blood specimen. However, peripheral blood leukocytes are very heterogeneous
between individuals, and thus high-resolution technologies are likely required.
We used cytometry by time-of-flight and next-generation sequencing to ask whether
a plasma cell cancer (multiple myeloma) and related precancerous states had any
consistent effect on the peripheral blood mononuclear cell phenotypes of
patients. Analysis of peripheral blood samples from 13 cancer patients, 9
precancer patients, and 9 healthy individuals revealed significant differences in
the frequencies of the T-cell, B-cell, and natural killer-cell compartments. Most
strikingly, we identified a novel B-cell population that normally accounts for
4.0% ± 0.7% (mean ± SD) of total B cells and is up to 13-fold expanded in
multiple myeloma patients with active disease. This population expressed markers 
previously associated with both memory (CD27(+)) and naïve (CD24(lo)CD38(+))
phenotypes. Single-cell immunoglobulin gene sequencing showed polyclonality,
indicating that these cells are not precursors to the myeloma, and somatic
mutations, a characteristic of memory cells. SYK, ERK, and p38 phosphorylation
responses, and the fact that most of these cells expressed isotypes other than
IgM or IgD, confirmed the memory character of this population, defining it as a
novel type of memory B cells.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0236-T 
PMCID: PMC4457663
PMID: 25711758  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

