
1. Environ Microbiol Rep. 2015 Jun;7(3):516-25. doi: 10.1111/1758-2229.12282. Epub
2015 Apr 8.

Seagrass biofilm communities at a naturally CO2 -rich vent.

Hassenrück C(1), Hofmann LC(2), Bischof K(2), Ramette A(1).

Author information: 
(1)HGF MPG Group for Deep-Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for
Marine Microbiology, Celsiusstrasse 1, Bremen, 28359, Germany.
(2)BreMarE, FB 02, University of Bremen, Leobener Str. NW2, Bremen, 28359,
Germany.

Seagrass meadows are a crucial component of tropical marine reef ecosystems.
Seagrass plants are colonized by a multitude of epiphytic organisms that
contribute to broadening the ecological role of seagrasses. To better understand 
how environmental changes like ocean acidification might affect epiphytic
assemblages, the microbial community composition of the epiphytic biofilm of
Enhalus acroides was investigated at a natural CO2 vent in Papua New Guinea using
molecular fingerprinting and next-generation sequencing of 16S and 18S rRNA
genes. Both bacterial and eukaryotic epiphytes formed distinct communities at the
CO2 -impacted site compared with the control site. This site-related CO2 effect
was also visible in the succession pattern of microbial epiphytes. We further
found an increased relative sequence abundance of bacterial types associated with
coral diseases at the CO2 -impacted site (Fusobacteria, Thalassomonas), whereas
eukaryotes such as certain crustose coralline algae commonly related to healthy
reefs were less diverse. These trends in the epiphytic community of E. acroides
suggest a potential role of seagrasses as vectors of coral pathogens and may
support previous predictions of a decrease in reef health and prevalence of
diseases under future ocean acidification scenarios.

© 2015 The Authors. Environmental Microbiology Reports published by Society for
Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1758-2229.12282 
PMCID: PMC4677816
PMID: 25727314  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

