
1. Gigascience. 2015 Feb 25;4:8. doi: 10.1186/s13742-015-0049-6. eCollection 2015.

Live time-lapse dataset of in vitro wound healing experiments.

Zaritsky A(1), Natan S(2), Kaplan D(3), Ben-Jacob E(4), Tsarfaty I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75024
USA.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 69978 Israel.
(3)Israel Institute for Biological Research, P.O.B. 19, Ness Ziona, 74100 Israel.
(4)School of Physics and Astronomy, The Raymond and Beverly Sackler Faculty of
Exact Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, 69978 Israel ; Center for
Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005-1827 USA ;
Research & Development Unit Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, Zerifin, 70300 Israel.

BACKGROUND: The wound healing assay is the common method to study collective cell
migration in vitro. Computational analyses of live imaging exploit the rich
temporal information and significantly improve understanding of complex phenomena
that emerge during this mode of collective motility. Publicly available
experimental data can allow application of new analyses to promote new
discoveries, and assess algorithms' capabilities to distinguish between different
experimental conditions.
FINDINGS: A freely-available dataset of 31 time-lapse in vitro wound healing
experiments of two cell lines is presented. It consists of six different
experimental conditions with 4-6 replicates each, gathered to study the effects
of a growth factor on collective cell migration. The raw data is available at
'The Cell: an Image Library' repository. This Data Note provides detailed
description of the data, intermediately processed data, scripts and experimental 
validations that have not been reported before and are currently available at
GigaDB. This is the first publicly available repository of live collective cell
migration data that includes independent replicates for each set of conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: This dataset has the potential for extensive reuse. Some aspects in 
the data remain unexplored and can be exploited extensively to reveal new
insight. The dataset could also be used to assess the performance of available
and new quantification methods by demonstrating phenotypic discriminatory
capabilities between the different experimental conditions. It may allow faster
and more elaborated, reproducible and effective analyses, which will likely lead 
to new biological and biophysical discoveries.

DOI: 10.1186/s13742-015-0049-6 
PMCID: PMC4341232
PMID: 25722853  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

