
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2015 Sep;22(18):13753-63. doi:
10.1007/s11356-014-3840-5. Epub 2015 Feb 27.

Determination of physiological, taxonomic, and molecular characteristics of a
cultivable arsenic-resistant bacterial community.

Cordi A(1), Pagnout C, Devin S, Poirel J, Billard P, Dollard MA, Bauda P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire des Environnements Continentaux (LIEC), UMR
7360, CNRS, Université de Lorraine, Campus Bridoux, rue du Général Delestraint,
57070, Metz, France.

A collection of 219 bacterial arsenic-resistant isolates was constituted from
neutral arsenic mine drainage sediments. Isolates were grown aerobically or
anaerobically during 21 days on solid DR2A medium using agar or gelan gum as
gelling agent, with 7 mM As(III) or 20 mM As(V) as selective pressure.
Interestingly, the sum of the different incubation conditions used (arsenic form,
gelling agent, oxygen pressure) results in an overall increase of the isolate
diversity. Isolated strains mainly belonged to Proteobacteria (63%),
Actinobacteria (25%), and Bacteroidetes (10%). The most representative genera
were Pseudomonas (20%), Acinetobacter (8%), and Serratia (15%) among the
Proteobacteria; Rhodococcus (13%) and Microbacterium (5%) among Actinobacteria;
and Flavobacterium (13%) among the Bacteroidetes. Isolates were screened for the 
presence of arsenic-related genes (arsB, ACR3(1), ACR3(2), aioA, arsM, and arrA).
In this way, 106 ACR3(1)-, 74 arsB-, 22 aioA-, 14 ACR3(2)-, and one arsM-positive
PCR products were obtained and sequenced. Analysis of isolate sensitivity toward 
metalloids (arsenite, arsenate, and antimonite) revealed correlations between
taxonomy, sensitivity, and genotype. Antimonite sensitivity correlated with the
presence of ACR3(1) mainly present in Bacteroidetes and Actinobacteria, and
arsenite or antimonite resistance correlated with arsB gene presence. The
presence of either aioA gene or several different arsenite carrier genes did not 
ensure a high level of arsenic resistance in the tested conditions.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-014-3840-5 
PMID: 25721523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

