
1. Mar Pollut Bull. 2015 Apr 15;93(1-2):68-74. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2015.02.013.
Epub 2015 Feb 28.

Effect of historical residual hexachlorocyclohexanes and
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane on bacterial communities in sediment core
collected from an estuary in northeastern China by next-generation sequencing.

Guo J(1), Zhao L(1), Lu W(2), Jia H(3), Wang L(3), Liu X(3), Sun Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Systems Biology, Dalian Maritime University,
Dalian, PR China.
(2)School of Food Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology,
Harbin, PR China.
(3)International Joint Research Center for Persistent Toxic Substances
(IJRC-PTS), Dalian Maritime University, Dalian, PR China.
(4)Institute of Environmental Systems Biology, Dalian Maritime University,
Dalian, PR China. Electronic address: yqsun@dlmu.edu.cn.

In this study, we evaluate the influence of hexachlorocyclohexanes (HCHs) and
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) on bacterial communities of sediment core
from an estuary formed during the period of 1960-2011. Canonical correspondence
analysis showed that o,p'-DDT, o,p'-DDD (mitotane), and depth had important
influences on bacterial community distributions (p<0.05). Furthermore, our
results found variance explained by all variables was 82.9%, while that by
o,p'-DDD was 24.4%, and that of o,p'-DDT was 9.8%, indicating that o,p'-DDD had a
greater influence on sediment-dwelling bacteria than o,p'-DDT. Also, bacterial
diversity was affected and the Shannon index was significantly negatively
correlated with total HCHs (r=-0.579, p<0.05) and total DDTs (r=-0.607, p<0.01), 
respectively. Furthermore, our results showed that Flavobacteria and Clostridia
content can be considered an indicator of pollution of HCHs and DDTs in sediment 
core samples.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2015.02.013 
PMID: 25736815  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

