
1. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Mar 5;16(3):323-37. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.01.015.

A continuous molecular roadmap to iPSC reprogramming through progression analysis
of single-cell mass cytometry.

Zunder ER(1), Lujan E(2), Goltsev Y(1), Wernig M(3), Nolan GP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell
Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA;
Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell
Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
Electronic address: gnolan@stanford.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Mar 5;16(3):215-6.

To analyze cellular reprogramming at the single-cell level, mass cytometry was
used to simultaneously measure markers of pluripotency, differentiation,
cell-cycle status, and cellular signaling throughout the reprogramming process.
Time-resolved progression analysis of the resulting data sets was used to
construct a continuous molecular roadmap for three independent reprogramming
systems. Although these systems varied substantially in Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and
c-Myc stoichiometry, they presented a common set of reprogramming landmarks.
Early in the reprogramming process, Oct4(high)Klf4(high) cells transitioned to a 
CD73(high)CD104(high)CD54(low) partially reprogrammed state. Ki67(low) cells from
this intermediate population reverted to a MEF-like phenotype, but Ki67(high)
cells advanced through the M-E-T and then bifurcated into two distinct
populations: an ESC-like Nanog(high)Sox2(high)CD54(high) population and a
mesendoderm-like Nanog(low)Sox2(low)Lin28(high)CD24(high)PDGFR-α(high)
population. The methods developed here for time-resolved, single-cell progression
analysis may be used for the study of additional complex and dynamic systems,
such as cancer progression and embryonic development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.01.015 
PMCID: PMC4401090
PMID: 25748935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

