
1. Stem Cells. 2015 Jun;33(6):1975-84. doi: 10.1002/stem.1988.

Mild Heat Treatment Primes Human CD34(+) Cord Blood Cells for Migration Toward
SDF-1α and Enhances Engraftment in an NSG Mouse Model.

Capitano ML(1), Hangoc G(1), Cooper S(1), Broxmeyer HE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

Simple efforts are needed to enhance cord blood (CB) transplantation. We
hypothesized that short-term exposure of CD34(+) CB cells to 39.5°C would enhance
their response to stromal-derived factor-1 (SDF-1), by increasing lipid raft
aggregation and CXCR4 expression, thus leading to enhanced engraftment. Mild
hyperthermia (39.5°C) significantly increased the percent of CD34(+) CB that
migrated toward SDF-1. This was associated with increased expression of CXCR4 on 
the cells. Mechanistically, mild heating increased the percent of CD34(+) cells
with aggregated lipid rafts and enhanced colocalization of CXCR4 within lipid
raft domains. Using methyl-β-cyclodextrin (MβCD), an agent that blocks lipid raft
aggregation, it was determined that this enhancement in chemotaxis was dependent 
upon lipid raft aggregation. Colocalization of Rac1, a GTPase crucial for cell
migration and adhesion, with CXCR4 to the lipid raft was essential for the
effects of heat on chemotaxis, as determined with an inhibitor of Rac1
activation, NSC23766. Application-wise, mild heat treatment significantly
increased the percent chimerism as well as homing and engraftment of CD34(+) CB
cells in sublethally irradiated non-obese diabetic severe combined
immunodeficiency IL-2 receptor gamma chain d (NSG) mice. Mild heating may be a
simple and inexpensive means to enhance engraftment following CB transplantation 
in patients.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.1988 
PMCID: PMC4441568
PMID: 25753525  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

