
1. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Aug;116(8):1540-52. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25095.

Differential Susceptibility of Human Pleural and Peritoneal Mesothelial Cells to 
Asbestos Exposure.

Dragon J(1), Thompson J(2), MacPherson M(2), Shukla A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine,
University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont, 05405.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, College of Medicine,
University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont, 05405.

Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is an aggressive cancer of mesothelial cells of
pleural and peritoneal cavities. In 85% of cases both pleural and peritoneal MM
is caused by asbestos exposure. Although both are asbestos-induced cancers, the
incidence of pleural MM is significantly higher (85%) than peritoneal MM (15%).
It has been proposed that carcinogenesis is a result of asbestos-induced
inflammation but it is not clear what contributes to the differences observed
between incidences of these two cancers. We hypothesize that the observed
differences in incidences of pleural and peritoneal MM are the result of
differences in the direct response of these cell types to asbestos rather than to
differences mediated by the in vivo microenvironment. To test this hypothesis we 
characterized cellular responses to asbestos in a controlled environment. We
found significantly greater changes in genome-wide expression in response to
asbestos exposure in pleural mesothelial cells as compared to peritoneal
mesothelial cells. In particular, a greater response in many common genes (IL-8, 
ATF3, CXCL2, CXCL3, IL-6, GOS2) was seen in pleural mesothelial cells as compared
to peritoneal mesothelial cells. Unique genes expressed in pleural mesothelial
cells were mainly pro-inflammatory (G-CSF, IL-1β, IL-1α, GREM1) and have
previously been shown to be involved in development of MM. Our results are
consistent with the hypothesis that differences in incidences of pleural and
peritoneal MM upon exposure to asbestos are the result of differences in
mesothelial cell physiology that lead to differences in the inflammatory
response, which leads to cancer.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.25095 
PMCID: PMC4698803
PMID: 25757056  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

