
1. Microb Biotechnol. 2015 May;8(3):541-8. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.12260. Epub 2015
Mar 10.

Environmental factors influencing the distribution of ammonifying and
denitrifying bacteria and water qualities in 10 lakes and reservoirs of the
Northeast, China.

Zhao X(1), Wei Z, Zhao Y, Xi B, Wang X, Zhao T, Zhang X, Wei Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Water Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, China; 
State Key Laboratory of Environmental Criteria and Risk Assessment, Chinese
Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing, 100012, China.

This study presents seasonal and spatial variations of the ammonifying bacteria
(AB) and denitrifying bacteria (DNB) and physicochemical parameters in 10 lakes
and reservoirs in the northeast of China. Water samples were collected in winter 
(January), spring (March), summer (July) and fall (November) in 2011. The study
revealed that physicochemical parameters such as pH, dissolved oxygen (DO), NH4
(+) -N and nitrate as nitrogen were closely related with the distribution of AB
and DNB. Seasonally, the levels of AB presents gradually upward trend from winter
to summer, and declines in fall and DNB were higher in spring and fall than
summer and lowest in winter. Spatially, the annual average of AB among 10 lakes
and reservoirs showed insignificant difference (P > 0.05), for DNB, Udalianchi
and Lianhuan Lake were lower than others (P < 0.05). Regression correlation
analysis showed that the levels of AB and DNB had a close relationship with
nitrogen nutrition. Three principal components were identified of total variances
which are conditionally classified by the 'natural' factor (PC1) and 'nitrogen
nutrients' (PC2, PC3). According the principal component scores, cluster analysis
detected two distinct groups: (C1) mainly affected by nitrogen nutrients and (C2)
natural environmental factors.

© 2015 The Authors. Microbial Biotechnology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
and Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/1751-7915.12260 
PMCID: PMC4408186
PMID: 25756244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

