
1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 13;10(3):e0119040. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119040.
eCollection 2015.

The NDST gene family in zebrafish: role of NDST1B in pharyngeal arch formation.

Filipek-Górniok B(1), Carlsson P(1), Haitina T(2), Habicher J(2), Ledin J(2),
Kjellén L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Science for Life Laboratory,
Uppsala University, Husargatan 3, PO Box 582, SE-751 23, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Dept. of Organismal Biology, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
Norbyvägen 18A, SE-752 36, Uppsala, Sweden.

Heparan sulfate (HS) proteoglycans are ubiquitous components of the extracellular
matrix and plasma membrane of metazoans. The sulfation pattern of the HS
glycosaminoglycan chain is characteristic for each tissue and changes during
development. The glucosaminyl N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase (NDST) enzymes
catalyze N-deacetylation and N-sulfation during HS biosynthesis and have a key
role in designing the sulfation pattern. We here report on the presence of five
NDST genes in zebrafish. Zebrafish ndst1a, ndst1b, ndst2a and ndst2b represent
duplicated mammalian orthologues of NDST1 and NDST2 that arose through teleost
specific genome duplication. Interestingly, the single zebrafish orthologue
ndst3, is equally similar to tetrapod Ndst3 and Ndst4. It is likely that a local 
duplication in the common ancestor of lobe-finned fish and tetrapods gave rise to
these two genes. All zebrafish Ndst genes showed distinct but partially
overlapping expression patterns during embryonic development. Morpholino
knockdown of ndst1b resulted in delayed development, craniofacial cartilage
abnormalities, shortened body and pectoral fin length, resembling some of the
features of the Ndst1 mouse knockout.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119040 
PMCID: PMC4359090
PMID: 25767878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

