
1. J Inorg Biochem. 2015 Jun;147:54-64. doi: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2015.02.007. Epub
2015 Feb 20.

Synthesis, characterization, X-ray crystal structure, DFT calculation and
antibacterial activities of new vanadium(IV, V) complexes containing chelidamic
acid and novel thiourea derivatives.

Farzanfar J(1), Ghasemi K(1), Rezvani AR(2), Delarami HS(1), Ebrahimi A(1),
Hosseinpoor H(1), Eskandari A(1), Rudbari HA(3), Bruno G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Sistan and Baluchestan, Zahedan
98135-674, Iran.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Sistan and Baluchestan, Zahedan
98135-674, Iran. Electronic address: Ali@hamoon.usb.ac.ir.
(3)Faculty of Chemistry, University of Isfahan, Isfahan 81746-73441, Iran.
(4)Universita degli Studi di Messina, dip. Scienze Chimiche. Viale Ferdinando S. 
d'Alcontres, 98166 Messina, Italy.

Three new thiourea ligands derived from the condensation of aroyl- and
aryl-isothiocyanate derivatives with 2,6-diaminopyridine, named
1,1'-(pyridine-2,6-diyl)bis(3-(benzoyl)thiourea) (L1),
1,1'-(pyridine-2,6-diyl)bis(3-(2-chlorobenzoyl)thiourea) (L2) and
1,1'-(pyridine-2,6-diyl)bis(3-(4-chlorophenyl)thiourea) (L3), their
oxido-vanadium(IV) complexes, namely [VO(L1('))(H2O)] (C1), [VO(L2('))(H2O)] (C2)
and [VO(L3('))(H2O)] (C3), and also, dioxo-vanadium(V) complex containing
4-hydroxy-2,6-pyridine dicarboxylic acid (chelidamic acid, H2dipic-OH) and
metformin (N,N-dimethylbiguanide, Met), named [H2Met][VO2(dipic-OH)]2·H2O (C4),
were synthesized and characterized by elemental analysis, FTIR and (1)H NMR and
UV-visible spectroscopies. Proposed structures for free thiourea ligands and
their vanadium complexes were corroborated by applying geometry optimization and 
conformational analysis. Solid state structure of complex
[H2Met][VO2(dipic-OH)]2·H2O (triclinic, Pī) was fully determined by single
crystal X-ray diffraction analysis. In this complex, metformin is double
protonated and acted as counter ion. The antibacterial properties of these
compounds were investigated in vitro against standard Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacterial strains. The experiments showed that vanadium(IV)
complexes had the superior antibacterial activities than novel thiourea
derivatives and vanadium(V) complex against all Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacterial strains.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2015.02.007 
PMID: 25770009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

