
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):4015-20. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1421865112. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

Global dispersion and local diversification of the methane seep microbiome.

Ruff SE(1), Biddle JF(2), Teske AP(3), Knittel K(4), Boetius A(5), Ramette A(6).

Author information: 
(1)HGF MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology and Department of Molecular 
Ecology, Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, D-28359 Bremen, Germany;
eruff@mpi-bremen.de.
(2)College of Earth, Ocean and Environment, University of Delaware, Lewes, DE
19958;
(3)Department of Marine Sciences, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-3300;
(4)Department of Molecular Ecology, Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology,
D-28359 Bremen, Germany;
(5)HGF MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology and Alfred Wegener
Institute, Helmholtz Center for Polar and Marine Research, D-27570 Bremerhaven,
Germany; and Center for Marine Environmental Sciences, University of Bremen,
D-28359 Bremen, Germany.
(6)HGF MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology and.

Methane seeps are widespread seafloor ecosystems shaped by the emission of gas
from seabed reservoirs. The microorganisms inhabiting methane seeps transform the
chemical energy in methane to products that sustain rich benthic communities
around the gas leaks. Despite the biogeochemical relevance of microbial methane
removal at seeps, the global diversity and dispersion of seep microbiota remain
unknown. Here we determined the microbial diversity and community structure of 23
globally distributed methane seeps and compared these to the microbial
communities of 54 other seafloor ecosystems, including sulfate-methane transition
zones, hydrothermal vents, coastal sediments, and deep-sea surface and subsurface
sediments. We found that methane seep communities show moderate levels of
microbial richness compared with other seafloor ecosystems and harbor distinct
bacterial and archaeal taxa with cosmopolitan distribution and key biogeochemical
functions. The high relative sequence abundance of ANME (anaerobic methanotrophic
archaea), as well as aerobic Methylococcales, sulfate-reducing Desulfobacterales,
and sulfide-oxidizing Thiotrichales, matches the most favorable microbial
metabolisms at methane seeps in terms of substrate supply and distinguishes the
seep microbiome from other seafloor microbiomes. The key functional taxa varied
in relative sequence abundance between different seeps due to the environmental
factors, sediment depth and seafloor temperature. The degree of endemism of the
methane seep microbiome suggests a high local diversification in these
heterogeneous but long-lived ecosystems. Our results indicate that the seep
microbiome is structured according to metacommunity processes and that few
cosmopolitan microbial taxa mediate the bulk of methane oxidation, with global
relevance to methane emission in the ocean.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1421865112 
PMCID: PMC4386351
PMID: 25775520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

