
1. Eur J Med Chem. 2015 Apr 13;94:306-16. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.03.015. Epub
2015 Mar 7.

Synthesis and antibacterial evaluation of a novel series of synthetic
phenylthiazole compounds against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA).

Mohammad H(1), Reddy PV(2), Monteleone D(2), Mayhoub AS(3), Cushman M(2), Seleem 
MN(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Pathobiology, Purdue University College of
Veterinary Medicine, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.
(2)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue
University College of Pharmacy, and the Purdue Center for Cancer Research, West
Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.
(3)Department of Organic Chemistry, Al Azhar University, Cairo 11884, Egypt.
(4)Department of Comparative Pathobiology, Purdue University College of
Veterinary Medicine, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. Electronic address:
mseleem@purdue.edu.

Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infections are a significant global
health challenge in part due to the emergence of strains exhibiting resistance to
nearly all classes of antibiotics. This underscores the urgent need for the rapid
development of novel antimicrobials to circumvent this burgeoning problem.
Previously, whole-cell screening of a library of 2,5-disubstituted thiazole
compounds revealed a lead compound exhibiting potent antimicrobial activity
against MRSA. The present study, conducting a more rigorous analysis of the
structure-activity relationship of this compound, reveals a nonpolar, hydrophobic
functional group is favored at thiazole-C2 and an
ethylidenehydrazine-1-carboximidamide moiety is necessary at C5 for the compound 
to possess activity against MRSA. Furthermore, the MTS assay confirmed analogs 5,
22d, and 25 exhibited an improved toxicity profile (not toxic up to 40 μg/mL to
mammalian cells) over the lead 1. Analysis with human liver microsomes revealed
compound 5 was more metabolically stable compared to the lead compound (greater
than eight-fold improvement in the half-life in human liver microsomes).
Collectively the results presented demonstrate the novel thiazole derivatives
synthesized warrant further exploration for potential use as future antimicrobial
agents for the treatment of multidrug-resistant S. aureus infections.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.03.015 
PMCID: PMC4716659
PMID: 25771109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

