
1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 23;10(3):e0121968. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121968.
eCollection 2015.

Migration of myeloid cells during inflammation is differentially regulated by the
cell surface receptors Slamf1 and Slamf8.

Wang G(1), van Driel BJ(1), Liao G(1), O'Keeffe MS(1), Halibozek PJ(1), Flipse
J(1), Yigit B(1), Azcutia V(2), Luscinskas FW(2), Wang N(1), Terhorst C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Immunology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pathology, Center for Excellence in Vascular Biology, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United
States of America.

Previous studies have demonstrated that the cell surface receptor Slamf1 (CD150) 
is requisite for optimal NADPH-oxidase (Nox2) dependent reactive oxygen species
(ROS) production by phagocytes in response to Gram- bacteria. By contrast, Slamf8
(CD353) is a negative regulator of ROS in response to Gram+ and Gram- bacteria.
Employing in vivo migration after skin sensitization, induction of peritonitis,
and repopulation of the small intestine demonstrates that in vivo migration of
Slamf1-/- dendritic cells and macrophages is reduced, as compared to wt mice. By 
contrast, in vivo migration of Slamf8-/- dendritic cells, macrophages and
neutrophils is accelerated. These opposing effects of Slamf1 and Slamf8 are
cell-intrinsic as judged by in vitro migration in transwell chambers in response 
to CCL19, CCL21 or CSF-1. Importantly, inhibiting ROS production of Slamf8-/-
macrophages by diphenyleneiodonium chloride blocks this in vitro migration. We
conclude that Slamf1 and Slamf8 govern ROS-dependent innate immune responses of
myeloid cells, thus modulating migration of these cells during inflammation in an
opposing manner.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121968 
PMCID: PMC4370648
PMID: 25799045  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

