
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 23;5:9410. doi: 10.1038/srep09410.

Altered autophagic flux enhances inflammatory responses during
inflammation-induced preterm labor.

Agrawal V(1), Jaiswal MK(2), Mallers T(2), Katara GK(2), Gilman-Sachs A(2),
Beaman KD(2), Hirsch E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, NorthShore University HealthSystem,
Evanston, IL.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rosalind Franklin University of
Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)1] Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, NorthShore University
HealthSystem, Evanston, IL [2] Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Pritzker 
School of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Cellular organelles and proteins are degraded and recycled through autophagy, a
process during which vesicles known as autophagosomes fuse with lysosomes.
Altered autophagy occurs in various diseases, but its role in preterm labor (PTL)
is unknown. We investigated the role of autophagic flux in two mouse models of
PTL compared to controls: 1) inflammation-induced PTL (IPTL), induced by
toll-like receptor agonists; and 2) non-inflammation (hormonally)-induced PTL
(NIPTL). We demonstrate that the autophagy related genes Atg4c and Atg7 (involved
in the lipidation of microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3) B-I to 
the autophagosome-associated form, LC3B-II) decrease significantly in uterus and 
placenta during IPTL but not NIPTL. Autophagic flux is altered in IPTL, as shown 
by the accumulation of LC3B paralogues and diminishment of lysosome associated
membrane protein (LAMP)-1, LAMP-2 and the a2 isoform of V-ATPase (a2V, an enzyme 
involved in lysosome acidification). These alterations in autophagy are
associated with increased activation of NF-ÎºB and proinflammatory
cytokines/chemokines in both uterus and placenta. Similar changes are seen in
macrophages exposed to TLR ligands and are enhanced with blockade of a2V. These
novel findings represent the first evidence of an association between altered
autophagic flux and hyper-inflammation and labor in IPTL.

DOI: 10.1038/srep09410 
PMCID: PMC4369745
PMID: 25797357  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

