
1. Exp Mol Pathol. 2015 Jun;98(3):574-84. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.03.022. Epub
2015 Mar 18.

Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4) could be involved in a regulatory role in 
apoptosis and a link between apoptosis and insulin resistance.

Dlamini Z(1), Ntlabati P(2), Mbita Z(3), Shoba-Zikhali L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Innovation & Engagements Portfolio, Mangosuthu University of Technology
Research, Durban, South Africa. Electronic address: Zodwa.Dlamini@bristol.ac.uk.
(2)Merck Chemicals (Pty) Ltd, Wadeville, Germiston, South Africa.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Biotechnology, University of
Limpopo, South Africa.
(4)Technology Innovation Agency, Durban, Umbogintwini, South Africa.

Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4), a mammalian mitochondrial serine kinase
has emerged as an interesting candidate for diabetes therapy. Due to the high
prevalence of this disease especially type 2 diabetes (T2D) and the health
complications associated with it, there is extensive effort to find the
appropriate treatment. Understanding the regulation of PDK4 activity would
therefore contribute significantly to the development of therapeutic agents. This
research outlines the utilization of bioinformatics tools such as Interweaver,
ClustalW and Protein Structure Visualizer, in order to predict proteins that
potentially interact with PDK4 and possibly regulate its activity. Interweaver
database identified 96 proteins that have possible interaction sites for PDK4.
Protein p100/p49, containing a death domain that is known to have a role in
suppressing apoptosis, was identified as a potential partner for PDK4. The
alignment between p100/p49 primary sequence and that of PDK4 using ClustalW
demonstrated sequence similarity between the two proteins. Swiss PDB Viewer then 
located the positions of the amino acids that are in the hypothetical protein
binding motif of p100/p49 within the 3D structure of hPDK4. These amino acids
were found to be located in the region of PDK4 which is known to bind protein
substrates of PDK4 and may be accessible to other proteins as well. These
findings were very interesting as PDK4 has not previously been associated with
apoptosis and this could be the link between apoptosis and insulin resistance.
Cell biology studies were then performed to verify the relationship between PDK4 
and apoptosis. In this regard, HeLa and HepG2 cells were treated with
apoptosis-inducing agents such as TNFα, C2-ceramide, and linoleic acid. These
cells were then monitored for apoptosis and PDK4 mRNA expression using a DNA
laddering assay as well as Real Time PCR. The results showed that these factors
induced apoptosis in a concentration dependent manner and suppressed PDK4 mRNA
levels. These findings suggested a relationship between PDK4 and apoptosis.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.03.022 
PMID: 25794976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

