
1. Int J Infect Dis. 2015 Mar;32:13-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2014.12.017.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific and MHC class I-restricted CD8+ T-cells
exhibit a stem cell precursor-like phenotype in patients with active pulmonary
tuberculosis.

Axelsson-Robertson R(1), Ju JH(2), Kim HY(2), Zumla A(3), Maeurer M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation (CAST), Karolinska University 
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Catholic University of Korea, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Division of Infection and Immunity, University College London, and NIHR
Biomedical Research Center at UCLHospital, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Centre for Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation (CAST), Karolinska University 
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden; Division of Therapeutic Immunology (TIM), F79,
Department of Laboratory Medicine (LABMED), Hälsovägen, Karolinska University
Hospital Huddinge, SE-14186 Huddinge, Sweden. Electronic address:
markus.maeurer@ki.se.

The nature and longevity of the T-cell response directed against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (MTB) are important for effective pathogen containment. We analyzed 
ex vivo the nature of MTB antigen-specific T-cell responses directed against the 
MTB secreted antigens Rv0288, Rv1886c, Rv3875, the antigens Rv2958c, Rv2957, and 
Rv0447c (intracellular, non-secreted enzymes) in blood from Korean patients with 
active tuberculosis (TB). MTB-specific T-cell function was defined by
intracellular cytokine production (interleukin (IL)-2, interferon gamma, tumour
necrosis factor alpha, and IL-17) and by multimer-guided (HLA-A*02:01 and
HLA-A*24:02) analysis of epitope-specific CD8+ T-cells, along with phenotypic
markers (CD45RA and CCR7), CD107a, a marker for degranulation, and CD127
co-staining for T-cell differentiation and homing. Cytokine production analysis
underestimated the frequencies of MTB antigen-specific T-cells defined by major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-peptide multimer analysis. We showed
that MTB antigen-specific CD8+ T-cells exhibit a distinct marker profile
associated with the nature of the MTB antigens, i.e., Rv0288, Rv1886c, and
Rv3875-reactive T-cells clustered in the precursor T-cell compartment, whereas
Rv2958c, Rv2957, and Rv0447c-reactive T-cells were associated with the terminally
differentiated T-cell phenotype, in the patient cohort. Rv0288, Rv1886c, and
Rv3875-specific CD8+ T-cells were significantly enriched for CD107a+ T-cells in
HLA-A*02:01 (p<0.0001) and HLA-A*24:02 (p=0.0018) positive individuals, as
compared to Rv2958c, Rv2957, and Rv0447c antigens. CD127 (IL-7
receptor)-expressing T-cells were enriched in HLA-A*02:01-positive individuals
for the Rv0288, Rv1886c, and Rv3875 specificities (p=0.03). A high proportion of 
antigen-specific T-cells showed a precursor-like phenotype (CD45RA+CCR7+) and
expressed the stem cell-associated markers CD95 and c-kit. These data show that
MTB-specific T-cells can express stem cell-like features; this is associated with
the nature of the MTB antigen and the genetic background of the individual.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2014.12.017 
PMID: 25809750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

