
1. Radiat Res. 2015 Apr;183(4):465-75. doi: 10.1667/RR13830.1. Epub 2015 Mar 25.

Mitigation of the hematopoietic and gastrointestinal acute radiation syndrome by 
octadecenyl thiophosphate, a small molecule mimic of lysophosphatidic acid.

Deng W(1), Kimura Y, Gududuru V, Wu W, Balogh A, Szabo E, Thompson KE, Yates CR, 
Balazs L, Johnson LR, Miller DD, Strobos J, McCool WS, Tigyi GJ.

Author information: 
(1)a  RxBio Inc., Memphis, Tennessee 38104;

We have previously demonstrated that the small molecule octadecenyl thiophosphate
(OTP), a synthetic mimic of the growth factor-like mediator lysophosphatidic acid
(LPA), showed radioprotective activity in a mouse model of total-body irradiation
(TBI) when given orally or intraperitoneally 30 min before exposure to 9 Gy γ
radiation. In the current study, we evaluated the effects of OTP, delivered
subcutaneously, for radioprotection or radiomitigation from -24 h before to up to
+72 h postirradiation using a mouse TBI model with therapeutic doses at around 1 
mg/kg. OTP was injected at 10 mg/kg without observable toxic side effects in
mice, providing a comfortable safety margin. Treatment of C57BL/6 mice with a
single dose of OTP over the time period from -12 h before to +26 h after a lethal
dose of TBI reduced mortality by 50%. When administered at +48 h to +72 h
postirradiation (LD50/30 to LD100/30), OTP reduced mortality by ≥34%. OTP
administered at +24 h postirradiation significantly elevated peripheral white
blood cell and platelet counts, increased crypt survival in the jejunum, enhanced
intestinal glucose absorption and reduced endotoxin seepage into the blood. In
the 6.4-8.6 Gy TBI range using LD50/10 as the end point, OTP yielded a dose
modification factor of 1.2. The current data indicate that OTP is a potent
radioprotector and radiomitigator ameliorating the mortality and tissue injury of
acute hematopoietic as well as acute gastrointestinal radiation syndrome.

DOI: 10.1667/RR13830.1 
PMCID: PMC4428663
PMID: 25807318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

