
1. Environ Microbiol. 2015 Nov;17(11):4352-65. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.12857. Epub
2015 Apr 28.

Biotic inactivation of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa quinolone signal molecule.

Soh EY(1)(2), Chhabra SR(1), Halliday N(1), Heeb S(1), Müller C(3), Birmes FS(3),
Fetzner S(3), Cámara M(1), Chan KG(2), Williams P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of
Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK.
(2)Division of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biological Sciences, 
Faculty of Science, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, 50603, Malaysia.
(3)Institute of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, University of Muenster,
D-48149, Muenster, Germany.

In Pseudomonas aeruginosa, quorum sensing (QS) regulates the production of
secondary metabolites, many of which are antimicrobials that impact on
polymicrobial community composition. Consequently, quenching QS modulates the
environmental impact of P. aeruginosa. To identify bacteria capable of
inactivating the QS signal molecule 2-heptyl-3-hydroxy-4(1H)-quinolone (PQS), a
minimal medium containing PQS as the sole carbon source was used to enrich a
Malaysian rainforest soil sample. This yielded an Achromobacter xylosoxidans
strain (Q19) that inactivated PQS, yielding a new fluorescent compound (I-PQS)
confirmed as PQS-derived using deuterated PQS. The I-PQS structure was elucidated
using mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy as
2-heptyl-2-hydroxy-1,2-dihydroquinoline-3,4-dione (HHQD). Achromobacter
xylosoxidans Q19 oxidized PQS congeners with alkyl chains ranging from C1 to C5
and also N-methyl PQS, yielding the corresponding
2-hydroxy-1,2-dihydroquinoline-3,4-diones, but was unable to inactivate the PQS
precursor HHQ. This indicates that the hydroxyl group at position 3 in PQS is
essential and that A. xylosoxidans inactivates PQS via a pathway involving the
incorporation of oxygen at C2 of the heterocyclic ring. The conversion of PQS to 
HHQD also occurred on incubation with 12/17 A. xylosoxidans strains recovered
from cystic fibrosis patients, with P. aeruginosa and with Arthrobacter,
suggesting that formation of hydroxylated PQS may be a common mechanism of
inactivation.

© 2015 The Authors. Environmental Microbiology published by Society for Applied
Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.12857 
PMID: 25809238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

