
1. J Immunol Res. 2015;2015:515187. doi: 10.1155/2015/515187. Epub 2015 Feb 28.

Neutrophil migration in the activation of the innate immune response to different
Flavobacterium psychrophilum vaccines in zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Solís CJ(1), Poblete-Morales M(2), Cabral S(3), Valdés JA(4), Reyes AE(4),
Avendaño-Herrera R(5), Feijóo CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Biologicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biologicas,
Universidad Andres Bello, 8370146 Santiago, Chile.
(2)Interdisciplinary Center for Aquiculture Aquaculture Research, (INCAR),
8340518 Concepción, Chile.
(3)SEPPIC Brazil, Rua Libero Badaro 182, 01008000 São Paolo, SP, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Ciencias Biologicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biologicas,
Universidad Andres Bello, 8370146 Santiago, Chile ; Interdisciplinary Center for 
Aquiculture Aquaculture Research, (INCAR), 8340518 Concepción, Chile.
(5)Departamento de Ciencias Biologicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biologicas,
Universidad Andres Bello, 8370146 Santiago, Chile ; Interdisciplinary Center for 
Aquiculture Aquaculture Research, (INCAR), 8340518 Concepción, Chile ; Centro de 
Investigación Marina Quintay (CIMARQ), Quintay, Chile.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is a Gram-negative bacterium, responsible for the
bacterial cold-water disease and the rainbow trout fry syndrome in freshwater
salmonid fish. At present, there is only one commercial vaccine in Chile, made
with two Chilean F. psychrophilum isolates and another licensed in Europe. The
present study analyzed neutrophil migration, as a marker of innate immune
activation, in zebrafish (Danio rerio) in response to different F. psychrophilum 
bath vaccines, which is the first step in evaluating vaccine effectiveness and
efficiency in fish. Results indicated that bacterins of the LM-02-Fp isolate were
more immunogenic than those from the LM-13-Fp isolate. However, no differences
were observed between the same bacteria inactivated by either formaldehyde or
heat. Importantly, the same vaccine formulation without an adjuvant only
triggered a mild neutrophil migration compared to the complete vaccine.
Observations also found that, after a year of storage at 4°C, the activation of
the innate immune system by the different vaccines was considerably decreased.
Finally, new vaccine formulations prepared with heat and formaldehyde inactivated
LM-02-Fp were significantly more efficient than the available commercial vaccine 
in regard to stimulating the innate immune system.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/515187 
PMCID: PMC4359811
PMID: 25815347  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

