
1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2015 Jun;45(6):610-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2015.01.013. Epub 2015 Mar 7.

Metal tolerance in emerging clinically relevant multidrug-resistant Salmonella
enterica serotype 4,[5],12:i:- clones circulating in Europe.

Mourão J(1), Novais C(1), Machado J(2), Peixe L(1), Antunes P(3).

Author information: 
(1)UCIBIO/REQUIMTE, Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Laboratório de
Microbiologia, Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(2)Laboratório Nacional de Referência de Infecções Gastrointestinais,
Departamento de Doenças Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr Ricardo
Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)UCIBIO/REQUIMTE, Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Laboratório de
Microbiologia, Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal;
Faculdade de Ciências da Nutrição e Alimentação, Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal. Electronic address: patriciaantunes@fcna.up.pt.

The occurrence of acquired metal tolerance genes in emerging MDR Salmonella
enterica serotype 4,[5],12:i:- clones was assessed and their associated platforms
and tolerance phenotype were characterised. Salmonella 4,[5],12:i:- from
different sources belonging to European, Spanish and Southern European clones
were studied. Screening for copper (pcoA-pcoD/tcrB), silver/copper (silA-silE),
mercury (merA), arsenic (arsB) and tellurite (terF) tolerance genes was performed
by PCR/sequencing. CuSO(4)/AgNO(3) MICs were determined in aerobic/anaerobic
atmospheres by agar dilution. Conjugation assays, genomic location and plasmid
analysis were performed by standard procedures. Most isolates from European (98%)
and Spanish (74%) clones carried silA-silE, contrasting with the Southern
European clone (26%). merA/62% (European and Spanish clones) and pcoA-pcoD/50%
(European clone) were also detected. merA±pco+sil were chromosomally located in
the European clone, whereas in Spanish and Southern European clones sil±merA were
within plasmids, both with antibiotic resistance genes. The
pcoA-pcoD/silA-silE(+) isolates showed higher MICCuSO(4) in anaerobiosis than
those without these genes (MIC(50)=24-28 vs. 2 mM). Different MICAgNO(3) of
silA-silE(+) (MIC(50)=0.25 mM) and silA-silE(-)(MIC(50)=0.16 mM) isolates were
observed in both atmospheres, with an MIC increment after prior exposure to
silver (>3 vs. 0.08-0.125 mM) in aerobiosis. A high frequency of copper and
silver tolerance, particularly among the two major Salmonella 4,[5],12:i:- MDR
clones (European/Spanish) circulating in Europe and causing human infections,
might facilitate adaptation/expansion of these strains in metal-contaminated
environments, particularly copper in anaerobiosis. Furthermore, metal toxic
concentrations in food-animal environments can contribute to persistence of
genetic platforms carrying metal/antibiotic resistance genes in this foodborne
zoonotic pathogen.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. and the International Society of Chemotherapy. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2015.01.013 
PMID: 25816978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

