
1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Jul;64:45-57. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.03.014.
Epub 2015 Mar 25.

Human enhancer of filamentation 1-induced colorectal cancer cell migration: Role 
of serine phosphorylation and interaction with the breast cancer anti-estrogen
resistance 3 protein.

Ibrahim R(1), Lemoine A(2), Bertoglio J(3), Raingeaud J(4).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U749, Institut Gustave Roussy, Université Paris-sud, Villejuif 94800,
France; Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy,
Tichrine University, Latakia, Syria.
(2)INSERM U1004, Laboratoire de biochimie, Hopital Paul Brousse, Université
Paris-sud, Villejuif 94800, France.
(3)INSERM U749, Institut Gustave Roussy, Université Paris-sud, Villejuif 94800,
France.
(4)INSERM U749, Institut Gustave Roussy, Université Paris-sud, Villejuif 94800,
France. Electronic address: joel.raingeaud@gustaveroussy.fr.

Human enhancer of filamentation 1 (HEF1) is a member of the p130Cas family of
docking proteins involved in integrin-mediated cytoskeleton reorganization
associated with cell migration. Elevated expression of HEF1 promotes invasion and
metastasis in multiple cancer cell types. To date, little is known on its role in
CRC tumor progression. HEF1 is phosphorylated on several Ser/Thr residues but the
effects of these post-translational modifications on the functions of HEF1 are
poorly understood. In this manuscript, we investigated the role of HEF1 in
migration of colorectal adeno-carcinoma cells. First, we showed that
overexpression of HEF1 in colo-carcinoma cell line HCT116 increases cell
migration. Moreover, in these cells, HEF1 increases Src-mediated phosphorylation 
of FAK on Tyr-861 and 925. We then showed that HEF1 mutation on Ser-369 enhances 
HEF1-induced migration and FAK phosphorylation as a result of protein
stabilization. We also, for the first time characterized a functional mutation of
HEF1 on Arg-367 which mimics the effect of Ser-369 to Ala mutation. Finally
through mass spectrometry experiments, we identified BCAR3 as an essential
interactor and mediator of HEF1-induced migration. We demonstrated that single
amino acid mutations that prevent formation of the HEF1-BCAR3 complex impair
HEF1-mediated migration. Therefore, amino-acid substitutions that impede Ser-369 
phosphorylation stabilize HEF1 which increases the migration of CRC cells and
this latter effect requires the interaction of HEF1 with the NSP family adaptor
protein BCAR3. Collectively, these data reveal the importance of HEF1 expression 
level in cancer cell motility and then support the utilization of HEF1 as a
biomarker of tumor progression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.03.014 
PMID: 25817040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

