
1. Microbes Environ. 2015;30(2):157-63. doi: 10.1264/jsme2.ME14105. Epub 2015 Mar
28.

Diversity Profile of Microbes Associated with Anaerobic Sulfur Oxidation in an
Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket Reactor Treating Municipal Sewage.

Aida AA(1), Kuroda K, Yamamoto M, Nakamura A, Hatamoto M, Yamaguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Systems Engineering, Nagaoka University of
Technology.

We herein analyzed the diversity of microbes involved in anaerobic sulfur
oxidation in an upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactor used for treating 
municipal sewage under low-temperature conditions. Anaerobic sulfur oxidation
occurred in the absence of oxygen, with nitrite and nitrate as electron
acceptors; however, reactor performance parameters demonstrated that anaerobic
conditions were maintained. In order to gain insights into the underlying basis
of anaerobic sulfur oxidation, the microbial diversity that exists in the UASB
sludge was analyzed comprehensively to determine their identities and
contribution to sulfur oxidation. Sludge samples were collected from the UASB
reactor over a period of 2 years and used for bacterial 16S rRNA gene-based
terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism (T-RFLP) and next-generation
sequencing analyses. T-RFLP and sequencing results both showed that microbial
community patterns changed markedly from day 537 onwards. Bacteria belonging to
the genus Desulforhabdus within the phylum Proteobacteria and uncultured bacteria
within the phylum Fusobacteria were the main groups observed during the period of
anaerobic sulfur oxidation. Their abundance correlated with temperature,
suggesting that these bacterial groups played roles in anaerobic sulfur oxidation
in UASB reactors.

DOI: 10.1264/jsme2.ME14105 
PMCID: PMC4462926
PMID: 25817585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

