
1. Autoimmunity. 2015;48(6):423-8. doi: 10.3109/08916934.2015.1030615.

Promotion of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis upon neutrophil
granulocytes' stimulation with formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (fMLP)
peptide.

Kilic AK(1), Esendagli G, Sayat G, Talim B, Karabudak R, Kurne AT.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Neurology , Hacettepe University Medical Faculty , Ankara ,
Turkey .

It has been acknowledged that neutrophil granulocytes, the common mediators of
immune responses against extracellular bacteria, can also intercede autoimmune
reactions such as experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE).
Formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (fMLP) is a microbial peptide that can be
well-tolerated when intravenously administered and can directly lead to
activation and accumulation of neutrophils into the blood circulation. Here, this
antigenic peptide was injected to the mice at the induction of EAE, and the
immunological and pathological outcomes were assessed. As a peripheral immune
organ, spleen of the animals that received fMLP contained considerably high
percentages of Gr-1(hi)Ly7/4(hi) mature neutrophils. In the sera samples, only a 
slight difference was determined in Th1/Th2/Th17-related cytokine levels.
Expression of CXCR1 or CXCR2 chemokine receptors was not significantly modulated 
in EAE with or without fMLP which might indicate a direct role for this antigenic
peptide on neutrophil accumulation. Even though fMLP administration did not
propone the clinical (symptomatic) onset of the disease, the animals showed
severe body conditions with higher EAE scores. Accordingly, the expression of
TNF-Î± and CXCL1 inflammatory mediators in the brain was increased in fMLP-EAE
group. In conclusion, with its potent capacity to mobilize neutrophils and to
stimulate innate immune cells, fMLP peptide can be used to aggravate immune
reactions in EAE. This observation may indicate that the strength of innate
immune responses particularly at the induction phase of EAE might influence the
clinical course of the disease.

DOI: 10.3109/08916934.2015.1030615 
PMID: 25826286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

