
1. Hum Mutat. 2015 Jul;36(7):704-11. doi: 10.1002/humu.22794.

Functional Complementation Assay for 47 MUTYH Variants in a MutY-Disrupted
Escherichia coli Strain.

Komine K(1)(2), Shimodaira H(1)(2), Takao M(3), Soeda H(1)(2), Zhang X(1),
Takahashi M(1)(2), Ishioka C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer,
Tohoku University, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Oncology, Tohoku University Hospital, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, 
Tohoku University, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.

MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP) is an adenomatous polyposis transmitted in an
autosomal-recessive pattern, involving biallelic inactivation of the MUTYH gene. 
Loss of a functional MUTYH protein will result in the accumulation of G:T
mismatched DNA caused by oxidative damage. Although p.Y179C and p.G396D are the
two most prevalent MUTYH variants, more than 200 missense variants have been
detected. It is difficult to determine whether these variants are disease-causing
mutations or single-nucleotide polymorphisms. To understand the functional
consequences of these variants, we generated 47 MUTYH gene variants via
site-directed mutagenesis, expressed the encoded proteins in MutY-disrupted
Escherichia coli, and assessed their abilities to complement the functional
deficiency in the E. coli by monitoring spontaneous mutation rates. Although the 
majority of variants exhibited intermediate complementation relative to the wild 
type, some variants severely interfered with this complementation. However, some 
variants retained functioning similar to the wild type. In silico predictions of 
functional effects demonstrated a good correlation. Structural prediction of
MUTYH based on the MutY protein structure allowed us to interpret effects on the 
protein stability or catalytic activity. These data will be useful for evaluating
the functional consequences of missense MUTYH variants detected in patients with 
suspected MAP.

Â© 2015 The Authors. **Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22794 
PMCID: PMC4682456
PMID: 25820570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

