
1. Thromb Haemost. 2015 Jul;114(1):115-22. doi: 10.1160/TH14-12-1053. Epub 2015 Apr 
2.

Endogenous tissue factor pathway inhibitor has a limited effect on host defence
in murine pneumococcal pneumonia.

van den Boogaard FE(1), van 't Veer C, Roelofs JJ, Meijers JC, Schultz MJ, Broze 
GJ Jr, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Floor van den Boogaard, MD, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 
Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, G2-130, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Tel: +31 20 566 5910, Fax: +31 20 566 7192, E-mail:
f.e.vandenboogaard@amc.uva.nl.

Streptococcus (S.) pneumoniae is the most common causative pathogen in
community-acquired pneumonia. Coagulation and inflammation interact in the host
response to infection. Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) is a natural
anticoagulant protein that inhibits tissue factor (TF), the main activator of
inflammation-induced coagulation. It was the objective of this study to
investigate the effect of endogenous TFPI levels on coagulation, inflammation and
bacterial growth during S. pneumoniae pneumonia in mice. The effect of low
endogenous TFPI levels was studied by administration of a neutralising anti-TFPI 
antibody to wild-type mice, and by using genetically modified mice expressing low
levels of TFPI, due to a genetic deletion of the first Kunitz domain of TFPI
(TFPIK1(-/-)) rescued with a human TFPI transgene. Pneumonia was induced by
intranasal inoculation with S. pneumoniae and samples were obtained at 6, 24 and 
48 hours after infection. Anti-TFPI reduced TFPI activity by ~50 %. Homozygous
lowTFPI mice and heterozygous controls had ~10 % and ~50 % of normal TFPI
activity, respectively. TFPI levels did not influence bacterial growth or
dissemination. Whereas lung pathology was unaffected in all groups, mice with
~10 % (but not with ~50 %) of TFPI levels displayed elevated lung cytokine and
chemokine concentrations 24 hours after infection. None of the groups with low
TFPI levels showed an altered procoagulant response in lungs or plasma during
pneumonia. These data argue against an important role for endogenous TFPI in the 
antibacterial, inflammatory and procoagulant response during pneumococcal
pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1160/TH14-12-1053 
PMCID: PMC4786014
PMID: 25832548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

