
1. Int Immunol. 2015 Jul;27(7):317-25. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxv017. Epub 2015 Apr 3.

Lack of IL-17 signaling decreases liver fibrosis in murine schistosomiasis
japonica.

Zhang Y(1), Huang D(1), Gao W(2), Yan J(3), Zhou W(1), Hou X(1), Liu M(1), Ren
C(1), Wang S(1), Shen J(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui
230032, PR China.
(2)Antagen Institute for Biomedical Research, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, Department 1,
Institute of Surgery Research, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400042, PR China.
(4)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui
230032, PR China Anhui Provincial Laboratory of Microbiology and Parasitology,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, PR China shenjijia@hotmail.com.

Accumulating evidence has identified the profibrogenic properties of IL-17A in
organ fibrosis. However, the role of IL-17A signal in liver fibrosis induced by
Schistosoma japonicum infection remains unclear. In this study, we investigated
liver fibrosis in wild-type (WT) and IL-17RA(-/-) mice upon S. japonicum
infection. Hepatic IL-17A, IL-17C, IL-17E (IL-25), IL-17F, IL-17RA, IL-17RB and
IL-17RC transcript levels were determined by RT-PCR. IL-17A(+) cells were
analyzed by flow cytometry and confocal microscopy among granuloma cells.
Immunostaining of IL-17R was performed on liver sections. Collagen deposition was
assessed by Van Gieson's staining. IL-17A, IL-17C, IL-17E, IL-17F, IL-17RA and
IL-17RC mRNA levels were dramatically increased in fibrotic livers. Among
granuloma cells, CD3(+) and CD3(-) lymphocytes, neutrophils and macrophages were 
found to express IL-17A. Compared to WT, IL-17RA(-/-) mice displayed attenuated
granulomatous inflammation, liver fibrosis, improved liver function and high
survival. Meanwhile, α-smooth muscle actin staining and the expression of
fibrogenic genes (transforming growth factor β, IL-13 and collagen-I) as well as 
IL-17A-induced proinflammatory mediators (IL-1β, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor α,
CXCL1 and CXCL2) and proteinases (MMP3 and TIMP1) involved in fibrosis were
markedly reduced in IL-17RA(-/-) mice. In addition, Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-17E
(IL-25) were also decreased in IL-17RA(-/-) mice. These results indicated that
IL-17A signal contributes to the pathogenesis of liver fibrosis in murine
schistosomiasis. This effect was induced possibly by activating hepatic stellate 
cells and stimulating the release of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines.
Furthermore, the Th2 response was also enhanced by IL-17A signals. Our data
demonstrate that IL-17A may serve as a promising target for antifibrotic therapy.

© The Japanese Society for Immunology. 2015. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxv017 
PMID: 25840437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

