
1. Mol Microbiol. 2015 Jul;97(1):18-32. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13019. Epub 2015 May 9.

Aspergillus nidulans flippase DnfA is cargo of the endocytic collar and plays
complementary roles in growth and phosphatidylserine asymmetry with another
flippase, DnfB.

Schultzhaus Z(1), Yan H(2), Shaw BD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Plant Protection, Fujian Agricultural and Forestry University,
Fuzhou, Fujian, China.

Comment in
    Mol Microbiol. 2015 Jul;97(1):1-6.

Endocytosis and exocytosis are strictly segregated at the ends of hyphal cells of
filamentous fungi, with a collar of endocytic activity encircling the growing
cell tip, which elongates through directed membrane fusion. It has been proposed 
that this separation supports an endocytic recycling pathway that maintains polar
localization of proteins at the growing apex. In a search for proteins in the
filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans that possess an NPFxD motif, which
signals for endocytosis, a Type 4 P-Type ATPase was identified and named DnfA.
Interestingly, NPFxD is at a different region of DnfA than the same motif in the 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae ortholog, although endocytosis is dependent on this
motif for both proteins. DnfA is involved in asexual sporulation and polarized
growth. Additionally, it is segregated within the Spitzenkörper from another Type
4 P-type ATPase, DnfB. Next, the phosphatidylserine marker GFP::Lact-C2 was
expressed in growing hyphae, which revealed that this phospholipid is enriched on
the cytosolic face of secretory vesicles. This distribution is affected by
deleting either dnfA or dnfB. These findings provide evidence for the spatial and
temporal segregation of Type4-ATPases in filamentous fungi, and the asymmetric
distribution of phosphatidylserine to the Spitzenkörper in A. nidulans.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13019 
PMID: 25846564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

