
1. Biotechnol Lett. 2015 Jul;37(7):1447-54. doi: 10.1007/s10529-015-1817-1. Epub
2015 Apr 7.

Nisin-induced expression of a recombinant antihypertensive peptide in dairy
lactic acid bacteria.

Renye JA Jr(1), Somkuti GA.

Author information: 
(1)Eastern Regional Research Center, Agricultural Research Service, United States
Department of Agriculture, 600 E. Mermaid Lane, Wyndmoor, PA, 19038, USA,
john.renye@ars.usda.gov.

OBJECTIVE: To improve the process for the production of milk-derived
antihypertensive peptides, including a 12-residue peptide (FFVAPFPECVGK) from
Î±S1-casein.
RESULTS: A synthetic gene encoding this peptide was cloned within the pediocin
operon, replacing the nucleic acid sequence encoding the mature pediocin peptide 
(papA) and resulting in a translational fusion between the pediocin leader
peptide and the 12-residue hypotensive (C-12) peptide. The recombinant operon was
subsequently cloned immediately downstream of the nisA promoter to allow for
inducible gene expression within Streptococcus thermophilus ST128, Lactococcus
lactis subsp. lactis ML3 and Lactobacillus casei C2. RT-PCR was used to confirm
recombinant gene expression in complex medium; and SDS-PAGE analysis showed that 
the pediocin secretion machinery, encoded by papC and papD, allowed for secretion
of the recombinant peptide from both L. lactis ML3 and L. casei C2 in a
chemically defined medium.
CONCLUSION: The use of a nisin as a "food-grade" inducer molecule, and
generally-regarded-as-safe LAB species suggests that this system could be used
for the production of functional food ingredients.

DOI: 10.1007/s10529-015-1817-1 
PMID: 25846139  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

