
1. Drug Discov Ther. 2015 Aug;9(4):282-8. doi: 10.5582/ddt.2015.01014. Epub 2015 Apr
6.

Niemann-Pick disease type C2 protein induces autophagy and inhibits growth in
FM3A breast cancer cells.

Adachi T(1), Matsumoto Y, Inagaki Y, Sekimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The
University of Tokyo.

Some peptides that are highly conserved between insects and mammals have
anti-tumor action. Screening for inhibitors of cell growth from animal fluids may
provide useful clues to anti-tumor drugs. Inducers of autophagy also have
anti-tumor activity. The current authors recently studied a protein found in
silkworm hemolymph, Niemann-Pick disease type C2 (NPC2). This protein, which is
highly conserved among eukaryotes, was found to have anti-proliferative action on
a silkworm cell line. The current study found that the silkworm NPC2 protein also
inhibits the growth of FM3A murine breast cancer cells. In FM3A cells, silkworm
NPC2 increased phosphorylation of AMP-activated protein kinase and decreased
phosphorylation of Akt and mammalian target of rapamycin, which are regulators of
autophagy. This study also found that NPC2 increased the amount of
microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 (LC3)-II, an autophagosome marker,
in FM3A cells. Silkworm NPC2 also induced an increase in the number of LC3-dots, 
a marker of pre-autophagic endosomes, in FM3A cells. When silkworm NPC2 was used 
to inhibit FM3A cell growth, that inhibition was attenuated by chloroquine, which
inhibits autophagic activity by preventing lysosomal acidification. Murine NPC2
also inhibited growth and induced autophagy in FM3A cells. These findings suggest
that NPC2 is involved in the induction and/or maintenance of autophagy and may
help to elucidate the mechanisms underlying other neurodegenerative disorders
such as Niemann-Pick disease.

DOI: 10.5582/ddt.2015.01014 
PMID: 25843701  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

