
1. J Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Dec;7(6):505-16. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjv022. Epub 2015 Apr 3.

The histone H3 lysine-27 demethylase Jmjd3 plays a critical role in specific
regulation of Th17 cell differentiation.

Liu Z(1), Cao W(1), Xu L(2), Chen X(1), Zhan Y(1), Yang Q(1), Liu S(1), Chen
P(1), Jiang Y(1), Sun X(1), Tao Y(1), Hu Y(1), Li C(1), Wang Q(1), Wang Y(1),
Chen CD(3), Shi Y(4), Zhang X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200031, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China xrzhang@sibs.ac.cn yufangshi@sibs.ac.cn
cdchen@sibcb.ac.cn.
(4)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200031, China xrzhang@sibs.ac.cn
yufangshi@sibs.ac.cn cdchen@sibcb.ac.cn.
(5)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200031, China Collaborative
Innovation Center of Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200240, China xrzhang@sibs.ac.cn yufangshi@sibs.ac.cn
cdchen@sibcb.ac.cn.

Interleukin (IL) 17-producing T helper (Th17) cells play critical roles in the
clearance of extracellular bacteria and fungi as well as the pathogenesis of
various autoimmune diseases, such as multiple sclerosis, psoriasis, and
ulcerative colitis. Although a global transcriptional regulatory network of Th17 
cell differentiation has been mapped recently, the participation of epigenetic
modifications in the differentiation process has yet to be elucidated. We
demonstrated here that histone H3 lysine-27 (H3K27) demethylation, predominantly 
mediated by the H3K27 demethylase Jmjd3, crucially regulated Th17 cell
differentiation. Activation of naïve CD4(+) T cells immediately induced high
expression of Jmjd3. Genetic depletion of Jmjd3 in CD4(+) T cells specifically
impaired Th17 cell differentiation both in vitro and in vivo. Ectopic expression 
of Jmjd3 largely rescued the impaired differentiation of Th17 cells in vitro in
Jmjd3-deficient CD4(+) T cells. Importantly, Jmjd3-deficient mice were resistant 
to the induction of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Furthermore,
inhibition of the H3K27 demethylase activity with the specific inhibitor GSK-J4
dramatically suppressed Th17 cell differentiation in vitro. At the molecular
level, Jmjd3 directly bound to and reduced the level of H3K27 trimethylation
(me3) at the genomic sites of Rorc, which encodes the master Th17 transcription
factor Rorγt, and Th17 cytokine genes such as Il17, Il17f, and Il22. Therefore,
our studies established a critical role of Jmjd3-mediated H3K27 demethylation in 
Th17 cell differentiation and suggest that Jmjd3 can be a novel therapeutic
target for suppressing autoimmune responses.

© The Author (2015). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of
Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/jmcb/mjv022 
PMID: 25840993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

