
1. Transpl Immunol. 2015 Jun;32(3):144-50. doi: 10.1016/j.trim.2015.03.002. Epub
2015 Apr 2.

Development of human B cells and antibodies following human hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation to Rag2(-/-)γc(-/-) mice.

Tanner A(1), Hallam SJ(1), Nielsen SJ(1), Cuadra GI(1), Berges BK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Brigham Young University,
Provo, UT 84602, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Brigham Young University,
Provo, UT 84602, USA. Electronic address: brad.berges@gmail.com.

Humanized mice represent a valuable model system to study the development and
functionality of the human immune system. In the RAG-hu mouse model highly
immunodeficient Rag2(-/-)γc(-/-) mice are transplanted with human CD34(+)
hematopoietic stem cells, resulting in human hematopoiesis and a predominant
production of B and T lymphocytes. Human adaptive immune responses have been
detected towards a variety of antigens in humanized mice but both cellular and
humoral immune responses tend to be weak and sporadically detected. The
underlying mechanisms for inconsistent responses are poorly understood. Here, we 
analyzed the kinetics of human B cell development and antibody production in
RAG-hu mice to better understand the lack of effective antibody responses. We
found that T cell levels in blood did not significantly change from 8 to 28 weeks
post-engraftment, while B cells reached a peak at 14 weeks. Concentrations of 3
antibody classes (IgM, IgG, IgA) were found to be at levels about 0.1% or less of
normal human levels, but human antibodies were still detected up to 32 weeks
after engraftment. Human IgM was detected in 92.5% of animals while IgG and IgA
were detected in about half of animals. We performed flow cytometric analysis of 
human B cells in bone marrow, spleen, and blood to examine the presence of
precursor B cells, immature B cells, naïve B cells, and plasma B cells. We
detected high levels of surface IgM(+) B cells (immature and naïve B cells) and
low levels of plasma B cells in these organs, suggesting that B cells do not
mature properly in this model. Low levels of human T cells in the spleen were
observed, and we suggest that the lack of T cell help may explain poor B cell
development and antibody responses. We conclude that human B cells that develop
in humanized mice do not receive the signals necessary to undergo class-switching
or to secrete antibody effectively, and we discuss strategies to potentially
overcome these barriers.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trim.2015.03.002 
PMID: 25843523  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

