
1. Microb Ecol. 2015 Oct;70(3):612-33. doi: 10.1007/s00248-015-0600-0. Epub 2015 Apr
8.

Diversity and Ecological Characterization of Sporulating Higher Filamentous
Marine Fungi Associated with Spartina maritima (Curtis) Fernald in Two Portuguese
Salt Marshes.

Calado Mda L(1)(2), Carvalho L(3)(4), Pang KL(5), Barata M(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Changes (Ce3C), Faculty of
Sciences of University of Lisbon, Edifício C2, 5° Piso, Campo Grande, 1749-016,
Lisbon, Portugal. mdcalado@fc.ul.pt.
(2)Department of Plant Biology, Faculty of Sciences of the University of Lisbon, 
Edifício C2, 2° Piso, Campo Grande, 1749-016, Lisbon, Portugal.
mdcalado@fc.ul.pt.
(3)Centre for Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Changes (Ce3C), Faculty of
Sciences of University of Lisbon, Edifício C2, 5° Piso, Campo Grande, 1749-016,
Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Department of Plant Biology, Faculty of Sciences of the University of Lisbon, 
Edifício C2, 2° Piso, Campo Grande, 1749-016, Lisbon, Portugal.
(5)Institute of Marine Biology and Centre of Excellence for the Oceans, National 
Taiwan Ocean University, 2 Pei-Ning Road, Keelung 20224, Taiwan, Republic of
China.

Fungal communities associated with early stages of decomposition of Spartina
maritima (Curtis) Fernald were assessed in two geographically distinct salt
marshes in Portugal by direct observation of fungal sporulating structures.
Twenty-three fungal taxa were identified from 390 plant samples, 11 of which were
common to both study sites. Natantispora retorquens, Byssothecium obiones,
Phaeosphaeria spartinicola, Phoma sp. 1 and Stagonospora sp. were the most
frequent fungal taxa in the studied communities. The fungal species Anthostomella
spissitecta, Camarosporium roumeguerii, Coniothyrium obiones, Decorospora
gaudefroyi, Halosarpheia trullifera, Leptosphaeria marina and Stagonospora
haliclysta were recorded for the first time on S. maritima plants; with the
exception of C. roumeguerii and L. marina, all of these species were also new
records for Portugal. The differences between species composition of the
communities associated with S. maritima were attributed to differences in abiotic
conditions of the salt marshes. Although the fungal taxa were distributed
differently along the host plants, common species to both fungal communities were
found on the same relative position, e.g. B. obiones, Lulworthia sp. and N.
retorquens occurred on the basal plant portions, Buergenerula spartinae,
Dictyosporium pelagicum and Phoma sp. 1 on the middle plant portions and P.
spartinicola and Stagonospora sp. on the top plant portions. The distinct
vertical distribution patterns reflected species-specific salinity requirements
and flooding tolerance, but specially substrate preferences. The most frequent
fungi in both communities also exhibited wider distribution ranges and produced a
higher number of fruiting structures, suggesting a more active key role in the
decay process of S. maritima.

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-015-0600-0 
PMID: 25851444  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

