
1. Eur Biophys J. 2015 Jul;44(5):301-7. doi: 10.1007/s00249-015-1022-0. Epub 2015
Apr 9.

A total internal reflection ellipsometry and atomic force microscopy study of
interactions between Proteus mirabilis lipopolysaccharides and antibodies.

Gleńska-Olender J(1), Sęk S, Dworecki K, Kaca W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biology, Jan Kochanowski University, 
ul. Świętokrzyska 15, 25-406, Kielce, Poland, joannaglenska@wp.pl.

Specific antigen-antibody interactions play a central role in the human immune
system. The objective of this paper is to detect immune complexes using
label-free detection techniques, that is, total internal reflection ellipsometry 
(TIRE) and atomic force microscopy (AFM)-based topography and recognition
imaging. Interactions of purified rabbit immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies with
bacterial endotoxins (Proteus mirabilis S1959 O3 lipopolysaccharides) were
studied. Lipopolysaccharide was adsorbed on gold surface for TIRE. In the AFM
imaging experiments, LPS was attachment to the PEG linker (AFM tip modification).
The mica surface was covered by IgG. In TIRE, the optical parameters Ψ and Δ
change when a complex is formed. It was found that even highly structured
molecules, such as IgG antibodies (anti-O3 LPS rabbit serum), preserve their
specific affinity to their antigens (LPS O3). LPS P. mirabilis O3 response of
rabbit serum anti-O3 was also tested by topography and recognition imaging. Both 
TIRE and AFM techniques were recruited to check for possible detection of
antigen-antibody recognition event. The presented data allow for determination of
interactions between a variety of biomolecules. In future research, this
technique has considerable potential for studying a wide range of
antigen-antibody interactions and its use may be extended to other
biomacromolecular systems.

DOI: 10.1007/s00249-015-1022-0 
PMID: 25854960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

