
1. Scand J Immunol. 2015 Jul;82(1):63-9. doi: 10.1111/sji.12300.

Genetic Polymorphisms in the Toll-like Receptor 10, Interleukin (IL)17A and IL17F
Genes Differently Affect the Risk for Tuberculosis in Croatian Population.

Bulat-Kardum LJ(1)(2), Etokebe GE(1), Lederer P(1), Balen S(3), Dembic Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Department of Oral Biology, Dental Faculty,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Pulmology, Clinic for Internal Medicine, Clinical Hospital
Center Rijeka, School of Medicine, University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia.
(3)Clinical Institute for Transfusion Medicine, Clinical Hospital Center Rijeka, 
School of Medicine, University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia.

Proinflammatory conditions leading to activation of macrophages via interferon-γ 
bear an important role in host defence against intracellular bacteria such as
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mt). Interleukin-17 plays a similar role, as it
appears to be also an activator of macrophages. Recently, the TLR-10 was
identified as an anti-inflammatory factor that exerts its action via association 
with the TLR-2 chain at the cell surface of macrophages, the latter being an
Mt-binding protein. We have previously found that gene polymorphisms that either 
inactivate the TLR2 gene product or have a dominant-negative role are associated 
with tuberculosis (TB) in Croatian population. We have now extended our survey
and found that single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in TLR10 (rs11096957) is
associated with risk for TB. Homozygotes carrying the A allele are associated
with predisposition to disease as analysed by the dominant model of inheritance. 
In contrast, SNPs in the proinflammatory IL17A and IL17F genes (rs2275913 and
rs763780, respectively), found previously to correlate with the disease
occurrence in Chinese population, were not significantly associated with
tuberculosis in the Croatian population.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/sji.12300 
PMID: 25857634  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

