
1. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2015 Jun;33:287-95. doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2015.03.013. Epub
2015 Apr 9.

Microbial dehalogenation of organohalides in marine and estuarine environments.

Zanaroli G(1), Negroni A(2), Häggblom MM(3), Fava F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil, Chemical, Environmental and Materials Engineering
(DICAM), University of Bologna, Via Terracini 28, 40131 Bologna, Italy.
Electronic address: giulio.zanaroli@unibo.it.
(2)Department of Civil, Chemical, Environmental and Materials Engineering
(DICAM), University of Bologna, Via Terracini 28, 40131 Bologna, Italy.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, School of Environmental and
Biological Sciences, Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, 76
Lipman Drive, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.

Marine sediments are the ultimate sink and a major entry way into the food chain 
for many highly halogenated and strongly hydrophobic organic pollutants, such as 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs),
polybrominated diphenylethers (PBDEs) and
1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDT). Microbial reductive
dehalogenation in anaerobic sediments can transform these contaminants into less 
toxic and more easily biodegradable products. Although little is still known
about the diversity of respiratory dehalogenating bacteria and their catabolic
genes in marine habitats, the occurrence of dehalogenation under actual site
conditions has been reported. This suggests that the activity of dehalogenating
microbes may contribute, if properly stimulated, to the in situ bioremediation of
marine and estuarine contaminated sediments.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.copbio.2015.03.013 
PMID: 25863015  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

