
1. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2015 May;176(1):1-12. doi: 10.1007/s12010-015-1555-9.
Epub 2015 Apr 14.

Expression, Purification and Characterisation of Secreted Esterase Rv2525c from
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Dang G(1), Chen L, Li Z, Deng X, Cui Y, Cao J, Yu S, Pang H, Liu S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bacterial Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Veterinary
Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, 427 Maduan Street, Nangang Dist., Harbin, 15000, People's 
Republic of China.

Rv2525c from Mycobacterium tuberculosis belongs to the domain of unknown function
(DUF) 1906 superfamily, but it also contains the motif G-X-S-X-G, the consensus
active site sequence of the ester/lipid family. Biochemical analysis indicated
that the mature Rv2525c protein is secreted. The discovery and characterisation
of novel enzymes secreted by M. tuberculosis are vital for understanding the
pathogenesis of the most important human bacterial pathogen. The proteome of M.
tuberculosis contains over 400 potentially secreted proteins, of which the
majority remain uncharacterised. In this study, we cloned and expressed the
rv2525c gene in Escherichia coli and purified the recombinant protein using a
three-step process (affinity chromatography, ion exchange chromatography, gel
filtration chromatography), obtaining more than 99% pure protein. Mass
spectrometry was performed to confirm that the purified protein was Rv2525c.
Circular dichroism spectroscopy results showed that its conformation was stable
at pH ranging from 6.0 to 8.0 and at temperatures ≤ 40 °C. Moreover, we tested
the esterase activity using p-nitrophenyl esters (C2, C4, C6, C8, C12, C14, C16).
This enzyme exhibited broad substrate acceptance, preferentially hydrolysing
p-nitrophenyl butyrate (C4) at pH 7.0 and 37 °C. The dynamic activity test
demonstrated that the optimal conditions were pH 8.0 and 38 °C. Site-directed
mutagenesis studies revealed that Gly 113, Ser 115 and Gly 117 residues play
catalytic roles in Rv2525c.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-015-1555-9 
PMID: 25869294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

