
1. Pathog Dis. 2015 Jul;73(5). pii: ftv031. doi: 10.1093/femspd/ftv031. Epub 2015
Apr 15.

Host gene expression for Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis infection in
human THP-1 macrophages.

Shin MK(1), Shin SW(2), Jung M(2), Park H(2), Park HE(2), Yoo HS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul, 151-742 Korea Dairy and Swine Research and
Development Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Sherbrooke, QC J1M 1Z3,
Canada.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul, 151-742 Korea.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul, 151-742 Korea Institute of Green Bio Science and
Technology, Seoul National University, Pyeongchang, 232-916, Korea
yoohs@snu.ac.kr.

Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP) is the causative agent of
Johne's disease, which causes considerable economic loss in the dairy industry
and has a possible relationship to Crohn's disease (CD) in humans. As MAP has
been detected in retail pasteurized milk samples, its transmission via milk is of
concern. Despite its possible role in the etiology of CD, there have been few
studies examining the interactions between MAP and human cells. In the current
study, we applied Ingenuity Pathway Analysis to the transcription profiles
generated from a murine model with MAP infection as part of a previously
conducted study. Twenty-one genes were selected as potential host immune
responses, compared with the transcriptional profiles in naturally MAP-infected
cattle, and validated in MAP-infected human monocyte-derived macrophage THP-1
cells. Of these, the potential host responses included up-regulation of genes
related to immune response (CD14, S100A8, S100A9, LTF, HP and CHCIL3),
up-regulation of Th1-polarizing factor (CCL4, CCL5, CXCL9 and CXCL10),
down-regulation of genes related to metabolism (ELANE, IGF1, TCF7L2 and MPO) and 
no significant response of other genes (GADD45a, GPNMB, HMOX1, IFNG and NQO1) in 
THP-1 cells infected with MAP.

Â© FEMS 2015. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/femspd/ftv031 
PMID: 25877879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

