
1. Eur J Med Chem. 2015;96:14-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.04.007. Epub 2015 Apr
6.

Exploring the chemical space of ureidothiophene-2-carboxylic acids as inhibitors 
of the quorum sensing enzyme PqsD from Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Sahner JH(1), Empting M(1), Kamal A(1), Weidel E(1), Groh M(1), Börger C(2),
Hartmann RW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Saarland University & Helmholtz
Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Department of Drug Design 
and Optimization, Campus C2 3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)PharmBioTec GmbH, Science Park 1, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
(3)Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Saarland University & Helmholtz
Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Department of Drug Design 
and Optimization, Campus C2 3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address:
rolf.hartmann@helmholtz-hzi.de.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa employs a quorum sensing (QS) communication system that
makes use of small diffusible molecules. Among other effects, the QS system
coordinates the formation of biofilm which decisively contributes to difficulties
in the therapy of Pseudomonas infections. The present work deals with the
structure-activity exploration of ureidothiophene-2-carboxylic acids as
inhibitors of PqsD, a key enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway of signal molecules 
in the Pseudomonas QS system. We describe an improvement of the inhibitory
activity by successfully combining features from two different PqsD inhibitor
classes. Furthermore the functional groups, which are responsible for the
inhibitory potency, were identified. Moreover, the inability of the new
inhibitors, to prevent signal molecule formation in whole cell assays, is
discussed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.04.007 
PMID: 25874327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

