
1. BMC Evol Biol. 2015 Apr 14;15:64. doi: 10.1186/s12862-015-0337-x.

Phylogeny and evolution of plant macrophage migration inhibitory
factor/D-dopachrome tautomerase-like proteins.

Panstruga R(1), Baumgarten K(2), Bernhagen J(3).

Author information: 
(1)RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Biology I, Unit of Plant Molecular Cell
Biology, Worringerweg 1, 52074, Aachen, Germany. panstruga@bio1.rwth-aachen.de.
(2)RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Biology I, Unit of Plant Molecular Cell
Biology, Worringerweg 1, 52074, Aachen, Germany. kira.baumgarten@rwth-aachen.de.
(3)RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, 
Pauwelsstrasse 30, 52074, Aachen, Germany. jbernhagen@ukaachen.de.

BACKGROUND: The human (Homo sapiens) chemokine-like protein macrophage migration 
inhibitory factor (HsMIF) is a pivotal mediator of inflammatory, infectious and
immune diseases including septic shock, colitis, malaria, rheumatoid arthritis,
and atherosclerosis, as well as tumorigenesis. HsMIF has been found to exhibit
several sequential and three-dimensional sequence motifs that in addition to its 
receptor binding sites include catalytic sites for oxidoreductase and tautomerase
activity, which provide this 12.5Â kDa protein with a remarkable functional
complexity. A human MIF paralog, D-dopachrome tautomerase (HsDDT), has been
identified, but its physiological relevance is incompletely understood.
MIF/DDT-like proteins have been described in animals, protists and bacteria.
Although based on sequence data banks the presence of MIF/DDT-like proteins has
also been recognized in the model plant species Arabidopsis thaliana, details on 
these plant proteins have not been reported.
RESULTS: To broaden the understanding of the biological role of these proteins
across kingdoms we performed a comprehensive in silico analysis of plant
MIF/DDT-like (MDL) genes/proteins. We found that the A. thaliana genome harbors
three MDL genes, of which two are chiefly constitutively expressed in aerial
plant organs, while the third gene shows stress-inducible transcript
accumulation. The product of the latter gene likely localizes to peroxisomes.
Structure prediction suggests that all three Arabidopsis proteins resemble the
secondary and tertiary structure of human MIF. MIF-like proteins are found in all
species across the plant kingdom, with an increasing family complexity towards
evolutionarily advanced plant taxa. Plant MDL proteins are predicted to lack
oxidoreductase activity, but possibly share tautomerase activity with human
MIF/DDT.
CONCLUSIONS: Peroxisome localization seems to be a specific feature of a subset
of MIF/DDT orthologs found in dicotyledonous plant species, which together with
its stress-inducible gene expression might point to convergent evolution in
higher plants and vertebrates towards neofunctionalization of MIF/MDL proteins in
stress response pathways including innate immunity.

DOI: 10.1186/s12862-015-0337-x 
PMCID: PMC4407349
PMID: 25888527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

