
1. Mol Microbiol. 2015 Aug;97(3):439-53. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13039. Epub 2015 May 20.

Biochemical and biophysical characterisation of haloalkane dehalogenases DmrA and
DmrB in Mycobacterium strain JS60 and their role in growth on haloalkanes.

Fung HK(1), Gadd MS(1), Drury TA(1), Cheung S(1), Guss JM(1), Coleman NV(1),
Matthews JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2006,
Australia.

Haloalkane dehalogenases (HLDs) catalyse the hydrolysis of haloalkanes to
alcohols, offering a biological solution for toxic haloalkane industrial wastes. 
Hundreds of putative HLD genes have been identified in bacterial genomes, but
relatively few enzymes have been characterised. We identified two novel HLDs in
the genome of Mycobacterium rhodesiae strain JS60, an isolate from an
organochlorine-contaminated site: DmrA and DmrB. Both recombinant enzymes were
active against C2-C6 haloalkanes, with a preference for brominated linear
substrates. However, DmrA had higher activity against a wider range of
substrates. The kinetic parameters of DmrA with 4-bromobutyronitrile as a
substrate were Km  = 1.9 ± 0.2 mM, kcat  = 3.1 ± 0.2 s(-1) . DmrB showed the
highest activity against 1-bromohexane. DmrA is monomeric, whereas DmrB is
tetrameric. We determined the crystal structure of selenomethionyl DmrA to 1.7 Å 
resolution. A spacious active site and alternate conformations of a methionine
side-chain in the slot access tunnel may contribute to the broad substrate
activity of DmrA. We show that M. rhodesiae JS60 can utilise 1-iodopropane,
1-iodobutane and 1-bromobutane as sole carbon and energy sources. This ability
appears to be conferred predominantly through DmrA, which shows significantly
higher levels of upregulation in response to haloalkanes than DmrB.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13039 
PMID: 25899475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

