
1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jun 5;290(23):14542-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.623876. Epub 2015
Apr 20.

Pneumococcal Adhesins PavB and PspC Are Important for the Interplay with Human
Thrombospondin-1.

Binsker U(1), Kohler TP(2), Krauel K(3), Kohler S(1), Schwertz H(3),
Hammerschmidt S(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department Genetics of Microorganisms, Interfaculty Institute for
Genetics and Functional Genomics, University of Greifswald,
Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Strasse 15a, D-17487 Greifswald, Germany and.
(2)From the Department Genetics of Microorganisms, Interfaculty Institute for
Genetics and Functional Genomics, University of Greifswald,
Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Strasse 15a, D-17487 Greifswald, Germany and
kohlert@uni-greifswald.de.
(3)Institute for Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, University Medicine
Greifswald, Ferdinand-Sauerbruch-Strasse, D-17489 Greifswald, Germany.

The human matricellular glycoprotein thrombospondin-1 (hTSP-1) is released by
activated platelets and mediates adhesion of Gram-positive bacteria to various
host cells. In staphylococci, the adhesins extracellular adherence protein (Eap) 
and autolysin (Atl), both surface-exposed proteins containing repeating
structures, were shown to be involved in the acquisition of hTSP-1 to the
bacterial surface. The interaction partner(s) on the pneumococcal surface was
hitherto unknown. Here, we demonstrate for the first time that pneumococcal
adherence and virulence factor B (PavB) and pneumococcal surface protein C (PspC)
are key players for the interaction of Streptococcus pneumoniae with
matricellular hTSP-1. PavB and PspC are pneumococcal surface-exposed adhesins and
virulence factors exhibiting repetitive sequences in their core structure.
Heterologously expressed fragments of PavB and PspC containing repetitive
structures exhibit hTSP-1 binding activity as shown by ELISA and surface plasmon 
resonance studies. Binding of hTSP-1 is charge-dependent and inhibited by
heparin. Importantly, the deficiency in PavB and PspC reduces the recruitment of 
soluble hTSP-1 by pneumococci and decreases hTSP-1-mediated pneumococcal
adherence to human epithelial cells. Platelet activation assays suggested that
PavB and PspC are not involved in the activation of purified human platelets by
pneumococci. In conclusion, this study indicates a pivotal role of PavB and PspC 
for pneumococcal recruitment of soluble hTSP-1 to the bacterial surface and
binding of pneumococci to host cell-bound hTSP-1 during adhesion.

Â© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.623876 
PMCID: PMC4505522
PMID: 25897078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

