
1. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2015 Apr;35(4):468-73.

[Role of CD44 in monocyte transmigration across Cryptococcus neoformans-infected 
blood-brain barrier in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang LK(1), Qiu JW, Liang XL, Huang BY, Li Y, DU L, Long M, Luo J, Huang SH, Cao
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Tropical
Disease Research, School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510515, China. E-mail: zlk8289@qq.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the role of CD44 in monocyte adhesion to human brain
microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs) and monocyte migration across an in
vitro model of blood-brain barrier (BBB) infected by Cryptococcus neoformans
(Cn).
METHODS: An in vitro blood-brain barrier model was constructed using a transwell 
chamber covered with a HBMEC monolayer. The wild-type strain of Cn B4500FO2,
TYCC645#32 strain with CPS1 gene deletion and PCIP strain with CPS1
complementation were chosen to infect the monolayer HBMECs. THP-1 cells were
added to the upper chamber of transwell, and the relative migration rate was
determined by counting the number of the cells entering the lower chambers. The
inhibitory effects of anti-CD44 monoclonal antibody and the CD44 inhibitor
bikunin were examined on THP-1 binding to and migration across HBMECs.
RESULTS: Cn infection of the HBMECs caused markedly enhanced THP-1 cell adhesion 
and migration across the monolyers (P<0.01) dependent on Cn concentration and
exposure time. Addition of anti-CD44 monoclonal antibody and bikunin
significantly lowered THP-1 adhesion and migration rates in the BBB model with
Cn-infected HBMECs (P<0.01) with a dose dependence of the antibody (within 0-1
Âµg) and inhibitor (within 0-20 nmol/L). Both THP-1 adhesion rate and migration
rate were lowered in the BBB model infected with CPS1 gene-deleted Cn but
increased in the model infected with the complemented strain compared with those 
in the wild-type strain-infected model.
CONCLUSION: In the in vitro BBB model, CD44 expressed on HBMECs may play an
essential role in monocyte adhesion to and migration across the BBB. The capsular
hyaluronic acid may mediate Cn-induced monocyte adhesion and migration.


PMID: 25907927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

