
1. J Org Chem. 2015 May 15;80(10):4835-50. doi: 10.1021/acs.joc.5b00550. Epub 2015
Apr 30.

Investigation and conformational analysis of fluorinated nucleoside antibiotics
targeting siderophore biosynthesis.

Dawadi S(1), Viswanathan K(1), Boshoff HI(2), Barry CE 3rd(2), Aldrich CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)†Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota 55455, United States.
(2)‡Tuberculosis Research Section, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, United States.

Antibiotic resistance represents one of the greatest threats to public health.
The adenylation inhibitor 5'-O-[N-(salicyl)sulfamoyl]adenosine (SAL-AMS) is the
archetype for a new class of nucleoside antibiotics that target iron acquisition 
in pathogenic microorganisms and is especially effective against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, the causative agent of tuberculosis. Strategic incorporation of
fluorine at the 2' and 3' positions of the nucleoside was performed by direct
fluorination to enhance activity and improve drug disposition properties. The
resulting SAL-AMS analogues were comprehensively assessed for biochemical
potency, whole-cell antitubercular activity, and in vivo pharmacokinetic
parameters. Conformational analysis suggested a strong preference of fluorinated 
sugar rings for either a 2'-endo, 3'-exo (South), or a 3'-endo,2'-exo (North)
conformation. The structure-activity relationships revealed a strong
conformational bias for the C3'-endo conformation to maintain potent biochemical 
and whole-cell activity, whereas improved pharmacokinetic properties were
associated with the C2'-endo conformation.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.joc.5b00550 
PMCID: PMC4674167
PMID: 25916415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

