
1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 28;10(4):e0124283. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124283.
eCollection 2015.

High EMT Signature Score of Invasive Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) Cells
Correlates with NFκB Driven Colony-Stimulating Factor 2 (CSF2/GM-CSF) Secretion
by Neighboring Stromal Fibroblasts.

Rudisch A(1), Dewhurst MR(2), Horga LG(2), Kramer N(3), Harrer N(2), Dong M(4),
van der Kuip H(4), Wernitznig A(2), Bernthaler A(2), Dolznig H(3), Sommergruber
W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lead Discovery, Boehringer Ingelheim RCV GmbH & Co KG, Vienna,
Austria; Department of Microbiology, Immunobiology and Genetics, Center of
Molecular Biology, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria.
(2)Department of Lead Discovery, Boehringer Ingelheim RCV GmbH & Co KG, Vienna,
Austria.
(3)Institute of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and University 
of Tübingen, Stuttgart, Baden-Württemberg, Germany.

We established co-cultures of invasive or non-invasive NSCLC cell lines and
various types of fibroblasts (FBs) to more precisely characterize the molecular
mechanism of tumor-stroma crosstalk in lung cancer. The HGF-MET-ERK1/2-CREB-axis 
was shown to contribute to the onset of the invasive phenotype of Calu-1 with HGF
being secreted by FBs. Differential expression analysis of the respective mono-
and co-cultures revealed an upregulation of NFκB-related genes exclusively in
co-cultures with Calu-1. Cytokine Array- and ELISA-based characterization of the 
"cytokine fingerprints" identified CSF2 (GM-CSF), CXCL1, CXCL6, VEGF, IL6, RANTES
and IL8 as being specifically upregulated in various co-cultures. Whilst CXCL6
exhibited a strictly FB-type-specific induction profile regardless of the
invasiveness of the tumor cell line, CSF2 was only induced in co-cultures of
invasive cell lines regardless of the partnered FB type. These cultures revealed 
a clear link between the induction of CSF2 and the EMT signature of the cancer
cell line. The canonical NFκB signaling in FBs, but not in tumor cells, was shown
to be responsible for the induced and constitutive CSF2 expression. In addition
to CSF2, cytokine IL6, IL8 and IL1B, and chemokine CXCL1 and CXCL6 transcripts
were also shown to be increased in co-cultured FBs. In contrast, their induction 
was not strictly dependent on the invasiveness of the co-cultured tumor cell. In 
a multi-reporter assay, additional signaling pathways (AP-1, HIF1-α, KLF4, SP-1
and ELK-1) were found to be induced in FBs co-cultured with Calu-1. Most
importantly, no difference was observed in the level of inducibility of these six
signaling pathways with regard to the type of FBs used. Finally, upon tumor
fibroblast interaction the massive induction of chemokines such as CXCL1 and
CXCL6 in FBs might be responsible for increased recruitment of a monocytic cell
line (THP-1) in a transwell assay.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124283 
PMCID: PMC4412534
PMID: 25919140  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

