
1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 24;10(4):e0120497. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120497.
eCollection 2015.

Clostridium perfringens Alpha-Toxin Induces Gm1a Clustering and Trka
Phosphorylation in the Host Cell Membrane.

Takagishi T(1), Oda M(2), Kabura M(1), Kurosawa M(3), Tominaga K(1), Urano S(1), 
Ueda Y(4), Kobayashi K(1), Kobayashi T(5), Sakurai J(1), Terao Y(3), Nagahama
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokushima
Bunri University, Yamashiro-cho 180, Tokushima, 770-8514, Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokushima
Bunri University, Yamashiro-cho 180, Tokushima, 770-8514, Japan; Division of
Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Niigata University Graduate School of
Medical and Dental Sciences, 2-5274, Gakkocho-dori, Chuo-ku, Niigata, 951-8514,
Japan.
(3)Division of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Niigata University Graduate 
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 2-5274, Gakkocho-dori, Chuo-ku, Niigata,
951-8514, Japan.
(4)Hematology and Immunology, Kanazawa Medical University, 1-1 Daigaku,
Uchinada-cho, Kahoku-gun, Ishikawa, 920-0293, Japan.
(5)Lipid Biology Laboratory, Rikagaku Kenkyujo (RIKEN), 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako,
Saitama, 351-0198, Japan.

Clostridium perfringens alpha-toxin elicits various immune responses such as the 
release of cytokines, chemokines, and superoxide via the GM1a/TrkA complex.
Alpha-toxin possesses phospholipase C (PLC) hydrolytic activity that contributes 
to signal transduction in the pathogenesis of gas gangrene. Little is known about
the relationship between lipid metabolism and TrkA activation by alpha-toxin.
Using live-cell fluorescence microscopy, we monitored transbilayer movement of
diacylglycerol (DAG) with the yellow fluorescent protein-tagged C1AB domain of
protein kinase C-γ (EYFP-C1AB). DAG accumulated at the marginal region of the
plasma membrane in alpha toxin-treated A549 cells, which also exhibited GM1a
clustering and TrkA phosphorylation. Annexin V binding assays showed that
alpha-toxin induced the exposure of phosphatidylserine on the outer leaflet of
the plasma membrane. However, H148G, a variant toxin which binds cell membrane
and has no enzymatic activity, did not induce DAG translocation, GM1a clustering,
or TrkA phosphorylation. Alpha-toxin also specifically activated endogenous
phospholipase Cγ-1 (PLCγ-1), a TrkA adaptor protein, via phosphorylation. U73122,
an endogenous PLC inhibitor, and siRNA for PLCγ-1 inhibited the formation of DAG 
and release of IL-8. GM1a accumulation and TrkA phosphorylation in A549 cells
treated with alpha-toxin were also inhibited by U73122. These results suggest
that the flip-flop motion of hydrophobic lipids such as DAG leads to the
accumulation of GM1a and TrkA. We conclude that the formation of DAG by
alpha-toxin itself (first step) and activation of endogenous PLCγ-1 (second step)
leads to alterations in membrane dynamics, followed by strong phosphorylation of 
TrkA.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120497 
PMCID: PMC4409118
PMID: 25910247  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

