
1. Plasmid. 2015 Jul;80:63-82. doi: 10.1016/j.plasmid.2015.04.003. Epub 2015 Apr 21.

The A to Z of A/C plasmids.

Harmer CJ(1), Hall RM(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW,
Australia. Electronic address: christopher.harmer@sydney.edu.au.
(2)School of Molecular Bioscience, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW,
Australia.

Plasmids belonging to incompatibility groups A and C (now A/C) were among the
earliest to be associated with antibiotic resistance in Gram-negative bacteria.
A/C plasmids are large, conjugative plasmids with a broad host range. The
prevalence of A/C plasmids in collections of clinical isolates has revealed their
importance in the dissemination of extended-spectrum β-lactamases and
carbapenemases. They also mobilize SGI1-type resistance islands. Revived interest
in the family has yielded many complete A/C plasmid sequences, revealing that
RA1, designated A/C1, is different from the remainder, designated A/C2. There are
two distinct A/C2 lineages. Backbones of 128-130 kb include over 120 genes or
ORFs encoding proteins of at least 100 amino acids, but very few have been
characterized. Genes potentially required for replication, stability and transfer
have been identified, but only the replication system of RA1 and the regulation
of transfer have been studied. There is enormous variety in the antibiotic
resistance genes carried by A/C2 plasmids but they are usually clustered in
larger regions at various locations in the backbone. The ARI-A and ARI-B
resistance islands are always at a specific location but have variable content.
ARI-A is only found in type 1 A/C2 plasmids, which disseminate blaCMY-2 and
blaNDM-1 genes, whereas ARI-B, carrying the sul2 gene, is found in both type 1
and type 2. This review summarizes current knowledge of A/C plasmids, and
highlights areas of research to be considered in the future.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plasmid.2015.04.003 
PMID: 25910948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

