
1. Protein Pept Lett. 2015;22(5):460-9.

Efficient In Vitro Refolding and Characterization of Major Histocompatibility
Complex Class I-Related Chain Molecules A (MICA) and Natural Killer Group 2
Member D (NKG2D) Expressed in E. coli.

Zhao X, Acheampong DO, Wang Y, Tang M, Xie W, Chen Z, Wang M, Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines, China Pharmaceutical University,
154#, Tong Jia Xiang 24, Nanjing 210009, P.R. China. juancpu@126.com.

Major Histocompatibility Complex class I-related chain molecules A (MICA) and
receptor Natural killer group 2 member D (NKG2D) are important membrane proteins 
with immunosurveillance properties which could serve as therapeutic targets for
immunotherapy. However, expression of MICA and NKG2D in E. coli often leads to
the formation of inclusion bodies. Here, we present simple, inexpensive and
convenient protocol for the solubilization and refolding of inclusion bodies of
MICA and NKG2D expressed in E. coli. The inclusion bodies were firstly dissolved 
in strong chaotropic reagent (8M urea) and subsequently purified by
immobilized-metal affinity column. The denatured MICA/NKG2D was refolded by
gradually removing both denaturant (8M urea) and imidazole via dialysis in
dialysis buffer of pH 7.4. The appropriate pH of the dialysis buffer was selected
based on the theoretical isoelectric points of MICA and NKG2D which were 5.0 and 
5.2 respectively. The folded MICA and NKG2D demonstrated the capacity to bind to 
recombinant NKG2D and MICA respectively by ELISA, Western blot and Surface
Plasmon Resonance (SPR) assays. Additionally, the folded MICA and NKG2D
demonstrated significant binding to NKG2D-positive Human leukemic cell line U937 
and MICA-positive Human pancreatic carcinoma, epithelial-like cell line (PANC-1) 
respectively, suggesting successful refolding. Successful refolding was further
confirmed by Circular Dichroism spectroscopy (CD). We have successfully
dissolved, refolded and characterized inclusion bodies of MICA/NKG2D expressed in
E. coli using simple, inexpensive and convenient protocol which can be carried
out in laboratories under-resourced.

DOI: 10.2174/0929866522666150428122144 
PMID: 25925769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

