
1. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Sep 1;24(17):2009-17. doi: 10.1089/scd.2015.0030. Epub 2015 
May 11.

MicroRNA-124 Targets Tip110 Expression and Regulates Hematopoiesis.

Liu Y(1), Huang X(2), Timani KA(1), Broxmeyer HE(2), He JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, University of North Texas Health Science Center , Fort Worth, Texas.
(2)2 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University , School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, India na.

MicroRNA (miR) regulates hematopoiesis through targeting different genes
post-transcriptionally. We have recently shown that Tip110 expression is
downregulated during hematopoietic stem cell differentiation. However, the
underlying mechanisms are not known. In this study, we identified a conserved
miR-124-binding site on the Tip110 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) and showed
that Tip110 was downregulated by miR-124 through its 3'-UTR. We then examined the
relationship among miR-124 and Tip110 expression and differentiation of human
cord blood CD34(+) cells. We found that miR-124 was expressed in a low level in
human cord blood CD34(+) cells, but it was considerably upregulated during
culturing and differentiation of these cells. Moreover, we demonstrated that
miR-124 expression decreased Tip110 expression and promoted differentiation of
human cord blood CD34(+) cells, while miR-124 knockdown increased Tip110
expression, slowed down differentiation of human cord blood CD34(+) cells, and
caused an expansion of hematopoietic progenitor cells in vitro. Finally, we used 
mouse embryonic fibroblasts derived from Tip110 transgenic mice, performed the
exon array analysis, and found that Tip110 altered a number of genes in the
hematopoiesis pathways. Dnmt3a as de novo methyltransferase was also
significantly upregulated. That miR-124 was markedly upregulated during human
cord blood CD34(+) cell differentiation could be the result of direct loss of its
promoter methylation from Dnmt3a. Taken together, our study demonstrates that
miR-124 regulates Tip110 expression and differentiation of human cord blood
CD34(+) cells and suggests important roles of miR-124/Tip110 in hematopoiesis.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.2015.0030 
PMCID: PMC4544784
PMID: 25928721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

