
1. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Dec;230(12):2981-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25029.

Possible Involvement of Palmitate in Pathogenesis of Periodontitis.

Shikama Y(1), Kudo Y(2), Ishimaru N(2), Funaki M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Center for Diabetes, Tokushima University Hospital,
Tokushima, Japan.
(2)Department of Oral Molecular Pathology, Institute of Health Biosciences, The
University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is characterized by decreased insulin sensitivity and
higher concentrations of free fatty acids (FFAs) in plasma. Among FFAs, saturated
fatty acids (SFAs), such as palmitate, have been suggested to promote
inflammatory responses. Although many epidemiological studies have shown a link
between periodontitis and T2D, little is known about the clinical significance of
SFAs in periodontitis. In this study, we showed that gingival fibroblasts have
cell-surface expression of CD36, which is also known as FAT/fatty acid
translocase. Moreover, CD36 expression was increased in gingival fibroblasts of
high-fat diet-induced T2D model mice, compared with gingival fibroblasts of mice 
fed a normal diet. DNA microarray analysis revealed that palmitate increased mRNA
expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in human gingival
fibroblasts (HGF). Consistent with these results, we confirmed that
palmitate-induced interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, and CXCL1 secretion in HGF, using a
cytokine array and ELISA. SFAs, but not an unsaturated fatty acid, oleate,
induced IL-8 production. Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), which is one of the omega-3 
polyunsaturated fatty acids, significantly suppressed palmitate-induced IL-6 and 
IL-8 production. Treatment of HGF with a CD36 inhibitor also inhibited
palmitate-induced pro-inflammatory responses. Finally, we demonstrated that
Porphyromonas gingivalis (P.g.) lipopolysaccharide and heat-killed P.g. augmented
palmitate-induced chemokine secretion in HGF. These results suggest a potential
link between SFAs in plasma and the pathogenesis of periodontitis.

Â© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Cellular Physiology Published by Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.25029 
PMID: 25921577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

