
1. Mamm Genome. 2015 Jun;26(5-6):264-70. doi: 10.1007/s00335-015-9564-0. Epub 2015
May 1.

Targeted disruption of CD1d prevents NKT cell development in pigs.

Yang G(1), Artiaga BL, Hackmann TJ, Samuel MS, Walters EM, Salek-Ardakani S,
Driver JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Florida, 2250 Shealy Drive, POB
110910, Gainesville, FL, 32611-0910, USA.

Studies in mice genetically lacking natural killer T (NKT) cells show that these 
lymphocytes make important contributions to both innate and adaptive immune
responses. However, the usefulness of murine models to study human NKT cells is
limited by the many differences between mice and humans, including that their NKT
cell frequencies, subsets, and distribution are dissimilar. A more suitable model
may be swine that share many metabolic, physiological, and growth characteristics
with humans and are also similar for NKT cells. Thus, we analyzed genetically
modified pigs made deficient for CD1d that is required for the development of
Type I invariant NKT (iNKT) cells that express a semi-invariant T-cell receptor
(TCR) and Type II NKT cells that use variable TCRs. Peripheral blood analyzed by 
flow cytometry and interferon-Î³ enzyme-linked immuno spot assays demonstrated
that CD1d-knockout pigs completely lack iNKT cells, while other leukocyte
populations remain intact. CD1d and NKT cells have been shown to be involved in
shaping the composition of the commensal microbiota in mice. Therefore, we also
compared the fecal microbiota profile between pigs expressing and lacking NKT
cells. However, no differences were found between pigs lacking or expressing
CD1d. Our results are the first to show that knocking-out CD1d prevents the
development of NKT cells in a non-rodent species. CD1d-deficient pigs should
offer a useful model to more accurately determine the contribution of NKT cells
for human immune responses. They also have potential for understanding how NKT
cells impact the health of commercial swine.

DOI: 10.1007/s00335-015-9564-0 
PMCID: PMC4830386
PMID: 25930071  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

