
1. Oncoimmunology. 2014 Dec 21;3(11):e970025. eCollection 2014 Nov.

Ectopic expression of embryonic stem cell and other developmental genes in
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.

Litvinov IV(1), Netchiporouk E(1), Cordeiro B(1), Zargham H(1), Pehr K(1),
Gilbert M(2), Zhou Y(3), Moreau L(1), Woetmann A(4), Ødum N(4), Kupper TS(5),
Sasseville D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology; McGill University Health Centre ; Montréal, QC
Canada.
(2)Division of Dermatology; Université Laval ; Québec City, QC Canada.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Skin Science; University of British Columbia ;
Vancouver, BC Canada.
(4)Department of International Health, Immunology, and Microbiology; University
of Copenhagen ; Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Dermatology; Harvard Skin Disease Research Center; Brigham and
Women's Hospital; Harvard University ; Boston, MA USA.

Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) is a potentially devastating malignancy. The
pathogenesis of this cancer remains poorly elucidated. Previous studies focused
on analysis of expression and function of known oncogenes and tumor suppressor
genes. However, emerging reports highlight that it is also important to analyze
the expression of genes that are ectopically expressed in CTCL (e.g., embryonic
stem cell genes (ESC), cancer testis (CT) genes, etc.). Currently, it is not
known whether ESC genes are expressed in CTCL. In the current work, we analyze by
RT-PCR the expression of 26 ESC genes, many of which are known to regulate
pluripotency and promote cancer stem cell-like phenotype, in a historic cohort of
60 patients from Boston and in a panel of 11 patient-derived CTCL cell lines and 
compare such expression to benign inflammatory dermatoses that often clinically
mimic CTCL. Our findings document that many critical ESC genes including NANOG,
SOX2, OCT4 (POU5F1) and their upstream and downstream signaling members are
expressed in CTCL. Similarly, polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) genes (i.e.,
EZH2, EED, and SUZ12) are also expressed in CTCL lesional skin. Furthermore,
select ESC genes (OCT4, EED, TCF3, THAP11, CHD7, TIP60, TRIM28) are
preferentially expressed in CTCL samples when compared to benign skin biopsies.
Our work suggests that ESC genes are ectopically expressed together with CT
genes, thymocyte development genes and B cell-specific genes and may be working
in concert to promote tumorigenesis. Specifically, while ESC genes may be
promoting cancer stem cell-like phenotype, CT genes may be contributing to
aneuploidy and genomic instability by producing aberrant chromosomal
translocations. Further analysis of ESC expression and function in this cancer
will greatly enhance our fundamental understanding of CTCL and will help us
identify novel therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.4161/21624011.2014.970025 
PMCID: PMC4368148
PMID: 25941598 

