
1. Cancer Immunol Res. 2015 Aug;3(8):926-35. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0239.
Epub 2015 May 8.

PD-1 and CD103 Are Widely Coexpressed on Prognostically Favorable Intraepithelial
CD8 T Cells in Human Ovarian Cancer.

Webb JR(1), Milne K(2), Nelson BH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Trev and Joyce Deeley Research Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Victoria, Canada. Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of
Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada. jwebb@bccrc.ca.
(2)Trev and Joyce Deeley Research Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Victoria, Canada.
(3)Trev and Joyce Deeley Research Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Victoria, Canada. Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of
Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada. Department of Medical Genetics,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

αE(CD103)β7 is a TGFβ-regulated integrin that mediates retention of lymphocytes
in peripheral tissues by binding to E-cadherin expressed on epithelial cells. We 
recently reported that αE(CD103)β7 specifically demarcates intraepithelial CD8(+)
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (CD8 TIL) in ovarian cancer and that CD103(+) TIL 
have a surface profile consistent with an active effector phenotype (HLA-DR(+),
Ki67(+), and CD127(lo)). These findings led us to hypothesize that, over time,
CD103-mediated retention of CD8 TIL within the tumor epithelium might result in
chronic stimulation by tumor antigen, which in turn might lead to an exhausted
phenotype. To investigate this possibility, we evaluated PD-1 expression in a
large cohort of ovarian tumors (N = 489) with known CD103(+) TIL content. PD-1(+)
cells were present in 38.5% of high-grade serous carcinomas (HGSC), but were less
prevalent in other histologic subtypes. PD-1(+) TIL were strongly associated with
increased disease-specific survival in HGSC (HR, 0.4864; P = 0.0007). Multicolor 
immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry revealed a high degree of PD-1 and CD103 
coexpression, specifically within the CD8 TIL compartment. PD-1(+)CD103(+) CD8
TIL were quiescent when assessed directly ex vivo yet were capable of robust
cytokine production after pharmacologic stimulation. Moreover, they showed
negligible expression of additional exhaustion-associated markers, including
TIM-3, CTLA-4, and LAG-3. Thus, as hypothesized, CD103(+) CD8 TIL express PD-1
and appear quiescent in the tumor microenvironment. However, these cells retain
functional competence and demonstrate strong prognostic significance. We
speculate that, after standard treatment, PD-1(+)CD103(+) CD8 TIL might regain
functional antitumor activity, an effect that potentially could be augmented by
immune modulation.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0239 
PMID: 25957117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

