
1. Pathog Dis. 2015 Jul;73(5). pii: ftu003. doi: 10.1093/femspd/ftu003. Epub 2014
Dec 4.

Resistance of MMP9 and TIMP1 to endotoxin tolerance.

Muthukuru M(1), Cutler CW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of periodontics, School of Dentistry, West Virginia University, One
Medical Center Drive, PO Box 9448, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA
mamuthukuru@hsc.wvu.edu.
(2)Department of periodontics, College of Dental Medicine, Georgia Health
Sciences University, 1120 15th Street, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Inflammatory cytokines activate tissue collagenases such as matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs). MMPs are antagonized by tissue inhibitors of
metalloproteinases (TIMPs) that attempt to regulate excessive collagenase
activity during inflammatory conditions. During chronic inflammatory conditions, 
induction of endotoxin tolerance negatively regulates the cytokine response in an
attempt to curtail excessive host tissue damage. However, little is known about
how downregulation of inflammatory cytokines during endotoxin tolerance regulates
MMP activities. In this study, human monocyte-derived macrophages were either
sensitized or further challenged to induce tolerance with lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) from Porphyromonas gingivalis (PgLPS) or Escherichia coli (EcLPS).
Inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α and IL-1β, and levels of MMP9 and TIMP1
were analyzed by a combination of cytometric bead array, western blot/gelatin
zymography and real-time RT-PCR. Functional blocking with anti-TLR4 but not with 
anti-TLR2 significantly downregulated TNF-α and IL-1β. However, MMP9 levels were 
not inhibited by toll-like receptor (TLR) blocking. Interestingly, endotoxin
tolerance significantly upregulated TIMP1 relative to MMP9 and downmodulated MMP9
secretion and its enzymatic activity. These results suggest that regulatory
mechanisms such as induction of endotoxin tolerance could inhibit MMP activities 
and could facilitate restoring host tissue homeostasis.

© FEMS 2014. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/femspd/ftu003 
PMCID: PMC4849345
PMID: 25951835  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

