
1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2015 Dec;1362:110-6. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12771. Epub 2015 May 11.

FCRL regulation in innate-like B cells.

Davis RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Microbiology, and Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, and the Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama.

Coelomic cavity-derived B-1 and splenic marginal zone (MZ) B lymphocytes play
principal roles in frontline host protection at homeostasis and during primary
humoral immune responses. Although they share many features that enable rapid and
broad-based defense against pathogens, these innate-like subsets have disparate B
cell receptor (BCR) signaling features. Members of the Fc receptor-like (FCRL)
family are preferentially expressed by B cells and possess tyrosine-based
immunoregulatory function. An unusual characteristic of many of these cell
surface proteins is the presence of both inhibitory (ITIM) and activating
(ITAM-like) motifs in their cytoplasmic tails. In mice, FCRL5 is a discrete
marker of splenic MZ and peritoneal B-1 B cells and has both ITIM and ITAM-like
sequences. Recent work explored its signaling properties and identified that
FCRL5 differentially influences innate-like BCR function. Closer scrutiny of
these differences disclosed the ability of FCRL5 to counter-regulate BCR
activation by recruiting SHP-1 and Lyn to its cytoplasmic motifs. Furthermore,
the disparity in FCRL5 regulation between MZ and B-1 B cells correlated with
relative intracellular concentrations of SHP-1. These findings validate and
extend our understanding of the unique signaling features in innate-like B cells 
and provide new insight into the complexity of FCRL modulation.

Â© 2015 The Authors. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences published by Wiley
Periodicals Inc. on behalf of The New York Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/nyas.12771 
PMCID: PMC4690519
PMID: 25964091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

