
1. Oncogene. 2016 Feb 11;35(6):748-60. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.133. Epub 2015 May 11.

TGF-β1-induced EMT promotes targeted migration of breast cancer cells through the
lymphatic system by the activation of CCR7/CCL21-mediated chemotaxis.

Pang MF(1)(2), Georgoudaki AM(3), Lambut L(1), Johansson J(1), Tabor V(1),
Hagikura K(1)(4), Jin Y(1), Jansson M(5), Alexander JS(6), Nelson CM(2),
Jakobsson L(1), Betsholtz C(1), Sund M(5), Karlsson MC(3), Fuxe J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vascular Biology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Division of Cell Regeneration and Transplantation, Department of Functional
Morphology, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Surgical and Perioperative Sciences/Surgery, Umea University,
Umea, Sweden.
(6)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA, USA.

Tumor cells frequently disseminate through the lymphatic system during metastatic
spread of breast cancer and many other types of cancer. Yet it is not clear how
tumor cells make their way into the lymphatic system and how they choose between 
lymphatic and blood vessels for migration. Here we report that mammary tumor
cells undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in response to
transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β1) become activated for targeted migration
through the lymphatic system, similar to dendritic cells (DCs) during
inflammation. EMT cells preferentially migrated toward lymphatic vessels compared
with blood vessels, both in vivo and in 3D cultures. A mechanism of this targeted
migration was traced to the capacity of TGF-β1 to promote CCR7/CCL21-mediated
crosstalk between tumor cells and lymphatic endothelial cells. On one hand,
TGF-β1 promoted CCR7 expression in EMT cells through p38 MAP kinase-mediated
activation of the JunB transcription factor. Blockade of CCR7, or treatment with 
a p38 MAP kinase inhibitor, reduced lymphatic dissemination of EMT cells in
syngeneic mice. On the other hand, TGF-β1 promoted CCL21 expression in lymphatic 
endothelial cells. CCL21 acted in a paracrine fashion to mediate chemotactic
migration of EMT cells toward lymphatic endothelial cells. The results identify
TGF-β1-induced EMT as a mechanism, which activates tumor cells for targeted,
DC-like migration through the lymphatic system. Furthermore, it suggests that p38
MAP kinase inhibition may be a useful strategy to inhibit EMT and lymphogenic
spread of tumor cells.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2015.133 
PMCID: PMC4753256
PMID: 25961925  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

