
1. Carbohydr Polym. 2015;127:451-61. doi: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2015.03.089. Epub 2015
Apr 14.

Incorporation of antimicrobial peptides on functionalized cotton gauzes for
medical applications.

Gomes AP(1), Mano JF(2), Queiroz JA(3), Gouveia IC(4).

Author information: 
(1)FibEnTech - Fiber Materials and Environmental Technologies - Research Unit,
Faculty of Engineering, University of Beira Interior, 6201-001 Covilhã, Portugal.
(2)3B's Research Group - Biomaterials, Biodegradables and Biomimetics, University
of Minho, Headquarters of the European Institute of Excellence on Tissue
Engineering and Regenerative Medicine, AvePark, 4806-909 Taipas, Guimarães,
Portugal; Health Sciences Research Centre, University of Beira Interior, 6201-001
Covilhã, Portugal.
(3)ICVS/3B's - PT Government Associate Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Portugal.
(4)FibEnTech - Fiber Materials and Environmental Technologies - Research Unit,
Faculty of Engineering, University of Beira Interior, 6201-001 Covilhã, Portugal.
Electronic address: igouveia@ubi.pt.

A large group of low molecular weight natural compounds that exhibit
antimicrobial activity has been isolated from animals and plants during the past 
two decades. Among them, peptides are the most widespread resulting in a new
generation of antimicrobial agents with higher specific activity. In the present 
study we have developed a new strategy to obtain antimicrobial wound-dressings
based on the incorporation of antimicrobial peptides into polyelectrolyte
multilayer films built by the alternate deposition of polycation (chitosan) and
polyanion (alginic acid sodium salt) over cotton gauzes. Energy dispersive X ray 
microanalysis technique was used to determine if antimicrobial peptides
penetrated within the films. FTIR analysis was performed to assess the chemical
linkages, and antimicrobial assays were performed with two strains:
Staphylococcus aureus (Gram-positive bacterium) and Klebsiella pneumonia
(Gram-negative bacterium). Results showed that all antimicrobial peptides used in
this work have provided a higher antimicrobial effect (in the range of 4 log-6
log reduction) for both microorganisms, in comparison with the controls, and are 
non-cytotoxic to normal human dermal fibroblasts at the concentrations tested.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2015.03.089 
PMID: 25965504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

