
1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 3;290(27):16989-7003. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.652818. Epub
2015 May 15.

During Cytochrome c Maturation CcmI Chaperones the Class I Apocytochromes until
the Formation of Their b-Type Cytochrome Intermediates.

Verissimo AF(1), Shroff NP(1), Daldal F(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104-6019.
(2)From the Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104-6019 fdaldal@sas.upenn.edu.

The c-type cytochromes are electron transfer proteins involved in energy
transduction. They have heme-binding (CXXCH) sites that covalently ligate heme b 
via thioether bonds and are classified into different classes based on their
protein folds and the locations and properties of their cofactors. Rhodobacter
capsulatus produces various c-type cytochromes using the cytochrome c maturation 
(Ccm) System I, formed from the CcmABCDEFGHI proteins. CcmI, a component of the
heme ligation complex CcmFHI, interacts with the heme-handling protein CcmE and
chaperones apocytochrome c2 by binding its C-terminal helix. Whether CcmI also
chaperones other c-type apocytochromes, and the effects of heme on these
interactions were unknown previously. Here, we purified different classes of
soluble and membrane-bound c-type apocytochromes (class I, c2 and c1, and class
II c') and investigated their interactions with CcmI and apoCcmE. We report that,
in the absence of heme, CcmI and apoCcmE recognized different classes of c-type
apocytochromes with different affinities (nM to μM KD values). When present, heme
induced conformational changes in class I apocytochromes (e.g. c2) and decreased 
significantly their high affinity for CcmI. Knowing that CcmI does not interact
with mature cytochrome c2 and that heme converts apocytochrome c2 into its b-type
derivative, these findings indicate that CcmI holds the class I apocytochromes
(e.g. c2) tightly until their noncovalent heme-containing b-type cytochrome-like 
intermediates are formed. We propose that these intermediates are subsequently
converted into mature cytochromes following the covalent ligation of heme via the
remaining components of the Ccm complex.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.652818 
PMCID: PMC4505443
PMID: 25979338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

