
1. PLoS One. 2015 May 15;10(5):e0126507. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126507.
eCollection 2015.

Potential Transmission Pathways of Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp.
gallolyticus.

Dumke J(1), Hinse D(1), Vollmer T(1), Schulz J(2), Knabbe C(1), Dreier J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Laboratory and Transfusion Medicine, Ruhr University of Bochum, 
Bad Oeynhausen, Germany.
(2)Institute for Animal Hygiene, Animal Welfare and Farm Animal Behavior,
University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Foundation, Hannover, Germany.

Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus (S. gallolyticus subsp.
gallolyticus), a member of group D streptococci, is an inhabitant of the animal
and human gastrointestinal tract. Furthermore, it is a facultative pathogen which
causes e.g. endocarditis, septicemia and mastitis. S. gallolyticus subsp.
gallolyticus may be transmitted either directly or indirectly between animals and
humans. However, the transmission routes are an unsolved issue. In this study, we
present systematic analyses of an S. gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus isolate of 
an infective endocarditis patient in relation to isolates of his laying hen
flock. Isolates from pooled droppings of laying hens, pooled dust samples and
human blood culture were characterized by using multilocus sequence typing (MLST)
and DNA fingerprinting. MLST revealed the same allelic profile of isolates from
the human blood culture and from the droppings of laying hens. In addition, these
isolates showed clonal identity regarding a similar DNA fingerprinting pattern.
For the first time, we received a hint that transmission of S. gallolyticus
subsp. gallolyticus between poultry and humans may occur. This raises the
question about the zoonotic potential of isolates from poultry and should be
considered in future studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126507 
PMCID: PMC4433203
PMID: 25978355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

