
1. PLoS One. 2015 May 13;10(5):e0125856. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125856.
eCollection 2015.

Strain-Specific Interactions of Listeria monocytogenes with the Autophagy System 
in Host Cells.

Cemma M(1), Lam GY(2), Stöckli M(3), Higgins DE(3), Brumell JH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8,
Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 
1A8, Canada.
(2)Cell Biology Program, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8,
Canada; Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8,
Canada.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, United States of America.
(4)Cell Biology Program, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8,
Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 
1A8, Canada; Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S
1A8, Canada.

Listeria monocytogenes is an intracellular bacterial pathogen that can replicate 
in the cytosol of host cells. These bacteria undergo actin-based motility in the 
cytosol via expression of ActA, which recruits host actin-regulatory proteins to 
the bacterial surface. L. monocytogenes is thought to evade killing by autophagy 
using ActA-dependent mechanisms. ActA-independent mechanisms of autophagy evasion
have also been proposed, but remain poorly understood. Here we examined autophagy
of non-motile (ΔactA) mutants of L. monocytogenes strains 10403S and EGD-e, two
commonly studied strains of this pathogen. The ΔactA mutants displayed
accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins and p62/SQSTM1 on their surface. However, 
only strain EGD-e ΔactA displayed colocalization with the autophagy marker LC3 at
8 hours post infection. A bacteriostatic agent (chloramphenicol) was required for
LC3 recruitment to 10403S ΔactA, suggesting that these bacteria produce a factor 
for autophagy evasion. Internalin K was proposed to block autophagy of L.
monocytogenes in the cytosol of host cells. However, deletion of inlK in either
the wild-type or ΔactA background of strain 10403S had no impact on autophagy
evasion by bacteria, indicating it does not play an essential role in evading
autophagy. Replication of ΔactA mutants of strain EGD-e and 10403S was comparable
to their parent wild-type strain in macrophages. Thus, ΔactA mutants of L.
monocytogenes can block killing by autophagy at a step downstream of protein
ubiquitination and, in the case of strain EGD-e, downstream of LC3 recruitment to
bacteria. Our findings highlight the strain-specific differences in the
mechanisms that L. monocytogenes uses to evade killing by autophagy in host
cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125856 
PMCID: PMC4430529
PMID: 25970638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

