
1. Microbiologyopen. 2015 Oct;4(5):699-711. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.263. Epub 2015 May 13.

Experimental approaches to identify small RNAs and their diverse roles in
bacteria--what we have learnt in one decade of MicA research.

Van Puyvelde S(1)(2), Vanderleyden J(1), De Keersmaecker SC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Microbial and Plant Genetics, KU Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 20,
Heverlee, Belgium.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Diagnostic Bacteriology Unit, Institute of 
Tropical Medicine, Nationalestraat 155, Antwerp, Belgium.
(3)Platform Biotechnology and Molecular Biology, WIV-ISP, Juliette Wytsmanstraat 
14, Brussels, Belgium.

Nowadays the identification of small RNAs (sRNAs) and characterization of their
role within regulatory networks takes a prominent place in deciphering complex
bacterial phenotypes. Compared to the study of other components of bacterial
cells, this is a relatively new but fast-growing research field. Although reports
on new sRNAs appear regularly, some sRNAs are already subject of research for a
longer time. One of such sRNAs is MicA, a sRNA best described for its role in
outer membrane remodeling, but probably having a much broader function than
anticipated. An overview of what we have learnt from MicA led to the conclusion
that even for this well-described sRNA, we still do not have the overall picture.
More general, the story of MicA might become an experimental lead for unraveling 
the many sRNAs with unknown functions. In this review, three important topics in 
the sRNA field are covered, exemplified from the perspective of MicA: (i)
identification of new sRNAs, (ii) target identification and unraveling the
biological function, (iii) structural analysis. The complex mechanisms of action 
of MicA deliver some original insights in the sRNA field which includes the
existence of dimer formation or simultaneous cis and trans regulation, and might 
further inspire the understanding of the function of other sRNAs.

Â© 2015 The Authors. MicrobiologyOpen published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.263 
PMCID: PMC4618604
PMID: 25974745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

