
1. Biochem J. 2015 Jul 15;469(2):267-78. doi: 10.1042/BJ20150242. Epub 2015 May 18.

Slc5a8, a Na+-coupled high-affinity transporter for short-chain fatty acids, is a
conditional tumour suppressor in colon that protects against colitis and colon
cancer under low-fibre dietary conditions.

Gurav A(1), Sivaprakasam S(1), Bhutia YD(2), Boettger T(3), Singh N(1), Ganapathy
V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, 
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, U.S.A.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX 79430, U.S.A.
(3)Department of Cardiac Development and Remodeling, Max-Planck-Institute for
Heart and Lung Research, Ludwigstr 43, Bad Nauheim, D-61231, Germany.
(4)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX 79430, U.S.A. vadivel.ganapathy@ttuhsc.edu.

Mammalian colon harbours trillions of bacteria under physiological conditions;
this symbiosis is made possible because of a tolerized response from the mucosal 
immune system. The mechanisms underlying this tolerogenic phenomenon remain
poorly understood. In the present study we show that Slc5a8 (solute carrier gene 
family 5a, member 8), a Na(+)-coupled high-affinity transporter in colon for the 
bacterial fermentation product butyrate, plays a critical role in this process.
Among various immune cells in colon, dendritic cells (DCs) are unique not only in
their accessibility to luminal contents but also in their ability to induce
tolerogenic phenotype in T-cells. We found that DCs exposed to butyrate express
the immunosuppressive enzymes indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) and aldehyde
dehydrogenase 1A2 (Aldh1A2), promote conversion of naive T-cells into
immunosuppressive forkhead box P3(+) (FoxP3(+)) Tregs (regulatory T-cells) and
suppress conversion of naive T-cells into pro-inflammatory interferon
(IFN)-γ-producing cells. Slc5a8-null DCs do not induce IDO1 and Aldh1A2 and do
not generate Tregs or suppress IFN-γ-producing T-cells in response to butyrate.
We also provide in vivo evidence for an obligatory role for Slc5a8 in suppression
of IFN-γ-producing T-cells. Furthermore, Slc5a8 protects against colitis and
colon cancer under conditions of low-fibre intake but not when dietary fibre
intake is optimal. This agrees with the high-affinity nature of the transporter
to mediate butyrate entry into cells. We conclude that Slc5a8 is an obligatory
link between dietary fibre and mucosal immune system via the bacterial metabolite
butyrate and that this transporter is a conditional tumour suppressor in colon
linked to dietary fibre content.

© 2015 Authors; published by Portland Press Limited.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20150242 
PMCID: PMC4943859
PMID: 25984582  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

