
1. Theor Appl Genet. 2015 Aug;128(8):1579-94. doi: 10.1007/s00122-015-2533-x. Epub
2015 May 16.

A QTL with major effect on reducing leaf rust severity on the short arm of
chromosome 1A of wheat detected across different genetic backgrounds and diverse 
environments.

Du Z(1), Che M, Li G, Chen J, Quan W, Guo Y, Wang Z, Ren J, Zhang H, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193,
People's Republic of China.

KEY MESSAGE: Selection for QLr.cau - 1AS (a major QTL detected in wheat for
reducing leaf rust severity) based on the DNA marker gpw2246 was as effective as 
selection for Lr34 based on cssfr5. Leaf rust is an important disease of wheat
worldwide. Utilization of slow-rusting resistance constitutes a strategy to
sustainably control this disease. The American wheat cultivar Luke exhibits slow 
leaf-rusting resistance at the adult plant stage. The objectives of this study
were to detect and validate QTL for the resistance in Luke. Three winter wheat
populations were used, namely, 149 recombinant inbred lines (RILs) derived from
the cross Luke × Aquileja, 307 RILs from Luke × AQ24788-83, and 80 F2:3 families 
selected from Lingxing66 × KA298. Aquileja and Lingxing66 are highly susceptible 
to leaf rust. AQ24788-83 shows high (susceptible) infection type but contains the
slow-rusting gene Lr34 as diagnosed by the gene-specific marker cssfr5. KA298, an
F9 RIL selected from Luke × AQ24788-83, contains Lr34 and QLr.cau-1AS (a major
QTL originated from Luke, this study). These wheats were evaluated for leaf rust 
in 12 field and greenhouse environments involving four locations and five
seasons. Genotyping was done using simple sequence repeat (SSR) and diversity
arrays technology markers. Of the detected QTLs, QLr.cau-1AS was significant
consistently across all the genetic backgrounds, test environments, and likely a 
wide range of pathogen races. QLr.cau-1AS explained 22.3-55.2% of leaf rust
phenotypic variation, being comparable to Lr34 in effect size. A co-dominant SSR 
marker (gpw2246, http://wheat.pw.usda.gov/GG2/index.shtml ) was identified to be 
tightly linked to QLr.cau-1AS. Selection based on gpw2246 for QLr.cau-1AS was as 
effective as the selection based on cssfr5 for Lr34. QLr.cau-1AS will be helpful 
for increasing the genetic diversity of slow leaf-rusting resistance in wheat
breeding programs.

DOI: 10.1007/s00122-015-2533-x 
PMID: 25982130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

