
1. Clin Immunol. 2015 Aug;159(2):128-33. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2015.05.008. Epub 2015 
May 16.

Control of intestinal homeostasis through crosstalk between natural killer T
cells and the intestinal microbiota.

Dowds CM(1), Blumberg RS(2), Zeissig S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University Medical Center
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endoscopy, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address:
rblumberg@partners.org.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine I, University Medical Center
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany; Department of Medicine I, University Medical
Center Dresden, Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany; Center for
Regenerative Therapies Dresden (CRTD), Technical University Dresden, Dresden,
Germany. Electronic address: sebastian.zeissig@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

The human host and the intestinal microbiota co-exist in a mutually beneficial
relationship, which contributes to host and microbial metabolism as well as
maturation of the host's immune system, among many other pathways (Tremaroli and 
Backhed, 2012; Hooper et al., 2012). At mucosal surfaces, and particularly in the
intestine, the commensal microbiota provides 'colonization resistance' to
invading pathogens and maintains homeostasis through microbial regulation of
mucosal innate and adaptive immunity (Renz et al., 2012). Recent evidence
suggests that natural killer T cells (NKT cells), a subgroup of lipid-reactive T 
cells, play central roles in bidirectional interactions between the host and the 
commensal microbiota, which govern intestinal homeostasis and prevent
inflammation. Here, we provide a brief overview of recently identified pathways
of commensal microbial regulation of NKT cells, discuss feedback mechanisms of
NKT cell-dependent control of microbial colonization and composition, and
highlight the critical role of host-microbial cross-talk for prevention of NKT
cell-dependent mucosal inflammation.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2015.05.008 
PMCID: PMC4817350
PMID: 25988859  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

