
1. Sci Rep. 2015 May 21;5:9461. doi: 10.1038/srep09461.

Swirl Flow Bioreactor coupled with Cu-alginate beads: A system for the
eradication of Coliform and Escherichia coli from biological effluents.

Atkinson S(1), Thomas SF(2), Goddard P(3), Bransgrove RM(1), Mason PT(2), Oak
A(4), Bansode A(5), Patankar R(4), Gleason ZD(6), Sim MK(6), Whitesell A(7),
Allen MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, The Hoe, Plymouth, PL1 3DH, UK.
(2)PML Applications, Prospect Place, The Hoe, Plymouth, PL1 3DH, UK.
(3)Protein Technologies Ltd, Williams House, Lloyd St North, Manchester M15 6SE, 
UK.
(4)PriMove Infrastructure Development Consultants Pvt. Ltd, Paud Road, Pune, 411 
038, India.
(5)The Sewage Treatment Plant, Rajiv Gandhi Infotech Park, Hinjewadi, Pune,
Maharashtra, India.
(6)Cascade Designs, Inc. 4000 First Avenue South, Seattle, Washington, 98134,
USA.
(7)Beaumont Design, 232 Pouli Road, Kailua, Hawaii, 96734, USA.

It is estimated that approximately 1.1 billion people globally drink unsafe
water. We previously reported both a novel copper-alginate bead, which quickly
reduces pathogen loading in waste streams and the incorporation of these beads
into a novel swirl flow bioreactor (SFB), of low capital and running costs and of
simple construction from commercially available plumbing pipes and fittings. The 
purpose of the present study was to trial this system for pathogen reduction in
waste streams from an operating Dewats system in Hinjewadi, Pune, India and in
both simulated and real waste streams in Seattle, Washington, USA. The trials in 
India, showed a complete inactivation of coliforms in the discharged effluent
(Mean Log removal Value (MLRV) = 3.51), accompanied by a total inactivation of E.
coli with a MLRV of 1.95. The secondary clarifier effluent also showed a 4.38
MLRV in viable coliforms during treatment. However, the system was slightly less 
effective in reducing E. coli viability, with a MLRV of 1.80. The trials in
Seattle also demonstrated the efficacy of the system in the reduction of viable
bacteria, with a LRV of 5.67 observed of viable Raoultella terrigena cells
(100%).

DOI: 10.1038/srep09461 
PMCID: PMC4440980
PMID: 25999243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

