
1. J Innate Immun. 2015;7(6):601-11. doi: 10.1159/000398799. Epub 2015 May 20.

Thrombospondin 1 Modulates Monocyte Properties to Suppress Intestinal Mucosal
Inflammation.

Fang LL(1), Yu HQ, Wu RJ, He C, Li M, Yan H, Li JJ, Wang S, Liu ZG, Liu ZJ, Yang 
PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji
University, Shanghai, China.

Monocytes (Mos) play an important role in the pathogenesis of intestinal mucosal 
inflammation. This study aims to investigate the mechanism by which the
intestinal epithelial cell-derived thrombospondin 1 (TSP1) modulates Mo
properties and regulates intestinal inflammatory responses. In this study, the
production of TSP1 by intestinal epithelial cells was evaluated by quantitative
real-time PCR and Western blotting. The properties of Mos were analyzed by flow
cytometry. A mouse model of colitis was created to assess the role of
epithelium-derived TSP1 in the suppression of intestinal inflammation. The
results demonstrated that mouse intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) expressed
TSP1, which was markedly upregulated by butyrate or feeding with Clostridium
butyricum. Coculture of the butyrate-primed IECs and Mos or exposure of Mos to
TSP1 in the culture induced the expression of transforming growth factor (TGF)-β 
in Mos. These TGF-β+ Mos had tolerogenic properties that could promote generation
of inducible regulatory T cells. Adoptive transfer with TSP1-primed Mos, or
feeding C. butyricum could prevent experimental colitis in mice. In summary, C.
butyricum induces intestinal epithelial cells to produce TSP1 and induces TGF-β+ 
Mos, which further suppress experimental colitis in mice. The results implicate
that the administration of C. butyricum or butyrate may have the potential to
ameliorate chronic intestinal inflammation through inducing immunosuppressive
Mos.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000398799 
PMCID: PMC6738854
PMID: 25998580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

