
1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 10;290(28):17096-105. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.657866. Epub
2015 May 20.

Structural Basis for Avoidance of Promutagenic DNA Repair by MutY Adenine DNA
Glycosylase.

Wang L(1), Lee SJ(1), Verdine GL(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Chemistry and Chemical Biology.
(2)From the Departments of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Stem Cell and
Regenerative Biology, and Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138 gregory_verdine@harvard.edu.

The highly mutagenic A:oxoG (8-oxoguanine) base pair in DNA most frequently
arises by aberrant replication of the primary oxidative lesion C:oxoG. This
lesion is particularly insidious because neither of its constituent nucleobases
faithfully transmit genetic information from the original C:G base pair. Repair
of A:oxoG is initiated by adenine DNA glycosylase, which catalyzes hydrolytic
cleavage of the aberrant A nucleobase from the DNA backbone. These enzymes, MutY 
in bacteria and MUTYH in humans, scrupulously avoid processing of C:oxoG because 
cleavage of the C residue in C:oxoG would actually promote mutagenic conversion
to A:oxoG. Here we analyze the structural basis for rejection of C:oxoG by MutY, 
using a synthetic crystallography approach to capture the enzyme in the process
of inspecting the C:oxoG anti-substrate, with which it ordinarily binds only
fleetingly. We find that MutY uses two distinct strategies to avoid presentation 
of C to the enzyme active site. Firstly, MutY possesses an exo-site that serves
as a decoy for C, and secondly, repulsive forces with a key active site residue
prevent stable insertion of C into the nucleobase recognition pocket within the
enzyme active site.

Â© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.657866 
PMCID: PMC4498048
PMID: 25995449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

