
1. Brain Res. 2015 Sep 16;1620:17-28. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2015.05.011. Epub 2015
May 18.

Extracellular α-crystallin protects astrocytes from cell death through activation
of MAPK, PI3K/Akt signaling pathway and blockade of ROS release from
mitochondria.

Zhu Z(1), Li R(1), Stricker R(1), Reiser G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Neurobiochemie (Institut für Inflammation und Neurodegeneration),
Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Magdeburg, Medizinische Fakultät, Leipziger Straße 
44, Magdeburg 39120, Germany.
(2)Institut für Neurobiochemie (Institut für Inflammation und Neurodegeneration),
Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Magdeburg, Medizinische Fakultät, Leipziger Straße 
44, Magdeburg 39120, Germany. Electronic address: georg.reiser@med.ovgu.de.

α-Crystallin with two isoforms, αA-crystallin (HSPB4) and αB-crystallin (HSPB5), 
is found in eye lens, spleen, lung, kidney, cornea, skin, but also in brain.
Several studies revealed roles of αA/αB-crystallin in regulating cell viability
and protection in the central nervous system. We previously demonstrated that
α-crystallin serves as an intracellular protectant in astrocytes. Compared to
well-studied intracellular functions of α-crystallin, there is limited proof for 
the role of α-crystallin as extracellular protectant. In order to clarify
protective effects of extracellular αA/αB-crystallin, we exposed astrocytes to
the toxic agents, staurosporine or C2-ceramide, or serum-starvation in the
presence of αA/αB-crystallin. Extracellular αA/αB-crystallin protected astrocytes
from staurosporine- and C2-ceramide-induced cell death. In addition,
extracellular αB-crystallin/HSPB5 effectively promoted astrocytes viability
through phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (Akt)/mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
(ERK1/2), p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases (p38) and c-Jun N-terminal
kinases (JNK) signaling pathways under serum-deprivation. Furthermore,
αB-crystallin/HSPB5 decreases the staurosporine-mediated cleavage of caspase 3
through PI3K/Akt signaling preventing apoptosis of astrocytes. Thus, the current 
study indicates that extracellular αA/αB-crystallin protects astrocytes exposed
to various harmful stimuli. Furthermore, application of αB-crystallin/HSPB5 to
isolated rat brain mitochondria inhibits ROS generation induced by complex III
inhibition with Antimycin A.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2015.05.011 
PMID: 25998538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

