
1. J Exp Med. 2015 Jun 1;212(6):927-38. doi: 10.1084/jem.20142384. Epub 2015 May 25.

Aberrant actin depolymerization triggers the pyrin inflammasome and
autoinflammatory disease that is dependent on IL-18, not IL-1β.

Kim ML(1), Chae JJ(2), Park YH(2), De Nardo D(1), Stirzaker RA(3), Ko HJ(3), Tye 
H(3), Cengia L(3), DiRago L(3), Metcalf D(1), Roberts AW(1), Kastner DL(2), Lew
AM(1), Lyras D(4), Kile BT(1), Croker BA(5), Masters SL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Inflammation, Division of Cancer and Hematology, Division of
Immunology, and ACRF Chemical Biology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia Department of 
Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia.
(2)Inflammatory Disease Section, Metabolic, Cardiovascular, and Inflammatory
Disease Genomics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.
(3)Division of Inflammation, Division of Cancer and Hematology, Division of
Immunology, and ACRF Chemical Biology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800,
Australia.
(5)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115.
(6)Division of Inflammation, Division of Cancer and Hematology, Division of
Immunology, and ACRF Chemical Biology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia Department of 
Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia
masters@wehi.edu.au.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2015 Jun 1;212(6):829-30.

Gain-of-function mutations that activate the innate immune system can cause
systemic autoinflammatory diseases associated with increased IL-1β production.
This cytokine is activated identically to IL-18 by an intracellular protein
complex known as the inflammasome; however, IL-18 has not yet been specifically
implicated in the pathogenesis of hereditary autoinflammatory disorders. We have 
now identified an autoinflammatory disease in mice driven by IL-18, but not
IL-1β, resulting from an inactivating mutation of the actin-depolymerizing
cofactor Wdr1. This perturbation of actin polymerization leads to systemic
autoinflammation that is reduced when IL-18 is deleted but not when IL-1
signaling is removed. Remarkably, inflammasome activation in mature macrophages
is unaltered, but IL-18 production from monocytes is greatly exaggerated, and
depletion of monocytes in vivo prevents the disease. Small-molecule inhibition of
actin polymerization can remove potential danger signals from the system and
prevents monocyte IL-18 production. Finally, we show that the inflammasome sensor
of actin dynamics in this system requires caspase-1, apoptosis-associated
speck-like protein containing a caspase recruitment domain, and the innate immune
receptor pyrin. Previously, perturbation of actin polymerization by pathogens was
shown to activate the pyrin inflammasome, so our data now extend this guard
hypothesis to host-regulated actin-dependent processes and autoinflammatory
disease.

© 2015 Kim et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20142384 
PMCID: PMC4451132
PMID: 26008898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

