
1. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2015 Dec;96(3):475-82. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2015.05.002. Epub 2015 May 15.

Potential role of Escherichia coli DNA mismatch repair proteins in colon cancer.

Khan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nanomedicine & Biotechnology Research Unit, Department of Pharmaceutics,
College of Pharmacy, King Saud University, PO Box 2457, Riyadh 11451, Saudi
Arabia. Electronic address: khan.shahanavaj@gmail.com.

The epithelium of gastrointestinal tract organizes many innate defense systems
against microbial intruders such as integrity of epithelial, rapid eviction of
infected cells, quick turnover of epithelial cell, intrinsic immune responses and
autophagy. However, Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) are equipped with
well developed infectious tricks that evade the host defense systems and utilize 
the gastrointestinal epithelium as a multiplicative foothold. During
multiplication on and within the epithelium, EPEC secrete various toxins that can
weaken, usurp, and use many host cellular systems. However, the possible
mechanisms of pathogenesis are still poorly elusive. Recent study reveals the
existence of EPEC in colorectal cancer patients and their potential role in
depletion of DNA mismatch repair (MMR) proteins of host cell in colonic cell
lines. The EPEC colonised intracellularly in colon mucosa of colorectal carcinoma
whereas extracellular strain was detected in mucosa of normal colon cells.
Interestingly, alteration in MutS, MutL complexes and MUTYH of mammalian cells
may be involved in development of CRC. These data propose that MMR of E. coli may
be potential therapeutic targets and early detection biomarkers for CRC. This
article reviews the potential role of E. coli MutS, MutL and MutY protein in CRC 
aetiology.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2015.05.002 
PMID: 26014615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

