
1. PLoS One. 2015 May 26;10(5):e0128220. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128220.
eCollection 2015.

CD47 Promotes Protective Innate and Adaptive Immunity in a Mouse Model of
Disseminated Candidiasis.

Navarathna DH(1), Stein EV(2), Lessey-Morillon EC(1), Nayak D(3), Martin-Manso
G(1), Roberts DD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States of America.
(2)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States of America; Microbiology and
Immunology Program of the Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Departments of
Microbiology, Immunology and Tropical Medicine, George Washington University,
Washington, D.C. 20037, United States of America.
(3)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States of America.

CD47 is a widely expressed receptor that regulates immunity by engaging its
counter-receptor SIRPα on phagocytes and its secreted ligand thrombospondin-1.
Mice lacking CD47 can exhibit enhanced or impaired host responses to bacterial
pathogens, but its role in fungal immunity has not been examined. cd47-/- mice on
a C57BL/6 background showed significantly increased morbidity and mortality
following Candida albicans infection when compared with wild-type mice. Despite
normal fungal colonization at earlier times, cd47-/- mice at four days
post-infection had increased colonization of brain and kidneys accompanied by
stronger inflammatory reactions. Neutrophil and macrophage numbers were
significantly elevated in kidneys and neutrophils in the brains of infected
cd47-/- mice. However, no defect in phagocytic activity towards C. albicans was
observed in cd47-/- bone-marrow-derived macrophages, and neutrophil and
macrophage killing of C. albicans was not impaired. CD47-deficiency did not alter
the early humoral immune response to C. albicans. Th1, Th2, and Th17 population
of CD4+ T cells were expanded in the spleen, and gene expression profiles of
spleen and kidney showed stronger pro-inflammatory signaling in infected cd47-/- 
mice. The chemoattractant chemokines MIP-2α and MIP-2β were highly expressed in
infected spleens of cd47-/- mice. G-CSF, GM-CSF, and the inflammasome component
NLRP3 were more highly expressed in infected cd47-/- kidneys than in infected
wild-type controls. Circulating pro- (TNF-α, IL-6) and anti-inflammatory
cytokines (IL-10) were significantly elevated, but IL-17 was decreased. These
data indicate that CD47 plays protective roles against disseminated candidiasis
and alters pro-inflammatory and immunosuppressive pathways known to regulate
innate and T cell immunity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128220 
PMCID: PMC4444371
PMID: 26010544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

