
1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2014 Jul 2;1:14027. doi: 10.1038/mtm.2014.27.
eCollection 2014.

Introduction of a point mutation into an HLA class I single-chain trimer induces 
enhancement of CTL priming and antitumor immunity.

Matsui M(1), Kawano M(2), Matsushita S(3), Akatsuka T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Saitama Medical University , Iruma-gun, Saitama,
Japan.
(2)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Saitama Medical University , Iruma-gun, 
Saitama, Japan.
(3)Department of Allergy and Immunology, Saitama Medical University , Iruma-gun, 
Saitama, Japan ; Allergy Center, Saitama Medical University , Iruma-gun, Saitama,
Japan.

We previously discovered one particular HLA-A*02:01 mutant that enhanced
peptide-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) recognition in vitro compared to
wild-type HLA-A*02:01. This mutant contains a single amino acid substitution from
histidine to leucine at position 74 (H74L) that is located in the peptide-binding
groove. To investigate the effect of the H74L mutation on the in vivo CTL
priming, we took advantage of the technology of the HLA class I single-chain
trimer (SCT) in which three components involving a peptide, β2 microglobulin and 
the HLA class I heavy chain are joined together via flexible linkers. We
generated recombinant adenovirus expressing SCT comprised influenza A matrix
protein (FMP)-derived peptide, β2 microglobulin and the H74L heavy chain.
HLA-A*02:01 transgenic mice were immunized with the adenovirus, and the induction
of peptide-specific CTLs and antitumor immunity was investigated. It was clearly 
shown that the H74L mutation enabled the HLA-A*02:01 SCT molecule to dramatically
enhance both in vivo priming of FMP-specific CTLs and protection against a lethal
challenge of tumor cells expressing FMP. These data present the first evidence
that a simple point mutation in the HLA class I heavy chain of SCT is beneficial 
for improving CTL-based immunotherapy and prophylaxis to control tumors.

DOI: 10.1038/mtm.2014.27 
PMCID: PMC4362367
PMID: 26015969 

