
1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2014 Jun 18;1:14023. doi: 10.1038/mtm.2014.23.
eCollection 2014.

Prevention of adverse events of interferon γ gene therapy by gene delivery of
interferon γ-heparin-binding domain fusion protein in mice.

Ando M(1), Takahashi Y(1), Yamashita T(1), Fujimoto M(1), Nishikawa M(1),
Watanabe Y(2), Takakura Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutics and Drug Metabolism , Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University , Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kyoto University , Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

Sustained gene delivery of interferon (IFN) γ can be an effective treatment, but 
our previous study showed high levels of IFNγ-induced adverse events, including
the loss of body weight. These unwanted events could be reduced by
target-specific delivery of IFNγ after in vivo gene transfer. To achieve this, we
selected the heparin-binding domain (HBD) of extracellular superoxide dismutase
as a molecule to anchor IFNγ to the cell surface. We designed three IFNγ
derivatives, IFNγ-HBD1, IFNγ-HBD2, and IFNγ-HBD3, each of which had 1, 2, or 3
HBDs, respectively. Each plasmid-encoding fusion proteins was delivered to the
liver, a model target in this study, by hydrodynamic tail vein injection. The
serum concentration of IFNγ-HBD2 and IFNγ-HBD3 after gene delivery was lower than
that of IFNγ or IFNγ-HBD1. Gene delivery of IFNγ-HBD2, but not of IFNγ-HBD3,
effectively increased the mRNA expression of IFNγ-inducible genes in the liver,
suggesting liver-specific distribution of IFNγ-HBD2. Gene delivery of
IFNγ-HBD2-suppressed tumor growth in the liver as efficiently as that of IFNγ
with much less symptoms of adverse effects. These results indicate that the
adverse events of IFNγ gene transfer can be prevented by gene delivery of
IFNγ-HBD2, a fusion protein with high cell surface affinity.

DOI: 10.1038/mtm.2014.23 
PMCID: PMC4362348
PMID: 26015966 

