
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2012 Nov;1(11):e39. doi: 10.1038/emi.2012.37. Epub 2012
Nov 7.

Identification and characterization of a novel incompatibility group X3 plasmid
carrying bla NDM-1 in Enterobacteriaceae isolates with epidemiological links to
multiple geographical areas in China.

Ho PL(1), Li Z(2), Lo WU(2), Cheung YY(2), Lin CH(3), Sham PC(3), Cheng VC(4), Ng
TK(5), Que TL(6), Chow KH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong, China ;
Carol Yu Center for Infection, The University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong, China.
(3)Centre for Genomic Sciences, The University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong, China.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Queen Mary Hospital, Hospital Authority , Hong
Kong, China.
(5)Department of Clinical Pathology, Princess Margaret Hospital, Hospital
Authority , Hong Kong, China.
(6)Department of Clinical Pathology, Tuen Mun Hospital, Hospital Authority , Hong
Kong, China.

The New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase (NDM-1) is one of the most important resistance
traits in Enterobacteriaceae. We characterized nine bla NDM-1 producing
Enterobacteriaceae recovered from seven patients who have recently travelled or
been treated in India (n=1) or mainland China (n=6) during December 2010-May
2012. All the China-linked patients had no links to the Indian subcontinent. The 
bla NDM-1 carrying plasmids belonged to the novel IncX3 (∼50 kb, in seven
isolates including two Escherichia coli, two Klebsiella pneumoniae, one
Citrobacter freundii, one Enterobacter aerogenes and one E. cloacae), IncA/C2
(∼140 kb, in one E. coli) or FII-F1B groups (∼110 kb, in one E. coli).
Restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis of the seven IncX3 plasmids
revealed identical pattern in six and two bands difference in the remaining one. 
The IncX3 plasmids carrying bla NDM-1 were epidemiologically linked to Guangzhou 
(n=1), Hunan (n=4), Haifeng (n=1) and Dongguan (n=1) in mainland China. Complete 
sequencing of the IncX3 plasmid pNDM-HN380 revealed that it was 54 035 bp long
and encoded 52 open reading frames. The bla NDM-1 gene was found in a
transposon-like structure flanked by ISAba125 and IS26, inserted into the plasmid
genetic load region. The sequences of the bla NDM-1 containing module within the 
two IS elements were identical to those previously described for bla
NDM-1-positive Tn125 in the plasmids or chromosome of Acinetobacter isolates. In 
summary, this is the first description of IncX3 plasmids carrying bla NDM-1. The 
findings indicate the worrisome involvement of an epidemic plasmid in the
dissemination of NDM-1 in China.

DOI: 10.1038/emi.2012.37 
PMCID: PMC3630922
PMID: 26038408 

