
1. Immunology. 2015 Sep;146(1):1-10. doi: 10.1111/imm.12485. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

Natural killer T cells in multiple sclerosis and its animal model, experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Van Kaer L(1), Wu L(1), Parekh VV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disease that causes
demyelination of neurons in the central nervous system. Traditional therapies for
MS have involved anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive drugs with significant
side effects that often only provide short-term relief. A more desirable outcome 
of immunotherapy would be to protect against disease before its clinical
manifestation or to halt disease after its initiation. One attractive approach to
accomplish this goal would be to restore tolerance by targeting immunoregulatory 
cell networks. Although much of the work in this area has focused on CD4(+)
Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells, other studies have investigated natural killer T
(NKT) cells, a subset of T cells that recognizes glycolipid antigens in the
context of the CD1d glycoprotein. Studies with human MS patients have revealed
alterations in the numbers and functions of NKT cells, which have been partially 
supported by studies with the experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis model of 
MS. Additional studies have shown that activation of NKT cells with synthetic
lipid antigens can, at least under certain experimental conditions, protect mice 
against the development of MS-like disease. Although mechanisms of this
protection remain to be fully investigated, current evidence suggests that it
involves interactions with other immunoregulatory cell types such as regulatory T
cells and immunosuppressive myeloid cells. These studies have provided a strong
foundation for the rational design of NKT-cell-based immunotherapies for MS that 
induce tolerance while sparing overall immune function. Nevertheless, additional 
pre-clinical and clinical studies will be required to bring this goal to
fruition.

Â© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.12485 
PMCID: PMC4552496
PMID: 26032048  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

