
1. J Food Prot. 2015 Jun;78(6):1182-5. doi: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-14-475.

Improvements to a PCR-Based Serogrouping Scheme for Salmonella enterica from
Dairy Farm Samples.

Karns JS(1), Haley BJ(2), Van Kessel JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Henry A.
Wallace Agricultural Research Center, Environmental Microbial and Food Safety
Laboratory, Beltsville, Maryland 20705, USA. jeffrey.karns@ars.usda.gov.
(2)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Henry A.
Wallace Agricultural Research Center, Environmental Microbial and Food Safety
Laboratory, Beltsville, Maryland 20705, USA.

Molecular serotyping through the use of PCR is a simple and useful technique for 
characterizing isolates of Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica belonging to
serogroups B, C1, C2, D1, and E1, which are the majority of the isolates
associated with human disease outbreaks. However, many of the Salmonella strains 
currently isolated from dairy farms in the northeastern United States are serovar
Cerro, a group K strain not detected by this assay. Primers from a well-known PCR
assay for the identification of Salmonella were added to a commonly used
serotyping assay so that strains, such as Salmonella Cerro, that do not produce
bands in the original assay can be confirmed as belonging to S. enterica subsp.
enterica. The modified assay frequently misidentified the serogroup of Salmonella
Mbandaka isolates because of failure to amplify the wzxC1 amplicon. Therefore,
the reverse primer for the wzxC1 target was modified based on in silico analysis 
to provide consistent classification of Salmonella Mbandaka as belonging to
serogroup C1. These two modifications to the serogrouping PCR method enhance the 
utility of the method for characterizing Salmonella isolates.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-14-475 
PMID: 26038910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

