
1. J Aquat Anim Health. 2015 Jun;27(2):135-43. doi: 10.1080/08997659.2015.1032440.

Oral Vaccination of Channel Catfish against Enteric Septicemia of Catfish Using a
Live Attenuated Edwardsiella ictaluri Isolate.

Wise DJ(1), Greenway TE, Byars TS, Griffin MJ, Khoo LH.

Author information: 
(1)a Thad Cochran National Warmwater Aquaculture Center, Mississippi Agricultural
and Forestry Experiment Station , Mississippi State University , Post Office Box 
197, Stoneville , Mississippi 38776 , USA.

Enteric septicemia of catfish (ESC), caused by Edwardsiella ictaluri, is the most
problematic bacterial disease affecting catfish aquaculture in the southeastern
United States. Efforts to develop an effective ESC vaccine have had limited
industrial success. In commercial settings, ESC vaccines are typically
administered by immersion when fry are transferred from the hatchery to rearing
ponds. While this approach is a practical method of mass delivery, this strategy 
administers vaccines to very young fish, which lack a fully developed immune
system. To circumvent this limitation, an oral vaccination strategy was evaluated
as a means of immunizing catfish at the fingerling stage of production, when fish
possess a more complete immune arsenal. A virulent E. ictaluri isolate (S97-773) 
was attenuated by successive passage on media containing increasing
concentrations of rifamycin. In laboratory trials, cultured vaccine was diluted
and mixed with feed (100 mL diluted vaccine/454 g feed). This mixture was then
fed to Channel Catfish Ictalurus punctatus fingerlings. Two separate dilutions of
cultured vaccine (1:10 and 1:100) were used to create the vaccine-feed mixture,
equating to estimated doses of 5 × 10⁷ and 5 × 10⁶ CFU/g of feed, respectively.
After 30 d, catfish were exposed by immersion (1 × 10⁶ CFU/mL) to the virulent
parental strain of E. ictaluri. The target dose (1:100 dilution, ∼5 × 10⁶ CFU/g
of feed) offered exceptional protection (relative percent survival = 82.6-100%). 
In addition, negligible deaths occurred in fish vaccinated at 10 times the target
dose (1:10 dilution, ∼5 × 10⁷ CFU/g of feed). In pond trials, antibody production
increased 18-fold in orally vaccinated fish. When compared with nonvaccinated
controls, vaccination significantly improved survival, feed fed, feed conversion,
biomass produced, and total harvest. This research demonstrates Channel Catfish
can be successfully immunized in a commercial setting against E. ictaluri with a 
single dose of an orally delivered, live attenuated, E. ictaluri vaccine.

DOI: 10.1080/08997659.2015.1032440 
PMID: 26030354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

