
1. Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res. 2015 Apr-Jun;764:43-50. doi:
10.1016/j.mrrev.2015.02.001. Epub 2015 Feb 16.

Error-free DNA-damage tolerance in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Xu X(1), Blackwell S(2), Lin A(3), Li F(3), Qin Z(3), Xiao W(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University, Beijing, 100048, China;
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
SK, Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
(3)College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University, Beijing, 100048, China.
(4)College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University, Beijing, 100048, China;
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
SK, Canada. Electronic address: wei.xiao@usask.ca.

DNA-damage tolerance (DDT) is an important mechanism for living cells to bypass
replication blocks on the template strand. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, DDT is
mediated by the RAD6 epistasis group of genes, consisting of two parallel
pathways: error-prone translesion DNA synthesis (TLS), and error-free lesion
bypass. The two pathways are activated by sequential ubiquitination of PCNA on
the Lys164 residue. When a replication fork is stalled at a lesion, PCNA is first
monoubiquitinated by Rad6-Rad18, which leads to the TLS pathway. The subsequent
ubiquitination by the Mms2-Ubc13-Rad5 complex on the monoubiquitinated PCNA is to
form a Lys63-linked polyubiquitin chain that promotes error-free lesion bypass.
While the TLS pathway has been extensively characterized, the molecular events
leading to error-free lesion bypass by polyubiquitinated PCNA are largely
obscure. Furthermore, PCNA can also be sumoylated at the same Lys164 residue,
which helps to recruit Srs2, a helicase and anti-recombinase. This review
summarizes recent advances in our understanding of error-free DDT and its
interplay with Srs2 and homologous recombination.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2015.02.001 
PMID: 26041265  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

