
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Aug 15;81(16):5449-57. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01529-15.
Epub 2015 Jun 5.

Identification of a Chemoreceptor for C2 and C3 Carboxylic Acids.

García V(1), Reyes-Darias JA(1), Martín-Mora D(1), Morel B(1), Matilla MA(1),
Krell T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Protection, Estación Experimental del Zaidín,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Granada, Spain.
(2)Department of Environmental Protection, Estación Experimental del Zaidín,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Granada, Spain
tino.krell@eez.csic.es.

Chemoreceptors are at the beginnings of chemosensory signaling cascades that
mediate chemotaxis. Most bacterial chemoreceptors are functionally unannotated
and are characterized by a diversity in the structure of their ligand binding
domains (LBDs). The data available indicate that there are two major
chemoreceptor families at the functional level, namely, those that respond to
amino acids or to Krebs cycle intermediates. Since pseudomonads show chemotaxis
to many different compounds and possess different types of chemoreceptors, they
are model organisms to establish relationships between chemoreceptor structure
and function. Here, we identify PP2861 (termed McpP) of Pseudomonas putida KT2440
as a chemoreceptor with a novel ligand profile. We show that the recombinant McpP
LBD recognizes acetate, pyruvate, propionate, and l-lactate, with KD (equilibrium
dissociation constant) values ranging from 34 to 107 μM. Deletion of the mcpP
gene resulted in a dramatic reduction in chemotaxis toward these ligands, and
complementation restored a native-like phenotype, indicating that McpP is the
major chemoreceptor for these compounds. McpP has a CACHE-type LBD, and we
present data indicating that CACHE-containing chemoreceptors of other species
also mediate taxis to C2 and C3 carboxylic acids. In addition, the LBD of NbaY of
Pseudomonas fluorescens, an McpP homologue mediating chemotaxis to
2-nitrobenzoate, bound neither nitrobenzoates nor the McpP ligands. This work
provides further insight into receptor structure-function relationships and will 
be helpful to annotate chemoreceptors of other bacteria.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01529-15 
PMCID: PMC4510177
PMID: 26048936  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

