
1. J Basic Microbiol. 2015 Oct;55(10):1179-90. doi: 10.1002/jobm.201500010. Epub
2015 Jun 8.

Assessment of rhizospheric culturable bacteria of Phragmites australis and Juncus
effusus from polluted sites.

Pereira SI(1), Pires C(1)(2), Henriques I(3), Correia A(3), Magan N(2), Castro
PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)CBQF - Centro de Biotecnologia e Qu, í, mica Fina - Laboratório Associado,
Escola Superior de Biotecnologia, Universidade Católica Portuguesa/Porto, Porto, 
Portugal.
(2)Cranfield Health, Cranfield University, Cranfield, Bedford, England.
(3)Department of Biology & CESAM (Center for Environmental and Marine Studies),
University of Aveiro, Campus Universit, á, rio de Santiago, Aveiro, Portugal.

This study aimed at the isolation and characterization of metal(loid)-tolerant
bacteria from the rhizosphere of Phragmites australis and Juncus effusus plants
growing in two long-term contaminated sites in Northern Portugal. Site 1 had
higher contamination than Site 3. Bacteria were isolated using
metal(loid)-supplemented (Cd, Zn, and As) media. Isolates were grouped by random 
amplified polymorphic DNA and identified by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Strains
were also examined for their metal(loid) tolerance. The counts of
metal(loid)-tolerant bacteria were higher in Site 1 and ranged between log
7.17 CFU g(-1) soil in As-containing medium and log 7.57 CFU g(-1) soil in
Zn-containing medium, while counts at Site 3 varied between log 5.33 CFU g(-1)
soil in Cd-containing medium and log 6.97 CFU g(-1) soil in As-containing medium.
The composition of bacterial populations varied between locations. In Site 1, the
classes Actinobacteria (36%) and Bacilli (24%) were well represented, while in
Site 3 strains were mainly affiliated to classes Actinobacteria (35%),
γ-Proteobacteria (35%), and β-Proteobacteria (12%). The order of metal(loid)
toxicity for the isolated strains was Cd > As > Zn. Overall, 10 strains grew at
500 mg Cd L(-1) , 1000 mg Zn L(-1) , and 500 mg As L(-1) , being considered the
most metal(loid)-tolerant bacteria. These strains belonged to genera Cupriavidus,
Burkholderia, Novosphingobium, Sphingobacterium, Castellaniella, Mesorhizobium,
Chryseobacterium, and Rhodococcus and were mainly retrieved from Site 1. The
multiple metal(loid)-tolerant strains isolated in this study have potential to be
used in bioremediation/phytoremediation.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.201500010 
PMID: 26059184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

