
1. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2015 Jun;71(Pt 6):1307-18. doi:
10.1107/S1399004715005945. Epub 2015 May 14.

The structure of Aquifex aeolicus FtsH in the ADP-bound state reveals a
C2-symmetric hexamer.

Vostrukhina M(1), Popov A(2), Brunstein E(3), Lanz MA(1), Baumgartner R(1),
Bieniossek C(1), Schacherl M(3), Baumann U(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Bern, Freiestrasse 3, 
Bern, CH-3012, Switzerland.
(2)European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, 6 Rue Jules Horowitz, Grenoble,
F-38043, France.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Cologne, Otto-Fischer-Strasse 12-14, 
Cologne, D-50674, Germany.

The crystal structure of a truncated, soluble quadruple mutant of FtsH from
Aquifex aeolicus comprising the AAA and protease domains has been determined at
2.96 Å resolution in space group I222. The protein crystallizes as a hexamer,
with the protease domain forming layers in the ab plane. Contacts between these
layers are mediated by the AAA domains. These are highly disordered in one
crystal form, but are clearly visible in a related form with a shorter c axis.
Here, adenosine diphosphate (ADP) is bound to each subunit and the AAA ring
exhibits twofold symmetry. The arrangement is different from the ADP-bound state 
of an analogously truncated, soluble FtsH construct from Thermotoga maritima. The
pore is completely closed and the phenylalanine residues in the pore line a
contiguous path. The protease hexamer is very similar to those described for
other FtsH structures. To resolve certain open issues regarding a conserved
glycine in the linker between the AAA and protease domains, as well as the
active-site switch β-strand, mutations have been introduced in the full-length
membrane-bound protein. Activity analysis of these point mutants reveals the
crucial importance of these residues for proteolytic activity and is in accord
with previous interpretation of the active-site switch and the importance of the 
linker glycine residue.

DOI: 10.1107/S1399004715005945 
PMID: 26057670  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

