
1. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2015 Aug;4(8):878-86. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2014-0213. Epub
2015 Jun 10.

Gaucher Disease-Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Display Decreased Erythroid
Potential and Aberrant Myelopoiesis.

Sgambato JA(1), Park TS(1), Miller D(1), Panicker LM(1), Sidransky E(1), Lun
Y(1), Awad O(1), Bentzen SM(1), Zambidis ET(1), Feldman RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Division of Biostatistics and
Bioinformatics, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA; Division of Pediatric
Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA; Medical Genetics
Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Division of Biostatistics and
Bioinformatics, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA; Division of Pediatric
Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA; Medical Genetics
Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA
rfeldman@som.umaryland.edu.

Gaucher disease (GD) is the most common lysosomal storage disease resulting from 
mutations in the lysosomal enzyme glucocerebrosidase (GCase). The hematopoietic
abnormalities in GD include the presence of characteristic Gaucher macrophages
that infiltrate patient tissues and cytopenias. At present, it is not clear
whether these cytopenias are secondary to the pathological activity of Gaucher
cells or a direct effect of GCase deficiency on hematopoietic development. To
address this question, we differentiated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)
derived from patients with types 1, 2, and 3 GD to
CD34(+)/CD45(+)/CD43(+)/CD143(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) and
examined their developmental potential. The formation of GD-HPCs was unaffected. 
However, these progenitors demonstrated a skewed lineage commitment, with
increased myeloid differentiation and decreased erythroid differentiation and
maturation. Interestingly, myeloid colony-formation assays revealed that GD-HPCs,
but not control-HPCs, gave rise to adherent, macrophage-like cells, another
indication of abnormal myelopoiesis. The extent of these hematologic
abnormalities correlated with the severity of the GCase mutations. All the
phenotypic abnormalities of GD-HPCs observed were reversed by incubation with
recombinant GCase, indicating that these developmental defects were caused by the
mutated GCase. Our results show that GCase deficiency directly impairs
hematopoietic development. Additionally, our results suggest that aberrant
myelopoiesis might contribute to the pathological properties of Gaucher
macrophages, which are central to GD manifestations. The hematopoietic
developmental defects we observed reflect hematologic abnormalities in patients
with GD, demonstrating the utility of GD-iPSCs for modeling this disease.

Â©AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.5966/sctm.2014-0213 
PMCID: PMC4511143
PMID: 26062980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

