
1. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Sep;45(9):2683-93. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445219. Epub 2015 Jun 
26.

Increased expression of TLR2 in CD4(+) T cells from SLE patients enhances immune 
reactivity and promotes IL-17 expression through histone modifications.

Liu Y(1), Liao J(1), Zhao M(1), Wu H(1), Yung S(2), Chan TM(2), Yoshimura A(3),
Lu Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenomics, Changsha, Hunan, P. R. China.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Queen
Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

The innate immune system has been shown to play an important pathologic role in
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). TLR2, a PRR, recognizes exogenous PAMPs, and 
endogenous damage-associated molecular patterns and has been implicated in the
initiation and maintenance of the perpetuated inflammatory reactions in
autoimmune diseases. Here, we report increased expression of TLR2 in CD4(+) and
CD8(+) T cells, CD19(+) B cells, and CD14(+) monocytes from SLE patients.
Conventional treatment, such as hydroxychloroquine and corticosteroids, showed no
effect on TLR2 expression in CD4(+) T cells from SLE patients. In vitro
stimulation of TLR2 in CD4(+) T cells from SLE patients increased CD40L and CD70 
expression, as well as secretion of IL-6, IL-17A, IL-17F, and TNF-α, while Foxp3 
transcription decreased. This effect was reversed by TLR2 siRNA. Moreover, TLR2
activation upregulated H3K4 tri-methylation and H4 acetylation levels while
downregulated H3K9 tri-methylation level in the IL-17A promoter region. In
addition, it also increased H4 acetylation levels and decreased H3K9
tri-methylation levels in the IL-17F promoter region. In summary, our findings
demonstrate that increased expression of TLR2 contributes to immune reactivity
and promotes IL-17A and IL-17F expression through histone modifications in SLE.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201445219 
PMID: 26079624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

