
1. Org Biomol Chem. 2015 Jul 21;13(27):7542-50. doi: 10.1039/c5ob00867k.

Synthesis of 2-deoxy-2,2-difluoro-α-maltosyl fluoride and its X-ray structure in 
complex with Streptomyces coelicolor GlgEI-V279S.

Thanna S(1), Lindenberger JJ, Gaitonde VV, Ronning DR, Sucheck SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Toledo, 2801 W.
Bancroft Street, MS602, Toledo, OH, USA 43606. donald.ronning@utoledo.edu
steve.sucheck@utoledo.edu.

Erratum in
    Org Biomol Chem. 2015 Aug 7;13(29):8080.

Streptomyces coelicolor (Sco) GlgEI is a glycoside hydrolase involved in α-glucan
biosynthesis and can be used as a model enzyme for structure-based inhibitor
design targeting Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) GlgE. The latter is a
genetically validated drug target for the development of anti-Tuberculosis (TB)
treatments. Inhibition of Mtb GlgE results in a lethal buildup of the GlgE
substrate maltose-1-phosphate (M1P). However, Mtb GlgE is difficult to
crystallize and affords lower resolution X-ray structures. Sco GlgEI-V279S on the
other hand crystallizes readily, produces high resolution X-ray data, and has
active site topology identical to Mtb GlgE. We report the X-ray structure of Sco 
GlgEI-V279S in complex with 2-deoxy-2,2-difluoro-α-maltosyl fluoride (α-MTF, 5)
at 2.3 Å resolution. α-MTF was designed as a non-hydrolysable mimic of M1P to
probe the active site of GlgE1 prior to covalent bond formation without
disruption of catalytic residues. The α-MTF complex revealed hydrogen bonding
between Glu423 and the C1F which provides evidence that Glu423 functions as
proton donor during catalysis. Further, hydrogen bonding between Arg392 and the
axial C2 difluoromethylene moiety of α-MTF was observed suggesting that the C2
position tolerates substitution with hydrogen bond acceptors. The key step in the
synthesis of α-MDF was transformation of peracetylated 2-fluoro-maltal 1 into
peracetylated 2,2-difluoro-α-maltosyl fluoride 2 in a single step via the use of 
Selectfluor®.

DOI: 10.1039/c5ob00867k 
PMCID: PMC4489993
PMID: 26072729  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

