
1. Biophys J. 2015 Jun 16;108(12):2865-75. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2015.05.016.

Nanoscale Pulling of Type IV Pili Reveals Their Flexibility and Adhesion to
Surfaces over Extended Lengths of the Pili.

Lu S(1), Giuliani M(1), Harvey H(2), Burrows LL(2), Wickham RA(1), Dutcher JR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Science, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Physics, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
Electronic address: dutcher@uoguelph.ca.

Type IV pili (T4P) are very thin protein filaments that extend from and retract
into bacterial cells, allowing them to interact with and colonize a broad array
of chemically diverse surfaces. The physical aspects that allow T4P to mediate
adherence to many different surfaces remain unclear. Atomic force microscopy
(AFM) nanoscale pulling experiments were used to measure the mechanical
properties of T4P of a mutant strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 unable to
retract its T4P. After adhering bacteria to the end of an AFM cantilever and
approaching surfaces of mica, gold, or polystyrene, we observed adhesion of the
T4P to all of the surfaces. Pulling of single and multiple T4P on retraction of
the cantilever from the surfaces could be described using the worm-like chain
(WLC) model. Distinct peaks in the measured distributions of the best-fit values 
of the persistence length Lp on two different surfaces provide strong evidence
for close-packed bundling of very flexible T4P. In addition, we observed force
plateaus indicating that adhesion of the T4P to both hydrophilic and hydrophobic 
surfaces occurs along extended lengths of the T4P. These data shed new light, to 
our knowledge, on T4P flexibility and support a low-affinity, high-avidity
adhesion mechanism that mediates bacteria-surface interactions.

Copyright Â© 2015 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2015.05.016 
PMCID: PMC4472224
PMID: 26083926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

