
1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Jun 17;11(6):e1004946. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004946.
eCollection 2015 Jun.

Virulence Factors of Pseudomonas aeruginosa Induce Both the Unfolded Protein and 
Integrated Stress Responses in Airway Epithelial Cells.

van 't Wout EF(1), van Schadewijk A(2), van Boxtel R(3), Dalton LE(4), Clarke
HJ(4), Tommassen J(3), Marciniak SJ(4), Hiemstra PS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, the
Netherlands; Cambridge Institute for Medical Research (CIMR), University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, the
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the
Netherlands.
(4)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research (CIMR), University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection can be disastrous in chronic lung diseases such 
as cystic fibrosis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Its toxic effects
are largely mediated by secreted virulence factors including pyocyanin, elastase 
and alkaline protease (AprA). Efficient functioning of the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) is crucial for cell survival and appropriate immune responses, while an
excess of unfolded proteins within the ER leads to "ER stress" and activation of 
the "unfolded protein response" (UPR). Bacterial infection and Toll-like receptor
activation trigger the UPR most likely due to the increased demand for protein
folding of inflammatory mediators. In this study, we show that cell-free
conditioned medium of the PAO1 strain of P. aeruginosa, containing secreted
virulence factors, induces ER stress in primary bronchial epithelial cells as
evidenced by splicing of XBP1 mRNA and induction of CHOP, GRP78 and GADD34
expression. Most aspects of the ER stress response were dependent on TAK1 and p38
MAPK, except for the induction of GADD34 mRNA. Using various mutant strains and
purified virulence factors, we identified pyocyanin and AprA as inducers of ER
stress. However, the induction of GADD34 was mediated by an ER stress-independent
integrated stress response (ISR) which was at least partly dependent on the
iron-sensing eIF2Î± kinase HRI. Our data strongly suggest that this increased
GADD34 expression served to protect against Pseudomonas-induced, iron-sensitive
cell cytotoxicity. In summary, virulence factors from P. aeruginosa induce ER
stress in airway epithelial cells and also trigger the ISR to improve cell
survival of the host.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004946 
PMCID: PMC4471080
PMID: 26083346  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

