
1. Microbes Infect. 2015 Sep;17(9):622-7. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2015.06.002. Epub
2015 Jun 16.

The receptor for advanced glycation end products promotes bacterial growth at
distant body sites in Staphylococcus aureus skin infection.

Achouiti A(1), Van't Veer C(2), de Vos AF(2), van der Poll T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center for Infection and
Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands. Electronic address: a.achouiti@amc.nl.
(2)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center for Infection and
Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Center for Infection and
Immunity Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands; Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The receptor for advanced glycation endproducts (RAGE) has been implicated in the
regulation of skin inflammation. We here sought to study the role of RAGE in host
defense during skin infection caused by Staphylococcus (S.) aureus, the most
common pathogen in this condition. Wild-type (Wt) and RAGE deficient (rage(-/-)) 
mice were infected subcutaneously with S. aureus and bacterial loads and local
inflammation were quantified at regular intervals up to 8 days after infection.
While bacterial burdens were similar in both mouse strains at the primary site of
infection, rage(-/-) mice had lower bacterial counts in lungs and liver. Skin
cytokine and chemokine levels did not differ between groups. In accordance with
the skin model, direct intravenous infection with S. aureus was associated with
lower bacterial loads in lungs and liver of rage(-/-) mice. Together these data
suggest that RAGE does not impact local host defense during S. aureus skin
infection, but facilitates bacterial growth at distant body sites.

Copyright Â© 2015 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2015.06.002 
PMID: 26086798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

