
1. Cancer Discov. 2015 Sep;5(9):988-1003. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-15-0298. Epub
2015 Jun 19.

Mass Cytometric Functional Profiling of Acute Myeloid Leukemia Defines Cell-Cycle
and Immunophenotypic Properties That Correlate with Known Responses to Therapy.

Behbehani GK(1), Samusik N(2), Bjornson ZB(2), Fantl WJ(3), Medeiros BC(4), Nolan
GP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California.
Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California. Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford, California.
(2)Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California.
(3)Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California.
Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California.
(4)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, California. Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford, California.
(5)Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California.
gnolan@stanford.edu.

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2015 Sep;5(9):912-4.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is characterized by a high relapse rate that has
been attributed to the quiescence of leukemia stem cells (LSC), which renders
them resistant to chemotherapy. However, this hypothesis is largely supported by 
indirect evidence and fails to explain the large differences in relapse rates
across AML subtypes. To address this, bone marrow aspirates from 41 AML patients 
and five healthy donors were analyzed by high-dimensional mass cytometry. All
patients displayed immunophenotypic and intracellular signaling abnormalities
within CD34(+)CD38(lo) populations, and several karyotype- and genotype-specific 
surface marker patterns were identified. The immunophenotypic stem and early
progenitor cell populations from patients with clinically favorable core-binding 
factor AML demonstrated a 5-fold higher fraction of cells in S-phase compared
with other AML samples. Conversely, LSCs in less clinically favorable FLT3-ITD
AML exhibited dramatic reductions in S-phase fraction. Mass cytometry also
allowed direct observation of the in vivo effects of cytotoxic
chemotherapy.SIGNIFICANCE: The mechanisms underlying differences in relapse rates
across AML subtypes are poorly understood. This study suggests that known
chemotherapy sensitivities of common AML subsets are mediated by cell-cycle
differences among LSCs and provides a basis for using in vivo functional
characterization of AML cells to inform therapy selection.

Â©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-15-0298 
PMCID: PMC4652947
PMID: 26091827  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

