
1. Immunobiology. 2015 Oct;220(10):1141-50. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2015.06.006. Epub
2015 Jun 17.

Borrelia burgdorferi clinical isolates induce human innate immune responses that 
are not dependent on genotype.

Mason LM(1), Herkes EA(2), Krupna-Gaylord MA(3), Oei A(4), van der Poll T(2),
Wormser GP(5), Schwartz I(3), Petzke MM(3), Hovius JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: l.m.mason@amc.uva.nl.
(2)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York Medical College, Valhalla,
NY, USA.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(5)Division of Infectious Disease, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA.

Borrelia burgdorferi can be categorized based on restriction fragment length
polymorphism analysis into ribosomal spacer type (RST) 1, 2 and 3. A correlation 
between RST type and invasiveness of Borrelia isolates has been demonstrated in
clinical studies and experimental models, and RST 1 isolates are more likely to
cause disseminated disease than RST 3 isolates. We hypothesized that this could
partially be due to increased susceptibility of RST 3 isolates to killing by the 
innate immune system early in infection. Thus, we investigated the interaction of
five RST 1 and five RST 3 isolates with various components of the human innate
immune system in vitro. RST 3 isolates induced significantly greater upregulation
of activation markers in monocyte-derived dendritic cells compared to RST 1
isolates at a low multiplicity of infection. However, RST 1 isolates stimulated
greater interleukin-6 production. At a high multiplicity of infection no
differences in dendritic cell activation or cytokine production were observed. In
addition, we observed no differences in the ability of RST 1 and RST 3 isolates
to activate monocytes or neutrophils and all strains were phagocytosed at a
comparable rate. Finally, all isolates tested were equally resistant to
complement-mediated killing, as determined by dark-field microscopy and a growth 
inhibition assay. In conclusion, we demonstrate that the RST 1 and 3 isolates
showed no distinction in their susceptibility to the various components of the
human immune system studied here, suggesting that other factors are responsible
for their differential invasiveness.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2015.06.006 
PMID: 26093919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

