
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 19;10(6):e0131054. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131054.
eCollection 2015.

Molecular Characterization of Notch1 Positive Progenitor Cells in the Developing 
Retina.

Dvoriantchikova G(1), Perea-Martinez I(1), Pappas S(1), Barry AF(1), Danek D(1), 
Dvoriantchikova X(1), Pelaez D(2), Ivanov D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of America.
(2)Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of America; Department
of Biomedical Engineering, University of Miami, Coral Gables, Florida, United
States of America.
(3)Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of America; Department
of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, Florida, United States of America.

The oscillatory expression of Notch signaling in neural progenitors suggests that
both repressors and activators of neural fate specification are expressed in the 
same progenitors. Since Notch1 regulates photoreceptor differentiation and
contributes (together with Notch3) to ganglion cell fate specification, we
hypothesized that genes encoding photoreceptor and ganglion cell fate activators 
would be highly expressed in Notch1 receptor-bearing (Notch1+) progenitors,
directing these cells to differentiate into photoreceptors or into ganglion cells
when Notch1 activity is diminished. To identify these genes, we used microarray
analysis to study expression profiles of whole retinas and isolated from them
Notch1+ cells at embryonic day 14 (E14) and postnatal day 0 (P0). To isolate
Notch1+ cells, we utilized immunomagnetic cell separation. We also used Notch3
knockout (Notch3KO) animals to evaluate the contribution of Notch3 signaling in
ganglion cell differentiation. Hierarchical clustering of 6,301 differentially
expressed genes showed that Notch1+ cells grouped near the same developmental
stage retina cluster. At E14, we found higher expression of repressors (Notch1,
Hes5) and activators (Dll3, Atoh7, Otx2) of neuronal differentiation in Notch1+
cells compared to whole retinal cell populations. At P0, Notch1, Hes5, and Dll1
expression was significantly higher in Notch1+ cells than in whole retinas. Otx2 
expression was more than thirty times higher than Atoh7 expression in Notch1+
cells at P0. We also observed that retinas of wild type animals had only 14% (P <
0.05) more ganglion cells compared to Notch3KO mice. Since this number is
relatively small and Notch1 has been shown to contribute to ganglion cell fate
specification, we suggested that Notch1 signaling may play a more significant
role in RGC development than the Notch3 signaling cascade. Finally, our findings 
suggest that Notch1+ progenitors--since they heavily express both pro-ganglion
cell (Atoh7) and pro-photoreceptor cell (Otx2) activators--can differentiate into
either ganglion cells or photoreceptors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131054 
PMCID: PMC4474692
PMID: 26091508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

