
1. J Neuroinflammation. 2015 Jun 24;12:123. doi: 10.1186/s12974-015-0342-4.

HLA-DRα1-mMOG-35-55 treatment of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
reduces CNS inflammation, enhances M2 macrophage frequency, and promotes
neuroprotection.

Benedek G(1)(2), Meza-Romero R(1)(2), Jordan K(2), Keenlyside L(2), Offner
H(1)(2)(3), Vandenbark AA(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Research, VA Portland Health Care System, Portland, OR, USA.
(2)Tykeson MS Research Laboratory, Department of Neurology UHS-46, Oregon Health 
& Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd, Portland, OR, USA.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine, Oregon Health &
Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
(4)Neuroimmunology Research, VA Portland Health Care System, Portland, OR, USA.
vandenba@ohsu.edu.
(5)Tykeson MS Research Laboratory, Department of Neurology UHS-46, Oregon Health 
& Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd, Portland, OR, USA.
vandenba@ohsu.edu.
(6)Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, OR, USA. vandenba@ohsu.edu.

BACKGROUND: DRα1-mouse(m)MOG-35-55, a novel construct developed in our laboratory
as a simpler and potentially less immunogenic alternative to two-domain class II 
constructs, was shown previously to target the MIF/CD74 pathway and to reverse
clinical and histological signs of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
(EAE) in DR*1501-Tg mice in a manner similar to the parent DR2β1-containing
construct.
METHODS: In order to determine whether DRα1-mMOG-35-55 could treat EAE in major
histocompatibility complex (MHC)-mismatched mice and to evaluate the treatment
effect on central nervous system (CNS) inflammation, C57BL/6 mice were treated
with DRα1-mMOG-35-55. In addition, gene expression profile was analyzed in spinal
cords of EAE DR*1501-Tg mice that were treated with DRα1-mMOG-35-55.
RESULTS: We here demonstrate that DRα1-mMOG-35-55 could effectively treat EAE in 
MHC-mismatched C57BL/6 mice by reducing CNS inflammation, potentially mediated in
part through an increased frequency of M2 monocytes in the spinal cord.
Microarray analysis of spinal cord tissue from DRα1-mMOG-35-55-treated vs.
vehicle control mice with EAE revealed decreased expression of a large number of 
pro-inflammatory genes including CD74, NLRP3, and IL-1β and increased expression 
of genes involved in myelin repair (MBP) and neuroregeneration (HUWE1).
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that the DRα1-mMOG-35-55 construct retains
therapeutic, anti-inflammatory, and neuroprotective activities during treatment
of EAE across MHC disparate barriers.

DOI: 10.1186/s12974-015-0342-4 
PMCID: PMC4481122
PMID: 26104759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

