
1. Biogerontology. 2016 Feb;17(1):229-39. doi: 10.1007/s10522-015-9587-7. Epub 2015 
Jun 26.

Development of depressive symptoms post hip fracture is associated with altered
immunosuppressive phenotype in regulatory T and B lymphocytes.

Duggal NA(1), Upton J(2), Phillips AC(2), Lord JM(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Immunity and Infection, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15
2TT, UK.
(2)School of Sport and Exercise Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham,
B15 2TT, UK.
(3)School of Immunity and Infection, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15
2TT, UK. J.M.Lord@bham.ac.uk.
(4)NIHR Surgical Reconstruction and Microbiology Research Centre, Birmingham, UK.
J.M.Lord@bham.ac.uk.

Hip fracture is a common physical trauma in older adults that is also associated 
with a high incidence of new onset depression. The immune system declines with
age and is also compromised by physical and psychological stress. This study
examined whether hip fracture and depressive symptoms had additive effects upon
the aged immune system that might contribute to poor health outcomes after hip
fracture. We assessed the frequency of regulatory T cells, Tregs (CD4(+) CD25(+) 
Foxp3(+)) and IL10 production by CD4 T cells, and the frequency and IL10
production by regulatory B cells, Bregs (CD19(+) CD24(hi) CD38(hi)) in 101 hip
fracture patients (81 female) 6 weeks after injury and 43 healthy age-matched
controls (28 female). 38 hip fracture patients (37%) developed depressive
symptoms. Hip fracture did not have an effect on circulating Tregs frequency but 
a significant reduction in the frequency of Bregs was observed in patients who
developed depression compared with non-depressed patients (p = 0.001) or healthy 
controls (p < 0.001). Bregs also showed a significant decline in IL10 production 
in depressed hip fracture patients compared with controls (p = 0.04) and
non-depressed patients (p = 0.01). In contrast, there was an increase in IL10
production by CD4 T cells in hip fracture patients with new onset depression
compared to hip fracture patients without depression (p = .04) and healthy
controls (p = .02). We conclude that the reduced immunity associated with new
onset depression post hip fracture could include a contribution by heightened
Tregs function.

DOI: 10.1007/s10522-015-9587-7 
PMCID: PMC4723613
PMID: 26112234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

