
1. Biochemistry. 1989 Sep 19;28(19):7600-9.

Structural analysis of specificity: alpha-lytic protease complexes with analogues
of reaction intermediates.

Bone R(1), Frank D, Kettner CA, Agard DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San
Francisco 94143-0448.

To better understand the structural basis of enzyme specificity, the structures
of complexes formed between alpha-lytic protease, an extracellular serine
protease of Lysobacter enzymogenes, and five inhibitory peptide boronic acids
(R2-boroX, where R2 is methoxysuccinyl-Ala-Ala-Pro- and boroX is the
alpha-aminoboronic acid analogue of Ala, Val, Ile, Norleu, or Phe) have been
studied at high resolution by X-ray crystallography. The enzyme has primary
specificity for Ala in the P1 position of peptide substrates with catalytic
efficiency decreasing with increasing side-chain volume. Enzyme affinity for
inhibitors with boroVal, boroIle, and boroPhe residues is much higher than
expected on the basis of the catalytic efficiencies of homologous substrates.
Covalent tetrahedral adducts are formed between the active-site serine and the
boronic acid moieties of R2-boroAla, R2-boroVal R2-boroIle, and R2-boroNorleu.
Though R2-boroVal is a slowly bound inhibitor and R2-boroAla is rapidly bound
[Kettner, C. A., Bone, R., Agard, D. A., & Bachovchin, W. W. (1988) Biochemistry 
27, 7682-7688], there appear to be no structural differences that could account
for slow binding. The removal from solution of 20% more hydrophobic surface on
binding accounts for the improved affinity of alpha-lytic protease for R2-boroVal
relative to R2-boroAla. The high affinity of the enzyme for R2-boroIle derives
from the selective binding of the L-allo stereoisomer of the boroIle residue,
which can avoid bad steric interactions in the binding pocket.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED
AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00445a015 
PMID: 2611204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

