
1. Cancer Gene Ther. 2015 Jul;22(7):368-74. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2015.29. Epub 2015 Jun 
26.

Upregulated expression of NKG2D and its ligands give potential therapeutic
targets for patients with thymoma.

Xuan XY(1), Zhang JF(2), Hu GM(3), Li QR(1), Liu PP(1), Du Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Basic Medical College, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, China.

The activating receptor NKG2D (natural killer group 2, member D) of natural
killer (NK) cells promotes tumor immune surveillance by targeting ligands
selectively induced on cancer cells, and thus having an important role in
antitumor immune response. Because these ligands are not widely expressed on
healthy adult tissue, NKG2D ligands may present as useful target for
immunotherapeutic approaches in cancer. In this study, to elucidate the role of
NKG2D-NKG2D ligand interaction in thymoma tissues and to evaluate the potential
role of NKG2D ligands as therapeutic target for thymoma, we examined the
expression of NKG2D and its specific ligands: MICA (major histocompatibility
complex class I chain-related protein A), MICB (major histocompatibility complex 
class I chain-related protein B) and ULBP (UL16-binding protein) in 36 thymomas
(6 subtype A, 6 subtype AB, 8 subtype B1, 5 subtype B2, 6 subtype B3 and 5
subtype C), 15 thymic atrophy and 8 thymic hyperplasia by immunohistochemistry
and reverse transcription-real-time-PCR methods. We demonstrated that both mRNA
and protein levels of NKG2D, MICA, MICB and ULBP were upregulated in six types of
thymomas compared with those in atrophic thymus or proliferating thymus.
Furthermore, the NKG2D ligands were found to be frequently coexpressed on thymoma
cells. Furthermore, the expression of MICA, MICB and ULBP in subtype C was higher
compared with those in subtype A, AB, B1, B2 and B3. Thus, we concluded that high
expressions of NKG2D, MICA, MICB and ULBP1 were shown in patients with thymoma,
and this may enhance the recognition function of NK cells to eliminate tumor
cells. MICA, MICB and ULBP presented an attractive target for thymoma therapy.
The abnormal expression of NKG2D, MICA, MICB and ULBP1 can provide us with
evidence of the occurrence of thymoma and could also be used as a target in the
treatment of thymoma.

DOI: 10.1038/cgt.2015.29 
PMID: 26113176  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

