
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 1;10(7):e0131317. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131317.
eCollection 2015.

Hyper Accumulation of Arsenic in Mutants of Ochrobactrum tritici Silenced for
Arsenite Efflux Pumps.

Sousa T(1), Branco R(1), Piedade AP(2), Morais PV(3).

Author information: 
(1)IMAR-CMA, Coimbra, Portugal.
(2)CEMUC-Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Coimbra, 3030-788
Coimbra, Portugal.
(3)IMAR-CMA, Coimbra, Portugal; Department of Life Sciences, University of
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.

Ochrobactrum tritici SCII24T is a highly As-resistant bacterium, with two
previously described arsenic resistance operons, ars1 and ars2. Among a large
number of genes, these operons contain the arsB and Acr3 genes that encode the
arsenite efflux pumps responsible for arsenic resistance. Exploring the genome of
O. tritici SCII24T, an additional putative operon (ars3) was identified and
revealed the presence of the Acr3_2 gene that encodes for an arsenite efflux
protein but which came to prove to not be required for full As resistance. The
genes encoding for arsenite efflux pumps, identified in this strain, were
inactivated to develop microbial accumulators of arsenic as new tools for
bioremediation. Six different mutants were produced, studied and three were more 
useful as biotools. O. tritici wild type and the Acr3-mutants showed the highest 
resistance to As(III), being able to grow up to 50 mM of arsenite. On the other
hand, arsB-mutants were not able to grow at concentrations higher than 1 mM
As(III), and were the most As(III) sensitive mutants. In the presence of 1 mM
As(III), the strain with arsB and Acr3_1 mutated showed the highest intracellular
arsenic concentration (up to 17 ng(As)/mg protein), while in assays with 5 mM
As(III), the single arsB-mutant was able to accumulate the highest concentration 
of arsenic (up to 10 ng(As)/mg protein). Therefore, arsB is the main gene
responsible for arsenite resistance in O. tritici. However, both genes arsB and
Acr3_1 play a crucial role in the resistance mechanism, depending on the arsenite
concentration in the medium. In conclusion, at moderate arsenite concentrations, 
the double arsB- and Acr3_1-mutant exhibited a great ability to accumulate
arsenite and can be seen as a promising bioremediation tool for environmental
arsenic detoxification.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131317 
PMCID: PMC4489015
PMID: 26132104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

