
1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 21;290(34):20904-20918. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.659466. Epub 
2015 Jul 1.

Intracellular Bacterial Pathogens Trigger the Formation of U Small Nuclear RNA
Bodies (U Bodies) through Metabolic Stress Induction.

Tsalikis J(1), Tattoli I(2), Ling A(1), Sorbara MT(3), Croitoru DO(1), Philpott
DJ(3), Girardin SE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto M6G 2T6, Canada.
(2)Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto M6G 2T6, Canada; Departments of Immunology, University of Toronto,
Toronto M6G 2T6, Canada.
(3)Departments of Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto M6G 2T6, Canada.
(4)Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto M6G 2T6, Canada. Electronic address: stephen.girardin@utoronto.ca.

Invasive bacterial pathogens induce an amino acid starvation (AAS) response in
infected host cells that controls host defense in part by promoting autophagy.
However, whether AAS has additional significant effects on the host response to
intracellular bacteria remains poorly characterized. Here we showed that
Shigella, Salmonella, and Listeria interfere with spliceosomal U snRNA maturation
in the cytosol. Bacterial infection resulted in the rerouting of U snRNAs and
their cytoplasmic escort, the survival motor neuron (SMN) complex, to processing 
bodies, thus forming U snRNA bodies (U bodies). This process likely contributes
to the decline in the cytosolic levels of U snRNAs and of the SMN complex
proteins SMN and DDX20 that we observed in infected cells. U body formation was
triggered by membrane damage in infected cells and was associated with the
induction of metabolic stresses, such as AAS or endoplasmic reticulum stress.
Mechanistically, targeting of U snRNAs to U bodies was regulated by translation
initiation inhibition and the ATF4/ATF3 pathway, and U bodies rapidly disappeared
upon removal of the stress, suggesting that their accumulation represented an
adaptive response to metabolic stress. Importantly, this process likely
contributed to shape the host response to invasive bacteria because
down-regulation of DDX20 expression using short hairpin RNA (shRNA) amplified
ATF3- and NF-κB-dependent signaling. Together, these results identify a critical 
role for metabolic stress and invasive bacterial pathogens in U body formation
and suggest that this process contributes to host defense.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.659466 
PMCID: PMC4543651
PMID: 26134566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

