
1. ChemMedChem. 2015 Aug;10(8):1351-64. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201500183. Epub 2015 Jul
1.

Bisamidate Prodrugs of 2-Substituted 9-[2-(Phosphonomethoxy)ethyl]adenine (PMEA, 
adefovir) as Selective Inhibitors of Adenylate Cyclase Toxin from Bordetella
pertussis.

Česnek M(1), Jansa P(1), Šmídková M(1), Mertlíková-Kaiserová H(1), Dračínský
M(1), Brust TF(2), Pávek P(3)(4), Trejtnar F(3), Watts VJ(2), Janeba Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Academy of Sciences of the
Czech Republic v.v.i. Flemingovo nám. 2, 166 10 Prague 6 (Czech Republic).
(2)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, College of
Pharmacy, Purdue University, 575 Stadium Mall Drive, West Lafayette, IN, 47907
(USA).
(3)Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Pharmacy in Hradec Králové,
Heyrovského 1203, 500 05 Hradec Králové (Czech Republic).
(4)Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and
Dentistry, Palacky University Olomouc, Hněvotínská 5, 775 15 Olomouc (Czech
Republic).
(5)Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Academy of Sciences of the
Czech Republic v.v.i. Flemingovo nám. 2, 166 10 Prague 6 (Czech Republic).
janeba@uochb.cas.cz.

Novel small-molecule agents to treat Bordetella pertussis infections are highly
desirable, as pertussis (whooping cough) remains a serious health threat
worldwide. In this study, a series of 2-substituted derivatives of
9-[2-(phosphonomethoxy)ethyl]adenine (PMEA, adefovir), in their isopropyl ester
bis(L-phenylalanine) prodrug form, were designed and synthesized as potent
inhibitors of adenylate cyclase toxin (ACT) isolated from B. pertussis. The
series consists of PMEA analogues bearing either a linear or branched aliphatic
chain or a heteroatom at the C2 position of the purine moiety. Compounds with a
small C2 substituent showed high potency against ACT without cytotoxic effects as
well as good selectivity over human adenylate cyclase isoforms AC1, AC2, and AC5.
The most potent ACT inhibitor was found to be the bisamidate prodrug of the
2-fluoro PMEA derivative (IC50 =0.145 μM). Although the bisamidate prodrugs
reported herein exhibit overall lower activity than the bis(pivaloyloxymethyl)
prodrug (adefovir dipivoxil), their toxicity and plasma stability profiles are
superior. Furthermore, the bisamidate prodrug was shown to be more stable in
plasma than in macrophage homogenate, indicating that the free phosphonate can be
effectively distributed to target tissues, such as the lungs. Thus, ACT
inhibitors based on acyclic nucleoside phosphonates may represent a new strategy 
to treat whooping cough.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cmdc.201500183 
PMID: 26136378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

