
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 6;10(7):e0132049. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132049.
eCollection 2015.

A Novel Lipase as Aquafeed Additive for Warm-Water Aquaculture.

Ran C(1), He S(1), Yang Y(1), Huang L(1), Zhou Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Feed Biotechnology of the Ministry of Agriculture, Feed
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, P. R.
China.

A novel Acinetobacter lipase gene lipG1 was cloned from DNA extracted from
intestinal sample of common carp (Cyprinus carpio), and expressed in E. coli
BL21. The encoded protein was 406 amino acids in length. Phylogenetic analysis
indicated that LipG1 and its relatives comprised a novel group of true lipases
produced by Gram-negative bacteria. LipG1 showed maximal activity at 40℃ and pH
8.0 when pNP decanoate (C10) was used as the substrate, and remained high
activity between 20℃ and 35℃. Activity of the lipase was promoted by Ca2+ and
Mg2+, and inhibited by Zn2+ and Cu2+. Moreover, LipG1 is stable with proteases,
most commercial detergents and organic solvents. Substrate specificity test
indicated that LipG1 can hydrolyse pNP esters with acyl chain length from C2 to
C16, with preference for medium-chain pNP esters (C8, C10). Lastly, LipG1 was
evaluated as an aquafeed additive for juvenile common carp (Cyprinus carpio).
Results showed that supplementation of LipG1 significantly improved the gut and
heptaopancreas lipase activity of fish fed with palm oil diet. Consistently,
improved feed conversion ratio and growth performance were recorded in the LipG1 
feeding group, to levels comparable to the group of fish fed with soybean oil
diet. Collectively, LipG1 exhibited good potential as an aquafeed additive
enzyme, and deserves further characterization as the representative of a novel
group of lipases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132049 
PMCID: PMC4492967
PMID: 26147311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

