
1. Cell Rep. 2015 Jul 14;12(2):163-71. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.015. Epub 2015 
Jul 2.

Defective TFH Cell Function and Increased TFR Cells Contribute to Defective
Antibody Production in Aging.

Sage PT(1), Tan CL(1), Freeman GJ(2), Haigis M(3), Sharpe AH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA; Evergrande Center for Immunologic Diseases, Harvard Medical School
and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA; Evergrande Center for Immunologic Diseases, Harvard Medical School
and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
arlene_sharpe@hms.harvard.edu.

Defective antibody production in aging is broadly attributed to immunosenescence.
However, the precise immunological mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we
demonstrate an increase in the ratio of inhibitory T follicular regulatory (TFR) 
cells to stimulatory T follicular helper (TFH) cells in aged mice. Aged TFH and
TFR cells are phenotypically distinct from those in young mice, exhibiting
increased programmed cell death protein-1 expression but decreased ICOS
expression. Aged TFH cells exhibit defective antigen-specific responses, and
programmed cell death protein-ligand 1 blockade can partially rescue TFH cell
function. In contrast, young and aged TFR cells have similar suppressive capacity
on a per-cell basis in vitro and in vivo. Together, these studies reveal
mechanisms contributing to defective humoral immunity in aging: an increase in
suppressive TFR cells combined with impaired function of aged TFH cells results
in reduced T-cell-dependent antibody responses in aged mice.

Copyright Â© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.015 
PMCID: PMC4504745
PMID: 26146074  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

