
1. Cent Eur J Immunol. 2014;39(2):142-51. doi: 10.5114/ceji.2014.43713. Epub 2014
Jun 27.

Umbilical cord blood-derived dendritic cells loaded with BGC823 tumor antigens
and DC-derived exosomes stimulate efficient cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses and 
antitumor immunity in vitro and in vivo.

Guan S(1), Li Q(1), Liu P(1), Xuan X(1), Du Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Basic Medical College, Zhengzhou
University, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Umbilical cord blood (UCB) is a rich source of hematopoietic stem
cells and from which a significant number of dendritic cells (DCs) can be
produced. But the therapeutic role of DCs and exosomes (EXO) generated from DCs
is not fully elucidated.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The UCB-derived DCs were loaded with tumor antigens
generated from BGC823 cell line. Exosomes were derived from these DCs by
ultracentrifugation. Dendritic cells and DCex were evaluated by light microscope,
transmission electron microscope (TEM), flow cytometry, and western blot assay.
The therapeutic role of DCs and EXO generated from DCs were then detected in
vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: Dendritic cells isolated from umbilical cord blood after loading with
tumor antigens generated from BGC823 cell line could express high levels of
protein molecules: MHC-I, MHC-II, CD34, CD40, CD80, CD86, CD11c and CD54 and
mediate a stronger promotion of T cells proliferation. And, they could also
enhance the cytotoxicity effects of the generated CTL in vitro and in vivo.
Exosomes isolated from these DCs were 40-90-nm round particles with a complete
membrane structure and could also expressed molecules similar to DCs. Exosomes
could stimulate T cell proliferation, produce effective cytotoxicity and induce
more efficient in vivo antitumor immunity.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggested that tumor antigens loaded DCs derived from 
unrelated umbilical cord blood or DCex can induce tumor specific cytotoxicity and
this may represent a novel immunotherapy for tumors. Because of their advantage
of stable, easy to store, DCex have a more brilliant prospects in the tumor
immunity.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION: We reported that exosomes derived from umbilical cord
blood dendritic cell (UBDC), similar to DCs, can trigger activation of T cells
significantly. These data demonstrate that DC-derived exosomes (DCex) can mediate
essential adaptive immune functions.

DOI: 10.5114/ceji.2014.43713 
PMCID: PMC4440031
PMID: 26155115 

