
1. J Immunol. 2015 Aug 15;195(4):1459-69. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500574. Epub 2015
Jul 8.

A Subset of CD8αβ+ Invariant NKT Cells in a Humanized Mouse Model.

Wen X(1), Kim S(1), Xiong R(1), Li M(1), Lawrenczyk A(1), Huang X(1), Chen SY(1),
Rao P(1), Besra GS(2), Dellabona P(3), Casorati G(3), Porcelli SA(4), Akbari
O(1), Exley MA(5), Yuan W(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033;
(2)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United
Kingdom;
(3)Experimental Immunology Unit, Division of Immunology, Transplantation and
Infectious Diseases, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20134 Milano, Italy;
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461;
(5)Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, Manchester Collaborative Centre for
Inflammation Research, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9NT, United
Kingdom; and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115.
(6)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033; weiming.yuan@usc.edu.

Invariant NKT (iNKT) cells are unconventional innate-like T cells demonstrating
potent antitumor function in conventional mouse models. However, the iNKT cell
ligands have had limited efficacy in human antitumor clinical trials, mostly due 
to the profound differences in the properties and compositions of iNKT cells
between the two species, including the presence of a CD8(+) subset of iNKT cells 
only in humans. To build reliable in vivo models for studying human iNKT cells,
we recently developed the first humanized mouse model (hCD1d-KI) with human CD1d 
knocked in. To further humanize the mouse model, we now introduced the human
invariant NKT TCRα-chain (Vα24Jα18) into the hCD1d-knockin mice. Similar to
humans, this humanized mouse model developed a subset of CD8αβ(+) iNKT cells
among other human-like iNKT subsets. The presence of the CD8αβ(+) iNKT cells in
the thymus suggests that these cells developed in the thymus. In the periphery,
these NKT cells showed a strong Th1-biased cytokine response and potent
cytotoxicity for syngeneic tumor cells upon activation, as do human CD8αβ(+) iNKT
cells. The low binding avidity of iNKT TCRs to the human CD1d/lipid complex and
high prevalence of Vβ7 TCRβ among the CD8(+) iNKT cells strongly point to a low
avidity-based developmental program for these iNKT cells, which included the
suppression of Th-POK and upregulation of eomesodermin transcriptional factors.
Our establishment of this extensively humanized mouse model phenotypically and
functionally reflecting the human CD1d/iNKT TCR system will greatly facilitate
the future design and optimization of iNKT cell-based immunotherapies.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500574 
PMCID: PMC4530047
PMID: 26157173  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

