
1. J Cutan Pathol. 2015 Oct;42(10):674-92. doi: 10.1111/cup.12550. Epub 2015 Aug 10.

Histopathology and immunophenotype of acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans
correlated with ospA and ospC genotypes of Borrelia species.

Brandt FC(1), Ertas B(2), Falk TM(2), Metze D(1), Böer-Auer A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Munster University, Münster, Germany.
(2)Dermatologikum Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Chronic cutaneous borreliosis (acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans,
ACA) is a relatively rare manifestation of borreliosis attributed mainly to
Borrelia afzelii. Chronic borreliosis has been associated with ospA and ospC
genotypes. Literature on molecular investigations of Borrelia in lesions of ACA
is scant.
METHODS: Histopathological and immmunohistochemical features in 22 biopsies of
ACA (16 patients) were examined. Paraffin-embedded biopsies were analyzed with
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays targeting ospA and ospC genes, sequencing 
and phylogenetic analysis.
RESULTS: Genotyping of ospA identified B. afzelii, serotype 2, in 12 of 16
patients. ospC-PCR was positive in seven patients revealing genotypes Af5
(n = 4), Af2 (n = 2) and Af6 (n = 1). Histopathologically, interstitial
granulomatous infiltrates (CD68 positive) were common, combined with thickened
collagen bundles and band-like infiltrates of CD4 positive T lymphocytes. Plasma 
cells were sparse/absent in 9 of 22 specimens even on staining with CD138. On
CD34-staining, interstitial fibroblasts were often reduced akin to the situation 
in morphea.
CONCLUSIONS: With assays targeting ospA and ospC genes we confirmed from
paraffin-embedded biopsies that B. afzelii, serotype 2, osp C groups Af5, Af2 and
Af6 is the main cause of ACA. Specimens commonly showed a combination of
band-like T-cell-rich infiltrates with interstitial granulomatous features, a
pattern previously under-recognized in ACA. This finding was particularly typical
for lesions infected with ospC genotype Af5.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cup.12550 
PMID: 26156537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

