
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Sep;59(9):5788-92. doi: 10.1128/AAC.04831-14.
Epub 2015 Jul 13.

Coexistence of heavy metal and antibiotic resistance within a novel composite
staphylococcal cassette chromosome in a Staphylococcus haemolyticus isolate from 
bovine mastitis milk.

Xue H(1), Wu Z(1), Li L(1), Li F(1), Wang Y(1), Zhao X(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi, People's Republic of China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi, People's Republic of China Department of Animal Science, McGill
University, Quebec, Canada xin.zhao@mcgill.ca.

The structure of a composite staphylococcal cassette chromosome (SCC) carried by 
a methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus haemolyticus (NW19A) isolated from a
bovine milk sample was analyzed. The formation of the circular forms of both
single SCC elements and composite SCC elements was detected in NW19A. Twenty
heavy metal and antibiotic resistance-related genes coexisted in this composite
SCC, suggesting that these genes might be coselected under environmental
pressure. The mec gene complex in NW19A, designated type C3, is different from
classic C1 or C2 gene complexes structurally and likely evolves differently.
Furthermore, results from alignment of the SCC composite island of NW19A with 50 
related sequences from different staphylococcal strains provided additional
evidence to support the notion that coagulase-negative staphylococci (CoNS) are
the original host of heavy metal resistance genes among staphylococci. Given that
a SCC composite island could transfer freely among different staphylococcal
species from different hosts, more attention should be paid to contamination with
heavy metals and antibiotics in dairy farming environments, including wastewater,
soil, feces, and feed.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.04831-14 
PMCID: PMC4538546
PMID: 26169408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

