
1. Cytokine. 2015 Dec;76(2):193-205. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.07.006. Epub 2015 Jul 
11.

Porin differentiates TLR mediated proinflammatory response of follicular zone B
cell from TLR-unresponsive IL-10 expressing marginal zone B cell.

Sinha D(1), Ghosh AK(1), Mukherjee S(1), Biswas R(1), Biswas T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases,
Kolkata, India.
(2)Division of Immunology, National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases,
Kolkata, India. Electronic address: shigellaporin@yahoo.com.

TLR-ligands are frequently chosen as candidates for vaccine or adjuvant
development because they can primarily bridge innate signaling with adaptive
immune responses. Since the adjuvant action of porin, the major outer membrane
protein commonly present on Gram-negative bacteria, has been tested on several
antigen-presenting cells, we investigated its role in driving systemic immunity
which is considered a benchmark for a successful adjuvant. Here, we show porin
differentially regulated splenic marginal zone (MZ) and follicular zone (FO) B
cell responses in contrast to other classical TLR2-ligands FSL-1 and Pam3CSK4.
The protein up-regulated TLR2 and TLR6 and stimulated the activation and
costimulatory molecules on FO B cells skewing the cells toward TLR-dependent
type-1 cytokine response. However, porin could not up-regulate the TLRs and
activate MZ B cells. These cells responded to porin by expressing
toll-interacting protein (TOLLIP), the TLR2 and -4 signaling inhibitor along with
stimulation of the intracellular pathogen recognition receptor NLR caspase
recruitment domain containing protein 5 (NLRC5). The CD1d(hi) MZ B cells released
IL-10 unequivocally demonstrating regulatory B cell feature. Immunization with
porin also resulted in transient IL-10 expression by the CD19(+)CD21(hi) B cells 
prior to plasma cell formation. Moreover, the plasma cells developed from the B-2
cell subsets show marked variation in generation of immunoglobulin subclasses.
The work delineates multi-faceted role of B cell subsets induced by porin for
robust immunity without compromising with the checks and controls.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.07.006 
PMID: 26174952  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

