
1. Tissue Antigens. 2015 Aug;86(2):122-33. doi: 10.1111/tan.12602. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Genetic association of complement component 2 polymorphism with systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Chen HH(1), Tsai LJ(2), Lee KR(1), Chen YM(3)(4)(5)(6), Hung WT(3)(4), Chen
DY(1)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(3)Division of Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology, Taichung Veterans General
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, Chung Shan Medical University,
Taichung, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Biomedical Science, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung,
Taiwan.
(6)Rong Hsing Research Center for Translational Medicine, National Chung Hsing
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, National Yang Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Complement component 2 (C2), an early member of the classical pathway, mainly
participates in apoptotic cell clearance. We hypothesize that C2 polymorphism may
confer genetic susceptibility to complement dysfunction in systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE). The major aim of our study was to investigate the clinical
and serological associations of C2 variants in Chinese patients with SLE. The
single-nucleotide polymorphism (rs2844455, G/A SNP) located in the intron region 
of C2 gene was genotyped by direct sequencing in 95 SLE patients and 95 matched
normal control subjects. The gene expression profiles were generated by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and reverse transcription 
PCR. Our results showed that the AA genotype was observed more frequently in SLE 
patients than in normal control subjects (22.1% vs 9.5%, P < 0.05). The A allele 
was strongly associated with the occurrence of hair loss, photosensitivity and
anti-cardiolipin antibodies; whereas, the G allele was associated with lower
frequencies of these clinical presentations. Relative expression levels were
significantly lower in patients with the AA genotype [median: 18.86,
interquartile range (IQR) 11.36-22.43, P = 0.002] than in those with the GG
genotype (35.76, IQR: 19.33-49.71). As expected, we confirmed the A allele as a
risk factor for SLE development in a Chinese population, in contrast, the G
allele might be a protective factor against the pathogenic autoantibody formation
and cutaneous manifestations in SLE patients.

Â© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tan.12602 
PMID: 26176736  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

