
1. BMC Struct Biol. 2015 Jul 15;15:13. doi: 10.1186/s12900-015-0040-6.

Crystal structure of O-methyltransferase CalO6 from the calicheamicin
biosynthetic pathway: a case of challenging structure determination at low
resolution.

Tsodikov OV(1), Hou C(2), Walsh CT(3), Garneau-Tsodikova S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of
Kentucky, 789 South Limestone Street, 40536-0596, Lexington, KY, USA.
oleg.tsodikov@uky.edu.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of
Kentucky, 789 South Limestone Street, 40536-0596, Lexington, KY, USA.
chou2@uky.edu.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, 200 Longwood Avenue, 02215, Boston, MA, USA.
christopher_walsh@hms.harvard.edu.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of
Kentucky, 789 South Limestone Street, 40536-0596, Lexington, KY, USA.
sylviegtsodikova@uky.edu.

BACKGROUND: Calicheamicins (CAL) are enedyine natural products with potent
antibiotic and cytotoxic activity, used in anticancer therapy. The
O-methyltransferase CalO6 is proposed to catalyze methylation of the hydroxyl
moiety at the C2 position of the orsellinic acid group of CAL.
RESULTS: Crystals of CalO6 diffracted non-isotropically, with the usable data
extending to 3.4 Å. While no single method of crystal structure determination
yielded a structure of CalO6, we were able to determine its structure by using
molecular replacement-guided single wavelength anomalous dispersion by using
diffraction data from native crystals of CalO6 and a highly non-isomorphous
mercury derivative. The structure of CalO6 reveals the methyltransferase fold and
dimeric organization characteristic of small molecule O-methyltransferases
involved in secondary metabolism in bacteria and plants. Uncommonly, CalO6 was
crystallized in the absence of S-adenosylmethionine (SAM; the methyl donor) or
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH; its product).
CONCLUSIONS: Likely as a consequence of the dynamic nature of CalO6 in the
absence of its cofactor, the central region of CalO6, which forms a helical
lid-like structure near the active site in CalO6 and similar enzymes, is not
observed in the electron density. We propose that this region controls the entry 
of SAM into and the exit of SAH from the active site of CalO6 and shapes the
active site for substrate binding and catalysis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12900-015-0040-6 
PMCID: PMC4501126
PMID: 26170207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

