
1. Biosci Rep. 2015 May 14;35(3). pii: e00212. doi: 10.1042/BSR20150067.

Does the liposuction method influence the phenotypic characteristic of human
adipose-derived stem cells?

Bajek A(1), Gurtowska N(2), Gackowska L(3), Kubiszewska I(3), Bodnar M(4),
Marszałek A(4), Januszewski R(2), Michalkiewicz J(5), Drewa T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tissue Engineering, Nicolaus Copernicus University, 85-092
Bydgoszcz, Poland a_bajek@wp.pl.
(2)Department of Tissue Engineering, Nicolaus Copernicus University, 85-092
Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(3)Chair of Immunology, Nicolaus Copernicus University, 85-094 Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(4)Department of Clinical Pathomorphology, Nicolaus Copernicus University, 85-094
Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(5)Chair of Immunology, Nicolaus Copernicus University, 85-094 Bydgoszcz, Poland 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Children's Memorial Health
Institute, 04-730 Warsaw, Poland.
(6)Department of Tissue Engineering, Nicolaus Copernicus University, 85-092
Bydgoszcz, Poland Department of Urology, Nicolaus Copernicus Hospital, 87-100
Torun, Poland.

Adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) possess a high differentiation and
proliferation potential. However, the phenotypic characterization of ASCs is
still difficult. Until now, there is no extensive analysis of ASCs markers
depending on different liposuction methods. Therefore, the aim of the present
study was to analyse 242 surface markers and determine the differences in the
phenotypic pattern between ASCs obtained during mechanical and
ultrasound-assisted liposuction. ASCs were isolated from healthy donors, due to
mechanical and ultrasound-assisted liposuction and cultured in standard medium to
the second passage. Differentiation potential and markers expression was
evaluated to confirm the mesenchymal nature of cells. Then, the BD LyoplateTM
Human Cell Surface Marker Screening Panel was used. Results shown that both
population of ASCs are characterized by high expression of markers specific for
ASCs: cluster of differentiation (CD)9, CD10, CD34, CD44, CD49d, CD54, CD55,
CD59, CD71 and low expression of CD11a, CD11c and CD144. Moreover, we have
noticed significant differences in antigen expression in 58 markers from the 242 
studied. Presented study shows for the first time that different liposuction
methods are not a significant factor which can influence the expression of human 
ASCs surface markers.

© 2015 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1042/BSR20150067 
PMCID: PMC4613685
PMID: 26182374  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

