
1. Waste Manag. 2015 Nov;45:42-50. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2015.06.041. Epub 2015 Jul 
15.

A safety analysis of food waste-derived animal feeds from three typical
conversion techniques in China.

Chen T(1), Jin Y(2), Shen D(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Environment Science & Engineering, Zhejiang Gongshang University,
Hangzhou 310012, China; Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Soild Waste
Treatment and Recycling, Hangzhou 310012, China. Electronic address:
chenting_15@mail.zjgsu.edu.cn.
(2)School of Environment, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(3)School of Environment Science & Engineering, Zhejiang Gongshang University,
Hangzhou 310012, China; Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Soild Waste
Treatment and Recycling, Hangzhou 310012, China.

This study was based on the food waste to animal feed demonstration projects in
China. A safety analysis of animal feeds from three typical treatment processes
(i.e., fermentation, heat treatment, and coupled hydrothermal treatment and
fermentation) was presented. The following factors are considered in this study: 
nutritive values characterized by organoleptic properties and general nutritional
indices; the presence of bovine- and sheep-derived materials; microbiological
indices for Salmonella, total coliform (TC), total aerobic plate counts (TAC),
molds and yeast (MY), Staphylococcus Aureus (SA), and Listeria; chemical
contaminant indices for hazardous trace elements such as Cr, Cd, and As; and
nitrite and organic contaminants such as aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) and
hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH). The present study reveals that the feeds from all
three conversion processes showed balanced nutritional content and retained a
certain feed value. The microbiological indices and the chemical contaminant
indices for HCH, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), nitrite, and mercury all 
met pertinent feed standards; however, the presence of bovine- and sheep-derived 
materials and a few chemical contaminants such as Pb were close to or might
exceed the legislation permitted values in animal feeding. From the view of
treatment techniques, all feed retained part of the nutritional values of the
food waste after the conversion processes. Controlled heat treatment can
guarantee the inactivation of bacterial pathogens, but none of the three
techniques can guarantee the absence of cattle- and sheep-derived materials and
acceptable levels of certain contaminants. The results obtained in this research 
and the feedstuffs legislation related to animal feed indicated that food
waste-derived feed could be considered an adequate alternative to be used in
animal diets, while the feeding action should be changed with the different
qualities of the products, such as restrictions on the application of ruminants, 
and recycling as formula feeds.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wasman.2015.06.041 
PMID: 26188613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

