
1. Environ Res. 2015 Oct;142:257-63. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2015.06.046. Epub 2015
Jul 14.

Effect of prolonged exposure to sublethal concentrations of DDT and DDE on
protein expression in human pancreatic beta cells.

Pavlikova N(1), Smetana P(2), Halada P(3), Kovar J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic. Electronic address:
nela.pavlikova@lf3.cuni.cz.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Structure Characterization, Institute of Microbiology,
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.

Pollution of the environment represents one of less explored potential reasons
for the worldwide epidemic of type 2 diabetes. One of the most prevalent
organochlorine pollutants remains the pesticide DDT and its degradation product
DDE. Despite some epidemiologic correlations between levels of DDT and DDE in
human organism and the prevalence of diabetes, there is almost no information
about the exact targets of these compounds inside pancreatic beta cells. To
detect functional areas of pancreatic beta cells that could be affected by
exposure to DDT and DDE, we analyzed changes in protein expression in the NES2Y
human pancreatic beta cell line exposed to three sublethal concentrations (0.1
μM, 1 μM, 10 μM) of DDT and DDE for 1 month. Protein separation and
identification was achieved using high-resolution 2D-electrophoresis, computer
analysis and mass spectrometry. With these techniques, four proteins were found
downregulated after exposure to 10 μM DDT: three cytoskeletal proteins
(cytokeratin 8, cytokeratin 18 and actin) and one protein involved in glycolysis 
(alpha-enolase). Two proteins were downregulated after exposure to 10 μM DDE:
cytokeratin 18 and heterogenous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H1 (HNRH1). These
changes correlate with previously described effects of other stress conditions
(e.g. exposure to palmitate, hyperglycemia, imidazoline derivative, and
cytokines) on protein expression in pancreatic beta cells. We conclude that
cytoskeletal proteins and their processing, glucose metabolism, and mRNA
processing may represent targets affected by exposure to conditions hostile to
pancreatic beta cells, including exposure to DDT and DDE.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2015.06.046 
PMID: 26186133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

