
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 20;10(7):e0133497. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133497.
eCollection 2015.

Antibodies against Proinsulin and Homologous MAP Epitopes Are Detectable in
Hashimoto's Thyroiditis Sardinian Patients, an Additional Link of Association.

Niegowska M(1), Paccagnini D(1), Burrai C(2), Palermo M(2), Sechi LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Università degli Studi di Sassari, Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Sezione
di Microbiologia e Virologia, Sassari.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Azienda Sanitaria Locale (ASL) 1, Sassari, Italy.

Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) is the prevailing organ-specific autoimmune disease 
in Sardinia, often complicated with other autoimmune disorders, most commonly
type 1 diabetes (T1D). While numerous studies describe levels of anty-thyroid
antibodies (Abs) in T1D patients, few papers evaluate the status of anti-islet
autoimmunity in subjects affected by HT. Previously, we portrayed Mycobacterium
avium subspecies paratuberculosis (MAP) as an environmental factor strongly
associated with both diseases. In this study, we analyzed plasma of Sardinian HT 
patients (n=177) and healthy controls (HCs; n=175) for the presence of Abs
against proinsulin and MAP-derived homologous epitopes: MAP1,4αgbp157-173/PI64-80
were recognized by 5,08% and 18,64% of HT vs 0,57% and 7,43% of HCs (AUC=0,6 for 
both; p<0,0003 and 0,002, respectively), whereas the prevalence of Abs against
MAP2404c70-85/PI46-61 peptides was higher but not significant in patients when
compared to HCs. In women (n=152), Abs against MAP1,4αgbp157-173 were detected in
12,50% of HT vs 2,75% of HCs (AUC=0,63; p<0,0002), while positivity to its human 
homolog PI64-80 was observed in 16,42% of HT vs 6,42% of HCs (AUC=0,61; p<0,001).
In men (n=25), a significant anti-PI46-61 Abs levels were detected in 4% of HT vs
none of the HCs (AUC=0,7; p<0,003). Age-related analyses revealed the highest
prevalence between 31-40 years old (45,83%) in the total study population and
among males (33,33%); in contrast, women had a higher seroreactivity between
51-60 years (42,11%). A further follow-up and determination of anti-islet Abs
levels is needed to evaluate the association of immune responses directed against
the MAP/PI homologous peptides with progression to overt diabetes in HT subjects.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133497 
PMCID: PMC4508117
PMID: 26192189  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

