
1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 21;10(7):e0133549. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133549.
eCollection 2015.

Progress in Understanding Algal Bloom-Mediated Fish Kills: The Role of Superoxide
Radicals, Phycotoxins and Fatty Acids.

Dorantes-Aranda JJ(1), Seger A(1), Mardones JI(1), Nichols PD(2), Hallegraeff
GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania, Hobart,
Tasmania, Australia.
(2)Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, University of Tasmania, Hobart,
Tasmania, Australia; CSIRO Oceans and Atmosphere Flagship, Hobart, Tasmania,
Australia.

Quantification of the role of reactive oxygen species, phycotoxins and fatty
acids in fish toxicity by harmful marine microalgae remains inconclusive. An in
vitro fish gill (from rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss) assay was used to
simultaneously assess the effect in superoxide dismutase, catalase and lactate
dehydrogenase enzymatic activities caused by seven species of ichthyotoxic
microalgae (Chattonella marina, Fibrocapsa japonica, Heterosigma akashiwo,
Karenia mikimotoi, Alexandrium catenella, Karlodinium veneficum, Prymnesium
parvum). Quantification of superoxide production by these algae was also
performed. The effect of purified phycotoxins and crude extracts was compared,
and the effect of fatty acids is discussed. The raphidophyte Chattonella was the 
most ichthyotoxic (gill cell viability down to 35%) and also the major producer
of superoxide radicals (14 pmol cell-1 hr-1) especially after cell lysis. The
raphidophyte Heterosigma and dinoflagellate Alexandrium were the least toxic and 
had low superoxide production, except when A. catenella was lysed (5.6 pmol
cell-1 hr-1). Catalase showed no changes in activity in all the treatments.
Superoxide dismutase (SOD) and lactate dehydrogenase exhibited significant
activity increases of ≤23% and 51.2% TCC (total cellular content), respectively, 
after exposure to C. marina, but SOD showed insignificant changes with remaining 
algal species. A strong relationship between gill cell viability and superoxide
production or superoxide dismutase was not observed. Purified brevetoxins PbTx-2 
and -3 (from Karenia brevis, LC50 of 22.1 versus 35.2 μg mL-1) and karlotoxin
KmTx-2 (from Karlodinium; LC50 = 380 ng mL-1) could almost entirely account for
the fish killing activity by those two dinoflagellates. However, the paralytic
shellfish toxins (PST) GTX1&4, C1&C2, and STX did not account for Alexandrium
ichthyotoxicity. Only aqueous extracts of Alexandrium were cytotoxic (≤65%
decrease of viability), whereas crude methanol and acetone extracts of
Chattonella, Fibrocapsa, Heterosigma, Karlodinium and Prymnesium decreased cell
viability down to 0%. These and our previous findings involving the role of fatty
acids confirm that superoxide radicals are only partially involved in
ichthyotoxicity and point to a highly variable contribution by other compounds
such as lipid peroxidation products (e.g. aldehydes).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133549 
PMCID: PMC4509671
PMID: 26197230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

