
1. Leukemia. 2016 Jan;30(1):144-53. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.189. Epub 2015 Jul 23.

Activation of OCT4 enhances ex vivo expansion of human cord blood hematopoietic
stem and progenitor cells by regulating HOXB4 expression.

Huang X(1), Lee MR(1)(2), Cooper S(1), Hangoc G(1), Hong KS(3), Chung HM(3),
Broxmeyer HE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(2)Soonchunhyang Institute of Medi-bio Science, Chungcheongnam-do, Korea.
(3)Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Although hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) are the best characterized and the most
clinically used adult stem cells, efforts are still needed to understand how to
best ex vivo expand these cells. Here we present our unexpected finding that OCT4
is involved in the enhancement of cytokine-induced expansion capabilities of
human cord blood (CB) HSC. Activation of OCT4 by Oct4-activating compound 1
(OAC1) in CB CD34(+) cells enhanced ex vivo expansion of HSC, as determined by a 
rigorously defined set of markers for human HSC, and in vivo short-term and
long-term repopulating ability in NSG mice. Limiting dilution analysis revealed
that OAC1 treatment resulted in 3.5-fold increase in the number of SCID
repopulating cells (SRCs) compared with that in day 0 uncultured CD34(+) cells
and 6.3-fold increase compared with that in cells treated with control vehicle.
Hematopoietic progenitor cells, as assessed by in vitro colony formation, were
also enhanced. Furthermore, we showed that OAC1 treatment led to OCT4-mediated
upregulation of HOXB4. Consistently, siRNA-mediated knockdown of HOXB4 expression
suppressed effects of OAC1 on ex vivo expansion of HSC. Our study has identified 
the OCT4-HOXB4 axis in ex vivo expansion of human CB HSC.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2015.189 
PMCID: PMC4703453
PMID: 26202933  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

