
1. Plant J. 2015 Sep;83(6):1019-33. doi: 10.1111/tpj.12946. Epub 2015 Aug 17.

Arabidopsis Elongator subunit 2 positively contributes to resistance to the
necrotrophic fungal pathogens Botrytis cinerea and Alternaria brassicicola.

Wang C(1), Ding Y(1), Yao J(2), Zhang Y(3), Sun Y(2), Colee J(4), Mou Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida, P.O.
Box 110700, Gainesville, FL, 32611, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Buffalo, Buffalo, NY,
14203, USA.
(3)Interdisciplinary Center for Biotechnology Research, University of Florida,
P.O. Box 103622, Gainesville, FL, 32610, USA.
(4)Department of Statistics, University of Florida, P.O. Box 118545, Gainesville,
FL, 32611, USA.

The evolutionarily conserved Elongator complex functions in diverse biological
processes including salicylic acid-mediated immune response. However, how
Elongator functions in jasmonic acid (JA)/ethylene (ET)-mediated defense is
unknown. Here, we show that Elongator is required for full induction of the JA/ET
defense pathway marker gene PLANT DEFENSIN1.2 (PDF1.2) and for resistance to the 
necrotrophic fungal pathogens Botrytis cinerea and Alternaria brassicicola. A
loss-of-function mutation in the Arabidopsis Elongator subunit 2 (ELP2) alters
B. cinerea-induced transcriptome reprogramming. Interestingly, in elp2,
expression of WRKY33, OCTADECANOID-RESPONSIVE ARABIDOPSIS AP2/ERF59 (ORA59), and 
PDF1.2 is inhibited, whereas transcription of MYC2 and its target genes is
enhanced. However, overexpression of WRKY33 or ORA59 and mutation of MYC2 fail to
restore PDF1.2 expression and B. cinerea resistance in elp2, suggesting that ELP2
is required for induction of not only WRKY33 and ORA59 but also PDF1.2. Moreover,
elp2 is as susceptible as coronatine-insensitive1 (coi1) and
ethylene-insensitive2 (ein2) to B. cinerea, indicating that ELP2 is an important 
player in B. cinerea resistance. Further analysis of the lesion sizes on the
double mutants elp2 coi1 and elp2 ein2 and the corresponding single mutants
revealed that the function of ELP2 overlaps with COI1 and is additive to EIN2 for
B. cinerea resistance. Finally, basal histone acetylation levels in the coding
regions of WRKY33, ORA59, and PDF1.2 are reduced in elp2 and a functional
ELP2-GFP fusion protein binds to the chromatin of these genes, suggesting that
constitutive ELP2-mediated histone acetylation may be required for full
activation of the WRKY33/ORA59/PDF1.2 transcriptional cascade.

© 2015 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tpj.12946 
PMID: 26216741  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

