
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2015 Nov 20;213:59-70. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2015.06.031. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Impact of NaCl reduction in Danish semi-hard Samsoe cheeses on proliferation and 
autolysis of DL-starter cultures.

Søndergaard L(1), Ryssel M(2), Svendsen C(2), Høier E(3), Andersen U(4),
Hammershøj M(5), Møller JR(5), Arneborg N(2), Jespersen L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen, 1958
Frederiksberg C, Denmark. Electronic address: lisesoe@food.ku.dk.
(2)Department of Food Science, Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen, 1958
Frederiksberg C, Denmark.
(3)Chr. Hansen A/S, 2970 Hørsholm, Denmark.
(4)Arla Strategic Innovation Centre, Rørdrumvej 2, 8220 Brabrand, Denmark.
(5)Department of Food Science, Aarhus University, Blichers Allé 20, Postboks 50, 
8830 Tjele, Denmark.

Reduction of sodium chloride (NaCl) in cheese manufacturing is a challenge for
the dairy industry. NaCl has a profound role on microbial development influencing
cheese sensory and technological properties. The purpose of this work was to
investigate how proliferation, distribution and autolysis of two commercial
DL-starter cultures (C1 and C2) used in the production of Danish semi-hard Samsoe
cheeses were affected by reduced NaCl levels. Cheeses containing <0.3%
(unsalted), 2.3% (reduced-salt) and 3.4% (normal-salted) (w/v) NaCl in moisture
were produced and analyzed during 12 weeks of ripening. Lactic acid bacteria
(LAB), distribution of bacteria as single cells or microcolonies, their viability
in the cheeses and cell autolysis were monitored during ripening, as well as the 
impact of NaCl content and autolysis on the formation of free amino acids (FAA). 
Reduction of NaCl resulted in higher LAB counts at the early stages of ripening, 
with differences between the two DL-starter cultures. The unsalted cheeses
produced with C1 had retained a significantly higher number of the initial LAB
counts (cfu/g) after 1 and 2 weeks of ripening (i.e. 58% and 71%), compared to
the normal-salted cheeses (i.e. 22% and 21%), whereas no significant difference
was found between the reduced-salt (i.e. 31% and 35%) and normal-salted cheeses. 
At the later stages of ripening (i.e. 7 and 11 weeks) NaCl had no significant
influence. For cheeses produced with C2, a significant influence of NaCl was only
found in cheeses ripened for 7 weeks, where the unsalted and reduced-salt cheeses
had retained a significantly higher number of the initial LAB counts (cfu/g)
(i.e. 39% and 38%), compared to the normal-salted cheeses (i.e. 21%). In the
Samsoe cheeses, bacteria were organized as single cells, in groups of 2-3 cells
or in groups of ≥4 cells. During ripening the decrease in the number of viable
bacteria was mainly due to a reduction in the number of viable bacteria organized
in groups of ≥4 cells. A negative correlation between NaCl content and PepX
activity was observed. At the end of ripening the total FAA content was lower in 
the unsalted cheeses, compared to the reduced- and normal-salted cheeses. In
conclusion, NaCl had a significant influence on proliferation of both DL-starter 
cultures. However, the influence of NaCl on culture development was more
pronounced in cheeses produced with DL-starter culture C1. As both texture and
taste are parameters known to be affected by the development of the starter
culture, the design of starter cultures for reduced NaCl cheeses is recommended.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2015.06.031 
PMID: 26216837  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

