
1. Mucosal Immunol. 2016 Mar;9(2):364-78. doi: 10.1038/mi.2015.66. Epub 2015 Jul 29.

Induction of human IL-10-producing neutrophils by LPS-stimulated Treg cells and
IL-10.

Lewkowicz N(1), Mycko MP(2), Przygodzka P(3), Ćwiklińska H(2), Cichalewska M(2), 
Matysiak M(2), Selmaj K(2), Lewkowicz P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology and Oral Mucosal Diseases, Medical University of 
Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(2)Department of Neurology, Laboratory of Neuroimmunology, Medical University of 
Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(3)Institute of Medical Biology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Lodz, Poland.

Recent evidence has revealed an unsuspected suppressive role played by
neutrophils during microbial infections. An especially intriguing aspect of this 
role is the ability of neutrophils to produce interleukin (IL)-10 following
interaction with lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated regulatory T (Treg) cells.
The present study demonstrates that generation of IL-10 in neutrophils induced by
LPS-stimulated Treg cells required direct cell-cell contact. This effect was
dependent on the binding of CD11b and intercellular adhesion molecule 1. Neither 
stimulation of neutrophils with LPS nor their culture with unstimulated Treg
cells, CD3/CD28 monoclonal antibodies-stimulated Treg cells, or T conventional
cells affected intracellular IL-10 expression. IL-10-positive neutrophils were
also induced by exogenous IL-10, providing an example of a positive feedback
loop. Both LPS-stimulated Treg cells and exogenous IL-10 exclusively promoted
posttranslational modifications of histones, H3K4me3 and H3Ac Lys4, that activate
IL-10 genomic locus in neutrophils, while the promoter of IL-10 gene was inactive
in resting, LPS-stimulated neutrophils, following blocking of direct interaction 
with LPS-stimulated Treg cells or in LPS-preactivated neutrophils incubated with 
LPS-stimulated Treg cells. We additionally confirmed the presence of
IL-10-producing neutrophils in vivo in patients with periodontal abscess induced 
by Gram-negative bacteria, as opposed to neutrophils isolated from the site of
aseptic inflammation in patients with neuromyelitis optica.

DOI: 10.1038/mi.2015.66 
PMID: 26220165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

