
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2015 Aug 15;61 Suppl 1:S5-9. doi: 10.1093/cid/civ424.

Strategic Regulatory Evaluation and Endorsement of the Hollow Fiber Tuberculosis 
System as a Novel Drug Development Tool.

Romero K(1), Clay R(1), Hanna D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Critical Path Institute, Tucson, Arizona.

The first nonclinical drug development tool (DDT) advanced by the Critical Path
to TB Drug Regimens (CPTR) Initiative through a regulatory review process has
been endorsed by leading global regulatory authorities. DDTs with demonstrated
predictive accuracy for clinical and microbiological outcomes are needed to
support decision making. Regulatory endorsement of these DDTs is critical for
drug developers, as it promotes confidence in their use in Investigational New
Drug and New Drug Application filings. The in vitro hollow fiber system model of 
tuberculosis (HFS-TB) is able to recapitulate concentration-time profiles
(exposure) observed in patients for single drugs and combinations, by evaluating 
exposure measures for the ability to kill tuberculosis in different physiologic
conditions. Monte Carlo simulations make this quantitative output useful to
inform susceptibility breakpoints, dosage, and optimal combination regimens in
patients, and to design nonclinical experiments in animal models. The
Pre-Clinical and Clinical Sciences Working Group within CPTR executed an
evidence-based evaluation of the HFS-TB for predictive accuracy. This extensive
effort was enabled through the collaboration of subject matter experts
representing the pharmaceutical industry, academia, product development
partnerships, and regulatory authorities including the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA). A comprehensive
analysis plan following the regulatory guidance documents for DDT qualification
was developed, followed by individual discussions with the FDA and the EMA. The
results from the quantitative analyses were submitted to both agencies, pursuing 
regulatory DDT endorsement. The EMA Qualification Opinion for the HFS-TB DDT was 
published 26 January 2015 (available at:
http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/regulation/document_listing/doc
ument_listing_000319.jsp).

Â© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/civ424 
PMID: 26224771  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

