
1. Am J Transplant. 2016 Jan;16(1):221-34. doi: 10.1111/ajt.13416. Epub 2015 Jul 30.

Nonchimeric HLA-Identical Renal Transplant Tolerance: Regulatory
Immunophenotypic/Genomic Biomarkers.

Leventhal JR(1)(2), Mathew JM(1)(2)(3), Salomon DR(4), Kurian SM(4), Friedewald
JJ(1)(5), Gallon L(1)(5), Konieczna I(1), Tambur AR(1)(2), Charette J(1)(2),
Levitsky J(1)(6), Jie C(1), Kanwar YS(7), Abecassis MM(1)(2)(3), Miller J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Transplant Center, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL.
(2)Department of Surgery-Transplantation, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL.
(3)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL.
(4)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA.
(5)Department of Medicine-Nephrology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL.
(6)Department of Medicine-Hepatology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL.
(7)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL.

We previously described early results of a nonchimeric operational tolerance
protocol in human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-identical living donor renal
transplants and now update these results. Recipients given alemtuzumab,
tacrolimus/MPA with early sirolimus conversion were multiply infused with donor
hematopoietic CD34(+) stem cells. Immunosuppression was withdrawn by 24 months.
Twelve months later, operational tolerance was confirmed by rejection-free
transplant biopsies. Five of the first eight enrollees were initially tolerant 1 
year off immunosuppression. Biopsies of three others after total withdrawal
showed Banff 1A acute cellular rejection without renal dysfunction. With longer
follow-up including 5-year posttransplant biopsies, four of the five tolerant
recipients remain without rejection while one developed Banff 1A without renal
dysfunction. We now add seven new subjects (two operationally tolerant), and
demonstrate time-dependent increases of circulating CD4(+) CD25(+++) CD127(-)
FOXP3(+) Tregs versus losses of Tregs in nontolerant subjects (p < 0.001). Gene
expression signatures, developed using global RNA expression profiling of
sequential whole blood and protocol biopsy samples, were highly associative with 
operational tolerance as early as 1 year posttransplant. The blood signature was 
validated by an external Immune Tolerance Network data set. Our approach to
nonchimeric operational HLA-identical tolerance reveals association with Treg
immunophenotypes and serial gene expression profiles.

© Copyright 2015 The American Society of Transplantation and the American Society
of Transplant Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1111/ajt.13416 
PMCID: PMC4718825
PMID: 26227106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

