
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2015 Nov;81:180-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2015.07.045. Epub
2015 Jul 29.

A cold-adapted, solvent and salt tolerant esterase from marine bacterium
Psychrobacter pacificensis.

Wu G(1), Zhang X(2), Wei L(2), Wu G(2), Kumar A(2), Mao T(2), Liu Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Plant Science
and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Life Science and
Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Shizishan street, Wuhan 430070,
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Life Science and
Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Shizishan street, Wuhan 430070,
China. Electronic address: lzd@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Lipolytic enzymes with unique physico-chemical characteristics are gaining more
attention for their immense industrial importance. In this study, a novel
lipolytic enzyme (Est11) was cloned from the genomic library of a marine
bacterium Psychrobacter pacificensis. The enzyme was expressed in Escherichia
coli and purified to homogeneity with molecular mass of 32.9kDa. The recombinant 
Est11 was able to hydrolyze short chain esters (C2-C8) and displayed an optimum
activity against butyrate ester (C4). The optimal temperature and pH were 25°C
and 7.5, respectively. Est11 retained more than 70% of its original activity at
10°C, suggesting that it was a cold-active esterase. The enzyme was highly active
and stable at high concentration of NaCl (5M). Further, incubation with ethanol, 
isopropanol, propanediol, DMSO, acetonitrile, and glycerol rendered remarkable
positive effects on Est11 activity. Typically, even at the concentration of 30%
(v/v), ethanol, DMSO, and propanediol increased Est11 activity by 1.3, 2.0, and
2.4-folds, respectively. This new robust enzyme with remarkable properties like
cold-adaptability, exceptional tolerance to salt and organic solvents provides us
a promising candidate to meet the needs of some harsh industrial processes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2015.07.045 
PMID: 26231332  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

