
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Oct 16;10(10):2382-92. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.5b00444. Epub 
2015 Aug 17.

Beyond a Fluorescent Probe: Inhibition of Cell Division Protein FtsZ by mant-GTP 
Elucidated by NMR and Biochemical Approaches.

Huecas S(1), Marcelo F(1)(2), Perona A(3), Ruiz-Ávila LB(1), Morreale A(3),
Cañada FJ(1), Jiménez-Barbero J(1), Andreu JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, CIB-CSIC , Ramiro de Maeztu 9, 28040
Madrid, Spain.
(2)UCIBIO, REQUIMTE , Dept. de Química, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, UNL, 
2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.
(3)Unidad de Bioinformática, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa,
CBMSO-CSIC , Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

FtsZ is the organizer of cell division in most bacteria and a target in the quest
for new antibiotics. FtsZ is a tubulin-like GTPase, in which the active site is
completed at the interface with the next subunit in an assembled FtsZ filament.
Fluorescent mant-GTP has been extensively used for competitive binding studies of
nucleotide analogs and synthetic GTP-replacing inhibitors possessing
antibacterial activity. However, its mode of binding and whether the mant tag
interferes with FtsZ assembly function were unknown. Mant-GTP exists in
equilibrium as a mixture of C2'- and C3'-substituted isomers. We have unraveled
the molecular recognition process of mant-GTP by FtsZ monomers. Both isomers bind
in the anti glycosidic bond conformation: 2'-mant-GTP in two ribose puckering
conformations and 3'-mant-GTP in the preferred C2' endo conformation. In each
case, the mant tag strongly interacts with FtsZ at an extension of the GTP
binding site, which is also supported by molecular dynamics simulations.
Importantly, mant-GTP binding induces archaeal FtsZ polymerization into inactive 
curved filaments that cannot hydrolyze the nucleotide, rather than straight
GTP-hydrolyzing assemblies, and also inhibits normal assembly of FtsZ from the
Gram-negative bacterium Escherichia coli but is hydrolyzed by FtsZ from
Gram-positive Bacillus subtilis. Thus, the specific interactions provided by the 
fluorescent mant tag indicate a new way to search for synthetic FtsZ inhibitors
that selectively suppress the cell division of bacterial pathogens.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.5b00444 
PMID: 26247422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

