
1. Methods Enzymol. 2015;560:355-76. doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2015.03.002. Epub 2015 Apr 
25.

Radical SAM-Mediated Methylation of Ribosomal RNA.

Stojković V(1), Fujimori DG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California
San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California
San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA; Department of Pharmaceutical
Chemistry, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California,
USA. Electronic address: danica.fujimori@ucsf.edu.

While RNA methylation occurs in all kingdoms of life, the type and the
distribution of different methylated species varies substantially among archaea, 
bacteria, and eukaryotes. The most prevalent type of RNA methylation is
methylation of nucleobases. However, despite recent advances in our knowledge of 
these marks, the biological roles of such modifications are still incompletely
understood (Machnicka et al., 2013; Motorin & Helm, 2011; Sergeeva et al., 2014; 
Sergiev et al., 2011). A number of mechanisms have evolved to enable RNA
methylation, which are tuned to the electronic demands of the substrate. Herein, 
we provide an overview of methods for expression, purification, and activity
analysis of a specific type of RNA methylating enzymes, radical SAM
methylsynthases. These enzymes modify the amidine carbon atoms of an adenosine,
A2503, in bacterial 23S rRNA. The activities of these enzymes have only been
recently reconstituted (Yan et al., 2010), which can be attributed to the complex
anaerobic catalysis that they perform. As the substrate A2503 is located at the
nascent peptide exit tunnel of the bacterial ribosome, methylations catalyzed by 
these enzymes have profound impact on the biology of the host strain. RlmN, an
endogenous protein found in all bacteria, methylates the C2 amidine carbon and
contributes to the translational fidelity (Benitez-Paez et al., 2012; Ramu et
al., 2011; Vazquez-Laslop, Ramu, Klepacki, Kannan, & Mankin, 2010). Cfr, found in
pathogenic species, methylates the C8 amidine carbon, a modification that confers
resistance to various classes of antibiotics (Giessing et al., 2009; Long et al.,
2006; Smith & Mankin, 2008). Interestingly, C2 methylated adenosine was recently 
detected in a subset of tRNAs, raising the question of the physiological role of 
this modification (Benitez-Paez et al., 2012). With an increase in available
whole genome sequences, the development of methods to identify target substrates 
of RNA methylating enzymes (Khoddami & Cairns, 2013; Meyer et al., 2012; Tim,
Katharina, & Matthias, 2010), as well as advances in the characterization of
their activities, we anticipate the coming years will unravel novel aspects of
mechanisms of the RNA methylation and deepen insight into the function of the
resulting modification.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mie.2015.03.002 
PMCID: PMC4530497
PMID: 26253978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

