
1. Endocrinology. 2015 Nov;156(11):3937-49. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1304. Epub 2015 Aug
7.

Heme Oxygenase-1 Induction Prevents Autoimmune Diabetes in Association With
Pancreatic Recruitment of M2-Like Macrophages, Mesenchymal Cells, and Fibrocytes.

Husseini M(1), Wang GS(1), Patrick C(1), Crookshank JA(1), MacFarlane AJ(1), Noel
JA(1), Strom A(1), Scott FW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chronic Disease Program (M.H., G.-S.W., C.P., J.A.C., J.A.N., A.S., F.W.S.),
Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6 and
Departments of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology (M.H., C.P., A.J.M.,
J.A.N., F.W.S.) and Medicine (F.W.S.), University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada K1H 8L6; Food Directorate (A.J.M.), Health Products and Food Branch,
Health Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1A 0K9.

Immunoregulatory and regenerative processes are activated in the pancreas during 
the development of type 1 diabetes (T1D) but are insufficient to prevent the
disease. We hypothesized that the induction of cytoprotective heme oxygenase-1
(HO-1) by cobalt protophoryrin (CoPP) would prevent T1D by promoting
anti-inflammatory and pro-repair processes. Diabetes-prone BioBreeding rats
received ip CoPP or saline twice per week for 3 weeks, starting at 30 days and
were monitored for T1D. Immunohistochemistry, confocal microscopy, quantitative
RT-PCR, and microarrays were used to evaluate postinjection pancreatic changes at
51 days, when islet inflammation is first visible. T1D was prevented in
CoPP-treated rats (29% vs 73%). Pancreatic Hmox1 was up-regulated along with
islet-associated CD68(+)HO-1(+) cells, which were also observed in a striking
peri-lobular interstitial infiltrate. Most interstitial cells expressed the
mesenchymal marker vimentin and the hematopoietic marker CD34. Spindle-shaped,
CD34(+)vimentin(+) cells coexpressed collagen V, characteristic of fibrocytes. M2
macrophage factors Krüppel-like factor 4, CD163, and CD206 were expressed by
interstitial cells, consistent with pancreatic upregulation of several
M2-associated genes. CoPP upregulated islet-regenerating REG genes and increased 
neogenic REG3β(+) and insulin(+) clusters. Thus, short-term induction of HO-1
promoted a protective M2-like milieu in the pancreas and recruited mesenchymal
cells, M2 macrophages, and fibrocytes that imparted immunoregulatory and
pro-repair effects, preventing T1D.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2015-1304 
PMID: 26252059  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

