
1. Nat Commun. 2015 Aug 10;6:7904. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8904.

The chromatin remodeller RSF1 is essential for PLK1 deposition and function at
mitotic kinetochores.

Lee HS(1)(2), Park YY(1), Cho MY(1)(2), Chae S(1), Yoo YS(1)(2), Kwon MH(2)(3),
Lee CW(4), Cho H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon 443-380,
Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Graduate School of Ajou University, Suwon
443-380, Korea.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon 443-380,
Korea.
(4)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, Suwon 440-746, Korea.

Accumulation of PLK1 at kinetochores is essential for chromosome alignment and
segregation; however, the mechanism underlying PLK1 recruitment to kinetochores
remains unresolved. The chromatin remodeller RSF1 tightly associates with
centromere proteins, but its mitotic function is unknown. Here we show that RSF1 
localizes at mitotic kinetochores and directly binds PLK1. RSF1 depletion
disrupts localization of PLK1 at kinetochores; the C-terminal fragment of RSF1,
which can bind PLK1, is sufficient to restore PLK1 localization. Moreover, CDK1
phosphorylates RSF1 at Ser1375, and this phosphorylation is necessary for PLK1
recruitment. Subsequently, PLK1 phosphorylates RSF1 at Ser1359, stabilizing PLK1 
deposition. Importantly, RSF1 depletion mimicks the chromosome misalignment
phenotype resulting from PLK1 knockdown; these defects are rescued by RSF1 S1375D
or RSF1 S1359D but not RSF1 S1375A, showing a functional link between
phosphorylation of RSF1 and chromosome alignment. Together, these data show that 
RSF1 is an essential centromeric component that recruits PLK1 to kinetochores and
plays a crucial role in faithful cell division.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms8904 
PMCID: PMC4918322
PMID: 26259146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

