
1. Kanho Hakhoe Chi. 1989 Dec;19(3):240-8.

[Respiratory hospital infections of patients with a tracheostomy].

[Article in Korean]

Yang SJ, Choi HJ, Kim MS.

The increase in size and numbers of general hospitals in the process of
conspicuous development of modern medicine has been accompanied by a serious
increase in hospital acquired infections. Hospital acquired infections cause pain
and discomfort, may threaten life, adds an economic burden, and delays recovery
and return to society. Even though respiratory hospital infection rates resulting
for tracheostomy and respiratory inhalation therapy, may be low, they are serious
because of their bad prognosis and high mortality rates. This study was designed 
to assess certain aspects of respiratory infections of patients with a
tracheostomy and thus provide baseline data for further research related to
preventive or therapeutic nursing interventions. The specific objectives were to 
determine the incidence of colonization in the trachea, clinical signs, type of
colonized bacteria and sensitivity to antibiotics. Data were collected from July 
1 to December 10, 1989 at two university Hospital in Seoul. Subjects were 20
patients with a tracheostomy admitted to the Intensive Care Unit or Cerebral
Vascular Accident Center. Clinical signs related to respiratory infection were
observed using a checklist based on previous study outcomes. Bacterial culture,
sensitivity test to antibiotics, WBC counts and chest X-ray were also performed. 
Cultures were done on the day of tracheostomy, and on the third, fifth and
seventh day. Cultures were then done on seventh days after the first
colonization. The results were as follows: 1. The incidence of bacteria
colonization in a week was 90% (18 patients); 50% (10/20 patients) on the day of 
tracheostomy, 70% (7/10 patients) on the third day, and 0% on the fifth day, and 
33% (1/3 patient) on the seventh day. 3 of 18 patients (16.7%) were colonies of
mixed growth isolated.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.4040/jnas.1989.19.3.240 
PMID: 2625834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

