
1. Chembiochem. 2015 Sep 21;16(14):1993-6. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201500305. Epub 2015
Aug 10.

Widening the Product Profile of Carbon Dioxide Reduction by Vanadium Nitrogenase.

Rebelein JG(1), Hu Y(2), Ribbe MW(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California in 
Irvine, 2230/2236 McGaugh Hall, Irvine, CA, 92697-3900, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California in 
Irvine, 2230/2236 McGaugh Hall, Irvine, CA, 92697-3900, USA. yilinh@uci.edu.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California in 
Irvine, 2230/2236 McGaugh Hall, Irvine, CA, 92697-3900, USA. mribbe@uci.edu.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of California in Irvine, 2236 McGaugh
Hall, Irvine, CA, 92697-2025, USA. mribbe@uci.edu.

Two reaction systems based on vanadium nitrogenase were previously shown to
reduce CO2 to hydrocarbons: 1) an enzyme-based system that used both components
of V nitrogenase for ATP-dependent reduction of CO2 to ≤C2 hydrocarbons; and 2) a
cofactor-based system that employed SmI2 to supply electrons to the isolated
V cluster for an ATP-independent reduction of CO2 to ≤C3 hydrocarbons. Here, we
report ATP-independent reduction of CO2 to hydrocarbons by a reaction system
comprising Eu(II) DTPA and the VFe protein of V nitrogenase. Combining features
of both enzyme- and cofactor-based systems, this system exhibits improved C-C
coupling and a broader product profile of ≤C4 hydrocarbons. The C-C coupling does
not employ CO2 -derived CO, and it is significantly enhanced in D2 O. These
observations afford initial insights into the characteristics of this unique
reaction and provide a potential template for future design of catalysts to
recycle the greenhouse gas CO2 into useful products.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201500305 
PMCID: PMC4696554
PMID: 26266490  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

