
1. J Bacteriol. 2015 Oct;197(20):3339-53. doi: 10.1128/JB.00349-15. Epub 2015 Aug
10.

NanI Sialidase, CcpA, and CodY Work Together To Regulate Epsilon Toxin Production
by Clostridium perfringens Type D Strain CN3718.

Li J(1), Freedman JC(1), McClane BA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA bamcc@pitt.edu.

Clostridium perfringens type D strains are usually associated with diseases of
livestock, and their virulence requires the production of epsilon toxin (ETX). We
previously showed (J. Li, S. Sayeed, S. Robertson, J. Chen, and B. A. McClane,
PLoS Pathog 7:e1002429, 2011, http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1002429)
that BMC202, a nanI null mutant of type D strain CN3718, produces less ETX than
wild-type CN3718 does. The current study proved that the lower ETX production by 
strain BMC202 is due to nanI gene disruption, since both genetic and physical
(NanI or sialic acid) complementation increased ETX production by BMC202.
Furthermore, a sialidase inhibitor that interfered with NanI activity also
reduced ETX production by wild-type CN3718. The NanI effect on ETX production was
shown to involve reductions in codY and ccpA gene transcription levels in BMC202 
versus wild-type CN3718. Similar to CodY, CcpA was found to positively control
ETX production. A double codY ccpA null mutant produced even less ETX than a codY
or ccpA single null mutant. CcpA bound directly to sequences upstream of the etx 
or codY start codon, and bioinformatics identified putative CcpA-binding cre
sites immediately upstream of both the codY and etx start codons, suggesting
possible direct CcpA regulatory effects. A ccpA mutation also decreased codY
transcription, suggesting that CcpA effects on ETX production can be both direct 
and indirect, including effects on codY transcription. Collectively, these
results suggest that NanI, CcpA, and CodY work together to regulate ETX
production, with NanI-generated sialic acid from the intestines possibly
signaling type D strains to upregulate their ETX production and induce
disease.IMPORTANCE: Clostridium perfringens NanI was previously shown to increase
ETX binding to, and cytotoxicity for, MDCK host cells. The current study
demonstrates that NanI also regulates ETX production via increased transcription 
of genes encoding the CodY and CcpA global regulators. Results obtained using
single ccpA or codY null mutants and a ccpA codY double null mutant showed that
codY and ccpA regulate ETX production independently of one another but that ccpA 
also affects codY transcription. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and
bioinformatic analyses suggest that both CodY and CcpA may directly regulate etx 
transcription. Collectively, results of this study suggest that sialic acid
generated by NanI from intestinal sources signals ETX-producing C. perfringens
strains, via CcpA and CodY, to upregulate ETX production and cause disease.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00349-15 
PMCID: PMC4573732
PMID: 26260460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

