
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Mar;1858(3):512-25. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2015.08.006.
Epub 2015 Aug 14.

Pore-forming activity of clostridial binary toxins.

Knapp O(1), Benz R(2), Popoff MR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Bactéries anaérobies et Toxines, Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr Roux, Paris,
France.
(2)Department of Life Sciences and Chemistry, Jacobs University, Campusring 1,
28759 Bremen, Germany.
(3)Bactéries anaérobies et Toxines, Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr Roux, Paris,
France. Electronic address: mpopoff@pasteur.fr.

Clostridial binary toxins (Clostridium perfringens Iota toxin, Clostridium
difficile transferase, Clostridium spiroforme toxin, Clostridium botulinum C2
toxin) as Bacillus binary toxins, including Bacillus anthracis toxins consist of 
two independent proteins, one being the binding component which mediates the
internalization into cell of the intracellularly active component. Clostridial
binary toxins induce actin cytoskeleton disorganization through
mono-ADP-ribosylation of globular actin and are responsible for enteric diseases.
Clostridial and Bacillus binary toxins share structurally and functionally
related binding components which recognize specific cell receptors, oligomerize, 
form pores in endocytic vesicle membrane, and mediate the transport of the
enzymatic component into the cytosol. Binding components retain the global
structure of pore-forming toxins (PFTs) from the cholesterol-dependent cytotoxin 
family such as perfringolysin. However, their pore-forming activity notably that 
of clostridial binding components is more related to that of heptameric PFT
family including aerolysin and C. perfringens epsilon toxin. This review focuses 
upon pore-forming activity of clostridial binary toxins compared to other related
PFTs. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Pore-Forming Toxins
edited by Mauro Dalla Serra and Franco Gambale.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2015.08.006 
PMID: 26278641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

