
1. J Immunol. 2015 Sep 15;195(6):2774-87. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401348. Epub 2015
Aug 17.

The Novel Receptor C5aR2 Is Required for C5a-Mediated Human Mast Cell Adhesion,
Migration, and Proinflammatory Mediator Production.

Pundir P(1), MacDonald CA(2), Kulka M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Atlantic Veterinary College, University of 
Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island C1A 4P3, Canada;
(2)National Institute for Nanotechnology, National Research Council Canada,
Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2M9, Canada; and.
(3)National Institute for Nanotechnology, National Research Council Canada,
Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2M9, Canada; and Department of Medical Microbiology and
Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G
2E1, Canada marianna.kulka@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca.

C5a generated during complement activation possesses proinflammatory and
immunoregulatory properties critical for the development and modulation of
allergic immune responses. In immune cells, C5a mediates its effects through
binding to two G protein-coupled receptors, C5aR1 and C5aR2. Mast cells are key
effectors in allergic reactions, and decades of research have suggested that the 
majority of C5a effects on mast cells are mediated through C5aR1, whereas the
expression and function of C5aR2 have not been explored. We demonstrated that the
human mast cell line Laboratory of Allergic Diseases 2 (LAD2) expresses surface
C5aR2 but not C5aR1, whereas CD34(+) cell-derived primary mast cells do not
express surface C5aR1 or C5aR2. Stem cell factor and IL-4 upregulated C5aR2
expression on LAD2 cells. Furthermore, C5a caused internalization of LAD2
cell-surface C5aR2. We therefore used LAD2 cells as a model to study
C5a/C5aR2-induced biological responses and signaling in human mast cells. We
found that whereas C5a was unable to induce degranulation, it stimulated GM-CSF, 
TNF, CXCL10, and CCL2 production. C5a caused ERK phosphorylation, a signaling
molecule important in cytokine and chemokine generation. In addition, C5a
stimulated adhesion and chemotaxis of mast cells. Wortmannin, an inhibitor of
PI3K, and small interfering RNA against β-arrestin-2 blocked C5a-induced
adhesion. Silencing of C5aR2 using lentiviral short hairpin RNA rendered the
cells unresponsive to C5a-induced adhesion, chemotaxis, and mediator release, as 
well as ERK phosphorylation. Overall, this study reveals a novel role for C5aR2
in C5a-mediated activation of mast cells and demonstrates that C5aR2 ligation
initiates a β-arrestin-2-, PI3K-, and ERK-dependent signaling pathway in these
cells.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401348 
PMID: 26283482  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

