
1. J Immunol. 2015 Oct 1;195(7):3472-81. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500258. Epub 2015
Aug 21.

Human Mucosa-Associated Invariant T Cells Accumulate in Colon Adenocarcinomas but
Produce Reduced Amounts of IFN-γ.

Sundström P(1), Ahlmanner F(1), Akéus P(1), Sundquist M(1), Alsén S(1), Yrlid
U(1), Börjesson L(2), Sjöling Å(3), Gustavsson B(2), Wong SB(4), Quiding-Järbrink
M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden;
(2)Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, 413 35 Gothenburg, Sweden;
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden;
Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77
Stockholm, Sweden;
(4)Department of Pathology, National University Hospital, Singapore 119074; and
Department of Microbiology, National University, Singapore 119260.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden;
marianne.quiding@microbio.gu.se.

Mucosa-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells are innate-like T cells with a
conserved TCR α-chain recognizing bacterial metabolites presented on the
invariant MHC-related 1 molecule. MAIT cells are present in intestinal tissues
and liver, and they rapidly secrete IFN-γ and IL-17 in response to bacterial
insult. In colon cancer, IL-17-driven inflammation promotes tumor progression,
whereas IFN-γ production is essential for antitumor immunity. Thus,
tumor-associated MAIT cells may affect antitumor immune responses by their
secreted cytokines. However, the knowledge of MAIT cell presence and function in 
tumors is virtually absent. In this study, we determined the frequency,
phenotype, and functional capacity of MAIT cells in colon adenocarcinomas and
unaffected colon lamina propria. Flow cytometric analyses showed significant
accumulation of MAIT cells in tumor tissue, irrespective of tumor stage or
localization. Colonic MAIT cells displayed an activated memory phenotype and
expression of chemokine receptors CCR6 and CCR9. Most MAIT cells in unaffected
colon tissues produced IFN-γ, whereas only few produced IL-17. Colonic MAIT cells
also produced TNF-α, IL-2, and granzyme B. In the tumors, significantly lower
frequencies of IFN-γ-producing MAIT cells were seen, whereas there were no
differences in the other cytokines analyzed, and in vitro studies showed that
secreted factors from tumor tissue reduced IFN-γ production from MAIT cells. In
conclusion, MAIT cells infiltrate colon tumors but their ability to produce IFN-γ
is substantially reduced. We suggest that MAIT cells have the capacity to promote
local immune responses to tumors, but factors in the tumor microenvironment act
to reduce MAIT cell IFN-γ production.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500258 
PMID: 26297765  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

