
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Dec;98(6):1049-60. doi: 10.1189/jlb.3A0315-085R. Epub 2015
Aug 21.

Serum amyloid A1α induces paracrine IL-8/CXCL8 via TLR2 and directly synergizes
with this chemokine via CXCR2 and formyl peptide receptor 2 to recruit
neutrophils.

De Buck M(1), Berghmans N(1), Pörtner N(1), Vanbrabant L(1), Cockx M(1), Struyf
S(1), Opdenakker G(1), Proost P(1), Van Damme J(2), Gouwy M(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Laboratory of Immunobiology, Rega
Institute for Medical Research, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)*Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Laboratory of Immunobiology, Rega
Institute for Medical Research, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium jo.vandamme@rega.kuleuven.be.

Cell migration depends on the ability of leukocytes to sense an external gradient
of chemotactic proteins produced during inflammation. These proteins include
chemokines, complement factors, and some acute phase proteins, such as serum
amyloid A. Serum amyloid A chemoattracts neutrophils, monocytes, and T
lymphocytes via its G protein-coupled receptor formyl peptide receptor 2. We
demonstrate that serum amyloid A1α more potently chemoattracts neutrophils in
vivo than in vitro. In contrast to CD14(+) monocytes, no rapid (within 2 h)
induction of interleukin-8/CXC chemokine ligand 8 or macrophage-inflammatory
protein-1α/CC chemokine ligand 3 was observed in purified human neutrophils after
stimulation of the cells with serum amyloid A1α or lipopolysaccharide. Moreover, 
interleukin-8/CXC chemokine ligand 8 induction in monocytes by serum amyloid A1α 
was mediated by toll-like receptor 2 and was inhibited by association of serum
amyloid A1α with high density lipoprotein. This indicates that the potent
chemotactic response of neutrophils toward intraperitoneally injected serum
amyloid A1α is indirectly enhanced by rapid induction of chemokines in peritoneal
cells, synergizing in a paracrine manner with serum amyloid A1α. We observed
direct synergy between IL-8/CXC chemokine ligand 8 and serum amyloid A1α, but not
lipopolysaccharide, in chemotaxis and shape change assays with neutrophils.
Furthermore, the selective CXC chemokine receptor 2 and formyl peptide receptor 2
antagonists, SB225002 and WRW4, respectively, blocked the synergy between
IL-8/CXC chemokine ligand 8 and serum amyloid A1α in neutrophil chemotaxis in
vitro, indicating that for synergy their corresponding G protein-coupled
receptors are required. Additionally, SB225002 significantly inhibited serum
amyloid A1α-mediated peritoneal neutrophil influx. Taken together, endogenous
(e.g., IL-1β) and exogenous (e.g., lipopolysaccharide) inflammatory mediators
induce primary chemoattractants such as serum amyloid A that synergize in an
autocrine (monocyte) or a paracrine (neutrophil) fashion with secondary
chemokines induced in stromal cells.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.3A0315-085R 
PMID: 26297794  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

