
1. PLoS Genet. 2015 Aug 20;11(8):e1005439. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005439.
eCollection 2015 Aug.

Loss and Gain of Natural Killer Cell Receptor Function in an African
Hunter-Gatherer Population.

Hilton HG(1), Norman PJ(1), Nemat-Gorgani N(1), Goyos A(1), Hollenbach JA(2),
Henn BM(3), Gignoux CR(4), Guethlein LA(1), Parham P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Structural Biology and Microbiology & Immunology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, California, 
United States of America.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolution, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New 
York, United States of America.
(4)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, United States of America.

Modulating natural killer cell functions in human immunity and reproduction are
diverse interactions between the killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) 
of Natural Killer (NK) cells and HLA class I ligands on the surface of tissue
cells. Dominant interactions are between KIR2DL1 and the C2 epitope of HLA-C and 
between KIR2DL2/3 and the C1 epitope of HLA-C. KhoeSan hunter-gatherers of
Southern Africa represent the earliest population divergence known and are the
most genetically diverse indigenous people, qualities reflected in their KIR and 
HLA genes. Of the ten KhoeSan KIR2DL1 alleles, KIR2DL1*022 and KIR2DL1*026 likely
originated in the KhoeSan, and later were transmitted at low frequency to the
neighboring Zulus through gene flow. These alleles arose by point mutation from
other KhoeSan KIR2DL1 alleles that are more widespread globally. Mutation of
KIR2DL1*001 gave rise to KIR2DL1*022, causing loss of C2 recognition and gain of 
C1 recognition. This makes KIR2DL1*022 a more avid and specific C1 receptor than 
any KIR2DL2/3 allotype. Mutation of KIR2DL1*012 gave rise to KIR2DL1*026, causing
premature termination of translation at the end of the transmembrane domain. This
makes KIR2DL1*026 a membrane-associated receptor that lacks both a cytoplasmic
tail and signaling function. At higher frequencies than their parental allotypes,
the combined effect of the KhoeSan-specific KIR2DL1*022 and KIR2DL1*026 is to
reduce the frequency of strong inhibitory C2 receptors and increase the frequency
of strong inhibitory C1 receptors. Because interaction of KIR2DL1 with C2 is
associated with risk of pregnancy disorder, these functional changes are
potentially advantageous. Whereas all other KhoeSan KIR2DL1 alleles are present
on a wide diversity of centromeric KIR haplotypes, KIR2DL1*026 is present on a
single KIR haplotype and KIR2DL1*022 is present on two very similar haplotypes.
The high linkage disequilibrium across their haplotypes is consistent with a
recent emergence for these KIR2DL1 alleles that have distinctive functions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005439 
PMCID: PMC4546388
PMID: 26292085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

