
1. Apoptosis. 2015 Oct;20(10):1271-80. doi: 10.1007/s10495-015-1161-x.

An epistatic effect of apaf-1 and caspase-9 on chlamydial infection.

Rahman MA(1), Shirai M, Aziz MA, Ushirokita R, Kubota S, Suzuki H, Azuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Yamaguchi University School of
Medicine, 1-1-1, Minamikogushi, Ube, Yamaguchi, 755-8505, Japan.

Chlamydia is an obligate intracellular bacterial pathogen that replicates solely 
within a membrane-bound vacuole termed an inclusion. Chlamydia seems to perturb
multiple cellular processes of the host, such as, rearrangement of the membrane
trafficking system for its intracellular multiplication, and inhibition of host
cell apoptosis for persistent infection. In an attempt to clarify host factor
involvement in apoptosis regulation, we found that inhibition of Caspase-9
restricted, while Apaf-1 promoted, Chlamydia pneumoniae infection in HEp-2, HeLa,
and mouse epithelial fibroblast (MEF) cells. These opposition contributions to
the chlamydial infection were confirmed using caspase-9 (-/-) and apaf-1 (-/-)
MEFs. Similar phenomena also appeared in the case of infection with Chlamydia
trachomatis. Interestingly, caspase-9 in apaf-1 (-/-) MEFs was activated by
chlamydial infection but during the infection caspase-3 was not activated. That
is, caspase-9 was activated without support for multiplication and activation by 
Apaf-1, and the activated caspase-9 may be physically disconnected from the
caspase cascade. This may be partially explained by the observation of caspase-9 
accumulation within chlamydial inclusions. The sequestration of caspase-9 by
chlamydia seems to result in apoptosis repression, which is crucial for the
chlamydial development cycle. Because Apaf-1 shares domains with intracellular
innate immune receptor NOD1, it may play a key role in the strategy to regulate
chlamydial infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s10495-015-1161-x 
PMCID: PMC4560761
PMID: 26290316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

