
1. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 25;10(8):e0136261. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136261.
eCollection 2015.

Ralstonia solanacearum RSp0194 Encodes a Novel 3-Keto-Acyl Carrier Protein
Synthase III.

Mao YH(1), Ma JC(1), Li F(1), Hu Z(1), Wang HH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Protein Function and Regulation in
Agricultural Organisms, College of Life Sciences, South China Agricultural
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510642, China.

Fatty acid synthesis (FAS), a primary metabolic pathway, is essential for
survival of bacteria. Ralstonia solanacearum, a Î²-proteobacteria member, causes a
bacterial wilt affecting more than 200 plant species, including many economically
important plants. However, thus far, the fatty acid biosynthesis pathway of R.
solanacearum has not been well studied. In this study, we characterized two forms
of 3-keto-ACP synthase III, RsFabH and RsFabW, in R. solanacearum. RsFabH, the
homologue of Escherichia coli FabH, encoded by the chromosomal RSc1050 gene,
catalyzes the condensation of acetyl-CoA with malonyl-ACP in the initiation steps
of fatty acid biosynthesis in vitro. The RsfabH mutant lost de novo fatty acid
synthetic ability, and grows in medium containing free fatty acids. RsFabW, a
homologue of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA3286, encoded by a megaplasmid gene,
RSp0194, condenses acyl-CoA (C2-CoA to C10-CoA) with malonyl-ACP to produce
3-keto-acyl-ACP in vitro. Although the RsfabW mutant was viable, RsfabW was
responsible for RsfabH mutant growth on medium containing free fatty acids. Our
results also showed that RsFabW could condense acyl-ACP (C4-ACP to C8-ACP) with
malonyl-ACP, to produce 3-keto-acyl-ACP in vitro, which implies that RsFabW plays
a special role in fatty acid synthesis of R. solanacearum. All of these data
confirm that R. solanacearum not only utilizes acetyl-CoA, but also, utilizes
medium-chain acyl-CoAs or acyl-ACPs as primers to initiate fatty acid synthesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136261 
PMCID: PMC4549310
PMID: 26305336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

