
1. Chembiochem. 2015 Oct 12;16(15):2237-43. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201500393. Epub 2015
Sep 2.

Isolation and Biosynthesis of an Azoxyalkene Compound Produced by a Multiple Gene
Disruptant of Streptomyces rochei.

Kunitake H(1), Hiramatsu T(1), Kinashi H(1), Arakawa K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Graduate School of Advanced Sciences of
Matter, Hiroshima University, 1-3-1 Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima,
739-8530, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Graduate School of Advanced Sciences of
Matter, Hiroshima University, 1-3-1 Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima,
739-8530, Japan. karakawa@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

Streptomyces rochei 7434AN4 predominantly produces lankacidin and lankamycin
under normal culture conditions, thus suggesting that other biosynthetic gene
clusters for secondary metabolites are silent. To identify the silent metabolites
of 7434AN4, we constructed mutant KA57 with multiple disruptions of the
transcriptional repressor srrB and the biosynthesis genes for both antibiotics.
KA57 accumulated a compound (KA57A) with a strong UV absorption at 235 nm, not
detected in the parent strain or other mutants. Various spectroscopic analyses
revealed that KA57A is an azoxyalkene compound with the molecular formula C10 H20
N2 O3 and with the R configuration at C-2. Biosynthesis of KA57A was also studied
by feeding with labeled acetates, amino acids, and 1-hexylamine. The hexenyl
moiety (C1'-C6') was derived from fatty acid, whereas the 3-aminobutan-1,2-diol
moiety (C1-C4) was derived from C-2 of acetate (C1) and serine (C2-C4).
Incorporation of [1,1-(2) H2 ]-1-hexylamine indicated that C1'-C2'
dehydrogenation occurs as the final step of biosynthesis.

Â© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201500393 
PMID: 26300120  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

