
1. J Immunol. 2015 Oct 1;195(7):3160-70. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501358. Epub 2015
Aug 26.

Polymorphic HLA-C Receptors Balance the Functional Characteristics of KIR
Haplotypes.

Hilton HG(1), Guethlein LA(1), Goyos A(1), Nemat-Gorgani N(1), Bushnell DA(2),
Norman PJ(1), Parham P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305; and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305.
(2)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305; and.
(3)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305; and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305 peropa@stanford.edu.

The human killer cell Ig-like receptor (KIR) locus comprises two groups of KIR
haplotypes, termed A and B. These are present in all human populations but with
different relative frequencies, suggesting they have different functional
properties that underlie their balancing selection. We studied the genomic
organization and functional properties of the alleles of the inhibitory and
activating HLA-C receptors encoded by KIR haplotypes. Because every HLA-C
allotype functions as a ligand for KIR, the interactions between KIR and HLA-C
dominate the HLA class I-mediated regulation of human NK cells. The C2 epitope is
recognized by inhibitory KIR2DL1 and activating KIR2DS1, whereas the C1 epitope
is recognized by inhibitory KIR2DL2 and KIR2DL3. This study shows that the
KIR2DL1, KIR2DS1, and KIR2DL2/3 alleles form distinctive phylogenetic clades that
associate with specific KIR haplotypes. KIR A haplotypes are characterized by
KIR2DL1 alleles that encode strong inhibitory C2 receptors and KIR2DL3 alleles
encoding weak inhibitory C1 receptors. In striking contrast, KIR B haplotypes are
characterized by KIR2DL1 alleles that encode weak inhibitory C2 receptors and
KIR2DL2 alleles encoding strong inhibitory C1 receptors. The wide-ranging
properties of KIR allotypes arise from substitutions throughout the KIR molecule.
Such substitutions can influence cell surface expression, as well as the avidity 
and specificity for HLA-C ligands. Consistent with the crucial role of inhibitory
HLA-C receptors in self-recognition, as well as NK cell education and response,
most KIR haplotypes have both a functional C1 and C2 receptor, despite the
considerable variation that occurs in ligand recognition and surface expression.

Copyright Â© 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501358 
PMCID: PMC4575877
PMID: 26311903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

