
1. Eukaryot Cell. 2015 Nov;14(11):1094-101. doi: 10.1128/EC.00118-15. Epub 2015 Aug 
28.

Unfolded Protein Response Pathways in Bloodstream-Form Trypanosoma brucei?

Tiengwe C(1), Brown AE(1), Bangs JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA
jdbangs@buffalo.edu.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a stress mechanism to cope with misfolded 
proteins in the early secretory pathway, the hallmark being transcriptional
upregulation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) molecular chaperones such as BiP and
protein disulfide isomerase. Despite the lack of transcriptional regulation and
the absence of the classical UPR machinery, African trypanosomes apparently
respond to persistent ER stress by a UPR-like response, including upregulation of
BiP, and a related spliced leader silencing (SLS) response whereby SL RNA
transcription is shut down. Initially observed by knockdown of the secretory
protein translocation machinery, both responses are also induced by chemical
agents known to elicit UPR in mammalian cells (H. Goldshmidt, D. Matas, A. Kabi, 
A. Carmi, R. Hope, S. Michaeli, PLoS Pathog 6:e1000731, 2010,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1000731). As these findings were generated
primarily in procyclic-stage trypanosomes, we have investigated both responses in
pathogenic bloodstream-stage parasites. RNA interference (RNAi) silencing of the 
core translocon subunit Trypanosoma brucei Sec61α (TbSec61α) failed to induce
either response. Interestingly, cell growth halted within 16 h of silencing, but 
sufficient TbSec61α remained to allow full competence for translocation of
nascent secretory proteins for up to 24 h, indicating that replication is finely 
coupled with the capacity to synthesize and transport secretory cargo.
Tunicamycin and thapsigargin at concentrations compatible with short-term (4 h)
and long-term (24 h) viability also failed to induce any of the indicators of
UPR-like or SLS responses. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was lethal at all concentrations 
tested. These results indicate that UPR-like and SLS responses to persistent ER
stress do not occur in bloodstream-stage trypanosomes.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00118-15 
PMCID: PMC4621318
PMID: 26318397  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

