
1. Phytopathology. 2015 Dec;105(12):1545-54. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-05-15-0117-R. Epub
2015 Nov 25.

Evaluation of the BlightPro Decision Support System for Management of Potato Late
Blight Using Computer Simulation and Field Validation.

Small IM(1), Joseph L(1), Fry WE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Plant-Microbe Biology, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY 14850.

The objective of this study was to evaluate the utility of the BlightPro decision
support system (DSS) for late blight management using computer simulation and
field tests. Three fungicide schedules were evaluated: (i) calendar-based
(weekly) applications, (ii) applications according to the DSS, or (iii) no
fungicide. Simulation experiments utilized 14 years of weather data from 59
locations in potato-producing states. In situations with unfavorable weather for 
late blight, the DSS recommended fewer fungicide applications with no loss of
disease suppression; and, in situations of very favorable weather for late
blight, the DSS recommended more fungicide applications but with improved disease
suppression. Field evaluation was conducted in 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013. All
experiments involved at least two cultivars with different levels of resistance. 
DSS-guided and weekly scheduled fungicide treatments were successful at
protecting against late blight in all field experiments. As expected, DSS-guided 
schedules were influenced by prevailing weather (observed and forecast) and host 
resistance and resulted in schedules that maintained or improved disease
suppression and average fungicide use efficiency relative to calendar-based
applications. The DSS provides an interactive system that helps users maximize
the efficiency of their crop protection strategy by enabling well-informed
decisions.

DOI: 10.1094/PHYTO-05-15-0117-R 
PMID: 26312965  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

