
1. J Theor Biol. 2015 Nov 21;385:102-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2015.08.009. Epub 2015 
Aug 28.

Role of structural flexibility in the evolution of emerin.

Yuan J(1), Xue B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology and Molecular Biology, School of
Natural Sciences and Mathematics, College of Arts and Sciences, University of
South Florida, 4202 E. Fowler Ave, ISA 2015, Tampa, FL 33620, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology and Molecular Biology, School of
Natural Sciences and Mathematics, College of Arts and Sciences, University of
South Florida, 4202 E. Fowler Ave, ISA 2015, Tampa, FL 33620, USA. Electronic
address: binxue@usf.edu.

Emerin is a short inner nuclear membrane protein with an LEM-domain at the
N-terminal end and a transmembrane domain at the C-terminal end. The middle
region of human emerin contains multiple binding motifs. Since emerin is often
found in evolutionarily newer species, the functional conservation of emerin
becomes an interesting topic. In this study, we have demonstrated that most of
the functional motifs of emerin are intrinsically disordered or highly flexible. 
Many post-translational modification sites and mutation sites are associated with
these disordered regions. The averaged substitution rates of most functional
motifs between species correlate positively with the averaged disorder scores of 
those functional motifs. Human emerin sequence may have acquired new functions on
protein-protein interaction through the formation of hydrophobic motifs in the
middle region, which is resulted from accumulated mutations during the evolution 
process.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2015.08.009 
PMID: 26319992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

