
1. Environ Monit Assess. 2015 Sep;187(9):597. doi: 10.1007/s10661-015-4798-6. Epub
2015 Aug 28.

Bio-optic characterization of Discosphaera tubifer bloom occurs in an overcrowded
fishing harbour at Veraval, India.

Mandal SK(1), Patel VR, Temkar G, George BM, Raman M.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biotechnology and Ecology, Marine Algal Research Station, Central Salt 
and Marine Chemicals Research Institute, Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research (CSIR), Mandapam Camp, Mandapam, Dist-Ramnathapuram, 623519, Tamil Nadu,
India, skmandal@csmcri.org.

Discosphaera tubifer, a coccolithophore has been first time reported as a
bloom-forming organism from an over-crowded fishing harbour at Veraval, west
coast of India. Physiochemical and optical parameters were measured following
standard protocols. Average concentration of inorganic nutrients, such as NO2-N
(17.26 ± 2.92 μM), NO3-N (643.80 ± 215.99 μM), PO4-P (74.10 ± 26.52 μM) and
SiO3-Si (137.66 ± 25.83 μM) were recorded as very high at Veraval port as
compared to other coastal stations i.e., 1.48 ± 0.66, 49.16 ± 13.73, 10.03 ± 5.31
and 96.23 ± 22.74 μM, respectively. The pH and salinity (‰) were observed to be
low (7.80 ± 0.15 and 28.00 ± 4.54 ‰) as compared to coastal seawaters
(8.34 ± 0.06 and 33.24 ± 2.32 ‰). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and spectral
signature (absorbance and reflectance) study revealed that the bloom-forming
organism was D. tubifer. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) study
detected that chlorophyllide-a represent nearly 47.53 % of total pigment
composition followed by chlorophyll c2 (27.40 %) and chlorophyll c3 (14.25 %).
Four prominent absorption peaks were observed within 350 to 700 nm. The first
peak was very wide and ranged from 350 to 530 nm and the rest of the three peaks 
ranged from 550 to 590, 590 to 650 and 650 to 690 nm, respectively. In case of
reflection, three peaks appeared between 550 and 590, 590 and 630 and 630 and 670
nm. Nearly 100 % reflection was observed after 720 nm. The eutrophic condition of
the port water along with low salinity and low pH might be the reason for D.
tubifer bloom formation. This species-specific spectral signature of the D.
tubifer bloom may be helpful for developing algorithm of remote sensing data
analysis.

DOI: 10.1007/s10661-015-4798-6 
PMID: 26314344  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

