
1. Fungal Biol. 2015 Sep;119(9):812-22. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2015.05.005. Epub 2015
May 28.

Substratum preference of two species of Xanthoparmelia.

Deduke C(1), Piercey-Normore MD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba 
R3T 2N2, Canada. Electronic address: umdeduke@myumanitoba.ca.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba 
R3T 2N2, Canada. Electronic address: Michele.Piercey-Normore@umanitoba.ca.

The distribution of established saxicolous lichens has been previously studied
but substratum preference and elemental composition has been relatively
unexplored. The objectives of this study were to compare ascospore germination
and growth for two species of Xanthoparmelia using media supplemented with
pulverized rock and to explore photobiont selectivity relative to ecological
guilds. Mature apothecia from X. cumberlandia and X. viriduloumbrina were
subjected to five treatments, which include water agar supplemented with crushed 
granodiorite, basalt, mica schist, dolostone, and malt yeast agar as the control.
The algal actin gene was sequenced and the closest algal matches were retrieved
from GenBank and analysed to produce a haplotype network. X. cumberlandia
exhibited substratum preference for the mica schist treatment, while X.
viriduloumbrina grew better on granodiorite and malt yeast agar relative to
dolostone. Ascospore germination for both species failed to progress beyond the
initial swelling and protrusion stage on the dolostone treatment. The actin gene 
sequences for the algae were most similar to those of Trebouxia jamesii. The rock
substrates did not correspond with the photobiont haplotypes, which does not
support the ecological guild hypothesis. This study provided insights into
substratum preference and the suitability of the substratum for algal selection.

Copyright © 2015 The British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.funbio.2015.05.005 
PMID: 26321730  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

