
1. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2015 Sep;71(Pt 9):1824-34. doi:
10.1107/S1399004715012067. Epub 2015 Aug 25.

Cap-domain closure enables diverse substrate recognition by the C2-type haloacid 
dehalogenase-like sugar phosphatase Plasmodium falciparum HAD1.

Park J(1), Guggisberg AM(2), Odom AR(1), Tolia NH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO 63110, USA.

Haloacid dehalogenases (HADs) are a large enzyme superfamily of more than 500,000
members with roles in numerous metabolic pathways. Plasmodium falciparum HAD1
(PfHAD1) is a sugar phosphatase that regulates the methylerythritol phosphate
(MEP) pathway for isoprenoid synthesis in malaria parasites. However, the
structural determinants for diverse substrate recognition by HADs are unknown.
Here, crystal structures were determined of PfHAD1 in complex with three sugar
phosphates selected from a panel of diverse substrates that it utilizes. Cap-open
and cap-closed conformations are observed, with cap closure facilitating
substrate binding and ordering. These structural changes define the role of cap
movement within the major subcategory of C2 HAD enzymes. The structures of an HAD
bound to multiple substrates identifies binding and specificity-determining
residues that define the structural basis for substrate recognition and catalysis
within the HAD superfamily. While the substrate-binding region of the cap domain 
is flexible in the open conformations, this region becomes ordered and makes
direct interactions with the substrate in the closed conformations. These studies
further inform the structural and biochemical basis for catalysis within a large 
superfamily of HAD enzymes with diverse functions.

DOI: 10.1107/S1399004715012067 
PMCID: PMC4556313
PMID: 26327372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

