
1. Food Microbiol. 2015 Dec;52:146-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fm.2015.07.015. Epub 2015 Jul
22.

Prevalence of ten putative virulence genes in the emerging foodborne pathogen
Arcobacter isolated from food products.

Girbau C(1), Guerra C(1), Martínez-Malaxetxebarria I(1), Alonso R(1),
Fernández-Astorga A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Paseo de la Universidad 7,
Vitoria-Gasteiz 01006, Spain.
(2)Department of Immunology, Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Paseo de la Universidad 7,
Vitoria-Gasteiz 01006, Spain. Electronic address: aurora.fernandez@ehu.eus.

Arcobacter spp. are considered to be emerging food- and waterborne pathogens for 
both humans and animals. However, their virulence mechanisms are still poorly
understood. In this study the presence of ten virulence genes (cadF, ciaB,
cj1349, hecA, hecB, mviN, pldA, irgA, tlyA and iroE) was assessed in a set of 47 
strains of Arcobacter butzleri, 10 of Arcobacter cryaerophilus and 1 Arcobacter
skirrowii strain recovered from different food products (pork, chicken, beef,
milk, clams and mussels). Overall, the genes cadF, ciaB, cj1349, mviN, pldA and
tlyA were detected in all A. butzleri and A. skirrowii strains. Lower detection
rates were observed for irgA, iroE, hecA and hecB. The genes hecB and iroE were
detected neither in A. cryaerophilus nor in A. skirrowii. The genes hecA and irgA
were not detected in A. skirrowii. It was noteworthy that the genes hecA and hecB
were significantly (P < 0.05) highly detected in A. butzleri strains isolated
from clams compared with strains isolated from milk and chicken. Therefore, our
findings underline clams as a source of A. butzleri strains with high prevalence 
of putative virulence genes. This could be hazardous to human health, especially 
because these bivalves are usually consumed raw or undercooked.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fm.2015.07.015 
PMID: 26338128  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

