
1. Int J Nephrol Renovasc Dis. 2015 Aug 5;8:77-81. doi: 10.2147/IJNRD.S84061.
eCollection 2015.

IgA-dominant post-infectious glomerulonephritis presenting as a fatal
pulmonary-renal syndrome.

Saad M(1), Daoud M(1), Nasr P(1), Syed R(2), El-Sayegh S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Staten Island University Hospital, Staten Island, NY, 
USA.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Staten Island University Hospital, Staten Island,
NY, USA.

Over the last decades, post-infectious glomerulonephritis underwent major changes
in its epidemiology, pathophysiology, and outcomes. We are reporting a case of
IgA-dominant post-infectious glomerulonephritis (IgA-PIGN) presenting as a fatal 
pulmonary-renal syndrome. An 86-year-old Filipino man presented with worsening
dyspnea, hemoptysis, and decreased urine output over 2 weeks. Past medical
history is significant for hypertension, chronic kidney disease stage III, and
pneumonia 3 weeks prior treated with intravenous cefazolin for
methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. Physical examination was 
remarkable for heart rate of 109/min and respiratory rate of 25/min saturating
99% on 3 liters via nasal cannula. There were bibasilar rales in the lungs and
bilateral ankle edema. A chest radiograph showed bibasilar opacifications. Blood 
work was significant for hemoglobin of 8.3 g/dL and creatinine of 9.2 mg/dL
(baseline of 1.67). TTE showed EF 55%. Urinalysis revealed large blood and red
blood cell casts. Kidney ultrasound showed bilateral echogenicity compatible with
renal disease. Pulse methylprednisolone therapy and hemodialysis were initiated
with patient's condition precluding kidney biopsy. Serology workup for rapidly
progressive glomerulonephritis was negative. On day 7, the patient required
mechanical ventilation; bronchoscopy showed alveolar hemorrhage and
plasmapheresis was initiated. Renal biopsy revealed IgA-PIGN with endocapillary
and focal extracapillary proliferative and exudative features. IgA-PIGN occurs in
diabetic elderly (mean age of 60 years), 0-16 weeks after an infection mainly by 
Staphylococcus. However, this nondiabetic patient had normal complement IgA-PIGN 
with fatal pulmonary-renal syndrome. Understanding the pathogenesis and
identifying the nephrotoxic bacteria species and the aberrant IgA molecule will
open new insights toward prevention and treatment.

DOI: 10.2147/IJNRD.S84061 
PMCID: PMC4531034
PMID: 26347210 

