
1. Mucosal Immunol. 2016 May;9(3):718-29. doi: 10.1038/mi.2015.95. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

IFN-γ induction by neutrophil-derived IL-17A homodimer augments pulmonary
antibacterial defense.

Cai S(1), Batra S(1), Langohr I(1), Iwakura Y(2), Jeyaseelan S(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Lung Biology, Department of Pathobiological Sciences and Center 
for Experimental Infectious Disease Research, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Louisiana State University (LSU), Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA.
(2)Center for Experimental Medicine and Core Research for Evolutional Science and
Technology (CREST), Japan Science and Technology Agency, Saitama, Japan.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, LSU Health
Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.

The role of interleukin-17A (IL-17A) in host defense against Legionella
pneumophila remains elusive. To address this issue, we used Il17a(-/-),
Il17f(-/-), and Il17a/Il17f(-/-) mice on a C57Bl/6 (non-permissive) background
and IL-17 neutralizing Abs in mice on an A/J (permissive) background. Higher
bacterial (L. pneumophila) counts in the lung and blood along with reduced
neutrophil recruitment were detected in Il17a(-/-), but not Il17f(-/-), mice. We 
found that neutrophils produce IL-17A homodimer (IL-17A) during L. pneumophila
infection, and hematopoietic cell-derived IL-17A is known to be important for
bacterial clearance. Thus, intratracheal administration of wild-type neutrophils 
or recombinant IL-17A restored bacterial clearance and neutrophil recruitment in 
Il17a(-/-) mice. Furthermore, neutrophil-depleted Rag2(-/-) and Rag2/Il-2rγ(-/-) 
mice exhibited increased bacterial burden, reduced neutrophil influx and IL-17A
production in the lung. Recombinant IFN-γ administration in Il17a(-/-) mice
augmented bacterial elimination, whereas IL-17A administration in Ifnγ(-/-) mice 
did not augment bacterial clearance. IFN-γ is produced by T cells, but not
neutrophils or macrophages, suggesting that neutrophil-derived IL-17A induces
IFN-γ in a paracrine fashion. Human pneumonic lungs and human neutrophils
challenged with L. pneumophila exhibited increased numbers of IL-17A producing
cells. These findings display a novel function of neutrophil-derived IL-17A in
antibacterial defense via the induction of IFN-γ in a paracrine manner.

DOI: 10.1038/mi.2015.95 
PMCID: PMC4785101
PMID: 26349661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

