
1. J Immunol. 2015 Oct 15;195(8):3725-36. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500397. Epub 2015
Sep 14.

A Distinctive Cytoplasmic Tail Contributes to Low Surface Expression and
Intracellular Retention of the Patr-AL MHC Class I Molecule.

Goyos A(1), Guethlein LA(2), Horowitz A(1), Hilton HG(2), Gleimer M(1), Brodsky
FM(3), Parham P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305; Stanford Immunology, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305;
(2)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305;
(3)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143; Department of Pharmaceutical
Chemistry, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143; and
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143.
(4)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305; Stanford Immunology, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305; peropa@stanford.edu.

Chimpanzees have orthologs of the six fixed, functional human MHC class I genes. 
But, in addition, the chimpanzee has a seventh functional gene, Patr-AL, which is
not polymorphic but contributes substantially to population diversity by its
presence on only 50% of MHC haplotypes. The ancestral AL gene emerged long before
the separation of human and chimpanzee ancestors and then subsequently and
specifically lost function during human evolution, but was maintained in
chimpanzees. Patr-AL is an alloantigen that participates in negative and positive
selection of the T cell repertoire. The three-dimensional structure and the
peptide-binding repertoire of Patr-AL and HLA-A*02 are surprisingly similar. In
contrast, the expression of these two molecules is very different, as shown using
specific mAbs and polyclonal Abs made against Patr-AL. Peripheral blood cells and
B cell lines express low levels of Patr-AL at the cell surface. Higher levels are
seen for 221-cell transfectants expressing Patr-AL, but in these cells a large
majority of Patr-AL molecules are retained in the early compartments of the
secretory pathway: mainly the endoplasmic reticulum, but also cis-Golgi.
Replacing the cytoplasmic tail of Patr-AL with that of HLA-A*02 increased the
cell-surface expression of Patr-AL substantially. Four substitutions distinguish 
the Patr-AL and HLA-A*02 cytoplasmic tails. Systematic mutagenesis showed that
each substitution contributes changes in cell-surface expression. The combination
of residues present in Patr-AL appears unique, but each individual residue is
present in other primate MHC class I molecules, notably MHC-E, the most ancient
of the functional human MHC class I molecules.

Copyright Â© 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500397 
PMCID: PMC4592827
PMID: 26371256  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

