
1. Genes Genet Syst. 2015;90(2):99-108. doi: 10.1266/ggs.90.99.

Identification, characterization and expression profiling of the Tollip gene in
Yesso scallop (Patinopecten yessoensis).

Zhang R(1), Li R, Wang J, Wang S, Zhang M, Hu X, Zhang L, Wang S, Wang R, Bao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding, College of Marine Life
Sciences, Ocean University of China.

Toll-interacting protein (Tollip) is a critical regulator of Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-mediated innate immune responses. However, the Tollip gene has not been
systematically characterized in shellfish. In this study, we identified and
characterized a Tollip gene, PyTollip, in Yesso scallop (Patinopecten
yessoensis). Phylogenetic and protein structural analyses were conducted to
determine its sequence identities and evolutionary relationships. Compared with
Tollip genes from other invertebrate and vertebrate species, the PyTollip gene is
highly conserved in its sequence and structural features, except that a unique
asparagine residue was found at a conserved site in the C2 domain of PyTollip.
Quantitative real-time PCR was used to investigate the expression profiles of
PyTollip in different developmental stages, healthy adult tissues, and in
hemolymph after Micrococcus luteus and Vibrio anguillarum bacterial infection.
Real-time PCR analysis demonstrated differential expression of PyTollip at the
acute phase (3 h) after infection with Gram-negative (V. anguillarum) and
Gram-positive (M. luteus) bacteria. A second strong response of PyTollip
expression was observed 24 h after challenge with V. anguillarum. Collectively,
these results provide novel insights into the specific role and response of
Tollip and TLR signaling pathways in host immune responses against different
bacterial pathogens in bivalves.

DOI: 10.1266/ggs.90.99 
PMID: 26399769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

