
1. Oncol Rep. 2015 Dec;34(6):2827-36. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4299. Epub 2015 Sep 21.

Targeting cryptic epitope with modified antigen coupled to the surface of
liposomes induces strong antitumor CD8 T-cell immune responses in vivo.

Horiuchi Y(1), Takagi A(1), Uchida T(1), Akatsuka T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Saitama Medical University,
Moroyama-cho, Iruma-gun, Saitama 350-0495, Japan.

Active cancer immunotherapy, such as cancer vaccine, is based on the fundamental 
knowledge that tumor‑associated antigens (TAAs) are presented on MHC molecules
for recognition by specific T cells. However, most TAAs are self-antigens and are
also expressed on normal tissues, including the thymus. This fact raises the
issue of the tolerance of the TAA‑specific T‑cell repertoire and consequently the
inability to trigger a strong and efficient antitumor immune response. In the
present study, we used antigens chemically coupled to the surface of liposomes to
target telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT), a widely expressed self/tumor
antigen. Taking advantage of the high homology between mouse and human TERT, we
investigated immunogenicity and antitumor efficiency of the liposomal TERT
peptides in HLA-A*0201 transgenic HHD mice. Using the heteroclitical
peptide-modifying approach with antigen‑coupled liposomes, we identified a novel 
cryptic epitope with low affinity for HLA*0201 molecules derived from TERT. The
heteroclitical variant derived from this novel low affinity peptide exhibited
strong affinity for HLA*0201 molecules. However, it induced only weak CD8 T‑cell 
immune responses in HHD mice when emulsified in IFA. By contrast, when coupled to
the surface of the liposomes, it induced powerful CD8 T‑cell immune responses
which cross-reacted against the original cryptic epitope. The induced CD8 T cells
also recognized endogenously TERT‑expressing tumor cells and inhibited their
growth in HHD mice. These data suggest that heteroclitical antigen derived from
low affinity epitope of tumor antigens coupled to the surface of liposome may
have a role as an effective cancer vaccine candidate.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2015.4299 
PMCID: PMC4722887
PMID: 26398429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

