
1. Med Microbiol Immunol. 2016 Apr;205(2):163-71. doi: 10.1007/s00430-015-0432-z.
Epub 2015 Sep 24.

Modulation of host ubiquitin system genes in human endometrial cell line infected
with Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Meenu S(1)(2), Thiagarajan S(1), Ramalingam S(1), Michael A(2), Ramalingam S(3).

Author information: 
(1)PSG Center for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, PSG Institute of Medical
Sciences and Research, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, 641 004, India.
(2)PSG College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, 641 004, India.
(3)PSG Center for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, PSG Institute of Medical
Sciences and Research, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, 641 004, India.
drrampsg@gmail.com.

Endometrium is one of the most commonly affected sites in genital tuberculosis.
The understanding of its interaction with the tubercle bacilli is of paramount
importance for studying the pathogenesis of this disease. The main objective of
this work was to study the interplay between Mycobacterium tuberculosis and host 
endometrial epithelial cell lines (Ishikawa cell lines), and to identify the
differentially expressed genes upon tuberculosis infection. To study this,
suppression subtractive hybridization library was constructed using M.
tuberculosis H37Rv-infected Ishikawa cell line harvested 24 h post-infection. The
subtracted cDNA library was screened, and 105 differentially expressed genes were
identified and grouped based on their functions. Since ubiquitination process has
gained importance in targeting M. tuberculosis to xenophagy, ubiquitin system
genes obtained in the library were selected, and time course analysis of their
gene expression was performed. We observed an upregulation of mkrn1 and cops5 and
downregulation of zfp91, ndfip2, ube2f, rnft1, psmb6, and psmd13 at 24 h
post-infection. From the results obtained, we surmise that ubiquitination pathway
genes may have roles in combating tuberculosis which are yet uncharted.

DOI: 10.1007/s00430-015-0432-z 
PMID: 26403675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

