
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Dec;81(24):8277-93. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02279-15. Epub 
2015 Sep 25.

Formation of polyphosphate by polyphosphate kinases and its relationship to
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) accumulation in Ralstonia eutropha strain H16.

Tumlirsch T(1), Sznajder A(1), Jendrossek D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany
dieter.jendrossek@imb.uni-stuttgart.de.

A protein (PhaX) that interacted with poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerase 
PhaZa1 and with PHB granule-associated phasin protein PhaP2 was identified by
two-hybrid analysis. Deletion of phaX resulted in an increase in the level of
polyphosphate (polyP) granule formation and in impairment of PHB utilization in
nutrient broth-gluconate cultures. A procedure for enrichment of polyP granules
from cell extracts was developed. Twenty-seven proteins that were absent in other
cell fractions were identified in the polyP granule fraction by proteome
analysis. One protein (A2437) harbored motifs characteristic of type 1
polyphosphate kinases (PPK1s), and two proteins (A1212, A1271) had PPK2 motifs.
In vivo colocalization with polyP granules was confirmed by expression of C- and 
N-terminal fusions of enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (eYFP) with the three
polyphosphate kinases (PPKs). Screening of the genome DNA sequence for additional
proteins with PPK motifs revealed one protein with PPK1 motifs and three proteins
with PPK2 motifs. Construction and subsequent expression of C- and N-terminal
fusions of the four new PPK candidates with eYFP showed that only A1979 (PPK2
motif) colocalized with polyP granules. The other three proteins formed
fluorescent foci near the cell pole (apart from polyP) (A0997, B1019) or were
soluble (A0226). Expression of the Ralstonia eutropha ppk (ppkReu) genes in an
Escherichia coli Δppk background and construction of a set of single and multiple
chromosomal deletions revealed that both A2437 (PPK1a) and A1212 (PPK2c)
contributed to polyP granule formation. Mutants with deletion of both genes were 
unable to produce polyP granules. The formation and utilization of PHB and polyP 
granules were investigated in different chromosomal backgrounds.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02279-15 
PMCID: PMC4644649
PMID: 26407880  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

