
1. J Mol Biol. 2015 Nov 6;427(22):3538-3553. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2015.09.013. Epub
2015 Sep 26.

Substrate-Induced Allosteric Change in the Quaternary Structure of the Spermidine
N-Acetyltransferase SpeG.

Filippova EV(1), Weigand S(2), Osipiuk J(3), Kiryukhina O(1), Joachimiak A(3),
Anderson WF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Northwestern
University , Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(2)DuPont-Northwestern-Dow Collaborative Access Team, Northwestern University
Synchrotron Research Center, Argonne, IL 60439, USA.
(3)Biosciences Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439, USA.
(4)Center for Structural Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Northwestern
University , Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic address:
wf-anderson@northwestern.edu.

The spermidine N-acetyltransferase SpeG is a dodecameric enzyme that catalyzes
the transfer of an acetyl group from acetyl coenzyme A to polyamines such as
spermidine and spermine. SpeG has an allosteric polyamine-binding site and
acetylating polyamines regulate their intracellular concentrations. The
structures of SpeG from Vibrio cholerae in complexes with polyamines and cofactor
have been characterized earlier. Here, we present the dodecameric structure of
SpeG from V. cholerae in a ligand-free form in three different conformational
states: open, intermediate and closed. All structures were crystallized in C2
space group symmetry and contain six monomers in the asymmetric unit cell. Two
hexamers related by crystallographic 2-fold symmetry form the SpeG dodecamer. The
open and intermediate states have a unique open dodecameric ring. This SpeG
dodecamer is asymmetric except for the one 2-fold axis and is unlike any known
dodecameric structure. Using a fluorescence thermal shift assay, size-exclusion
chromatography with multi-angle light scattering, small-angle X-ray scattering
analysis, negative-stain electron microscopy and structural analysis, we
demonstrate that this unique open dodecameric state exists in solution. Our
combined results indicate that polyamines trigger conformational changes and
induce the symmetric closed dodecameric state of the protein when they bind to
their allosteric sites.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2015.09.013 
PMCID: PMC4629997
PMID: 26410587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

