
1. J Environ Public Health. 2015;2015:497980. doi: 10.1155/2015/497980. Epub 2015
Aug 31.

Phenotypic and Molecular Characterisation of Extended-Spectrum Beta-Lactamase
Producing Escherichia coli Obtained from Animal Fecal Samples in Ado Ekiti,
Nigeria.

Olowe OA(1), Adewumi O(2), Odewale G(1), Ojurongbe O(1), Adefioye OJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Ladoke Akintola University of
Technology, Ogbomoso, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Ladoke Akintola University of
Technology, Ogbomoso, Nigeria ; Department of Medical Laboratory Science, Afe
Babalola University, Ado Ekiti, Ekiti State, Nigeria.

Production of extended-spectrum Î²-lactamases (ESBLs) producing E. coli in animals
and different methods of identifications from Ado Ekiti, Ekiti State, Nigeria,
were investigated. Three hundred and fifty fecal samples, collected from
apparently healthy cattle and pigs, were cultured and identified following
standard procedures. ESBL phenotypic detection was carried out using combination 
disc test, double disc synergism test, and ESBL brilliance agar screening.
Molecular detection of TEM, SHV, and CTX-M genes was carried out using standard
molecular method. One hundred and fourteen E. coli isolates were recovered from
the 350 samples processed, out of which 72 (63.2%) isolates were positive for
ESBLs with multiple resistance to the antibiotics used. Eighty-one (71%) isolates
were positive for ESBL by combination disc test, 90 (78.9%) were positive for
double disc synergism test, and 93 (81.6%) were positive for ESBL brilliance
agar. TEM and CTX-M genes were detected in 48 (42.1%) and 51 (44.7%) isolates,
respectively. SHV gene was not detected in any of the isolates while TEM and
CTX-M were detected in 33 (28.9%) isolates. This study showed high resistance of 
E. coli to antibiotics, particularly to the third generation cephalosporins.
Regular monitoring and regulated use of antibiotics in livestock should be
encouraged.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/497980 
PMCID: PMC4568380
PMID: 26417371  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

