
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016 Jan;100(2):673-85. doi:
10.1007/s00253-015-7011-5. Epub 2015 Oct 1.

Characterization of a unique Caulobacter crescentus aldose-aldose oxidoreductase 
having dual activities.

Andberg M(1), Maaheimo H(2), Kumpula EP(2), Boer H(2), Toivari M(2), Penttil√§
M(2), Koivula A(2).

Author information: 
(1)VTT, Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd, P.O. Box 1000, FI-02044 VTT,
Espoo, Finland. martina.andberg@vtt.fi.
(2)VTT, Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd, P.O. Box 1000, FI-02044 VTT,
Espoo, Finland.

We describe here the characterization of a novel enzyme called aldose-aldose
oxidoreductase (Cc AAOR; EC 1.1.99) from Caulobacter crescentus. The Cc AAOR
exists in solution as a dimer, belongs to the Gfo/Idh/MocA family and shows
homology with the glucose-fructose oxidoreductase from Zymomonas mobilis.
However, unlike other known members of this protein family, Cc AAOR is specific
for aldose sugars and can be in the same catalytic cycle both oxidise and reduce 
a panel of monosaccharides at the C1 position, producing in each case the
corresponding aldonolactone and alditol, respectively. Cc AAOR contains a
tightly-bound nicotinamide cofactor, which is regenerated in this
oxidation-reduction cycle. The highest oxidation activity was detected on
D-glucose but significant activity was also observed on D-xylose, L-arabinose and
D-galactose, revealing that both hexose and pentose sugars are accepted as
substrates by Cc AAOR. The configuration at the C2 and C3 positions of the
saccharides was shown to be especially important for the substrate binding.
Interestingly, besides monosaccharides, Cc AAOR can also oxidise a range of
1,4-linked oligosaccharides having aldose unit at the reducing end, such as
lactose, malto- and cello-oligosaccharides as well as xylotetraose. (1)H NMR used
to monitor the oxidation and reduction reaction simultaneously, demonstrated that
although D-glucose has the highest affinity and is also oxidised most efficiently
by Cc AAOR, the reduction of D-glucose is clearly not as efficient. For the
overall reaction catalysed by Cc AAOR, the L-arabinose, D-xylose and D-galactose 
were the most potent substrates.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-015-7011-5 
PMID: 26428243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

