
1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 2;10(10):e0139733. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139733.
eCollection 2015.

Endocytosis‒Mediated Invasion and Pathogenicity of Streptococcus agalactiae in
Rat Cardiomyocyte (H9C2).

Pooja S(1), Pushpanathan M(1), Gunasekaran P(1), Rajendhran J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Biological Sciences, Madurai Kamaraj
University, Madurai, 625 021, India.

Streptococcus agalactiae infection causes high mortality in cardiovascular
disease (CVD) patients, especially in case of setting prosthetic valve during
cardiac surgery. However, the pathogenesis mechanism of S. agalactiae associate
with CVD has not been well studied. Here, we have demonstrated the pathogenicity 
of S. agalactiae in rat cardiomyocytes (H9C2). Interestingly, both live and dead 
cells of S. agalactiae were uptaken by H9C2 cells. To further dissect the process
of S. agalactiae internalization, we chemically inhibited discrete parts of
cellular uptake system in H9C2 cells using genistein, chlorpromazine, nocodazole 
and cytochalasin B. Chemical inhibition of microtubule and actin formation by
nocodazole and cytochalasin B impaired S. agalactiae internalization into H9C2
cells. Consistently, reverse‒ transcription PCR (RT‒PCR) and quantitative real
time‒PCR (RT-qPCR) analyses also detected higher levels of transcripts for
cytoskeleton forming genes, Acta1 and Tubb5 in S. agalactiae‒infected H9C2 cells,
suggesting the requirement of functional cytoskeleton in pathogenesis. Host
survival assay demonstrated that S. agalactiae internalization induced
cytotoxicity in H9C2 cells. S. agalactiae cells grown with benzyl penicillin
reduced its ability to internalize and induce cytotoxicity in H9C2 cells, which
could be attributed with the removal of surface lipoteichoic acid (LTA) from S.
agalactiae. Further, the LTA extracted from S. agalactiae also exhibited
dose‒dependent cytotoxicity in H9C2 cells. Taken together, our data suggest that 
S. agalactiae cells internalized H9C2 cells through energy‒dependent endocytic
processes and the LTA of S. agalactiae play major role in host cell
internalization and cytotoxicity induction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139733 
PMCID: PMC4592223
PMID: 26431539  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

