
1. Semin Immunopathol. 2016 Mar;38(2):153-66. doi: 10.1007/s00281-015-0531-3. Epub
2015 Oct 5.

Pathology and immune reactivity: understanding multidimensionality in pulmonary
tuberculosis.

Dorhoi A(1), Kaufmann SH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology,
Charitéplatz 1, 10117, Berlin, Germany. dorhoi@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de.
(2)Department of Immunology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology,
Charitéplatz 1, 10117, Berlin, Germany. kaufmann@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de.

Heightened morbidity and mortality in pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) are
consequences of complex disease processes triggered by the causative agent,
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). Mtb modulates inflammation at distinct stages
of its intracellular life. Recognition and phagocytosis, replication in
phagosomes and cytosol escape induce tightly regulated release of cytokines
[including interleukin (IL)-1, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), IL-10], chemokines,
lipid mediators, and type I interferons (IFN-I). Mtb occupies various lung
lesions at sites of pathology. Bacteria are barely detectable at foci of lipid
pneumonia or in perivascular/bronchiolar cuffs. However, abundant organisms are
evident in caseating granulomas and at the cavity wall. Such lesions follow polar
trajectories towards fibrosis, encapsulation and mineralization or liquefaction, 
extensive matrix destruction, and tissue injury. The outcome is determined by
immune factors acting in concert. Gradients of cytokines and chemokines (CCR2,
CXCR2, CXCR3/CXCR5 agonists; TNF/IL-10, IL-1/IFN-I), expression of
activation/death markers on immune cells (TNF receptor 1, PD-1, IL-27 receptor)
or abundance of enzymes [arginase-1, matrix metalloprotease (MMP)-1, MMP-8,
MMP-9] drive genesis and progression of lesions. Distinct lesions coexist such
that inflammation in TB encompasses a spectrum of tissue changes. A better
understanding of the multidimensionality of immunopathology in TB will inform
novel therapies against this pulmonary disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00281-015-0531-3 
PMID: 26438324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

