
1. Diagn Pathol. 2015 Oct 9;10:186. doi: 10.1186/s13000-015-0420-z.

Primary sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma of kidney with variant
histomorphologic features: report of 2 cases and review of the literature.

Ertoy Baydar D(1), Kosemehmetoglu K(2), Aydin O(3), Bridge JA(4), Buyukeren B(5),
Aki FT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hacettepe University Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
dertoy@hacettepe.edu.tr.
(2)Department of Pathology, Hacettepe University Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
dokemal@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Pathology, Ondokuz Mayis University Hospital, Samsun, Turkey.
uzaydin@yahoo.com.
(4)Departments of Pathology/Microbiology, Pediatrics and Orthopaedic Surgery,
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA. jbridge@unmc.edu.
(5)Department of Pathology, Hacettepe University Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
berrinbuyukeren@hotmail.com.
(6)Department of Urology, Hacettepe University Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
ftuncayaki@yahoo.com.

The authors present two cases of primary sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma
(SEF) of the kidney. Both patients had a mass in the upper part of the left
kidney without any primary extrarenal neoplastic lesions. Grossly, the tumors
were solid masses both measuring 7.5 cm in the greatest diameter. Histologically,
one of the lesions exhibited a predominantly lobular growth of round or oval
small uniform epithelioid cells in variable cellularity. Circular zones of
crowded tumor cells alternating with hypocellular collagenous tissue in a
concentric fashion around entrapped native renal tubules were distinctive. The
second case was distinctive with significant cytological atypia in the neoplastic
cells and prominent reactive proliferations in the trapped renal tubules.
Immunohistochemically, vimentin, bcl-2 and MUC4 were diffusely positive in both. 
They were negative for S-100 protein, CD34, and desmin, whereas CD99 were
positive in one lesion. Fluorescence in situ hybridization assay using dual
staining probes detected EWSR1-CREB3L1 fusion in each lesion, which is
characteristic molecular findings of SEF. One patient presented widespread
distant metastases at the time of diagnosis. In the other, no tumor deposits were
detected other than primary. Both patients have been alive with 30 and 10 month
follow-ups, respectively. These tumors are 6th and 7th cases of primary renal SEF
in the literature confirmed by FISH study, which exhibit unique and remarkable
histomorphologic features.

DOI: 10.1186/s13000-015-0420-z 
PMCID: PMC4599747
PMID: 26449317  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

