
1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 7;10(10):e0139090. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139090.
eCollection 2015.

Comparative Transcriptome Analysis Reveals Cool Virulence Factors of Ralstonia
solanacearum Race 3 Biovar 2.

Meng F(1), Babujee L(1), Jacobs JM(1), Allen C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin, 53706, United States of America.

While most strains of the plant pathogenic bacterium Ralstonia solanacearum are
tropical, the race 3 biovar 2 (R3bv2) subgroup attacks plants in cooler climates.
To identify mechanisms underlying this trait, we compared the transcriptional
profiles of R. solanacearum R3bv2 strain UW551 and tropical strain GMI1000 at
20°C and 28°C, both in culture and during tomato pathogenesis. 4.2% of the ORFs
in the UW551 genome and 7.9% of the GMI1000 ORFs were differentially expressed by
temperature in planta. The two strains had distinct transcriptional responses to 
temperature change. GMI1000 up-regulated several stress response genes at 20°C,
apparently struggling to cope with plant defenses. At the cooler temperature,
R3bv2 strain UW551 up-regulated a cluster encoding a mannose-fucose binding
lectin, LecM; a quorum sensing-dependent protein, AidA; and a related
hypothetical protein, AidC. The last two genes are absent from the GMI1000
genome. In UW551, all three genes were positively regulated by the adjacent
SolI/R quorum sensing system. These temperature-responsive genes were required
for full virulence in R3bv2. Mutants lacking lecM, aidA, or aidC were each
significantly more reduced in virulence on tomato at 20°C than at 28°C in both a 
naturalistic soil soak inoculation assay and when they were inoculated directly
into tomato stems. The lecM and aidC mutants also survived poorly in potato
tubers at the seed tuber storage temperature of 4°C, and the lecM mutant was
defective in biofilm formation in vitro. Together, these results suggest novel
mechanisms, including a lectin, are involved in the unique temperate epidemiology
of R3bv2.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139090 
PMCID: PMC4596706
PMID: 26445498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

