
1. Glycobiology. 2016 Feb;26(2):155-65. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwv088. Epub 2015 Oct 6.

Galectin-3 modulates the EGFR signalling-mediated regulation of Sox2 expression
via c-Myc in lung cancer.

Kuo HY(1), Hsu HT(1), Chen YC(1), Chang YW(1), Liu FT(2), Wu CW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.
(2)Institute of Biomedical Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan Department of
Dermatology, University of California at Davis, Davis, USA.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Institute of Microbiology and 
Immunology and Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan Institute of Biomedical Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
cwwu@ym.edu.tw.

Galectin-3 is a ubiquitous lectin exerting multiple cellular functions such as
RNA splicing, protein trafficking and apoptosis. Its expression is positively
correlated with the poor prognosis in lung cancer patients. Galectin-3 can
promote cancer progression through its effects on cell proliferation, cell
survival or cancer metastasis. However, the role of galectin-3 in the regulation 
of cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) is still unclear. Here, we investigated the
hypothesis that galectin-3 might regulate lung CSCs via the EGF receptor (EGFR)
signaling pathway. In our study, galectin-3 facilitated EGFR activation and
enhanced the sphere formation activity of lung cancer cells. Furthermore,
galectin-3 promoted Sox2 expression in an EGFR activation-dependent manner;
importantly, forced expression of Sox2 blunted the effect of galectin-3 knockdown
on lung cancer sphere formation ability. These results suggest that galectin-3
promotes EGFR activation leading to the upregulation of Sox2 expression and lung 
CSCs properties. Moreover, we showed that the carbohydrate-binding activity of
galectin-3 was important for the regulation of EGFR activation, Sox2 expression
and sphere formation. We have recently reported that c-Myc is a transcriptional
activator of Sox2. We further found that galectin-3 enhanced c-Myc protein
stability leading to increased c-Myc binding to the Sox2 gene promoter. We also
examined the effect of the stemness factors, Oct4, Nanog and Sox2 on the
expression of galectin-3. We found that Oct4 enhanced galectin-3 expression. Our 
results together suggest that galectin-3 enhances lung cancer stemness through
the EGFR/c-Myc/Sox2 axis; Oct4, in turn, promotes galectin-3 expression, forming 
a positive regulatory loop in lung CSCs.

Â© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwv088 
PMID: 26447186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

