
1. Cell Microbiol. 2016 Apr;18(4):561-72. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12534. Epub 2015 Nov 10.

Campylobacter jejuni outer membrane vesicle-associated proteolytic activity
promotes bacterial invasion by mediating cleavage of intestinal epithelial cell
E-cadherin and occludin.

Elmi A(1), Nasher F(1), Jagatia H(1), Gundogdu O(1), Bajaj-Elliott M(2), Wren
B(1), Dorrell N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene &
Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London, WC1E 7HT, UK.
(2)Infection, Immunity, Inflammation and Physiological Medicine, UCL Institute of
Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 1EH, UK.

Outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) play an important role in the pathogenicity of
Gram-negative bacteria. Campylobacter jejuni produces OMVs that trigger IL-8,
IL-6, hBD-3 and TNF-α responses from T84 intestinal epithelial cells and are
cytotoxic to Caco-2 IECs and Galleria mellonella larvae. Proteomic analysis of
11168H OMVs identified the presence of three proteases, HtrA, Cj0511 and Cj1365c.
In this study, 11168H OMVs were shown to possess proteolytic activity that was
reduced by pretreatment with specific serine protease inhibitors. OMVs isolated
from 11168H htrA, Cj0511 or Cj1365c mutants possess significantly reduced
proteolytic activity. 11168H OMVs are able to cleave both E-cadherin and
occludin, but this cleavage is reduced with OMVs pretreated with serine protease 
inhibitors and also with OMVs isolated from htrA or Cj1365c mutants.
Co-incubation of T84 monolayers with 11168H OMVs results in a visible reduction
in both E-cadherin and occludin. The addition of 11168H OMVs to the co-culture of
live 11168H bacteria with T84 cells results in enhanced levels of bacterial
adhesion and invasion in a time-dependent and dose-dependent manner. Further
investigation of the cleavage of host cell structural proteins by C. jejuni OMVs 
should enhance our understanding of the interactions of this important pathogen
with intestinal epithelial cells.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12534 
PMID: 26451973  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

