
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Oct 12;60(1):115-25. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01066-15.
Print 2016 Jan.

Benzo[b]quinolizinium Derivatives Have a Strong Antimalarial Activity and Inhibit
Indoleamine Dioxygenase.

Jortzik E(1), Zocher K(1), Isernhagen A(1), Mailu BM(1), Rahlfs S(1), Viola G(2),
Wittlin S(3), Hunt NH(4), Ihmels H(5), Becker K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Justus Liebig University, Giessen,
Germany.
(2)Department of Woman's and Child's Health, University of Padova, Padua, Italy.
(3)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute and University of Basel, Basel,
Switzerland.
(4)Molecular Immunopathology Unit, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Biology, University of Siegen, Siegen, Germany.
(6)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, Germany
katja.becker@uni-giessen.de.

The heme-containing enzymes indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase-1 (IDO-1) and IDO-2
catalyze the conversion of the essential amino acid tryptophan into kynurenine.
Metabolites of the kynurenine pathway and IDO itself are involved in immunity and
the pathology of several diseases, having either immunoregulatory or
antimicrobial effects. IDO-1 plays a central role in the pathogenesis of cerebral
malaria, which is the most severe and often fatal neurological complication of
infection with Plasmodium falciparum. Mouse models are usually used to study the 
underlying pathophysiology. In this study, we screened a natural compound library
against mouse IDO-1 and identified 8-aminobenzo[b]quinolizinium (compound 2c) to 
be an inhibitor of IDO-1 with potency at nanomolar concentrations (50% inhibitory
concentration, 164 nM). Twenty-one structurally modified derivatives of compound 
2c were synthesized for structure-activity relationship analyses. The compounds
were found to be selective for IDO-1 over IDO-2. We therefore compared the roles 
of prominent amino acids in the catalytic mechanisms of the two isoenzymes via
homology modeling, site-directed mutagenesis, and kinetic analyses. Notably,
methionine 385 of IDO-2 was identified to interfere with the entrance of
l-tryptophan to the active site of the enzyme, which explains the selectivity of 
the inhibitors. Most interestingly, several benzo[b]quinolizinium derivatives (6 
compounds with 50% effective concentration values between 2.1 and 6.7 nM) were
found to be highly effective against P. falciparum 3D7 blood stages in cell
culture with a mechanism independent of IDO-1 inhibition. We believe that the
class of compounds presented here has unique characteristics; it combines the
inhibition of mammalian IDO-1 with strong antiparasitic activity, two features
that offer potential for drug development.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01066-15 
PMCID: PMC4704160
PMID: 26459907  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

