
1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 14;10(10):e0133994. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133994.
eCollection 2015.

Characterization of the Cardiac Overexpression of HSPB2 Reveals Mitochondrial and
Myogenic Roles Supported by a Cardiac HspB2 Interactome.

Grose JH(1), Langston K(1), Wang X(2), Squires S(3), Mustafi SB(2), Hayes W(1),
Neubert J(1), Fischer SK(4), Fasano M(4), Saunders GM(2), Dai Q(5), Christians
E(2), Lewandowski ED(4), Ping P(6), Benjamin IJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Molecular Biology Department, Brigham Young University,
Provo, UT, 84602, United States of America.
(2)Laboratory of Cardiac Disease, Redox Signaling and Cell Regeneration, Division
of Cardiology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, 84132, 
United States of America.
(3)Laboratory of Cardiac Disease, Redox Signaling and Cell Regeneration, Division
of Cardiology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, 84132, 
United States of America; Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Dept. of Medicine,
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, 53226, United States of America.
(4)Program in Integrative Cardiac Metabolism, Center for Cardiovascular Research,
University of Illinois at Chicago College of Medicine, Chicago, IL, 60612, United
States of America.
(5)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Dept. of Medicine, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, 53226, United States of America.
(6)UCLA Departments of Physiology, Medicine, and Cardiology, Los Angeles, CA,
90095, United States of America.

Small Heat Shock Proteins (sHSPs) are molecular chaperones that transiently
interact with other proteins, thereby assisting with quality control of proper
protein folding and/or degradation. They are also recruited to protect cells from
a variety of stresses in response to extreme heat, heavy metals, and
oxidative-reductive stress. Although ten human sHSPs have been identified, their 
likely diverse biological functions remain an enigma in health and disease, and
much less is known about non-redundant roles in selective cells and tissues.
Herein, we set out to comprehensively characterize the cardiac-restricted Heat
Shock Protein B-2 (HspB2), which exhibited ischemic cardioprotection in
transgenic overexpressing mice including reduced infarct size and maintenance of 
ATP levels. Global yeast two-hybrid analysis using HspB2 (bait) and a human
cardiac library (prey) coupled with co-immunoprecipitation studies for
mitochondrial target validation revealed the first HspB2 "cardiac interactome" to
contain many myofibril and mitochondrial-binding partners consistent with the
overexpression phenotype. This interactome has been submitted to the Biological
General Repository for Interaction Datasets (BioGRID). A related sHSP chaperone
HspB5 had only partially overlapping binding partners, supporting specificity of 
the interactome as well as non-redundant roles reported for these sHSPs. Evidence
that the cardiac yeast two-hybrid HspB2 interactome targets resident
mitochondrial client proteins is consistent with the role of HspB2 in maintaining
ATP levels and suggests new chaperone-dependent functions for metabolic
homeostasis. One of the HspB2 targets, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH), has reported roles in HspB2 associated phenotypes including cardiac ATP 
production, mitochondrial function, and apoptosis, and was validated as a
potential client protein of HspB2 through chaperone assays. From the clientele
and phenotypes identified herein, it is tempting to speculate that small molecule
activators of HspB2 might be deployed to mitigate mitochondrial related diseases 
such as cardiomyopathy and neurodegenerative disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133994 
PMCID: PMC4605610
PMID: 26465331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

