
1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 19;10(10):e0140331. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140331.
eCollection 2015.

Malva sylvestris Inhibits Inflammatory Response in Oral Human Cells. An In Vitro 
Infection Model.

Benso B(1), Rosalen PL(1), Alencar SM(2), Murata RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Piracicaba Dental School, University of 
Campinas, Piracicaba, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Agri-food Industry, Food and Nutrition, "Luiz de Queiroz"
College of Agriculture, University of Sao Paulo, Piracicaba, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Division of Periodontology, Diagnostic Sciences & Dental Hygiene and Division 
of Biomedical Sciences Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, United States of America.

The aim of this study was to investigate the in vitro anti-inflammatory activity 
of Malva sylvestris extract (MSE) and fractions in a co-culture model of cells
infected by Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans. In addition, we evaluated the 
phytochemical content in the extract and fractions of M. sylvestris and
demonstrated that polyphenols were the most frequent group in all samples
studied. An in vitro dual-chamber model to mimic the periodontal structure was
developed using a monolayer of epithelial keratinocytes (OBA-9) and a
subepithelial layer of fibroblasts (HGF-1). The invasive periodontopathogen A.
actinomycetemcomitans (D7S-1) was applied to migrate through the cell layers and 
induce the synthesis of immune factors and cytokines in the host cells. In an
attempt to analyze the antimicrobial properties of MSE and fractions, a
susceptibility test was carried out. The extract (MIC 175 μg/mL, MBC 500μg/mL)
and chloroform fraction (MIC 150 μg/mL, MBC 250 μg/mL) were found to have
inhibitory activity. The extract and all fractions were assessed using a
cytotoxicity test and results showed that concentrations under 100 μg/mL did not 
significantly reduce cell viability compared to the control group (p > 0.05,
viability > 90%). In order to analyze the inflammatory response, transcriptional 
factors and cytokines were quantified in the supernatant released from the cells.
The chloroform fraction was the most effective in reducing the bacterial
colonization (p< 0.05) and controlling inflammatory mediators, and promoted the
down-regulation of genes including IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-10, CD14, PTGS, MMP-1 and
FOS as well as the reduction of the IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-8 and GM-CSF protein
levels (p< 0.05). Malva sylvestris and its chloroform fraction minimized the A.
actinomycetemcomitans infection and inflammation processes in oral human cells by
a putative pathway that involves important cytokines and receptors. Therefore,
this natural product may be considered as a successful dual
anti-inflammatory-antimicrobial candidate.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140331 
PMCID: PMC4610699
PMID: 26479870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

