
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2016 Mar 3;12(3):829-36. doi:
10.1080/21645515.2015.1103405.

Generation of human MHC (HLA-A11/DR1) transgenic mice for vaccine evaluation.

Zeng Y(1)(2), Gao T(3), Zhao G(1), Jiang Y(1), Yang Y(1), Yu H(1), Kou Z(1), Lone
Y(2), Sun S(1), Zhou Y(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of
Microbiology and Epidemiology , Beijing , China.
(2)b INSERM U1197 (ex U1014), University of Paris-Sud, Hospital Paul Brousse ,
Villejuif , France.
(3)c Wenzhou Medical University , Zhejiang , China.

The rapid occurrence of emerging infectious diseases demonstrates an urgent need 
for a new preclinical experimental model that reliably replicates human immune
responses. Here, a new homozygous humanized human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A11/DR1
transgenic mouse (HLA-A11(+/+)/DR01(+/+)/H-2-β2m(-/-)/IAβ(-/-)) was generated by 
crossing HLA-A11 transgenic (Tg) mice with
HLA-A2(+/+)/DR01(+/+)/H-2-β2m(-/-)/IAβ(-/-) mice. The HLA-A11-restricted immune
response of this mouse model was then examined. HLA-A11 Tg mice expressing a
chimeric major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecule comprising the α1, α2,
and β2m domains of human HLA-A11 and the α3 transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains
of murine H-2D(b) were generated. The correct integration of HLA-A11 and HLA-DR1 
into the genome of the HLA-A11/DR1 Tg mice (which lacked the expression of
endogenous H-2-I/II molecules) was then confirmed. Immunizing mice with a
recombinant HBV vaccine or a recombinant HIV-1 protein resulted in the generation
of IFN-γ-producing cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) and antigen-specific antibodies. 
The HLA-A11-restricted CTL response was directed at HLA immunodominant epitopes. 
These mice represent a versatile animal model for studying the immunogenicity of 
HLA CTL epitopes in the absence of a murine MHC response. The established animal 
model will also be useful for evaluating and optimizing T cell-based vaccines and
for studying differences in antigen processing between mice and humans.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2015.1103405 
PMCID: PMC4964720
PMID: 26479036  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

