
1. BMC Immunol. 2015 Oct 22;16:63. doi: 10.1186/s12865-015-0119-7.

Sequence conservation analysis and in silico human leukocyte antigen-peptide
binding predictions for the Mtb72F and M72 tuberculosis candidate vaccine
antigens.

Mortier MC(1), Jongert E(2), Mettens P(3), Ruelle JL(4).

Author information: 
(1)GSK Vaccines, Rue de l'Institut 89, 1330, Rixensart, Belgium.
marie-cecile.mortier@gsk.com.
(2)GSK Vaccines, Rue de l'Institut 89, 1330, Rixensart, Belgium.
erik.x.jongert@gsk.com.
(3)GSK Vaccines, Rue de l'Institut 89, 1330, Rixensart, Belgium.
pascal.mettens@gsk.com.
(4)GSK Vaccines, Rue de l'Institut 89, 1330, Rixensart, Belgium.
jean-louis.ruelle@gsk.com.

BACKGROUND: Requisites for an efficacious tuberculosis (TB) vaccine are a minimal
genomic diversity among infectious Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains for the
selected antigen, and the capability to induce robust T-cell responses in the
majority of human populations. A tool in the identification of putative T-cell
epitopes is in silico prediction of major histocompatibility complex
(MHC)-peptide binding. Candidate TB vaccine antigen Mtb72F and its successor M72 
are recombinant fusion proteins derived from Mtb32A and Mtb39A (encoded by Rv0125
and Rv1196, respectively). Adjuvanted Mtb72F and M72 candidate vaccines were
shown to induce CD4(+) T-cell responses in European, US, African and Asian
populations.
METHODS: Sequence conservation of Mtb32A, Mtb39A, Mtb72F and M72 among 46 strains
(prevalent Mycobacterium strains causing human TB disease, and H37Ra) was
assessed by multiple alignments using ClustalX. For Mtb32A, Mtb39A and Mtb72F,
15-mer human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-class II-binding peptides were predicted for
158 DRB1 alleles prevailing in populations with high TB burden, 6 DRB3/4/5, 8 DQ 
and 6 DP alleles, using NetMHCII-pan-3.0. Results for 3 DRB1 alleles were
compared with previously published allele-matched in vitro binding data.
Additional analyses were done for M72. Nonameric MHC class I-binding peptides in 
Mtb72F were predicted for three alleles representative of class I supertypes A02,
A03 and B07, using seven prediction algorithms.
RESULTS: Sequence identity among strains was ≥98 % for each protein. Residue
changes in Mtb39A comprised primarily single residue or nucleotide insertions
and/or deletions in repeat regions, and were observed in 67 % of strains. For
Mtb72F, 156 DRB1, 6 DRB3/4/5, 7 DQ and 5 DP alleles were predicted to contain at 
least one MHC class II-binding peptide, and class I-binding peptides were
predicted for each HLA-A/B allele. Comparison of predicted MHC-II-binding
peptides with experimental data indicated that the algorithm's sensitivity and
specificity were variable among alleles.
CONCLUSIONS: The sequences from which Mtb72F and M72 are derived are highly
conserved among representative Mycobacterium strains. Predicted putative T-cell
epitopes in M72 and/or Mtb72F covered a wide array of HLA alleles. In silico
binding predictions for class I- and II-binding putative epitopes can be
complemented with biochemical verification of HLA binding capacity, processing
and immunogenicity of the predicted peptides.

DOI: 10.1186/s12865-015-0119-7 
PMCID: PMC4619029
PMID: 26493839  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

