
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016 Feb;100(4):1753-1764. doi:
10.1007/s00253-015-7031-1.

Characterization of a poly(butylene adipate-co-terephthalate)- hydrolyzing lipase
from Pelosinus fermentans.

Biundo A(1), Hromic A(2)(3), Pavkov-Keller T(2)(3), Gruber K(2)(3), Quartinello
F(1), Haernvall K(4), Perz V(4), Arrell MS(5), Zinn M(5), Ribitsch D(6)(7),
Guebitz GM(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Biotechnology, University of Natural Resources and 
Life Science (BOKU), Konrad Lorenz Strasse 22, 3430, Tulln an der Donau, Austria.
(2)Austrian Centre for Industrial Biotechnology (ACIB), Petersgasse 14, 8010,
Graz, Austria.
(3)Institute of Molecular Bioscience, University of Graz, Universitaetsstraße 15,
8010, Graz, Austria.
(4)Austrian Centre for Industrial Biotechnology (ACIB), Konrad Lorenz Strasse 22,
3430, Tulln an der Donau, Austria.
(5)Institute of Life Technologies, University of Applied Sciences Western
Switzerland (HES-SO Valais/Wallis), Rue du Rawil 47, 1950, Sion, Switzerland.
(6)Institute of Environmental Biotechnology, University of Natural Resources and 
Life Science (BOKU), Konrad Lorenz Strasse 22, 3430, Tulln an der Donau, Austria.
doris.ribitsch@acib.at.
(7)Austrian Centre for Industrial Biotechnology (ACIB), Konrad Lorenz Strasse 22,
3430, Tulln an der Donau, Austria. doris.ribitsch@acib.at.

Certain α/β hydrolases have the ability to hydrolyze synthetic polyesters. While 
their partial hydrolysis has a potential for surface functionalization, complete 
hydrolysis allows recycling of valuable building blocks. Although knowledge about
biodegradation of these materials is important regarding their fate in the
environment, it is currently limited to aerobic organisms. A lipase from the
anaerobic groundwater organism Pelosinus fermentans DSM 17108(PfL1) was cloned
and expressed in Escherichia coli BL21-Gold (DE3) and purified from the cell
extract. Biochemical characterization with small substrates showed
thermoalkalophilic properties (Topt=50 °C, pHopt=7.5) and higher activity towards
para-nitrophenyl octanoate (12.7 U mg(-1)) compared to longer and shorter chain
lengths (C14 0.7 U mg(-1) and C2 4.3 U mg(-1), respectively). Crystallization and
determination of the 3-D structure displayed the presence of a lid structure and 
a zinc ion surrounded by an extra domain. These properties classify the enzyme
into the I.5 lipase family. PfL1 is able to hydrolyze poly(1,4-butylene
adipate-co-terephthalate) (PBAT) polymeric substrates. The hydrolysis of PBAT
showed the release of small building blocks as detected by liquid chromatography 
mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Protein dynamics seem to be involved with lid opening 
for the hydrolysis of PBAT by PfL1.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-015-7031-1 
PMID: 26490551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

