
1. Eur Phys J E Soft Matter. 2015 Oct;38(10):110. doi: 10.1140/epje/i2015-15110-8.
Epub 2015 Oct 22.

Insertion and self-diffusion of a monotopic protein, the Aquifex aeolicus sulfide
quinone reductase, in supported lipid bilayers.

Harb F(1)(2), Prunetti L(3), Giudici-Orticoni MT(3), Guiral M(3), Tinland B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences - Section II, Lebanese University, 
Beirut, Lebanon.
(2)CINaM-CNRS, Aix-Marseille Université, UMR7325, 13288, Marseille, France.
(3)CNRS, BIP UMR 7281, Aix Marseille Université, 13402, Marseille, France.
(4)CINaM-CNRS, Aix-Marseille Université, UMR7325, 13288, Marseille, France.
tinland@cinam.univ-mrs.fr.

Monotopic proteins constitute a class of membrane proteins that bind tightly to
cell membranes, but do not span them. We present a FRAPP (Fluorescence Recovery
After Patterned Photobleaching) study of the dynamics of a bacterial monotopic
protein, SQR (sulfide quinone oxidoreductase) from the thermophilic bacteria
Aquifex aeolicus, inserted into two different types of lipid bilayers (EggPC:
L-α-phosphatidylcholine (Egg, Chicken) and DMPC:
1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine) supported on two different types of 
support (mica or glass). It sheds light on the behavior of a monotopic protein
inside the bilayer. The insertion of SQR is more efficient when the bilayer is in
the fluid phase than in the gel phase. We observed diffusion of the protein, with
no immobile fraction, and deduced from the diffusion coefficient measurements
that the resulting inserted object is the same whatever the incubation
conditions, i.e. homogeneous in terms of oligomerization state. As expected, the 
diffusion coefficient of the SQR is smaller in the gel phase than in the fluid
phase. In the supported lipid bilayer, the diffusion coefficient of the SQR is
smaller than the diffusion coefficient of phospholipids in both gel and fluid
phase. SQR shows a diffusion behavior different from the transmembrane protein
α-hemolysin, and consistent with its monotopic character. Preliminary experiments
in the presence of the substrate of SQR, DecylUbiquinone, an analogue of quinone,
component of transmembrane electrons transport systems of eukaryotic and
prokaryotic organisms, have been carried out. Finally, we studied the behavior of
SQR, in terms of insertion and diffusion, in bilayers formed with lipids from
Aquifex aeolicus. All the conclusions that we have found in the biomimetic
systems applied to the biological system.

DOI: 10.1140/epje/i2015-15110-8 
PMID: 26490251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

