
1. GMS Interdiscip Plast Reconstr Surg DGPW. 2014 Oct 20;3:Doc08. doi:
10.3205/iprs000049. eCollection 2014.

Histopathological Osteomyelitis Evaluation Score (HOES) - an innovative approach 
to histopathological diagnostics and scoring of osteomyelitis.

Tiemann A(1), Hofmann GO(2), Krukemeyer MG(3), Krenn V(3), Langwald S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Orthopedic and Trauma Surgery, SRH Zentralklinikum Suhl, Germany.
(2)Clinic for Trauma and Reconstructive Surgery, BG-Kliniken Bergmannstrost
Halle, Germany.
(3)Medical Center for Histology, Cytology and Molecular Diagnostic, Trier,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Treatment and diagnosis of osteomyelitis are still a challenging
problem for surgeons, microbiologists and histopathologists. A direct
microbiological detection of bacteria in tissues is still gold standard, but it
is not always successful for example in chronic osteomyelitis and/or when an
antibiotic treatment has already been started or in cases of low virulent
bacteria. The goal of this study was to define diagnostic criteria of
osteomyelitis, the inflammatory regression of osteomyelitis ("osteomyelitis
score") under specific therapy by the correlation of histopathological and
microbiological and clinical standard tests.
METHODS: In this retrospective analysis patients with medical history and
clinically clear signs of bacterial infection and osteomyelitis underwent surgery
between 01.01.2013 and 31.12.2012. Their formal consent was given. Tissue samples
were taken during surgery according to defined criteria including surgical
interventions. Histopathological diagnosis was carried out by conventional
techniques based on defined criteria of bacterial infection in connective tissue,
peri-implant membrane and bone. These results were carried out in tables by
numbers representing the histopathological criteria of acute osteomyelitis (A1 to
A3) as well as the chronic criteria (C1 and C2) in a semiquantitative way (scale 
0 to 3). On the other hand a notational, graduated histopathological report was
performed. Preoperative clinical diagnosis, perioperative macroscopic diagnosis, 
histopathological and microbiological findings were correlated.
RESULTS: Histopathological samples of 52 surgical interventions based on the
preoperative diagnosis "osteomyelitis" (AOM, ECOM or COM) were included. 37 times
preoperatively signs of a chronic osteomyelitis (COM), 10 times preoperatively
acute osteomyelitis (AOM) was diagnosed. Another 5 patients were preoperatively
diagnosed as acute exacerbated osteomyelitis (ECOM). The correlation of the
histopathological infection including the inflammatory activity and
microbiological detection of bacteria was 57%. The correlation between
preoperative diagnosis and histopathological findings was 68%.
CONCLUSION: The relatively small 68% correlation between clinical preoperative
and histopathological diagnosis and 57% correlation between preoperative clinical
diagnosis and microbiological findings indicates: Clinical findings are not
sufficient for the diagnosis "osteomyelitis".Clinical findings are not sufficient
for the differentiation between AOM, ECOM and COM.Histopathological analysis is
the critical factor for the diagnosis ("osteomyelitis") and differential
diagnosis (AOM vs. COM).Histopathological analysis represents the basis for
further treatment.HOES facilitates the classification of the histopathological
findings.HOES is a sufficient tool for the treating physician in order to define 
the further treatment.

Publisher: Grundlegende Überlegung: Diagnose und Therapie der Osteomyelitis
fordern auch heute Chirurgen, Mikrobiologen und Pathologen gleichermaßen. Der
direkte mikrobiologische Nachweis des krankheitsverursachenden Erregers stellt
einen „Gold Standard“ in der Diagnostik der Knocheninfektion dar. Leider gelingt 
der Keimnachweis nicht in allen Fällen, speziell bei chronischen
Krankheitsverläufen, laufender Antibiotikatherapie oder im Falle der „low grade
Infektion“. Die histopathologische Analyse ist insofern eine Condotio sine qua
non. Nur anhand dieser Ergebnisse lässt sich zweifelsfrei das Vorliegen einer
Osteomyelitis detektieren und eine Aussage zu ihrer Akuität machen. Ziel dieser
Studie ist die Vorstellung eines standardisierten histopathologischen Scores,
anhand dessen analog zum TMN-System bei Tumorerkrankungen eine valide Kartierung 
einer Osteomyelitis möglich ist. Weiterhin wurde die Korrelation zwischen
histopathologischen Ergebnissen und der klinischen Diagnose ebenso wie dem
positiven Keimnachweis überprüft.Methode: In einer retrospektiven Analyse wurden 
die histopathologischen und mikrobiologischen Befunde von Patienten mit den
eindeutigen klinischen Symptomen einer Osteomyelitis untersucht. Alle in die
Studie eingeschlossenen Patienten wurden zwischen dem 01.01.2013 und dem
31.12.2013 operiert. Sämtliche Gewebsproben wurden während der operativen
Eingriffe gewonnen. Die histologischen Untersuchungen basierten auf den
Standardtechniken für bakterielle Infektionen im Bindegewebe, periimplantär und
im Knochen. Die Ergebnisse wurden erfasst:in einer tabellarischen Form durch
Zahlen, welche die Ausprägung von akuten (A1 bis A3) und chronischen (C1 und C2) 
Osteomyelitis-Kriterien semiquantitativ (Scala 0–3) in einer getrennten Form für 
akute und chronische Veränderungen darstellt (Histopathologischer
Osteomyelitis-Evaluationsscore),in einer schriftlichen, abgestuften Form, welche 
sich durch die Summation der tabellarischen Werte ergibt.Die präoperative und die
perioperative Diagnose, das histologische Ergebnis und die Mikrobiologie wurden
hinsichtlich ihrer Übereinstimmung korreliert (dabei war nicht die
Keimtypisierung, sondern der Keimnachweis an sich relevant). Ergebnisse: 52
chirurgische Proben wurden ausgewertet. Sie alle stammten von Patienten mit der
präoperativen Diagnose „Osteomyelitis“ (akute Osteomyelitis = AOM; akute
Exazerbation einer chronischen Osteomyelitis = ECOM; chronische Osteomyelitis =
COM). Es fanden sich: COM n=37, AOM n=10, ECOM n=5. Die Korrelation zwischen dem 
histopathologischen Bild inklusive der inflammatorischen Reaktion und einem
positiven Erregernachweis betrug 57%. Die Korrelation zwischen der präoperativen 
Diagnose und der histologischen Analyse betrug 68%.Schlussfolgerung: Die relative
geringe Übereinstimmung von präoperativer Diagnose, histopathologischem Ergebnis 
und der Mikrobiologie legt Folgendes nahe:Die klinische Vermutung allein ist
nicht ausreichend für die Diagnose „Osteomyelitis“.Die klinische Vermutung allein
ist nicht ausreichend zur Differenzierung zwischen AOM, ECOM und COM.Die
histopathologische Analyse ist das entscheidende Kriterium. Einerseits für die
Diagnose „Osteomyelitis“ an sich und andererseits für deren Akuität.Die
histopathologische Analyse ist die Basis für die Therapie.HOES ist ein
brauchbares Instrument zur standardisierten Kartierung der histopathologischen
Ergebnisse.
DOI: 10.3205/iprs000049 
PMCID: PMC4582515
PMID: 26504719 

