
1. mBio. 2015 Oct 27;6(6):e01263-15. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01263-15.

A Molecular-Level Landscape of Diet-Gut Microbiome Interactions: Toward Dietary
Interventions Targeting Bacterial Genes.

Ni Y(1), Li J(1), Panagiotou G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology and Bioinformatics Group, School of Biological Sciences, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Systems Biology and Bioinformatics Group, School of Biological Sciences, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China gipa@hku.hk.

As diet is considered the major regulator of the gut ecosystem, the overall
objective of this work was to demonstrate that a detailed knowledge of the
phytochemical composition of food could add to our understanding of observed
changes in functionality and activity of the gut microbiota. We used
metatranscriptomic data from a human dietary intervention study to develop a
network that consists of >400 compounds present in the administered plant-based
diet linked to 609 microbial targets in the gut. Approximately 20% of the
targeted bacterial proteins showed significant changes in their gene expression
levels, while functional and topology analyses revealed that proteins in
metabolic networks with high centrality are the most "vulnerable" targets. This
global view and the mechanistic understanding of the associations between
microbial gene expression and dietary molecules could be regarded as a promising 
methodological approach for targeting specific bacterial proteins that impact
human health.IMPORTANCE: It is a general belief that microbiome-derived drugs and
therapies will come to the market in coming years, either in the form of
molecules that mimic a beneficial interaction between bacteria and host or
molecules that disturb a harmful interaction or proteins that can modify the
microbiome or bacterial species to change the balance of "good" and "bad"
bacteria in the gut microbiome. However, among the numerous factors, what has
proven the most influential for modulating the microbial composition of the gut
is diet. In line with this, we demonstrate here that a systematic analysis of the
interactions between the small molecules present in our diet and the gut
bacterial proteome holds great potential for designing dietary interventions to
improve human health.

Copyright Â© 2015 Ni et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01263-15 
PMCID: PMC4626853
PMID: 26507230  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

