
1. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:490531. doi: 10.1155/2015/490531. Epub 2015 Oct 5.

Glycosylation-Based Serum Biomarkers for Cancer Diagnostics and Prognostics.

Kirwan A(1), Utratna M(1), O'Dwyer ME(2), Joshi L(1), Kilcoyne M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Glycoscience Group, National Centre for Biomedical Engineering Science,
National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland.
(2)Department of Hematology, National University of Ireland Galway, Galway,
Ireland.
(3)Glycoscience Group, National Centre for Biomedical Engineering Science,
National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland ; Carbohydrate Signalling 
Group, Microbiology, School of Natural Sciences, National University of Ireland
Galway, Galway, Ireland.

Cancer is the second most common cause of death in developed countries with
approximately 14 million newly diagnosed individuals and over 6 million
cancer-related deaths in 2012. Many cancers are discovered at a more advanced
stage but better survival rates are correlated with earlier detection. Current
clinically approved cancer biomarkers are most effective when applied to patients
with widespread cancer. Single biomarkers with satisfactory sensitivity and
specificity have not been identified for the most common cancers and some
biomarkers are ineffective for the detection of early stage cancers. Thus, novel 
biomarkers with better diagnostic and prognostic performance are required.
Aberrant protein glycosylation is well known hallmark of cancer and represents a 
promising source of potential biomarkers. Glycoproteins enter circulation from
tissues or blood cells through active secretion or leakage and patient serum is
an attractive option as a source for biomarkers from a clinical and diagnostic
perspective. A plethora of technical approaches have been developed to address
the challenges of glycosylation structure detection and determination. This
review summarises currently utilised glycoprotein biomarkers and novel
glycosylation-based biomarkers from the serum glycoproteome under investigation
as cancer diagnostics and for monitoring and prognostics and includes details of 
recent high throughput and other emerging glycoanalytical techniques.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/490531 
PMCID: PMC4609776
PMID: 26509158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

