
1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Mar;1857(3):232-46. doi: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2015.10.014.
Epub 2015 Nov 11.

Development and dynamics of the photosynthetic apparatus in purple phototrophic
bacteria.

Niederman RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey, 604 Allison Road, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854-8082,
United States. Electronic address: rniederm@rci.rutgers.edu.

The purple bacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides provides a useful model system for
studies of the assembly and dynamics of bacterial photosynthetic membranes. For
the nascent developing membrane, proteomic analyses showed an ~2-fold enrichment 
in general membrane assembly factors, compared to chromatophores. When the
protonophore carbonyl-cyanide m-chlorophenyl-hydrazone (CCCP) was added to an ICM
inducing culture, an ~2-fold elevation in spectral counts vs. the control was
seen for the SecA translocation ATPase, the preprotein translocase SecY, SecD and
SecF insertion components, and chaperonins DnaJ and DnaK, which act early in the 
assembly process. It is suggested that these factors accumulated with their
nascent polypeptides, as putative assembly intermediates in a functionally
arrested state. Since in Synechocystis PCC 6803, a link has been established
between Chl delivery involving the high-light HilD protein and the
SecY/YidC-requiring cotranslational insertion of nascent polypeptides, such a
connection between BChl biosynthesis and insertion and folding of nascent Rba.
sphaeroides BChl binding proteins is likely to also occur. AFM imaging studies of
the formation of the reaction center (RC)-light harvesting 1 (LH1) complex
suggested a cooperative assembly mechanism in which, following the association
between the RC template and the initial LH1 unit, addition of successive LH1
units to the RC drives the assembly process to completion. Alterations in
membrane dynamics as the developing membrane becomes filled with LH2-rings were
assessed by fluorescence induction/relaxation kinetics, which showed a slowing in
RC electron transfer rate thought to mainly reflect alterations in donor side
electron transfer. This was attributed to an increased distance for electron flow
in cytochrome c2 between the RC and cytochrome bc1 complexes, as suggested in the
current structural models. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled
Organization and dynamics of bioenergetic systems in bacteria, edited by Prof
Conrad Mullineaux.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2015.10.014 
PMID: 26519773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

