
1. J Bacteriol. 2015 Nov 2;198(2):311-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00471-15. Print 2016 Jan
15.

Identification and Characterization of a New 7-Aminocephalosporanic Acid
Deacetylase from Thermophilic Bacterium Alicyclobacillus tengchongensis.

Ding JM(1), Yu TT(1), Han NY(1), Yu JL(1), Li JJ(1), Yang YJ(1), Tang XH(1), Xu
B(1), Zhou JP(1), Tang HZ(2), Huang ZX(3).

Author information: 
(1)Engineering Research Center of Sustainable Development and Utilization of
Biomass Energy, Ministry of Education, School of Life Sciences, Yunnan Normal
University, Kunming, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
tanghongzhi@sjtu.edu.cn huangzunxi@163.com.
(3)Engineering Research Center of Sustainable Development and Utilization of
Biomass Energy, Ministry of Education, School of Life Sciences, Yunnan Normal
University, Kunming, China tanghongzhi@sjtu.edu.cn huangzunxi@163.com.

Deacetylation of 7-aminocephalosporanic acid (7-ACA) at position C-3 provides
valuable starting material for producing semisynthetic β-lactam antibiotics.
However, few enzymes have been characterized in this process before now.
Comparative analysis of the genome of the thermophilic bacterium Alicyclobacillus
tengchongensis revealed a hypothetical protein (EstD1) with typical esterase
features. The EstD1 protein was functionally cloned, expressed, and purified from
Escherichia coli BL21(DE3). It indeed displayed esterase activity, with optimal
activity at around 65°C and pH 8.5, with a preference for esters with short-chain
acyl esters (C2 to C4). Sequence alignment revealed that EstD1 is an SGNH
hydrolase with the putative catalytic triad Ser15, Asp191, and His194, which
belongs to carbohydrate esterase family 12. EstD1 can hydrolyze acetate at the
C-3 position of 7-aminocephalosporanic acid (7-ACA) to form deacetyl-7-ACA, which
is an important starting material for producing semisynthetic β-lactam
antibiotics. EstD1 retained more than 50% of its initial activity when incubated 
at pH values ranging from 4 to 11 at 65°C for 1 h. To the best of our knowledge, 
this enzyme is a new SGNH hydrolase identified from thermophiles that is able to 
hydrolyze 7-ACA.IMPORTANCE: Deacetyl cephalosporins are highly valuable building 
blocks for the industrial production of various kinds of semisynthetic β-lactam
antibiotics. These compounds are derived mainly from 7-ACA, which is obtained by 
chemical or enzymatic processes from cephalosporin C. Enzymatic transformation of
7-ACA is the main method because of the adverse effects chemical deacylation
brought to the environment. SGNH hydrolases are widely distributed in plants.
However, the tools for identifying and characterizing SGNH hydrolases from
bacteria, especially from thermophiles, are rather limited. Here, our work
demonstrates that EstD1 belongs to the SGNH family and can hydrolyze acetate at
the C-3 position of 7-ACA. Moreover, this study can enrich our understanding of
the functions of these enzymes from this family.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00471-15 
PMCID: PMC4751793
PMID: 26527640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

