
1. Mutat Res Genet Toxicol Environ Mutagen. 2015 Nov;793:9-13. doi:
10.1016/j.mrgentox.2015.06.010. Epub 2015 Jun 17.

Activation of the Fanconi anemia/BRCA pathway at low doses of ionization
radiation.

Bosch PC(1), Bogliolo M(1), Surrallés J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genome Instability and DNA Repair Group, Department of Genetics and
Microbiology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain and
Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Spain.
(2)Genome Instability and DNA Repair Group, Department of Genetics and
Microbiology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain and
Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Spain.
Electronic address: jordi.surralles@uab.cat.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare, clinically heterogeneous autosomal recessive or
X-linked genetic disease characterized by chromosome fragility, congenital
malformations and cancer susceptibility. FA patients are usually radiosensitive
when exposed to radiotherapy but the role of the FA in response to ionizing
radiation (IR) is controversial. Here we have investigated IR-induced activation 
of the FA pathway by systematically analyzing monoubiquitination of the central
protein FANCD2 and subsequent recruitment to stalled replication forks in primary
fibroblasts. We developed an immunolabelling method to simultaneously visualize
IR-induced FANCD2 and γH2AX foci in S-phase. We observed FANCD2 foci formation in
a subset of IR-induced γH2AX foci in S-phase cells. This was observed at doses of
IR ranging from 0.1 to 5.0Gy in a dose dependent non-threshold fashion. Our
results indicate that minimum doses of IR can produce replication fork stalling
and FA pathway activation during S-phase in primary cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrgentox.2015.06.010 
PMID: 26520367  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

