
1. Cytokine. 2016 Jan;77:44-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.10.008. Epub 2015 Oct 29.

Chemokine and cytokine levels in inflammatory bowel disease patients.

Singh UP(1), Singh NP(2), Murphy EA(2), Price RL(3), Fayad R(4), Nagarkatti M(2),
Nagarkatti PS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA. Electronic address:
Udai.singh@uscmed.sc.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of South Carolina,
Columbia, SC 29208, USA.
(4)Department of Exercise Science, Arnold School of Public Health, University of 
South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA.

Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC), two forms of inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD), are chronic, relapsing, and tissue destructive lesions that are
accompanied by the uncontrolled activation of effector immune cells in the
mucosa. Recent estimates indicate that there are 1.3 million annual cases of IBD 
in the United States, 50% of which consists of CD and 50% of UC. Chemokines and
cytokines play a pivotal role in the regulation of mucosal inflammation by
promoting leukocyte migration to sites of inflammation ultimately leading to
tissue damage and destruction. In recent years, experimental studies in rodents
have led to a better understanding of the role played by these inflammatory
mediators in the development and progression of colitis. However, the clinical
literature on IBD remains limited. Therefore, the aim of this study was to
evaluate systemic concentrations of key chemokines and cytokines in forty-two IBD
patients with a range of disease activity compared to levels found in ten healthy
donors. We found a significant increase in an array of chemokines including
macrophage migration factor (MIF), CCL25, CCL23, CXCL5, CXCL13, CXCL10, CXCL11,
MCP1, and CCL21 in IBD patients as compared to normal healthy donors (P<0.05).
Further, we also report increases in the inflammatory cytokines IL-16, IFN-γ,
IL-1β and TNF-α in IBD patients when compared to healthy donors (P<0.05). These
data clearly indicate an increase in circulating levels of specific chemokines
and cytokines that are known to modulate systemic level through immune cells
results in affecting local intestinal inflammation and tissue damage in IBD
patients. Blockade of these inflammatory mediators should be explored as a
mechanism to alleviate or even reverse symptoms of IBD.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.10.008 
PMCID: PMC4666758
PMID: 26520877  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

