
1. BMC Immunol. 2015 Nov 4;16:66. doi: 10.1186/s12865-015-0130-z.

Cd1d regulates B cell development but not B cell accumulation and IL10 production
in mice with pathologic CD5(+) B cell expansion.

Palmer VL(1), Nganga VK(2), Rothermund ME(3), Perry GA(4), Swanson PC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Creighton University, 2500 
California Plaza, Omaha, NE, 68178, USA. VictoriaFaust@creighton.edu.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Creighton University, 2500 
California Plaza, Omaha, NE, 68178, USA. VincentNganga@creighton.edu.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Creighton University, 2500 
California Plaza, Omaha, NE, 68178, USA. MaryRothermund@creighton.edu.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Creighton University, 2500 
California Plaza, Omaha, NE, 68178, USA. gap00438@creighton.edu.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Creighton University, 2500 
California Plaza, Omaha, NE, 68178, USA. pswanson@creighton.edu.

BACKGROUND: CD1d is a widely expressed lipid antigen presenting molecule required
for CD1d-restricted invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cell development. Elevated 
CD1d expression is detected in CD5(+) IL10-producing B cells, called B10 B cells,
and is correlated with poorer prognosis in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), a 
CD5(+) B cell malignancy with B10-like functional properties. Whether CD1d
expression regulates CD5(+) B cell accumulation, IL10 competence, and antibody
production in naïve mice with pathologic CD5(+) B cell expansion remains
untested.
RESULTS: Using three different transgenic mouse models of benign or leukemic
CD5(+) B cell expansion, we found that CD1d was differentially expressed on
CD5(+) B cells between the three models, but loss of CD1d expression had no
effect on CD5(+) B cell abundance or inducible IL10 expression in any of the
models. Interestingly, in the CLL-prone Eμ-TCL1 model, loss of CD1d expression
suppressed spontaneous IgG (but not IgM) production, whereas in the
dnRAG1xEμ-TCL1 (DTG) model of accelerated CLL, loss of CD1d expression was
associated with elevated numbers of splenic CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells and an
inverted CD4(+):CD8(+) T cell ratio. Unexpectedly, before leukemia onset, all
three transgenic CD1d-deficient mouse strains had fewer splenic transitional B
cells than their CD1d-proficient counterparts.
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that CD1d expression and iNKT cells are dispensable
for the development, accumulation, or IL10 competence of CD5(+) B cells in mice
prone to benign or leukemic CLL-like B cell expansion, but reveal a novel role
for iNKT cells in supporting B cell progression through the transitional stage of
development in these animals. These results suggest CD1d-directed therapies to
target CLL could be evaded by downregulating CD1d expression with little effect
on continued leukemic CD5(+) B cell survival. The data also imply that iNKT cells
help restrain pro-leukemic CD8(+) T cell expansion in CLL, potentially explaining
a reported correlation in human CLL between disease progression, the loss of NKT 
cells, and a paradoxical increase in CD8(+) T cells.

DOI: 10.1186/s12865-015-0130-z 
PMCID: PMC4632344
PMID: 26537916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

