
1. Phytopathology. 2015 Dec;105(12):1594-600. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-05-15-0129-R. Epub 
2015 Nov 9.

Metalaxyl Resistance in Phytophthora infestans: Assessing Role of RPA190 Gene and
Diversity Within Clonal Lineages.

Matson ME(1), Small IM(1), Fry WE(1), Judelson HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)First and fourth authors: Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology,
University of California, Riverside, CA 92521; and second and third authors:
Section of Plant Pathology and Plant-Microbe Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY 14853.

Prior work has shown that the inheritance of resistance to metalaxyl, an
oomycete-specific fungicide, is complex and may involve multiple genes. Recent
research indicated that a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the gene
encoding RPA190, the largest subunit of RNA polymerase I, confers resistance to
metalaxyl (or mefenoxam) in some isolates of the potato late blight pathogen
Phytophthora infestans. Using both DNA sequencing and high resolution melt assays
for distinguishing RPA190 alleles, we show here that the SNP is absent from
certain resistant isolates of P. infestans from North America, Europe, and
Mexico. The SNP is present in some members of the US-23 and US-24 clonal
lineages, but these tend to be fairly sensitive to the fungicide based on
artificial media and field test data. Diversity in the level of sensitivity,
RPA190 genotype, and RPA190 copy number was observed in these lineages but were
uncorrelated. Controlled laboratory crosses demonstrated that RPA190 did not
cosegregate with metalaxyl resistance from a Mexican and British isolate. We
conclude that while metalaxyl may be used to control many contemporary strains of
P. infestans, an assay based on RPA190 will not be sufficient to diagnose the
sensitivity levels of isolates.

DOI: 10.1094/PHYTO-05-15-0129-R 
PMID: 26551315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

