
1. Tumour Biol. 2016 Apr;37(4):5455-66. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-4313-2. Epub 2015
Nov 13.

Differential expression of ligands for NKG2D and DNAM-1 receptors by epithelial
ovarian cancer-derived exosomes and its influence on NK cell cytotoxicity.

Labani-Motlagh A(1), Israelsson P(1)(2), Ottander U(2), Lundin E(3), Nagaev I(1),
Nagaeva O(1), Dehlin E(1), Baranov V(1), Mincheva-Nilsson L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology/Clinical Immunology, Umeå University,
S-90185, Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences/Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Umeå University,
S-90185, Umeå, Sweden.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences/Pathology, Umeå University, S-90185, Umeå,
Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Microbiology/Clinical Immunology, Umeå University,
S-90185, Umeå, Sweden. lucia.mincheva-nilsson@umu.se.

Cancers constitutively produce and secrete into the blood and other biofluids
30-150 nm-sized endosomal vehicles called exosomes. Cancer-derived exosomes
exhibit powerful influence on a variety of biological mechanisms to the benefit
of the tumors that produce them. We studied the immunosuppressive ability of
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) exosomes on two cytotoxic pathways of importance 
for anticancer immunity-the NKG2D receptor-ligand pathway and the
DNAM-1-PVR/nectin-2 pathway. Using exosomes, isolated from EOC tumor explant and 
EOC cell-line culture supernatants, and ascitic fluid from EOC patients, we
studied the expression of NKG2D and DNAM-1 ligands on EOC exosomes and their
ability to downregulate the cognate receptors. Our results show that EOC exosomes
differentially and constitutively express NKG2D ligands from both MICA/B and ULBP
families on their surface, while DNAM-1 ligands are more seldom expressed and not
associated with the exosomal membrane surface. Consequently, the NKG2D
ligand-bearing EOC exosomes significantly downregulated the NKG2D receptor
expression on peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) while the DNAM-1 receptor
was unaffected. The downregulation of NKG2D receptor expression was coupled to
inhibition of NKG2D receptor-ligand-mediated degranulation and cytotoxicity
measured in vitro with OVCAR-3 and K562 cells as targets. The EOC exosomes acted 
as a decoy impairing the NKG2D mediated cytotoxicity while the DNAM-1
receptor-ligand system remained unchanged. Taken together, our results support
and explain the mechanism behind the recently reported finding that in EOC,
NK-cell recognition and killing of tumor cells was mainly dependent on DNAM-1
signaling while the contribution of the NKG2D receptor-ligand pathway was
complementary and uncertain.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-015-4313-2 
PMID: 26563374  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

