
1. Eur J Immunol. 2016 Feb;46(2):409-19. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445289. Epub 2015 Dec
20.

HLA class I downregulation is associated with enhanced NK-cell killing of
melanoma cells with acquired drug resistance to BRAF inhibitors.

Sottile R(1)(2), Pangigadde PN(1)(2), Tan T(3), Anichini A(4), Sabbatino F(5),
Trecroci F(2), Favoino E(5), Orgiano L(3), Roberts J(3), Ferrone S(5), Kärre
K(1), Colucci F(3), Carbone E(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)University Magna Graecia of Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Cambridge School of
Clinical Medicine, NIHR Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(5)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

The frequent development of drug resistance to targeted therapies in cancer
patients has stimulated interest in strategies counteracting resistance.
Combining immunotherapies with targeted therapies is one such strategy. In this
context, we asked whether human NK cells can target melanoma cells that have
acquired resistance to selective inhibitors targeting activating mutants of the
B-Raf kinase (BRAF inhibitors, BRAFi). We generated drug-resistant cell variants 
in vitro from human BRAF-mutant melanoma cell lines MEL-HO, COLO-38, SK-MEL-37,
1520 and from primary melanoma cells freshly isolated from two patients. All
drug-resistant cell variants remained susceptible to lysis by IL-2-activated NK
cells; and two BRAFi-resistant lines (BRAFi-R) became significantly more
susceptible to NK-cell lysis than their parental lines. This was associated with 
significant HLA class I antigen downregulation and PD-L1 upregulation on the
drug-resistant lines. Although blocking HLA class I enhanced the extent of lysis 
of both BRAFi-R and parental cells to NK-cell-mediated lysis, antibody-mediated
inhibition of PD1-PD-L1 interactions had no detectable effect. HLA class I
antigen expression on BRAFi-R melanoma variants thus appears to play a major role
in their susceptibility to NK-cell cytotoxicity. These findings suggest that
NK-cell-based immunotherapy may be a viable approach to treat melanoma patients
with acquired resistance to BRAF inhibitors.

© 2015 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology published by WILEY-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201445289 
PMCID: PMC4832274
PMID: 26564811  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

