
1. Microbiol Immunol. 2015 Dec;59(12):705-15. doi: 10.1111/1348-0421.12339.

The diagnostic potential of MPT63-derived HLA-A*0201-restricted CD8+ T-cell
epitopes for active pulmonary tuberculosis.

Duan Z(1), Li D(2)(3), Jia Q(2)(4), Xu J(2)(4), Chen X(1)(2), Xu Z(2)(4), Liu
H(2)(4), Chen B(2), Wen J(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Xueyuan West Road.
(2)Institute of Arboviruses, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wenzhou Medical
University, Chashan, Wenzhou 325000.
(3)Department of Liver Disease, Second People's Hospital of Ningbo, Ningbo
315010.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Wenzhou Medical University, Chashan, Wenzhou 325000, China.

MPT63 protein is found only in Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex, including M.
tuberculosis and M. bovis. Detection of MPT63-specific IFN-γ-secreting T cells
could be useful for the diagnosis of tuberculosis (TB) diseases. In the present
study, the HLA-A*0201 restriction of ten predicted MPT63-derived CD8(+) T-cell
epitopes was assessed on the basis of T2 cell line and HLA-A*0201 transgenic
mice. The diagnostic potential of immunogenic peptides in active pulmonary TB
patients was evaluated using an IFN-γ enzyme-linked immunospot assay. It was
found that five peptides bound to HLA-A*0201 with high affinity, whereas the
remaining peptides exhibited low affinity for HLA-A*0201. Five immunogenic
peptides (MPT6318-26 , MPT6329-37 , MPT6320-28 , MPT635-14 and MPT6310-19 )
elicited large numbers of cytotoxic IFN-γ-secreting T cells in HLA-A*0201
transgenic mice. Each of the five immunogenic peptides was recognized by
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 45% to 73% of 40 HLA-A*0201 positive TB
patients. The total diagnostic sensitivity of the five immunogenic peptides was
higher than that of a T-SPOT.TB assay (based on ESAT-6 and CFP-10) (93% versus
90%). It is noticeable that the diagnostic sensitivity of the combination of five
immunogenic peptides and T-SPOT.TB assay reached 100%. These MPT63-derived
HLA-A*0201-restricted CD8(+) T-cell epitopes would likely contribute to the
immunological diagnosis of M. tuberculosis infection and may provide the
components for designing an effective TB vaccine.

© 2015 The Societies and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1348-0421.12339 
PMID: 26577013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

