
1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2016;897:33-44. doi: 10.1007/5584_2015_5009.

The Lactobacillus plantarum Eno A1 Enolase Is Involved in Immunostimulation of
Caco-2 Cells and in Biofilm Development.

Vastano V(1), Pagano A(2), Fusco A(2), Merola G(1), Sacco M(1), Donnarumma G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental, Biological, and Pharmaceutical Science and
Technology, Second University of Naples, via Vivaldi n 43, Caserta, 81100, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Microbiology and Clinical
Microbiology, Second University of Naples, via De Crecchio n 7, Naples, 80138,
Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Microbiology and Clinical
Microbiology, Second University of Naples, via De Crecchio n 7, Naples, 80138,
Italy. giovanna.donnarumma@unina2.it.

The role of probiotics in prevention and treatment of a variety of diseases is
now well assessed. The presence of adhesive molecules on the cell surface of
probiotics has been related to the ability to confer health benefit to the host. 
We have previously shown that the enolase EnoA1 of Lactobacillus plantarum, one
of the most predominant species in the gut microbiota of healthy individuals, is 
cell surface-expressed and is involved in binding with human fibronectin and
plasminogen. By means of comparative analysis between L. plantarum LM3 (wild
type) and its isogenic LM3-CC1 (ΔenoA1) mutant strain, here we show that EnoA1
affects the ability of this bacterium to modulate immune response as determined
by analysis of expression of immune system molecules in Caco-2 cells. Indeed, we 
observed induction of TLR2 expression in cells exposed to L. plantarum LM3, while
no induction was detectable in cells exposed to LM3-CC1. This difference was much
less consistent when expression of TLR4 was determined in cells exposed to the
two strains. Pro-inflammatory (IL-6) and anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-10,
TGF-β), and the antimicrobial peptide HBD-2 were induced in Caco-2 cells exposed 
to L. plantarum LM3, while lower levels of induction were detected in cells
exposed to LM3-CC1. We also analyzed the ability to develop biofilm of the two
strains, and observed a decrease of about 65 % in the development of mature
biofilm in LM3-CC1 compared to the wild type.

DOI: 10.1007/5584_2015_5009 
PMID: 26577529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

