
1. Hypertension. 2016 Jan;67(1):107-17. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.115.06062. Epub
2015 Nov 16.

Nrf2-Mediated Cardiac Maladaptive Remodeling and Dysfunction in a Setting of
Autophagy Insufficiency.

Qin Q(1), Qu C(1), Niu T(1), Zang H(1), Qi L(1), Lyu L(1), Wang X(1), Nagarkatti 
M(1), Nagarkatti P(1), Janicki JS(1), Wang XL(2), Cui T(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research,
Shandong University Qilu Hospital Research Center for Cell Therapy, Qilu Hospital
of Shandong University, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong, 
China (Q.Q., C.Q., T.N., H.Z., L.Q., L.L., X.L.W., T.C.); Division of Basic
Biomedical Science, Sanford School of Medicine, University of South Dakota,
Vermillion (X.W.); and Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology
(M.N., P.N.) and Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy (J.S.J., T.C.),
University of South Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia.
(2)From the Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research,
Shandong University Qilu Hospital Research Center for Cell Therapy, Qilu Hospital
of Shandong University, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong, 
China (Q.Q., C.Q., T.N., H.Z., L.Q., L.L., X.L.W., T.C.); Division of Basic
Biomedical Science, Sanford School of Medicine, University of South Dakota,
Vermillion (X.W.); and Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology
(M.N., P.N.) and Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy (J.S.J., T.C.),
University of South Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia. xingliwang@sdu.edu.cn 
Taixing.Cui@uscmed.sc.edu.

Nuclear factor erythroid-2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) appears to exert either a
protective or detrimental effect on the heart; however, the underlying mechanism 
remains poorly understood. Herein, we uncovered a novel mechanism for turning off
the Nrf2-mediated cardioprotection and switching on Nrf2-mediated cardiac
dysfunction. In a murine model of pressure overload-induced cardiac remodeling
and dysfunction via transverse aortic arch constriction, knockout of Nrf2
enhanced myocardial necrosis and death rate during an initial stage of cardiac
adaptation when myocardial autophagy function is intact. However, knockout of
Nrf2 turned out to be cardioprotective throughout the later stage of cardiac
maladaptive remodeling when myocardial autophagy function became insufficient.
Transverse aortic arch constriction -induced activation of Nrf2 was dramatically 
enhanced in the heart with impaired autophagy, which is induced by
cardiomyocyte-specific knockout of autophagy-related gene (Atg)5. Notably, Nrf2
activation coincided with the upregulation of angiotensinogen (Agt) only in the
autophagy-impaired heart after transverse aortic arch constriction. Agt5 and Nrf2
gene loss-of-function approaches in combination with Jak2 and Fyn kinase
inhibitors revealed that suppression of autophagy inactivated Jak2 and Fyn and
nuclear translocation of Fyn, while enhancing nuclear translocation of Nrf2 and
Nrf2-driven Agt expression in cardiomyocytes. Taken together, these results
indicate that the pathophysiological consequences of Nrf2 activation are closely 
linked with the functional integrity of myocardial autophagy during cardiac
remodeling. When autophagy is intact, Nrf2 is required for cardiac adaptive
responses; however, autophagy impairment most likely turns off Fyn-operated Nrf2 
nuclear export thus activating Nrf2-driven Agt transcription, which exacerbates
cardiac maladaptation leading to dysfunction.

Â© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.115.06062 
PMCID: PMC4837959
PMID: 26573705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

