
1. Mol Genet Genomics. 2016 Apr;291(2):789-99. doi: 10.1007/s00438-015-1146-z. Epub 
2015 Nov 20.

Regulation signature of miR-143 and miR-26 in porcine Salmonella infection
identified by binding site enrichment analysis.

Yao M(1), Gao W(1), Tao H(1), Yang J(1), Liu G(1)(2), Huang T(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science, Yangtze University, Jingzhou, 434025, Hubei, China.
(2)Black Pig Research Institute, Yangtze University, Jingzhou, 434025, Hubei,
China.
(3)College of Animal Science, Yangtze University, Jingzhou, 434025, Hubei, China.
thua45@126.com.

Salmonella infects many vertebrate species, and pigs colonized with Salmonella
are typically Salmonella carriers. Transcriptomic analysis of the response to
Salmonella infection in whole blood has been reported for the pig. The objective 
of this study is to identify the important miRNAs involved in Salmonella
infection using binding site enrichment analysis. We predicted porcine microRNA
(miRNA) binding sites in the 3' UTR of protein-coding genes for all miRNA
families. Based on those predictions, we analyzed miRNA-binding sites for mRNAs
expressed in peripheral blood to investigate the functional importance of miRNAs 
in Salmonella infection in pig. Enrichment analysis revealed that binding sites
of five miRNAs (including miR-143, -9839, -26, -2483, and -4335) were
significantly over represented for the differentially expressed gene sets.
Real-time PCR results indicated that selected members of this miRNA group
(miR-143, -26, and -4335) were differentially expressed in whole blood after
Salmonella inoculation. The luciferase reporter assay showed that ATP6V1A and
IL13RA1 were targets of miR-143 and that miR-26 regulates BINP3L and ARL6IP6. The
results strongly suggest that miR-143 and miR-26 play important regulatory roles 
in the development of Salmonella infection in pig.

DOI: 10.1007/s00438-015-1146-z 
PMID: 26589421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

