
1. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 18;10(11):e0143158. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143158.
eCollection 2015.

Black Tea Extract and Its Theaflavin Derivatives Inhibit the Growth of
Periodontopathogens and Modulate Interleukin-8 and β-Defensin Secretion in Oral
Epithelial Cells.

Lombardo Bedran TB(1), Morin MP(2), Palomari Spolidorio D(3), Grenier D(2).

Author information: 
(1)São Paulo Dental School, UNINOVE University, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Oral Ecology Research Group, Faculty of Dentistry, Laval University, Quebec
City, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Oral Diagnosis and Surgery, Araraquara Dental School, State
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Over the years, several studies have brought evidence suggesting that tea
polyphenols, mostly from green tea, may have oral health benefits. Since few data
are available concerning the beneficial properties of black tea and its
theaflavin derivatives against periodontal disease, the objective of this study
was to investigate their antibacterial activity as well as their ability to
modulate interleukin-8 and human β-defensin (hBD) secretion in oral epithelial
cells. Among the periodontopathogenic bacteria tested, Porphyromonas gingivalis
was found to be highly susceptible to the black tea extract and theaflavins.
Moreover, our data indicated that the black tea extract, theaflavin and
theaflavin-3,3'-digallate can potentiate the antibacterial effect of
metronidazole and tetracycline against P. gingivalis. Using
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated oral epithelial cells, the black tea extract (100
μg/ml), as well as theaflavin and theaflavin-3,3'-digallate (50 μg/ml) reduced
interleukin-8 (IL-8) secretion by 85%, 79%, and 86%, respectively, thus
suggesting an anti-inflammatory property. The ability of the black tea extract
and its theaflavin derivatives to induce the secretion of the antimicrobial
peptides hBD-1, hBD-2 and hBD-4 by oral epithelial cells was then evaluated. Our 
results showed that the black tea extract as well as theaflavin-3,3'-digallate
were able to increase the secretion of the three hBDs. In conclusion, the ability
of a black tea extract and theaflavins to exert antibacterial activity against
major periodontopathogens, to attenuate the secretion of IL-8, and to induce hBD 
secretion in oral epithelial cells suggest that these components may have a
beneficial effect against periodontal disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143158 
PMCID: PMC4651492
PMID: 26581041  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

