
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 23;5:16972. doi: 10.1038/srep16972.

Intrahaplotypic Variants Differentiate Complex Linkage Disequilibrium within
Human MHC Haplotypes.

Lam TH(1)(2), Tay MZ(1)(3), Wang B(1), Xiao Z(1), Ren EC(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Singapore Immunology Network, A*STAR, 8A Biomedical Grove, #03-06 Immunos,
Singapore 138648, Singapore.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 5 Science Drive 2, MD4 Level 5, Singapore 117597,
Singapore.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

Distinct regions of long-range genetic fixation in the human MHC region, known as
conserved extended haplotypes (CEHs), possess unique genomic characteristics and 
are strongly associated with numerous diseases. While CEHs appear to be
homogeneous by SNP analysis, the nature of fine variations within their genomic
structure is unknown. Using multiple, MHC-homozygous cell lines, we demonstrate
extensive sequence conservation in two common Asian MHC haplotypes: A33-B58-DR3
and A2-B46-DR9. However, characterization of phase-resolved MHC haplotypes
revealed unique intra-CEH patterns of variation and uncovered 127 single
nucleotide variants (SNVs) which are missing from public databases. We further
show that the strong linkage disequilibrium structure within the human MHC that
typically confounds precise identification of genetic features can be resolved
using intra-CEH variants, as evidenced by rs3129063 and rs448489, which affect
expression of ZFP57, a gene important in methylation and epigenetic regulation.
This study demonstrates an improved strategy that can be used towards genetic
dissection of diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/srep16972 
PMCID: PMC4655331
PMID: 26593880  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

