
1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016 Feb;26(2):277-86. doi: 10.4014/jmb.1510.10093.

Cytoprotective Effect of Makgeolli Lees on Paraquat Induced Oxidative Stress in
A549 Cells via Activation of NRF2 and Antioxidant Genes.

Jeon M(1), Rahman N(1)(2), Kim YS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Soonchunhyang University,
Cheonan 31151, Republic of Korea.
(2)Institute of Tissue Engineering, College of Medicine, Soonchunhyang
University, Cheonan 31151, Republic of Korea.

Makgeolli lees (ML) has several physiological effects such as antioxidant,
antidiabetic, and anticancer properties, but its biological functions have not
been determined definitively. Here, we tested whether ML has a cytoprotective
effect on paraquat (PQ)-induced oxidative stress in the human lung carcinoma cell
line A549. At 0.1 mg/ml ML, viability of PQ-exposed A549 cells was restored by
12.4%, 18.5%, and 48.6% after 24, 48, and 72 h, respectively. ML also reduced
production of the intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) that were generated
by PQ treatment. Further experiments revealed that ML treatment enhanced the
expression and nuclear translocation of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor
2 (NRF2) as well as ARE-GFP reporter activity. ML treatment also effectively
increased the expression of NRF2's target genes NAD(P)H dehydrogenase quinone 1
(NQO1) and heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1). Moreover, we found that expression of
cytoprotective genes, including glutathione peroxidases (GPXs), superoxide
dismutase (SOD1), catalase (CAT), peroxiredoxin 3 (PRDX3), and peroxiredoxin 4
(PRDX4), was greatly enhanced by treatment with ML during PQ exposure. Taken
together, the data suggest that treatment of PQ-exposed A549 cells with ML
ameliorates cytotoxicity through induction of NRF2 expression and its target
genes HO-1, NQO1, and other antioxidant genes. Thus, ML may serve as a functional
food applicable to ROS-mediated human diseases.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1510.10093 
PMID: 26597533  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

