
1. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2015 Dec;47(12):969-80. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmv111.

Apelin-13 promotes cardiomyocyte hypertrophy via PI3K-Akt-ERK1/2-p70S6K and
PI3K-induced autophagy.

Xie F(1), Liu W(2), Feng F(1), Li X(1), He L(1), Lv D(1), Qin X(1), Li L(3), Li
L(4), Chen L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, Learning Key Laboratory for
Pharmacoproteomics, University of South China, Hengyang 421001, China.
(2)Institute of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, Learning Key Laboratory for
Pharmacoproteomics, University of South China, Hengyang 421001, China Department 
of Pharmacy, The Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha
410013, China.
(3)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology, University of South China,
Hengyang 421001, China.
(4)Institute of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, Learning Key Laboratory for
Pharmacoproteomics, University of South China, Hengyang 421001, China
lxchen6@126.com Wjliu829@yahoo.com.cn.

Apelin is highly expressed in rat left ventricular hypertrophy Sprague Dawley rat
models, and it plays a crucial role in the cardiovascular system. The aim this
study was to clarify whether apelin-13 promotes hypertrophy in H9c2 rat
cardiomyocytes and to investigate its underlying mechanism. The cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy was observed by measuring the diameter, volume, and protein content
of H9c2 cells. The activation of autophagy was evaluated by observing the
morphology of autophagosomes by transmission electron microscopy, observing the
subcellular localization of LC3 by light microscopy, and detecting the
membrane-associated form of LC3 by western blot analysis. The
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway was identified and the
proteins expression was detected using western blot analysis. The results
revealed that apelin-13 increased the diameter, volume, and protein content of
H9c2 cells and promoted the phosphorylation of PI3K, Akt, ERK1/2, and p70S6K.
Apelin-13 activated the PI3K-Akt-ERK1/2-p70S6K pathway. PI3K inhibitor LY294002, 
Akt inhibitor 1701-1, ERK1/2 inhibitor PD98059 attenuated the increase of the
cell diameter, volume, protein content induced by apelin-13. Apelin-13 increased 
the autophagosomes and up-regulated the expressions of beclin 1 and LC3-II/I both
transiently and stably. The autophagy inhibitor 3MA ameliorated the increase of
cell diameter, volume, and protein content that were induced by apelin-13. These 
results suggested that apelin-13 promotes H9c2 rat cardiomyocyte hypertrophy via 
PI3K-Akt-ERK1/2-p70S6K and PI3K-induced autophagy.

Â© The Author 2015. Published by ABBS Editorial Office in association with Oxford 
University Press on behalf of the Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1093/abbs/gmv111 
PMID: 26607438  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

