
1. Dev Biol. 2016 Jan 15;409(2):459-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.11.011. Epub 2015 
Nov 18.

A novel function for the DEAD-box RNA helicase DDX-23 in primary microRNA
processing in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Chu YD(1), Chen HK(1), Huang T(1), Chan SP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei 10051, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei 10051, Taiwan; Genome and Systems Biology Degree Program,
College of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan.
Electronic address: shihpengchan@ntu.edu.tw.

Primary microRNAs (pri-miRNAs) are cleaved by the nuclear RNase III Drosha to
produce hairpin-shaped precursor miRNAs (pre-miRNAs). In humans, this process is 
known to be facilitated by the DEAD-box helicases p68 (DDX5) and p72 (DDX17). In 
this study, we performed a candidate-based RNAi screen in C. elegans to identify 
DEAD/H-box proteins involved in miRNA biogenesis. In a let-7(mg279) sensitized
genetic background, knockdown of a homolog of yeast splicing factor Prp28p,
DDX-23, or a homolog of human helicases p68 and p72, DDX-17, enhanced let-7
loss-of-function phenotypes, suggesting that these helicases play a role in let-7
processing and/or function. In both ddx-23(RNAi) and ddx-17(RNAi), levels of
mature let-7 were decreased while pri-let-7 was found to accumulate, indicating
that the helicases likely act at the level of pri-let-7 processing. DDX-23 and
DDX-17 were also required for the biogenesis of other known heterochronic miRNAs,
including lin-4 and the let-7 family members miR-48, miR-84 and miR-241. Their
function was not confined to the heterochronic pathway, however, since they were 
both necessary for down-regulation of cog-1 by the spatial patterning miRNA,
lsy-6. Here, we present a novel function for C. elegans DDX-23 in pri-miRNA
processing, and also suggest a conserved role for DDX-17 in this process.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.11.011 
PMID: 26601717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

