
1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2015 Nov 12;2(6):e176. doi:
10.1212/NXI.0000000000000176. eCollection 2015 Dec.

Immunologic and MRI markers of the therapeutic effect of IFN-β-1a in
relapsing-remitting MS.

Tao Y(1), Zhang X(1), Zivadinov R(1), Dwyer MG(1), Kennedy C(1), Bergsland N(1), 
Ramasamy D(1), Durfee J(1), Hojnacki D(1), Hayward B(1), Dangond F(1),
Weinstock-Guttman B(1), Markovic-Plese S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurology (Y.T., X.Z., S.M.-P.) and Microbiology and Immunology
(S.M.-P.), University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; Buffalo Neuroimaging
Analysis Center (R.Z., M.G.D., C.K., N.B., D.R., J.D.), Department of Neurology
(R.Z., M.G.D., C.K., N.B., D.R., D.H., J.D., B.W.-G.), State University of New
York at Buffalo; and EMD Serono, Inc. (B.H., F.D.), Rockland, MA.

OBJECTIVES: To assess potential roles of effector cells and immunologic markers
in demyelinating CNS lesion formation, and their modulation by interferon β-1a
(IFN-β-1a).
METHODS: Twenty-three patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS)
received IFN-β-1a for 6 months. Immunologic marker results were correlated with
brain MRI lesion volumes, and volumes of normal-appearing brain tissue (NABT)
with decreasing or increasing voxel-wise magnetization transfer ratio (VW-MTR),
suggestive of demyelination and remyelination, respectively.
RESULTS: Baseline expression of Th22 cell transcription factor aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR) and interleukin (IL)-17F, and percentages of IL-22-expressing
CD4(+) and CD8(+) cells, were significantly higher in patients vs 15 healthy
controls; IL-4 in CD4(+) cells was lower. Baseline percentage of IL-22-producing 
CD8(+) cells positively correlated with T2 lesion volumes, while percentage of
IL-17A-producing CD8(+) cells positively correlated with T2 and T1 lesion
volumes. IFN-β-1a induced reductions in transcription factor AHR, T-bet, and
retinoic acid-related orphan nuclear hormone receptor C (RORc) gene expression,
while it increased GATA3's expression in CD4(+) cells. Percentages of IL-22-,
IL-17A-, and IL-17F-expressing T cells significantly decreased following
treatment. Increased percentages of IL-10-expressing CD4(+) and CD8(+) cells
correlated with greater NABT volume with increasing VW-MTR, while decreased
percentage of IL-17F-expressing CD4(+) cells positively correlated with decreased
NABT volume with decreasing VW-MTR.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings indicate that IFN-β-1a suppresses Th22 and Th17 cell
responses, which were associated with decreased MRI-detectable demyelination.
CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This pilot study provides Class III evidence that
reduced Th22 and Th17 responses are associated with decreased demyelination
following IFN-β-1a treatment in patients with RRMS.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000000176 
PMCID: PMC4645170
PMID: 26601116 

