
1. Cell Tissue Res. 2016 May;364(2):415-27. doi: 10.1007/s00441-015-2324-3. Epub
2015 Nov 27.

Possible involvement of inflammatory/reparative processes in the development of
uterine fibroids.

Protic O(1), Toti P(2), Islam MS(1)(3), Occhini R(2), Giannubilo SR(4), Catherino
WH(5), Cinti S(1)(6), Petraglia F(7), Ciavattini A(4), Castellucci M(8), Hinz
B(9), Ciarmela P(10)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Polytechnic University of Marche, via Tronto 10/a, 60020, Ancona, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical Biotechnology, University of Siena, 53100, Siena, Italy.
(3)Biotechnology and Microbiology Laboratory, Department of Botany, University of
Rajshahi, Rajshahi, 6205, Bangladesh.
(4)Department of Clinical Science, Polytechnic University of Marche, 60131,
Ancona, Italy.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Uniformed Services University of the 
Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, 20814, USA.
(6)Center of Obesity, Polytechnic University of Marche - United Hospitals,
Ancona, Italy.
(7)Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, Obstetrics, and
Gynecology, University of Siena, 53100, Siena, Italy.
(8)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Polytechnic University of Marche, via Tronto 10/a, 60020, Ancona, Italy.
m.castellucci@univpm.it.
(9)Laboratory of Tissue Repair and Regeneration, Matrix Dynamics Group, Faculty
of Dentistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3E2, Canada.
(10)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Polytechnic University of Marche, via Tronto 10/a, 60020, Ancona, Italy.
p.ciarmela@univpm.it.
(11)Department of Information Engineering, Polytechnic University of Marche,
Ancona, Italy. p.ciarmela@univpm.it.

Uterine leiomyomas are benign tumors in the smooth muscle layer of the uterus.
The most common histological type is the "usual leiomyoma", characterized by
overexpression of ECM proteins, whereas the "cellular type" has higher cellular
content. Our objective is to investigate the involvement of inflammatory and
reparative processes in leiomyoma pathobiology. Using a morphological approach,
we investigate the presence of inflammatory cells. Next, we determine the
localization of the ECM, the presence/absence of fibrotic cells via α-sma and
desmin and the immunohistochemical profile of the mesenchymal cells with respect 
to CD34. Finally, we explore the effect of inflammatory mediators (TNF-α, IL-1β, 
IL-6, IL-15, GM-CSF and IFN-γ) on pro-fibrotic factor activin A mRNA expression
in vitro. Higher numbers of macrophages were found inside and close to leiomyomas
as compared to the more distant myometrium. Cellular leiomyomas showed more
macrophages and mast cells than the "usual type". Inside the fibroid tissue, we
found cells positive for α-sma, but negative for desmin and a large amount of
collagen surrounding the nodule, suggestive of myofibroblasts producing ECM. In
the myometrium and leiomyomas of the "usual type", we identified numerous CD34+
fibroblasts, which are known to give rise to myofibroblasts upon loss of CD34
expression. In leiomyomas of the "cellular type", stromal fibroblasts were
CD34-negative. Finally, we found that TNF-α increased activin A mRNA in
myometrial and leiomyoma cells. In conclusion, this study demonstrates the
presence of inflammatory cells in uterine leiomyomas, which may contribute to
excessive ECM production, tissue remodeling and leiomyoma growth.

DOI: 10.1007/s00441-015-2324-3 
PMID: 26613601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

