
1. Microb Pathog. 2016 Jan;90:69-77. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2015.11.023. Epub 2015
Nov 23.

Differential induction of innate defense antimicrobial peptides in primary nasal 
epithelial cells upon stimulation with inflammatory cytokines, Th17 cytokines or 
bacterial conditioned medium from Staphylococcus aureus isolates.

Burgey C(1), Kern WV(2), Römer W(3), Rieg S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine II, University Medical
Center Freiburg, Hugstetter Straße 55, 79106, Freiburg, Germany; Faculty of
Biology, Schänzlestraße 1, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, 79104, Freiburg,
Germany. Electronic address: christine.burgey@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine II, University Medical
Center Freiburg, Hugstetter Straße 55, 79106, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Faculty of Biology, Schänzlestraße 1, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg,
79104, Freiburg, Germany; BIOSS - Centre for Biological Signalling Studies,
Schänzlestraβe 18, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, 79104, Freiburg, Germany.

To date it is incompletely understood why half of the human population is
intrinsically resistant to Staphylococcus aureus colonization whereas the other
half is intermittently or permanently colonized. Nasal colonization represents
the primary niche for S. aureus. We therefore investigated whether primary nasal 
epithelial cells (HNEC) express antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) upon stimulation by
inflammatory cytokines or bacterial conditioned medium (BCM) of different
colonizing and invasive staphylococci. Stimulation with classical cytokines
(IL-1β, TNF-α, IFN-γ) potently induced hBD-3 and RNase7 in HNEC. Th17 cytokines
(IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-22) yielded comparably weak hBD-3 and RNase7 induction and no
synergistic effects with classical cytokines. BCM of S. aureus and Staphylococcus
epidermidis isolates moderately induced hBD3 and RNase7 mRNA expression without
significant differences when comparing colonizing vs. invasive isolates. Our
results indicate that HNEC contribute to the innate defense by secretion of an
AMP-containing chemical defense shield along the nasal mucosa i.e. within the
primary colonization niche of S. aureus. Further studies are needed to
investigate whether a deficient AMP expression in the nasal mucosa may be related
to different S. aureus carrier states. AMPs or AMP-inducing agents may be
promising candidates for future topical decolonization regimens that aim to
prevent invasive S. aureus infections.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2015.11.023 
PMID: 26616165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

