
1. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:153561. doi: 10.1155/2015/153561. Epub 2015 Nov 5.

Regulated Control of the Assembly and Diversity of LPS by Noncoding sRNAs.

Klein G(1), Raina S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Bacterial Genetics, Gdansk University of Technology, Narutowicza
11/12, 80-233 Gdansk, Poland.

The outer membrane (OM) of Gram-negative bacteria is asymmetric due to the
presence of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) facing the outer leaflet of the OM and
phospholipids facing the periplasmic side. LPS is essential for bacterial
viability, since it provides a permeability barrier and is a major virulence
determinant in pathogenic bacteria. In Escherichia coli, several steps of LPS
biosynthesis and assembly are regulated by the RpoE sigma factor and stress
responsive two-component systems as well as dedicated small RNAs. LPS composition
is highly heterogeneous and dynamically altered upon stress and other challenges 
in the environment because of the transcriptional activation of RpoE regulon
members and posttranslational control by RpoE-regulated Hfq-dependent RybB and
MicA sRNAs. The PhoP/Q two-component system further regulates Kdo2-lipid A
modification via MgrR sRNA. Some of these structural alterations are critical for
antibiotic resistance, OM integrity, virulence, survival in host, and adaptation 
to specific environmental niches. The heterogeneity arises following the
incorporation of nonstoichiometric modifications in the lipid A part and
alterations in the composition of inner and outer core of LPS. The biosynthesis
of LPS and phospholipids is tightly coupled. This requires the availability of
metabolic precursors, whose accumulation is controlled by sRNAs like SlrA, GlmZ, 
and GlmY.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/153561 
PMCID: PMC4651636
PMID: 26618164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

