
1. FEBS J. 2016 Feb;283(3):510-20. doi: 10.1111/febs.13606. Epub 2015 Dec 24.

Stoichiometry and deletion analyses of subunits in the heterotrimeric F-ATP
synthase c ring from the acetogenic bacterium Acetobacterium woodii.

Brandt K(1), Müller DB(1), Hoffmann J(2), Langer JD(3), Brutschy B(2), Morgner
N(2), Müller V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Microbiology and Bioenergetics, Institute of Molecular Biosciences, 
Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Institute for Physical and Theoretical Chemistry, Goethe University Frankfurt 
am Main, Germany.
(3)Department of Molecular Membrane Biology, Max-Planck-Institute of Biophysics, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

The ion-translocating c ring of the Na(+) F1 Fo ATP synthase of the anaerobic
bacterium Acetobacterium woodii is the first heteromeric c ring found in nature
that contains one V- (c1 ) and two F-type-like c subunits (c2 /c3 ), the latter
of identical amino acid sequence. To address whether they are of equal or
different importance for function, they were deleted in combination or
individually. Deletion of c1 was compensated by incorporation of two c2 /c3
subunits but the enzyme was unstable and largely impaired in Na(+) transport.
Deletion of c2 was compensated by incorporation of c3 but also led to a reduction
of Na(+) transport. Deletion of c3 had no effect. In contrast, deletion of both
c2 and c3 led to a complete loss of ATPase activity at the cytoplasmic membrane. 
Mass spectrometric analysis of c2 +1 Ala and c2 +2 Ala variants revealed a copy
number of 8 : 1 for c2 /c3 which is consistent with the biochemical
characteristics of the variants. These data indicate a role of c1 in assembly and
a function of c2 as the predominant c ring constituent.

© 2015 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.13606 
PMID: 26613566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

