
1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 22;291(4):2004-2017. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.685628. Epub
2015 Dec 1.

Non-native Conformers of Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator NBD1
Are Recognized by Hsp27 and Conjugated to SUMO-2 for Degradation.

Gong X(1), Ahner A(1), Roldan A(2), Lukacs GL(2), Thibodeau PH(3), Frizzell
RA(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Cell Biology and.
(2)the Department of Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6,
Canada.
(3)Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261 and.
(4)From the Departments of Cell Biology and. Electronic address:
frizzell@pitt.edu.

A newly identified pathway for selective degradation of the common mutant of the 
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), F508del, is initiated
by binding of the small heat shock protein, Hsp27. Hsp27 collaborates with Ubc9, 
the E2 enzyme for protein SUMOylation, to selectively degrade F508del CFTR via
the SUMO-targeted ubiquitin E3 ligase, RNF4 (RING finger protein 4) (1). Here, we
ask what properties of CFTR are sensed by the Hsp27-Ubc9 pathway by examining the
ability of NBD1 (locus of the F508del mutation) to mimic the disposal of
full-length (FL) CFTR. Similar to FL CFTR, F508del NBD1 expression was reduced
50-60% by Hsp27; it interacted preferentially with the mutant and was modified
primarily by SUMO-2. Mutation of the consensus SUMOylation site, Lys(447),
obviated Hsp27-mediated F508del NBD1 SUMOylation and degradation. As for FL CFTR 
and NBD1 in vivo, SUMO modification using purified components in vitro was
greater for F508del NBD1 versus WT and for the SUMO-2 paralog. Several findings
indicated that Hsp27-Ubc9 targets the SUMOylation of a transitional, non-native
conformation of F508del NBD1: (a) its modification decreased as [ATP] increased, 
reflecting stabilization of the nucleotide-binding domain by ligand binding; (b) 
a temperature-induced increase in intrinsic fluorescence, which reflects
formation of a transitional NBD1 conformation, was followed by its SUMO
modification; and (c) introduction of solubilizing or revertant mutations to
stabilize F508del NBD1 reduced its SUMO modification. These findings indicate
that the Hsp27-Ubc9 pathway recognizes a non-native conformation of mutant NBD1, 
which leads to its SUMO-2 conjugation and degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome
system.

Â© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.685628 
PMCID: PMC4722474
PMID: 26627832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

