
1. J Mass Spectrom. 2015 Dec;50(12):1358-66. doi: 10.1002/jms.3706.

Characterization of dehydroascorbate-mediated modification of glutaredoxin by
mass spectrometry.

Flandrin A(1)(2), Allouche S(1)(2), Rolland Y(1)(2), McDuff FO(1), Richard Wagner
J(3), Klarskov K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pharmacologie et Physiologie, Faculté de Médecine et des
Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.
(2)École nationale supérieure des ingénieurs en arts chimiques et technologiques,
Toulouse, France.
(3)Département de Médecine Nucléaire et Radiobiologie, Faculté de Médecine et des
Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.

Ascorbate is as a potent antioxidant in vivo protecting the organism against
oxidative stress. In this process, ascorbate is oxidized in two steps to
dehydroascorbate (DHA), which if not efficiently reduced back to ascorbate
decomposes irreversibly to a complex mixture of products. We demonstrate that a
component of this mixture specifically reacts with the thiol group of cysteine
residues at physiological pH to give a protein adduct involving the addition of a
5-carbon fragment of DHA (+112 Da). Incubations of glutaredoxin-1 expressed in
Escherichia coli and dehydroascorbate revealed abundant adducts of +112, +224 and
+336 Da due to the addition of one, two and three conjugation products of DHA,
respectively. ESI-MS of carbamidomethylated glutaredoxin-1 before incubation with
DHA, deuterium exchange together with tandem mass spectrometry analysis and
LC-ESIMS/MS of modified peptides confirmed structure and sites of modification in
the protein. Modification of protein thiols by a DHA-derived product can be
involved in oxidative stress-mediated cellular toxicity.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jms.3706 
PMID: 26634969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

