
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2015 Dec 9;117(2):133-43. doi: 10.3354/dao02942.

Shewanella putrefaciens in cultured tilapia detected by a new
calcein-loop-mediated isothermal amplification (Ca-LAMP) method.

Suebsing R(1), Kampeera J, Sirithammajak S, Pradeep PJ, Jitrakorn S, Arunrut N,
Sangsuriya P, Saksmerprome V, Senapin S, Withyachumnarnkul B, Kiatpathomchai W.

Author information: 
(1)Bioengineering and Sensing Technology Laboratory, BIOTEC, National Science and
Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), 113 Thailand Science Park, Phahonyothin
Rd., Klong Neung, Klong Luang, Pathum Thani 12120, Thailand.

Shewanella putrefaciens is being increasingly isolated from a wide variety of
sources and is pathogenic to many marine and freshwater fish. For better control 
of this pathogen, there is a need for the development of simple and inexpensive
but highly specific, sensitive, and rapid detection methods suitable for
application in field laboratories. Our colorogenic loop-mediated isothermal
amplification (LAMP) assay combined with calcein (Ca-LAMP) for unaided visual
confirmation of LAMP amplicons is a simple method for fish pathogen detection in 
cultured tilapia. Here, we describe the detection of S. putrefaciens using the
same platform. As before, the method gave positive results (orange to green color
change) in 45 min at 63Â°C with sensitivity 100 times higher than that of a
conventional PCR assay, with no cross-amplification of other known fish bacterial
pathogens tested. Using the assay with 389 samples of gonads, fertilized eggs,
and fry of farmed Nile and red tilapia Oreochromis spp., 35% of samples were
positive for S. putrefaciens. The highest prevalence was found in samples of
gonads (55%) and fertilized eggs (55%) from adult breeding stocks, indicating
that S. putrefaciens could be passed on easily to fry used for stocking
production ponds. Tissue tropism assays revealed that the spleen showed the
highest colonization by S. putrefaciens in naturally infected tilapia and that it
would be the most suitable organ for screening and monitoring fish stocks for
presence of the bacteria.

DOI: 10.3354/dao02942 
PMID: 26648105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

