
1. Immunol Res. 2016 Apr;64(2):565-75. doi: 10.1007/s12026-015-8754-x.

Ikaros, Helios, and Aiolos protein levels increase in human thymocytes after β
selection.

Mitchell JL(1), Seng A(1), Yankee TM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics, and Immunology, University of 
Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd, 3025 WHW - MS 3029, Kansas City, KS,
66160, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics, and Immunology, University of 
Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd, 3025 WHW - MS 3029, Kansas City, KS,
66160, USA. tyankee@kumc.edu.

In human T cell development, the mechanisms that regulate cell fate decisions
after TCRβ expression remain unclear. We defined the stages of T cell development
that flank TCRβ expression and found distinct patterns of human T cell
development. In half the subjects, T cell development progressed from the
CD4(-)CD8(-) double-negative stage to the CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive (DP) stage
through an immature single-positive (ISP) CD4(+) intermediate. However, in some
patients, CD4 and CD8 were expressed simultaneously and the ISP population was
small. In each group of patients, CD3(-) ISP and DP thymocytes were subdivided
into ISP1, ISP2, DP1, DP2, DP3, DP4, and DP5 developmental stages according to
their expression of CD28, CD44, CD1a, CD7, CD45RO, and CD38. The ISP2, DP2, and
DP3 thymocyte populations proliferated more robustly than ISP1 and DP1 and
expressed markers consistent with TCRβ expression. After the DP3 stage,
proliferation returned to baseline levels. We then analyzed protein levels of
Ikaros, Helios, and Aiolos, the three Ikaros family members most abundantly
expressed in human thymocytes. Ikaros and Helios expression increased transiently
at the ISP2, DP2, and DP3 populations. Aiolos expression also increased at the
ISP2, DP2, and DP3 stages, but its expression remained elevated throughout the
DP4 and DP5 stages. In summary, we propose a model of human T cell development
that reflects the asynchronous nature of TCRβ expression and we define the
subpopulations of thymocytes that are highly proliferative and express Ikaros
family members.

DOI: 10.1007/s12026-015-8754-x 
PMCID: PMC4814933
PMID: 26645971  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

