
1. Toxicol Lett. 2016 Feb 3;242:23-33. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2015.11.025. Epub 2015 
Nov 27.

Piperine impairs the migration and T cell-activating function of dendritic cells.

Rodgers G(1), Doucette CD(1), Soutar DA(1), Liwski RS(2), Hoskin DW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Nova Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada.
(2)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Nova Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty
of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Nova Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty
of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada;
Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada. Electronic address: d.w.hoskin@dal.ca.

Piperine, a major alkaloid found in the fruits of black and long pepper plants,
has anti-inflammatory properties; however, piperine's effect on dendritic cell
(DC) migration and T cell-activating function has not been investigated. Bone
marrow-derived mouse DCs that were matured in the presence of 100 μM piperine
showed reduced in vitro migration in response to CCL21, as well as reduced in
vivo migration to lymph nodes. In addition, piperine-treated DCs had reduced CCR7
expression and elevated CCR5 expression, as well as reduced expression of CD40
and class II major histocompatibility complex molecules and decreased nuclear
accumulation of RelB. DC production of interleukin (IL)-6, tumor necrosis factor 
α, and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in response to lipopolysaccharide
stimulation was also reduced following piperine treatment. Exposure to piperine
during maturation therefore caused DCs to retain an immature phenotype, which was
associated with a reduced capacity to promote T cell activation since co-culture 
of ovalbumin (OVA323-339)-specific T cells with OVA323-339-pulsed DCs that were
previously matured in the presence of piperine showed reduced interferon-γ and
IL-2 expression. OVA323-339-specific T cell proliferation was also reduced in
vivo in the presence of piperine-treated DCs. Inhibition of DC migration and
function by piperine may therefore be a useful strategy to down-regulate
potentially harmful DC-driven T cell responses to self-antigens and
transplantation antigens.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2015.11.025 
PMID: 26640239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

