
1. Immunol Lett. 2016 Jan;169:82-92. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2015.11.014. Epub 2015 Dec
2.

C4b-binding protein: The good, the bad and the deadly. Novel functions of an old 
friend.

Ermert D(1), Blom AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lund University, Department of Translational Medicine, Division of Medical
Protein Chemistry, Inga Marie Nilssons Street 53, Malmö, 20502, Sweden.
Electronic address: David.Ermert@med.lu.se.
(2)Lund University, Department of Translational Medicine, Division of Medical
Protein Chemistry, Inga Marie Nilssons Street 53, Malmö, 20502, Sweden.
Electronic address: Anna.Blom@med.lu.se.

C4b-binding protein (C4BP) is best known as a potent soluble inhibitor of the
classical and lectin pathways of the complement system. This large 500 kDa
multimeric plasma glycoprotein is expressed mainly in the liver but also in lung 
and pancreas. It consists of several identical 75 kDa α-chains and often also one
40 kDa β-chain, both of which are mainly composed of complement control protein
(CCP) domains. Structure-function studies revealed that one crucial binding site 
responsible for inhibition of complement is located to CCP1-3 of the α-chain.
Binding of anticoagulant protein S to the CCP1 of the β-chain provides C4BP with 
the ability to strongly bind apoptotic and necrotic cells in order to prevent
inflammation arising from activation of complement by these cells. Further, C4BP 
interacts strongly with various types of amyloid and enhances fibrillation of
islet amyloid polypeptide secreted from pancreatic beta cells, which may
attenuate pro-inflammatory and cytotoxic effects of this amyloid. Full deficiency
of C4BP has not been identified but non-synonymous alterations in its sequence
have been found in haemolytic uremic syndrome and recurrent pregnancy loss.
Furthermore, C4BP is bound by several bacterial pathogens, notably Streptococcus 
pyogenes, which due to inhibition of complement and enhancement of bacterial
adhesion to endothelial cells provides these bacteria with a survival advantage
in the host. Thus, depending on the context, C4BP has a protective or detrimental
role in the organism.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2015.11.014 
PMID: 26658464  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

