
1. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 10;5:18101. doi: 10.1038/srep18101.

FgMon1, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor of FgRab7, is important for vacuole 
fusion, autophagy and plant infection in Fusarium graminearum.

Li Y(1), Li B(1), Liu L(1), Chen H(2), Zhang H(1), Zheng X(1), Zhang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, College of Plant Protection, Nanjing
Agricultural University, and Key Laboratory of Integrated Management of Crop
Diseases and Pests, Ministry of Education, Nanjing 210095, China.
(2)Institute of Plant Protection, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Nanjing 210014, China.

The Ccz1-Mon1 protein complex, the guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) of
the late endosomal Rab7 homolog Ypt7, is required for the late step of multiple
vacuole delivery pathways, such as cytoplasm-to-vacuole targeting (Cvt) pathway
and autophagy processes. Here, we identified and characterized the yeast Mon1
homolog in Fusarium graminearum, named FgMon1. FgMON1 encodes a trafficking
protein and is well conserved in filamentous fungi. Targeted gene deletion showed
that the ∆Fgmon1 mutant was defective in vegetative growth, asexual/sexual
development, conidial germination and morphology, plant infection and
deoxynivalenol production. Cytological examination revealed that the ∆Fgmon1
mutant was also defective in vacuole fusion and autophagy, and delayed in
endocytosis. Yeast two hybrid and in vitro GST-pull down assays approved that
FgMon1 physically interacts with a Rab GTPase FgRab7 which is also important for 
the development, infection, membrane fusion and autophagy in F. graminearum.
FgMon1 likely acts as a GEF of FgRab7 and constitutively activated FgRab7 was
able to rescue the defects of the ∆Fgmon1 mutant. In summary, our study provides 
evidences that FgMon1 and FgRab7 are critical components that modulate vesicle
trafficking, endocytosis and autophagy, and thereby affect the development, plant
infection and DON production of F. graminearum.

DOI: 10.1038/srep18101 
PMCID: PMC4674805
PMID: 26657788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

