
1. Pathog Dis. 2016 Mar;74(2). pii: ftv116. doi: 10.1093/femspd/ftv116. Epub 2015
Dec 9.

Potential protective effect of a G>A SNP in the 3'UTR of HLA-A for Chlamydia
trachomatis symptomatology and severity of infection.

Jansen ME(1), Branković I(2), Spaargaren J(3), Ouburg S(3), Morré SA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Public Health Genomics, Department of Genetics and Cell Biology,
School for Oncology and Developmental Biology (GROW), Faculty of Health, Medicine
and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, 6200 MD, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(2)Institute for Public Health Genomics, Department of Genetics and Cell Biology,
School for Oncology and Developmental Biology (GROW), Faculty of Health, Medicine
and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, 6200 MD, Maastricht, the Netherlands
Laboratory of Immunogenetics, Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection
Control, VU University Medical Center, 1081 HV, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection
Control, VU University Medical Center, 1081 HV, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Institute for Public Health Genomics, Department of Genetics and Cell Biology,
School for Oncology and Developmental Biology (GROW), Faculty of Health, Medicine
and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, 6200 MD, Maastricht, the Netherlands
Laboratory of Immunogenetics, Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection
Control, VU University Medical Center, 1081 HV, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
samorretravel@yahoo.co.uk.

The interindividual differences in response to Chlamydia trachomatis (CT)
infections are for an important part based on the differences in our host genetic
make-up. In the past, several genes and pathways have been identified and linked 
to protection against or risk for CT infection (i.e. susceptibility), and/or the 
severity of infection, with a major emphasis on the development of tubal
pathology, one of the main causes of female infertility. In the current study, we
analyzed in Dutch Caucasian women whether the carriage of HLA-A G>A SNP
(rs1655900) was related to the susceptibility of CT infection in a STD cohort (n 
= 329) and to the severity of infection in a subfertility cohort (n = 482). We
also investigated if this A-allele was linked to increase in severity of
symptoms, from mild symptoms (lower genital infection) to lower abdominal pain
(upper genital tract infection) to the most severe late complication of tubal
pathology, including double-sided tubal pathology. We showed that the carriage of
HLA-A SNP rs1655900 studied is not associated with the susceptibility to CT
infection based on the data from the STD cohort, but might be protective to the
development of late complications (p = 0.0349), especially tubal pathology could 
be relevant.

© FEMS 2015. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/femspd/ftv116 
PMCID: PMC4857152 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26656886  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

