
1. Cell Microbiol. 2016 Jun;18(6):831-43. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12556. Epub 2016 Jan 12.

The opportunistic pathogen Enterococcus faecalis resists phagosome acidification 
and autophagy to promote intracellular survival in macrophages.

Zou J(1), Shankar N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.

While many strains of Enterococcus faecalis have been reported to be capable of
surviving within macrophages for extended periods, the exact mechanisms involved 
are largely unknown. In this study, we found that after phagocytosis by
macrophages, enterococci-containing vacuoles resist acidification, and
E. faecalis is resistant to low pH. Ultrastructural examination of the
enterococci-containing vacuole by transmission electron microscopy revealed a
single membrane envelope, with no evidence of the classical double-membraned
autophagosomes. Western blot analysis further confirmed that E. faecalis could
trigger inhibition of the production of LC3-II during infection. By employing
cells transfected with RFP-LC3 plasmid and infected with GFP-labelled
E. faecalis, we also observed that E. faecalis was not delivered into
autophagosomes during macrophage infection. While these observations indicated no
role for autophagy in elimination of intracellular E. faecalis, enhanced
production of reactive oxygen species and nitric oxide were keys to this process.
Stimulation of autophagy suppressed the intracellular survival of E. faecalis in 
macrophages in vitro and decreased the burden of E. faecalis in vivo. In summary,
the results from this study offer new insights into the interaction of
E. faecalis with host cells and may provide a new approach to treatment of
enterococcal infections.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12556 
PMID: 26663775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

