
1. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 14;10(12):e0144954. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144954.
eCollection 2015.

Brazilian Red Propolis Attenuates Inflammatory Signaling Cascade in LPS-Activated
Macrophages.

Bueno-Silva B(1), Kawamoto D(1), Ando-Suguimoto ES(1), Alencar SM(2), Rosalen
PL(3), Mayer MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)College of Agriculture "Luiz de Queiroz" (ESALQ/USP), Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.
(3)Piracicaba Dental School, University of Campinas-UNICAMP, Department of
Physiologic Sciences, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.

Although previous studies suggested an anti-inflammatory property of Brazilian
red propolis (BRP), the mechanisms involved in the anti-inflammatory effects of
BRP and its activity on macrophages were still not elucidated. This study aimed
to evaluate whether BRP attenuates the inflammatory effect of LPS on macrophages 
and to investigate its underlying mechanisms. BRP was added to RAW 264.7 murine
macrophages after activation with LPS. NO production, cell viability, cytokines
profile were evaluated. Activation of inflammatory signaling pathways and
macrophage polarization were determined by RT-qPCR and Western blot. BRP at 50
μg/ml inhibited NO production by 78% without affecting cell viability. Cd80 and
Cd86 were upregulated whereas mrc1 was down regulated by BRP indicating
macrophage polarization at M1. BRP attenuated the production of pro-inflammatory 
mediators IL-12, GM-CSF, IFN-Ɣ, IL-1β in cell supernatants although levels of
TNF- α and IL-6 were slightly increased after BRP treatment. Levels of IL-4,
IL-10 and TGF-β were also reduced by BRP. BRP significantly reduced the
up-regulation promoted by LPS of transcription of genes in inflammatory signaling
(Pdk1, Pak1, Nfkb1, Mtcp1, Gsk3b, Fos and Elk1) and of Il1β and Il1f9
(fold-change rate > 5), which were further confirmed by the inhibition of NF-κB
and MAPK signaling pathways. Furthermore, the upstream adaptor MyD88 adaptor-like
(Mal), also known as TIRAP, involved in TLR2 and TLR4 signaling, was down-
regulated in BRP treated LPS-activated macrophages. Given that BRP inhibited
multiple signaling pathways in macrophages involved in the inflammatory process
activated by LPS, our data indicated that BRP is a noteworthy food-source for the
discovery of new bioactive compounds and a potential candidate to attenuate
exhacerbated inflammatory diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144954 
PMCID: PMC4684384
PMID: 26660901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

