
1. Med Cutan Ibero Lat Am. 1989;17(1):9-12.

[Surgical treatment of mycetoma located in the face].

[Article in Spanish]

Orellano Ocampo F(1), Arellano Huacuja A, Leon Valle C.

Author information: 
(1)Jefe del Servicio de Dermatología y Alergía del Hospital de Especialidades de 
Puebla del Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social.

The first case described in Mexico, was studied by Cícero in 1900 and 1911
Ocaranza, in Sonora, reports some cases, pointing out that the first known case
dates back to 1874. In USA González Ochoa identifies the causative agent of the
cases he studied, as the same identified in USA, but he calls attention to the
fact that it has already been described under the name of Actinomyces
brasiliensis, finally, taxonomically it is included among the nocardias. In
Mexico the micetoma is caused in 90% of the cases by Nocardia brasiliensis, and
8% by Streptomysis and other actinomycetos and only in 1.5% it is determined by
true fungi. Until the observation of the present case, mycetomas had been
reported located or scattered in different places of the human body, except the
face. This case is observed in a 24 years old woman patient, of peasant
extraction, who presents tumoration of the left hemiface, irregularly oval, 18 x 
25 cm. of anfractous surface, with nodes and fistulas that secrete suppuration.
The evolution is of seven years duration, and begins after a trauma. The
mycologic and histopathologic study, confirms N. brasiliensis as the causative
agent. X rays prove that the skull bones are not affected, but the mycosis cause 
anemia. Specific treatment for anemia is installed with trimetropryn and
sulphametoxazol plus sulphone, for a period of six months. A change is made to
streptomycin to a total of 40 g. and then this is replaced by isonizasyn, adding 
to both these drugs alphamatoxipyridazine, for a period of six months and in last
months, riprampycin plus sulphone are given; always with bad results.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 2666793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

