
1. Food Microbiol. 2016 Feb;53(Pt B):182-91. doi: 10.1016/j.fm.2015.10.001. Epub
2015 Oct 9.

Volatile chemical spoilage indexes of raw Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) stored
under aerobic condition in relation to microbiological and sensory shelf lives.

Mikš-Krajnik M(1), Yoon YJ(2), Ukuku DO(3), Yuk HG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Food Science and Technology Programme, c/o Department of Chemistry, National
University of Singapore, 3 Science Drive 3, Singapore 117543, Singapore.
(2)Division of Engineering Mechanics, School of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
(3)Food Safety Intervention Technologies Research Unit, Eastern Regional Research
Center, Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 600 East, 
Mermaid Lane, Wyndmoor, PA 19038, USA.
(4)Food Science and Technology Programme, c/o Department of Chemistry, National
University of Singapore, 3 Science Drive 3, Singapore 117543, Singapore; National
University of Singapore (Suzhou) Research Institute, No. 377 Linquan Street,
Suzhou Industrial Park, Suzhou 215123, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address:
chmyukhg@nus.edu.sg.

The purpose of this investigation was to identify and quantify the volatile
chemical spoilage indexes (CSIs) for raw Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) fillets
stored under aerobic storage conditions at 4, 10 and 21 °C in relation to
microbial and sensory shelf lives. The volatile organic compounds (VOCs) were
analyzed with SPME-GC-MS technique. Through multivariate chemometric method,
hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) and Pearson's correlations, the CSIs:
trimethylamine (TMA), ethanol (EtOH), 3-methyl-1-butanol (3Met-1But), acetoin and
acetic acid (C2) were selected from the group of 28 detected VOCs. At the moment 
of microbiological shelf life established at total viable count (TVC) of 7.0 log 
CFU/g, the CSIs achieved levels of 11.5, 38.3, 0.3, 24.0 and 90.7 μg/g of salmon 
for TMA, EtOH, 3M-1But, acetoin and C2, respectively. Pseudomonas spp. was found 
as major specific spoilage organism (SSOs), suitable for shelf life prediction
using modified Gompertz model at the cut-off level of 6.5 log CFU/g. H2S
producing bacteria and Brochothrix thermosphacta were considered as important
spoilage microorganisms; however, they were not suitable for shelf life
estimation. Partial least square (PLS) regression revealed possible associations 
between microorganisms and synthetized VOCs, showing correlations between
Pseudomonas spp. and 3Met-1But and aldehydes synthesis, lactic acid bacteria were
linked with EtOH, C2 and esters, and B. thermosphacta with acetoin formation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fm.2015.10.001 
PMID: 26678146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

