
1. Aquat Toxicol. 2016 Jan;170:240-250. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2015.11.029. Epub
2015 Dec 2.

Stability evaluation of reference genes for real-time PCR in zebrafish (Danio
rerio) exposed to cadmium chloride and subsequently infected by bacteria
Aeromonas hydrophila.

Lang X(1), Wang L(2), Zhang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, 030006 Shanxi Province,
China.
(2)School of Life Science, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, 030006 Shanxi Province,
China. Electronic address: lanwang@sxu.edu.cn.
(3)School of Life Science, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, 030006 Shanxi Province,
China. Electronic address: zbzhang@sxu.edu.cn.

Environmental and occupational cadmium (Cd) toxicity is a global concern, and the
model organism zebrafish is an ideal species to investigate Cd toxicity. Among
various detecting techniques, quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) is a sensitive
and efficient tool. Stable reference genes are critical for relative qPCR
analysis. However, accumulated evidence shows that conventional reference genes
can vary significantly under different experimental setups. Here we evaluated the
stability of eight candidate reference genes of zebrafish with or without
exposure to different concentrations of Cd. The results showed that the best four
suitable reference genes in the five selected organs were: (1) spleen:
β-actin>gapdh>ef1α>rpl13α; (2) kidney: rplp2>rpl7>β-actin>ef1α; (3) liver:
rpl7>rpl13α>β-actin>ef1α; (4) gills: rplp2>gapdh>rnf7>ef1α; (5) intestine:
ef1α>rnf7>rplp2>rpl13α. Moreover, we further assessed the expression stability of
the four reference genes for Cd immunotoxicology studies in zebrafish. The
expression profiles showed that ef1α in spleen and kidney, rpl13a in liver and
rplp2 in intestine were the most suitable reference genes at 12h and 9 days after
the injection with Aeromonas hydrophila following Cd exposure. In gills, the
expression of gapdh was more stable than ef1α after 9 days of bacteria challenge 
while ef1α showed a higher stability than gapdh at 12h after bacteria injection. 
In conclusion, this study has demonstrated that different tissues of zebrafish
have different suitable reference genes after Cd exposure and the subsequently
pathogenic insults for qPCR. It emphasized the importance of reference gene
evaluation for studies using qPCR, in particular when investigations involve
factors not explored previously.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2015.11.029 
PMID: 26675370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

