
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Jan 29;44(2):801-10. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1469. Epub 2015 
Dec 15.

Structure and stereochemistry of the base excision repair glycosylase MutY reveal
a mechanism similar to retaining glycosidases.

Woods RD(1), O'Shea VL(2), Chu A(1), Cao S(1), Richards JL(1), Horvath MP(3),
David SS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA
Department of Chemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA
martin.horvath@utah.edu.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA
ssdavid@ucdavis.edu.

MutY adenine glycosylases prevent DNA mutations by excising adenine from
promutagenic 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine (OG):A mismatches. Here, we describe
structural features of the MutY active site bound to an azaribose transition
state analog which indicate a catalytic role for Tyr126 and approach of the water
nucleophile on the same side as the departing adenine base. The idea that Tyr126 
participates in catalysis, recently predicted by modeling calculations, is
strongly supported by mutagenesis and by seeing close contact between the
hydroxyl group of this residue and the azaribose moiety of the transition state
analog. NMR analysis of MutY methanolysis products corroborates a mechanism for
adenine removal with retention of stereochemistry. Based on these results, we
propose a revised mechanism for MutY that involves two nucleophilic displacement 
steps akin to the mechanisms accepted for 'retaining' O-glycosidases. This
new-for-MutY yet familiar mechanism may also be operative in related base
excision repair glycosylases and provides a critical framework for analysis of
human MutY (MUTYH) variants associated with inherited colorectal cancer.

Â© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv1469 
PMCID: PMC4737165
PMID: 26673696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

