
1. Neuro Oncol. 2016 Jul;18(7):928-38. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nov310. Epub 2015 Dec 18.

Bone morphogenetic protein signaling promotes tumorigenesis in a murine model of 
high-grade glioma.

Hover LD(1), Owens P(1), Munden AL(1), Wang J(1), Chambless LB(1), Hopkins CR(1),
Hong CC(1), Moses HL(1), Abel TW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee (L.D.H., T.W.A.); Department of Cancer
Biology and Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee (P.O., H.L.M.); Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee (A.M.); Department of
Neurological Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 
(J.W., L.C.); Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee (C.H.); Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee (C.C.H.);
Vanderbilt Institute of Chemical Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
(C.C.H.); Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee (C.C.H.); Research Medicine, Veterans Affairs Tennessee
Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, Tennessee (C.C.H.).

BACKGROUND: Improved therapies for high-grade glioma (HGG) are urgently needed as
the median survival for grade IV gliomas is only 15 months. Bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) signaling plays critical and complex roles in many types of cancer,
including glioma, with most of the recently published work focusing on
BMP-mediated regulation of glioma stem cells (GSCs). We hypothesized that BMP
signaling may be an important modulator of tumorigenic properties in glioma cells
outside of the GSC compartment.
METHODS: We used a human HGG tissue microarray and performed immunohistochemistry
for phospho-Smads1,5,8. To examine the role of BMP signaling in tumorigenic
astrocytes, transgenic mice were used to delete the BMP type IA receptor (Bmpr1a)
and generate astrocytes transformed with oncogenic Ras and homozygous deletion of
p53. The cells were transplanted orthotopically into immunocompetent adult host
mice.
RESULTS: First we established that BMP signaling is active within the vast
majority of HGG tumor cells. Mice implanted with BMPR1a-knockout transformed
astrocytes showed an increase in median survival compared with mice that received
BMPR1a-intact transformed astrocytes (52.5 vs 16 days). In vitro analysis showed 
that deletion of BMPR1a in oncogenic astrocytes resulted in decreased
proliferation, decreased invasion, decreased migration, and increased expression 
of stemness markers. In addition, inhibition of BMP signaling in murine cells and
astrocytoma cells with a small molecule BMP receptor kinase inhibitor resulted in
similar tumor suppressive effects in vitro.
CONCLUSION: BMP inhibition may represent a viable therapeutic approach in adult
HGG.

Â© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/nov310 
PMCID: PMC4896540
PMID: 26683138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

