
1. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2016 Jan 13;8(1):411-8. doi: 10.1021/acsami.5b09192.
Epub 2015 Dec 30.

First Observation of Physically Capturing and Maneuvering Bacteria using Magnetic
Clays.

Liu TY(1), Chen CL(2), Lee YC(2), Chan TY(1), Wang YL(3)(4), Lin JJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials Engineering, Ming Chi University of Technology , New
Taipei City 24301, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Polymer Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University ,
Taipei 10617, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Atomic and Molecular Sciences, Academia Sinica , Taipei 10617,
Taiwan.
(4)Department of Physics, National Taiwan University , Taipei 10617, Taiwan.

A new class of nanohybrids composed of structurally exfoliated silicate platelets
and magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles was synthesized and shown to be capable of 
capturing microbes in liquid microbiological media. Nanoscale silicate platelets 
with an approximate thickness of 1.0 nm were prepared from the naturally
occurring mineral clays montmorillonite and mica; these clays yielded platelets
with lateral dimensions on the order of 80-100 nm and 300-1000 nm, respectively. 
The magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles, approximately 8.3 nm in diameter, were coated
in situ onto the silicates during the synthesis process, which involved the
coprecipitation of aqueous Fe(2+)/Fe(3+) salts. Owing to the high surface
area-to-volume ratios and the presence of ionically charged groups (i.e.,
â‰¡SiO(-)Na(+)), the silicate nanoplatelets exhibited intense noncovalent bonding
forces between Fe3O4 nanoparticles and the surrounding microorganisms. The
Fe3O4-on-nanoplatelet nanohybrids enabled the entrapment of bacterial cells in
liquid microbiological media. These captured bacteria formed bacterial aggregates
on the order of micrometers that became physically maneuverable under a magnetic 
field. This phenomenon was demonstrated with Staphylococcus aureus in liquid
microbiological media by physically removing them using a magnetic bar; in two
experimental examples, bacterial concentrations were reduced from 10(6) to 10(2) 
and from 10(4) to 10(0) CFU/mL (colony formation unit/mL con). Under a scanning
electron microscope, these bacteria appeared to have rough and wrinkled surfaces 
due to the accumulated silicate platelets. Furthermore, the external application 
of a high-frequency magnetic field completely destroyed these aggregated microbes
by the magnetically induced heat. Hence, the newly developed nanohybrids were
shown to be viable for physically capturing microbes and also for potential
hyperthermia treatment applications.

DOI: 10.1021/acsami.5b09192 
PMID: 26686424  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

