
1. Biotechnol Biofuels. 2015 Dec 21;8:221. doi: 10.1186/s13068-015-0396-7.
eCollection 2015.

Electrolytic extraction drives volatile fatty acid chain elongation through
lactic acid and replaces chemical pH control in thin stillage fermentation.

Andersen SJ(1), Candry P(1), Basadre T(1), Khor WC(1), Roume H(1),
Hernandez-Sanabria E(1), Coma M(2), Rabaey K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbial Ecology and Technology (LabMET), Ghent University,
Coupure Links 653, Building A, Room A0.092, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Microbial Ecology and Technology (LabMET), Ghent University,
Coupure Links 653, Building A, Room A0.092, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium ; Centre for
Sustainable Chemical Technologies, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath, BA2 
7AY UK.

BACKGROUND: Volatile fatty acids (VFA) are building blocks for the chemical
industry. Sustainable, biological production is constrained by production and
recovery costs, including the need for intensive pH correction. Membrane
electrolysis has been developed as an in situ extraction technology tailored to
the direct recovery of VFA from fermentation while stabilizing acidogenesis
without caustic addition. A current applied across an anion exchange membrane
reduces the fermentation broth (catholyte, water reduction: H2O + e(-) → ½
H2 + OH(-)) and drives carboxylate ions into a clean, concentrated VFA stream
(anolyte, water oxidation: H2O → 2e(-) + 2 H(+) + O2).
RESULTS: In this study, we fermented thin stillage to generate a mixed VFA
extract without chemical pH control. Membrane electrolysis (0.1 A, 3.22 ± 0.60 V)
extracted 28 ± 6 % of carboxylates generated per day (on a carbon basis) and
completely replaced caustic control of pH, with no impact on the total
carboxylate production amount or rate. Hydrogen generated from the applied
current shifted the fermentation outcome from predominantly C2 and C3 VFA
(64 ± 3 % of the total VFA present in the control) to majority of C4 to C6
(70 ± 12 % in the experiment), with identical proportions in the VFA acid
extract. A strain related to Megasphaera elsdenii (maximum abundance of 57 %), a 
bacteria capable of producing mid-chain VFA at a high rate, was enriched by the
applied current, alongside a stable community of Lactobacillus spp. (10 %),
enabling chain elongation of VFA through lactic acid. A conversion of 30 ± 5 %
VFA produced per sCOD fed (60 ± 10 % of the reactive fraction) was achieved, with
a 50 ± 6 % reduction in suspended solids likely by electro-coagulation.
CONCLUSIONS: VFA can be extracted directly from a fermentation broth by membrane 
electrolysis. The electrolytic water reduction products are utilized in the
fermentation: OH(-) is used for pH control without added chemicals, and H2 is
metabolized by species such as Megasphaera elsdenii to produce greater value,
more reduced VFA. Electro-fermentation displays promise for generating added
value chemical co-products from biorefinery sidestreams and wastes.

DOI: 10.1186/s13068-015-0396-7 
PMCID: PMC4687354
PMID: 26697110 

