
1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2016 Jan 15;24(2):113-22. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.11.038. Epub
2015 Nov 28.

The indole alkaloid meleagrin, from the olive tree endophytic fungus Penicillium 
chrysogenum, as a novel lead for the control of c-Met-dependent breast cancer
proliferation, migration and invasion.

Mady MS(1), Mohyeldin MM(2), Ebrahim HY(2), Elsayed HE(2), Houssen WE(3), Haggag 
EG(4), Soliman RF(4), El Sayed KA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Louisiana at Monroe, 1800 Bienville Drive, Monroe, LA 71201, United States;
Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Helwan University, Helwan,
Cairo 11795, Egypt.
(2)Department of Basic Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Louisiana at Monroe, 1800 Bienville Drive, Monroe, LA 71201, United States.
(3)Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD,
Scotland, UK; Pharmacognosy Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Mansoura University,
Mansoura 35516, Egypt.
(4)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Helwan University, Helwan,
Cairo 11795, Egypt.
(5)Department of Basic Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Louisiana at Monroe, 1800 Bienville Drive, Monroe, LA 71201, United States.
Electronic address: elsayed@ulm.edu.

Fungi of the genus Penicillium produce unique and chemically diverse biologically
active secondary metabolites, including indole alkaloids. The role of
dysregulated hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and its receptor, c-Met, in the
development and progression of breast carcinoma is documented. The goal of this
work is to explore the chemistry and bioactivity of the secondary metabolites of 
the endophytic Penicillium chrysogenum cultured from the leaf of the olive tree
Olea europea, collected in its natural habitat in Egypt. This fungal extract
showed good inhibitory activities against the proliferation and migration of
several human breast cancer lines. The CH2Cl2 extract of P. chrysogenum mycelia
was subjected to bioguided chromatographic separation to afford three known
indole alkaloids; meleagrin (1), roquefortine C (2) and DHTD (3). Meleagrin
inhibited the growth of the human breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231, MDA-468,
BT-474, SK BR-3, MCF7 and MCF7-dox, while similar treatment doses were found to
have no effect on the growth and viability of the non-tumorigenic human mammary
epithelial cells MCF10A. Meleagrin also showed excellent ATP competitive c-Met
inhibitory activity in Z-Lyte assay, which was further confirmed via molecular
docking studies and Western blot analysis. In addition, meleagrin treatment
caused a dose-dependent inhibition of HGF-induced cell migration, and invasion of
breast cancer cell lines. Meleagrin treatment potently suppressed the invasive
triple negative breast tumor cell growth in an orthotopic athymic nude mice
model, promoting this unique natural product from hit to a lead rank. The indole 
alkaloid meleagrin is a novel lead c-Met inhibitory entity useful for the control
of c-Met-dependent metastatic and invasive breast malignancies.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.11.038 
PMCID: PMC4703546
PMID: 26692349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

