
1. Braz J Microbiol. 2015 Oct-Dec;46(4):991-1000. doi:
10.1590/S1517-838246420140188. Epub 2015 Oct 27.

Variation of Spirulina maxima biomass production in different depths of urea-used
culture medium.

Affan MA(1), Lee DW(1), Al-Harbi SM(2), Kim HJ(1), Abdulwassi NI(3), Heo SJ(1),
Oh C(1), Park HS(1), Ma CW(3), Lee HY(4), Kang DH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Korea Institute of Ocean Science & Technology, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Marine Biology, King AbdulAziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Marine Biotechnology, Soon Chun Hyang University, Asan-si,
Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Food Science and Engineering, Seowon University, Cheongju,
Chungbuk, Republic of Korea.

Fewer studies have assessed the outdoor cultivation of Spirulina maxima compared 
with S. platensis, although the protein content of S. maxima is higher than S.
platensis. Spirulina growth medium requires an increased amount of NaHCO3,
Na2CO3, and NaNO3, which increases the production cost. Therefore, the current
study used a low-cost but high-efficiency biomass production medium (Medium M-19)
after testing 33 different media. The medium depth of 25 cm (group A) was
sub-divided into A1 (50% cover with a black curtain (PolyMax, 12 oz
ultra-blackout), A2 (25% cover), and A3 (no cover). Similarly the medium depths
of 30 and 35 cm were categorized as groups B (B1, B2, and B3) and C (C1, C2, and 
C3), respectively, and the effects of depth and surface light availability on
growth and biomass production were assessed. The highest biomass production was
2.05 g L-1 in group A2, which was significantly higher (p < 0.05) than that in
all other groups and sub-groups. Spirulina maxima died in B1 and C1 on the fifth 
day of culture. The biochemical composition of the biomass obtained from A2
cultures, including protein, carbohydrate, lipid, moisture, and ash, was 56.59%, 
14.42%, 0.94%, 5.03%, and 23.02%, respectively. Therefore, S. maxima could be
grown outdoors with the highest efficiency in urea-enriched medium at a 25-cm
medium depth with 25% surface cover or uncovered.

DOI: 10.1590/S1517-838246420140188 
PMCID: PMC4704634
PMID: 26691456  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

