
1. Biomaterials. 2016 Feb;80:57-67. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.11.048. Epub
2015 Dec 2.

PSMA-specific theranostic nanoplex for combination of TRAIL gene and 5-FC prodrug
therapy of prostate cancer.

Chen Z(1), Penet MF(2), Krishnamachary B(1), Banerjee SR(2), Pomper MG(2),
Bhujwalla ZM(3).

Author information: 
(1)JHU ICMIC Program, Division of Cancer Imaging Research, The Russell H. Morgan 
Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA.
(2)JHU ICMIC Program, Division of Cancer Imaging Research, The Russell H. Morgan 
Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA;
Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA.
(3)JHU ICMIC Program, Division of Cancer Imaging Research, The Russell H. Morgan 
Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA;
Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA. Electronic address: zaver@mri.jhu.edu.

Metastatic prostate cancer causes significant morbidity and mortality and there
is a critical unmet need for effective treatments. We have developed a
theranostic nanoplex platform for combined imaging and therapy of prostate
cancer. Our prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) targeted nanoplex is
designed to deliver plasmid DNA encoding tumor necrosis factor related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), together with bacterial cytosine deaminase
(bCD) as a prodrug enzyme. Nanoplex specificity was tested using two variants of 
human PC3 prostate cancer cells in culture and in tumor xenografts, one with high
PSMA expression and the other with negligible expression levels. The expression
of EGFP-TRAIL was demonstrated by fluorescence optical imaging and real-time PCR.
Noninvasive (19)F MR spectroscopy detected the conversion of the nontoxic prodrug
5-fluorocytosine (5-FC) to cytotoxic 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) by bCD. The
combination strategy of TRAIL gene and 5-FC/bCD therapy showed significant
inhibition of the growth of prostate cancer cells and tumors. These data
demonstrate that the PSMA-specific theranostic nanoplex can deliver gene therapy 
and prodrug enzyme therapy concurrently for precision medicine in metastatic
prostate cancer.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.11.048 
PMCID: PMC4706473
PMID: 26706476  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

