
1. Ticks Tick Borne Dis. 2016 Mar;7(2):350-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2015.12.006.
Epub 2015 Dec 9.

Natural foci of Borrelia lusitaniae in a mountain region of Central Europe.

Tarageľová VR(1), Mahríková L(2), Selyemová D(3), Václav R(4), Derdáková M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Dúbravská cesta 9, 845 06
Bratislava, Slovak Republic. Electronic address: veronika.taragelova@savba.sk.
(2)Institute of Zoology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Dúbravská cesta 9, 845 06
Bratislava, Slovak Republic. Electronic address: lenka.mydlova@gmail.com.
(3)Institute of Zoology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Dúbravská cesta 9, 845 06
Bratislava, Slovak Republic. Electronic address: diana.zelinkova@savba.sk.
(4)Institute of Zoology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Dúbravská cesta 9, 845 06
Bratislava, Slovak Republic. Electronic address: radovan.vaclav@savba.sk.
(5)Institute of Zoology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Dúbravská cesta 9, 845 06
Bratislava, Slovak Republic. Electronic address: marketa.derdakova@gmail.com.

Lyme borreliosis is the most prevalent tick-borne disease in Europe. It is caused
by spirochaetes of the Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato (s.l.) complex and
transmitted to humans by ticks of the genus Ixodes. Borrelia afzelii, Borrelia
garinii, and Borrelia valaisiana are the most common genospecies in Central
Europe. In contrast, Borrelia lusitaniae predominates in Mediterranean countries 
such as Portugal, Morocco, and Tunisia. In Slovakia, its prevalence is low and
restricted to only a few sites. The aim of our research was to study the
expansion of ticks into higher altitudes in the ecosystem of the Malá Fatra
mountains (north Slovakia) and their infection with B. burgdorferi s.l.
pathogens. Questing ticks were collected by flagging in seven years (2004,
2006-2011) at three different altitudes: low (630-660 m above sea level (ASL)),
intermediate (720-750 m ASL), and high (1040-1070 m ASL). Tick abundance was
highest at the lowest altitude and lowest at the highest altitude. The average
infection prevalence of B. burgdorferi s.l. in nymphs and adults was 16.8% and
36.2%, respectively. The number of infected ticks decreased from 38.5% at the
lowest altitude to 4.4% at the highest altitude. B. lusitaniae was the most
frequently found genospecies (>60% of the ticks found positive for B. burgdorferi
s.l.) in all sites in all the studied years with the exception of 2008 when B.
afzelii predominated (62%). Our study confirms the spread of Ixodes ricinus ticks
to higher altitudes in Slovakia. The discovery that our mountain study sites were
a natural foci of B. lusitaniae was unexpected because this genospecies is
usually associated with lizards and xerothermic habitats.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2015.12.006 
PMID: 26711673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

