
1. Intern Emerg Med. 2016 Jun;11(4):571-6. doi: 10.1007/s11739-015-1371-9. Epub 2015
Dec 30.

Severe sepsis and septic shock in pre-hospital emergency medicine: survey results
of medical directors of emergency medical services concerning antibiotics, blood 
cultures and algorithms.

Casu S(1), Häske D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Critical and Emergency Care, Department of Anesthesiology,
Intensive Care and Pain Management, Hospital of Main-Taunus-District, Teaching
Hospital of J.-W. Goethe University Medical School, Kronberger Str. 36, 65812,
Bad Soden, Germany. scasu@kliniken-mtk.de.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, Geissweg 5, 72076,
Tuebingen, Germany.

Delayed antibiotic treatment for patients in severe sepsis and septic shock
decreases the probability of survival. In this survey, medical directors of
different emergency medical services (EMS) in Germany were asked if they are
prepared for pre-hospital sepsis therapy with antibiotics or special algorithms
to evaluate the individual preparations of the different rescue areas for the
treatment of patients with this infectious disease. The objective of the survey
was to obtain a general picture of the current status of the EMS with respect to 
rapid antibiotic treatment for sepsis. A total of 166 medical directors were
invited to complete a short survey on behalf of the different rescue service
districts in Germany via an electronic cover letter. Of the rescue districts,
25.6 % (n = 20) stated that they keep antibiotics on EMS vehicles. In addition,
2.6 % carry blood cultures on the vehicles. The most common antibiotic is
ceftriaxone (third generation cephalosporin). In total, 8 (10.3 %) rescue
districts use an algorithm for patients with sepsis, severe sepsis or septic
shock. Although the German EMS is an emergency physician-based rescue system,
special opportunities in the form of antibiotics on emergency physician vehicles 
are missing. Simultaneously, only 10.3 % of the rescue districts use a special
algorithm for sepsis therapy. Sepsis, severe sepsis and septic shock do not
appear to be prioritized as highly as these deadly diseases should be in the
pre-hospital setting.

DOI: 10.1007/s11739-015-1371-9 
PMID: 26719078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

