
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2016 Jan 5;15:1. doi: 10.1186/s12934-015-0402-6.

Assembly of a novel biosynthetic pathway for gentamicin B production in
Micromonospora echinospora.

Ni X(1), Sun Z(2), Gu Y(3), Cui H(4), Xia H(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biopharmaceutics, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, No.103 Wenhua Road, Shenyang, Liaoning, China. nixianpu126@126.com.
(2)School of Life Science and Biopharmaceutics, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, No.103 Wenhua Road, Shenyang, Liaoning, China. 1026625249@qq.com.
(3)School of Life Science and Biopharmaceutics, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, No.103 Wenhua Road, Shenyang, Liaoning, China. gyw0636@163.com.
(4)School of Life Science and Biopharmaceutics, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, No.103 Wenhua Road, Shenyang, Liaoning, China. cuihao102@163.com.
(5)School of Life Science and Biopharmaceutics, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, No.103 Wenhua Road, Shenyang, Liaoning, China. xiahz612@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: Isepamicin is a weakly toxic but highly active aminoglycoside
antibiotic derivative of gentamicin B. Gentamicin B is a naturally occurring
minor component isolated from Micromonospora echinospora. 2'-NH2-containing
gentamicin C complex is a dominant compound produced by wild-type M. echinospora;
by contrast, 2'-OH-containing gentamicin B is produced as a minor component.
However, the biosynthetic pathway of gentamicin B remains unclear. Considering
that gentamicin B shares a unique C2' hydroxyl group with kanamycin A, we aimed
to design a new biosynthetic pathway of gentamicin B by combining twelve steps of
gentamicin biosynthesis and two steps of kanamycin biosynthesis.
RESULTS: We blocked the biosynthetic pathway of byproducts and generated a strain
overproducing JI-20A, which was used as a precursor of gentamicin B biosynthesis,
by disrupting genK and genP. The amount of JI-20A produced in M. echinospora ∆K∆P
reached 911 μg/ml, which was 14-fold higher than that of M. echinospora ∆P. The
enzymes KanJ and KanK necessary to convert 2'-NH2 into 2'-OH from the kanamycin
biosynthetic pathway were heterologously expressed in M. echinospora ΔKΔP to
transform JI-20A into gentamicin B. The strain with kanJK under PermE* could
produce 80 μg/ml of gentamicin B, which was tenfold higher than that of the
wild-type strain. To enhance gentamicin B production, we employed different
promoters and gene integration combinations. When a PhrdB promoter was used and
kanJ and kanK were integrated in the genome through gene replacement, gentamicin 
B was generated as the major product with a maximum yield of 880 μg/ml.
CONCLUSION: We constructed a new biosynthetic pathway of high-level gentamicin B 
production; in this pathway, most byproducts were removed. This method also
provided novel insights into the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites via the
combinatorial biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-015-0402-6 
PMCID: PMC4700567
PMID: 26729212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

