
1. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2016 Feb 20;120:402-12. doi: 10.1016/j.jpba.2015.11.022.
Epub 2015 Dec 24.

Chiral separation of tedizolid using charge single isomer derivatives of
cyclodextrins by capillary electrokinetic chromatography.

Michalska K(1), Gruba E(2), Cielecka-Piontek J(3), Bednarek E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Antibiotics and Microbiology, National Medicines Institute,
Chełmska 30/34, 00-725 Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
k.michalska@nil.gov.pl.
(2)Department of Antibiotics and Microbiology, National Medicines Institute,
Chełmska 30/34, 00-725 Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Poznań University
of Medical Sciences, Grunwaldzka 6, 60-780 Poznań, Poland.
(4)Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Laboratory, National Medicines Institute, Chełmska 
30/34, 00-725 Warsaw, Poland.

A method to enantioseparate tedizolid (TED), the second analogue after linezolid 
(LIN) in a truly new class of antibacterial agents, the oxazolidinones, was
developed based on capillary electrokinetic chromatography using cyclodextrin as 
chiral pseudophase (CD-cEKC). The single isomer R-tedizolid possesses one chiral 
centre at C5 of the oxazolidinone ring, which is associated with the
antibacterial activity of the drug. Tedizolid enantiomers are non-charged and
therefore require the use of charged cyclodextrins (CCDs) as carrier hosts to
achieve a velocity difference during migration. During method development,
hydrophilic anionic single-isomer and moderately hydrophobic and hydrophobic
cyclodextrins were tested, including
heptakis-(2,3-dihydroxy-6-sulfo)-β-cyclodextrin (HS-β-CD),
heptakis-(2,3-diacetyl-6-sulfo)-β-cyclodextrin (HDAS-β-CD),
oktakis-(2,3-diacetyl-6-sulfo)-γ-cyclodextrin (ODAS-γ-CD) and
heptakis-(2,3-dimethyl-6-sulfo)-β-cyclodextrin (HDMS-β-CD). Only CDs that have
acetyl groups at the C2 and C3 positions with seven (HDAS-β-CD) or eight
(ODAS-γ-CD) residues of glucopyranose units provided baseline separation of the
tedizolid enantiomers with the addition of organic solvent. During the
experiments, different organic solvents were tested, such as methanol,
acetonitrile, tetrahydrofuran, which varied in their abilities to donate or
accept protons. The best enantiomer separation results were obtained using the
CD-cEKC method with 37.5mM HDAS-β-CD dissolved in 50mM formic buffer (pH 4.0)
with the addition of acetonitrile (81.4:18.6, v/v) at 27ºC, normal polarity, and 
12kV. Finally, the apparent binding constants for each enantiomer-HDAS-β-CD pair 
were calculated. Moreover, in order to evaluate the behaviour of TED and LIN
enantiomers relative to chiral selector, enantioselective interactions towards
the precursors of TED and LIN isomers were also investigated.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpba.2015.11.022 
PMID: 26724911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

