
1. Vaccine. 2016 Jan 27;34(5):599-608. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.12.044. Epub 2015
Dec 24.

Oral vaccination of first-feeding Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar L., confers
greater protection against yersiniosis than immersion vaccination.

Ghosh B(1), Nguyen TD(2), Crosbie PBB(3), Nowak BF(4), Bridle AR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Marine and Antarctic Sciences, University of Tasmania, Locked
Bag 1370, Launceston, Tasmania 7250, Australia. Electronic address:
bikramjit.ghosh@utas.edu.au.
(2)Institute for Marine and Antarctic Sciences, University of Tasmania, Locked
Bag 1370, Launceston, Tasmania 7250, Australia. Electronic address:
Diem.Nguyen@utas.edu.au.
(3)Institute for Marine and Antarctic Sciences, University of Tasmania, Locked
Bag 1370, Launceston, Tasmania 7250, Australia. Electronic address:
philip.crosbie@utas.edu.au.
(4)Institute for Marine and Antarctic Sciences, University of Tasmania, Locked
Bag 1370, Launceston, Tasmania 7250, Australia. Electronic address:
b.nowak@utas.edu.au.
(5)Institute for Marine and Antarctic Sciences, University of Tasmania, Locked
Bag 1370, Launceston, Tasmania 7250, Australia. Electronic address:
andrew.bridle@utas.edu.au.

Yersinia ruckeri is a ubiquitous pathogen of finfish capable of causing major
mortalities in farmed fish stocks. It can be transmitted vertically from parent
to progeny as well as horizontally in the water column from both clinically
infected fish and asymptomatic carriers, and is consequently capable of infecting
fish at early stages of development. Immunisation strategies that can protect
small fry are therefore critical for the effective management of fish health, as 
is the ability to detect covertly infected fish. In this study, first-feeding
Atlantic salmon fry (<0.5 g) were immunised either by oral administration of a
microencapsulated Y. ruckeri vaccine formulation (0.38 g initial weight), or via 
immersion in bacterin suspension (0.26 g), with and without a booster immersion
vaccination at 1g size. Protection in groups receiving only immersion
immunisation did not differ significantly from untreated controls when challenged
with Y. ruckeri at approximately 5 g size, while orally immunised fish were
significantly better protected than untreated controls (F=4.38, df=4,10,
P=0.026), with RPS varying between 29.4% (ORAL) and 51% (ORAL+DIP). A
quantitative real-time PCR assay was used to successfully detect covertly
infected fish among challenge survivors, indicating more than 50% of surviving
fish in each group were infected with no significant differences between
immunised fish and untreated controls.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.12.044 
PMID: 26724544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

