
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 5;11(1):e0146192. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146192.
eCollection 2016.

Osteopontin That Is Elevated in the Airways during COPD Impairs the Antibacterial
Activity of Common Innate Antibiotics.

Gela A(1), Bhongir RK(1), Mori M(2), Keenan P(1), Mörgelin M(3), Erjefält JS(2), 
Herwald H(3), Egesten A(1), Kasetty G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Medicine & Allergology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund
University, SE-221 84, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Airway Inflammation Unit, Department of Experimental Medical Sciences, Lund
University, SE-221 84, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Infection Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University,
SE-221 84, Lund, Sweden.

Bacterial infections of the respiratory tract contribute to exacerbations and
disease progression in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). There is
also an increased risk of invasive pneumococcal disease in COPD. The underlying
mechanisms are not fully understood but include impaired mucociliary clearance
and structural remodeling of the airways. In addition, antimicrobial proteins
that are constitutively expressed or induced during inflammatory conditions are
an important part of the airway innate host defense. In the present study, we
show that osteopontin (OPN), a multifunctional glycoprotein that is highly
upregulated in the airways of COPD patients co-localizes with several
antimicrobial proteins expressed in the airways. In vitro, OPN bound lactoferrin,
secretory leukocyte peptidase inhibitor (SLPI), midkine, human beta defensin-3
(hBD-3), and thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) but showed low or no affinity
for lysozyme and LL-37. Binding of OPN impaired the antibacterial activity
against the important bacterial pathogens Streptococcus pneumoniae and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Interestingly, OPN reduced lysozyme-induced killing of S.
pneumoniae, a finding that could be explained by binding of OPN to the bacterial 
surface, thereby shielding the bacteria. A fragment of OPN generated by elastase 
of P. aeruginosa retained some inhibitory effect. Some antimicrobial proteins
have additional functions. However, the muramidase-activity of lysozyme and the
protease inhibitory function of SLPI were not affected by OPN. Taken together,
OPN can contribute to the impairment of innate host defense by interfering with
the function of antimicrobial proteins, thus increasing the vulnerability to
acquire infections during COPD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146192 
PMCID: PMC4712133
PMID: 26731746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

