
1. J Immunol. 2016 Feb 1;196(3):1419-29. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501293. Epub 2016
Jan 6.

Human Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma-Associated Semaphorin 4D Induces
Expansion of Myeloid-Derived Suppressor Cells.

Younis RH(1), Han KL(2), Webb TJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Diagnostic Sciences, School of Dentistry,
University of Maryland, Baltimore, Baltimore, MD 21201; Marlene and Stewart
Greenebaum Cancer Center, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Baltimore, MD 21201;
and ryounis@umaryland.edu.
(2)Department of Oncology and Diagnostic Sciences, School of Dentistry,
University of Maryland, Baltimore, Baltimore, MD 21201;
(3)Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center, University of Maryland,
Baltimore, Baltimore, MD 21201; and Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Maryland, Baltimore, Baltimore, MD 21201.

One of the mechanisms by which malignancies can induce immune suppression is
through the production of cytokines that affect the maturation and
differentiation of inflammatory cells in the tumor microenvironment. Semaphorin
4D (Sema4D) is a proangiogenic cytokine produced by several malignancies, which
has been described in the regulation of the immune system. In the present study, 
we examined the role of human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC)-secreted Sema4D on myeloid cell differentiation. CD33(+) cells cultured
in HNSCC cell line-derived conditioned medium differentiated into myeloid derived
suppressor cells (MDSC) (CD33(+)CD11b(+)HLA-DR(-/low)). The addition of
anti-Sema4D Ab to HNSCC conditioned medium significantly reduced the expansion of
the MDSC population. Similarly, knockdown of Sema4D in an HNSCC cell line
resulted in a loss of MDSC function as shown by a decrease in the production of
the immune-suppressive cytokines arginase-1, TGF-β, and IL-10 by MDSC,
concomitant with recovery of T cell proliferation and IFN-γ production following 
stimulation of CD3/CD28. Importantly, CD33(+) myeloid and T cells cultured in
conditioned medium of HNSCC cells in which Sema4D was knocked down promoted
antitumor inflammatory profile, through recovery of the effector T cells
(CD4(+)T-bet(+) and CD8(+)T-bet(+)), as well as a decrease in regulatory T cells 
(CD4(+)CD25(+)FOXP3(+)). We also showed that Sema4D was comparable to GM-CSF in
its induction of MDSC. Collectively, this study describes a novel
immunosuppressive role for Sema4D in HNSCC through induction of MDSC, and it
highlights Sema4D as a therapeutic target for future studies to enhance the
antitumorigenic inflammatory response in HNSCC and other epithelial malignancies.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501293 
PMCID: PMC4722498
PMID: 26740106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

