
1. Obes Facts. 2016;9(1):1-11. doi: 10.1159/000442479. Epub 2016 Jan 9.

Gut Microbiota and Metabolic Endotoxemia in Young Obese Mexican Subjects.

Radilla-Vázquez RB(1), Parra-Rojas I, Martínez-Hernández NE, Márquez-Sandoval YF,
Illades-Aguiar B, Castro-Alarcón N.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad Acadx00E9;mica de Ciencias Qux00ED;mico-Biolx00F3;gicas, Universidad
Autx00F3;noma de Guerrero, Chilpancingo, Mx00E9;xico.

BACKGROUND: The gut microbiota plays an important role in human metabolism;
previous studies suggest that the imbalance can cause a metabolic endotoxemia
that may be linked to weight gain and insulin resistance. The purpose of this
study was to investigate the relationship between the gut microbiota composition,
the lipopolysaccharide levels and the metabolic profile in obese and
normal-weight young subjects.
METHODS: We studied 32 obese (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2) and 32 normal-weight subjects (BMI 
= 18.5-24.9 kg/m2), aged 18-25 years. Quantification of intestinal bacteria was
performed by real-time PCR. Endotoxin units were determined with the test
QCL-1000, and biochemical profile was performed under a standard protocol of
Spinreact.
RESULTS: Obese individuals had a BMI of 34.5 (32.9-36.45) kg/m2, increased
triglycerides (123 vs. 70 mg/dl), total cholesterol (168 vs. 142 mg/dl), and
LDL-cholesterol (114 vs. 96.5 mg/dl). In obese subjects body temperature was
higher than in normal-weight subjects. We found a greater number of Clostridum
leptum and Lactobacillus (p < 0.001) and lower numbers of Prevotella and
Escherichia coli (p < 0.001) in the obese group. A decrease of E. coli was
associated with an increased risk of lipopolysaccharide levels ranging from 1 to 
1.3 EU/ml. A positive correlation was found between serum lipopolysaccharides and
BMI (r = 0.46, p = 0.008), triglyceride levels (r = 0.44, p = 0.011) as well as
waist circumference (r = 0.34, p = 0.040), being more evident in young obese
females.
CONCLUSION: Subclinical metabolic endotoxemia determined by serum concentration
of lipopolysaccharides was related to the smallest amount of E. coli, high
triglyceride levels, and central adiposity in obese young persons.

© 2016 S. Karger GmbH, Freiburg.

DOI: 10.1159/000442479 
PMCID: PMC5644836
PMID: 26745497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

