
1. Cytokine. 2016 Jun;82:58-69. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.12.007. Epub 2015 Dec 31.

Negative regulation of the hepatic fibrogenic response by suppressor of cytokine 
signaling 1.

Kandhi R(1), Bobbala D(1), Yeganeh M(1), Mayhue M(1), Menendez A(2), Ilangumaran 
S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Division, Department of Pediatrics, Sherbrooke, Québec J1H 5N4,
Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec J1H 5N4, Canada;
CR-CHUS, Sherbrooke, Québec J1H 5N4, Canada.
(3)Immunology Division, Department of Pediatrics, Sherbrooke, Québec J1H 5N4,
Canada; CR-CHUS, Sherbrooke, Québec J1H 5N4, Canada. Electronic address:
Subburaj.Ilangumaran@Usherbrooke.ca.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1) is an indispensable regulator of IFNγ 
signaling and has been implicated in the regulation of liver fibrosis. However,
it is not known whether SOCS1 mediates its anti-fibrotic functions in the liver
directly, or via modulating IFNγ, which has been implicated in attenuating
hepatic fibrosis. Additionally, it is possible that SOCS1 controls liver fibrosis
by regulating hepatic stellate cells (HSC), a key player in fibrogenic response. 
While the activation pathways of HSCs have been well characterized, the
regulatory mechanisms are not yet clear. The goals of this study were to
dissociate IFNγ-dependent and SOCS1-mediated regulation of hepatic fibrogenic
response, and to elucidate the regulatory functions of SOCS1 in HSC activation.
Liver fibrosis was induced in Socs1(-/-)Ifng(-/-) mice with dimethylnitrosamine
or carbon tetrachloride. Ifng(-/-) and C57BL/6 mice served as controls. Following
fibrogenic treatments, Socs1(-/-)Ifng(-/-) mice showed elevated serum ALT levels 
and increased liver fibrosis compared to Ifng(-/-) mice. The latter group showed 
higher ALT levels and fibrosis than C57BL/6 controls. The livers of
SOCS1-deficient mice showed bridging fibrosis, which was associated with
increased accumulation of myofibroblasts and abundant collagen deposition.
SOCS1-deficient livers showed increased expression of genes coding for smooth
muscle actin, collagen, and enzymes involved in remodeling the extracellular
matrix, namely matrix metalloproteinases and tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinases. Primary HSCs from SOCS1-deficient mice showed increased
proliferation in response to growth factors such as HGF, EGF and PDGF, and the
fibrotic livers of SOCS1-deficient mice showed increased expression of the Pdgfb 
gene. Taken together, these data indicate that SOCS1 controls liver fibrosis
independently of IFNγ and that part of this regulation may occur via regulating
HSC proliferation and limiting growth factor availability.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.12.007 
PMID: 26748724  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

