
1. Springerplus. 2016 Jan 4;5:2. doi: 10.1186/s40064-015-1651-x. eCollection 2016.

Hypoxia-induced inflammation and purinergic signaling in cross clamping the human
aorta.

Jalkanen J(1), Maksimow M(2), Jalkanen S(2), Hakovirta H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, Turku University and Turku University
Hospital, Hämeenkatu 11, 20521 Turku, Finland.
(2)MediCity Research Laboratory, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Turku, Tykistönkatu 6A, 20520 Turku, Finland.

Open aortic surgery evokes a systemic inflammatory response and is associated
with high morbidity and mortality. Purinergic signaling has been shown to be
crucial for maintaining vascular integrity and attenuating inflammation related
to hypoxia. The involvement of purinergic signaling in cross clamping of major
human arteries is unknown. Our aim was to compare systemic inflammatory responses
and hypoxia-induced purinergic signaling in patients undergoing either open
infra-renal abdominal aortic repair or infra-inguinal revascularization. Pre- and
24 h post-operative blood samples were gathered from 6 patients undergoing aortic
clamping and 6 similar patients undergoing common femoral artery cross-clamping. 
Using Biorad Multipex™ 21- and 27-panels 48 different cytokines, chemokines and
growth factors were analyzed, in addition to circulating levels of ATP, ADP,
CD39, CD73 and HIF-1α, and compared between the groups. Several inflammatory
cytokines were elevated from baseline levels after aortic clamping, but not after
femoral cross clamping. Most pronoun rises were seen in IL-6 (667 %, P = 0.016)
and HGF (760 %, P = 0.016). HIF-1α values showed a steady increase after clamping
of either artery unless the subject underwent blood transfusion. Despite an
adequate increase in HIF-1α CD39 and CD73 activity decreased significantly after 
aortic clamping (P = 0.047 and P = 0.016, respectively). Aortic clamping is
associated with a clear and strong systemic inflammatory response and impaired
repair mechanisms in terms of purinergic signaling. Patients undergoing open
aorta repair could benefit from pre-operative medical therapy, which enhances
CD73 expression.

DOI: 10.1186/s40064-015-1651-x 
PMCID: PMC4700025
PMID: 26759741 

