
1. Glycobiology. 2016 Jun;26(6):640-54. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cww003. Epub 2016 Jan
13.

Kinetic analysis and molecular modeling of the inhibition mechanism of
roneparstat (SST0001) on human heparanase.

Pala D(1), Rivara S(2), Mor M(1), Milazzo FM(3), Roscilli G(4), Pavoni E(4),
Giannini G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Farmacia, Università degli Studi di Parma, Parco Area delle
Scienze 27/A, Parma 43124, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Farmacia, Università degli Studi di Parma, Parco Area delle
Scienze 27/A, Parma 43124, Italy silvia.rivara@unipr.it
ferdinando.milazzo@sigma-tau.it.
(3)R&D Sigma-Tau Industrie Farmaceutiche Riunite S.p.A., Via Pontina Km 30,400,
Pomezia, Roma 00071, Italy silvia.rivara@unipr.it
ferdinando.milazzo@sigma-tau.it.
(4)Takis s.r.l., Via Castel Romano 100, Roma 00128, Italy.
(5)R&D Sigma-Tau Industrie Farmaceutiche Riunite S.p.A., Via Pontina Km 30,400,
Pomezia, Roma 00071, Italy.

Heparanase is a β-d-glucuronidase which cleaves heparan sulfate chains in the
extracellular matrix and on cellular membranes. A dysregulated heparanase
activity is intimately associated with cell invasion, tumor metastasis and
angiogenesis, making heparanase an attractive target for the development of
anticancer therapies. SST0001 (roneparstat; Sigma-Tau Research Switzerland S.A.) 
is a non-anticoagulant 100% N-acetylated and glycol-split heparin acting as a
potent heparanase inhibitor, currently in phase I in advanced multiple myeloma.
Herein, the kinetics of heparanase inhibition by roneparstat is reported. The
analysis of dose-inhibition curves confirmed the high potency of roneparstat
(IC50 ≈ 3 nM) and showed, at higher concentrations, a Hill coefficient consistent
with the engagement of two molecules of inhibitor. A homology model of human
heparanase GS3 construct was built and used for docking experiments with
inhibitor fragments. The model has high structural similarity with the recently
reported crystal structure of human heparanase. Different interaction schemes are
proposed, which support the hypothesis of a complex binding mechanism involving
the recruitment of one or multiple roneparstat chains, depending on its
concentration. In particular, docking solutions were obtained in which (i) a
single roneparstat molecule interacts with both heparin-binding domains (HBDs) of
heparanase or (ii) two fragments of roneparstat interact with either HBD-1 or
HBD-2, consistent with the possibility of different inhibitor:enzyme binding
stoichiometries. This study provides unique insights into the mode of action of
roneparstat as well as clues of its interaction with heparanase at a molecular
level, which could be exploited to design novel potential inhibitor molecules.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cww003 
PMCID: PMC4847616
PMID: 26762172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

