
1. J Biotechnol. 2016 Feb 20;220:25-32. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2015.12.038. Epub
2016 Jan 6.

Combining chitinase C and N-acetylhexosaminidase from Streptomyces coelicolor
A3(2) provides an efficient way to synthesize N-acetylglucosamine from
crystalline chitin.

Nguyen-Thi N(1), Doucet N(2).

Author information: 
(1)INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier, Université du Québec, 531 Boul. des Prairies,
Laval, Québec H7V 1B7, Canada.
(2)INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier, Université du Québec, 531 Boul. des Prairies,
Laval, Québec H7V 1B7, Canada; PROTEO, The Québec Network for Research on Protein
Function, Engineering, and Applications, 1045 Avenue de la Médecine, Université
Laval, Québec, Québec, G1V 0A6, Canada; GRASP, The Groupe de Recherche Axé sur la
Structure des Protéines, 3649 Promenade Sir William Osler, McGill University,
Montréal, Québec, H3G 0B1, Canada. Electronic address:
nicolas.doucet@iaf.inrs.ca.

The enzymatic bioconversion of chitin is of considerable interest for the natural
production of bioactive compounds such as chitooligosaccharides and
N-acetyl-d-glucosamine (GlcNAc). Key enzymes are involved in the natural
processing of chitin, hydrolyzing this abundant biopolymer to yield
chitooligosaccharides with substantial value to the medicinal and
biotechnological fields. In this study, chitinase C (ScChiC) from the soil
bacterium and chitin decomposer Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) was expressed,
purified and characterized. We also optimized a Streptomyces lividans system
generating ScChiC expression yields nearly 500-fold higher than the previously
reported heterologous expression in Escherichia coli. The purified enzyme was
found to be stable below 55°C for a broad range of pH values (pH 3.5-9) and
exhibited high activity against chitin and chitooligosaccharides to form
chitobiose (C2) as main product. Crab shell chitin hydrolysis profiles also
revealed that ScChiC catalyzes the bioconversion of chitopolysaccharides through 
an endo-nonprocessive mode of action. When combining ScChiC with an
N-acetylhexosaminidase from S. coelicolor A3(2) (ScHEX) in an assay using crude
extracts and crystalline chitin as substrate, GlcNAc was generated as final
product with a yield over 90% after 8h incubation. This chitin hydrolysis yield
represents one of the most efficient enzyme bioconversion of chitopolysaccharides
to GlcNAc characterized to date, making the S. coelicolor ScChiC-ScHEX pair a
potentially suitable contender for the viable industrial production of this
important bioactive compound.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2015.12.038 
PMID: 26767320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

