
1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2016 Feb 17;179:301-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.01.003. Epub
2016 Jan 4.

Effects of Aloe barbadensis Mill. extract (AVH200®) on human blood T cell
activity in vitro.

Ahluwalia B(1), Magnusson MK(2), Isaksson S(3), Larsson F(4), Öhman L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Sahlgrenska Academy at University
of Gothenburg, Box 435, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden; Calmino Group AB, Sahlgrenska 
Science Park, Medicinaregatan 8A, 413 46 Gothenburg, Sweden. Electronic address: 
bani.ahluwalia@calmino.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Sahlgrenska Academy at University
of Gothenburg, Box 435, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden; Department of Internal
Medicine and Clinical Nutrition, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg,
413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden. Electronic address: maria.magnusson@microbio.gu.se.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Sahlgrenska Academy at University
of Gothenburg, Box 435, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden; Department of Internal
Medicine and Clinical Nutrition, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg,
413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden. Electronic address: stefan.isaksson@microbio.gu.se.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Nutrition, Sahlgrenska Academy at
University of Gothenburg, 413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden. Electronic address:
fredrik.larsson@calmino.com.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Sahlgrenska Academy at University
of Gothenburg, Box 435, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden; Department of Internal
Medicine and Clinical Nutrition, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg,
413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden. Electronic address: lena.ohman@microbio.gu.se.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Aloe barbadensis Mill. (Aloe vera) is a widely
used medicinal plant well reputed for its diverse therapeutic applications. It
has been used for thousands of years in folk medicine to treat various conditions
and the Aloe vera gel has been reported to possess anti-inflammatory as well as
immunostimulatory and immunomodulatory properties. However, the mode of action is
still unclear.
AIM OF THE STUDY: The aim of this study was determine the effects of two
well-defined A. barbadensis Mill. extracts AVH200® and AVE200 on human blood T
cells in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from healthy
donors were stimulated polyclonally in the presence or absence of AVH200® and
AVE200. The T cell phenotype was investigated by flow cytometry, cell
proliferation was determined by CFSE dye and thymidine assay, respectively and
cytokine secretion was determined by MSD® Multi-Spot Assay system and ELISA.
RESULTS: The presence of AVH200® resulted in a reduced expression of CD25 among
CD3(+) T cells and suppression of T cell proliferation in a dose dependent
manner. Furthermore, AVH200® reduced the expression of CD28 on CD3(+) T cells.
AVH200® also reduced the secretion of IL-2, IFN-γ and IL-17A in PBMC cultures.
The AVH200® dose dependent reduction in T cell activation and proliferation
recorded in the cell cultures was not due to apoptosis or cell death.
Additionally, AVH200® was found to be more effective as compared to AVE200 in
reducing T cell activation and proliferation.
CONCLUSION: AVH200® has the potential to reduce the activation, proliferation and
cytokine secretion of healthy human blood T cells. Our study suggests that
AVH200® has a suppressive effect on human blood T cells in vitro.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.01.003 
PMID: 26771068  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

