
1. J Basic Microbiol. 2016 Jan;56(1):85-91. doi: 10.1002/jobm.201500247. Epub 2015
Sep 11.

Isolation of N2 -fixing rhizobacteria from Lolium perenne and evaluating their
plant growth promoting traits.

Castellano-Hinojosa A(1), Correa-Galeote D(1), Palau J(2), Bedmar EJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soil Microbiology and Symbiotic Systems, Estación Experimental
del Zaidín, Granada, Spain.
(2)Professional Sportsverd Football S.L., Badalona, Spain.

Twenty one dinitrogen (N2 )-fixing bacteria were isolated from the rhizosphere of
Lolium perenne grown for more than 10 years without N-fertilization. The nearly
complete sequence of the 16S rRNA gene of each strain and pairwise alignments
among globally aligned sequences of the 16S rRNA genes clustered them into nine
different groups. Out of the 21 strains, 11 were members of genus Bacillus, 3
belonged to each one of genera Paenibacillus and Pseudoxanthomonas, and the
remaining 2 strains to each one of genera Burkholderia and Staphylococcus,
respectively. A representative strain from each group contained the nifH gene and
fixed atmospheric N2 as determined by the acetylene-dependent ethylene production
assay (acetylene reduction activity, ARA). The nine selected strains were also
examined to behave as plant growth promoting bacteria (PGPRs) including their
ability to act as a biocontrol agent. The nine representative strains produced
indol acetic acid (IAA) and solubilized calcium triphosphate, five of them,
strains C2, C3, C12, C15, and C16, had ACC deaminase activity, and strains C2,
C3, C4, C12, C16, and C17 produced siderophores. Strains C13, C16, and C17 had
the capability to control growth of the pathogen Fusarium oxysporum mycelial
growth in vitro. PCA analysis of determined PGPR properties showed that ARA, ACC 
deaminase activity, and siderophore production were the most valuable as they had
the maximal contribution to the total variance.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.201500247 
PMID: 26781208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

