
1. J Bacteriol. 2016 Jan 19;198(7):1066-76. doi: 10.1128/JB.00975-15.

Functional Determinants of Metal Ion Transport and Selectivity in Paralogous
Cation Diffusion Facilitator Transporters CzcD and MntE in Streptococcus
pneumoniae.

Martin JE(1), Giedroc DP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, USA
giedroc@indiana.edu.

Cation diffusion facilitators (CDFs) are a large family of divalent metal
transporters that collectively possess broad metal specificity and contribute to 
intracellular metal homeostasis and virulence in bacterial pathogens.
Streptococcus pneumoniae expresses two homologous CDF efflux transporters, MntE
and CzcD. Cells lacking mntE or czcD are sensitive to manganese (Mn) or zinc (Zn)
toxicity, respectively, and specifically accumulate Mn or Zn, respectively, thus 
suggesting that MntE selectively transports Mn, while CzcD transports Zn. Here,
we probe the origin of this metal specificity using a phenotypic growth analysis 
of pneumococcal variants. Structural homology to Escherichia coli YiiP predicts
that both MntE and CzcD are dimeric and each protomer harbors four pairs of
conserved metal-binding sites, termed the A site, the B site, and the C1/C2
binuclear site. We find that single amino acid mutations within both the
transmembrane domain A site and the B site in both CDFs result in a cellular
metal sensitivity similar to that of the corresponding null mutants. However,
multiple mutations in the predicted cytoplasmic C1/C2 cluster of MntE have no
impact on cellular Mn resistance, in contrast to the analogous substitutions in
CzcD, which do have on impact on cellular Zn resistance. Deletion of the
MntE-specific C-terminal tail, present only in Mn-specific bacterial CDFs,
resulted in only a modest growth phenotype. Further analysis of MntE-CzcD
functional chimeric transporters showed that Asn and Asp in the ND-DD A-site
motif of MntE and the most N-terminal His in the HD-HD site A of CzcD (the
specified amino acids are underlined) play key roles in transporter metal
selectivity.IMPORTANCE: Cation diffusion facilitator (CDF) proteins are divalent 
metal ion transporters that are conserved in organisms ranging from bacteria to
humans and that play important roles in cellular physiology, from metal
homeostasis and resistance to type I diabetes in vertebrates. The respiratory
pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae expresses two metal CDF transporters, CzcD and 
MntE. How CDFs achieve metal selectivity is unclear. We show here that CzcD and
MntE are true paralogs, as CzcD transports zinc, while MntE selectively
transports manganese. Through the use of an extensive collection of pneumococcal 
variants, we show that a primary determinant for metal selectivity is the A site 
within the transmembrane domain. This extends our understanding of how CDFs
discriminate among transition metals.

Copyright Â© 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00975-15 
PMCID: PMC4800876
PMID: 26787764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

