
1. J Food Sci. 2016 Feb;81(2):M454-62. doi: 10.1111/1750-3841.13215. Epub 2016 Jan
19.

Effect of Initial Headspace O2 Level on the Growth and Volatile Metabolite
Production of Leuconostoc Mesenteriodes and the Microbial and Sensorial Quality
of Modified Atmosphere Packaged Par-Fried French Fries.

Samapundo S(1), Mujuru FM(1), de Baenst I(1), Denon Q(1), Devlieghere F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Food Microbiology and Food Preservation, Dept. of Food Safety and Food
Quality, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Member of Food2Know, Ghent Univ,
Coupure Links 653, 9000, Gent, Belgium.

This study evaluated the effect of residual O2 level (0% to 5%) on microbial
growth and volatile metabolite production on par-fried French fries packaged in a
modified atmosphere with 60% CO2 (rest N2 ) at 4 °C. The results obtained showed 
that the initial headspace (IH) O2 level had an effect on growth of Leuconostoc
mesenteroides on French fry simulation agar, whereby growth was slightly faster
under 5% O2 . In terms of quantity, ethanol, 2-methyl-1-propanol, and dimethyl
disulphide were the most significant volatile metabolites produced by L.
mesenteroides. The production of ethanol by L. mesenteroides was highest on
simulation agar packaged under low IH O2 levels (0% to 1%), indicating that the
fermentative metabolism was induced under these conditions. In agreement with the
results observed on the simulation medium, growth of native lactic acid bacteria 
was faster under an IH O2 level of 5%. In addition, ethanol, 2-methyl-1-propanol,
and dimethyl disulphide were also quantitatively the most important volatile
metabolites. However, in contrast, greater quantities of ethanol and dimethyl
disulphide were produced on par-fried French fries packaged under 5% O2 . This
was attributed to the limited growth of the native flora on the par-fried French 
fries under residual O2 levels of 0% and 1%. Although some significant
differences (P < 0.05) occurred between the French fries packaged in 0%, 1%, and 
5 % residual O2 during storage, all products were considered to be acceptable for
consumption. The results of this study can be used to optimize the shelf-life of 
packaged chill stored potato products.

© 2016 Institute of Food Technologists®

DOI: 10.1111/1750-3841.13215 
PMID: 26784149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

