
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 16;7(7):7563-77. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6927.

Successful expansion of functional and stable regulatory T cells for
immunotherapy in liver transplantation.

Safinia N(1), Vaikunthanathan T(1), Fraser H(1), Thirkell S(1), Lowe K(1),
Blackmore L(2), Whitehouse G(2), Martinez-Llordella M(2), Jassem W(2),
Sanchez-Fueyo A(2), Lechler RI(1), Lombardi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Transplantation, Division of Transplantation Immunology and
Mucosal Biology, King's College London, Guy's Hospital, London, UK.
(2)Institute of Liver Studies, King's College Hospital, London, UK.

Strategies to prevent organ transplant rejection whilst minimizing long-term
immunosuppression are currently under intense investigation with regulatory T
cells (Tregs) nearing clinical application. The clinical trial, ThRIL, recently
commenced at King's College London, proposes to use Treg cell therapy to induce
tolerance in liver transplant recipients, the success of which has the potential 
to revolutionize the management of these patients and enable a future of
drug-free transplants. This is the first report of the manufacture of clinical
grade Tregs from prospective liver transplant recipients via a CliniMACS-based
GMP isolation technique and expanded using anti-CD3/CD28 beads, IL-2 and
rapamycin. We report the enrichment of a pure, stable population of Tregs (>95%
CD4(+)CD25(+)FOXP3(+)), reaching adequate numbers for their clinical application.
Our protocol proved successful in, influencing the expansion of superior
functional Tregs, as compared to freshly isolated cells, whilst also preventing
their conversion to Th17 cells under pro-inflammatory conditions. We conclude
with the manufacture of the final Treg product in the clinical research facility 
(CRF), a prerequisite for the clinical application of these cells. The data
presented in this manuscript together with the much-anticipated clinical results 
from ThRIL, will undoubtedly inform the improved management of the liver
transplant recipient.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.6927 
PMCID: PMC4884938
PMID: 26788992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

