
1. Cancer Lett. 2016 Mar 28;372(2):192-200. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.12.011. Epub 
2016 Jan 12.

Induction of CXCR2 ligands, stem cell-like phenotype, and metastasis in
chemotherapy-resistant breast cancer cells.

Sharma B(1), Varney ML(2), Saxena S(2), Wu L(2), Singh RK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE; Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer
Center, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison,
WI.
(2)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE.
(3)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE; Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, 985900 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE. Electronic
address: rsingh@unmc.edu.

CXCR2 and its ligands have been shown to play an important role in tumor
angiogenesis, therapy resistance and progression. In this study, we investigated 
whether CXCR2 ligands are responsible for the survival advantage and metastasis
of drug-resistant cells and examined the underlying mechanism(s) doxorubicin or
paclitaxel resistant mammary tumor cells. Our results demonstrated that
drug-resistant Cl66 cells upregulated CXCR2 ligands but downregulated expression 
of CXCR2. We observed delayed tumor growth but increased metastasis in mice using
these drug-resistant cells. Furthermore, we observed differential upregulation of
stem cell and mesenchymal markers in the doxorubicin and paclitaxel-resistant
tumor cells. Abrogation of the CXCR2 signaling axis using CXCR2 ligand
neutralization resulted in significant inhibition of drug-resistant cell growth. 
Together, our data suggest chemotherapy-specific differential regulation of CXCR2
ligands, stem cell-like and mesenchymal phenotypes, and enhanced metastasis in
drug-resistant cells and targeting CXCR2 signaling, may help circumvent therapy
resistance in breast cancer.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.12.011 
PMCID: PMC4821546
PMID: 26797460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

