
1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2016 Feb;77:129-34. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2015.12.020. Epub 
2015 Dec 29.

IL-17A and IL-17F induce autophagy in RAW 264.7 macrophages.

Orosz L(1), Papanicolaou EG(1), Seprényi G(2), Megyeri K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunobiology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Szeged, H-6720 Szeged, Dóm tér 10., Hungary.
(2)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Szeged,
Somogyi Béla u. 4, Szeged, Hungary.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunobiology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Szeged, H-6720 Szeged, Dóm tér 10., Hungary. Electronic address:
megyeri.klara@med.u-szeged.hu.

Autophagy is an important cellular catabolic process for the lysosomal
degradation of cytoplasmic organelles, proteins and microorganisms. The
autophagic process is intertwined with the immune response: autophagy regulates
both innate and adaptive immunity, conversely, cytokines produced during the
course of the immune response modulate various functions of the autophagic
cascade. The IL-17 family member cytokines play a pivotal role in immune
protection against extra- and intracellular bacterial pathogens. Since the
effects of IL-17A and IL-17F on autophagy have not yet been reported, we have
evaluated the autophagic activity in the RAW 264.7 cell line treated with either 
IL-17A or IL-17F. Both IL-17A and IL-17F proved to promote microtubule-associated
protein 1 light chain 3 B-II (LC3B-II) accumulation, enhance the autophagic flux,
facilitate the intracellular redistribution of LC3B, increase both the average
number and the size of autophagosomes per cell, and foster the formation of
acidic vesicular organelles. IL-17F was considerably more efficient than IL-17A
in promoting the autophagic process. Further experiments to determine the
potential effect of IL-17-induced autophagy on the antibacterial activity of RAW 
macrophages revealed that IL-17F significantly decreased the intracellular counts
of Mycobacterium terrae, while the colony-forming unit values remained comparable
in the IL-17A-treated cells and the control cultures. In conclusion, these
results demonstrate that IL-17A and IL-17F are capable of inducing autophagy in
macrophages, and thereby contribute to the elimination of Mycobacterium terrae.
These data may bear on the pathogenesis of infections caused by Mycobacterium
terrae, as IL-17 plays a pivotal role in the immune response to mycobacteria.
IL-17-mediated activation of autophagy may also be implicated in various
infections and other pathological conditions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2015.12.020 
PMID: 26796276  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

