
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 27;6:19684. doi: 10.1038/srep19684.

Secreted Thrombospondin-1 Regulates Macrophage Interleukin-1β Production and
Activation through CD47.

Stein EV(1)(2), Miller TW(1), Ivins-O'Keefe K(1), Kaur S(1), Roberts DD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1500, USA.
(2)Microbiology and Immunology Program of the Institute for Biomedical Sciences, 
Departments of Microbiology, Immunology and Tropical Medicine, George Washington 
University, Washington, DC, 20037, USA.

Thrombospondin-1 regulates inflammation by engaging several cell surface
receptors and by modulating activities of other secreted factors. We have
uncovered a novel role of thrombospondin-1 in modulating production and
activation of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-1β by human and murine macrophages.
Physiological concentrations of thrombospondin-1 limit the induction by
lipopolysaccharide of IL-1β mRNA and total protein production by human
macrophages. This inhibition can be explained by the ability of thrombospondin-1 
to disrupt the interaction between CD47 and CD14, thereby limiting activation of 
NFκB/AP-1 by lipopolysaccharide. Only the CD47-binding domain of thrombospondin-1
exhibits this activity. In contrast, CD47, CD36, and integrin-binding domains of 
thrombospondin-1 independently enhance the inflammasome-dependent maturation of
IL-1β in human THP-1 monocyte-derived macrophages. Correspondingly, mouse bone
marrow-derived macrophages that lack either thrombospondin-1 or CD47 exhibit
diminished induction of mature IL-1β in response to lipopolysaccharide. Lack of
CD47 also limits lipopolysaccharide induction of IL-1β, NLRP3, and caspase-1
mRNAs. These data demonstrate that thrombospondin-1 exerts CD47-dependent and
-independent pro-and anti-inflammatory effects on the IL-1β pathway. Therefore,
thrombospondin-1 and its receptor CD47 may be useful targets for limiting the
pro-inflammatory effects of lipopolysaccharide and for treating endotoxemia.

DOI: 10.1038/srep19684 
PMCID: PMC4728557
PMID: 26813769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

