
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016 Apr;100(7):3361-70. doi:
10.1007/s00253-015-7238-1. Epub 2016 Jan 25.

Efficient butanol-ethanol (B-E) production from carbon monoxide fermentation by
Clostridium carboxidivorans.

Fernández-Naveira Á(1), Abubackar HN(1), Veiga MC(1), Kennes C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Engineering Laboratory, Faculty of Sciences, University of La Coruña,
Rúa da Fraga 10, E-15008, La Coruña, Spain.
(2)Chemical Engineering Laboratory, Faculty of Sciences, University of La Coruña,
Rúa da Fraga 10, E-15008, La Coruña, Spain. kennes@udc.es.

The fermentation of waste gases rich in carbon monoxide using acetogens is an
efficient way to obtain valuable biofuels like ethanol and butanol. Different
experiments were carried out with the bacterial species Clostridium
carboxidivorans as biocatalyst. In batch assays with no pH regulation, after
complete substrate exhaustion, acetic acid, butyric acid, and ethanol were
detected while only negligible butanol production was observed. On the other
side, in bioreactors, with continuous carbon monoxide supply and pH regulation,
both C2 and C4 fatty acids were initially formed as well as ethanol and butanol
at concentrations never reported before for this type of anaerobic bioconversion 
of gaseous C1 compounds, showing that the operating conditions significantly
affect the metabolic fermentation profile and butanol accumulation. Maximum
ethanol and butanol concentrations in the bioreactors were obtained at pH 5.75,
reaching values of 5.55 and 2.66 g/L, respectively. The alcohols were produced
both from CO fermentation as well as from the bioconversion of previously
accumulated acetic and butyric acids, resulting in low residual concentrations of
such acids at the end of the bioreactor experiments. CO consumption was often
around 50% and reached up to more than 80%. Maximum specific rates of ethanol and
butanol production were reached at pH 4.75, with values of 0.16 g/h*g of biomass 
and 0.07 g/h*g of biomass, respectively, demonstrating that a low pH was more
favorable to solventogenesis in this process, although it negatively affects
biomass growth which does also play a role in the final alcohol titer.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-015-7238-1 
PMID: 26810079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

