
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 27;11(1):e0148016. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148016.
eCollection 2016.

Diversity and Biogeography of Bathyal and Abyssal Seafloor Bacteria.

Bienhold C(1), Zinger L(1), Boetius A(1), Ramette A(1).

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred Wegener Institute
Helmholtz Center for Polar and Marine Research, Bremerhaven, Germany, and Max
Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.

The deep ocean floor covers more than 60% of the Earth's surface, and hosts
diverse bacterial communities with important functions in carbon and nutrient
cycles. The identification of key bacterial members remains a challenge and their
patterns of distribution in seafloor sediment yet remain poorly described.
Previous studies were either regionally restricted or included few deep-sea
sediments, and did not specifically test biogeographic patterns across the vast
oligotrophic bathyal and abyssal seafloor. Here we define the composition of this
deep seafloor microbiome by describing those bacterial operational taxonomic
units (OTU) that are specifically associated with deep-sea surface sediments at
water depths ranging from 1000-5300 m. We show that the microbiome of the surface
seafloor is distinct from the subsurface seafloor. The cosmopolitan bacterial OTU
were affiliated with the clades JTB255 (class Gammaproteobacteria, order
Xanthomonadales) and OM1 (Actinobacteria, order Acidimicrobiales), comprising 21%
and 7% of their respective clades, and about 1% of all sequences in the study.
Overall, few sequence-abundant bacterial types were globally dispersed and
displayed positive range-abundance relationships. Most bacterial populations were
rare and exhibited a high degree of endemism, explaining the substantial
differences in community composition observed over large spatial scales. Despite 
the relative physicochemical uniformity of deep-sea sediments, we identified
indicators of productivity regimes, especially sediment organic matter content,
as factors significantly associated with changes in bacterial community structure
across the globe.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148016 
PMCID: PMC4731391
PMID: 26814838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

