
1. J Environ Qual. 2016 Jan;45(1):331-40. doi: 10.2134/jeq2015.07.0406.

Electron Donor Substances and Iron Oxides Stimulate Anaerobic Dechlorination of
DDT in a Slurry System with Hydragric Acrisols.

Liu CY, Cade-Menun BJ, Xu XH, Fan JL.

The interactive effects between electron donor substances and iron (Fe) oxides
have significant influence on electron transfer and the growth of Fe-reducing
bacteria, which may affect the reductive dechlorination of
1,1,1-trichoro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDT) in soils. To evaluate the
roles of volatile fatty acids and Fe(III) oxide in accelerating the reductive
dechlorination of DDT in Hydragric Acrisols, a batch anaerobic incubation
experiment was conducted in a slurry system with the following seven treatments: 
sterile soil, control (DDT-contaminated soil), lactic acid, propionic acid,
goethite, lactic acid + goethite, and propionic acid + goethite. Results showed
that after 20 d of incubation, DDT residues for these treatments decreased by 34,
65, 77, 81, 77, 90, and 92% of the initial quantities, respectively, with
1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)-ethane as the dominant metabolite. The
application of lactic acid had no significant effect on DDT dechlorination in the
first 8 d while the methanogenesis rate increased quickly but accelerated DDT
dechlorination after Day 8 while the methanogenesis rate decreased and Fe(II)
contents increased. The application of propionic acid enhanced DDT dechlorination
rates throughout the incubation. The amendment by goethite stimulated microbial
reduction of Fe(III) oxides to generate Fe(II), which was an efficient electron
donor, thus accelerating DDT dechlorination significantly in the early incubation
period. A synergetic interaction that accelerated DDT dechlorination, either
between lactic acid and goethite or between propionic acid and goethite, was
obtained. The results will be of great significance to develop efficient in situ 
remediation technology of DDT-contaminated soil.

Copyright Â© by the American Society of Agronomy, Crop Science Society of America,
and Soil Science Society of America, Inc.

DOI: 10.2134/jeq2015.07.0406 
PMID: 26828189  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

