
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 9;7(6):6424-35. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7024.

Residual tumor micro-foci and overwhelming regulatory T lymphocyte infiltration
are the causes of bladder cancer recurrence.

Parodi A(1), Traverso P(1)(2)(3), Kalli F(1), Conteduca G(1), Tardito S(1), Curto
M(1), Grillo F(2)(3), Mastracci L(2)(3), Bernardi C(1), Nasi G(1), Minaglia
F(2)(3), Simonato A(2)(3), Carmignani G(2)(3), Ferrera F(1), Fenoglio D(1)(3)(4),
Filaci G(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Excellence for Biomedical Research, University of Genoa, Genoa,
Italy.
(2)Department of Surgical Sciences and Integrated Diagnostics, University of
Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria San Martino - IST - Istituto Nazionale
per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genoa, Italy.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.

Bladder cancer has an unexplained, high recurrence rate. Causes of recurrence
might include the presence of sporadic tumor micro-foci in the residual
urothelial tissue after surgery associated with an inverted ratio between
intratumoral effector and regulatory T cell subsets. Hence, surgical specimens of
both tumors and autologous, macroscopically/histologically free-of-tumor tissues 
were collected from 28 and 20 patients affected by bladder or renal cancer,
respectively. The frequencies of effector (IFNÎ³+ and IL17+ T cells) and
regulatory (CD4+CD25hiCD127lo and CD8+CD28-CD127loCD39+ Treg) T cell
subpopulations among tumor infiltrating lymphocytes were analyzed by
immunofluorescence, while the gene expression of MAGE-A1 and MAGE-A2
tumor-associated antigens was studied by RT-PCR. The results show that both the T
cell infiltrate and the frequency of MAGE-A1/A2 gene expression were comparable
in tumors and in autologous free-of-tumor tissues in bladder cancer, while the
autologous free-of-tumor renal tissues showed reduced T cell infiltrate and
frequency of MAGE gene expression as compared to the autologous tumors.
Importantly, the intra-tumor T effector/Treg cell ratio was consistently <1 in
bladder cancer patients (n. 7) who relapsed within two years, while it was always
>1 in patients (n. 6) without recurrence (regardless of tumor stage) (P = 0.0006,
Odds ratio = 195). These unprecedented findings clarify the pathogenic mechanism 
of bladder cancer recurrence and suggest that microscopically undetectable
micro-foci of tumor may predispose to recurrence when associated with an inverted
intratumoral T effector/Treg cell ratio.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7024 
PMCID: PMC4872724
PMID: 26824503  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

