
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 9;7(6):6448-59. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7044.

Human melanoma immunotherapy using tumor antigen-specific T cells generated in
humanized mice.

Hu Z(1)(2), Xia J(2), Fan W(1), Wargo J(3), Yang YG(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)The First Bethune Hospital and Institute of Immunology, Jilin University,
Changchun, China.
(2)Columbia Center for Translational Immunology, Department of Medicine, Columbia
University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.

A major factor hindering the exploration of adoptive immunotherapy in preclinical
settings is the limited availability of tumor-reactive human T cells. Here we
developed a humanized mouse model that permits large-scale production of human T 
cells expressing the engineered melanoma antigen MART-1-specific TCR. Humanized
mice, made by transplantation of human fetal thymic tissue and CD34+ cells
virally-transduced with HLA class I-restricted melanoma antigen (MART-1)-specific
TCR gene, showed efficient development of MART-1-TCR+ human T cells with
predominantly CD8+ cells. Importantly, MART-1-TCR+CD8+ T cells developing in
these mice were capable of mounting antigen-specific responses in vivo, as
evidenced by their proliferation, phenotypic conversion and IFN-Î³ production
following MART-1 peptide immunization. Moreover, these MART-1-TCR+CD8+ T cells
mediated efficient killing of melanoma cells in an HLA/antigen-dependent manner. 
Adoptive transfer of in vitro expanded MART-1-TCR+CD8+ T cells induced potent
antitumor responses that were further enhanced by IL-15 treatment in
melanoma-bearing recipients. Finally, a short incubation of MART-1-specific T
cells with rapamycin acted synergistically with IL-15, leading to significantly
improved tumor-free survival in recipients with metastatic melanoma. These data
demonstrate the practicality of using humanized mice to produce potentially
unlimited source of tumor-specific human T cells for experimental and preclinical
exploration of cancer immunotherapy. This study also suggests that pretreatment
of tumor-reactive T cells with rapamycin in combination with IL-15 administration
may be a novel strategy to improve the efficacy of adoptive T cell therapy.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7044 
PMCID: PMC4872726
PMID: 26824989  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

