
1. J Diabetes Res. 2016;2016:7959060. doi: 10.1155/2016/7959060. Epub 2015 Dec 28.

An HLA-Transgenic Mouse Model of Type 1 Diabetes That Incorporates the Reduced
but Not Abolished Thymic Insulin Expression Seen in Patients.

Babad J(1), Ali R(1), Schloss J(1), DiLorenzo TP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA; Department of Medicine, Division of
Endocrinology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune disease characterized by T cell-mediated
destruction of the pancreatic islet beta cells. Multiple genetic loci contribute 
to disease susceptibility in humans, with the most responsible locus being the
major histocompatibility complex (MHC). Certain MHC alleles are predisposing,
including the common HLA-A(∗)02:01. After the MHC, the locus conferring the
strongest susceptibility to T1D is the regulatory region of the insulin gene, and
alleles associated with reduced thymic insulin expression are predisposing. Mice 
express two insulin genes, Ins1 and Ins2. While both are expressed in beta cells,
only Ins2 is expressed in the thymus. We have developed an
HLA-A(∗)02:01-transgenic NOD-based T1D model that is heterozygous for a
functional Ins2 gene. These mice exhibit reduced thymic insulin expression and
accelerated disease in both genders. Immune cell populations are not grossly
altered, and the mice exhibit typical signs of islet autoimmunity, including CD8 
T cell responses to beta cell peptides also targeted in HLA-A(∗)02:01-positive
type 1 diabetes patients. This model should find utility as a tool to uncover the
mechanisms underlying the association between reduced thymic insulin expression
and T1D in humans and aid in preclinical studies to evaluate insulin-targeted
immunotherapies for the disease.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/7959060 
PMCID: PMC4707332
PMID: 26824049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

