
1. Acta Biochim Pol. 2016;63(1):117-125. doi: 10.18388/abp.2015_1074. Epub 2016 Jan 
28.

Cloning, expression, and biochemical characterization of a cold-active
GDSL-esterase of a Pseudomonas sp. S9 isolated from Spitsbergen island soil.

Wicka M(1), Wanarska M(1), Krajewska E(1), Pawlak-Szukalska A(1), Kur J(1),
Cieśliński H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Microbiology, Gdańsk University of
Technology, Gdańsk, Poland.

An estS9 gene, encoding an esterase of the psychrotolerant bacterium Pseudomonas 
sp. S9 was cloned and sequenced. The deduced sequence revealed a protein of 636
amino acid residues with a molecular mass of 69 kDa. Further amino acid sequence 
analysis revealed that the EstS9 enzyme contained a G-D-S-L motif centered at a
catalytic serine, an N-terminal catalytic domain and a C-terminal autotransporter
domain. Two recombinant E. coli strains for production of EstS9N (a two domain
enzyme) and EstS9Δ (a one domain enzyme) proteins were constructed, respectively.
Both recombinant proteins were successfully produced as inclusion bodies and then
purified under denaturing conditions. However, because of the low enzymatic
activity of the refolded EstS9Δ protein, only the EstS9N protein was further
characterized. The purified and refolded EstS9N protein was active towards
short-chain p-nitrophenyl esters (C2-C8), with optimal activity for the butyrate 
(C4) ester. With p-nitrophenyl butyrate as the substrate, the enzyme displayed
optimal activity at 35°C and pH 9.0. Additionally, the EstS9N esterase retained
~90% of its activity from 25-40°C and ~40% of its activity at 10°C. Moreover,
analysis of its kinetic parameters (Km, kcat, kcat/Km) toward p-nitrophenyl
butyrate determined at 15°C and 25°C confirmed that the EstS9 enzyme is
cold-adapted. To the best of our knowledge, EstS9 is the third characterized
cold-active GDSL-esterase and the first one confirmed to contain an
autotransporter domain characteristic for enzymes secreted by the type V
secretion system.

DOI: 10.18388/abp.2015_1074 
PMID: 26824293  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

