
1. Dev Biol. 2016 Mar 15;411(2):266-276. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.12.016. Epub 2016
Jan 27.

BMPs are direct triggers of interdigital programmed cell death.

Kaltcheva MM(1), Anderson MJ(1), Harfe BD(2), Lewandoski M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Vertebrate Development Section, Cancer and Developmental Biology
Lab, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Frederick, MD
21702, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, The Genetics Institute,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
(3)Genetics of Vertebrate Development Section, Cancer and Developmental Biology
Lab, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Frederick, MD
21702, USA. Electronic address: Lewandom@mail.nih.gov.

During vertebrate embryogenesis the interdigital mesenchyme is removed by
programmed cell death (PCD), except in species with webbed limbs. Although bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) have long been known to be players in this process,
it is unclear if they play a direct role in the interdigital mesenchyme or if
they only act indirectly, by affecting fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling. 
A series of genetic studies have shown that BMPs act indirectly by regulating the
withdrawal of FGF activity from the apical ectodermal ridge (AER); this FGF
activity acts as a cell survival factor for the underlying mesenchyme. Other
studies using exogenous factors to inhibit BMP activity in explanted mouse limbs 
suggest that BMPs do not act directly in the mesenchyme. To address the question 
of whether BMPs act directly, we used an interdigit-specific Cre line to
inactivate several genes that encode components of the BMP signaling pathway,
without perturbing the normal downregulation of AER-FGF activity. Of three Bmps
expressed in the interdigital mesenchyme, Bmp7 is necessary for PCD, but Bmp2 and
Bmp4 both have redundant roles, with Bmp2 being the more prominent player.
Removing BMP signals to the interdigit by deleting the receptor gene, Bmpr1a,
causes a loss of PCD and syndactyly, thereby unequivocally proving that BMPs are 
direct triggers of PCD in this tissue. We present a model in which two events
must occur for normal interdigital PCD: the presence of a BMP death trigger and
the absence of an FGF survival activity. We demonstrate that neither event is
required for formation of the interdigital vasculature, which is necessary for
PCD. However, both events converge on the production of reactive oxygen species
that activate PCD.

Copyright Â© 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.12.016 
PMCID: PMC7028150
PMID: 26826495  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

