
1. J Cell Mol Med. 2016 Apr;20(4):758-64. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12784. Epub 2016 Feb 2.

Metformin prevents the effects of Pseudomonas aeruginosa on airway epithelial
tight junctions and restricts hyperglycaemia-induced bacterial growth.

Patkee WR(1), Carr G(2), Baker EH(1), Baines DL(1), Garnett JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Infection and Immunity, St George's, University of London,
London, UK.
(2)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK.

Lung disease and elevation of blood glucose are associated with increased glucose
concentration in the airway surface liquid (ASL). Raised ASL glucose is
associated with increased susceptibility to infection by respiratory pathogens
including Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. We have previously
shown that the anti-diabetes drug, metformin, reduces glucose-induced S. aureus
growth across in vitro airway epithelial cultures. The aim of this study was to
investigate whether metformin has the potential to reduce glucose-induced P.
aeruginosa infections across airway epithelial (Calu-3) cultures by limiting
glucose permeability. We also explored the effect of P. aeruginosa and metformin 
on airway epithelial barrier function by investigating changes in tight junction 
protein abundance. Apical P. aeruginosa growth increased with basolateral glucose
concentration, reduced transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) and increased
paracellular glucose flux. Metformin pre-treatment of the epithelium inhibited
the glucose-induced growth of P. aeruginosa, increased TEER and decreased glucose
flux. Similar effects on bacterial growth and TEER were observed with the AMP
activated protein kinase agonist, 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide. 
Interestingly, metformin was able to prevent the P. aeruginosa-induced reduction 
in the abundance of tight junction proteins, claudin-1 and occludin. Our study
highlights the potential of metformin to reduce hyperglycaemia-induced P.
aeruginosa growth through airway epithelial tight junction modulation, and that
claudin-1 and occludin could be important targets to regulate glucose
permeability across airway epithelia and supress bacterial growth. Further
investigation into the mechanisms regulating metformin and P. aeruginosa action
on airway epithelial tight junctions could yield new therapeutic targets to
prevent/suppress hyperglycaemia-induced respiratory infections, avoiding the use 
of antibiotics.

Â© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.12784 
PMCID: PMC4864950
PMID: 26837005  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

