
1. Bioessays. 2016 Apr;38(4):325-32. doi: 10.1002/bies.201500187. Epub 2016 Feb 9.

Formula G1: Cell cycle in the driver's seat of stem cell fate determination.

Julian LM(1)(2), Carpenedo RL(1)(2), Rothberg JL(1)(2)(3), Stanford
WL(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Sprott Centre for Stem Cell Research, Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa
Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(2)Faculty of Graduate and Postdoctoral Studies, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(5)Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Cell cycle dynamics has emerged as a key regulator of stem cell fate decisions.
In particular, differentiation decisions are associated with the G1 phase, and
recent evidence suggests that self-renewal is actively regulated outside of G1.
The mechanisms underlying these phenomena are largely unknown, but direct control
of gene regulatory programs by the cell cycle machinery is heavily implicated. A 
recent study sheds important mechanistic insight by demonstrating that in human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) the Cyclin-dependent kinase CDK2 controls a
wide-spread epigenetic program that drives transcription at
differentiation-related gene promoters specifically in G1. Here, we discuss this 
finding and explore whether similar mechanisms are likely to function in
multipotent stem cells. The implications of this discovery toward our
understanding of stem cell-related disease are discussed, and we postulate novel 
mechanisms that position the cell cycle as a regulator of cell fate gene networks
at epigenetic, transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels.

Â© 2016 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bies.201500187 
PMID: 26857166  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

