
1. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 9;11(2):e0148772. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148772.
eCollection 2016.

Can MLVA Differentiate among Endemic-Like MRSA Isolates with Identical Spa-Type
in a Low-Prevalence Region?

Blomfeldt A(1), Hasan AA(2), Aamot HV(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, Akershus University
Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, Oslo and Akershus University College of Applied
Sciences, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Clinical Molecular Biology (EpiGen), Division of Medicine,
Akershus University Hospital and University of Oslo, Lørenskog, Norway.

The prevalence of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in Norway is
low, but an endemic-like MRSA clone with Staphylococcal protein A (spa)-type t304
has been established especially in nursing homes in the Oslo region causing
several large outbreaks. The challenge was that spa-typing and the gold standard 
Pulsed-Field Gel Electrophoresis (PFGE) were inadequate in discriminating
isolates in outbreak investigations. Additional higher resolution genotyping
methods were needed. The aims of this study were a) to evaluate whether
Multiple-Locus Variable number of tandem repeat Analysis (MLVA) could
differentiate within the PFGE clusters between epidemiologically related and
unrelated endemic-like ST8-MRSA-IV-t304-PVL-neg (MRSA-t304) isolates and b)
investigate the evolution of the endemic-like MRSA-t304 clone over a 15-year time
period. All MRSA-t304 isolates detected in the region from 1998 through April
2013 were included. In total, 194 of 197 isolates were available for PFGE and
MLVA analyses. PFGE results on isolates from 1998-2010 have been published
previously. Two PFGE clusters subdivided into eight MLVA types were detected. One
major outbreak clone (PFGE cluster C2/ MLVA type MT5045) appeared from 2004 to
2011 causing long-lasting and large outbreaks in seven nursing homes and one
hospital. Five new MLVA types (N = 9 isolates) differing in only one VNTR
compared to the outbreak clone C2/MT5045 were detected, but only one (C2/MT5044) 
was seen after 2011. We suggest that MLVA can replace PFGE analysis, but MLVA may
not be the optimal method in this setting as it did not discriminate between all 
epidemiologically unrelated isolates. The results may indicate that all eight
outbreaks in different locations within the PFGE C2 cluster may be branches of
one large regional outbreak. The major outbreak strain C2/MT5045 may now,
however, be under control, extinguished or has moved geographically.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148772 
PMCID: PMC4747572
PMID: 26859765  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

