
1. Oncol Lett. 2016 Jan;11(1):461-465. Epub 2015 Oct 29.

Costimulation with anti-cluster of differentiation 3 and anti-cluster of
differentiation 28 reduces the activity of mucin 1-stimulated human mononuclear
cells.

Wright SE(1), Rewers-Felkins KA(2), Quinlin I(2), Zohra F(2), Ahmed J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Women's Health Research Institute, Texas Tech
University Health Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA; Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA; Department of Biomedical Sciences,
School of Pharmacy, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX
79106, USA; Harrington Cancer Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Women's Health Research Institute, Texas Tech
University Health Sciences Center, Amarillo, TX 79106, USA.

Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte activation and extension of the cell life span is
necessary in order to enable immunotherapy to perform effectively against cancer.
In the present study, mucin 1 (MUC1)-stimulated human mononuclear cells (M1SHMCs)
were costimulated with bead-attached monoclonal antibodies specific for cluster
of differentiation (CD)3 and CD28 receptors. The study was undertaken to
determine whether costimulation was capable of enhancing the killing of cancer
cells in vitro and of protecting non-obese diabetic severe combined
immunodeficient mice from tumor development. Lysis of MCF-7 tumor cells by
M1SHMCs was reduced following costimulation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28.
Furthermore, costimulation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 eliminated the protective 
effects of M1SHMCs on MCF-7 breast cancer cell growth in the non-obese diabetic
severe combined immunodeficient mice. The present study suggested that
costimulation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 is not advisable following antigen
activation of lymphocytes under the conditions used here. Using a lower
anti-CD3/CD28 bead to T-cell ratio may prevent immune suppression, however,
further studies are required to support this hypothesis.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2015.3840 
PMCID: PMC4732541
PMID: 26870234 

