
1. Front Immunol. 2016 Feb 4;7:24. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00024. eCollection 2016.

Cell Type-Specific Regulation of Immunological Synapse Dynamics by B7 Ligand
Recognition.

Brzostek J(1), Gascoigne NR(1), Rybakin V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine and
Immunology Programme, National University of Singapore , Singapore , Singapore.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine and
Immunology Programme, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore;
Laboratory of Immunobiology, Rega Institute for Medical Research, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.

B7 proteins CD80 (B7-1) and CD86 (B7-2) are expressed on most antigen-presenting 
cells and provide critical co-stimulatory or inhibitory input to T cells via
their T-cell-expressed receptors: CD28 and CTLA-4. CD28 is expressed on effector 
T cells and regulatory T cells (Tregs), and CD28-dependent signals are required
for optimum activation of effector T cell functions. CD28 ligation on effector T 
cells leads to formation of distinct molecular patterns and induction of
cytoskeletal rearrangements at the immunological synapse (IS). CD28 plays a
critical role in recruitment of protein kinase C (PKC)-θ to the effector T cell
IS. CTLA-4 is constitutively expressed on the surface of Tregs, but it is
expressed on effector T cells only after activation. As CTLA-4 binds to B7
proteins with significantly higher affinity than CD28, B7 ligand recognition by
cells expressing both receptors leads to displacement of CD28 and PKC-θ from the 
IS. In Tregs, B7 ligand recognition leads to recruitment of CTLA-4 and PKC-η to
the IS. CTLA-4 plays a role in regulation of T effector and Treg IS stability and
cell motility. Due to their important roles in regulating T-cell-mediated
responses, B7 receptors are emerging as important drug targets in oncology. In
this review, we present an integrated summary of current knowledge about the role
of B7 family receptor-ligand interactions in the regulation of spatial and
temporal IS dynamics in effector and Tregs.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00024 
PMCID: PMC4740375
PMID: 26870040 

