
1. Vaccine. 2016 Mar 18;34(13):1504-1514. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.02.021. Epub
2016 Feb 13.

Protective role of Th17 cells in pulmonary infection.

Rathore JS(1), Wang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine, Department of
Microbiology, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Gautam Buddha University, School of
Biotechnology, Greater Noida, Yamuna Expressway, Uttar Pradesh, India. Electronic
address: jitendra@gbu.ac.in.
(2)University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine, Department of
Microbiology, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Th17 cells are characterized as preferential producer of interleukins including
IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-21 and IL-22. Corresponding receptors of these cytokines are
expressed on number of cell types found in the mucosa, including epithelial cells
and fibroblasts which constitute the prime targets of the Th17-associated
cytokines. Binding of IL-17 family members to their corresponding receptors lead 
to modulation of antimicrobial functions of target cells including alveolar
epithelial cells. Stimulated alveolar epithelial cells produce antimicrobial
peptides and are involved in granulepoesis, neutrophil recruitment and tissue
repair. Mucosal immunity mediated by Th17 cells is protective against numerous
pulmonary pathogens including extracellular bacterial and fungal pathogens. This 
review focuses on the protective role of Th17 cells during pulmonary infection,
highlighting subset differentiation, effector cytokines production, followed by
study of the binding of these cytokines to their corresponding receptors, the
subsequent signaling pathway they engender and their effector role in host
defense.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.02.021 
PMID: 26878294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

