
1. Innate Immun. 2016 Apr;22(3):238-44. doi: 10.1177/1753425916632305. Epub 2016 Feb
16.

Src kinases central to T-cell receptor signaling regulate TLR-activated innate
immune responses from human T cells.

Sharma N(1), Akhade AS(1), Qadri A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hybridoma Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg,
New Delhi 110067, India.
(2)Hybridoma Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg,
New Delhi 110067, India ayub@nii.ac.in.

TLRs have a fundamental role in immunity. We have recently reported that
stimulation of TLR2 and TLR5 in freshly isolated and activated human T cells with
microbial ligands without concomitant activation through the TCR brings about
secretion of neutrophil chemoattractant, CXCL8, and effector cytokine, IFN-γ,
respectively. However, the mechanism of TLR signaling in T cells has not been
worked out. Here, we show that the Src family kinases, p56(lck)(Lck) and
p59(fyn)(Fyn), which are essential for activation of T cells through the TCR, are
also critical for signal transduction through TLRs in human T cells. The
secretion of CXCL8 following stimulation of the model human T cell line, Jurkat, 
with the TLR5 ligand, flagellin, was reduced in presence of the Src-kinase
inhibitor, PP2 and specific inhibitors of Lck and Fyn. These inhibitors
suppressed generation of activated JNK and p38, which were both required for
TLR-induced CXCL8 production. The Lck-deficient derivative of Jurkat, JCam1.6,
responded poorly to TLR2, TLR5 and TLR7 agonists, and did not generate active
signaling intermediates. Lck and Fyn inhibitors also reduced TLR5-induced IFN-γ
secretion from the activated T cell phenotype-representing T cell line, HuT78,
without modulating JNK and p38 activation. These results reveal that TCR and TLRs
share key proximal signaling regulators in T cells.

© The Author(s) 2016.

DOI: 10.1177/1753425916632305 
PMID: 26888964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

