
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 18;6:21332. doi: 10.1038/srep21332.

Biodegradation of DDT by Stenotrophomonas sp. DDT-1: Characterization and genome 
functional analysis.

Pan X(1), Lin D(1), Zheng Y(1), Zhang Q(1), Yin Y(1), Cai L(2), Fang H(1), Yu
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pesticide and Environmental Toxicology, College of Agriculture
&Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310029, China.
(2)Division of Life Science, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong, China.

A novel bacterium capable of utilizing
1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDT) as the sole carbon and energy
source was isolated from a contaminated soil which was identified as
Stenotrophomonas sp. DDT-1 based on morphological characteristics, BIOLOG GN2
microplate profile, and 16S rDNA phylogeny. Genome sequencing and functional
annotation of the isolate DDT-1 showed a 4,514,569 bp genome size, 66.92% GC
content, 4,033 protein-coding genes, and 76 RNA genes including 8 rRNA genes.
Totally, 2,807 protein-coding genes were assigned to Clusters of Orthologous
Groups (COGs), and 1,601 protein-coding genes were mapped to Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway. The degradation half-lives of DDT increased 
with substrate concentration from 0.1 to 10.0 mg/l, whereas decreased with
temperature from 15 °C to 35 °C. Neutral condition was the most favorable for DDT
biodegradation. Based on genome annotation of DDT degradation genes and the
metabolites detected by GC-MS, a mineralization pathway was proposed for DDT
biodegradation in which it was orderly converted into DDE/DDD, DDMU, DDOH, and
DDA via dechlorination, hydroxylation, and carboxylation, and ultimately
mineralized to carbon dioxide. The results indicate that the isolate DDT-1 is a
promising bacterial resource for the removal or detoxification of DDT residues in
the environment.

DOI: 10.1038/srep21332 
PMCID: PMC4758049
PMID: 26888254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

