
1. Endocrinology. 2016 Apr;157(4):1630-43. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1851. Epub 2016 Feb 
16.

Obesity-Dependent Increases in Oocyte mRNAs Are Associated With Increases in
Proinflammatory Signaling and Gut Microbial Abundance of Lachnospiraceae in
Female Mice.

Xie F(1), Anderson CL(1), Timme KR(1), Kurz SG(1), Fernando SC(1), Wood JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science (F.X., K.R.T., S.G.K., S.C.F., J.R.W.),
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68583-0908; School of
Biological Sciences (C.L.A., S.C.F.), University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln,
Nebraska 68588-0118; and Food Science and Technology Department (S.C.F.),
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68583-0919.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2016 May;157(5):1725-7.

RNAs stored in the metaphase II-arrested oocyte play important roles in
successful embryonic development. Their abundance is defined by transcriptional
activity during oocyte growth and selective degradation of transcripts during
LH-induced oocyte maturation. Our previous studies demonstrated that mRNA
abundance is increased in mature ovulated oocytes collected from obese humans and
mice and therefore may contribute to reduced oocyte developmental competence
associated with metabolic dysfunction. In the current study mouse models of
diet-induced obesity were used to determine whether obesity-dependent increases
in proinflammatory signaling regulate ovarian abundance of oocyte-specific mRNAs.
The abundance of oocyte-specific Bnc1, Dppa3, and Pou5f1 mRNAs as well as markers
of proinflammatory signaling were significantly increased in ovaries of obese
compared with lean mice which were depleted of fully grown preovulatory
follicles. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation analyses also demonstrated increased
association of phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 
with the Pou5f1 promoter in ovaries of obese mice suggesting that proinflammatory
signaling regulates transcription of this gene in the oocyte. The cecum microbial
content of lean and obese female mice was subsequently examined to identify
potential relationships between microbial composition and proinflammatory
signaling in the ovary. Multivariate Association with Linear Models identified
significant positive correlations between cecum abundance of the bacterial family
Lachnospiraceae and ovarian abundance of Tnfa as well as Dppa3, Bnc1, and Pou5f1 
mRNAs. Together, these data suggest that diet-induced changes in gut microbial
composition may be contributing to ovarian inflammation which in turn alters
ovarian gene expression and ultimately contributes to obesity-dependent reduction
in oocyte quality and development of infertility in obese patients.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2015-1851 
PMCID: PMC4816731
PMID: 26881311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

