
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2016 Apr;48(4):779-84. doi: 10.1007/s11250-016-1026-5.
Epub 2016 Feb 22.

Rumen metabolism of swamp buffaloes fed rice straw supplemented with cassava hay 
and urea.

Ampapon T(1), Wanapat M(2), Kang S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
40002, Thailand.
(2)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
40002, Thailand. metha@kku.ac.th.
(3)Agricultural Unit, Department of Education, National Institute of Education,
Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

The objectives of this experiment were to investigate effects of cassava hay (CH)
and urea (U) supplementation on feed intake, digestibility, rumen fermentation,
and microbial protein synthesis of swamp buffaloes fed on rice straw. Four
rumen-fistulated swamp buffaloes, 365 ± 15.0 kg, were randomly assigned according
to a 4 × 4 Latin square design to receive four dietary treatments: T1 = CH 400
g/head/day + U 0 g/head/day, T2 = CH + U 30 g/head/day, T3 = CH + U 60
g/head/day, and T4 = CH + U 90 g/head/day, respectively. Results revealed that
feed intake was not affected while nutrient digestibilities were increased (P <
0.05) with increasing U level supplementation especially at 90 g/head/day.
Ruminal pH and temperature were not altered by urea supplementation, whereas
ammonia nitrogen (NH3-N) and blood urea nitrogen were increased with urea
supplement (P < 0.05). In addition, total volatile fatty acid and butyric acid
were similar among treatments, while propionic acid (C3) was increased by level
of urea supplement (P < 0.05), but acetic acid (C2) and C2/C3 ratio were
significantly decreased (P < 0.05). On the other hand, protozoal population and
methane production were decreased by CH and urea supplement, while bacterial
population particularly those of proteolytic, cellulolytic, and amylolytic
bacteria and efficiency of microbial nitrogen synthesis were linearly increased
(P < 0.05). Based on this experiment, it suggested that supplementation of urea
and cassava hay for buffaloes fed rice straw improved rumen ecology and increased
fermentation end products and microbial protein synthesis while reducing
protozoal populations and methane production. Urea supplements of 60-90
g/head/day when fed with cassava hay are recommended for swamp buffaloes
consuming rice straw.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-016-1026-5 
PMID: 26898691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

