
1. Mutagenesis. 2016 Jul;31(4):443-51. doi: 10.1093/mutage/gew007. Epub 2016 Feb 19.

Comparative investigation of the mutagenicity of propenylic and allylic asarone
isomers in the Ames fluctuation assay.

Berg K(1), Bischoff R(1), Stegmüller S(1), Cartus A(1), Schrenk D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Food Chemistry and Toxicology, University of Kaiserslautern,
Erwin-Schroedinger-Strasse 52, D-67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany.
(2)Food Chemistry and Toxicology, University of Kaiserslautern,
Erwin-Schroedinger-Strasse 52, D-67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany
schrenk@rhrk.uni-kl.de.

α-, β- and γ-asarone are naturally occurring phenylpropenes that occur in
different plant families, mainly in Aristolochiaceae, Acoraceae and Lauraceae.
Plants containing asarones are used as flavouring ingredients in alcoholic
beverages (bitters), traditional phytomedicines and the rhizome of e.g. Acorus
calamus is used to prepare tea. Although α- and β-asarone show a potential in the
treatment of several diseases, previous studies have shown carcinogenicity in
rodents (duodenum, liver). However, the mechanism of action remained unclear.
Studies on the mutagenicity of propenylic α- and β-asarone are inconsistent and
data on carcinogenicity and genotoxicity of allylic γ-asarone are lacking
completely. Thus, the present study determined the mutagenicity of the three
asarone isomers using the Ames fluctuation assay with and without exogenous
metabolic activation (S9 mix) in the standard Salmonella typhimurium strains TA98
and TA100. A concentration dependent increase in mutagenicity could be verified
for α- and β-asarone in strain TA100 in the presence of rat liver homogenate. The
side-chain epoxides of α- and β-asarone, major metabolites formed in liver
microsomes, caused mutations in TA100, supporting the hypothesis that epoxidation
of the side chain plays a key role in mutagenicity of the propenylic
alkenylbenzenes. The allylic γ-asarone, not undergoing detectable side-chain
epoxidation in liver microsomes, was supposed to be activated via side-chain
hydroxylation and further sulphonation, a typical pathway for other allylic
alkenylbenzenes like estragole or methyleugenol. However, neither y-asarone nor
1'-OH-γ-asarone showed any mutagenic effect even in the human SULT-expressing
Salmonella strains (TA100-hSULT1A1 and TA100-hSULT1C2), while 1'-OH-methyleugenol
used as a positive control was mutagenic under these conditions. These results
indicate that the propenylic asarones are genotoxic via metabolic formation of
side-chain epoxides while the side-chain hydroxylation/sulphonation pathway is
either not operative or does not lead to mutagenicity with the allylic γ-asarone.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the UK
Environmental Mutagen Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/mutage/gew007 
PMID: 26895844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

