
1. J Innate Immun. 2016;8(3):258-68. doi: 10.1159/000443401. Epub 2016 Feb 20.

Granzymes A and B Regulate the Local Inflammatory Response during Klebsiella
pneumoniae Pneumonia.

García-Laorden MI(1), Stroo I, Blok DC, Florquin S, Medema JP, de Vos AF, van der
Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Klebsiella pneumoniae is a common cause of hospital-acquired pneumonia. Granzymes
(gzms), mainly found in cytotoxic lymphocytes, have been implicated as mediators 
of infection and inflammation. We here sought to investigate the role of gzmA and
gzmB in the host response to K. pneumoniae-induced airway infection and sepsis.
For this purpose, pneumonia was induced in wild-type (WT) and gzmA-deficient
(gzmA-/-), gzmB-/- and gzmAxB-/- mice by intranasal infection with K. pneumoniae.
In WT mice, gzmA and gzmB were mainly expressed by natural killer cells.
Pneumonia was associated with reduced intracellular gzmA and increased
intracellular gzmB levels. Gzm deficiency had little impact on antibacterial
defence: gzmA-/- and gzmAxB-/- mice transiently showed modestly higher bacterial 
loads in the lungs but not in distant organs. GzmB-/- and, to a larger extent,
gzmAxB-/- mice displayed transiently increased lung inflammation, reflected in
the semi-quantitative histology scores and levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines
and chemokines. Most differences between gzm-deficient and WT mice had
disappeared during late-stage pneumonia. Gzm deficiency did not impact on distant
organ injury or survival. These results suggest that gzmA and gzmB partly
regulate local inflammation during early pneumonia but eventually play an
insignificant role during pneumosepsis by the common human pathogen K.
pneumoniae.

© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000443401 
PMCID: PMC6738821
PMID: 26894590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

