
1. J Cell Sci. 2016 Mar 1;129(5):881-91. doi: 10.1242/jcs.163758. Epub 2016 Feb 15.

Precision autophagy directed by receptor regulators - emerging examples within
the TRIM family.

Kimura T(1), Mandell M(2), Deretic V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New Mexico
Health Sciences Center, 915 Camino de Salud, NE, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA
tkimura@salud.unm.edu vderetic@salud.unm.edu.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New Mexico
Health Sciences Center, 915 Camino de Salud, NE, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.

Selective autophagy entails cooperation between target recognition and assembly
of the autophagic apparatus. Target recognition is conducted by receptors that
often recognize tags, such as ubiquitin and galectins, although examples of
selective autophagy independent of these tags are emerging. It is less known how 
receptors cooperate with the upstream autophagic regulators, beyond the
well-characterized association of receptors with Atg8 or its homologs, such as
LC3B (encoded by MAP1LC3B), on autophagic membranes. The molecular details of the
emerging role in autophagy of the family of proteins called TRIMs shed light on
the coordination between cargo recognition and the assembly and activation of the
principal autophagy regulators. In their autophagy roles, TRIMs act both as
receptors and as platforms ('receptor regulators') for the assembly of the core
autophagy regulators, such as ULK1 and Beclin 1 in their activated state. As
autophagic receptors, TRIMs can directly recognize endogenous or exogenous
targets, obviating a need for intermediary autophagic tags, such as ubiquitin and
galectins. The receptor and regulatory features embodied within the same entity
allow TRIMs to govern cargo degradation in a highly exact process termed
'precision autophagy'.

Â© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.163758 
PMCID: PMC6518167
PMID: 26906420  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

