
1. Protein Sci. 2016 May;25(5):987-98. doi: 10.1002/pro.2906. Epub 2016 Mar 11.

The extended structure of the periplasmic region of CdsD, a structural protein of
the type III secretion system of Chlamydia trachomatis.

Meriläinen G(1), Koski MK(1), Wierenga RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter Oulu and Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, 90014
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

The type III secretion system (T3SS) is required for the virulence of many
gram-negative bacterial human pathogens. It is composed of several structural
proteins, forming the secretion needle and its basis, the basal body. In
Chlamydia spp., the T3SS inner membrane ring (IM-ring) of the basal body is
formed by the periplasmic part of CdsD (outer ring) and CdsJ (inner ring). Here
we describe the crystal structure of the C-terminal, periplasmic part of CdsD,
not including the last 60 residues. Two crystal forms were obtained, grown in
three different crystallization conditions. In both crystal forms there is one
molecule per asymmetric unit adopting a similar extended structure. The
structures consist of three periplasmic domains (PDs) of similar αββαβ topology
as seen also in the structures of the homologous PrgH (Salmonella typhimurium)
and YscD (Yersinia enterocolitica). Only in the C2 crystal form, there is a
C-terminal additional helix after the PD3 domain. The relative orientation of the
three subsequent CdsD PD domains with respect to each other is more extended than
in PrgH but less extended than in YscD. Small-angle X-ray scattering data show
that also in solution this CdsD construct adopts the same elongated shape. In
both crystal forms the CdsD molecules are packed in a parallel fashion, using
translational crystallographic symmetry. The most extensive crystal contacts are 
preserved in both crystal forms, suggesting a possible mode of assembly of the
CdsD periplasmic part into a 24-mer complex forming the outer ring of the IM-ring
of the T3SS.

© 2016 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.2906 
PMCID: PMC4838655
PMID: 26914207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

