
1. Cancer Immunol Res. 2016 May;4(5):452-62. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-15-0176.
Epub 2016 Feb 26.

Systemic Immunotherapy of Non-Muscle Invasive Mouse Bladder Cancer with Avelumab,
an Anti-PD-L1 Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor.

Vandeveer AJ(1), Fallon JK(1), Tighe R(2), Sabzevari H(2), Schlom J(3), Greiner
JW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.
(2)EMD Serono Research and Development Institute, Billerica, Massachusetts.
(3)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland. js141c@nih.gov.

Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) is the standard of care for intravesical therapy
for carcinoma in situ and non-muscle invasive, nonmetastatic human urothelial
carcinoma. Although the responsiveness to this immunotherapeutic is believed to
be linked with (i) a high number of somatic mutations and (ii) a large number of 
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, recent findings of the roles that inhibitory
immune receptors and their ligands play in tumor evasion may provide insights
into the limitations of the effectiveness of BCG and offer new targets for
immune-based therapy. In this study, an aggressive, bioluminescent orthotopic
bladder cancer model, MB49 tumor cells transfected with luciferase (MB49(luc)),
was used to study the antitumor effects of avelumab, an antibody to PD-L1.
MB49(luc) murine tumor cells form multifocal tumors on the mucosal wall of the
bladder reminiscent of non-muscle invasive, nonmetastatic urothelial carcinomas. 
MB49(luc) bladder tumors are highly positive for the expression of PD-L1, and
avelumab administration induced significant (P < 0.05) antitumor effects. These
antitumor effects were more dependent on the presence of CD4 than CD8 T cells, as
determined by in vivo immune cell depletions. The findings suggest that in this
bladder tumor model, interruption of the immune-suppressive PD-1/PD-L1 complex
releases a local adaptive immune response that, in turn, reduces tumor growth.
This bladder tumor model can be used to further identify host antitumor immune
mechanisms and evaluate combinations of immune-based therapies for carcinoma in
situ and non-muscle invasive, nonmetastatic urothelial carcinoma, to provide the 
rationale for subsequent clinical studies. Cancer Immunol Res; 4(5); 452-62.
©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-15-0176 
PMCID: PMC4881865
PMID: 26921031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

