
1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Apr 29;291(18):9581-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.709261. Epub 2016
Feb 29.

The METTL20 Homologue from Agrobacterium tumefaciens Is a Dual Specificity
Protein-lysine Methyltransferase That Targets Ribosomal Protein L7/L12 and the β 
Subunit of Electron Transfer Flavoprotein (ETFβ).

Małecki J(1), Dahl HA(1), Moen A(1), Davydova E(1), Falnes PØ(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biosciences, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural
Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo 0316, Norway.
(2)From the Department of Biosciences, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural
Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo 0316, Norway pal.falnes@ibv.uio.no.

Human METTL20 is a mitochondrial, lysine-specific methyltransferase that
methylates the β-subunit of electron transfer flavoprotein (ETFβ). Interestingly,
putative METTL20 orthologues are found in a subset of α-proteobacteria, including
Agrobacterium tumefaciens Using an activity-based approach, we identified in
bacterial extracts two substrates of recombinant METTL20 from A. tumefaciens
(AtMETTL20), namely ETFβ and the ribosomal protein RpL7/L12. We show that
AtMETTL20, analogous to the human enzyme, methylates ETFβ on Lys-193 and Lys-196 
both in vitro and in vivo ETF plays a key role in mediating electron transfer
from various dehydrogenases, and we found that its electron transferring ability 
was diminished by AtMETTL20-mediated methylation of ETFβ. Somewhat surprisingly, 
AtMETTL20 also catalyzed monomethylation of RpL7/L12 on Lys-86, a common
modification also found in many bacteria that lack METTL20. Thus, we here
identify AtMETTL20 as the first enzyme catalyzing RpL7/L12 methylation. In
summary, here we have identified and characterized a novel bacterial
lysine-specific methyltransferase with unprecedented dual substrate specificity
within the seven β-strand class of lysine-specific methyltransferases, as it
targets two apparently unrelated substrates, ETFβ and RpL7/L12. Moreover, the
present work establishes METTL20-mediated methylation of ETFβ as the first lysine
methylation event occurring in both bacteria and humans.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.709261 
PMCID: PMC4850296
PMID: 26929405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

