
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Mar 15;113(11):2851-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1519846113. Epub 2016 Feb 29.

Structural basis for DNA cleavage by the potent antiproliferative agent
(-)-lomaiviticin A.

Woo CM(1), Li Z(1), Paulson EK(1), Herzon SB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520;
(2)Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520; Department of
Pharmacology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520 seth.herzon@yale.edu.

(-)-Lomaiviticin A (1) is a complex antiproliferative metabolite that inhibits
the growth of many cultured cancer cell lines at low nanomolar-picomolar
concentrations. (-)-Lomaiviticin A (1) possesses a C2-symmetric structure that
contains two unusual diazotetrahydrobenzo[b]fluorene (diazofluorene) functional
groups. Nucleophilic activation of each diazofluorene within 1 produces vinyl
radical intermediates that affect hydrogen atom abstraction from DNA, leading to 
the formation of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Certain DNA DSB
repair-deficient cell lines are sensitized toward 1, and 1 is under evaluation in
preclinical models of these tumor types. However, the mode of binding of 1 to DNA
had not been determined. Here we elucidate the structure of a 1:1 complex between
1 and the duplex d(GCTATAGC)2 by NMR spectroscopy and computational modeling.
Unexpectedly, we show that both diazofluorene residues of 1 penetrate the duplex.
This binding disrupts base pairing leading to ejection of the central AT bases,
while placing the proreactive centers of 1 in close proximity to each strand. DNA
binding may also enhance the reactivity of 1 toward nucleophilic activation
through steric compression and conformational restriction (an example of
shape-dependent catalysis). This study provides a structural basis for the DNA
cleavage activity of 1, will guide the design of synthetic DNA-activated DNA
cleavage agents, and underscores the utility of natural products to reveal novel 
modes of small molecule-DNA association.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1519846113 
PMCID: PMC4801295
PMID: 26929332  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

