
1. Peptides. 2016 Apr;78:99-108. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2016.01.006. Epub 2016 Feb 
27.

Single amino acid insertions in extracellular loop 2 of Bombyx mori ABCC2 disrupt
its receptor function for Bacillus thuringiensis Cry1Ab and Cry1Ac but not Cry1Aa
toxins.

Tanaka S(1), Miyamoto K(2), Noda H(2), Endo H(1), Kikuta S(1), Sato R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bio-Applications and Systems Engineering, Tokyo University 
of Agriculture and Technology, Koganei, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Bio-Applications and Systems Engineering, Tokyo University 
of Agriculture and Technology, Koganei, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address:
ryoichi@cc.tuat.ac.jp.

In a previous report, seven Cry1Ab-resistant strains were identified in the
silkworm, Bombyx mori; these strains were shown to have a tyrosine insertion at
position 234 in extracellular loop 2 of the ABC transporter C2 (BmABCC2). This
insertion was confirmed to destroy the receptor function of BmABCC2 and confer
the strains resistance against Cry1Ab and Cry1Ac. However, these strains were
susceptible to Cry1Aa. In this report, we examined the mechanisms of the loss of 
receptor function of the transporter by expressing mutations in Sf9 cells. After 
replacement of one or two of the five amino acid residues in loop 2 of the
susceptible BmABCC2 gene [BmABCC2_S] with alanine, cells still showed
susceptibility, retaining the receptor function. Five mutants with single amino
acid insertions at position 234 in BmABCC2 were also generated, resulting in loop
2 having six amino acids, which corresponds to replacing the tyrosine insertion
in the resistant BmABCC2 gene [BmABCC2_R(+(234)Y)] with another amino acid. All
five mutants exhibited loss of function against Cry1Ab and Cry1Ac. These results 
suggest that the amino acid sequence in loop 2 is less important than the loop
size (five vs. six amino acids) or loop structure for Cry1Ab and Cry1Ac activity.
Several domain-swapped mutant toxins were then generated among Cry1Aa, Cry1Ab,
and Cry1Ac, which are composed of three domains. Swapped mutants containing
domain II of Cry1Ab or Cry1Ac did not kill Sf9 cells expressing
BmABCC2_R(+(234)Y), suggesting that domain II of the Cry toxin is related to the 
interaction with the receptor function of BmABCC2. This also suggests that
different reactions against Bt-toxins in some B. mori strains, that is, Cry1Ab
resistance or Cry1Aa susceptibility, are attributable to structural differences
in domain II of Cry1A toxins.

Copyright Â© 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2016.01.006 
PMID: 26928903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

