
1. Infect Immun. 2016 Apr 22;84(5):1446-1456. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01311-15. Print 2016 
May.

FAD-I, a Fusobacterium nucleatum Cell Wall-Associated Diacylated Lipoprotein That
Mediates Human Beta Defensin 2 Induction through Toll-Like Receptor-1/2 (TLR-1/2)
and TLR-2/6.

Bhattacharyya S(1), Ghosh SK(1), Shokeen B(2), Eapan B(1), Lux R(2), Kiselar
J(3), Nithianantham S(1), Young A(4), Pandiyan P(1), McCormick TS(1)(4), Weinberg
A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Case School of Dental Medicine, Cleveland,
Ohio, USA.
(2)School of Dentistry, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California, USA.
(3)Center for Proteomics, Case School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Case School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Science, Case School of Dental Medicine, Cleveland,
Ohio, USA aaron.weinberg@case.edu.

We previously identified a cell wall-associated protein from Fusobacterium
nucleatum, a Gram-negative bacterium of the oral cavity, that induces human beta 
defensin 2 (hBD-2) in primary human oral epithelial cells (HOECs) and designated 
it FAD-I (Fusobacterium-associated defensin inducer). Here, we report
differential induction of hBD-2 by different strains of F. nucleatum; ATCC 25586 
and ATCC 23726 induce significantly more hBD-2 mRNA than ATCC 10953. Heterologous
expression of plasmid-borne fadI from the highly hBD-2-inducing strains in a
ΔfadI mutant of ATCC 10953 resulted in hBD-2 induction to levels comparable to
those of the highly inducing strains, indicating that FAD-I is the principal F.
nucleatum agent for hBD-2 induction in HOECs. Moreover, anti-FAD-I antibodies
blocked F. nucleatum induction of hBD-2 by more than 80%. Recombinant FAD-I
(rFAD-I) expressed in Escherichia coli triggered levels of hBD-2 transcription
and peptide release in HOECs similar to those of native FAD-I (nFAD-I) isolated
from F. nucleatum ATCC 25586. Tandem mass spectrometry revealed a diacylglycerol 
modification at the cysteine residue in position 16 for both nFAD-I and rFAD-I.
Cysteine-to-alanine substitution abrogated FAD-I's ability to induce hBD-2.
Finally, FAD-I activation of hBD-2 expression was mediated via both Toll-like
receptor-1/2 (TLR-1/2) and TLR-2/6 heterodimerization. Microbial molecules like
FAD-I may be utilized in novel therapeutic ways to bolster the host innate immune
response at mucosal surfaces.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01311-15 
PMCID: PMC4862701
PMID: 26930710  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

