
1. Microbiol Res. 2016 Apr;185:36-44. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2016.01.005. Epub 2016
Jan 28.

Biosynthesis of 3″-demethyl-gentamicin C components by genN disruption strain of 
Micromonospora echinospora and test their antimicrobial activities in vitro.

Ni X(1), Zong T(1), Zhang H(1), Gu Y(1), Huang M(1), Tian W(2), Xia H(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biopharmaceutics, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China.
(2)School of Life Science and Biopharmaceutics, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China. Electronic address: tianweiww@sina.com.
(3)School of Life Science and Biopharmaceutics, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China. Electronic address: xiahz612@sina.com.

Gentamicin consists primarily of four components, which have different patterns
of methylation at C-6' position. The methyl groups have a significant impact on
gentamicin antimicrobial activity. Sequence analysis predicted that GenN was a
methyltransferase in the gentamicin biosynthetic pathway. To study the function
of genN, it was disrupted in Micromonospora echinospora. The genN disruption
strains produced 3″-N-demethyl-gentamicin C complex instead of the gentamicin C
complex. In this study, 3″-N-demethyl gentamicin C1a was purified from the broth 
of disruption strain, and its structure was elucidated using MS and NMR. Besides 
3″-N-demethyl products corresponding to gentamicin C1a, C2, and C2a, two
3″-N-demethyl products corresponding to gentamicin C1 were detected, which were
concluded as C-6' epimers originating from decreased substrate specificity of
6'-N methyltransferase. To explore the effects of 3″-N-methyl on gentamicin
antimicrobial activity, antimicrobial activity of these demethyl gentamicin
analogues were tested in vitro. 3″-N-Demethyl gentamicin components have
identical activity with corresponding components of gentamicin. The results of
bioassays showed that the 3″-N-methyl group has little impact on gentamicin
activity. However, these highly bioactive compounds afforded a unique opportunity
for creating new and high potent aminoglycoside antibiotics.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micres.2016.01.005 
PMID: 26946376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

