
1. Cancer Lett. 2016 May 1;374(2):292-303. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2016.02.032. Epub
2016 Mar 2.

Helicobacter pylori upregulates Nanog and Oct4 via Wnt/β-catenin signaling
pathway to promote cancer stem cell-like properties in human gastric cancer.

Yong X(1), Tang B(1), Xiao YF(1), Xie R(1), Qin Y(1), Luo G(1), Hu CJ(1), Dong
H(2), Yang SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, 400037, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, 400037, China; Division of Gastroenterology, Department of
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, 400037, China. Electronic address: shimingyang@yahoo.com.

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection is considered a major risk factor for
gastric cancer. CagA behaves as a major bacterial oncoprotein playing a key role 
in H. pylori-induced tumorigenesis. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are believed to
possess the ability to initiate tumorigenesis and promote progression. Although
studies have suggested that cancer cells can exhibit CSC-like properties in the
tumor microenvironment, it remains unclear whether H. pylori infection could
induce the emergence of CSC-like properties in gastric cancer cells and, the
underlying mechanism. Here, gastric cancer cells were co-cultured with a
CagA-positive H. pylori strain or a CagA isogenic mutant strain. We found that
H. pylori-infected gastric cancer cells exhibited CSC-like properties, including 
an increased expression of CSC specific surface markers CD44 and Lgr5, as well as
that of Nanog, Oct4 and c-myc, which are known pluripotency genes, and an
increased capacity for self-renewal, whereas these properties were not observed
in the CagA isogenic mutant strain-infected cells. Further studies revealed that 
H. pylori activated Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway in a CagA-dependent manner
and that the activation of this pathway was dependent upon CagA-positive
H. pylori-mediated phosphorylation of β-catenin at the C-terminal Ser675 and
Ser552 residues in a c-met- and/or Akt-dependent manner. We further demonstrated 
that this activation was responsible for H. pylori-induced CSC-like properties.
Moreover, we found the promoter activity of Nanog and Oct4 were upregulated, and 
β-catenin was observed to bind to these promoters during H. pylori infection,
while a Wnt/β-catenin inhibitor suppressed promoter activity and binding. Taken
together, these results suggest that H. pylori upregulates Nanog and Oct4 via
Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway to promote CSC-like properties in gastric cancer 
cells.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2016.02.032 
PMID: 26940070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

