
1. Crit Care Med. 2016 Jul;44(7):1338-46. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000001650.

Admission Hyperglycemia in Critically Ill Sepsis Patients: Association With
Outcome and Host Response.

van Vught LA(1), Wiewel MA, Klein Klouwenberg PM, Hoogendijk AJ, Scicluna BP, Ong
DS, Cremer OL, Horn J, Bonten MM, Schultz MJ, van der Poll T; Molecular Diagnosis
and Risk Stratification of Sepsis Consortium.

Collaborators: de Beer F, Bos LJ, Frencken J, Glas G, van Hooijdonk RM, Huson MM,
Schouten LA, Straat M, Witteveen E, Wieske L.

Author information: 
(1)1Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 2The Center for Infection
and Immunity, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. 3Department of Intensive Care Medicine, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. 4Department of Medical Microbiology,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands. 5Julius Center for
Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. 6Department of Intensive Care, Academic Medical Center, University
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 7Division of Infectious Diseases,
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2016 Jul;44(7):1433-4.
    J Thorac Dis. 2016 Jul;8(7):E575-7.
    J Thorac Dis. 2016 Jul;8(7):E621-4.
    J Thorac Dis. 2016 Jul;8(7):E567-70.
    J Thorac Dis. 2016 Jul;8(7):E581-3.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate whether admission hyperglycemia is associated with the
presentation and/or outcome of sepsis, what the influence of hyperglycemia is on 
key host responses to sepsis, and whether hyperglycemia differentially affects
patients with diabetes mellitus.
DESIGN AND SETTING: A substudy of a prospective observational cohort study was
conducted in the intensive care of two tertiary hospitals between January 2011
and July 2013.
PATIENTS: Of all consecutive critically ill sepsis patients, admission glucose
was used to stratify patients in euglycemia (71-140 mg/dL), mild hyperglycemia
(141-199 mg/dL), and severe hyperglycemia (≥ 200 mg/dL), and patients with
hypoglycemia were excluded. Fifteen plasma biomarkers providing insight in key
host responses implicated in sepsis pathogenesis were measured on admission.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Of 987 sepsis patients with admission glucose
levels greater than 70 mg/dL, 519 (52.6%) had normal glucose levels, 267 (27.1%) 
had mild, and 201 (20.4%) severe hyperglycemia. Admission hyperglycemia was
accompanied by mitigated alterations in plasma host response biomarker levels
indicative of activation of the cytokine network, the vascular endothelium, and
the coagulation system in patients without a history of diabetes. Severe, but not
mild, admission hyperglycemia was associated with increased 30-day mortality
(adjusted hazard ratio, 1.66 [95% CI, 1.24-2.23]), in both patients without
diabetes (adjusted hazard ratio, 1.65 [95% CI, 1.12-2.42]) and with diabetes
(adjusted hazard ratio, 1.91 [95% CI, 1.01-3.62]).
CONCLUSION: Admission hyperglycemia is associated with adverse outcome of sepsis 
irrespective of the presence or absence of preexisting diabetes by a mechanism
unrelated to exaggerated inflammation or coagulation.

DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000001650 
PMID: 26958752  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

