
1. Int J Food Sci. 2015;2015:931970. doi: 10.1155/2015/931970. Epub 2015 Jan 31.

Indigenous Starter Cultures to Improve Quality of Artisanal Dry Fermented
Sausages from Chaco (Argentina).

Palavecino Prpich NZ(1), Castro MP(1), Cayré ME(2), Garro OA(1), Vignolo GM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Microbiología de Alimentos, Universidad Nacional del Chaco
Austral, Comandante Fernández 755, Presidencia Roque Sáenz Peña, 3700 Chaco,
Argentina; Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), 
C1033AAJ Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Laboratorio de Microbiología de Alimentos, Universidad Nacional del Chaco
Austral, Comandante Fernández 755, Presidencia Roque Sáenz Peña, 3700 Chaco,
Argentina.
(3)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), C1033AAJ
Buenos Aires, Argentina; Centro de Referencia para Lactobacilos (CERELA),
Chacabuco 145, San Miguel de Tucumán, 4000 Tucumán, Argentina.

Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) and coagulase negative cocci (CNC) were isolated from 
artisanal dry sausages sampled from the northeastern region of Chaco, Argentina. 
In order to evaluate their performance in situ and considering technological
features of the isolated strains, two mixed selected autochthonous starter
cultures (SAS) were designed: (i) SAS-1 (Lactobacillus sakei 487 + Staphylococcus
vitulinus C2) and (ii) SAS-2 (L. sakei 442 + S. xylosus C8). Cultures were
introduced into dry sausage manufacturing process at a local small-scale
facility. Microbiological and physicochemical parameters were monitored
throughout fermentation and ripening periods, while sensory attributes of the
final products were evaluated by a trained panel. Lactic acid bacteria revealed
their ability to colonize and adapt properly to the meat matrix, inhibiting the
growth of spontaneous microflora and enhancing safety and hygienic profile of the
products. Both SAS showed a beneficial effect on lipid oxidation and texture of
the final products. Staphylococcus vitulinus C2, from SAS-1, promoted a better
redness of the final product. Sensory profile revealed that SAS addition
preserved typical sensory attributes. Introduction of these cultures could
provide an additional tool to standardize manufacturing processes aiming to
enhance safety and quality while keeping typical sensory attributes of regional
dry fermented sausages.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/931970 
PMCID: PMC4756577
PMID: 26955636 

