
1. Curr Microbiol. 2016 Jun;72(6):783-7. doi: 10.1007/s00284-016-1019-7. Epub 2016
Mar 7.

Roles of RPS41 in Biofilm Formation, Virulence, and Hydrogen Peroxide Sensitivity
in Candida albicans.

Lu H(1), Xiong J(1), Shang Q(2), Jiang Y(3), Cao Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of the Plateau of the Environmental Damage Control, Lanzhou
General Hospital of Lanzhou Military Command, Lanzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Center for New Drug Research, School of Pharmacy, 
Second Military Medical University, 325 Guohe Road, Shanghai, 200433, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Center for New Drug Research, School of Pharmacy, 
Second Military Medical University, 325 Guohe Road, Shanghai, 200433, China.
13761571578@163.com.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Center for New Drug Research, School of Pharmacy, 
Second Military Medical University, 325 Guohe Road, Shanghai, 200433, China.
caoyingying608@163.com.

In eukaryotes, loss of cytoplasmic ribosomal proteins (RPs) results in a reduced 
growth rate and other phenotypic defects. The ability to transition from a
unicellular budding yeast to a filamentous form is very important for biofilm
formation and virulence in Candida albicans. Our recent study found that loss of 
the RPS41 (C2_10620W_A) gene but not its paralog RPS42 (C1_01640W_A) resulted in 
altered growth and filamentation changes in C. albicans, so we hypothesized that 
the RPS41 gene should play important roles in virulence and biofilm formation in 
this pathogen. We found that both virulence and the ability to form biofilms were
defective due to deletion of the RPS41 gene. We also found that loss of the RPS41
gene increased sensitivity to hydrogen peroxide, and that hydrogen peroxide
induced the expression of the RPS41 gene in a wild-type strain. These results
suggested that the RPS41 gene plays important roles in C. albicans biofilm
formation, virulence, and susceptibility to hydrogen peroxide.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-016-1019-7 
PMID: 26952720  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

