
1. J Bacteriol. 2016 Apr 28;198(10):1499-512. doi: 10.1128/JB.00952-15. Print 2016
May 15.

Structural Basis of the Enhanced Pollutant-Degrading Capabilities of an
Engineered Biphenyl Dioxygenase.

Dhindwal S(1), Gomez-Gil L(2), Neau DB(3), Pham TT(4), Sylvestre M(4), Eltis
LD(2), Bolin JT(5), Kumar P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, 
Uttarakhand, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Biochemistry, Life Sciences Institute, The
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Northeastern
Collaborative Access Team, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois, USA.
(4)Institut National de Recherche Scientifique (INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier),
Laval, Québec, Canada.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences and Center for Cancer Research, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA.
(6)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, 
Uttarakhand, India pravshai@gmail.com.

Biphenyl dioxygenase, the first enzyme of the biphenyl catabolic pathway, is a
major determinant of which polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) congeners are
metabolized by a given bacterial strain. Ongoing efforts aim to engineer BphAE,
the oxygenase component of the enzyme, to efficiently transform a wider range of 
congeners. BphAEII9, a variant of BphAELB400 in which a seven-residue segment,
(335)TFNNIRI(341), has been replaced by the corresponding segment of BphAEB356,
(333)GINTIRT(339), transforms a broader range of PCB congeners than does either
BphAELB400 or BphAEB356, including 2,6-dichlorobiphenyl, 3,3'-dichlorobiphenyl,
4,4'-dichlorobiphenyl, and 2,3,4'-trichlorobiphenyl. To understand the structural
basis of the enhanced activity of BphAEII9, we have determined the
three-dimensional structure of this variant in substrate-free and biphenyl-bound 
forms. Structural comparison with BphAELB400 reveals a flexible active-site mouth
and a relaxed substrate binding pocket in BphAEII9 that allow it to bind
different congeners and which could be responsible for the enzyme's altered
specificity. Biochemical experiments revealed that BphAEII9 transformed
2,3,4'-trichlorobiphenyl and 2,2',5,5'-tetrachlorobiphenyl more efficiently than 
did BphAELB400 and BphAEB356 BphAEII9 also transformed the insecticide
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) more efficiently than did either parental
enzyme (apparent kcat/Km of 2.2 ± 0.5 mM(-1) s(-1), versus 0.9 ± 0.5 mM(-1) s(-1)
for BphAEB356). Studies of docking of the enzymes with these three substrates
provide insight into the structural basis of the different substrate
selectivities and regiospecificities of the enzymes.IMPORTANCE: Biphenyl
dioxygenase is the first enzyme of the biphenyl degradation pathway that is
involved in the degradation of polychlorinated biphenyls. Attempts have been made
to identify the residues that influence the enzyme activity for the range of
substrates among various species. In this study, we have done a structural study 
of one variant of this enzyme that was produced by family shuffling of genes from
two different species. Comparison of the structure of this variant with those of 
the parent enzymes provided an important insight into the molecular basis for the
broader substrate preference of this enzyme. The structural and functional
details gained in this study can be utilized to further engineer desired
enzymatic activity, producing more potent enzymes.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00952-15 
PMCID: PMC4859605
PMID: 26953337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

