
1. Microb Ecol. 2016 Jul;72(1):207-220. doi: 10.1007/s00248-016-0748-2. Epub 2016
Mar 9.

Abundance and Diversity of Bacterial, Archaeal, and Fungal Communities Along an
Altitudinal Gradient in Alpine Forest Soils: What Are the Driving Factors?

Siles JA(1), Margesin R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, University of Innsbruck, Technikerstrasse 25,
A-6020, Innsbruck, Austria. Jose.Siles-Martos@uibk.ac.at.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, University of Innsbruck, Technikerstrasse 25,
A-6020, Innsbruck, Austria.

Shifts in soil microbial communities over altitudinal gradients and the driving
factors are poorly studied. Their elucidation is indispensable to gain a
comprehensive understanding of the response of ecosystems to global climate
change. Here, we investigated soil archaeal, bacterial, and fungal communities at
four Alpine forest sites representing a climosequence, over an altitudinal
gradient from 545 to 2000Â m above sea level (asl), regarding abundance and
diversity by using qPCR and Illumina sequencing, respectively. Archaeal community
was dominated by Thaumarchaeota, and no significant shifts were detected in
abundance or community composition with altitude. The relative bacterial
abundance increased at higher altitudes, which was related to increasing levels
of soil organic matter and nutrients with altitude. Shifts in bacterial richness 
and diversity as well as community structure (comprised basically of
Proteobacteria, Acidobacteria, Actinobacteria, and Bacteroidetes) significantly
correlated with several environmental and soil chemical factors, especially soil 
pH. The site at the lowest altitude harbored the highest bacterial richness and
diversity, although richness/diversity community properties did not show a
monotonic decrease along the gradient. The relative size of fungal community also
increased with altitude and its composition comprised Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, 
and Zygomycota. Changes in fungal richness/diversity and community structure were
mainly governed by pH and C/N, respectively. The variation of the predominant
bacterial and fungal classes over the altitudinal gradient was the result of the 
environmental and soil chemical factors prevailing at each site.

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-016-0748-2 
PMCID: PMC4902835
PMID: 26961712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

