
1. Infect Immun. 2016 Apr 22;84(5):1633-1641. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00051-16. Print 2016 
May.

Bacterial Dose-Dependent Role of G Protein-Coupled Receptor Kinase 5 in
Escherichia coli-Induced Pneumonia.

Packiriswamy N(1), Steury M(2), McCabe IC(2), Fitzgerald SD(3), Parameswaran
N(4)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Medicine and Integrative Biology Program, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan,
USA.
(3)Department of Pathobiology and Diagnostic Investigation, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(4)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan,
USA narap@msu.edu.

G protein-coupled receptor kinase 5 (GRK5) is a serine/threonine kinase
previously shown to mediate polymicrobial sepsis-induced inflammation. The goal
of the present study was to examine the role of GRK5 in monomicrobial pulmonary
infection by using an intratracheal Escherichia coli infection model of
pneumonia. We used sublethal and lethal doses of E. coli to examine the
mechanistic differences between low-grade and high-grade inflammation induced by 
E. coli infection. With a sublethal dose of E. coli, GRK5 knockout (KO) mice
exhibited higher plasma CXCL1/KC levels and enhanced lung neutrophil recruitment 
early after infection, and lower bacterial loads, than wild-type (WT) mice. The
inflammatory response was also diminished, and resolution of inflammation
advanced, in the lungs of GRK5 KO mice. In contrast to the reduced bacterial
loads in GRK5 KO mice following a sublethal dose, at a lethal dose of E. coli,
the bacterial burdens remained high in GRK5 KO mice relative to those in WT mice.
This occurred in spite of enhanced plasma CXCL1 levels as well as neutrophil
recruitment in the KO mice. But the recruited neutrophils (following high-dose
infection) exhibited decreased CD11b expression and reduced reactive oxygen
species production, suggesting decreased neutrophil activation or increased
neutrophil exhaustion in the GRK5 KO mice. In agreement with the increased
bacterial burden, KO mice showed poorer survival than WT mice following E. coli
infection at a lethal dose. Overall, our data suggest that GRK5 negatively
regulates CXCL1/KC levels during bacterial pneumonia but that the role of GRK5 in
the clinical outcome in this model is dependent on the bacterial dose.

Copyright Â© 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00051-16 
PMCID: PMC4862718
PMID: 26975990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

