
1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2016 Mar;97:73-85. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2015.12.002. Epub
2015 Dec 18.

Canonical pathways, networks and transcriptional factor regulation by clinical
strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in pulmonary alveolar epithelial cells.

Mvubu NE(1), Pillay B(2), Gamieldien J(3), Bishai W(4), Pillay M(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, College of Agriculture, Engineering and Science,
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Westville 3630, South Africa. Electronic address:
207500550@stu.ukzn.ac.za.
(2)School of Life Sciences, College of Agriculture, Engineering and Science,
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Westville 3630, South Africa. Electronic address:
pillayb1@ukzn.ac.za.
(3)South African National Bioinformatics Institute/MRC Unit for Bioinformatics
Capacity Development, University of the Western Cape, Bellville 7530, South
Africa. Electronic address: junaid@sanbi.ac.za.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Johns Hopkins School 
of Medicine, 1550 Orleans St., Baltimore, MD, United State of America. Electronic
address: wbishai1@jhmi.edu.
(5)Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, School of Laboratory Medicine and 
Medical Sciences, College of Health Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal, 719
Umbilo Road, Private Bag 7, Congella 4013, Durban, South Africa. Electronic
address: pillayc@ukzn.ac.za.

Limited knowledge exists on pathways, networks and transcriptional factors
regulated within epithelial cells by diverse Mycobacterium tuberculosis
genotypes. This study aimed to elucidate these mechanisms induced in A549
epithelial cells by dominant clinical strains in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. RNA
for sequencing was extracted from epithelial cells at 48 h post-infection with 5 
strains at a multiplicity of infection of approximately 10:1. Bioinformatics
analysis performed with the RNA-Seq Tuxedo pipeline identified differentially
expressed genes. Changes in pathways, networks and transcriptional factors were
identified using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). The interferon signalling and 
hepatic fibrosis/hepatic stellate cell activation pathways were among the top 5
canonical pathways in all strains. Hierarchical clustering for enrichment of
cholesterol biosynthesis and immune associated pathways revealed similar patterns
for Beijing and Unique; F15/LAM4/KZN and F11; and, F28 and H37Rv strains,
respectively. However, the induction of top scoring networks varied among the
strains. Among the transcriptional factors, only EHL, IRF7, PML, STAT1, STAT2 and
VDR were induced by all clinical strains. Activation of the different pathways,
networks and transcriptional factors revealed in the current study may be an
underlying mechanism that results in the differential host response by clinical
strains of M. tuberculosis.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2015.12.002 
PMID: 26980499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

