
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2016 Jul;185(1):98-106. doi: 10.1111/cei.12792. Epub 2016 Apr
12.

The differential effects of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 on Salmonella-induced
interleukin-8 and human beta-defensin-2 in intestinal epithelial cells.

Huang FC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Salmonellosis or Salmonella, one of the most common food-borne diseases, remains 
a major public health problem worldwide. Intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) play 
an essential role in the mucosal innate immunity of the host to defend against
the invasion of Salmonella by interleukin (IL)-8 and human β-defensin-2 (hBD-2). 
Accumulated research has unravelled important roles of vitamin D in the
regulation of innate immunity. Therefore, we investigated the effects of
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D3) on Salmonella-induced innate immunity in IECs. 
We demonstrate that pretreatment of 1,25D3 results in suppression of
Salmonella-induced IL-8 but enhancement of hBD-2, either protein secretion and
mRNA expression, in IECs. Furthermore, 1,25D3 enhanced Salmonella-induced
membranous recruitment of nucleotide oligomerization domain (NOD2) and its mRNA
expression and activation of protein kinase B (Akt), a downstream effector of
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K). Inhibition of the PI3K/Akt signal counteracted 
the suppressive effect of 1,25D3 on Salmonella-induced IL-8 expression, while
knock-down of NOD2 by siRNA diminished the enhanced hBD-2 expression. These data 
suggest differential regulation of 1,25D3 on Salmonella-induced IL-8 and hBD-2
expression in IECs via PI3K/Akt signal and NOD2 protein expression, respectively.
Active vitamin D-enhanced anti-microbial peptide in Salmonella-infected IECs
protected the host against infection, while modulation of proinflammatory
responses by active vitamin D prevented the host from the detrimental effects of 
overwhelming inflammation. Thus, active vitamin D-induced innate immunity in IECs
enhances the host's protective mechanism, which may provide an alternative
therapy for invasive Salmonella infection.

© 2016 British Society for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/cei.12792 
PMCID: PMC4908287
PMID: 26990648  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

