
1. RSC Adv. 2016 Jan 1;6(19):15469-15477. Epub 2016 Jan 28.

Antibacterial Low Molecular Weight Cationic Polymers: Dissecting the Contribution
of Hydrophobicity, Chain Length and Charge to Activity.

Grace JL(1), Huang JX(2), Cheah SE(3), Truong NP(1), Cooper MA(2), Li J(3), Davis
TP(1), Quinn JF(1), Velkov T(3), Whittaker MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Convergent Bio-Nano
Science and Technology, 381 Royal Pde, Parkville, VIC, AUSTRALIA, 3052.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane QLD
Australia 4072.
(3)Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 381 Royal Pde, Parkville, VIC,
AUSTRALIA, 3052.

The balance of cationicity and hydrophobicity can profoundly affect the
performance of antimicrobial polymers. To this end a library of 24 cationic
polymers with uniquely low degrees of polymerization was synthesized via
Cu(0)-mediated polymerization, using three different cationic monomers and two
initiators: providing two different hydrocarbon chain tail lengths (C2 and C12). 
The polymers exhibited structure-dependent antibacterial activity when tested
against a selection of bacteria, viz, Staphylococcus aureus ATCC 29213,
Klebsiella pneumoniae ATCC 13883, Acinetobacter baumannii ATCC 19606, and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 27853 as a representative palette of Gram-positive
and Gram-negative ESKAPE pathogens. The five best-performing polymers were
identified for additional testing against the polymyxin-resistant A. baumannii
ATCC 19606R strain. Polymers having the lowest DP and a C12 hydrophobic tail were
shown to provide the broadest antimicrobial activity against the bacteria panel
studied as evidenced by lower minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). An
optimal polymer composition was identified, and its mechanism of action
investigated via membrane permeability testing against Escherichia coli. Membrane
disruption was identified as the most probable mechanism for bacteria cell
killing.

DOI: 10.1039/C5RA24361K 
PMCID: PMC4792307
PMID: 26998253 

