
1. Genet Mol Biol. 2016 Mar;39(1):14-23. doi: 10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2015-0055.

Genotypic diversity of the Killer Cell Immunoglobulin-like Receptors (KIR) and
their HLA class I Ligands in a Saudi population.

Omar SY(1), Alkuriji A(1), Alwasel S(1), Dar JA(2), Alhammad A(3), Christmas
S(4), Mansour L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zoology Department, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyad, Saudi
Arabia.
(2)Central Laboratory College of Science, King Saud University, Riyad, Saudi
Arabia.
(3)Immunology Unit, Department of Pathology, King Saud University, Riyad, Saudi
Arabia.
(4)Department of Clinical Infection, Microbiology & Immunology, Institute of
Global Health, Faculty of Health & Life Sciences, University of Liverpool,
Liverpool, UK.

Killer Cell Immunoglobulin-like Receptors (KIR) have been used as good markers
for the study of genetic predisposition in many diseases and in human genetic
population dynamics. In this context, we have investigated the genetic diversity 
of KIR genes and their main HLA class I ligands in Saudi population and compared 
the data with other studies of neighboring populations. One hundred and fourteen 
randomly selected healthy Saudi subjects were genotyped for the presence or
absence of 16 KIR genes and their HLA-C1, -C2, -Bw4Thr80 and Bw4Ile80 groups,
using a PCR-SSP technique. The results show the occurrence of the framework genes
(3DL2, 3DL3 and 2DL4) and the pseudogenes (2DP1 and 3DP1) at highest frequencies.
All inhibitory KIR (iKIR) genes appeared at higher frequencies than activating
genes (aKIR), except for 2DS4 with a frequency of 90.35%. A total of 55 different
genotypes were observed appearing at different frequencies, where 12 are
considered novel. Two haplotypes were characterized, AA and Bx (BB and AB), which
were observed in 24.5% and 75.5% respectively of the studied group. The
frequencies of iKIR + HLA associations were found to be much higher than aKIR +
HLA. KIR genes frequencies in the Saudi population are comparable with other
Middle Eastern and North African populations.

DOI: 10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2015-0055 
PMCID: PMC4807387
PMID: 27007893 

