
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 22;11(3):e0151135. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151135.
eCollection 2016.

Assessment of In Vivo Antidiabetic Properties of Umbelliferone and Lupeol
Constituents of Banana (Musa sp. var. Nanjangud Rasa Bale) Flower in
Hyperglycaemic Rodent Model.

Ramu R(1)(2), S Shirahatti P(2), S NS(2), Zameer F(3), Lakkappa Dhananjaya B(4), 
M N NP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Sri Dharmasthala Manjunatheshwara College of Post
Graduate Centre, Ujire, Dakshina Kannada - 574240, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Sri Jayachamarajendra College of Engineering, JSS
Technical Institutions Campus, Mysore - 570 006, Karnataka, India.
(3)Department of Studies in Biotechnology, Microbiology and Biochemistry,
Mahajana Life Science Research Centre, Pooja Bhagavat Memorial Mahajana PG
Centre, Mysore - 570 016, Karnataka, India.
(4)Toxinology/Toxicology and Drug Discovery Unit, Centre for Emerging
Technologies (CET), Jain Global Campus, Jain University, Kanakapura Taluk,
Ramanagara Dist, Karnataka-562112, India.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016;11(7):e0160048.

Banana is an extensively cultivated plant worldwide, mainly for its fruit, while 
its ancillary product, the banana flower is consumed as a vegetable and is highly
recommended for diabetics in the traditional Indian medicine system. This study
is based on an investigation of the in vivo antihyperglycaemic activity of
Umbelliferone (C1) and Lupeol (C2) isolated from the ethanol extract of banana
flower (EF) in alloxan induced diabetic rat model. Diabetic rats which were
administered with C1, C2 and EF (100 and 200 mg/kg b. wt.) for 4 weeks showed
deterioration in fasting hyperglycaemia and reversal of abnormalities in
serum/urine protein, urea and creatinine, when compared to the diabetic control
group of rats. The diabetic group of rats fed with EF, C1 and C2 (100 mg/kg b.
wt.) once daily, for a period of 28 days resulted in a significant reduction of
diabetic symptoms viz., polyphagia, polydipsia, polyuria and urine sugar together
with an improved body weight. HbA1c extent was reduced whereas levels of insulin 
and Hb were increased. Both the extract and compounds wielded positive impacts in
diabetic rats by reversal of altered activities of hepatic marker enzymes viz.,
aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase
(ALP); glycolytic enzyme (hexokinase); shunt enzyme (glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase); gluconeogenic enzymes (glucose-6-phosphatase,
fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, lactate dehydrogenase) and pyruvate kinase. The
characteristic diabetic complications such as hypercholesterolemia and
hypertriacylglycerolemia also significantly reverted to normal in the serum/liver
of diabetic rats. Besides these, the treatment increased the activities of
enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants in the serum and liver. The histological
observations revealed a marked regeneration of the β-cells in the drug treated
diabetic rats. In conclusion, the present study illustrates that EF, C1 and C2
enhances the glycolytic activities, besides increasing the hepatic glucose
utilization in diabetic rats by stimulating insulin secretion from the remnant
β-cells along with potential enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidant activities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151135 
PMCID: PMC4803188
PMID: 27003006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

