
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2016 May 16;82(11):3331-3347. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00537-16. 
Print 2016 Jun 1.

Type III-Dependent Translocation of HrpB2 by a Nonpathogenic hpaABC Mutant of the
Plant-Pathogenic Bacterium Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria.

Scheibner F(1), Schulz S(1), Hausner J(1), Marillonnet S(2), Büttner D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, Department of Genetics, Martin Luther University
Halle-Wittenberg, Halle (Saale), Germany.
(2)Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Halle (Saale), Germany.
(3)Institute of Biology, Department of Genetics, Martin Luther University
Halle-Wittenberg, Halle (Saale), Germany daniela.buettner@genetik.uni-halle.de.

The plant-pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria employs a
type III secretion (T3S) system to translocate effector proteins into plant
cells. The T3S apparatus spans both bacterial membranes and is associated with an
extracellular pilus and a channel-like translocon in the host plasma membrane.
T3S is controlled by the switch protein HpaC, which suppresses secretion and
translocation of the predicted inner rod protein HrpB2 and promotes secretion of 
translocon and effector proteins. We previously reported that HrpB2 interacts
with HpaC and the cytoplasmic domain of the inner membrane protein HrcU (C.
Lorenz, S. Schulz, T. Wolsch, O. Rossier, U. Bonas, and D. Büttner, PLoS Pathog
4:e1000094, 2008, http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1000094). However, the
molecular mechanisms underlying the control of HrpB2 secretion are not yet
understood. Here, we located a T3S and translocation signal in the N-terminal 40 
amino acids of HrpB2. The results of complementation experiments with HrpB2
deletion derivatives revealed that the T3S signal of HrpB2 is essential for
protein function. Furthermore, interaction studies showed that the N-terminal
region of HrpB2 interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of HrcU, suggesting that
the T3S signal of HrpB2 contributes to substrate docking. Translocation of HrpB2 
is suppressed not only by HpaC but also by the T3S chaperone HpaB and its
secreted regulator, HpaA. Deletion of hpaA, hpaB, and hpaC leads to a loss of
pathogenicity but allows the translocation of fusion proteins between the HrpB2
T3S signal and effector proteins into leaves of host and non-host
plants.IMPORTANCE: The T3S system of the plant-pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas
campestris pv. vesicatoria is essential for pathogenicity and delivers effector
proteins into plant cells. T3S depends on HrpB2, which is a component of the
predicted periplasmic inner rod structure of the secretion apparatus. HrpB2 is
secreted during the early stages of the secretion process and interacts with the 
cytoplasmic domain of the inner membrane protein HrcU. Here, we localized the
secretion and translocation signal of HrpB2 in the N-terminal 40 amino acids and 
show that this region is sufficient for the interaction with the cytoplasmic
domain of HrcU. Our results suggest that the T3S signal of HrpB2 is required for 
the docking of HrpB2 to the secretion apparatus. Furthermore, we provide
experimental evidence that the N-terminal region of HrpB2 is sufficient to target
effector proteins for translocation in a nonpathogenic X. campestris pv.
vesicatoria strain.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00537-16 
PMCID: PMC4959247
PMID: 27016569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

