
1. Front Psychiatry. 2016 Mar 14;7:31. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2016.00031. eCollection
2016.

Staphylococcus aureus Colonization Modulates Tic Expression and the Host Immune
Response in a Girl with Tourette Syndrome.

Eftimiadi C(1), Eftimiadi G(2), Vinai P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medicina Generale Convenzionata - ASL CN1, Carrù, Italy; GNOSIS Research Group
NPO, Magliano Alpi, Italy.
(2)GNOSIS Research Group NPO , Magliano Alpi , Italy.

A 9-year-old girl with Tourette syndrome (TS) and increased antibody levels
against Streptococcus pyogenes was monitored longitudinally for the presence of
nasopharyngeal bacteria, specific antibody titers, and autoimmunity directed
against brain antigens. Microbiological monitoring indicated that the child was
an intermittent Staphylococcus aureus nasopharyngeal carrier. Clinical
improvements in motor tic frequency and severity were observed during the S.
aureus colonization phase and were temporally correlated with the downregulation 
of anti-streptococcal and anti-D1/D2 dopamine receptor antibody production. After
decolonization, clinical conditions reverted to the poor scores previously
observed, suggesting a possible role of the immune response in bacterial
clearance as a trigger of symptom recrudescence. These findings imply that a
cause-effect relationship exists between S. aureus colonization and tic
improvement, as well as between bacterial decolonization and tic exacerbation.
Understanding the impact of S. aureus on the host adaptive immune response and
the function of autoantibodies in the pathogenesis of TS may alter approaches for
managing autoimmune neuropsychiatric and tic disorders.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2016.00031 
PMCID: PMC4789548
PMID: 27014098 

