
1. Front Immunol. 2016 Mar 17;7:96. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00096. eCollection 2016.

Postbiotic Modulation of Retinoic Acid Imprinted Mucosal-like Dendritic Cells by 
Probiotic Lactobacillus reuteri 17938 In Vitro.

Haileselassie Y(1), Navis M(1), Vu N(1), Qazi KR(1), Rethi B(2),
Sverremark-Ekström E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm
University , Stockholm , Sweden.
(2)Department of Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital , Stockholm , Sweden.

Lactobacilli are widely used as probiotics with beneficial effects on
infection-associated diarrhea, but also used in clinical trials of e.g.,
necrotizing enterocolitis and inflammatory bowel diseases. The possibility of
using probiotic metabolic products, so-called postbiotics, is desirable as it
could prevent possible side effects of live bacteria in individuals with a
disturbed gut epithelial barrier. Here, we studied how Lactobacillus reuteri DSM 
17938 cell-free supernatant (L. reuteri-CFS) influenced retinoic acid (RA)-driven
mucosal-like dendritic cells (DC) and their subsequent effect on T regulatory
cells (Treg) in vitro. RA clearly imprinted a mucosal-like DC phenotype with
higher IL10 production, increased CD103 and CD1d expression, and a downregulated 
mRNA expression of several inflammatory-associated genes (NFκB1, RELB, and TNF). 
Treatment with L. reuteri-CFS further influenced the tolerogenic phenotype of
RA-DC by downregulating most genes involved in antigen uptake, antigen
presentation, and signal transduction as well as several chemokine receptors,
while upregulating IL10 production. L. reuteri-CFS also augmented CCR7 expression
on RA-DC. In cocultures, RA-DC increased IL10 and FOXP3 expression in Treg, but
pre-treatment with L. reuteri-CFS did not further influence the Treg phenotype.
In conclusion, L. reuteri-CFS modulates the phenotype and function of
mucosal-like DC, implicating its potential application as postbiotic.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00096 
PMCID: PMC4794487
PMID: 27014275 

