
1. Mol Immunol. 2016 May;73:19-28. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2016.03.006. Epub 2016 Mar 
28.

Negative regulation of TCR signaling by ubiquitination of Zap-70 Lys-217.

Ivanova E(1), Carpino N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Room 130, Life Sciences
Building, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-5222, United States.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Room 130, Life Sciences
Building, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-5222, United States.
Electronic address: nicholas.carpino@stonybrook.edu.

The tyrosine kinase Zap-70 is a key regulator of T cell receptor (TCR) signaling 
downstream of antigen presentation, with coordinated regulation of Zap-70 kinase 
activity critical for proper T cell proliferation, differentiation, and effector 
function during an immune response. Zap-70 is cytosolic in unstimulated T cells, 
but is rapidly recruited to the TCR complex following receptor stimulation. Its
activity is regulated both by binding to subunits of the TCR and by
phosphorylation on multiple tyrosine residues. Zap-70 also has been reported to
be ubiquitinated following TCR stimulation. Herein, we confirm the ubiquitination
of Zap-70 in T cell lines and in primary human and mouse T cells, and report the 
identification of nine novel Zap-70 ubiquitination sites. Three sites, including 
Lys-193, Lys-217, and Lys-376, displayed greater than 20-fold increase in
modification levels following TCR stimulation. Abrogation of Lys-217
ubiquitination results in increased kinase activation, enhanced activation of
downstream signaling pathways, and elevated IL-2 production following TCR
stimulation. These data suggest that Zap-70 ubiquitination contributes to the
regulation of Zap-70 signaling following TCR stimulation.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2016.03.006 
PMCID: PMC4902731
PMID: 27032069  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

