
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2016 Jul;123:83-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2016.03.010. Epub 2016 
Mar 29.

Expression and purification of human MHC class I-related chain molecule B-α1
domain.

Wang S(1), Xiang Z(1), Wang Y(1), Xu H(1), Zhang D(2), Wang X(3), Sheng J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Pu-er Tea Science, Ministry of Education, Yunnan
Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, China; Agricultural Experiment Station
for Tea and Tea Processing of Yunnan, Ministry of Agriculture, Kunming 650201,
China; Tea Research Center of Yunnan, Kunming 650201, China; College of Food
Science and Technology, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Pu-er Tea Science, Ministry of Education, Yunnan
Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, China; Agricultural Experiment Station
for Tea and Tea Processing of Yunnan, Ministry of Agriculture, Kunming 650201,
China; Tea Research Center of Yunnan, Kunming 650201, China; College of Food
Science and Technology, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, China.
Electronic address: epazhang@outlook.com.
(3)Key Laboratory of Pu-er Tea Science, Ministry of Education, Yunnan
Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, China; Agricultural Experiment Station
for Tea and Tea Processing of Yunnan, Ministry of Agriculture, Kunming 650201,
China; Tea Research Center of Yunnan, Kunming 650201, China; College of Pu-er
Tea, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, China. Electronic address:
wangxuanjun@gmail.com.
(4)Key Laboratory of Pu-er Tea Science, Ministry of Education, Yunnan
Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, China; Agricultural Experiment Station
for Tea and Tea Processing of Yunnan, Ministry of Agriculture, Kunming 650201,
China; Tea Research Center of Yunnan, Kunming 650201, China. Electronic address: 
623157535@qq.com.

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-related chain A/B (MICA/B) is a
type of stress-induced molecule that plays an important role in tumor
surveillance. MICA/B shares a similar structure with MHC class I molecules, but
MICA/B contains a closed cleft, not an open one, in its N-terminal alpha1 domain.
The alpha 1 domain was believed to have no roles in antigen presentation, because
the closed cleft provides limited space for binding with known molecules, and the
cleft of MICA/B have been reported no known functions. To study the possible
function of the cleft located in human MICA/B's alpha 1 domain, we attempted to
express the human MICB-α1 (hMICB-α1) domain allele protein, which is
approximately 20.5 kDa, by utilizing an Escherichia coli (E. coli) secretory
pathway. Protein expression was accomplished through the phosphate-limited
inducible promoter. After purification using ammonium sulfate precipitation,
phenyl hydrophobic Sepharose, SP Sepharose and HisTrap affinity Sepharose,
recombinant human MICB-α1 (rhMICB-α1) was obtained with 94.3% purity. The binding
capacity of rhMICB-α1 with natural killer group 2, member D (NKG2D) was evaluated
in vitro. The results demonstrated that rhMICB-α1 can be prepared through the
E. coli secretory pathway. Purified rhMICB-α1 protein was able to functionally
bind with NKG2D. This method can be further used to obtain functionally active
rhMICB-α1 protein, which can served as the basis for further studies of the
possible function of the MICB cleft.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2016.03.010 
PMID: 27036081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

