
1. J Phycol. 2016 Apr;52(2):274-82. doi: 10.1111/jpy.12396. Epub 2016 Mar 8.

Molecular markers define progressing stages of phosphorus limitation in the
nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium, Crocosphaera.

Pereira N(1), Shilova IN(1), Zehr JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ocean Science Department, University of California, Santa Cruz, California,
95064, USA.

Crocosphaera watsonii is a marine cyanobacterium that frequently inhabits low
phosphate environments in oligotrophic oceans. While C. watsonii has the ability 
to fix atmospheric nitrogen, its growth may be limited by availability of
phosphorus. Biomarkers that indicate cellular phosphorus status give insight into
how P-limitation can affect the distribution of nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterial
populations. However, adaptation to phosphorus stress is complex and one marker
may not be sufficient to determine when an organism is P-limited. In this study, 
we characterized the transcription of key genes, activated during phosphorus
stress in C. watsonii WH8501, to determine how transcription changed during the
phosphorus stress response. Transcription of pstS, which encodes a high-affinity 
phosphate binding protein, was discovered to be quickly up-regulated in
phosphorus-depleted cells as an immediate stress response; however, its
transcription declined after a period of phosphorus starvation. In addition, diel
regulation of pstS in C. watsonii WH8501 complicates the interpretation of this
marker in field applications. Transcription of the gene coding for the arsenite
efflux protein, arsB, was upregulated after pstS in phosphorus limited cells, but
it remained upregulated at later stages of phosphorus limitation. These results
demonstrate that a single molecular marker does not adequately represent the
entire phosphorus stress response in C. watsonii WH8501. Using both markers, the 
variations in transcriptional response over a range of degrees of phosphorus
limitation may be a better approach for defining cellular phosphorus status.

© 2016 Phycological Society of America.

DOI: 10.1111/jpy.12396 
PMID: 27037592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

