
1. Innate Immun. 2016 May;22(4):249-56. doi: 10.1177/1753425916640326. Epub 2016 Mar
30.

Yeast-containing feed additive alters gene expression profiles associated with
innate immunity in whole blood of a rodent model.

Branson JA(1), McLean DJ(1), Forsberg NE(1), Bobe G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Rangeland Sciences, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR, USA OmniGen Research Laboratory, Phibro Animal Health, Corvallis, 
OR, USA.
(2)Department of Animal and Rangeland Sciences, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR, USA Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
OR, USA gerd.bobe@oregonstate.edu.

Feeding a yeast-containing additive (YCA; OmniGen-AF) improves immune responses
in ruminant livestock and reduces subsequent production losses. The objective was
to identify molecular pathways by which dietary YCA may modify immune responses
using a rodent model. Thirty-seven healthy, unchallenged CD rats received a diet 
containing 0 (control; n = 5, only 28 d), 0.5% (n = 15) or 1% (n = 17) YCA for 7 
(n = 4/group), 14 (n = 3 or 4/group), 21 (n = 3 or 4/group) or 28 (n = 5/group)
d. At the end of the feeding periods, whole blood was collected and the isolated 
RNA was analyzed for the expression of 84 genes involved in innate and
cell-mediated adaptive immune responses. Three bacterial pattern recognition
receptors TLR1 (0.5%: + 2.01; 1%: + 2.38), TLR6 (0.5%: + 2.11; 1%: + 2.34) and
NOD2 (0.5%: + 2.32; 1%: + 2.23), two APC surface receptors CD1D1 (0.5%: + 1.75;
1%: + 2.33) and CD80 (0.5%: +2.45; 1%: +3.00), and the cell signaling molecule
MAPK8 (0.5%: +1.87; 1%: +2.35) were significantly up-regulated by YCA at both
inclusion rates. In conclusion, feeding YCA may potentially increase recognition 
and responses to bacterial pathogens and T-cell activation and differentiation
and thereby maintain health and prevent production losses.

© The Author(s) 2016.

DOI: 10.1177/1753425916640326 
PMID: 27033362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

