
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Mar 23;7:362. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00362. eCollection
2016.

Identification and Partial Characterization of a Novel
UDP-N-Acetylenolpyruvoylglucosamine Reductase/UDP-N-Acetylmuramate:l-Alanine
Ligase Fusion Enzyme from Verrucomicrobium spinosum DSM 4136(T).

Naqvi KF(1), Patin D(2), Wheatley MS(1), Savka MA(1), Dobson RC(3), Gan HM(4),
Barreteau H(2), Blanot D(2), Mengin-Lecreulx D(2), Hudson AO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Thomas H. Gosnell School of Life Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, NY, USA.
(2)Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell, CEA, CNRS, Univ Paris-Sud,
Université Paris-Saclay Orsay, France.
(3)Biomolecular Interaction Centre, School of Biological Sciences, University of 
CanterburyChristchurch, New Zealand; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Bio21 Molecular and Biotechnology Institute, The University of
MelbourneParkville, VIC, Australia.
(4)Monash University Malaysia Genomics Facility, Monash University
MalaysiaSelangor, Malaysia; School of Science, Monash University
MalaysiaSelangor, Malaysia.

The enzymes involved in synthesizing the bacterial cell wall are attractive
targets for the design of antibacterial compounds, since this pathway is
essential for bacteria and is absent in animals, particularly humans. A survey of
the genome of a bacterium that belongs to the phylum Verrucomicrobia, the closest
free-living relative to bacteria from the Chlamydiales phylum, shows genetic
evidence that Verrucomicrobium spinosum possesses a novel fusion open reading
frame (ORF) annotated by the locus tag (VspiD_010100018130). The ORF, which is
predicted to encode the enzymes UDP-N-acetylenolpyruvoylglucosamine reductase
(MurB) and UDP-N-acetylmuramate:l-alanine ligase (MurC) that are involved in the 
cytoplasmic steps of peptidoglycan biosynthesis, was cloned. In vivo analyses
using functional complementation showed that the fusion gene was able to
complement Escherichia coli murB and murC temperature sensitive mutants. The
purified recombinant fusion enzyme (MurB/C Vs ) was shown to be endowed with
UDP-N-acetylmuramate:l-alanine ligase activity. In vitro analyses demonstrated
that the latter enzyme had a pH optimum of 9.0, a magnesium optimum of 10 mM and 
a temperature optimum of 44-46°C. Its apparent K m values for ATP, UDP-MurNAc,
and l-alanine were 470, 90, and 25 μM, respectively. However, all attempts to
demonstrate an in vitro UDP-N-acetylenolpyruvoylglucosamine reductase (MurB)
activity were unsuccessful. Lastly, Hidden Markov Model-based similarity search
and phylogenetic analysis revealed that this fusion enzyme could only be
identified in specific lineages within the Verrucomicrobia phylum.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00362 
PMCID: PMC4803751
PMID: 27047475 

