
1. Vet World. 2015 Jul;8(7):924-7. doi: 10.14202/vetworld.2015.924-927. Epub 2015
Jul 29.

Isolation and detection of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis in the reproductive
organs and associated lymph nodes of non-pregnant does experimentally inoculated 
through intradermal route in chronic form.

Latif NA(1), Abdullah FF(2), Othman AM(1), Rina A(3), Chung EL(1), Zamri-Saad
M(3), Saharee AA(1), Haron AW(2), Lila MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia; Research Centre for
Ruminant Disease, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Veterinary Pathology and Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.

AIM: Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis is the etiological agent of caseous
lymphadenitis that affects sheep and goats. This study was designed to determine 
the presence of the causative organism in the female reproductive organs and
associated lymph nodes in non-pregnant does experimentally inoculated through
intradermal route in the chronic form.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 18 non-pregnant healthy Katjang does aged 2-year-old were 
divided randomly into two groups. The first and second group consists of nine
non-pregnant does each and the two groups were subdivided into three subgroups.
The first group was experimentally inoculated with 1 ml of 10(7)cfu of live C.
pseudotuberculosis through intradermal route, whereas the second group was
inoculated with 1 ml phosphate buffer saline (pH 7) solution intradermally. The
first group were further subdivided into three subgroups where, the first
subgroup (B1) were kept for 30 days post-infection, second subgroup (B2) were
kept for 60 days post-infection, and third subgroup (B3) were kept for 90 days.
The second group was further subdivided into three subgroups (C1, C2, and C3)
where they were kept for 39, 60, and 90 days post-infection, respectively.
RESULTS: From this study, there was successful isolation of C. pseudotuberculosis
from the reproductive organs of the treatment group after 60 days post-infection.
The subgroups (B1, C1, C2, and C3) did not show any presence of the causative
organism in the reproductive organs. The second subgroup B2 and third subgroup B3
showed positive isolation of the causative organisms from the ovary, uterine
horns, uterus, cervix, vagina, and inguinal lymph node of the experimental
non-pregnant does.
CONCLUSION: This study showed that chronic infection of C. pseudotuberculosis via
intradermal route may cause effect toward the reproductive organs and may be able
to influence the reproductive efficiency of the infected animals.

DOI: 10.14202/vetworld.2015.924-927 
PMCID: PMC4774689
PMID: 27047177 

