
1. Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol. 2016 Apr;72(Pt 4):467-76. doi:
10.1107/S2059798316001170. Epub 2016 Mar 24.

Novel mode of inhibition by D-tagatose 6-phosphate through a Heyns rearrangement 
in the active site of transaldolase B variants.

Stellmacher L(1), Sandalova T(2), Schneider S(1), Schneider G(3), Sprenger GA(1),
Samland AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Universität Stuttgart, Allmandring 31, 70550
Stuttgart, Germany.
(2)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Solna, Karolinska
Institutet, 17 165 Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 17
177 Stockholm, Sweden.

Transaldolase B (TalB) and D-fructose-6-phosphate aldolase A (FSAA) from
Escherichia coli are C-C bond-forming enzymes. Using kinetic inhibition studies
and mass spectrometry, it is shown that enzyme variants of FSAA and TalB that
exhibit D-fructose-6-phosphate aldolase activity are inhibited covalently and
irreversibly by D-tagatose 6-phosphate (D-T6P), whereas no inhibition was
observed for wild-type transaldolase B from E. coli. The crystal structure of the
variant TalB(F178Y) with bound sugar phosphate was solved to a resolution of 1.46
Å and revealed a novel mode of covalent inhibition. The sugar is bound covalently
via its C2 atom to the ℇ-NH2 group of the active-site residue Lys132. It is
neither bound in the open-chain form nor as the closed-ring form of D-T6P, but
has been converted to β-D-galactofuranose 6-phosphate (D-G6P), a five-membered
ring structure. The furanose ring of the covalent adduct is formed via a Heyns
rearrangement and subsequent hemiacetal formation. This reaction is facilitated
by Tyr178, which is proposed to act as acid-base catalyst. The crystal structure 
of the inhibitor complex is compared with the structure of the Schiff-base
intermediate of TalB(E96Q) formed with the substrate D-fructose 6-phosphate
determined to a resolution of 2.20 Å. This comparison highlights the differences 
in stereochemistry at the C4 atom of the ligand as an essential determinant for
the formation of the inhibitor adduct in the active site of the enzyme.

DOI: 10.1107/S2059798316001170 
PMID: 27050126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

