
1. Aquat Toxicol. 2016 Jun;175:160-70. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2016.03.026. Epub 2016
Mar 31.

PFOS, PFNA, and PFOA sub-lethal exposure to embryonic zebrafish have different
toxicity profiles in terms of morphometrics, behavior and gene expression.

Jantzen CE(1), Annunziato KA(2), Bugel SM(3), Cooper KR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Department of Environmental
Sciences, New Brunswick, NJ, USA. Electronic address:
carrie.greenfield@rutgers.edu.
(2)Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Department of Biochemistry and
Microbiology, New Brunswick, NJ, USA.
(3)Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR, USA.
(4)Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Department of Environmental
Sciences, New Brunswick, NJ, USA; Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, New Brunswick, NJ, USA.

Polyfluorinated compounds (PFC) are a class of anthropogenic, persistent and
toxic chemicals. PFCs are detected worldwide and consist of fluorinated carbon
chains of varying length, terminal groups, and industrial uses. Previous
zebrafish studies in the literature as well as our own studies have shown that
exposure to these chemicals at a low range of concentrations (0.02-2.0μM;
20-2000ppb) resulted in chemical specific developmental defects and reduced post 
hatch survival. It was hypothesized that sub-lethal embryonic exposure to
perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS), perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA), or
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) would result in different responses with regard to 
morphometric, behavior, and gene expression in both yolk sac fry and larval
zebrafish. Zebrafish were exposed to PFOS, PFOA, and PFNA (0.02, 0.2, 2.0μM) for 
the first five days post fertilization (dpf) and analyzed for morphometrics (5
dpf, 14 dpf), targeted gene expression (5 dpf, 14 dpf), and locomotive behavior
(14 dpf). All three PFCs commonly resulted in a decrease in total body length,
increased tfc3a (muscle development) expression and decreased ap1s (protein
transport) expression at 5dpf, and hyperactive locomotor activity 14 dpf. All
other endpoints measured at both life-stage time points varied between each of
the PFCs. PFOS, PFNA, and PFOA exposure resulted in significantly altered
responses in terms of morphometric, locomotion, and gene expression endpoints,
which could be manifested in field exposed teleosts.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2016.03.026 
PMCID: PMC5204304
PMID: 27058923  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: of potential conflicts of interest: The authors
have no potential conflicts of interest to declare.

