
1. Cell Rep. 2016 Apr 19;15(3):519-530. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.03.054. Epub 2016
Apr 7.

BET Bromodomain Inhibition Releases the Mediator Complex from Select
cis-Regulatory Elements.

Bhagwat AS(1), Roe JS(2), Mok BYL(2), Hohmann AF(2), Shi J(3), Vakoc CR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA; Department
of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY
11794, USA.
(2)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA.
(3)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA; Molecular
and Cellular Biology Program, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.
(4)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA. Electronic
address: vakoc@cshl.edu.

The bromodomain and extraterminal (BET) protein BRD4 can physically interact with
the Mediator complex, but the relevance of this association to the therapeutic
effects of BET inhibitors in cancer is unclear. Here, we show that BET inhibition
causes a rapid release of Mediator from a subset of cis-regulatory elements in
the genome of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells. These sites of Mediator
eviction were highly correlated with transcriptional suppression of neighboring
genes, which are enriched for targets of the transcription factor MYB and for
functions related to leukemogenesis. A shRNA screen of Mediator in AML cells
identified the MED12, MED13, MED23, and MED24 subunits as performing a similar
regulatory function to BRD4 in this context, including a shared role in
sustaining a block in myeloid maturation. These findings suggest that the
interaction between BRD4 and Mediator has functional importance for gene-specific
transcriptional activation and for AML maintenance.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.03.054 
PMCID: PMC4838499
PMID: 27068464  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

