
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 May 13;473(4):1106-1110. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.04.023. Epub 2016 Apr 6.

Heterologous gene expression and functional analysis of a type III polyketide
synthase from Aspergillus niger NRRL 328.

Kirimura K(1), Watanabe S(2), Kobayashi K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Waseda
Universrity, 3-4-1 Ohkubo, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan. Electronic
address: kkohtaro@waseda.jp.
(2)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Waseda
Universrity, 3-4-1 Ohkubo, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan.

Type III polyketide synthases (PKSs) catalyze the formation of pyrone- and
resorcinol-types aromatic polyketides. The genomic analysis of the filamentous
fungus Aspergillus niger NRRL 328 revealed that this strain has a putative gene
(chr_8_2: 2978617-2979847) encoding a type III PKS, although its functions are
unknown. In this study, for functional analysis of this putative type III PKS
designated as An-CsyA, cloning and heterologous expression of the An-CsyA gene
(An-csyA) in Escherichia coli were performed. Recombinant His-tagged An-CsyA was 
successfully expressed in E. coli BL21 (DE3), purified by Ni(2+)-affinity
chromatography, and used for in vitro assay. Tests on the substrate specificity
of the His-tagged An-CsyA with myriad acyl-CoAs as starter substrates and
malonyl-CoA as extender substrate showed that His-tagged An-CsyA accepted fatty
acyl-CoAs (C2-C14) and produced triketide pyrones (C2-C14), tetraketide pyrones
(C2-C10), and pentaketide resorcinols (C10-C14). Furthermore, acetoacetyl-CoA,
malonyl-CoA, isobutyryl-CoA, and benzoyl-CoA were also accepted as starter
substrates, and both of triketide pyrones and tetraketide pyrones were produced. 
It is noteworthy that the His-tagged An-CsyA produced polyketides from
malonyl-CoA as starter and extender substrates and produced tetraketide pyrones
from short-chain fatty acyl-CoAs as starter substrates. Therefore, this is the
first report showing the functional properties of An-CsyA different from those of
other fungal type III PKSs.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.04.023 
PMID: 27060547  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

