
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Mar 31;7:453. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00453. eCollection
2016.

Selected Factors of Innate Immunity in Healthy Individuals with S. aureus Nasal
Carriage.

Karpiński TM(1), Żaba Z(2), Chudzicka-Strugała I(1), Szkaradkiewicz AK(3),
Jaworska A(1), Zeidler A(1), Andrzejewska E(1), Szkaradkiewicz A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences
Poznań, Poland.
(2)Department of Teaching Anaesthesiology and Intensive Therapy, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences Poznań, Poland.
(3)Department of Conservative Dentistry and Periodontology, Poznan University of 
Medical Sciences Poznań, Poland.

Nasal carriage of Staphylococcus aureus represents a well-defined factor of risk 
involving community and hospital-acquired infections. Recently a significance of 
several host factors has been pointed out and, in particular, of immune
determinants in nasal S. aureus colonization. Therefore, this study aimed at
analysis of manifestation involving manifestation in the nasal secretions of
important components of the host innate immunity - human beta-defensin-2 (HBD-2),
lysozyme (Ly), and interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) in healthy individuals and in persons
with persistent carriage of S. aureus. The studies were conducted in two groups
of healthy volunteers, encompassing non-carriers (group 1) or persistent carriers
of S. aureus (group 2). Elisa assays were employed to evaluate levels of HBD-2,
Ly, and IFN-γ in nasal secretions of the examined donors. In S. aureus carriers a
significant variability of HBD-2 levels was detected, corresponding to,
respectively, the high (averaging at 1.46 ng/ml) and the low (averaging at 0.13
ng/ml) secretory response of the defensin. The level of Ly in S. aureus carriers 
averaged at 1.46 μg/ml and it manifested no significant difference as compared to
that noted in non-carriers. In turn, concentrations of IFN-γ in nasal secretions 
in the group of carriers of S. aureus amounted on the average to 81.7 pg/ml and
they were 1.3-fold higher that in the group of non-carriers. The obtained results
allow to conclude that IFN-γ secretion by the nasal cavity-colonizing S. aureus
remains quantitatively insufficient to eliminate the pathogen. Nevertheless, a
significant increase in levels of this host factor may be important for
restriction of the staphylococcal colonization and protection against development
of an invasive infection. In turn, the role of HBD-2 and Ly in inactivation of
the colonizing S. aureus remains doubtful.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00453 
PMCID: PMC4814897
PMID: 27065998 

