
1. J Immunol Res. 2016;2016:4325646. doi: 10.1155/2016/4325646. Epub 2016 Mar 15.

Differences between Mycobacterium-Host Cell Relationships in Latent Tuberculous
Infection of Mice Ex Vivo and Mycobacterial Infection of Mouse Cells In Vitro.

Ufimtseva E(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Research Institute of Biochemistry, 2 Timakova Street, Novosibirsk 630117,
Russia.

The search for factors that account for the reproduction and survival of
mycobacteria, including vaccine strains, in host cells is the priority for
studies on tuberculosis. A comparison of BCG-mycobacterial loads in granuloma
cells obtained from bone marrow and spleens of mice with latent tuberculous
infection and cells from mouse bone marrow and peritoneal macrophage cultures
infected with the BCG vaccine in vitro has demonstrated that granuloma
macrophages each normally contained a single BCG-Mycobacterium, while those
acutely infected in vitro had increased mycobacterial loads and death rates.
Mouse granuloma cells were observed to produce the IFNγ, IL-1α, GM-CSF, CD1d,
CD25, CD31, СD35, and S100 proteins. None of these activation markers were found 
in mouse cell cultures infected in vitro or in intact macrophages. Lack of
colocalization of lipoarabinomannan-labeled BCG-mycobacteria with the
lysosomotropic LysoTracker dye in activated granuloma macrophages suggests that
these macrophages were unable to destroy BCG-mycobacteria. However, activated
mouse granuloma macrophages could control mycobacterial reproduction in cells
both in vivo and in ex vivo culture. By contrast, a considerable increase in the 
number of BCG-mycobacteria was observed in mouse bone marrow and peritoneal
macrophages after BCG infection in vitro, when no expression of the
activation-related molecules was detected in these cells.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/4325646 
PMCID: PMC4811625
PMID: 27066505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

