
1. J Cell Mol Med. 2016 Sep;20(9):1718-28. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12867. Epub 2016 Apr
12.

Identification of HLA-A*11:01-restricted Mycobacterium tuberculosis CD8(+) T cell
epitopes.

Liu SD(1), Su J(2), Zhang SM(1), Dong HP(3), Wang H(1), Luo W(1), Wen Q(1), He
JC(1), Yang XF(1), Ma L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Immunology, School of Biotechnology, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Nanfang Hospital,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Severe Tuberculosis Medicine, Guangzhou Chest Hospital,
Guangzhou, China.

New vaccines are needed to combat Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) infections.
The currently employed Bacillus Calmette-Guérin vaccine is becoming ineffective, 
due in part to the emergence of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) strains
and the reduced immune capacity in cases of HIV coinfection. CD8(+) T cells play 
an important role in the protective immunity against MTB infections, and the
identification of immunogenic CD8(+) T cell epitopes specific for MTB is
essential for the design of peptide-based vaccines. To identify CD8(+) T cell
epitopes of MTB proteins, we screened a set of 94 MTB antigens for HLA class I
A*11:01-binding motifs. HLA-A*11:01 is one of the most prevalent HLA molecules in
Southeast Asians, and definition of T cell epitopes it can restrict would provide
significant coverage for the Asian population. Peptides that bound with high
affinity to purified HLA molecules were subsequently evaluated in functional
assays to detect interferon-γ release and CD8(+) T cell proliferation in active
pulmonary TB patients. We identified six novel epitopes, each derived from a
unique MTB antigen, which were recognized by CD8(+) T cells from active pulmonary
TB patients. In addition, a significant level of epitope-specific T cells could
be detected ex vivo in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from active TB patients
by an HLA-A*11:01 dextramer carrying the peptide Rv3130c194-204 (from the MTB
triacylglycerol synthase Tgs1), which was the most frequently recognized epitope 
in our peptide library. In conclusion, this study identified six dominant CD8(+) 
T cell epitopes that may be considered potential targets for subunit vaccines or 
diagnostic strategies against TB.

© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.12867 
PMCID: PMC4988290
PMID: 27072810  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

