
1. Microbes Infect. 2016 Jul-Aug;18(7-8):496-504. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2016.03.012.
Epub 2016 Apr 12.

Use of human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons as a model for
Cerebral Toxoplasmosis.

Tanaka N(1), Ashour D(1), Dratz E(2), Halonen S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Montana State University, Bozeman, 
MT 59717, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Montana State University, Bozeman,
MT 59717, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Montana State University, Bozeman, 
MT 59717, USA. Electronic address: shalonen@montana.edu.

Toxoplasma gondii is a ubiquitous protozoan parasite with approximately one-third
of the worlds' population chronically infected. In chronically infected
individuals, the parasite resides primarily in cysts within neurons in the
central nervous system. The chronic infection in immunocompetent individuals has 
been considered to be asymptomatic but increasing evidence indicates the chronic 
infection can lead to neuropsychiatric disorders such as Schizophrenia, prenatal 
depression and suicidal thoughts. A better understanding of the mechanism(s) by
which the parasite exerts effects on human behavior is limited due to lack of
suitable human neuronal models. In this paper, we report the use of human neurons
derived from normal cord blood CD34+ cells generated via genetic reprogramming,
as an in vitro model for the study T. gondii in neurons. This culture method
resulted in a relatively pure monolayer of induced human neuronal-like cells that
stained positive for neuronal markers, MAP2, NFL, NFH and NeuN. These induced
human neuronal-like cells (iHNs) were efficiently infected by the Prugniad strain
of the parasite and supported replication of the tachyzoite stage and development
of the cyst stage. Infected iHNs could be maintained through 5 days of infection,
allowing for formation of large cysts. This induced human neuronal model
represents a novel culture method to study both tachyzoite and bradyzoite stages 
of T. gondii in human neurons.

Copyright © 2016 Institut Pasteur. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2016.03.012 
PMID: 27083472  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

