
1. Int J Oncol. 2016 Jun;48(6):2277-86. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3493. Epub 2016 Apr
18.

In vivo monitoring of CD44+ cancer stem-like cells by γ-irradiation in breast
cancer.

Kim MH(1), Kim MH(1), Kim KS(2), Park MJ(2), Jeong JH(3), Park SW(3), Ji YH(3),
Kim KI(1), Lee TS(1), Ryu PY(4), Kang JH(1), Lee YJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Imaging Research Center, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical
Sciences, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Radiation Cancer Research/Research Center for Radio-Senescence,
Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Research Center for Radiotherapy, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical 
Sciences, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Chonnam National University College of Medicine,
Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

There is increasing evidence that cancer contains cancer stem cells (CSCs) that
are capable of regenerating a tumor following chemotherapy or radiotherapy. CD44 
and CD133 are used to identify CSCs. This study investigated non-invasive in vivo
monitoring of CD44-positive cancer stem-like cells in breast cancer by
γ-irradiation using molecular image by fusing the firefly luciferase (fLuc) gene 
with the CD44 promoter. We generated a breast cancer cell line stably expressing 
fLuc gene by use of recombinant lentiviral vector controlled by CD44 promoter
(MCF7-CL). Irradiated MCF7-CL spheres showed upregulated expression of CD44 and
CD133, by immunofluorescence and flow cytometry. Also, gene expression levels of 
CSCs markers in irradiated spheres were clearly increased. CD44+ CSCs increased
fLuc expression and tumor growth in vivo and in vitro. When MCF7-CL was treated
with siCD44 and irradiated, CD44 expression was inhibited and cell survival ratio
was decreased. MCF7-CL subsets were injected into the mice and irradiated by
using a cobalt-60 source. Then, in vivo monitoring was performed to observe the
bioluminescence imaging (BLI). When breast cancer was irradiated, relative BLI
signal was increased, but tumor volume was decreased compared to non-irradiated
tumor. These results indicate that increased CD44 expression, caused by general
feature of CSCs by irradiation and sphere formation, can be monitored by using
bioluminescence imaging. This system could be useful to evaluate CD44- expressed 
CSCs in breast cancer by BLI in vivo as well as in vitro for radiotherapy.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3493 
PMCID: PMC4864145
PMID: 27098303  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

