
1. Hum Immunol. 2016 Jul;77(7):559-65. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2016.04.016. Epub 2016 
Apr 22.

Polymorphisms of IFN-γ (+874A/T) and IL-12 (+1188A/C) in tuberculosis patients
and their household contacts in Hyderabad, India.

Thada S(1), Ponnana M(2), Sivangala R(2), Joshi L(2), Alasandagutti M(2), Ansari 
MS(2), Schumann RR(3), Valluri V(4), Gaddam S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Bhagwan Mahavir Medical Research Centre, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India;
Institute for Microbiology and Hygiene, Charite University Medical Center,
Berlin, Germany.
(2)Bhagwan Mahavir Medical Research Centre, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India.
(3)Institute for Microbiology and Hygiene, Charite University Medical Center,
Berlin, Germany.
(4)Bhagwan Mahavir Medical Research Centre, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India;
LEPRA India - Blue Peter Public Health & Research Centre, Cherlapally, Hyderabad,
Andhra Pradesh, India.
(5)Bhagwan Mahavir Medical Research Centre, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India;
Department of Genetics, Osmania University Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
Electronic address: sumanlathag@yahoo.com.

Several cytokine gene variants have shown to be associated with host
susceptibility to infectious diseases including tuberculosis (TB). High rates of 
transmission were identified within household members of TB patients. In this
study, we examined whether single nucleotide polymorphisms of IFN-γ +874A/T and
IL-12 +1188A/C affect susceptibility to TB. Genomic DNA from patients with active
disease, their household contacts HHC and healthy controls HC was genotyped for
IFN-γ +874A/T and IL-12 +1188A/C SNPs by amplification refractory mutation
system-polymerase chain reaction (ARMS-PCR). IFN-γ +874 AA and AT genotypes were 
significantly with different frequencies in patients and total HHC as compared to
HC (p<0.0001). In patients IL-12 +1188 AC and CC genotypes were associated with
TB (p<0.003, p<0.008). In total HHC AC, CC genotypes and both alleles (A&C) were 
significantly different as compared to HC (p<0.004, p<0.001, p<0.034) and the
same result was obtained when HHC were stratified into related (p<0.02, p<0.001) 
and unrelated (p<0.009, p<0.017) individuals. Allelic frequencies, however, were 
significant only in related contacts (p<0.021). Generalized multifactor
dimensionality reduction method (GMDR) testing revealed high risk combinations of
several genotypes in IFN-γ & IL-12 genes. Our findings suggest an important role 
of genetic variations of IFN-γ and IL-12 for susceptibility to TB.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2016.04.016 
PMID: 27108964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

