
1. Comput Biol Chem. 2016 Jun;62:82-95. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2016.04.006.
Epub 2016 Apr 19.

Designing an efficient multi-epitope peptide vaccine against Vibrio cholerae via 
combined immunoinformatics and protein interaction based approaches.

Nezafat N(1), Karimi Z(2), Eslami M(1), Mohkam M(2), Zandian S(1), Ghasemi Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran; Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of
Pharmacy, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran; Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of
Pharmacy, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran; Department of
Medical Biotechnology, School of Advanced Medical Sciences and Technologies,
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. Electronic address:
ghasemiy@sums.ac.ir.

Cholera continues to be a major global health concern. Among different Vibrio
cholerae strains, only O1 and O139 cause acute diarrheal diseases that are
related to epidemic and pandemic outbreaks. The currently available cholera
vaccines are mainly lived and attenuated vaccines consisting of V. cholerae
virulence factors such as toxin-coregulated pili (TCP), outer membrane proteins
(Omps), and nontoxic cholera toxin B subunit (CTB). Nowadays, there is a great
interest in designing an efficient epitope vaccine against cholera. Epitope
vaccines consisting of immunodominant epitopes and adjuvant molecules enhance the
possibility of inciting potent protective immunity. In this study, V. cholerae
protective antigens (OmpW, OmpU, TcpA and TcpF) and the CTB, which is broadly
used as an immunostimulatory adjuvant, were analyzed using different
bioinformatics and immunoinformatics tools. The common regions between
promiscuous epitopes, binding to various HLA-II supertype alleles, and B-cell
epitopes were defined based upon the aforementioned protective antigens. The
ultimately selected epitopes and CTB adjuvant were fused together using proper
GPGPG linkers to enhance vaccine immunogenicity. A three-dimensional model of the
thus constructed vaccine was generated using I-TASSER. The model was structurally
validated using the ProSA-web error-detection software and the Ramachandran plot.
The validation results indicated that the initial 3D model needed refinement.
Subsequently, a high-quality model obtained after various refinement cycles was
used for defining conformational B-cell epitopes. Several linear and
conformational B-cell epitopes were determined within the epitope vaccine,
suggesting likely antibody triggering features of our designed vaccine. Next,
molecular docking was performed between the 3D vaccine model and the tertiary
structure of the toll like receptor 2 (TLR2). To gain further insight into the
interaction between vaccine and TLR2, molecular dynamics simulation was
performed, corroborating stable vaccine-TLR2 binding. In sum, the results suggest
that our designed epitope vaccine could incite robust long-term protective
immunity against V. cholera.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2016.04.006 
PMID: 27107181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

