
1. PLoS One. 2016 Apr 26;11(4):e0154043. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154043.
eCollection 2016.

Metabolomics Revealed an Association of Metabolite Changes and Defective Growth
in Methylobacterium extorquens AM1 Overexpressing ecm during Growth on Methanol.

Cui J(1), Good NM(2), Hu B(3), Yang J(1), Wang Q(4), Sadilek M(5), Yang S(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, Qingdao Agricultural University, Shandong Province Key
Laboratory of Applied Mycology, and Qingdao International Center on Microbes
Utilizing Biogas, Qingdao, Shandong Province, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States of America.
(3)Kemin Industries, KI Research & Development, Des Moines, Iowa, United States
of America.
(4)Central Laboratory, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, Shandong
Province, China.
(5)Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United
States of America.
(6)Key Laboratory of Systems Bioengineering, Ministry of Education, Tianjin
University, Tianjin, China.

Methylobacterium extorquens AM1 is a facultative methylotroph capable of growth
on both single-carbon and multi-carbon compounds. The ethylmalonyl-CoA (EMC)
pathway is one of the central assimilatory pathways in M. extorquens during
growth on C1 and C2 substrates. Previous studies had shown that ethylmalonyl-CoA 
mutase functioned as a control point during the transition from growth on
succinate to growth on ethylamine. In this study we overexpressed ecm, phaA,
mcmAB and found that upregulating ecm by expressing it from the strong
constitutive mxaF promoter caused a 27% decrease in growth rate on methanol
compared to the strain with an empty vector. Targeted metabolomics demonstrated
that most of the central intermediates in the ecm over-expressing strain did not 
change significantly compared to the control strain; However,
poly-Î²-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) was 4.5-fold lower and 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA was
1.6-fold higher. Moreover, glyoxylate, a toxic and highly regulated essential
intermediate, was determined to be 2.6-fold higher when ecm was overexpressed.
These results demonstrated that overexpressing ecm can manipulate carbon flux
through the EMC pathway and divert it from the carbon and energy storage product 
PHB, leading to an accumulation of glyoxylate. Furthermore, untargeted
metabolomics discovered two unusual metabolites, alanine
(Ala)-meso-diaminopimelic acid (mDAP) and Ala-mDAP-Ala, each over 45-fold higher 
in the ecm over-expressing strain. These two peptides were also found to be
highly produced in a dose-dependent manner when glyoxylate was added to the
control strain. Overall, this work has explained a direct association of ecm
overexpression with glyoxylate accumulation up to a toxic level, which inhibits
cell growth on methanol. This research provides useful insight for manipulating
the EMC pathway for efficiently producing high-value chemicals in M. extorquens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154043 
PMCID: PMC4846091
PMID: 27116459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

