
1. Eur J Immunol. 2016 Jul;46(7):1758-69. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545991. Epub 2016 May 
17.

In vivo engineering of mobilized stem cell grafts with the immunomodulatory drug 
FTY720 for allogeneic transplantation.

Lakshmikanth T(1)(2), Heuts F(2), Muvva SS(1), Wallin RP(2), Persson AK(2),
Fauriat C(1)(3)(4)(5), Applequist SE(1), Ljunggren HG(1), Höglund P(2), Kärre
K(2), Svensson M(1), Juarez JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Centre de Recherche en Cancerologie de Marseille, Inserm, Marseille, France.
(4)Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France.
(5)CNRS, Marseille, France.

The immunological attributes of stem cell grafts play an important role in the
outcome of allogeneic stem cell transplants. Currently, ex vivo manipulation
techniques such as bulk T-cell depletion or positive selection of CD34(+) cells
are utilized to improve the immunological attributes of grafts and minimize the
potential for graft-versus-host disease (GvHD). Here, we demonstrate a novel
graft engineering technique, which utilizes the immunomodulatory drug FTY720 for 
in vivo depletion of naïve T (TN ) cells from donor G-CSF-mobilized grafts
without ex vivo manipulation. We show that treatment of donor mice with FTY720
during mobilization depletes grafts of TN cells and prevents lethal GvHD
following transplantation in a major mismatch setting. Importantly, both stem
cells and NK cells are retained in the FTY720-treated grafts. FTY720 treatment
does not negatively affect the engraftment potential of stem cells as
demonstrated in our congenic transplants or the functionality of NK cells. In
addition, potentially useful memory T cells may be retained in the graft. These
findings suggest that FTY720 may be used to optimize the immunological attributes
of G-CSF-mobilized grafts by removing potentially deleterious TN cells which can 
contribute to GvHD, and by retaining useful cells which can promote immunity in
the recipient.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201545991 
PMID: 27119199  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

