
1. Biomed Res Int. 2016;2016:7923874. doi: 10.1155/2016/7923874. Epub 2016 Mar 24.

Advantages and Limitations of Direct PCR Amplification of Bacterial 16S-rDNA from
Resected Heart Tissue or Swabs Followed by Direct Sequencing for Diagnosing
Infective Endocarditis: A Retrospective Analysis in the Routine Clinical Setting.

Maneg D(1), Sponsel J(1), MÃ¼ller I(1), Lohr B(1), Penders J(2), Madlener K(3),
Hunfeld KP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Microbiology and Infection Control, The
Northwest Medical Centre, 60488 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)CAPHRI School for Public Health and Primary Care, Department of Medical
Microbiology, Maastricht University Medical Center, 6200 MD Maastricht,
Netherlands.
(3)Kerckhoff Klinik, 61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany.

Infective endocarditis (IE) is a life-threatening disease that is associated with
high morbidity and mortality. Its long-term prognosis strongly depends on a
timely and optimized antibiotic treatment. Therefore, identification of the
causative pathogen is crucial and currently based on blood cultures followed by
characterization and susceptibility testing of the isolate. However, antibiotic
treatment starting prior to blood sampling or IE caused by fastidious or
intracellular microorganisms may cause negative culture results. Here we
investigate the additional diagnostic value of broad-range PCR in combination
with direct sequencing on resected heart tissue or swabs in patients with tissue 
or swab culture-negative IE in a routine clinical setting. Sensitivity,
specificity, and positive and negative predictive values of broad-range PCR from 
diagnostic material in our patients were 33.3%, 76.9%, 90.9%, and 14.3%,
respectively. We identified a total of 20 patients (21.5%) with tissue or
culture-negative IE who profited by the additional application of broad-range
PCR. We conclude that broad-range PCR on resected heart tissue or swabs is an
important complementary diagnostic approach. It should be seen as an
indispensable new tool for both the therapeutic and diagnostic management of
culture-negative IE and we thus propose its possible inclusion in Duke's
diagnostic classification scheme.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/7923874 
PMCID: PMC4823489
PMID: 27110570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

