
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 May 10;113(19):5251-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1525034113. Epub 2016 Apr 25.

Divergent non-heme iron enzymes in the nogalamycin biosynthetic pathway.

Siitonen V(1), Selvaraj B(2), Niiranen L(1), Lindqvist Y(2), Schneider G(3),
Metsä-Ketelä M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku, FIN-20014, Turku, Finland;
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet,
S-171 77, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet,
S-171 77, Stockholm, Sweden mikko.mk@gmail.com gunter.schneider@ki.se.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku, FIN-20014, Turku, Finland;
mikko.mk@gmail.com gunter.schneider@ki.se.

Nogalamycin, an aromatic polyketide displaying high cytotoxicity, has a unique
structure, with one of the carbohydrate units covalently attached to the aglycone
via an additional carbon-carbon bond. The underlying chemistry, which implies a
particularly challenging reaction requiring activation of an aliphatic carbon
atom, has remained enigmatic. Here, we show that the unusual C5''-C2
carbocyclization is catalyzed by the non-heme iron α-ketoglutarate
(α-KG)-dependent SnoK in the biosynthesis of the anthracycline nogalamycin. The
data are consistent with a mechanistic proposal whereby the Fe(IV) = O center
abstracts the H5'' atom from the amino sugar of the substrate, with subsequent
attack of the aromatic C2 carbon on the radical center. We further show that, in 
the same metabolic pathway, the homologous SnoN (38% sequence identity) catalyzes
an epimerization step at the adjacent C4'' carbon, most likely via a radical
mechanism involving the Fe(IV) = O center. SnoK and SnoN have surprisingly
similar active site architectures considering the markedly different chemistries 
catalyzed by the enzymes. Structural studies reveal that the differences are
achieved by minor changes in the alignment of the substrates in front of the
reactive ferryl-oxo species. Our findings significantly expand the repertoire of 
reactions reported for this important protein family and provide an illustrative 
example of enzyme evolution.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1525034113 
PMCID: PMC4868444
PMID: 27114534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

