
1. PLoS One. 2016 Apr 25;11(4):e0154153. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154153.
eCollection 2016.

Characterisation of the Immunomodulatory Effects of Meningococcal Opa Proteins on
Human Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells and CD4+ T Cells.

Jones C(1), Sadarangani M(1), Lewis S(1), Payne I(1), Saleem M(2), Derrick JP(2),
Pollard AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Vaccine Group, Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford and NIHR
Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
(2)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom.

Opa proteins are major surface-expressed proteins located in the Neisseria
meningitidis outer membrane, and are potential meningococcal vaccine candidates. 
Although Opa proteins elicit high levels of bactericidal antibodies following
immunisation in mice, progress towards human clinical trials has been delayed due
to previous findings that Opa inhibits T cell proliferation in some in vitro
assays. However, results from previous studies are conflicting, with different
Opa preparations and culture conditions being used. We investigated the effects
of various Opa+ and Opa- antigens from N. meningitidis strain H44/76 in a range
of in vitro conditions using peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and
purified CD4+ T cells, measuring T cell proliferation by CFSE dilution using flow
cytometry. Wild type recombinant and liposomal Opa proteins inhibited CD4+ T cell
proliferation after stimulation with IL-2, anti-CD3 and anti-CD28, and these
effects were reduced by mutation of the CEACAM1-binding region of Opa. These
effects were not observed in culture with ex vivo PBMCs. Opa+ and Opa- OMVs did
not consistently exert a stimulatory or inhibitory effect across different
culture conditions. These data do not support a hypothesis that Opa proteins
would be inhibitory to T cells if given as a vaccine component, and T cell immune
responses to OMV vaccines are unlikely to be significantly affected by the
presence of Opa proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154153 
PMCID: PMC4844130
PMID: 27111850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

