
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016 Jun 20;60(7):4082-8. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00368-16.
Print 2016 Jul.

Mechanisms Involved in Acquisition of blaNDM Genes by IncA/C2 and IncFIIY
Plasmids.

Wailan AM(1), Sidjabat HE(2), Yam WK(2), Alikhan NF(3), Petty NK(4), Sartor
AL(2), Williamson DA(5), Forde BM(4), Schembri MA(4), Beatson SA(4), Paterson
DL(6), Walsh TR(2), Partridge SR(7).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland, UQ Centre for Clinical Research, Herston,
Queensland, Australia alexander.wailan@uqconnect.edu.au
sally.partridge@health.nsw.gov.au.
(2)The University of Queensland, UQ Centre for Clinical Research, Herston,
Queensland, Australia.
(3)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, Brisbane, Australia.
(4)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, Brisbane, Australia School of 
Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Australia.
(5)Institute of Environmental Science and Research, Wellington, New Zealand.
(6)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, Brisbane, Australia Infectious
Diseases Unit, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Brisbane, Australia Pathology
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(7)Centre for Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, The Westmead Institute for
Medical Research, The University of Sydney, Westmead Hospital, New South Wales,
Australia alexander.wailan@uqconnect.edu.au sally.partridge@health.nsw.gov.au.

blaNDM genes confer carbapenem resistance and have been identified on
transferable plasmids belonging to different incompatibility (Inc) groups. Here
we present the complete sequences of four plasmids carrying a blaNDM gene,
pKP1-NDM-1, pEC2-NDM-3, pECL3-NDM-1, and pEC4-NDM-6, from four clinical samples
originating from four different patients. Different plasmids carry segments that 
align to different parts of the blaNDM region found on Acinetobacter plasmids.
pKP1-NDM-1 and pEC2-NDM-3, from Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia coli,
respectively, were identified as type 1 IncA/C2 plasmids with almost identical
backbones. Different regions carrying blaNDM are inserted in different locations 
in the antibiotic resistance island known as ARI-A, and ISCR1 may have been
involved in the acquisition of blaNDM-3 by pEC2-NDM-3. pECL3-NDM-1 and
pEC4-NDM-6, from Enterobacter cloacae and E. coli, respectively, have similar
IncFIIY backbones, but different regions carrying blaNDM are found in different
locations. Tn3-derived inverted-repeat transposable elements (TIME) appear to
have been involved in the acquisition of blaNDM-6 by pEC4-NDM-6 and the rmtC 16S 
rRNA methylase gene by IncFIIY plasmids. Characterization of these plasmids
further demonstrates that even very closely related plasmids may have acquired
blaNDM genes by different mechanisms. These findings also illustrate the complex 
relationships between antimicrobial resistance genes, transposable elements, and 
plasmids and provide insights into the possible routes for transmission of blaNDM
genes among species of the Enterobacteriaceae family.

Copyright Â© 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00368-16 
PMCID: PMC4914633
PMID: 27114281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

