
1. PLoS One. 2016 Apr 28;11(4):e0154590. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154590.
eCollection 2016.

Porphyromonas gingivalis Differentially Modulates Cell Death Profile in Ox-LDL
and TNF-α Pre-Treated Endothelial Cells.

Bugueno IM(1), Khelif Y(1), Seelam N(1)(2), Morand DN(1)(2), Tenenbaum H(1)(2),
Davideau JL(1)(2), Huck O(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM 1109 « Osteoarticular & Dental Regenerative Nanomedicine », Fédération 
de Médecine Translationnelle de Strasbourg (FMTS), Strasbourg, France.
(2)Université de Strasbourg, Faculté de Chirurgie-dentaire, Department of
Periodontology, Strasbourg, France.

OBJECTIVE: Clinical studies demonstrated a potential link between atherosclerosis
and periodontitis. Porphyromonas gingivalis (Pg), one of the main periodontal
pathogen, has been associated to atheromatous plaque worsening. However,
synergism between infection and other endothelial stressors such as oxidized-LDL 
or TNF-α especially on endothelial cell (EC) death has not been investigated.
This study aims to assess the role of Pg on EC death in an inflammatory context
and to determine potential molecular pathways involved.
METHODS: Human umbilical vein ECs (HUVECs) were infected with Pg (MOI 100) or
stimulated by its lipopolysaccharide (Pg-LPS) (1μg/ml) for 24 to 48 hours. Cell
viability was measured with AlamarBlue test, type of cell death induced was
assessed using Annexin V/propidium iodide staining. mRNA expression regarding
caspase-1, -3, -9, Bcl-2, Bax-1 and Apaf-1 has been evaluated with RT-qPCR.
Caspases enzymatic activity and concentration of APAF-1 protein were evaluated to
confirm mRNA results.
RESULTS: Pg infection and Pg-LPS stimulation induced EC death. A cumulative
effect has been observed in Ox-LDL pre-treated ECs infected or stimulated. This
effect was not observed in TNF-α pre-treated cells. Pg infection promotes EC
necrosis, however, in infected Ox-LDL pre-treated ECs, apoptosis was promoted.
This effect was not observed in TNF-α pre-treated cells highlighting specificity 
of molecular pathways activated. Regarding mRNA expression, Pg increased
expression of pro-apoptotic genes including caspases-1,-3,-9, Bax-1 and decreased
expression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2. In Ox-LDL pre-treated ECs, Pg increased
significantly the expression of Apaf-1. These results were confirmed at the
protein level.
CONCLUSION: This study contributes to demonstrate that Pg and its Pg-LPS could
exacerbate Ox-LDL and TNF-α induced endothelial injury through increase of EC
death. Interestingly, molecular pathways are differentially modulated by the
infection in function of the pre-stimulation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154590 
PMCID: PMC4849801
PMID: 27124409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

