
1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2016 Jun;36(6):1263-71. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.115.306094. Epub 2016 Apr 28.

Micro-RNA-126 Reduces the Blood Thrombogenicity in Diabetes Mellitus via
Targeting of Tissue Factor.

Witkowski M(1), Weithauser A(1), Tabaraie T(1), Steffens D(1), Kränkel N(1),
Witkowski M(1), Stratmann B(1), Tschoepe D(1), Landmesser U(1), Rauch-Kroehnert
U(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Charité Centrum 11, Department of Cardiology,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany; Research Centre Immunology and
Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Mainz Medical
Centre, Mainz, Germany; and Heart and Diabetes Center NRW, Ruhr University of
Bochum, Bad Oeynhausen, Germany.
(2)From the Charité Centrum 11, Department of Cardiology,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany; Research Centre Immunology and
Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Mainz Medical
Centre, Mainz, Germany; and Heart and Diabetes Center NRW, Ruhr University of
Bochum, Bad Oeynhausen, Germany. ursula.rauch@charite.de.

OBJECTIVE: Diabetes mellitus involves vascular inflammatory processes and is a
main contributor to cardiovascular mortality. Notably, heightened levels of
circulating tissue factor (TF) account for the increased thrombogenicity and put 
those patients at risk for thromboembolic events. Here, we sought to investigate 
the role of micro-RNA (miR)-driven TF expression and thrombogenicity in diabetes 
mellitus.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Plasma samples of patients with diabetes mellitus were
analyzed for TF protein and activity as well as miR-126 expression before and
after optimization of the antidiabetic treatment. We found low miR-126 levels to 
be associated with markedly increased TF protein and TF-mediated thrombogenicity.
Reduced miR-126 expression was accompanied by increased vascular inflammation as 
evident from the levels of vascular adhesion molecule-1 and fibrinogen, as well
as leukocyte counts. With optimization of the antidiabetic treatment miR-126
levels increased and thrombogenicity was reduced. Using a luciferase reporter
system, we demonstrated miR-126 to directly bind to the F3-3'-untranslated
region, thereby reducing TF expression both on mRNA and on protein levels in
human microvascular endothelial cells as well as TF mRNA and activity in
monocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Circulating miR-126 exhibits antithrombotic properties via
regulating post-transcriptional TF expression, thereby impacting the hemostatic
balance of the vasculature in diabetes mellitus.

© 2016 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.115.306094 
PMCID: PMC4894779
PMID: 27127202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

