
1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2016 Oct;163:68-76. doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2016.04.004.
Epub 2016 Apr 25.

Biotransformation of the mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists spironolactone
and canrenone by human CYP11B1 and CYP11B2: Characterization of the products and 
their influence on mineralocorticoid receptor transactivation.

Schiffer L(1), Müller AR(1), Hobler A(1), Brixius-Anderko S(1), Zapp J(2),
Hannemann F(1), Bernhardt R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Saarland University, Campus B2.2, 66123
Saarbruecken, Germany.
(2)Pharmaceutical Biology, Saarland University, Campus C2.2, 66123 Saarbruecken, 
Germany.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry, Saarland University, Campus B2.2, 66123
Saarbruecken, Germany. Electronic address: ritabern@mx.uni-saarland.de.

Spironolactone and its major metabolite canrenone are potent mineralocorticoid
receptor antagonists and are, therefore, applied as drugs for the treatment of
primary aldosteronism and essential hypertension. We report that both compounds
can be converted by the purified adrenocortical cytochromes P450 CYP11B1 and
CYP11B2, while no conversion of the selective mineralocorticoid receptor
antagonist eplerenone was observed. As their natural function, CYP11B1 and
CYP11B2 carry out the final steps in the biosynthesis of gluco- and
mineralocorticoids. Dissociation constants for the new exogenous substrates were 
determined by a spectroscopic binding assay and demonstrated to be comparable to 
those of the natural substrates, 11-deoxycortisol and 11-deoxycorticosterone.
Metabolites were produced at preparative scale with a CYP11B2-dependent
Escherichia coli whole-cell system and purified by HPLC. Using NMR spectroscopy, 
the metabolites of spironolactone were identified as 11β-OH-spironolactone,
18-OH-spironolactone and 19-OH-spironolactone. Canrenone was converted to
11β-OH-canrenone, 18-OH-canrenone as well as to the CYP11B2-specific product
11β,18-diOH-canrenone. Therefore, a contribution of CYP11B1 and CYP11B2 to the
biotransformation of drugs should be taken into account and the metabolites
should be tested for their potential toxic and pharmacological effects. A
mineralocorticoid receptor transactivation assay in antagonist mode revealed
11β-OH-spironolactone as pharmaceutically active metabolite, whereas all other
hydroxylation products negate the antagonist properties of spironolactone and
canrenone. Thus, human CYP11B1 and CYP11B2 turned out to metabolize steroid-based
drugs additionally to the liver-dependent biotransformation of drugs. Compared
with the action of the parental drug, changed properties of the metabolites at
the target site have been observed.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2016.04.004 
PMID: 27125452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

