
1. Mol Oral Microbiol. 2017 Apr;32(2):166-177. doi: 10.1111/omi.12163. Epub 2016 Jul
6.

Filifactor alocis collagenase can modulate apoptosis of normal oral
keratinocytes.

Chioma O(1), Aruni AW(1), Milford TA(1), Fletcher HM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Department of Basic Sciences,
School of Medicine, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, USA.
(2)Institute of Oral Biology, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Korea.

To successfully colonize host cells, pathogenic bacteria must circumvent the
host's structural barrier such as the collagen-rich extracellular matrix (ECM),
as a preliminary step to invasion and colonization of the periodontal tissue.
Filifactor alocis possesses a putative Peptidase U32 family protein
(HMPREF0389_00504) with collagenase activity that may play a significant role in 
colonization of host tissue during periodontitis by breaking down collagen into
peptides and disruption of the host cell. Domain architecture of the
HMPREF0389_00504 protein predicted the presence of a characteristic PrtC-like
collagenase domain, and a peptidase domain. Our study demonstrated that the
recombinant F. alocis peptidase U32 protein (designated PrtFAC) can interact
with, and degrade, type I collagen, heat-denatured collagen and gelatin in a
calcium-dependent manner. PrtFAC decreased viability and induced apoptosis of
normal oral keratinocytes (NOKs) in a time and dose-dependent manner.
Transcriptome analysis of NOK cells treated with PrtFAC showed an upregulation of
the genes encoding human pro-apoptotic proteins: Apoptotic peptidase activating
factor 1 (Apaf1) cytochrome C, as well as caspase 3 and caspase 9, suggesting the
involvement of the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. There was a significant
increase in caspase 3/7 activity in NOK cells treated with PrtFAC. Taken
together, these findings suggest that F. alocis PrtFAC protein may play a role in
the virulence and pathogenesis of F. alocis.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/omi.12163 
PMCID: PMC5097893
PMID: 27149930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

