
1. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2016 Aug;13(8):417-22. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2015.2091. Epub
2016 May 5.

A Multischool Outbreak Due to Salmonella enterica serovar Napoli Associated with 
Elevated Rates of Hospitalizations and Bacteremia, Milan, Italy, 2014.

Huedo P(1), Gori M(1), Amato E(1), Bianchi R(2), Valerio E(2), Magnoli L(2),
Pontello M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Universit√† degli Studi di Milano ,
Milan, Italy .
(2)2 Dipartimento di Prevenzione Medico ASL Milano 1 , Milan, Italy .

A multischool outbreak of salmonellosis caused by Salmonella enterica serovar
Napoli was investigated in the province of Milan from October to November 2014,
following an increase in school absenteeism coinciding with two positive cases.
Epidemiological studies detected 47 cases in four primary schools: 46 children
and 1 adult woman (51.4% males and 48.6% females, median age 8.9). From these, 14
cases (29.8%) were severe and resulted in hospitalization, including 6 children
(12.8%) who developed an invasive salmonellosis. The epidemic curve revealed an
abnormally long incubation period, peaking 1 week after the first confirmed case.
Twenty-five available isolates were typed by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis
showing an identical pattern. The isolate belongs to ST474, an ST composed
exclusively of Salmonella Napoli human strains isolated in France and Italy.
Antibiotic resistance analysis showed resistance to aminoglycosides, correlating 
with the presence of the aminoglycoside resistance gene aadA25 in its genome.
Trace-back investigations strongly suggested contaminated ham as the most likely 
food vehicle, which was delivered by a common food center on 21 October.
Nevertheless, this ingredient could not be retrospectively investigated since it 
was no longer available at the repository. This represents the largest Salmonella
Napoli outbreak ever reported in Italy and provides a unique scenario for
studying the outcome of salmonellosis caused by this emerging and potentially
invasive nontyphoidal serotype.

DOI: 10.1089/fpd.2015.2091 
PMID: 27148636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

