
1. Hypertension. 2016 Jul;68(1):167-74. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.116.07493. Epub
2016 May 2.

Interleukin-17A Regulates Renal Sodium Transporters and Renal Injury in
Angiotensin II-Induced Hypertension.

Norlander AE(1), Saleh MA(1), Kamat NV(1), Ko B(1), Gnecco J(1), Zhu L(1), Dale
BL(1), Iwakura Y(1), Hoover RS(1), McDonough AA(1), Madhur MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics (A.E.N., B.L.D.,
M.S.M.) and Microbiology, Immunology, and Pathology (J.G.), Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, TN; Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of
Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN (M.A.S., L.Z.,
M.S.M.); Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Mansoura
University, Mansoura, Egypt (M.A.S.); Department of Cell and Neurobiology, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles (N.V.K.,
A.A.M.D.); Department of Medicine, Chicago University School of Medicine, IL
(B.K.); Research Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Tokyo University of Science, 
Tokyo, Japan (Y.I.); and Division of Renal Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA (R.S.H.).

Angiotensin II-induced hypertension is associated with an increase in T-cell
production of interleukin-17A (IL-17A). Recently, we reported that IL-17A(-/-)
mice exhibit blunted hypertension, preserved natriuresis in response to a saline 
challenge, and decreased renal sodium hydrogen exchanger 3 expression after 2
weeks of angiotensin II infusion compared with wild-type mice. In the current
study, we performed renal transporter profiling in mice deficient in IL-17A or
the related isoform, IL-17F, after 4 weeks of Ang II infusion, the time when the 
blood pressure reduction in IL-17A(-/-) mice is most prominent. Deficiency of
IL-17A abolished the activation of distal tubule transporters, specifically the
sodium-chloride cotransporter and the epithelial sodium channel and protected
mice from glomerular and tubular injury. In human proximal tubule (HK-2) cells,
IL-17A increased sodium hydrogen exchanger 3 expression through a serum and
glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1-dependent pathway. In mouse distal convoluted
tubule cells, IL-17A increased sodium-chloride cotransporter activity in a serum 
and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1/Nedd4-2-dependent pathway. In both cell
types, acute treatment with IL-17A induced phosphorylation of serum and
glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1 at serine 78, and treatment with a serum and
glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1 inhibitor blocked the effects of IL-17A on
sodium hydrogen exchanger 3 and sodium-chloride cotransporter. Interestingly,
both HK-2 and mouse distal convoluted tubule 15 cells produce endogenous IL-17A. 
IL17F had little or no effect on blood pressure or renal sodium transporter
abundance. These studies provide a mechanistic link by which IL-17A modulates
renal sodium transport and suggest that IL-17A inhibition may improve renal
function in hypertension and other autoimmune disorders.

Â© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.116.07493 
PMCID: PMC4900947
PMID: 27141060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

