
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Jul 8;44(12):5944-56. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw388. Epub 2016 
May 5.

'Z-DNA like' fragments in RNA: a recurring structural motif with implications for
folding, RNA/protein recognition and immune response.

D'Ascenzo L(1), Leonarski F(2), Vicens Q(3), Auffinger P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, Université de Strasbourg, Institut de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du CNRS, Strasbourg 67084, France.
(2)Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, Université de Strasbourg, Institut de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du CNRS, Strasbourg 67084, France Faculty of
Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Pasteura 1, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, Université de Strasbourg, Institut de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du CNRS, Strasbourg 67084, France
q.vicens@ibmc-cnrs.unistra.fr.
(4)Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, Université de Strasbourg, Institut de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du CNRS, Strasbourg 67084, France
p.auffinger@ibmc-cnrs.unistra.fr.

Since the work of Alexander Rich, who solved the first Z-DNA crystal structure,
we have known that d(CpG) steps can adopt a particular structure that leads to
forming left-handed helices. However, it is still largely unrecognized that other
sequences can adopt 'left-handed' conformations in DNA and RNA, in double as well
as single stranded contexts. These 'Z-like' steps involve the coexistence of
several rare structural features: a C2'-endo puckering, a syn nucleotide and a
lone pair-π stacking between a ribose O4' atom and a nucleobase. This particular 
arrangement induces a conformational stress in the RNA backbone, which limits the
occurrence of Z-like steps to ≈0.1% of all dinucleotide steps in the PDB. Here,
we report over 600 instances of Z-like steps, which are located within r(UNCG)
tetraloops but also in small and large RNAs including riboswitches, ribozymes and
ribosomes. Given their complexity, Z-like steps are probably associated with slow
folding kinetics and once formed could lock a fold through the formation of
unique long-range contacts. Proteins involved in immunologic response also
specifically recognize/induce these peculiar folds. Thus, characterizing the
conformational features of these motifs could be a key to understanding the
immune response at a structural level.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw388 
PMCID: PMC4937326
PMID: 27151194  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

