
1. Vet Microbiol. 2016 Oct 15;194:93-97. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2016.04.015. Epub
2016 Apr 25.

Characterization of canine and feline methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
pseudintermedius (MRSP) from Thailand.

Kadlec K(1), Weiß S(2), Wendlandt S(2), Schwarz S(2), Tonpitak W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Farm Animal Genetics, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut (FLI),
Neustadt, Mariensee, Germany. Electronic address: kristina.kadlec@fli.bund.de.
(2)Institute of Farm Animal Genetics, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut (FLI),
Neustadt, Mariensee, Germany.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Mahanakorn
University of Technology, Bangkok, Thailand.

Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus pseudintermedius (MRSP) in small animal
practice are very difficult to treat due to multi-resistance. In contrast to
other countries, little is known about MRSP from Thailand. In particular,
information on feline MRSP isolates in general is rare. In total, 39 MRSP
isolates from dogs (n=28) and cats (n=11) from Thailand collected from
independent clinical cases were used. Oxacillin resistance and presence of the
mecA gene was confirmed. Susceptibility to additional 29 antimicrobial agents was
tested according to CLSI recommendations. Antimicrobial resistance genes were
detected by PCR assays. Molecular typing comprised spa typing, dru typing and
macrorestriction analysis with subsequent pulsed-field gel electrophoresis
(PFGE). For selected isolates, multi-locus sequence typing (MLST) was performed. 
All isolates were multi-resistant with resistance to at least six classes of
antimicrobial agents. In all cases corresponding resistance genes were detected. 
In addition to mecA, the genes blaZ, catpC221, aacA/aphD, erm(B), dfrG, tet(M)
and tet(K) were identified. Six spa types (t02, t05, t09, t10, t23, t72), eleven 
dru types (dt8ak, dt10ao, dt10cp, dt10cq, dt11a, dt11bo, dt11cb, dt11cj, dt11v,
dt11y, dt11z) and 27 PFGE types (designated as A1-A10, B1-B8, C1-C2, D, E, F, G, 
H, I, J) were identified. MLST for one isolate of each main PFGE pattern A-J
revealed seven types [ST45 (n=3), ST112, ST155, ST282 and the novel types ST432, 
ST433 (n=2) and ST434]. This study showed that MRSP isolates from clinical cases 
in individual dogs and cats in Thailand are multi-resistant with similar
resistance genes and characteristics as isolates from Europe and North America.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2016.04.015 
PMID: 27160358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

