
1. Theriogenology. 2016 Sep 15;86(5):1203-11. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2016.04.011. Epub 2016 Apr 18.

Oxytocin plus antibiotics: A synergism of potentiation to enhance bovine uterine 
contractility.

Piccinno M(1), Rizzo A(1), Cariello G(2), Staffieri F(1), Sciorsci RL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, Section of Veterinary
Medicine and Animal Production, University of Bari Aldo Moro, Valenzano, BA,
Italy.
(2)ASL, Specialist agreement, Siav, Putignano, Bari, Italy.
(3)Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, Section of Veterinary
Medicine and Animal Production, University of Bari Aldo Moro, Valenzano, BA,
Italy. Electronic address: raffaeleluigi.sciorsci@uniba.it.

This in vitro study investigates the modulatory effect of three antibiotics
(amoxicillin, enrofloxacin, and rifaximin) on contractility of the bovine uterine
tissue, in follicular and luteal phases. The evaluation of the effects of these
antibiotics (10(-4) M) was performed on oxytocin-induced contractility. The
decision to test these antibiotics with the oxytocin (10(-6) M) comes from the
reported ability of these combinations of hinder the antibiotic resistance and
the formation of bacterial biofilms. The procedures were carried out in isolated 
organ bath, and the contractile functionality of the strip throughout the
experiment was evaluated after a dose of carbachol (10(-5) M). The results
demonstrate the different modulatory activity of these antibiotics, on the
plateau of contraction induced by oxytocin, in both phases of the estrus cycle.
The differing individual antibiotic effects of our testing made it possible to
identify, only in some cases. Rifaximin in the follicular phase and enrofloxacin 
in both phases of the estrous cycle, induced a synergistic enhancement
(potentiation) of uterine strip contraction induced by oxytocin. This result is
thought important because these associations might enable, in vivo, a
simultaneous increase of uterine cleaning and the antimicrobial action on
bacteria in planktonic form and of those organized in biofilms.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.theriogenology.2016.04.011 
PMID: 27173953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

