
1. Protein J. 2016 Jun;35(3):225-30. doi: 10.1007/s10930-016-9665-y.

Expression, Purification, Crystallisation and X-ray Crystallographic Analysis of 
a Truncated Form of Human Src Homology 2 Containing Inositol 5-Phosphatase 2.

Le Coq J(1), Heredia Gallego L(1), Lietha D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signalling and Adhesion Group, Structural Biology and Biocomputing
Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Calle Melchor
Fernández Almagro 3, 28029, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Cell Signalling and Adhesion Group, Structural Biology and Biocomputing
Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Calle Melchor
Fernández Almagro 3, 28029, Madrid, Spain. dlietha@cnio.es.

The Src homology 2 containing inositol 5-phosphatase 2 (SHIP2) catalyses the
dephosphorylation of the phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate
(PI(3,4,5)P3) to form PI(3,4)P2. PI(3,4,5)P3 is a key lipid second messenger,
which can recruit signalling proteins to the plasma membrane and subsequently
initiate numerous downstream signalling pathways responsible for the regulation
of a plethora of cellular events such as proliferation, growth, apoptosis and
cytoskeletal rearrangements. SHIP2 has been heavily implicated with several
serious diseases such as cancer and type 2 diabetes but its regulation remains
poorly understood. In order to gain insight into the mechanisms of SHIP2
regulation, a fragment of human SHIP2 containing the phosphatase domain and a
region proposed to resemble a C2 domain was crystallized. Currently, no
structural information is available on the putative C2-related domain or its
relative position with respect to the phosphatase domain. Initial crystals were
polycrystalline, but were optimized to obtain diffraction data to a resolution of
2.1 Å. Diffraction data analysis revealed a P212121 space group with unit cell
parameters a = 136.04 Å, b = 175.84 Å, c = 176.89 Å. The Matthews coefficient is 
2.54 Å(3) Da(-1) corresponding to 8 molecules in the asymmetric unit with a
solvent content of 51.7 %.

DOI: 10.1007/s10930-016-9665-y 
PMID: 27170292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

