
1. Cell Host Microbe. 2016 May 11;19(5):731-43. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2016.04.017.

Genetic Determinants of the Gut Microbiome in UK Twins.

Goodrich JK(1), Davenport ER(1), Beaumont M(2), Jackson MA(2), Knight R(3), Ober 
C(4), Spector TD(2), Bell JT(2), Clark AG(1), Ley RE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14850, USA.
(2)Department of Twin Research & Genetic Epidemiology, King's College London,
London SE1 7EH, UK.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Computer Science and Engineering, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14850, USA; Department of Microbiome Science, Max Planck Institute for
Developmental Biology, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. Electronic address:
rel222@cornell.edu.

Studies in mice and humans have revealed intriguing associations between host
genetics and the microbiome. Here we report a 16S rRNA-based analysis of the gut 
microbiome in 1,126 twin pairs, a subset of which was previously reported.
Tripling the sample narrowed the confidence intervals around heritability
estimates and uncovered additional heritable taxa, some of which are validated in
other studies. Repeat sampling of subjects showed heritable taxa to be temporally
stable. A candidate gene approach uncovered associations between heritable taxa
and genes related to diet, metabolism, and olfaction. We replicate an association
between Bifidobacterium and the lactase (LCT) gene locus and identify an
association between the host gene ALDH1L1 and the bacteria SHA-98, suggesting a
link between formate production and blood pressure. Additional genes detected are
involved in barrier defense and self/non-self recognition. Our results indicate
that diet-sensing, metabolism, and immune defense are important drivers of
human-microbiome co-evolution.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2016.04.017 
PMCID: PMC4915943
PMID: 27173935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

