
1. Iran J Vet Res. 2015 Summer;16(3):261-6.

Characterization of Enterococcus faecalis isolates originating from different
sources for their virulence factors and genes, antibiotic resistance patterns,
genotypes and biofilm production.

Gulhan T(1), Boynukara B(2), Ciftci A(1), Sogut MU(3), Findik A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ondokuz Mayis
University, 55139 Kurupelit, Samsun, Turkey;
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Namik Kemal
University, Tekirdag, Turkey;
(3)Department of Dietetics, High School of Health, Ondokuz Mayis University,
55139 Kurupelit, Samsun, Turkey.

In this study, 72 Enterococcus faecalis isolates originating from humans (n=39), 
dogs (n=26) and cats (n=7) were investigated for some virulence factors, some
virulence genes, antibiotic resistance phenotypes, randomly amplified polymorphic
DNA-polymerase chain reaction (RAPD-PCR) patterns and biofilm production. Of the 
isolates, 31 (43.1%) were positive for gelatinase, 11 (15.3%) for aggregation
substance and cytolysine, 38 (52.8%) for gelE and 34 (47.2%) for asa1 genes. All 
isolates were found to be negative for hyl, esp and cylA genes. All isolates were
found to be resistant to nalidixic acid and kanamycin. On the other hand, all
isolates were cited for susceptible to amoxicillin. Vancomycin resistance genes
(vanA, vanB, vanC1/C2 or vanD) have not been detected in any of the
phenotypically vancomycin resistant isolates. Isolates from humans, dogs and cats
were grouped into 8, 2 and 4 antibiotypes depending upon susceptibilities to 12
different antibiotics. In all human, dog and cat isolates, 9, 12 and 2 genotypes 
were determined by RAPD-PCR, respectively. Nine (34.6%) of the dog isolates were 
found to be positive for biofilm production. This study showed that multiple
antibiotic resistance among human isolates is more frequent than in dog and cat
isolates.


PMCID: PMC4782695
PMID: 27175186 

