
1. Cell Death Dis. 2016 May 12;7:e2220. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2016.121.

Stalled replication forks within heterochromatin require ATRX for protection.

Huh MS(1), Ivanochko D(1)(2), Hashem LE(1)(3), Curtin M(1)(2), Delorme M(1)(2),
Goodall E(1)(2), Yan K(1), Picketts DJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON 
K1H 8L6, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada.

Expansive growth of neural progenitor cells (NPCs) is a prerequisite to the
temporal waves of neuronal differentiation that generate the six-layered
neocortex, while also placing a heavy burden on proteins that regulate chromatin 
packaging and genome integrity. This problem is further reflected by the growing 
number of developmental disorders caused by mutations in chromatin regulators.
ATRX gene mutations cause a severe intellectual disability disorder
(α-thalassemia mental retardation X-linked (ATRX) syndrome; OMIM no. 301040),
characterized by microcephaly, urogenital abnormalities and α-thalassemia.
Although the ATRX protein is required for the maintenance of repetitive DNA
within heterochromatin, how this translates to disease pathogenesis remain poorly
understood and was a focus of this study. We demonstrate that Atrx(FoxG1Cre)
forebrain-specific conditional knockout mice display poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1 (Parp-1) hyperactivation during neurogenesis and generate fewer
late-born Cux1- and Brn2-positive neurons that accounts for the reduced cortical 
size. Moreover, DNA damage, induced Parp-1 and Atm activation is elevated in
progenitor cells and contributes to their increased level of cell death.
ATRX-null HeLa cells are similarly sensitive to hydroxyurea-induced replication
stress, accumulate DNA damage and proliferate poorly. Impaired BRCA1-RAD51
colocalization and PARP-1 hyperactivation indicated that stalled replication
forks are not efficiently protected. DNA fiber assays confirmed that MRE11
degradation of stalled replication forks was rampant in the absence of ATRX or
DAXX. Indeed, fork degradation in ATRX-null cells could be attenuated by
treatment with the MRE11 inhibitor mirin, or exacerbated by inhibiting PARP-1
activity. Taken together, these results suggest that ATRX is required to limit
replication stress during cellular proliferation, whereas upregulation of PARP-1 
activity functions as a compensatory mechanism to protect stalled forks, limiting
genomic damage, and facilitating late-born neuron production.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2016.121 
PMCID: PMC4917659
PMID: 27171262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

