
1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2016 May 18;4(1):49. doi: 10.1186/s40478-016-0317-4.

Critical residues involved in tau binding to fyn: implications for tau
phosphorylation in Alzheimer's disease.

Lau DH(1), Hogseth M(1), Phillips EC(1), O'Neill MJ(2), Pooler AM(1)(3), Noble
W(1), Hanger DP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, King's College London, Maurice 
Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute (K1.24), 125 Coldharbour Lane, London, SE5
9NU, UK.
(2)Eli Lilly and Company Limited, Lilly Research Centre, Erl Wood Manor,
Windlesham, Surrey, GU20 6PH, UK.
(3)Present address: Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, King's College London, Maurice 
Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute (K1.24), 125 Coldharbour Lane, London, SE5
9NU, UK. diane.hanger@kcl.ac.uk.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder
characterised by neuropathological deposits of amyloid plaques and
neurofibrillary tangles comprised of β-amyloid and tau protein, respectively. In 
AD, tau becomes abnormally phosphorylated and aggregates to form intracellular
deposits. However, the mechanisms by which tau exerts neurotoxicity in disease
remain unclear. Recent studies have suggested that the presence of tau at
synapses may indicate a role in neuronal signalling, which could be disrupted in 
pathological conditions. The non-receptor-associated tyrosine kinase fyn is
located at the dendrite in neurons, where it was recently shown to interact with 
tau to stabilise receptor complexes at the post-synaptic density. Fyn also
co-localises with tau in a proportion of neurons containing tau tangles in AD and
fyn is also a tau kinase. Hence, tau-fyn interactions could play a pathogenic
role in AD. Here we report the identification of critical proline residues,
Pro213, Pro216, and Pro219, located within the fifth and sixth Pro-X-X-Pro motifs
in the proline-rich region of tau, that are important for its binding to fyn.
These residues in tau are flanked by numerous phosphorylation sites and therefore
we investigated the relationship between fyn and the degree of tau
phosphorylation in human post-mortem brain tissue. We found no difference in the 
amount of fyn present in control and AD brain. Notably, however, there was a
significant correlation between fyn and phosphorylated tau at specific
phospho-epitopes in control, but not in AD brain. Our results suggest that the
pathological mechanisms underlying AD, that result in increased tau
phosphorylation, may disrupt the physiological relationship between tau
phosphorylation and fyn.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-016-0317-4 
PMCID: PMC4870772
PMID: 27193083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

