
1. Immunity. 2016 May 17;44(5):955-72. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2016.05.002.

Coinhibitory Pathways in the B7-CD28 Ligand-Receptor Family.

Schildberg FA(1), Klein SR(2), Freeman GJ(2), Sharpe AH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, and Evergrande Center for
Immunologic Diseases, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, and Evergrande Center for
Immunologic Diseases, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic
address: arlene_sharpe@hms.harvard.edu.

Immune responses need to be controlled for optimal protective immunity and
tolerance. Coinhibitory pathways in the B7-CD28 family provide critical
inhibitory signals that regulate immune homeostasis and defense and protect
tissue integrity. These coinhibitory signals limit the strength and duration of
immune responses, thereby curbing immune-mediated tissue damage, regulating
resolution of inflammation, and maintaining tolerance to prevent autoimmunity.
Tumors and microbes that cause chronic infections can exploit these coinhibitory 
pathways to establish an immunosuppressive microenvironment, hindering their
eradication. Advances in understanding T cell coinhibitory pathways have
stimulated a new era of immunotherapy with effective drugs to treat cancer,
autoimmune and infectious diseases, and transplant rejection. In this review we
discuss the current knowledge of the mechanisms underlying the coinhibitory
functions of pathways in the B7-CD28 family, the diverse functional consequences 
of these inhibitory signals on immune responses, and the overlapping and unique
functions of these key immunoregulatory pathways.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2016.05.002 
PMCID: PMC4905708
PMID: 27192563  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

