
1. Clin Transl Immunology. 2016 Apr 8;5(4):e69. doi: 10.1038/cti.2016.14.
eCollection 2016 Apr.

Synthetic glycolipid activators of natural killer T cells as immunotherapeutic
agents.

Carreño LJ(1), Saavedra-Ávila NA(2), Porcelli SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA; Millennium Institute on Immunology and Immunotherapy,
Programa Disciplinario de Inmunologia, Instituto de Ciencias Biomedicas, Facultad
de Medicina, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
, Bronx, NY, USA.

Certain types of glycolipids have been found to have remarkable immunomodulatory 
properties as a result of their ability to activate specific T lymphocyte
populations with an extremely wide range of immune effector properties. The most 
extensively studied glycolipid reactive T cells are known as invariant natural
killer T (iNKT) cells. The antigen receptors of these cells specifically
recognize certain glycolipids, most notably glycosphingolipids with α-anomeric
monosaccharides, presented by the major histocompatibility complex class I-like
molecule CD1d. Once activated, iNKT cells can secrete a very diverse array of
pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines to modulate innate and adaptive immune
responses. Thus, glycolipid-mediated activation of iNKT cells has been explored
for immunotherapy in a variety of disease states, including cancer and a range of
infections. In this review, we discuss the design of synthetic glycolipid
activators for iNKT cells, their impact on adaptive immune responses and their
use to modulate iNKT cell responses to improve immunity against infections and
cancer. Current challenges in translating results from preclinical animal studies
to humans are also discussed.

DOI: 10.1038/cti.2016.14 
PMCID: PMC4855264
PMID: 27195112 

