
1. Radiat Res. 2016 Jun;185(6):580-90. doi: 10.1667/RR14109.1. Epub 2016 May 19.

Radiation Sensitivity of Human CD34(+) Cells Versus Peripheral Blood T
Lymphocytes of Newborns and Adults: DNA Repair and Mutagenic Effects.

Vandevoorde C(1), Vral A(1), Vandekerckhove B(2), Philippé J(2), Thierens H(1).

Author information: 
(1)a   Departments of Basic Medical Sciences and.
(2)b   Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Ghent University, Gent,
Belgium.

As hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) self-renew throughout life,
accumulation of genomic alterations can potentially give rise to radiation
carcinogenesis. In this study we examined DNA double-strand break (DSB) induction
and repair as well as mutagenic effects of ionizing radiation in CD34(+) cells
and T lymphocytes from the umbilical cord of newborns. The age dependence of DNA 
damage repair end points was investigated by comparing newborn T lymphocytes with
adult peripheral blood T lymphocytes. As umbilical cord blood (UCB) contains T
lymphocytes that are practically all phenotypically immature, we examined the
radiation response of separated naive (CD45RA(+)) and memory (CD45RO(+)) T
lymphocytes. The number of DNA DSBs was assessed by microscopic scoring of
γ-H2AX/53BP1 foci 0.5 h after low-dose radiation exposure, while DNA repair was
studied by scoring the number of residual γ-H2AX/53BP1 foci 24 h after exposure. 
Mutagenic effects were studied by the cytokinesis block micronucleus (CBMN)
assay. No significant differences in the number of DNA DSBs induced by low-dose
(100-200 mGy) radiation were observed among the three different cell types.
However, residual γ-H2AX/53BP1 foci levels 24 h postirradiation were
significantly lower in CD34(+) cells compared to newborn T lymphocytes, while
newborn T lymphocytes showed significantly higher foci yields than adult T
lymphocytes. No significant differences in the level of radiation-induced
micronuclei at 2 Gy were observed between CD34(+) cells and newborn T
lymphocytes. However, newborn T lymphocytes showed a significantly higher number 
of micronuclei compared to adult T lymphocytes. These results confirm that
CD34(+) cell quiescence promotes mutagenesis after exposure. Furthermore, we can 
conclude that newborn peripheral T lymphocytes are significantly more
radiosensitive than adult peripheral T lymphocytes. Using the results from the
comparative study of radiation-induced DNA damage repair end points in naive
(CD45RA(+)) and memory (CD45RO(+)) T lymphocytes, we could demonstrate that the
observed differences between newborn and adult T lymphocytes can be explained by 
the immunophenotypic change of T lymphocytes with age, which is presumably linked
with the remodeling of the closed chromatin structure of naive T lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.1667/RR14109.1 
PMID: 27195608  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

