
1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2016 May;363(10). pii: fnw082. doi: 10.1093/femsle/fnw082.
Epub 2016 Apr 7.

Antigenic characterization of dimorphic surface protein in Mycobacterium
tuberculosis.

Matsuba T(1), Siddiqi UR(2), Hattori T(2), Nakajima C(3), Fujii J(4), Suzuki
Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bacteriology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty
of Medicine, Tottori University, 86 Nishi-cho, Yonago, Tottori 683-8503, Japan
matsubat@med.tottori-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Emerging Infectious Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine,
Tohoku University 1-1 Seiryo-cho, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.
(3)Division of Bioresources, Hokkaido University Research Center for Zoonosis
Control, Kita 20-Nishi 10, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 001-0020, Japan The Global 
Station for Zoonosis Control, Hokkaido University Global Institution for
Collaborative Research and Education, Kita 20-Nishi 10, Kita-ku, Sapporo,
Hokkaido 001-0020, Japan.
(4)Division of Bacteriology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty
of Medicine, Tottori University, 86 Nishi-cho, Yonago, Tottori 683-8503, Japan.

The Mycobacterium tuberculosis Rv0679c protein is a surface protein that
contributes to host cell invasion. We previously showed that a single nucleotide 
transition of the Rv0679c gene leads to a single amino acid substitution from
asparagine to lysine at codon 142 in the Beijing genotype family. In this study, 
we examined the immunological effect of this substitution. Several recombinant
proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli and Mycobacterium smegmatis and
characterized with antisera and two monoclonal antibodies named 5D4-C2 and
8G10-H2. A significant reduction of antibody binding was detected by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and western blot analysis in the
Lys142-type protein. This reduction of 8G10-H2 binding was more significant, with
the disappearance of a signal in the proteins expressed by recombinant
mycobacteria in western blot analysis. In addition, epitope mapping analysis of
the recombinant proteins showed a linear epitope by 5D4-C2 and a discontinuous
epitope by 8G10-H2. The antibody recognizing the conformational epitope detected 
only mycobacterial Asn142-type recombinant protein. Our results suggest that a
single amino acid substitution of Rv0679c has potency for antigenic change in
Beijing genotype strains.

Â© FEMS 2016. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/femsle/fnw082 
PMID: 27190237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

