
1. PLoS One. 2016 May 19;11(5):e0156004. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0156004.
eCollection 2016.

East Coast Fever Caused by Theileria parva Is Characterized by Macrophage
Activation Associated with Vasculitis and Respiratory Failure.

Fry LM(1)(2), Schneider DA(1)(2), Frevert CW(3), Nelson DD(2), Morrison WI(4),
Knowles DP(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Disease Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, US Department of 
Agriculture, Pullman, Washington, United States of America.
(2)Department of Veterinary Microbiology & Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, Washington, United States of America.
(3)Department of Comparative Medicine Center of Lung Biology, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(4)The Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush, Midlothian, United
Kingdom.

Respiratory failure and death in East Coast Fever (ECF), a clinical syndrome of
African cattle caused by the apicomplexan parasite Theileria parva, has
historically been attributed to pulmonary infiltration by infected lymphocytes.
However, immunohistochemical staining of tissue from T. parva infected cattle
revealed large numbers of CD3- and CD20-negative intralesional mononuclear cells.
Due to this finding, we hypothesized that macrophages play an important role in
Theileria parva disease pathogenesis. Data presented here demonstrates that
terminal ECF in both Holstein and Boran cattle is largely due to multisystemic
histiocytic responses and resultant tissue damage. Furthermore, the combination
of these histologic changes with the clinical findings, including
lymphadenopathy, prolonged pyrexia, multi-lineage leukopenia, and
thrombocytopenia is consistent with macrophage activation syndrome. All animals
that succumbed to infection exhibited lymphohistiocytic vasculitis of small to
medium caliber blood and lymphatic vessels. In pulmonary, lymphoid, splenic and
hepatic tissues from Holstein cattle, the majority of intralesional macrophages
were positive for CD163, and often expressed large amounts of IL-17. These data
define a terminal ECF pathogenesis in which parasite-driven lymphoproliferation
leads to secondary systemic macrophage activation syndrome, mononuclear
vasculitis, pulmonary edema, respiratory failure and death. The accompanying
macrophage phenotype defined by CD163 and IL-17 is presented in the context of
this pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0156004 
PMCID: PMC4873194
PMID: 27195791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

