
1. Eur J Immunol. 2016 Aug;46(8):1867-77. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545923. Epub 2016 Jun 
8.

α-Galactosylceramide-activated murine NK1.1(+) invariant-NKT cells in the
myometrium induce miscarriages in mice.

Ichikawa T(1)(2), Negishi Y(1)(2), Shimizu M(1), Takeshita T(2), Takahashi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo,
Japan.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

Innate immunity, which is unable to discriminate self from allo-antigens, is
thought to be important players in the induction of miscarriages. Here, we show
that the administration of IL-12 to syngeneic-mated C57BL/6 mice on gestation day
7.5 (Gd 7.5), drives significant miscarriages in pregnant females. Furthermore,
the administration on Gd 7.5 of α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer), which is known
to activate invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells, induced miscarriages in both
syngeneic-mated C57BL/6 mice and allogeneic-mated mice (C57BL/6 (♀) × BALB/c
(♂)). Surprisingly, the percentages of both DEC-205(+) DCs and CD1d-restricted
NK1.1(+) iNKT cells were higher in the myometrium of pregnant mice treated i.p.
with α-GalCer than in the decidua. IL-12 secreted from α-GalCer-activated
DEC-205(+) DCs stimulated the secretion of cytokines, including IL-2, IL-4,
IFN-γ, TNF-α, perforin, and granzyme B, from the NK1.1(+) iNKT cells in the
myometrium, leading to fetal loss in pregnant mice. Finally, the i.p.
administration of IL-12 and/or α-GalCer in iNKT-deficient Jα18(-/-) (Jα18 KO)
mice did not induce miscarriages. This study provides a new perspective on the
importance of the myometrium, rather than the decidua, in regulating pregnancy
and a mechanism of miscarriage mediated by activated DEC-205(+) DCs and NK1.1(+) 
iNKT cells in the myometrium of pregnant mice.

© 2016 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology published by WILEY-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201545923 
PMCID: PMC5089647
PMID: 27198610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

