
1. Microb Ecol. 2016 Nov;72(4):955-964. Epub 2016 May 19.

High Nutrient Concentration Can Induce Virulence Factor Expression and Cause
Higher Virulence in an Environmentally Transmitted Pathogen.

Penttinen R(1), Kinnula H(2), Lipponen A(3), Bamford JK(2), Sundberg LR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Science and Nanoscience Center,
University of Jyvaskyla, Center of Excellence in Biological Interactions, P.O.
Box 35, FI-40014, University of Jyvaskyla, Jyvaskyla, Finland.
reetta.k.penttinen@jyu.fi.
(2)Department of Biological and Environmental Science and Nanoscience Center,
University of Jyvaskyla, Center of Excellence in Biological Interactions, P.O.
Box 35, FI-40014, University of Jyvaskyla, Jyvaskyla, Finland.
(3)University of Eastern Finland, A.I. Virtanen Institute for Molecular Sciences,
P.O. Box 1627, FI-70211, Kuopio, Finland.

Environmentally transmitted opportunistic pathogens shuttle between two
substantially different environments: outside-host and within-host habitats.
These environments differ from each other especially with respect to nutrient
availability. Consequently, the pathogens are required to regulate their behavior
in response to environmental cues in order to survive, but how nutrients control 
the virulence in opportunistic pathogens is still poorly understood. In this
study, we examined how nutrient level in the outside-host environment affects the
gene expression of putative virulence factors of the opportunistic fish pathogen 
Flavobacterium columnare. The impact of environmental nutrient concentration on
bacterial virulence was explored by cultivating the bacteria in various nutrient 
conditions, measuring the gene expression of putative virulence factors with
RT-qPCR and, finally, experimentally challenging rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss) fry with these bacteria. Our results show that increased environmental
nutrient concentration can increase the expression of putative virulence genes,
chondroitinase (cslA) and collagenase, in the outside-host environment and may
lead to more rapid fish mortality. These findings address that the environmental 
nutrients may act as significant triggers of virulence gene expression and
therefore contribute to the interaction between an environmentally transmitted
opportunistic pathogen and its host.

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-016-0781-1 
PMID: 27193154  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

