
1. Global Spine J. 2016 Jun;6(4):383-93. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1565260. Epub 2015 Oct 
13.

Upper Cervical Epidural Abscess in Clinical Practice: Diagnosis and Management.

Al-Hourani K(1), Al-Aref R(2), Mesfin A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Bristol Royal Infirmary, Bristol, England, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, United States.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, New York, United States.

Study Design Narrative review. Objective Upper cervical epidural abscess (UCEA)
is a rare surgical emergency. Despite increasing incidence, uncertainty remains
as to how it should initially be managed. Risk factors for UCEA include
immunocompromised hosts, diabetes mellitus, and intravenous drug use. Our
objective is to provide a comprehensive overview of the literature including the 
history, clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and management of UCEA.
Methods Using PubMed, studies published prior to 2015 were analyzed. We used the 
keywords "Upper cervical epidural abscess," "C1 osteomyelitis," "C2
osteomyelitis," "C1 epidural abscess," "C2 epidural abscess." We excluded cases
with tuberculosis. Results The review addresses epidemiology, etiology, imaging, 
microbiology, and diagnosis of this condition. We also address the nonoperative
and operative management options and the relative indications for each as
reviewed in the literature. Conclusion A high index of suspicion is required to
diagnose this rare condition with magnetic resonance imaging being the imaging
modality of choice. There has been a shift toward surgical management of this
condition in recent times, with favorable outcomes.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0035-1565260 
PMCID: PMC4868579
PMID: 27190742 

