
1. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2016 May 25;35:84. doi: 10.1186/s13046-016-0359-2.

Yin Yang 1 is associated with cancer stem cell transcription factors (SOX2, OCT4,
BMI1) and clinical implication.

Kaufhold S(1), Garb√°n H(2), Bonavida B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90095,
USA.
(2)NantBioScience, Inc, NantWorks, LLC & California NanoSystems Institute (CnSI),
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA.
hgarban@ucla.edu.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90095,
USA. bbonavida@mednet.ucla.edu.

The transcription factor Yin Yang 1 (YY1) is frequently overexpressed in
cancerous tissues compared to normal tissues and has regulatory roles in cell
proliferation, cell viability, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, metastasis and 
drug/immune resistance. YY1 shares many properties with cancer stem cells (CSCs) 
that drive tumorigenesis, metastasis and drug resistance and are regulated by
overexpression of certain transcription factors, including SOX2, OCT4 (POU5F1),
BMI1 and NANOG. Based on these similarities, it was expected that YY1 expression 
would be associated with SOX2, OCT4, BMI1, and NANOG's expressions and
activities. Data mining from the proteomic tissue-based datasets from the Human
Protein Atlas were used for protein expression patterns of YY1 and the four CSC
markers in 17 types of cancer, including both solid and hematological
malignancies. A close association was revealed between the frequency of
expressions of YY1 and SOX2 as well as SOX2 and OCT4 in all cancers analyzed. Two
types of dynamics were identified based on the nature of their association,
namely, inverse or direct, between YY1 and SOX2. These two dynamics define
distinctive patterns of BMI1 and OCT4 expressions. The relationship between YY1
and SOX2 expressions as well as the expressions of BMI1 and OCT4 resulted in the 
classification of four groups of cancers with distinct molecular signatures: (1) 
Prostate, lung, cervical, endometrial, ovarian and glioma cancers
(YY1(lo)SOX2(hi)BMI1(hi)OCT4(hi)) (2) Skin, testis and breast cancers
(YY1(hi)SOX2(lo)BMI1(hi)OCT4(hi)) (3) Liver, stomach, renal, pancreatic and
urothelial cancers (YY1(lo)SOX2(lo)BMI1(hi)OCT4(hi)) and (4) Colorectal cancer,
lymphoma and melanoma (YY1(hi)SOX2(hi)BMI1(lo)OCT4(hi)). A regulatory loop is
proposed consisting of the cross-talk between the NF-kB/PI3K/AKT pathways and the
downstream inter-regulation of target gene products YY1, OCT4, SOX2 and BMI1.

DOI: 10.1186/s13046-016-0359-2 
PMCID: PMC4881184
PMID: 27225481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

