
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Jun 7;113(23):E3260-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1522811113. Epub 2016 May 25.

Coxiella burnetii effector CvpB modulates phosphoinositide metabolism for optimal
vacuole development.

Martinez E(1), Allombert J(1), Cantet F(1), Lakhani A(1), Yandrapalli N(1),
Neyret A(1), Norville IH(2), Favard C(1), Muriaux D(1), Bonazzi M(3).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, Formation de Recherche en Évolution 3689, Centre d'études d'agents
Pathogènes et Biotechnologies pour la Santé, Université Montpellier, 34090
Montpellier, France;
(2)Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, Porton Down SP4 0JQ, United
Kingdom.
(3)CNRS, Formation de Recherche en Évolution 3689, Centre d'études d'agents
Pathogènes et Biotechnologies pour la Santé, Université Montpellier, 34090
Montpellier, France; matteo.bonazzi@cpbs.cnrs.fr.

The Q fever bacterium Coxiella burnetii replicates inside host cells within a
large Coxiella-containing vacuole (CCV) whose biogenesis relies on the
Dot/Icm-dependent secretion of bacterial effectors. Several membrane trafficking 
pathways contribute membranes, proteins, and lipids for CCV biogenesis. These
include the endocytic and autophagy pathways, which are characterized by
phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate [PI(3)P]-positive membranes. Here we show that
the C. burnetii secreted effector Coxiella vacuolar protein B (CvpB) binds PI(3)P
and phosphatidylserine (PS) on CCVs and early endosomal compartments and perturbs
the activity of the phosphatidylinositol 5-kinase PIKfyve to manipulate PI(3)P
metabolism. CvpB association to early endosome triggers vacuolation and
clustering, leading to the channeling of large PI(3)P-positive membranes to CCVs 
for vacuole expansion. At CCVs, CvpB binding to early endosome- and
autophagy-derived PI(3)P and the concomitant inhibition of PIKfyve favor the
association of the autophagosomal machinery to CCVs for optimal homotypic fusion 
of the Coxiella-containing compartments. The importance of manipulating PI(3)P
metabolism is highlighted by mutations in cvpB resulting in a multivacuolar
phenotype, rescuable by gene complementation, indicative of a defect in CCV
biogenesis. Using the insect model Galleria mellonella, we demonstrate the in
vivo relevance of defective CCV biogenesis by highlighting an attenuated
virulence phenotype associated with cvpB mutations.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1522811113 
PMCID: PMC4988616
PMID: 27226300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

