
1. Eur J Immunol. 2016 Aug;46(8):1959-69. doi: 10.1002/eji.201646401. Epub 2016 Jun 
16.

Epidermal NLRP10 contributes to contact hypersensitivity responses in mice.

Damm A(1), Giebeler N(2), Zamek J(2), Zigrino P(2), Kufer TA(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Venerology, University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany.
(3)Institute of Nutritional Medicine, Department of Immunology, University of
Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany.

The nucleotide binding and oligomerization domain-like receptor (NLR) protein
NLRP10 is highly expressed in the epidermis and contributes to cell-autonomous
responses against invasive bacteria. To investigate the role of NLRP10 in
inflammatory responses of the skin we analyzed the effect of full-body and
keratinocyte-specific depletion of NLRP10 in croton oil-induced irritant contact 
dermatitis (ICD) and 1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (DNFB)-induced contact
hypersensitivity (CHS) in mice. Nlrp10(-/-) mice were phenotypically normal and
skin repair after wounding was not affected by lack of NLRP10. Similarly, we did 
not detect a contribution of NLRP10 to the ICD response induced by croton oil. In
contrast, Nlrp10(-/-) mice showed significantly reduced inflammation in the
DNFB-induced CHS response as compared to control animals. Microscopic analysis
revealed significantly reduced numbers of CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells in the
infiltrates of animals lacking NLRP10 expression after CHS challenge.
Epidermis-specific deletion of Nlrp10 by keratin-14 promotor driven
Cre-recombinase was sufficient to account for this phenotype, although lymphocyte
recruitment seemed to be unaltered in animals lacking NLRP10 expression in
keratinocytes. Taken together, we provide evidence that NLRP10 contributes to
T-cell-mediated inflammatory responses in the skin and highlight a physiological 
role of NLRP10 in epidermal keratinocytes.

Â© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201646401 
PMID: 27221772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

