
1. Rice (N Y). 2012 Dec;5(1):24. doi: 10.1186/1939-8433-5-24. Epub 2012 Sep 8.

Rice UBC13, a candidate housekeeping gene, is required for K63-linked
polyubiquitination and tolerance to DNA damage.

Zang Y(1), Wang Q(1), Xue C(1), Li M(1), Wen R(1)(2), Xiao W(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University, Beijing, China, 100048.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, SK, Canada, S7N 5E5.
(3)College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University, Beijing, China, 100048.
wei.xiao@usask.ca.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, SK, Canada, S7N 5E5. wei.xiao@usask.ca.

While plant growth and reproduction is dependent on sunlight, UV irradiation from
sunlight is one of the major genotoxic stresses that threaten plant survival and 
genome stability. In addition, many environmental chemicals can also damage the
plant genome. In yeast and mammalian cells protection against the above genome
instability is provided by an error-free DNA-damage tolerance (DDT) pathway,
which is dependent on Ubc13-mediated K63-linked polyubiquitination of the
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). In this study, we isolated the UBC13
gene from rice and characterized its functions. Expression of OsUBC13 can protect
a yeast ubc13 null mutant against spontaneous and environmental DNA damage.
Furthermore, OsUbc13 physically interacts with human Ubc13 partners Mms2 and
Uev1A, and catalyzes K63 polyubiquitination in vitro. These observations
collectively suggest that the K63 polyubiquitination is conserved in rice, and
that OsUBC13 may be involved in DDT and other cellular processes. In addition,
OsUBC13 is constitutively expressed at a high level even under various stress
conditions, suggesting that it is a housekeeping gene.

DOI: 10.1186/1939-8433-5-24 
PMCID: PMC5520843
PMID: 27234244 

