
1. J Neuroimmunol. 2016 Jun 15;295-296:12-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2016.03.019.
Epub 2016 Apr 6.

TLR4 induces CCR7-dependent monocytes transmigration through the blood-brain
barrier.

Paradis A(1), Bernier S(1), Dumais N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie, Faculté des Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, QC J1K 2R1, Canada.
(2)Département de Biologie, Faculté des Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, QC J1K 2R1, Canada. Electronic address: Nancy.Dumais@USherbrooke.ca.

In this study, we examined whether bacterial pathogen-associated molecular
patterns recognized by toll-like receptors (TLRs) can modify the CCR7-dependent
migration of human monocytes. MonoMac-1 (MM-1) cells and freshly isolated human
monocytes were cultivated in the presence of agonists for TLR4 (which senses
lipopolysaccharides from gram-negative bacteria), TLR1/2 (which senses
peptidoglycan from gram-positive bacteria), and TLR9 (which recognizes bacterial 
DNA rich in unmethylated CpG DNA). CCR7 mRNA transcription was measured using
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and protein
expression was examined using flow cytometry. CCR7 function was monitored using
migration and transmigration assays in response to CCL19/CCL21, which are natural
ligands for CCR7. Our results show that TLR4 strongly increases monocyte
migratory capacity in response to CCL19 in chemotaxis and transmigration assays
in a model that mimics the human blood-brain barrier, whereas TLR1/2 and 9 have
no effect. Examination of monocyte migration in response to TLRs that are
activated by bacterial components would contribute to understanding the excessive
monocyte migration that characterizes the pathogenesis of bacterial infections
and/or neuroinflammatory diseases.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2016.03.019 
PMID: 27235343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

