
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2016 Sep;23(17):16883-903. doi:
10.1007/s11356-016-6887-7. Epub 2016 May 28.

Molecular perspectives and recent advances in microbial remediation of persistent
organic pollutants.

Chakraborty J(1), Das S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Microbiology and Ecology (LEnME), Department of
Life Science, National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, 769 008, Odisha, India.
(2)Laboratory of Environmental Microbiology and Ecology (LEnME), Department of
Life Science, National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, 769 008, Odisha, India.
surajit@nitrkl.ac.in.

Nutrition and pollution stress stimulate genetic adaptation in microorganisms and
assist in evolution of diverse metabolic pathways for their survival on several
complex organic compounds. Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are highly
lipophilic in nature and cause adverse effects to the environment and human
health by biomagnification through the food chain. Diverse microorganisms,
harboring numerous plasmids and catabolic genes, acclimatize to these
environmentally unfavorable conditions by gene duplication, mutational drift,
hypermutation, and recombination. Genetic aspects of some major POP catabolic
genes such as biphenyl dioxygenase (bph), DDT 2,3-dioxygenase, and angular
dioxygenase assist in degradation of biphenyl, organochlorine pesticides, and
dioxins/furans, respectively. Microbial metagenome constitutes the largest
genetic reservoir with miscellaneous enzymatic activities implicated in
degradation. To tap the metabolic potential of microorganisms, recent techniques 
like sequence and function-based screening and substrate-induced gene expression 
are proficient in tracing out novel catabolic genes from the entire metagenome
for utilization in enhanced biodegradation. The major endeavor of today's
scientific world is to characterize the exact genetic mechanisms of microbes for 
bioremediation of these toxic compounds by excavating into the uncultured
plethora. This review entails the effect of POPs on the environment and
involvement of microbial catabolic genes for their removal with the advanced
techniques of bioremediation.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-016-6887-7 
PMID: 27234838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

