
1. Water Sci Technol. 2016;73(11):2772-80. doi: 10.2166/wst.2016.137.

Cytotoxic and genotoxic activities of waters and sediments from highway and
parking lot runoffs.

Haile TM(1), Mišík M(2), Grummt T(3), Halh AS(2), Pichler C(2), Knasmueller S(2),
Fuerhacker M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Sanitary Engineering and Water Pollution Control, Department of
Water-Atmosphere-Environment, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, 
Muthgasse 18, Vienna 1190, Austria E-mail: tadele.m.haile@boku.ac.at.
(2)Institute of Cancer Research, Department of Internal Medicine I, Medical
University of Vienna, Borschkegasse 8A, Vienna 1090, Austria.
(3)Section Drinking Water and Swimming Pool Water Toxicology, Federal Environment
Agency (UBA), Heinrich-Heine-Str. 12, Bad Elster 08645, Germany.

The genotoxicity of water and sediment samples from stormwater treatment systems 
and water from urban highway runoff was tested in the Salmonella/microsome assays
with Salmonella typhimurium, micronucleus assay (Trad-MN) with plants and with
human-derived liver cells (HepG2), or comet assay with HepG2. Cytotoxicity of
water samples was studied using either reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, 
cell proliferation or dye exclusion assay in HepG2. Concentrations of several
contaminants in the tested samples were also measured. Results suggested that
urban highway runoff exposed to severe vehicle traffic emissions caused genotoxic
effects in comet assay and in Trad-MN assays. Sediments induced either mutagenic 
effects in strain YG1024 or genotoxic effects in Trad-MN assay. These effects
could be due to the presence of nitro-polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (NPAHs)
which possess carcinogenic and mutagenic properties. Influent and effluents of
stormwater treatment systems did not induce genotoxic activity or effects on
HepG2 cell viability; however, the influents were able to induce ROS generation
and cell proliferation in HepG2 cells. As the methods require a sterile
filtration of the water samples, this could have also removed
particulate-associated polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and resulted in a 
less pronounced induction of genotoxicity, as would be expected by PAH
contamination.

DOI: 10.2166/wst.2016.137 
PMID: 27232415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

