
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Jun 7;7(23):33557-70. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9677.

β2-spectrin depletion impairs DNA damage repair.

Horikoshi N(1)(2), Pandita RK(1)(2), Mujoo K(1), Hambarde S(1)(3), Sharma D(1),
Mattoo AR(1), Chakraborty S(1)(2), Charaka V(1), Hunt CR(1)(2), Pandita TK(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Houston Methodist Research Institute,
Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
School, Dallas, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, McGovern Medical School,
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.

β2-Spectrin (β2SP/SPTBN1, gene SPTBN1) is a key TGF-β/SMAD3/4 adaptor and
transcriptional cofactor that regulates TGF-β signaling and can contribute to
liver cancer development. Here we report that cells deficient in β2-Spectrin
(β2SP) are moderately sensitive to ionizing radiation (IR) and extremely
sensitive to agents that cause interstrand cross-links (ICLs) or replication
stress. In response to treatment with IR or ICL agents (formaldehyde, cisplatin, 
camptothecin, mitomycin), β2SP deficient cells displayed a higher frequency of
cells with delayed γ-H2AX removal and a higher frequency of residual chromosome
aberrations. Following hydroxyurea (HU)-induced replication stress,
β2SP-deficient cells displayed delayed disappearance of γ-H2AX foci along with
defective repair factor recruitment (MRE11, CtIP, RAD51, RPA, and FANCD2) as well
as defective restart of stalled replication forks. Repair factor recruitment is a
prerequisite for initiation of DNA damage repair by the homologous recombination 
(HR) pathway, which was also defective in β2SP deficient cells. We propose that
β2SP is required for maintaining genomic stability following replication fork
stalling, whether induced by either ICL damage or replicative stress, by
facilitating fork regression as well as DNA damage repair by homologous
recombination.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9677 
PMCID: PMC5085102
PMID: 27248179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflicts of interest were
disclosed.

