
1. Food Funct. 2016 Jul 13;7(7):3046-55. doi: 10.1039/c6fo00482b.

Identification of an anti-inflammatory potential of Eriodictyon angustifolium
compounds in human gingival fibroblasts.

Walker J(1), Reichelt KV(2), Obst K(2), Widder S(2), Hans J(2), Krammer GE(2),
Ley JP(2), Somoza V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional and Physiological Chemistry, Christian Doppler
Laboratory for Bioactive Aroma Compounds, Faculty of Chemistry, University of
Vienna, Althanstrasse 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria. Jessica.Walker@univie.ac.at.
(2)Symrise AG, Mühlenfeldstrasse, 37603 Holzminden, Germany.

Polyphenol-rich plant extracts have been shown to possess anti-inflammatory
activity against oral pathogen-induced cytokine release in model systems of
inflammation. Here, it was hypothesized that a flavanone-rich extract of E.
angustifolium exhibits an anti-inflammatory potential against endotoxin-induced
inflammatory response in human gingival fibroblasts (HGF-1). HGF-1 cells were
stimulated with lipopolysaccharide from Porphyromonas gingivalis (pg-LPS) to
release pro-inflammatory cytokines. Concentrations of interleukins IL-6 and IL-8 
and macrophage chemoattractant protein-1 in the incubation media upon stimulation
were determined by means of magnetic bead analysis. A crude ethanol/water extract
of E. angustifolium (EE) was fractionated via gel permeation chromatography into 
a flavanone-rich fraction (FF) and an erionic acid-rich fraction (EF). Individual
flavanones and erionic acids as well as EE, EF and FF were tested in the
pg-LPS-stimulated HGF-1 cells for their anti-inflammatory potential. The E.
angustifolium extract possessed anti-inflammatory potential in this model system,
attenuating the pg-LPS-induced release of IL-6 by up to 52.0 ± 15.5%. Of the
individual flavanones, eriodictyol and naringenin had the most pronounced effect.
However, a mixture of the flavanones did not possess the same effect as the
entire flavanoid fraction, indicating that other compounds may contribute to the 
anti-inflammatory potential of E. angustifolium. For the first time, an
anti-inflammatory potential of E. angustifolium and containing erionic acids has 
been determined.

DOI: 10.1039/c6fo00482b 
PMID: 27248833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

