
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jun 3;6:27375. doi: 10.1038/srep27375.

Mutation of the Traj18 gene segment using TALENs to generate Natural Killer T
cell deficient mice.

Zhang J(1), Bedel R(1), Krovi SH(1), Tuttle KD(1), Zhang B(2), Gross J(2), Gapin 
L(1)(2), Matsuda JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado Denver
School of Medicine and National Jewish Health, Aurora, CO 80206, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Research, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206,
USA.

Invariant Natural Killer T (iNKT) cells are a unique subset of T lymphocytes that
have been implicated in both promoting and suppressing a multitude of immune
responses. In mice, iNKT cells express T cell antigen receptors (TCRs) comprising
a unique TCRα rearrangement between the Trav11 and Traj18 gene segments. When
paired with certain Trbv TCRβ chains, these TCRs recognize lipid antigens
presented by the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-like molecule,
CD1d. Until recently, the sole model of iNKT deficiency targeted the Jα18, which 
is absolutely required to form the TCR with the appropriate antigenic
specificity. However, these mice were demonstrated to have a large reduction in
TCR repertoire diversity, which could confound results arising from studies using
these mice. Here, we have created a new NKT-deficient mouse strain using
transcription activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN) technology to only disrupt
the expression of Jα18, leaving the remaining Jα repertoire unperturbed. We
confirm that these mice lack iNKT cells and do not respond to lipid antigen
stimulation while the development of conventional T cells, regulatory T cells,
and type Ib NKT cells is normal. This new mouse strain will serve as a new model 
of iNKT cell deficiency to facilitate our understanding of iNKT biology.

DOI: 10.1038/srep27375 
PMCID: PMC4891675
PMID: 27256918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

