
1. Eur J Med Chem. 2016 Aug 8;118:299-315. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2016.04.043.

Novel c-Met inhibitory olive secoiridoid semisynthetic analogs for the control of
invasive breast cancer.

Mohyeldin MM(1), Busnena BA(1), Akl MR(1), Dragoi AM(2), Cardelli JA(2), El Sayed
KA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Louisiana at Monroe, 1800 Bienville Drive, Monroe, LA, 71201, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Feist-Weiller Cancer Center, Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA, USA.
(3)Department of Basic Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Louisiana at Monroe, 1800 Bienville Drive, Monroe, LA, 71201, USA. Electronic
address: elsayed@ulm.edu.

Dysregulated receptor tyrosine kinase c-Met and its ligand HGF is valid and
attractive molecular target for therapeutic blockade in cancer. Inspired by the
chemical structure of the naturally occurring olive secoiridoid (-)-oleocanthal
(1) and its documented anticancer activity against c-Met-dependent malignancies, 
a previous study reported tyrosol sinapate (4) as a c-Met inhibitor hit. This
study reports additional semisynthetic optimization and SAR of 4 to improve its
selective activity against c-Met-dependent breast cancer by increasing its
capacity to inhibit c-Met phosphorylation. Forty-three compounds (5-47) were
synthesized, among which the novel analog homovanillyl sinapate (HVS-16) was
distinguished for its remarkable activity. HVS-16 substantially impaired
c-Met-mediated proliferation, migration, and invasion across human breast cancer 
cell lines in two- and three-dimensional culture systems, while similar treatment
doses were found to have effect neither on the non-tumorigenic human mammary
epithelial cell growth nor on the c-Met independent breast cancer cell viability.
HVS-16 showed a dose-dependent inhibition of ligand-mediated c-Met activation in 
human breast cancer cells. Docking studies revealed that HVS-16 fits very well
inside c-Met crystal structures, satisfying critical interactions at the ATP
binding site. This study identified important structural pharmacophoric features 
in HVS-16 and correlated its postulated binding pose with c-Met kinase assay data
that would guide future olive secoiridoid bioisostere lead design. Results
presented herein suggest HVS-16 as a promising c-Met inhibitor validated hit with
potential to control invasive breast malignancies with aberrant c-Met activity.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2016.04.043 
PMCID: PMC5073051
PMID: 27258622 

