
1. Metab Eng. 2016 Nov;38:19-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2016.06.002. Epub 2016 Jun 4.

Heterologous biosynthesis and manipulation of alkanes in Escherichia coli.

Cao YX(1), Xiao WH(2), Zhang JL(2), Xie ZX(2), Ding MZ(2), Yuan YJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Systems Bioengineering (Ministry of Education), Tianjin
University, Tianjin 300072, PR China; SynBio Research Platform, Collaborative
Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), School of
Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, PR
China. Electronic address: caoyingxiu@163.com.
(2)Key Laboratory of Systems Bioengineering (Ministry of Education), Tianjin
University, Tianjin 300072, PR China; SynBio Research Platform, Collaborative
Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), School of
Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, PR
China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Systems Bioengineering (Ministry of Education), Tianjin
University, Tianjin 300072, PR China; SynBio Research Platform, Collaborative
Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), School of
Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, PR
China. Electronic address: yjyuan@tju.edu.cn.

Biosynthesis of alkanes in microbial foundries offers a sustainable and green
supplement to traditional fossil fuels. The dynamic equilibrium of fatty
aldehydes, key intermediates, played a critical role in microbial alkanes
production, due to the poor catalytic capability of aldehyde deformylating
oxygenase (ADO). In our study, exploration of competitive pathway together with
multi-modular optimization was utilized to improve fatty aldehydes balance and
consequently enhance alkanes formation in Escherichia coli. Endogenous fatty
alcohol formation was supposed to be competitive with alkane production, since
both of the two routes consumed the same intermediate-fatty aldehyde.
Nevertheless, in our case, alkanes production in E. coli was enhanced from trace 
amount to 58.8mg/L by the facilitation of moderate fatty alcohol biosynthesis,
which was validated by deletion of endogenous aldehyde reductase (AHR),
overexpression of fatty alcohol oxidase (FAO) and consequent transcriptional
assay of aar, ado and adhP genes. Moreover, alkanes production was further
improved to 81.8mg/L, 86.6mg/L or 101.7mg/L by manipulation of fatty acid
biosynthesis, lipids degradation or electron transfer system modules, which
directly referenced to fatty aldehydes dynamic pools. A titer of 1.31g/L alkanes 
was achieved in 2.5L fed-batch fermentation, which was the highest reported titer
in E. coli. Our research has offered a reference for chemical overproduction in
microbial cell factories facilitated by exploring competitive pathway.

Copyright Â© 2016 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2016.06.002 
PMID: 27267408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

