
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jun 7;6:27392. doi: 10.1038/srep27392.

Transcriptional reprogramming and phenotypic switching associated with the
adaptation of Lactobacillus plantarum C2 to plant niches.

Filannino P(1), Di Cagno R(2), Crecchio C(1), De Virgilio C(2), De Angelis M(1), 
Gobbetti M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant, Soil and Food Sciences, University of Bari A. Moro, Via
Amendola 165/a, 70126 Bari, Italy.
(2)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnologies and Biopharmaceutics, University of
Bari, Via Orabona, 4, 70126 Bari, Italy.

Lactobacillus plantarum has been isolated from a large variety of ecological
niches, thus highlighting its remarkable environmental adaptability as a
generalist. Plant fermentation conditions markedly affect the functional features
of L. plantarum strains. We investigated the plant niche-specific traits of L.
plantarum through whole-transcriptome and phenotypic microarray profiles. Carrot 
(CJ) and pineapple (PJ) juices were chosen as model systems, and MRS broth was
used as a control. A set of 3,122 genes was expressed, and 21 to 31% of genes
were differentially expressed depending on the plant niche and cell physiological
state. L. plantarum C2 seemed to specifically respond to plant media conditions. 
When L. plantarum was cultured in CJ, useful pathways were activated, which were 
aimed to sense the environment, save energy and adopt alternative routes for
NAD(+) regeneration. In PJ the acidic environment caused a transcriptional
switching, which was network-linked to an acid tolerance response involving
carbohydrate flow, amino acid and protein metabolism, pH homeostasis and membrane
fluidity. The most prominent phenotypic dissimilarities observed in cells grown
in CJ and PJ were related to carbon and nitrogen metabolism, respectively.
Summarising, a snapshot of a carrot and pineapple sensing and adaptive regulation
model for L. plantarum C2 was proposed.

DOI: 10.1038/srep27392 
PMCID: PMC4895336
PMID: 27273017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

