
1. HLA. 2016 Jun;87(6):422-31. doi: 10.1111/tan.12829. Epub 2016 Jun 7.

The effect of missing KIR ligands, activating KIR genotype and haplotype on the
outcome of T-cell-replete hematopoietic stem cell transplantation from
HLA-identical siblings in Thai patients.

Khanuntong S(1)(2), Kuptawintu P(2), Upaisilpsathaporn K(3), Poolchareon A(3),
Bunworasate U(3), Hirankarn N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology Interdisciplinary Program, Graduate School, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics Laboratory, National Blood Centre, Thai 
Red Cross Society, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Center of Excellence in Immunology and Immune-mediated Diseases, Department of
Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.

This study was a retrospective analysis of Thai patients undergoing T-replete
hematopoietic stem cell transplant from human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-identical
sibling donors. We investigated 66 patients, including 40 patients with acute
myeloid leukemia (AML), 12 patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia and 14
patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. Killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptor 
(KIR) genes and HLA ligands were typed by polymerase chain reaction-sequence
specific oligonucleotide probes. We analyzed the effect of the number of missing 
KIR ligands (Bw4, C1 and C2) on clinical outcomes. A beneficial effect of missing
KIR ligand was not observed in both univariate and multivariate analysis. When we
analyzed the effect of specific missing KIR ligand on clinical outcomes, there
was a trend that patients with missing A11 ligand had lower relapse rate
(P = 0.076). Therefore, we also conducted the analysis by including the group
with missing KIR ligands of Bw4, C1, C2 and A11. Patients with two or more than
two missing KIR ligands had a trend for better clinical outcome including reduced
relapse (P = 055) and statistically significant in terms of reduced acute
graft-vs-host disease (aGVHD) rate (P = 0.013). In multivariate analysis,
patients with two or more than two missing KIR ligands had a statistically
significant better clinical outcome in terms of reduced aGVHD rate (HR = 0.155,
95%CI = 0.040-0.605, P = 0.007). The association between clinical outcome with
KIR haplotypes, centromeric B haplotype and activating KIR was not observed here.
Although the sample size in this study is rather limited, these data can later be
subjected to meta-analysis to help reach the conclusion of the usefulness of this
additional promising KIR genotyping in various hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation types.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tan.12829 
PMID: 27273744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

