
1. Biol Reprod. 2016 Jul;95(1):20. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.134635. Epub 2016 Jun
8.

Phenotypic and Molecular Characterization of Domestic Cat (Felis catus)
Spermatogonial Stem Cells.

Powell RH(1), Galiguis J(2), Biancardi MN(2), Pope CE(2), Leibo SP(1), Wang G(3),
Gómez MC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana
Audubon Center for Research of Endangered Species, New Orleans, Louisiana.
(2)Audubon Center for Research of Endangered Species, New Orleans, Louisiana.
(3)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology, Genetics and Medicine, School of
Medicine, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans,
Louisiana.
(4)Audubon Center for Research of Endangered Species, New Orleans, Louisiana
martha@mcgomez.com.

In many mammalian species, surface markers have been used to obtain enriched
populations of spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) for assisted reproduction and
other applications; however, little is known about the expression patterns of
feline SSCs. In this study, we assessed expression of the SSC surface markers
commonly used in other species, KIT, ITGA6, CD9, GFRalpha1, ADGRA3, and THY1, in 
addition to the less frequently used pluripotent markers TRA-1-60, TRA-1-81,
SSEA-1, and SSEA-4 in SSCs of both prepubertal and adult domestic cats (Felis
catus). To further characterize cat SSCs, we sorted cells using SSC-specific
markers and evaluated the expression of the pluripotent transcription factors
NANOG, POU5F1, and SOX2 and the proto-oncogene MYC within these populations. We
concluded that SSC surface markers used in other mammalian species were not
specific for identifying cat SSCs. However, the pluripotent markers we evaluated 
were more specific to cat spermatogonia, and the presence of SSEA-1 and SSEA-4 in
fewer and primarily individual cells suggests that these two markers may be used 
for enrichment of cat SSCs. The expression of pluripotent transcription factors
at mRNA level by single-stained cells positive for SSEA-4 and by dual-stained
cells positive for both GFRalpha1 and SSEA-4 reflects the undifferentiated stage 
of cat SSCs. The absence of transcription factors in double-stained cells
positive for only one marker implies the loss of the stem cell-like identity with
the loss of either GFRalpha1 or SSEA-4. Further investigation is warranted to
elucidate the biological characteristics of these spermatogonial subpopulations.

© 2016 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

DOI: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.134635 
PMID: 27281702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

