
1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Jun 9;12(6):e1005690. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005690.
eCollection 2016 Jun.

Leishmania major Promastigotes Evade LC3-Associated Phagocytosis through the
Action of GP63.

Matte C(1), Casgrain PA(1), SÃ©guin O(1), Moradin N(1), Hong WJ(2)(3), Descoteaux 
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier and Centre for host-parasite interactions,
Laval, Quebec, Canada.
(2)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, People's
Republic of China.
(3)Institute of Molecular Cell Biology, Singapore, Singapore.

The protozoan Leishmania parasitizes macrophages and evades the microbicidal
consequences of phagocytosis through the inhibition of phagolysosome biogenesis. 
In this study, we investigated the impact of this parasite on LC3-associated
phagocytosis, a non-canonical autophagic process that enhances phagosome
maturation and functions. We show that whereas internalization of L. major
promastigotes by macrophages promoted LC3 lipidation, recruitment of LC3 to
phagosomes was inhibited through the action of the parasite surface
metalloprotease GP63. Reactive oxygen species generated by the NOX2 NADPH oxidase
are necessary for LC3-associated phagocytosis. We found that L. major
promastigotes prevented, in a GP63-dependent manner, the recruitment of NOX2 to
phagosomes through a mechanism that does not involve NOX2 cleavage. Moreover, we 
found that the SNARE protein VAMP8, which regulates phagosomal assembly of the
NADPH oxidase NOX2, was down-modulated by GP63. In the absence of VAMP8,
recruitment of LC3 to phagosomes containing GP63-deficient parasites was
inhibited, indicating that VAMP8 is involved in the phagosomal recruitment of
LC3. These findings reveal a role for VAMP8 in LC3-associated phagocytosis and
highlight a novel mechanism exploited by L. major promastigotes to interfere with
the host antimicrobial machinery.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005690 
PMCID: PMC4900527
PMID: 27280768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

