
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jun 10;11(6):e0156762. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0156762.
eCollection 2016.

Transfer of Maternal Immune Cells by Breastfeeding: Maternal Cytotoxic T
Lymphocytes Present in Breast Milk Localize in the Peyer's Patches of the Nursed 
Infant.

Cabinian A(1), Sinsimer D(1), Tang M(1), Zumba O(1), Mehta H(1), Toma A(1),
Sant'Angelo D(1), Laouar Y(2), Laouar A(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Child Health Institute of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan School of
Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

Despite our knowledge of the protective role of antibodies passed to infants
through breast milk, our understanding of immunity transfer via maternal
leukocytes is still limited. To emulate the immunological interface between the
mother and her infant while breast-feeding, we used murine pups fostered after
birth onto MHC-matched and MHC-mismatched dams. Overall, data revealed that: 1)
Survival of breast milk leukocytes in suckling infants is possible, but not
significant after the foster-nursing ceases; 2) Most breast milk lymphocytes
establish themselves in specific areas of the intestine termed Peyer's patches
(PPs); 3) While most leukocytes in the milk bolus were myeloid cells, the
majority of breast milk leukocytes localized to PPs were T lymphocytes, and
cytotoxic T cells (CTLs) in particular; 4) These CTLs exhibit high levels of the 
gut-homing molecules α4β7 and CCR9, but a reduced expression of the systemic
homing marker CD62L; 5) Under the same activation conditions, transferred CD8 T
cells through breast milk have a superior capacity to produce potent cytolytic
and inflammatory mediators when compared to those generated by the breastfed
infant. It is therefore possible that maternal CTLs found in breast milk are
directed to the PPs to compensate for the immature adaptive immune system of the 
infant in order to protect it against constant oral infectious risks during the
postnatal phase.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0156762 
PMCID: PMC4902239
PMID: 27285085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

