
1. J Food Prot. 2016 Jun;79(6):1032-5. doi: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-15-325.

Salmonella Persistence within the Peripheral Lymph Nodes of Cattle following
Experimental Inoculation.

Edrington TS(1), Loneragan GH(2), Genovese KJ(3), Hanson DL(2), Nisbet DJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Food and Feed
Safety Research Unit, 2881 F&B Road, College Station, Texas 77845, USA.
tom.edrington@ars.usda.gov.
(2)International Center for Food Industry Excellence, Department of Animal and
Food Sciences, P.O. Box 42141, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas 79409, USA.
(3)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Food and Feed
Safety Research Unit, 2881 F&B Road, College Station, Texas 77845, USA.

Utilizing a transdermal method of inoculation developed in our laboratory, the
duration of infection of Salmonella in the peripheral lymph nodes of steers was
examined. Thirty-six Holstein steers (mean body weight of 137 kg) were inoculated
with Salmonella Montevideo (day 0) on each lower leg and both sides of the back
and abdomen. Calves were euthanized beginning at 6 h and subsequently on each of 
days 1, 2, 4, 7, 9, 11, 14, and 21 postinoculation (four animals each time). The 
subiliac, popliteal, and superficial cervical (prescapular) lymph nodes were
collected and cultured (quantitatively and qualitatively) for the challenge
strain of Salmonella. The challenge strain was detected via direct culture within
the lymph nodes at 6 h postinoculation and on each subsequent necropsy date.
Salmonella levels in lymph node were 0.8 to 1.8 log CFU/g. Lymph nodes were
generally positive after enrichment culture throughout the experiment. Salmonella
elimination appeared to begin approximately 14 days postinoculation. However,
elimination was not completed by day 21; therefore, a second experiment was
conducted identical to the first except that the time from inoculation to
necropsy was extended. Salmonella was recovered via direct culture on each of the
necropsy days, and results in general were similar to those of experiment I,
except that on days 20, 24, and 28 isolates from serogroups C2 and E1 were
identified in addition to the inoculation strain C1 in multiple animals. The data
from both experiments indicate that after a single inoculation event, Salmonella 
would be completely cleared by approximately 28 days. Further research with
expanded times between inoculation and necropsy is required for verification.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-15-325 
PMID: 27296609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

