
1. Ann Agric Environ Med. 2016 Jun 2;23(2):242-7. doi: 10.5604/12321966.1203884.

Synthesis of Th17 cytokines in the culture of peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
stimulated with Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato.

Grygorczuk S(1), Świerzbińska R(1), Moniuszko A(1), Kondrusik M(1), Zajkowska
J(1), Czupryna P(1), Dunaj J(1), Pancewicz S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Neuroinfections, Medical University,
Białystok, Poland.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVE: Th17 lymphocytes and their cytokines, interleukin 17A
(IL-17A), IL-17F and IL-22, participate in the response to extracellular bacteria
and in the autoimmunity and may be engaged in the pathogenesis of Lyme
borreliosis. Concentrations were measured of IL-17A, IL-17F and IL-22 in the
supernatant of the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) culture stimulated
with Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato (B. burgdorferi).
MATERIALS AND METHOD: The study group consisted of 13 patients with early
disseminated and late Lyme borreliosis and a control group of 7 healthy persons. 
PBMC cultures were stimulated for 48 hours with B. burgdorferi spirochetes of
three pathogenic species: B. burgdorferi sensu stricto, B. afzelii or B. garinii,
in the multiplicity of infection 10:1. Concentrations of Th17 cytokines IL-17A,
IL-17F and IL-22, as well as Th2/immunoregulatory cytokine IL-10 were measured
with ELISA assays.
RESULTS: Expression of IL-17A, IL-17F and IL-22 increased under stimulation,
simultaneously with the increased IL-10 expression. Concentration of IL-17F
tended to be lower in early neuroborreliosis than in late Lyme borreliosis and
than in controls. B. afzelii elicited higher expression of IL-17A than the other 
two species.
CONCLUSIONS: IL-17A, IL-17F and IL-22 are synthesized simultaneously by PBMC
stimulated with B. burgdorferi. There is no antagonism between Th17 response and 
IL-10 expression. The role of Th17 cytokines seems to differ depending on the
clinical stage of Lyme borreliosis and on the B. burgdorferi species.

DOI: 10.5604/12321966.1203884 
PMID: 27294626  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

