
1. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2016 Jul 14;18(26):17380-8. doi: 10.1039/c6cp02790c. Epub
2016 Jun 15.

Atomic elucidation of the cyclodextrin effects on DDT solubility and
biodegradation.

Ren B(1), Zhang M, Gao H, Zheng J, Jia L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Dalian University of Technology,
Dalian 116024, China. lyj81@dlut.edu.cn.

DDT (1,1,1-trichloro-2.2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane), one of the most abused
insecticides, is a highly hazardous component for both human health and
environmental applications. The biodegradation of DDT into non-toxic,
environmentally benign components is strongly limited by the poor bioavailability
of DDT. In this work, we combined experiments and molecular simulations to
examine the effect of three cyclodextrins (α-, β-, and γ-CD) on their
structure-specific interactions with DDT, specifically in relation to DDT
solubility and biodegradability. It was found that all three CDs were able to
bind to DDT with their inner hydrophobic cavity and different binding affinities 
and orientations, demonstrating their ability to improve DDT solubility.
Different from the strong binding between DDT and β-/γ-CDs via a fully DDT bury
mode, α-CD had a relatively weak binding with DDT via a partial DDT bury mode,
which allowed DDT to be readily disassociated from α-CD at the lipid membrane
interface, followed by DDT permeation into and across the cell membrane. The
different binding modes between DDT and CDs explain why only α-CD can promote the
bioavailability and biodegradation of DDT by simultaneously increasing its
aqueous solubility and membrane interaction. This work provides structural-based 
binding information for the further modification and optimization of these three 
CDs to enhance their solubility and biodegradability of DDT.

DOI: 10.1039/c6cp02790c 
PMID: 27301608  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

