
1. Protein Expr Purif. 2016 Nov;127:1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2016.06.002. Epub 2016
Jun 11.

Microbial host selection and periplasmic folding in Escherichia coli affect the
biochemical characteristics of a cutinase from Fusarium oxysporum.

Nikolaivits E(1), Kokkinou A(2), Karpusas M(2), Topakas E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Laboratory, School of Chemical Engineering, National Technical
University of Athens, 5 Iroon Polytechniou Str., Zografou Campus, Athens 15780,
Greece.
(2)Physics Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, Agricultural University of
Athens, Athens 11855, Greece.
(3)Biotechnology Laboratory, School of Chemical Engineering, National Technical
University of Athens, 5 Iroon Polytechniou Str., Zografou Campus, Athens 15780,
Greece. Electronic address: vtopakas@chemeng.ntua.gr.

A cutinase from the mesophilic fungus Fusarium oxysporum (FoCut5a) was
functionally expressed in different hosts and their recombinant products were
characterized regarding their activity, thermostability and tolerance in organic 
solvents. The cutinase gene cut5a was expressed in the BL21 and Origami 2
Escherichia coli strains and the resulting protein was folded either in the
cytoplasm or in the periplasmic space, with the aim of correct formation of
disulfide bonds. Increase of thermostability occurred when the enzyme was
expressed in the oxidative cytoplasm of Origami 2. All expression products showed
maximum enzyme activity at 40 °C, while thermostability increased by 73% when
expressed in the Origami strain compared to the cytoplasmic expression in
BL21 cells. The melting temperature of each protein construct was determined by
fluorescence spectroscopy showing an additional transition at about 63 °C for
enzymes expressed in Origami cells, indicating the co-presence of a different
thermostable species. Kinetic studies performed on three p-nitrophenyl synthetic 
esters of aliphatic acids (C2, C4, C12) indicated that this cutinase shows higher
affinity for the hydrolysis of the butyl ester.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2016.06.002 
PMID: 27302766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

