
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jun 22;6:28473. doi: 10.1038/srep28473.

Adipocyte-specific CD1d-deficiency mitigates diet-induced obesity and insulin
resistance in mice.

Satoh M(1), Hoshino M(1), Fujita K(1), Iizuka M(1), Fujii S(2), Clingan CS(3),
Van Kaer L(4), Iwabuchi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Asahikawa Medical University, Asahikawa,
Japan.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, Lowell General
Hospital, Boston, MA 02111, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA.

It has been shown that CD1d expression and glycolipid-reactive, CD1d-restricted
NKT cells exacerbate the development of obesity and insulin resistance in mice.
However, the relevant CD1d-expressing cells that influence the effects of NKT
cells on the progression of obesity remain incompletely defined. In this study,
we have demonstrated that 3T3-L1 adipocytes can present endogenous ligands to NKT
cells, leading to IFN-γ production, which in turn, stimulated 3T3-L1 adipocytes
to enhance expression of CD1d and CCL2, and decrease expression of adiponectin.
Furthermore, adipocyte-specific CD1d deletion decreased the size of the visceral 
adipose tissue mass and enhanced insulin sensitivity in mice fed a high-fat diet 
(HFD). Accordingly, NKT cells were less activated, IFN-γ production was
significantly reduced, and levels of adiponectin were increased in these animals 
as compared with control mice on HFD. Importantly, macrophage recruitment into
the adipose tissue of adipocyte-specific CD1d-deficient mice was significantly
blunted. These findings indicate that interactions between NKT cells and
CD1d-expressing adipocytes producing endogenous NKT cell ligands play a critical 
role in the induction of inflammation and functional modulation of adipose tissue
that leads to obesity.

DOI: 10.1038/srep28473 
PMCID: PMC4916414
PMID: 27329323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

