
1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2016 Oct;132:240-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2016.06.013.
Epub 2016 Jun 21.

Relevance of the bioavailable fraction of DDT and its metabolites in freshwater
sediment toxicity: New insight into the mode of action of these chemicals on
Dictyostelium discoideum.

Sforzini S(1), Governa D(1), Boeri M(1), Oliveri L(1), Oldani A(2), Vago F(2),
Viarengo A(3), Borrelli R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sciences and Technological Innovation (DiSIT), University of
Piemonte Orientale "A. Avogadro", V.le T. Michel 11, 15121 Alessandria, Italy.
(2)Renewable Energy & Environmental R&D Center - Istituto eni Donegani, via G.
Fauser 4, 28100 Novara, Italy.
(3)Department of Sciences and Technological Innovation (DiSIT), University of
Piemonte Orientale "A. Avogadro", V.le T. Michel 11, 15121 Alessandria, Italy.
Electronic address: aldo.viarengo@uniupo.it.

In this work, the toxicity of lake sediments contaminated with DDT and its
metabolites DDD and DDE (collectively, DDX) was evaluated with widely used
toxicity tests (i.e., Vibrio fischeri, Daphnia magna, Pseudokirchneriella
subcapitata, and Lumbriculus variegatus) and with the social amoeba Dictyostelium
discoideum, a model organism that is also suitable for studying pollutant-induced
alterations at the molecular and cellular levels. Although the DDX concentration 
in the sediments was high (732.5 ppb), the results suggested a minimal
environmental risk; in fact, no evidence of harmful effects was found using the
different bioassays or when we considered the results of more sensitive sublethal
biomarkers in D. discoideum amoebae. In line with the biological results, the
chemical data showed that the concentration of DDX in the pore water (in general 
a highly bioavailable phase) showed a minimal value (0.0071ppb). To confirm the
importance of the bioavailability of the toxic chemicals in determining their
biological effects and to investigate the mechanisms of DDX toxicity, we exposed 
D. discoideum amoebae to 732.5ppb DDX in water solution. DDX had no effect on
cell viability; however, a strong reduction in amoebae replication rate was
observed, which depended mainly on a reduction in endocytosis rate and on
lysosomal and mitochondrial alterations. In the presence of a moderate and
transient increase in reactive oxygen species, the glutathione level in
DDX-exposed amoebae drastically decreased. These results highlight that studies
of the bioavailability of pollutants in environmental matrices and their
biological effects are essential for site-specific ecological risk assessment.
Moreover, glutathione depletion in DDX-exposed organisms is a new finding that
could open the possibility of developing new pesticide mixtures that are more
effective against DDT-resistant malaria vectors.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2016.06.013 
PMID: 27340883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

