
1. J Breath Res. 2016 Jun 24;10(3):036003. doi: 10.1088/1752-7155/10/3/036003.

Breath gas monitoring during a glucose challenge by a combined
PTR-QMS/GC×GC-TOFMS approach for the verification of potential volatile
biomarkers.

Gruber B(1), Keller S, Groeger T, Matuschek G, Szymczak W, Zimmermann R.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Mass Spectrometry Centre, Comprehensive Molecular Analytics, Helmholtz
Zentrum München, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, Neuherberg 85764, Germany. Joint Mass
Spectrometry Centre, Chair of Analytical Chemistry, University of Rostock, Dr.
Lorenz Weg 1, Rostock 18059, Germany.

Breath gas profiles, which reflect metabolic disorders like diabetes, are the
subject of scientific focus. Nevertheless, profiling is still a challenging task 
that requires complex and standardized methods. This study was carried out to
verify breath gas patterns that were obtained in previous proton-transfer
reaction-quadrupole mass spectrometry (PTR-QMS) studies and that can be linked to
glucose metabolism. An experimental setup using simultaneous PTR-QMS and
complementary highly time-resolved needle trap micro extraction (NTME) combined
with comprehensive 2D gas chromatography-time-of-flight mass spectrometry
(GC×GC-TOFMS) was established for the analysis of highly polar volatile organic
compounds (VOCs). The method was applied to the breath gas analysis of three
volunteers during a glucose challenge, whereby subjects ingested a glucose
solution orally. Challenge responsive PTR-QMS target VOCs could be linked to
small n-carbonic (C2-C4) alcohols and short chain fatty acids (SCFA). Specific
isomers could be identified by simultaneously applied NTME-GC×GC-TOFMS and
further verified by their characteristic time profiles and concentrations. The
identified VOCs potentially originate from bacteria that are found in the oral
cavity and gastrointestinal tract. In this study breath gas monitoring enabled
the identification of potential VOC metabolites that can be linked to glucose
metabolism.

DOI: 10.1088/1752-7155/10/3/036003 
PMID: 27341456  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

