
1. Phytopathology. 2016 Nov;106(11):1335-1343. Epub 2016 Sep 1.

Analyzing Genetic Diversity for Virulence and Resistance Phenotypes in
Populations of Stem Rust (Puccinia graminis f. sp. secalis) and Winter Rye
(Secale cereale).

Miedaner T(1), Schmitt AK(1), Klocke B(1), Schmiedchen B(1), Wilde P(1), Spieß
H(1), Szabo L(1), Koch S(1), Flath K(1).

Author information: 
(1)First and eighth authors: State Plant Breeding Institute, Universität
Hohenheim (720), Fruwirthstrasse 21, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany; second, third, and
ninth authors: Julius-Kühn Institute, Institute of Plant Protection in Field
Crops and Grassland, Stahnsdorfer Damm 81, 14532 Kleinmachnow, Germany; fourth
and fifth authors: KWS LOCHOW GMBH, Bergen, Germany; and sixth and seventh
authors: Landbauschule Dottenfelderhof e.V., 61118 Bad Vilbel, Germany.

Stem rust (Puccinia graminis f. sp. secalis) leads to considerable yield losses
in rye-growing areas with continental climate, from Eastern Germany to Siberia.
For implementing resistance breeding, it is of utmost importance to (i) analyze
the diversity of stem rust populations in terms of pathotypes (= virulence
combinations) and (ii) identify resistance sources in winter rye populations. We 
analyzed 323 single-uredinial isolates mainly collected from German rye-growing
areas across 3 years for their avirulence/virulence on 15 rye inbred
differentials. Out of these, 226 pathotypes were detected and only 56 pathotypes 
occurred more than once. This high diversity was confirmed by a Simpson index of 
1.0, a high Shannon index (5.27), and an evenness index of 0.97. In parallel, we 
investigated stem rust resistance among and within 121 heterogeneous rye
populations originating mainly from Russia, Poland, Austria, and the United
States across 3 to 15 environments (location-year combinations). While German rye
populations had an average stem rust severity of 49.7%, 23 nonadapted populations
were significantly (P < 0.01) more resistant with a stem rust severity ranging
from 3 to 40%. Out of these, two modern Russian breeding populations and two old 
Austrian landraces were the best harboring 32 to 70% fully resistant plants
across 8 to 10 environments. These populations with the lowest disease severity
in adult-plant stage in the field also displayed resistance in leaf segment
tests. In conclusion, stem rust populations are highly diverse and the majority
of resistances in rye populations seems to be race specific.

DOI: 10.1094/PHYTO-10-15-0252-R 
PMID: 27349739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

