
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Jul 19;7(29):45976-45994. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.10275.

miR146a-mediated targeting of FANCM during inflammation compromises genome
integrity.

Sundaravinayagam D(1)(2), Kim HR(1)(3), Wu T(1)(3), Kim HH(1)(3), Lee HS(1)(2),
Jun S(1)(2), Cha JH(4), Kee Y(5), You HJ(1)(2), Lee JH(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genomic Instability and Cancer Therapeutics, Cancer Mutation
Research Center, Chosun University School of Medicine, Gwangju, Republic of
Korea.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Chosun University School of Medicine, Gwangju,
Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Chosun University School of
Medicine, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Oral Biology, Department of Applied Life Science, The Graduate
School, Yonsei University College of Dentistry, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, College of
Arts and Sciences, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States of 
America.

Erratum in
    Oncotarget. 2020 May 26;11(21):2024-2025.

Inflammation is a potent inducer of tumorigenesis. Increased DNA damage or loss
of genome integrity is thought to be one of the mechanisms linking inflammation
and cancer development. It has been suggested that NF-κB-induced microRNA-146
(miR146a) may be a mediator of the inflammatory response. Based on our initial
observation that miR146a overexpression strongly increases DNA damage, we
investigated its potential role as a modulator of DNA repair. Here, we
demonstrate that FANCM, a component in the Fanconi Anemia pathway, is a novel
target of miR146a. miR146a suppressed FANCM expression by directly binding to the
3' untranslated region of the gene. miR146a-induced downregulation of FANCM was
associated with inhibition of FANCD2 monoubiquitination, reduced DNA homologous
recombination repair and checkpoint response, failed recovery from replication
stress, and increased cellular sensitivity to cisplatin. These phenotypes were
recapitulated when miR146a expression was induced by overexpressing the NF-κB
subunit p65/RelA or Helicobacter pylori infection in a human gastric cell line;
the phenotypes were effectively reversed with an anti-miR146a antagomir. These
results suggest that undesired inflammation events caused by a pathogen or
over-induction of miR146a can impair genome integrity via suppression of FANCM.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.10275 
PMCID: PMC5216775
PMID: 27351285  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no conflicts of interest
exist.

