
1. J Food Prot. 2016 Jul;79(7):1234-9. doi: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-15-224.

Multidrug-Resistant Salmonella Isolates from Swine in the Eastern Cape Province, 
South Africa.

Iwu CJ(1), Iweriebor BC(2), Obi LC(3), Basson AK(4), Okoh AI(5).

Author information: 
(1)South African Medical Research Council Microbial Water Quality Monitoring
Centre, , University of Fort Hare, Alice 5700, Eastern Cape, South Africa;
Applied and Environmental Microbiology Research Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Fort Hare, Alice 5700, Eastern Cape, South
Africa. chinwelolo@gmail.com.
(2)South African Medical Research Council Microbial Water Quality Monitoring
Centre, University of Fort Hare, Alice 5700, Eastern Cape, South Africa;Applied
and Environmental Microbiology Research Group, Department of Biochemistry and
Microbiology, University of Fort Hare, Alice 5700, Eastern Cape, South Africa.
(3)Academic and Research Division, University of Fort Hare, Alice 5700, Eastern
Cape, South Africa.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Zululand,
KwaDlangezwa, 3886, South Africa.
(5)South African Medical Research Council Microbial Water Quality Monitoring
Centre, University of Fort Hare, Alice 5700, Eastern Cape, South Africa; Applied 
and Environmental Microbiology Research Group, Department of Biochemistry and
Microbiology, University of Fort Hare, Alice 5700, Eastern Cape, South Africa.

The exposure of farm animals to antimicrobials for treatment, prophylaxis, or
growth promotion can select for resistant bacteria that can be transmitted to
humans, and Salmonella as an important zoonotic pathogen can act as a potential
reservoir of antimicrobial resistance determinants. We assessed the antibiogram
profiles of Salmonella species isolated from pig herds in two commercial farms in
South Africa. Two hundred fifty-eight presumptive Salmonella isolates were
recovered from the fecal samples of 500 adult pigs. Specific primers targeting
Salmonella serogroups A, B, C1, C2, and D were used to determine the prevalence
of different serogroups. Only serogroup A (n = 48) was detected, while others
were not. Antimicrobial susceptibility of the confirmed Salmonella serogroup A
isolates was performed by using the disk diffusion method against a panel of 18
antibiotics. All the 48 isolates were resistant to tetracycline and
oxytetracycline, while 75% were resistant to ampicillin,
sulphamethoxazole-trimethoprim, nalidixic acid, and streptomycin. All the
isolates exhibited multidrug resistance, with the predominant phenotype being
against 11 antibiotics, and multiple antibiotic resistance index ranged between
0.3 and 0.6. The incidence of genes encoding resistance against ampicillin
(ampC), tetracycline (tetA), and streptomycin (strA) were 54, 61, and 44%,
respectively. We conclude that healthy pigs are potential reservoirs of
multidrug-resistant Salmonella that could be transmitted to humans through the
food chain and, hence, a significant public health threat.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-15-224 
PMID: 27357044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

