
1. Protein Sci. 2016 Sep;25(9):1722-33. doi: 10.1002/pro.2977. Epub 2016 Jul 17.

A model for the interaction of the G3-subdomain of Geobacillus stearothermophilus
IF2 with the 30S ribosomal subunit.

Dongre R(1), Folkers GE(1), Gualerzi CO(2), Boelens R(1), Wienk H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, NMR Spectroscopy, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular
Research, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory of Genetics, Department of Biosciences and Biotechnology,
University of Camerino, Italy.

Bacterial translation initiation factor IF2 complexed with GTP binds to the 30S
ribosomal subunit, promotes ribosomal binding of fMet-tRNA, and favors the
joining of the small and large ribosomal subunits yielding a 70S initiation
complex ready to enter the translation elongation phase. Within the IF2 molecule 
subdomain G3, which is believed to play an important role in the IF2-30S
interaction, is positioned between the GTP-binding G2 and the fMet-tRNA binding
C-terminal subdomains. In this study the solution structure of subdomain G3 of
Geobacillus stearothermophilus IF2 has been elucidated. G3 forms a core structure
consisting of two β-sheets with each four anti-parallel strands, followed by a
C-terminal α-helix. In line with its role as linker between G3 and subdomain C1, 
this helix has no well-defined orientation but is endowed with a dynamic nature. 
The structure of the G3 core is that of a typical OB-fold module, similar to that
of the corresponding subdomain of Thermus thermophilus IF2, and to that of other 
known RNA-binding modules such as IF2-C2, IF1 and subdomains II of elongation
factors EF-Tu and EF-G. Structural comparisons have resulted in a model that
describes the interaction between IF2-G3 and the 30S ribosomal subunit.

© 2016 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.2977 
PMCID: PMC5338232
PMID: 27364543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

