
1. Immunogenetics. 2016 Aug;68(8):639-48. doi: 10.1007/s00251-016-0933-y. Epub 2016 
Jul 1.

Invariant natural killer T cells: front line fighters in the war against
pathogenic microbes.

Crosby CM(1), Kronenberg M(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 9420 Athena Circle, La Jolla,
CA, 92037, USA.
(2)La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 9420 Athena Circle, La Jolla,
CA, 92037, USA. Mitch@lji.org.
(3)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, 92037, USA. Mitch@lji.org.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells constitute a unique subset of innate-like
T cells that have been shown to have crucial roles in a variety of immune
responses. iNKT cells are characterized by their expression of both NK cell
markers and an invariant T cell receptor (TCR) Î± chain, which recognizes
glycolipids presented by the MHC class I-like molecule CD1d. Despite having a
limited antigen repertoire, the iNKT cell response can be very complex, and
participate in both protective and harmful immune responses. The protective role 
of these cells against a variety of pathogens has been particularly well
documented. Through the use of these pathogen models, our knowledge of the
breadth of the iNKT cell response has been expanded. Specific iNKT cell antigens 
have been isolated from several different bacteria, from which iNKT cells are
critical for protection in mouse models. These responses can be generated by
direct, CD1d-mediated activation, or indirect, cytokine-mediated activation, or a
combination of the two. This can lead to secretion of a variety of different Th1,
Th2, or Th17 cytokines, which differentially impact the downstream immune
response against these pathogens. This critical role is emphasized by the
conservation of these cells between mice and humans, warranting further
investigation into how iNKT cells participate in protective immune responses,
with the ultimate goal of harnessing their potential for treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-016-0933-y 
PMCID: PMC5065929
PMID: 27368411  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

