
1. Exp Mol Med. 2016 Jul 1;48(7):e243. doi: 10.1038/emm.2016.38.

The role of autophagy in allergic inflammation: a new target for severe asthma.

Liu JN(1)(2), Suh DH(1), Trinh HK(1), Chwae YJ(3), Park HS(1), Shin YS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Ajou University School of
Medicine, Suwon, Korea.
(2)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Jilin Provincial Cancer Hospital, Changchun, 
China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea.

Autophagy has been investigated for its involvement in inflammatory diseases, but
its role in asthma has been little studied. This study aimed to explore the
possible role of autophagy and its therapeutic potential in severe allergic
asthma. BALB/c mice were sensitized with ovalbumin (OVA) on days 0 and 14,
followed by primary OVA challenge on days 28-30. The mice received a secondary 1 
or 2% OVA challenge on days 44-46. After the final OVA challenge, the mice were
assessed for airway responsiveness (AHR), cell composition and cytokine levels in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). LC3 expression in lung tissue was measured
by western blot and immunofluorescence staining. Autophagosomes were detected by 
electron microscopy. 3-Methyladenine (3-MA) treatment and Atg5 knockdown were
applied to investigate the potential role of autophagy in allergic asthma mice.
AHR, inflammation in BALF and LC3 expression in lung tissue were significantly
increased in the 2% OVA-challenged mice compared with the 1% OVA-challenged mice 
(P<0.05). In addition, eosinophils showed prominent formation of autophagosomes
and increased LC3 expression compared with other inflammatory cells in BALF and
lung tissue. After autophagy was inhibited by 3-MA and Atg5 shRNA treatment, AHR,
eosinophilia, interleukin (IL)-5 levels in BALF and histological inflammatory
findings were much improved. Finally, treatment with an anti-IL-5 antibody
considerably reduced LC3 II expression in lung homogenates. Our findings suggest 
that autophagy is closely correlated with the severity of asthma through
eosinophilic inflammation, and its modulation may provide novel therapeutic
approaches for severe allergic asthma.

DOI: 10.1038/emm.2016.38 
PMCID: PMC4973311
PMID: 27364893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

