
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Aug 19;44(14):6830-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw601. Epub 2016 
Jul 4.

Experimental single-strain mobilomics reveals events that shape pathogen
emergence.

Schoeniger JS(1), Hudson CM(1), Bent ZW(1), Sinha A(1), Williams KP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Department, Sandia National Laboratories, Livermore, CA 94551,
USA.
(2)Systems Biology Department, Sandia National Laboratories, Livermore, CA 94551,
USA kpwilli@sandia.gov.

Virulence genes on mobile DNAs such as genomic islands (GIs) and plasmids promote
bacterial pathogen emergence. Excision is an early step in GI mobilization,
producing a circular GI and a deletion site in the chromosome; circular forms are
also known for some bacterial insertion sequences (ISs). The recombinant sequence
at the junctions of such circles and deletions can be detected sensitively in
high-throughput sequencing data, using new computational methods that enable
empirical discovery of mobile DNAs. For the rich mobilome of a hospital
Klebsiella pneumoniae strain, circularization junctions (CJs) were detected for
six GIs and seven IS types. Our methods revealed differential biology of multiple
mobile DNAs, imprecision of integrases and transposases, and differential
activity among identical IS copies for IS26, ISKpn18 and ISKpn21 Using the
resistance of circular dsDNA molecules to exonuclease, internally calibrated with
the native plasmids, showed that not all molecules bearing GI CJs were circular. 
Transpositions were also detected, revealing replicon preference (ISKpn18 prefers
a conjugative IncA/C2 plasmid), local action (IS26), regional preferences,
selection (against capsule synthesis) and IS polarity inversion. Efficient
discovery and global characterization of numerous mobile elements per experiment 
improves accounting for the new gene combinations that arise in emerging
pathogens.

Â© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw601 
PMCID: PMC5001619
PMID: 27378783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

