
1. Immunogenetics. 2016 Aug;68(8):597-610. doi: 10.1007/s00251-016-0925-y. Epub 2016
Jul 5.

Glycolipid activators of invariant NKT cells as vaccine adjuvants.

Kharkwal SS(1), Arora P(1), Porcelli SA(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461, USA. steven.porcelli@einstein.yu.edu.
(3)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, 10461,
USA. steven.porcelli@einstein.yu.edu.

Natural Killer T cells (NKT cells) are a subpopulation of T lymphocytes with
unique phenotypic properties and a remarkably broad range of immune effector and 
regulatory functions. One subset of these cells, known as invariant NKT cells
(iNKT cells), has become a significant focus in the search for new and better
ways to enhance immunotherapies and vaccination. These unconventional T cells are
characterized by their ability to be specifically activated by a range of foreign
and self-derived glycolipid antigens presented by CD1d, an MHC class I-related
antigen presenting molecule that has evolved to bind and present lipid antigens. 
The development of synthetic Î±-galactosylceramides as a family of powerful
glycolipid agonists for iNKT cells has led to approaches for augmenting a wide
variety of immune responses, including those involved in vaccination against
infections and cancers. Here we review the basic background biology of iNKT cells
that is relevant to their potential for improving immune responses, and summarize
recent work supporting the further development of glycolipid activators of iNKT
cells as a new class of vaccine adjuvants.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-016-0925-y 
PMID: 27377623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

