
1. Springerplus. 2016 Jun 29;5(1):913. doi: 10.1186/s40064-016-2575-9. eCollection
2016.

Natural deep eutectic solvents: cytotoxic profile.

Hayyan M(1), Mbous YP(2), Looi CY(3), Wong WF(4), Hayyan A(5), Salleh Z(2),
Mohd-Ali O(6).

Author information: 
(1)University of Malaya Centre for Ionic Liquids (UMCiL), University of Malaya,
50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia ; Department of Civil Engineering, University of
Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)University of Malaya Centre for Ionic Liquids (UMCiL), University of Malaya,
50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia ; Department of Chemical Engineering, University of 
Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia.
(5)University of Malaya Centre for Ionic Liquids (UMCiL), University of Malaya,
50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia ; Institute of Halal Research University of Malaya
(IHRUM), Academy of Islamic Studies, University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.
(6)UiTM Medical Specialist Centre, University of Technology MARA, Jalan Hospital,
47000 Sungai Buloh, Selangor, Malaysia.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the cytotoxic profiles of different 
ternary natural deep eutectic solvents (NADESs) containing water. For this
purpose, five different NADESs were prepared using choline chloride as a salt,
alongside five hydrogen bond donors (HBD) namely glucose, fructose, sucrose,
glycerol, and malonic acid. Water was added as a tertiary component during the
eutectics preparation, except for the malonic acid-based mixture. Coincidentally,
the latter was found to be more toxic than any of the water-based NADESs. A trend
was observed between the cellular requirements of cancer cells, the viscosity of 
the NADESs, and their cytotoxicity. This study also highlights the first time
application of the conductor-like screening model for real solvent (COSMO-RS)
software for the analysis of the cytotoxic mechanism of NADESs. COSMO-RS
simulation of the interactions between NADESs and cellular membranes'
phospholipids suggested that NADESs strongly interacted with cell surfaces and
that their accumulation and aggregation possibly defined their cytotoxicity. This
reinforced the idea that careful selection of NADESs components is necessary, as 
it becomes evident that organic acids as HBD highly contribute to the increasing 
toxicity of these neoteric mixtures. Nevertheless, NADESs in general seem to
possess relatively less acute toxicity profiles than their DESs parents. This
opens the door for future large scale utilization of these mixtures.

DOI: 10.1186/s40064-016-2575-9 
PMCID: PMC4927554
PMID: 27386357 

