
1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2016 Nov;100:188-198. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.06.031. Epub 2016 Jul 5.

Mitochondrial Lon protease in human disease and aging: Including an etiologic
classification of Lon-related diseases and disorders.

Bota DA(1), Davies KJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, UC Irvine
School of Medicine, 200 S. Manchester Ave., Suite 206, Orange, CA 92868, USA.
Electronic address: dbota@uci.edu.
(2)Leonard Davis School of Gerontology of the Ethel Percy Andrus Gerontology
Center, Los Angeles, CA 90089-0191, USA; Division of Molecular & Computational
Biology, Department of Biological Sciences, Dornsife College of Letters, Arts, & 
Sciences, The University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-0191, USA.

The Mitochondrial Lon protease, also called LonP1 is a product of the nuclear
gene LONP1. Lon is a major regulator of mitochondrial metabolism and response to 
free radical damage, as well as an essential factor for the maintenance and
repair of mitochondrial DNA. Lon is an ATP-stimulated protease that cycles
between being bound (at the inner surface of the inner mitochondrial membrane) to
the mitochondrial genome, and being released into the mitochondrial matrix where 
it can degrade matrix proteins. At least three different roles or functions have 
been ascribed to Lon: 1) Proteolytic digestion of oxidized proteins and the
turnover of specific essential mitochondrial enzymes such as aconitase, TFAM, and
StAR; 2) Mitochondrial (mt)DNA-binding protein, involved in mtDNA replication and
mitogenesis; and 3) Protein chaperone, interacting with the Hsp60-mtHsp70
complex. LONP1 orthologs have been studied in bacteria, yeast, flies, worms, and 
mammals, evincing the widespread importance of the gene, as well as its
remarkable evolutionary conservation. In recent years, we have witnessed a
significant increase in knowledge regarding Lon's involvement in physiological
functions, as well as in an expanding array of human disorders, including cancer,
neurodegeneration, heart disease, and stroke. In addition, Lon appears to have a 
significant role in the aging process. A number of mitochondrial diseases have
now been identified whose mechanisms involve various degrees of Lon dysfunction. 
In this paper we review current knowledge of Lon's function, under normal
conditions, and we propose a new classification of human diseases characterized
by a either over-expression or decline or loss of function of Lon. Lon has also
been implicated in human aging, and we review the data currently available as
well as speculating about possible interactions of aging and disease. Finally, we
also discuss Lon as potential therapeutic target in human disease.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.06.031 
PMCID: PMC5183306
PMID: 27387767  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

