
1. Genes Cancer. 2016 Mar;7(3-4):110-124. doi: 10.18632/genesandcancer.104.

MUC16 contributes to the metastasis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma through
focal adhesion mediated signaling mechanism.

Muniyan S(#)(1), Haridas D(#)(1), Chugh S(1), Rachagani S(1), Lakshmanan I(1),
Gupta S(1), Seshacharyulu P(1), Smith LM(2), Ponnusamy MP(1)(3), Batra
SK(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE,
USA.
(3)Fred and Pamela Buffett Cancer Center, Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer
and Allied Diseases, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

MUC16, a heavily glycosylated type-I transmembrane mucin is overexpressed in
several cancers including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Previously, we
have shown that MUC16 is significantly overexpressed in human PDAC tissues.
However, the functional consequences and its role in PDAC is poorly understood.
Here, we show that MUC16 knockdown decreases PDAC cell proliferation, colony
formation and migration in vitro. Also, MUC16 knockdown decreases the tumor
formation and metastasis in orthotopic xenograft mouse model. Mechanistically,
immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence analyses confirms MUC16 interaction
with galectin-3 and mesothelin in PDAC cells. Adhesion assay displayed decreased 
cell attachment of MUC16 knockdown cells with recombinant galectin-1 and
galectin-3 protein. Further, CRISPR/Cas9-mediated MUC16 knockout cells show
decreased tumor-associated carbohydrate antigens (T and Tn) in PDAC cells.
Importantly, carbohydrate antigens were decreased in the region that corresponds 
to MUC16 and suggests for the decreased MUC16-galectin interactions.
Co-immunoprecipitation also revealed a novel interaction between MUC16 and FAK in
PDAC cells. Interestingly, we observed decreased expression of mesenchymal and
increased expression of epithelial markers in MUC16-silenced cells. Additionally,
MUC16 loss showed a decreased FAK-mediated Akt and ERK/MAPK activation.
Altogether, these findings suggest that MUC16-focal adhesion signaling may play a
critical role in facilitating PDAC growth and metastasis.

DOI: 10.18632/genesandcancer.104 
PMCID: PMC4918949
PMID: 27382435 

