
1. Immunogenetics. 2016 Aug;68(8):611-22. doi: 10.1007/s00251-016-0936-8. Epub 2016 
Jul 8.

Are human iNKT cells keeping tabs on lipidome perturbations triggered by
oxidative stress in the blood?

Felley L(1), Gumperz JE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, 53706, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, 53706, USA.
jegumperz@wisc.edu.

The central paradigm of conventional MHC-restricted T cells is that they respond 
specifically to foreign peptides, while displaying tolerance to self-antigens. In
contrast, it is now becoming clear that a number of innate-like T cell
subsets-CD1-restricted T cells, Vγ9Vδ2 T cells, and MAIT cells-may operate by
different rules: rather than focusing on the recognition of specific foreign
antigens, these T cells all appear to respond to alterations to lipid-related
pathways. By monitoring perturbations to the "lipidome," these T cells may be
able to spring into action to deal with physiological situations that are of self
as well as microbial origin. iNKT cells are a prime example of this type of
lipidome-reactive T cell. As a result of their activation by self
lyso-phospholipid species that are generated downstream of blood lipid oxidation,
human iNKT cells in the vasculature may respond sensitively to a variety of
oxidative stresses. Some of the cytokines produced by activated iNKT cells have
angiogenic effects (e.g., GM-CSF, IL-8), whereas others (e.g., IFN-γ) are
pro-inflammatory factors that can propagate vascular pathology by influencing the
functions of macrophages and dendritic cells. Consistent with this, evidence is
accumulating that iNKT cells contribute to atherosclerosis, which is one of the
most common inflammatory pathologies, and one that is integrally related to
characteristics of the lipidome.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-016-0936-8 
PMID: 27393663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

