
1. mSphere. 2016 Jun 29;1(4). pii: e00121-16. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00121-16.
eCollection 2016 Jul-Aug.

Separate F-Type Plasmids Have Shaped the Evolution of the H30 Subclone of
Escherichia coli Sequence Type 131.

Johnson TJ(1), Danzeisen JL(1), Youmans B(1), Case K(1), Llop K(1), Munoz-Aguayo 
J(1), Flores-Figueroa C(1), Aziz M(2), Stoesser N(3), Sokurenko E(4), Price
LB(2), Johnson JR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, University of Minnesota, St.
Paul, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Division of Pathogen Genomics, Translational Genomics Research Institute,
Flagstaff, Arizona, USA; Department of Occupational and Environmental Health,
George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA.
(3)Modernising Medical Microbiology Consortium, Nuffield Department of Medicine, 
John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA.
(5)Minneapolis Veterans Health Care System, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA;
Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.

The extraintestinal pathogenic Escherichia coli (ExPEC) H30 subclone of sequence 
type 131 (ST131-H30) has emerged abruptly as a dominant lineage of ExPEC
responsible for human disease. The ST131-H30 lineage has been well described
phylogenetically, yet its plasmid complement is not fully understood. Here,
single-molecule, real-time sequencing was used to generate the complete plasmid
sequences of ST131-H30 isolates and those belonging to other ST131 clades.
Comparative analyses revealed separate F-type plasmids that have shaped the
evolution of the main fluoroquinolone-resistant ST131-H30 clades. Specifically,
an F1:A2:B20 plasmid is strongly associated with the H30R/C1 clade, whereas an
F2:A1:B- plasmid is associated with the H30Rx/C2 clade. A series of plasmid gene 
losses, gains, and rearrangements involving IS26 likely led to the current
plasmid complements within each ST131-H30 sublineage, which contain several
overlapping gene clusters with putative functions in virulence and fitness,
suggesting plasmid-mediated convergent evolution. Evidence suggests that the
H30Rx/C2-associated F2:A1:B- plasmid type was present in strains ancestral to the
acquisition of fluoroquinolone resistance and prior to the introduction of a
multidrug resistance-encoding gene cassette harboring bla CTX-M-15. In vitro
experiments indicated a host strain-independent low frequency of plasmid
transfer, differential levels of plasmid stability even between closely related
ST131-H30 strains, and possible epistasis for carriage of these plasmids within
the H30R/Rx lineages. IMPORTANCE A clonal lineage of Escherichia coli known as
ST131 has emerged as a dominating strain type causing extraintestinal infections 
in humans. The evolutionary history of ST131 E.Â coli is now well understood.
However, the role of plasmids in ST131's evolutionary history is poorly defined. 
This study utilized real-time, single-molecule sequencing to compare plasmids
from various current and historical lineages of ST131. From this work, it was
determined that a series of plasmid gains, losses, and recombinational events has
led to the currently circulating plasmids of ST131 strains. These plasmids appear
to have evolved to acquire similar gene clusters on multiple occasions,
suggesting possible plasmid-mediated convergent evolution leading to evolutionary
success. These plasmids also appear to be better suited to exist in specific
strains of ST131 due to coadaptive mutations. Overall, a series of events has
enabled the evolution of ST131 plasmids, possibly contributing to the lineage's
success.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00121-16 
PMCID: PMC4933990
PMID: 27390780 

