
1. Scand J Rheumatol. 2017 Mar;46(2):138-142. doi: 10.1080/03009742.2016.1183038.
Epub 2016 Jul 11.

PCR analysis is superior to histology for diagnosis of Whipple's disease
mimicking seronegative rheumatic diseases.

Lehmann P(1), Ehrenstein B(1), Hartung W(1), Dragonas C(1), Reischl U(2), Fleck
M(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology , Asklepios Medical
Centre , Bad Abbach , Germany.
(2)b Institute of Clinical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Medical Centre
Regensburg , Regensburg , Germany.
(3)c Department of Internal Medicine I , University Medical Centre Regensburg ,
Regensburg , Germany.

OBJECTIVES: The diagnosis of Whipple's disease (WD) is commonly confirmed by
histology demonstrating Periodic Acid Schiff (PAS)-positive macrophages in the
duodenal mucosa. Analysis of intestinal tissue or other specimens using
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a more sensitive method. However, the
relevance of positive PCR findings is still controversial. Therefore, we
evaluated the relevance of histology and PCR findings to establishing the
diagnosis of WD in a series of WD patients initially presenting with suspected
rheumatic diseases.
METHOD: Between 2006 and 2014, 20 patients with seronegative rheumatic diseases
tested positive for Tropheryma whipplei (Tw) by PCR and/or histology and were
enrolled in a retrospective analysis of the diagnostic value of both procedures.
RESULTS: Seven of the 20 cases (35%) were diagnosed with 'classic' WD as
indicated by PAS-positive macrophages. In the remaining 13 patients, the presence
of Tw was detected by intestinal (n = 10) or synovial PCR analysis (n = 3). Two
of the 20 patients (10%) with evidence of Tw did not respond to antibiotic
therapy. They were not considered to suffer from WD. Therefore, relying only on
histological findings of intestinal biopsies would have missed 11 (61%) of the 18
patients with WD in our cohort. In comparison, PCR of intestinal biopsies
detected Tw-DNA in 14 (93%) of the 15 WD patients evaluated. Patients with a
positive histology did not differ from PCR-positive patients with regard to sex, 
age, or duration of disease, but more often presented with gastrointestinal
symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: A substantial number of WD patients present without typical
intestinal histology findings. Additional PCR analysis of intestinal tissue or
synovial fluid increased the sensitivity of the diagnostic evaluation and should 
be considered particularly in patients presenting with atypical seronegative
rheumatic diseases and a high-risk profile for WD.

DOI: 10.1080/03009742.2016.1183038 
PMID: 27398638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

