
1. Genes Dev. 2016 Jul 1;30(13):1542-57. doi: 10.1101/gad.284166.116.

HGF-independent regulation of MET and GAB1 by nonreceptor tyrosine kinase FER
potentiates metastasis in ovarian cancer.

Fan G(1), Zhang S(2), Gao Y(3), Greer PA(3), Tonks NK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA;
(2)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA;
Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University, Stony 
Brook, New York 11794, USA;
(3)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Queen's University, Kingston,
Ontario K7L3N6, Canada.

Ovarian cancer cells disseminate readily within the peritoneal cavity, which
promotes metastasis, and are often resistant to chemotherapy. Ovarian cancer
patients tend to present with advanced disease, which also limits treatment
options; consequently, new therapies are required. The oncoprotein tyrosine
kinase MET, which is the receptor for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), has been
implicated in ovarian tumorigenesis and has been the subject of extensive drug
development efforts. Here, we report a novel ligand- and
autophosphorylation-independent activation of MET through the nonreceptor
tyrosine kinase feline sarcoma-related (FER). We demonstrated that the levels of 
FER were elevated in ovarian cancer cell lines relative to those in immortalized 
normal surface epithelial cells and that suppression of FER attenuated the
motility and invasive properties of these cancer cells. Furthermore, loss of FER 
impaired the metastasis of ovarian cancer cells in vivo. Mechanistically, we
demonstrated that FER phosphorylated a signaling site in MET: Tyr1349. This
enhanced activation of RAC1/PAK1 and promoted a kinase-independent scaffolding
function that led to recruitment and phosphorylation of GAB1 and the specific
activation of the SHP2-ERK signaling pathway. Overall, this analysis provides new
insights into signaling events that underlie metastasis in ovarian cancer cells, 
consistent with a prometastatic role of FER and highlighting its potential as a
novel therapeutic target for metastatic ovarian cancer.

Â© 2016 Fan et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.284166.116 
PMCID: PMC4949327
PMID: 27401557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

