
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2016 Sep;56:169-180. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2016.07.004. Epub
2016 Jul 9.

Optimization of efficacy of a live attenuated Flavobacterium psychrophilum
immersion vaccine.

Sudheesh PS(1), Cain KD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fish and Wildlife Sciences and Aquaculture Research Institute,
College of Natural Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844-1136, USA.
(2)Department of Fish and Wildlife Sciences and Aquaculture Research Institute,
College of Natural Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844-1136, USA.
Electronic address: kcain@uidaho.edu.

This study was aimed at optimizing the efficacy of a recently developed live
attenuated immersion vaccine (B.17-ILM) as a promising vaccine against bacterial 
coldwater disease (BCWD) caused by Flavobacterium psychrophilum in salmonids.
Rainbow trout (RBT) fry were vaccinated by immersion, and different parameters
affecting vaccination such as fish size, vaccine delivery time, dose, duration of
protection, booster regimes and vaccine growth incubation time were optimized.
Specific anti-F. psychrophilum immune response was determined by ELISA.
Protective efficacy was determined by challenging with a virulent strain of
F. psychrophilum (CSF-259-93) and calculating cumulative percent mortality (CPM) 
and relative percent survival (RPS). All vaccinated fish developed significantly 
higher levels of serum antibody titers by week 8 when compared to their
respective controls. Immersion vaccination for 3, 6 and 30 min produced
significant protection with comparable RPS values of 47%, 53% and 52%,
respectively. This vaccine provided significant protection for fish as small as
0.5 g with an RPS of 55%; larger fish of 1 g and 2 g yielded slightly higher RPS 
values of 59% and 60%, respectively. Fish vaccinated with higher vaccine doses of
∼10(10) and 10(8) colony forming units mL(-1) (cfu ml(-1)) were strongly
protected out to at least 24 weeks with RPS values up to 70%. Fish vaccinated
with lower doses (∼10(6) and 10(5) cfu mL(-1)) had good protection out to 12
weeks, but RPS values dropped to 36% and 34%, respectively by 24 weeks. Vaccine
efficacy was optimum when the primary vaccination was followed by a single
booster (week 12 challenge RPS = 61%) rather than two boosters (week 12 challenge
RPS = 48%). Vaccination without a booster resulted in a lower RPS (13%)
indicating the necessity of a single booster vaccination to maximize efficacy.
This study presents key findings that demonstrate the efficacy and commercial
potential for this live attenuated BCWD vaccine.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2016.07.004 
PMID: 27403595  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

