
1. PLoS One. 2016 Jul 13;11(7):e0158682. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0158682.
eCollection 2016.

Cloning and Heterologous Expression of the Grecocycline Biosynthetic Gene
Cluster.

Bilyk O(1), Sekurova ON(2), Zotchev SB(2), Luzhetskyy A(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Saarland University 
Campus, Building C2.3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)Department of Pharmacognosy, University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(3)Universität des Saarlandes, Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie, Building C2.3,
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.

Transformation-associated recombination (TAR) in yeast is a rapid and inexpensive
method for cloning and assembly of large DNA fragments, which relies on natural
homologous recombination. Two vectors, based on p15a and F-factor replicons that 
can be maintained in yeast, E. coli and streptomycetes have been constructed.
These vectors have been successfully employed for assembly of the grecocycline
biosynthetic gene cluster from Streptomyces sp. Acta 1362. Fragments of the
cluster were obtained by PCR and transformed together with the "capture" vector
into the yeast cells, yielding a construct carrying the entire gene cluster. The 
obtained construct was heterologously expressed in S. albus J1074, yielding
several grecocycline congeners. Grecocyclines have unique structural moieties
such as a dissacharide side chain, an additional amino sugar at the C-5 position 
and a thiol group. Enzymes from this pathway may be used for the derivatization
of known active angucyclines in order to improve their desired biological
properties.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0158682 
PMCID: PMC4943663
PMID: 27410036  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

