
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016 Nov;100(21):9175-9186. Epub 2016 Jul 13.

Generation of new compounds through unbalanced transcription of landomycin A
cluster.

Myronovskyi M(1), Brötz E(1), Rosenkränzer B(1), Manderscheid N(1), Tokovenko
B(1), Rebets Y(1), Luzhetskyy A(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Saarland University 
Campus, Building C2.3, 66123, Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Saarland University 
Campus, Building C2.3, 66123, Saarbrücken, Germany.
andriy.luzhetskyy@helmholtz-hzi.de.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Helmholtz-Institute for
Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Actinobacteria Metabolic Engineering Group,
Saarland University, UdS Campus, C2 3, 66123, Saarbrücken, Germany.
andriy.luzhetskyy@helmholtz-hzi.de.

The biosynthetically well-studied landomycin A cluster has been used to
demonstrate the unbalancing of gene transcription as an efficient method for the 
generation of new compounds. Landomycin A structural genes were decoupled from
the native regulators LanI and LanK and placed under the control of a single
synthetic promoter and expressed in a heterologous host Streptomyces albus J1074.
In contrast to their native quantitative and temporal regulation, these genes
were transcribed as a single polycistronic mRNA leading to the production of four
novel and two known compounds. No glycosylated landomycins were detected though
the entire biosynthetic cluster was transcribed, showing the crucial role of the 
balanced gene expression for the production of landomycin A. Two new compounds,
fridamycin F and G, isolated in this study were shown to originate from the
interplay between the expressed biosynthetic pathway and metabolic network of the
heterologous host. Structure activity studies of the isolated compounds as well
as results of transcriptome sequencing are discussed in this article.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-016-7721-3 
PMID: 27412461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

