
1. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2016 Sep;408(23):6423-30. doi: 10.1007/s00216-016-9760-0. Epub
2016 Jul 13.

Development of a biotinylated broad-specificity single-chain variable fragment
antibody and a sensitive immunoassay for detection of organophosphorus
pesticides.

Zhao F(1), Tian Y(2), Wang H(1), Liu J(1), Han X(1), Yang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Life Science, Key Laboratory for
Agriculture Microbiology, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian, 271018, China.
(2)College of Life Science, Taishan Medical University, Taian, 271016, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, College of Life Science, Key Laboratory for
Agriculture Microbiology, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian, 271018, China.
zhyouyang@sdau.edu.cn.

Organophosphorus pesticides (OPs) are the most widely used pesticides in
agriculture, and OP residues have been broadly reported in food and environmental
samples. The aim of this study is to develop a recombinant antibody-based
broad-specificity immunoassay for OPs. A phage display library was prepared from 
a mouse pre-immunized with a generic immunogen of OPs, and a single-chain
variable fragment (scFv) antibody was selected. The selected scFv antibody was
fused with biotin acceptor domain (BAD) and overexpressed as an inclusion body in
Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3). Then, the protein was refolded by stepwise urea
gradient dialysis and biotinylated in vitro by E. coli biotin ligase (BirA).
Subsequently, the scFv-BAD protein was purified from the biotinylated system with
high yield (66.7 mg L(-1)) and confirmed by SDS-PAGE and Western blot. Based on
the biotinylated scFv-BAD, a sensitive and broad-specificity competitive indirect
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ciELISA) for detection of OPs was developed.
The cross-reactivity (CR) studies demonstrated that the ciELISA described here
exhibited the broadest detection spectrum for OPs up to now, and 30 OPs could be 
determined with 50 % inhibition value (IC50) values ranging from 19.4 to
515.2 ng mL(-1). Moreover, the developed ciELISA was used for the recovery study 
of the spiked samples and showed satisfactory recoveries. Graphical Abstract
Schematic diagram of the development of biotinylated broad-specificity
single-chain variable fragment antibody-based immunoassay for organophosphorus
pesticides.

DOI: 10.1007/s00216-016-9760-0 
PMID: 27411546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

