
1. BMC Med Genomics. 2016 Jul 15;9(1):40. doi: 10.1186/s12920-016-0200-y.

Acute appendicitis: transcript profiling of blood identifies promising biomarkers
and potential underlying processes.

Chawla LS(1)(2), Toma I(3), Davison D(1), Vaziri K(4), Lee J(1)(4), Lucas R(5),
Seneff MG(5), Nyhan A(3), McCaffrey TA(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, The George Washington
University Medical Center, 2300 I Street, NW Ross 443, Washington, DC, 20037,
USA.
(2)The Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, The George
Washington University Medical Center, 2300 I Street, NW Ross 443, Washington, DC,
20037, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Genomic Medicine, The George Washington
University Medical Center, 2300 I Street, NW Ross 443, Washington, DC, 20037,
USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, The George Washington University Medical Center, 2300 I
Street, NW Ross 443, Washington, DC, 20037, USA.
(5)Department of Emergency Medicine, The George Washington University Medical
School and GW Medical Faculty Associates, Washington, DC, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Genomic Medicine, The George Washington
University Medical Center, 2300 I Street, NW Ross 443, Washington, DC, 20037,
USA. mcc@gwu.edu.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Tropical Medicine, The George
Washington University Medical Center, 2300 I Street, NW Ross 443, Washington, DC,
20037, USA. mcc@gwu.edu.

BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of acute appendicitis can be surprisingly difficult
without computed tomography, which carries significant radiation exposure.
Circulating blood cells may carry informative changes in their RNA expression
profile that would signal internal infection or inflammation of the appendix.
METHODS: Genome-wide expression profiling was applied to whole blood RNA of acute
appendicitis patients versus patients with other abdominal disorders, in order to
identify biomarkers of appendicitis. From a large cohort of emergency patients, a
discovery set of patients with surgically confirmed appendicitis, or abdominal
pain from other causes, was identified. RNA from whole blood was profiled by
microarrays, and RNA levels were filtered by a combined fold-change (>2) and p
value (<0.05). A separate set of patients, including patients with respiratory
infections, was used to validate a partial least squares discriminant (PLSD)
prediction model.
RESULTS: Transcript profiling identified 37 differentially expressed genes (DEG) 
in appendicitis versus abdominal pain patients. The DEG list contained 3 major
ontologies: infection-related, inflammation-related, and ribosomal processing.
Appendicitis patients had lower level of neutrophil defensin mRNA (DEFA1,3), but 
higher levels of alkaline phosphatase (ALPL) and interleukin-8 receptor-ÃŸ
(CXCR2/IL8RB), which was confirmed in a larger cohort of 60 patients using
droplet digital PCR (ddPCR).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with acute appendicitis have detectable changes in the mRNA
expression levels of factors related to neutrophil innate defense systems. The
low defensin mRNA levels suggest that appendicitis patient's immune cells are not
directly activated by pathogens, but are primed by diffusible factors in the
microenvironment of the infection. The detected biomarkers are consistent with
prior evidence that biofilm-forming bacteria in the appendix may be an important 
factor in appendicitis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-016-0200-y 
PMCID: PMC4946184
PMID: 27417541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

