
1. PLoS Genet. 2016 Jul 18;12(7):e1006172. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006172.
eCollection 2016 Jul.

Orderly Replication and Segregation of the Four Replicons of Burkholderia
cenocepacia J2315.

Du WL(1), Dubarry N(1), Passot FM(1), Kamgoué A(2), Murray H(3), Lane D(1), Pasta
F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie et Génétique Moléculaires, Centre National de
Recherche Scientifique / Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire Eucaryote, Centre National de Recherche
Scientifique / Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France.
(3)Centre for Bacterial Cell Biology, Institute for Cell & Molecular Biosciences,
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

Bacterial genomes typically consist of a single chromosome and, optionally, one
or more plasmids. But whole-genome sequencing reveals about ten per-cent of them 
to be multipartite, with additional replicons which by size and indispensability 
are considered secondary chromosomes. This raises the questions of how their
replication and partition is managed without compromising genome stability and of
how such genomes arose. Vibrio cholerae, with a 1 Mb replicon in addition to its 
3 Mb chromosome, is the only species for which maintenance of a multipartite
genome has been investigated. In this study we have explored the more complex
genome of Burkholderia cenocepacia (strain J2315). It comprises an extra replicon
(c2) of 3.21 Mb, comparable in size to the3.87Mb main chromosome (c1), another
extra replicon(c3) of 0.87 Mb and a plasmid of 0.09 Mb. The replication origin of
c1 is typically chromosomal and those of c2 and c3 are plasmid-like; all are
replicated bidirectionally. Fluorescence microscopy of tagged origins indicates
that all initiate replication at mid-cell and segregate towards the cell quarter 
positions sequentially, c1-c2-p1/c3. c2 segregation is as well-phased with the
cell cycle as c1, implying that this plasmid-like origin has become subject to
regulation not typical of plasmids; in contrast, c3 segregates more randomly
through the cycle. Disruption of individual Par systems by deletion of parAB or
by addition of parS sites showed each Par system to govern the positioning of its
own replicon only. Inactivation of c1, c2 and c3 Par systems not only reduced
growth rate, generated anucleate cells and compromised viability but influenced
processes beyond replicon partition, notably regulation of replication,
chromosome condensation and cell size determination. In particular, the absence
of the c1 ParA protein altered replication of all three chromosomes, suggesting
that the partition system of the main chromosome is a major participant in the
choreography of the cell cycle.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006172 
PMCID: PMC4948915
PMID: 27428258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

