
1. Inflammation. 2016 Oct;39(5):1690-703. doi: 10.1007/s10753-016-0404-5.

Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) Polarizes Both M-CSF- and GM-CSF-Differentiated 
Macrophages Toward an M1-Like Phenotype.

Seif M(1), Philippi A(1), Breinig F(2), Kiemer AK(3), Hoppstädter J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Korea Institute of Science and Technology Europe, Saarbruecken, Germany.
(2)Molecular and Cell Biology, Saarland University, Saarbruecken, Germany.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Biology, Saarland University, Campus C2
3, 66123, Saarbruecken, Germany.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Biology, Saarland University, Campus C2
3, 66123, Saarbruecken, Germany. j.hoppstaedter@mx.uni-saarland.de.

Macrophages are a heterogeneous and plastic cell population with two main
phenotypes: pro-inflammatory classically activated macrophages (M1) and
anti-inflammatory alternatively activated macrophages (M2). Saccharomyces
cerevisiae is a promising vehicle for the delivery of vaccines. It is well
established that S. cerevisiae is taken up by professional phagocytic cells.
However, the response of human macrophages to S. cerevisiae is ill-defined. In
this study, we characterized the interaction between S. cerevisiae and M1- or
M2-like macrophages. M1-like macrophages had a higher yeast uptake capacity than 
M2-like macrophages, but both cell types internalized opsonized yeast to the same
extent. The M1 surface markers HLAII and CD86 were upregulated after yeast uptake
in M1- and M2-like macrophages. Moreover, mRNA expression levels of
pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α, IL-12, and IL-6, increased, whereas
the expression of anti-inflammatory mediators did not change. These results
demonstrate that S. cerevisiae can target both M1 and M2 macrophages, paralleled 
by skewing toward an M1 phenotype. Thus, the use of yeast-based delivery systems 
might be a promising approach for the treatment of pathologic conditions that
would benefit from the presence of M1-polarized macrophages, such as cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s10753-016-0404-5 
PMID: 27422006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

