
1. Metab Eng. 2016 Nov;38:98-104. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2016.07.002. Epub 2016 Jul
15.

Biological conversion of gaseous alkenes to liquid chemicals.

Desai SH(1), Koryakina I(1), Case AE(1), Toney MD(2), Atsumi S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California-Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of California-Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
Electronic address: mdtoney@ucdavis.edu.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of California-Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
Electronic address: satsumi@ucdavis.edu.

Industrial gas-to-liquid (GTL) technologies are well developed. They generally
employ syngas, require complex infrastructure, and need high capital investment
to be economically viable. Alternatively, biological conversion has the potential
to be more efficient, and easily deployed to remote areas on relatively small
scales for the utilization of otherwise stranded resources. The present study
demonstrates a novel biological GTL process in which engineered Escherichia coli 
converts C2-C4 gaseous alkenes into liquid diols. Diols are versatile
industrially important chemicals, used routinely as antifreeze agents, polymer
precursors amongst many other applications. Heterologous co-expression of a
monooxygenase and an epoxide hydrolase in E. coli allows whole cell conversion of
C2-C4 alkenes for the formation of ethylene glycol, 1,2-propanediol,
1,2-butanediol, and 2,3-butanediol at ambient temperature and pressure in one
pot. Increasing intracellular NADH supply via addition of formate and a formate
dehydrogenase increases ethylene glycol production titers, resulting in an
improved productivity of 9mg/L/h and a final titer of 250mg/L. This represents a 
novel biological method for GTL conversion of alkenes to industrially valuable
diols.

Copyright Â© 2016 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2016.07.002 
PMID: 27424209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

