
1. Healthcare (Basel). 2014 Dec 19;2(4):516-26. doi: 10.3390/healthcare2040516.

A Modern Approach to Disinfection, as Old as the Evolution of Vertebrates.

Migliarina F(1), Ferro S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Administrative Services Business, ASL AT, via Conte Verde 125, 14100 Asti,
Italy. fmigliarina@asl.at.it.
(2)Department of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Ferrara, via
Fossato di Mortara, 17-27, 44121 Ferrara, Italy. fre@unife.it.

The immune system of vertebrates "naturally" produces hypochlorous acid (HOCl) to
fight against bacteria and pathogens. A patented electrochemical technology
mirrors the above defense system, allowing the synthesis of HOCl solutions
through the electrolysis of water enriched in salts, at the level of a few grams 
per liter. The system allows for the careful control of the pH of produced
solutions, with consequent optimization of their activity. Once the HOCl is
introduced into the water system; it is able to remove the biofilm from pipe
network; significantly decreasing the level of Legionella colonization; within
8-10 weeks from the beginning of the disinfection approach. The technology has
been applied in a variety of healthcare facilities, both in Italy and in
neighboring European countries. In the present paper, two successful case studies
are briefly presented: Data were obtained from experiences in two different
healthcare facilities, one in Italy and the other in Germany. Destruction of
biofilm was indirectly testified by an increase of total organic carbon content
of water; as a consequence, and because of the dosing of the disinfecting agent, 
some Î¼g/L of total halomethanes were also formed. However, both compositional
features were only observed during the initial stages of the disinfection
treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare2040516 
PMCID: PMC4934573
PMID: 27429291 

