
1. J Immunol. 2016 Sep 1;197(5):1754-61. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1600641. Epub 2016
Jul 20.

Manipulating Memory CD8 T Cell Numbers by Timed Enhancement of IL-2 Signals.

Kim MT(1), Kurup SP(2), Starbeck-Miller GR(3), Harty JT(4).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Program in Immunology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA
52242; Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242;
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242; and.
(3)Interdisciplinary Program in Immunology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA
52242;
(4)Interdisciplinary Program in Immunology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA
52242; Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242; and
Department of Pathology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242
john-harty@uiowa.edu.

As a result of the growing burden of tumors and chronic infections, manipulating 
CD8 T cell responses for clinical use has become an important goal for
immunologists. In this article, we show that dendritic cell (DC) immunization
coupled with relatively early (days 1-3) or late (days 4-6) administration of
enhanced IL-2 signals increase peak effector CD8 T cell numbers, but only early
IL-2 signals enhance memory numbers. IL-2 signals delivered at relatively late
time points drive terminal differentiation and marked Bim-mediated contraction
and do not increase memory T cell numbers. In contrast, early IL-2 signals induce
effector cell metabolic profiles that are more conducive to memory formation. Of 
note, downregulation of CD80 and CD86 was observed on DCs in vivo following early
IL-2 treatment. Mechanistically, early IL-2 treatment enhanced CTLA-4 expression 
on regulatory T cells, and CTLA-4 blockade alongside IL-2 treatment in vivo
prevented the decrease in CD80 and CD86, supporting a cell-extrinsic role for
CTLA-4 in downregulating B7 ligand expression on DCs. Finally, DC immunization
followed by early IL-2 treatment and anti-CTLA-4 blockade resulted in lower
memory CD8 T cell numbers compared with the DC+early IL-2 treatment group. These 
data suggest that curtailed signaling through the B7-CD28 costimulatory axis
during CD8 T cell activation limits terminal differentiation and preserves memory
CD8 T cell formation; thus, it should be considered in future T cell-vaccination 
strategies.

Copyright Â© 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1600641 
PMCID: PMC4992593
PMID: 27439516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

