
1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2016;2016:2353560. doi: 10.1155/2016/2353560. Epub 2016 Jun
28.

The Dysregulation of Polyamine Metabolism in Colorectal Cancer Is Associated with
Overexpression of c-Myc and C/EBPβ rather than Enterotoxigenic Bacteroides
fragilis Infection.

Snezhkina AV(1), Krasnov GS(2), Lipatova AV(1), Sadritdinova AF(3), Kardymon
OL(1), Fedorova MS(1), Melnikova NV(1), Stepanov OA(1), Zaretsky AR(4), Kaprin
AD(5), Alekseev BY(5), Dmitriev AA(1), Kudryavtseva AV(3).

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow
119991, Russia.
(2)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow
119991, Russia; Orekhovich Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Russian Academy of 
Medical Sciences, Moscow 119121, Russia.
(3)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow
119991, Russia; National Medical Research Center of Radiology, Ministry of
Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow 125284, Russia.
(4)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow 117997, Russia.
(5)National Medical Research Center of Radiology, Ministry of Healthcare of the
Russian Federation, Moscow 125284, Russia.

Colorectal cancer is one of the most common cancers in the world. It is well
known that the chronic inflammation can promote the progression of colorectal
cancer (CRC). Recently, a number of studies revealed a potential association
between colorectal inflammation, cancer progression, and infection caused by
enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis (ETBF). Bacterial enterotoxin activates
spermine oxidase (SMO), which produces spermidine and H2O2 as byproducts of
polyamine catabolism, which, in turn, enhances inflammation and tissue injury.
Using qPCR analysis, we estimated the expression of SMOX gene and ETBF
colonization in CRC patients. We found no statistically significant associations 
between them. Then we selected genes involved in polyamine metabolism, metabolic 
reprogramming, and inflammation regulation and estimated their expression in CRC.
We observed overexpression of SMOX, ODC1, SRM, SMS, MTAP, c-Myc, C/EBPβ (CREBP), 
and other genes. We found that two mediators of metabolic reprogramming,
inflammation, and cell proliferation c-Myc and C/EBPβ may serve as regulators of 
polyamine metabolism genes (SMOX, AZIN1, MTAP, SRM, ODC1, AMD1, and AGMAT) as
they are overexpressed in tumors, have binding site according to ENCODE ChIP-Seq 
data, and demonstrate strong coexpression with their targets. Thus, increased
polyamine metabolism in CRC could be driven by c-Myc and C/EBPβ rather than ETBF 
infection.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/2353560 
PMCID: PMC4940579
PMID: 27433286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

