
1. Bioresour Technol. 2016 Oct;218:1055-63. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2016.07.071.
Epub 2016 Jul 21.

Effects of end products on fermentation profiles in Clostridium carboxidivorans
P7 for syngas fermentation.

Zhang J(1), Taylor S(2), Wang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosystems Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849,
USA.
(2)Department of Biosystems Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849,
USA; Center for Bioenergy and Bioproducts, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849,
USA.
(3)Department of Biosystems Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849,
USA; Center for Bioenergy and Bioproducts, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849,
USA. Electronic address: yiwang3@auburn.edu.

Clostridium carboxidivorans P7 is a strict anaerobic bacterium capable of
converting syngas to biofuels. However, its fermentation profiles is poorly
understood. Here, various end-products, including acetic acid, butyric acid,
hexanoic acid, ethanol and butanol were supplemented to evaluate their effects on
fermentation profiles in C. carboxidivorans at two temperatures. At 37°C, fatty
acids addition likely led to more corresponding alcohols production. At 25°C, C2 
and C4 fatty acids supplementation resulted in more corresponding higher fatty
acids, while supplemented hexanoic acid increased yields of C2 and C4 fatty acids
and hexanol. Supplementation of ethanol or butanol caused increased production of
C2 and C4 acids at both temperatures; however, long-chain alcohols were still
more likely produced at lower temperature. In conclusion, fermentation profiles
of C. carboxidivorans can be changed in respond to pre-added end-products and
carbon flow may be redirected to desired products by controlling culture
conditions.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2016.07.071 
PMID: 27459682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

