
1. J Nat Prod. 2016 Aug 26;79(8):2014-21. doi: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.6b00267. Epub
2016 Jul 25.

Characterization of the Two Methylation Steps Involved in the Biosynthesis of
Mycinose in Tylosin.

Kim E(1), Song MC(1), Kim MS(1), Beom JY(1), Lee EY(2), Kim DM(3), Nam SJ(1),
Yoon YJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Nanoscience, Ewha Womans University , Seoul 03760,
Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Kyung Hee University , Gyeonggi-do 17104, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, Chungnam National
University , Daejeon 34134, Republic of Korea.

The S-adenosyl-l-methionine-dependent O-methyltransferases TylE and TylF catalyze
the last two methylation reactions in the tylosin biosynthetic pathway of
Streptomyces fradiae. It has long been known that the TylE-catalyzed
C2‴-O-methylation of the 6-deoxy-d-allose bound to demethylmacrocin or
demethyllactenocin precedes the TylF-catalyzed C3‴-O-methylation of the d-javose 
(C2‴-O-methylated 6-deoxy-d-allose) attached to macrocin or lactenocin. This
study reveals the unexpected substrate promiscuity of TylE and TylF responsible
for the biosynthesis of d-mycinose (C3‴-O-methylated d-javose) in tylosin through
the identification of a new minor intermediate 2‴-O-demethyldesmycosin (2;
3‴-methyl-demethyllactenocin), which lacks a 2‴-O-methyl group on the mycinose
moiety of desmycosin, along with 2‴-O-demethyltylosin (1;
3‴-methyl-demethylmacrocin) that was previously detected from the S. fradiae
mutant containing a mutation in the tylE gene. These results unveil the unique
substrate flexibility of TylE and TylF and demonstrate their potential for the
engineered biosynthesis of novel glycosylated macrolide derivatives.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.6b00267 
PMID: 27453999  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

