
1. Cell Death Dis. 2016 Jul 28;7(7):e2320. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2016.223.

PML regulates neuroprotective innate immunity and neuroblast commitment in a
hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy model.

Palibrk V(1)(2), Suganthan R(3), Scheffler K(1)(2), Wang W(1)(2), Bjørås
M(1)(2)(3), Bøe SO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital and University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Oslo University Hospital, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway.

Regulation of innate immune responses and activation of tissue regenerative
processes are key elements in the pathophysiology of brain injuries. The
promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene was originally identified on a breakpoint of
chromosomal translocation t(15;17) associated with acute PML. We have studied the
role of PML protein during acute and regenerative phases after hypoxia-ischemia
(HI) in brains of neonatal mice. We found that PML prevents tissue loss and
apoptotic cell death selectively in subcortical regions of the brain at early
stages after damage. In accordance with this, we revealed that PML is important
for microglia activation and production of key inflammatory cytokines such as
IL1α, IL1β, IL1RN, CXCL10, CCL12 and TNFα. During the regenerative phase,
PML-depleted mice were found to have impaired transformation of
transit-amplifying precursors into migratory progenitors. This was accompanied by
increased ratios of symmetric versus asymmetric neural progenitor cell divisions 
during tissue repair and a specific defect in tissue restoration within the
striatum 42 days after HI. The data demonstrate a dual role of PML in protection 
and recovery after brain injury.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2016.223 
PMCID: PMC4973360
PMID: 27468695  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

