
1. Front Immunol. 2016 Jul 11;7:273. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00273. eCollection
2016.

Probiotic Lactobacilli Modulate Staphylococcus aureus-Induced Activation of
Conventional and Unconventional T cells and NK Cells.

Johansson MA(1), Björkander S(1), Mata Forsberg M(1), Qazi KR(1), Salvany Celades
M(1), Bittmann J(1), Eberl M(2), Sverremark-Ekström E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Arrhenius Laboratories for Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular
Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm University , Stockholm ,
Sweden.
(2)Division of Infection and Immunity, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, UK; Systems Immunity Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff,
UK.

Lactobacilli are probiotic commensal bacteria and potent modulators of immunity. 
When present in the gut or supplemented as probiotics, they beneficially modulate
ex vivo immune responsiveness. Further, factors derived from several lactobacilli
strains act immune regulatory in vitro. In contrast, Staphylococcus aureus (S.
aureus) is known to induce excessive T cell activation. In this study, we aimed
to investigate S. aureus-induced activation of human mucosal-associated invariant
T cells (MAIT cells), γδ T cells, NK cells, as well as of conventional CD4(+) and
CD8(+) T cells in vitro. Further, we investigated if lactobacilli-derived factors
could modulate their activation. PBMC were cultured with S. aureus 161:2
cell-free supernatants (CFS), staphylococcal enterotoxin A or CD3/CD28-beads
alone, or in combination with Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG-CFS or Lactobacillus
reuteri DSM 17938-CFS and activation of T and NK cells was evaluated. S.
aureus-CFS induced IFN-γ and CD107a expression as well as proliferation.
Costimulation with lactobacilli-CFS dampened lymphocyte-activation in all cell
types analyzed. Preincubation with lactobacilli-CFS was enough to reduce
subsequent activation, and the absence of APC or APC-derived IL-10 did not
prevent lactobacilli-mediated dampening. Finally, lactate selectively dampened
activation of unconventional T cells and NK cells. In summary, we show that
molecules present in the lactobacilli-CFS are able to directly dampen in vitro
activation of conventional and unconventional T cells and of NK cells. This study
provides novel insights on the immune-modulatory nature of probiotic lactobacilli
and suggests a role for lactobacilli in the modulation of induced T and NK cell
activation.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00273 
PMCID: PMC4939411
PMID: 27462316 

