
1. J Immunol. 2016 Sep 1;197(5):1743-53. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1502107. Epub 2016
Jul 27.

RasGRP1 and RasGRP3 Are Required for Efficient Generation of Early Thymic
Progenitors.

Golec DP(1), Henao Caviedes LM(1), Baldwin TA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2S2, Canada.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2S2, Canada tbaldwin@ualberta.ca.

T cell development is dependent on the migration of progenitor cells from the
bone marrow to the thymus. Upon reaching the thymus, progenitors undergo a
complex developmental program that requires inputs from various highly conserved 
signaling pathways including the Notch and Wnt pathways. To date, Ras signaling
has not been implicated in the very earliest stages of T cell differentiation,
but members of a family of Ras activators called RasGRPs have been shown to be
involved at multiple stages of T cell development. We examined early T cell
development in mice lacking RasGRP1, RasGRP3, and RasGRPs 1 and 3. We report that
RasGRP1- and RasGRP3-deficient thymi show significantly reduced numbers of early 
thymic progenitors (ETPs) relative to wild type thymi. Furthermore, RasGRP1/3
double-deficient thymi show significant reductions in ETP numbers compared with
either RasGRP1 or RasGRP3 single-deficient thymi, suggesting that both RasGRP1
and RasGRP3 regulate the generation of ETPs. In addition, competitive bone marrow
chimera experiments reveal that RasGRP1/3 double-deficient progenitors
intrinsically generate ETPs less efficiently than wild type progenitors. Finally,
RasGRP1/3-deficient progenitors show impaired migration toward the CCR9 ligand,
CCL25, suggesting that RasGRP1 and RasGRP3 may regulate progenitor entry into the
thymus through a CCR9-dependent mechanism. These data demonstrate that, in
addition to Notch and Wnt, the highly conserved Ras pathway is critical for the
earliest stages of T cell development and further highlight the importance of Ras
signaling during thymocyte maturation.

Copyright Â© 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1502107 
PMID: 27465532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

