
1. Cell Cycle. 2016 Oct;15(19):2636-2646. Epub 2016 Jul 27.

The USP1-UAF1 complex interacts with RAD51AP1 to promote homologous recombination
repair.

Cukras S(1), Lee E(1), Palumbo E(1), Benavidez P(1), Moldovan GL(2), Kee Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Cell Biology , Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, College of
Arts and Sciences, University of South Florida , Tampa , FL , USA.
(2)b Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine , Hershey , PA , USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2016 Dec;15(23):3163-3164.

USP1 deubiquitinating enzyme and its stoichiometric binding partner UAF1 play an 
essential role in promoting DNA homologous recombination (HR) repair in response 
to various types of DNA damaging agents. Deubiquitination of FANCD2 may be
attributed to the key role of USP1-UAF1 complex in regulating HR repair, however 
whether USP1-UAF1 promotes HR repair independently of FANCD2 deubiquitination is 
not known. Here we show evidence that the USP1-UAF1 complex has a
FANCD2-independent function in promoting HR repair. Proteomic search of
UAF1-interacting proteins revealed that UAF1 associates with RAD51AP1, a
RAD51-interacting protein implicated in HR repair. We show that UAF1 mediates the
interaction between USP1 and RAD51AP1, and that depletion of USP1 or UAF1 led to 
a decreased stability of RAD51AP1. Protein interaction mapping analysis
identified some key residues within RAD51AP1 required for interacting with the
USP1-UAF1 complex. Cells expressing the UAF1 interaction-deficient mutant of
RAD51AP1 show increased chromosomal aberrations in response to Mitomycin C
treatment. Moreover, similar to the RAD51AP1 depleted cells, the cells expressing
UAF1-interaction deficient RAD51AP1 display persistent RAD51 foci following DNA
damage exposure, indicating that these factors regulate a later step during the
HR repair. These data altogether suggest that the USP1-UAF1 complex promotes HR
repair via multiple mechanisms: through FANCD2 deubiquitination, as well as by
interacting with RAD51AP1.

DOI: 10.1080/15384101.2016.1209613 
PMCID: PMC5053553
PMID: 27463890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

