
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2016 Oct;48(7):1449-54. doi: 10.1007/s11250-016-1115-5.
Epub 2016 Jul 30.

Supplementation of Flemingia macrophylla and cassava foliage as a rumen enhancer 
on fermentation efficiency and estimated methane production in dairy steers.

Phesatcha B(1), Wanapat M(2), Phesatcha K(1), Ampapon T(1), Kang S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
40002, Thailand.
(2)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
40002, Thailand. metha@kku.ac.th.
(3)Agricultural Unit, Department of Education, National Institute of Education,
Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

Four rumen-fistulated dairy steers, 3 years old with 180 ± 15 kg body weight
(BW), were randomly assigned according to a 4 × 4 Latin square design to
investigate on the effect of Flemingia macrophylla hay meal (FMH) and cassava hay
meal (CH) supplementation on rumen fermentation efficiency and estimated methane 
production. The treatments were as follows: T1 = non-supplement, T2 = CH
supplementation at 150 g/head/day, T3 = FMH supplementation at 150 g/head/day,
and T4 = CH + FMH supplementation at 75 and 75 g/head/day. All steers were fed
rice straw ad libitum and concentrate was offered at 0.5 % of BW. Results
revealed that supplementation of CH and/or FMH did not affect on feed intake
(P > 0.05) while digestibility of crude protein and neutral detergent fiber were 
increased especially in steers receiving FMH and CH+FMH (P < 0.05). Ruminal pH,
temperature, and blood urea nitrogen were similar among treatments while ammonia 
nitrogen was increased in all supplemented groups (P < 0.05). Furthermore,
propionic acid (C3) was increased while acetic acid (C2), C2:C3 ratio, and
estimated methane production were decreased by dietary treatments. Protozoa and
fungi population were not affected by dietary supplement while viable bacteria
count increased in steers receiving FMH. Supplementation of FMH and/or FMH+CH
increased microbial crude protein and efficiency of microbial nitrogen supply.
This study concluded FMH (150 g/head/day) and/or CH+FMH (75 and 75 g/head/day)
supplementation could be used as a rumen enhancer for increasing nutrient
digestibility, rumen fermentation efficiency, and microbial protein synthesis
while decreasing estimated methane production without adverse effect on voluntary
feed intake of dairy steers fed rice straw.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-016-1115-5 
PMID: 27473104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

