
1. Oncogene. 2017 Feb 16;36(7):933-941. doi: 10.1038/onc.2016.259. Epub 2016 Aug 1.

CBP/p300 acetyltransferases regulate the expression of NKG2D ligands on tumor
cells.

Sauer M(1), Schuldner M(1), Hoffmann N(1), Cetintas A(1), Reiners KS(1),
Shatnyeva O(1), Hallek M(1)(2), Hansen HP(1), Gasser S(3), von Strandmann
EP(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department I of Internal Medicine, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany.
(2)Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Response in Aging-Associated
Diseases, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(3)Immunology Programme, Department of Microbiology, Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Experimental Tumor Research, Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology, Clinic
for Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany.

Tumor surveillance of natural killer (NK) cells is mediated by the cytotoxicity
receptor natural-killer group 2 member D (NKG2D). Ligands for NKG2D are generally
not expressed on healthy cells, but induced on the surface of malignant cells. To
date, NKG2D ligand (NKG2D-L) induction was mainly described to depend on the
activation of the DNA damage response, although the molecular mechanisms that
regulate NKG2D-L expression remain largely unknown. Here, we show that the
acetyltransferases CBP (CREB-binding protein) and p300 play a crucial role in the
regulation of NKG2D-L on tumor cells. Loss of CBP/p300 decreased the basal cell
surface expression of human ligands and reduced the upregulation of MICA/B and
ULBP2 in response to histone deacetylase inhibitors or DNA damage. Furthermore,
CBP/P300 deficiency abrogated the sensitivity of stressed cells to NK
cell-mediated killing. CBP/p300 were also identified as major regulators of mouse
NKG2D ligand RAE-1 in vitro and in vivo using the EÎ¼-Myc lymphoma model.
Mechanistically, we observed an enhanced activation of the CBP/p300 binding
transcription factor CREB (cAMP response element-binding protein) correlating to 
the NKG2D-L upregulation. Moreover, increased binding of CREB and CBP/p300 to
NKG2D-L promoters and elevated histone acetylation were detectable. This study
provides strong evidence for a major role of CBP and p300 in orchestrating
NKG2D-L induction and consequently immunosurveillance of tumors in mice and
humans. These findings might help to develop novel immunotherapeutic approaches
against cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2016.259 
PMCID: PMC5318661
PMID: 27477692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

