
1. Genome. 2016 Aug;59(8):565-73. doi: 10.1139/gen-2016-0015. Epub 2016 Jun 21.

Identification and analysis of copine/BONZAI proteins among evolutionarily
diverse plant species.

Zou B(1), Hong X(1), Ding Y(1), Wang X(1), Liu H(1), Hua J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Nanjing
Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China.
(2)b Plant Biology Section, School of Integrated Plant Science, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Copines are evolutionarily conserved calcium-dependent membrane-binding proteins 
with potentially critical biological functions. In plants, the function of these 
proteins has not been analyzed except for in Arabidopsis thaliana where they play
critical roles in development and disease resistance. To facilitate functional
studies of copine proteins in crop plants, genome-wide identification, curation, 
and phylogeny analysis of copines in 16 selected plant species were conducted.
All the identified 32 plant copines have conserved features of the two C2 domains
(C2A and C2B) and the von Willebrand factor A (vWA) domain. Different from animal
and protozoa copines, plant copines have glycine at the second residue
potentially acquiring a unique protein myristoylation modification. Phylogenetic 
analysis suggests that copine was present as one copy when evolving from green
algae to basal flowering plants, and duplicated before the divergence of monocots
and dicots. In addition, gene expression and protein localization study of rice
copines suggests both conserved and different properties of copines in dicots and
monocots. This study will contribute to uncovering the role of copine genes in
different plant species.

DOI: 10.1139/gen-2016-0015 
PMID: 27484220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

