
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2016 Aug;72(Pt 8):604-8. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X16010311. Epub 2016 Jul 13.

Crystallization and X-ray diffraction analysis of an L-arabinonate dehydratase
from Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. trifolii and a D-xylonate dehydratase from
Caulobacter crescentus.

Rahman MM(1), Andberg M(2), Koivula A(2), Rouvinen J(1), Hakulinen N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Eastern Finland, Joensuu Campus, PO Box
111, FIN-80101 Joensuu, Finland.
(2)VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd, PO Box 1000, FIN-02044 VTT
Espoo, Finland.

L-Arabinonate dehydratase (EC 4.2.1.25) and D-xylonate dehydratase (EC 4.2.1.82) 
are two enzymes that are involved in a nonphosphorylative oxidation pathway of
pentose sugars. L-Arabinonate dehydratase converts L-arabinonate into
2-dehydro-3-deoxy-L-arabinonate, and D-xylonate dehydratase catalyzes the
dehydration of D-xylonate to 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-D-xylonate. L-Arabinonate and
D-xylonate dehydratases belong to the IlvD/EDD family, together with
6-phosphogluconate dehydratases and dihydroxyacid dehydratases. No crystal
structure of any L-arabinonate or D-xylonate dehydratase is available in the PDB.
In this study, recombinant L-arabinonate dehydratase from Rhizobium leguminosarum
bv. trifolii (RlArDHT) and D-xylonate dehydratase from Caulobacter crescentus
(CcXyDHT) were heterologously expressed in Escherichia coli and purified by the
use of affinity chromatography followed by gel-filtration chromatography. The
purified proteins were crystallized using the hanging-drop vapour-diffusion
method at 293 K. Crystals of RlArDHT that diffracted to 2.40 Å resolution were
obtained using sodium formate as a precipitating agent. They belonged to space
group P21, with unit-cell parameters a = 106.07, b = 208.61, c = 147.09 Å, β =
90.43°. Eight RlArDHT molecules (two tetramers) in the asymmetric unit give a VM 
value of 3.2 Å(3) Da(-1) and a solvent content of 62%. Crystals of CcXyDHT that
diffracted to 2.66 Å resolution were obtained using sodium formate and
polyethylene glycol 3350. They belonged to space group C2, with unit-cell
parameters a = 270.42, b = 236.13, c = 65.17 Å, β = 97.38°. Four CcXyDHT
molecules (a tetramer) in the asymmetric unit give a VM value of 4.0 Å(3) Da(-1) 
and a solvent content of 69%.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X16010311 
PMCID: PMC4973301
PMID: 27487924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

