
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2016 Oct;39:251-264. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2016.07.027. Epub
2016 Aug 3.

Depletion of T lymphocytes ameliorates cardiac fibrosis in streptozotocin-induced
diabetic cardiomyopathy.

Abdullah CS(1), Li Z(1), Wang X(2), Jin ZQ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, South Dakota State
University, Brookings, SD 57007, USA.
(2)Department of Biology and Microbiology, College of Agriculture and Biological 
Sciences, South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD 57007, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, South Dakota State
University, Brookings, SD 57007, USA; Department of Pharmaceutical & Biomedical
Sciences, College of Pharmacy, California Northstate University, Elk Grove, CA
95757, USA. Electronic address: zhuqiu.jin@cnsu.edu.

T cell infiltration has been associated with increased coronary heart disease
risk in patients with diabetes mellitus. Effect of modulation of T cell
trafficking on diabetes-induced cardiac fibrosis has yet to be determined.
Therefore, our aim was to investigate the circulatory T cell depletion-mediated
cardioprotection in streptozotocin-induced diabetic cardiomyopathy. Fingolimod
(FTY720), an immunomodulatory drug, was tested in wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 and
recombination activating gene 1 (Rag1) knockout (KO) mice without mature
lymphocytes in streptozotocin-induced type 1 diabetic model. FTY720
(0.3mg/kg/day) was administered intraperitoneally daily for the first 4weeks with
interim 3weeks then resumed for another 4weeks in 11weeks study period. T
lymphocyte counts, cardiac histology, function, and fibrosis were examined in
diabetic both WT and KO mice. FTY720 reduced both CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells in
diabetic WT mice. FTY720-treated diabetic WT mouse myocardium showed reduction in
CD3 T cell infiltration and decreased expression of S1P1 and TGF-β1 in cardiac
tissue. Fibrosis was reduced after FTY720 treatment in diabetic WT mice. Rag1 KO 
mice exhibited no CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells in the blood and CD3 T cells in the
heart. Diabetic Rag1 KO mouse hearts appeared no fibrosis and exhibited preserved
myocardial contractility. FTY720-induced antifibrosis was abolished in diabetic
Rag1 KO mice. These findings demonstrate that chronic administration with FTY720 
induces lymphopenia and protects diabetic hearts in WT mice whereas FTY720
increases cardiac fibrosis and myocardial dysfunction in diabetic Rag1 KO mice
without mature lymphocytes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2016.07.027 
PMID: 27494688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

