
1. RNA. 2016 Oct;22(10):1500-9. doi: 10.1261/rna.057455.116. Epub 2016 Aug 4.

Characterization of the tRNA ligases of pathogenic fungi Aspergillus fumigatus
and Coccidioides immitis.

Remus BS(1), Schwer B(2), Shuman S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York
10065, USA.
(2)Microbiology and Immunology Department, Weill Cornell Medical College, New
York, New York 10065, USA.

Yeast tRNA ligase (Trl1) is an essential trifunctional enzyme that repairs RNA
breaks with 2',3'-cyclic-PO4 and 5'-OH ends. Trl1 is composed of C-terminal
cyclic phosphodiesterase and central polynucleotide kinase domains that heal the 
broken ends to generate the 3'-OH, 2'-PO4, and 5'-PO4 termini required for
sealing by an N-terminal ligase domain. Trl1 enzymes are found in all human
fungal pathogens and they are promising targets for antifungal drug discovery
because: (i) their domain structures and biochemical mechanisms are unique
compared to the mammalian RtcB-type tRNA splicing enzyme; and (ii) there are no
obvious homologs of the Trl1 ligase domain in mammalian proteomes. Here we
characterize the tRNA ligases of two human fungal pathogens: Coccidioides immitis
and Aspergillus fumigatus The biological activity of CimTrl1 and AfuTrl1 was
verified by showing that their expression complements a Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
trl1Δ mutant. Purified recombinant AfuTrl1 and CimTrl1 proteins were
catalytically active in joining 2',3'-cyclic-PO4 and 5'-OH ends in vitro, either 
as full-length proteins or as a mixture of separately produced healing and
sealing domains. The biochemical properties of CimTrl1 and AfuTrl1 are similar to
those of budding yeast Trl1, particularly with respect to their preferential use 
of GTP as the phosphate donor for the polynucleotide kinase reaction. Our
findings provide genetic and biochemical tools to screen for inhibitors of tRNA
ligases from pathogenic fungi.

© 2016 Remus et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the RNA
Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.057455.116 
PMCID: PMC5029449
PMID: 27492257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

