
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2016 Sep;56:473-482. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2016.07.037. Epub
2016 Aug 2.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 (SOCS2) negatively regulates the expression of
antimicrobial peptides by affecting the Stat transcriptional activity in shrimp
Marsupenaeus japonicus.

Sun JJ(1), Lan JF(2), Xu JD(1), Niu GJ(1), Wang JX(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Cells and Developmental Biology, 
School of Life Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250100, China.
(2)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Cells and Developmental Biology, 
School of Life Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250100, China.
Electronic address: lanjiangfeng@mail.hzau.edu.cn.
(3)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Cells and Developmental Biology, 
School of Life Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250100, China.
Electronic address: jxwang@sdu.edu.cn.

The suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) family is a kind of negative
regulators in the Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription
(Jak/Stat) pathway in mammals and Drosophila. In kuruma shrimp, Marsupenaeus
japonicus, SOCS2 is identified and its expression can be stimulated by
peptidoglycan and polycytidylic acid. However, if SOCS2 participates in
regulating Jak/Stat pathway in shrimp still needs further study. In this study,
SOCS2 with Src homology 2 domain and SOCS box was identified in kuruma shrimp, M.
japonicus. SOCS2 existed in hemocytes, heart, hepatopancreas, gills, stomach, and
intestine, the expression of SOCS2 was upregulated significantly in the hemocytes
and intestine of shrimp challenged with Vibrio anguillarum at 6 h. To analyze
SOCS2 function in shrimp immunity, bacterial clearance and survival rate were
analyzed after knockdown of SOCS2 in shrimp challenged with V. anguillarum.
Results showed that bacterial clearance increased, and the survival rate improved
significantly comparing with controls. The SOCS2 was expressed in Escherichia
coli and the recombinant SOCS2 was injected into shrimp, and Stat phosphorylation
and translocation were analyzed. The result showed that "overexpression" of SOCS2
declined Stat phosphorylation level and inhibited Stat translocation into the
nucleus. After knockdown of SOCS2 in shrimp prior to V. anguillarum infection,
the expression level of antimicrobial peptides, including anti-lipopolysaccharide
factors C1, C2 and D1, and Crustin I was upregulated significantly, and the
expression of the AMPs was declined after recombinant SOCS2 injection. The SOCS2 
expression was also decreased in Stat-knockdown shrimp challenged by
V. anguillarum at 6 and 12 h. Therefore, SOCS2 negatively regulates the AMP
expression by inhibiting Stat phosphorylation and translocation into nucleus in
shrimp, meanwhile, SOCS2 expression was also regulated by Jak/Stat pathway.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2016.07.037 
PMID: 27492125  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

