
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2016 Oct 1;178:57-63. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2016.06.010. Epub 2016 Jun 28.

Characterization and use of new monoclonal antibodies to CD11c, CD14, and CD163
to analyze the phenotypic complexity of ruminant monocyte subsets.

Elnaggar MM(1), Abdellrazeq GS(1), Mack V(2), Fry LM(3), Davis WC(2), Park KT(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, WA, USA; Department of Microbiology,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Alexandria University, Egypt.
(2)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, WA, USA; Animal Disease Research Unit,
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Pullman, WA,
99164, USA.
(4)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Washington State University, WA, USA; Department of Veterinary
Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: magic007@snu.ac.kr.

The sequencing of the bovine genome and development of mass spectrometry, in
conjunction with flow cytometry (FC), have afforded an opportunity to complete
the characterization of the specificity of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), only
partially characterized during previous international workshops focused on
antibody development for livestock (1991, Leukocyte Antigens in Cattle, Sheep,
and Goats; 1993, Leukocyte Antigens of Cattle and Sheep; 1996, Third Workshop on 
Ruminant Leukocyte Antigens). The objective of this study was to complete the
characterization of twelve mAbs incompletely characterized during the workshops
that reacted with molecules predominantly expressed on bovine monocytes and use
them to provide further information on the phenotypic complexity of monocyte
subsets in ruminants. Analysis revealed that the mAbs could be grouped into three
clusters that recognize three different molecules: CD11c, CD14, and CD163.
Following characterization, comparison of the patterns of expression of CD14 and 
CD163 with expression of CD16, CD172a, and CD209 revealed the mononuclear cell
population is comprised of multiple subsets with differential expression of these
molecules. Further analysis revealed the epitopes recognized by mAbs to CD14 and 
CD163 are conserved on orthologues in sheep and goats. In contrast to CD14 that
is also expressed on sheep and goat granulocytes, CD163 is a definitive marker
for their monocytes.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2016.06.010 
PMID: 27496743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

