
1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2016 Sep;88:146-52. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2016.07.001. Epub 2016 Jul 6.

Role of group 3 innate lymphoid cells during experimental otitis media in a rat
model.

Cho CG(1), Gong SH(2), Kim HB(2), Song JJ(3), Park JH(2), Lim YS(2), Park SW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Dongguk University
Hospital, Goyang, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: cho69@dumc.or.kr.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Dongguk University
Hospital, Goyang, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Korea University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

The objective of this study was to evaluate the role of group 3 innate lymphoid
cells (ILC3) in the middle ear (ME) mucosal response to bacterial infection in a 
rat model. To confirm the role of ILC3 in bacterially induced otitis media (OM), 
the serum concentrations of IL-17 and IL-22 were determined by ELISA, and the
tissue expression of IL-17 and IL-22 in infected ME mucosa was assessed by
immunohistochemical staining. Immunohistochemical staining of specific cell
surface markers was also assessed to confirm the origin of the cells expressing
IL-17 and IL-22. Twenty Sprague-Dawley rats were used in the surgically-induced
animal model of OM. OM was induced by inoculation of non-typeable Haemophilus
influenzae into the ME cavity of the rats. The rats were divided into four
experimental groups: three infected groups and one control group. Infected groups
were subdivided into sets of 5 rats, one for each of the three time points (1, 4 
and 7 days post-inoculation). For determination of rat IL-17 and IL-22 levels in 
infected rats and control rats, infected or control ME mucosa sections were
analyzed by immunohistochemistry with specific antibodies directed against IL-17 
and IL-22. Immunohistochemical staining for CD3, RORγt, and NKp46 were also
conducted on the samples to confirm the origin of cells expressing IL-17 and
IL-22. IL-17 and IL-22 serum concentrations were significantly increased in the
infected rats compared to control rats. Immunohistochemical staining revealed
increased IL-17 and IL-22 expressions in all infected ME mucosae from the first
day after inoculation. In addition, the results of tissue staining for the
specific surface markers were negative for CD3 and NKp46, but were highly
positive for RORγt. IL-17 and IL-22 revealed their association with the
bacterially induced proliferative and hyperplastic responses of ME mucosa, which 
are characteristic features in pathogenesis of OM. Surface marker examination
showed that the source cells for IL-17 and IL-22 seemed to be lymphoid tissue
inducer (LTi) cells. The results suggest that LTi cells release IL-17 and IL-22, 
and play a significant role in both the early phase of OM induction and recovery 
from it.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2016.07.001 
PMID: 27497403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

