
1. PLoS One. 2016 Aug 8;11(8):e0160575. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0160575.
eCollection 2016.

MDP: A Deinococcus Mn2+-Decapeptide Complex Protects Mice from Ionizing
Radiation.

Gupta P(1), Gayen M(1)(2), Smith JT(3), Gaidamakova EK(1), Matrosova VY(1),
Grichenko O(1), Knollmann-Ritschel B(1), Daly MJ(1), Kiang JG(3), Maheshwari
RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences 
(USUHS), School of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Biological Sciences Group, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, 
Rajasthan, India.
(3)Radiation Combined Injury Program, Armed Forces Radiobiology Research
Institute (AFRRI), Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

The radioprotective capacity of a rationally-designed Mn2+-decapeptide complex
(MDP), based on Mn antioxidants in the bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans, was
investigated in a mouse model of radiation injury. MDP was previously reported to
be extraordinarily radioprotective of proteins in the setting of vaccine
development. The peptide-component (DEHGTAVMLK) of MDP applied here was selected 
from a group of synthetic peptides screened in vitro for their ability to protect
cultured human cells and purified enzymes from extreme damage caused by ionizing 
radiation (IR). We show that the peptides accumulated in Jurkat T-cells and
protected them from 100 Gy. MDP preserved the activity of T4 DNA ligase exposed
to 60,000 Gy. In vivo, MDP was nontoxic and protected B6D2F1/J (female) mice from
acute radiation syndrome. All irradiated mice treated with MDP survived exposure 
to 9.5 Gy (LD70/30) in comparison to the untreated mice, which displayed 63%
lethality after 30 days. Our results show that MDP provides early protection of
white blood cells, and attenuates IR-induced damage to bone marrow and
hematopoietic stem cells via G-CSF and GM-CSF modulation. Moreover, MDP mediated 
the immunomodulation of several cytokine concentrations in serum including G-CSF,
GM-CSF, IL-3 and IL-10 during early recovery. Our results present the necessary
prelude for future efforts towards clinical application of MDP as a promising IR 
countermeasure. Further investigation of MDP as a pre-exposure prophylactic and
post-exposure therapeutic in radiotherapy and radiation emergencies is warranted.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0160575 
PMCID: PMC4976947
PMID: 27500529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

