
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2016 Sep 21;138(37):12077-89. doi: 10.1021/jacs.6b01193. Epub 2016
Sep 7.

Binding Site Recognition and Docking Dynamics of a Single Electron Transport
Protein: Cytochrome c2.

Singharoy A(1), Barragan AM(1)(2), Thangapandian S(1)(3), Tajkhorshid E(1)(3),
Schulten K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois 
at Urbana-Champaign , 405 North Mathews Avenue, Urbana, Illinois 61801, United
States.
(2)Department of Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign , 1110 West 
Green Street, Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign , 600
South Mathews Avenue, Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States.

Small diffusible redox proteins facilitate electron transfer in respiration and
photosynthesis by alternately binding to their redox partners and integral
membrane proteins and exchanging electrons. Diffusive search, recognition,
binding, and unbinding of these proteins often amount to kinetic bottlenecks in
cellular energy conversion, but despite the availability of structures and
intense study, the physical mechanisms controlling redox partner interactions
remain largely unknown. The present molecular dynamics study provides an all-atom
description of the cytochrome c2-docked bc1 complex in Rhodobacter sphaeroides in
terms of an ensemble of favorable docking conformations and reveals an intricate 
series of conformational changes that allow cytochrome c2 to recognize the bc1
complex and bind or unbind in a redox state-dependent manner. In particular, the 
role of electron transfer in triggering a molecular switch and in altering
water-mediated interface mobility, thereby strengthening and weakening complex
formation, is described. The results resolve long-standing discrepancies between 
structural and functional data.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.6b01193 
PMCID: PMC5518707
PMID: 27508459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

