
1. Cell Signal. 2017 Jan;29:41-51. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2016.08.001. Epub 2016 Aug
7.

Establishing estrogen-responsive mouse mammary organoids from single Lgr5+ cells.

Zhang L(1), Adileh M(2), Martin ML(2), Klingler S(2), White J(3), Ma X(4), Howe
LR(5), Brown AM(6), Kolesnick R(7).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200240, China; Laboratory of Signal Transduction, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of Cell &
Developmental Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Signal Transduction, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10065, USA.
(3)Tri-Institutional Laboratory of Comparative Pathology & Genetically Engineered
Mouse Phenotyping Service, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA.
(4)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200240, China; Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(5)Department of Cell & Developmental Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New
York, NY 10065, USA.
(6)Department of Cell & Developmental Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New
York, NY 10065, USA; Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address:
amcbrown@med.cornell.edu.
(7)Laboratory of Signal Transduction, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: r-kolesnick@ski-mskcc.org.

Recent evidence suggests that mammary cells expressing R-spondin receptor and Wnt
pathway regulator Lgr5, regarded as a stem cell marker in multiple tissues, might
represent mammary stem cells (MaSCs). Whether L gr5 marks a multipotent
subpopulation of Lin-CD24low/medCD49fhigh MaSCs remains controversial. To some
extent the differing results reflect different assays used to assess properties
of stemness, including lineage tracing in vivo, mammosphere culture, and mammary 
fat pad transplantation assays. To address this issue directly, we isolated Lgr5+
cells from mammary glands of Lgr5-lacZ mice and established organoids based on
principles adapted from studies of Wnt-driven Lgr5+ cell populations in other
organs. Mammary organoids were grown from single Lgr5+ mammary cells in Matrigel,
the substratum of choice for intestinal organoids, and in a growth factor
cocktail containing EGF, Wnt3a and R-spondin, designed to optimally activate the 
endogenous Wnt signaling program of stem cells. Colonies derived from single
Lgr5+ cells manifest at least four distinct cell populations: Lgr5+ and Lgr5-
basal cells and c-Kit+ and c-Kit- luminal cells that spontaneously organize into 
a ductal structure with basal cells around the periphery and luminal cells lining
an interior cavity, reminiscent of normal mammary duct structure. Lgr5+
cell-derived organoids were sustainable during prolonged passaging. In contrast, 
although Lgr5- cells expand into primary colonies, colony-forming efficiency
immediately dissipated upon passaging. Furthermore, reproductive hormones induce 
epithelial cell proliferation resulting in marked increases in lumen diameter
accompanied by squamous transdifferentiation. We propose this
estrogen-responsive, self-organizing duct-like structure derived from single
murine Lgr5+ mammary cells represents a "mini-breast" organoid.

Copyright Â© 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2016.08.001 
PMCID: PMC5138122
PMID: 27511963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ★ Disclosures: No potential conflicts are
disclosed.

