
1. Biomed Res Int. 2016;2016:8196960. doi: 10.1155/2016/8196960. Epub 2016 Jul 27.

Synthesis of Novel Pyrimethanil Grafted Chitosan Derivatives with Enhanced
Antifungal Activity.

Li Y(1), Liu S(2), Qin Y(2), Xing R(2), Chen X(2), Li K(2), Li P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 7 Nanhai Road,
Qingdao 266071, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049,
China; Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 7 Nanhai Road, Qingdao 266071, China.
(2)Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 7 Nanhai Road,
Qingdao 266071, China; Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute
of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 7 Nanhai Road, Qingdao 266071,
China.

In this study, three pyrimethanil grafted chitosan (PML-g-CS) derivatives were
obtained. The structures of the conjugates were confirmed by FT-IR, (1)H NMR, and
EA. The grafting ratios were measured by HPLC. Antifungal properties of
pyrimethanil grafted chitosan (PML-g-CS) derivatives against the plant pathogenic
fungi Rhizoctonia solani and Gibberella zeae were investigated at concentrations 
of 100, 200, and 400â€‰mg/L. The PML-g-CS derivatives showed enhanced antifungal
activity in comparison with chitosan. The PML-g-CS-1 showed the best antifungal
activity against R. solani, whose antifungal index was 58.32%. The PML-g-CS-2
showed the best antifungal activity against G. zeae, whose antifungal index was
53.48%. The conjugation of chitosan and pyrimethanil showed synergistic effect.
The PML-g-CS derivatives we developed showed potential for further study and
application in crop protection.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/8196960 
PMCID: PMC4978835
PMID: 27529072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

