
1. Bioimpacts. 2016;6(2):105-10. doi: 10.15171/bi.2016.16. Epub 2016 Jun 30.

Overexpression of molecular chaperons GRP78 and GRP94 in CD44(hi)/CD24(lo) breast
cancer stem cells.

Nami B(1), Ghasemi-Dizgah A(2), Vaseghi A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and The Women and Children's Health Research
Institute (WCHRI), University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Young Researchers and Elite Club, Ardabil Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Ardabil, Iran.

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer stem cell with CD44(hi)/CD24(lo) phonotype is
described having stem cell properties and represented as the main driving factor 
in breast cancer initiation, growth, metastasis and low response to anti-cancer
agents. Glucoseregulated proteins (GRPs) are heat shock protein family chaperons 
that are charged with regulation of protein machinery and modulation of
endoplasmic reticulum homeostasis whose important roles in stem cell development 
and invasion of various cancers have been demonstrated. Here, we investigated the
expression levels of GRP78 and GRP94 in CD44(hi)/CD24(lo) phenotype breast cancer
stem cells (BCSCs).
METHODS: MCF7, T-47D and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines were used.
CD44(hi)/CD24(lo) phenotype cell population were analyzed and sorted by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). Transcriptional and translational
expression of GRP78 and GRP94 were investigated by western blotting and
quantitative real time PCR.
RESULTS: RESULTS showed different proportion of CD44(hi)/CD24(lo) phenotype cell 
population in their original bulk cells. The ranking of the cell lines in terms
of CD44(hi)/CD24(lo) phenotype cell population was as MCF7<T-47D<MDA-MB-231. Our 
results also indicated that CD44(hi)/CD24(lo) phenotype cells exhibited higher
mRNA and protein expression level of GRP78 and GRP94 compared to their original
bulk cells.
CONCLUSION: Our results show a relationship between overexpression of GRP78 and
GRP94 and exhibiting CD44hi/CD24lo phenotype in breast cancer cells. We conclude 
that upregulation of GRPs may be an important factor in the emergence of
CD44hi/CD24lo phenotype BCSCs features.

DOI: 10.15171/bi.2016.16 
PMCID: PMC4981248
PMID: 27525228 

