
1. J Immunol. 2016 Sep 15;197(6):2119-30. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1600133. Epub 2016
Aug 12.

New Murine Model of Early Onset Autoimmune Thyroid Disease/Hypothyroidism and
Autoimmune Exocrinopathy of the Salivary Gland.

Kayes TD(1), Weisman GA(2), Camden JM(2), Woods LT(2), Bredehoeft C(1), Downey
EF(1), Cole J(1), Braley-Mullen H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65212;
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211;
Christopher S. Bond Life Sciences Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO
65211; and.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65212; Department
of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO
65212 mullenh@health.missouri.edu.

Sixty to seventy percent of IFN-γ(-/-) NOD.H-2h4 mice given sodium iodide
(NaI)-supplemented water develop a slow onset autoimmune thyroid disease,
characterized by thyrocyte epithelial cell (TEC) hyperplasia and proliferation
(H/P). TEC H/P develops much earlier in CD28(-/-) mice and nearly 100% (both
sexes) have severe TEC H/P at 4 mo of age. Without NaI supplementation, 50% of 5-
to 6-mo-old CD28(-/-)IFN-γ(-/-) mice develop severe TEC H/P, and 2-3 wk of NaI is
sufficient for optimal development of severe TEC H/P. Mice with severe TEC H/P
are hypothyroid, and normalization of serum thyroxine levels does not reduce TEC 
H/P. Activated CD4(+) T cells are sufficient to transfer TEC H/P to SCID
recipients. Thyroids of mice with TEC H/P have infiltrating T cells and expanded 
numbers of proliferating thyrocytes that highly express CD40. CD40 facilitates,
but is not required for, development of severe TEC H/P, as
CD40(-/-)IFN-γ(-/-)CD28(-/-) mice develop severe TEC H/P. Accelerated development
of TEC H/P in IFN-γ(-/-)CD28(-/-) mice is a result of reduced regulatory T cell
(Treg) numbers, as CD28(-/-) mice have significantly fewer Tregs, and transfer of
CD28(+) Tregs inhibits TEC H/P. Essentially all female IFN-γ(-/-)CD28(-/-)
NOD.H-2h4 mice have substantial lymphocytic infiltration of salivary glands and
reduced salivary flow by 6 mo of age, thereby providing an excellent new model of
autoimmune exocrinopathy of the salivary gland. This is one of very few models
where autoimmune thyroid disease and hypothyroidism develop in most mice by 4 mo 
of age. This model will be useful for studying the effects of hypothyroidism on
multiple organ systems.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1600133 
PMCID: PMC5010957
PMID: 27521344  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

