
1. J Immunol. 2016 Sep 15;197(6):2434-43. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1600037. Epub 2016
Aug 12.

IL-12 Signals through the TCR To Support CD8 Innate Immune Responses.

Goplen NP(1), Saxena V(1), Knudson KM(1), Schrum AG(2), Gil D(2), Daniels MA(1), 
Zamoyska R(3), Teixeiro E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65212;
(2)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN
55905; and.
(3)Institute of Immunology and Infection Research, Centre for Immunity, Infection
and Evolution, Ashworth Laboratories, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3JT,
United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65212; teixeiropernase@missouri.edu.

CD8 T cells must integrate antigenic and inflammatory signals to differentiate
into efficient effector and memory T cells able to protect us from infections.
The mechanisms by which TCR signaling and proinflammatory cytokine receptor
signaling cooperate in these processes are poorly defined. In this study, we show
that IL-12 and other proinflammatory cytokines transduce signals through the TCR 
signalosome in a manner that requires Fyn activity and self-peptide-MHC
(self-pMHC) interactions. This mechanism is crucial for CD8 innate T cell
functions. Loss of Fyn activity or blockade of self-pMHC interactions severely
impaired CD8 T cell IFN-γ and NKG2D expression, proliferation, and cytotoxicity
upon cytokine-mediated bystander activation. Most importantly, in the absence of 
self-pMHC interactions, CD8 memory T cells fail to undergo bystander activation
upon an unrelated infection. Thus, CD8 T cell bystander activation, although
independent of cognate Ag, still requires self-pMHC and TCR signaling.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1600037 
PMCID: PMC5010952
PMID: 27521342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

