
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016 Sep 23;60(10):6333-40. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01213-16. Print 2016 Oct.

Improved Protection in a Rabbit Model of Community-Associated
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Necrotizing Pneumonia upon
Neutralization of Leukocidins in Addition to Alpha-Hemolysin.

Diep BA(1), Le VT(2), Visram ZC(3), Rouha H(3), Stulik L(3), Dip EC(2), Nagy
G(3), Nagy E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of HIV, Infectious Diseases, and Global Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA
binh.diep@ucsf.edu eszter.nagy@arsanis.com.
(2)Division of HIV, Infectious Diseases, and Global Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California,
USA.
(3)Arsanis, Inc./Arsanis Biosciences GmbH, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Arsanis, Inc./Arsanis Biosciences GmbH, Vienna, Austria binh.diep@ucsf.edu
eszter.nagy@arsanis.com.

Community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA),
especially the USA300 pulsotype, is a frequent cause of skin and soft tissue
infections and severe pneumonia. Despite appropriate antibiotic treatment,
complications are common and pneumonia is associated with high mortality. S.
aureus strains express multiple cytotoxins, including alpha-hemolysin (Hla) and
up to five bicomponent leukocidins that specifically target phagocytic cells for 
lysis. CA-MRSA USA300 strains carry the genes for all six cytotoxins. Species
specificity of the leukocidins greatly contributes to the ambiguity regarding
their role in S. aureus pathogenesis. We performed a comparative analysis of the 
leukocidin susceptibility of human, rabbit, and mouse polymorphonuclear
leukocytes (PMNs) to assess the translational value of mouse and rabbit S. aureus
models. We found that mouse PMNs were largely resistant to LukSF-PV, HlgAB, and
HlgCB and susceptible only to LukED, whereas rabbit and human PMNs were highly
sensitive to all these cytotoxins. In the rabbit pneumonia model with a USA300
CA-MRSA strain, passive immunization with a previously identified human
monoclonal antibody (MAb), Hla-F#5, which cross-neutralizes Hla, LukSF-PV, HlgAB,
HlgCB, and LukED, provided full protection, whereas an Hla-specific MAb was only 
partially protective. In the mouse USA300 CA-MRSA pneumonia model, both types of 
antibodies demonstrated full protection, suggesting that Hla, but not
leukocidin(s), is the principal virulence determinant in mice. As the rabbit
recapitulates the high susceptibility to leukocidins characteristic of humans,
this species represents a valuable model for assessing novel, cytotoxin-targeting
anti-S. aureus therapeutic approaches.

Copyright Â© 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01213-16 
PMCID: PMC5038318
PMID: 27527081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

