
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Aug 3;7:1173. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01173. eCollection
2016.

How Clonal Is Clonal? Genome Plasticity across Multicellular Segments of a
"Candidatus Marithrix sp." Filament from Sulfidic, Briny Seafloor Sediments in
the Gulf of Mexico.

Salman-Carvalho V(1), Fadeev E(1), Joye SB(2), Teske A(3).

Author information: 
(1)HGF MPG Joint Research Group for Deep-Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck
Institute for Marine Microbiology Bremen, Germany.
(2)Department of Marine Sciences, University of Georgia Athens, GA, USA.
(3)Department of Marine Sciences, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

"Candidatus Marithrix" is a recently described lineage within the group of large 
sulfur bacteria (Beggiatoaceae, Gammaproteobacteria). This genus of bacteria
comprises vacuolated, attached-living filaments that inhabit the sediment surface
around vent and seep sites in the marine environment. A single filament is ca.
100 Î¼m in diameter, several millimeters long, and consists of hundreds of clonal 
cells, which are considered highly polyploid. Based on these characteristics,
"Candidatus Marithrix" was used as a model organism for the assessment of genomic
plasticity along segments of a single filament using next generation sequencing
to possibly identify hotspots of microevolution. Using six consecutive segments
of a single filament sampled from a mud volcano in the Gulf of Mexico, we
recovered ca. 90% of the "Candidatus Marithrix" genome in each segment. There was
a high level of genome conservation along the filament with average nucleotide
identities between 99.98 and 100%. Different approaches to assemble all reads
into a complete consensus genome could not fill the gaps. Each of the six segment
datasets encoded merely a few hundred unique nucleotides and 5 or less unique
genes-the residual content was redundant in all datasets. Besides the overall
high genomic identity, we identified a similar number of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) between the clonal segments, which are comparable to numbers
reported for other clonal organisms. An increase of SNPs with greater distance of
filament segments was not observed. The polyploidy of the cells was apparent when
analyzing the heterogeneity of reads within a segment. Here, a strong increase in
single nucleotide variants, or "intrasegmental sequence heterogeneity" (ISH)
events, was observed. These sites may represent hotspots for genome plasticity,
and possibly microevolution, since two thirds of these variants were not
co-localized across the genome copies of the multicellular filament.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01173 
PMCID: PMC4971068
PMID: 27536274 

