
1. Cancer Immunol Res. 2016 Oct;4(10):869-880. Epub 2016 Aug 22.

Reduction of MDSCs with All-trans Retinoic Acid Improves CAR Therapy Efficacy for
Sarcomas.

Long AH(1), Highfill SL(2), Cui Y(2), Smith JP(2), Walker AJ(2), Ramakrishna
S(2), El-Etriby R(3), Galli S(3), Tsokos MG(3), Orentas RJ(2), Mackall CL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland. Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland.
(3)Laboratory of Pathology, CCR, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland.
(4)Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland. Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California. cmackall@stanford.edu.

Genetically engineered T cells expressing CD19-specific chimeric antigen
receptors (CAR) have shown impressive activity against B-cell malignancies, and
preliminary results suggest that T cells expressing a first-generation
disialoganglioside (GD2)-specific CAR can also provide clinical benefit in
patients with neuroblastoma. We sought to assess the potential of GD2-CAR
therapies to treat pediatric sarcomas. We observed that 18 of 18 (100%) of
osteosarcomas, 2 of 15 (13%) of rhabdomyosarcomas, and 7 of 35 (20%) of Ewing
sarcomas expressed GD2. T cells engineered to express a third-generation GD2-CAR 
incorporating the 14g2a-scFv with the CD28, OX40, and CD3ζ signaling domains
(14g2a.CD28.OX40.ζ) mediated efficient and comparable lysis of both GD2+ sarcoma 
and neuroblastoma cell lines in vitro However, in xenograft models, GD2-CAR T
cells had no antitumor effect against GD2+ sarcoma, despite effectively
controlling GD2+ neuroblastoma. We observed that pediatric sarcoma xenografts,
but not neuroblastoma xenografts, induced large populations of monocytic and
granulocytic murine myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) that inhibited human 
CAR T-cell responses in vitro Treatment of sarcoma-bearing mice with all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA) largely eradicated monocytic MDSCs and diminished the
suppressive capacity of granulocytic MDSCs. Combined therapy using GD2-CAR T
cells plus ATRA significantly improved antitumor efficacy against sarcoma
xenografts. We conclude that retinoids provide a clinically accessible class of
agents capable of diminishing the suppressive effects of MDSCs, and that
co-administration of retinoids may enhance the efficacy of CAR therapies
targeting solid tumors. Cancer Immunol Res; 4(10); 869-80. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-15-0230 
PMCID: PMC5050151
PMID: 27549124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflict of interest
exists.

