
1. Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res. 2016 Jul-Sep;769:36-46. doi:
10.1016/j.mrrev.2016.06.004. Epub 2016 Jun 23.

The ubiquitin family meets the Fanconi anemia proteins.

Renaudin X(1), Koch Lerner L(2), Menck CF(2), Rosselli F(3).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8200-Equipe Labellisée "La Ligue Contre le Cancer"-Institut Gustave
Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France; Gustave Roussy Cancer Center, 94805 Villejuif,
France; Université Paris Sud, 91400 Orsay, France. Electronic address:
xr212@mrc-cu.cam.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, SP 05508-900, Brazil.
(3)CNRS UMR 8200-Equipe Labellisée "La Ligue Contre le Cancer"-Institut Gustave
Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France; Gustave Roussy Cancer Center, 94805 Villejuif,
France; Université Paris Sud, 91400 Orsay, France. Electronic address:
filippo.rosselli@gustaveroussy.fr.

Fanconi anaemia (FA) is a hereditary disorder characterized by bone marrow
failure, developmental defects, predisposition to cancer and chromosomal
abnormalities. FA is caused by biallelic mutations that inactivate genes encoding
proteins involved in replication stress-associated DNA damage responses. The 20
FANC proteins identified to date constitute the FANC pathway. A key event in this
pathway involves the monoubiquitination of the FANCD2-FANCI heterodimer by the
collective action of at least 10 different proteins assembled in the FANC core
complex. The FANC core complex-mediated monoubiquitination of FANCD2-FANCI is
essential to assemble the heterodimer in subnuclear, chromatin-associated, foci
and to regulate the process of DNA repair as well as the rescue of stalled
replication forks. Several recent works have demonstrated that the activity of
the FANC pathway is linked to several other protein post-translational
modifications from the ubiquitin-like family, including SUMO and NEDD8. These
modifications are related to DNA damage responses but may also affect other
cellular functions potentially related to the clinical phenotypes of the
syndrome. This review summarizes the interplay between the ubiquitin and
ubiquitin-like proteins and the FANC proteins that constitute a major pathway for
the surveillance of the genomic integrity and addresses the implications of their
interactions in maintaining genome stability.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2016.06.004 
PMID: 27543315  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

