
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Aug 24;6:31985. doi: 10.1038/srep31985.

Circulating Tumor DNA Detection in Early-Stage Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer
Patients by Targeted Sequencing.

Chen KZ(1), Lou F(2), Yang F(1), Zhang JB(2), Ye H(2), Chen W(2), Guan T(1), Zhao
MY(2), Su XX(2), Shi R(2), Jones L(3), Huang XF(3), Chen SY(3), Wang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Department of Bioinformatics, San Valley Biotechnology Incorporated, Beijing, 
China.
(3)Departments of Molecular Microbiology &Immunology and Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.

Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) isolated from peripheral blood has recently been
shown to be an alternative source to detect gene mutations in primary tumors;
however, most previous studies have focused on advanced stage cancers, and few
have evaluated ctDNA detection in early-stage lung cancer. In the present study, 
blood and tumor samples were collected prospectively from 58 early-stage
non-small lung cancer (NSCLC) patients (stages IA, IB, and IIA) and a targeted
sequencing approach was used to detect somatic driver mutations in matched tumor 
DNA (tDNA) and plasma ctDNA. We identified frequent driver mutations in plasma
ctDNA and tDNA in EGFR, KRAS, PIK3CA, and TP53, and less frequent mutations in
other genes, with an overall study concordance of 50.4% and sensitivity and
specificity of 53.8% and 47.3%, respectively. Cell-free (cfDNA) concentrations
were found to be significantly associated with some clinical features, including 
tumor stage and subtype. Importantly, the presence of cfDNA had a higher positive
predictive value than that of currently used protein tumor biomarkers. This study
demonstrates the feasibility of identifying plasma ctDNA mutations in the
earliest stage lung cancer patients via targeted sequencing, demonstrating a
potential utility of targeted sequencing of ctDNA in the clinical management of
NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1038/srep31985 
PMCID: PMC4995492
PMID: 27555497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors F.L., J.-B.Z., H.Y., W.C., M.-Y.Z.,
X.-X.S. and R.S. are employees of San Valley Biotechnology Inc. in Beijing,
China. All other authors declare no conflict of interest.

