
1. J Exp Med. 2016 Sep 19;213(10):1999-2018. doi: 10.1084/jem.20160393. Epub 2016
Aug 22.

G-CSF maintains controlled neutrophil mobilization during acute inflammation by
negatively regulating CXCR2 signaling.

Bajrami B(1), Zhu H(2), Kwak HJ(1), Mondal S(1), Hou Q(1), Geng G(2), Karatepe
K(1), Zhang YC(1), Nombela-Arrieta C(3), Park SY(1), Loison F(1), Sakai J(1), Xu 
Y(2), Silberstein LE(1), Luo HR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 Department
of Lab Medicine, The Stem Cell Program, Joint Program in Transfusion Medicine,
Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA 02115 Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center,
Boston, MA 02115.
(2)The State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology
and Blood Diseases Hospital, Center for Stem Cell Medicine, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin 300020, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 Department
of Lab Medicine, The Stem Cell Program, Joint Program in Transfusion Medicine,
Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA 02115 Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center,
Boston, MA 02115 Department of Experimental Hematology, University Hospital
Zurich, 8091 Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 Department
of Lab Medicine, The Stem Cell Program, Joint Program in Transfusion Medicine,
Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA 02115 Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center,
Boston, MA 02115 Hongbo.Luo@childrens.harvard.edu.

Cytokine-induced neutrophil mobilization from the bone marrow to circulation is a
critical event in acute inflammation, but how it is accurately controlled remains
poorly understood. In this study, we report that CXCR2 ligands are responsible
for rapid neutrophil mobilization during early-stage acute inflammation.
Nevertheless, although serum CXCR2 ligand concentrations increased during
inflammation, neutrophil mobilization slowed after an initial acute fast phase,
suggesting a suppression of neutrophil response to CXCR2 ligands after the acute 
phase. We demonstrate that granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), usually
considered a prototypical neutrophil-mobilizing cytokine, was expressed later in 
the acute inflammatory response and unexpectedly impeded CXCR2-induced neutrophil
mobilization by negatively regulating CXCR2-mediated intracellular signaling.
Blocking G-CSF in vivo paradoxically elevated peripheral blood neutrophil counts 
in mice injected intraperitoneally with Escherichia coli and sequestered large
numbers of neutrophils in the lungs, leading to sterile pulmonary inflammation.
In a lipopolysaccharide-induced acute lung injury model, the homeostatic
imbalance caused by G-CSF blockade enhanced neutrophil accumulation, edema, and
inflammation in the lungs and ultimately led to significant lung damage. Thus,
physiologically produced G-CSF not only acts as a neutrophil mobilizer at the
relatively late stage of acute inflammation, but also prevents exaggerated
neutrophil mobilization and the associated inflammation-induced tissue damage
during early-phase infection and inflammation.

Â© 2016 Bajrami et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20160393 
PMCID: PMC5030805
PMID: 27551153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

