
1. J Immunol Methods. 2016 Oct;437:43-52. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2016.08.002. Epub 2016 
Aug 20.

Correlation of transferrin receptor (CD71) with Ki67 expression on stimulated
human and mouse T cells: The kinetics of expression of T cell activation markers.

Motamedi M(1), Xu L(1), Elahi S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G2E1, Canada.
(2)Department of Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G2E1, Canada;
Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, AB T6G2E1, Canada. Electronic address: elahi@ualberta.ca.

T cell activation is a fascinating, yet tightly regulated cascade of events that 
lead to the induction of cytokine and expression of activation molecules that
eventually result in divergent immune responses. Analyzing the qualitative and
quantitative nature of T cell activation in different immunological conditions
provides valuable information about the immune responses mediated by different
agents or vaccinations. We evaluated the kinetics of CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cell
activation markers such as CD25, CD38, CD69, CD71 and Ki67 following
anti-CD3/CD28 stimulation over a time course. Our data show that the kinetics of 
expression of these activation markers follows a precise and consistent
time-course with some differences between mouse and human T cells. Percentage of 
human T cells expressing CD69 and CD25 reached >90% at 24h stimulation, whereas
higher percentage of cells co-expressing CD71 and Ki67 was evident for CD8(+) T
cells compared with CD4(+) T cells at 24h. Similar to human T cells, percentage
of CD8(+)CD38(+) cells was delayed but reached to >90% on mouse CD8(+) T cells at
48h and on mouse CD4(+) T cells at 72h. After 72h of stimulation all tested
activation markers remained at the maximum levels in mouse T cells but
interestingly percentages of cells expressing CD69 was significantly reduced in
human T cells. Furthermore, these data demonstrate a positive correlation between
CD71 and Ki67 expression on both mouse and human T cells from 12h post
stimulation. Thus our results define the kinetics of activation
markers/proliferation in human and mouse T cells; and may serve a reference for
monitoring T cell function in clinical study and vaccinology.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2016.08.002 
PMID: 27555239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

