
1. Am J Pathol. 2016 Oct;186(10):2650-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2016.06.020. Epub
2016 Aug 23.

Altered Dermal Fibroblasts in Systemic Sclerosis Display Podoplanin and CD90.

Nazari B(1), Rice LM(1), Stifano G(1), Barron AM(2), Wang YM(1), Korndorf T(1),
Lee J(3), Bhawan J(3), Lafyatis R(4), Browning JL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(2)Section of Rheumatology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts; Department of Microbiology, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts.
(4)Section of Rheumatology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts; Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(5)Section of Rheumatology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts; Department of Microbiology, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address: browninj@bu.edu.

Tissue injury triggers the activation and differentiation of multiple cell types 
to minimize damage and initiate repair processes. In systemic sclerosis, these
repair processes appear to run unchecked, leading to aberrant remodeling and
fibrosis of the skin and multiple internal organs, yet the fundamental
pathological defect remains unknown. We describe herein a transition wherein the 
abundant CD34(+) dermal fibroblasts present in healthy human skin disappear in
the skin of systemic sclerosis patients, and CD34(-), podoplanin(+), and CD90(+) 
fibroblasts appear. This transition is limited to the upper dermis in several
inflammatory skin diseases, yet in systemic sclerosis, it can occur in all
regions of the dermis. In vitro, primary dermal fibroblasts readily express
podoplanin in response to the inflammatory stimuli tumor necrosis factor and
IL-1β. Furthermore, we show that on acute skin injury in both human and murine
settings, this transition occurs quickly, consistent with a response to
inflammatory signaling. Transitioned fibroblasts partially resemble the cells
that form the reticular networks in organized lymphoid tissues, potentially
linking two areas of fibroblast research. These results allow for the
visualization and quantification of a basic stage of fibroblast differentiation
in inflammatory and fibrotic diseases in the skin.

Copyright © 2016 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2016.06.020 
PMCID: PMC5222985
PMID: 27565038  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

