
1. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2016 Aug 31;10(8):799-806. doi: 10.3855/jidc.8014.

Multidrug-resistant enterococci in the hospital environment: detection of novel
vancomycin-resistant E. faecium clone ST910.

Dziri R(1), Lozano C, Ben Said L, Bellaaj R, Boudabous A, Ben Slama K, Torres C, 
Klibi N.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Sciences of Tunis, University of Tunis El Manar, Tunis, Tunisia.
rawdha_dziri@hotmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: The role of the hospital environment as a reservoir of resistant
bacteria in Tunisia has been poorly investigated; however, it could be
responsible for the transmission of multidrug-resistant bacteria. The objective
was to study the prevalence of Enterococcus in the environment of a Tunisian
hospital and the antibiotic resistance phenotype/genotype in recovered isolates, 
with special reference to vancomycin resistance.
METHODOLOGY: A total of 300 samples were taken (March-June, 2013) and inoculated 
in Slanetz-Bartley agar plates supplemented or not supplemented with 8 Âµg/mL of
vancomycin. Antibiotic resistance genes were tested by polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR). The clonal relatedness of the vanA isolates was assessed using
pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and multilocus sequence testing (MLST).
RESULTS: Enterococci were recovered in 33.3% of tested samples inoculated in SB
medium. E faecium was the most prevalent species, followed by E. faecalis and E. 
casseliflavus. Antimicrobial resistance genes detected were as follows (number of
isolates): erm(B) (71), tet(M) (18), aph(3')-IIIa (27), ant(6)-Ia (15), cat(A)
(4), and van(C2) (6). Vancomycin-resistant-enterococci (VRE) were recovered from 
14 samples (4.7%), when tested in SB-VAN. The 14 VRE (one per positive sample)
were identified as E. faecium and contained the van(A),erm(B), tet(M), ant(6)-Ia,
and aph(3')-IIIa genes. Thirteen of the VRE strains were ascribed by PFGE and
MLST to a novel clone (new ST910), and only one VRE strain was typed as ST80
included in CC17.
CONCLUSIONS: The emergence and spread of new clones of VRE, especially in the
hospital environment in this country, could become particularly problematic.

DOI: 10.3855/jidc.8014 
PMID: 27580324  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

