
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Sep 2;10(9):e0004952. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004952.
eCollection 2016 Sep.

Oral Vaccination with Attenuated Salmonella typhimurium-Delivered TsPmy DNA
Vaccine Elicits Protective Immunity against Trichinella spiralis in BALB/c Mice.

Wang L(1)(2), Wang X(1), Bi K(1), Sun X(1), Yang J(1), Gu Y(1), Huang J(1), Zhan 
B(3), Zhu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Capital Medical University, Beijing, PR China.
(2)Beijing Tropical Medicine Research Institute, Beijing Friendship Hospital,
Capital Medical University, Beijing, PR China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, National School of Tropical Medicine, Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Our previous studies showed that Trichinella spiralis paramyosin
(TsPmy) is an immunomodulatory protein that inhibits complement C1q and C8/C9 to 
evade host complement attack. Vaccination with recombinant TsPmy protein induced 
protective immunity against T. spiralis larval challenge. Due to the difficulty
in producing TsPmy as a soluble recombinant protein, we prepared a DNA vaccine as
an alternative approach in order to elicit a robust immunity against Trichinella 
infection.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: The full-length TsPmy coding DNA was cloned into the
eukaryotic expression plasmid pVAX1, and the recombinant pVAX1/TsPmy was
transformed into attenuated Salmonella typhimurium strain SL7207. Oral
vaccination of mice with this attenuated Salmonella-delivered TsPmy DNA vaccine
elicited a significant mucosal sIgA response in the intestine and a systemic IgG 
antibody response with IgG2a as the predominant subclass. Cytokine analysis also 
showed a significant increase in the Th1 (IFN-Î³, IL-2) and Th2 (IL-4, 5, 6, 10)
responses in lymphocytes from the spleen and MLNs of immunized mice upon
stimulation with TsPmy protein. The expression of the homing receptors CCR9/CCR10
on antibody secreting B cells may be related to the translocation of IgA-secreted
B cells to local intestinal mucosa. The mice immunized with Salmonella-delivered 
TsPmy DNA vaccine produced a significant 44.8% reduction in adult worm and a
46.6% reduction in muscle larvae after challenge with T. spiralis larvae.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrated that oral vaccination with TsPmy DNA
delivered by live attenuated S. typhimurium elicited a significant local IgA
response and a mixed Th1/Th2 immune response that elicited a significant
protection against T. spiralis infection in mice.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004952 
PMCID: PMC5010209
PMID: 27589591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

