
1. Wounds. 2016 Nov;28(11):408-420. Epub 2016 Aug 15.

The Effect of a Bacteria- and Fungi- binding Mesh Dressing on the Bacterial Load 
of Pressure Ulcers Treated With Negative Pressure Wound Therapy: A Pilot Study.

Ciliberti M(1), De Lara F(1), Serra G(1), Tafuro F(1), Iazzetta FM(1), Filosa
A(2), Scognamiglio R(2), Ciliberti G(2), Veneri MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Aziendale di Riparazione Tissutale, Wound Care Centre, ASL NAPOLI 3
SUD, Napoli, Italy.
(2)Micobiology Unit, San Leonardo Hospital, ASL NAPOLI 3 SUD, Napoli, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: This study was designed to clinically evaluate the efficacy of a
bacteria- and-fungi-binding mesh (BFBM) dressing to modify the bacterial load of 
pressure ulcers (PUs) of categories 3 and 4, when used as a wound contact layer
(WCL) during negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT).
METHODS: This was an observational single-centre study in patients with PUs of
categories 3 or 4, who were treated with NPWT. Patients were observed for 7 days 
and received NPWT at -80 mm Hg with the BFBM dressing as the WCL. Wound biopsies 
were performed at inclusion (B0), at 48 hours (B1), and at day 7 (B7). Bacteria- 
and fungi-binding mesh dressings were examined for bacterial load at 48 hours
(D1) and at 7 days (D7). The primary endpoint was the changes in bacterial loads.
RESULTS: Fifty patients were enrolled; 43 (86%) of their PUs were on the sacrum. 
At B0, 3 groups of wounds were identified by the bioburden level: group A had
negative results (28%) to bacterial loads from 102 to 5 x 103 colony forming
units (CFU) CFU/mL (18%); group B had 104 to 105 CFU/mL (18%); and group C with â‰¥
106 CFU/mL (36%). The authors did not find any significant difference in
bacterial loads in group A, but significant differences were found in group B at 
B1 and B7 (P = 0.04 and P = 0.0067) and in group C at B1 and B7 (P < 0.00001).
There was no significant difference on the bacterial loads of the dressing at D1 
and D7 (P = 0.823). No device-related adverse events were reported.
CONCLUSION: The BFBM dressing seems to be at the origin of a statistically
significant reduction of bacterial burden in wounds with moderate or high levels 
of colonization. The authors' findings suggest BFBM dressings may be a WCL of
choice during the treatment of chronic wounds with NPWT.


PMID: 27589361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

