
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Sep 2;6:32320. doi: 10.1038/srep32320.

Enhanced immune response of MAIT cells in tuberculous pleural effusions depends
on cytokine signaling.

Jiang J(1)(2)(3), Chen X(1)(4), An H(2), Yang B(2), Zhang F(3), Cheng X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, Shenzhen Third People's
Hospital, Guangdong Medical College, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(2)Division of Research, Institute of Tuberculosis, 309th Hospital, Beijing,
China.
(3)Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Pathogen Biology, School of Medicine, Shenzhen University,
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.

The functions of MAIT cells at the site of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection
in humans are still largely unknown. In this study, the phenotypes and immune
response of MAIT cells from tuberculous pleural effusions and peripheral blood
were investigated. MAIT cells in tuberculous pleural effusions had greatly
enhanced IFN-γ, IL-17F and granzyme B response compared with those in peripheral 
blood. The level of IFN-γ response in MAIT cells from tuberculous pleural
effusions was inversely correlated with the extent of tuberculosis infection
(p = 0.0006). To determine whether cytokines drive the immune responses of MAIT
cells at the site of tuberculosis infection, the role of IL-1β, IL-2, IL-7,
IL-12, IL-15 and IL-18 was investigated. Blockade of IL-2, IL-12 or IL-18 led to 
significantly reduced production of IFN-γ and/or granzyme B in MAIT cells from
tuberculous pleural effusions. Majority of IL-2-producing cells (94.50%) in
tuberculous pleural effusions had phenotype of CD3(+)CD4(+), and most
IL-12p40-producing cells (91.39%) were CD14(+) cells. MAIT cells had
significantly elevated expression of γc receptor which correlated with enhanced
immune responses of MAIT cells. It is concluded that MAIT cells from tuberculous 
pleural effusions exhibited highly elevated immune response to Mtb antigens,
which are controlled by cytokines produced by innate/adaptive immune cells.

DOI: 10.1038/srep32320 
PMCID: PMC5009363
PMID: 27586092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

