
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2016 Oct 27;82(22):6584-6592. Print 2016 Nov 15.

Transposon Mutagenesis Identifies Genes Critical for Growth of Pseudomonas
nitroreducens TX1 on Octylphenol Polyethoxylates.

Nguyen TN(1), Yeh CW(2), Tsai PC(1), Lee K(3), Huang SL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, National Central University, Jhongli City,
Taoyuan County, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Bio Health Science, Changwon National University, Kyongnam,
Republic of Korea sl.huang@ym.edu.tw klee@changwon.ac.kr.
(4)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan Graduate Institute of Environmental Engineering, National Central 
University, Jhongli City, Taoyuan County, Taiwan sl.huang@ym.edu.tw
klee@changwon.ac.kr.

Pseudomonas nitroreducens TX1 is of special interest because of its ability to
utilize 0.05% to 20% octylphenol polyethoxylates (OPEOn) as a sole source of
carbon. In this study, a library containing 30,000 Tn5-insertion mutants of the
wild-type strain TX1 was constructed and screened for OPEOn utilization, and 93
mutants were found to be unable to grow on OPEOn In total, 42 separate disrupted 
genes were identified, and the proteins encoded by the genes were then classified
into various categories, namely, information storage and processing (14.3%),
cellular processes and signaling (28.6%), metabolism (35.7%), and unknown
proteins (21.4%). The individual deletion of genes encoding isocitrate lyase
(aceA), malate synthase (aceB), and glycolate dehydrogenase (glcE) was carried
out, and the requirement for aceA and aceB but not glcE confirmed the role of the
glyoxylate cycle in OPEOn degradation. Furthermore, acetaldehyde dehydrogenase
and acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) synthetase activity levels were 13.2- and
2.1-fold higher in TX1 cells grown on OPEOn than in TX1 cells grown on succinate,
respectively. Growth of the various mutants on different carbon sources was
tested, and based on these findings, a mechanism involving exoscission to
liberate acetaldehyde from the end of the OPEOn chain during degradation is
proposed for the breakdown of OPEOn IMPORTANCE: Octylphenol polyethoxylates
belong to the alkylphenol polyethoxylate (APEOn) nonionic surfactant family.
Evidence based on the analysis of intermediate metabolites suggested that the
primary biodegradation of APEOn can be achieved by two possible pathways for the 
stepwise removal of the C2 ethoxylate units from the end of the chain. However,
direct evidence for these hypotheses is still lacking. In this study, we
described the use of transposon mutagenesis to identify genes critical to the
catabolism of OPEOn by P. nitroreducens TX1. The exoscission of the ethoxylate
chain leading to the liberation of acetaldehyde is proposed. Isocitrate lyase and
malate synthase in glyoxylate cycle are required in the catabolism of ethoxylated
surfactants. Our findings also provide many gene candidates that may help
elucidate the mechanisms in stress responses to ethoxylated surfactants by
bacteria.

Copyright Â© 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01907-16 
PMCID: PMC5086552
PMID: 27590807  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

