
1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2016 Oct;79:288-297. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2016.08.024. 
Epub 2016 Aug 31.

Proteomic profiling reveals oxidative phosphorylation pathway is suppressed in
longissimus dorsi muscle of weaned piglets fed low-protein diet supplemented with
limiting amino acids.

Yan G(1), Li X(1), Cheng X(1), Peng Y(2), Long B(1), Fan Q(1), Wang Z(1), Zheng
Z(1), Shi M(1), Yan X(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Sciences and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University,
Wuhan, 430070, Hubei, China; The Cooperative Innovation Center for Sustainable
Pig Production, Wuhan, 430070, Hubei, China.
(2)The Cooperative Innovation Center for Sustainable Pig Production, Wuhan,
430070, Hubei, China; State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, Hubei,
China.
(3)College of Animal Sciences and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University,
Wuhan, 430070, Hubei, China; The Cooperative Innovation Center for Sustainable
Pig Production, Wuhan, 430070, Hubei, China. Electronic address:
xhyan@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Feeding high-protein diets in animals can lead to a decrease of nitrogen
utilization efficiency, and then promote the environmental pollution. Recently,
more reports have demonstrated that lowering protein level in diets supplemented 
with specific amino acids can address these problems. However, the whole proteome
alteration in the skeletal muscle of weaned piglets fed low-protein diets is
poorly understood. Here, we applied the isobaric tags for relative and absolute
quantification approach to investigate this alteration. We fed weaned piglets
with normal protein diet (20% crude protein) and low-protein diet supplemented
with lysine, methionine, threonine, and tryptophan (17% crude protein) for
25days. Then proteomic profiling of skeletal muscles was performed. In total,
1354 proteins were quantified in the porcine skeletal muscle proteome. 132
proteins were identified as differentially expressed proteins between the two
groups. Differentially expressed proteins were significantly enriched in various 
nutrient metabolism including lipid, carbohydrate, and amino acid metabolism.
Interestingly, a total of 20 differentially expressed proteins, which are
involved in the oxidative phosphorylation pathway, were all down-regulated by the
low-protein diet feeding. Further immunoblotting confirmed the down-regulations
of MT-ATP8, COX2, NDUFA6, and SDHB, four selected proteins among these 20
proteins. Meanwhile, the ATP level in the low-protein diet group was also
reduced. These findings for the first time reveal that oxidative phosphorylation 
pathway is suppressed in longissimus dorsi muscle of weaned piglets fed
low-protein diet supplemented with limiting amino acids, which may provide new
insights into further formula design and the choice of limiting amino acids in
diets.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2016.08.024 
PMID: 27590855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

