
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2016 Sep;72(Pt 9):707-12. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X16012310. Epub 2016 Aug 26.

The role of water molecules in the binding of class I and II peptides to the SH3 
domain of the Fyn tyrosine kinase.

Camara-Artigas A(1), Ortiz-Salmeron E(1), Andujar-Sánchez M(1), Bacarizo J(1),
Martin-Garcia JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Physics, University of Almería, Agrifood Campus of
International Excellence (ceiA3), Carretera de Sacramento, 04120 Almeria, Spain.
(2)School of Molecular Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.

Interactions of proline-rich motifs with SH3 domains are present in signal
transduction and other important cell processes. Analysis of structural and
thermodynamic data suggest a relevant role of water molecules in these
protein-protein interactions. To determine whether or not the SH3 domain of the
Fyn tyrosine kinase shows the same behaviour, the crystal structures of its
complexes with two high-affinity synthetic peptides, VSL12 and APP12, which are
class I and II peptides, respectively, have been solved. In the class I complexes
two water molecules were found at the binding interface that were not present in 
the class II complexes. The structures suggest a role of these water molecules in
facilitating conformational changes in the SH3 domain to allow the binding of the
class I or II peptides. In the third binding pocket these changes modify the
cation-π and salt-bridge interactions that determine the affinity of the binding.
Comparison of the water molecules involved in the binding of the peptides with
previous reported hydration spots suggests a different pattern for the SH3
domains of the Src tyrosine kinase family.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X16012310 
PMCID: PMC5012211
PMID: 27599862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

