
1. Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol. 2016 Sep;72(Pt 9):1049-61. doi:
10.1107/S2059798316012535. Epub 2016 Aug 31.

Structural studies of a cold-adapted dimeric β-D-galactosidase from Paracoccus
sp. 32d.

Rutkiewicz-Krotewicz M(1), Pietrzyk-Brzezinska AJ(1), Sekula B(1), Cieśliński
H(2), Wierzbicka-Woś A(3), Kur J(2), Bujacz A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Technical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biotechnology and Food
Sciences, Technical University of Lodz, Stefanowskiego 4/10, 90-924 Lodz, Poland.
(2)Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Gdansk University of Technology,
Narutowicza 11/12, 80-233 Gdansk, Poland.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biology, University of Szczecin,
Felczaka 3c, 71-412 Szczecin, Poland.

The crystal structure of a novel dimeric β-D-galactosidase from Paracoccus sp.
32d (ParβDG) was solved in space group P212121 at a resolution of 2.4 Å by
molecular replacement with multiple models using the BALBES software. This enzyme
belongs to glycoside hydrolase family 2 (GH2), similar to the tetrameric and
hexameric β-D-galactosidases from Escherichia coli and Arthrobacter sp. C2-2,
respectively. It is the second known structure of a cold-active GH2
β-galactosidase, and the first in the form of a functional dimer, which is also
present in the asymmetric unit. Cold-adapted β-D-galactosidases have been the
focus of extensive research owing to their utility in a variety of industrial
technologies. One of their most appealing applications is in the hydrolysis of
lactose, which not only results in the production of lactose-free dairy, but also
eliminates the `sandy effect' and increases the sweetness of the product, thus
enhancing its quality. The determined crystal structure represents the
five-domain architecture of the enzyme, with its active site located in close
vicinity to the dimer interface. To identify the amino-acid residues involved in 
the catalytic reaction and to obtain a better understanding of the mechanism of
action of this atypical β-D-galactosidase, the crystal structure in complex with 
galactose (ParβDG-Gal) was also determined. The catalytic site of the enzyme is
created by amino-acid residues from the central domain 3 and from domain 4 of an 
adjacent monomer. The crystal structure of this dimeric β-D-galactosidase reveals
significant differences in comparison to other β-galactosidases. The largest
difference is in the fifth domain, named Bgal_windup domain 5 in ParβDG, which
contributes to stabilization of the functional dimer. The location of this domain
5, which is unique in size and structure, may be one of the factors responsible
for the creation of a functional dimer and cold-adaptation of this enzyme.

DOI: 10.1107/S2059798316012535 
PMID: 27599737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

