
1. Adv Healthc Mater. 2016 Nov;5(21):2788-2798. doi: 10.1002/adhm.201600644. Epub
2016 Sep 7.

Engineered Breast Cancer Cell Spheroids Reproduce Biologic Properties of Solid
Tumors.

Ham SL(1), Joshi R(1), Luker GD(2), Tavana H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The University of Akron, Akron, OH,
44325, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, Microbiology and Immunology, and Biomedical
Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.

Solid tumors develop as 3D tissue constructs. As tumors grow larger, spatial
gradients of nutrients and oxygen and inadequate diffusive supply to cells
distant from vasculature develops. Hypoxia initiates signaling and
transcriptional alterations to promote survival of cancer cells and generation of
cancer stem cells (CSCs) that have self-renewal and tumor-initiation
capabilities. Both hypoxia and CSCs are associated with resistance to therapies
and tumor relapse. This study demonstrates that 3D cancer cell models, known as
tumor spheroids, generated with a polymeric aqueous two-phase system (ATPS)
technology capture these important biological processes. Similar to solid tumors,
spheroids of triple negative breast cancer cells deposit major extracellular
matrix proteins. The molecular analysis establishes presence of hypoxic cells in 
the core region and expression of CSC gene and protein markers including CD24,
CD133, and Nanog. Importantly, these spheroids resist treatment with chemotherapy
drugs. A combination treatment approach using a hypoxia-activated prodrug,
TH-302, and a chemotherapy drug, doxorubicin, successfully targets drug resistant
spheroids. This study demonstrates that ATPS spheroids recapitulate important
biological and functional properties of solid tumors and provide a unique model
for studies in cancer research.

Â© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/adhm.201600644 
PMCID: PMC5142748
PMID: 27603912  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

