
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016 Oct 21;60(11):6780-6786. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01121-16. Print 2016 Nov.

Characterization of Two Multidrug-Resistant IncA/C Plasmids from the 1960s by
Using the MinION Sequencer Device.

Szabó M(1), Nagy T(1), Wilk T(1), Farkas T(1), Hegyi A(1), Olasz F(1), Kiss J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Biotechnology Institute, National Agricultural Research and
Innovation Centre, Gödöllő, Hungary.
(2)Agricultural Biotechnology Institute, National Agricultural Research and
Innovation Centre, Gödöllő, Hungary kiss.janos@abc.naik.hu.

Two A/C incompatibility group (IncA/C family) plasmids from the 1960s have been
sequenced and classified into the A/C2 type 1 group. R16a and IP40a contain novel
antibiotic resistance islands and a complete GIsul2 genomic island not previously
found in the family. In the 173.1-kb R16a, the 29.9-kb antibiotic resistance
island (ARI) is located in a unique backbone position not utilized by ARIs.
ARIR16a consists of Tn1, Tn6020, and Tn6333, harboring the resistance genes
blaTEM-1D and aphA1b and a mer module, respectively; a truncated Tn5393 copy; and
a gene cluster with unknown function. Plasmid IP40a is 170.4 kb in size and
contains a 5.6-kb ARI inserted into the kfrA gene. ARIIP40a carrying blaTEM-1D
and aphA1b genes is composed of Tn1 with a Tn6023 insertion. Additionally, IP40a 
harbors single IS2, IS186, and Tn1000 insertions scattered in the backbone; an
IS150 copy in GIsul2; and a complete Tn6333 carrying a mer module at the position
of ARIR16a Loss of resistance markers in R16a, IP40a, and R55 was observed during
stability tests. Every phenotypic change proved to be the result of recombination
events involving mobile elements. Intramolecular transposition of IS copies that 
generated IP40a derivatives lacking large parts of the backbone could account for
the formation of other family members, too. The MinION platform proved to be a
valuable tool in bacterial genome sequencing since it generates long reads that
span repetitive elements and facilitates full-length plasmid or chromosome
assembly. Nanopore technology enables rapid characterization of large,
low-copy-number plasmids and their rearrangement products.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01121-16 
PMCID: PMC5075086
PMID: 27600047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

