
1. Tissue Cell. 2016 Oct;48(5):397-406. doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2016.08.008. Epub 2016
Aug 28.

Comparison of stem cell behaviors between indigenous high and low-CD24 percentage
expressing cells of stem cells from apical papilla (SCAPs).

Aguilar P(1), Lertchirakarn V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Student in Oral Biology Program, Faculty of Dentistry,
Chulalongkorn University Henri-Dunant Rd, Patumwan, Bangkok, 10330, Thailand.
Electronic address: what_mickey_want@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology and RU on Oral Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty
of Dentistry, Chulalongkorn University, Henri-Dunant Rd, Patumwan, Bangkok,
10330, Thailand. Electronic address: veera.l@chula.ac.th.

CD24 was suggested as a marker to SCAPs and has been reported for a decade. CD24 
has been shown to involve stem cell activities such as self-renewal,
proliferation and differentiation. However, the percentage variations of CD24
positive cells were reported among the studies. It is possible that this
variation may affect these SCAPs behaviors. In this study, the variation was
confirmed. To elucidate the influence of CD24 positive cells quantity on SCAPs
stem cell behaviors, the 3 cell lines with the most maximum and the least numbers
of CD24 positive cells (High-CD24 and Low-CD24 group) were selected to study.
Both groups expressed the same mesenchymal stem cell markers and negative to
hematopoietic marker. High-CD24 group demonstrated less self-renewal capacity by 
lower colony-forming-unit count and pluripotency marker gene expressions.
However, cell proliferation was not different. In contrast, osteogenic and
adipogenic differentiation were better than Low-CD24 group. The early stage of
root development demonstrated higher CD24 expressing cells than later stage. In
conclusion, quantity of CD24 expressing cells influenced SCAPs self-renewal and
multi-lineage differentiation but did not influence on cell proliferation. Stage 
of root development influenced to CD24 expressing cell numbers.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tice.2016.08.008 
PMID: 27613575  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

