
1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2016 Nov;65(11):1411-1421. Epub 2016 Sep 10.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors enhance CD1d-dependent NKT cell responses to
lymphoma.

Tiper IV(1), Webb TJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum
Cancer Center, University of Maryland School of Medicine, HSF I-Rm 380, 685 W
Baltimore St, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum
Cancer Center, University of Maryland School of Medicine, HSF I-Rm 380, 685 W
Baltimore St, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA. twebb@som.umaryland.edu.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are a family of enzymes that influence expression of
genes implicated in tumor initiation, progression, and anti-tumor responses. In
addition to their canonical role in deacetylation of histones, HDACs regulate
many non-canonical targets, such as Signal Transducer and Activator of
Transcription 3 (STAT3). We hypothesize that tumors use epigenetic mechanisms to 
dysregulate CD1d-mediated antigen presentation, thereby impairing the ability of 
natural killer T (NKT) cells to recognize and destroy malignant cells. In this
study, we pre-treated CD1d-expressing tumor cells with HDAC inhibitors (HDACi)
and assessed CD1d-dependent NKT cell responses to mantle cell lymphoma (MCL).
Pre-treatment with Trichostatin-A, a pan-HDACi, rapidly enhanced both CD1d- and
MHC class II-mediated antigen presentation. Similarly, treatment of MCL cells
with other HDACi resulted in enhanced CD1d-dependent NKT cell responses. The
observed changes are due, at least in part, to an increase in both CD1D mRNA and 
CD1d cell surface expression. Mechanistically, we found that HDAC2 binds to the
CD1D promoter. Knockdown of HDAC2 in tumor cells resulted in a significant
increase in CD1d-mediated antigen presentation. In addition, treatment with HDACi
inhibited STAT3 and STAT3-regulated inflammatory cytokine secretion by MCL cells.
We demonstrated that MCL-secreted IL-10 inhibits CD1d-mediated antigen
presentation and pre-treatment with TSA abrogates secretion of IL-10 by MCL.
Taken together, our studies demonstrate the efficacy of HDACi in restoring
anti-tumor responses to MCL through both cell-intrinsic and cell-extrinsic
mechanisms and strongly implicate a role for HDACi in enhancing immune responses 
to cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-016-1900-z 
PMCID: PMC5580026
PMID: 27614429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

