
1. Proteins. 2016 Dec;84(12):1786-1796. doi: 10.1002/prot.25161. Epub 2016 Oct 1.

Unique coenzyme binding mode of hyperthermophilic archaeal
sn-glycerol-1-phosphate dehydrogenase from Pyrobaculum calidifontis.

Hayashi J(1), Yamamoto K(1), Yoneda K(2), Ohshima T(3), Sakuraba H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Kagawa
University, 2393 Ikenobe, Miki-cho, Kita-gun, Kagawa, 761-0795, Japan.
(2)Department of Bioscience, School of Agriculture, Tokai University, Aso,
Kumamoto, 869-1404, Japan.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Osaka Institute 
of Technology, 5-16-1 Ohmiya, Asahi-ku, Osaka, 535-8585, Japan.

A gene encoding an sn-glycerol-1-phosphate dehydrogenase (G1PDH) was identified
in the hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrobaculum calidifontis. The gene was
overexpressed in Escherichia coli, and its product was purified and
characterized. In contrast to conventional G1PDHs, the expressed enzyme showed
strong preference for NADH: the reaction rate (Vmax ) with NADPH was only 2.4% of
that with NADH. The crystal structure of the enzyme was determined at a
resolution of 2.45 Å. The asymmetric unit consisted of one homohexamer.
Refinement of the structure and HPLC analysis showed the presence of the bound
cofactor NADPH in subunits D, E, and F, even though it was not added in the
crystallization procedure. The phosphate group at C2' of the adenine ribose of
NADPH is tightly held through the five biased hydrogen bonds with Ser40 and
Thr42. In comparison with the known G1PDH structure, the NADPH molecule was
observed to be pushed away from the normal coenzyme binding site. Interestingly, 
the S40A/T42A double mutant enzyme acquired much higher reactivity than the
wild-type enzyme with NADPH, which suggests that the biased interactions around
the C2'-phosphate group make NADPH binding insufficient for catalysis. Our
results provide a unique structural basis for coenzyme preference in
NAD(P)-dependent dehydrogenases. Proteins 2016; 84:1786-1796. © 2016 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.25161 
PMID: 27616573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

