
1. Oncoimmunology. 2016 May 13;5(7):e1180485. doi: 10.1080/2162402X.2016.1180485.
eCollection 2016 Jul.

Tumor-released autophagosomes induce IL-10-producing B cells with suppressive
activity on T lymphocytes via TLR2-MyD88-NF-κB signal pathway.

Zhou M(1), Wen Z(1), Cheng F(1), Ma J(1), Li W(1), Ren H(1), Sheng Y(1), Dong
H(1), Lu L(2), Hu HM(3), Wang LX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical School of Southeast
University , Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Pathology and Center of Infection and Immunology, The University
of Hong Kong , Hong Kong, Special Administrative Region, P.R. China.
(3)Laboratory of Cancer Immunobiology, Earle A. Chiles Research Institute,
Providence Portland Medical Center , Portland, OR, USA.

Recent studies have shown that tumor cells can release autophagosomes, which
transport a broad array of biologically active molecules with potential
modulatory effects on immune cell functions. In this study, we aimed to
investigate the role of tumor cells-released autophagosomes (i.e. TRAP) in
regulating B cell differentiation and function. TRAPs from murine tumor cell
lines were found to induce splenic B cells to differentiate into IL-10-producing 
regulatory B cells (Bregs) with a distinct phenotype of CD1d(+) CD5(+), which
could potently inhibit CD8(+) and CD4(+) T cell responses in IL-10-depedent
manner both in vitro and in vivo. Notably, adoptive transfer of TRAP-induced
Bregs abrogated the immune response and antitumor effect induced by OVA-loaded DC
vaccinations in E.G7-OVA-bearing mouse model. Mechanistic studies revealed that
membrane-bound high-mobility group B1 (HMGB1) on the intact TRAPs was crucial for
inducing Breg differentiation via the activation of TLR2-MyD88-NF-κB signal
pathway in B cells. Moreover, TRAPs enriched from malignant effusions of cancer
patients could induce human B cells to differentiate into IL-10-producing B cells
with immunoregulatory functions, the frequency of which were positively
correlated with the HMGB1 levels on TRAPs. Together, our findings have
demonstrated that TRAPs promote the generation of IL-10(+) Bregs, which may
contribute to the suppression of antitumor immunity.

DOI: 10.1080/2162402X.2016.1180485 
PMCID: PMC5006924
PMID: 27622036 

