
1. Plasmid. 2016 Sep - Nov;87-88:51-57. doi: 10.1016/j.plasmid.2016.09.003. Epub
2016 Sep 13.

Destabilization of IncA and IncC plasmids by SGI1 and SGI2 type Salmonella
genomic islands.

Harmer CJ(1), Hamidian M(1), Ambrose SJ(1), Hall RM(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, NSW,
Australia.
(2)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, NSW,
Australia. Electronic address: ruth.hall@sydney.edu.au.

Both the Salmonella genomic islands (SGI) and the conjugative IncC plasmids are
known to contribute substantially to the acquisition of resistance to multiple
antibiotics, and plasmids in the A/C group are known to mobilize the Salmonella
genomic island SGI1, which also carries multiple antibiotic resistance genes.
Plasmid pRMH760 (IncC; A/C2) was shown to mobilize SGI1 variants SGI1-I, SGI1-F, 
SGI1-K and SGI2 from Salmonella enterica to Escherichia coli where it was
integrated at the preferred location, at the end of the trmE (thdF) gene. The
plasmid was transferred at a similar frequency. However, we observed that
co-transfer of the SGI and the plasmid was rarer. In E. coli to E. coli transfer,
the frequency of transfer of the IncC plasmid pRMH760 was at least 1000-fold
lower when the donor carried SGI1-I or SGI1-K, indicating that the SGI suppresses
transfer of the plasmid. In addition, pRMH760 was rapidly lost from both E. coli 
and S. enterica strains that also carried SGI1-I, SGI1-F or SGI2. However,
plasmid loss was not seen when the SGI1 variant was SGI1-K, which lacks two
segments of the SGI1 backbone. The complete sequence of the SGI1-I and SGI1-F
were determined and SGI1-K also carries two single base substitutions relative to
SGI1-I. The IncA (A/C1) plasmid RA1 was also shown to mobilize SGI2-A and though 
there are significant differences between the backbones of IncA and IncC
plasmids, RA1 was also rapidly lost when SGI2-A was present in the same cell. We 
conclude that there are multiple interactions, both cooperative and antagonistic,
between an IncA or IncC plasmid and the SGI1 and SGI2 family genomic islands.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plasmid.2016.09.003 
PMID: 27620651  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

