
1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2016 Nov 1;311(5):G817-G826. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00173.2016. Epub 2016 Sep 15.

Lactobacillus acidophilus counteracts inhibition of NHE3 and DRA expression and
alleviates diarrheal phenotype in mice infected with Citrobacter rodentium.

Kumar A(1), Anbazhagan AN(1), Coffing H(1), Chatterjee I(1), Priyamvada S(1),
Gujral T(1), Saksena S(1), Gill RK(1), Alrefai WA(1), Borthakur A(2), Dudeja
PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago and Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago,
Illinois.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago and Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago,
Illinois alipb@uic.edu.

Impaired absorption of electrolytes is a hallmark of diarrhea associated with
inflammation or enteric infections. Intestinal epithelial luminal membrane NHE3
(Na+/H+ exchanger 3) and DRA (Down-Regulated in Adenoma; Cl-/HCO3- exchanger)
play key roles in mediating electroneutral NaCl absorption. We have previously
shown decreased NHE3 and DRA function in response to short-term infection with
enteropathogenic E coli (EPEC), a diarrheal pathogen. Recent studies have also
shown substantial downregulation of DRA expression in a diarrheal model of
infection with Citrobacter rodentium, the mouse counterpart of EPEC. Since our
previous studies showed that the probiotic Lactobacillus acidophilus (LA)
increased DRA and NHE3 function and expression and conferred protective effects
in experimental colitis, we sought to evaluate the efficacy of LA in
counteracting NHE3 and DRA inhibition and ameliorating diarrhea in a model of C
rodentium infection. FVB/N mice challenged with C rodentium [1 × 109
colony-forming units (CFU)] with or without administration of live LA (3 × 109
CFU) were assessed for NHE3 and DRA mRNA and protein expression, mRNA levels of
carbonic anhydrase, diarrheal phenotype (assessed by colonic weight-to-length
ratio), myeloperoxidase activity, and proinflammatory cytokines. LA counteracted 
C rodentium-induced inhibition of colonic DRA, NHE3, and carbonic anhydrase I and
IV expression and attenuated diarrheal phenotype and MPO activity. Furthermore,
LA completely blocked C rodentium induction of IL-1β, IFN-γ, and CXCL1 mRNA and C
rodentium-induced STAT3 phosphorylation. In conclusion, our data provide
mechanistic insights into antidiarrheal effects of LA in a model of infectious
diarrhea and colitis.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00173.2016 
PMCID: PMC5130543
PMID: 27634011  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

