
1. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol. 2016;2016:1462818. doi: 10.1155/2016/1462818. Epub 2016 
Aug 23.

Novel Hypomorphic Mutation in FANCD2 Gene Observed in a Fetus with Multiple
Congenital Anomalies.

Vazharova R(1), Vragaleva S(2), Dimitrova V(3), Ivanov S(4), Balabanski L(4),
Malinov M(4), Toncheva D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Gynecology and Assisted Reproduction Hospital "Malinov DM", 1680 Sofia,
Bulgaria; Department of Biology, Medical Genetics and Microbiology, Faculty of
Medicine, Sofia University "St. Kliment Ohridski", 1407 Sofia, Bulgaria.
(2)Medical Center "Femina", 1202 Sofia, Bulgaria.
(3)Medical Center "Femina", 1202 Sofia, Bulgaria; University Ob/Gyn Hospital
"Maichin Dom" and Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of 
Sofia, 1431 Sofia, Bulgaria.
(4)Gynecology and Assisted Reproduction Hospital "Malinov DM", 1680 Sofia,
Bulgaria.
(5)Gynecology and Assisted Reproduction Hospital "Malinov DM", 1680 Sofia,
Bulgaria; Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Sofia, 1431
Sofia, Bulgaria.

Congenital anomalies affect 1% to 2% of the newborns. The urinary tract and the
kidneys are involved in 4-5% of the cases while upper-extremities abnormalities
are present in 10%. Certain anomalies occur in isolation, whereas others are
associated with systemic conditions. The prenatal detection of fetal anomalies
compatible with life is a challenge for both the parents and the physician. The
prognosis for the fetus/newborn and the reproductive decisions of the family
largely depend on the causes underlying the disease. The reported case is of a
G2P1 pregnant woman referred for routine ultrasound scan at 24 weeks of gestation
(w.g.). The fetus had growth retardation, right kidney agenesis, bilateral
absence of radial bones and thumbs, radial deviation of the wrists, and short
humeri. Nuchal fold thickness was 5â€‰mm and there was a single umbilical artery.
After termination of pregnancy, SNP array genotyping and next-generation
sequencing of targeted candidate-genes were performed trying to clarify the
etiology of the fetal polymalformative syndrome. A new hypomorphic mutation in
FANCD2 gene was found to underlie this fetal anomaly. The case illustrates that
patients/families affected by rare monogenic disorders may benefit from
application of modern technologies like microarrays and NGS.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/1462818 
PMCID: PMC5011510
PMID: 27642530 

