
1. Autophagy. 2016 Dec;12(12):2286-2299. Epub 2016 Sep 22.

Activation of MTOR in pulmonary epithelium promotes LPS-induced acute lung
injury.

Hu Y(1), Lou J(1), Mao YY(1), Lai TW(1), Liu LY(1), Zhu C(1), Zhang C(1), Liu
J(1), Li YY(1), Zhang F(1), Li W(1), Ying SM(1), Chen ZH(1), Shen HH(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine , Second Affiliated
Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine , Hangzhou , China.
(2)b State Key Lab of Respiratory Diseases , Guangzhou , China.

MTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin [serine/threonine kinase]) plays a crucial 
role in many major cellular processes including metabolism, proliferation and
macroautophagy/autophagy induction, and is also implicated in a growing number of
proliferative and metabolic diseases. Both MTOR and autophagy have been suggested
to be involved in lung disorders, however, little is known about the role of MTOR
and autophagy in pulmonary epithelium in the context of acute lung injury (ALI). 
In the present study, we observed that lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation
induced MTOR phosphorylation and decreased the expression of MAP1LC3B/LC3B
(microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 Î²)-II, a hallmark of autophagy,
in mouse lung epithelium and in human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells. The
activation of MTOR in HBE cells was mediated by TLR4 (toll-like receptor 4)
signaling. Genetic knockdown of MTOR or overexpression of autophagy-related
proteins significantly attenuated, whereas inhibition of autophagy further
augmented, LPS-induced expression of IL6 (interleukin 6) and IL8, through NFKB
signaling in HBE cells. Mice with specific knockdown of Mtor in bronchial or
alveolar epithelial cells exhibited significantly attenuated airway inflammation,
barrier disruption, and lung edema, and displayed prolonged survival in response 
to LPS exposure. Taken together, our results demonstrate that activation of MTOR 
in the epithelium promotes LPS-induced ALI, likely through downregulation of
autophagy and the subsequent activation of NFKB. Thus, inhibition of MTOR in
pulmonary epithelial cells may represent a novel therapeutic strategy for
preventing ALI induced by certain bacteria.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2016.1230584 
PMCID: PMC5173285
PMID: 27658023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

