
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2016 Dec;66(12):5167-5172. doi:
10.1099/ijsem.0.001491. Epub 2016 Sep 23.

Description of Jeotgalibacillus alkaliphilus sp. nov., isolated from a solar salt
pan, and Jeotgalibacillus terrae sp. nov., a name to replace 'Jeotgalibacillus
soli' Chen et al. 2010.

Srinivas A(1), Divyasree B(1), Sasikala C(1), Tushar L(2), Bharti D(3), Ramana
CV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bacterial Discovery Laboratory, Center for Environment, Institute of Science
and Technology, J.N.T. University Hyderabad, Kukatpally, Hyderabad 500085, India.
(2)Department of Plant Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of
Hyderabad, PO Central University, Hyderabad 500046, India.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Majaraja Krishnakumarsinhji Bhavnagar University,
Bhavnagar, Gujarat 364002, India.

A Gram-stain-positive, non-motile, rod-shaped bacterium (strain JC303T) isolated 
from a salt pan was identified based on 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis as a
member of the genus Jeotgalibacillus. It was related most closely to
Jeotgalibacillus salarius ASL-1T (99.1 % similarity),
Jeotgalibacillusalimentarius YKJ-13T (97.9 %), Jeotgalibacillussoli JSM 081008
(97.9 %), Jeotgalibacillusmalaysiensis D5T (97.8 %), Jeotgalibacillusmarinus DSM 
1297T (96.3 %), Jeotgalibacilluscampisalis SF-57T (96.1 %) and J. soli P9T
(94.9 %). Genomic relatedness based on DNA-DNA hybridization of strain JC303T
with the type strains of the closest related species was less than 40 %.
Diphosphatidylglycerol, three aminophospholipids, an unidentified
aminoglycolipid, two unidentified phospholipids and an unidentified lipid were
the polar lipids of strain JC303T. Major (>10 %) fatty acids were
anteiso-C15 : 0, iso-C15 : 0 and iso-C14 : 0. Cell-wall amino acids contained
peptidoglycan with l-lysine as the diagnostic diamino acid. Strain JC303T
contained MK-7 as the predominant (96 %) menaquinone with the presence of a
significant amount (4 %) of MK-8. The DNA G+C content was 43 mol%. On the basis
of morphological, physiological, genotypic, phylogenetic and chemotaxonomic
analyses, strain JC303T is considered to represent a novel species of the genus
Jeotgalibacillus, for which the name Jeotgalibacillus alkaliphilus sp. nov. is
proposed. The type strain is JC303T (=KCTC 33662T=LMG 28756T). In addition, we
propose to rename J. soli (Chen et al., 2010), an illegitimate homonym of the
validly published name Jeotgalibacillus soli(Cunha et al., 2012) as
Jeotgalibacillus terrae sp. nov. with type strain JSM 081008T (=DSM 22174T=KCTC
13528T).

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.001491 
PMID: 27667642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

