
1. Microb Pathog. 2016 Nov;100:195-200. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2016.09.018. Epub
2016 Sep 22.

Ferric hydroxamate uptake system contributes to Edwardsiella ictaluri virulence.

Abdelhamed H(1), Lu J(1), Lawrence ML(1), Karsi A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi
State University, Mississippi State, MS 39762, USA.
(2)Department of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi
State University, Mississippi State, MS 39762, USA. Electronic address:
karsi@cvm.msstate.edu.

Edwardsiella ictaluri is a Gram-negative facultative intracellular pathogen
causing enteric septicemia in fish, particularly in channel catfish. Ferric iron 
is an essential micronutrient for bacterial survival, and some bacterial
pathogens use secreted hydroxamate-type siderophores to chelate iron in host
tissues. Siderophore-iron complexes are taken up by these bacteria via the ferric
hydroxamate uptake (Fhu) system. In E. ictaluri, the Fhu system consists of fhuC,
fhuD, fhuB, and fhuA genes. However, the importance of the Fhu system in
E. ictaluri virulence has not been investigated completely. Here, we present
construction of E. ictaluri fhuD and fhuB mutants (EiΔfhuD and EiΔfhuB) by
in-frame gene deletion and evaluation of the mutants' virulence and
immunogenicity in channel catfish fingerlings and fry. Immersion challenges
showed that EiΔfhuD was not significantly attenuated (p < 0.05) in catfish
fingerlings, whereas EiΔfhuB was significantly attenuated (p < 0.01). Catfish
fingerlings immunized with EiΔfhuD and EiΔfhuB showed 100% and 97.62% survival,
respectively. Fry immersion challenges indicated EiΔfhuB was also significantly
attenuated (p < 0.05) in two-week old fry compared to the wild-type (48.96% vs.
82.14% mortalities). The survival rate in the fry vaccinated with EiΔfhuB was
significantly higher (p < 0.05) than that of non-vaccinated fry (96.77% vs.
21.42% survival). Our data indicates that the fhuB gene, but not the fhuD gene,
contributes to E. ictaluri virulence.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2016.09.018 
PMID: 27666508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

