
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Nov 1;7(44):71099-71111. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.12153.

TIM-4 is expressed on invariant NKT cells but dispensable for their development
and function.

Zhang X(1)(2)(3), Gu J(3), Zhou L(1)(2)(4)(5), Mi QS(1)(2)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Henry Ford Immunology Program, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, United
States of America.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, United
States of America.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, United
States of America.
(5)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, MI, United States of America.

T cell immunoglobulin and mucin-4 (TIM-4), mainly expressed on antigen presenting
cells, plays a versatile role in immunoregulation. CD1d-restricted invariant
natural killer T (iNKT) cells are potent cells involved in the diverse immune
responses. It was recently reported that recombinant TIM-4 (rTIM-4) alone
enhanced cytokine production in NKT hybridoma, DN32.D3 cells. Hence, we
hypothesized that TIM-4 might regulate iNKT cell biology, especially their
function of cytokine secretion. For the first time, we identified that TIM-4 was 
expressed in thymus iNKT cells, and its expression increased upon iNKT cell
migration to the secondary lymphoid organs, especially in lymph nodes. Using
TIM-4-deficient mice, we found that lack of TIM-4 did not disturb iNKT cell
development, maturation, peripheral homeostasis and cytokine secretion. Moreover,
TIM-4 deficiency did not alter the polarization of iNKT sublineages, including
NKT1, NKT2 and NKT17. Finally, the mixed bone marrow transfer experiments further
confirmed normal iNKT cell development and function from TIM-4-deficient bone
marrow. In conclusion, our data suggest that TIM-4 is expressed on iNKT cells but
dispensable for their development and function.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.12153 
PMCID: PMC5340118
PMID: 27662666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

