
1. J Bacteriol. 2016 Nov 18;198(24):3309-3317. Print 2016 Dec 15.

The Phosphorolytic Exoribonucleases Polynucleotide Phosphorylase and RNase PH
Stabilize sRNAs and Facilitate Regulation of Their mRNA Targets.

Cameron TA(1), De Lay NR(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, McGovern Medical School,
Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, McGovern Medical School,
Houston, Texas, USA nicholas.r.delay@uth.tmc.edu.
(3)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas Health Science
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Gene regulation by base pairing between small noncoding RNAs (sRNAs) and their
mRNA targets is an important mechanism that allows bacteria to maintain
homeostasis and respond to dynamic environments. In Gram-negative bacteria, sRNA 
pairing and regulation are mediated by several RNA-binding proteins, including
the sRNA chaperone Hfq and polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase). PNPase and its 
homolog RNase PH together represent the two 3' to 5' phosphorolytic
exoribonucleases found in Escherichia coli; however, the role of RNase PH in sRNA
regulation has not yet been explored and reported. Here, we have examined in
detail how PNPase and RNase PH interact to support sRNA stability, activity, and 
base pairing in exponential and stationary growth conditions. Our results
indicate that these proteins facilitate the stability and regulatory function of 
the sRNAs RyhB, CyaR, and MicA during exponential growth. PNPase further appears 
to contribute to pairing between RyhB and its mRNA targets. During stationary
growth, each sRNA responded differently to the absence or presence of PNPase and 
RNase PH. Finally, our results suggest that PNPase and RNase PH stabilize only
Hfq-bound sRNAs. Taken together, these results confirm and extend previous
findings that PNPase participates in sRNA regulation and reveal that RNase PH
serves a similar, albeit more limited, role as well. These proteins may,
therefore, act to protect sRNAs from spurious degradation while also facilitating
regulatory pairing with their targets.IMPORTANCE: In many bacteria, Hfq-dependent
base-pairing sRNAs facilitate rapid changes in gene expression that are critical 
for maintaining homeostasis and responding to stress and environmental changes.
While a role for Hfq in this process was identified more than 2 decades ago, the 
identity and function of the other proteins required for Hfq-dependent regulation
by sRNAs have not been resolved. Here, we demonstrate that PNPase and RNase PH,
the two phosphorolytic RNases in E. coli, stabilize sRNAs against premature
degradation and, in the case of PNPase, also accelerate regulation by sRNA-mRNA
pairings for certain sRNAs. These findings are the first to demonstrate that
RNase PH influences and supports sRNA regulation and suggest shared and distinct 
roles for these phosphorolytic RNases in this process.

Copyright Â© 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00624-16 
PMCID: PMC5116934
PMID: 27698082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

