
1. PLoS One. 2016 Oct 3;11(10):e0164040. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164040.
eCollection 2016.

Borrelia burgdorferi Induces TLR2-Mediated Migration of Activated Dendritic Cells
in an Ex Vivo Human Skin Model.

Mason LM(1), Wagemakers A(1), van 't Veer C(1), Oei A(2), van der Pot WJ(3),
Ahmed K(3), van der Poll T(1)(4), Geijtenbeek TB(5), Hovius JW(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Plastic Surgery, Kennemer Gasthuis, Haarlem, the Netherlands.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Experimental Immunology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.

Borrelia burgdorferi is transmitted into the skin of the host where it encounters
and interacts with two dendritic cell (DC) subsets; Langerhans cells (LCs) and
dermal DCs (DDCs). These cells recognize pathogens via pattern recognition
receptors, mature and migrate out of the skin into draining lymph nodes, where
they orchestrate adaptive immune responses. In order to investigate the response 
of skin DCs during the early immunopathogenesis of Lyme borreliosis, we injected 
B. burgdorferi intradermally into full-thickness human skin and studied the
migration of DCs out of the skin, the activation profile and phenotype of
migrated cells. We found a significant increase in the migration of LCs and DDCs 
in response to B. burgdorferi. Notably, migration was prevented by blocking TLR2.
DCs migrated from skin inoculated with higher numbers of spirochetes expressed
significantly higher levels of CD83 and produced pro-inflammatory cytokines. No
difference was observed in the expression of HLA-DR, CD86, CD38, or CCR7. To
conclude, we have established an ex vivo human skin model to study DC-B.
burgdorferi interactions. Using this model, we have demonstrated that B.
burgdorferi-induced DC migration is mediated by TLR2. Our findings underscore the
utility of this model as a valuable tool to study immunity to spirochetal
infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164040 
PMCID: PMC5047638
PMID: 27695100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

