
1. J Hazard Mater. 2017 Jan 5;321:672-680. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2016.09.051. Epub 
2016 Sep 23.

Linking toxicity profiles to pollutants in sludge and sediments.

Stiborova H(1), Kolar M(2), Vrkoslavova J(3), Pulkrabova J(4), Hajslova J(4),
Demnerova K(3), Uhlik O(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Faculty of Food and Biochemical
Technology, University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague, Czech Republic.
Electronic address: hana.stiborova@vscht.cz.
(2)Department of Genomics and Bioinformatics, Institute of Molecular Genetics,
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Faculty of Food and Biochemical
Technology, University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Food Analysis and Nutrition, Faculty of Food and Biochemical
Technology, University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Faculty of Food and Biochemical
Technology, University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague, Czech Republic.
Electronic address: ondrej.uhlik@vscht.cz.

Obtaining a complex picture of how pollutants synergistically influence toxicity 
of a system requires statistical correlation of chemical and ecotoxicological
data. In this study, we determined concentrations of eight potentially toxic
metals (PTMs) and four groups of organic pollutants in 15 sewage sludge and 12
river sediment samples, then linked measured contaminant concentrations to the
toxicity of each matrix through constrained correspondence analysis (CCA). In
sludge samples, Hg, As, hexachlorohexane (HCH), polybrominated diphenyl ethers
(PBDEs) and hexabromocyclododecane (HBCD) influenced the toxicity profiles, with 
the first four having significant effects and HBCD being marginally significant. 
In sediment samples, Hg, As, PBDEs, hexachlorobenzene (HCB),
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), HBCD, HCH and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) were found to explain toxicity profiles with Hg, As, PBDEs,
HCB, DDT, HBCD, and HCH having significant effects and PAHs being marginally
significant. Interestingly, HCH was present in small amounts yet proved to have a
significant impact on toxicity. To the contrary, PAHs were often present in high 
amounts, yet proved to be only marginally significant for sediment toxicity.
These results indicate that statistical correlation of chemical and
ecotoxicological data can provide more detailed understanding of the role played 
by specific pollutants in shaping toxicity of sludge and sediments.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2016.09.051 
PMID: 27694046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

