
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2017 Jan;24(1):152-163. doi:
10.1007/s11356-016-7682-1. Epub 2016 Oct 5.

Novel insights into the metabolic pathway of iprodione by soil bacteria.

Campos M(1)(2), Karas PS(2), Perruchon C(2), Papadopoulou ES(2), Christou V(2),
Menkissoglou-Spiroudi U(3), Diez MC(1)(4), Karpouzas DG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Environmental Biotechnology, BIOREN, Universidad de La Frontera,
Temuco, Chile.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Thessaly, 41221,
Larissa, Greece.
(3)Faculty of Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Environment, School of
Agriculture, Pesticide Science Laboratory, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 
Thessaloniki, Greece.
(4)Chemical Engineering Department, Universidad de La Frontera, Temuco, Chile.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Thessaly, 41221,
Larissa, Greece. dkarpouzas@bio.uth.gr.

Microbial degradation constitutes the key soil dissipation process for iprodione.
We recently isolated a consortium, composed of an Arthrobacter sp. strain C1 and 
an Achromobacter sp. strain C2, that was able to convert iprodione to
3,5-dichloroaniline (3,5-DCA). However, the formation of metabolic intermediates 
and the role of the strains on iprodione metabolism remain unknown. We examined
the degradation of iprodione and its suspected metabolic intermediates,
3,5-dichlorophenyl-carboxamide (metabolite I) and 3,5-dichlorophenylurea-acetate 
(metabolite II), by strains C1 and C2 and their combination under selective (MSM)
and nutrient-rich conditions (LB). Bacterial growth during degradation of the
tested compounds was determined by qPCR. Strain C1 rapidly degraded iprodione
(DT50 = 2.3 h) and metabolite II (DT50 = 2.9 h) in MSM suggesting utilization of 
isopropylamine, transiently formed by hydrolysis of iprodione, and glycine
liberated during hydrolysis of metabolite II, as C and N sources. In contrast,
strain C1 degraded metabolite I only in LB and growth kinetics suggested the
involvement of a detoxification process. Strain C2 was able to transform
iprodione and its metabolites only in LB. Strain C1 degraded vinclozolin, a
structural analog of iprodione, and partially propanil, but not procymidone and
phenylureas indicating a structure-dependent specificity related to the
substituents of the carboxamide moiety.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-016-7682-1 
PMID: 27704380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

