
1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Nov 18;291(47):24377-24389. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.752329. Epub 
2016 Oct 4.

Different DNA End Configurations Dictate Which NHEJ Components Are Most Important
for Joining Efficiency.

Chang HHY(1), Watanabe G(1), Gerodimos CA(1), Ochi T(2), Blundell TL(2), Jackson 
SP(2), Lieber MR(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Pathology, Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, and
Molecular Microbiology & Immunology and the Section of Molecular & Computational 
Biology, Department of Biological Sciences, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, 90033
and.
(2)the Gurdon Institute and Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge CB2 1QN, United Kingdom.
(3)From the Departments of Pathology, Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, and
Molecular Microbiology & Immunology and the Section of Molecular & Computational 
Biology, Department of Biological Sciences, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, 90033
and. Electronic address: lieber@usc.edu.

The nonhomologous DNA end-joining (NHEJ) pathway is a key mechanism for repairing
dsDNA breaks that occur often in eukaryotic cells. In the simplest model, these
breaks are first recognized by Ku, which then interacts with other NHEJ proteins 
to improve their affinity at DNA ends. These include DNA-PKcs and Artemis for
trimming the DNA ends; DNA polymerase μ and λ to add nucleotides; and the DNA
ligase IV complex to ligate the ends with the additional factors, XRCC4 (X-ray
repair cross-complementing protein 4), XLF (XRCC4-like factor/Cernunos), and PAXX
(paralog of XRCC4 and XLF). In vivo studies have demonstrated the degrees of
importance of these NHEJ proteins in the mechanism of repair of dsDNA breaks, but
interpretations can be confounded by other cellular processes. In vitro studies
with NHEJ proteins have been performed to evaluate the nucleolytic resection,
polymerization, and ligation steps, but a complete system has been elusive. Here 
we have developed a NHEJ reconstitution system that includes the nuclease,
polymerase, and ligase components to evaluate relative NHEJ efficiency and
analyze ligated junctional sequences for various types of DNA ends, including
blunt, 5' overhangs, and 3' overhangs. We find that different dsDNA end
structures have differential dependence on these enzymatic components. The
dependence of some end joining on only Ku and XRCC4·DNA ligase IV allows us to
formulate a physical model that incorporates nuclease and polymerase components
as needed.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.752329 
PMCID: PMC5114395
PMID: 27703001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

