
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2016 Sep 22;6:108. eCollection 2016.

Anaplasma phagocytophilum APH0032 Is Exposed on the Cytosolic Face of the
Pathogen-Occupied Vacuole and Co-opts Host Cell SUMOylation.

Oki AT(1), Huang B(1), Beyer AR(1), May LJ(1), Truchan HK(1), Walker NJ(2),
Galloway NL(1), Borjesson DL(2), Carlyon JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University
Medical Center, School of Medicine Richmond, VA, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of
California School of Veterinary Medicine Davis, CA, USA.

Anaplasma phagocytophilum, a member of the family Anaplasmataceae and the
obligate intracellular bacterium that causes granulocytic anaplasmosis, resides
in a host cell-derived vacuole. Bacterial proteins that localize to the A.
phagocytophilum-occupied vacuole membrane (AVM) are critical host-pathogen
interfaces. Of the few bacterial AVM proteins that have been identified, the
domains responsible for AVM localization and the host cell pathways that they
co-opt are poorly defined. APH0032 is an effector that is expressed and localizes
to the AVM late during the infection cycle. Herein, the APH0032 domain that is
essential for associating with host cell membranes was mapped. Immunofluorescent 
labeling of infected cells that had been differentially permeabilized confirmed
that APH0032 is exposed on the AVM's cytosolic face, signifying its potential to 
interface with host cell processes. SUMOylation is the covalent attachment of a
member of the small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) family of proteins to lysines 
in target substrates. Previous work from our laboratory determined that
SUMOylation is important for A. phagocytophilum survival and that SUMOylated
proteins decorate the AVM. Algorithmic prediction analyses identified APH0032 as 
a candidate for SUMOylation. Endogenous APH0032 was precipitated from infected
cells using a SUMO affinity matrix, confirming that the effector co-opts
SUMOylation during infection. APH0032 pronouncedly colocalized with SUMO1, but
not SUMO2/3 moieties on the AVM. Ectopic expression of APH0032 in A.
phagocytophilum infected host cells significantly boosted the bacterial load.
This study delineates the first domain of any Anaplasmataceae protein that is
essential for associating with the pathogen-occupied vacuole membrane,
demonstrates the importance of APH0032 to infection, and identifies it as the
second A. phagocytophilum effector that co-opts SUMOylation, thus underscoring
the relevance of this post-translational modification to infection.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2016.00108 
PMCID: PMC5031783
PMID: 27713867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

