
1. Heliyon. 2016 Oct 1;2(9):e00168. eCollection 2016 Sep.

Whole genomic analysis of G2P[4] human Rotaviruses in Mymensingh, north-central
Bangladesh.

Aida S(1), Nahar S(2), Paul SK(2), Hossain MA(2), Kabir MR(2), Sarkar SR(2),
Ahmed S(2), Ghosh S(3), Urushibara N(1), Kawaguchiya M(1), Aung MS(1), Sumi A(1),
Kobayashi N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Mymensingh Medical College, Mymensingh,
Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Hygiene, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan; Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ross University School of Veterinary
Medicine, St. Kitts, West Indies.

Rotavirus A (RVA) is a dominant causative agent of acute gastroenteritis in
children worldwide. G2P[4] is one of the most common genotypes among human
rotavirus (HRV) strains, and has been persistently prevalent in South Asia
including Bangladesh. In the present study, whole genome sequences of a total of 
16 G2P[4] HRV strains (8 strains each in 2010 and 2013) detected in Mymensingh,
north-central Bangladesh were determined. These strains had typical DS-1-like
genotype constellation. Most of gene segments from DS-1 genogroup exhibited high 
level sequence identities to each other (>98%), while slight diversity was
observed for VP1, VP3, and NSP4 genes. By phylogenetic analysis, individual RNA
segments were classified into one (V) or two-three lineages (V-VI or V-VII). In
terms of lineages (sublineages) of 11 gene segments, the 16 Bangladeshi strains
could be further classified into four clades (A-D) containing 8 lineage
constellations, revealing the presence of three clades (A-C) with three lineage
constellations in 2010, and a single clade (D) with four constellations in 2013. 
Therefore, co-existence of multiple G2P[4] HRV strains with different lineage
constellations, and change in clades for the study period were demonstrated.
Although amino acids in the antigenic regions on VP7 and VP4 were mostly
identical to those of global G2P[4] strains after 2000, VP4 of clade D RVAs in
2013 had alanine and proline at positions 88 and 114, respectively, which are
novel substitutions compared with recent global G2P[4] strains. Replacement of
lineage constellations associated with unique amino acid changes in the antigenic
region in VP4 suggested continuous genetic evolutionary state for emerging new
G2P[4] rotavirus strains in Bangladesh.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2016.e00168 
PMCID: PMC5047856
PMID: 27722206 

