
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016 Dec;100(24):10627-10636. Epub 2016 Oct 8.

Degradation of phenanthrene by Novosphingobium sp. HS2a improved plant growth in 
PAHs-contaminated environments.

Rodriguez-Conde S(1), Molina L(1), González P(2), García-Puente A(1), Segura
A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Protection Department, Estación Experimental del Zaidín, Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, C/Profesor Albareda 1, 18008, Granada,
Spain.
(2)Molecular Biology Department, Universidad Nacional de Río Cuarto (UNRC), 5800 
Río Cuarto, Córdoba, Argentina.
(3)Environmental Protection Department, Estación Experimental del Zaidín, Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, C/Profesor Albareda 1, 18008, Granada,
Spain. ana.segura@eez.csic.es.

At the same time that the European Union (EU) policy recommend to direct efforts 
towards reductions of heavy metals, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and
mining residues, there is the need to increase the cultivable areas within Europe
to cope with the increasing demands for food and energy crops. Bioremediation is 
a good technique for the restoration of contaminated soils; however, it has not
been used extensively because of the variability of the outcome. This variability
is frequently due to a bad establishment of foreign degrading populations in
soil. We have demonstrated that Novosphingobium sp. HS2aR (i) is able to compete 
with other root colonizers and with indigenous bacteria, (ii) is able to
establish in high numbers in the contaminated environments and (iii) is able to
remove more than 90 % of the extractable phenanthrene in artificially
contaminated soils. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that the capacity to remove
phenanthrene is linked to the ability to promote plant growth in contaminated
environments. The fact that the presence of Novosphingobium sp. HS2aR improves
the growth of plants in contaminated soil suggests that it may be a useful strain
for utilization in amelioration of soil quality while improving the growth of
economically important energy crops, thus adding value to the bioremediation
strategy.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-016-7892-y 
PMID: 27722914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

