
1. Cell Death Dis. 2016 Oct 13;7(10):e2406. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2016.315.

DDX3 DEAD-box RNA helicase plays a central role in mitochondrial protein quality 
control in Leishmania.

Padmanabhan PK(1), Zghidi-Abouzid O(1), Samant M(2), Dumas C(1), Aguiar BG(1),
Estaquier J(1)(3), Papadopoulou B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center in Infectious Diseases, CHU de Quebec Research
Center-University Laval and Department of Microbiology, Infectious Disease and
Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University Laval, Quebec, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Zoology, Kumaun University, Almora, Uttarakhand, India.
(3)CNRS FR3636, Universit√© Paris Descartes, Paris, France.

DDX3 is a highly conserved member of ATP-dependent DEAD-box RNA helicases with
multiple functions in RNA metabolism and cellular signaling. Here, we describe a 
novel function for DDX3 in regulating the mitochondrial stress response in the
parasitic protozoan Leishmania. We show that genetic inactivation of DDX3 leads
to the accumulation of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) associated
with a defect in hydrogen peroxide detoxification. Upon stress, ROS production is
greatly enhanced, causing mitochondrial membrane potential loss, mitochondrial
fragmentation, and cell death. Importantly, this phenotype is exacerbated upon
oxidative stress in parasites forced to use the mitochondrial oxidative
respiratory machinery. Furthermore, we show that in the absence of DDX3, levels
of major components of the unfolded protein response as well as of
polyubiquitinated proteins increase in the parasite, particularly in the
mitochondrion, as an indicator of mitochondrial protein damage. Consistent with
these findings, immunoprecipitation and mass-spectrometry studies revealed
potential interactions of DDX3 with key components of the cellular stress
response, particularly the antioxidant response, the unfolded protein response,
and the AAA-ATPase p97/VCP/Cdc48, which is essential in mitochondrial protein
quality control by driving proteosomal degradation of polyubiquitinated proteins.
Complementation studies using DDX3 deletion mutants lacking conserved motifs
within the helicase core support that binding of DDX3 to ATP is essential for
DDX3's function in mitochondrial proteostasis. As a result of the inability of
DDX3-depleted Leishmania to recover from ROS damage and to survive various
stresses in the host macrophage, parasite intracellular development was impaired.
Collectively, these observations support a central role for the Leishmania DDX3
homolog in preventing ROS-mediated damage and in maintaining mitochondrial
protein quality control.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2016.315 
PMCID: PMC5133982
PMID: 27735940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

