
1. Amino Acids. 2017 Jan;49(1):183-191. doi: 10.1007/s00726-016-2349-2. Epub 2016
Oct 12.

Insights into binding of S100 proteins to scavenger receptors: class B scavenger 
receptor CD36 binds S100A12 with high affinity.

Tondera C(1)(2), Laube M(1), Pietzsch J(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiopharmaceutical and Chemical Biology, Institute of
Radiopharmaceutical Cancer Research, Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf,
Dresden, Germany.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Food Chemistry, Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden, Germany.
(3)Department of Radiopharmaceutical and Chemical Biology, Institute of
Radiopharmaceutical Cancer Research, Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf,
Dresden, Germany. j.pietzsch@hzdr.de.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Food Chemistry, Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden, Germany. j.pietzsch@hzdr.de.

The EF-hand type calcium-binding protein S100A12 exerts numerous intra- and
extracellular functions of (patho)physiological relevance. Therefore, receptors
of S100A12 are of high interest for research and clinical applications. Beside
the extensively studied receptor for advanced glycation endproducts (RAGE),
G-protein coupled receptors and more recently, scavenger receptors are suggested 
to be putative S100A12 receptors. Own findings and further information from the
literature predestined CD36, a class B scavenger receptor, as promising
candidate. To substantiate or prove against this hypothesis, this study aimed at 
investigation of interaction of S100A12 and CD36 on molecular and cellular level 
by the use of surface plasmon resonance (SPR), radio- and
fluorescence-tracer-based cell binding, and cell activation experiments. S100A12 
revealed binding affinity to CD36 in the low nanomolar range, essentially, at the
CD36 thrombospondin-1 binding site. Additionally, S100A12-mediated translocation 
of CD36 to the membrane and elevation of both CD36 and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) expression was observed, which suggest 
a potential regulatory function of S100A12-CD36 interaction.

DOI: 10.1007/s00726-016-2349-2 
PMCID: PMC5241339
PMID: 27734162  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial
interests.

