
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Oct 13;6:35198. doi: 10.1038/srep35198.

Structural basis for ligand recognition by a Cache chemosensory domain that
mediates carboxylate sensing in Pseudomonas syringae.

Brewster JL(1), McKellar JL(1), Finn TJ(1), Newman J(2), Peat TS(2), Gerth ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago, Dunedin, 9054, New Zealand.
(2)Biomedical Manufacturing Program, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation (CSIRO), Parkville, Victoria, 3052, Australia.

Chemoreceptors enable bacteria to detect chemical signals in the environment and 
navigate towards niches that are favourable for survival. The sensor domains of
chemoreceptors function as the input modules for chemotaxis systems, and provide 
sensory specificity by binding specific ligands. Cache-like domains are the most 
common extracellular sensor module in prokaryotes, however only a handful have
been functionally or structurally characterised. Here, we have characterised a
chemoreceptor Cache-like sensor domain (PscD-SD) from the plant pathogen
Pseudomonas syringae pv. actinidiae (Psa). High-throughput fluorescence thermal
shift assays, combined with isothermal thermal titration calorimetry, revealed
that PscD-SD binds specifically to C2 (glycolate and acetate) and C3 (propionate 
and pyruvate) carboxylates. We solved the structure of PscD-SD in complex with
propionate using X-ray crystallography. The structure reveals the key residues
that comprise the ligand binding pocket and dictate the specificity of this
sensor domain for C2 and C3 carboxylates. We also demonstrate that all four
carboxylate ligands are chemoattractants for Psa, but only two of these (acetate 
and pyruvate) are utilisable carbon sources. This result suggests that in
addition to guiding the bacteria towards nutrients, another possible role for
carboxylate sensing is in locating potential sites of entry into the host plant.

DOI: 10.1038/srep35198 
PMCID: PMC5062169
PMID: 27734909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

