
1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2016 Dec;101S:S28-S34. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2016.09.018.
Epub 2016 Sep 28.

The early secreted antigenic target of 6 kD of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
inhibits the proliferation and differentiation of human peripheral blood CD34+
cells.

Yi N(1), Jung BG(1), Wang X(1), Vankayalapati R(1), Samten B(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pulmonary Immunology, University of Texas Health Science
Center at Tyler, 11937 US HWY 271, Tyler, TX 75708-3154, USA.
(2)The Department of Pulmonary Immunology, University of Texas Health Science
Center at Tyler, 11937 US HWY 271, Tyler, TX 75708-3154, USA. Electronic address:
buka.samten@uthct.edu.

Abnormalities in hematopoiesis are common in tuberculosis patients and highly
prevalent in AIDS patients with tuberculosis coinfection. To explore the
potential role of the early secreted antigenic target of 6-kD (ESAT-6) of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) in abnormal hematopoiesis in tuberculosis, we
studied the effect of ESAT-6 on proliferation and differentiation of
in vitro-expanded CD34+ cells isolated from the peripheral blood of the healthy
donors. ESAT-6 but not control protein antigen 85A (Ag85A) of Mtb inhibited the
proliferation of CD34+ cell derived peripheral blood stem/progenitor cells
(PBSPC) in a dose dependent manner when determined by MTT-assay. ESAT-6 but not
Ag85A reduced the number of colony forming cells (CFC) of PBSPC by 60-90% as
determined by CFC assay by incubation of CD34+ cells in a semi-solid cellulose
media in the presence of cytokine cocktail for two weeks. ESAT-6 but not Ag85A
increased the percentages of the Annexin-V positive cells and enhanced the
cleavage of caspase-3 in PBSPC in a time and dose dependent manner as determined 
by flow cytometry and Western blot analysis, respectively. ESAT-6 also inhibited 
murine bone marrow derived non-adherent cell proliferation in response to
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor treatment. We conclude that
ESAT-6, an essential virulence factor of Mtb, may contribute to the abnormal
hematopoiesis of tuberculosis patients by inhibiting the proliferation and
differentiation of hematopoietic cells via apoptosis.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2016.09.018 
PMID: 27745787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

