
1. Cytotechnology. 2016 Dec;68(6):2257-2269. Epub 2016 Oct 18.

Characterization of the growth modulatory activities of osteoblast conditioned
media on cord blood progenitor cells.

Abu-Khader A(1), Pasha R(1), Ward GC(1), Boisjoli G(1), Pineault N(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Innovation, Canadian Blood Services, 1800 Alta Vista, Ottawa, ON,
K1G 4J5, Canada.
(2)Centre for Innovation, Canadian Blood Services, 1800 Alta Vista, Ottawa, ON,
K1G 4J5, Canada. nicolas.pineault@blood.ca.
(3)Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology Department, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. nicolas.pineault@blood.ca.

Engraftment outcomes are strongly correlated with the numbers of hematopoietic
stem and progenitor cells (HSPC) infused. Expansion of umbilical cord blood (CB) 
HSPC has gained much interest lately since infusion of expanded HSPC can
accelerate engraftment and improve clinical outcomes. Many novel protocols based 
on different expansion strategies of HSPC and their downstream derivatives are
under development. Herein, we describe the production and properties of
serum-free medium (SFM) conditioned with mesenchymal stromal cells
derived-osteoblasts (OCM) for the expansion of umbilical CB cells and
progenitors. After optimization of the conditioning length, we show that OCM
increased the production of human CB total nucleated cells and CD34+ cells by
1.8-fold and 1.5-fold over standard SFM, respectively. Production of immature
CD34+ subpopulations enriched in hematopoietic stem cells was also improved with 
a shorter conditioning period. Moreover, we show that the growth modulatory
activities of OCM on progenitor expansion are regulated by both soluble factors
and non-soluble cellular elements. Finally, the growth and differentiation
modulatory activities of OCM were fully retained after high dose-ionizing
irradiation and highly stable when OCM is stored frozen. In summary, our results 
suggest that OCM efficiently mimics some of the natural regulatory activities of 
osteoblasts on HSPC and highlight the marked expansion potentials of SFM
conditioned with osteoblasts.

DOI: 10.1007/s10616-016-0019-6 
PMCID: PMC5101297
PMID: 27757713 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to
disclose.

