
1. Oncoimmunology. 2016 Jul 22;5(9):e1213932. eCollection 2016.

CD1b-autoreactive T cells recognize phospholipid antigens and contribute to
antitumor immunity against a CD1b+ T cell lymphoma.

Bagchi S(1), Li S(2), Wang CR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University , Chicago, 
IL, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University, Chicago,
IL, USA; Department of Microbiology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.

Adoptive immunotherapy for cancer treatment is an emerging field of study. Till
now, several tumor-derived, peptide-specific T cell responses have been harnessed
for treating cancers. However, the contribution of lipid-specific T cells in
tumor immunity has been understudied. CD1 molecules, which present self- and
foreign lipid antigens to T cells, are divided into group 1 (CD1a, CD1b, and
CD1c) and group 2 (CD1d). Although the role of CD1d-restricted natural killer T
cells (NKT) in several tumor models has been well established, the contribution
of group 1 CD1-restricted T cells in tumor immunity remains obscure due to the
lack of group 1 CD1 expression in mice. In this study, we used a double
transgenic mouse model expressing human group 1 CD1 molecules (hCD1Tg) and a
CD1b-restricted, self-lipid reactive T cell receptor (HJ1Tg) to study the
potential role of group 1 CD1-restricted autoreactive T cells in antitumor
response. We found that HJ1 T cells recognized phospholipids and responded more
potently to lipid extracted from tumor cells than the equivalent amount of lipids
extracted from normal cells. Additionally, the autoreactivity of HJ1 T cells was 
enhanced upon treatment with various intracellular toll-like receptor (TLR)
agonists, including CpG oligodeoxynucleotides (ODN), R848, and poly (I:C).
Interestingly, the adoptive transfer of HJ1 T cells conferred protection against 
the CD1b-transfected murine T cell lymphoma (RMA-S/CD1b) and CpG ODN enhanced the
antitumor effect. Thus, this study, for the first time, demonstrates the
antitumor potential of CD1b-autoreactive T cells and their potential use in
adoptive immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1080/2162402X.2016.1213932 
PMCID: PMC5048778
PMID: 27757307 

