
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Oct 25;7(43):70912-70923. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.12292.

NKp44 and NKp30 splice variant profiles in decidua and tumor tissues: a
comparative viewpoint.

Shemesh A(1)(2), Kugel A(1), Steiner N(3), Yezersky M(3), Tirosh D(3), Edri A(1),
Teltsh O(1), Rosental B(4), Sheiner E(3), Rubin E(1), Campbell KS(5), Porgador
A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty 
of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(2)National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben-Gurion University of
the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Soroka
University Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva,
Israel.
(4)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University
School of Medicine and the Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford, CA, USA.
(5)Blood Cell Development and Function Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

NKp44 and NKp30 splice variant profiles have been shown to promote diverse
cellular functions. Moreover, microenvironment factors such as TGF-Î², IL-15 and
IL-18 are able to influence both NKp44 and NKp30 splice variant profiles, leading
to cytokine-associated profiles. Placenta and cancerous tissues have many
similarities; both are immunologically privileged sites and both share immune
tolerance mechanisms to support tissue development. Therefore, we studied the
profiles of NKp44 and NKp30 splice variants in these states by comparing (i)
decidua from pregnancy disorder and healthy gestation and (ii) matched normal and
cancer tissue. Decidua samples had high incidence of both NKp44 and NKp30. In
cancerous state it was different; while NKp30 expression was evident in most
cancerous and matched normal tissues, NKp44 incidence was lower and was mostly
associated with the cancerous tissues. A NKp44-1dominant inhibitory profile
predominated in healthy pregnancy gestation. Interestingly, the NKp44-2/3
activation profile becomes the leading profile in spontaneous abortions, whereas 
balanced NKp44 profiles were observed in preeclampsia. In contrast, a clear
preference for the NKp30a/b profile was evident in the 1st trimester decidua, yet
no significant differences were observed for NKp30 profiles between healthy
gestation and spontaneous abortions/preeclampsia. Both cancerous and matched
normal tissues manifested balanced NKp30c inhibitory and NKp30a/b activation
profiles with a NKp44-1dominant profile. However, a shift in NKp30 profiles
between matched normal and cancer tissue was observed in half of the cases. To
summarize, NKp44 and NKp30 splice variants profiles are tissue/condition specific
and demonstrate similarity between placenta and cancerous tissues.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.12292 
PMCID: PMC5342598
PMID: 27765926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

