
1. Int J Med Sci. 2016 Sep 27;13(10):772-782. eCollection 2016.

Capping Agent-Dependent Toxicity and Antimicrobial Activity of Silver
Nanoparticles: An In Vitro Study. Concerns about Potential Application in Dental 
Practice.

Niska K(1), Knap N(1), KÄ™dzia A(2), Jaskiewicz M(3), Kamysz W(3),
Inkielewicz-Stepniak I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry, Medical University Gdansk, Poland.
(2)Department of Oral Microbiology, Medical University Gdansk, Poland.
(3)Department of Inorganic Chemistry, Medical University Gdansk, Poland.

Objectives: In dentistry, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) have drawn particular
attention because of their wide antimicrobial activity spectrum. However,
controversial information on AgNPs toxicity limited their use in oral infections.
Therefore, the aim of the present study was to evaluate the antibacterial
activities against a panel of oral pathogenic bacteria and bacterial biofilms
together with potential cytotoxic effects on human gingival fibroblasts of 10 nm 
AgNPs: non-functionalized - uncapped (AgNPs-UC) as well as surface-functionalized
with capping agent: lipoic acid (AgNPs-LA), polyethylene glycol (AgNPs-PEG) or
tannic acid (AgNPs-TA) using silver nitrate (AgNO3) as control. Methods: The
interaction of AgNPs with human gingival fibroblast cells (HGF-1) was evaluated
using the mitochondrial metabolic potential assay (MTT). Antimicrobial activity
of AgNPs was tested against anaerobic Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria
isolated from patients with oral cavity and respiratory tract infections, and
selected aerobic Staphylococci strains. Minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC)
values were determined by the agar dilution method for anaerobic bacteria or
broth microdilution method for reference Staphylococci strains and Streptococcus 
mutans. These strains were also used for antibiofilm activity of AgNPs. Results: 
The highest antimicrobial activities at nontoxic concentrations were observed for
the uncapped AgNPs and the AgNPs capped with LA. It was found that AgNPs-LA and
AgNPs-PEG demonstrated lower cytotoxicity as compared with the AgNPs-TA or
AgNPs-UC in the gingival fibroblast model. All of the tested nanoparticles proved
less toxic and demonstrated wider spectrum of antimicrobial activities than AgNO3
solution. Additionally, AgNPs-LA eradicated Staphylococcus epidermidis and
Streptococcus mutans 1-day biofilm at concentration nontoxic to oral cells.
Conclusions: Our results proved that a capping agent had significant influence on
the antibacterial, antibiofilm activity and cytotoxicity of AgNPs. Clinical
significance: This study highlighted potential usefulness of AgNPs against oral
anaerobic Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial infections and aerobic
Staphylococci strains provided that pharmacological activity and risk assessment 
are carefully performed.

DOI: 10.7150/ijms.16011 
PMCID: PMC5069413
PMID: 27766027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.

