
1. J Control Release. 2016 Dec 10;243:214-224. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.10.018.
Epub 2016 Oct 18.

The bacterial cell envelope as delimiter of anti-infective bioavailability - An
in vitro permeation model of the Gram-negative bacterial inner membrane.

Graef F(1), Vukosavljevic B(2), Michel JP(3), Wirth M(4), Ries O(5), De Rossi
C(6), Windbergs M(7), Rosilio V(8), Ducho C(9), Gordon S(10), Lehr CM(11).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Helmholtz
Center for Infection Research (HZI), Department of Drug Delivery, Campus E8 1,
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address: Florian.Graef@hemholtz-hzi.de.
(2)Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Helmholtz
Center for Infection Research (HZI), Department of Drug Delivery, Campus E8 1,
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address:
Branko.Vukosavljevic@helmholtz-hzi.de.
(3)Institut Galien Paris Sud, UMR 8612, Univ Paris-Sud, CNRS, Université
Paris-Saclay, 5 rue J.B. Clément, F-92290 Châtenay-Malabry, France. Electronic
address: jean-philippe.michel@u-psud.fr.
(4)Saarland University, Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical and Medicinal
Chemistry, Campus C2 3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address:
marius.wirth@uni-saaland.de.
(5)Saarland University, Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical and Medicinal
Chemistry, Campus C2 3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
(6)Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Helmholtz
Center for Infection Research (HZI), Department of Drug Delivery, Campus E8 1,
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address: Chiara.DeRossi@helmholtz-hzi.de.
(7)Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Helmholtz
Center for Infection Research (HZI), Department of Drug Delivery, Campus E8 1,
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address: Maike.Windbergs@helmholtz-hzi.de.
(8)Institut Galien Paris Sud, UMR 8612, Univ Paris-Sud, CNRS, Université
Paris-Saclay, 5 rue J.B. Clément, F-92290 Châtenay-Malabry, France. Electronic
address: veronique.rosilio@u-psud.fr.
(9)Saarland University, Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical and Medicinal
Chemistry, Campus C2 3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address:
christian.ducho@uni-saarland.de.
(10)Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Helmholtz
Center for Infection Research (HZI), Department of Drug Delivery, Campus E8 1,
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address: Sarah.Gordon@helmholtz-hzi.de.
(11)Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Helmholtz
Center for Infection Research (HZI), Department of Drug Delivery, Campus E8 1,
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany; Saarland University, Department of Pharmacy,
Biopharmacy and Pharmaceutical Technology, Campus E8 1, 66123 Saarbrücken,
Germany. Electronic address: Claus-Michael.Lehr@helmholtz-hzi.de.

Gram-negative bacteria possess a unique and complex cell envelope, composed of an
inner and outer membrane separated by an intermediate cell wall-containing
periplasm. This tripartite structure acts intrinsically as a significant
biological barrier, often limiting the permeation of anti-infectives, and so
preventing such drugs from reaching their target. Furthermore, identification of 
the specific permeation-limiting envelope component proves difficult in the case 
of many anti-infectives, due to the challenges associated with isolation of
individual cell envelope structures in bacterial culture. The development of an
in vitro permeation model of the Gram-negative inner membrane, prepared by
repeated coating of physiologically-relevant phospholipids on Transwell® filter
inserts, is therefore reported, as a first step in the development of an overall 
cell envelope model. Characterization and permeability investigations of model
compounds as well as anti-infectives confirmed the suitability of the model for
quantitative and kinetically-resolved permeability assessment, and additionally
confirmed the importance of employing bacteria-specific base materials for more
accurate mimicking of the inner membrane lipid composition - both advantages
compared to the majority of existing in vitro approaches. Additional
incorporation of further elements of the Gram-negative bacterial cell envelope
could ultimately facilitate model application as a screening tool in
anti-infective drug discovery or formulation development.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.10.018 
PMID: 27769806  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

