
1. Ann Parasitol. 2016 Oct 1;62(3):201-208. doi: 10.17420/ap6203.55.

The hydrolytic enzymes produced by fungi strains isolated from the sand and soil 
of recreational areas

Kurnatowski P(1), Wójcik A(1), Błaszkowska J(2), Góralska K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Medical Parasitology, Medical University of Lodz,
pl. Hallera 1, 90-647 Łódź, Poland
(2)Department of Diagnostics and Treatment of Parasitic Diseases and Mycoses,
Medical University of Lodz, pl. Hallera 1, 90-647 Łódź, Poland

The pathogenicity of fungi depends on, inter alia, the secretion of hydrolytic
enzymes. The aim of this study was to determine the enzymatic activity of yeasts 
and yeast-like fungi isolated from children’s recreation areas, and compare the
results with literature data of strains obtained from patients with mycoses. The 
enzymatic activity of 96 strains was assessed using an API ZYM kit (bioMerieux,
France) and their biotypes were established. The fungal species were found to
produce from 16 to 19 hydrolases: the most active were: leucine arylamidase (e5),
acid phosphatase (e10), alkaline phosphatase (e1),
naphthol-AS-BI-phosphohydrolase (e11), esterase – C4 (e2), β-galac - tosidase
(e13) and β-glucosidase (e16). In addition, 13 biotypes characteristic of
particular species of fungi were defined. Most strains could be categorized as
biotypes C2 – 39.5% and A – 26%. The examined fungal strains isolated from
recreational areas have selected biochemical characteristics i.e. production of
hydrolases, which demonstrate their pathogenicity. They produce a number of
enzymes which are also present in strains isolated from patients with mycoses,
including: leucine arylamidase (e5), acid phosphatase (e10),
naphthol-AS-BI-phosphohydrolase (e11) and alkaline phosphatase (e1). The biotypes
identified in the course of this study (A, B3, B4, C1, C6 and D3) have been also 
reported in cases of fungal infection. Therefore, the fungi present in the sand
and soil of recreational have pathogenic properties and are possible factors of
fungal infection among children.

DOI: 10.17420/ap6203.55 
PMID: 27770760  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

