
1. Biochemistry. 2016 Nov 15;55(45):6295-6303. Epub 2016 Nov 2.

Chemical Mechanism of the Branched-Chain Aminotransferase IlvE from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis.

Amorim Franco TM(1), Hegde S(1), Blanchard JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine , 1300 Morris 
Park Avenue, Bronx, New York 10461, United States.

The biosynthetic pathway of the branched-chain amino acids is essential for
Mycobacterium tuberculosis growth and survival. We report here the kinetic and
chemical mechanism of the pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP)-dependent branched-chain
aminotransferase, IlvE, from M. tuberculosis (MtIlvE). This enzyme is responsible
for the final step of the synthesis of the branched-chain amino acids isoleucine,
leucine, and valine. As seen in other aminotransferases, MtIlvE displays a
ping-pong kinetic mechanism. pK values were identified from the pH dependence on 
V as well as V/K, indicating that the phosphate ester of the PLP cofactor, and
the α-amino group from l-glutamate and the active site Lys204, play roles in
acid-base catalysis and binding, respectively. An intrinsic primary kinetic
isotope effect was identified for the α-C-H bond cleavage of l-glutamate. Large
solvent kinetic isotope effect values for the ping and pong half-reactions were
also identified. The absence of a quininoid intermediate in combination with the 
Dkobs in our multiple kinetic isotope effects under single-turnover conditions
suggests a concerted type of mechanism. The deprotonation of C2 of l-glutamate
and the protonation of C4' of the PLP cofactor happen synchronously in the ping
half-reaction. A chemical mechanism is proposed on the basis of the results
obtained here.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00928 
PMCID: PMC5443349
PMID: 27780341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

