
1. Int J Physiol Pathophysiol Pharmacol. 2016 Sep 30;8(3):78-86. eCollection 2016.

Modulatory influence of Parkia biglobosa protein isolate on testosterone and
biomarkers of oxidative stress in brain and testes of streptozotocin-induced
diabetic male rats.

Ogunyinka BI(1), Oyinloye BE(2), Osunsanmi FO(1), Opoku AR(1), Kappo AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand Kwadlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
(2)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of ZululandKwadlangezwa 3886, South Africa;
Department of Biochemistry, College of Sciences, Afe Babalola UniversityPMB 5454,
Ado-Ekiti 360001, Nigeria.

Parkia biglobosa seed an important household spice commonly consumed in Nigeria
is believed to possess antioxidant activity that may exert modulatory effects in 
diabetes and diabetic complications. This study investigated the modulatory
potential of Parkia biglobosa protein isolate (PBPi) on serum testosterone (sTT) 
level as well as its influence on biomarkers of oxidative stress in brain and
testes of streptozotocin-induced diabetic male rats. Animals were made diabetic
by single intraperitoneal administration of streptozotocin (STZ; 60 mg/kg body
weight). PBPi (200 or 400 mg/kg body weight) was given orally by gavage or
insulin (5 U/kg, i.p.) was administered daily to STZ-induced diabetic rats for 28
days. The results revealed a significant elevation in thiobarbituric acid
reactive substances (TBARS) levels in the brain and testes of diabetic rats. This
was closely associated with a concomitant reduction in levels of sTT and reduced 
testes weight, a noticeable decline in the glutathione-S-transferase (GST),
superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) as well as total glutathione (Total
GSH) level in the brain and testes of diabetic rats. Interestingly, treatment
with PBPi efficiently prevented the alterations witnessed in the serum sTT and
also ameliorated various alterations in the biomarkers of oxidative stress
(TBARS, Total GSH, GST, SOD and CAT) in brain and testes of diabetic rats. These 
results provide evidence that PBPi could protect the brain and testicular tissues
against oxidative stress induced by STZ, via modulation of serum testosterone
concentration and also by enhancing antioxidant defence system in STZ-diabetic
rats.


PMCID: PMC5078479
PMID: 27785334 

