
1. Chemistry. 2016 Dec 5;22(49):17813-17819. doi: 10.1002/chem.201604279. Epub 2016 
Oct 28.

Total Synthesis of Dansylated Park's Nucleotide for High-Throughput MraY Assays.

Wohnig S(1)(2), Spork AP(1)(2)(3), Koppermann S(1)(2), Mieskes G(3), Gisch N(4), 
Jahn R(3), Ducho C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Saarland
University, Campus C2 3, 66123, Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Institute of Organic and Biomolecular Chemistry,
Georg-August-University Göttingen, Tammannstr. 2, 37077, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077,
Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Division of Bioanalytical Chemistry, Research Center Borstel, Leibniz-Center
for Medicine and Biosciences, Parkallee 1-40, 23845, Borstel, Germany.

The membrane protein translocase I (MraY) is a key enzyme in bacterial
peptidoglycan biosynthesis. It is therefore frequently discussed as a target for 
the development of novel antibiotics. The screening of compound libraries for the
identification of MraY inhibitors is enabled by an established fluorescence-based
MraY assay. However, this assay requires a dansylated derivative of the bacterial
biosynthetic intermediate Park's nucleotide as the MraY substrate. Isolation of
Park's nucleotide from bacteria and subsequent dansylation only furnishes limited
amounts of this substrate, thus hampering the high-throughput screening for MraY 
inhibitors. Accordingly, the efficient provision of dansylated Park's nucleotide 
is a major bottleneck in the exploration of this promising drug target. In this
work, we present the first total synthesis of dansylated Park's nucleotide,
affording an unprecedented amount of the target compound for high-throughput MraY
assays.

© 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/chem.201604279 
PMID: 27791327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

