
1. Inflammation. 2017 Feb;40(1):144-153. doi: 10.1007/s10753-016-0463-7.

Porphyromonas gingivalis Lipopolysaccharide Induces a Pro-inflammatory Human
Gingival Fibroblast Phenotype.

Bozkurt SB(1), Hakki SS(2), Hakki EE(3), Durak Y(4), Kantarci A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Faculty of Dentistry, Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey.
buketbozkurt@yahoo.com.
(2)Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Periodontology, Selcuk University, Konya, 
Turkey.
(3)Faculty of Agriculture, Department of Soil Science & Plant Nutrition, Selcuk
University, Konya, Turkey.
(4)Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey.
(5)Department of Periodontology, The Forsyth Institute, Boston, MA, USA.

Human gingival fibroblasts (HGFs) are the major constituents of the gingival
tissues responsible for the synthesis and degradation of the connective tissue
while actively participating in immune reactions and inflammation. The aim of
this study was to test the impact of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Porphyromonas 
gingivalis (P. gingivalis) on human gingival fibroblasts. Human gingival
fibroblasts were treated with different P. gingivalis LPS concentrations. Cell
survival rate was evaluated with 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl
tetrazolium bromide (MTT) after 24 h. Cell proliferation was determined by
counting cells on days 3 and 12. Expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), 
tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMPs), and pro-inflammatory cytokine transcripts in
HGFs was determined by quantitative PCR (Q-PCR) analysis on days 3 and 8. P.
gingivalis LPS decreased cell proliferation on day 3 (p < 0.05) compared to the
control group without significantly impacting the cell survival (p > 0.05).The
experiments showed that P. gingivalis LPS dose-dependently and differentially
modulated the expression of MMP-1, 2, and 3 and TIMP-1 and 2 on days 3 and 8.
TIMP-1 expression was significantly induced in P. gingivalis LPS-treated cells
while TIMP-2 was increased in response to 10 and 30 ng/ml of LPS on day 3. P.
gingivalis LPS induced up-regulation of MMP-1/TIMP-1 ratio on day 3 and increased
MMP-2/TIMP-2 ratio on day 8 dose-dependently. Expression of interleukin (IL)-6
and IL-8 was stimulated at higher concentrations (1000 and 3000 ng/ml) of LPS.
These findings demonstrate that P. gingivalis LPS suppresses cell proliferation
and leads to increased pro-inflammatory changes in HGFs, suggesting that P.
gingivalis LPS-induced modification of phenotypic and inflammatory
characteristics in HGF could potentially be a pathogenic mechanism underlying the
tissue destruction.

DOI: 10.1007/s10753-016-0463-7 
PMID: 27812843  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

