
1. FEBS J. 2016 Dec;283(24):4474-4490. doi: 10.1111/febs.13952. Epub 2016 Nov 29.

Functional characterization of Bacillus thuringiensis Cry toxin receptors
explains resistance in insects.

Tanaka S(1), Endo H(1), Adegawa S(1), Kikuta S(1), Sato R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bio-Applications and Systems Engineering, Tokyo University 
of Agriculture and Technology, Japan.

Comment in
    FEBS J. 2016 Dec;283(24):4458-4461.

Bacillus thuringiensis produces Cry toxins, which are used as insecticides in
sprays and in transgenic crops. However, little is known about the function of
Cry toxin receptors and the mechanisms that determine their binding specificity
and activity. In this study, the cRNAs of Bombyx mori ABC transporter C2
(BmABCC2), the toxin-binding region of cadherin-like receptor (BtR175-TBR), or
aminopeptidase N1 (BmAPN1) were injected into Xenopus oocytes, and the
Cry1Aa-dependent cation-selective pore formation activities of these receptors
were analyzed using a two-electrode voltage clamp. Cation current passing through
the pores was detected within 25 s, and increased in a linear fashion in
BmABCC2-expressing oocytes treated with 88 nm Cry1Aa. This result suggested that 
Cry1Aa continuously made stable pores with the help of BmABCC2. In contrast, no
cation current was observed until 60 min after incubation with 500 nm Cry1Aa in
BtR175TBR-expressing oocytes even though oligomerization of Cry1Aa progressed.
This result indicated that in the presence of BtR175-TBR most of the oligomerized
toxin could not enter the cell membrane. However, oocytes that simultaneously
expressed both receptors demonstrated that BtR175-TBR exerted a synergistic
effect with BmABCC2 on pore formation in the presence of 22 nm Cry1Aa. These
results confirm that the main reason for moderate-level resistance in insects
lacking the cadherin-like receptor but expressing ABCC2 is the absence of a
similar synergistic promotion of toxin oligomerization. Similar to results from
our previous report evaluating ectopic expression in the Sf9/Baculovirus system, 
BmAPN1 could not by itself cause Cry1A-related pore formation, despite the fact
that BmAPN1 gathered toxin on the oocytes as well as BmABCC2 did.

Â© 2016 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.13952 
PMID: 27813251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

