
1. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2016 Dec;109:365-373. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2016.10.020.
Epub 2016 Oct 24.

Chlorophyll a is a favorable substrate for Chlamydomonas Mg-dechelatase encoded
by STAY-GREEN.

Matsuda K(1), Shimoda Y(1), Tanaka A(2), Ito H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Low Temperature Science, Hokkaido University, N19 W8, Sapporo,
060-0819, Japan.
(2)Institute of Low Temperature Science, Hokkaido University, N19 W8, Sapporo,
060-0819, Japan; CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, N19 W8, Sapporo,
060-0819, Japan.
(3)Institute of Low Temperature Science, Hokkaido University, N19 W8, Sapporo,
060-0819, Japan; CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, N19 W8, Sapporo,
060-0819, Japan. Electronic address: ito98@lowtem.hokudai.ac.jp.

Mg removal from chlorophyll by Mg-dechelatase is the first step of chlorophyll
degradation. Recent studies showed that in Arabidopsis, Stay Green (SGR) encodes 
Mg-dechelatase. Though the Escherichia coli expression system is advantageous for
investigating the properties of Mg-dechelatase, Arabidopsis Mg-dechelatase is not
successfully expressed in E. coli. Chlamydomonas reinhardtii SGR (CrSGR) has a
long, hydrophilic tail, suggesting that active CrSGR can be expressed in E. coli.
After the incubation of chlorophyll a with CrSGR expressed in E. coli, pheophytin
a accumulated, indicating that active CrSGR was expressed in E. coli. Substrate
specificity of CrSGR against chlorophyll b and an intermediate molecule of the
chlorophyll b degradation pathway was examined. CrSGR exhibited no activity
against chlorophyll b and low activity against 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a,
consistent with the fact that chlorophyll b is degraded only after conversion to 
chlorophyll a. CrSGR exhibited low activity against divinyl chlorophyll a and
chlorophyll a', and no activity against chlorophyllide a, protochlorophyll a,
chlorophyll c2, and Zn-chlorophyll a. These observations indicate that
chlorophyll a is the most favorable substrate for CrSGR. When CrSGR was expressed
in Arabidopsis cells, the chlorophyll content decreased, further confirming that 
SGR has Mg-dechelating activity in chloroplasts.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2016.10.020 
PMID: 27810676  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

