
1. J Thromb Haemost. 2017 Jan;15(1):91-95. doi: 10.1111/jth.13560. Epub 2016 Dec 18.

A multicenter study to assess the reproducibility of antiphospholipid antibody
results produced by an automated system.

Devreese KM(1), Poncet A(2), Lindhoff-Last E(3), Musial J(4), de Moerloose P(5), 
Fontana P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Coagulation Laboratory, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and
Immunology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)CRC and Division of Clinical-Epidemiology, Department of Health and Community 
Medicine, University of Geneva and University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland.
(3)Cardiology Angiology Center Bethanien (CCB) Vascular Center-Coagulation
Center, Frankfurt, Germany.
(4)Department of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow,
Poland.
(5)Division of Angiology and Haemostasis, Faculty of Medicine, University
Hospitals of Geneva and Geneva Platelet Group, Geneva, Switzerland.

Essentials Inter-lab variation studies for antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) with
the same assay are lacking. We carried out an assessment of repeatability and
reproducibility of an automated aPL assay. High intra-center repeatability for
anticardiolipin and aβ2 GPI makes duplicate testing unnecessary. Inter-lab
reproducibility was high except for aβ2GPI IgG.SUMMARY: Background Inter-assay
variability is a well-known problem in antiphospholipid antibody testing, because
of the lack of standardization. Inter-laboratory reproducibility for the same
assay is similarly important. Objectives Testing repeatability and
reproducibility of HemosIL® AcuStar for anticardiolipin (aCL) and
antiβ2-glycoprotein I antibodies (aβ2GPI) IgG and IgM. Patients/Methods In this
observational study, out of 420 samples from the thrombophilia centers of Ghent
and Geneva, 100 samples were randomly selected and successively analyzed in three
centers: Ghent (C1, in duplicate for repeatability evaluation), Geneva (C2) and
Frankfurt (C3). Results Results from 99 samples were available, including 25 from
patients with antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) and 74 from non-APS patients. The
intra-center repeatability expressed as intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC)
was higher than 0.99 for each parameter. Differences between two measurements
rarely exceeded 1 U mL-1 for values below 100 U mL-1 , except for aβ2GPI IgG,
where differences varied from -4 to 4 U mL-1 . The inter-center ICCs were higher 
than 0.99, except for aCL IgM (ICC = 0.961). These ICCs remained high even when
considering values below 100 U mL-1 (0.943, 0.964 and 0.977 for aCL IgG, aCL gM
and aβ2GPI IgM, respectively), except for aβ2GPI IgG (ICC = 0.652). Qualitative
comparison showed less than 5% discordant classification between centers, with
somewhat more discordant results for aβ2GPI IgG. Conclusions In terms of
discriminating properties, the HemosIL® AcuStar has excellent intra-center
repeatability and a good inter-center reproducibility for aCL IgG, aCL IgM and
aβ2GPI IgM. Some concern may arise for aβ2GPI IgG.

© 2016 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.13560 
PMID: 27813343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

