
1. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2017;406:97-118. doi: 10.1007/82_2016_44.

Cell Entry of C3 Exoenzyme from Clostridium botulinum.

Rohrbeck A(1), Just I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625, Hannover, Germany. just.ingo@mh-hannover.de.

Clostridium botulinum C3 is the prototype of C3-like ADP-ribosyltransferases that
selectively ADP-ribosylate the small GTP-binding proteins RhoA/B/C and inhibit
their downstream signaling pathways. It is used as pharmacological tool to study 
cellular Rho functions. In addition, C3bot harbors a transferase-independent
activity on neurons to promote axonal and dendritic growth and branching. Many
bacterial protein toxins interact specifically with proteins and/or other
membrane components at the surface of target cells. Binding enables access to the
appropriate cellular compartment so that the knowledge of the receptor allows
essential insight into the mechanism of these toxins. Unlike other bacterial
protein toxins (such as the clostridial C1 and C2 toxins from C. botulinum), C3
exoenzyme is devoid of a binding and translocation domain, with which toxins
usually initiate receptor-mediated endocytosis followed by access to the intact
cell. To date, no specific mechanism for internalization of C3 exoenzyme has been
identified. Recently, vimentin was identified as membranous C3-binding partner
involved in binding and uptake of C3. Although vimentin is not detected in
neurons, vimentin is re-expressed after damage in regenerating neurons.
Reappearance of vimentin allows C3 to get access to lesioned neurons/axons to
exhibit axonotrophic and dentritotrophic effects.

DOI: 10.1007/82_2016_44 
PMCID: PMC7122702
PMID: 27832378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

