
1. J Immunol. 2016 Dec 15;197(12):4569-4575. Epub 2016 Nov 11.

Characterization of the Syk-Dependent T Cell Signaling Response to an Altered
Peptide.

Park JE(1), Rotondo JA(1), Cullins DL(1), Brand DD(1)(2), Yi AK(3), Stuart
JM(1)(2), Kang AH(1)(2), Myers LK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis
TN 38163.
(2)Research Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Memphis TN 38104.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Biochemistry, University of
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis TN 38163; and.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis TN 38163 lmyers@uthsc.edu.

Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disorder characterized by T cell
dysregulation. We have shown that an altered peptide ligand (A9) activates T
cells to use an alternate signaling pathway that is dependent on FcRγ and spleen 
tyrosine kinase, resulting in downregulation of inflammation. In the experiments 
described in this study, we have attempted to determine the molecular basis of
this paradox. Three major Src family kinases found in T cells (Lck, Fyn, and Lyn)
were tested for activation following stimulation by A9/I-Aq Unexpectedly we found
they are not required for T cell functions induced by A9/I-Aq, nor are they
required for APL stimulation of cytokines. On the other hand, the induction of
the second messenger inositol trisphosphate and the mobilization of calcium are
clearly triggered by the APL A9/I-Aq stimulation and are required for cytokine
production, albeit the cytokines induced are different from those produced after 
activation of the canonical pathway. DBA/1 mice doubly deficient in IL-4 and
IL-10 were used to confirm that these two cytokines are important for the
APL-induced attenuation of arthritis. These studies provide a basis for exploring
the effectiveness of analog peptides and the inhibitory T cells they induce as
therapeutic tools for autoimmune arthritis.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1600771 
PMCID: PMC5714308
PMID: 27837109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

