
1. Toxins (Basel). 2016 Nov 8;8(11). pii: E326.

Trimethylamine N-Oxide: The Good, the Bad and the Unknown.

Velasquez MT(1), Ramezani A(2), Manal A(3), Raj DS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, The George Washington University 
School of Medicine, 2150 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037, USA.
mvelasquez@mfa.gwu.edu.
(2)Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, The George Washington University 
School of Medicine, 2150 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037, USA.
ramezani@gwu.edu.
(3)Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, The George Washington University 
School of Medicine, 2150 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037, USA.
malotaibi@email.gwu.edu.
(4)Division of Renal Diseases and Hypertension, The George Washington University 
School of Medicine, 2150 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037, USA.
draj@mfa.gwu.edu.

Trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) is a small colorless amine oxide generated from
choline, betaine, and carnitine by gut microbial metabolism. It accumulates in
the tissue of marine animals in high concentrations and protects against the
protein-destabilizing effects of urea. Plasma level of TMAO is determined by a
number of factors including diet, gut microbial flora and liver flavin
monooxygenase activity. In humans, a positive correlation between elevated plasma
levels of TMAO and an increased risk for major adverse cardiovascular events and 
death is reported. The atherogenic effect of TMAO is attributed to alterations in
cholesterol and bile acid metabolism, activation of inflammatory pathways and
promotion foam cell formation. TMAO levels increase with decreasing levels of
kidney function and is associated with mortality in patients with chronic kidney 
disease. A number of therapeutic strategies are being explored to reduce TMAO
levels, including use of oral broad spectrum antibiotics, promoting the growth of
bacteria that utilize TMAO as substrate and the development of target-specific
molecules with varying level of success. Despite the accumulating evidence, it is
questioned whether TMAO is the mediator of a bystander in the disease process.
Thus, it is important to undertake studies examining the cellular signaling in
physiology and pathological states in order to establish the role of TMAO in
health and disease in humans.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins8110326 
PMCID: PMC5127123
PMID: 27834801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

