
1. Autophagy. 2017 Jan 2;13(1):187-200. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2016.1254864. Epub
2016 Nov 15.

Ubiquitin-coated nanodiamonds bind to autophagy receptors for entry into the
selective autophagy pathway.

Liu KK(1), Qiu WR(2), Naveen Raj E(2), Liu HF(1), Huang HS(1), Lin YW(2), Chang
CJ(1), Chen TH(1), Chen C(3), Chang HC(4), Hwang JK(5), Chao JI(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department and Institute of Biological Science and Technology , National
Chiao Tung University , Hsinchu , Taiwan.
(2)b Institute of Molecular Medicine and Bioengineering, National Chiao Tung
University , Hsinchu , Taiwan.
(3)c Department of Chemistry , National Dong Hwa University , Hualien , Taiwan.
(4)d Institute of Atomic and Molecular Sciences, Academia Sinica , Taipei ,
Taiwan.
(5)e Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, National Chiao Tung
University , Hsinchu , Taiwan.

Selective macroautophagy/autophagy plays a pivotal role in the processing of
foreign pathogens and cellular components to maintain homeostasis in human cells.
To date, numerous studies have demonstrated the uptake of nanoparticles by cells,
but their intracellular processing through selective autophagy remains unclear.
Here we show that carbon-based nanodiamonds (NDs) coated with ubiquitin (Ub) bind
to autophagy receptors (SQSTM1 [sequestosome 1], OPTN [optineurin], and
CALCOCO2/NDP52 [calcium binding and coiled-coil domain 2]) and are then linked to
MAP1LC3/LC3 (microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3) for entry into the
selective autophagy pathway. NDs are ultimately delivered to lysosomes.
Ectopically expressed SQSTM1-green fluorescence protein (GFP) could bind to the
Ub-coated NDs. By contrast, the Ub-associated domain mutant of SQSTM1 (Î”UBA)-GFP 
did not bind to the Ub-coated NDs. Chloroquine, an autophagy inhibitor, prevented
the ND-containing autophagosomes from fusing with lysosomes. Furthermore,
autophagy receptors OPTN and CALCOCO2/NDP52, involved in the processing of
bacteria, were found to be involved in the selective autophagy of NDs. However,
ND particles located in the lysosomes of cells did not induce mitotic blockage,
senescence, or cell death. Single ND clusters in the lysosomes of cells were
observed in the xenografted human lung tumors of nude mice. This study
demonstrated for the first time that Ub-coated nanoparticles bind to autophagy
receptors for entry into the selective autophagy pathway, facilitating their
delivery to lysosomes.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2016.1254864 
PMCID: PMC5240834
PMID: 27846374  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

