
1. Nat Nanotechnol. 2017 Mar;12(3):260-266. doi: 10.1038/nnano.2016.236. Epub 2016
Nov 14.

Tuning membrane protein mobility by confinement into nanodomains.

Karner A(1), Nimmervoll B(1), Plochberger B(2), Klotzsch E(3), Horner A(4),
Knyazev DG(4), Kuttner R(4), Winkler K(4), Winter L(4), Siligan C(4), Ollinger
N(4), Pohl P(4), Preiner J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Bioanalysis GmbH, Gruberstrasse 40-42, 4020 Linz, Austria.
(2)Upper Austria University of Applied Sciences, Campus Linz, Garnisonstrasse 21,
4020 Linz, Austria.
(3)EMBL Australia Node in Single Molecule Science and ARC Centre of Excellence in
Advanced Molecular Imaging, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
(4)Institute of Biophysics, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Gruberstrasse 40,
4020 Linz, Austria.

High-speed atomic force microscopy (HS-AFM) can be used to visualize
function-related conformational changes of single soluble proteins. Similar
studies of single membrane proteins are, however, hampered by a lack of suitable 
flat, non-interacting membrane supports and by high protein mobility. Here we
show that streptavidin crystals grown on mica-supported lipid bilayers can be
used as porous supports for membranes containing biotinylated lipids. Using
SecYEG (protein translocation channel) and GlpF (aquaglyceroporin), we
demonstrate that the platform can be used to tune the lateral mobility of
transmembrane proteins to any value within the dynamic range accessible to HS-AFM
imaging through glutaraldehyde-cross-linking of the streptavidin. This allows
HS-AFM to study the conformation or docking of spatially confined proteins, which
we illustrate by imaging GlpF at sub-molecular resolution and by observing the
motor protein SecA binding to SecYEG.

DOI: 10.1038/nnano.2016.236 
PMCID: PMC5734611
PMID: 27842062  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

