
1. Cell Rep. 2016 Nov 15;17(8):2112-2124. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.10.055.

Nucleosome Density ChIP-Seq Identifies Distinct Chromatin Modification Signatures
Associated with MNase Accessibility.

Lorzadeh A(1), Bilenky M(2), Hammond C(3), Knapp DJHF(3), Li L(1), Miller PH(3), 
Carles A(1), Heravi-Moussavi A(2), Gakkhar S(2), Moksa M(1), Eaves CJ(4), Hirst
M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Michael Smith Laboratories Centre
for High-Throughput Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T
1Z4, Canada.
(2)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Science Center, BC Cancer Agency Vancouver, BC
V5Z 4S6, Canada.
(3)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1L3, Canada.
(4)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1L3, Canada;
Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6H
3N1, Canada.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Michael Smith Laboratories Centre
for High-Throughput Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T
1Z4, Canada; Canada's Michael Smith Genome Science Center, BC Cancer Agency
Vancouver, BC V5Z 4S6, Canada. Electronic address: mhirst@bcgsc.ca.

Nucleosome position, density, and post-translational modification are widely
accepted components of mechanisms regulating DNA transcription but still
incompletely understood. We present a modified native ChIP-seq method combined
with an analytical framework that allows MNase accessibility to be integrated
with histone modification profiles. Application of this methodology to the
primitive (CD34+) subset of normal human cord blood cells enabled genomic regions
enriched in one versus two nucleosomes marked by histone 3 lysine 4
trimethylation (H3K4me3) and/or histone 3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) to 
be associated with their transcriptional and DNA methylation states. From this
analysis, we defined four classes of promoter-specific profiles and demonstrated 
that a majority of bivalent marked promoters are heterogeneously marked at a
single-cell level in this primitive cell type. Interestingly, extension of this
approach to human embryonic stem cells revealed an altered relationship between
chromatin modification state and nucleosome content at promoters, suggesting
developmental stage-specific organization of histone methylation states.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.10.055 
PMID: 27851972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

