
1. FEBS Lett. 2016 Dec;590(24):4606-4616. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.12496. Epub 2016
Dec 9.

Both bulk and cancer stem cell subpopulations in triple-negative breast cancer
are susceptible to Wnt, HDAC, and ERα coinhibition.

Sulaiman A(1), Sulaiman B(1), Khouri L(1), McGarry S(1), Nessim C(2), Arnaout
A(2), Li X(1)(3), Addison C(1)(2), Dimitroulakos J(1)(2), Wang L(1)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Canada.
(2)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Canada.
(3)Centre for Biologics Evaluation, Biologics and Genetic Therapies Directorate, 
Health Canada Sir Frederick G. Banting Research Centre, Ottawa, Canada.
(4)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Canada.
(5)Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, University of Ottawa, Canada.

Development of targeted therapies for triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC, a more
aggressive subtype) is an unmet medical need. We analyzed data from 887 patients 
with invasive breast cancer and observed that increased Wnt and histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activities are associated with estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and 
progesterone receptor (PGR) repression, poor survival, and increased relapse. The
inverse correlation between Wnt signaling and repression of ESR1 and PGR
expression was found to be magnified in cancer stem cell (CSC) subpopulations in 
TNBC cell lines. Cosuppression of Wnt, HDAC, and ESR1 using clinically relevant
low-dose inhibitors effectively repressed both bulk and CSC subpopulations and
converted CSCs to non-CSCs in TNBC cells without affecting MCF-10A mammary
epithelial cells.

© 2016 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1873-3468.12496 
PMID: 27859250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

