
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2016 Dec;182:11-21. doi: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2016.08.012. 
Epub 2016 Aug 31.

Cellular endocytic compartment localization of expressed canine CD1 molecules.

Schjaerff M(1), Keller SM(2), Affolter VK(2), Kristensen AT(3), Moore PF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of
Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, 
95616 CA, USA; Department of Veterinary Clinical and Animal Sciences, Faculty of 
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Dyrlaegevej 16, 1870
Frederiksberg, Denmark.
(2)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of
Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, 
95616 CA, USA.
(3)Department of Veterinary Clinical and Animal Sciences, Faculty of Health and
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Dyrlaegevej 16, 1870 Frederiksberg,
Denmark.
(4)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of
Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, 
95616 CA, USA. Electronic address: pfmoore@ucdavis.edu.

CD1 molecules are glycoproteins present primarily on dendritic cells (DCs), which
recognize and present a variety of foreign- and self-lipid antigens to T-cells.
Humans have five different CD1 isoforms that survey distinct cellular
compartments allowing for recognition of a large repertoire of lipids. The canine
CD1 family consists of seven functional CD1 molecules (canine CD1a2, CD1a6,
CD1a8, CD1a9, CD1b, CD1c and CD1e) and one presumed non-functional isoform
(canine CD1d) due to a disrupted gene structure. The aim of this study was to
describe in vitro steady-state localization ptterns of canine CD1 isoforms and
their correlation with endocytic organelles. GFP-fused canine CD1 293T cell
transfectants were stained with markers for early endocytic compartments (EEA-1) 
and late endocytic/lysosomal compartments (LAMP-1), respectively, and analyzed by
confocal microscopy. Canine CD1a molecules localized to the plasma membrane and
partially to the early endocytic compartment, but not to late endosomes or
lysosomes. In contrast, canine CD1b was highly associated with late
endosomal/lysosomal compartments and showed a predominant intracellular
expression pattern. Canine CD1c protein expression localized more promiscuously
to both the early endosomal compartments and the late endosomal/lysosomal
compartments. The canine CD1e molecule showed a strictly intracellular expression
with a partial overlap with late endosomal/lysosomal compartments. Lastly, canine
CD1d was expressed abnormally showing only a diminished GFP expression. In
conclusion, canine CD1 transfectants show distinct localization patterns that are
similar to human CD1 proteins with the exception of the canine CD1d isoform,
which most likely is non-functional. These findings imply that canine CD1
localization overall resembles human CD1 trafficking patterns. This knowledge is 
important for the understanding of lipid antigen-receptor immunity in the dog.

Copyright Â© 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2016.08.012 
PMID: 27863541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

