
1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2016 Dec;101:62-66. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2016.07.014. Epub
2016 Jul 30.

New Mycobacterium tuberculosis LAM sublineage with geographical specificity for
the Old World revealed by phylogenetical and Bayesian analyses.

Reynaud Y(1), Rastogi N(2).

Author information: 
(1)WHO Supranational TB Reference Laboratory, Tuberculosis and Mycobacteria Unit,
Institut Pasteur de la Guadeloupe, Morne Jolivière, 97183 Abymes, Guadeloupe,
France. Electronic address: yreynaud@pasteur-guadeloupe.fr.
(2)WHO Supranational TB Reference Laboratory, Tuberculosis and Mycobacteria Unit,
Institut Pasteur de la Guadeloupe, Morne Jolivière, 97183 Abymes, Guadeloupe,
France. Electronic address: nrastogi@pasteur-guadeloupe.fr.

We recently showed that the Mycobacterium tuberculosis sublineage LAM9 could be
subdivided as two distinct subpopulations - each reflecting its unique
biogeographical structure and evolutionary history. We subsequently attempted to 
verify if this genetic structuration could be traced in an enlarged global
sample. For this purpose, we analyzed global evolutionary relationships of LAM
strains in a large dataset (n = 1923 isolates from 35 countries worldwide) with
concomitant spoligotyping and MIRU-VNTR data, followed by a deeper analysis of
LAM9 sublineage (n = 851 isolates). Based on a combination of phylogenetical
analysis and Bayesian statistics, a total of three different clusters,
tentatively named LAM9C1, C2 and C3 were described in this dataset. Closer
inspection of the phylogenetic tree with concomitant data on origin of isolates
with genetic clusterization revealed LAM9C3 being the most tightly knit group
exclusively found in the Old World as opposed to LAM9C2 being a loosely-knit
group without any phylogeographical specificity; while LAM9C1 appeared with a
majority of strains being well-clustered despite some isolates that intermixed
with unrelated LAM clusters. Subsequently, we hereby describe a new M.
tuberculosis LAM sublineage named LAM9C3 with phylogeographical specificity for
the Old World. These findings open new perspectives to study respective migration
histories and adaptation to human hosts of specific M. tuberculosis clones during
the exploration and conquest of the New World. We therefore plan to reevaluate
the nomenclature and evolutionary history of various LAM sublineages using Whole 
Genome Sequencing (WGS).

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2016.07.014 
PMID: 27865400  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

