
1. Comp Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis. 2016 Dec;49:1-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cimid.2016.08.008. Epub 2016 Aug 31.

Antimicrobial resistance and molecular characterization of virulence genes,
phylogenetic groups of Escherichia coli isolated from diarrheic and healthy
camel-calves in Tunisia.

Bessalah S(1), Fairbrother JM(2), Salhi I(3), Vanier G(2), Khorchani T(3), Seddik
MM(3), Hammadi M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Livestock and Wildlife Laboratory, Arid Lands Institute (I.R.A), University of
Gabès, Médenine, Tunisia; Faculty of Sciences of Sfax, University of Sfax, Sfax, 
Tunisia. Electronic address: bessalahsalma@yahoo.fr.
(2)OIE Reference Laboratory for Escherichia coli (EcL), Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Université de Montréal, Saint-Hyacinthe, QC, Canada.
(3)Livestock and Wildlife Laboratory, Arid Lands Institute (I.R.A), University of
Gabès, Médenine, Tunisia.

This study was conducted to determine the prevalence of virulence genes,
serogroups, antimicrobial resistance and phylogenetic groups of Escherichia coli 
strains isolated from diarrheic and healthy camel calves in Tunisia. From 120
fecal samples (62 healthy and 58 diarrheic camel calves aged less than 3 months),
70 E. coli isolates (53 from diarrheic herds and 17 from healthy herds) were
examined by PCR for detection of the virulence genes associated with pathogenic
E. coli in animals. A significantly greater frequency of the f17 gene was
observed in individual camels and in herds with diarrhea, this gene being found
in 44.7% and 41.5% of isolates from camels and herds with diarrhea versus 22.5%
and 11.7% in camels (p=0.05) and herds without diarrhea (p=0.02). The aida,
cnf1/2, f18, stx2 and paa genes were found only in isolates from camels with
diarrhea, although at a low prevalence, 1.8%, 3.7%, 1.8%, 3.7% and 11.3%,
respectively. Prevalence of afa8, cdtB, eae, east1, iroN, iss, kpsMTII, paa, sfa,
tsh and papC genes did not differ significantly between herds with or without
diarrhea. Genes coding for faeG, fanC, f41, estI, estII, CS31a and eltA were not 
detected in any isolates. All isolates were sensitive to amikacin,
chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin and ceftiofur and the highest
frequency of resistance was observed to tetracycline, and ampicillin (52.8% and
37.1% respectively). The phylogenetic groups were identified by conventional
triplex PCR. Results showed that E. coli strains segregated mainly in
phylogenetic group B1, 52.8% in diarrheic herds and 52.9% in healthy herds.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cimid.2016.08.008 
PMID: 27865260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

