
1. Microbiol Immunol. 2016 Nov;60(11):725-739. doi: 10.1111/1348-0421.12450.

A comparison of the immunological potency of Burkholderia lipopolysaccharides in 
endotoxemic BALB/c mice.

Hsueh PT(1), Liu CL(2), Wang HH(2), Ni WF(2), Chen YL(2), Liu JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National Sun Yat-sen University, 70 Lienhai
Rd., Kaohsiung 80424, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, National Kaohsiung Normal University, 60
Shenjhong Rd., 82446, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Lipopolysaccharide is one of the virulence factors of the soil-borne pathogens
Burkholderia pseudomallei, B. thailandensis, B. cenocepacia and B. multivorans,
which cause septic melioidosis (often in B. pseudomallei infections but rarely in
B. thailandensis infections) or cepacia syndromes (commonly in B. cenocepacia
infections but rarely in B. multivorans infections). The inflammatory responses
in Burkholderia LPS-induced endotoxemia were evaluated in this study. Prior to
induction, the conserved structures and functions of each purified LPS were
determined using electrophoretic phenotypes, the ratios of 3-hydroxytetradecanoic
to 3-hydroxyhexadecanoic acid and endotoxin units. In an in vitro assay, cytokine
expression of myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 and Toll/IL-1
receptor domain containing adapter-inducing INF-β-dependent signaling-dependent
signaling differed when stimulated by different LPS. Endotoxemia was induced in
mice by s.c. injection as evidenced by increasing serum concentrations of
3-hydroxytetradecanoic acid and the septic prognostic markers CD62E and ICAM-1.
During endotoxemia, splenic CD11b+ I-A+ , CD11b+ CD80+ , CD11b+ CD86+ and CD11b+ 
CD11c+ subpopulations increased. After induction with B. pseudomallei LPS, there 
were significant increases in splenic CD49b NK cells and CD14 macrophages. The
inflamed CD11b+ CCR2+ , CD11b+ CD31+ , CD11b+ CD14+ , resident CD11b+ CX3 CR1+
and progenitor CD11b+ CD34+ cells showed delayed increases in bone marrow. B.
multivorans LPS was the most potent inducer of serum cytokines and chemokines,
whereas B. cenocepacia LPS induced relatively low concentrations of the
chemokines MIP-1α and MIP-1β. Endotoxin activities did not correlate with the
virulence of Burkholderia strains. Thus factors other than LPS and/or other
mechanisms of low activity LPS must mediate the pathogenicity of highly virulent 
Burkholderia strains.

© 2016 The Societies and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1348-0421.12450 
PMID: 27862204  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

