
1. Clin Sci (Lond). 2017 Jan 1;131(2):159-168. doi: 10.1042/CS20160593. Epub 2016
Nov 22.

CXCR2 is involved in pulmonary intravascular macrophage accumulation and
angiogenesis in a rat model of hepatopulmonary syndrome.

Li X(1), Chen Y(2), Chang Y(3), Li S(3), Zhao Z(4), Zhang H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Changzhi Medical College, Changzhi 046000, China
qazw3000@126.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Changzhi Medical College, Changzhi 046000, China.
(3)Department of Physiology, Changzhi Medical College, Changzhi 046000, China.
(4)Institute of Liver Disease, Changzhi Medical College, Changzhi 046000, China.
(5)Department of Pathophysiology, Changzhi Medical College, Changzhi 046000,
China.

Hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS) is a lung complication in various liver diseases, 
with high incidence, poor prognosis and no effective non-surgical treatments in
patients with hepatocirrhosis. Therefore, assessing HPS pathogenesis to explore
proper therapy strategies is clinically relevant. In the present study, male
Sprague-Dawley rats underwent sham operation or common bile duct ligation (CBDL).
Two weeks post-surgery, the following groups were set up for 2 weeks of
treatment: sham + normal saline, CBDL + CXCR2 antagonist SB225002, CBDL + tumour 
necrosis factor α (TNF-α) antagonist PTX and CBDL + normal saline groups. Liver
and lung tissues were collected after mean arterial pressure (MAP) and portal
venous pressure (PVP) measurements. Haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining (lung) 
and Masson staining (liver) were performed for pathological analyses. Finally,
pulmonary tissue RNA and total protein were assessed for target effectors. The
mRNA and protein levels of CXCR2 were significantly increased in the pulmonary
tissue of CBDL rats. What's more, CXCR2 inhibition by SB225002 reduced the
expression of CD68 and von Willebrand factor (vWf) in CBDL rats. Importantly,
CXCR2 inhibition suppressed the activation of Akt and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) in CBDL rats. Antagonization of TNF-α with PTX
down-regulated the expression of CXCR2. During HPS pathogenesis in rats, CXCR2
might be involved in the accumulation of pulmonary intravascular macrophages and 
angiogenesis, possibly by activating Akt and ERK, with additional regulation by
TNF-α that enhanced pulmonary angiogenesis by directly acting on the pulmonary
tissue. Finally, the present study may provide novel targets for the treatment of
HPS.

© 2016 The Author(s). published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/CS20160593 
PMID: 27879294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

