
1. PLoS One. 2016 Nov 28;11(11):e0166935. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0166935.
eCollection 2016.

Multivalent Interactions of Human Primary Amine Oxidase with the V and C22
Domains of Sialic Acid-Binding Immunoglobulin-Like Lectin-9 Regulate Its Binding 
and Amine Oxidase Activity.

Elovaara H(1), Parkash V(2), Fair-Mäkelä R(1)(3), Salo-Ahen OM(2)(4), Guédez
G(2), Bligt-Lindén E(2), Grönholm J(2), Jalkanen S(1)(5), Salminen TA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medicity Research Laboratory, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(2)Structural Bioinformatics Laboratory, Biochemistry, Faculty of Science and
Engineering, Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland.
(3)Turku Doctoral Program of Molecular Medicine, University of Turku, Turku,
Finland.
(4)Pharmaceutical Sciences Laboratory, Pharmacy, Faculty of Science and
Engineering, Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Turku, Turku,
Finland.

Sialic acid-binding immunoglobulin-like lectin-9 (Siglec-9) on leukocyte surface 
is a counter-receptor for endothelial cell surface adhesin, human primary amine
oxidase (hAOC3), a target protein for anti-inflammatory agents. This interaction 
can be used to detect inflammation and cancer in vivo, since the labeled peptides
derived from the second C2 domain (C22) of Siglec-9 specifically bind to the
inflammation-inducible hAOC3. As limited knowledge on the interaction between
Siglec-9 and hAOC3 has hampered both hAOC3-targeted drug design and in vivo
imaging applications, we have now produced and purified the extracellular region 
of Siglec-9 (Siglec-9-EC) consisting of the V, C21 and C22 domains, modeled its
3D structure and characterized the hAOC3-Siglec-9 interactions using biophysical 
methods and activity/inhibition assays. Our results assign individual, previously
unknown roles for the V and C22 domains. The V domain is responsible for the
unusually tight Siglec-9-hAOC3 interactions whereas the intact C22 domain of
Siglec-9 is required for modulating the enzymatic activity of hAOC3, crucial for 
the hAOC3-mediated leukocyte trafficking. By characterizing the Siglec-9-EC
mutants, we could conclude that R120 in the V domain likely interacts with the
terminal sialic acids of hAOC3 attached glycans whereas residues R284 and R290 in
C22 are involved in the interactions with the active site channel of hAOC3.
Furthermore, the C22 domain binding enhances the enzymatic activity of hAOC3
although the sialic acid-binding capacity of the V domain of Siglec-9 is
abolished by the R120S mutation. To conclude, our results prove that the V and
C22 domains of Siglec-9-EC interact with hAOC3 in a multifaceted and unique way, 
forming both glycan-mediated and direct protein-protein interactions,
respectively. The reported results on the mechanism of the Siglec-9-hAOC3
interaction are valuable for the development of hAOC3-targeted therapeutics and
diagnostic tools.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0166935 
PMCID: PMC5125647
PMID: 27893774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

