
1. Fungal Biol. 2016 Dec;120(12):1582-1599. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2016.08.007. Epub 
2016 Aug 20.

Routes of phlogopite weathering by three fungal strains.

Pinzari F(1), Cuadros J(2), Napoli R(3), Canfora L(3), Baussà Bardají D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Consiglio per la ricerca in agricoltura e l'analisi dell'economia agraria,
Centro Agricoltura Ambiente, Via della Navicella 2-4, 00184 Rome, Italy;
Department of Life Sciences, Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, SW7 5BD
London, UK. Electronic address: flavia.pinzari@crea.gov.it.
(2)Department of Earth Sciences, Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, SW7 5BD
London, UK.
(3)Consiglio per la ricerca in agricoltura e l'analisi dell'economia agraria,
Centro Agricoltura Ambiente, Via della Navicella 2-4, 00184 Rome, Italy.

Fungi dissolve soil minerals by acidification and mechanical disruption.
Dissolution may occur at the microscale (contact between fungus and mineral) and 
medium scale (entire mineral grains). Mineral weathering by fungi and other
microorganisms is thought to be of significant global contribution, perhaps
producing specific weathering signatures. We report fungal dissolution of
phlogopite mica in experiments with three fungal strains (Alternaria tenuissima, 
Cladosporium cladosporioides, Stilbella sp.) on solid medium for 30 days at 21 °C
and 96-100% relative humidity. The study used variable-pressure SEM-EDS equipped 
with charge contrast imaging. Statistical analysis of the results discriminated
between the weathering activities of the three fungal species, which increased
from Stilbella sp. to C. cladosporioides to A. tenuissima, in agreement with the 
respective decreasing pH in the media (6.4, 5.8, 5.2 ± 0.03). Phlogopite
weathering features were irregular and variable, apparently not caused by direct 
contact with fungal hyphae. EDS values indicated two or more dissolution
mechanisms, one of them suggesting cation rearrangement in the mica towards
formation of Al-rich smectite. Intimate fungus-mineral interaction was observed, 
and the lack of observable dissolution traces from such contact interaction is
interpreted as the result of effacing by the more intense acid leaching operating
at larger scale.

Copyright Â© 2016 British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.funbio.2016.08.007 
PMID: 27890092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

