
1. Biomed Environ Mass Spectrom. 1989 Sep;18(9):741-52.

Characterization of new bacterial transformation products of
1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis-(4-chlorophenyl) ethane (DDT) by gas chromatography/mass 
spectrometry.

Massé R(1), Lalanne D, Messier F, Sylvestre M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université du Québec Canada.

The microbial transformation of DDT, DDD and DDE was studied in Gram-negative
strain B-206 and a number of phenolic metabolites were identified as the
trimethylsilyl derivatives in the bacterial extracts by gas chromatography/mass
spectrometry. The major metabolites of DDT were DDD, DDE, DDMU,
1,1,1-trichloro-2-(2-hydroxy-4-chlorophenyl)-2-(4'-chlorophenyl) ethane,
1,1,1-trichloro-2-(2-hydroxy-4-chlorophenyl)-2-(4'-hydroxyphenyl) ethane, and
1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis-(2-hydroxy-4-chlorophenyl) ethane. Conversely, DDD was
mainly degraded into DDE,
1,1-dichloro-2-(2-hydroxy-4-chlorophenyl)-2-(4'-chlorophenyl) ethane and
1,1-dichloro-2-(2-hydroxy-4-chlorophenyl)-2-(4'-hydroxyphenyl) ethane. Finally,
DDE was transformed into DDMU,
1,1-dichloro-2-(2-hydroxy-4-chlorophenyl)-2-(4'-chlorophenyl) ethylene,
1,1-dichloro-2-(2-hydroxy-4-chlorophenyl)-2-(4'hydroxyphenyl) ethylene and
1-chloro-2-(2-hydroxy-4-chlorophenyl)-2-(4'-chlorophenyl) ethylene. The phenolic 
metabolites exhibited [M - TMSCl]+., [M - HCl - TMSCl]+. and/or [M - HCl - TMSCl 
- Me]+ fragment ions which reflect the presence of an ortho hydroxyl group in
these molecules. Other mass spectral features used to determine their structure
are presented and a metabolic scheme accounting for their formation is proposed.

DOI: 10.1002/bms.1200180917 
PMID: 2790260  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

