
1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2017 Jun;107:179-201. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.11.042. Epub 2016 Nov 27.

Repair of 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells:
Properties and biological roles of the Fpg and OGG1 DNA N-glycosylases.

Boiteux S(1), Coste F(2), Castaing B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biophysique Moléculaire, CNRS, UPR4301, rue Charles Sadron, 45072
Orléans, France. Electronic address: serge.boiteux@cnrs-orleans.fr.
(2)Centre de Biophysique Moléculaire, CNRS, UPR4301, rue Charles Sadron, 45072
Orléans, France.
(3)Centre de Biophysique Moléculaire, CNRS, UPR4301, rue Charles Sadron, 45072
Orléans, France. Electronic address: bertrand.castaing@cnrs-orleans.fr.

Oxidatively damaged DNA results from the attack of sugar and base moieties by
reactive oxygen species (ROS), which are formed as byproducts of normal cell
metabolism and during exposure to endogenous or exogenous chemical or physical
agents. Guanine, having the lowest redox potential, is the DNA base the most
susceptible to oxidation, yielding products such as 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine
(8-oxoG) and 2-6-diamino-4-hydroxy-5-formamidopyrimidine (FapyG). In DNA, 8-oxoG 
was shown to be mutagenic yielding GC to TA transversions upon incorporation of
dAMP opposite this lesion by replicative DNA polymerases. In prokaryotic and
eukaryotic cells, 8-oxoG is primarily repaired by the base excision repair
pathway (BER) initiated by a DNA N-glycosylase, Fpg and OGG1, respectively. In
Escherichia coli, Fpg cooperates with MutY and MutT to prevent 8-oxoG-induced
mutations, the "GO-repair system". In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, OGG1 cooperates
with nucleotide excision repair (NER), mismatch repair (MMR), post-replication
repair (PRR) and DNA polymerase η to prevent mutagenesis. Human and mouse cells
mobilize all these pathways using OGG1, MUTYH (MutY-homolog also known as MYH),
MTH1 (MutT-homolog also known as NUDT1), NER, MMR, NEILs and DNA polymerases η
and λ, to prevent 8-oxoG-induced mutations. In fact, mice deficient in both OGG1 
and MUTYH develop cancer in different organs at adult age, which points to the
critical impact of 8-oxoG repair on genetic stability in mammals. In this review,
we will focus on Fpg and OGG1 proteins, their biochemical and structural
properties as well as their biological roles. Other DNA N-glycosylases able to
release 8-oxoG from damaged DNA in various organisms will be discussed. Finally, 
we will report on the role of OGG1 in human disease and the possible use of
8-oxoG DNA N-glycosylases as therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.11.042 
PMID: 27903453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

