
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Dec 2;6:38491. doi: 10.1038/srep38491.

miR-27a attenuates adipogenesis and promotes osteogenesis in steroid-induced rat 
BMSCs by targeting PPARγ and GREM1.

Gu C(1), Xu Y(2), Zhang S(2), Guan H(2), Song S(2), Wang X(1), Wang Y(1), Li
Y(2), Zhao G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, No. 1 Jianshe East Road, Zhengzhou 450052, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Zhengzhou University, No. 100 Kexue Road, Zhengzhou 450001, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Zhengzhou University, No. 100 Kexue Road, Zhengzhou 450001, China.

The imbalance between adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation in bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of
steroid-induced osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH). Several microRNAs
(miRNAs) are involved in regulating adipogenesis and osteogenesis. In this study,
we established a steroid-induced ONFH rat model to identify the potential
relevant miRNAs. We identified 9 up-regulated and 28 down-regulated miRNAs in the
ONFH rat model. Of these, miR-27a was down-regulated and negatively correlated
with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARγ) and gremlin 1
(GREM1) expression. Further studies confirmed that PPARγ and GREM1 were direct
targets of miRNA-27a. Additionally, adipogenic differentiation was enhanced by
miR-27a down-regulation, whereas miRNA-27a up-regulation attenuated adipogenesis 
and promoted osteogenesis in steroid-induced rat BMSCs. Moreover, miRNA-27a
up-regulation had a stronger effect on adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation 
in steroid-induced rat BMSCs than si-PPARγ and si-GREM1. In conclusion, we
identified 37 differentially expressed miRNAs in the steroid-induced ONFH model, 
of which miR-27a was down-regulated. Our results showed that miR-27a
up-regulation could inhibit adipogenesis and promote osteogenesis by directly
targeting PPARγ and GREM1. Thus, miR-27a is likely a key regulator of
adipogenesis in steroid-induced BMSCs and a potential therapeutic target for ONFH
treatment.

DOI: 10.1038/srep38491 
PMCID: PMC5133594
PMID: 27910957  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

