
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2017 Jan;80:61-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2016.11.008. Epub
2016 Nov 30.

Expressing a moth abcc2 gene in transgenic Drosophila causes susceptibility to Bt
Cry1Ac without requiring a cadherin-like protein receptor.

Stevens T(1), Song S(1), Bruning JB(1), Choo A(1), Baxter SW(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Adelaide, 5005 Australia.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Adelaide, 5005 Australia.
Electronic address: simon.baxter@adelaide.edu.au.

Bt toxins ingested by insect pests can bind to midgut receptors and cause death, 
although several steps in this process remain unclear. Multiple Bt toxin
receptors have been identified in Lepidoptera, including a cadherin-like protein 
(CaLP), which is central to several models explaining Bt toxins' mode of action. 
Mutations in the Plutella xylostella ATP-dependent binding cassette transporter
C2 (Px-abcc2), rather than CaLP, are genetically linked with Bt Cry1Ac
resistance. Here we expressed Px-abcc2 in Drosophila and performed larval
bioassays to determine whether this protein acts as an effective Bt receptor.
Cry1Ac had no effect on larvae expressing Px-abcc2 in salivary glands, yet larvae
expressing Px-abcc2 in the midgut were highly susceptible to both Cry1Ac protoxin
and trypsin activated toxin. Furthermore, the CaLP orthologue has been lost from 
the Drosophila genome, making this a useful system for investigating the role of 
CaLP peptides from Manduca sexta (CR12-MPED), which are known to act as Bt
synergists in larval feeding assays. Drosophila larvae expressing Px-ABCC2 in the
midgut were fed LD50 concentrations of Cry1Ac toxin or protoxin, plus purified
CR12-MPED cloned from M. sexta or P. xylostella. The M. sexta CR12-MPED protein
acted synergistically with Cry1Ac protoxin and activated toxin significantly more
effectively than the P. xylostella peptide. This work demonstrates ABCC2 is the
major functional Cry1Ac receptor for P. xylostella and the importance of CaLP
proteins in Bt mode of action may vary between different lepidopteran species.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2016.11.008 
PMID: 27914919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

