
1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2017 Jan 1;312(1):L143-L153. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00361.2016. Epub 2016 Dec 2.

CD36 mediates H2O2-induced calcium influx in lung microvascular endothelial
cells.

Suresh K(1), Servinsky L(2), Reyes J(2), Undem C(2), Zaldumbide J(2), Rentsendorj
O(2), Modekurty S(2), Dodd-O JM(3), Scott A(4), Pearse DB(2), Shimoda LA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland;
ksuresh2@jhmi.edu.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; and.
(4)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland.

Elevated levels of reactive oxygen species and intracellular Ca2+ play a key role
in endothelial barrier dysfunction in acute lung injury. We previously showed
that H2O2-induced increases in intracellular calcium concentrations ([Ca2+]i) in 
lung microvascular endothelial cells (LMVECs) involve the membrane Ca2+ channel, 
transient receptor potential vanilloid-4 (TRPV4) and that inhibiting this channel
attenuated H2O2-induced barrier disruption in vitro. We also showed that
phosphorylation of TRPV4 by the Src family kinase, Fyn, contributes to
H2O2-induced Ca2+ influx in LMVEC. In endothelial cells, Fyn is tethered to the
cell membrane by CD36, a fatty acid transporter. In this study, we assessed the
effect of genetic loss or pharmacological inhibition of CD36 on Ca2+ responses to
H2O2 H2O2-induced Ca2+ influx was attenuated in LMVEC isolated from mice lacking 
CD36 (CD36-/-). TRPV4 expression and function was unchanged in LMVEC isolated
from wild-type (WT) and CD36-/- mice, as well as mice with deficiency for Fyn
(Fyn-/-). TRPV4 immunoprecipitated with Fyn, but this interaction was decreased
in CD36-/- LMVEC. The amount of phosphorylated TRPV4 was decreased in LMVEC from 
CD36-/- mice compared with WT controls. Loss of CD36 altered subcellular
localization of Fyn, while inhibition of CD36 fatty acid transport with
succinimidyl oleate did not attenuate H2O2-induced Ca2+ influx. Lastly, we found 
that CD36-/- mice were protected from ischemia-reperfusion injury in vivo. In
conclusion, our data suggest that CD36 plays an important role in H2O2-mediated
lung injury and that the mechanism may involve CD36-dependent scaffolding of Fyn 
to the cell membrane to facilitate TRPV4 phosphorylation.

Copyright Â© 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00361.2016 
PMCID: PMC5283925
PMID: 27913425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

