
1. J Immunol Methods. 2017 Feb;441:31-38. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2016.11.012. Epub 2016 
Nov 30.

Innate immune-stimulatory activity of Porphyromonas gingivalis fimbriae is
eliminated by phase separation using Triton X-114.

Nozoe K(1), Sanui T(1), Takeshita M(1), Fukuda T(1), Haraguchi A(2), Aida Y(3),
Nishimura F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Periodontology, Division of Oral Rehabilitation, Faculty of Dental 
Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Division of General Dentistry, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Section of Periodontology, Division of Oral Rehabilitation, Faculty of Dental 
Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. Electronic address:
yaida@dent.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

Fimbriae are virulence factors of Porphyromonas gingivalis (P. gingivalis). In
this study, the action of fimbriae on neutrophil respiratory burst and cytokine
production by mononuclear cells (MNC) were investigated. Native or denatured form
of purified P. gingivalis fimbriae contained endotoxin at an equivalence of
1-3μglipopolysaccharides(LPS)/mg protein. The endotoxin could be reduced to the
equivalent of 1ng-LPS/mg protein by phase separation using Triton X-114.
Unfractionated fimbriae caused serum-dependent priming of neutrophils for
enhanced respiratory burst, but both native and denatured forms of Triton
X-114-fractionated fimbriae were not active at 100μg/mL. Unfractionated fimbriae 
induced serum-dependent production of IL-1β by MNC. Triton X-114-fractionated
fimbriae (10μg/mL)-induced production of IL-1β, IL-8 or TNF-α was much lower than
that induced by unfractionated fimbriae or 10ng/mL P. gingivalis-LPS preparation.
Triton X-114-fractionated fimbriae immobilized on polystyrene tubes induced
adhesion-stimulated superoxide release by LPS-primed neutrophils in a β2
integrin-dependent manner. P. gingivalis cells caused priming of neutrophils;
however, Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 antagonists did not affect this response.
Thus, P. gingivalis fimbriae were ineffective in inducing innate immune response 
in leukocytes; however, they induced β2 integrin-mediated response by
neutrophils. Immune-stimulatory components of P. gingivalis might be recognized
by receptors other than TLR4.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2016.11.012 
PMID: 27913143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

