
1. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2017 Feb;64(2):158-163. doi: 10.1111/lam.12697.

Effect of rhizobacterial consortia from undisturbed arid- and agro-ecosystems on 
wheat growth under different conditions.

Inostroza NG(1), Barra PJ(1), Wick LY(2), Mora ML(1), Jorquera MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Plant, Soil interaction and Natural Resources Biotechnology,
Scientific and Technological Bioresource Nucleus, Universidad de La Frontera,
Temuco, Chile.
(2)Department of Environmental Microbiology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental
Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany.

Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) are studied as
complements/alternatives to chemical fertilizers used in agriculture. However,
poor information exists on the potential of PGPR from undisturbed ecosystems.
Here, we have evaluated the plant growth-promoting (PGP) effect of rhizobacterial
consortia from undisturbed Chilean arid ecosystems (Consortium C1) and
agro-ecosystems (Consortium C2) on plant biomass production. The PGP effects of
C1 and C2 were assayed in wheat seedlings (Triticum aestivum L.) grown in pots
under growth chamber conditions and in pots placed in an open greenhouse under
natural conditions, using two different Chilean Andisols (Piedras Negras and
Freire series) kept either at 30 or 60% of their maximum water holding capacity
(MWHC). PGP effects depended on the soil type, MWHC and the growth conditions
tested. Although both consortia showed PGB effects in artificial soils relative
to controls in growth chambers, only C1 provoked a PGP effect at 60% MWHC in
phosphorus-poor soil of the 'Piedras Negras' series. At natural conditions,
however, only C1 exhibited statistically significant PGP effects at 30% MWHC in
'Piedras Negras', yet and most importantly allowed to maintain similar plant
biomass as at 60% MWHC. Our results support possible applications of
rhizobacterial consortia from arid ecosystems to improve wheat growth in Chilean 
Andisols under water shortage conditions.SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY:
Wheat seedling inoculated with rhizobacterial consortia obtained from an
undisturbed Chilean arid ecosystem showed improved growth in phosphorus-poor and 
partly dry soil. Arid ecosystems should be considered in further studies as an
alternative source of microbial inoculants for agro-ecosystems subjected to
stressful conditions by low nutrients and/or adverse climate events.

Â© 2016 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.12697 
PMID: 27914208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

