
1. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2017;18(5):412-424. doi:
10.2174/1389203717666161201203311.

Structure, Function and Evolution of Clostridium botulinum C2 and C3 Toxins:
Insight to Poultry and Veterinary Vaccines.

Chellapandi P(1), Prisilla A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Systems Engineering Lab, Department of Bioinformatics, School of
Life Sciences, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli-620 024, Tamil Nadu.
India.

Clostridium botulinum group III strains are able to produce cytotoxins, C2 toxin 
and C3 exotoxin, along with botulinum neurotoxin types C and D. C2 toxin and C3
exotoxin produced by this organism are the most important members of bacterial
ADP-ribosyltransferase superfamily. Both toxins have distinct pathophysiological 
functions in the avian and mammalian hosts. The members of this superfamily
transfer an ADP-ribose moiety of NAD+ to specific eukaryotic target proteins. The
present review describes the structure, function and evolution aspects of these
toxins with a special emphasis to the development of veterinary vaccines. C2
toxin is a binary toxin that consists of a catalytic subunit (C2I) and a
translocation subunit (C2II). C2I component is structurally and functionally
similar to the VIP2 and iota A toxin whereas C2II component shows a significant
homology with the protective antigen from anthrax toxin and iota B. Unlike C2
toxin, C3 toxin is devoid of translocation/binding subunit. Extensive studies on 
their sequence-structure-function link spawn additional efforts to understand the
catalytic mechanisms and target recognition. Structural and functional
relationships with them are often determined by using evolutionary constraints as
valuable biological measures. Enzyme-deficient mutants derived from these toxins 
have been used as drug/protein delivery systems in eukaryotic cells. Thus,
current knowledge on their molecular diversity is a well-known perspective to
design immunotoxin or subunit vaccine for C. botulinum infection.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1389203717666161201203311 
PMID: 27915984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

