
1. Iran J Microbiol. 2016 Jun;8(3):187-192.

Phylogenetic background of enterotoxigenic and enteroinvasive Escherichia coli
from patients with diarrhea in Sirjan, Iran.

Hoseinzadeh T(1), Ghanbarpour R(2), Rokhbakhsh-Zamin F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Kerman Branch, Islamic Azad University, Kerman, Iran.
(2)Molecular Microbiology Department, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Shahid
Bahonar University, Kerman, Iran.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Diarrheagenic Escherichia coli (DEC) strains are a
major cause of intestinal syndromes in the developing countries. The aim of this 
study was to determine the prevalence of enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) and
enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) in relation to phylogenetic background from
patients with diarrhea.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 110 E. coli isolates were obtained from
diarrhea patients in Sirjan, southeast of Iran. The E. coli isolates were
confirmed using biochemical and bacteriological tests. DNA of E. coli isolates
was extracted by boiling method and checked for existence of ETEC (LT and ST
genes) and EIEC (ipaH gene) pathotypes and also characterize the phylogenetic
groups on the basis of presence or absence of the chuA, yjaA genes and an
anonymous DNA fragment, TspE4. C2 by multiplex PCR.
RESULTS: Out of 110 E. coli isolates, 32 (29.09%) were positive for ETEC (LT and 
ST genes) and 6 (5.45%) possessed EIEC (ipaH gene) pathotypes. Isolates fall into
four phylogenetic groups: A (39.09%), B1 (20%), B2 (15.45%) and D (25.45%).
Phylotyping of isolates of DEC indicated they were distributed in four
phylogenetic groups including A (12 isolates), B1 (7), B2 (9) and D (10).
CONCLUSION: In this study, the DEC isolates were segregated into different
phylogenetic groups. The majority of isolates belonged to phylo-groups A and D.


PMCID: PMC5139922
PMID: 27928486 

