
1. J Bacteriol. 2017 Jan 30;199(4). pii: e00675-16. doi: 10.1128/JB.00675-16. Print 
2017 Feb 15.

A Sulfur Oxygenase from the Haloalkaliphilic Bacterium Thioalkalivibrio paradoxus
with Atypically Low Reductase Activity.

Rühl P(1), Pöll U(1), Braun J(1), Klingl A(2), Kletzin A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Sulfur Biochemistry and Microbial Bioenergetics, Department of Biology,
Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany.
(2)Plant Development, Department of Biology I, Biocenter LMU Munich,
Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
(3)Sulfur Biochemistry and Microbial Bioenergetics, Department of Biology,
Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany kletzin@bio.tu-darmstadt.de.

Sequence comparisons showed that the sulfur oxygenase reductase (SOR) of the
haloalkaliphilic bacterium Thioalkalivibrio paradoxus Arh 1 (TpSOR) is branching 
deeply within dendrograms of these proteins (29 to 34% identity). A synthetic
gene encoding TpSOR expressed in Escherichia coli resulted in a protein 14.7 ±
0.9 nm in diameter and an apparent molecular mass of 556 kDa. Sulfite and
thiosulfate were formed from elemental sulfur in a temperature range of 10 to
98°C (optimum temperature ≈ 80°C) and a pH range of 6 to 11.5 (optimum pH ≈ 9;
308 ± 78 U/mg of protein). Sulfide formation had a maximum specific activity of
0.03 U/mg, or <1% of the corresponding activity of other SORs. Hence, reductase
activity seems not to be an integral part of the reaction mechanism. TpSOR was
most active at NaCl or glycine betaine concentrations of 0 to 1 M, although 0.2% 
of the maximal activity was detected even at 5 M NaCl and 4 M betaine. The
melting point of TpSOR was close to 80°C, when monitored by circular dichroism
spectroscopy or differential scanning fluorimetry; however, the denaturation
kinetics were slow: 55% of the residual activity remained after 25 min of
incubation at 80°C. Site-directed mutagenesis showed that the active-site residue
Cys44 is essential for activity, whereas alanine mutants of the two other
conserved cysteines retained about 0.5% residual activity. A model of the sulfur 
metabolism in T. paradoxus is discussed.IMPORTANCE: Sulfur oxygenase reductases
(SORs) are the only enzymes catalyzing an oxygen-dependent disproportionation of 
elemental sulfur and/or polysulfides to sulfite, thiosulfate, and hydrogen
sulfide. SORs are known from mesophilic and extremophilic archaea and bacteria.
All SORs seem to form highly thermostable 24-subunit hollow spheres. They carry a
low-potential mononuclear nonheme iron in the active site and an indispensable
cysteine; however, their exact reaction mechanisms are unknown. Typically, the
reductase activity of SORs is in the range of 5 to 50% of the oxygenase activity,
but mutagenesis studies had so far failed to identify residues crucial for the
reductase reaction. We describe here the first SOR, which is almost devoid of the
reductase reaction and which comes from a haloalkaliphilic bacterium.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00675-16 
PMCID: PMC5287398
PMID: 27920296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

