
1. Autophagy. 2017 Feb;13(2):264-284. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2016.1260808. Epub 2016 
Dec 8.

Autophagic homeostasis is required for the pluripotency of cancer stem cells.

Sharif T(1), Martell E(1), Dai C(1), Kennedy BE(1), Murphy P(1), Clements DR(2), 
Kim Y(2), Lee PW(1)(2), Gujar SA(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Microbiology and Immunology , Dalhousie University , Halifax ,
Nova Scotia , Canada.
(2)b Department of Pathology , Dalhousie University , Halifax , Nova Scotia ,
Canada.
(3)c Centre for Innovative and Collaborative Health Services Research, Quality
and System Performance, IWK Health Centre , Halifax , Nova Scotia , Canada.

Pluripotency is an important feature of cancer stem cells (CSCs) that contributes
to self-renewal and chemoresistance. The maintenance of pluripotency of CSCs
under various pathophysiological conditions requires a complex interaction
between various cellular pathways including those involved in homeostasis and
energy metabolism. However, the exact mechanisms that maintain the CSC
pluripotency remain poorly understood. In this report, using both human and
murine models of CSCs, we demonstrate that basal levels of autophagy are required
to maintain the pluripotency of CSCs, and that this process is differentially
regulated by the rate-limiting enzyme in the NAD+ synthesis pathway NAMPT
(nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase) and the transcription factor POU5F1/OCT4
(POU class 5 homeobox 1). First, our data show that the pharmacological
inhibition and knockdown (KD) of NAMPT or the KD of POU5F1 in human CSCs
significantly decreased the expression of pluripotency markers POU5F1, NANOG
(Nanog homeobox) and SOX2 (SRY-box 2), and upregulated the differentiation
markers TUBB3 (tubulin β 3 class III), CSN2 (casein β), SPP1 (secreted
phosphoprotein 1), GATA6 (GATA binding protein 6), T (T brachyury transcription
factor) and CDX2 (caudal type homeobox 2). Interestingly, these
pluripotency-regulating effects of NAMPT and POU5F1 were accompanied by
contrasting levels of autophagy, wherein NAMPT KD promoted while POU5F1 KD
inhibited the autophagy machinery. Most importantly, any deviation from the basal
level of autophagy, either increase (via rapamycin, serum starvation or
Tat-beclin 1 [Tat-BECN1] peptide) or decrease (via ATG7 or ATG12 KD), strongly
decreased the pluripotency and promoted the differentiation and/or senescence of 
CSCs. Collectively, these results uncover the link between the NAD+ biosynthesis 
pathway, CSC transcription factor POU5F1 and pluripotency, and further identify
autophagy as a novel regulator of pluripotency of CSCs.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2016.1260808 
PMCID: PMC5324853
PMID: 27929731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

