
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Dec 20;113(51):14852-14857. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1611184114. Epub 2016 Dec 7.

Electrotonic coupling of excitable and nonexcitable cells in the heart revealed
by optogenetics.

Quinn TA(1), Camelliti P(2), Rog-Zielinska EA(3), Siedlecka U(3), Poggioli T(3), 
O'Toole ET(4), Kn√∂pfel T(5), Kohl P(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H
4R2, Canada; alex.quinn@dal.ca peter.kohl@universitaets-herzzentrum.de.
(2)School of Biosciences and Medicine, University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7XH,
United Kingdom.
(3)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Harefield UB9 6JH,
United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309.
(5)Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, United
Kingdom.
(6)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Harefield UB9 6JH,
United Kingdom; alex.quinn@dal.ca peter.kohl@universitaets-herzzentrum.de.
(7)Institute for Experimental Cardiovascular Medicine, University Heart Centre
Freiburg/Bad Krozingen, Medical School of the University of Freiburg, 79110
Freiburg, Germany.

Electrophysiological studies of excitable organs usually focus on action
potential (AP)-generating cells, whereas nonexcitable cells are generally
considered as barriers to electrical conduction. Whether nonexcitable cells may
modulate excitable cell function or even contribute to AP conduction via direct
electrotonic coupling to AP-generating cells is unresolved in the heart: such
coupling is present in vitro, but conclusive evidence in situ is lacking. We used
genetically encoded voltage-sensitive fluorescent protein 2.3 (VSFP2.3) to
monitor transmembrane potential in either myocytes or nonmyocytes of murine
hearts. We confirm that VSFP2.3 allows measurement of cell type-specific
electrical activity. We show that VSFP2.3, expressed solely in nonmyocytes, can
report cardiomyocyte AP-like signals at the border of healed cryoinjuries. Using 
EM-based tomographic reconstruction, we further discovered tunneling nanotube
connections between myocytes and nonmyocytes in cardiac scar border tissue. Our
results provide direct electrophysiological evidence of heterocellular
electrotonic coupling in native myocardium and identify tunneling nanotubes as a 
possible substrate for electrical cell coupling that may be in addition to
previously discovered connexins at sites of myocyte-nonmyocyte contact in the
heart. These findings call for reevaluation of cardiac nonmyocyte roles in
electrical connectivity of the heterocellular heart.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1611184114 
PMCID: PMC5187735
PMID: 27930302  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

