
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Biol Lipids. 2017 Mar;1862(3):283-290. doi:
10.1016/j.bbalip.2016.12.001. Epub 2016 Dec 6.

Utilization of multiple substrates by butyrate kinase from Listeria
monocytogenes.

Sirobhushanam S(1), Galva C(1), Saunders LP(1), Sen S(1), Jayaswal R(1),
Wilkinson BJ(1), Gatto C(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Illinois State University, Normal, IL 61790,
United States.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Illinois State University, Normal, IL 61790,
United States. Electronic address: cgatto@ilstu.edu.

Listeria monocytogenes, the causative agent of listeriosis, can build up to
dangerous levels in refrigerated foods potentially leading to expensive product
recalls. An important aspect of the bacterium's growth at low temperatures is its
ability to increase the branched-chain fatty acid anteiso C15:0 content of its
membrane at lower growth temperatures, which imparts greater membrane fluidity.
Mutants in the branched-chain α-keto dehydrogenase (bkd) complex are deficient in
branched-chain fatty acids (BCFAs,) but these can be restored by feeding C4 and
C5 branched-chain carboxylic acids (BCCAs). This suggests the presence of an
alternate pathway for production of acyl CoA precursors for fatty acid
biosynthesis. We hypothesize that the alternate pathway is composed of butyrate
kinase (buk) and phosphotransbutyrylase (ptb) encoded in the bkd complex which
produce acyl CoA products by their sequential action through the metabolism of
carboxylic acids. We determined the steady state kinetics of recombinant
His-tagged Buk using 11 different straight-chain and BCCA substrates in the acyl 
phosphate forming direction. Buk demonstrated highest catalytic efficiency with
pentanoate as the substrate. Low product formation observed with acetate (C2) and
hexanoate (C6) as the substrates indicates that Buk is not involved in either
acetate metabolism or long chain carboxylic acid activation. We were also able to
show that Buk catalysis occurs through a ternary complex intermediate.
Additionally, Buk demonstrates a strong preference for BCCAs at low temperatures.
These results indicate that Buk may be involved in the activation and
assimilation of exogenous carboxylic acids for membrane fatty acid biosynthesis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2016.12.001 
PMCID: PMC5263062
PMID: 27940001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

