
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2017 Jan 22;482(4):1367-1374. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.12.043. Epub 2016 Dec 9.

The new obesity-associated protein, neuronal growth regulator 1 (NEGR1), is
implicated in Niemann-Pick disease Type C (NPC2)-mediated cholesterol
trafficking.

Kim H(1), Chun Y(1), Che L(1), Kim J(1), Lee S(2), Lee S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Chungnam National
University, Daejeon, 34134, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul, 03080, Republic of 
Korea.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Chungnam National
University, Daejeon, 34134, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
leesoojin@cnu.ac.kr.

Neuronal growth regulator 1 (NEGR1) is a newly identified raft-associated
protein, which has recently been spotlighted as a new locus related to human
obesity. Niemann-Pick disease Type C2 (NPC2) protein functions as a key player in
the intracellular cholesterol trafficking, and its defect is linked to a fatal
human neurodegenerative disease, NPC. In this study, we identified that NEGR1
interacts with NPC2 and increases its protein stability. Ectopically expressed
NEGR1 proteins relieved an abnormal cholesterol accumulation in endosomal
compartments. Importantly, NEGR1-defective mouse embryonic fibroblast cells
exhibit increased cholesterol levels and triglyceride contents. These findings
provide the first insight into the role of NEGR1 in intracellular cholesterol
homeostasis, possibly explaining the missing link between NEGR1 with human
obesity.

Copyright Â© 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.12.043 
PMID: 27940359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

