
1. Turk J Haematol. 2017 Dec 1;34(4):314-320. doi: 10.4274/tjh.2016.0214. Epub 2016 
Dec 12.

Flow Cytometric Aldehyde Dehydrogenase Assay Enables a Fast and Accurate Human
Umbilical Cord Blood Hematopoietic Stem Cell Assessment.

Gençer EB(1)(2), Yurdakul P(1)(3), Dalva K(4), Beksaç M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Cord Blood Bank, Ankara, Turkey
(2)Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Biotechnology Institute, Ankara, Turkey
(3)TOBB Economics Technology and University Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Medical Microbiology, Ankara, Turkey
(4)Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Stem Cell Research Institute, Ankara,
Turkey
(5)Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Hematology, Ankara,
Turkey

OBJECTIVE: Colony-forming units of granulocytes/macrophages (CFU-GM) analysis is 
the most widely used method to determine the hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
content of human umbilical cord blood (CB) for prediction of engraftment
potential. The measurement of aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity is a more
recent method for HSC qualification. Our aim was to correlate phenotypic and
functional assays to find the most predictive method.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, flow cytometric quantitation of CD34+ cells
and ALDH positivity along with CFU-GM capacity were assessed in fresh and
post-thaw CB units.
RESULTS: Among 30 post-processing samples, for each CB unit the mean total number
of nucleated cells (TNCs) was (93.8±30.1)x107, CD34+ cells were (3.85±2.55)x106, 
ALDH+ cells were (3.14±2.55)x106, and CFU-GM count was (2.64±1.96)x105. Among an 
additional 19 post-thaw samples the cell counts were as follows: TNCs,
(32.79±17.27)x107; CD34+, (2.18±3.17)x106; ALDH+, (2.01±2.81)x106; CFU-GM,
(0.74±0.92)x105. Our findings showed that in fresh samples TNCs, CD34+ cells, and
ALDH correlated highly with counts of CFU-GM,
CFU-erythroids/granulocytes-macrophages/megakaryocytic cells (GEMM), and burst
forming units of erythroids (BFU-E) as follows: TNCs, r=0.47, r=0.35, r=0.41;
CD34+, r=0.44, r=0.54, r=0.41; and ALDH, r=0.63, r=0.45, r=0.6, respectively. In 
terms of post-thaw samples, the correlations were as follows: TNCs, r=0.59,
r=0.46, r=0.56; CD34+, r=0.67, r=0.48, r=0.61; and ALDH, r=0.61, r=0.67, r=0.67, 
for CFU-GM, CFU-GEMM, and BFU-E, respectively. All correlations were
statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: In our experience, HSC assessment by ALDH activity yields the highest
correlation with conventional analytical methods, particularly for post-thaw
samples. Thus, this fast, inexpensive method has the potential to overcome the
weaknesses of other techniques.

Publisher: Amaç: Granülositer makrofaj koloni oluşturma (CFU-GM) testi kordon
kanı (KK) hematopoietik kök hücre engrafman potensiyelini ölçmek için kullanılan 
bir yöntemdir. Aldehit dehidrogenaz (ALDH) enzimi ölçüm yöntemide hematopoetik
kök hücre (HKH) kalitesini belirlemek amacıyla kullanılan daha yeni bir metottur.
Çalışmamızda fenotipik ve fonksiyonel olarak korelasyon analizi yapılarak HKH
ölçümünde en etkili metodu bulmayı amaçladık. Gereç ve Yöntemler: Bu çalışmada
taze ve donma çözme sonrası KK ünitelerinde CD34+ ve ALDH+ hücrelerle CFU-GM
kapasiteleri araştırılmıştır.  Bulgular: Otuz taze KK ünitesinde her KK için
ortalama değerler: Toplam çekirdekli hücre sayısı (TNC): 93,8±30,1x107, CD34+:
3,85±2,55x106, ALDH+: 3,14±2,55 x106, CFU-GM: 2,64±1,96x105. On dokuz KK
ünitesinde donma çözme sonrası hücre değerleri: TNC: 32,79±17,27x107, CD34+:
2,18±3,17x106, ALDH+: 2,01±2,81x106, CFU-GM: 0,74±0,92x105’dir. Bulgularımız;
taze KK’da TNC, CD34 ve ALDH; CFU-GM, CFU-GEMM ve BFU-E ile korelasyon
gösterirken (TNC, r=0,47, r=0,35, r=0,41; CD34+, r=0,44, r=0,54 r=0,41; ve ALDH, 
r=0,63 r=0,45 r=0,6) donma çözme sonrası KK’da korelasyon sırasıyla CFU-GM,
CFU-GEMM, ve BFU-E için, TNC r=0,59, r=0,46, r=0,56, CD34+ r=0,67, r=0,48, r=0,61
ve ALDH r=0,61, r=0,67, r=0,67 olarak saptanmıştır. Bütün bulgularımız
istatistiksel olarak anlamlı çıkmıştır.  Sonuç: Çalışmamız, ALDH aktivitesi tayin
metodu HKH tayininde geleneksel yöntemlerle özellikle donma çözme sonrası
örnekler açısından korelasyon göstermiştir. Böylelikle hızlı, ucuz bir metod
olarak ALDH diğer HKH belirlemede kullanılan yöntemlere üstün olabilecek
kapasitededir. Anahtar Sözcükler: Göbek kordon kanı, Aldehit dehidrogenaz, Koloni
oluşturan birim granülositer/makrofaj.
DOI: 10.4274/tjh.2016.0214 
PMCID: PMC5774350
PMID: 27956370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

