
1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jan 31;8(5):7740-7752. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.13946.

Leptin-Notch signaling axis is involved in pancreatic cancer progression.

Harbuzariu A(1), Rampoldi A(1), Daley-Brown DS(1), Candelaria P(1), Harmon TL(1),
Lipsey CC(1), Beech DJ(2), Quarshie A(3), Ilies GO(4), Gonzalez-Perez RR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Immunology, Morehouse School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 30310 USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 30310 USA.
(3)Biomedical Informatics Program and Master of Science in Clinical Research
Program, Clinical Research Center, Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30310, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, GA, 30303 USA.

Pancreatic cancer (PC) shows a high death rate. PC incidence and prognosis are
affected by obesity, a pandemic characterized by high levels of leptin. Notch is 
upregulated by leptin in breast cancer. Thus, leptin and Notch crosstalk could
influence PC progression. Here we investigated in PC cell lines (BxPC-3,
MiaPaCa-2, Panc-1, AsPC-1), derived tumorspheres and xenografts whether a
functional leptin-Notch axis affects PC progression and expansion of pancreatic
cancer stem cells (PCSC). PC cells and tumorspheres were treated with leptin and 
inhibitors of Notch (gamma-secretase inhibitor, DAPT) and leptin (iron oxide
nanoparticle-leptin peptide receptor antagonist 2, IONP-LPrA2). Leptin treatment 
increased cell cycle progression and proliferation, and the expression of Notch
receptors, ligands and targeted molecules (Notch1-4, DLL4, JAG1, Survivin and
Hey2), PCSC markers (CD24/CD44/ESA, ALDH, CD133, Oct-4), ABCB1 protein, as well
as tumorsphere formation. Leptin-induced effects on PC and tumorspheres were
decreased by IONP-LPrA2 and DAPT. PC cells secreted leptin and expressed the
leptin receptor, OB-R, which indicates a leptin autocrine/paracrine signaling
loop could also affect tumor progression. IONP-LPrA2 treatment delayed the onset 
of MiaPaCa-2 xenografts, and decreased tumor growth and the expression of
proliferation and PCSC markers. Present data suggest that leptin-Notch axis is
involved in PC. PC has no targeted therapy and is mainly treated with
chemotherapy, whose efficiency could be decreased by leptin and Notch activities.
Thus, the leptin-Notch axis could be a novel therapeutic target, particularly for
obese PC patients.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.13946 
PMCID: PMC5352357
PMID: 27999190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

