
1. Molecules. 2016 Dec 17;21(12). pii: E1741. doi: 10.3390/molecules21121741.

DeBouganin Diabody Fusion Protein Overcomes Drug Resistance to ADCs Comprised of 
Anti-Microtubule Agents.

Chooniedass S(1), Dillon RL(2), Premsukh A(3), Hudson PJ(4), Adams GP(5),
MacDonald GC(6), Cizeau J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Viventia Bio Inc., Winnipeg, MB R3T 3Z1, Canada. SChooniedass@viventia.com.
(2)Viventia Bio Inc., Winnipeg, MB R3T 3Z1, Canada. RDillon@viventia.com.
(3)Viventia Bio Inc., Winnipeg, MB R3T 3Z1, Canada. APremsukh@Viventia.com.
(4)Avipep Pty Ltd., Parkville 3052, Victoria, Australia.
Peter.Hudson@avipep.com.au.
(5)Eleven Biotherapeutics, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. GAdams@viventia.com.
(6)Eleven Biotherapeutics, Winnipeg, MB R3E 0W3, Canada.
glen.macdonald@eleven.com.
(7)Viventia Bio Inc., Winnipeg, MB R3T 3Z1, Canada. JCizeau@viventia.com.

Antibody drug conjugates (ADC), comprised of highly potent small molecule
payloads chemically conjugated to a full-length antibody, represent a growing
class of therapeutic agents. The targeting of cytotoxic payloads via the
specificity and selectivity of the antibody has led to substantial clinical
benefits. However, ADC potency can be altered by mechanisms of resistance such as
overexpression of efflux pumps or anti-apoptotic proteins. DeBouganin is a
de-immunized variant of bouganin, a ribosome-inactivating protein (RIP) that
blocks protein synthesis, thereby leading to apoptosis. When conjugated to
trastuzumab (T-deB), deBouganin was more potent than ado-trastuzumab-emtansine
(T-DM1) and unaffected by resistance mechanisms to which DM1 is susceptible. To
further highlight the differentiating mechanism of action of deBouganin, HCC1419 
and BT-474 tumor cells that survived T-DM1 or trastuzumab-MMAE (T-MMAE) treatment
were treated with an anti-HER2 C6.5 diabody-deBouganin fusion protein or T-deB.
C6.5 diabody-deBouganin and T-deB were potent against HCC1419 and BT-474 cells
that were resistant to T-DM1 or T-MMAE killing. The resistant phenotype involved 
MDR pumps, Bcl-2 family members, and the presence of additional unknown pathways.
Overall, the data suggest that deBouganin is effective against tumor cell
resistance mechanisms selected in response to ADCs composed of anti-microtubule
payloads.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules21121741 
PMCID: PMC6273041
PMID: 27999336  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

