
1. J Biol Chem. 2017 Feb 3;292(5):1559-1572. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.759811. Epub 2016
Dec 19.

Stabilization of Nucleotide Binding Domain Dimers Rescues ABCC6 Mutants
Associated with Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum.

Ran Y(1), Thibodeau PH(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Pittsburgh, School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15219.
(2)From the Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Pittsburgh, School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15219. Electronic
address: thibodea@pitt.edu.

ABC transporters are polytopic membrane proteins that utilize ATP binding and
hydrolysis to facilitate transport across biological membranes. Forty-eight human
ABC transporters have been identified in the genome, and the majority of these
are linked to heritable disease. Mutations in the ABCC6 (ATP binding cassette
transporter C6) ABC transporter are associated with pseudoxanthoma elasticum, a
disease of altered elastic properties in multiple tissues. Although ∼200
mutations have been identified in pseudoxanthoma elasticum patients, the
underlying structural defects associated with the majority of these are poorly
understood. To evaluate the structural consequences of these missense mutations, 
a combination of biophysical and cell biological approaches were applied to
evaluate the local and global folding and assembly of the ABCC6 protein.
Structural and bioinformatic analyses suggested that a cluster of mutations,
representing roughly 20% of the patient population with identified missense
mutations, are located in the interface between the transmembrane domain and the 
C-terminal nucleotide binding domain. Biochemical and cell biological analyses
demonstrate these mutations influence multiple steps in the biosynthetic pathway,
minimally altering local domain structure but adversely impacting ABCC6 assembly 
and trafficking. The differential impacts on local and global protein structure
are consistent with hierarchical folding and assembly of ABCC6. Stabilization of 
specific domain-domain interactions via targeted amino acid substitution in the
catalytic site of the C-terminal nucleotide binding domain restored proper
protein trafficking and cell surface localization of multiple biosynthetic
mutants. This rescue provides a specific mechanism by which chemical chaperones
could be developed for the correction of ABCC6 biosynthetic defects.

© 2017 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.759811 
PMCID: PMC5290935
PMID: 27994049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

