
1. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2017 Sep;9(3):278-283. doi:
10.1007/s12602-016-9246-6.

Effect of Lactobacillus reuteri on Cell Viability and PGE2 Production in Human
Gingival Fibroblasts.

A Castiblanco G(1), Yucel-Lindberg T(2), Roos S(3), Twetman S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Odontology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University
of Copenhagen, Nørre Allé 20, DK-2200, Copenhagen N, Denmark. gcrubio@sund.ku.dk.
(2)Division of Periodontology, Department of Dental Medicine, Karolinska
Institutet, Alfred Nobels Allé 8, SE-141 52, Huddinge, Sweden.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Uppsala BioCenter, Swedish University of
Agricultural Sciences, Almas Allé 8, Box 7025, SE-750 07, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Department of Odontology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University
of Copenhagen, Nørre Allé 20, DK-2200, Copenhagen N, Denmark.

Erratum in
    Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2017 Jun;9(2):213.

Emerging evidence suggests that probiotic therapy can play a role in the
prevention and management of oral inflammatory diseases through immunomodulation 
and down-regulation of the inflammatory cascade. The aim of this in vitro study
was to investigate the viability of human gingival fibroblasts (HGF) and its
production of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), when exposed to supernatants of two mixed 
Lactobacillus reuteri strains (ATCC PTA 5289 and DSM 17938). The experiments were
conducted in the presence and absence of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1β. L. 
reuteri strains were grown and the bacterial supernatant was collected. The
cell-free supernatant was diluted to concentrations equivalent to the ones
produced by 0.5 to 5.0 × 107 CFU/mL bacteria. Cell viability was assessed with
the MTT colorimetric assay and the amount of PGE2 in the cell culture medium was 
determined using the monoclonal enzyme immune assay kits. Our findings showed
that none of the L. reuteri supernatants were cytotoxic or affected the viability
of HGF. The most concentrated bacterial supernatant stimulated the production of 
PGE2 by the gingival cells in a significant way in the presence of IL-1β
(p < 0.05), suggesting that bacterial products secreted from L. reuteri might
play a role in the resolution of inflammation in HGF. Thus, our findings justify 
further investigations on the influence of probiotic bacteria on gingival
inflammatory reactions.

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-016-9246-6 
PMID: 28028690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

