
1. J Hazard Mater. 2017 Apr 5;327:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2016.12.038. Epub
2016 Dec 21.

A key esterase required for the mineralization of quizalofop-p-ethyl by a natural
consortium of Rhodococcus sp. JT-3 and Brevundimonas sp. JT-9.

Zhang H(1), Li M(1), Li J(1), Wang G(2), Li F(1), Xu D(1), Liu Y(1), Xiong M(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Huaibei Normal University, Huaibei 235000, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Huaibei Normal University, Huaibei 235000, China.
Electronic address: guangliwang@aliyun.com.

A natural consortium, named L1, of Rhodococcus sp. JT-3 and Brevundimonas sp.
JT-9 was obtained from quizalofop-p-ethyl (QE) polluted soil. The consortium was 
able to use QE as a sole carbon source for growth and degraded 100mgL-1 of QE in 
60h. Strain JT-3 initiated the catabolism of QE to quizalofop acid (QA), which
was used by strain JT-9 as carbon source for growth and to simultaneously feed
strain JT-3. A novel esterase EstS-JT, which was responsible for the
transformation of QE to QA and essential for the mineralization of QE by the
consortium, was cloned from strain JT-3. EstS-JT showed low amino acid identity
to other reported esterases from esterase family VIII and represents a new member
of this family. The deduced amino acid sequence contained the esterase family
VIII conserved motifs S-X-X-K, YSV and WAG. The purified recombinant EstS-JT
displayed maximal esterase activity at 35°C and pH 7.5. An inhibitor assay,
site-directed mutagenesis and 3D modeling analysis revealed that S64, K67 and
Y175 were essential for catalysis and probably comprised the catalytic center of 
EstS-JT. Additionally, EstS-JT had broad substrate specificity and was capable of
hydrolyzing p-nitrophenyl esters (C2-C8) and various AOPP herbicides.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2016.12.038 
PMID: 28027504  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

