
1. Immune Netw. 2016 Dec;16(6):322-329. doi: 10.4110/in.2016.16.6.322. Epub 2016 Dec
22.

Unusual CD4+CD28- T Cells and Their Pathogenic Role in Chronic Inflammatory
Disorders.

Lee GH(1), Lee WW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of
Medicine and BK21Plus Biomedical Science Project, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul 03080, Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of
Medicine and BK21Plus Biomedical Science Project, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul 03080, Korea.; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Seoul National University College of Medicine; Ischemic/Hypoxic
Disease Institute and Institute of Infectious Diseases, Seoul National University
College of Medicine; Seoul National University Hospital Biomedical Research
Institute, Seoul 03080, Korea.

CD28 is a primary co-stimulatory receptor that is essential for successful T cell
activation, proliferation, and survival. While ubiquitously expressed on naive T 
cells, the level of CD28 expression on memory T cells is largely dependent on the
T-cell differentiation stage in humans. Expansion of circulating T cells lacking 
CD28 was originally considered a hallmark of age-associated immunological changes
in humans, with a progressive loss of CD28 following replicative senescence with 
advancing age. However, an increasing body of evidence has revealed that there is
a significant age-inappropriate expansion of CD4+CD28- T cells in patients with a
variety of chronic inflammatory diseases, suggesting that these cells play a role
in their pathogenesis. In fact, expanded CD4+CD28- T cells can produce large
amounts of proinflammatory cytokines such as IFN-γ and TNF-α and also have
cytotoxic potential, which may cause tissue damage and development of
pathogenesis in many inflammatory disorders. Here we review the characteristics
of CD4+CD28- T cells as well as the recent advances highlighting the contribution
of these cells to several disease conditions.

DOI: 10.4110/in.2016.16.6.322 
PMCID: PMC5195841
PMID: 28035207 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest with the contents of this article.

