
1. PLoS One. 2017 Jan 3;12(1):e0169119. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0169119.
eCollection 2017.

Human and Mouse Hematopoietic Stem Cells Are a Depot for Dormant Mycobacterium
tuberculosis.

Tornack J(1), Reece ST(2), Bauer WM(3), Vogelzang A(2), Bandermann S(2), Zedler
U(2), Stingl G(3), Kaufmann SH(2), Melchers F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Senior Group on Lymphocyte Development, Max Planck Institute for Infection
Biology, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Immunology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, 
Germany.
(3)Division of Immunology, Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Department of
Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

An estimated third of the world's population is latently infected with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), with no clinical signs of tuberculosis (TB),
but lifelong risk of reactivation to active disease. The niches of persisting
bacteria during latent TB infection remain unclear. We detect Mtb DNA in
peripheral blood selectively in long-term repopulating pluripotent hematopoietic 
stem cells (LT-pHSCs) as well as in mesenchymal stem cells from latently infected
human donors. In mice infected with low numbers of Mtb, that do not develop
active disease we, again, find LT-pHSCs selectively infected with Mtb. In human
and mouse LT-pHSCs Mtb are stressed or dormant, non-replicating bacteria.
Intratracheal injection of Mtb-infected human and mouse LT-pHSCs into
immune-deficient mice resuscitates Mtb to replicating bacteria within the lung,
accompanied by signs of active infection. We conclude that LT-pHSCs, together
with MSCs of Mtb-infected humans and mice serve as a hitherto unappreciated
quiescent cellular depot for Mtb during latent TB infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0169119 
PMCID: PMC5207496
PMID: 28046053  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

