
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 3;7:39751. doi: 10.1038/srep39751.

Soluble OX40L and JAG1 Induce Selective Proliferation of Functional Regulatory
T-Cells Independent of canonical TCR signaling.

Kumar P(1), Alharshawi K(1), Bhattacharya P(1), Marinelarena A(1), Haddad C(1),
Sun Z(2), Chiba S(3), Epstein AL(4), Prabhakar BS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois-College of
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope, Duarte,
CA, USA.
(3)Department of Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba,
Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California Keck School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Regulatory T-cells (Tregs) play a pivotal role in maintaining peripheral
tolerance. Increasing Treg numbers/functions has been shown to ameliorate
autoimmune diseases. However, common Treg expansion approaches use T-Cell
Receptor (TCR)-mediated stimulation which also causes proliferation of effector
T-cells (Teff). To overcome this limitation, purified patient-specific Tregs are 
expanded ex vivo and transfused. Although promising, this approach is not
suitable for routine clinical use. Therefore, an alternative approach to
selectively expand functional Tregs in vivo is highly desired. We report a novel 
TCR-independent strategy for the selective proliferation of Foxp3+Tregs (without 
Teff proliferation), by co-culturing CD4+ T-cells with OX40 L+Jagged(JAG)-1+ bone
marrow-derived DCs differentiated with GM-CSF or treating them with soluble
OX40 L and JAG1 in the presence of exogenous IL-2. Tregs expanded using soluble
OX40 L and JAG1 were of suppressive phenotype and delayed the onset of diabetes
in NOD mice. Ligation of OX40 L and JAG1 with their cognate-receptors OX40 and
Notch3, preferentially expressed on Tregs but not on Teff cells, was required for
selective Treg proliferation. Soluble OX40L-JAG1-induced NF-κB activation as well
as IL-2-induced STAT5 activation were essential for the proliferation of Tregs
with sustained Foxp3 expression. Altogether, these findings demonstrate the
utility of soluble OX40 L and JAG1 to induce TCR-independent Treg proliferation.

DOI: 10.1038/srep39751 
PMCID: PMC5206631
PMID: 28045060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

