
1. J Korean Med Sci. 2017 Feb;32(2):186-194. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2017.32.2.186.

Enhancement of Gastric Ulcer Healing and Angiogenesis by Hepatocyte Growth Factor
Gene Mediated by Attenuated Salmonella in Rats.

Ha X(1), Peng J(2), Zhao H(2), Deng Z(2), Dong J(2), Fan H(2), Zhao Y(2), Li
B(2), Feng Q(2), Yang Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Lanzhou General Hospital of
Lanzhou Military Region, People's Liberation Army, Key Laboratory of Stem Cell
and Gene Drug in Gansu Province, Lanzhou, China. haxiaoqin2013@163.com.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Lanzhou General Hospital of
Lanzhou Military Region, People's Liberation Army, Key Laboratory of Stem Cell
and Gene Drug in Gansu Province, Lanzhou, China.

The present study developed an oral hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) gene therapy
strategy for gastric ulcers treatment. An attenuated Salmonella typhimurium that 
stably expressed high HGF (named as TPH) was constructed, and the antiulcerogenic
effect of TPH was evaluated in a rat model of gastric ulcers that created by
acetic acid subserosal injection. From day 5 after injection, TPH (1 × 10⁹ cfu), 
vehicle (TP, 1 × 10⁹ cfu), or sodium bicarbonate (model control) was administered
orally every alternate day for three times. Then ulcer size was measured at day
21 after ulcer induction. The ulcer area in TPH-treated group was 10.56 ± 3.30
mm², which was smaller when compared with those in the TP-treated and model
control groups (43.47 ± 4.18 and 56.25 ± 6.38 mm², respectively). A higher level 
of reepithelialization was found in TPH-treated group and the crawling length of 
gastric epithelial cells was significantly longer than in the other two groups (P
< 0.05). The microvessel density in the ulcer granulation tissues of the
TPH-treated rats was 39.9 vessels/mm², which was greater than in the TP-treated
and model control rats, with a significant statistical difference. These results 
suggest that TPH treatment significantly accelerates the healing of gastric
ulcers via stimulating proliferation of gastric epithelial cells and enhancing
angiogenesis on gastric ulcer site.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2017.32.2.186 
PMCID: PMC5219983
PMID: 28049228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of
interest to disclose.

