
1. J Innate Immun. 2017;9(3):281-299. doi: 10.1159/000453594. Epub 2017 Jan 5.

Transmembrane Mucins: Signaling Receptors at the Intersection of Inflammation and
Cancer.

van Putten JPM(1), Strijbis K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Utrecht University, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Mucosal surfaces line our body cavities and provide the interaction surface
between commensal and pathogenic microbiota and the host. The barrier function of
the mucosal layer is largely maintained by gel-forming mucin proteins that are
secreted by goblet cells. In addition, mucosal epithelial cells express
cell-bound mucins that have both barrier and signaling functions. The family of
transmembrane mucins consists of diverse members that share a few
characteristics. The highly glycosylated extracellular mucin domains inhibit
invasion by pathogenic bacteria and can form a tight mesh structure that protects
cells in harmful conditions. The intracellular tails of transmembrane mucins can 
be phosphorylated and connect to signaling pathways that regulate inflammation,
cell-cell interactions, differentiation, and apoptosis. Transmembrane mucins play
important roles in preventing infection at mucosal surfaces, but are also
renowned for their contributions to the development, progression, and metastasis 
of adenocarcinomas. In general, transmembrane mucins seem to have evolved to
monitor and repair damaged epithelia, but these functions can be highjacked by
cancer cells to yield a survival advantage. This review presents an overview of
the current knowledge of the functions of transmembrane mucins in inflammatory
processes and carcinogenesis in order to better understand the diverse functions 
of these multifunctional proteins.

Â© 2017 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000453594 
PMCID: PMC5516414
PMID: 28052300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

