
1. PLoS Pathog. 2017 Jan 4;13(1):e1006146. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006146.
eCollection 2017 Jan.

CRL4WDR1 Controls Polo-like Kinase Protein Abundance to Promote Bilobe
Duplication, Basal Body Segregation and Flagellum Attachment in Trypanosoma
brucei.

Hu H(1), Zhou Q(1), Han X(1), Li Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, McGovern Medical School,
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, United
States of America.

The Polo-like kinase homolog in Trypanosoma brucei, TbPLK, plays essential roles 
in basal body segregation, flagellum attachment and cytokinesis. The level of
TbPLK protein is tightly controlled, but the underlying mechanism remains
elusive. Here, we report a Cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase composed of Cullin4, the 
DNA damage-binding protein 1 homolog TbDDB1 and a WD40-repeat protein WDR1 that
controls TbPLK abundance in the basal body and the bilobe. WDR1, through its
C-terminal domain, interacts with the PEST motif in TbPLK and, through its
N-terminal WD40 motif, binds to TbDDB1. Depletion of WDR1 inhibits bilobe
duplication and basal body segregation, disrupts the assembly of the new
flagellum attachment zone filament and detaches the new flagellum. Consistent
with its role in TbPLK degradation, depletion of WDR1 causes excessive
accumulation of TbPLK in the basal body and the bilobe, leading to continuous
phosphorylation of TbCentrin2 in the bilobe at late cell cycle stages. Together, 
these results identify a novel WD40-repeat protein as a TbPLK receptor in the
Cullin4-DDB1 ubiquitin ligase complex for degrading TbPLK in the basal body and
the bilobe after the G1/S cell cycle transition, thereby promoting bilobe
duplication, basal body separation and flagellum-cell body adhesion.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006146 
PMCID: PMC5241021
PMID: 28052114  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare no competing interests.

