
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr. 2017 Mar;1859(3):475-483. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2017.01.010. Epub 2017 Jan 7.

Characterization of planar biomimetic lipid films composed of
phosphatidylethanolamines and phosphatidylglycerols from Escherichia coli.

Konarzewska D(1), Juhaniewicz J(1), Güzeloğlu A(1), Sęk S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Chemistry, Biological and Chemical Research Centre, University of
Warsaw, Żwirki i Wigury 101, 02-089 Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Faculty of Chemistry, Biological and Chemical Research Centre, University of
Warsaw, Żwirki i Wigury 101, 02-089 Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
slasek@chem.uw.edu.pl.

We have characterized planar lipid films composed of phosphatidylethanolamines
(PE) and phosphatidylglycerols (PG) from E. coli bacteria. The nature of the
interactions and miscibility of PE and PG components within mixed lipid films was
evaluated based on surface pressure measurements and Brewster angle microscopy
imaging at the air-water interface. We have found that PE and PG components show 
tendency to form separated domains at surface pressures relevant for biological
membranes. Further, we have directly compared mechanisms of formation of
supported lipid bilayers either on mica or Au(111) by spreading of small
unilamellar vesicles. The bilayer formation was monitored by in situ atomic force
microscopy imaging. The pathways of the vesicles spreading on each substrate are 
substantially different and the buildup of the bilayer on Au(111) occurs through 
complex multistep mechanism. The morphology and nanomechanical properties of the 
resulting PE/PG bilayers were thoroughly compared. We have found that the
interactions between lipids and supporting substrate significantly affect
molecular organization within the films since the bilayer on Au(111) is uniform
in terms of the topography, while the same lipid composition on mica results in
formation of distinct gel and liquid disordered domains. Different molecular
organization affects also nanomechanical properties of lipid films. The latter
were expressed in terms of Young's moduli and bending stiffness.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2017.01.010 
PMID: 28069413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

