
1. Chemosphere. 2017 Apr;172:120-126. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2016.12.038. Epub
2016 Dec 21.

Construction of PAH-degrading mixed microbial consortia by induced selection in
soil.

Zafra G(1), Absalón ÁE(1), Anducho-Reyes MÁ(2), Fernandez FJ(3), Cortés-Espinosa 
DV(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro de Investigación en Biotecnología
Aplicada, Carretera Estatal San Inés Tecuexcomac-Tepetitla Km 1.5, C.P. 90700,
Tepetitla de Lardizabal, Tlaxcala, Mexico.
(2)Universidad Politécnica de Pachuca, Laboratorio de Microbiología Molecular,
Carretera Pachuca-Cd, Sahagún, Km 20, Ex-Hacienda de Santa Bárbara, Zempoala,
Hidalgo, Mexico.
(3)Departamento de Biotecnología, Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana-Iztapalapa, 
Av. San Rafael Atlixco 186, Vicentina, C.P. 09340, México, D.F., Mexico.
(4)Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro de Investigación en Biotecnología
Aplicada, Carretera Estatal San Inés Tecuexcomac-Tepetitla Km 1.5, C.P. 90700,
Tepetitla de Lardizabal, Tlaxcala, Mexico. Electronic address: dcortes@ipn.mx.

Bioremediation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)-contaminated soils
through the biostimulation and bioaugmentation processes can be a strategy for
the clean-up of oil spills and environmental accidents. In this work, an induced 
microbial selection method using PAH-polluted soils was successfully used to
construct two microbial consortia exhibiting high degradation levels of low and
high molecular weight PAHs. Six fungal and seven bacterial native strains were
used to construct mixed consortia with the ability to tolerate high amounts of
phenanthrene (Phe), pyrene (Pyr) and benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) and utilize these
compounds as a sole carbon source. In addition, we used two engineered
PAH-degrading fungal strains producing heterologous ligninolytic enzymes. After a
previous selection using microbial antagonism tests, the selection was performed 
in microcosm systems and monitored using PCR-DGGE, CO2 evolution and PAH
quantitation. The resulting consortia (i.e., C1 and C2) were able to degrade up
to 92% of Phe, 64% of Pyr and 65% of BaP out of 1000 mg kg-1 of a mixture of Phe,
Pyr and BaP (1:1:1) after a two-week incubation. The results indicate that
constructed microbial consortia have high potential for soil bioremediation by
bioaugmentation and biostimulation and may be effective for the treatment of
sites polluted with PAHs due to their elevated tolerance to aromatic compounds,
their capacity to utilize them as energy source.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2016.12.038 
PMID: 28063314  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

