
1. J Neuroimmunol. 2017 Feb 15;303:81-89. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2016.12.013. Epub 
2016 Dec 30.

Fatigue favors in vitro Th1 and Th17-like cell expansion and reduces corticoid
sensitivity in MS patients.

Alvarenga-Filho H(1), Salles M(2), Hygino J(2), Ferreira TB(2), Sacramento PM(2),
Monteiro C(2), Vasconcelos CC(2), Alvarenga RM(1), Bento CA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Federal University of the State of Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Federal University of the State
of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Department of Neurology, Federal University of the State of Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil; Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Federal University of the
State of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Electronic address: cbento@unirio.br.

Fatigue is a common "ghost" symptom in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), an 
autoimmune disease mediated by T cells that target myelin antigens of the central
nervous system. As fatigue has been associated with inflammatory states, its
occurrence may negatively impact MS progression. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the impact of fatigue on the cytokine profile of patients with
relapsing-remitting (RR) MS. For our study, blood were collected from MS patients
in clinical remission phase with (n=15) and without (n=15) fatigue. Cytokines
were detected by ELISA in the plasma and supernatant collected from
anti-CD3/anti-CD28-activated T cells or LPS-stimulated monocytes. In some wells, 
different doses of hydrocortisone (HC) were added at the beginning of the
culture. Here, peripheral levels of IL-6 and TNF-α, as well as in vitro
production of cytokines related to Th17 (IL-6, IL-17, IL-22, and GM-CSF) or Th1
(IFN-γ) phenotypes, were elevated in fatigued patients and their levels were
associated with fatigue severity. The same phenomenon was observed between the
production of IL-6, TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-23 by monocytes and fatigue. Moreover,
HC was less efficient in inhibiting in vitro inflammatory cytokine production in 
patients with fatigue, mainly those produced by both CD8+ T cells and monocytes. 
Our data, although preliminary, suggests that the occurrence of fatigue, by
favoring the in vitro production of Th1/Th17-related cytokines and corticoid
resistance, may negatively impact the course of MS.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2016.12.013 
PMID: 28065580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

