
1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Dec 22;7:2074. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.02074. eCollection
2016.

Harnessing Bacterial Signals for Suppression of Biofilm Formation in the
Nosocomial Fungal Pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus.

Reen FJ(1), Phelan JP(1), Woods DF(1), Shanahan R(2), Cano R(2), Clarke S(2),
McGlacken GP(2), O'Gara F(3).

Author information: 
(1)BIOMERIT Research Centre, School of Microbiology, University College Cork -
National University of Ireland Cork, Ireland.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Analytical and Biological Chemistry Research
Facility, University College Cork - National University of Ireland Cork, Ireland.
(3)BIOMERIT Research Centre, School of Microbiology, University College Cork -
National University of IrelandCork, Ireland; School of Biomedical Sciences,
Curtin Health Innovation Research Institute, Curtin University, PerthWA,
Australia.

Faced with the continued emergence of antibiotic resistance to all known classes 
of antibiotics, a paradigm shift in approaches toward antifungal therapeutics is 
required. Well characterized in a broad spectrum of bacterial and fungal
pathogens, biofilms are a key factor in limiting the effectiveness of
conventional antibiotics. Therefore, therapeutics such as small molecules that
prevent or disrupt biofilm formation would render pathogens susceptible to
clearance by existing drugs. This is the first report describing the effect of
the Pseudomonas aeruginosa alkylhydroxyquinolone interkingdom signal molecules
2-heptyl-3-hydroxy-4-quinolone and 2-heptyl-4-quinolone on biofilm formation in
the important fungal pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus. Decoration of the
anthranilate ring on the quinolone framework resulted in significant changes in
the capacity of these chemical messages to suppress biofilm formation. Addition
of methoxy or methyl groups at the C5-C7 positions led to retention of
anti-biofilm activity, in some cases dependent on the alkyl chain length at
position C2. In contrast, halogenation at either the C3 or C6 positions led to
loss of activity, with one notable exception. Microscopic staining provided key
insights into the structural impact of the parent and modified molecules,
identifying lead compounds for further development.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.02074 
PMCID: PMC5177741
PMID: 28066389 

