
1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2017 Jan;102:16-23. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2016.11.005. Epub
2016 Nov 17.

B-lymphocytes forming follicle-like structures in the lung tissue of
tuberculosis-infected mice: Dynamics, phenotypes and functional activity.

Linge I(1), Dyatlov A(1), Kondratieva E(1), Avdienko V(1), Apt A(2), Kondratieva 
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Central Institute for Tuberculosis, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Department of Immunology, Central Institute for Tuberculosis, Moscow, Russia; 
Department of Immunology, School of Biology, Moscow State University, Moscow,
Russia. Electronic address: asapt@aha.ru.

During tuberculosis (TB) infection, B cells form follicles in close vicinity of
lung granuloma. We assessed the dynamics of follicle formation, surface
phenotypes and functional activity of lung B cells during TB course in
genetically susceptible mice. The follicles appeared early post infection and
peaked at weeks 7-8. Lung B cells resembled classical B2 cells
(CD19+IgMloIgDhiCD1d-CD21/35intCD5-CD11b-CD43-), but differed from them by the
absence of B2 marker CD23. Lung B-cells constitutively expressed MHC II
molecules, presented mycobacterial antigens to immune CD4+ T-cells and produced
high amounts of IL-6 and IL-11, but no classical type 1 (TNF-α, IFN-γ), or
anti-inflammatory (IL-10, TGF-β) cytokines. The total antibody response in
tuberculous lung showed almost no specificity to mycobacteria. A panel of
monoclonal antibodies obtained from lung B cells contained only few clones with
reactivity to mycobacteria. Our results suggest that anti-TB B cell response in
the lung has clear pathological and doubtful protective role.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2016.11.005 
PMID: 28061947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

