
1. Nat Commun. 2017 Jan 9;7:13839. doi: 10.1038/ncomms13839.

The microbiota maintain homeostasis of liver-resident γδT-17 cells in a lipid
antigen/CD1d-dependent manner.

Li F(1), Hao X(2), Chen Y(1), Bai L(1), Gao X(3), Lian Z(1), Wei H(1)(2), Sun
R(1)(2)(4), Tian Z(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology and the Key Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic 
Disease (Chinese Academy of Science), School of Life Science and Medical Center, 
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China.
(2)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, Hefei, Anhui
230027, China.
(3)Model Animal Research Center, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210061,
China.
(4)Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310003, China.

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2017 Apr 06;8:15265.

The microbiota control regional immunity using mechanisms such as inducing
IL-17A-producing γδ T (γδT-17) cells in various tissues. However, little is known
regarding hepatic γδT cells that are constantly stimulated by gut commensal
microbes. Here we show hepatic γδT cells are liver-resident cells and predominant
producers of IL-17A. The microbiota sustain hepatic γδT-17 cell homeostasis,
including activation, survival and proliferation. The global commensal quantity
affects the number of liver-resident γδT-17 cells; indeed, E. coli alone can
generate γδT-17 cells in a dose-dependent manner. Liver-resident γδT-17 cell
homeostasis depends on hepatocyte-expressed CD1d, that present lipid antigen, but
not Toll-like receptors or IL-1/IL-23 receptor signalling. Supplementing mice in 
vivo or loading hepatocytes in vitro with exogenous commensal lipid antigens
augments the hepatic γδT-17 cell number. Moreover, the microbiota accelerate
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease through hepatic γδT-17 cells. Thus, our work
describes a unique liver-resident γδT-17 cell subset maintained by gut commensal 
microbes through CD1d/lipid antigens.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms13839 
PMCID: PMC5227332
PMID: 28067223  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

