
1. Food Sci Nutr. 2016 Apr 29;5(1):139-147. doi: 10.1002/fsn3.373. eCollection 2017 
Jan.

Comparative study on proximate, functional, mineral, and antinutrient composition
of fermented, defatted, and protein isolate of Parkia biglobosa seed.

Ogunyinka BI(1), Oyinloye BE(2), Osunsanmi FO(1), Kappo AP(1), Opoku AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry (BSB) Group Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology University of Zululand KwaDlangezwa 3886 South
Africa.
(2)Biotechnology and Structural Biochemistry (BSB) Group Department of
Biochemistry and Microbiology University of Zululand KwaDlangezwa 3886 South
Africa; Department of Biochemistry College of Sciences Afe Babalola University
PMB 5454 Ado-Ekiti 360001 Nigeria.

The use of plant-derived foods in the prevention, treatment, and management of
metabolic diseases especially diabetes has gained prominence; this has been
associated with their physicochemical properties. This study was conducted to
compare the proximate, functional, mineral, and antinutrient composition of the
fermented seeds, the defatted seeds, and the protein isolate from Parkia
biglobosa seeds. The results showed that the fermented, defatted, and protein
isolate varied in composition within the parameters studied. The proximate
analysis revealed that the protein isolate had the highest ash (6.0%) and protein
(59.4%) as well as the lowest fat (5.7%) and moisture (5.1%) content when
compared to the fermented and defatted samples. In like manner, the functional
properties of the protein isolate were relatively better than those of the
fermented and defatted samples, with oil absorption capacity of 4.2% and emulsion
capacity of 82%. The magnesium and zinc content of the protein isolate were
significantly higher when compared with the fermented and defatted samples, while
a negligible amount of antinutrient was present in all the samples, with the
protein isolate having the lowest quantity. The overall data suggest that the
protein isolate had better proximate, mineral, functional, and antinutrient
properties when compared to the fermented and defatted samples. Therefore, the
synergistic effect of all these components present in the protein isolate from
P. biglobosa seed in association with its low carbohydrate and high protein/ash
contents could play a vital role in the management of diabetes and its associated
complications.

DOI: 10.1002/fsn3.373 
PMCID: PMC5217894
PMID: 28070325 

