
1. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2016 Oct-Dec;30(4):1209-1215.

Comparative molecular analysis of bacterial species associated with periodontal
disease.

De Iuliis V(1), Ursi S(2), Di Tommaso LM(2), Caruso M(1), Marino A(1), D'Ercole
S(1), Caputi S(1), Sinjari B(1), Festa F(1), Macri M(1), Martinotti S(1)(2),
Vitullo G(2), Toniato E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological Sciences, University of
Chieti, Chieti, Italy.
(2)SS Annunziata University Hospital, Unit of Clinical Molecular Biology and
Predictive Medicine, University of Chieti, ASL Lanciano-Vasto-Chieti, Chieti,
Italy.

Periodontal disease is an inflammatory disorder affecting the supporting teeth
structures, including gingiva, periodontal ligament and alveolar bone, causing
loss of connective tissue, reabsorption of alveolar bone and formation of
periodontal pockets. The aim of this study is to find a correlation between
bacterial growth and periodontal disease. Fifty-seven patients aged between 21
and 65 years, median age 46 years, were enrolled. According to gingival pocket
depth, ranging from 3 to 7 mm, patients were divided into two groups: the first
(30 patients, 53%) with deep pockets Â³ 5 mm and the second (27 patients, 47%)
less than 5 mm. The samples taken were processed for microbiological analysis by 
absolute quantitative real-time Taq-Man technique. Patients affected by
periodontal disease were 32 (56%) and patients with gingival bleeding were 35
(61%). This data showed that the presence, the type and the bacterial load in
gingival pockets were strongly correlated with gingival depth, periodontal
disease and gingival bleeding. Quantitative microbiological analysis is a key
point to improve patient compliance, allowing to choose the specific antibiotic
treatment. avoiding antibiotic resistance and ensuring the successful outcome of 
therapy for periodontal disease.


PMID: 28078876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

