
1. PLoS One. 2017 Jan 13;12(1):e0169937. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0169937.
eCollection 2017.

Aminoalcohol-Induced Activation of Organophosphorus Hydrolase (OPH) towards
Diisopropylfluorophosphate (DFP).

Li D(1)(2), Zhang Y(1), Song H(3), Lu L(3), Liu D(1), Yuan Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, School of 
Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, Hubei, P. R. China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Hubei University
of Medicine, Shiyan, Hubei, P.R. China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Pesticide & Chemical Biology, Ministry of Education, College
of Chemistry, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, Hubei, P. R. China.

Aminoalcohols have been addressed as activating buffers for alkaline phosphatase.
However, there is no record on the buffer activation regarding organophosphorus
hydrolase (OPH). Here we reported the activating effects of aminoalcohols on
OPH-catalyzed hydrolysis of diisopropylfluorophosphate (DFP), an analog molecule 
of G-type warfare agents. The kinetic parametors kcat, Vmax and kcat/Km in the
OPH reaction were remarkably increased in the buffers (pH 8.0, 25Â°C) containing
aminoalcohols with C2 between nitrogen (N) and oxygen (O) in their structures,
including triethanolamine (TEA), diethanolamine, monoethanolamine,
1-amino-2-propanol, 2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol, and triisopropanolamine. In
contrast, much lower or no rate-enhancing effects were observed in the adding of 
amines, alcohols, amine/alcohol mixtures, or 3-amino-1-propanol (C3 between N and
O). The 300 mM TEA further increased DFP-degrading activities of OPH mutants
F132Y and L140Y, the previously reported OPH mutants with desirable activities
towards DFP. However, the treatment of ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA)
markedly abolished the TEA-induced activation of OPH. The product fluoride
effectively inhibited OPH-catalyzed hydrolysis of DFP by a linear mixed
inhibition (inhibition constant Ki ~ 3.21 mM), which was partially released by
TEA adding at initial or later reaction stage. The obtained results indicate the 
activation of OPH by aminoalcohol buffers could be attributed to the reduction of
fluoride inhibition, which would be beneficial to the hydrolase-based
detoxification of organophosphofluoridate.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0169937 
PMCID: PMC5234802
PMID: 28085964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

