
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 16;7:40793. doi: 10.1038/srep40793.

Differential susceptibility and maturation of thymocyte subsets during Salmonella
Typhimurium infection: insights on the roles of glucocorticoids and
Interferon-gamma.

Majumdar S(1), Deobagkar-Lele M(1), Adiga V(2)(3), Raghavan A(1), Wadhwa N(1),
Ahmed SM(1), Rananaware SR(1), Chakraborty S(1), Joy O(3), Nandi D(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012,
India.
(2)Centre for Infectious Disease Research, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
560012, India.
(3)Flow Cytometry Facility, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India.

The thymus is known to atrophy during infections; however, a systematic study of 
changes in thymocyte subpopulations has not been performed. This aspect was
investigated, using multi-color flow cytometry, during oral infection of mice
with Salmonella Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium). The major highlights are: First, a 
block in the developmental pathway of CD4-CD8- double negative (DN) thymocytes is
observed. Second, CD4+CD8+ double positive (DP) thymocytes, mainly in the DP1
(CD5loCD3lo) and DP2 (CD5hiCD3int), but not DP3 (CD5intCD3hi), subsets are
reduced. Third, single positive (SP) thymocytes are more resistant to depletion
but their maturation is delayed, leading to accumulation of CD24hiCD3hi SP.
Kinetic studies during infection demonstrated differences in sensitivity of
thymic subpopulations: Immature single positive (ISP) > DP1, DP2 > DN3,
DN4 > DN2 > CD4+ > CD8+. Upon infection, glucocorticoids (GC), inflammatory
cytokines, e.g. Ifnγ, etc are induced, which enhance thymocyte death. Treatment
with RU486, the GC receptor antagonist, increases the survival of most thymic
subsets during infection. Studies with Ifnγ-/- mice demonstrated that endogenous 
Ifnγ produced during infection enhances the depletion of DN2-DN4 subsets,
promotes the accumulation of DP3 and delays the maturation of SP thymocytes. The 
implications of these observations on host cellular responses during infections
are discussed.

DOI: 10.1038/srep40793 
PMCID: PMC5238503
PMID: 28091621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

