
1. Biotech Histochem. 2017;92(1):15-28. doi: 10.1080/10520295.2016.1243728. Epub
2017 Jan 18.

Effects of umbilical cord blood stem cells on healing factors for diabetic foot
injuries.

Çil N(1), Oğuz EO(1), Mete E(2), Çetinkaya A(1), Mete GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Departments of Histology and Embryology.
(2)b Departments of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine , Pamukkale University ,
Denizli , Turkey.

The use of stem or progenitor cells from bone marrow, or peripheral or umbilical 
cord blood is becoming more common for treatment of diabetic foot problems. These
cells promote neovascularization by angiogenic factors and they promote
epithelium formation by stimulating cell replication and migration under certain 
pathological conditions. We investigated the role of CD34 + stem cells from human
umbilical cord blood in wound healing using a rat model. Rats were randomly
divided into a control group and two groups with diabetes induced by a single
dose of 55 mg/kg intraperitoneal streptozocin. Scarred areas 5 mm in diameter
were created on the feet of all rats. The diabetic rats constituted the diabetes 
control group and a diabetes + stem cell group with local injection into the
wound site of 0.5 × 106 CD34 + stem cells from human umbilical cord blood. The
newly formed skin in the foot wounds following CD34 + stem cell treatment showed 
significantly improvement by immunohistochemistry and TUNEL staining, and were
closer to the wound healing of the control group than the untreated diabetic
animals. The increase in FGF expression that accompanied the local injection of
CD34 + stem cells indicates that FGF stimulation helped prevent apoptosis. Our
findings suggest a promising new treatment approach to diabetic wound healing.

DOI: 10.1080/10520295.2016.1243728 
PMID: 28098485  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

