
1. Toxins (Basel). 2017 Jan 18;9(1). pii: E39. doi: 10.3390/toxins9010039.

Is the Insect World Overcoming the Efficacy of Bacillus thuringiensis?

Peralta C(1)(2), Palma L(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones y Transferencia de Villa María (CITVM-CONICET),
Universidad Nacional de Villa María, 5900 Villa María, Córdoba, Argentina.
ceci036@gmail.com.
(2)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, C1 425FQB Ciudad
Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina. ceci036@gmail.com.
(3)Centro de Investigaciones y Transferencia de Villa María (CITVM-CONICET),
Universidad Nacional de Villa María, 5900 Villa María, Córdoba, Argentina.
palma.leopoldo@gmail.com.
(4)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, C1 425FQB Ciudad
Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina. palma.leopoldo@gmail.com.

The use of chemical pesticides revolutionized agriculture with the introduction
of DDT (Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) as the first modern chemical
insecticide. However, the effectiveness of DDT and other synthetic pesticides,
together with their low cost and ease of use, have led to the generation of
undesirable side effects, such as pollution of water and food sources, harm to
non-target organisms and the generation of insect resistance. The alternative
comes from biological control agents, which have taken an expanding share in the 
pesticide market over the last decades mainly promoted by the necessity to move
towards more sustainable agriculture. Among such biological control agents, the
bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) and its insecticidal toxins have been the
most studied and commercially used biological control agents over the last 40
years. However, some insect pests have acquired field-evolved resistance to the
most commonly used Bt-based pesticides, threatening their efficacy, which
necessitates the immediate search for novel strains and toxins exhibiting
different modes of action and specificities in order to perpetuate the
insecticidal potential of this bacterium.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins9010039 
PMCID: PMC5308271
PMID: 28106770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

