
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 20;7:41144. doi: 10.1038/srep41144.

Ameliorative effects of Compound K and ginsenoside Rh1 on non-alcoholic fatty
liver disease in rats.

Chen XJ(1), Liu WJ(2), Wen ML(3), Liang H(1), Wu SM(1), Zhu YZ(1), Zhao JY(3),
Dong XQ(1), Li MG(3), Bian L(4), Zou CG(3), Ma LQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yunnan Institute of Digestive Disease, Department of Digestive Diseases, First
Affiliated Hospital, Kunming Medical University, Kunming, Yunnan 650032, China.
(2)School of Medicine, Yunnan University, Kunming, Yunnan 650091, China.
(3)Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-resource in Yunnan, and
Key Laboratory for Microbial Resources of the Ministry of Education, Yunnan
Institute of Microbiology, Yunnan University, Kunming, Yunnan 650091, PR China.
(4)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital, Kunming Medical
University, Kunming, Yunnan 650032, China.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a common liver disease, which has no
standard treatment available. Panax notoginseng saponines (PNS) have recently
been reported to protect liver against hepatocyte injury induced by ethanol or
high fat diet (HFD) in rats. Compound K and ginsenoside Rh1 are the main
metabolites of PNS. In this study, we evaluated the effects of CK and Rh1 on
NAFLD. Rats fed HFD showed significant elevations in liver function markers,
lipids, glucose tolerance, and insulin resistance. Treatment with CK or Rh1
either alone or in combination dramatically ameliorated the liver function
impairment induced by HFD. Histologically, CK and Rh1 significantly reversed
HFD-induced hepatocyte injury and liver fibrosis. In vitro experiments
demonstrated that treatment with CK or Rh1 alone or in combination markedly
induced cell apoptosis, and inhibited cell proliferation and activation in HSC-T6
cells. Additionally, CK and Rh1, either alone or in combination, also repressed
the expression of fibrotic factors TIMP-1, PC-I, and PC-III. Taken together, our 
results demonstrate that CK and Rh1 have positive effects on NAFLD via the
anti-fibrotic and hepatoprotective activity.

DOI: 10.1038/srep41144 
PMCID: PMC5247696
PMID: 28106137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

