
1. PLoS One. 2017 Jan 25;12(1):e0169906. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0169906.
eCollection 2017.

Temporal and Spatial Variations of Bacterial and Faunal Communities Associated
with Deep-Sea Wood Falls.

Pop Ristova P(1), Bienhold C(1), WenzhÃ¶fer F(1), Rossel PE(1)(2), Boetius A(1).

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred Wegener Institute
for Polar and Marine Research, Bremerhaven, Germany, and Max Planck Institute for
Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.
(2)Research Group for Marine Geochemistry (ICBM-MPI Bridging group), Institute
for Chemistry and Biology of the marine environment, University of Oldenburg,
ICBM, Oldenburg, Germany.

Sinking of large organic food falls i.e. kelp, wood and whale carcasses to the
oligotrophic deep-sea floor promotes the establishment of locally highly
productive and diverse ecosystems, often with specifically adapted benthic
communities. However, the fragmented spatial distribution and small area poses
challenges for the dispersal of their microbial and faunal communities. Our study
focused on the temporal dynamics and spatial distributions of sunken wood
bacterial communities, which were deployed in the vicinity of different cold
seeps in the Eastern Mediterranean and the Norwegian deep-seas. By combining
fingerprinting of bacterial communities by ARISA and 454 sequencing with in situ 
and ex situ biogeochemical measurements, we show that sunken wood logs have a
locally confined long-term impact (> 3y) on the sediment geochemistry and
community structure. We confirm previous hypotheses of different successional
stages in wood degradation including a sulphophilic one, attracting
chemosynthetic fauna from nearby seep systems. Wood experiments deployed at
similar water depths (1100-1700 m), but in hydrographically different oceanic
regions harbored different wood-boring bivalves, opportunistic faunal
communities, and chemosynthetic species. Similarly, bacterial communities on
sunken wood logs were more similar within one geographic region than between
different seas. Diverse sulphate-reducing bacteria of the Deltaproteobacteria,
the sulphide-oxidizing bacteria Sulfurovum as well as members of the
Acidimicrobiia and Bacteroidia dominated the wood falls in the Eastern
Mediterranean, while Alphaproteobacteria and Flavobacteriia colonized the
Norwegian Sea wood logs. Fauna and bacterial wood-associated communities changed 
between 1 to 3 years of immersion, with sulphate-reducers and sulphide-oxidizers 
increasing in proportion, and putative cellulose degraders decreasing with time. 
Only 6% of all bacterial genera, comprising the core community, were found at any
time on the Eastern Mediterranean sunken wooden logs. This study suggests that
biogeography and succession play an important role for the composition of
bacteria and fauna of wood-associated communities, and that wood can act as
stepping-stones for seep biota.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0169906 
PMCID: PMC5266260
PMID: 28122036  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

