
1. Oncotarget. 2017 Feb 28;8(9):14806-14820. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.14775.

hPaf1/PD2 interacts with OCT3/4 to promote self-renewal of ovarian cancer stem
cells.

Karmakar S(1), Seshacharyulu P(1), Lakshmanan I(1), Vaz AP(1), Chugh S(1),
Sheinin YM(2), Mahapatra S(3), Batra SK(1)(4), Ponnusamy MP(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE,
USA.
(4)Fred and Pamela Buffett Cancer Center, Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer
and Allied Disease, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs), which mediate drug resistance and disease recurrence in
several cancers, are therapeutically relevant to ovarian cancer (OC), wherein
approximately 80% of patients manifest with tumor recurrence. While there are
several markers for ovarian CSCs (OCSCs), the mechanism for their self-renewal
maintenance by unique driver/markers is poorly understood. Here, we evaluated the
role of hPaf1/PD2, a core component of RNA Polymerase II-Associated Factor (PAF) 
complex, in self-renewal of OCSCs through marker and functional analyses,
including CRISPR/Cas9-silencing of hPaf1/PD2 in OCSCs and provided a possible
mechanism for maintenance of OCSCs. Expression of hPaf1/PD2 showed moderate to
intense staining in 32.4% of human OC tissues, whereas 67.6% demonstrated basal
expression by immunohistochemistry analysis, implying that the minor proportion
of cells overexpressing hPaf1/PD2 could be putative OCSCs. Isolated OCSCs showed 
higher expression of hPaf1/PD2 along with established CSC and self-renewal
markers. Knockdown of hPaf1/PD2 in OCSCs resulted in a significant downregulation
of CSC and self-renewal markers, and impairment of in vitro tumor sphere (P <
0.05) and colony formation (P = 0.013). Co-immunoprecipitation revealed that
OCT3/4 specifically interacts with hPaf1/PD2, and not with other PAF components
(Ctr9, Leo1, Parafibromin) in OCSCs, suggesting a complex-independent role for
hPaf1/PD2 in OCSC maintenance. Moreover, there was a significant overexpression
and co-localization of hPaf1/PD2 with OCT3/4 in OC tissues compared to normal
ovary tissues. Our results indicate that hPaf1/PD2 is overexpressed in OCSCs and 
maintains the self-renewal of OCSCs through its interaction with OCT3/4; thus,
hPaf1/PD2 may be a potential therapeutic target to overcome tumor relapse in OC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.14775 
PMCID: PMC5362445
PMID: 28122356  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

