
1. Postepy Biochem. 2016;62(3):327-334.

RNA 3'-terminal phosphate cyclases and cyclase-like proteins.

Filipowicz W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Maulberstrasse 66, 4058 
Basel, Switzerland.

RNA molecules bearing terminal 2', 3'-cyclic phosphate are quite common in
nature. For example, 2', 3'-cyclic phosphate termini are produced during RNA
cleavage by many endoribonucleases either as intermediates or final products.
Many RNA-based nucleases (ribozymes) also generate cyclic phosphate termini.
However, cleavage reactions are not the only way in which RNAs bearing cyclic
phosphate ends are produced. They can also be generated by RNA 3'-terminal
phosphate cyclases (RtcA), a family of enzymes conserved in eukaryotes, bacteria,
and archaea. These enzymes catalyze the ATP-dependent conversion of the
3'-phosphate to a 2', 3'-cyclic phosphodiester at the end of RNA. In this
article, I review knowledge about the biochemistry and structure of RNA
3'-phosphate cyclases and also proteins of the RNA cyclase-like (Rcl1) family,
and discuss their documented or possible roles in different RNA metabolic
reactions.

Publisher: Cząsteczki RNA zakończone 2', 3'-cyklicznym fosforanem są częstymi
produktami metabolizmu RNA w komórce. Dla przykładu, 2', 3'-cykliczny fosforan
jest przejściowym lub końcowym produktem cięcia RNA przez różne endorybonukleazy.
Wiele rybozymów również generuje cykliczny fosforan na 3' końcu.
Endonukleolityczna fragmentacja nie jest jednak jedynym sposobem produkcji
molekuł zawierających 2', 3'-cykliczny fosforan. Powstają one również w reakcji
katalizowanej przez cyklazy 3'-końcowego fosforanu RNA (RtcA), enzymy występujące
u Eukaryota, Bacteria i Archaea. Enzymy te przekształcają końcowy 3'-monofosforan
w 2', 3'-cykliczny fosfodwuester w reakcji zależnej od ATP. Niniejszy artykuł
omawia właściwości biochemiczne i strukturalne cyklaz 3'-końcowego fosforanu RNA 
oraz białek z rodziny Rcl1 o strukturze podobnej do cyklaz. Białka Rcl1 nie
posiadają aktywności cyklazy lecz uczestniczą w biogenezie rybosomalnego RNA.

PMID: 28132487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

