
1. Infect Immun. 2017 Mar 23;85(4). pii: e00966-16. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00966-16. Print
2017 Apr.

Cellular Uptake of Clostridium botulinum C2 Toxin Requires Acid Sphingomyelinase 
Activity.

Nagahama M(1), Takehara M(2), Takagishi T(2), Seike S(2), Miyamoto K(2),
Kobayashi K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokushima
Bunri University, Yamashiro, Tokushima, Japan nagahama@ph.bunri-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokushima
Bunri University, Yamashiro, Tokushima, Japan.

Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin consists of an enzyme component (C2I) and a
binding component (C2II). Activated C2II (C2IIa) binds to a cell receptor, giving
rise to lipid raft-dependent oligomerization, and it then assembles with C2I. The
whole toxin complex is then endocytosed into the cytosol, resulting in the
destruction of the actin cytoskeleton and cell rounding. Here, we showed that C2 
toxin requires acid sphingomyelinase (ASMase) activity during internalization. In
this study, inhibitors of ASMase and lysosomal exocytosis blocked C2
toxin-induced cell rounding. C2IIa induced Ca2+ influx from the extracellular
medium to cells. C2 toxin-induced cell rounding was enhanced in the presence of
Ca2+ ASMase was released extracellularly when cells were incubated with C2IIa in 
the presence of Ca2+ Small interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown of ASMase reduced C2
toxin-induced cell rounding. ASMase hydrolyzes sphingomyelin to ceramide on the
outer leaflet of the membrane at acidic pH. Ceramide was detected in cytoplasmic 
vesicles containing C2IIa. These results indicated that ASMase activity is
necessary for the efficient internalization of C2 toxin into cells. Inhibitors of
ASMase may confer protection against infection.

Copyright Â© 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00966-16 
PMCID: PMC5364297
PMID: 28138018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

