
1. Can J Vet Res. 2017 Jan;81(1):28-32.

Phylogenetic analysis of Escherichia coli isolated from broilers with
colibacillosis based on gyrA gene sequences.

Shamsi H(1), Mardani K(1), Ownagh A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Hygiene and Quality Control, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Urmia University, Urmia, West Azerbaijan, Iran (Shamsi, Mardani);
Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Urmia University,
Urmia, West Azerbaijan, Iran (Ownagh).

Escherichia coli isolates from chickens with colibacillosis were assigned to
phylogenetic groups based on multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
antibacterial resistance of E. coli belonging to these groups was examined.
Furthermore, the gyrA gene of isolates was sequenced and a phylogenetic tree was 
generated. A total of 84 E. coli isolates were grouped using multiplex PCR of
TSPE4.C2, chuA, yjaA, and gadA molecular markers. Four phylogenetic groups were
identified with strains divided as follows: 16 in group A (19.05%), 17 in group
B1 (20.24%), 23 in group B2 (27.38%), and 28 in group D (33.33%). Escherichia
coli isolates belonging to phylogenetic groups B2 and D were resistant to Soltrim
and Flumequine unlike the majority of E. coli isolates that belonged to groups A 
and B1, and which were susceptible to these antibiotics. The phylogenetic results
based on gyrA gene sequences from multiplex PCR revealed that E. coli
phylogenetic grouping was in accordance with the clusters obtained in the
phylogenetic tree. In conclusion, the comparative sequence analysis of gyrA
sequences provides a firm framework for an accurate classification of E. coli and
related taxa and may constitute a pertinent phylogenetic marker for E. coli.

Publisher: Les isolats d’Escherichia coli provenant de poulets avec colibacillose
ont été assignés à des groupes phylogénétiques sur la base d’une réaction
d’amplification en chaine par la polymérase multiplex (ACP) et la résistance
antimicrobienne des E. coli appartenant à ces groupes a été examinée. De plus, le
gène gyrA des isolats a été séquencé et un arbre phylogénétique a été généré. Un 
total de 84 isolats a été groupé à l’aide de l’ACP multiplex utilisant les
marqueurs moléculaires TSPE4.C2, chuA, yjaA et gadA. Quatre groupes
phylogénétiques ont été identifiés et les souches réparties comme suit: 16 dans
le groupe A (19,05 %), 17 dans le groupe B1 (20,24 %), 23 dans le groupe B2
(27,38 %), et 28 dans le groupe D (33,33 %). Les isolats d’E. coli appartenant
aux groups phylogénétiques B2 et D étaient résistants au Soltrim et à la
fluméquine contrairement à la majorité des isolats d’E. coli appartenant aux
groupes A et B1, qui étaient sensibles à ces antibiotiques. Les résultats
phylogénétiques basés sur les séquences du gène gyrA provenant de l’ACP multiplex
ont révélé que le regroupement phylogénétique des E. coli était en accord avec
les groupes obtenus dans l’arbre phylogénétique. En conclusion, l’analyse
comparative des séquences gyrA fourni un patron solide pour une classification
précise des E. coli et taxons associés et pourrait constituer un marqueur
phylogénétique pertinent pour les isolats d’E. coli.(Traduit par Docteur Serge
Messier).

PMCID: PMC5220591
PMID: 28154459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

