
1. Innate Immun. 2017 Apr;23(3):258-275. doi: 10.1177/1753425917690814. Epub 2017
Feb 5.

Age-dependent cellular reactions of the human immune system of humanized NOD scid
gamma mice on LPS stimulus.

Rodewohl A(1)(2), Scholbach J(1)(3), Leichsenring A(1), Köberle M(1)(2), Lange
F(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)2 Translational Centre for Regenerative Medicine, University of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany.
(3)3 Institute of Clinical Immunology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

Despite sepsis being a life-threatening disease, targeted drugs that improve the 
therapy of affected patients are still lacking. Infants and adults differ in the 
maturity level of their immune system and this results in distinct reactions to
Gram-negative bacteria. To study reactions of human immune cells in vivo, we used
NOD scid gamma mice transplanted with human CD34+ stem cells to engraft a
functional human immune system. Human cells undergo differentiation and
maturation in these mice after transplantation and, accordingly, animals were
divided into two groups: 8-13 wk and 15-22 wk after transplantation. Endotoxemia 
was induced by injecting LPS. Six h later, mice were euthanized. In both groups, 
LPS stimulation induced a decrease of CD14+ monocytes in peripheral blood, an
up-regulation of activation markers on different cell subsets such as myeloid
dendritic cells, and a release of the human cytokines TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-10.
However, significant differences were detected with regard to the amounts of
released cytokines, and 8-13-wk-old mice produced more IL-6, while PTX3 was
mainly released by 15-22-wk-old animals. Thus, here we provide a potential model 
for preclinical research of sepsis in infants and adults.

DOI: 10.1177/1753425917690814 
PMID: 28162006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

