
1. Hum Mol Genet. 2017 Mar 1;26(5):942-954. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx009.

KLF13 is a genetic modifier of the Holt-Oram syndrome gene TBX5.

Darwich R(1), Li W(1)(2), Yamak A(1), Komati H(1), Andelfinger G(3), Sun K(2),
Nemer M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Cardiac Regeneration Laboratory, Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, K1N 6N5,
Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Xinhua Hospital, Affiliated to Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(3)Sainte Justine Hospital, Cardiovascular Genetics, Montréal, Quebec, H3T 1C5,
Canada.

TBX5, a member of the T-box family of transcription factors, is a dosage
sensitive regulator of heart development. Mutations in TBX5 are responsible for
Holt-Oram Syndrome, an autosomal dominant disease with variable and partially
penetrant cardiac defects suggestive of the existence of genetic and
environmental modifiers. KLF13, a member of the Krüppel-like family of zinc
finger proteins is co-expressed with TBX5 in several cardiac cells including
atrial cardiomyocytes and cells of the interatrial septum. We report that KLF13
interacts physically and functionally with TBX5 to synergistically activate
transcription of cardiac genes. We show that TBX5 contacts KLF13 via its T-domain
and find that several disease-causing mutations therein have decreased KLF13
interaction. Whereas Klf13 heterozygote mice have no detectable cardiac defects, 
loss of a Klf13 allele in Tbx5 heterozygote mice significantly increases the
penetrance of TBX5-dependent cardiac abnormalities including atrial,
atrial-ventricular and ventricular septal defects. The results reveal for the
first time combinatorial interaction between a T-box protein and a KLF family
member and its importance for heart and possibly other organ development. The
data also suggest that, in human, KLF13 may be a genetic modifier of the
Holt-Oram Syndrome gene TBX5.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddx009 
PMID: 28164238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

