
1. Bioresour Technol. 2017 May;231:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2017.01.054. Epub
2017 Jan 30.

Effects of different swine manure to wheat straw ratios on antibiotic resistance 
genes and the microbial community structure during anaerobic digestion.

Song W(1), Wang X(2), Gu J(3), Zhang S(1), Yin Y(3), Li Y(3), Qian X(3), Sun
W(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Science, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China.
(2)College of Resources and Environmental Sciences, Northwest A & F University,
Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China. Electronic address: xiaojuan7069@sina.com.
(3)College of Resources and Environmental Sciences, Northwest A & F University,
Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China.

This study explored the effects of different mass ratios of swine manure relative
to wheat straw (3:7, 5:5, and 7:3, i.e., control reactors C1, C2, and C3,
respectively) on variations in antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) and the
microbial community during anaerobic digestion (AD). The cumulative biogas
production volumes were 1711, 3857, and 3226mL in C1, C2, and C3, respectively.
After AD, the total relative abundance of ARGs decreased by 4.23 logs in C3,
whereas the reductions were only 1.03 and 1.37 logs in C1 and C2, respectively.
Network analysis showed that the genera Solibacillus, Enterococcus, Facklamia,
Corynebacterium_1, and Acinetobacter were potential hosts of ermB, sul1, and
dfrA7. Redundancy analysis showed that the bacterial communities and
environmental factors played important roles in the variation in ARGs. Thus,
reductions in ARGs should be considered before reusing animal manure treated by
AD.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2017.01.054 
PMID: 28171769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

