
1. PLoS One. 2017 Feb 8;12(2):e0171084. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0171084.
eCollection 2017.

Expression of hemoglobin-α and β subunits in human vaginal epithelial cells and
their functional significance.

Saha D(1), Koli S(1), Patgaonkar M(1), Reddy KV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology and Microbiology (MIM), National Institute
for Research in Reproductive Health (NIRRH), Parel, Mumbai, India.

Hemoglobin (Hb) is a major protein involved in transport of oxygen (O2). It
consists of Hb-α and Hb-β subunits, which are normally expressed by cells of
erythroid lineage. However, till recently, it was not known whether non-erythroid
cells like vaginal cells synthesize Hb and whether it has any functional
significance. Therefore, we designed the following objectives: (1) to establish
in-vitro culture system of human primary vaginal epithelial cells (hPVECs), (2)
to determine whether Hb-α and Hb-β proteins are truly synthesized by hPVECs, (3) 
to evaluate the effect of LPS (lipopolysaccharide) on the expression of Hb-α and 
Hb-β proteins (4) to decipher the significance of the Hb-α and Hb-β expression in
hPVECs and (5) to determine the molecular mechanism regulating the expression of 
Hb-α in hPVECs. To accomplish these studies, we applied a battery of assays such 
as RT-PCR, qRT-PCR, Flow cytometry, western blot, and immunofluorescence,
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP). The results revealed the expression of Hb-α and Hb-β at both mRNA and
protein level in hPVECs. The expression was significantly upregulated following
LPS treatment (10μg/ml for 6 hrs) and these results are comparable with the
expression induced by LPS in human vaginal epithelial cell line (VK2/E6E7). These
cells constitutively produced low levels of pro-inflammatory (IL-6) and
anti-inflammatory (IL-10) cytokines. Also, the response of phosphorylated
(p65)-NF-κB to LPS was upregulated with increased expression of IL-6, Toll-like
receptor-4 (TLR4) and human beta defensin-1 (hBD-1) in hPVECs and VK2/E6E7 cells.
However, Bay 11-7082 treatment (5μM for 24 hrs) could neutralize the effect of
LPS-induced p65-NF-κB activity and represses the production`of Hb-α and Hb-β. The
results of EMSA revealed the presence of putative binding sites of NF-κB in the
human Hb-α promoter region (nt-115 to -106). ChIP analysis confirmed the binding 
of NF-κB to Hb-α promoter. In conclusion, the present findings revealed for the
first time that hPVECs synthesized Hb-α and Hb-β and the expression is comparable
with the expression of VK2/E6E7 cells. The identification of NF-κB regulatory
sequences in Hb-α promoter, whose activation is associated with immune response
of hPVECs, indicating Hb-α and Hb-β may act as an endogenous antimicrobial
defense protein against vaginal inflammation/infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0171084 
PMCID: PMC5298339
PMID: 28178273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interests regarding the publication of this paper.

