
1. Mucosal Immunol. 2017 Sep;10(5):1320-1334. doi: 10.1038/mi.2016.130. Epub 2017
Feb 8.

IL-36γ is a crucial proximal component of protective type-1-mediated lung mucosal
immunity in Gram-positive and -negative bacterial pneumonia.

Kovach MA(1)(2), Singer B(1), Martinez-Colon G(3), Newstead MW(1), Zeng X(1),
Mancuso P(4), Moore TA(1), Kunkel SL(5), Peters-Golden M(1), Moore BB(1)(3),
Standiford TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(2)Unit for Lung and Airway Research, Physiology Division, Institute of
Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(4)Department of Nutritional Sciences and School of Public Health, University of 
Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA.

Interleukin-36γ (IL-36γ) is a member of novel IL-1-like proinflammatory cytokine 
family that are highly expressed in epithelial tissues and several
myeloid-derived cell types. Little is known about the role of the IL-36 family in
mucosal immunity, including lung anti-bacterial responses. We used murine models 
of IL-36γ deficiency to assess the contribution of IL-36γ in the lung during
experimental pneumonia. Induction of IL-36γ was observed in the lung in response 
to Streptococcus pneumoniae (Sp) infection, and mature IL-36γ protein was
secreted primarily in microparticles. IL-36γ-deficient mice challenged with Sp
demonstrated increased mortality, decreased lung bacterial clearance and
increased bacterial dissemination, in association with reduced local expression
of type-1 cytokines, and impaired lung macrophage M1 polarization. IL-36γ
directly stimulated type-1 cytokine induction from dendritic cells in vitro in a 
MyD88-dependent manner. Similar protective effects of IL-36γ were observed in a
Gram-negative pneumonia model (Klebsiella pneumoniae). Intrapulmonary delivery of
IL-36γ-containing microparticles reconstituted immunity in IL-36γ-/- mice.
Enhanced expression of IL-36γ was also observed in plasma and bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid of patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome because of
pneumonia. These studies indicate that IL-36γ assumes a vital proximal role in
the lung innate mucosal immunity during bacterial pneumonia by driving protective
type-1 responses and classical macrophage activation.

DOI: 10.1038/mi.2016.130 
PMCID: PMC5548659
PMID: 28176791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

