
1. J Fish Dis. 2017 Oct;40(10):1309-1320. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12603. Epub 2017 Feb 11.

In vivo adherence of Flavobacterium psychrophilum to mucosal external surfaces of
rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) fry.

Papadopoulou A(1), Dalsgaard I(2), Lindén A(3), Wiklund T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Aquatic Pathobiology, Environmental and Marine Biology, Åbo
Akademi University, Turku, Finland.
(2)National Veterinary Institute, Technical University of Denmark, Frederiksberg 
C, Denmark.
(3)Coastal Zone Research Team, Novia University of Applied Sciences, Ekenäs,
Finland.

The adherence of Flavobacterium psychrophilum to surfaces of epithelial tissues
has been inconclusively suggested as a mechanism, which enables the bacterium to 
invade the host. Hence, the present study aimed to examine the adherence of the
cells of two colony phenotypes, smooth and rough, of F. psychrophilum to mucosal 
tissues of rainbow trout fry and to test the skin mucus as a nutrient for the
growth of F. psychrophilum. Fish were immersed in water containing 106  CFU  mL-1
F. psychrophilum for each colony phenotype. Mucosal tissue samples from fins,
gills, skin and eyes, and swab samples from spleen and kidney were taken and
inoculated onto TYES agar plates. Colony phenotypes of F. psychrophilum were
identified and number of colonies counted. The results showed that cells of both 
phenotypes initially (0 h) adhered to all mucosal surfaces, but only the rough
cells were still present on tissues 1 h post-immersion. Both phenotypes showed a 
tissue tropism with the fin tissue being the most adhered. Furthermore, skin
mucus promoted the growth of both colony phenotypes. We suggest that the growth
of F. psychrophilum cells in skin mucus apparently facilitates the bacterial
adherence to mucosal surfaces, and the subsequent invasion into the host.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.12603 
PMID: 28188658  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

