
1. Vet Clin Pathol. 2017 Mar;46(1):77-84. doi: 10.1111/vcp.12463. Epub 2017 Feb 10.

Progression of cutaneous plasmacytoma to plasma cell leukemia in a dog.

Rout ED(1), Shank AM(2), Waite AH(3), Siegel A(4), Avery AC(1), Avery PR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO,
USA.
(2)IDEXX Laboratories, Inc., North Grafton, MA, USA.
(3)The Oncology Service, Dogwood Veterinary Emergency & Specialty Center,
Richmond, VA, USA.
(4)IDEXX Laboratories, Inc., New York, NY, USA.

A 5-year-old male neutered Bernese Mountain Dog was presented for cutaneous
plasmacytoma, which was treated by surgical excision. Four months later, the dog 
developed multiple skin masses, hyphema, pericardial and mild bicavitary
effusions, myocardial masses, and marked plasmacytosis in the peripheral blood.
Circulating plasma cells expressed CD34 and MHC class II by flow cytometry.
Immunocytochemistry demonstrated that these cells were strongly positive for
multiple myeloma oncogene 1/interferon regulatory factor 4 (MUM-1) and weakly to 
moderately positive for Pax5. The dog was hypoglobulinemic but had a monoclonal
IgA gammopathy detected by serum immunofixation electrophoresis. The PCR analysis
of antigen receptor gene rearrangements (PARR) by fragment analysis using
GeneScan methodology revealed that plasmacytoid cells in the original cutaneous
plasmacytoma and peripheral blood had an identical immunoglobulin heavy chain
gene (IgH) rearrangement, indicating that both populations were derived from the 
same neoplastic clone. Canine cutaneous plasmacytoma rarely progresses to a
malignant form and plasma cell leukemia is rarely diagnosed in the dog. This
report describes a case of cutaneous plasmacytoma progressing to plasma cell
leukemia with a rapid and aggressive clinical course. This report also highlights
the utility of flow cytometry, immunocytochemistry, immunofixation
electrophoresis, and PARR by fragment analysis using GeneScan methodology in the 
diagnosis of this hematopoietic neoplasm.

Â© 2017 American Society for Veterinary Clinical Pathology.

DOI: 10.1111/vcp.12463 
PMID: 28186653  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

