
1. Endocr J. 2017 Apr 29;64(4):457-461. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ16-0417. Epub 2017
Feb 10.

The impact of the clinical CYP11B2 mutation V386A strongly depends on the
enzyme's genetic background.

Neunzig J(1), Khatri Y(1), Bernhardt R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Saarland University, Saarbr√ºcken 66123, Germany.

Human cytochrome P450 11B2 (CYP11B2) is an essential enzyme in the steroid
hormone biosynthesis, which catalyzes the last three reaction steps of the
aldosterone synthesis. These reactions comprise a hydroxylation at position C11
of the steroid intermediate deoxycorticosterone yielding corticosterone, followed
by a hydroxylation at position C18 yielding 18-hydroxy-corticosterone and a
subsequent oxidation of the hydroxyl group at C18, which results in the formation
of aldosterone. Alterations in the amino acid sequence of CYP11B2 often cause
severe disease patterns. We previously described a procedure for expression and
purification of human CYP11B2 employing recombinant E. coli, which allows the
rapid characterization of CYP11B2 mutants on a molecular level. This system was
now utilized for the examination of the influence of the polymorphism at position
173 in combination with the mutation V386A on the activity of CYP11B2. Our in
vitro findings show that the combination of the V386A mutation with the variant
CYP11B2 173Arg only slightly reduces the 18-hydroxylase and 18-oxidase activity, 
whereas the V386A mutation with the CYP11B2 173Lys variant almost abolishes the
18-hydroxylation and 18-oxidation. In both cases the 11-hydroxylase activity is
not affected. These findings highlight the importance of the genetic background
of an enzyme when regarding the effect of clinical mutations.

DOI: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ16-0417 
PMID: 28190867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

