
1. J Control Release. 2017 Mar 28;250:107-115. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2017.02.008.
Epub 2017 Feb 10.

Electrospun polyurethane nanofiber scaffolds with ciprofloxacin oligomer versus
free ciprofloxacin: Effect on drug release and cell attachment.

Wright ME(1), Parrag IC(2), Yang M(3), Santerre JP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Interface Biologics Inc., Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Faculty of Dentistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Interface Biologics Inc., Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
Faculty of Dentistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic
address: paul.santerre@utoronto.ca.

An electrospun degradable polycarbonate urethane (PCNU) nanofiber scaffold loaded
with antibiotic was investigated in terms of antibacterial efficacy and cell
compatibility for potential use in gingival tissue engineering. Antimicrobial
oligomer (AO), a compound which consists of two molecules of ciprofloxacin (CF)
covalently bound via hydrolysable linkages to triethylene glycol (TEG), was
incorporated via a one-step blend electrospinning process using a single solvent 
system at 7 and 15% w/w equivalent CF with respect to the PCNU. The oligomeric
form of the drug was used to overcome the challenge of drug aggregation and burst
release when antibiotics are incorporated as free drug. Electrospinning
parameters were optimized to obtain scaffolds with similar alignment and fiber
diameter to non-drug loaded fibers. AO that diffused from the fibers was
hydrolysed to release CF slowly and in a linear manner over the duration of the
study, whereas scaffolds with CF at the same concentration but in free form
showed a burst release within 1h with no further release throughout the study
duration. Human gingival fibroblast (HGF) adhesion and spreading was dependent on
the concentration and form the CF was loaded (AO vs. free CF), which was
attributed in part to differences in scaffold surface chemistry. Surface
segregation of AO was quantified using surface-resolved X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS). These findings are encouraging and support further
investigation for the use of AO as a means of attenuating the rapid release of
drug loaded into nanofibers. The study also demonstrates through quantitative
measures that drug additives have the potential to surface-locate without phase
separating from the fibers, leading to fast dissolution and differential
fibroblast cell attachment.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2017.02.008 
PMID: 28192154  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

