
1. J Biol Chem. 2017 Apr 7;292(14):5770-5783. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.760504. Epub
2017 Feb 16.

Serotype 3 pneumococci sequester platelet-derived human thrombospondin-1 via the 
adhesin and immune evasion protein Hic.

Binsker U(1), Kohler TP(2), Krauel K(3), Kohler S(1), Habermeyer J(1), Schwertz
H(3), Hammerschmidt S(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department Genetics of Microorganisms, Interfaculty Institute for
Genetics and Functional Genomics, University of Greifswald, D-17487 Greifswald,
Germany and.
(2)From the Department Genetics of Microorganisms, Interfaculty Institute for
Genetics and Functional Genomics, University of Greifswald, D-17487 Greifswald,
Germany and kohlert@uni-greifswald.de.
(3)the Institute for Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, University Medicine
Greifswald, D-17489 Greifswald, Germany.

Streptococcus pneumoniae serotype 3 strains emerge frequently within clinical
isolates of invasive diseases. Bacterial invasion into deeper tissues is
associated with colonization and immune evasion mechanisms. Thus, pneumococci
express a versatile repertoire of surface proteins sequestering and interacting
specifically with components of the human extracellular matrix and serum. Hic, a 
PspC-like pneumococcal surface protein, possesses vitronectin and factor H
binding activity. Here, we show that heterologously expressed Hic domains
interact, similar to the classical PspC molecule, with human matricellular
thrombospondin-1 (hTSP-1). Binding studies with isolated human thrombospondin-1
and various Hic domains suggest that the interaction between hTSP-1 and Hic
differs from binding to vitronectin and factor H. Binding of Hic to hTSP-1 is
inhibited by heparin and chondroitin sulfate A, indicating binding to the
N-terminal globular domain or type I repeats of hTSP-1. Competitive inhibition
experiments with other pneumococcal hTSP-1 adhesins demonstrated that PspC and
PspC-like Hic recognize similar domains, whereas PavB and Hic can bind
simultaneously to hTSP-1. In conclusion, Hic binds specifically hTSP-1; however, 
truncation in the N-terminal part of Hic decreases the binding activity,
suggesting that the full length of the α-helical regions of Hic is required for
an optimal interaction.

© 2017 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.760504 
PMCID: PMC5392572
PMID: 28209711  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

