
1. J Infect Public Health. 2017 Sep - Oct;10(5):518-521. doi:
10.1016/j.jiph.2016.09.018. Epub 2017 Feb 13.

Characteristics of nontyphoidal Salmonella gastroenteritis in Taiwanese children:
A 9-year period retrospective medical record review.

Hung YT(1), Lay CJ(2), Wang CL(3), Koo M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, Dalin Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical
Foundation, Dalin, Chiayi, 62247, Taiwan; School of Medicine, Tzu Chi University,
Hualien, 97004, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Infectious Disease, Dalin Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi
Medical Foundation, Dalin, Chiayi, 62247, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Pediatrics, Dalin Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical
Foundation, Dalin, Chiayi, 62247, Taiwan; School of Medicine, Tzu Chi University,
Hualien, 97004, Taiwan; Division of Infectious Disease, Dalin Tzu Chi Hospital,
Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation, Dalin, Chiayi, 62247, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Research, Dalin Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi
Medical Foundation, Dalin, Chiayi, 62247, Taiwan; Dalla Lana School of Public
Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G3, Canada. Electronic
address: m.koo@utoronto.ca.

Nontyphoidal Salmonella is among the most common causes of acute pediatric
gastroenteritis in Taiwan. It is important to study antibiotic resistance
patterns in nontyphoidal Salmonella isolated from children. Therefore, the
objective of this study was to investigate the prevalence of serogroups and
susceptibility to antimicrobial nontyphoidal Salmonella isolated from Taiwanese
children with gastroenteritis. A retrospective review of the medical records of
patients aged under 18 years with a diagnosis of acute gastroenteritis at a
regional hospital located in southern Taiwan from August 2000 to August 2009 was 
conducted. Patients whose records documented stool cultures positive for
nontyphoidal Salmonella underwent serogrouping and antimicrobial susceptibility
testing. Of the 1938 patients diagnosed with acute gastroenteritis, 100 (5.2%)
had nontyphoidal Salmonella infections. Most of the cases of nontyphoidal
Salmonella gastroenteritis occurred during the summer months of July and August. 
The most common Salmonella strains isolated were classified as belonging to
serogroup B (51%). Three cases had blood cultures that tested positive for
nontyphoidal Salmonella, all of which were classified as belonging to serogroup
C2. Isolates from the stool cultures of 23 cases that occurred between 2007 and
2009 were further tested to determine their antimicrobial susceptibility
profiles, and 87% of these isolates were sensitive to two common third-generation
cephalosporins (cefotaxime and ceftriaxone). In conclusion, the results of this
nine-year period medical record review study suggested that although
extended-spectrum cephalosporins were more effective than ampicillin and
ciprofloxacin in treating childhood nontyphoidal Salmonella gastroenteritis, only
87% of isolates were susceptible to these agents. Prevention through proper
hygienic practices to minimize potential exposure to nontyphoidal Salmonella is
clearly a better strategy than treating patients with antibiotics following the
incidence of infection.

Copyright Â© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiph.2016.09.018 
PMID: 28209468  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

