
1. BMC Cancer. 2017 Feb 15;17(1):133. doi: 10.1186/s12885-017-3114-y.

Effect of myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 on expression profiles
of genes during the development and progression of Helicobacter-induced gastric
cancer.

Lozano-Pope I(1), Sharma A(2), Matthias M(1), Doran KS(2), Obonyo M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of California, La Jolla, CA, USA.
mobonyo@ucsd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer is one of the most common and lethal type of cancer
worldwide. Infection with Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) is recognized as the
major cause of gastric cancer. However, it remains unclear the mechanism by which
Helicobacter infection leads to gastric cancer. Furthermore, the underlying
molecular events involved during the progression of Helicobacter infection to
gastric malignancy are not well understood. In previous studies, we demonstrated 
that that H. felis-infected Myd88 -/- mice exhibited dramatic pathology and an
accelerated progression to gastric dysplasia; however, the MyD88 downstream gene 
targets responsible for this pathology have not been described. This study was
designed to identify MyD88-dependent genes involved in the progression towards
gastric cancer during the course of Helicobacter infection.
METHODS: Wild type (WT) and Myd88 deficient mice (Myd88 -/-) were infected with
H. felis for 25 and 47 weeks and global transcriptome analysis performed on
gastric tissue using MouseWG-6 v2 expression BeadChips microarrays. Function and 
pathway enrichment analyses of statistically significant, differential expressed 
genes (p < 0.05) were performed using the Database for Annotation, Visualization 
and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) online tools.
RESULTS: Helicobacter infection affected the transcriptional profile of more
genes in Myd88 -/- mice compared to WT mice. Infection of Myd88 -/- mice resulted
in the differential expression of 1,989 genes at 25 weeks (1031 up and 958
downregulated). At 47 weeks post-H.felis infection, 2,162 (1140 up and 1022
downregulated) were differentially expressed. The most significant differentially
upregulated gene during Helicobacter infection in Myd88 -/- mice was
chitinase-like 4 (chil4), which is involved in tissue remodeling and wound
healing. Other highly upregulated genes in H. felis-infected Myd88 -/- mice
included, Indoleamine 2,3-Dioxygenase 1 (Ido1), Guanylate binding protein 2
(Gbp2), ubiquitin D (Ubd), β 2 -Microglobulin (B2m), CD74 antigen (Cd74), which
have been reported to promote cancer progression by enhancing angiogenesis,
proliferation, migration, metastasis, invasion, and tumorigenecity. For
downregulated genes, the highly expressed genes included, ATPase H+/K+
transporting, alpha subunit (Atp4a), Atp4b, Mucin 5 AC (Muc5ac), Apolipoprotein
A-1 (Apoa1), and gastric intrinsic factor (Gif), whose optimal function is
important in maintaining gastric hemostasis and lower expression has been
associated with increased risk of gastric carcinogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide a global transcriptional gene profile during
the development and progression of Helicobacter-induced gastric cancer. The data 
show that our mouse model system is useful for identifying genes involved in
gastric cancer progression.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-017-3114-y 
PMCID: PMC5310019
PMID: 28201999  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

