
1. Oncotarget. 2017 Apr 11;8(15):25066-25079. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.15339.

The combined action of mast cell chymase, tryptase and carboxypeptidase A3
protects against melanoma colonization of the lung.

Grujic M(1), Paivandy A(1), Gustafson AM(1), Thomsen AR(2), Ã–hrvik H(1), Pejler
G(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Uppsala University, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology,
Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)University of Copenhagen, Department of Immunology and Microbiology,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Department of Anatomy, Physiology
and Biochemistry, Uppsala, Sweden.

Mast cell secretory granules are densely packed with various bioactive mediators 
including proteases of chymase, tryptase and CPA3 type. Previous studies have
indicated that mast cells can affect the outcome of melanoma but the contribution
of the mast cell granule proteases to such effects has not been clear. Here we
addressed this issue by assessing mice lacking either the chymase Mcpt4, the
tryptase Mcpt6 or carboxypeptidase A3 (Cpa3), as well as mice simultaneously
lacking all three proteases, in a model of melanoma dissemination from blood to
the lung. Although mice with individual deficiency in the respective proteases
did not differ significantly from wildtype mice in the extent of melanoma
colonization, mice with multiple protease deficiency (Mcpt4/Mcpt6/Cpa3-deficient)
exhibited a higher extent of melanoma colonization in lungs as compared to
wildtype animals. This was supported by higher expression of melanoma-specific
genes in lungs of Mcpt4/Mcpt6/CPA3-deficient vs. wildtype mice. Cytokine
profiling showed that the levels of CXCL16, a chemokine with effects on T cell
populations and NKT cells, were significantly lower in lungs of
Mcpt4/Mcpt6/Cpa3-deficient animals vs. controls, suggesting that multiple mast
cell protease deficiency might affect T cell or NKT cell populations. In line
with this, we found that the Mcpt4/Mcpt6/Cpa3-deficiency was associated with a
reduction in cells expressing CD1d, a MHC class 1-like molecule that is crucial
for presenting antigen to invariant NKT (iNKT) cells. Together, these findings
indicate a protective role of mast cell-specific proteases in melanoma
dissemination, and suggest that this effect involves a CXCL16/CD1d/NKT cell axis.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.15339 
PMCID: PMC5421910
PMID: 28212574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

