
1. Metab Eng. 2017 Mar;40:148-156. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2017.02.003. Epub 2017 Feb
13.

Rational engineering of diol dehydratase enables 1,4-butanediol biosynthesis from
xylose.

Wang J(1), Jain R(2), Shen X(1), Sun X(1), Cheng M(2), Liao JC(3), Yuan Q(4), Yan
Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of
Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China; Beijing Advanced Innovation Center
for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical
Technology, Beijing 100029, China.
(2)College of Engineering, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
(3)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California,
Los Angeles, 420 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; UCLA-DOE Institute
of Genomics and Proteomics, 420 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of
Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China; Beijing Advanced Innovation Center
for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical
Technology, Beijing 100029, China. Electronic address: yuanqp@mail.buct.edu.cn.
(5)College of Engineering, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
Electronic address: yajunyan@uga.edu.

Establishing novel synthetic routes for microbial production of chemicals often
requires overcoming pathway bottlenecks by tailoring enzymes to enhance
bio-catalysis or even achieve non-native catalysis. Diol dehydratases have been
extensively studied for their interactions with C2 and C3 diols. However,
attempts on utilizing these insights to enable catalysis on non-native substrates
with more than two hydroxyl groups have been plagued with low efficiencies. Here,
we rationally engineered the Klebsiella oxytoca diol dehydratase to enable and
enhance catalytic activity toward a non-native C4 triol, 1,2,4-butanetriol. We
analyzed dehydratase's interaction with 1,2-propanediol and glycerol, which led
us to develop rationally conceived hypotheses. An in silico approach was then
developed to identify and screen candidate mutants with desired activity. This
led to an engineered diol dehydratase with nearly 5 fold higher catalytic
activity toward 1,2,4-butanetriol than the wild type as determined by in vitro
assays. Based on this result, we then expanded the 1,2,4-butanetriol pathway to
establish a novel 1,4-butanediol production platform. We engineered Escherichia
coli's xylose catabolism to enhance the biosynthesis of 1,2,4-butanetriol from
224mg/L to 1506mg/L. By introducing the complete pathway in the engineered strain
we achieve de novo biosynthesis of 1,4-butanediol at 209mg/L from xylose. This
work expands the repertoire of substrates catalyzed by diol dehydratases and
serves as an elucidation to establish novel biosynthetic pathways involving
dehydratase based biocatalysis.

Copyright Â© 2017 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2017.02.003 
PMID: 28215518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

