
1. Cell Death Differ. 2017 Apr;24(4):626-637. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2017.12. Epub 2017
Feb 17.

Expression level is a key determinant of E2F1-mediated cell fate.

Shats I(1), Deng M(1), Davidovich A(1), Zhang C(1), Kwon JS(2), Manandhar D(3),
Gord√¢n R(3), Yao G(2), You L(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson,
AZ, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Center for Genomic and
Computational Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC, USA.

The Rb/E2F network has a critical role in regulating cell cycle progression and
cell fate decisions. It is dysfunctional in virtually all human cancers, because 
of genetic lesions that cause overexpression of activators, inactivation of
repressors, or both. Paradoxically, the downstream target of this network, E2F1, 
is rarely strongly overexpressed in cancer. E2F1 can induce both proliferation
and apoptosis but the factors governing these critical cell fate decisions remain
unclear. Previous studies have focused on qualitative mechanisms such as
differential cofactors, posttranslational modification or state of other
signaling pathways as modifiers of the cell fate decisions downstream of E2F1
activation. In contrast, the importance of the expression levels of E2F1 itself
in dictating the downstream phenotypes has not been rigorously studied, partly
due to the limited resolution of traditional population-level measurements. Here,
through single-cell quantitative analysis, we demonstrate that E2F1 expression
levels have a critical role in determining the fate of individual cells. Low
levels of exogenous E2F1 promote proliferation, moderate levels induce G1, G2 and
mitotic cell cycle arrest, and very high levels promote apoptosis. These multiple
anti-proliferative mechanisms result in a strong selection pressure leading to
rapid elimination of E2F1-overexpressing cells from the population.
RNA-sequencing and RT-PCR revealed that low levels of E2F1 are sufficient to
induce numerous cell cycle-promoting genes, intermediate levels induce growth
arrest genes (i.e., p18, p19 and p27), whereas higher levels are necessary to
induce key apoptotic E2F1 targets APAF1, PUMA, HRK and BIM. Finally, treatment of
a lung cancer cell line with a proteasome inhibitor, MLN2238, resulted in an
E2F1-dependent mitotic arrest and apoptosis, confirming the role of endogenous
E2F1 levels in these phenotypes. The strong anti-proliferative activity of
moderately overexpressed E2F1 in multiple cancer types suggests that targeting
E2F1 for upregulation may represent an attractive therapeutic strategy in cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/cdd.2017.12 
PMCID: PMC5384025
PMID: 28211871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

