
1. PLoS One. 2017 Feb 24;12(2):e0172687. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0172687.
eCollection 2017.

Single nucleotide polymorphism discovery in bovine liver using RNA-seq
technology.

Pareek CS(1), Błaszczyk P(1)(2), Dziuba P(1), Czarnik U(3), Fraser L(3), Sobiech 
P(4), Pierzchała M(5), Feng Y(6), Kadarmideen HN(7), Kumar D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Functional Genomics in Biological and Biomedical Research, Centre 
for Modern Interdisciplinary Technologies, Nicolaus Copernicus University, Torun,
Poland.
(2)Faculty of Biology and Environmental Protection, Nicolaus Copernicus
University, Torun, Poland.
(3)Faculty of Animal Bioengineering, University of Warmia and Mazury, Olsztyn,
Poland.
(4)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Warmia and Mazury, Olsztyn,
Poland.
(5)Institute of Genetics and Animal Breeding of the Polish Academy of Sciences,
Jastrzebiec, Poland.
(6)Waksman Institute of Microbiology, Rutgers, The State University of New
Jersey, Piscataway Township, NJ, United States of America.
(7)Department of Bio and Health Informatics, Technical University of Denmark,
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: RNA-seq is a useful next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology that 
has been widely used to understand mammalian transcriptome architecture and
function. In this study, a breed-specific RNA-seq experiment was utilized to
detect putative single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in liver tissue of young
bulls of the Polish Red, Polish Holstein-Friesian (HF) and Hereford breeds, and
to understand the genomic variation in the three cattle breeds that may reflect
differences in production traits.
RESULTS: The RNA-seq experiment on bovine liver produced 107,114,4072 raw
paired-end reads, with an average of approximately 60 million paired-end reads
per library. Breed-wise, a total of 345.06, 290.04 and 436.03 million paired-end 
reads were obtained from the Polish Red, Polish HF, and Hereford breeds,
respectively. Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) read alignments showed that 81.35%,
82.81% and 84.21% of the mapped sequencing reads were properly paired to the
Polish Red, Polish HF, and Hereford breeds, respectively. This study identified
5,641,401 SNPs and insertion and deletion (indel) positions expressed in the
bovine liver with an average of 313,411 SNPs and indel per young bull. Following 
the removal of the indel mutations, a total of 195,3804, 152,7120 and 205,3184
raw SNPs expressed in bovine liver were identified for the Polish Red, Polish HF,
and Hereford breeds, respectively. Breed-wise, three highly reliable
breed-specific SNP-databases (SNP-dbs) with 31,562, 24,945 and 28,194 SNP records
were constructed for the Polish Red, Polish HF, and Hereford breeds,
respectively. Using a combination of stringent parameters of a minimum depth of
≥10 mapping reads that support the polymorphic nucleotide base and 100% SNP
ratio, 4,368, 3,780 and 3,800 SNP records were detected in the Polish Red, Polish
HF, and Hereford breeds, respectively. The SNP detections using RNA-seq data were
successfully validated by kompetitive allele-specific PCR (KASPTM) SNP genotyping
assay. The comprehensive QTL/CG analysis of 110 QTL/CG with RNA-seq data
identified 20 monomorphic SNP hit loci (CARTPT, GAD1, GDF5, GHRH, GHRL, GRB10,
IGFBPL1, IGFL1, LEP, LHX4, MC4R, MSTN, NKAIN1, PLAG1, POU1F1, SDR16C5, SH2B2,
TOX, UCP3 and WNT10B) in all three cattle breeds. However, six SNP loci (CCSER1, 
GHR, KCNIP4, MTSS1, EGFR and NSMCE2) were identified as highly polymorphic among 
the cattle breeds.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified breed-specific SNPs with greater SNP ratio and
excellent mapping coverage, as well as monomorphic and highly polymorphic
putative SNP loci within QTL/CGs of bovine liver tissue. A breed-specific SNP-db 
constructed for bovine liver yielded nearly six million SNPs. In addition, a
KASPTM SNP genotyping assay, as a reliable cost-effective method, successfully
validated the breed-specific putative SNPs originating from the RNA-seq
experiments.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0172687 
PMCID: PMC5325534
PMID: 28234981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

