
1. Immunol Lett. 2017 Apr;184:61-66. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2017.02.013. Epub 2017 Feb
21.

T helper cells in leprosy: An update.

Saini C(1), Tarique M(2), Rai R(2), Siddiqui A(3), Khanna N(4), Sharma A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical sciences, New Delhi
110029, India. Electronic address: chamansaini82@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical sciences, New Delhi
110029, India.
(3)Department of Zoology, Barnagar Science College, Ujjain, M.P, India.
(4)Department of Dermatology, All India Institute of Medical sciences, New Delhi 
110029, India.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical sciences, New Delhi
110029, India. Electronic address: dralpanasharma@gmail.com.

Leprosy is an ancient disease caused by gram positive, rod shaped bacilli called 
Mycobacterium leprae. Patients present with varied clinico-pathological disease
depending on the host immune response to Mycobacterium leprae. Thus tuberculoid
(TT) and lepromatous (LL) patients represent two ends of a spectrum where the
former shows limited disease, high T cell mediate immune (CMI) response and low
antibody (HI) levels in serum. In contrast the latter has low T cell and high
humoral immune response i.e antibody levels. The mechanisms underlying these
differences have been investigated intensely; however, there is no consensus on
the primary immunological basis. Over three decades, Th1 and Th2 paradigm were
thought to underling tuberculoid and lepromatous disease respectively. However
many patients were shown to have mixed Th1/Th2 pattern of (IFN-γ/IL-4) cytokines.
The present review was undertaken with a view to understand the T cells and
cytokine dysregulation in leprosy. In recent years the sub classes of T cells
that are Regulatory in nature (Treg) have been implicated in immune diseases
where they were shown to suppress T cell functions. Additionally Th17 cells
secreting IL-17A, IL17F, were implicated in immune inflammation. Taken together
these regulatory cells may play a part in influencing immune responses in
leprosy.

Copyright © 2017 European Federation of Immunological Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2017.02.013 
PMID: 28235552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

