
1. Water Sci Technol. 2017 Feb;75(3-4):916-927. doi: 10.2166/wst.2016.532.

Performance evaluation of 388 full-scale waste stabilization pond systems with
seven different configurations.

Espinosa MF(1), von Sperling M(1), Verbyla ME(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sanitary and Environmental Engineering, Federal University of
Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos 6627 - Escola de Engenharia, Bloco 1 - sala
4622, 31270-901 Belo Horizonte, Brazil E-mail: ferespinosac@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of South
Florida, 4202 E. Fowler Ave., Tampa, FL 33620, USA; Present address: School of
Architecture, Civil and Environmental Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne (EPFL), GR C2 554, Station 2, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Waste stabilization ponds (WSPs) and their variants are one the most widely used 
wastewater treatment systems in the world. However, the scarcity of systematic
performance data from full-scale plants has led to challenges associated with
their design. The objective of this research was to assess the performance of 388
full-scale WSP systems located in Brazil, Ecuador, Bolivia and the United States 
through the statistical analysis of available monitoring data. Descriptive
statistics were calculated of the influent and effluent concentrations and the
removal efficiencies for 5-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5), total suspended 
solids (TSS), ammonia nitrogen (N-Ammonia), and either thermotolerant coliforms
(TTC) or Escherichia coli for each WSP system, leading to a broad
characterization of actual treatment performance. Compliance with different water
quality and system performance goals was also evaluated. The treatment plants
were subdivided into seven different categories, according to their units and
flowsheet. The median influent concentrations of BOD5 and TSS were 431 mg/L and
397 mg/L and the effluent concentrations varied from technology to technology,
but median values were 50 mg/L and 47 mg/L, respectively. The median removal
efficiencies were 85% for BOD5 and 75% for TSS. The overall removals of TTC and
E. coli were 1.74 and 1.63 log10 units, respectively. Future research is needed
to better understand the influence of design, operational and environmental
factors on WSP system performance.

DOI: 10.2166/wst.2016.532 
PMID: 28234292  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

