
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2017 Jul;72:103-111. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2017.02.019. Epub 2017 
Feb 24.

Characterization and expression analysis of serpinB3, the first clade B serine
protease inhibitor in Pacific white shrimp, Litopenaeus vannamei.

Liu Y(1), Hou F(1), Liu X(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Yangling 712100, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Yangling 712100, China. Electronic address: liuxiaolin@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

Currently, about nine serpin clades (A-I) were preferentially observed in higher 
animals and clustered on the basis of function. Of these, eight clades contain
extracellular proteins, while clade B contains predominantly intracellular
proteins. In the present study, the first clade B serpin (named LvserpinB3) was
identified from the Pacific white shrimp Litopenaeus vannamei. LvserpinB3 encoded
a 412-amino acid protein with a 19-amino acid signal peptide and a serpin domain.
Moreover, a transmembrane helix (TMHs) was predicted to be located on the
N-terminal of LvserpinB3. Alignment with the cDNA sequence indicated that the
genomic LvserpinB3 gene contains 2 exons and 1 intron. The P1-P1' scissile bond
of the core feature reactive center loop (RCL) represented for
Arginine-Isoleucine (RI), which was in accordance with PmserpinB3, Msserpin-4, -5
and -7. The highest mRNA expression level of LvserpinB3 was detected in
hepatopancreas. A significant decrease of LvserpinB3 was detected in
hepatopancreas at 6 h post Vibrio anguillarum injection, and later on, the
expression of LvserpinB3 was remarkably elevated at 24 h post bacterial
challenge. Suppression of LvserpinB3 in vivo by double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)
mediated RNA interference (RNAi) led to a significant increase in the transcripts
of LvSP1 (Serine protease 1), LvPPAE2 (Prophenoloxidase-activating Enzyme 2) and 
cumulative mortality. Furthermore, rLvserpinB3 protein was expressed and purified
in vitro for the prophenoloxidase inhibition assay. The rLvserpinB3 protein can
strongly impede the extent of proPO cascade. All above imply that LvserpinB3
might be an inhibitor for prophenoloxidase-activating system.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2017.02.019 
PMID: 28238878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

