
1. Insect Sci. 2018 Aug;25(4):655-666. doi: 10.1111/1744-7917.12451. Epub 2017 May
8.

Cytotoxicity and binding profiles of activated Cry1Ac and Cry2Ab to three insect 
cell lines.

Wei J(1)(2), Liang G(1), Wu K(1), Gu S(1), Guo Y(1), Ni X(3), Li X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute
of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Entomology and BIO5 Institute, University of Arizona, Tucson,
AZ, USA.
(3)USDA-ARS, Crop Genetics and Breeding Research Unit, Tifton, GA, USA.

While Cry1Ac has been known to bind with larval midgut proteins cadherin, APN
(amino peptidase N), ALP (alkaline phosphatase) and ABCC2 (adenosine
triphosphate-binding cassette transporter subfamily C2), little is known about
the receptors of Cry2Ab. To provide a clue to the receptors of Cry2Ab, we tested 
the baseline cytotoxicity of activated Cry1Ac and Cry2Ab against the midgut and
fat body cell lines of Helicoverpa zea and the ovary cell line of Spodoptera
frugiperda (SF9). As expected, the descending order of cytotoxicity of Cry1Ac
against the three cell lines in terms of 50% lethal concetration (LC50 ) was
midgut (31.0 μg/mL) > fat body (59.0 μg/mL) and SF9 cell (99.6 μg/mL). By
contrast, the fat body cell line (LC50 = 7.55 μg/mL) was about twice more
susceptible to Cry2Ab than the midgut cell line (16.0 μg/mL), the susceptibility 
of which was not significantly greater than that of SF9 cells (27.0 μg/mL).
Further, ligand blot showed the binding differences between Cry1Ac and Cry2Ab in 
the three cell lines. These results indicated that the receptors of Cry2Ab were
enriched in fat body cells and thus largely different from the receptors of
Cry1Ac, which were enriched in midgut cells.

© 2017 Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/1744-7917.12451 
PMID: 28247982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

