
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2017 Mar 29;65(12):2530-2539. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.6b05599.
Epub 2017 Mar 15.

Hidden Reaction: Mesophilic Cellobiose 2-Epimerases Produce Lactulose.

Kuschel B(1), Seitl I(1), Glück C(1), Mu W(2), Jiang B(2), Stressler T(1),
Fischer L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Enzyme Science, Institute of Food Science and 
Biotechnology, University of Hohenheim , Garbenstrasse 25, D-70599, Stuttgart,
Germany.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University ,
Wuxi, Jiangsu 214122, China.

Lactulose (4-O-β-d-galactopyranosyl-d-fructofuranose) is a prebiotic sugar
derived from the milk sugar lactose (4-O-β-d-galactopyranosyl-d-glucopyranose).
In our study we observed for the first time that known cellobiose 2-epimerases
(CEs; EC 5.1.3.11) from mesophilic microorganisms were generally able to catalyze
the isomerization reaction of lactose into lactulose. Commonly, CEs catalyze the 
C2-epimerization of d-glucose and d-mannose moieties at the reducing end of
β-1,4-glycosidic-linked oligosaccharides. Thus, epilactose
(4-O-β-d-galactopyranosyl-d-mannopyranose) is formed with lactose as substrate.
So far, only four CEs, exclusively from thermophilic microorganisms, have been
reported to additionally catalyze the isomerization reaction of lactose into
lactulose. The specific isomerization activity of the seven CEs in this study
ranged between 8.7 ± 0.1 and 1300 ± 37 pkat/mg. The results indicate that very
likely all CEs are able to catalyze both the epimerization as well as the
isomerization reaction, whereby the latter is performed at a comparatively much
lower reaction rate.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.6b05599 
PMID: 28252294  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

