
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1978 Dec;75(12):6197-201.

Binding of HLA antigen-containing liposomes to bacteria.

Klareskog L, Banck G, Forsgren A, Peterson PA.

Highly purified, detergent-solubilized HLA-A and -B antigens and HLA-D antigens
were separately incorporated into liposomes. Detergent-solubilized
transplantation antigens, but not papain-solubilized antigens lacking the
membrane-integrated portions of the molecules, were bound to the liposomes. A
considerable portion of the liposome-bound antigens displayed accessible
antigenic sites, suggesting that they were oriented in the right-side-out
direction. Liposomes containing the HLA-A and -B antigens or the HLA-D antigen
interacted similarly with bacteria. The two types of liposomes bound efficiently 
to two strains of Neisseria catarrhalis (now classified as Branhamella
catarrhalis) and to one strain of Haemophilus influenzae, weakly to one strain of
Escherichia coli, and not at all to another strain of E. coli. The binding
between the HLA antigen-containing liposomes and one strain of N. catarrhalis was
abolished when Fab fragments directed against the heavy chains of HLA-A and -B
antigens or against HLA-D antigens, respectively, were added. In contrast Fab
fragments against beta(2)-microglobulin did not measurably impede the
bacteria-liposome interaction, suggesting that, with regard to the HLA-A and -B
antigens, the heavy, but not the light, chains interacted with the bacteria.
Additional experiments showed that N. catarrhalis preferentially interacted with 
transplantation antigens when mixed with detergent-solubilized lymphocyte
membrane glycoproteins. These data suggest that HLA-A and -B and HLA-D antigens
may have the function of interacting with foreign antigens such as bacteria.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.75.12.6197 
PMCID: PMC393146
PMID: 282637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

