
1. Proteins. 2017 Jun;85(6):1146-1158. doi: 10.1002/prot.25279. Epub 2017 Mar 24.

Comparative studies of the catalytic mechanisms of two chorismatases: CH-fkbo and
CH-Hyg5.

Dong L(1)(2), Liu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong, 250100, China.
(2)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Qilu Normal University, Jinan,
Shandong, 250013, China.

Chorismatase is an important enzyme involved in Shikimate pathway, which
catalyzes the conversion of chorismate into pyruvate and (dihydro)-benzoic acid
derivatives. According to the outcomes of catalytic reactions, chorismatases can 
be divided into three subfamilies: CH-Fkbo, CH-Hyg5 and CH-XanB2. Recently, the
crystal structures of CH-Fkbo and CH-Hyg5 from Streptomyces hygroscopicus have
been successfully obtained, allowing us to perform QM/MM calculations to explore 
the reaction details. Our calculation results support the proposal that CH-Fkbo
and CH-Hyg5 employ different catalytic mechanisms and gave the mechanistic
details. Fkbo follows a typical hydrolytic mechanism, which contains three
consecutive steps, including the protonation step of the methylene group of
substrate, the nucleophilic attack of the resulted carbocation by activated water
and cleavage of C2'-O8 bond of tetrahedral intermediate (hemiketal). The
protonation of methylene group and the C2'-O8 cleavage correspond to similar
energy barriers (26.5 and 24.8 kcal/mol), suggesting both steps to be
rate-limiting. Whereas Hyg5 employs an intramolecular mechanism, in which the
oxygen from C4 migrates to C3 via an arene oxide intermediate. The first step of 
Hyg5, which corresponds to the concerted protonation of methylene group and the
cleavage of C3-O8, is calculated to be rate-limiting with an energy barrier of
26.3 kcal/mol. The nonconserved active site residue G240Hyg5 (or A244Fkb °) is
suggested to be responsible for leading to different reaction mechanism in
CH-Fkbo and CH-Hyg5. During the catalytic reaction, residue C327 plays an
important role in directing the product selectivity in Hyg5 enzyme. Proteins
2017; 85:1146-1158. © 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.25279 
PMID: 28263400  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

