
1. Sci Total Environ. 2017 Jul 1;589:191-199. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.02.147. 
Epub 2017 Mar 3.

Survey of sediment oxygenation in rhizospheres of the saltmarsh grass - Spartina 
anglica.

Koop-Jakobsen K(1), Fischer J(2), Wenzhöfer F(3).

Author information: 
(1)MARUM - Center for Marine Environmental Sciences, University of Bremen,
Leobener Str., D-28359 Bremen, Germany; HGF MPG Joint Research Group for Deep Sea
Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology,
Celsiusstrasse 1, 28359 Bremen, Germany. Electronic address: Kjakobsen@marum.de.
(2)HGF MPG Joint Research Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck
Institute for Marine Microbiology, Celsiusstrasse 1, 28359 Bremen, Germany.
(3)HGF MPG Joint Research Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck
Institute for Marine Microbiology, Celsiusstrasse 1, 28359 Bremen, Germany; HGF
MPG Joint Research Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology,
Alfred-Wegener-Institute Helmholtz Center for Polar and Marine Research, Am
Handelshafen 12, 27570 Bremerhaven, Germany.

Although transport of oxygen via the aerenchyma tissue and subsequent oxygen loss
across root surfaces is well-documented for salt marsh grasses, only few studies 
have measured the oxygenation of sediment surrounding roots and rhizomes. In this
study, sediment oxygenation was assessed in situ in rhizospheres of the
intertidal salt marsh grass, Spartina anglica - an invading species, vigorously
spreading in many wetlands around the world. The rhizospheres of two populations 
of S. anglica with differing plant morphology growing in different sediment types
were investigated in situ using a novel multifiber optode system with 100 oxygen 
probes. No oxygen was detected inside the rhizospheres at any depth in either
location, indicating a limited impact of plant-mediated sediment oxygenation on
the bulk anoxic sediment. Subsequent planar optode studies imaging the oxygen
content around the roots substantiated these findings showing that sediment
oxygenation was present in both locations, but it was confined only to the
immediate vicinity of the root tips. The size of the oxic zones surrounding the
root tips differed between sediment-types: in S. anglica growing in permeable
sandy sediment, oxic root zones extended 1.5mm away from the roots surface
compared to only 0.4mm in muddy tidal flat deposit, which had a substantially
higher oxygen demand. The oxygen concentration inside the oxic root zones
remained stable during continuous light and air-exposure of the aboveground
biomass. In comparison, sediment oxygenation generated by burrowing infauna
(Hediste diversicolor) showed to be markedly more temporally variability,
reaching anoxic conditions multiple times during a 5-h period.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.02.147 
PMID: 28262356  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

