
1. Clin Dermatol. 2017 Mar - Apr;35(2):236-241. doi:
10.1016/j.clindermatol.2016.05.021. Epub 2016 May 30.

Pemphigus vulgaris and pemphigus foliaceus determined by CD86 and CTLA4
polymorphisms.

Tanasilovic S(1), Popadic S(1), Medenica L(1), Popadic D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatovenereology, School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, 
Belgrade, Serbia; Clinic of Dermatovenereology, Clinical Center of Serbia,
Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. Electronic address: Spopadic@med.bg.ac.rs.

Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) and pemphigus foliaceus (PF) are rare autoimmune
blistering diseases with presumed T-cell-dependent pathology. Activation of naïve
T cells is dependent on antigen recognition, subsequent signaling through the
T-cell receptor complex (signal 1), and various other interactions of T cells
with antigen presenting cells that may be collectively designated as signal 2,
which is unconditionally required for T-cell activation both in response to
infection and to autoantigens. Among the best described interactions contributing
to signal 2 are those mediated by B7 family molecules, such as CD80 and CD86 with
their ligands; CD28, providing activation signals; and cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4), conferring inhibition. Single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within genes encoding those molecules may alter
the signaling process. It is not known whether functional genetic polymorphisms
within genes encoding the aforementioned proteins may increase risk for
developing PV and PF and, if so, whether they might serve as biomarkers for
susceptibility to these diseases. To address those questions, we examined
functional single nucleotide polymorphisms within CD86 (rs1129055) and CTLA4
(rs733618 and rs5742909) genes in 61 pemphigus patients and 486 healthy controls.
We found statistically significant differences in allele and genotype frequencies
between PV patients and controls for rs1129055, as well as for rs5742909 among PV
and PF patients. Namely, the rs1129055 A allele was significantly more common in 
PV patients compared with controls (35.4% versus 25.7%, respectively; P = .040), 
whereas the rs5742909 T allele was significantly more common in PF compared with 
PV patients (19.2% versus 5.2%, respectively; P = .035). The frequency of the
rs5742909 T allele did not, however, differ significantly in PF or in PV compared
with controls (10.5%; P = .187 and P = .100, respectively). We report a novel
association of SNPs within CD86 and CTLA4 genes with pemphigus. The CD86
rs1129055 A allele appears to confer susceptibility to PV but not to PF. © 2016
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2016.05.021 
PMID: 28274366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

