
1. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2017 May 30;139:98-108. doi: 10.1016/j.jpba.2017.01.041.
Epub 2017 Feb 21.

Enantioselective recognition of radezolid by cyclodextrin modified capillary
electrokinetic chromatography and electronic circular dichroism.

Michalska K(1), Gruba E(2), Bocian W(3), Cielecka-Piontek J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Antibiotics and Microbiology, National Medicines Institute,
Chełmska 30/34, 00-725 Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
k.michalska@nil.gov.pl.
(2)Department of Antibiotics and Microbiology, National Medicines Institute,
Chełmska 30/34, 00-725 Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Laboratory, National Medicines Institute, Chełmska 
30/34, 00-725 Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Poznan University
of Medical Sciences, Grunwaldzka 6, 60-780 Poznan, Poland.

A method for the enantioseparation of radezolid (RAD), an analogue of a truly new
class of antibacterial agents, oxazolidinones, was developed based on capillary
electrokinetic chromatography using a cyclodextrin as a chiral pseudophase
(CD-cEKC). The mechanism of RAD separation, together with its precursor, were
investigated to directly define the relationship between the oxazolidinone
structure and the complexation process. During the development of the method,
anionic single isomer cyclodextrins were tested. They were ranked in order from
hydrophilic to hydrophobic as follows:
heptakis-(2,3-dihydroxy-6-sulfo)-β-cyclodextrin (HS-β-CD),
heptakis-(2,3-diacetyl-6-sulfo)-β-cyclodextrin (HDAS-β-CD) and
heptakis-(2,3-dimethyl-6-sulfo)-β-cyclodextrin (HDMS-β-CD). Experiments were
performed at pH values of 2.5, 6.6, 8.2 and 9.6. The cyclodextrins that had an
acetyl or methyl group at the C2 and C3 positions, referred to as HDAS-β-CD and
HDMS-β-CD, respectively, exhibited partial and baseline separation of enantiomers
in a low pH buffer. However, higher temperatures were required for HDAS-β-CD and 
acetonitrile addition was required for HDMS-β-CD. During the experiments,
different organic solvents, varying in their amphiprotic or aprotic nature, were 
tested. The best results for the separation of enantiomers using the CD-cEKC
method were obtained with 40mM HDMS-β-CD dissolved in a 50mM phosphate buffer (pH
2.5) with the addition of acetonitrile (65:35, v/v) at 27°C, reversed polarity
and a voltage equal to 28kV. The apparent binding constants for each enantiomer
to HDAS-β-CD or HDMS-β-CD were calculated. Finally, the stereochemistry of (S)
and (R)-RAD and the behaviour of selected complex formations were established
using electronic circular dichroism.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpba.2017.01.041 
PMID: 28279932  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

