
1. Cytokine. 2017 Aug;96:49-53. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2017.03.003. Epub 2017 Mar 10.

Case-control, exploratory study of cerebrospinal fluid chemokines/cytokines and
lymphocyte subsets in childhood Tourette syndrome with positive streptococcal
markers.

Pranzatelli MR(1), Tate ED(2), Allison TJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Pediatric Myoclonus Center and National Pediatric Neuroinflammation
Organization, Inc., Orlando, FL, USA. Electronic address:
mpranzatelli@omsusa.org.
(2)National Pediatric Myoclonus Center and National Pediatric Neuroinflammation
Organization, Inc., Orlando, FL, USA. Electronic address: etate@omsusa.org.
(3)National Pediatric Myoclonus Center and National Pediatric Neuroinflammation
Organization, Inc., Orlando, FL, USA. Electronic address: tallison@cmh.edu.

A longstanding question is whether neuroinflammation is present in children
symptomatic for Tourette syndrome (TS) with positive streptococcal serology and
throat cultures. The objective was to directly test for it using modern
hypothesis-driven approaches. Profiling studies for 14 immune cell types (flow
cytometry), 7 chemokines/cytokines (ELISA), oligoclonal bands, and other
immunoglobulins were performed in this IRB-approved study of 5 children with TS
and streptococcal markers compared to data from 26 non-inflammatory pediatric
neurological controls. Subjects were well-characterized clinically and with
standardized scales for tics and obsessions/compulsions. Three subjects with TS
(60%) had positive throat cultures for Group A beta-hemolytic strep, five had
elevated anti-deoxyribonuclease-B titers (mean=444), and 4 (80%) had elevated
anti-streptolysin O titers (981). There were no significant differences between
groups in the frequency of CSF B and T cell subsets or NK cells; the proportion
of intracellularly-stained T helper type 1 (IFN-γ) or type 2 (IL-4) cells; the
concentrations of B cell chemoattractants CXCL13, CXCL10; the B cell
proliferation/survival cytokines BAFF and APRIL, or other chemokines (CCL19,
CCL21, CCL22). None of the patients had positive CSF oligoclonal bands or an
abnormal IgG index/synthesis rate. Parallel blood studies were negative. This
novel study found no group CSF lymphocyte phenotypic abnormalities or elevated
inflammatory mediators in childhood TS despite positive serology and throat
cultures for Group A beta-hemolytic streptococci. It demonstrates feasibility of 
the methodology, and should serve as the basis for a larger study of putative
streptococcal-associated neuroimmunological disorders.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2017.03.003 
PMID: 28288328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

