
1. Vet Microbiol. 2017 Mar;201:216-224. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2017.01.032. Epub 2017
Jan 31.

Genetic and serological diversity of Flavobacterium psychrophilum isolates from
salmonids in United Kingdom.

Ngo TPH(1), Bartie KL(2), Thompson KD(3), Verner-Jeffreys DW(4), Hoare R(2),
Adams A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling, Stirling, FK9 4LA, UK.
Electronic address: tpn1@stir.ac.uk.
(2)Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling, Stirling, FK9 4LA, UK.
(3)Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling, Stirling, FK9 4LA, UK;
Moredun Research Institute, Pentlands Science Park, Penicuik, EH26 0PZ, UK.
(4)The Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, The Nothe,
Barrack Road, Weymouth, DT4 8UB, UK.

Flavobacterium psychrophilum is one of the most important bacterial pathogens
affecting cultured rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) and is increasingly
causing problems in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.) hatcheries. Little is known 
about the heterogeneity of F. psychrophilum isolates on UK salmonid farms. A
total of 315 F. psychrophilum isolates, 293 of which were collected from 27 sites
within the UK, were characterised using four genotyping methods and a serotyping 
scheme. A high strain diversity was identified among the isolates with 54
pulsotypes, ten (GTG)5-PCR types, two 16S rRNA allele lineages, seven plasmid
profiles and three serotypes. Seven PFGE groups and 27 singletons were formed at 
a band similarity of 80%. PFGE group P (n=75) was found to be numerically
predominant in eight sites within the UK. Two major PFGE clusters and 13 outliers
were found at the band similarity of 40%. The predominant profileobserved within 
the F. psychrophilum isolates examined was PFGE cluster II - (GTG)5-PCR type
r1-16S rRNA lineage II - serotype Th (70/156 isolates examined, 45%).
Co-existence of genetically and serologically heterogeneous isolates within each 
farm was detected, confounding the ability to control RTFS outbreaks. The
occurrence over time (up to 11 years) of F. psychrophilum pulsotypes in three
representative sites (Scot I, Scot III and Scot V) within Scotland was examined, 
potentially providing important epidemiological data for farm management and the 
development of site-specific vaccines.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2017.01.032 
PMID: 28284613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

