
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Feb 23;8:196. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00196. eCollection
2017.

Activation of Blood CD3+CD56+CD8+ T Cells during Pregnancy and Multiple
Sclerosis.

de Andrés C(1), Fernández-Paredes L(2), Tejera-Alhambra M(3), Alonso B(3),
Ramos-Medina R(3), Sánchez-Ramón S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón ,
Madrid , Spain.
(2)Department of Clinical Immunology, IdISSC, Hospital Clínico San Carlos ,
Madrid , Spain.
(3)Department of Immunology, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón ,
Madrid , Spain.
(4)Department of Clinical Immunology, IdISSC, Hospital Clínico San Carlos,
Madrid, Spain; Department of Microbiology I, Complutense University School of
Medicine, Madrid, Spain.

A striking common feature of most autoimmune diseases is their female
predominance, with at least twice as common among women than men in
relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS), the prevailing MS clinical form with
onset at childbearing age. This fact, together with the protective effect on
disease activity during pregnancy, when there are many biological changes
including high levels of estrogens and progesterone, puts sex hormones under the 
spotlight. The role of natural killer (NK) and NKT cells in MS disease beginning 
and course is still to be elucidated. The uterine NK (uNK) cells are the most
predominant immune population in early pregnancy, and the number and function of 
uNK cells infiltrating the endometrium are sex-hormones' dependent. However,
there is controversy on the role of estrogen or progesterone on circulating NK
(CD56dim and CD56bright) and NKT cells' subsets. Here, we show a significantly
increased activation of CD3+CD56+CD8+ cells in pregnant MS women (MSP) compared
with non-pregnant MS women (NPMS) (p < 0.001) and even with respect to healthy
pregnant women (HP, p < 0.001), remaining increased even after delivery. The
dynamics of expression of early activation marker CD69 on CD3+CD56+CD8+ cells
showed a progressive statistically significant increase along the gestation
trimesters (T) and at postpartum (PP) with respect to NPMS (1T: p = 0.018; 2T:
p = 0.004; 3T: p < 0.001; PP: p = 0.001). In addition, early activation
expression of CD69 on CD3+CD56+CD8+ cells was higher in MSP than HP in the first 
two trimesters of gestation (p = 0.004 and p = 0.015, respectively). NPMS showed 
significantly increased cytotoxic/regulatory NK ratio compared with healthy
controls (p < 0.001). On the other hand, gender studies showed no differences
between MS women and men in NK and CD3+CD56+CD8+ cells' subsets. Our findings may
add on the understanding of the regulatory axis in MS during pregnancy. Further
studies on specific CD8+ NKT cells function and their role in pregnancy
beneficial effects on MS are warranted to move forward more effective MS
treatments.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00196 
PMCID: PMC5322280
PMID: 28280497 

