
1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2017 Apr 15;620:1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2017.03.004. Epub 
2017 Mar 12.

Hydroxylation of 4-hydroxyphenylethylamine derivatives by R263 variants of the
oxygenase component of p-hydroxyphenylacetate-3-hydroxylase.

Chenprakhon P(1), Dhammaraj T(2), Chantiwas R(3), Chaiyen P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Innovative Learning, Mahidol University, Nakhon Pathom 73170,
Thailand. Electronic address: pirom.che@mahidol.ac.th.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Center for Excellence in Protein and Enzyme
Technology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Rama 6 Road, Bangkok 10400,
Thailand.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Center of Excellence for Innovation in Chemistry, 
Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Rama 6 Road, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.

p-hydroxyphenylacetate 3-hydroxylase from Acinetobacter baumannii catalyzes the
hydroxylation of p-hydroxyphenylacetate (HPA) to yield 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetate
(DHPA). In this study, we investigated whether variants of the oxygenase
component (C2) could catalyze hydroxylation of 4-hydroxyphenylethylamines to
synthesize catecholamine derivatives. Single turnover product analysis showed
that the R263D variant can catalyze hydroxylation of tyramine to form dopamine
with the highest yield (57%). The enzyme was also found to have dual substrate
charge specificity because it can also maintain reasonable hydroxylation
efficiency of HPA (86%). This property is different from the R263E variant, which
can hydroxylate HPA (73%) but not tyramine. The R263A variant can hydroxylate HPA
(72%) and tyramine to a small extent (7%). Stopped-flow experiments indicated
that tyramine and HPA prefer binding to R263D after C4a-hydroperoxy-FMN
formation, while tyramine cannot bind to the wild-type or R263E enzymes. Data
also indicate that the hydroxylation rate constant is the rate-limiting step. The
R263D variant was used as a starting enzyme for further mutation to obtain other 
variants for the synthesis of additional catecholamine drugs. The R263D/Y398D
double mutant enzyme showed interesting results in that it was able to catalyze
the hydroxylation of octopamine to form norepinephrine. However, the enzyme still
lacked stereo-selectivity in its reaction.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2017.03.004 
PMID: 28300536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

