
1. PLoS One. 2017 Mar 16;12(3):e0174011. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0174011.
eCollection 2017.

Daxx plays a novel role in T cell survival but is dispensable in Fas-induced
apoptosis.

Li J(1), Qian L(1), Dowling JP(1), Curcione C(1), Kurup D(1), Zhang J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Sidney Kimmel Medical College,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of
America.
(2)Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Daxx was originally isolated as a Fas-binding protein. However, the in vivo
function of Daxx in Fas-induced apoptosis has remained enigmatic. Fas plays an
important role in homeostasis in the immune system. Fas gene mutations lead to
autoimmune-lymphoproliferation (lpr) diseases characterized by hyperplasia of
secondary lymphoid organs. It is well established that the FADD adaptor binds to 
Fas, and recruits/activates caspase 8. However, additional proteins including
Daxx have also been indicated to associate with Fas. It was proposed that Daxx
mediates a parallel apoptotic pathway that is independent of FADD and caspase 8, 
but signals through ASK1-mediated apoptotic pathway. However, because the
deletion of Daxx leads to embryonic lethality, the in vivo function of Daxx has
not been properly analyzed. In the current study, analysis was performed using a 
conditional mutant mouse in which Daxx was deleted specifically in T cells. The
data show that Daxx-/- T cells were able to undergo normal Fas-induced apoptosis.
While containing normal thymocyte populations, the T cell-specific Daxx-/- mice
have a reduced peripheral T cell pool. Importantly, Daxx-deficient T cells
displayed increased death responses upon activation through TCR stimulation.
These results unequivocally demonstrated that Daxx does not mediate Fas-induced
apoptosis, but rather that it plays a critical role in survival responses in
primary mature T cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0174011 
PMCID: PMC5354431
PMID: 28301594  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

