
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2017 Apr;49(4):777-782. doi: 10.1007/s11250-017-1262-3.
Epub 2017 Mar 21.

Arcobacter spp. in fecal samples from Brazilian farmed caimans (Caiman yacare,
Daudin 1802).

Oliveira MG(1), Pressinotti LN(2), Carvalho GS(2), Oliveira MC(1), Moreno LZ(1), 
Matajira CE(1), Bergamo AS(2), Aleixo VM(3), Veiga AC(2), de Souza Corsino E(3), 
Christ AP(4), Sato MI(4), Moreno AM(1), Knöbl T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária e Zootecnia da Universidade de São Paulo,
Av. Prof. Dr. Orlando Marques de Paiva, 87-Cidade Universitária, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.
(2)Universidade do Estado de Mato Grosso, Av. São João s/n-Cavalhada, Cáceres,
MT, Spain.
(3)Instituto Federal de Educação Ciência e Tecnologia de Mato Grosso Campus
Cáceres, Av. dos Ramires s/n-Distrito Industrial, Cáceres, MT, Spain.
(4)Companhia Ambiental do Estado de São Paulo (CETESB), Av. Prof. Frederico
Hermann Jr, 345, Pinheiros, São Paulo/SP, 05459-900, Brazil.
(5)Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária e Zootecnia da Universidade de São Paulo,
Av. Prof. Dr. Orlando Marques de Paiva, 87-Cidade Universitária, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil. tknobl@usp.br.

The aim of this study was to perform the identification and molecular
characterization of Arcobacter cryaerophilus and Arcobacter butzleri isolated
from caiman (Caiman yacare), kept at a production farm, in Brazil. Forty fecal
samples were analyzed. After isolation and identification, 21/40 strains of A.
butzleri and 19/40 strains of A. cryaerophilus were subjected to PCR for
potential virulence gene detection. The results of the PCR showed 38/40 strains
positive for the cadF, cj1349, ciaB, and tlyA genes, 39/40 strains positive for
the pldA gene, and 40/40 strains positive for the mviN gene. None of the strains 
presented the irgA gene. Hemagglutinin (hecA gene) and hemolysin (hecB) genes
were detected in 21/40 and 16/40 strains, respectively. The SE-AFLP showed a
great genetic diversity, but some clonally groups were disseminated in various
tanks. These data reveal that the strains presented the same virulence traits
described from Arcobacter isolated from food-borne disease in humans.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-017-1262-3 
PMID: 28321791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

