
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Mar 9;8:260. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00260. eCollection 2017.

High Interferon-γ Uniquely in Vδ1 T Cells Correlates with Markers of Inflammation
and Axonal Damage in Early Multiple Sclerosis.

Singh AK(1), Novakova L(2), Axelsson M(2), Malmeström C(2), Zetterberg H(3),
Lycke J(2), Cardell SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg , Gothenburg , Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg , Gothenburg , Sweden.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden;
Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal,
Sweden; Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London,
UK.

We have identified a population of T lymphocytes in peripheral blood, Vδ1 TCRγδ T
lymphocytes, which unexpectedly was uniquely expressing high production of
interferon-γ in newly diagnosed, untreated multiple sclerosis (MS) patients.
IFN-γ production in this population distinctly correlated to parameters of
clinical disease activity, inflammation, and neuronal damage. These Vδ1 T
lymphocytes belong to a population of innate T lymphocytes that recognize antigen
in the context of CD1d/CD1c and which include reactivity to the myelin
glycosphingolipid sulfatide. Importantly, patients treated with natalizumab,
blocking leukocyte transmigration to central nervous system, had completely
normalized levels of interferon-γ-producing Vδ1 T lymphocytes. A biomarker and
early sign of demyelinating disease in MS is much warranted and would help
identify immunopathogenesis and prognosis of disease as well as monitor success
with adequate treatment. The present study identifies the Vδ1 T lymphocytes as an
early marker of MS and a possible link to understanding the disease etiology.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00260 
PMCID: PMC5343019
PMID: 28337205 

