
1. J Gen Appl Microbiol. 2017 May 12;63(2):147-156. doi: 10.2323/jgam.2016.09.002.
Epub 2017 Mar 22.

In vitro evaluation of candidate Bacillus spp. for animal feed.

Mingmongkolchai S(1)(2), Panbangred W(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University.
(2)Mahidol University-Osaka University Collaborative Research Center for
Bioscience and Biotechnology (MUOU:CRC), Faculty of Science, Mahidol University.

The aim of this study was to select aerobic spore-formers for animal feed based
on their in vitro probiotic potential, including their enzyme-producing ability
and safety assessment. Seven isolates out of 187 spore-forming bacteria were
selected for their ability to produce cellulase (89.21-1668.32 U/ml), xylanase
(1399.68-4351.10 U/ml), and phytase (2.72-28.70 U/ml). Among seven isolates, five
had activities towards a broad range of p-nitrophenyl esters with acyl chain
lengths from C2 to C12. The probiotic properties of all selected isolates varied 
with respect to their acid and bile salt tolerance under simulated
gastrointestinal tract (GIT) conditions, and their adherence ability to human
intestinal cell lines (Caco-2 and HT-29). The safety assessment revealed that the
isolate CM40 was not cytotoxic to Caco-2 and HT-29, did not exhibit hemolytic
activity, carried no enterotoxin or emetic toxin genes, and was susceptible to
ten antibiotics, including six key antibiotics (chloramphenicol, erythromycin,
gentamicin, tetracycline, streptomycin, and kanamycin) as recommended by the
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). Co-incubation of isolate CM40 with enteric
bacteria (Salmonella Typhi, Salmonella Enteritidis 1781, and Escherichia coli)
demonstrated that CM40 significantly decreased the number of pathogens (about
30-48%) adhering to Caco-2 and HT-29 (P < 0.05). Analysis of gene encoding 16S
rRNA, gyrase A (gyrA) and the cheA histidine kinase revealed that CM40 belongs to
Bacillus subtilis. On the basis of probiotic properties and basic safety aspects,
the B. subtilis strain CM40 was found to possess desirable in vitro probiotic
properties, and may be a potential candidate for supplementation of animal feed.

DOI: 10.2323/jgam.2016.09.002 
PMID: 28331163  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

