
1. F1000Res. 2017 Feb 28;6. pii: F1000 Faculty Rev-195. doi:
10.12688/f1000research.10609.1. eCollection 2017.

Escherichia coli ST131: a multidrug-resistant clone primed for global domination.

Pitout JD(1), DeVinney R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology, Immunology, and Infectious Diseases, Cummings
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Departments 
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cummings School of Medicine, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, Canada; Division of Microbiology, Calgary Laboratory Services, 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Medical Microbiology, University of
Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(2)Departments of Microbiology, Immunology, and Infectious Diseases, Cummings
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

A single extra-intestinal pathogenic Escherichia coli (ExPEC) clone, named
sequence type (ST) 131, is responsible for millions of global
antimicrobial-resistant (AMR) infections annually. Population genetics indicate
that ST131 consists of different clades (i.e. A, B, and C); however, clade C is
the most dominant globally. A ST131 subclade, named C1-M27, is emerging in Japan 
and has been responsible for the recent increase in AMR ExPEC in that country.
The sequential acquisition of several virulence and AMR genes associated with
mobile genetic elements during the 1960s to 1980s primed clade C (and its
subclades C1 and C2) for success in the 1990s to 2000s. IncF plasmids with
F1:A2:B20 and F2:A1:B replicons have shaped the evolution of the C1 and C2
subclades. It is possible that ST131 is a host generalist with different
accessory gene profiles. Compensatory mutations within the core genome of this
clone have counterbalanced the fitness cost associated with IncF plasmids. ST131 
clade C had dramatically changed the population structure of ExPEC, but it still 
remains unclear which features of this clade resulted in one of the most
unprecedented AMR successes of the 2000s.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.10609.1 
PMCID: PMC5333602
PMID: 28344773 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: JDDP has previously received
research funds from Merck and Astra Zeneca. RdeV has no competing interests to
declare.No competing interests were disclosed.No competing interests were
disclosed.

