
1. Chem Phys Lipids. 2017 Apr;204:94-104. doi: 10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2017.03.002.
Epub 2017 Mar 23.

Continuous gradient temperature Raman spectroscopy and differential scanning
calorimetry of N-3DPA and DHA from -100 to 10°C.

Broadhurst CL(1), Schmidt WF(2), Nguyen JK(2), Qin J(2), Chao K(2), Aubuchon
SR(3), Kim MS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Microbiology and Food Safety Laboratory, U.S. Department of
Agriculture Agricultural Research Service, 10300 Baltimore Avenue, Beltsville,
MD, 20705, United States; Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of
Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD, 21250, United States. Electronic
address: leigh.broadhurst@ars.usda.gov.
(2)Environmental Microbiology and Food Safety Laboratory, U.S. Department of
Agriculture Agricultural Research Service, 10300 Baltimore Avenue, Beltsville,
MD, 20705, United States.
(3)TA/Waters Instruments, Inc., New Castle, DE, 19720, United States.

Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:6n-3) is exclusively utilized in fast signal
processing tissues such as retinal, neural and cardiac. N-3 docosapentaenoic acid
(n-3DPA, 22:5n-3), with just one less double bond, is also found in the marine
food chain yet cannot substitute for DHA. Gradient temperature Raman spectroscopy
(GTRS) applies the temperature gradients utilized in differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC) to Raman spectroscopy, providing a straightforward technique to
identify molecular rearrangements that occur near and at phase transitions.
Herein we apply GTRS and both conventional and modulated DSC to n-3DPA and DHA
from -100 to 20°C. Three-dimensional data arrays with 0.2°C increments and first 
derivatives allowed complete assignment of solid, liquid and transition state
vibrational modes. Melting temperatures n-3DPA (-45°C) and DHA (-46°C) are
similar and show evidence for solid-state phase transitions not seen in n-6DPA
(-27°C melt). The C6H2 site is an elastic marker for temperature perturbation of 
all three lipids, each of which has a distinct three dimensional structure. N-3
DPA shows the spectroscopic signature of saturated fatty acids from C1 to C6. DHA
does not have three aliphatic carbons in sequence; n-6DPA does but they occur at 
the methyl end, and do not yield the characteristic signal. DHA appears to have
uniform twisting from C6H2 to C12H2 to C18H2 whereas n-6DPA bends from C12 to
C18, centered at C15H2. For n-3DPA, twisting is centered at C6H2 adjacent to the 
C2-C3-C4-C5 aliphatic moiety. These molecular sites are the most elastic in the
solid phase and during premelting.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2017.03.002 
PMID: 28342541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

