
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Mar 13;8:269. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00269. eCollection
2017.

CIMAvax-EGF: A New Therapeutic Vaccine for Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer
Patients.

Saavedra D(1), Crombet T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Molecular Immunology , Havana , Cuba.

Lung cancer is the common fatal illness with the highest incidence and mortality 
globally. Epidermal growth factor receptor overexpression by tumor cells is
associated with uncontrolled proliferation, angiogenesis, anti-apoptotic signals,
metastization, and invasiveness. CIMAvax-EGF vaccine consists of a chemical
conjugate of the EGF with the P64 protein derived from the Meningitis B bacteria 
and Montanide ISA 51, as adjuvant. The vaccine is projected to induce antibodies 
against EGF that results in EGF withdrawal. CIMAvax-EGF demonstrated to be safe
and immunogenic in advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. The
efficacy study was an open-label, multicentric Phase III clinical trial, which
enrolled 405 advanced NSCLC patients. Patients with proven stage IIIB/IV NSCLC,
who had completed four to six cycles of chemotherapy (CTP) were randomized to
receive CIMAvax-EGF or best supportive care. CIMAvax-EGF resulted in a
significantly larger overall survival in patients receiving at least four doses. 
High EGF concentration at baseline was a good predictive biomarker of the vaccine
activity and a poor prognostic biomarker for the non-treated population. The
proportion of CD8+CD28- cells, CD4 cells, and the CD4/CD8 ratio after first-line 
CTP was also associated with CIMAvax-EGF clinical benefit. After completing the
Phase III, a Phase IV trial was done where the vaccine was administered in
primary care units. Administering the vaccine at primary care institutions
granted better access and treatment compliance. Safety was confirmed. Several
clinical trials are currently ongoing to validate EGF as a predictive biomarker
of CIMAvax-EGF efficacy.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00269 
PMCID: PMC5346887
PMID: 28348561 

