
1. Brain Behav Immun. 2017 Nov;66:23-30. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2017.03.011. Epub 2017
Mar 24.

Microbiota differences between commercial breeders impacts the post-stroke immune
response.

Sadler R(1), Singh V(1), Benakis C(2), Garzetti D(3), Brea D(4), Stecher B(3),
Anrather J(4), Liesz A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, Klinikum der Universität München, 
Feodor-Lynen Strasse 17, 81377 Munich, Germany; Munich Cluster for Systems
Neurology (SyNergy), 80336 Munich, Germany.
(2)Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, Klinikum der Universität München, 
Feodor-Lynen Strasse 17, 81377 Munich, Germany; Munich Cluster for Systems
Neurology (SyNergy), 80336 Munich, Germany; Feil Family Brain and Mind Research
Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065,
USA.
(3)Max-von-Pettenkofer Institute, Klinikum der Universität München, 80336 Munich,
Germany; German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Munich, 80336 
Munich, Germany.
(4)Feil Family Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, 
1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(5)Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, Klinikum der Universität München, 
Feodor-Lynen Strasse 17, 81377 Munich, Germany; Munich Cluster for Systems
Neurology (SyNergy), 80336 Munich, Germany. Electronic address:
Arthur.Liesz@med.uni-muenchen.de.

Experimental reproducibility between laboratories is a major translational
obstacle worldwide, particularly in studies investigating immunomodulatory
therapies in relation to brain disease. In recent years increasing attention has 
been drawn towards the gut microbiota as a key factor in immune cell
polarization. Moreover, manipulation of the gut microbiota has been found
effective in a diverse range of brain disorders. Within this study we aimed to
test the impact of microbiota differences between mice from different sources on 
the post-stroke neuroinflammatory response. With this rationale, we have
investigated the correlation between microbiota differences and the immune
response in mice from three commercial breeders with the same genetic background 
(C57BL/6). While overall bacterial load was comparable, we detected substantial
differences in species diversity and microbiota composition on lower taxonomic
levels. Specifically, we investigated segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB)-which 
have been shown to promote T cell polarization-and found that they were absent in
mice from one breeder but abundant in others. Our experiments revealed a breeder 
specific correlation between SFB presence and the ratio of Treg to Th17 cells.
Moreover, recolonization of SFB-negative mice with SFB resulted in a T cell shift
which mimicked the ratios found in SFB-positive mice. We then investigated the
response to a known experimental immunotherapeutic approach, CD28 superagonist
(CD28SA), which has been previously shown to expand the Treg population. CD28SA
treatment had differing effects between mice from different breeders and was
found to be ineffective at inducing Treg expansion in SFB-free mice. These
changes directly corresponded to stroke outcome as mice lacking SFB had
significantly larger brain infarcts. This study demonstrates the major impact of 
microbiota differences on T cell polarization in mice during ischemic stroke
conditions, and following immunomodulatory therapies.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2017.03.011 
PMID: 28347867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

