
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2017 Mar 30;124(1):85-90. doi: 10.3354/dao03103.

Isolation of Lacinutrix venerupis strains associated with disease outbreaks in
sea bream Sparus aurata and European sea bass Dicentrarchus labrax.

López JR(1), Alcantara R, Lorenzo L, Navas JI.

Author information: 
(1)IFAPA Centro Agua del Pino, Junta de Andalucía, Carretera El Rompido-Punta
Umbría km 3.8., CP21450, Cartaya, Huelva, Spain.

Four Gram-negative bacterial isolates were recovered from 2 disease outbreaks
that occurred in 2013 affecting European sea bass Dicentrarchus labrax fry and
sea bream Sparus aurata adults. Main symptoms were erratic swimming, eroded fins 
and, in the sea bream outbreak, haemorrhages on the body surface; bacteria were
always recovered from internal organs, almost in pure culture. On the basis of
phenotypic characterization and 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis, the isolates
were identified as Lacinutrix venerupis, a bacterium not previously reported as a
fish pathogen. The highest 16S rDNA sequence similarities were recorded with the 
type strain of this species (99.9-100% similarity), while other species showed
similarities below 97%, the closest relative being L. mariniflava (96.3%
similarity). Phenotypic characterization showed some discrepancies with the L.
venerupis type strain (mainly in BIOLOG GN profile); however, DNA-DNA
hybridization assays with L. venerupis and L. mariniflava type strains confirmed 
that these isolates belong to the former species (levels of DNA relatedness were 
98-100% and 38-50%, respectively). Finally, a virulence evaluation of the
isolates using Senegalese sole Solea senegalensis fry was also performed;
significant mortalities (80-100% mortality within 4 d) were recorded after
intraperitoneal injection, but only with high doses of bacteria (107colony
forming units fish-1). Further studies will be necessary to determine the
importance of this species as a fish pathogen.

DOI: 10.3354/dao03103 
PMID: 28357988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

