
1. Microb Cell. 2015 May 4;2(5):150-162. doi: 10.15698/mic2015.05.201.

Toxoplasma gondii inhibits cytochrome c-induced caspase activation in its host
cell by interference with holo-apoptosome assembly.

Graumann K(1), Schaumburg F(2), Reubold TF(3), Hippe D(4), Eschenburg S(3), Lüder
CG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Georg-August-University, Göttingen,
Germany. ; Present address: In den Brühlwiesen 12, 61352 Bad Homburg, Germany.
(2)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Georg-August-University, Göttingen,
Germany. ; Present address: Institute for Medical Microbiology, University
Hospital Münster, Domagkstraße 10, 48149 Münster, Germany.
(3)Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.
(4)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Georg-August-University, Göttingen,
Germany.

Comment in
    Microb Cell. 2015 May 30;2(6):178-181.

Inhibition of programmed cell death pathways of mammalian cells often facilitates
the sustained survival of intracellular microorganisms. The apicomplexan parasite
Toxoplasma gondii is a master regulator of host cell apoptotic pathways. Here, we
have characterized a novel anti-apoptotic activity of T. gondii. Using a
cell-free cytosolic extract model, we show that T. gondii interferes with the
activities of caspase 9 and caspase 3/7 which have been induced by exogenous
cytochrome c and dATP. Proteolytic cleavage of caspases 9 and 3 is also
diminished suggesting inhibition of holo-apoptosome function. Parasite infection 
of Jurkat T cells and subsequent triggering of apoptosome formation by exogenous 
cytochrome cin vitro and in vivo indicated that T. gondii also interferes with
caspase activation in infected cells. Importantly, parasite inhibition of
cytochrome c-induced caspase activation considerably contributes to the overall
anti-apoptotic activity of T. gondii as observed in staurosporine-treated cells. 
Co-immunoprecipitation showed that T. gondii abolishes binding of caspase 9 to
Apaf-1 whereas the interaction of cytochrome c with Apaf-1 remains unchanged.
Finally, T. gondii lysate mimics the effect of viable parasites and prevents
holo-apoptosome functionality in a reconstituted in vitro system comprising
recombinant Apaf-1 and caspase 9. Beside inhibition of cytochrome c release from 
host cell mitochondria, T. gondii thus also targets the holo-apoptosome assembly 
as a second mean to efficiently inhibit the caspase-dependent intrinsic cell
death pathway.

DOI: 10.15698/mic2015.05.201 
PMCID: PMC5349237
PMID: 28357287 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no
conflict of interest.

