
1. Int J Oncol. 2017 Mar 16. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2017.3916. [Epub ahead of print]

Effects of irradiation on human leukocyte antigen class I expression in human
papillomavirus positive and negative base of tongue and mobile tongue squamous
cell carcinoma cell lines.

Haeggblom L(1), Nordfors C(2), Tertipis N(3), Bersani C(1), Ramqvist T(1), Näsman
A(1), Dalianis T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Cancer Center
Karolinska (CCK), Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska
Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics (MEB), Karolinska
Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is a risk factor for oropharyngeal cancer,
besides smoking and alcohol. Patients with HPV-positive tumors have a better
prognosis than those with HPV-negative tumors. Furthermore, patients with
HPV-positive tumors, with high CD8+ tumor infiltrating lymphocyte counts or
absent/low human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I expression have the best
outcome. The latter is paradoxical, since HLA class I expression is important for
tumor recognition. Below, the hypothesis that radiation therapy increases HLA
class I expression was tested. HPV16 positive head and neck cancer cell lines
UPCI-SCC-154, UPCI-SCC-090 and UM-SCC-47, and the HPV-negative cancer cell line
UT-SCC-14, were treated with 2-10 Gray (Gy) and tested for HLA class I
expression, cell cycle changes and apoptosis by flow cytometry. HPV16 E5, E7 and 
HLA-A mRNA expression was tested by quantitative PCR. A dose of 10 Gy resulted in
a tendency of increased HLA class I cell surface expression for all cell lines
and reached statistical significance for UPCI-SCC-154 and UPCI-SCC-090. There
were, however, no significant changes in HLA-A mRNA expression in any of the cell
lines, or HPV16 E5, or E7 mRNA expression for UPCI-SCC-47 and UPCI-SCC-154, while
for UPCI-SCC-090 HPV16 E5 mRNA decreased. In all cell lines there was a shift
towards G2/M phase and increased apoptosis after irradiation with 10 Gy. To
conclude, irradiation with 10 Gy increased HLA class I expression in the
HPV-positive cell lines UPCI-SCC-154 and UPCI-SCC-090. A similar tendency was
observed for HPV-positive UM-SCC-47 and HPV-negative UT-SCC-14.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2017.3916 
PMID: 28350079 

