
1. Cell Death Dis. 2017 Mar 30;8(3):e2724. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2017.151.

Myogenic differentiation triggers PML nuclear body loss and DAXX relocalization
to chromocentres.

Salsman J(1), Rapkin LM(2), Margam NN(3), Duncan R(3), Bazett-Jones DP(2),
Dellaire G(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, B3H 4R2.
(2)Genetics & Genome Biology Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
ON, Canada, M5G 1X8.
(3)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS,
Canada, B3H 4R2.
(4)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
NS, Canada, B3H 4R2.

The promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) is expressed in most normal human
tissues and forms nuclear bodies (NBs) that have roles in gene regulation and
cellular processes such as DNA repair, cell cycle control, and cell fate
decisions. Using murine C2C12 myoblasts, we demonstrate that activation of
skeletal muscle differentiation results in loss of PML and PML NBs prior to
myotube fusion. Myotube formation was associated with marked chromatin
reorganization and the relocalization of DAXX from PML NBs to chromocentres. MyoD
expression was sufficient to cause PML NB loss, and silencing of PML induced DAXX
relocalization. Fusion of C2C12 cells using the reptilian reovirus p14 fusogenic 
protein failed to disrupt PML NBs yet still promoted DAXX redistribution and
loss; whereas ectopic expression of PML in differentiated cells only partially
restored PML NB formation and DAXX localization at NBs. Finally, we determined
that the C-terminal SUMO-interacting motif of DAXX is required for its
colocalization with ATRX in heterochromatin domains during myotube formation.
These data support a model in which activation of myogenic differentiation
results in PML NB loss, chromatin reorganization and DAXX relocalization, and
provides a paradigm for understanding the consequence of PML loss in other
cellular contexts, such as during cancer development and progression.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2017.151 
PMCID: PMC5386546
PMID: 28358373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

