
1. Bioresour Technol. 2017 Jul;235:140-148. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2017.03.085.
Epub 2017 Mar 18.

Engineering coenzyme A-dependent pathway from Clostridium saccharobutylicum in
Escherichia coli for butanol production.

Ye W(1), Li J(1), Han R(1), Xu G(1), Dong J(1), Ni Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carbohydrate Chemistry and Biotechnology, Ministry of
Education, School of Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China; Key 
Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology, Ministry of Education, School of
Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Carbohydrate Chemistry and Biotechnology, Ministry of
Education, School of Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China; Key 
Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology, Ministry of Education, School of
Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China. Electronic address:
yni@jiangnan.edu.cn.

Clostridium saccharobutylicum has been proved to be efficient in butanol
fermentation from various feedstocks. Whereas, lack of genetic manipulation
system has severely hindered the engineering of C. saccharobutylicum for more
extensive applications. In this study, recombinant Escherichia coli harboring
heterologous coenzyme A-dependent pathway from C. saccharobutylicum DSM 13864 was
constructed, which consisted of solventogenic pathway genes: acetoacetyl-CoA
thiolase (thlA), aldehyde/alcohol dehydrogenase (adhE2) and bcs-operon
(crt-bcd1-etfB2-fixB2-hbd). Then, a butanol titer of 67mg/L was attained. After
replacing thlA with acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase (atoB) from E. coli and deleting
the competitive branch genes lactate dehydrogenase (ldhA), aldehyde/alcohol
dehydrogenase (adhE1) and fumarate reductase (frdBC), the butanol titer was
successfully improved for 3.8-fold (254mg/L). Under the optimum fermentation
conditions, the final butanol titer reached 584mg/L after 120h. This result
demonstrates the feasibility of adapting CoA-dependent solventogenic pathway from
C. saccharobutylicum in E. coli for butanol synthesis.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2017.03.085 
PMID: 28365341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

