
1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2017 Aug;189(2):211-225. doi: 10.1111/cei.12968. Epub 2017 May 
10.

In vivo activation of invariant natural killer T cells induces systemic and local
alterations in T-cell subsets prior to preterm birth.

Gomez-Lopez N(1)(2)(3), Romero R(1)(4)(5)(6), Arenas-Hernandez M(1)(2)(7),
Schwenkel G(1)(2), St Louis D(1)(2), Hassan SS(1)(2), Mial TN(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Perinatology Research Branch, NICHD/NIH/DHHS, Bethesda, MD, and Detroit, MI,
USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Wayne State University, School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Immunology & Microbiology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 
USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI, USA.
(6)Center for Molecular Medicine & Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI,
USA.
(7)Department of Molecular Biomedicine, CINVESTAV, Mexico City, Mexico.

Preterm birth, the leading cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality worldwide,
is frequently preceded by spontaneous preterm labour, a syndrome of multiple
aetiologies. Pathological inflammation is causally linked to spontaneous preterm 
labour. Indeed, direct activation of invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells via 
α-galactosylceramide induces preterm labour/birth largely by initiating systemic 
and local (i.e. decidua and myometrium) innate immune responses. Herein, we
investigated whether iNKT-cell activation altered local and systemic T-cell
subsets. Administration of α-galactosylceramide induced an expansion of activated
CD1d-restricted iNKT cells in the decidua and a reduction in the number of: (1)
total T cells (conventional CD4+ and CD8+ T cells) through the down-regulation of
the CD3ɛ molecule in the peripheral circulation, spleen, uterine-draining lymph
nodes (ULNs), decidua and/or myometrium; (2) CD4+ regulatory T cells in the
spleen, ULNs and decidua; (3) T helper type 17 (Th17) cells in the ULNs but an
increase in the number of decidual Th17 cells; (4) CD8+ regulatory T cells in the
spleen and ULNs; and (5) CD4+ and CD8+ forkhead box protein 3 negative (Foxp3- ) 
responder T cells in the spleen and ULNs. As treatment with rosiglitazone
prevents iNKT-cell activation-induced preterm labour/birth, we also explored
whether the administration of this peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma (PPARγ) agonist would restore the number of T cells. Treating
α-galactosylceramide-injected mice with rosiglitazone partially restored the
number of T cells in the spleen but not in the decidua. In summary, iNKT-cell
activation altered the systemic and local T-cell subsets prior to preterm
labour/birth; however, treatment with rosiglitazone partially reversed such
effects.

© 2017 British Society for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/cei.12968 
PMCID: PMC5508324
PMID: 28369855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

