
1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2017 Mar 17;10:69. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00069. eCollection
2017.

Whole Genome Expression Analysis in a Mouse Model of Tauopathy Identifies MECP2
as a Possible Regulator of Tau Pathology.

Maphis NM(1), Jiang S(1), Binder J(1), Wright C(2), Gopalan B(3), Lamb BT(4),
Bhaskar K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque NM, USA.
(2)Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Baltimore MD, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Cleveland Clinic Foundation Cleveland OH, USA.
(4)Stark Neurosciences Research Institute, Indiana University, Indianapolis IN,
USA.

Increasing evidence suggests that hyperphosphorylation and aggregation of
microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT or tau) correlates with the development 
of cognitive impairment in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related tauopathies.
While numerous attempts have been made to model AD-relevant tau pathology in
various animal models, there has been very limited success for these models to
fully recapitulate the progression of disease as seen in human tauopathies. Here,
we performed whole genome gene expression in a genomic mouse model of tauopathy
that expressed human MAPT gene under the control of endogenous human MAPT
promoter and also were complete knockout for endogenous mouse tau [referred to as
'hTau MaptKO(Duke)' mice]. First, whole genome expression analysis revealed 64
genes, which were differentially expressed (32 up-regulated and 32
down-regulated) in the hippocampus of 6-month-old hTau MaptKO(Duke) mice compared
to age-matched non-transgenic controls. Genes relevant to neuronal function or
neurological disease include up-regulated genes: PKC-alpha (Prkca), MECP2
(Mecp2), STRN4 (Strn4), SLC40a1 (Slc40a1), POLD2 (Pold2), PCSK2 (Pcsk2), and
down-regulated genes: KRT12 (Krt12), LASS1 (Cers1), PLAT (Plat), and NRXN1
(Nrxn1). Second, network analysis suggested anatomical structure development,
cellular metabolic process, cell death, signal transduction, and stress response 
were significantly altered biological processes in the hTau MaptKO(Duke) mice as 
compared to age-matched non-transgenic controls. Further characterization of a
sub-group of significantly altered genes revealed elevated phosphorylation of
MECP2 (methyl-CpG-binding protein-2), which binds to methylated CpGs and
associates with chromatin, in hTau MaptKO(Duke) mice compared to age-matched
controls. Third, phoshpho-MECP2 was elevated in autopsy brain samples from human 
AD compared to healthy controls. Finally, siRNA-mediated knockdown of MECP2 in
human tau expressing N2a cells resulted in a significant decrease in total and
phosphorylated tau. Together, these results suggest that MECP2 is a potential
novel regulator of tau pathology relevant to AD and tauopathies.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00069 
PMCID: PMC5355442
PMID: 28367114 

