
1. Carbohydr Res. 2017 Apr 18;443-444:73-77. doi: 10.1016/j.carres.2017.03.005. Epub
2017 Mar 6.

Synthesis and biological activities of C-glycosides of KRN 7000 with novel
ceramide residues.

Altiti AS(1), Ma X(2), Zhang L(2), Ban Y(2), Franck RW(1), Mootoo DR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Hunter College, 695 Park Avenue, New York, NY, 10065,
USA; The Graduate Center, CUNY, 365 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY, 10016, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medicine, 1300 York
Ave, New York, NY, 10065, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Hunter College, 695 Park Avenue, New York, NY, 10065,
USA; The Graduate Center, CUNY, 365 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY, 10016, USA.
Electronic address: dmootoo@hunter.cuny.edu.

The identification of immunoactive agents for clinical and mechanistic
applications is a very active area of research. In this vein, analogues of the
potent immunostimulant KRN 7000 with diverse cytokine profiles have attracted
considerable attention. These compounds have been shown to activate iNKT cells
via presentation by CD1d. Herein, we report on the synthesis and activity for
four new C-glycosides of KRN 7000, 11-phenylundecanoyl and
11-p-fluorophenylundecanoyl derivatives of C-KRN 7000, 2,3-bis-epi-C-KRN 7000 and
the reverse amide of C-KRN 7000. In mice, compared to C-KRN 7000,
2,3-bis-epi-C-KRN 7000 stimulated higher release of the anti-inflammatory
cytokine IL-4 and lower release of the inflammatory cytokines IFN-γ and IL-12.
The phenyl terminated alkanoyl and reverse amide analogues were inactive. These
data suggest that structure activity effects for KRN 7000 are not necessarily
additive and their use in the design of new analogues will require an improved
understanding of how subtle structural changes impact on cytokine activity.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.carres.2017.03.005 
PMCID: PMC5499692
PMID: 28365448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

