
1. J Food Prot. 2017 Apr 3:779-782. doi: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-16-394. [Epub ahead
of print]

Isolation and Identification of Arcobacter Species from Costa Rican Poultry
Production and Retail Sources.

Barboza K(1), Angulo I(1), Zumbado L(2), Redondo-Solano M(1), Castro E(3), Arias 
ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Tropical Disease Research Center and Food Microbiology Laboratory, Faculty
of Microbiology, Universidad de Costa Rica, 2060 San José, Costa Rica.
(2)2 Veterinary School, Universidad Nacional, 40101 Heredia, Costa Rica.
(3)3 Medical Sciences University (UCIMED), 10103 San Jose, Costa Rica.

Arcobacter is a gram-negative rod recognized as a potential food- and waterborne 
pathogen; nevertheless, little is known about the effects of this pathogen on
human and animal health. Although Arcobacter species are commonly found in
nature, poultry is suspected to be the main vehicle for the transmission of this 
pathogen. The aims of this work were to determine the prevalence of Arcobacter
spp. in broilers produced in Costa Rica for human consumption and to analyze the 
pathogenic capacity of the isolates through the detection of virulence genes. One
hundred fifty-two samples of cecal content (87 farms), 104 samples of carcass
rinse after chiller (six processing plants), and 96 carcass rinses from as many
retail stores were analyzed. The suspicious isolates were identified using
genus-specific PCR, and species-level identification was achieved with a
multiplex PCR. Virulence genes were identified using the protocol described by L.
Douidah, L. de Zutter, J. Baré, P. De Vos, P. Vandamme, O. Vandenberg, A.-M. Van 
den Abeele, and K. Houf (J. Clin. Microbiol. 50:735-741, 2012), which includes
nine different virulence genes. The overall isolation frequency of Arcobacter was
6.5% (n = 23). Eight (34.8%) of the isolates came from cecal content, 2 (8.7%)
were isolated from samples taken after chiller, and 13 (56.5%) were from retail
stores. The species isolated included A. thereius (30.4%), A. butzleri (21.7%),
A. skirrowii (4.3%), and A. cibarius (4.3%). The remaining samples were
classified as Arcobacter sp. Gene tlyA was the most prevalent virulence gene,
present in 9 of 23 samples analyzed; genes hecA and pldA were present in one only
strain each. A strain of A. butzleri isolated from a retail store presented the
highest number of virulence genes (five), and 11 samples did not present any of
the genes analyzed. The results obtained suggest that the presence of virulent
Arcobacter isolates in the poultry production chain from Costa Rica could be a
risk for individuals who consume the contaminated product.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-16-394 
PMID: 28371593 

