
1. Chemosphere. 2017 Jul;179:222-231. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.03.117. Epub
2017 Mar 28.

Bioavailability of five hydrophobic organic compounds to earthworms from sterile 
and non-sterile artificial soils.

Šmídová K(1), Kim S(1), Hofman J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, RECETOX, 62500 Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, RECETOX, 62500 Brno, Czech Republic.
Electronic address: hofman@recetox.muni.cz.

Bioaccumulation factors (BAFs) of organic pollutants to soil biota, often
required by risk assessment, are mostly obtained in non-sterile
laboratory-contaminated artificial soils. However, microbial degradation has been
indicated by many authors to influence the fate of hydrophobic organic compounds 
(HOCs) in soils. A question arises if the microbial community of peat which is
used for artificial soil preparation affects the measured values of BAFs. In this
study the effect of soil microorganisms on bioavailability of HOCs was studied
and a portion of each soil was sterilized by gamma irradiation. Results indicated
that the sterilization process significantly affected the fate of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs; phenanthrene and pyrene) and increased
bioavailability of these compounds to earthworms with BAFs several times higher
in the sterile soils compared to their non-sterile variants. This suggests that
sterilization of soils can be used as the "worst-case scenario" for laboratory
tests of toxicity or bioaccumulation of biodegradable HOCs such as PAHs. It
represents a situation of limited microbial degradation resulting in higher
bioavailable fractions to other organisms (e.g. invertebrates). This may be the
case in soils where microbial communities face stresses caused by contamination
or land management. The bioavailability of chlorinated HOCs (lindane, 4,4'-DDT
and PCB 153) was not affected by sterilization, as their BAFs were similar in the
sterile and non-sterile soils during the experiment.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.03.117 
PMID: 28371706  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

