
1. Transfus Med Rev. 2017 Jul;31(3):183-192. doi: 10.1016/j.tmrv.2017.03.001. Epub
2017 Mar 22.

Intersecting Worlds of Transfusion and Transplantation Medicine: An International
Symposium Organized by the Canadian Blood Services Centre for Innovation.

Hodgkinson KM(1), Kiernan J(2), Shih AW(3), Solh Z(4), Sheffield WP(5), Pineault 
N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Innovation, Canadian Blood Services, Ottawa and Hamilton, Ontario, 
Canada.
(2)The Centre for Transfusion Research, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada.
(3)Pathology and Molecular Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada; Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada; Utilization, Canadian Blood Services, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Centre for Innovation, Canadian Blood Services, Ottawa and Hamilton, Ontario, 
Canada; Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada.
(6)Centre for Innovation, Canadian Blood Services, Ottawa and Hamilton, Ontario, 
Canada; Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, 
Canada. Electronic address: nicolas.pineault@blood.ca.

The principal theme of the symposium was centered on how the world of
regenerative medicine intersects with that of transfusion medicine, with a
particular focus on hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and stem cell therapies. The 
symposium highlighted several exciting developments and identified areas where
additional research is needed. A revised map of human hematopoietic hierarchy was
presented based on the functional and phenotypic analysis of thousands of single 
stem and progenitor cells from adult bone marrow and fetal liver. These analyses 
revealed that multipotency is largely restricted to the HSC and multipotent
progenitor compartments in adult bone marrow where most progenitors are
unipotent, whereas fetal liver contains a large number of distinct oligopotent
progenitors. Furthermore, unlike adult bone marrow, multipotency is extended in
the downstream progenitors in the hierarchy in the fetal liver stage. Production 
of platelets ex vivo from HSCs is emerging as a potentially viable option because
of advances in culture techniques that combine cytokine mixtures, small
molecules, and shear stress. However, limited HSC expansion and low platelet
yield from culture-derived megakaryocytes remain problematic. Evidence was
presented to support stricter guidelines for transfusion of platelets and red
blood cells practices in allogeneic HSC transplant patients, although evidence is
often extrapolated from general indications. Basic principles of human leukocyte 
antigen testing in HSC transplant were described, emphasizing the need for a
national (and global) stem cell donor registry. Ongoing research is aimed at
improving cellular cryopreservation including the establishment of a new thawing 
protocol that improves viability of umbilical cord blood CD34+ cells. Umbilical
cord blood transplantation practices have also been improved; recent studies
suggest noninferior outcomes when patients are transplanted with umbilical cord
blood vs a matched adult donor. Finally, mesenchymal stem cell infusion is an
example of a cellular therapy useful for immunomodulation. Preclinical trials
suggest that mesenchymal stem cells may be effective in managing sepsis. In
conclusion, practices and research surrounding HSCs are continuing to evolve
rapidly as new information is obtained.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tmrv.2017.03.001 
PMID: 28385575  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

