
1. J Reprod Immunol. 2017 Apr;120:15-19. doi: 10.1016/j.jri.2017.03.001. Epub 2017
Mar 30.

Higher prevalence of colonization with Gardnerella vaginalis and gram-negative
anaerobes in patients with recurrent miscarriage and elevated peripheral natural 
killer cells.

Kuon RJ(1), Togawa R(1), Vomstein K(1), Weber M(2), Goeggl T(1), Strowitzki T(1),
Markert UR(2), Zimmermann S(3), Daniel V(4), Dalpke AH(3), Toth B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecological Endocrinology and Fertility Disorders,
Ruprecht-Karls University Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 440, 69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(2)Placenta-Lab, Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena, Am Klinikum 
1, 07747 Jena, Germany.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Medical Microbiology and Hygiene,
Ruprecht-Karls University Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 324, 69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(4)Transplantation-Immunology, Institute of Immunology, Ruprecht-Karls University
Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 672, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Department of Gynecological Endocrinology and Reproductive Medicine, Medical
University Innsbruck, Anichstrasse 35, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria. Electronic
address: bettina.toth@i-med.ac.at.

The role of vaginal infections in recurrent miscarriage (RM) is discussed
controversially and screening is not recommended in international guidelines.
Peripheral and uterine NK cells (pNK, uNK) play an important role in the
establishment of a healthy pregnancy and are targets of immune diagnostics in RM 
patients. The aim of this study was to analyze the composition of the vaginal
microbiota in RM patients and to correlate the findings to clinical
characteristics as well as NK cell parameters. In total, n=243 RM patients with
≥3 consecutive miscarriages were recruited between 11/2011 and 03/2016. Vaginal
swabs were analyzed by microbiological culture. Further, a cervical swab was
taken in n=187 patients and the presence of Chlamydia trachomatis was evaluated
by a molecular assay. Peripheral blood levels of CD45+CD3-CD56+CD16+ pNK
(determined by four-color fluorescence flow cytometry) and CD56+ uNK (uterine
biopsy, determined by immunohistochemistry) were analyzed. The prevalence of
Gardnerella vaginalis colonization in RM patients was 19.0%, gram-negative
anaerobes 20.5%, Candida species 7.9%, group B Streptococcus 11.0% and
Enterobacteriaceae 14.8%. Commensal lactobacilli were absent in 14.5% of the
women. Chlamydia trachomatis was detected in n=1 case (0.53%). The prevalence of 
Gardnerella vaginalis and gram-negative anaerobes in RM patients with elevated
pNK (>280/μl, n=69) was significantly higher (p=0.012, p=0.04) compared to
patients with normal pNK (n=174). In conclusion, RM patients with elevated pNK
suffer more often from colonization by Gardnerella vaginalis and gram-negative
anaerobes. This might indicate an association between the vaginal microbiota,
local inflammation, changes in immune parameters and miscarriage.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jri.2017.03.001 
PMID: 28388469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

