
1. J Mol Evol. 2017 Apr;84(4):174-186. doi: 10.1007/s00239-017-9791-y. Epub 2017 Apr
5.

Molecular Evolutionary Constraints that Determine the Avirulence State of
Clostridium botulinum C2 Toxin.

Prisilla A(1), Prathiviraj R(1), Chellapandi P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Systems Engineering Lab, Department of Bioinformatics, School of
Life Sciences, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, 620 024,
India.
(2)Molecular Systems Engineering Lab, Department of Bioinformatics, School of
Life Sciences, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, 620 024,
India. pchellapandi@gmail.com.

Clostridium botulinum (group-III) is an anaerobic bacterium producing C2 toxin
along with botulinum neurotoxins. C2 toxin is belonged to binary toxin A family
in bacterial ADP-ribosylation superfamily. A structural and functional diversity 
of binary toxin A family was inferred from different evolutionary constraints to 
determine the avirulence state of C2 toxin. Evolutionary genetic analyses
revealed evidence of C2 toxin cluster evolution through horizontal gene transfer 
from the phage or plasmid origins, site-specific insertion by gene divergence,
and homologous recombination event. It has also described that residue in
conserved NAD-binding core, family-specific domain structure, and functional
motifs found to predetermine its virulence state. Any mutational changes in these
residues destabilized its structure-function relationship. Avirulent mutants of
C2 toxin were screened and selected from a crucial site required for catalytic
function of C2I and pore-forming function of C2II. We found coevolved amino acid 
pairs contributing an essential role in stabilization of its local structural
environment. Avirulent toxins selected in this study were evaluated by detecting 
evolutionary constraints in stability of protein backbone structure, folding and 
conformational dynamic space, and antigenic peptides. We found 4 avirulent
mutants of C2I and 5 mutants of C2II showing more stability in their local
structural environment and backbone structure with rapid fold rate, and low
conformational flexibility at mutated sites. Since, evolutionary constraints-free
mutants with lack of catalytic and pore-forming function suggested as potential
immunogenic candidates for treating C. botulinum infected poultry and veterinary 
animals. Single amino acid substitution in C2 toxin thus provides a major
importance to understand its structure-function link, not only of a molecule but 
also of the pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00239-017-9791-y 
PMID: 28382496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

