
1. 3 Biotech. 2017 May;7(1):24. doi: 10.1007/s13205-016-0581-9. Epub 2017 Apr 11.

Purification and structural elucidation of three bioactive compounds isolated
from Streptomyces coelicoflavus BC 01 and their biological activity.

Raghava Rao KV(1), Mani P(2), Satyanarayana B(3), Raghava Rao T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Andhra University, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, 
530 003, India. kv.raghavarao@yahoo.co.in.
(2)Department of Organic Chemistry, Andhra University, Visakhapatnam, 530 003,
India.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Andhra University, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, 
530 003, India.

The strain Streptomyces coelicoflavus BC 01 was isolated from mangrove soil and
used as inoculum for submerged fermentation. The fermented broth was extracted
with ethyl acetate, the crude extract was subjected to silica gel column
chromatography and the homogeneity of the isolated fractions was determined by
TLC and then subjected to RP-HPLC for their purity. The purification steps led to
the isolation of three pure bioactive compounds named as BC 01_C1, BC 01_C2 and
BC 01_C3. The chemical structure of these three compounds was established on the 
basis of their spectroscopic studies like UV, IR, 1H and 13C NMR and GC-MS data
by comparison with reference data from literature. The structure of the compound 
BC 01_C1 was established as 5-amino-2-(6-(2-hydroxyethyl)-3-oxononyl)
cyclohex-2-enone. The compound BC 01_C2 was established
as8-(aminomethyl)-7-hydroxy-1-(1-hydroxy-4-(hydroxylmethoxy)-2,3-dimethylbutyl)-2
-methyl dodecahydro phenanthren-9(1H)-one and the compound BC 01_C3 was
established
as1-((E)-2-ethylhex-1-en-1-yl)2-((E)-2-ethylidenehexyl)cyclohexane-1,2-dicarboxyl
ate. The MIC values of the three isolated compounds (BC 01_C1, BC 01_C2 and BC
01_C3) were found between 12.5-75 μg/ml for bacteria and 50-125 μg/ml for fungi
used in this study. These compounds also possess in vitro antioxidant and
anti-inflammatory activities.

DOI: 10.1007/s13205-016-0581-9 
PMCID: PMC5388647
PMID: 28401462 

