
1. Mucosal Immunol. 2018 Jan;11(1):131-143. doi: 10.1038/mi.2017.34. Epub 2017 Apr
12.

Unique invariant natural killer T cells promote intestinal polyps by suppressing 
TH1 immunity and promoting regulatory T cells.

Wang Y(1), Sedimbi S(1), Löfbom L(1), Singh AK(1), Porcelli SA(2), Cardell SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Department of Medicine, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

CD1d-restricted invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are known as potent early
regulatory cells of immune responses. Besides the established roles in the
regulation of inflammation and autoimmune disease, studies have shown that iNKT
cells have important roles in tumor surveillance and the control of tumor
metastasis. Here we found that the absence of iNKT cells markedly decreased the
total number of intestinal polyps in APCMin/+ mice, a model for colorectal
cancer. Polyp iNKT cells were enriched for interleukin-10 (IL-10)- and
IL-17-producing cells, showed a distinct phenotype being CD4+, NK1.1- CD44int,
and PD-1lo, and they were negative for the NKT cell transcription factor
promyelocytic leukemia zinc-finger. The absence of iNKT cells was associated with
a reduced frequency of regulatory T (Tregs) cells and lower expression levels of 
FoxP3 protein and transcript uniquely in the polyps, and a switch to an
inflammatory macrophage phenotype. Moreover, in iNKT cell-deficient APCMin/+
mice, expression of T-helper (TH) 1-associated genes, such as IFN-γ and Nos2, was
increased in polyps, concomitantly with elevated frequencies of conventional CD4+
and CD8+ T cells in this tissue. The results suggest that a population of
regulatory iNKT cells locally promote intestinal polyp formation by enhancing
Treg cells and immunosuppression of antitumor TH1 immunity.

DOI: 10.1038/mi.2017.34 
PMCID: PMC5638666
PMID: 28401935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

