
1. Exp Dermatol. 2017 Nov;26(11):1026-1032. doi: 10.1111/exd.13361. Epub 2017 Jul 3.

Two arginine residues in the COOH-terminal of human β-defensin-3 constitute an
essential motif for antimicrobial activity and IL-6 production.

Sakagami-Yasui Y(1), Shirafuji Y(1), Yamasaki O(1), Morizane S(1), Hamada T(1),
Umemura H(1), Iwatsuki K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Dermatology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.

Human β-defensin-3 (HBD-3) possesses antimicrobial activities and the potential
to induce proinflammatory cytokines. HBD-3 contains a unique motif of two
arginine residues (Arg or R) in the COOH-terminal region. To understand the
bioactive properties of the Arg residues of HBD-3, we examined antimicrobial
activities against Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa using
synthetic HBD-2, HBD-3 and two variant peptides of HBD-3: the Arg-truncated
variant designated desR HBD-3 and NRR HBD-3, in which both Arg residues were
shifted to the N-terminal region. IL-6 production from keratinocytes was studied 
using the peptides. HBD-3 possessed approximately five-fold more potent
antimicrobial activities, evaluated as the minimum inhibitory concentration
(MIC), against S. aureus compared with desR and NRR HBD-3, while no significant
activity was observed in HBD-2. The antimicrobial activity of HBD-3 against
S. aureus was well preserved even at high sodium chloride concentrations, but was
attenuated in desR and NRR HBD-3. All the peptides exhibited similar
antimicrobial activities against P. aeruginosa, but HBD-2 and desR HBD-3 showed
diminished antimicrobial activities against P. aeruginosa at high salt
concentrations. IL-6 production was significantly induced in keratinocytes with
HBD-3, but not remarkably with stimulation by other peptide. These Arg residues
are essential for the antimicrobial and biological properties of HBD-3.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.13361 
PMID: 28418601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

