
1. Exp Ther Med. 2017 Apr;13(4):1347-1352. doi: 10.3892/etm.2017.4112. Epub 2017 Feb
9.

The mechanism of human β-defensin 3 in MRSA-induced infection of implant
drug-resistant bacteria biofilm in the mouse tibial bone marrow.

Zhu C(1), Bao NR(1), Chen S(1), Zhao JN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University School
of Medicine, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, P.R. China.

The mechanism of human β-defensin 3 (HBD-3) in methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA-induced infection of implant drug-resistant bacteria 
biofilm in the mouse tibial bone marrow was studied. Healthy adult male
Sprague-Dawley rats with average weight of 230 g were selected to construct the
infection model of MRSA-induced implant drug-resistant bacteria biofilm in the
mouse left tibial bone marrow. The drugs were intraperitoneally injected after 24
h medullary cavity infection, and the experimental groups included the model
group, HBD-3 group, and vancomycin group (20 rats in each group). The model group
was injected with 10 ml saline, HBD-3 group was injected with 10 ml of 8 µg/ml (1
MIC) and vancomycin group was injected with 10 ml of 0.5 µg/ml (1 MIC), five
animals in each group were sacrificed on the 1, 7, 14 and 21 days, respectively. 
Observation was carried out on whether there was swelling and purulent secretion 
on the local wound; 1 ml venous sinus blood of eye socket was collected for blood
routine examination and blood culture, and the laser scanning confocal microscopy
was used to observe the morphology of the biofilm on the implant surface and the 
number of viable bacteria. Immunohistochemical staining was adopted to test the
expression of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4), and
ELISA method was used to test interleukin-10 (IL-10), tumor necrosis factor-α
(TNF-α), IL-1α and interferon-γ (INF-γ)-inducible protein-10 (IP-10) expression
levels. There was no death due to infection in the HBD-3 group or vancomycin
group, 1 case with significant wound swelling was found, respectively, in each
group, but there was no purulent secretion. The percentage of the total white
blood cells and neutrophil granulocytes as well as the biofilm morphology and the
number of viable bacteria in the model group was gradually increased with time,
while those in the HBD-3 group and vancomycin group were decreased with time. The
comparative difference among groups was statistically significant (P<0.05); those
in the HBD-3 group and vancomycin group at each time-point was decreased
significantly compared with the model group, and the difference among groups was 
statistically significant (P<0.05), but in terms of the comparison between the
HBD-3 group and vancomycin group, the difference was not significantly different 
(P>0.05). The NF-κB and TLR-4 expressions in the model group and vancomycin group
were not significantly changed at each time-point, those in the HBD-3 group began
to increase on the 1st day, and reached the peak on the 7th day and began to
decline on the 14th day, and the comparative difference at each time-point was
statistically significant (P<0.05); those in the HBD-3 group were significantly
higher than the model group and vancomycin group at each time-point and the
difference was statistically significant (P<0.05). The IL-10, TNF-α, IL-1α, and
IP-10 expressions in the model group at each time were significantly higher than 
the other two groups and the difference was statistically significant (P<0.05);
in terms of the comparison between the HBD-3 group and vancomycin group, the
difference was not statistically significant (P>0.05). In conclusion, β-defensin 
3 can inhibit the bacterial growth by regulating inflammation and immune
responses in the MRSA-induced implant drug-resistant bacteria biofilm infection
in the mouse tibial bone marrow.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2017.4112 
PMCID: PMC5377296
PMID: 28413476 

