
1. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2017 Dec;9(4):397-405. doi:
10.1007/s12602-017-9275-9.

The Effects of Direct-fed Microbial Supplementation, as an Alternative to
Antibiotics, on Growth Performance, Intestinal Immune Status, and Epithelial
Barrier Gene Expression in Broiler Chickens.

Gadde U(1), Oh ST(1), Lee YS(1), Davis E(2), Zimmerman N(2), Rehberger T(2),
Lillehoj HS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biosciences and Biotechnology Laboratory, Beltsville Agricultural
Research Center, Agricultural Research Service, USDA, 10300 Baltimore Ave, Bldg. 
1043, Beltsville, MD, 20705, USA.
(2)Agro Biosciences Inc., 10437 Innovation Drive, Wauwatosa, WI, 53226, USA.
(3)Animal Biosciences and Biotechnology Laboratory, Beltsville Agricultural
Research Center, Agricultural Research Service, USDA, 10300 Baltimore Ave, Bldg. 
1043, Beltsville, MD, 20705, USA. hyun.lillehoj@ars.usda.gov.

The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of Bacillus
subtilis-based probiotic supplementation in broiler chicken diets on growth
performance, feed efficiency, intestinal cytokine, and tight junction (TJ)
protein mRNA expression. Zero-day-old broiler chicks (n = 140) were randomly
assigned to one of five dietary treatments: basal diet (CON); basal diet
supplemented with either antibiotic bacitracin methylene disalicylate (BMD); or
probiotics, namely, B. subtilis strain 1781 (PB1), a combination of B. subtilis
strain 1104 + strain 747 (PB2), or B. subtilis strain 1781 + strain 747 (PB3).
Body weight and feed intake were measured at 14 days of age, and the feed
conversion ratio (FCR) was calculated. At 14 days of age, ileal samples were
collected and used for intestinal cytokine, TJ protein, and mucin gene expression
analysis using qRT-PCR. The chickens supplemented with antibiotic (BMD) and B.
subtilis strain 1781 alone (PB1) had significantly higher body weights compared
to controls of the same age. Dietary supplementation with antibiotic (BMD) or
probiotics (PB1, PB2, PB3) significantly improved the feed efficiency as
evidenced by decreased FCR compared to controls. No differences were observed in 
the expression of IL1β, IL17F, IFNγ, and MUC2 gene among the different treatment 
groups. However, elevated expression of IL6 (BMD, PB1, PB2), IL8 (PB2), and
TNFSF15 (PB1, PB2, PB3) compared to controls was observed in the ileum. IL2 and
IL10 expression was upregulated in chicks in the PB2 and PB3 groups, and IL4 was 
elevated in the PB1 group. IL13 was elevated in all probiotic-fed groups (PB1,
PB2, PB3). Probiotic supplementation was also shown to significantly increase the
expression of TJ proteins JAM2, ZO1 (PB2, PB3), and occludin (PB1, PB2). Taken
together, B. subtilis supplementation altered intestinal immune activity and
influenced gut barrier integrity through increased tight junction gene
expression.

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-017-9275-9 
PMID: 28421423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

