
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2017 Jul;101(13):5291-5300. doi:
10.1007/s00253-017-8256-y. Epub 2017 Apr 20.

Engineered jadomycin analogues with altered sugar moieties revealing JadS as a
substrate flexible O-glycosyltransferase.

Li L(1), Pan G(1), Zhu X(1), Fan K(1), Gao W(1), Ai G(1), Ren J(2), Shi M(1),
Olano C(3), Salas JA(3), Yang K(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, People's Republic of China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Mycology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, People's Republic of China.
(3)Departamento de Biología Funcional e Instituto Universitario de Oncología del 
Principado de Asturias (I.U.O.P.A), Universidad de Oviedo, 33006, Oviedo, Spain.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, People's Republic of China.
yangkq@im.ac.cn.

Glycosyltransferases (GTs)-mediated glycodiversification studies have drawn
significant attention recently, with the goal of generating bioactive compounds
with improved pharmacological properties by diversifying the appended sugars. The
key to achieving glycodiversification is to identify natural and/or engineered
flexible GTs capable of acting upon a broad range of substrates. Here, we report 
the use of a combinatorial biosynthetic approach to probe the substrate
flexibility of JadS, the GT in jadomycin biosynthesis, towards different
non-native NDP-sugar substrates, enabling us to identify six jadomycin B
analogues with different sugar moieties. Further structural engineering by
precursor-directed biosynthesis allowed us to obtain 11 new jadomycin analogues. 
Our results for the first time show that JadS is a flexible O-GT that can utilize
both L- and D- sugars as donor substrates, and tolerate structural changes at the
C2, C4 and C6 positions of the sugar moiety. JadS may be further exploited to
generate novel glycosylated jadomycin molecules in future glycodiversification
studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-017-8256-y 
PMID: 28429060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

