
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr. 2017 Jul;1859(7):1291-1300. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2017.04.010. Epub 2017 Apr 19.

Effects of mixed proximal and distal topogenic signals on the topological
sensitivity of a membrane protein to the lipid environment.

Vitrac H(1), Dowhan W(1), Bogdanov M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, the University of Texas
Health Science Center McGovern Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, the University of Texas
Health Science Center McGovern Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic
address: Mikhail.V.Bogdanov@uth.tmc.edu.

The final topology of membrane proteins is thought to be dictated primarily by
the encoding sequence. However, according to the Charge Balance Rule the
topogenic signals within nascent membrane proteins are interpreted in agreement
with the Positive Inside Rule as influenced by the protein phospholipid
environment. The role of long-range protein-lipid interactions in establishing a 
final uniform or dual topology is unknown. In order to address this role, we
determined the positional dependence of the potency of charged residues as
topological signals within Escherichia coli sucrose permease (CscB) in cells in
which the zwitterionic phospholipid phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), acting as
topological determinant, was either eliminated or tightly titrated. Although the 
position of a single or paired oppositely charged amino acid residues within an
extramembrane domain (EMD), either proximal, central or distal to a transmembrane
domain (TMD) end, does not appear to be important, the oppositely charged
residues exert their topogenic effects separately only in the absence of PE.
Thus, the Charge Balance Rule can be executed in a retrograde manner from any
cytoplasmic EMD or any residue within an EMD most likely outside of the
translocon. Moreover, CscB is inserted into the membrane in two opposite
orientations at different ratios with the native orientation proportional to the 
mol % of PE. The results demonstrate how the cooperative contribution of
lipid-protein interactions affects the potency of charged residues as topological
signals, providing a molecular mechanism for the realization of single, equal or 
different amounts of oppositely oriented protein within the same membrane.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2017.04.010 
PMCID: PMC5660859
PMID: 28432030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

