
1. Clin Transl Immunology. 2017 Mar 17;6(3):e134. doi: 10.1038/cti.2017.4.
eCollection 2017 Mar.

Understanding CD8+ T-cell responses toward the native and alternate
HLA-A*02:01-restricted WT1 epitope.

Nguyen TH(1), Tan AC(1)(2), Xiang SD(2)(3), Goubier A(2), Harland KL(1), Clemens 
EB(1), Plebanski M(2)(3), Kedzierska K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Peter
Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(2)PX Biosolutions, South Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Department of Immunology and Pathology, Monash University, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia.

The Wilms' tumor 1 (WT1) antigen is expressed in solid and hematological
malignancies, but not healthy tissues, making it a promising target for cancer
immunotherapies. Immunodominant WT1 epitopes, the native HLA-A2/WT1126-134
(RMFPNAPYL) (HLA-A2/RMFPNAPYL epitope (WT1A)) and its modified variant YMFPNAPYL 
(HLA-A2/YMFPNAPYL epitope (WT1B)), can induce WT1-specific CD8+ T cells, although
WT1B is more stably bound to HLA-A*02:01. Here, to further determine the benefits
of those two targets, we assessed the naive precursor frequencies; immunogenicity
and cross-reactivity of CD8+ T cells directed toward these two WT1 epitopes. Ex
vivo naive WT1A- and WT1B-specific CD8+ T cells were detected in healthy
HLA-A*02:01+ individuals with comparable precursor frequencies (1 in 105-106) to 
other naive CD8+ T-cell pools (for example, A2/HIV-Gag77-85), but as expected,
~100 × lower than those found in memory populations (influenza, A2/M158-66; EBV, 
A2/BMLF1280-288). Importantly, only WT1A-specific naive precursors were detected 
in HLA-A2.1 mice. To further assess the immunogenicity and recruitment of CD8+ T 
cells responding to WT1A and WT1B, we immunized HLA-A2.1 mice with either
peptide. WT1A immunization elicited numerically higher CD8+ T-cell responses to
the native tumor epitope following re-stimulation, although both regimens
produced functionally similar responses toward WT1A via cytokine analysis and
CD107a expression. Interestingly, however, WT1B immunization generated
cross-reactive CD8+ T-cell responses to WT1A and could be further expanded by
WT1A peptide revealing two distinct populations of single- and cross-reactive
WT1A+CD8+ T cells with unique T-cell receptor-αβ gene signatures. Therefore,
although both epitopes are immunogenic, the clinical benefits of WT1B vaccination
remains debatable and perhaps both peptides may have separate clinical benefits
as treatment targets.

DOI: 10.1038/cti.2017.4 
PMCID: PMC5382434
PMID: 28435676 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

