
1. Adv Appl Microbiol. 2017;99:103-137. doi: 10.1016/bs.aambs.2017.01.001. Epub 2017
Mar 6.

The Arsenic Detoxification System in Corynebacteria: Basis and Application for
Bioremediation and Redox Control.

Mateos LM(1), Villadangos AF(1), de la Rubia AG(1), Mourenza A(1), Marcos-Pascual
L(1), Letek M(2), Pedre B(3), Messens J(3), Gil JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of León, León, Spain.
(2)University of León, León, Spain; University of Roehampton, London, United
Kingdom.
(3)Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium; VIB Center for Structural
Biology, Brussels, Belgium.

Arsenic (As) is widespread in the environment and highly toxic. It has been
released by volcanic and anthropogenic activities and causes serious health
problems worldwide. To survive arsenic-rich environments, soil and saprophytic
microorganisms have developed molecular detoxification mechanisms to survive
arsenic-rich environments, mainly by the enzymatic conversion of inorganic
arsenate (AsV) to arsenite (AsIII) by arsenate reductases, which is then extruded
by arsenite permeases. One of these Gram-positive bacteria, Corynebacterium
glutamicum, the workhorse of biotechnological research, is also resistant to
arsenic. To sanitize contaminated soils and waters, C. glutamicum strains were
modified to work as arsenic "biocontainers." Two chromosomally encoded ars
operons (ars1 and ars2) are responsible for As resistance. The genes within these
operons encode for metalloregulatory proteins (ArsR1/R2), arsenite permeases
(Acr3-1/-2), and arsenate reductases (ArsC1/C2/C1'). ArsC1/C2 arsenate reductases
are coupled to the low molecular weight thiol mycothiol (MSH) and to the recently
discovered mycoredoxin-1 (Mrx-1) present in most Actinobacteria. This MSH/Mrx-1
redox system protects cells against different forms of stress, including reactive
oxygen species (ROS), metals, and antibiotics. ROS can modify functional sulfur
cysteines by oxidizing the thiol (-SH) to a sulfenic acid (-SOH). These
oxidation-sensitive protein cysteine thiols are redox regulated by the MSH/Mrx-1 
couple in Corynebacterium and Mycobacterium. In summary, the molecular mechanisms
involved in arsenic resistance system in C. glutamicum have paved the way for
understanding the cellular response against oxidative stress in Actinobacteria.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.aambs.2017.01.001 
PMID: 28438267  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

