
1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2017 Jul 28;27(7):1306-1315. doi: 10.4014/jmb.1701.01073.

Evaluation of the Synergistic Effect of Mixed Cultures of White-Rot Fungus
Pleurotus ostreatus and Biosurfactant-Producing Bacteria on DDT Biodegradation.

Purnomo AS(1), Ashari K(1), Hermansyah FT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Institut
Teknologi Sepuluh Nopember (ITS), Kampus ITS Sukolilo, Surabaya 60111, Indonesia.

DDT (1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl) ethane) is one of the organic
synthetic pesticides that has many negative effects for human health and the
environment. The purpose of this study was to investigate the synergistic effect 
of mixed cutures of white-rot fungus, Pleurotus ostreatus, and
biosurfactant-producing bacteria, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Bacillus subtilis,
on DDT biodegradation. Bacteria were added into the P. ostreatus culture
(mycelial wet weight on average by 8.53 g) in concentrations of 1, 3, 5, and 10
ml (1 ml ≈ 1.25 × 109 bacteria cells/ml culture). DDT was degraded to
approximately 19% by P. ostreatus during the 7-day incubation period. The
principal result of this study was that the addition of 3 ml of P. aeruginosa
into P. ostreatus culture gave the highest DDT degradation rate (approximately
86%) during the 7-day incubation period. This mixed culture combination of the
fungus and bacteria also gave the best ratio of optimization of 1.91. DDD
(1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl) ethane), DDE
(1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl) ethylene), and DDMU
(1-chloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl) ethylene) were detected as metabolic products
from the DDT degradation by P. ostreatus and P. aeruginosa. The results of this
study indicate that P. aeruginosa has a synergistic relationship with P.
ostreatus and can be used to optimize the degradation of DDT by P. ostreatus.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1701.01073 
PMID: 28434213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

