
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Apr 21;7(1):1002. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-01185-6.

A role of human RNase P subunits, Rpp29 and Rpp21, in homology directed-repair of
double-strand breaks.

Abu-Zhayia ER(1), Khoury-Haddad H(1), Guttmann-Raviv N(1), Serruya R(2), Jarrous 
N(3), Ayoub N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
3200003, Israel.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, IMRIC, The Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical School, 91120, Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, IMRIC, The Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical School, 91120, Jerusalem, Israel.
jarrous@md.huji.ac.il.
(4)Department of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
3200003, Israel. ayoubn@technion.ac.il.

DNA damage response (DDR) is needed to repair damaged DNA for genomic integrity
preservation. Defective DDR causes accumulation of deleterious mutations and DNA 
lesions that can lead to genomic instabilities and carcinogenesis. Identifying
new players in the DDR, therefore, is essential to advance the understanding of
the molecular mechanisms by which cells keep their genetic material intact. Here,
we show that the core protein subunits Rpp29 and Rpp21 of human RNase P complex
are implicated in DDR. We demonstrate that Rpp29 and Rpp21 depletion impairs
double-strand break (DSB) repair by homology-directed repair (HDR), but has no
deleterious effect on the integrity of non-homologous end joining. We also
demonstrate that Rpp29 and Rpp21, but not Rpp14, Rpp25 and Rpp38, are rapidly and
transiently recruited to laser-microirradiated sites. Rpp29 and Rpp21 bind poly
ADP-ribose moieties and are recruited to DNA damage sites in a PARP1-dependent
manner. Remarkably, depletion of the catalytic H1 RNA subunit diminishes their
recruitment to laser-microirradiated regions. Moreover, RNase P activity is
augmented after DNA damage in a PARP1-dependent manner. Altogether, our results
describe a previously unrecognized function of the RNase P subunits, Rpp29 and
Rpp21, in fine-tuning HDR of DSBs.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-01185-6 
PMCID: PMC5430778
PMID: 28432356  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

