
1. Hum Cell. 2017 Oct;30(4):237-248. doi: 10.1007/s13577-017-0173-y. Epub 2017 Apr
22.

Establishment and characterization of novel epithelial-like cell lines derived
from human periodontal ligament tissue in vitro.

Tansriratanawong K(1)(2), Ishikawa H(3), Toyomura J(3), Sato S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Periodontology, Faculty of Dentistry, Mahidol 
University, 6 Yothi Street Rajthevi, Bangkok, 10400, Thailand.
kallapat.tan@mahidol.ac.th.
(2)Department of NDU Life Sciences, Nippon Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
kallapat.tan@mahidol.ac.th.
(3)Department of NDU Life Sciences, Nippon Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Periodontology, Nippon Dental University, Niigata, Japan.

In this study, novel human-derived epithelial-like cells (hEPLCs) lines were
established from periodontal ligament (PDL) tissues, which were composed of a
variety of cell types and exhibited complex cellular activities. To elucidate the
putative features distinguishing these from epithelial rest of Malassez (ERM), we
characterized hEPLCs based on cell lineage markers and tight junction protein
expression. The aim of this study was, therefore, to establish and characterize
hEPLCs lines from PDL tissues. The hEPLCs were isolated from PDL of third molar
teeth. Cellular morphology and cell organelles were observed thoroughly. The
characteristics of epithelial-endothelial-mesenchymal-like cells were compared in
several markers by gene expression and immunofluorescence, to ERM and human
umbilical-vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). The resistance between cellular
junctions was assessed by transepithelial electron resistance, and inflammatory
cytokines were detected by ELISA after infecting hEPLCs with periodontopathic
bacteria. The hEPLCs developed into small epithelial-like cells in pavement
appearance similar to ERM. However, gene expression patterns and
immunofluorescence results were different from ERM and HUVECs, especially in
tight junction markers (Claudin, ZO-1, and Occludins), and endothelial markers
(vWF, CD34). The transepithelial electron resistance indicated higher resistance 
in hEPLCs, as compared to ERM. Periodontopathic bacteria were phagocytosed with
upregulation of inflammatory cytokine secretion within 24Â h. In conclusion,
hEPLCs that were derived using the single cell isolation method formed tight
multilayers colonies, as well as strongly expressed tight junction markers in
gene expression and immunofluorescence. Novel hEPLCs lines exhibited differently 
from ERM, which might provide some specific functions such as metabolic exchange 
and defense mechanism against bacterial invasion in periodontal tissue.

DOI: 10.1007/s13577-017-0173-y 
PMCID: PMC5646140
PMID: 28434170  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

