
1. Phytochemistry. 2017 Aug;140:16-26. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2017.04.009. Epub
2017 Apr 22.

Epoxynemanione A, nemanifuranones A-F, and nemanilactones A-C, from Nemania
serpens, an endophytic fungus isolated from Riesling grapevines.

Ibrahim A(1), Sørensen D(1), Jenkins HA(1), Ejim L(2), Capretta A(1), Sumarah
MW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, L8S 4M1, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, M.G. DeGroote Institute
for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, L8S 4M1,
Canada.
(3)London Research and Development Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada,
London, Ontario, N5V 4T3, Canada. Electronic address: mark.sumarah@agr.gc.ca.

Ten polyketide specialized metabolites, epoxynemanione A, nemanifuranones A-F,
and nemanilactones A-C, were isolated from the culture filtrate of Nemania
serpens (Pers.) Grey (1821), an endophytic fungus from a Riesling grapevine
(Vitis vinifera) found in Canada's Niagara region. Additionally, four known
metabolites 2-(hydroxymethyl)-3-methoxy-benzoic acid, phyllostine,
5-methylmellein and a nordammarane triterpenoid were isolated. A related known
metabolite 2,3-dihydro-2-hydroxy-2,4-dimethyl-5-trans-propenylfuran-3-one has
also been included for structural and biological comparison to the
nemanifuranones. The latter was isolated from the culture filtrates of Mollisia
nigrescens, an endophytic fungus from the leaves and stems of lowbush blueberry
(Vaccinium angustifolium) found in the Acadian forest of Nova Scotia, Canada.
Their structures were elucidated based on 1D and 2D NMR, HRESIMS measurements,
X-ray crystallographic analysis of nemanifuranone A, the nordammarane
triterpenoid and 2,3-dihydro-2-hydroxy-2,4-dimethyl-5-trans-propenylfuran-3-one
compounds, and comparison of NOE and vicinal 1H-1H coupling constants to
literature data for relative stereochemical assignments. Nemanifuranone A
possesses a rare C2 hemiacetal and was active against both Gram-negative and
Gram-positive bacteria.

Crown Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2017.04.009 
PMID: 28441516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

