
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 May 9;114(19):4993-4998. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1705327114. Epub 2017 Apr 26.

Proliferation of PD-1+ CD8 T cells in peripheral blood after PD-1-targeted
therapy in lung cancer patients.

Kamphorst AO(1), Pillai RN(2), Yang S(1), Nasti TH(1), Akondy RS(1), Wieland
A(1), Sica GL(3), Yu K(2), Koenig L(2), Patel NT(2), Behera M(2), Wu H(1),
McCausland M(1), Chen Z(4), Zhang C(4), Khuri FR(2), Owonikoko TK(2), Ahmed R(5),
Ramalingam SS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Emory Vaccine Center, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322.
(2)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322.
(3)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins School of Public
Health and Biostatistics Shared Resource, Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA
30322.
(5)Emory Vaccine Center, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322; rahmed@emory.edu
ssramal@emory.edu.
(6)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322; rahmed@emory.edu
ssramal@emory.edu.

Exhausted T cells in chronic infections and cancer have sustained expression of
the inhibitory receptor programmed cell death 1 (PD-1). Therapies that block the 
PD-1 pathway have shown promising clinical results in a significant number of
advanced-stage cancer patients. Nonetheless, a better understanding of the
immunological responses induced by PD-1 blockade in cancer patients is lacking.
Identification of predictive biomarkers is a priority in the field, but whether
peripheral blood analysis can provide biomarkers to monitor or predict patients' 
responses to treatment remains to be resolved. In this study, we analyzed
longitudinal blood samples from advanced stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients (n = 29) receiving PD-1-targeted therapies. We detected an increase in
Ki-67+ PD-1+ CD8 T cells following therapy in ∼70% of patients, and most
responses were induced after the first or second treatment cycle. This T-cell
activation was not indiscriminate because we observed only minimal effects on
EBV-specific CD8 T cells, suggesting that responding cells may be tumor specific.
These proliferating CD8 T cells had an effector-like phenotype (HLA-DR+, CD38+,
Bcl-2lo), expressed costimulatory molecules (CD28, CD27, ICOS), and had high
levels of PD-1 and coexpression of CTLA-4. We found that 70% of patients with
disease progression had either a delayed or absent PD-1+ CD8 T-cell response,
whereas 80% of patients with clinical benefit exhibited PD-1+ CD8 T-cell
responses within 4 wk of treatment initiation. Our results suggest that
peripheral blood analysis may provide valuable insights into NSCLC patients'
responses to PD-1-targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1705327114 
PMCID: PMC5441721
PMID: 28446615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: R.A. is an
inventor on patents held by Emory University that cover the topic of
PD-1–directed immunotherapy. S.S.R. served on the scientific advisory board and
received an honorarium from BMS, Merck, Genentech, and Astra Zeneca.

