
1. Molecules. 2017 Apr 25;22(5). pii: E687. doi: 10.3390/molecules22050687.

Synthesis and Bioactivity Evaluation of Novel 2-Salicyloylbenzofurans as
Antibacterial Agents.

Phan PT(1), Nguyen TT(2)(3), Nguyen HT(4), Le BN(5), Vu TT(6), Tran DC(7), Pham
TN(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ton Duc Thang
University, Ho Chi Minh City 700000, Vietnam. phanthiphuongthuy@tdt.edu.vn.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmacy, Da Nang University of
Medical Technology and Pharmacy, Da Nang 550000, Vietnam.
nguyenthithutrang184@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Medicine
and Pharmacy at Ho Chi Minh City, Ho Chi Minh City 700000, Vietnam.
nguyenthithutrang184@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Medicine
and Pharmacy at Ho Chi Minh City, Ho Chi Minh City 700000, Vietnam.
hongnhungrose2193@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Medicine
and Pharmacy at Ho Chi Minh City, Ho Chi Minh City 700000, Vietnam.
lnbkhanh@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University
of Medicine and Pharmacy at Ho Chi Minh City, Ho Chi Minh City 700000, Vietnam.
vuthao910@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University
of Medicine and Pharmacy at Ho Chi Minh City, Ho Chi Minh City 700000, Vietnam.
trancatdong@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Medicine
and Pharmacy at Ho Chi Minh City, Ho Chi Minh City 700000, Vietnam.
anh.pham81@uphcm.edu.vn.

In order to discover new antibacterial agents, series of 2-salicyloylbenzofuran
derivatives were designed, synthesized and evaluated for their antibacterial
activities against three Gram-(+) strains (methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus
aureus (MSSA) ATCC 29213, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) ATCC
43300, and Streptococcus faecalis (S. faecalis) ATCC 29212) and one Gram-(-)
strain (Escherichia coli (E. coli) ATCC 25922). The 2-salicyloylbenzofuran
heterocycles were generated by Rap-Stoermer condensation of salicylaldehydes with
phenacyl bromides and then converted to diverse O-ether derivatives by Williamson
synthesis. The targeted products were screened for in vitro qualitative (zone of 
inhibition) and quantitative (MIC) antibacterial activities by agar well
diffusion assay and agar dilution method. Amongst the compounds, those bearing
carboxylic acid functional group were found to exhibit reasonable activity
against Gram-(+) bacterial strains including S. faecalis, MSSA and MRSA with the 
most potent antibacterial agent 8h (MICs = 0.06-0.12 mM). Besides, the
2-salicyloylbenzofurans partly displayed inhibitory activity against MRSA with
the best MICs = 0.14 mM (8f) and 0.12 mM (8h). Finally, the antibacterial results
preliminarily suggested that the substituent bearing carboxylic acid group at
salicyloyl-C2 and the bromine atoms on the benzofuran moiety seem to be the
functionality necessary for antibacterial activities.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules22050687 
PMCID: PMC6154660
PMID: 28441350  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

