
1. PLoS One. 2017 Apr 28;12(4):e0176756. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176756.
eCollection 2017.

Idiosyncratic recognition of UUG/UUA codons by modified nucleoside
5-taurinomethyluridine, τm5U present at 'wobble' position in anticodon loop of
tRNALeu: A molecular modeling approach.

Kamble AS(1), Fandilolu PM(1), Sambhare SB(1), Sonawane KD(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Structural Bioinformatics Unit, Department of Biochemistry, Shivaji
University, Kolhapur, (M.S.), India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Shivaji University, Kolhapur, (M.S.), India.

Lack of naturally occurring modified nucleoside 5-taurinomethyluridine (τm5U) at 
the 'wobble' 34th position in tRNALeu causes mitochondrial myopathy,
encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes (MELAS). The τm5U34
specifically recognizes UUG and UUA codons. Structural consequences of τm5U34 to 
read cognate codons have not been studied so far in detail at the atomic level.
Hence, 50ns multiple molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of various anticodon
stem loop (ASL) models of tRNALeu in presence and absence of τm5U34 along with
UUG and UUA codons were performed to explore the dynamic behaviour of τm5U34
during codon recognition process. The MD simulation results revealed that τm5U34 
recognizes G/A ending codons by 'wobble' as well as a novel 'single' hydrogen
bonding interactions. RMSD and RMSF values indicate the comparative stability of 
the ASL models containing τm5U34 modification over the other models, lacking
τm5U34. Another MD simulation study of 55S mammalian mitochondrial rRNA with
tRNALeu showed crucial interactions between the A-site residues, A918, A919, G256
and codon-anticodon bases. Thus, these results could improve our understanding
about the decoding efficiency of human mt tRNALeu with τm5U34 to recognize UUG
and UUA codons.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176756 
PMCID: PMC5409519
PMID: 28453549  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

