
1. Microbiol Res. 2017 Jun;199:49-56. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2017.03.003. Epub 2017
Mar 16.

Involvement of phenazine-1-carboxylic acid in the interaction between Pseudomonas
chlororaphis subsp. aureofaciens strain M71 and Seiridium cardinale in vivo.

Raio A(1), Reveglia P(2), Puopolo G(3), Cimmino A(2), Danti R(4), Evidente A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Sustainable Plant Protection - CNR, Via Madonna del Piano, 10.
50019 Sesto F. (FI) Italy. Electronic address: aida.raio@ipsp.cnr.it.
(2)Università di Napoli "Federico II" Department of Chemical Sciences, Complesso 
Universitario Monte Sant'Angelo, Via Cintia 4, 80126 Naples, Italy.
(3)Italy Department of Sustainable Agro-Ecosystems and Bioresources, Research and
Innovation Centre, Fondazione Edmund Mach (FEM), San Michele all'Adige, Italy.
(4)Institute for Sustainable Plant Protection - CNR, Via Madonna del Piano, 10.
50019 Sesto F. (FI) Italy.

Pseudomonas chlororaphis subsp. aureofaciens encompasses bacterial strains that
effectively control phytopathogenic fungi through the production of the natural
antibiotics named phenazines. In this work, the involvement of phenazine
production in the interaction between the biological control agent P.
chlororaphis subsp. aureofaciens M71 and the fungus Seiridium cardinale, a
serious cypress pathogen, was investigated. Field trials were carried out to
assess the role of phenazines in the control of S. cardinale in vivo. Results
showed that P. chlororaphis subsp. aureofaciens M71 and 30-84, both able to
produce phenazine-1-carboxylic acid (PCA), drastically reduced the canker
development incited by S. cardinale. Conversely, strain M71b, a natural gacA
mutant of P. chlororaphis subsp. aureofaciens M71, showed a decrease in PCA
production and a reduction in controlling S. cardinale. These results were
enforced by the reduction of canker size higher than 94% registered when 6μg of
pure PCA was directly applied on each cypress wound. Furthermore, PCA was
detected in cypress plant tissues only when P. chlororaphis subsp. aureofaciens
M71 was interacting with S. cardinale for 30 days. All these data support that
the biological control of S. cardinale achieved by the application of P.
chlororaphis subsp. aureofaciens M71 relies mainly on the ability of the
bacterial strain to produce PCA in planta.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micres.2017.03.003 
PMID: 28454709  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

