
1. J Biotechnol. 2017 Jun 10;251:145-150. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2017.04.029. Epub
2017 Apr 29.

Development of a one-step gene knock-out and knock-in method for metabolic
engineering of Aureobasidium pullulans.

Guo J(1), Wang Y(1), Li B(1), Huang S(1), Chen Y(2), Guo X(1), Xiao D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Fermentation Microbiology, Ministry of Education 
College of Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science Technology, Tianjin,
300457, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Industrial Fermentation Microbiology, Ministry of Education 
College of Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science Technology, Tianjin,
300457, China. Electronic address: yfchen@tust.edu.cn.

Aureobasidium pullulans is an increasingly attractive host for bio-production of 
pullulan, heavy oil, polymalic acid, and a large spectrum of extracellular
enzymes. To date, genetic manipulation of A. pullulans mainly relies on
time-consuming conventional restriction enzyme digestion and ligation methods. In
this study, we present a one-step homologous recombination-based method for rapid
genetic manipulation in A. pullulans. Overlaps measuring >40bp length and 10μg
DNA segments for homologous recombination provided maximum benefits to
transformation of A. pullulans. This optimized method was successfully applied to
PKSIII gene (encodes polyketide synthase) knock-out and gltP gene (encodes
glycolipid transfer protein) knock-in. After disruption of PKSIII gene, secretion
of melanin decreased slightly. The melanin purified from disruptant showed lower 
reducing capacity compared with that of the parent strain, leading to a decrease 
in exopolysaccharide production. Knock-in of gltP gene resulted in at least
4.68-fold increase in heavy oil production depending on the carbon source used,
indicating that gltP can regulate heavy oil synthesis in A. pullulans.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2017.04.029 
PMID: 28465214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

