
1. Cell Signal. 2017 Aug;36:117-126. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2017.04.022. Epub 2017
Apr 29.

Crk adaptor proteins regulate CD3ζ chain phosphorylation and TCR/CD3
down-modulation in activated T cells.

Dong G(1), Kalifa R(2), Nath PR(3), Babichev Y(2), Gelkop S(4), Isakov N(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty 
of Health Sciences and the Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel. Electronic address: gdong@upenn.edu.
(2)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty 
of Health Sciences and the Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel.
(3)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty 
of Health Sciences and the Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel. Electronic address:
pulak.nath@nih.gov.
(4)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty 
of Health Sciences and the Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel; Programme in Molecular Biology and
Cancer, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto,
Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada.
(5)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty 
of Health Sciences and the Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel. Electronic address: noah@bgu.ac.il.

T cell receptor (TCR) recognition of a peptide antigen in the context of MHC
molecules initiates positive and negative cascades that regulate T cell
activation, proliferation and differentiation, and culminate in the acquisition
of effector T cell functions. These processes are a prerequisite for the
induction of specific T cell-mediated adaptive immune responses. A key event in
the activation of TCR-coupled signaling pathways is the phosphorylation of
tyrosine residues within the cytoplasmic tails of the CD3 subunits, predominantly
CD3ζ. These transiently formed phosphotyrosyl epitopes serve as docking sites for
SH2-domain containing effector molecules, predominantly the ZAP70 protein
tyrosine kinase, which is critical for signal propagation. We found that CrkI and
CrkII adaptor proteins also interact with CD3ζ in TCR activated-, but not in
resting-, T cells. Crk binding to CD3ζ was independent of ZAP70 and also occurred
in ZAP70-deficient T cells. Binding was mediated by Crk-SH2 domain interaction
with phosphotyrosine-containing motifs on CD3ζ, via a direct physical
interaction, as demonstrated by Far-Western blot. CrkII binding to CD3ζ could
also be demonstrated in a heterologous system, where coexpression of a
catalytically active Lck was used to phosphorylate the CD3ζ chain. TCR
activation-induced Crk binding to CD3ζ resulted in increased and prolonged
phosphorylation of CD3ζ, as well as ZAP70 and LAT, suggesting a positive role for
CrkI/II binding to CD3ζ in regulation of TCR-coupled signaling pathways.
Furthermore, Crk-dependent increased phosphorylation of CD3ζ coincided with
inhibition of TCR downmodulation, supporting a positive role for Crk adaptor
proteins in TCR-mediated signal amplification.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2017.04.022 
PMID: 28465009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

