
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Nov;85(22):8618-22.

Detailed delineation of an interferon-gamma-responsive element important in human
HLA-DRA gene expression in a glioblastoma multiform line.

Basta PV(1), Sherman PA, Ting JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill 27599.

In this report, we determined that induction of the DR alpha-chain by recombinant
human interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) in a human glioblastoma multiform cell line is
transcriptionally regulated and showed that protein synthesis is not necessary
for this to occur. The regions of the DR alpha-chain gene that are responsible
for basal and recombinant IFN-gamma-induced gene transcription have been
determined by gene transfer of a series of 5' deletion mutants in which the
upstream region of the DR alpha chain was linked to a reporter gene,
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase. Chloramphenicol acetyltransferase transcript
and protein levels were determined by S1 nuclease protection and chloramphenicol 
acetyltransferase enzyme assays, respectively. By using these deletion mutants,
we were able to draw the following conclusions. (i) One hundred and nine base
pairs of upstream sequence contains the basic DR alpha-chain gene promoter and
represents the minimal amount of sequence necessary for basal gene expression.
(ii) An additional 9 base pairs of upstream sequence can mediate recombinant
IFN-gamma induction. (iii) Maximal recombinant IFN-gamma induction requires at
most an additional 23 base pairs of upstream sequence. (iv) The sequence between 
positions -267 and -141 does not appear to contain any additional positive or
negative regulatory elements. These results suggest that the region between
positions -141 and -109 contains a critical IFN-gamma-responsive element.
Substitution mutagenesis was performed to confirm this suggestion.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.85.22.8618 
PMCID: PMC282510
PMID: 2847168  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

