
1. Biomed Res Int. 2017;2017:2756891. doi: 10.1155/2017/2756891. Epub 2017 Apr 4.

OCT4B1 Regulates the Cellular Stress Response of Human Dental Pulp Cells with
Inflammation.

Liu L(1), Huang R(1)(2), Yang R(1), Wei X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Operative Dentistry and Endodontics, Guanghua School of Stomatology,
Affiliated Stomatological Hospital, Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of
Stomatology, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation and Science and Engineering
Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.

Introduction. Infection and apoptosis are combined triggers for inflammation in
dental tissues. Octamer-binding transcription factor 4-B1 (OCT4B1), a novel
spliced variant of OCT4 family, could respond to the cellular stress and possess 
antiapoptotic property. However, its specific role in dental pulpitis remains
unknown. Methods. To investigate the effect of OCT4B1 on inflammation of dental
pulp cells (DPCs), its expression in inflamed dental pulp tissues and DPCs was
examined by in situ hybridization, real-time PCR, and FISH assay. OCT4B1
overexpressed DPCs model was established, confirmed by western blot and
immunofluorescence staining, and then stimulated with Lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
Apoptotic rate was determined by Hoechst/PI staining and FACS. Cell survival rate
was calculated by CCK8 assay. Results. In situ hybridization, real-time PCR, and 
FISH assay revealed that OCT4B1 was extensively expressed in inflamed dental pulp
tissues and DPCs with LPS stimulation. Western blot and immunofluorescence
staining showed the expression of OCT4B1 and OCT4B increased after OCT4B1
transfection. Hoechst/PI staining and FACS demonstrated that less red/blue
fluorescence was detected and apoptotic percentage decreased (3.45%) after
transfection. CCK8 demonstrated that the survival rate of pCDH-OCT4B1-flag cells 
increased. Conclusions. OCT4B1 plays an essential role in inflammation and
apoptosis of DPCs. OCT4B might operate synergistically with OCT4B1 to reduce
apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/2756891 
PMCID: PMC5394356
PMID: 28473980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

