
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 May 23;114(21):E4223-E4232. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1617941114. Epub 2017 May 8.

Structural basis for cancer immunotherapy by the first-in-class checkpoint
inhibitor ipilimumab.

Ramagopal UA(1), Liu W(1)(2), Garrett-Thomson SC(1), Bonanno JB(1), Yan Q(2),
Srinivasan M(3), Wong SC(3), Bell A(3), Mankikar S(3), Rangan VS(3), Deshpande
S(3), Korman AJ(4), Almo SC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461.
(3)Biologics Discovery California, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Redwood City, CA 94063.
(4)Biologics Discovery California, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Redwood City, CA 94063
steve.almo@einstein.yu.edu alan.korman@bms.com.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
10461; steve.almo@einstein.yu.edu alan.korman@bms.com.

Rational modulation of the immune response with biologics represents one of the
most promising and active areas for the realization of new therapeutic
strategies. In particular, the use of function blocking monoclonal antibodies
targeting checkpoint inhibitors such as CTLA-4 and PD-1 have proven to be highly 
effective for the systemic activation of the human immune system to treat a wide 
range of cancers. Ipilimumab is a fully human antibody targeting CTLA-4 that
received FDA approval for the treatment of metastatic melanoma in 2011.
Ipilimumab is the first-in-class immunotherapeutic for blockade of CTLA-4 and
significantly benefits overall survival of patients with metastatic melanoma.
Understanding the chemical and physical determinants recognized by these mAbs
provides direct insight into the mechanisms of pathway blockade, the organization
of the antigen-antibody complexes at the cell surface, and opportunities to
further engineer affinity and selectivity. Here, we report the 3.0 Å resolution
X-ray crystal structure of the complex formed by ipilimumab with its human CTLA-4
target. This structure reveals that ipilimumab contacts the front β-sheet of
CTLA-4 and intersects with the CTLA-4:Β7 recognition surface, indicating that
direct steric overlap between ipilimumab and the B7 ligands is a major
mechanistic contributor to ipilimumab function. The crystallographically observed
binding interface was confirmed by a comprehensive cell-based binding assay
against a library of CTLA-4 mutants and by direct biochemical approaches. This
structure also highlights determinants responsible for the selectivity exhibited 
by ipilimumab toward CTLA-4 relative to the homologous and functionally related
CD28.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1617941114 
PMCID: PMC5448203
PMID: 28484017  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: S.C.A.,
S.C.G.-T., U.A.R., W.L., and Q.Y. declare no competing financial interests. A.B. 
is a former employee of Bristol–Myers & Squibb. A.J.K., M.S., S.C.W., S.M.,
V.S.R., and S.D. are employees and stockholders of Bristol–Myers & Squibb.

