
1. Elife. 2017 May 8;6. pii: e24494. doi: 10.7554/eLife.24494.

A diverse host thrombospondin-type-1 repeat protein repertoire promotes symbiont 
colonization during establishment of cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis.

Neubauer EF(1), Poole AZ(2)(3), Neubauer P(4), Detournay O(5), Tan K(3), Davy
SK(1), Weis VM(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, 
New Zealand.
(2)Department of Biology, Western Oregon University, Monmouth, United States.
(3)Department of Integrative Biology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, United 
States.
(4)Dragonfly Data Science, Wellington, New Zealand.
(5)Planktovie sas, Allauch, France.

The mutualistic endosymbiosis between cnidarians and dinoflagellates is mediated 
by complex inter-partner signaling events, where the host cnidarian innate immune
system plays a crucial role in recognition and regulation of symbionts. To date, 
little is known about the diversity of thrombospondin-type-1 repeat (TSR) domain 
proteins in basal metazoans or their potential role in regulation of
cnidarian-dinoflagellate mutualisms. We reveal a large and diverse repertoire of 
TSR proteins in seven anthozoan species, and show that in the model sea anemone
Aiptasia pallida the TSR domain promotes colonization of the host by the
symbiotic dinoflagellate Symbiodinium minutum. Blocking TSR domains led to
decreased colonization success, while adding exogenous TSRs resulted in a 'super 
colonization'. Furthermore, gene expression of TSR proteins was highest at early 
time-points during symbiosis establishment. Our work characterizes the diversity 
of cnidarian TSR proteins and provides evidence that these proteins play an
important role in the establishment of cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.24494 
PMCID: PMC5446238
PMID: 28481198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

