
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2017 May 11;124(3):215-222. doi: 10.3354/dao03123.

Characterization of Aliivibrio fischeri strains associated with disease outbreak 
in brill Scophthalmus rhombus.

López JR(1), Lorenzo L, Alcantara R, Navas JI.

Author information: 
(1)IFAPA Centro Agua del Pino, Junta de Andalucía, Carretera El Rompido-Punta
Umbría km 3.8, CP21450 Cartaya, Huelva, Spain.

Three bacterial isolates were recovered from a disease outbreak with high
mortality affecting brill Scophthalmus rhombus (Linnaeus, 1758). Moribund fish
showed no external signs of disease, but plentiful haemorrhages were observed in 
liver. On the basis of phenotypic and genotypic characterization, the isolates
were identified as Aliivibrio fischeri. The phenotypic profile of the isolates
was basically similar to that of the type strain of this species, although some
discrepancies were observed, mainly in the BIOLOG GN profile. The main cellular
fatty acids of strain a591 were also consistent with this species. The highest
16S rDNA sequence similarities were recorded with the type strain of A. fischeri 
(99.07%); other Aliivibrio species showed similarity values below 96%. The
highest sequence similarities with gyrB, rpoD and recA genes were also recorded
with A. fischeri type strain (99.31, 98.99 and 95.29% similarity, respectively). 
DNA-DNA hybridization assays confirmed that these isolates belong to A. fischeri;
levels of DNA relatedness were 73.5 to 86.2% with isolate a591 (reciprocal values
of 86.9 to 99.04%). Finally, a virulence evaluation of the isolates using
Senegalese sole fry was also performed; significant mortalities (100% mortality
within 5 d) were recorded by intraperitoneal injection, but only with high doses 
of bacteria (2 × 106 cfu g-1 body weight).

DOI: 10.3354/dao03123 
PMID: 28492177  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

