
1. Thromb Haemost. 2017 Jul 26;117(8):1601-1614. doi: 10.1160/TH16-12-0920. Epub
2017 May 11.

Coagulation factor XI improves host defence during murine pneumonia-derived
sepsis independent of factor XII activation.

Stroo I(1), Zeerleder S, Ding C, Luken BM, Roelofs JJTH, de Boer OJ, Meijers JCM,
Castellino FJ, van 't Veer C, van der Poll T.

Author information: 
(1)Ingrid Stroo, Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical
Center, Meibergdreef 9, G2-1051105 AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands, Tel.: +31 20
5666034, E-mail: i.stroo@amc.uva.nl.

Bacterial pneumonia, the most common cause of sepsis, is associated with
activation of coagulation. Factor XI (FXI), the key component of the intrinsic
pathway, can be activated via factor XII (FXII), part of the contact system, or
via thrombin. To determine whether intrinsic coagulation is involved in host
defence during pneumonia and whether this is dependent on FXII activation, we
infected in parallel wild-type (WT), FXI knockout (KO) and FXII KO mice with two 
different clinically relevant pathogens, the Gram-positive bacterium
Streptococcus pneumoniae and the Gram-negative bacterium Klebsiella pneumoniae,
via the airways. FXI deficiency worsened survival and enhanced bacterial
outgrowth in both pneumonia models. This was accompanied with enhanced
inflammatory responses in FXI KO mice. FXII KO mice were comparable with WT mice 
in Streptococcus pneumoniae pneumonia. On the contrary, FXII deficiency improved 
survival and reduced bacterial outgrowth following infection with Klebsiella
pneumoniae. In both pneumonia models, local coagulation was not impaired in
either FXI KO or FXII KO mice. The capacity to phagocytose bacteria was impaired 
in FXI KO neutrophils and in human neutrophils where activation of FXI was
inhibited. Deficiency for FXII or blocking activation of FXI via FXIIa had no
effect on phagocytosis. Taken together, these data suggest that FXI protects
against sepsis derived from Streptococcus pneumoniae or Klebsiella pneumoniae
pneumonia at least in part by enhancing the phagocytic capacity of neutrophils by
a mechanism that is independent of activation via FXIIa.

DOI: 10.1160/TH16-12-0920 
PMID: 28492700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

