
1. J Neuroimmunol. 2017 Jun 15;307:82-90. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2017.04.001. Epub 
2017 Apr 7.

Expansion of IL-6+ Th17-like cells expressing TLRs correlates with microbial
translocation and neurological disabilities in NMOSD patients.

Barros PO(1), Dias ASO(1), Kasahara TM(1), Ornelas AMM(2), Aguiar RS(2), Leon
SA(3), Ruiz A(4), Marignier R(4), Araújo ACRA(3), Alvarenga R(3), Bento CAM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Federal University of the State
of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Departament of Genetics, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Neurology, Federal University of the State of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Service de Neurologie A and Eugène Devic EDMUS Foundation against Multiple
Sclerosis, Observatoire Français de la Sclérose en Plaques (OFSEP), Hôpital
Neurologique Pierre Wertheimer, Hospices Civils de Lyon, 69677 Bron,
France-Université Lyon 1, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Federal University of the State
of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Neurology, Federal University of the State of Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. Electronic address: cbento@unirio.br.

Different microbial antigens, by signaling through toll-like receptors (TLR), may
contribute to Th17-mediated autoimmune diseases, such as neuromyelitis optica
spectrum disorder (NMOSD). The objective of this study was to determine the
proportion of different Th17-like cell subsets that express TLR in NMOSD
patients. For this study, the frequency of different Th17 cell subsets expressing
TLR subsets in healthy individuals (n=20) and NMOSD patients (n=20) was evaluated
by cytometry. The peripheral levels of soluble CD14 (sCD14) and cytokines were
determined by ELISA. Our results demonstrated that the proportion of peripheral
CD4+ T cells expressing TLR2, 4 and 9 was significantly higher in NMOSD samples
than in healthy subjects. In NMOSD, these cells are CD28+PD-1-CD57- and produce
elevated levels of IL-17. Among different TLRs+ Th17-like subsets, the proportion
of those that co-express IL-17 and IL-6 was significantly higher in NMOSD
patients, which was positively correlated with sCD14 levels and EDSS score. By
contrast, the percentage of TLRs+Treg17 cells (IL-10+IL-17+) was negatively
related to sCD14 and the severity of NMOSD. In conclusion, the expansion of
peripheral IL-6-producing TLR+ Th17-like cells in NMOSD patients was associated
with both bacterial translocation and disease severity.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2017.04.001 
PMID: 28495144  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

