
1. Res Vet Sci. 2017 Oct;114:236-243. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2017.05.004. Epub 2017 May
6.

Dietary Bacillus subtilis-based direct-fed microbials alleviate LPS-induced
intestinal immunological stress and improve intestinal barrier gene expression in
commercial broiler chickens.

Gadde UD(1), Oh S(1), Lee Y(1), Davis E(2), Zimmerman N(2), Rehberger T(2),
Lillehoj HS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biosciences and Biotechnology Laboratory, Beltsville Agricultural
Research Center, Agricultural Research Service, USDA, Beltsville, MD 20705, USA.
(2)Agro Biosciences Inc., 10437 Innovation Drive, Wauwatosa, WI 53226, USA.
(3)Animal Biosciences and Biotechnology Laboratory, Beltsville Agricultural
Research Center, Agricultural Research Service, USDA, Beltsville, MD 20705, USA. 
Electronic address: hyun.lillehoj@ars.usda.gov.

This study investigated the effects of Bacillus subtilis-based probiotics on the 
performance, modulation of host inflammatory responses and intestinal barrier
gene expression of broilers subjected to LPS challenge. Chickens were randomly
allocated to one of the 3 dietary treatment groups - control, antibiotic, or
probiotic. At 14days, half of the chickens in each treatment were injected with
LPS (1mg/kg body weight), and the other half injected with sterile PBS. Chickens 
fed probiotics weighed significantly more than controls at 15days of age,
irrespective of immune challenge. LPS challenge significantly reduced weight gain
at 24h post-injection, and the probiotics did not alleviate the LPS-induced
reduction of weight gain. Serum Î±-1-AGP levels were significantly higher in
LPS-injected chickens, and probiotic supplementation significantly reduced their 
levels. The percentages of CD4+ lymphocytes were significantly increased in
probiotic groups in the absence of immunological challenge but were reduced
during LPS challenge compared to controls. CD8+ lymphocytes were significantly
reduced in probiotic-fed birds. The LPS-induced increase in the expression of
cytokines IL8 and TNFSF15 was reduced by probiotic supplementation, and IL17F,
iNOS expression was found to be significantly elevated in probiotic-fed birds
subjected to LPS challenge. The reduced gene expression of tight junction
proteins (JAM2, occludin and ZO1) and MUC2 induced by LPS challenge was reversed 
by probiotic supplementation. The results indicate that B. subtilis-based
probiotics differentially regulate intestinal immune and tight junction protein
mRNA expression during states of LPS-mediated immunological challenge.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2017.05.004 
PMID: 28505587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

