
1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2017 Sep;66(9):1229-1241. doi:
10.1007/s00262-017-2016-9. Epub 2017 May 13.

Paracrine release of IL-2 and anti-CTLA-4 enhances the ability of artificial
polymer antigen-presenting cells to expand antigen-specific T cells and inhibit
tumor growth in a mouse model.

Zhang L(1), Wang L(1), Shahzad KA(1), Xu T(1), Wan X(1), Pei W(1), Shen C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical School, Southeast
University, 87 Dingjiaqiao Rd, Nanjing, 210009, Jiangsu, People's Republic of
China.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical School, Southeast
University, 87 Dingjiaqiao Rd, Nanjing, 210009, Jiangsu, People's Republic of
China. chuanlaishen@seu.edu.cn.

Accumulating evidence indicates that bead-based artificial antigen-presenting
cells (aAPCs) are a powerful tool to induce antigen-specific T cell responses in 
vitro and in vivo. To date, most conventional aAPCs have been generated by
coupling an antigen signal (signal 1) and one or two costimulatory signals, such 
as anti-CD28 with anti-LFA1 or anti-4-1BB (signal 2), onto the surfaces of
cell-sized or nanoscale magnetic beads or polyester latex beads. The development 
of a biodegradable scaffold and the combined use of multiple costimulatory
signals as well as third signals for putative clinical applications is the next
step in the development of this technology. Here, a novel biodegradable aAPC
platform for active immunotherapy was developed by co-encapsulating IL-2 and
anti-CTLA-4 inside cell-sized polylactic-co-glycolic acid microparticles
(PLGA-MPs) while co-coupling an H-2Kb/TRP2-Ig dimer and anti-CD28 onto the
surface. Cytokines (activating signal) and antibodies (anti-inhibition signal)
were efficiently co-encapsulated in PLGA-MP-based aAPCs and co-released without
interfering with each other. The targeted, sustained co-release of IL-2 and
anti-CTLA-4 achieved markedly enhanced, synergistic effects in activating and
expanding tumor antigen-specific T cells both in vitro and in vivo, as well as in
inhibiting tumor growth in a mouse melanoma model, as compared with conventional 
two-signal aAPCs and IL-2 or anti-CTLA-4 single-released aAPCs. These data
revealed the feasibility and importance of the paracrine release of multiple
costimulatory molecules and cytokines from biodegradable aAPCs and thus provide a
proof of principle for the future use of polymeric aAPCs for active immunotherapy
of tumors and infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-017-2016-9 
PMID: 28501941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

