
1. Protein Sci. 2017 Aug;26(8):1595-1608. doi: 10.1002/pro.3195. Epub 2017 May 31.

The structural basis for inhibition of the classical and lectin complement
pathways by S. aureus extracellular adherence protein.

Woehl JL(1), Ramyar KX(1), Katz BB(1), Walker JK(2), Geisbrecht BV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Kansas State University, 
Manhattan, Kansas, 66506.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, St. Louis University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, 63104.

The extracellular adherence protein (Eap) plays a crucial role in pathogenesis
and survival of Staphylococcus aureus by inhibiting the classical and lectin
pathways of complement. We have previously shown that Eap binds with nanomolar
affinity to complement C4b and disrupts the initial interaction between C4b and
C2, thereby inhibiting formation of the classical and lectin pathway C3
pro-convertase. Although an underlying mechanism has been identified, the
structural basis for Eap binding to C4b is poorly understood. Here, we show that 
Eap domains 3 and 4 each contain a low-affinity, but saturable binding site for
C4b. Taking advantage of the high lysine content of Eap, we used a zero-length
crosslinking approach to map the Eap binding site to both the α'- and γ-chains of
C4b. We also probed the C4b/Eap interface through a chemical footprinting
approach involving lysine modification, proteolytic digestion, and mass
spectrometry. This identified seven lysines in Eap that undergo changes in
solvent exposure upon C4b binding. We found that simultaneous mutation of these
lysines to either alanine or glutamate diminished C4b binding and complement
inhibition by Eap. Together, our results provide insight into Eap recognition of 
C4b, and suggest that the repeating domains that comprise Eap are capable of
multiple ligand-binding modes.

© 2017 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.3195 
PMCID: PMC5521547
PMID: 28512867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

