
1. J Orthop Res. 2018 Jan;36(1):443-451. doi: 10.1002/jor.23605. Epub 2017 Jun 13.

Exposure to fermentation supernatant of Staphylococcus aureus accelerated
dedifferentiation of chondrocytes and production of antimicrobial peptides.

Li S(1), Zhang Y(1), Sun Y(1), Cao W(2), Cui L(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School 
of Medicine, 389 Xincun Road, Shanghai, 200065, P. R. China.
(2)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 639 Zhi-Zao-Ju Road, 
Shanghai, 200011, P. R. China.
(3)Department of Plastic Surgery, Beijing Shijitan Hospital affiliated to Beijing
Capital Medical University, 10 Tieyi Road, Beijing, 100038, P. R. China.

Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) is the most popular pathogen found in septic
arthritis. Despite bacteria was eradicated from joint cavity during acute
infection, destruction of articular cartilage often continues for years, leading 
to permanent joint damage. The mechanism responsible for this consistent
catabolic reaction in septic arthritis remains unclear. Here, we found that
fermentation supernatant (FS) of S. aureus accelerated dedifferentiation of
chondrocytes and induced expression of catabolic factors including A
Disintegrin-like and Metalloproteinase with Thrombospondin-1 motifs 5, NO
synthase 2, matrix metalloproteinase-3, -13. In response to FS of S. aureus
stimulation, expression of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) including β-defensin-1, 
-2, -3, -4, cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide (CAMP) in dedifferentiated
chondrocytes was significantly higher than that in chondrocytes which maintained 
their differentiated phenotype. Among AMPs detected, expression of CAMP in
dedifferentiated chondrocytes was observed to increase 170 times higher than that
in differentiated ones. When exposed to FS of S. aureus, expression of
interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-17F, and IL-22 were remarkably increased in
dedifferentiated chondrocytes. These results indicated that dedifferentiation of 
chondrocytes caused by exposure to S. aureus might be responsible for secondary
osteoarthritis (OA) after acute S. aureus infection in joint. While, one
potential benefit of dedifferentiation resulted from S. aureus exposure is that
chondrocytes initiates a self-protective responsiveness by producing more AMPs
against bacterial infection. © 2017 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Orthop Res 36:443-451, 2018.

© 2017 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jor.23605 
PMID: 28513981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

