
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2017 Jul;66:325-333. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.05.022. Epub
2017 May 13.

Proteome profiling reveals immune responses in Japanese flounder (Paralichthys
olivaceus) infected with Edwardsiella tarda by iTRAQ analysis.

Wang L(1), Shao C(1), Xu W(1), Zhou Q(1), Wang N(1), Chen S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Sustainable Development of Marine Fisheries, Ministry of
Agriculture, Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery 
Sciences, Qingdao 266071, China; Laboratory for Marine Fisheries Science and Food
Production Processes, Qingdao National Laboratory for Marine Science and
Technology, Qingdao 266237, China.
(2)Key Laboratory for Sustainable Development of Marine Fisheries, Ministry of
Agriculture, Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery 
Sciences, Qingdao 266071, China; Laboratory for Marine Fisheries Science and Food
Production Processes, Qingdao National Laboratory for Marine Science and
Technology, Qingdao 266237, China. Electronic address: chensl@ysfri.ac.cn.

The liver is an important organ for bacterial pathogen attack in fish. The
differential proteomic response of the Japanese flounder liver to Edwardsiella
tarda infection was examined using isobaric tags for relative and absolute
quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). A total of 3290 proteins were identified and classified 
into categories related to biological process (51.4%), molecular function
(63.6%), and cellular component (57.7%). KEGG enrichment analysis indicated the
complement and coagulation cascade pathways and the mineral absorption pathway
were significantly enriched. Among the differentially expressed proteins, those
involved in mediating complement cascade (e.g. complement component C7, C8, C9,
complement factor H, complement factor Bf/C2) and mineral absorption (e.g.
ferritin, STEAP-4) were most significantly upregulated during infection.
Subsequently, five significantly upregulated (C4, C8beta, ferritin middle
subunit, PRDX4-like and KRT18) and one significantly downregulated (transferrin) 
candidate immune proteins were validated by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM)
assays. Furthermore, changes in expression of 15 proteins in the complement
cascade and mineral absorption pathways were validated at the transcriptional
level using quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR). The transcriptional levels of four
transcription factors (p21Ras, Rab-31-like, NF-κB, STAT3) were also investigated 
by qPCR following infection with E. tarda. This study contributes to
understanding the defense mechanisms of the liver in fish.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.05.022 
PMID: 28511951  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

