
1. J Immunol Res. 2017;2017:2157247. doi: 10.1155/2017/2157247. Epub 2017 Apr 23.

Analysis of Serum Cytokines and Single-Nucleotide Polymorphisms of SOD1, SOD2,
and CAT in Erysipelas Patients.

Emene CC(1), Kravchenko IE(2), Aibatova GI(2), Rizvanov AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Fundamental Medicine and Biology, Kazan Federal University,
Kazan, Russia.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Kazan State Medical University, Kazan,
Russia.

Increased free radical production had been documented in group A (β-hemolytic)
streptococcus infection cases. Comparing 71 erysipelas patients to 55 age-matched
healthy individuals, we sought for CAT, SOD1, and SOD2 single polymorphism
mutation (SNPs) interactions with erysipelas' predisposition and serum cytokine
levels in the acute and recovery phases of erysipelas infection. Whereas female
patients had a higher predisposition to erysipelas, male patients were prone to
having a facial localization of the infection. The presence of SOD1 G7958, SOD2
T2734, and CAT C262 alleles was linked to erysipelas' predisposition. T and C
alleles of SOD2 T2734C individually were linked to patients with bullous and
erythematous erysipelas, respectively. G and A alleles of SOD1 G7958A
individually were associated with lower limbs and higher body part localizations 
of the infection, respectively. Serum levels of IL-1β, CCL11, IL-2Rα, CXCL9,
TRAIL, PDGF-BB, and CCL4 were associated with symptoms accompanying the
infection, while IL-6, IL-9, IL-10, IL-13, IL-15, IL-17, G-CSF, and VEGF were
associated with predisposition and recurrence of erysipelas. While variations of 
IL-1β, IL-7, IL-8, IL-17, CCL5, and HGF were associated with the SOD2 T2734C SNP,
variations of PDFG-BB and CCL2 were associated with the CAT C262T SNP.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/2157247 
PMCID: PMC5420430
PMID: 28512644  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

