
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2017 Jul 1;488(3):541-546. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.05.082. Epub 2017 May 17.

TCR crosslinking promotes Crk adaptor protein binding to tyrosine-phosphorylated 
CD3ζ chain.

Dong G(1), Kalifa R(2), Nath PR(3), Gelkop S(4), Isakov N(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty 
of Health Sciences and the Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel. Electronic address: gdong@upenn.edu.
(2)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty 
of Health Sciences and the Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel. Electronic address:
rachel.kalifa@gmail.com.
(3)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty 
of Health Sciences and the Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel. Electronic address:
pulak.nath@nih.gov.
(4)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty 
of Health Sciences and the Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel. Electronic address:
sigal.gelkop@gmail.com.
(5)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty 
of Health Sciences and the Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel. Electronic address: noah@bgu.ac.il.

T cell antigen receptor (TCR) binding of a peptide antigen presented by
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) in the context of surface MHC molecules initiates
signaling events that regulate T cell activation, proliferation and
differentiation. A key event in the activation process is the phosphorylation of 
the conserved tyrosine residues within the CD3 chain immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs), which operate as docking sites for SH2 
domain-containing effector proteins. Phosphorylation of the CD3ζ ITAMs renders
the CD3 chain capable of binding the ζ-chain associated protein 70 kDa (ZAP70), a
protein tyrosine kinase that is essential for T cell activation. We found that
TCR/CD3 crosslinking in Jurkat T cells promotes the association of Crk adaptor
proteins with the transiently phosphorylated CD3ζ chain. Pull down assays using
bead-immobilized GST fusion proteins revealed that the Crk-SH2 domain mediates
binding of phospho-CD3ζ. Phospho-CD3ζ binding is selective and is mediated by the
three types of Crk, including CrkI, CrkII, and CrkL, but not by other SH2
domain-containing adaptor proteins, such as Grb2, GRAP and Nck. Crk interaction
with phospho-CD3ζ is rapid and transient, peaking 1 min post TCR/CD3
crosslinking. The results suggest the involvement of Crk adaptor proteins in the 
early stages of T cell activation in which Crk might help recruiting effector
proteins to the vicinity of the phospho-CD3ζ and contribute to the fine-tuning of
the TCR/CD3-coupled signal transduction pathways.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.05.082 
PMID: 28526413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

