
1. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2017 May 20;37(5):633-639.

[Expression, purification and activity analysis of GGDEF and EAL
domain-containing proteins from Lactobacillus acidophilus].

[Article in Chinese]

He JH(1), Sun JL, Yan WJ, Wang F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou 510515, China.E-mail: jiahui_0421@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the functions of the proteins containing the GGDEF or EAL 
domain in Lactobacillus acidophilus for investigation of the regulatory mechanism
of c-di-GMP in this strain.
METHODS: The DNA fragments of NH13_07045-GGDEF, NH13_07050 and NH13_07055 from
Lactobacillus acidophilus ATCC4356 were amplified by PCR and cloned into the
expression vector pMAL-His-c2. After sequencing, the recombinant plasmids were
transformed into competent Escherichia coli cells, which were induced by IPTG to 
express the recombinant proteins fused with maltose binding protein (MBP). The
fusion proteins were purified using amylose resin column for diguanylate cyclase 
(DGC) or phosphodiesterase (PDE) activity assays in vitro followed by analysis
with high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).
RESULTS: The target DNA fragments were obtained by PCR, and their sequences were 
all identical to that in GenBank. The purified and concentrated fusion proteins, 
which were identified by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting, had relative molecular
masses of 59 kD, 67 kD and 72 kD. HPLC analysis showed no DGC activity in
NH13_07045-GGDEF, while PDE activity was found in NH13_07050 but not in
NH13_07055.
CONCLUSION: We obtained the protein encoded by NH13_07050 that possesses PDE
activity in vitro. This protein may facilitate the evaluation of the regulatory
function of c-di-GMP in Lactobacillus acidophilus.


PMCID: PMC6780469
PMID: 28539286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

