
1. Cell Rep. 2017 May 23;19(8):1572-1585. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.04.078.

Chemokine Signaling and the Regulation of Bidirectional Leukocyte Migration in
Interstitial Tissues.

Powell D(1), Tauzin S(1), Hind LE(1), Deng Q(2), Beebe DJ(3), Huttenlocher A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
47907, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering and University of Wisconsin Carbone
Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University
of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic address:
huttenlocher@wisc.edu.

Motile cells navigate through complex tissue environments that include both
attractive and repulsive cues. In response to tissue wounding, neutrophils,
primary cells of the innate immune response, exhibit bidirectional migration that
is orchestrated by chemokines and their receptors. Although progress has been
made in identifying signals that mediate the recruitment phase, the mechanisms
that regulate neutrophil reverse migration remain largely unknown. Here, we
visualize bidirectional neutrophil migration to sterile wounds in zebrafish
larvae and identify specific roles for the chemokine receptors Cxcr1 and Cxcr2 in
neutrophil recruitment to sterile injury and infection. Notably, we also identify
Cxcl8a/Cxcr2 as a specific ligand-receptor pair that orchestrates neutrophil
chemokinesis in interstitial tissues during neutrophil reverse migration and
resolution of inflammation. Taken together, our findings identify distinct
receptors that mediate bidirectional leukocyte motility during interstitial
migration depending on the context and type of tissue damage in vivo.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.04.078 
PMCID: PMC5505660
PMID: 28538177  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

