
1. PLoS One. 2017 May 25;12(5):e0178336. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0178336.
eCollection 2017.

Establishment a real-time reverse transcription PCR based on host biomarkers for 
the detection of the subclinical cases of Mycobacterium avium subsp.
paratuberculosis.

Park HE(1), Park HT(1), Jung YH(2), Yoo HS(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Animal Resoures Devlopment, National Instiute of Animal Science,
Rural Development Administration, Cheonan, Republic of Korea.
(3)Institute of Green Bio Science and Technology, Seoul National University,
Pyeongchang, Republic of Korea.

Bovine paratuberculosis (PTB) is a chronic enteric inflammatory disease of
ruminants caused by Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP) that causes
large economic losses in the dairy industry. Spread of PTB is mainly provoked by 
a long subclinical stage during which MAP is shed into the environment with
feces; accordingly, detection of subclinical animals is very important to its
control. However, current diagnostic methods are not suitable for detection of
subclinical animals. Therefore, the current study was conducted to develop a
diagnostic method for analysis of the expression of genes of prognostic potential
biomarker candidates in the whole blood of cattle naturally infected with MAP.
Real-time PCR with nine potential biomarker candidates was developed for the
diagnosis of MAP subclinical infection. Animals were divided into four groups
based on fecal MAP PCR and serum ELISA. Eight genes (Timp1, Hp, Serpine1, Tfrc,
Mmp9, Defb1, Defb10, and S100a8) were up-regulated in MAP-infected cattle (p
<0.05). Moreover, ROC analysis revealed that eight genes (Timp1, Hp, Serpine1,
Tfrc, Mmp9, Defb1, Defb10, and S100a8) showed fair diagnostic performance
(AUCâ‰¥0.8). Four biomarkers (Timp1, S100a8, Defb1, and Defb10) showed the highest 
diagnostic accuracy in the PCR positive and ELISA negative group (PN group) and
three biomarkers (Tfrc, Hp, and Serpine1) showed the highest diagnostic accuracy 
in the PCR negative and ELISA positive group (NP group). Moreover, three
biomarkers (S100a8, Hp, and Defb10) were considered the most reliable for the PCR
positive and ELISA positive group (PP group). Taken together, our data suggest
that real-time PCR based on eight biomarkers (Timp1, Hp, Serpine1, Tfrc, Mmp9,
Defb1, Defb10, and S100a8) might be useful for diagnosis of JD, including
subclinical stage cases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0178336 
PMCID: PMC5444815
PMID: 28542507  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

