
1. J Immunol. 2017 Jul 1;199(1):149-158. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1600441. Epub 2017
May 26.

SOCS1 Is a Key Molecule That Prevents Regulatory T Cell Plasticity under
Inflammatory Conditions.

Takahashi R(1)(2)(3), Nakatsukasa H(3), Shiozawa S(2), Yoshimura A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Research Institute, Nozaki Tokushukai, Daitou, Osaka
574-0074, Japan; rtakahas@tokushukai.jp.
(2)Rheumatic Disease Unit, Department of Medicine, Kyushu University Beppu
Hospital, Beppu 874-0838, Japan; and.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Shinjuku-Ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

We previously showed that regulatory T cells (Tregs) from T cell-specific
Socs1-deficient mice (Socs1fl/flLck-Cre+ mice) easily convert into Th1- or
Th17-like cells (ex-Tregs), which lose Foxp3 expression and suppressive functions
in vivo. Because Tregs in Socs1fl/flLck-Cre+ mice are constantly exposed to a
large amount of inflammatory cytokines produced by non-Tregs in vivo, in this
study we analyzed Treg-specific Socs1-deficient mice (Socs1fl/flFoxp3YFP-Cre
mice). These mice developed dermatitis, splenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy that
were much milder than those in Socs1fl/flLck-Cre+ mice. A fate mapping study
revealed that Socs1 deficiency accelerated the conversion of Tregs to
Foxp3-IFN-γ+ ex-Tregs in the tumor microenvironment and suppressed tumor growth. 
When transferred into Rag2-/- mice, Tregs from Socs1fl/flLck-Cre+ mice easily
lost Foxp3 expression, whereas those from Socs1fl/flFoxp3YFP-Cre mice maintained 
Foxp3 expression. Although Tregs from Socs1fl/flLck-Cre+ mice produced IFN-γ
after a 3-d culture in response to anti-CD3/CD28 Ab stimulation in vitro, Tregs
from Socs1fl/flFoxp3YFP-Cre mice did not. This finding suggested that the
inflammatory conditions in Socs1fl/flLck-Cre+ mice modified the born nature of
Socs1-deficient Tregs. To investigate this mechanism, Tregs from
Socs1fl/flFoxp3YFP-Cre mice were cultured with APCs from Socs1fl/flLck-Cre+ mice.
These APCs facilitated STAT4 phosphorylation, IFN-γ production, and loss of Foxp3
expression in Tregs from Socs1fl/flFoxp3YFP-Cre mice in an IL-12-dependent
manner. The results indicate that Socs1-deficient Tregs tend to convert into
ex-Tregs under the inflammatory conditions in which APCs are highly activated,
and that SOCS1 could be a useful target for enhancement of anti-tumor immunity.

Copyright © 2017 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1600441 
PMID: 28550203  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

