
1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2017 Sep 15;331:69-75. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2017.05.020.
Epub 2017 May 26.

Using DR52c/Ni2+ mimotope tetramers to detect Ni2+ reactive CD4+ T cells in
patients with joint replacement failure.

Zhang Y(1), Wang Y(1), Anderson K(1), Novikov A(1), Liu Z(1), Pacheco K(2), Dai
S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Research, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206,
USA; Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Research, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206,
USA; Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Electronic address: dais@njhealth.org.

T cell mediated hypersensitivity to nickel (Ni2+) is one of the most common
causes of allergic contact dermatitis. Ni2+ sensitization may also contribute to 
the failure of Ni2+ containing joint implants, and revision to non-Ni2+
containing hardware can be costly and debilitating. Previously, we identified
Ni2+ mimotope peptides, which are reactive to a CD4+ T cell clone, ANi2.3 (Vα1,
Vβ17), isolated from a Ni2+ hypersensitive patient with contact dermatitis. This 
T cell is restricted to the major histocompatibility complex class II (MHCII)
molecule, Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA)-DR52c (DRA, DRB3*0301). However, it is
not known if Ni2+ induced T cell responses in sensitized joint replacement
failure patients are similar to subjects with Ni2+ induced contact dermatitis.
Here, we generated DR52c/Ni2+ mimotope tetramers, and used them to test if the
same Ni2+ T cell activation mechanism could be generalized to Ni2+ sensitized
patients with associated joint implant failure. We confirmed the specificity of
these tetramers by staining of ANi2.3T cell transfectomas. The DR52c/Ni2+
mimotope tetramer detected Ni2+ reactive CD4+ T cells in the peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) of patients identified as Ni2+ sensitized by patch
testing and a positive Ni2+ LPT. When HLA-typed by a DR52 specific antibody,
three out of four patients were DR52 positive. In one patient, Ni2+ stimulation
induced the expansion of Vβ17 positive CD4+ T cells from 0.8% to 13.3%. We found 
that the percentage of DR52 positivity and Vβ17 usage in Ni2+ sensitized joint
failure patients are similar to Ni sensitized skin allergy patients. Ni2+
independent mimotope tetramers may be a useful tool to identify the Ni2+ reactive
CD4+ T cells.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2017.05.020 
PMCID: PMC5813678
PMID: 28554661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

