
1. Carbohydr Polym. 2017 Sep 1;171:307-315. doi: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2017.03.018. Epub
2017 Mar 8.

Physicochemical characterization and antitumour activity of exopolysaccharides
produced by Lactobacillus casei SB27 from yak milk.

Di W(1), Zhang L(2), Wang S(3), Yi H(4), Han X(1), Fan R(5), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, 
Harbin, 150090, China.
(2)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, 
Harbin, 150090, China; College of Food Science and Engineering, Ocean University 
of China, Qingdao, 266003, China. Electronic address: zhanglw@hit.edu.cn.
(3)School of Food Science and Engineering, Harbin University, Harbin, 150086,
China.
(4)College of Food Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao,
266003, China.
(5)College of Food Science and Engineering, Qingdao Agricultural University,
Qingdao, 266109, China.

Two high molecular weight fractions (LW1 and LW2) of exopolysaccharides (EPSs)
produced by Lactobacillus casei SB27 were isolated from yak milk obtained from
the Gansu Tibetan area of China. GC-MS, FTIR spectroscopy, methylation analysis
and FE-SEM analysis were performed to elucidate the physicochemical
characterization of these two fractions, and their in vitro antitumour activities
were also evaluated. The molecular weights (Mws) of LW1 and LW2 as determined by 
HPGPC were 25.10 and 12.34kDa, respectively. Monosaccharide composition analysis 
revealed that LW1 and LW2 were mainly composed of galactose (52.4% and 57.4%,
mol%) and glucose (29.1% and 22.2%, mol%), respectively. Methylation results
showed that the main chain of LW1 likely involves (1→4)-linked Galp and
(1→4)-linked Glcp with its side chains being (1→4,6)-linked Galp through the O-6 
position connected to the backbone, whereas the main chain of LW2 likely involves
(1→4)-linked Galp and (1→4)-linked Glcp with its side chains being (1→3)-Galp
through the O-6 position of (1→3,6)-Galp linked to the main chain. Evaluation of 
the microcosmic morphology, as revealed by FE-SEM analysis of the two EPS
fractions, showed a sheet-like appearance with a folded surface and a compact
structure. The results from in vitro antitumour tests indicated that both LW1 and
LW2 could significantly inhibit the proliferation of HT-29 colorectal cancer
cells and up-regulated the expressions of Bad, Bax, Caspase-3 and -8 genes.
Finally, TEM images revealed the apoptotic morphological changes of HT-29 cells
induced by LW1 and LW2. Our results suggested that LW1 and LW2 possess potential 
not only for use in functional food products but also as a source of natural
antitumour drugs.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2017.03.018 
PMID: 28578968  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

