
1. J Environ Sci (China). 2017 Jun;56:25-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jes.2016.08.022. Epub
2016 Oct 1.

High-throughput metagenomic analysis of petroleum-contaminated soil microbiome
reveals the versatility in xenobiotic aromatics metabolism.

Bao YJ(1), Xu Z(2), Li Y(3), Yao Z(4), Sun J(3), Song H(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Laboratory for Industrial Enzymes, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Tianjin 300308, China; Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Tianjin 300308, China. Electronic address:
ybao2@nd.edu.
(2)National Engineering Laboratory for Industrial Enzymes, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Tianjin 300308, China; Key Laboratory of Systems Microbial
Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Tianjin 300308, China; Tianjin
Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Tianjin
300308, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Systems Microbial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Tianjin 300308, China; Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Tianjin 300308, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Immune Microenvironment and Disease of the Ministry of
Education, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China.
(5)National Engineering Laboratory for Industrial Enzymes, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Tianjin 300308, China; Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Tianjin 300308, China. Electronic address:
song_h@tib.cas.cn.

The soil with petroleum contamination is one of the most studied soil ecosystems 
due to its rich microorganisms for hydrocarbon degradation and broad applications
in bioremediation. However, our understanding of the genomic properties and
functional traits of the soil microbiome is limited. In this study, we used
high-throughput metagenomic sequencing to comprehensively study the microbial
community from petroleum-contaminated soils near Tianjin Dagang oilfield in
eastern China. The analysis reveals that the soil metagenome is characterized by 
high level of community diversity and metabolic versatility. The metageome
community is predominated by γ-Proteobacteria and α-Proteobacteria, which are key
players for petroleum hydrocarbon degradation. The functional study demonstrates 
over-represented enzyme groups and pathways involved in degradation of a broad
set of xenobiotic aromatic compounds, including toluene, xylene, chlorobenzoate, 
aminobenzoate, DDT, methylnaphthalene, and bisphenol. A composite metabolic
network is proposed for the identified pathways, thus consolidating our
identification of the pathways. The overall data demonstrated the great potential
of the studied soil microbiome in the xenobiotic aromatics degradation. The
results not only establish a rich reservoir for novel enzyme discovery but also
provide putative applications in bioremediation.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jes.2016.08.022 
PMID: 28571861  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

