
1. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl. 2017 Sep 1;78:1135-1146. doi:
10.1016/j.msec.2017.04.142. Epub 2017 Apr 23.

A highly bioactive poly (amido amine)/70S30C bioactive glass hybrid with
photoluminescent and antimicrobial properties for bone regeneration.

Akbari Dourbash F(1), Alizadeh P(2), Nazari S(3), Farasat A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials Science & Engineering, Faculty of Engineering &
Technology, Tarbiat Modares University, P. O. Box: 14115-143, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Materials Science & Engineering, Faculty of Engineering &
Technology, Tarbiat Modares University, P. O. Box: 14115-143, Tehran, Iran.
Electronic address: P-Alizadeh@modares.ac.ir.
(3)Department of Environmental Health Engineering, School of Public Health, Iran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Young Researchers & Elite Club, Pharmaceutical Sciences Branch, Islamic Azad
University, Tehran, Iran.

The field of tissue engineering constantly calls for novel biomaterials that
possess intrinsically multifunctional properties such as bioactivity, bioimaging 
ability and antibacterial properties. In this paper, poly (amido amine)
generation 5/bioactive glass inorganic-organic hybrids have been developed
through direct hybridization by 3-glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane (GPTMS) as
coupling agent. Results indicated that the degree of covalent coupling by GPTMS
and the weight percent of inorganic and organic constituents highly influence
hybrids properties. It was found that nanoscale integration of inorganic and
organic chains by GPTMS significantly endows hybrids with high thermal stability.
Furthermore, hybrids exhibited photoluminescent ability (emission 400-600nm and
700nm) without incorporating of any organic dyes or quantum dots. In addition,
hydrophilicity of our hybrids indicated good cell/material interaction. The
biological apatite was formed on the surface of calcium containing hybrids when
soaked in simulated body fluid (SBF) for 1week. Hybrids also showed linear
biodegradation behavior in SBF that could be controlled by the degree of covalent
crosslinking which was indicative of their stable biodegradation ability. High
inherent antibacterial properties against Staphylococcus aureus was also observed
from poly (amido amine)/silica hybrids. No adverse cytotoxicity for human
gingival fibroblast cell lines (HGF) was detected after 4days. It is envisaged
that our novel multifunctional hybrid system will confer intriguing potential in 
advancing the field of tissue engineering.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msec.2017.04.142 
PMID: 28575949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

