
1. Indian J Hematol Blood Transfus. 2017 Jun;33(2):200-206. doi:
10.1007/s12288-016-0703-x. Epub 2016 Jun 29.

Bacteremia During Early Post-allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
Period: A Single Center Experience.

El-Ghammaz AMS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, Internal Medicine Department,
Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt.

Bacteremia is a significant complication of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT). We aimed to study bacteremia occurring during early
post-transplant period at Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit of Ain Shams
University regarding its risk factors and impact on survival. Patients performing
allogeneic HSCT were followed up for occurrence of bacteremia. Survival status
was assessed at 180 days post-transplant. Bacteremia occurred in 53.3 % of
patients. On univariate analysis, CD34 +ve cell dose (P = 0.004), duration of
neutropenia (P = 0.018), time interval between day of stem cell infusion and day 
of neutrophil engraftment (P = 0.043) and > 1 apheresis days (P = 0.040) were
associated with higher rates of bacteremia. On multivariate analysis, CD34 +ve
cell dose (P = 0.002) and apheresis day number (P = 0.038) remained significant. 
There was significant difference between patients who developed bacteremia and
those who did not regarding overall survival (OS) (P = 0.042). Patients
developing bacteremia caused by Gram negative bacteria (GNB) had lower OS than
Gram positive bacteria (GPB) (P < 0.001). In conclusion, stem cell dose and
apheresis day number influence bacteremia risk. Also, Gram negative bacteremia
has negative impact on allogeneic transplant recipient survival rates.

DOI: 10.1007/s12288-016-0703-x 
PMCID: PMC5442052
PMID: 28596651 

