
1. J Water Health. 2017 Jun;15(3):402-409. doi: 10.2166/wh.2017.296.

Occurrence of Legionella in showers at recreational facilities.

De Filippis P(1), Mozzetti C(1), Amicosante M(1), D'Alò GL(1), Messina A(1),
Varrenti D(2), Giammattei R(2), Di Giorgio F(2), Corradi S(2), D'Auria A(2),
Fraietta R(2), Gabrieli R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hygiene, Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of
Rome 'Tor Vergata', Via Montpellier 1, Rome 00133, Italy E-mail:
patrizia.de.filippis@uniroma2.it.
(2)Service of Hygiene and Public Health, ASL Roma 6 ex H, Borgo Garibaldi 12,
Albano Laziale, Rome 00041, Italy.

Critical environments, including water systems in recreational settings,
represent an important source of Legionella pneumophila infection in humans. In
order to assess the potential risk for legionellosis, we analyzed Legionella
contamination of water distribution systems in 36 recreational facilities
equipped with swimming pools. One hundred and sixty water samples were analyzed
from shower heads or taps located in locker rooms or in bathrooms. By culture
method and polymerase chain reaction, 41/160 samples were positive for Legionella
from 12/36 recreational centers. Hotels (57.1%) and sports centers (41.2%) were
the most contaminated. L. pneumophila serotypes 2-14 (25/41) were more frequently
found than serotype 1 (10/41). Samples at temperature ≥30 °C were more frequently
positive than samples at temperature <30 °C (n = 39 vs n = 2, p < 0.00001). The
presence of L. pneumophila was investigated by comparison with heterotrophic
plate count (HPC), an indicator of water quality. The presence of L. pneumophila 
was associated more frequently with high and intermediate HPC load at 37 °C,
therefore should be considered a potential source when HPC at 37 °C is >10
CFU/mL. Maintenance, good hygiene practices, interventions on the hydraulic
system and regular controls must be implemented to minimize exposure to L.
pneumophila infection risk.

DOI: 10.2166/wh.2017.296 
PMID: 28598344  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

