
1. PLoS One. 2017 Jun 12;12(6):e0179237. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179237.
eCollection 2017.

Phylogenetic analysis of Mycobacterium massiliense strains having recombinant
rpoB gene laterally transferred from Mycobacterium abscessus.

Kim BJ(1), Kim GN(1), Kim BR(1), Shim TS(2), Kook YH(1), Kim BJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Biomedical Sciences, Liver Research
Institute and Cancer Research Institute, College of Medicine, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

Recent multi locus sequence typing (MLST) and genome based studies indicate that 
lateral gene transfer (LGT) events in the rpoB gene are prevalent between
Mycobacterium abscessus complex strains. To check the prevalence of the M.
massiliense strains subject to rpoB LGT (Rec-mas), we applied rpoB typing (711
bp) to 106 Korean strains of M. massiliense infection that had already been
identified by hsp65 sequence analysis (603 bp). The analysis indicated 6 smooth
strains in M. massiliense Type I (10.0%, 6/60) genotypes but no strains in M.
massiliense Type II genotypes (0%, 0/46), showing a discrepancy between the 2
typing methods. Further MLST analysis based on the partial sequencing of seven
housekeeping genes, argH, cya, glpK, gnd, murC, pta and purH, as well as erm(41) 
PCR proved that these 6 Rec-mas strains consisted of two distinct genotypes
belonging to M. massiliense and not M. abscessus. The complete rpoB sequencing
analysis showed that these 6 Rec-mas strains have an identical hybrid rpoB gene, 
of which a 478 bp partial rpoB fragment may be laterally transferred from M.
abscessus. Notably, five of the 6 Rec-mas strains showed complete identical
sequences in a total of nine genes, including the seven MLST genes, hsp65, and
rpoB, suggesting their clonal propagation in South Korea. In conclusion, we
identified 6 M. massiliense smooth strains of 2 phylogenetically distinct
genotypes with a specific hybrid rpoB gene laterally transferred from M.
abscessus from Korean patients. Their clinical relevance and bacteriological
traits remain to be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179237 
PMCID: PMC5467896
PMID: 28604829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

