
1. J Immunother. 2017 Jul/Aug;40(6):201-210. doi: 10.1097/CJI.0000000000000176.

Antigen Presentation by Individually Transferred HLA Class I Genes in HLA-A,
HLA-B, HLA-C Null Human Cell Line Generated Using the Multiplex CRISPR-Cas9
System.

Hong CH(1), Sohn HJ, Lee HJ, Cho HI, Kim TG.

Author information: 
(1)*Departments of Microbiology †Catholic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Bank ‡Cancer
Research Institute, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul,
Korea.

Human leukocyte antigens (HLAs) are essential immune molecules that affect
transplantation and adoptive immunotherapy. When hematopoietic stem cells or
organs are transplanted with HLA-mismatched recipients, graft-versus-host disease
or graft rejection can be induced by allogeneic immune responses. The function of
each HLA allele has been studied using HLA-deficient cells generated from mutant 
cell lines or by RNA interference, zinc finger nuclease, and the CRISPR/Cas9
system. To improve HLA gene editing, we attempted to generate an HLA class I null
cell line using the multiplex CRISPR/Cas9 system by targeting exons 2 and 3 of
HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C genes simultaneously. Multiplex HLA editing could induce 
the complete elimination of HLA class I genes by bi-allelic gene disruption on
target sites which was defined by flow cytometry and target-specific polymerase
chain reaction. Furthermore, artificial antigen-presenting cells were generated
by transfer of a single HLA class I allele and co-stimulatory molecules into this
novel HLA class I null cell line. Artificial antigen-presenting cells showed
HLA-restricted antigen presentation following antigen processing and were
successfully used for the efficient generation of tumor antigen-specific
cytotoxic T cells in vitro. The efficient editing of HLA genes may provide a
basis for universal cellular therapies and transplantation.

DOI: 10.1097/CJI.0000000000000176 
PMID: 28604557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

