
1. Nat Commun. 2017 Jun 12;8:15827. doi: 10.1038/ncomms15827.

Structural and mechanistic basis of differentiated inhibitors of the acute
pancreatitis target kynurenine-3-monooxygenase.

Hutchinson JP(1), Rowland P(1), Taylor MRD(2), Christodoulou EM(1), Haslam C(1), 
Hobbs CI(1), Holmes DS(3), Homes P(1), Liddle J(3), Mole DJ(4)(5), Uings I(3),
Walker AL(3), Webster SP(6), Mowat CG(2), Chung CW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Platform Technologies and Science, GlaxoSmithKline, Stevenage SG1 2NY, UK.
(2)EastChem School of Chemistry, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3FJ, UK.
(3)Discovery Partnerships with Academia, GlaxoSmithKline, Stevenage, UK.
(4)Medical Research Council Centre for Inflammation Research, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ,
UK.
(5)Clinical Surgery, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4SA, UK.
(6)Centre for Cardiovascular Science, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16
4TJ, UK.

Kynurenine-3-monooxygenase (KMO) is a key FAD-dependent enzyme of tryptophan
metabolism. In animal models, KMO inhibition has shown benefit in
neurodegenerative diseases such as Huntington's and Alzheimer's. Most recently it
has been identified as a target for acute pancreatitis multiple organ dysfunction
syndrome (AP-MODS); a devastating inflammatory condition with a mortality rate in
excess of 20%. Here we report and dissect the molecular mechanism of action of
three classes of KMO inhibitors with differentiated binding modes and kinetics.
Two novel inhibitor classes trap the catalytic flavin in a previously unobserved 
tilting conformation. This correlates with picomolar affinities, increased
residence times and an absence of the peroxide production seen with previous
substrate site inhibitors. These structural and mechanistic insights culminated
in GSK065(C1) and GSK366(C2), molecules suitable for preclinical evaluation.
Moreover, revising the repertoire of flavin dynamics in this enzyme class offers 
exciting new opportunities for inhibitor design.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15827 
PMCID: PMC5477544
PMID: 28604669  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

