
1. Cell Microbiol. 2017 Nov;19(11). doi: 10.1111/cmi.12757. Epub 2017 Jul 27.

EPEC effector EspF promotes Crumbs3 endocytosis and disrupts epithelial cell
polarity.

Tapia R(1), Kralicek SE(1), Hecht GA(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Loyola 
University Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood,
IL, USA.
(3)Edward Hines Jr. VA Hospital, Hines, IL, USA.

Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) uses a type III secretion system to
inject effector proteins into host intestinal epithelial cells causing diarrhoea.
EPEC infection redistributes basolateral proteins β1-integrin and Na+ /K+ ATPase 
to the apical membrane of host cells. The Crumbs (Crb) polarity complex
(Crb3/Pals1/Patj) is essential for epithelial cell polarisation and tight
junction (TJ) assembly. Here, we demonstrate that EPEC displaces Crb3 and Pals1
from the apical membrane to the cytoplasm of cultured intestinal epithelial cells
and colonocytes of infected mice. In vitro studies show that EspF, but not Map,
alters Crb3, whereas both effectors modulate Pals1. EspF perturbs polarity
formation in cyst morphogenesis assays and induces endocytosis and apical
redistribution of Na+ /K+ ATPase. EspF binds to sorting nexin 9 (SNX9) causing
membrane remodelling in host cells. Infection with ΔespF/pespFD3, a mutant strain
that ablates EspF binding to SNX9, or inhibition of dynamin, attenuates Crb3
endocytosis caused by EPEC. In addition, infection with ΔespF/pespFD3 has no
impact on Na+ /K+ ATPase endocytosis. These data support the hypothesis that EPEC
perturbs apical-basal polarity in an EspF-dependent manner, which would
contribute to EPEC-associated diarrhoea by disruption of TJ and altering the
crucial positioning of membrane transporters involved in the absorption of ions
and solutes.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12757 
PMCID: PMC5645036
PMID: 28618099  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

