
1. Front Mol Biosci. 2017 May 29;4:33. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2017.00033. eCollection
2017.

Structure and Function of p97 and Pex1/6 Type II AAA+ Complexes.

Saffert P(1), Enenkel C(2), Wendler P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, University 
of PotsdamPotsdam, Germany.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of TorontoToronto, ON, Canada.

Protein complexes of the Type II AAA+ (ATPases associated with diverse cellular
activities) family are typically hexamers of 80-150 kDa protomers that harbor two
AAA+ ATPase domains. They form double ring assemblies flanked by associated
domains, which can be N-terminal, intercalated or C-terminal to the ATPase
domains. Most prominent members of this family include NSF (N-ethyl-maleimide
sensitive factor), p97/VCP (valosin-containing protein), the Pex1/Pex6 complex
and Hsp104 in eukaryotes and ClpB in bacteria. Tremendous efforts have been
undertaken to understand the conformational dynamics of protein remodeling type
II AAA+ complexes. A uniform mode of action has not been derived from these
works. This review focuses on p97/VCP and the Pex1/6 complex, which both
structurally remodel ubiquitinated substrate proteins. P97/VCP plays a role in
many processes, including ER- associated protein degradation, and the Pex1/Pex6
complex dislocates and recycles the transport receptor Pex5 from the peroxisomal 
membrane during peroxisomal protein import. We give an introduction into existing
knowledge about the biochemical and cellular activities of the complexes before
discussing structural information. We particularly emphasize recent electron
microscopy structures of the two AAA+ complexes and summarize their structural
differences.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2017.00033 
PMCID: PMC5447069
PMID: 28611990 

