
1. Vet Res. 2017 Jun 17;48(1):36. doi: 10.1186/s13567-017-0440-7.

Variation in susceptibility of different breeds of sheep to Mycobacterium avium
subspecies paratuberculosis following experimental inoculation.

Begg DJ(1), Purdie AC(1), de Silva K(1), Dhand NK(1), Plain KM(1), Whittington
RJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Farm Animal and Veterinary Public Health, Sydney School of Veterinary Science 
and School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, The University
of Sydney, 425 Werombi Rd, Camden, NSW, 2570, Australia.
(2)Farm Animal and Veterinary Public Health, Sydney School of Veterinary Science 
and School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, The University
of Sydney, 425 Werombi Rd, Camden, NSW, 2570, Australia.
richard.whittington@sydney.edu.au.

Exposure to Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis (MAP) does not always
lead to Johne's disease. Understanding differences in disease susceptibility of
individual animals is a key aspect to controlling mycobacterial diseases. This
study was designed to examine the susceptibility or resistance of various breeds 
of sheep to MAP infection. Merino, Suffolk first cross Merino, Border Leicester, 
and Poll Dorset sheep were orally inoculated with MAP and monitored for
14Â months. Clinical disease occurred more frequently in the Merino (42%) and
Suffolk first cross Merino (36%) compared to the Border Leicester (12%) and Poll 
Dorset (11%) breeds. Infection risk, as determined by culture of gut and
associated lymphoid tissues, ranged from 75% for the Suffolk first cross Merino
to 47% for the Poll Dorset sheep. Significant differences were identified in the 
site in the intestines of the most severe histopathological lesions and the
immune responses to infection between the breeds. However, there was no
difference in faecal MAP shedding by clinical cases between breeds. All breeds
tested were susceptible to MAP infection, as determined by infection and clinical
disease development, although there were differences in the proportions of
diseased animals between the breeds. Poll Dorset and Border Leicester sheep were 
more resilient to MAP infection but there was evidence that more animals could
have developed disease if given more time. These findings provide evidence of
potential differential disease susceptibility between breeds, further our
understanding of disease pathogenesis and risks of disease spread, and may have
an influence on control programs for paratuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1186/s13567-017-0440-7 
PMCID: PMC5474048
PMID: 28623935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

