
1. Anal Biochem. 2017 Sep 15;533:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2017.06.006. Epub 2017 Jun
15.

A refined DNA methylation detection method using MspJI coupled quantitative PCR.

Petell CJ(1), Loiseau G(2), Gandy R(1), Pradhan S(3), Gowher H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907,
United States.
(2)College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, VA 23187, United States.
(3)New England Biolabs Inc., 240 County Road, Ipswich, MA 01938, United States.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907,
United States; Purdue University Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN 47907, United States. Electronic address: hgowher@purdue.edu.

DNA methylation is a highly conserved epigenetic modification with critical roles
ranging from protection against phage infection in bacteria to the regulation of 
gene expression in mammals. DNA methylation at specific sequences can be measured
by using methylation dependent or sensitive restriction enzymes coupled to semi- 
or quantitative PCR (MD-qPCR). This study reports a refined MD-qPCR method for
detecting gain or loss of DNA methylation at specific sites through the specific 
use of MspJI or HpaII, respectively. By employing varying concentrations of DNA
with methylation ranging from 0 to 100%, our data provide evidence that compared 
to HpaII, MspJI increases the sensitivity and accuracy of detecting relative DNA 
methylation gains by MD-qPCR. We also show that the MspJI-coupled MD-qPCR can
accurately determine the percent gain in DNA methylation at the Sall4 enhancer
and is more sensitive than HpaII in detecting relative gains in DNA methylation
at the Oct4 proximal enhancer during embryonic stem cell (ESC) differentiation.
The high specificity and sensitivity of this targeted approach increases its
potential as a diagnostic tool to detect relatively smaller gains in DNA
methylation at specific sites from limited amounts of sample.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2017.06.006 
PMCID: PMC5972016
PMID: 28624296  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

