
1. Front Immunol. 2017 May 31;8:656. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00656. eCollection
2017.

Vitamin D Counteracts Mycobacterium tuberculosis-Induced Cathelicidin
Downregulation in Dendritic Cells and Allows Th1 Differentiation and IFNγ
Secretion.

Rode AKO(1), Kongsbak M(1), Hansen MM(1), Lopez DV(1), Levring TB(1), Woetmann
A(1), Ødum N(1), Bonefeld CM(1), Geisler C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Department of Immunology and
Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Tuberculosis (TB) presents a serious health problem with approximately one-third 
of the world's population infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis in a latent
state. Experience from the pre-antibiotic era and more recent clinical studies
have established a beneficial role of sunlight and vitamin D in patients with TB.
At the same time, experimental data have shown that Th1 cells through production 
of IFNγ are crucial for cathelicidin release by macrophages, bacterial killing,
and containment of M. tuberculosis in granulomas. Paradoxically, vitamin D has
repeatedly been ascribed an immune-suppressive function inhibiting Th1
differentiation and production of IFNγ in T cells. The aim of this study was to
investigate this apparent paradox. We studied naïve human CD4+ T cells activated 
either with CD3 and CD28 antibodies or with allogeneic dendritic cells (DC)
stimulated with heat-killed M. tuberculosis (HKMT) or purified toll-like receptor
(TLR) ligands. We show that vitamin D does not block differentiation of human
CD4+ T cells to Th1 cells and that interleukin (IL)-12 partially counteracts
vitamin D-mediated inhibition of IFNγ production promoting production of equal
amounts of IFNγ in Th1 cells in the presence of vitamin D as in T cells activated
in the absence of vitamin D and IL-12. Furthermore, we show that HKMT and TLR2
ligands strongly downregulate cathelicidin expression in DC and that vitamin D
counteracts this by upregulating cathelicidin expression. In conclusion, we
demonstrate that vitamin D counteracts M. tuberculosis-induced cathelicidin
downregulation and allows Th1 differentiation and IFNγ secretion.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00656 
PMCID: PMC5450038
PMID: 28620394 

