
1. Biochemistry. 2017 Jul 18;56(28):3682-3688. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00381.
Epub 2017 Jul 5.

Molecular Structures and Functions of Chlorophylls-a Esterified with
Geranylgeranyl, Dihydrogeranylgeranyl, and Tetrahydrogeranylgeranyl Groups at the
17-Propionate Residue in a Diatom, Chaetoceros calcitrans.

Mizoguchi T(1), Isaji M(1), Yamano N, Harada J(2), Fujii R, Tamiaki H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life Sciences, Ritsumeikan University , Kusatsu, Shiga
525-8577, Japan.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Kurume University School of Medicine ,
Kurume, Fukuoka 830-0011, Japan.

The 17-propionate ester group of chlorophyll(Chl)-a in some oxygenic phototrophs 
was investigated using HPLC. Chls-a esterified with partially dehydrogenated
forms of a phytyl group were found in fully grown cells of a diatom, Chaetoceros 
calcitrans: geranylgeranyl (GG), dihydrogeranylgeranyl (DHGG), and
tetrahydrogeranylgeranyl (THGG). Chls-a bearing such esterifying groups were
reported to be found only in greening processes of higher plants, and thus these 
Chls-a have been thought to be biosynthetic precursors for phytylated Chl-a.
Their molecular structures were unambiguously determined using 1H and 13C NMR
spectroscopy and mass spectrometry. In particular, the positions of C═C double
bonds in DHGG were identified at C2═C3, C6═C7, and C14═C15, and those in THGG
were determined to be at C2═C3 and C14═C15. Notably, the present DHGG was
different from the previously determined DHGG of bacteriochlorophyll-a in purple 
bacteria (C2═C3, C10═C11, and C14═C15). Moreover, thylakoid membranes as well as 
fucoxanthin-chlorophyll-a/c proteins called FCPs were isolated from the diatom,
and their Chl-a compositions were analyzed. Chls-a esterified with GG, DHGG, and 
THGG were detected by HPLC, indicating that such Chls-a were not merely
biosynthetic precursors, but photosynthetically active pigments.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00381 
PMID: 28627163  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

