
1. J Leukoc Biol. 2017 Sep;102(3):837-844. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1AB0217-065R. Epub 2017 
Jun 21.

CD4+CD8β+ double-positive T cells in skin-draining lymph nodes respond to
inflammatory signals from the skin.

Overgaard NH(1)(2), Cruz JL(1), Bridge JA(1), Nel HJ(1), Frazer IH(1), La Gruta
NL(3), Blumenthal A(1), Steptoe RJ(1), Wells JW(4).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Queensland, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia.
(2)Division of Immunology and Vaccinology, National Veterinary Institute,
Technical University of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark; and.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia.
(4)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Queensland, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia; j.wells3@uq.edu.au.

CD4+CD8+ double-positive (DP), mature, peripheral T cells are readily detectable 
in a variety of species and tissues. Despite a common association with autoimmune
and malignant skin disorders, however, little is understood about their role or
function. Herein, we show that DP T cells are readily detectable in the blood,
spleen, and peripheral lymph nodes of naïve C57BL/6 mice. DP T cells were also
present in Jα18-/- and CD1d-/- mice, indicating that these cells are not NK-T
cells. After skin administration of CASAC adjuvant, but not Quil A adjuvant, both
total DP T cells and skin-infiltrating DP T cells increased in number. We
explored the possibility that DP T cells could represent aggregates between CD4+ 
and CD8+ single-positive T cells and found strong evidence that a large
proportion of apparent DP T cells were indeed aggregates. However, the existence 
of true CD4+CD8+ DP T cells was confirmed by Amnis ImageStream (Millipore Sigma, 
Billerica, MA, USA) imaging. Multiple rounds of FACS sorting separated true DP
cells from aggregates and indicated that conventional analyses may lead to
∼10-fold overestimation of DP T cell numbers. The high degree of aggregate
contamination and overestimation of DP abundance using conventional analysis
techniques may explain discrepancies reported in the literature for DP T cell
origin, phenotype, and function.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.1AB0217-065R 
PMID: 28637895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

