
1. Inflammation. 2017 Oct;40(5):1606-1621. doi: 10.1007/s10753-017-0601-x.

Thrombospondin-1 Production Regulates the Inflammatory Cytokine Secretion in
THP-1 Cells Through NF-κB Signaling Pathway.

Xing T(1)(2), Wang Y(3), Ding WJ(3), Li YL(3), Hu XD(3), Wang C(3), Ding A(4),
Shen JL(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases Research of Anhui Province, Stomatologic
Hospital and College, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, China.
(3)Department of Pathogen Biology, Provincial Laboratories of Pathogen Biology
and Zoonoses, Hefei, Anhui, 230022, China.
(4)Stomatology Department of Affiliated Provincial Hospital, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, 230001, China.
(5)Department of Immunology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, China.
shenjilong53@126.com.
(6)Department of Pathogen Biology, Provincial Laboratories of Pathogen Biology
and Zoonoses, Hefei, Anhui, 230022, China. shenjilong53@126.com.

Thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) is upregulated in several inflammatory diseases. Recent 
data have shown that macrophages from TSP-1-deficient mice have a reduced
inflammatory phenotype, suggesting that TSP-1 plays a part in macrophage
activation. DNA microarray approach revealed that Porphyromonas gingivalis
lipopolysaccharide (P. gingivalis LPS) may induce the enhanced TSP-1 expression
in human monocytes, suggesting a role of TSP-1-mediated pathogenesis in
periodontitis. Until recently, the function of TSP-1 has been a matter of debate.
In this study, we explored the role of TSP-1 in inflammatory cytokine secretions 
and its putative mechanism in pathogenesis of periodontitis. We demonstrated that
TSP-1 expression was significantly upregulated in gingival tissues with
periodontitis and in P. gingivalis LPS-stimulated THP-1 cells. Deficiency of
TSP-1 by transfecting siRNAs decreased IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α secretions in THP-1
cells, whereas overexpression of TSP-1 resulted in an upregulation of IL-6,
IL-1β, and TNF-α productions. Additional experiments showed that Pyrrolidine
dithiocarbamate (PDTC) inhibited IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α expression induced by
overexpression of TSP-1, accompanying with downregulation of phosphorylated p65
and IκBα protein levels in response to P. gingivalis LPS. These results indicated
that TSP-1 played a significant role in P. gingivalis LPS-initiated inflammatory 
cytokines (IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α) secretions of THP-1 cells, and the NF-κB
signaling is involved in its induction of expression. Thus, TSP-1 effectively
elevated P. gingivalis LPS-induced inflammation mediated by the NF-κB pathway and
may be critical for pathology of periodontitis.

DOI: 10.1007/s10753-017-0601-x 
PMID: 28634844  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

