
1. Int J Bacteriol. 2017;2017:4604789. doi: 10.1155/2017/4604789. Epub 2017 May 28.

Molecular Characterization of Salmonella from Human and Animal Origins in Uganda.

Kagirita AA(1), Baguma A(1)(2), Owalla TJ(3), Bazira J(2), Majalija S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Disease Surveillance and Outbreak, Uganda National Health
Laboratories Services, Ministry of Health, P.O. Box 7272, Kampala, Uganda.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Mbarara University of Science
and Technology, P.O. Box 1410, Mbarara, Uganda.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Med Biotech Laboratories, P.O. Box 9364,
Kampala, Uganda.
(4)Department of Biosecurity, Ecosystem and Veterinary Public Health, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Animal Resources and Biosecurity, Makerere University, P.O. 
Box 7062, Kampala, Uganda.

Sporadic Salmonella outbreaks with varying clinical presentations have been on
the rise in various parts of Uganda. The sources of outbreaks and factors
underlying the different clinical manifestation are curtailed by paucity of
information on Salmonella genotypes and the associated virulence genes. This
study reports molecular diversity of Salmonella enterica and their genetic
virulence profiles among human and animal isolates. Characterization was done
using Kauffman-White classification scheme and virulence genes analysis using
multiplex PCR. Overall, 52% of the isolates belonged to serogroup D, 16% to
serogroup E, 15% to poly F, H-S, and 12% to serogroup B. Serogroups A, C1, and C2
each consisted of only one isolate representing 5%. Virulence genes located on
SPI-1 [spaN and sipB] and on SPI-2 [spiA] in addition to pagC and msgA were
equally distributed in isolates obtained from all sources. Plasmid encoded
virulence gene spvB was found in <5% of isolates from both human epidemic and
animal origins whereas it occurred in 80% of clinical isolates. This study
reveals that serogroup D is the predominant Salmonella serogroup in circulation
and it is widely shared among animals and humans and calls for joint and
coordinated surveillance for one health implementation in Uganda.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/4604789 
PMCID: PMC5467339
PMID: 28634597 

