
1. Anim Sci J. 2017 Nov;88(11):1849-1854. doi: 10.1111/asj.12802. Epub 2017 Jun 19.

Survival of spray-dried and free-cells of potential probiotic Lactobacillus
plantarum 564 in soft goat cheese.

Radulović Z(1), Miočinović J(1), Mirković N(1), Mirković M(1), Paunović D(1),
Ivanović M(1), Seratlić S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agriculture, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Teagasc Food Research Centre, Moorepark, Fermoy, Co. Cork, Ireland.

A high viability of probiotics in food product, with a living cells threshold of 
107 /cfu/g (colony-forming units/g) is a challenge to achieve in food production.
Spray drying is an efficient and economic industrial method for probiotic
bacterial preservation and its application in food products. In this study, the
survival of free and spray-dried cells of potential probiotic strain
Lactobacillus plantarum 564 after production and during 8 weeks of storage of
soft acid coagulated goat cheese was investigated, as well as compositional and
sensory quality of cheese. Total bacterial count of spray-dried Lb. plantarum 564
cells were maintained at the high level of 8.82 log/cfu/g in cheese after 8 weeks
of storage, while free-cell number decreased to 6.9 log/cfu/g. However, the
chemical composition, pH values and sensory evaluation between control cheese (C1
sample made with commercial starter culture) and treated cheese samples (C2 and
C3, made with the same starter, with the addition of free and spray-dried Lb.
plantarum 564 cells, respectively) did not significantly differ. High viability
of potential probiotic bacteria and acceptable sensory properties indicate that
spray-dried Lb. plantarum 564 strain could be successfully used in the production
of soft acid coagulated goat cheeses.

© 2017 Japanese Society of Animal Science.

DOI: 10.1111/asj.12802 
PMID: 28631434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

