
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Jul 11;114(28):7355-7360. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1700902114. Epub 2017 Jun 27.

Nonredox thiolation in tRNA occurring via sulfur activation by a [4Fe-4S]
cluster.

Arragain S(1), Bimai O(1), Legrand P(2), Caillat S(3), Ravanat JL(3), Touati
N(4), Binet L(4)(5), Atta M(6), Fontecave M(7), Golinelli-Pimpaneau B(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie des Processus Biologiques, Unité Mixte de Recherche 8229
CNRS, Collège de France, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 75231 Paris cedex 05, 
France.
(2)SOLEIL Synchrotron, L'Orme des Merisiers, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(3)University of Grenoble Alpes, Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique, Institut
Nanosciences et Cryogénie, Systèmes Moléculaires et Nanomatériaux pour l'Energie 
et la Santé, F-38054 Grenoble, France.
(4)CNRS Institut de Recherche Renard, Chimie-ParisTech, 75005 Paris, France.
(5)Paris Sciences et Lettres Research University, Chimie-ParisTech, Institut de
Recherche de Chimie-Paris, 75005 Paris, France.
(6)University of Grenoble Alpes, Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique, Direction de 
Recherche Fondamentale, Institut de Biosciences et Biotechnologies de Grenoble,
Laboratoire Chimie et Biologie des Métaux, Unité Mixte de Recherche 5249, F-38000
Grenoble, France.
(7)Laboratoire de Chimie des Processus Biologiques, Unité Mixte de Recherche 8229
CNRS, Collège de France, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 75231 Paris cedex 05, 
France; marc.fontecave@cea.fr beatrice.golinelli@college-de-france.fr.

Sulfur is present in several nucleosides within tRNAs. In particular, thiolation 
of the universally conserved methyl-uridine at position 54 stabilizes tRNAs from 
thermophilic bacteria and hyperthermophilic archaea and is required for growth at
high temperature. The simple nonredox substitution of the C2-uridine carbonyl
oxygen by sulfur is catalyzed by tRNA thiouridine synthetases called TtuA.
Spectroscopic, enzymatic, and structural studies indicate that TtuA carries a
catalytically essential [4Fe-4S] cluster and requires ATP for activity. A series 
of crystal structures shows that (i) the cluster is ligated by only three
cysteines that are fully conserved, allowing the fourth unique iron to bind a
small ligand, such as exogenous sulfide, and (ii) the ATP binding site, localized
thanks to a protein-bound AMP molecule, a reaction product, is adjacent to the
cluster. A mechanism for tRNA sulfuration is suggested, in which the unique iron 
of the catalytic cluster serves to bind exogenous sulfide, thus acting as a
sulfur carrier.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1700902114 
PMCID: PMC5514717
PMID: 28655838  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

