
1. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces. 2017 Sep 1;157:473-480. doi:
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2017.05.081. Epub 2017 Jun 17.

Specific and selective probes for Staphylococcus aureus from phage-displayed
random peptide libraries.

De Plano LM(1), Carnazza S(1), Messina GML(2), Rizzo MG(1), Marletta G(2),
Guglielmino SPP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, Biological, Pharmaceutical and Environmental,
University of Messina, Viale F. Stagnod'Alcontres 31, 98166 Messina, Italy.
(2)LAMSUN (Laboratory for Molecular Surfaces and Nanotechnology), Department of
Chemical Sciences, University of Catania and CSGI, Viale A. Doria 6, 95125
Catania, Italy.
(3)Department of Chemical Sciences, Biological, Pharmaceutical and Environmental,
University of Messina, Viale F. Stagnod'Alcontres 31, 98166 Messina, Italy.
Electronic address: sguglielm@unime.it.

Staphylococcus aureus is a major human pathogen causing health care-associated
and community-associated infections. Early diagnosis is essential to prevent
disease progression and to reduce complications that can be serious. In this
study, we selected, from a 9-mer phage peptide library, a phage clone displaying 
peptide capable of specific binding to S. aureus cell surface, namely St.au9IVS5 
(sequence peptide RVRSAPSSS).The ability of the isolated phage clone to interact 
specifically with S. aureus and the efficacy of its bacteria-binding properties
were established by using enzyme linked immune-sorbent assay (ELISA). We also
demonstrated by Western blot analysis that the most reactive and selective phage 
peptide binds a 78KDa protein on the bacterial cell surface. Furthermore, we
observed selectivity of phage-bacteria-binding allowing to identify clinical
isolates of S. aureus in comparison with a panel of other bacterial species. In
order to explore the possibility of realizing a selective bacteria biosensor
device, based on immobilization of affinity-selected phage, we have studied the
physisorbed phage deposition onto a mica surface. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)
was used to determine the organization of phage on mica surface and then the
binding performance of mica-physisorbed phage to bacterial target was evaluated
during the time by fluorescent microscopy. The system is able to bind
specifically about 50% of S. aureus cells after 15' and 90% after one hour. Due
to specificity and rapidness, this biosensing strategy paves the way to the
further development of new cheap biosensors to be used in developing countries,
as lab-on-chip (LOC) to detect bacterial agents in clinical diagnostics
applications.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2017.05.081 
PMID: 28654884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

