
1. J Biol Chem. 2017 Aug 11;292(32):13402-13414. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M117.799080. Epub 
2017 Jun 26.

Mechanism of pathogen recognition by human dectin-2.

Feinberg H(1), Jégouzo SAF(2), Rex MJ(2), Drickamer K(2), Weis WI(1), Taylor
ME(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Structural Biology and Molecular and Cellular
Physiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305
and.
(2)the Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ,
United Kingdom.
(3)the Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ,
United Kingdom maureen.taylor@imperial.ac.uk.

Dectin-2, a C-type lectin on macrophages and other cells of the innate immune
system, functions in response to pathogens, particularly fungi. The
carbohydrate-recognition domain (CRD) in dectin-2 is linked to a transmembrane
sequence that interacts with the common Fc receptor γ subunit to initiate immune 
signaling. The molecular mechanism by which dectin-2 selectively binds to
pathogens has been investigated by characterizing the CRD expressed in a
bacterial system. Competition binding studies indicated that the CRD binds to
monosaccharides with modest affinity and that affinity was greatly enhanced for
mannose-linked α1-2 or α1-4 to a second mannose residue. Glycan array analysis
confirmed selective binding of the CRD to glycans that contain Manα1-2Man
epitopes. Crystals of the CRD in complex with a mammalian-type high-mannose
Man9GlcNAc2 oligosaccharide exhibited interaction with Manα1-2Man on two
different termini of the glycan, with the reducing-end mannose residue ligated to
Ca2+ in a primary binding site and the nonreducing terminal mannose residue
occupying an adjacent secondary site. Comparison of the binding sites in DC-SIGN 
and langerin, two other pathogen-binding receptors of the innate immune system,
revealed why these two binding sites accommodate only terminal Manα1-2Man
structures, whereas dectin-2 can bind Manα1-2Man in internal positions in mannans
and other polysaccharides. The specificity and geometry of the dectin-2-binding
site provide the molecular mechanism for binding of dectin-2 to fungal mannans
and also to bacterial lipopolysaccharides, capsular polysaccharides, and
lipoarabinomannans that contain the Manα1-2Man disaccharide unit.

© 2017 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M117.799080 
PMCID: PMC5555199
PMID: 28652405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

