
1. PLoS Genet. 2017 Jun 26;13(6):e1006862. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006862.
eCollection 2017 Jun.

Distinguishing functional polymorphism from random variation in the sequences of 
>10,000 HLA-A, -B and -C alleles.

Robinson J(1)(2), Guethlein LA(3), Cereb N(4), Yang SY(4), Norman PJ(3), Marsh
SGE(1)(2), Parham P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Anthony Nolan Research Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(2)UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Dept. of Structural Biology & Dept. of Microbiology & Immunology, School of
Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States of America.
(4)Histogenetics, Ossining, New York, United States of America.

HLA class I glycoproteins contain the functional sites that bind peptide antigens
and engage lymphocyte receptors. Recently, clinical application of sequence-based
HLA typing has uncovered an unprecedented number of novel HLA class I alleles.
Here we define the nature and extent of the variation in 3,489 HLA-A, 4,356 HLA-B
and 3,111 HLA-C alleles. This analysis required development of suites of methods,
having general applicability, for comparing and analyzing large numbers of
homologous sequences. At least three amino-acid substitutions are present at
every position in the polymorphic α1 and α2 domains of HLA-A, -B and -C. A
minority of positions have an incidence >1% for the 'second' most frequent
nucleotide, comprising 70 positions in HLA-A, 85 in HLA-B and 54 in HLA-C. The
majority of these positions have three or four alternative nucleotides. These
positions were subject to positive selection and correspond to binding sites for 
peptides and receptors. Most alleles of HLA class I (>80%) are very rare, often
identified in one person or family, and they differ by point mutation from older,
more common alleles. These alleles with single nucleotide polymorphisms reflect
the germ-line mutation rate. Their frequency predicts the human population
harbors 8-9 million HLA class I variants. The common alleles of human populations
comprise 42 core alleles, which represent all selected polymorphism, and
recombinants that have assorted this polymorphism.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006862 
PMCID: PMC5507469
PMID: 28650991  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

