
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2017 Aug 26;490(3):1093-1099. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.06.173. Epub 2017 Jun 29.

A novel conformation of the LC3-interacting region motif revealed by the
structure of a complex between LC3B and RavZ.

Kwon DH(1), Kim L(1), Kim BW(1), Kim JH(1), Roh KH(1), Choi EJ(1), Song HK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Korea University, 145 Anam-ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul
02841, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Korea University, 145 Anam-ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul
02841, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: hksong@korea.ac.kr.

LC3-family member proteins play a critical role in autophagy, a cellular process 
responsible for the degradation of massive cellular components including
intracellular pathogens. A variety of molecules involved in the autophagic
pathway engage in specific interactions with a unique sequence motif referred to 
as the LIR (LC3-interacting region) motif. Although identification of conserved
structural features of LIR motifs in complex with LC3-family members has
established a canonical LIR motif, atypical conformations of LIR motifs have
recently been revealed. Here, we determined the three-dimensional crystal
structures of LC3B in complex with three different LIR motifs of RavZ from
Legionella pneumophila, an intracellular pathogen that can manipulate the host
autophagy system. The tandem LIR motifs located in the N-terminal region of RavZ 
adopt a novel β-sheet conformation and thus provide specific ionic interactions
with LC3B in addition to canonical hydrophobic plugged-in interactions.
Consequently, these motifs possess higher binding affinity to LC3-family members 
than canonical LIR motifs, although the tandem repeats can only bind to one LC3
molecule. These findings broaden our understanding of the functional repertoire
of LIR motifs in autophagy.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.06.173 
PMID: 28668392  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

