
1. J Infect Dis. 2017 Aug 1;216(3):366-374. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jix298.

Genomic Epidemiology of a Major Mycobacterium tuberculosis Outbreak:
Retrospective Cohort Study in a Low-Incidence Setting Using Sparse Time-Series
Sampling.

Folkvardsen DB(1), Norman A(1)(2), Andersen ÅB(3)(4), Michael Rasmussen E(1),
Jelsbak L(2), Lillebaek T(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Reference Laboratory of Mycobacteriology, Statens Serum
Institut, Copenhagen.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, 
Lyngby.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital,
Rigshospitalet.
(4)Research Unit for Infectious Diseases, Department of Clinical Research,
University of Southern Denmark, Odense.

Since 1992, Denmark has documented the largest outbreak of tuberculosis in
Scandinavia ascribed to a single genotype, termed C2/1112-15. As of spring 2017, 
the International Reference Laboratory of Mycobacteriology in Copenhagen has
collected and identified isolates from more than a thousand cases belonging to
this outbreak via routine mycobacterial interspersed repetitive units-variable
number of tandem repeats typing. Here, we present a retrospective analysis of the
C2/1112-15 dataset, based on whole-genome data from a sparse time series
consisting of 5 randomly selected isolates from 23 years of sampling. Even if
these data are derived from only 12% of the collected isolates, we have been able
to extract important key information, such as mutation rate and conserved
single-nucleotide polymorphisms to identify discrete transmission chains, as well
as the possible historical origins of the outbreak.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jix298 
PMID: 28666374  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

