
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2017 Dec;105(Pt 1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.06.030.
Epub 2017 Jun 30.

Characterization of an exopolysaccharide with distinct rheological properties
from Paenibacillus edaphicus NUST16.

Li J(1), Xu H(1), Chen X(1), Xu L(1), Cheng R(1), Zhang J(1), Wang S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Metabolism, Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
200 Xiaolingwei Street, Nanjing 210094, China.
(2)Center for Molecular Metabolism, Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
200 Xiaolingwei Street, Nanjing 210094, China. Electronic address:
bioeng@njust.edu.cn.

Microbial exopolysaccharides (EPSs) have been commercially used for decades owing
to their distinct rheological properties. New EPSs with special traits are being 
explored continuously. The strain Paenibacillus edaphicus NUST16 was isolated in 
this study. NUST16 produces 12.5g/L EPS after 72h cultivation in shaker flask.
Moreover, the purified EPS, POS16, has the molecular weight of 1.2×107Da and
consists of five types of glycosides, namely, D-Glc, D-Man, L-Fuc, D-GlcA, and
D-Gal. Methylation, NMR, and FT-IR results indicate that three glucosides and
three mannosides make up the main chain of POS16 via 1→3 linkage. The
Gal(1→3)Fuc(1→3)Fuc(1→ and GlcA(1→ branches link to the C6 positions of two
mannosides, respectively. The other mannoside is partially derivatized by the
acetyl group at C2 position. Rheological analysis shows that POS16 has typical
shear-thinning pattern which fits the Hershel-Bulkley model well. More
importantly, POS16 shows ideal saline tolerance as the apparent viscosity keeps
high in solutions containing 100g/L salts, such as NaCl, KCl, MgCl2, and CaCl2.
Furthermore, POS16 behaves more viscous than xanthan gum and sodium
carboxymethylcellulose in divalent ion solutions. The results suggest that POS16 
is a potential rheological modulator that can be used in operations where high
concentrations of salts exist.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.06.030 
PMID: 28673840  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

