
1. Biochemistry. 2017 Jul 18;56(28):3519-3522. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00472.
Epub 2017 Jul 7.

Methylcobalamin-Dependent Radical SAM C-Methyltransferase Fom3 Recognizes
Cytidylyl-2-hydroxyethylphosphonate and Catalyzes the Nonstereoselective
C-Methylation in Fosfomycin Biosynthesis.

Sato S(1), Kudo F(1), Kim SY(2), Kuzuyama T(2), Eguchi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Tokyo Institute of Technology , 2-12-1 O-okayama,
Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8551, Japan.
(2)Biotechnology Research Center, The University of Tokyo , 1-1-1 Yayoi,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

A methylcobalamin (MeCbl)-dependent radical S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM)
methyltransferase Fom3 was found to catalyze the C-methylation of
cytidylyl-2-hydroxyethylphosphonate (HEP-CMP) to give
cytidylyl-2-hydroxypropylphosphonate (HPP-CMP), although it was originally
proposed to catalyze the C-methylation of 2-hydroxyethylphosphonate to give
2-hydroxypropylphosphonate in the biosynthesis of a unique C-P bond containing
antibiotic fosfomycin in Streptomyces. Unexpectedly, the Fom3 reaction product
from HEP-CMP was almost a 1:1 diastereomeric mixture of HPP-CMP, indicating that 
the C-methylation is not stereoselective. Presumably, only the CMP moiety of
HEP-CMP is critical for substrate recognition; on the other hand, the enzyme does
not fix the 2-hydroxy group of the substrate and either of the prochiral hydrogen
atoms at the C2 position can be abstracted by the 5'-deoxyadenosyl radical
generated from SAM to form the substrate radical intermediates, which react with 
MeCbl to afford the corresponding products. This strict substrate recognition
mechanism with no stereoselectivity of a MeCbl-dependent radical SAM
methyltransferase is remarkable in natural product biosynthetic chemistry,
because such a hidden clue for selective substrate recognition is likely to be
found in the other biosynthetic pathways.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00472 
PMID: 28678474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

