
1. Sci Total Environ. 2017 Dec 15;605-606:683-691. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.06.203. Epub 2017 Jul 1.

Contrasting habitats but comparable microbial decomposition in the benthic and
hyporheic zone.

Risse-Buhl U(1), Mendoza-Lera C(2), Norf H(3), Pérez J(4), Pozo J(4), Schlief
J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Freshwater Conservation, Brandenburg University of Technology
Cottbus-Senftenberg, Seestraße 45, 15526 Bad Saarow, Germany; Department River
Ecology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ, Brückstraße 3a, 
39114 Magdeburg, Germany. Electronic address: ute.risse-buhl@ufz.de.
(2)Department of Freshwater Conservation, Brandenburg University of Technology
Cottbus-Senftenberg, Seestraße 45, 15526 Bad Saarow, Germany.
(3)Department River Ecology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH -
UFZ, Brückstraße 3a, 39114 Magdeburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Plant Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Science and Technology,
University of the Basque Country, Apdo. 644, Bilbao 48080, Spain.

Input of allochthonous leaf litter is the main carbon source for heterotrophic
metabolism in low-order forested streams. A major part of this leaf litter is
accumulated at benthic retention structures or buried in the hyporheic zone. As a
result of hyporheic sediment characteristics, hyporheic physicochemistry differs 
from that of the benthic zone selecting the microbial community. The present
study aimed at understanding the influence of the hydrological and physiochemical
differences between the benthic and hyporheic zone on microbial leaf litter
decomposition and on the structure and function of the associated microbial
community. Leached leaves of Alnus glutinosa were exposed for 62days in 250-μm
mesh bags in the benthic zone and buried in the hyporheic zone at a depth of
2-3cm. Decomposition rates were comparable for both zones. In contrast,
respiration, bacterial abundance, ergosterol content, fungal spore production and
richness of fungal morphotypes were lower associated with hyporheic than with
benthic leaves. Microbial community structure displayed zone-dependent temporal
dynamics. Thus, the microbial community carried out leaf litter decomposition
independently of its structure. These results suggest that carbon processing is
not necessarily impaired by environmental constraints because the community
structure may compensate those constraints (i.e. functional redundancy).

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.06.203 
PMID: 28675878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

