
1. Cytokine. 2017 Dec;100:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2017.06.017. Epub 2017 Jul 4.

IL-33 and the intestine: The good, the bad, and the inflammatory.

Hodzic Z(1), Schill EM(2), Bolock AM(2), Good M(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO, USA. Electronic address: mistygood@wustl.edu.

Interleukin-33 (IL-33) is a member of the IL-1 cytokine family that has been
widely studied since its discovery in 2005 for its dichotomous functions in
homeostasis and inflammation. IL-33, along with its receptor suppression of
tumorigenicity 2 (ST2), has been shown to modulate both the innate and adaptive
immune system. Originally, the IL-33/ST2 signaling axis was studied in the
context of inducing type 2 immune responses with the expression of ST2 by T
helper 2 (TH2) cells. However, the role of IL-33 is not limited to TH2 responses.
Rather, IL-33 is a potent activator of TH1 cells, group 2 innate lymphoid cells
(ILC2s), regulatory T (Treg) cells, and CD8+ T cells. The intestine is uniquely
important in this discussion, as the intestinal epithelium is distinctively
positioned to interact with both pathogens and the immune cells housed in the
mucosa. In the intestine, IL-33 is expressed by the pericryptal fibroblasts and
its expression is increased particularly in disease states. Moreover, IL-33/ST2
signaling aberrancy is implicated in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD). Accordingly, for this review, we will focus on the role of IL-33
in the regulation of intestinal immunity, involvement in intestinal disease, and 
implication in potential therapeutics.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2017.06.017 
PMCID: PMC5650929
PMID: 28687373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

