
1. Rev Med Suisse. 2016 Oct 12;12(534):1703-1707.

[Clostridium septicum aortitis : case report and update on infectious aortitis].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Rouiller S(1), Abbet P(2), Daniel D(3), Nicolas T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Service des urgences, Centre Hospitalier du Valais Romand-Sion/Hôpital du
Valais, Avenue du Grand-Champsec 80, 1951 Sion.
(2)Département de médecine interne, Centre Hospitalier du Valais
Romand-Martigny/Hôpital du Valais, Avenue de la Fusion 27, 1920 Martigny.
(3)Département de chirurgie, Centre Hospitalier du Valais Romand-Sion/Hôpital du 
Valais, Avenue du Grand-Champsec 80, 1951 Sion.
(4)Service des maladies infectieuses, Institut Central des Hôpitaux/Hôpital du
Valais, Av. du Grand-Champsec 86, 1951 Sion.

A case of Clostridium septicum aortitis is reported. The patient did not present 
any colon tumor. She died in spite of surgery and i.v. antibiotics. To date C.
septicum has been reported only in about 40 cases of infectious aortitis, a
disease with unspecific clinical presentation and a high mortality rate. A high
index of suspicion is warranted for an early diagnosis which can be made mainly
by blood cultures and contrast-enhanced CT-scan. Only starting without delay a
treatment that combines antibiotics with surgery can improve a prognosis that
remains nevertheless globally bad.

Publisher: Un cas d’aortite infectieuse due à Clostridium septicum est décrit,
non associé à une tumeur du côlon et dont l’issue fut fatale malgré un traitement
combinant la chirurgie et une antibiothérapie. A ce jour, C. septicum n’a été
isolé que dans une quarantaine de cas d’aortites infectieuses, une maladie dont
la présentation clinique est aspécifique et dont le taux de mortalité est élevé. 
Un haut indice de suspicion est requis afin d’établir un diagnostic précoce qui
repose essentiellement sur les hémocultures et la tomodensitométrie avec
injection de produit de contraste. Seule une prise en charge rapide, associant
une antibiothérapie adaptée et la chirurgie, est susceptible d’améliorer un
pronostic qui reste globalement sombre.

PMID: 28686395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Les auteurs n’ont déclaré aucun conflit
d’intérêts en relation avec cet article.

