
1. Int J Low Extrem Wounds. 2017 Mar;16(1):6-13. doi: 10.1177/1534734617696728. Epub
2017 Mar 8.

Expression and Influence of Matrix Metalloproteinase-9/Tissue Inhibitor of
Metalloproteinase-1 and Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor in Diabetic Foot
Ulcers.

Li G(1), Zou X(2), Zhu Y(2), Zhang J(2), Zhou L(2), Wang D(2), Li B(2), Chen
Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Wuhan Union Hospital of Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(2)2 Liyuan Hospital of Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of Science 
and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

A high matrix metalloproteinase-9/tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1
(MMP9/TIMP1) ratio is associated with poor ulcer healing, yet how the ratio of
MMP9/TIMP1 changes in diabetic foot ulcers (DFUs) with infection and how these
changes may affect wound healing remain unclear. Therefore, the objective of this
investigation was to explore relationships among the MMP9/TIMP1 ratio, infection,
and DFUs. After being informed of the details of this study, 32 patients signed
consent forms. Skin biopsies were performed for all patients. Wound tissues were 
obtained from all patients with wounds, and healthy skin samples were collected
from patients without wounds during orthopedic surgery. Microbial cultures were
obtained using the samples from diabetic patients with wounds. All patients were 
divided into 4 groups according to colony-forming units (CFUs) per gram of tissue
(>1 × 106 or <1 × 106): group A (diabetic wounds with high quantities of
bacteria), group B (diabetic wounds with low quantities of bacteria), group C
(diabetic patients without wounds), and group D (nondiabetic patients with
wounds). In addition, the biopsies were evaluated by both reverse
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting to
assess the levels of MMP9, TIMP1, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). 
The results show that for both mRNA and protein, expression of MMP9 (fold change 
1.14 ± 0.12 vs 0.60 ± 0.08 vs 0.39±0.09 vs 0.13 ± 0.06, P < .01) decreased,
whereas that of TIMP1 (1.01 ± 0.09 vs 2.86 ± 0.85 vs 4.88 ± 0.83 vs 7.29 ± 1.55, 
P < .01) and VEGF (1.01 ± 0.22 vs 3.55 ± 0.97 vs 5.72 ± 0.55 vs 6.92 ± 1.55, P < 
.01) increased from group A to group D. These results suggest that an increase in
the MMP9/TIMP1 ratio in infected DFUs may induce a decrease in VEGF expression.

DOI: 10.1177/1534734617696728 
PMID: 28682675  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

