
1. Hua Xi Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2017 Apr 1;35(2):192-197. doi:
10.7518/hxkq.2017.02.016.

[Effects of oral interventions on carotid artery in rats with chronic
periodontitis for the detection of Porphyromonas gingivalis and the expression of
C-reactive protein].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Xiuyun R(1), Chong W(1), Xin L(1), Hao L(1), Qianhui M(1), Mu L(1), Xuexue S(1), 
Jinhua G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Periodontology, School of Stomatology, Shanxi Medical University,
Taiyuan 030001, China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to establish a SD rat model of chronic periodontitis 
(CP) merged with hyperlipidemia (HL), perform periodontal treatment, detect the
expression of partial C-reactive protein (CRP) and Porphyromonas gingivalis (P.
gingivalis) in the rat carotid artery, and explore the relationship between
periodontitis and atherosclerosis.
METHODS: SD rats were randomly divided into three groups: control group (A), HL
group (B), and CP+HL group (C). Group C rats were divided into natural process
group (C1), scaling and root planning group (C2), and tooth extraction group
(C3). Group C2 rats were randomly divided into C2-1 (scaling and root planning
group) and C2-2 (scaling and root planning+minocyline+systemic antibiotics
group). Group C3 rats were randomly divided into C3-1 (tooth extraction group)
and C3-2 (tooth extraction+systemic antibiotic group). One rat from group B was
randomly selected and sacrificed after 15 weeks. Subsequently, the carotid
vascular tissue was collected for oil red O staining. Modeling was successful
when foam cell formation was observed. Periodontal treatments were conducted
twice, and euthanasia was performed after the experiment. Moreover,
double-carotid artery bifurcation was carried out to detect the expression of CRP
and P. gingivalis. Immunohistochemical and 16sRNA semiquantitative methods were
used to detect the CRP expression and the relative contents of P. gingivalis,
respectively.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical results showed that the CRP-positive expression in
groups B and C was significantly higher than that in group A (P<0.05). The
CRP-positive expression in other group C rats were significantly lower than that 
in group C1 (P<0.05). The CRP-positive expression in group C2-2 was the lowest
among the groups (P<0.05). The relative quantity of P. gingivalis in group C1 was
the highest and significantly higher than that in groups A and B (P<0.05). The
relative quantities of P. gingivalis in groups C2-1, C2-2, C3-1, and C3-2 were
significantly lower than that in group C1 (P<0.05), and the quantity in group
C3-2 was the lowest (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Rats with CP associated with HL will increase the CRP expression and
oral bacteria quantity on carotid artery, and lesions will gradually aggravate.
Interventions, such as periodontal basic treatment and tooth extraction, could
improve carotid artery lesions. The basic treatment with local and systemic
anti-inflammatory drugs exerts the most satisfactory effect on local CRP
expression. Tooth extraction with antibiotics is an effective method on reducing 
oral bacteria in carotid artery. Periodontal basic treatment associated with
local and systemic antiflammatory drugs can obviously improve the effect. .

Publisher: 目的
建立慢性牙周炎（CP）合并高脂血症（HL）的SD大鼠模型并对其进行口腔干预，检测大鼠颈动脉局部C-反应蛋白（CRP）的表达情况及牙龈卟啉单胞菌的检出量，探讨牙周炎
与动脉粥样硬化的相关性。方法
SD大鼠随机分为3组，A组为对照组，B组为HL组，C组为CP+HL组。C组分为C1组（不治疗组），C2组（基础治疗组），C3组（拔牙组）；C2组又分为C2-1组（
单纯牙周基础治疗组），C2-2组（牙周基础治疗+米诺环素+抗生素组）；C3组又分为C3-1组（拔除患牙组），C3-2组（拔除患牙+抗生素组）。建模开始15周后随机
处死B组大鼠1只，取颈动脉分叉血管组织进行油红O染色，观察到泡沫细胞形成则HL建模成功。建模成功后进行2次口腔干预，干预结束后5周处死所有大鼠，取双侧颈动脉血管分
叉处组织，分别采用免疫组织化学法检测CRP相对含量，16sRNA半定量法检测样本中的牙龈卟啉单胞菌的相对含量。结果
免疫组织化学结果显示，B、C组CRP阳性表达明显高于A组（P<0.05），与C1组相比，C组各干预组的CRP表达均降低（P<0.05），其中辅助抗生素组较不加抗生
素组阳性表达更低（P<0.05），C2-2组在各干预组中阳性表达最低。牙龈卟啉单胞菌检测结果显示，C1组检出量最高，明显高于A、B组（P<0.05）；C组各干预组
的检出量均较C1组低（P<0.05），C3-2组最低（P<0.05）。结论
伴HL的牙周炎大鼠不加干预任其发展，颈动脉血管中CRP的表达及牙龈卟啉单胞菌检出量都明显增加，血管病变逐渐加重。牙周基础治疗和拔牙均可有效降低颈动脉血管中CRP的
表达及致病菌含量，其中牙周基础治疗对CRP表达的降低作用更明显，拔牙对降低牙周致病菌的作用更有效；基础治疗或拔牙时若辅以局部及全身抗炎药物，均可以有效提高CRP和
牙周致病菌的降低作用。.
DOI: 10.7518/hxkq.2017.02.016 
PMCID: PMC7029988
PMID: 28682552  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

