
1. Syst Appl Microbiol. 2017 Sep;40(6):345-351. doi: 10.1016/j.syapm.2017.05.005.
Epub 2017 Jun 7.

Caballeronia mineralivorans sp. nov., isolated from oak-Scleroderma citrinum
mycorrhizosphere.

Uroz S(1), Oger P(2).

Author information: 
(1)INRA-Université de Lorraine, UMR 1136 "Interactions Arbres-Microorganismes",
F-54280 Champenoux, France. Electronic address: stephane.uroz@inra.fr.
(2)Université de Lyon, INSA de Lyon, CNRS UMR 5240, Lyon, France.

Erratum in
    Syst Appl Microbiol. 2019 May;42(3):423-424.

Six bacterial strains were isolated from the oak-Scleroderma citrinum
ectomycorrhizosphere in acidic and nutrient-poor forest soil for their high
efficacy to weather minerals. Four of the six isolates, PML1(12)T and PML1(4),
PML1(14) and PML1(16), were further characterized extensively. They were Gram
negative, obligate aerobic, motile, non spore forming and rod-shaped. The major
fatty acids of strain PML1(12)T were cyclo-C17:0, cyclo-C19:0-ω8c, C16:0 and
C18:1-ω7c. The GC content of the DNA was 60.8%. The 16S rRNA and GyrB analyses
showed that the four PML strains formed a distinct phylogenetic lineage within
the genus Caballeronia, most closely related to Caballeronia udeis. This result
was confirmed by whole-genome phylogeny analyses done on strain PML1(12)T. The
results of digital DNA-DNA relatedness further supported the separation of the
new isolates from closely related species. Morphological, chemotaxonomic
properties were also consistent with the description of the genus Caballeronia.
It is therefore proposed that strains PML1(12)T and PML1(4), PML1(14) and
PML1(16) be recognized as a novel species, for which the name Caballeronia
mineralivorans sp. nov. is proposed. The type strain is PML1(12)T (=DSM 104028
and LMG 2991).

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.syapm.2017.05.005 
PMID: 28688535  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

