
1. Immun Inflamm Dis. 2017 Dec;5(4):461-468. doi: 10.1002/iid3.178. Epub 2017 Jul 6.

KIR2DS5 allotypes that recognize the C2 epitope of HLA-C are common among
Africans and absent from Europeans.

Blokhuis JH(1), Hilton HG(1), Guethlein LA(1), Norman PJ(1), Nemat-Gorgani N(1), 
Nakimuli A(2), Chazara O(3), Moffett A(3), Parham P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Structural Biology and Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Makerere University, Kampala,
Uganda.
(3)Department of Pathology and Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: KIR2DS5 is an activating human NK cell receptor of lineage III KIR.
These include both inhibitory KIR2DL1, 2 and 3 and activating KIR2DS1 that
recognize either the C1 or C2 epitope of HLA-C. In Europeans KIR2DS5 is
essentially monomorphic, with KIR2DS5*002 being predominant. Pioneering
investigations showed that KIR2DS5*002 has activating potential, but cannot
recognize HLA-A, -B, or -C. Subsequent studies have shown that KIR2DS5 is highly 
polymorphic in Africans, and that KIR2DS5*006 protects pregnant Ugandan women
from preeclampsia. Because inhibitory C2-specific KIR2DL1 correlates with
preeclampsia, whereas activating C2-specific KIR2DS1 protects, this association
pointed to KIR2DS5*006 being an activating C2-specific receptor. To test this
hypothesis we made KIR-Fc fusion proteins from all ten KIR2DS5 allotypes and
tested their binding to a representative set of HLA-A, -B and -C allotypes.
RESULTS: Six African-specific KIR2DS5 bound to C2+ HLA-C but not to other HLA
class I. Their avidity for C2 is ∼20% that of C2-specific KIR2DL1 and ∼40% that
of C2-specific KIR2DS1. Among the African C2 receptors is KIR2DS5*006, which
protected a cohort of pregnant Ugandans from pre-eclampsia. Three African KIR2DS5
allotypes and KIR2DS5*002, bound no HLA-A, -B or -C. As a group the C2-binding
KIR2DS5 allotypes protect against pre-eclampsia compared to the non-binding
KIR2DS5 allotypes. Natural substitutions that contribute to loss or reduction of 
C2 receptor function are at positions 127, 158, and 176 in the D2 domain.
CONCLUSIONS: KIR2DS5*005 has the KIR2DS5 consensus sequence, is the only allele
found at both centromeric and telomeric locations of KIR2DS5, and is likely the
common ancestor of all KIR2DS5 alleles. That KIR2DS5*005 has C2 receptor
activity, points to KIR2DS5*002, and other allotypes lacking C2 receptor
function, being products of attenuation, a characteristic feature of most KIR B
haplotype genes. Alleles encoding attenuated and active KIR2DS5 are present in
both centromeric and telomeric locations.

© 2017 The Authors. Immunity, Inflammation and Disease Published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/iid3.178 
PMCID: PMC5691316
PMID: 28685972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

