
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2017 Aug 24;61(9). pii: e01093-17. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01093-17. Print 2017 Sep.

Characterization of the Complete Nucleotide Sequences of IncA/C2 Plasmids
Carrying In809-Like Integrons from Enterobacteriaceae Isolates of Wildlife
Origin.

Papagiannitsis CC(1)(2)(3), Kutilova I(4)(5), Medvecky M(6), Hrabak J(4)(2)(3),
Dolejska M(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Wildlife Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Hygiene and
Ecology, University of Veterinary and Pharmaceutical Sciences Brno, Brno, Czech
Republic c.papagiannitsis@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital in
Plzen, Charles University, Plzen, Czech Republic.
(3)Biomedical Center, Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Plzen, Czech
Republic.
(4)Department of Biology and Wildlife Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Hygiene and
Ecology, University of Veterinary and Pharmaceutical Sciences Brno, Brno, Czech
Republic.
(5)CEITEC VFU, University of Veterinary and Pharmaceutical Sciences Brno, Brno,
Czech Republic.
(6)Veterinary Research Institute, Brno, Czech Republic.

A total of 18 Enterobacteriaceae (17 from gulls and 1 from a clinical sample)
collected from Australia, carrying IncA/C plasmids with the IMP-encoding
In809-like integrons, were studied. Seven plasmids, being representatives of
different origins, plasmid sizes, replicon combinations, and resistance genes,
were completely sequenced. Plasmid pEc158, identified in a clinical Escherichia
coli ST752 isolate, showed extensive similarity to type 2 IncA/C2 plasmids.
pEc158 carried none of the blaCMY-2-like region or ARI-B and ARI-A regions, while
it contained a hybrid transposon structure. The six remaining plasmids, which
were of wildlife origin, were highly similar to each other and probably were
fusion derivatives of type 1 and type 2 A/C2 plasmids. The latter plasmids
contained an ARI-B region and hybrid transposon structures. In all plasmids,
hybrid transposon structures containing In809-like integrons were inserted 3,434 
bp downstream of the rhs2 start codon. In all cases, the one outermost 38-bp
inverted repeat (IR) of the transposon was associated with the Tn1696 tnp module,
while the other outermost 38-bp IR of the transposon was associated with either a
Tn6317-like module or a Tn21 mer module. However, the internal structure of the
transposon and the resistance genes were different in each plasmid. These
findings indicated that, for the specific periods of time and settings, different
IncA/C2 plasmid types carrying In809-like elements circulated among isolates of
wildlife and clinical origins. Additionally, they provided the basis for
speculations regarding the reshuffling of IncA/C2 plasmids with In809-like
integrons and confirmed the rapid evolution of IncA/C2 plasmid lineages.

Copyright Â© 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01093-17 
PMCID: PMC5571335
PMID: 28696228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

