
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2017 Sep;123(3):748-758. doi: 10.1111/jam.13535.

Arsenic-resistant and plant growth-promoting Firmicutes and γ-Proteobacteria
species from industrially polluted irrigation water and corresponding cropland.

Qamar N(1), Rehman Y(2), Hasnain S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of the Punjab,
Lahore, Pakistan.

AIMS: The aim of the study was to explore irrigation water polluted with
industrial waste and corresponding cropland to screen bacteria for As
detoxification and plant growth promotion.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Plant growth-promoting (PGP) As-resistant cropland bacteria 
were isolated from contaminated irrigation water and corresponding agricultural
soil. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the isolates belonged to two distinct
bacterial lineages; Firmicutes and γ-Proteobacteria. Maximum As(V) resistance was
exhibited by Klebsiella pneumoniae T22 and Klebsiella oxytoca N53 (550 mmol l-1
), whereas maximum resistance against As(III) was exhibited by K. oxytoca N53
(200 mmol l-1 ). Maximum As(V) reduction was shown by K. pneumoniae T22
(6·7 mmol l-1 ), whereas maximum As(III) oxidation was exhibited by Bacillus
subtilis T23 (4·8 mmol l-1 ). As resistance genes arsB and ACR3 were detected in 
many of the isolates through polymerase chain reaction. Many of these isolates
exhibited PGP traits such as hydrogen cyanide and auxin production as well as
phosphate solubilization. The bacterial strains were able to enhance Triticum
aestivum growth both in the absence and presence of As, and statistically
significant increase in shoot and root lengths was observed especially in case of
Acinetobacter lwoffii T24 and Citrobacter freundii N52-treated plants.
CONCLUSIONS: Cropland bacteria have the ability to support plant growth. Bacteria
of croplands irrigated with industrially polluted water develop resistance
against toxicants. These bacteria are helpful for the plant growth in such
contaminated lands.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The bacteria capable of both As
detoxification and plant growth promotion, such as A. lwoffii T24 and C. freundii
N52, are ideal for remediation and reclamation of polluted lands for agriculture 
purposes.

© 2017 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.13535 
PMID: 28708308  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

