
1. Biochemistry. 2017 Aug 8;56(31):4044-4052. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00307. Epub
2017 Jul 26.

Mechanistic Characterization of Escherichia coli l-Aspartate Oxidase from Kinetic
Isotope Effects.

Chow C(1), Hegde S(1), Blanchard JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine , 1300 Morris 
Park Avenue, Bronx, New York 10461, United States.

l-Aspartate oxidase, encoded by the nadB gene, is the first enzyme in the de novo
synthesis of NAD+ in bacteria. This FAD-dependent enzyme catalyzes the oxidation 
of l-aspartate to generate iminoaspartate and reduced flavin. Distinct from most 
amino acid oxidases, it can use either molecular oxygen or fumarate to reoxidize 
the reduced enzyme. Sequence alignments and the three-dimensional crystal
structure have revealed that the overall fold and catalytic residues of NadB
closely resemble those of the succinate dehydrogenase/fumarate reductase family
rather than those of the prototypical d-amino acid oxidases. This suggests that
the enzyme can catalyze amino acid oxidation via typical amino acid oxidase
chemistry, involving the removal of protons from the α-amino group and the
transfer of the hydride from C2, or potentially deprotonation at C3 followed by
transfer of the hydride from C2, similar to chemistry occurring during succinate 
oxidation. We have investigated this potential mechanistic ambiguity using a
combination of primary, solvent, and multiple deuterium kinetic isotope effects
in steady state experiments. Our results indicate that the chemistry is similar
to that of typical amino acid oxidases in which the transfer of the hydride from 
C2 of l-aspartate to FAD is rate-limiting and occurs in a concerted manner with
respect to deprotonation of the α-amine. Together with previous kinetic and
structural data, we propose that NadB has structurally evolved from succinate
dehydrogenase/fumarate reductase-type enzymes to gain the new functionality of
oxidizing amino acids while retaining the ability to reduce fumarate.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00307 
PMCID: PMC5839506
PMID: 28700220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

