
1. Mar Drugs. 2017 Jul 12;15(7). pii: E222. doi: 10.3390/md15070222.

Sponge-Inspired Dibromohemibastadin Prevents and Disrupts Bacterial Biofilms
without Toxicity.

Le Norcy T(1), Niemann H(2), Proksch P(3), Tait K(4), Linossier I(5), Réhel K(6),
Hellio C(7), Faÿ F(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biotechnologie et Chimie Marines, Institut Universitaire
Européen de la Mer, Université de Bretagne-Sud, 56100 Lorient, France.
tiffany.le-norcy@univ-ubs.fr.
(2)Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology and Biotechnology,
Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
hendrik-niemann@web.de.
(3)Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology and Biotechnology,
Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
peter.proksch@hhu.de.
(4)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Plymouth PL1 3DH, UK. KTAIT@pml.ac.uk.
(5)Laboratoire de Biotechnologie et Chimie Marines, Institut Universitaire
Européen de la Mer, Université de Bretagne-Sud, 56100 Lorient, France.
isabelle.linossier@univ-ubs.fr.
(6)Laboratoire de Biotechnologie et Chimie Marines, Institut Universitaire
Européen de la Mer, Université de Bretagne-Sud, 56100 Lorient, France.
karine.rehel@univ-ubs.fr.
(7)Biodimar, LEMAR UMR 6539, Institut Européen de la Mer, Université de Bretagne 
Occidentale, 29200 Brest, France. Claire.hellio@univ-brest.fr.
(8)Laboratoire de Biotechnologie et Chimie Marines, Institut Universitaire
Européen de la Mer, Université de Bretagne-Sud, 56100 Lorient, France.
fabienne.fay@univ-ubs.fr.

Since the banning of several families of compounds in antifouling (AF) coatings, 
the search for environmentally friendly AF compounds has intensified. Natural
sources of AF compounds have been identified in marine organisms and can be used 
to create analogues in laboratory. In a previous study, we identified that
dibromohemibastadin-1 (DBHB) is a promising AF molecule, leading to the
inhibition of the activity of phenoloxidase, an enzyme involved in the attachment
of mussels to surfaces. This paper describes the activity of the DBHB on biofilm 
formation and its detachment and on bacterial adhesion and communication: quorum 
sensing. DBHB has an anti-biofilm activity without affecting adhesion of marine
and terrestrial bacteria at a dose of 10 µM. Moreover, DBHB activity on quorum
sensing (QS) is demonstrated at doses of 8 and 16 µM. The activity of DBHB on QS 
is compared to kojic acid, a quorum sensing inhibitor already described. This
compound is a promising environmentally friendly molecule potentially useful for 
the inhibition of microfouling.

DOI: 10.3390/md15070222 
PMCID: PMC5532664
PMID: 28704947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

