
1. Mol Immunol. 2017 Oct;90:98-105. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2017.06.250. Epub 2017 Jul
11.

CD3/CD28 dynabeads induce expression of tn antigen in human t cells accompanied
by hypermethylation of the cosmc promoter.

Shi C(1), Xu X(1), Yu X(2), Du Z(3), Luan X(1), Liu D(1), Hu T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, PR China.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Linzi District People's Hospital, Linzi, 
PR China.
(3)Department of Pathogen biology Laboratory, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai,
PR China.
(4)Department of Immunology, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, PR China.
Electronic address: hutao0408@sina.com.

Glycosylation is an important protein post-translational modification. In this
process, the intermediate product, Tn antigen, arises from somatic mutations in
core1β3-galactosyltransferase-specific molecular chaperone (Cosmc), which is
required for the formation of active core1β3-galactosyltransferase (T-synthase). 
As a type of tumor-associated carbohydrate antigen, Tn antigen is mainly
expressed in many human tumor cells and is absent in normal cells. Surprisingly, 
it is also expressed in normal activated T cells after in vitro stimulation, but 
the mechanism underlying its expression remains unclear. This study demonstrated 
that Tn antigen was expressed in activated T cells and that the percentage of
positive (Tn+) cells increased and subsequently decreased within 72h after
stimulation with CD3/CD28 Dynabeads, with peak expression occurring at 48h.
During activation, interleukin-4 (IL-4) expression in the T-cell supernatant
consistently increased with Tn+ cells, and was inversely correlated with serum
interferon gamma (IFN-γ) levels. Compared with unactivated (without CD3/CD28
Dynabead stimulation) T cells, the level of T-synthase transcription in activated
T cells did not significantly change, whereas T-synthase activity and Cosmc
transcription significantly decreased, accompanied by a further increase in
methylation of the Cosmc promoter. The results also showed that Cosmc
transcription and translation decreased and then increased, and that Cosmc
promoter methylation was a dynamic process during T cell activation. These data
suggest that hypermethylation of the Cosmc promoter may induce the expression of 
Tn antigen in activated T cells.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2017.06.250 
PMID: 28708980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

