
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Aug 1;114(31):8348-8353. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1705882114. Epub 2017 Jul 17.

Structural determination of lipid antigens captured at the CD1d-T-cell receptor
interface.

Brennan PJ(1), Cheng TY(2), Pellicci DG(3)(4), Watts GFM(2), Veerapen N(5), Young
DC(2), Rossjohn J(6)(7)(8), Besra GS(5), Godfrey DI(3)(4), Brenner MB(1), Moody
DB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115;
pbrennan3@bwh.harvard.edu mbrenner@research.bwh.harvard.edu
bmoody@bwh.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for
Infection and Immunity, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia.
(4)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular
Imaging, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia.
(5)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United
Kingdom.
(6)Infection and Immunity Program, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800,
Australia.
(7)Institute of Infection and Immunity, Cardiff University School of Medicine,
Cardiff CF14 4XN, United Kingdom.
(8)Australian Research Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular Imaging, Monash
University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia.

Glycolipid antigens recognized by αβ T-cell receptors (TCRs) drive the activation
of invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells, a specialized subset of innate T
lymphocytes. Glycolipids with α-linked anomeric carbohydrates have been
identified as potent microbial lipid antigens for iNKT cells, and their unusual
α-anomeric linkage has been thought to define a "foreign" lipid antigen motif.
However, mammals use endogenous lipids to select iNKT cells, and there is
compelling evidence for iNKT cell responses in various types of sterile
inflammation. The nature of endogenous or environmental lipid antigens
encountered by iNKT cells is not well defined. Here, we sought to identify lipid 
antigens in cow's milk, a prominent part of the human diet. We developed a method
to directly capture lipid antigens within CD1d-lipid-TCR complexes, while
excluding CD1d bound to nonantigenic lipids, followed by direct biochemical
analysis of the lipid antigens trapped at the TCR-CD1d interface. The specific
antigens captured by this "TCR trap" method were identified as α-linked
monohexosylceramides by mass spectrometry fragmentation patterns that
distinguished α- from β-anomeric monohexosylceramides. These data provide direct 
biochemical evidence for α-linked lipid antigens from a common dietary source.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1705882114 
PMCID: PMC5547638
PMID: 28716901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

