
1. BMC Plant Biol. 2017 Jul 17;17(1):126. doi: 10.1186/s12870-017-1073-8.

Characterization of four rice UEV1 genes required for Lys63-linked
polyubiquitination and distinct functions.

Wang Q(1), Zang Y(1), Zhou X(1), Xiao W(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University, Beijing, 100048, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University, Beijing, 100048, China.
wei.xiao@usask.ca.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, SK, S7N 5E5, Canada. wei.xiao@usask.ca.

BACKGROUND: The error-free branch of the DNA-damage tolerance (DDT) pathway is
orchestrated by Lys63-linked polyubiquitination of proliferating cell nuclear
antigen (PCNA), and this polyubiquitination is mediated by a Ubc13-Uev complex in
yeast. We have previously cloned OsUBC13 from rice, whose product functions as an
E2 to promote Lys63-linked ubiquitin chain assembly in the presence of yeast or
human Uev.
RESULTS: Here we identify four highly conserved UEV1 genes in rice whose products
are able to form stable heterodimers with OsUbc13 and mediate Lys63-linked
ubiquitin chain assembly. Expression of OsUEV1s is able to rescue the yeast mms2 
mutant from death caused by DNA-damaging agents. Interestingly, OsUev1A contains 
a unique C-terminal tail with a conserved prenylation site not found in the other
three OsUev1s, and this post-translational modification appears to be required
for its unique subcellular distribution and association with the membrane. The
analysis of OsUEV1 expression profiles obtained from the Genevestigator database 
indicates that these genes are differentially regulated.
CONCLUSIONS: We speculate that different OsUev1s play distinct roles by serving
as a regulatory subunit of the Ubc13-Uev1 complex to respond to diverse cellular,
developmental and environmental signals.

DOI: 10.1186/s12870-017-1073-8 
PMCID: PMC5513143
PMID: 28716105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

