
1. Water Res. 2017 Oct 15;123:751-760. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2017.07.033. Epub 2017 
Jul 15.

Spectroscopic descriptors for dynamic changes of soluble microbial products from 
activated sludge at different biomass growth phases under prolonged starvation.

Maqbool T(1), Cho J(1), Hur J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environment and Energy, Sejong University, Seoul, 05006, South
Korea.
(2)Department of Environment and Energy, Sejong University, Seoul, 05006, South
Korea. Electronic address: jinhur@sejong.ac.kr.

In this study, the spectroscopic indices of soluble microbial products (SMP) were
explored using absorption and fluorescence spectroscopy to identify different
distinctive biomass growth phases (i.e., exponential phase, pseudo-endogenous
phase, and endogenous phase) and to describe the microbial activity of activated 
sludge in a batch type bioreactor under prolonged starvation. The optical
descriptors, including UV absorption at 254 nm (UVA254), spectral slope,
absorbance slope index (ASI), biological index (BIX), humification index (HIX),
and the ratio of tryptophan-like to humic-like components (C1/C2), were examined 
to describe the dynamic changes in SMP. These indices were mostly associated with
dissolved organic carbon (DOC) of SMPs and specific oxygen uptake rate (SOUR).
Among those, ASI was the most strongly correlated with the SOUR data for the
pseudo-endogenous and the endogenous periods. Although the three microbial phases
were well discriminated using the spectral slope, BIX, and the C1/C2 ratio, the
C1/C2 ratio can be suggested as the most preferable indicator as it can also
trace the changes of the relative abundance of proteins to humic-like substances 
in SMPs. The suggested spectroscopic descriptors were reasonably explained by the
general trends of decreased large-sized biopolymer fractions (e.g., proteins) and
increased humic substrates (HS) with starvation time, which were detected by size
exclusion chromatography. This study provides a novel insight into the strong
potential of using optical descriptors to easily probe microbial status in
biological treatment systems.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2017.07.033 
PMID: 28732328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

