
1. Nature. 2017 Aug 3;548(7665):117-121. doi: 10.1038/nature23271. Epub 2017 Jul 26.

Complex cellular logic computation using ribocomputing devices.

Green AA(1)(2), Kim J(1)(3), Ma D(2), Silver PA(1)(3), Collins JJ(1)(4)(5), Yin
P(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
(2)Biodesign Center for Molecular Design and Biomimetics, Biodesign Institute and
School of Molecular Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287,
USA.
(3)Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.
(4)Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Department of Biological
Engineering, and Synthetic Biology Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.
(5)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.

Synthetic biology aims to develop engineering-driven approaches to the
programming of cellular functions that could yield transformative technologies.
Synthetic gene circuits that combine DNA, protein, and RNA components have
demonstrated a range of functions such as bistability, oscillation, feedback, and
logic capabilities. However, it remains challenging to scale up these circuits
owing to the limited number of designable, orthogonal, high-performance parts,
the empirical and often tedious composition rules, and the requirements for
substantial resources for encoding and operation. Here, we report a strategy for 
constructing RNA-only nanodevices to evaluate complex logic in living cells. Our 
'ribocomputing' systems are composed of de-novo-designed parts and operate
through predictable and designable base-pairing rules, allowing the effective in 
silico design of computing devices with prescribed configurations and functions
in complex cellular environments. These devices operate at the
post-transcriptional level and use an extended RNA transcript to co-localize all 
circuit sensing, computation, signal transduction, and output elements in the
same self-assembled molecular complex, which reduces diffusion-mediated signal
losses, lowers metabolic cost, and improves circuit reliability. We demonstrate
that ribocomputing devices in Escherichia coli can evaluate two-input logic with 
a dynamic range up to 900-fold and scale them to four-input AND, six-input OR,
and a complex 12-input expression (A1 AND A2 AND NOT A1*) OR (B1 AND B2 AND NOT
B2*) OR (C1 AND C2) OR (D1 AND D2) OR (E1 AND E2). Successful operation of
ribocomputing devices based on programmable RNA interactions suggests that
systems employing the same design principles could be implemented in other host
organisms or in extracellular settings.

DOI: 10.1038/nature23271 
PMCID: PMC6078203
PMID: 28746304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

