
1. PLoS Pathog. 2017 Jul 24;13(7):e1006531. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006531.
eCollection 2017 Jul.

Acquisition of C1 inhibitor by Bordetella pertussis virulence associated gene 8
results in C2 and C4 consumption away from the bacterial surface.

Hovingh ES(1)(2), van den Broek B(1), Kuipers B(2), Pinelli E(2), Rooijakkers
SHM(1), Jongerius I(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Centre for Infectious Disease Control, National institute for Public Health
and the Environment, Bilthoven, The Netherlands.

Whooping cough, or pertussis, is a contagious disease of the respiratory tract
that is re-emerging worldwide despite high vaccination coverage. The causative
agent of this disease is the Gram-negative Bordetella pertussis. Knowledge on
complement evasion strategies of this pathogen is limited. However, this is of
great importance for future vaccine development as it has become apparent that a 
novel pertussis vaccine is needed. Here, we unravel the effect of Virulence
associated gene 8 (Vag8) of B. pertussis on the human complement system at the
molecular level. We show that both recombinant and endogenously secreted Vag8
inhibit complement deposition on the bacterial surface at the level of C4b. We
reveal that Vag8 binding to human C1-inhibitor (C1-inh) interferes with the
binding of C1-inh to C1s, C1r and MASP-2, resulting in the release of active
proteases that subsequently cleave C2 and C4 away from the bacterial surface. We 
demonstrate that the depletion of these complement components in the bacterial
surrounding and subsequent decreased deposition on B. pertussis leads to less
complement-mediated bacterial killing. Vag8 is the first protein described that
specifically prevents C1s, C1r and MASP-2 binding to C1-inh and thereby mediates 
complement consumption away from the bacterial surface. Unravelling the mechanism
of this unique complement evasion strategy of B. pertussis is one of the first
steps towards understanding the interactions between the first line of defense
complement and B. pertussis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006531 
PMCID: PMC5542704
PMID: 28742139  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

