
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2017 Jul 29;18(8). pii: E1648. doi: 10.3390/ijms18081648.

Targeting Apoptotic Activity Against Prostate Cancer Stem Cells.

Jaworska D(1), Szliszka E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine with the
Division of Dentistry in Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia in Katowice,
Jordana 19, 41-808 Zabrze, Poland. djaworska@sum.edu.pl.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine with the
Division of Dentistry in Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia in Katowice,
Jordana 19, 41-808 Zabrze, Poland. eszliszka@sum.edu.pl.

Numerous data suggest that an increase of cancer stem cells (CSCs) in tumor mass 
can be the reason for failure of conventional therapies because of their
resistance. CD44+/CD24- cells are a putative cancer stem cells subpopulation in
prostate cancer. TRAIL (tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand) 
is an activator of apoptosis in tumor cells. However, some tumors are
TRAIL-resistant. Cancer cells can be re-sensitized to TRAIL induced apoptosis by 
a combination of TRAIL and taxanes. The aim of this work was to analyze the
enhancement of the anticancer effect of TRAIL by paclitaxel, cabazitaxel and
docetaxel in the whole population of PC3 and DU145 prostate cancer cells, but
also in CD44+/CD24- prostate cancer stem cells. We examined the apoptotic effect 
of TRAIL and taxanes using flow cytometry and Annexin-V-PE staining. The
co-treatment with taxanes and TRAIL enhanced significantly the apoptosis in
CD44+/CD24- cells only in PC3 cell line but not in DU145 cells. We discovered
also that taxanes can increase the expression of death receptor TRAIL-R2 in PC3
prostate cancer cells. The results of our study show that treatment with
paclitaxel, cabazitaxel and docetaxel is able to enhance the apoptosis induced by
TRAIL even in prostate cancer stem cells.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms18081648 
PMCID: PMC5578038
PMID: 28758908  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

