
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2017 Sep 15;12(9):2362-2370. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.7b00359. Epub
2017 Aug 16.

Streptomyces albus: A New Cell Factory for Non-Canonical Amino Acids
Incorporation into Ribosomally Synthesized Natural Products.

Lopatniuk M(1), Myronovskyi M(1), Luzhetskyy A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Saarland University , 66123
Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research , Saarland Campus, Building
C2.3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.

The incorporation of noncanonical amino acids (ncAAs) with different side chains 
into a peptide is a promising technique for changing the functional properties of
that peptide. Of particular interest is the incorporation of ncAAs into
peptide-derived natural products to optimize their biophysical properties for
medical and industrial applications. Here, we present the first instance of ncAA 
incorporation into the natural product cinnamycin in streptomycetes using the
orthogonal pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase/tRNAPyl pair from Methanosarcina barkeri.
This approach allows site-specific incorporation of ncAAs via the read-through of
a stop codon by the suppressor tRNAPyl, which can carry different pyrrolysine
analogues. Five new deoxycinnamycin derivatives were obtained with three distinct
pyrrolysine analogues incorporated into diverse positions of the antibiotic. The 
combination of partial hydrolysis and MS/MS fragmentation analysis was used to
verify the exact position of the incorporation events. The introduction of ncAAs 
into different positions of the peptide had opposite effects on the peptide's
biological activity.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.7b00359 
PMID: 28758722  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

