
1. Phytopathology. 2017 Dec;107(12):1522-1531. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-02-17-0040-R. Epub
2017 Oct 2.

Disease Resistance to Multiple Fungal and Oomycete Pathogens Evaluated Using a
Recombinant Inbred Line Population in Pepper.

Naegele RP(1), Granke LL(1), Fry J(1), Hill TA(1), Ashrafi H(1), Van Deynze A(1),
Hausbeck MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)First author: Research Horticulturalist, United States Department of
Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service Crop Diseases, Pests and Genetics
Research Unit, Parlier, CA 93720; second author: Associate Research Scientist,
Dow Agrosciences, Indianapolis, IN 46268; third author: Former Graduate Research 
Assistant, Department of Plant, Soil and Microbial Sciences, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, MI 48824; fourth author: Senior Research Associate,
Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis 95616; fifth
author: Assistant Professor, North Carolina State University, Raleigh 27695-7550;
sixth author: Director of Research, Seed Biotechnology Center, University of
California, Davis; and seventh author: Professor, Department of Plant, Soil, and 
Microbial Sciences, Michigan State University, East Lansing 48824.

Incorporating disease resistance into cultivars is a primary focus of modern
breeding programs. Resistance to pathogens is often introgressed from landrace or
wild individuals with poor fruit quality into commercial-quality cultivars. Sites
of multiple disease resistance (MDR) are regions or "hot spots" of the genome
with closely linked genes for resistance to different pathogens that could enable
rapid incorporation of resistance. An F2-derived F6 recombinant inbred line
population from a cross between 'Criollo de Morelos 334' (CMM334) and 'Early
Jalapeno' was evaluated in inoculated fruit studies for susceptibility to
oomycete and fungal pathogens: Phytophthora capsici, P. nicotianae, Botrytis
cinerea, Fusarium oxysporum, F. solani, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, Alternaria
spp., Rhizopus oryzae, R. stolonifer, and Colletotrichum acutatum. All isolates
evaluated were virulent on pepper. Significant differences in disease
susceptibility were identified among lines for each of the pathogens evaluated.
P. capsici was the most virulent pathogen, while R. oryzae and one Sclerotinia
isolate were the least virulent. Quantitative trait loci associated with
resistance were identified for Alternaria spp. and S. sclerotiorum. Positive
correlations in disease incidence were detected between Alternaria spp. and F.
oxysporum, F. solani, and C. acutatum, as well as between C. acutatum and
Botrytis spp., F. oxysporum, F. solani, and P. capsici. No sites of MDR were
identified for pathogens tested; however, positive correlations in disease
incidence were detected among pathogens suggesting there may be genetic linkage
among resistance genes in CM334 and Early Jalapeno.

DOI: 10.1094/PHYTO-02-17-0040-R 
PMID: 28762287  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

