
1. Genes Cells. 2017 Oct;22(10):918-928. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12519. Epub 2017 Aug 4.

Artificial acceleration of mammalian cell reprogramming by bacterial proteins.

Ikeda T(1), Uchiyama I(2), Iwasaki M(1), Sasaki T(3), Nakagawa M(1), Okita K(1), 
Masui S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science Frontiers, Center for iPS Cell Research and
Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 
606-8507, Japan.
(2)National Institute for Basic Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences,
Nishigonaka 38, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8585, Japan.
(3)Honeybee Science Research Center, Research Institute, Tamagawa University,
6-1-1 Tamagawagakuen, Machida, Tokyo, 194-8610, Japan.

The molecular mechanisms of cell reprogramming and differentiation involve
various signaling factors. Small molecule compounds have been identified to
artificially influence these factors through interacting cellular proteins.
Although such small molecule compounds are useful to enhance reprogramming and
differentiation and to show the mechanisms that underlie these events, the
screening usually requires a large number of compounds to identify only a very
small number of hits (e.g., one hit among several tens of thousands of
compounds). Here, we show a proof of concept that xenospecific gene products can 
affect the efficiency of cell reprogramming to pluripotency. Thirty genes
specific for the bacterium Wolbachia pipientis were forcibly expressed
individually along with reprogramming factors (Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc) that
can generate induced pluripotent stem cells in mammalian cells, and eight were
found to affect the reprogramming efficiency either positively or negatively (hit
rate 26.7%). Mechanistic analysis suggested one of these proteins interacted with
cytoskeleton to promote reprogramming. Our results raise the possibility that
xenospecific gene products provide an alternative way to study the regulatory
mechanism of cell identity.

Â© 2017 Molecular Biology Society of Japan and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/gtc.12519 
PMID: 28776863  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

