
1. Haematologica. 2017 Oct;102(10):1671-1682. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2017.168799.
Epub 2017 Aug 3.

Endotoxemia shifts neutrophils with TIMP-free gelatinase B/MMP-9 from bone marrow
to the periphery and induces systematic upregulation of TIMP-1.

Vandooren J(1), Swinnen W(1), Ugarte-Berzal E(1), Boon L(1), Dorst D(1), Martens 
E(1), Opdenakker G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega
Institute for Medical Research, University of Leuven, KU Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Immunobiology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega
Institute for Medical Research, University of Leuven, KU Leuven, Belgium.
ghislain.opdenakker@kuleuven.be.

Lipopolysaccharides or endotoxins elicit an excessive host inflammatory response 
and lead to life-threatening conditions such as endotoxemia and septic shock.
Lipopolysaccharides trigger mobilization and stimulation of leukocytes and
exaggerated production of pro-inflammatory molecules including cytokines and
proteolytic enzymes. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) or gelatinase B, a
protease stored in the tertiary granules of polymorphonuclear leukocytes, has
been implicated in such inflammatory reactions. Moreover, several studies even
pinpointed MMP-9 as a potential target molecule to counter excessive inflammation
in endotoxemia. Whereas the early effect of lipopolysaccharide-induced
inflammation in vivo on the expression of MMP-9 in various peripheral organs has 
been described, the effects on the bone marrow and during late stage endotoxemia 
remain elusive. We demonstrate that TIMP-free MMP-9 is a major factor in bone
marrow physiology and pathology. By using a mouse model for late-stage
endotoxemia, we show that lipopolysaccharides elicited a depletion of neutrophil 
MMP-9 in the bone marrow and a shift of MMP-9 and MMP-9-containing cells towards 
peripheral organs, a pattern which was primarily associated with a relocation of 
CD11bhighGr-1high cells. In contrast, analysis of the tissue inhibitors of
metalloproteinases was in line with a natural, systematic upregulation of TIMP-1,
the main tissue inhibitor of TIMP-free MMP-9, and a general shift toward control 
of matrix metalloproteinase activity by tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases.

CopyrightÂ© 2017 Ferrata Storti Foundation.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2017.168799 
PMCID: PMC5622851
PMID: 28775117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

