
1. J Basic Microbiol. 2017 Nov;57(11):922-932. doi: 10.1002/jobm.201700072. Epub
2017 Aug 8.

Nitrogen fixing potential of various heterotrophic Bacillus strains from a
tropical estuary and adjacent coastal regions.

Yousuf J(1)(2), Thajudeen J(1), Rahiman M(3), Krishnankutty S(1), P Alikunj A(1),
A Abdulla MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Biology, Microbiology and Biochemistry, School of Marine 
Sciences, Cochin University of Science and Technology, Cochin, Kerala, India.
(2)School of Environmental Sciences, Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam, Kerala,
India.
(3)Post Graduate and Research Department of Aquaculture and Fishery Microbiology,
M.E.S Ponnani College, Ponnani, Kerala, India.

In the present study, we report the nitrogen fixing potential of heterotrophic
diazotrophs isolated from a tropical estuary and adjacent coastal sea. Results of
the study revealed that most of the species that are capable of fixing nitrogen
in the study area belongs to the genus Bacillus. The isolates from the estuary
showed maximum homology with Bacillus megaterium, B. cereus, B. safencis, B.
licheniformis, B. aerophilus, B. oceanisediminis, B. flexus, B. aquimaris, B.
vietnamensis, and B. subterraneaus, whereas the diazotrophic isolates from
coastal samples were closely related to B. subtilis, B. megaterium, B. circulans,
B. aerophilus, B. flexus, and B. oceanisediminis. Experimental studies to
determine the nitrogen fixation potential of isolates revealed considerable
variation among different strains and the highest nitrogen fixing potential was
recorded in B. megaterium (210.05 ± 7.0 nmol C2 H4 /mg protein/day) followed by
B. flexus (108.76 ± 3.66 nmol C2 H4 /mg protein/day) and B. circulans
(98.28 ± 4.32 nmol C2 H4 /mg protein/day). Molecular basis of nitrogen fixation
by these heterotrophic Bacillus strains has been explored in terms of the
presence of nifH gene in them. We observed that heterotrophic Bacillus sp. have
potential ability to fix nitrogen.

© 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.201700072 
PMID: 28787089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

