
1. J Biomed Mater Res A. 2017 Dec;105(12):3475-3481. doi: 10.1002/jbm.a.36170. Epub 
2017 Oct 4.

Pectin nanocoating reduces proinflammatory fibroblast response to bacteria.

Mieszkowska A(1), Folkert J(1), Gaber T(2), Miksch K(1), Gurzawska K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Biotechnology Department, Faculty of Energy and Environmental
Engineering, Silesian University of Technology, Gliwice 44-100, Poland.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Charité University
Medicine, Berlin 10117, Germany.
(3)Oral Surgery Department, Birmingham Dental School and Hospital, University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham B46NN, United Kingdom.

Implant failures are primarily related to bacterial infections and inflammation. 
Nanocoating of implant devices with organic molecules is a method used for
improving their integration into host tissues and limiting inflammation.
Bioengineered plant-derived rhamnogalacturonan-Is (RG-Is) from pectins improve
tissue regeneration and exhibit anti-inflammatory properties. Therefore, the aim 
of this study is to evaluate the in vitro effect of RG-I nanocoating on human
gingival primary fibroblast (HGF) activity and proinflammatory response following
Porphyromonas gingivalis (P. gingivalis) infection. Infected HGFs were incubated 
on tissue culture polystyrene (TCPS) plates coated with unmodified RG-I isolated 
from potato pectin (PU) and dearabinanated RG-I (PA). HGF morphology,
proliferation, metabolic activity, and expression of genes responsible for
extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover and proinflammatory response were examined.
Following the P. gingivalis infection, PU and PA significantly promoted HGF
proliferation and metabolic activity. Moreover, gene expression levels of IL1B,
IL8, TNFA, and MMP2 decreased in the infected cells cultured on PU and PA,
whereas the expression of COL1A1, FN1, and FGFR1 was upregulated. The results
indicate that RG-Is are promising candidates for nanocoating of an implant
surface, can reduce inflammation, and enhance implant integration, particularly
in medically compromised patients with chronic inflammatory diseases such as
periodontitis and rheumatoid arthritis. © 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biomed
Mater Res Part A: 105A: 3475-3481, 2017.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.36170 
PMID: 28782183  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

