
1. Parasitology. 2018 May;145(6):775-782. doi: 10.1017/S0031182017001330. Epub 2017 
Aug 8.

Can Wolbachia modulate the fecundity costs of Plasmodium in mosquitoes?

Zélé F(1), Denoyelle J, Duron O(2), Rivero A(2).

Author information: 
(1)cE3c: centre for Ecology,Evolution and Environmental changes, Faculdade de
Ciencias,Universidade de Lisboa,Edificio C2, 3° Piso Campo Grande, 1749016
Lisbon,Portugal.
(2)Maladies Infectieuses et Vecteurs: Ecologie, Génétique,Evolution et Contrôle, 
CNRS (UMR 5290), Centre de Recherche IRD,911 Avenue Agropolis, 34394
Montpellier,France.

Vertically transmitted parasites (VTPs) such as Wolbachia are expected not only
to minimize the damage they inflict on their hosts, but also to protect their
hosts against the damaging effects of coinfecting parasites. By modifying the
fitness costs of the infection, VTPs can therefore play an important role in the 
evolution and epidemiology of infectious diseases.Using a natural system, we
explore the effects of a Wolbachia-Plasmodium co-infection on mosquito fecundity.
While Plasmodium is known to frequently express its virulence by partially
castrating its mosquito vectors, the effects of Wolbachia infections on mosquito 
fecundity are, in contrast, highly variable. Here, we show that Plasmodium
drastically decreases the fecundity of mosquitoes by ca. 20%, and we provide the 
first evidence that this decrease is independent of the parasite's burden.
Wolbachia, on the other hand, increases fecundity by roughly 10%, but does not
alter the tolerance (fecundity-burden relationship) of mosquitoes to Plasmodium
infection.Although Wolbachia-infected mosquitoes fare overall better than
uninfected ones, Wolbachia does not confer a sufficiently high reproductive boost
to mosquitoes to compensate for the reproductive losses inflicted by Plasmodium. 
We discuss the potential mechanisms and implications underlying the conflicting
effects of these two parasites on mosquito reproduction.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182017001330 
PMID: 28786370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

