
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Aug 7;7(1):7438. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-07457-5.

A camelid single-domain antibody neutralizes botulinum neurotoxin A by blocking
host receptor binding.

Yao G(1), Lam KH(1), Weisemann J(2), Peng L(3), Krez N(2), Perry K(4), Shoemaker 
CB(5), Dong M(3), Rummel A(2), Jin R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of California, Irvine,
California, USA.
(2)Institut für Toxikologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
(3)Department of Urology, Boston Children's Hospital, Department of Microbiology 
and Immunobiology and Department of Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(4)NE-CAT and Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University,
Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois, USA.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases and Global Health, Tufts Clinical and
Translational Science Institute, North Grafton, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of California, Irvine,
California, USA. r.jin@uci.edu.

Antibody treatment is currently the only available countermeasure for botulism, a
fatal illness caused by flaccid paralysis of muscles due to botulinum neurotoxin 
(BoNT) intoxication. Among the seven major serotypes of BoNT/A-G, BoNT/A poses
the most serious threat to humans because of its high potency and long duration
of action. Prior to entering neurons and blocking neurotransmitter release,
BoNT/A recognizes motoneurons via a dual-receptor binding process in which it
engages both the neuron surface polysialoganglioside (PSG) and synaptic vesicle
glycoprotein 2 (SV2). Previously, we identified a potent neutralizing antitoxin
against BoNT/A1 termed ciA-C2, derived from a camelid heavy-chain-only antibody
(VHH). In this study, we demonstrate that ciA-C2 prevents BoNT/A1 intoxication by
inhibiting its binding to neuronal receptor SV2. Furthermore, we determined the
crystal structure of ciA-C2 in complex with the receptor-binding domain of
BoNT/A1 (HCA1) at 1.68 Å resolution. The structure revealed that ciA-C2 partially
occupies the SV2-binding site on HCA1, causing direct interference of HCA1
interaction with both the N-glycan and peptide-moiety of SV2. Interestingly, this
neutralization mechanism is similar to that of a monoclonal antibody in clinical 
trials, despite that ciA-C2 is more than 10-times smaller. Taken together, these 
results enlighten our understanding of BoNT/A1 interactions with its neuronal
receptor, and further demonstrate that inhibiting toxin binding to the host
receptor is an efficient countermeasure strategy.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-07457-5 
PMCID: PMC5547058
PMID: 28785006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

