
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017 Aug 11;11(8):e0005803. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0005803. eCollection 2017 Aug.

Assessment and optimization of Theileria parva sporozoite full-length p67 antigen
expression in mammalian cells.

Tebaldi G(1), Williams LB(2), Verna AE(1), Macchi F(1), Franceschi V(1), Fry
LM(2), Knowles DP(2), Donofrio G(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical-Veterinary Science, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(2)United States Department of Agriculture and Department of Veterinary
Microbiology & Pathology, Animal Disease Research Unit, Agricultural Research
Service, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, United States of America.
(3)Paul G. Allen School for Global Animal Health, Washington State University
College of Veterinary Medicine, Pullman, WA, United States of America.

Delivery of various forms of recombinant Theileria parva sporozoite antigen (p67)
has been shown to elicit antibody responses in cattle capable of providing
protection against East Coast fever, the clinical disease caused by T. parva.
Previous formulations of full-length and shorter recombinant versions of p67
derived from bacteria, insect, and mammalian cell systems are expressed in
non-native and highly unstable forms. The stable expression of full-length
recombinant p67 in mammalian cells has never been described and has remained
especially elusive. In this study, p67 was expressed in human-derived cells as a 
full-length, membrane-linked protein and as a secreted form by omission of the
putative transmembrane domain. The recombinant protein expressed in this system
yielded primarily two products based on Western immunoblot analysis, including
one at the expected size of 67 kDa, and one with a higher than expected molecular
weight. Through treatment with PNGase F, our data indicate that the larger
product of this mammalian cell-expressed recombinant p67 cannot be attributed to 
glycosylation. By increasing the denaturing conditions, we determined that the
larger sized mammalian cell-expressed recombinant p67 product is likely a dimeric
aggregate of the protein. Both forms of this recombinant p67 reacted with a
monoclonal antibody to the p67 molecule, which reacts with the native sporozoite.
Additionally, through this work we developed multiple mammalian cell lines,
including both human and bovine-derived cell lines, transduced by a lentiviral
vector, that are constitutively able to express a stable, secreted form of p67
for use in immunization, diagnostics, or in vitro assays. The recombinant p67
developed in this system is immunogenic in goats and cattle based on ELISA and
flow cytometric analysis. The development of a mammalian cell system that
expresses full-length p67 in a stable form as described here is expected to
optimize p67-based immunization.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005803 
PMCID: PMC5568440
PMID: 28800590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

