
1. ChemMedChem. 2017 Oct 9;12(19):1616-1626. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201700363. Epub 2017 
Sep 26.

Biophysical Screening of a Focused Library for the Discovery of CYP121 Inhibitors
as Novel Antimycobacterials.

Brengel C(1), Thomann A(1), Schifrin A(2), Allegretta G(1), Kamal AAM(1),
Haupenthal J(1), Schnorr I(1), Cho SH(3), Franzblau SG(3), Empting M(1), Eberhard
J(1), Hartmann RW(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, HIPS, Department for
Drug Design and Optimization, Campus E8.1, 66123, Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Saarland University, Campus B2.2, 66123,
Saarbrücken, Germany.
(3)Institute for Tuberculosis Research, College of Pharmacy, University of
Illinois at Chicago, 833 S. Wood Street, Chicago, IL, 60612-7231, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Saarland
University, Campus C2.3, 66123, Saarbrücken, Germany.

The development of novel antimycobacterial agents against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis (Mtb) is urgently required due to the appearance of multidrug
resistance (MDR) combined with complicated long-term treatment. CYP121 was shown 
to be a promising novel target for inhibition of mycobacterial growth. In this
study, we describe the rational discovery of new CYP121 inhibitors by a
systematic screening based on biophysical and microbiological methods. The best
hits originating from only one structural class gave initial information about
molecular motifs required for binding and activity. The initial screening
procedure was followed by mode-of-action studies and further biological
characterizations. The results demonstrate superior antimycobacterial efficacy
and a decreased toxicity profile of our frontrunner compound relative to the
reference compound econazole. Due to its low molecular weight, promising
biological profile, and physicochemical properties, this compound is an excellent
starting point for further rational optimization.

© 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cmdc.201700363 
PMID: 28815923  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

