
1. J Chem Inf Model. 2017 Sep 25;57(9):2351-2357. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.7b00265.
Epub 2017 Sep 1.

Active Site Flexibility of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Isocitrate Lyase in Dimer
Form.

Lee YV(1), Choi SB(2), Wahab HA(2), Choong YS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Molecular Medicine (INFORMM), Universiti Sains
Malaysia , 11800 Minden, Penang, Malaysia.
(2)Pharmaceutical Design and Simulation Laboratory, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia , 11800 Minden, Penang, Malaysia.

Tuberculosis (TB) still remains a global threat due to the emergence of a
drug-resistant strain. Instead of focusing on the drug target of active stage TB,
we are highlighting the isocitrate lyase (ICL) at the dormant stage TB. ICL is
one of the persistent factors for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) to survive
during the dormant phase. In addition, the absence of ICL in human has made ICL a
potential drug target for TB therapy. However, the dynamic details of ICL which
could give insights to the ICL-ligand interaction have yet to be solved.
Therefore, a series of ICL dimer dynamics studies through molecular dynamics
simulation were performed in this work. The ICL active site entrance gate closure
is contributed to by hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions with the
C-terminal. Analysis suggested that the open-closed behavior of the ICL active
site entrance depends on the type of ligand present in the active site. We also
observed four residues (Ser91, Asp108, Asp153, and Cys191) which could possibly
be the nucleophiles for nucleophilic attack on the cleavage of isocitrate at the 
C2-C3 bond. We hope that the elucidation of ICL dynamics can benefit future works
such as lead identification or antibody design against ICL for TB therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jcim.7b00265 
PMID: 28820943  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

