
1. Vet Res. 2017 Aug 18;48(1):43. doi: 10.1186/s13567-017-0448-z.

Efficacy of a polyvalent immersion vaccine against Flavobacterium psychrophilum
and evaluation of immune response to vaccination in rainbow trout fry
(Onchorynchus mykiss L.).

Hoare R(1), Ngo TPH(2), Bartie KL(2), Adams A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling, Stirling, FK9 4LA, UK.
rowena.hoare1@stir.ac.uk.
(2)Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling, Stirling, FK9 4LA, UK.

Rainbow trout fry syndrome (RTFS) is a disease caused by the Gram-negative
bacterium Flavobacterium psychrophilum, responsible for significant economic
losses in salmonid aquaculture worldwide. The diversity of F. psychrophilum
isolates and the inherent difficulties in vaccinating juvenile fish has hampered 
the development of a vaccine for RTFS. Disease episodes tend to occur between
10-14 °C with necrotic lesions often seen on the skin surrounding the dorsal fin 
and tail. At present no commercial vaccines are available for RTFS in the UK,
leaving antibiotics as the only course of action to control disease outbreaks.
The current work was performed as a pilot study to assess the efficacy of a
polyvalent, whole cell vaccine containing formalin-inactivated F. psychrophilum, 
to induce protective immunity in rainbow trout fry. Duplicate groups of 30 trout 
(5 g) were immersed in 1 L of the vaccine for 30 s. Samples were taken 4 h, day 2
and 7 post-vaccination (pv) of skin mucus, tissues for histology and gene
expression analysis; serum and histology samples were taken 6 weeks pv. A booster
vaccination was given at 315 degree days (dd) also by immersion. Challenge was by
immersion with a heterologous isolate of F. psychrophilum 630 dd post primary
vaccination. The vaccine provided significant protection to the trout fry with a 
RPS of 84% (p < 0.0001). Detection of increased numbers of IgT positive cells in 
systemic organs, up-regulation of IgT expression in hind-gut and an increase in
total IgT in serum was observed in vaccinated fish; however a functional role of 
IgT in the observed protection remains to be demonstrated.

DOI: 10.1186/s13567-017-0448-z 
PMCID: PMC5563058
PMID: 28821298  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

