
1. Front Immunol. 2017 Aug 3;8:899. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00899. eCollection 2017.

IL-1β As Mediator of Resolution That Reprograms Human Peripheral Monocytes toward
a Suppressive Phenotype.

Giesbrecht K(1)(2), Eberle ME(1), Wölfle SJ(1), Sahin D(1), Sähr A(1), Oberhardt 
V(1), Menne Z(1), Bode KA(1), Heeg K(1)(2), Hildebrand D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Centre for Infectious Diseases, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)DZIF German Center for Infection Research, Brunswick, Germany.

During infection pathogen-associated molecular patterns activate immune cells to 
initiate a cascade of reactions leading to inflammation and the activation of the
adaptive immune response culminating in the elimination of foreign pathogens.
However, shortly after activation of the host defense machinery, a return to
homeostasis is preferred to prevent inflammation-induced tissue damage. This
switch from the initial immunogenic to the subsequent tolerogenic phase after
clearance of the infection can be mediated through highly plastic peripheral
monocytes. Our studies reveal that an early encounter with toll-like receptor
7/8-ligand R848 mediates a strong pro-inflammatory monocytic phenotype that
primes its own reprogramming toward an immunosuppressive one. Previously, we
showed that these R848-treated antigen-presenting cells (APCs) fail to activate
allogeneic T cells and induce regulatory T cells (Tregs) through signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)-dependent PD-L1. Here, we
further demonstrate that R848-treated APCs suppress CD3/CD28-mediated and
dendritic cell-mediated T cell activation and that adenosine and indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase/kynurenin pathways are involved in tolerance induction.
Reprogramming of monocytes after R848 stimulation requires the pro-inflammatory
cytokine IL-1β and a boosted IL-6 release. The subsequent autocrine prolonged
activation of STAT3 induces direct upregulation of tolerogenic factors which
finally downregulate proliferation of activated T cells and mediate Tregs.
Thereby our study suggests that inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1β and IL-6,
should be considered as mediators of resolution of inflammation.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00899 
PMCID: PMC5540955
PMID: 28824627 

