
1. PLoS One. 2017 Aug 23;12(8):e0182498. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0182498.
eCollection 2017.

Distinct aging profiles of CD8+ T cells in blood versus gastrointestinal mucosal 
compartments.

Dock J(1), Ramirez CM(2), Hultin L(3)(4), Hausner MA(3)(4), Hultin P(4)(5),
Elliott J(6)(4), Yang OO(4)(7)(8)(9), Anton PA(4)(6), Jamieson BD(3)(4), Effros
RB(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States of
America.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Fielding School of Public Health, University of
California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America.
(3)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United
States of America.
(4)UCLA AIDS Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, United States of
America.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Fielding School of Public Health, University of
California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America.
(6)Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States of
America.
(7)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School
of Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States
of America.
(8)Department of Microbiology Immunology & Molecular Genetics, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United
States of America.
(9)AIDS Healthcare Foundation, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America.

A hallmark of human immunosenescence is the accumulation of late-differentiated
memory CD8+ T cells with features of replicative senescence, such as inability to
proliferate, absence of CD28 expression, shortened telomeres, loss of telomerase 
activity, enhanced activation, and increased secretion of inflammatory cytokines.
Importantly, oligoclonal expansions of these cells are associated with increased 
morbidity and mortality risk in elderly humans. Currently, most information on
the adaptive immune system is derived from studies using peripheral blood, which 
contains approximately only 2% of total body lymphocytes. However, most
lymphocytes reside in tissues. It is not clear how representative blood changes
are of the total immune status. This is especially relevant with regard to the
human gastrointestinal tract (GALT), a major reservoir of total body lymphocytes 
(approximately 60%) and an anatomical region of high antigenic exposure. To
assess how peripheral blood T cells relate to those in other locations, we
compare CD8+ T cells from peripheral blood and the GALT, specifically
rectosigmoid colon, in young/middle age, healthy donors, focusing on phenotypic
and functional alterations previously linked to senescence in peripheral blood.
Overall, our results indicate that gut CD8+ T cells show profiles suggestive of
greater differentiation and activation than those in peripheral blood.
Specifically, compared to blood from the same individual, the gut contains
significantly greater proportions of CD8+ T cells that are CD45RA- (memory),
CD28-, CD45RA-CD28+ (early memory), CD45RA-CD28- (late memory), CD25-,
HLA-DR+CD38+ (activated) and Ki-67+ (proliferating); ex vivo CD3+ telomerase
activity levels are greater in the gut as well. However, gut CD8+ T cells may not
necessarily be more senescent, since they expressed significantly lower levels of
CD57 and PD-1 on CD45RO+ memory cells, and had in vitro proliferative dynamics
similar to that of blood cells. Compartment-specific age-effects in this cohort
were evident as well. Blood cells showed a significant increase with age in
proportion of HLA-DR+38+, Ki-67+ and CD25+ CD8+ T cells; and an increase in total
CD3+ ex-vivo telomerase activity that approached significance. By contrast, the
only age-effect seen in the gut was a significant increase in CD45RA- (memory)
and concurrent decrease in CD45RA+CD28+ (na√Øve) CD8+ T cells. Overall, these
results indicate dynamics of peripheral blood immune senescence may not hold true
in the gut mucosa, underscoring the importance for further study of this
immunologically important tissue in evaluating the human immune system,
especially in the context of chronic disease and aging.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0182498 
PMCID: PMC5568404
PMID: 28832609  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

