
1. Nanotechnology. 2017 Oct 27;28(43):435101. doi: 10.1088/1361-6528/aa8838. Epub
2017 Aug 24.

Bismuth subsalicylate nanoparticles with anaerobic antibacterial activity for
dental applications.

Vega-Jiménez AL(1), Almaguer-Flores A, Flores-Castañeda M, Camps E, Uribe-Ramírez
M, Aztatzi-Aguilar OG, De Vizcaya-Ruiz A.

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Odontología, División de Estudios de Posgrado e Investigación,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Circuito exterior s/n, Ciudad
Universitaria, 04510 CDMX, México.

In recent years, nanomaterials have been used in the medical-dental field as new 
alternative antimicrobial agents. Bismuth subsalicylate (BSS) has been used as an
antimicrobial agent, but the effect of BSS in the form of nanoparticles
(BSS-nano) as a potential antimicrobial agent has not been tested, in specific
against bacteria responsible for periodontal disease. The aim of this study was
to evaluate the antibacterial effect of BSS-nano against oral anaerobic bacteria 
and to assess the safety of BSS-nano by evaluating their cytotoxicity in human
gingival fibroblast (HGF-1) cells. BSS-nano were synthesized by laser ablation
and were previously physico-chemically characterized using in vitro assays. The
antibacterial activity was measured using the tetrazolium-based XTT assay, and
cytotoxicity was determined using lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and MTS assays in
HGF-1 cells. Transmission electron microscopy of HGF-1 exposed to BSS-nano was
also performed. BSS-nano was shown to have a primary size of 4-22 nm and a
polygonal shape. Among the tested bacterial strains, those with a greater
sensitivity to BSS-nano (highest concentration of 21.7 μg ml-1) were A.
actinomycetemcomitans, C. gingivalis, and P. gingivalis. BSS-nano at a
concentration of 60 μg ml-1 showed low cytotoxicity (6%) in HFG-1 cells and was
mainly localized intracellularly in acidic vesicles. Our results indicate that
the concentration of BSS-nano used as an effective antibacterial agent does not
induce cytotoxicity in mammalian cells; thus, BSS-nano can be applied as an
antibacterial agent in dental materials or antiseptic solutions.

DOI: 10.1088/1361-6528/aa8838 
PMID: 28837052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

