
1. J Bacteriol. 2017 Nov 15;199(22). pii: JB.00297-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.00297-17.
Epub 2017 Aug 28.

Maintenance of Microbial Cooperation Mediated by Public Goods in Single- and
Multiple-Trait Scenarios

Özkaya Ö(1), Xavier KB(2), Dionisio F(2)(3), Balbontín R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal rbalbontin@igc.gulbenkian.pt
oozkaya@igc.gulbenkian.pt.
(2)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.
(3)cE3c: Centre for Ecology, Evolution, and Environmental Changes, Faculty of
Sciences, University of Lisbon, Edifício C2, 38 piso, 1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal.

Microbes often form densely populated communities, which favor competitive and
cooperative interactions. Cooperation among bacteria often occurs through the
production of metabolically costly molecules produced by certain individuals that
become available to other neighboring individuals; such molecules are called
public goods. This type of cooperation is susceptible to exploitation, since
nonproducers of a public good can benefit from it while saving the cost of its
production (cheating), gaining a fitness advantage over producers (cooperators). 
Thus, in mixed cultures, cheaters can increase in frequency in the population,
relative to cooperators. Sometimes, and as predicted by simple game-theoretic
arguments, such increases in the frequency of cheaters cause loss of the
cooperative traits by exhaustion of the public goods, eventually leading to a
collapse of the entire population. In other cases, however, both cooperators and 
cheaters remain in coexistence. This raises the question of how cooperation is
maintained in microbial populations. Several strategies to prevent cheating have 
been studied in the context of a single trait and a unique environmental
constraint. In this review, we describe current knowledge on the evolutionary
stability of microbial cooperation and discuss recent discoveries describing the 
mechanisms operating in multiple-trait and multiple-constraint settings. We
conclude with a consideration of the consequences of these complex interactions, 
and we briefly discuss the potential role of social interactions involving
multiple traits and multiple environmental constraints in the evolution of
specialization and division of labor in microbes.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00297-17 
PMCID: PMC5648865
PMID: 28847922 

