
1. Mol Med Rep. 2017 Oct;16(4):5683-5692. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2017.7242. Epub 2017 Aug 
14.

Thy-1 stimulation of mouse T cells induces a delayed T cell receptor-like signal 
that results in Ca2+‑independent cytotoxicity.

Furlong S(1), Power Coombs MR(2), Hoskin DW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS
B3H 4R2, Canada.
(2)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, Canada.

Antibody-mediated crosslinking of Thy-1 [also known as cluster of differentiation
(CD)90], results in a T cell receptor (TcR)‑like signal; however, the impact of
Thy‑1 stimulation in comparison to TcR stimulation on T cell activation and
effector function has yet to be fully elucidated. In the present study, the
outcome of Thy‑1‑ and TcR‑induced stimulation of T cells was investigated in
mice, using fragment crystalizable (Fc) receptor‑bound antibodies and
costimulatory signals provided by syngeneic lipopolysaccharide‑matured bone
marrow‑derived dendritic cells. Compared with TcR signaling, Thy‑1 signaling
initiated a less robust proliferative response in T cells, as determined by
tritiated‑thymidine incorporation. In addition, enzyme‑linked immunosorbent
assays revealed that interleukin‑2 production was reduced, and the expression of 
CD25 and cyclin D3 was weaker in Thy‑1‑stimulated cells, as determined by western
blotting; however, the expression of cyclin‑dependent kinase 6 was similar to
that in TcR‑induced T cells. Furthermore, western blotting demonstrated that the 
phosphorylation of ζ-chain‑associated protein kinase 70 and extracellular
signal‑regulated kinase 1/2 was delayed following Thy‑1 stimulation. DNA
fragmentation assays revealed that cytotoxic effector function was also slower to
develop in Thy‑1‑stimulated T cells, required more time to be effective and was
largely Ca2+‑independent; these findings suggested that Fas ligand rather than
granule‑associated perforin was involved in T cell effector function. In
conclusion, the present results suggested that Thy‑1 signaling may contribute to 
the regulation of T cell homeostasis and the development of non‑specific T
cell‑mediated cytotoxicity. However, further studies are required to elucidate
the exact physiological roles of TcR‑like signals that result from Thy‑1
crosslinking and to investigate the molecular mechanisms that are involved.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2017.7242 
PMID: 28849009  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

