
1. Mol Immunol. 2017 Oct;90:245-254. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2017.08.005. Epub 2017
Aug 30.

Interaction of Zap70 and CXCR4 receptor at lamellipodia that determines the
directionality during Jurkat T cells chemotaxis.

Wu CY(1), Tsai YY(2), Chen SY(3), Lin YP(4), Shin JW(5), Wu CC(6), Yang BC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan 70428, Taiwan. Electronic address:
jawork520@yahoo.com.tw.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan 70428, Taiwan. Electronic address: yabiapple@gmail.com.
(3)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan 70428, Taiwan. Electronic address: wilson1211983@gmail.com.
(4)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan 70428, Taiwan. Electronic address: b8504062@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Parasitology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan 70428, Taiwan. Electronic address: z8308010@email.ncku.edu.tw.
(6)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, College of Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan 70428, Taiwan. Electronic address:
joshccwu@mail.ncku.edu.tw.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan 70428, Taiwan; Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70428, Taiwan; Center
of Infectious Disease and Signaling Research, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan 70428, Taiwan. Electronic address: y1357@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

Directional migration of T-lymphocytes is a key process during immune activation 
and is tightly regulated both temporally and spatially. The initial cell membrane
protrusion at a particular site is critical for determining the direction of cell
migration. In this study, we found that ZAP-70 protein appeared not only at the
margin of the spreading areas of polarized Jurkat T cells but also formed
clusters near the center of the cell body on a fibronectin plate. Specifically,
some pZAP-70 was located at the lamellipodia/filopodia and was closely associated
with the most extended membrane contact. To visualize the dynamic distribution of
ZAP-70 on migrating Jurkat T cells, we generated a fluorescent ZAP-70-EGFP fusion
protein (hZAP70G). Expression of the hZAP70G in P116 cells, a ZAP-70 defective
Jurkat derivative, restored its chemotactic migration toward SDF-1, adhesion to
fibronectin matrix, and integrin activation. In addition, the distribution of
hZAP70G protein is associated with changes in cell shape, specifically the
membrane protrusion step, forming filopodia/lamellipodia and a retracting uropod.
Furthermore, SDF-1 stimulated the formation of ZAP-70 and CXCR4 complex. CXCR4
was observed mainly at the leading edge of migrating cell. The localization of
ZAP-70 at the very front edge of protruding lamellipodia was close to CXCR4 and a
part of them were overlapped. Collectively, our data describe the critical early 
step of directional cell movement toward SDF-1 that ZAP-70 is recruited to the
CXCR4 at the leading edge of membrane and consequently modulates
lamellipodia/filopodia formation and integrin activation.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2017.08.005 
PMID: 28846922  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

