
1. J Cell Biochem. 2018 Feb;119(2):2212-2221. doi: 10.1002/jcb.26383. Epub 2017 Oct 
18.

Autophagy-dependent crosstalk between GILT and PAX-3 influences radiation
sensitivity of human melanoma cells.

Hathaway-Schrader JD(1), Doonan BP(1), Hossain A(1), Radwan FFY(1), Zhang L(1),
Haque A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Hollings Cancer Center, and
Children's Research Institute, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
South Carolina.

Melanoma represents an ever-increasing problem in the western world as incidence 
rates continue to climb. Though manageable during early stages, late stage
metastatic disease is highly resistant to current intervention. We have
previously shown that gamma-interferon-inducible lysosomal thiol-reductase (GILT)
enhances HLA class II antigen processing and immune detection of human melanoma
cells. Here we report that GILT expression inhibits a potential target, paired
box-3 (PAX-3) protein, in late stage human metastatic melanoma. We also show that
GILT transfection or induction by IFN-γ, decreases PAX-3 protein expression while
upregulating the expression of Daxx, which is also a repressor of PAX-3. Confocal
microscopic analysis demonstrated that GILT co-localizes with PAX-3 protein, but 
not with Daxx within melanoma cells. Immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting
studies suggest that GILT expression negatively regulates PAX-3 through the
autophagy pathway, potentially resulting in increased susceptibility to
conventional treatment in the form of chemotherapy or radiotherapy. While
high-dose radiation is a common treatment for melanoma patients, our data suggest
that GILT expression significantly increased the susceptibility of melanoma cells
to low-dose radiation therapy via upregulation of tumor suppressor protein p53.
Overall, these data suggest that GILT has multiple roles in inducing human
melanoma cells as better targets for radiation and immunotherapy.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.26383 
PMCID: PMC5747991
PMID: 28857256  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

