
1. Microbiol Immunol. 2017 Oct;61(10):442-451. doi: 10.1111/1348-0421.12533.

Expression of HLA-DRA and CD74 mRNA in whole blood during the course of
complicated and uncomplicated Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia.

Rasmussen G(1)(2), Cajander S(1)(2), Bäckman A(3), Källman J(1)(2), Söderquist
B(1)(2), Strålin K(2)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Örebro University Hospital, Örebro
University, Örebro.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health, School of Medical Sciences, Örebro University,
Örebro.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Health, Department of Clinical Research Laboratory,
Örebro University, Örebro.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(5)Department of Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

To improve management of Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia (SAB), better
understanding of host-pathogen interactions is needed. In vitro studies have
shown that S. aureus bacteria induce dose-dependent immunosuppression that is
evidenced by reduced expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class
II on antigen presenting cells. Thus, the aim of this study was to determine
whether expression of the MHC class II-related genes HLA-DRA and CD74 is more
greatly reduced in complicated SAB, with its probable higher loads of S. aureus, 
than in uncomplicated SAB. Adult patients with SAB were prospectively included
and blood samples taken on the day of confirmation of SAB (Day 1) and on Days 2, 
3, 5 and 7. HLA-DRA and CD74 mRNA expression was determined by quantitative
reverse transcription PCR. Sepsis was defined according to the Sepsis-3
classification and SAB was categorized as complicated in patients with
deep-seated infection and/or hematogenous seeding. Twenty patients with SAB were 
enrolled and samples obtained on all assessment days. HLA-DRA and CD74 expression
did not differ significantly between patients with SAB and sepsis (n = 13) and
those without sepsis (n = 7) on any assessment day. However, patients with
complicated SAB (n = 14) had significantly weaker HLA-DRA expression on all five 
assessment days than patients with uncomplicated SAB (n = 6). Additionally, they 
tended to have weaker CD74 expressions. Neutrophil, monocyte and leukocyte counts
did not differ significantly between complicated and uncomplicated SAB. In
conclusion, patients with complicated SAB show weaker HLA-DRA expression than
those with uncomplicated SAB during the first week of bacteremia.

© 2017 The Societies and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1348-0421.12533 
PMID: 28862321  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

