
1. Immune Netw. 2017 Aug;17(4):237-249. doi: 10.4110/in.2017.17.4.237. Epub 2017 Aug
28.

Comparative Analyses of Signature Genes in Acute Rejection and Operational
Tolerance.

Choi JW(1)(2), Kim YH(3)(4), Oh JW(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, Kyungpook National University Hospital, Daegu
41404, Korea.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, Daegu
41944, Korea.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, 
Daegu 41944, Korea.
(4)Xenotransplantation Research Center, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul 03080, Korea.

Using biomarkers as prediction tools or therapeutic targets can be a valuable
strategy in transplantation. Recent studies identified biomarkers of acute
rejection (AR) and operational tolerance (TOL) through the application of
meta-analysis. In this study, we comparatively analyzed the signature genes in
acute rejection and operational tolerance seen in human allogeneic
transplantations using massive bioinformatical meta-analysis. To identify the
signature genes in opposite immunological conditions, AR and TOL, we first
collected the 1,252 gene expression data specifically intended for those
circumstances. Then we excluded based on biological cut-values, Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) as well as Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS). Using
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) from meta-analysis, we then applied a
ranked scoring system to identify the signature genes of AR and TOL. We
identified 53 up-regulated and 32 down-regulated signature genes in acute
rejection condition. Among them, ISG20, CXCL9, CXCL10, CCL19, FCER1G, PMSE1, UBD 
are highly expressed in AR condition. In operational tolerance, we identified 110
up-regulated and 48 down-regulated signature genes. TCL1A, BLNK, MS4A1, EBF1,
IGHM are up-regulated in TOL condition. These genes are highly representative of 
AR or TOL across the different organs such as liver, kidney and heart. Since
immune response is the sum of complex biological and molecular dynamics, these
signature genes as well as pathway analysis using a systems biology approach
could be used to catch the insights of the certain pathways that would be
overlooked with the conventional gene-level comparative analysis.

DOI: 10.4110/in.2017.17.4.237 
PMCID: PMC5577301
PMID: 28860953 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no
potential conflicts of interest.

