
1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2017 Oct 15;25(20):5652-5661. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2017.08.038.
Epub 2017 Aug 23.

Design and optimization of N-acylhydrazone pyrimidine derivatives as E. coli PDHc
E1 inhibitors: Structure-activity relationship analysis, biological evaluation
and molecular docking study.

He H(1), Xia H(2), Xia Q(3), Ren Y(3), He H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Pesticide and Chemical Biology of Ministry of Education,
College of Chemistry, Central China Normal University, 152 Luoyu Road, Wuhan
430079, PR China; Jiangxi Key Laboratory of Organic Chemistry, Jiangxi Science
and Technology Normal University, Fenglin Street, Nanchang, Jiangxi 330013, PR
China.
(2)Jiangxi Key Laboratory of Organic Chemistry, Jiangxi Science and Technology
Normal University, Fenglin Street, Nanchang, Jiangxi 330013, PR China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Pesticide and Chemical Biology of Ministry of Education,
College of Chemistry, Central China Normal University, 152 Luoyu Road, Wuhan
430079, PR China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Pesticide and Chemical Biology of Ministry of Education,
College of Chemistry, Central China Normal University, 152 Luoyu Road, Wuhan
430079, PR China. Electronic address: he1208@mail.ccnu.edu.cn.

By targeting the thiamin diphosphate (ThDP) binding site of Escherichia coli (E. 
coli) pyruvate dehydrogenase multienzyme complex E1 (PDHc E1), a series of novel 
'open-chain' classes of ThDP analogs A, B, and C with N-acylhydrazone moieties
was designed and synthesized to explore their activities against E. coli PHDc E1 
in vitro and their inhibitory activity against microbial diseases were further
evaluated in vivo. As a result, A1-23 exhibited moderate to potent inhibitory
activities against E. coli PDHc E1 (IC50=0.15-23.55μM). The potent inhibitors
A13, A14, A15, C2, had strong inhibitory activities with IC50 values of 0.60,
0.15, 0.39 and 0.34μM against E. coli PDHc E1 and with good enzyme-selective
inhibition between microorganisms and mammals. Especially, the most powerful
inhibitor A14 could 99.37% control Xanthimonas oryzae pv. Oryzae. Furthermore,
the binding features of compound A14 within E. coli PDHc E1 were investigated to 
provide useful insights for the further construction of new inhibitor by
molecular docking, site-directed mutagenesis, and enzymatic assays. The results
indicated that A14 had most powerful inhibition against E. coli PDHc E1 due to
the establishment of stronger interaction with Glu571, Met194, Glu522, Leu264 and
Phe602 at active site of E.coli PDHc E1. It could be used as a lead compound for 
further optimization, and may have potential as a new microbicide.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2017.08.038 
PMID: 28866375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

