
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2018 Mar;98(5):1839-1849. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.8660. Epub 2017 Oct
12.

Changes in physiological and some nutritional, nutraceuticals, chemical-physical,
microbiological and sensory quality of minimally processed cactus pears cvs
'Bianca', 'Gialla' and 'Rossa' stored under passive modified atmosphere.

Palma A(1), Continella A(2), La Malfa S(2), D'Aquino S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Sciences of Food Production, National Research Council, Regione
Baldinca, Li Punti, Sassari, Italy.
(2)Department of Agriculture, Food and Environment, University of Catania,
Catania, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The objective of this study was to compare the overall quality
changes of minimally processed cactus pears cvs 'Bianca', Gialla' and 'Rossa'
stored at 4 °C for 10 days. Periodically in-package CO2 , O2 and C2 H4 were
determined and fruit were assessed for overall quality changes (pH, acidity,
sugars, phenolics, betacyanins and betaxanthines, antioxidant capacity, colour,
firmness, microbiological population and sensory attributes). In a preliminary
study three different polymeric films were tested to select the most suitable to 
design a package with a short lag time to achieve steady-state conditions.
RESULTS: Results showed marked differences between measured in-package CO2 and O2
values and those calculated based on respiration of peeled fruit and film
permeance to CO2 and O2 provided by manufactures. The sensory evaluation of
packed fruit indicated in film BBT-Bolphane, which created a steady-state
in-package partial pressure for CO2 of 4.3-4.8 kPa and for O2 of 4.8-5.5 kPa, as 
the best film. Results of in-package gas composition with the three cultivars
were similar to those achieved in cv. 'Gialla' with the preliminary test. All
measured qualitative parameters changed slightly over the storage period for all 
cultivars and followed the same trend, despite significant differences existing
among cultivars.
CONCLUSION: This study clearly showed a similar physiological behavior of
minimally processed 'Bianca', 'Gialla' and 'Rossa' cactus pears. Storage
conditions optimal for one cultivar fit well for the others; thus mixing fruit of
different cultivars in a package designed for one specific cultivar does not lead
to relevant deviation from expected results. © 2017 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2017 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.8660 
PMID: 28885688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

