
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2017 Oct;101(20):7497-7507. doi:
10.1007/s00253-017-8470-7. Epub 2017 Sep 9.

Polyhydroxyalkanoate production from sucrose by Cupriavidus necator strains
harboring csc genes from Escherichia coli W.

Arikawa H(1), Matsumoto K(2), Fujiki T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bioproducts Research Group, Biotechnology Development Laboratories, KANEKA
CORPORATION, 1-8 Miyamae-Cho, Takasago-Cho, Takasago, Hyogo, 676-8688, Japan.
Hisashi.Arikawa@kaneka.co.jp.
(2)Bioproducts Research Group, Biotechnology Development Laboratories, KANEKA
CORPORATION, 1-8 Miyamae-Cho, Takasago-Cho, Takasago, Hyogo, 676-8688, Japan.

Cupriavidus necator H16 is the most promising bacterium for industrial production
of polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) because of their remarkable ability to accumulate
them in the cells. With genetic modifications, this bacterium can produce
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyhexanoate) (PHBHHx), which has better physical
properties, as well as poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) using plant oils and sugars 
as a carbon source. Considering production cost, sucrose is a very attractive raw
material because it is inexpensive; however, this bacterium cannot assimilate
sucrose. Here, we used the sucrose utilization (csc) genes of Escherichia coli W 
to generate C. necator strains that can assimilate sucrose. Especially,
glucose-utilizing recombinant C. necator strains harboring the sucrose hydrolase 
gene (cscA) and sucrose permease gene (cscB) of E. coli W grew well on sucrose as
a sole carbon source and accumulated PHB. In addition, strains introduced with a 
crotonyl-CoA reductase gene (ccr), ethylmalonyl-CoA decarboxylase gene (emd), and
some other genetic modifications besides the csc genes and the glucose-utilizing 
mutations produced PHBHHx with a 3-hydroxyhexanoate (3HHx) content of maximum
approximately 27 mol% from sucrose. Furthermore, when one of the PHBHHx-producing
strains was cultured with sucrose solution in a fed-batch fermentation, PHBHHx
with a 3HHx content of approximately 4 mol% was produced and reached 113 g/L for 
65 h, which is approximately 1.5-fold higher than that produced using glucose
solution.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-017-8470-7 
PMID: 28889198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

