
1. Bioresour Technol. 2017 Dec;245(Pt A):426-433. doi:
10.1016/j.biortech.2017.09.024. Epub 2017 Sep 5.

Enhancement of solvent production by overexpressing key genes of the
acetone-butanol-ethanol fermentation pathway in Clostridium
saccharoperbutylacetonicum N1-4.

Wang S(1), Dong S(1), Wang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosystems Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849,
USA.
(2)Department of Biosystems Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849,
USA; Center for Bioenergy and Bioproducts, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849,
USA. Electronic address: yiwang3@auburn.edu.

Clostridium saccharoperbutylacetonicum N1-4 is well known as a hyper-butanol
producing strain. However, little information is available concerning its butanol
production mechanism and the development of more robust strains. In this study,
key biosynthetic genes (either endogenous or exogenous) including the sol operon 
(bld-ctfA-ctfB-adc), adhE1, adhE1D485G, thl, thlA1V5A, thlAV5A and the expression
cassette EC (thl-hbd-crt-bcd) were overexpressed in C. saccharoperbutylacetonicum
N1-4 to evaluate their potential in enhancement of butanol production. The
overexpression of sol operon increased ethanol production by 400%. The
overexpression of adhE1 and adhED485G resulted in a 5.6- and 4.9-fold higher
ethanol production, respectively, producing final acetone-butanol-ethanol (ABE)
titers (30.6 and 30.1gL-1) of among the highest as ever reported for
solventogenic clostridia. The most significant increase of butanol production (by
13.7%) and selectivity (73.7%) was achieved by the overexpression of EC. These
results provides a solid foundation and essential references for the further
development of more robust strains.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2017.09.024 
PMID: 28898840  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

