
1. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2018 Mar;13(1):90-99. doi: 10.1007/s11481-017-9763-4.
Epub 2017 Sep 13.

Altered B Cell Homeostasis in Patients with Major Depressive Disorder and
Normalization of CD5 Surface Expression on Regulatory B Cells in Treatment
Responders.

Ahmetspahic D(1)(2), Schwarte K(1)(2), Ambrée O(1)(3), Bürger C(1), Falcone V(1),
Seiler K(1), Kooybaran MR(1)(2), Grosse L(1), Roos F(1), Scheffer J(1), Jörgens
S(1), Koelkebeck K(1), Dannlowski U(1), Arolt V(1), Scheu S(4), Alferink
J(5)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Münster,
Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, 48149, Münster, Germany.
(2)Cluster of Excellence EXC 1003, Cells in Motion, University of Münster,
Münster, Germany.
(3)Department of Behavioural Biology, University of Osnabrück, Osnabrück,
Germany.
(4)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hospital Hygiene, University of
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Münster,
Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, 48149, Münster, Germany.
Judith.Alferink@ukmuenster.de.
(6)Cluster of Excellence EXC 1003, Cells in Motion, University of Münster,
Münster, Germany. Judith.Alferink@ukmuenster.de.
(7)Alexianer Hospital for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Münster, Germany.
Judith.Alferink@ukmuenster.de.

Pro-inflammatory activity and cell-mediated immune responses have been widely
observed in patients with major depressive disorder (MDD). Besides their
well-known function as antibody-producers, B cells play a key role in
inflammatory responses by secreting pro- and anti-inflammatory factors. However, 
homeostasis of specific B cell subsets has not been comprehensively investigated 
in MDD. In this study, we characterized circulating B cells of distinct
developmental steps including transitional, naïve-mature, antigen-experienced
switched, and non-switched memory cells, plasmablasts and regulatory B cells by
multi-parameter flow cytometry. In a 6-weeks follow-up, circulating B cells were 
monitored in a small group of therapy responders and non-responders. Frequencies 
of naïve lgD+CD27- B cells, but not lgD+CD27+ memory B cells, were reduced in
severely depressed patients as compared to healthy donors (HD) or mildly to
moderately depressed patients. Specifically, B cells with immune-regulatory
capacities such as CD1d+CD5+ B cells and CD24+CD38hi transitional B cells were
reduced in MDD. Also Bm1-Bm5 classification in MDD revealed reduced Bm2' cells
comprising germinal center founder cells as well as transitional B cells. We
further found that reduced CD5 surface expression on transitional B cells was
associated with severe depression and normalized exclusively in clinical
responders. This study demonstrates a compromised peripheral B cell compartment
in MDD with a reduction in B cells exhibiting a regulatory phenotype. Recovery of
CD5 surface expression on transitional B cells in clinical response, a molecule
involved in activation and down-regulation of B cell responses, further points
towards a B cell-dependent process in the pathogenesis of MDD.

DOI: 10.1007/s11481-017-9763-4 
PMID: 28905187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

