
1. J Food Prot. 2017 Oct;80(10):1705-1710. doi: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-16-509.

Prevalence of Putative Virulence Genes in Campylobacter and Arcobacter Species
Isolated from Poultry and Poultry By-Products in Tunisia.

Jribi H(1), Sellami H(1)(2), Hassena AB(1), Gdoura R(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Laboratoire de recherche Toxicologie Microbiologie Environnementale et Santé
(LR17ES06), Faculté des Sciences de Sfax, Université de Sfax, Sfax 3038, Tunisia.
(2)2 Laboratoire de Traitement et de Valorisation des Rejets Hydriques (LTVRH),
Water Researches and Technologies Center (CERTE), University of Carthage, Tourist
route Soliman, BP 273-8020, Nabeul 8000, Tunisia.

Campylobacter and Arcobacter spp. are common causes of gastroenteritis in humans;
these infections are commonly due to undercooked poultry. However, their
virulence mechanism is still poorly understood. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the presence of genotypic virulence markers in Campylobacter and
Arcobacter species using PCR. The prevalence of virulence and cytolethal
distending toxin (CDT) genes was estimated in 71 Campylobacteraceae isolates. PCR
was used to detect the presence of virulence genes (iam, cadF, virB1, flaA, cdtA,
cdtB, and cdtC) using specific primers for a total of 45 Campylobacter isolates, 
including 37 C. jejuni and 8 C. coli. All the Campylobacter isolates were
positive for the cadF gene. The plasmid gene virB11 was not detected in any
strain. The invasion associated marker was not detected in C. jejuni. Lower
detection rates were observed for flaA, cdtA, cdtB, and cdtC. The presence of
nine putative Arcobacter virulence genes (cadF, ciaB, cj1349, mviN, pldA, tlyA,
irgA, hecA, and hecB) was checked in a set of 22 Arcobacter butzleri and 4
Arcobacter cryaerophilus isolates. The pldA and mviN genes were predominant
(88.64%). Lower detection rates were observed for tlyA (84.76%), ciaB (84.61%),
cadF and cj1349 (76.92%), IrgA and hecA (61.53%), and hecB (57.69%). The findings
revealed that a majority of the Campylobacteraceae strains have these putative
virulence genes that may lead to pathogenic effects in humans.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-16-509 
PMID: 28906158  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

