
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Sep 12;7(1):11311. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-11532-2.

High throughput data analyses of the immune characteristics of Microtus fortis
infected with Schistosoma japonicum.

Hu Y(1), Sun L(1), Yuan Z(1), Xu Y(1), Cao J(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, MOH, China,
National Center for International Research on Tropical Diseases, China, WHO
Collaborating Center for Tropical Diseases, Shanghai, 200025, China.
(2)National Institute of Parasitic Diseases, Chinese Center for Disease Control
and Prevention, Key Laboratory of Parasite and Vector Biology, MOH, China,
National Center for International Research on Tropical Diseases, China, WHO
Collaborating Center for Tropical Diseases, Shanghai, 200025, China.
caojp@yahoo.com.

Microtus fortis exhibits natural resistance against Schistosoma japonicum, and
the parasite cannot grow and develop in M. fortis. Extensive research has been
carried out, however, the associated mechanism remains unclear. In the present
study, we analysed the combined data obtained from a cytokine chip assay,
transcriptome, and metabolome. The cytokine profile from C57BL/6 and M. fortis
mice was assessed before and after infection. Several cytokines increased during 
the second and third week post-infection. Some transcripts related to cytokine
genes and associated proteins were also highly expressed (i.e., Hgf, C3, and
Lbp). The liver metabolism of M. fortis following infection with S. japonicum was
assessed. We identified 25 different metabolites between the uninfected and
infected M. fortis, and 22 different metabolites between infected M. fortis and
C57BL/6 mice. The metabolomic pathways of these differential metabolites were
then analysed with MetPA, revealing that they were involved in histidine
metabolism, valine, leucine, and isoleucine biosyntheses, and lysine degradation.
Thus, the elevated expression of these metabolites and pathways may promote the
phagocytic function of the neutrophils and natural killer cell activity following
TLR activation. These results provide novel insight into the resistance mechanism
of M. fortis against S. japonicum.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-11532-2 
PMCID: PMC5595801
PMID: 28900150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

