
1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jul 27;8(33):53935-53947. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.19644.
eCollection 2017 Aug 15.

SNX10 promotes phagosome maturation in macrophages and protects mice against
Listeria monocytogenes infection.

Lou J(#)(1)(2), Li X(#)(1)(2), Huang W(1)(2), Liang J(1)(2), Zheng M(1)(2), Xu
T(1)(2), Lyu J(1)(2), Li D(1)(2), Xu Q(1)(2), Jin X(1)(2), Fu G(1)(2), Wang
D(1)(2), Lu L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou,
China.
(2)Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, Zhejiang University School of
Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Listeria monocytogenes (L. monocytogenes), which is a facultative intracellular
bacterial pathogen that causes listeriosis, is widely used to study the mammalian
immune response to infection. After phagocytosis by professional phagocytes, L.
monocytogenes is initially contained within phagosomes, which mature into
phagolysosomes, where the bacteria are degraded. Although phagocytosis and
subsequent phagosome maturation is essential for the clearance of infectious
microbial pathogens, the underlying regulatory mechanisms are still unclear.
SNX10 (Sorting nexin 10) has the simplest structure of the SNX family and has
been reported to regulate endosomal morphology, which might be crucial for
macrophage function, including phagocytosis and digestion of pathogens,
inflammatory response, and antigen presentation. Our results showed that SNX10
expression was upregulated following L. monocytogenes infection in macrophages.
It was also revealed that SNX10 promoted phagosome maturation by recruiting the
Mon1-Ccz1 complex to endosomes and phagosomes. As a result, SNX10 deficiency
decreased the bacterial killing ability of macrophages, and SNX10-deficient mice 
showed increased susceptibility to L. monocytogenes infection in vivo. Thus, this
study revealed an essential role of SNX10 in controlling bacterial infection.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.19644 
PMCID: PMC5589552
PMID: 28903313 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST All authors reported no
conflict of interest.

