
1. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2017;410:99-126. doi: 10.1007/82_2017_61.

CTLA-4, an Essential Immune-Checkpoint for T-Cell Activation.

Chikuma S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine,
35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-Ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan. schikuma@keio.jp.

The response of peripheral T lymphocytes (T cell) is controlled by multiple
checkpoints to avoid unwanted activation against self-tissues. Two opposing
costimulatory receptors, CD28 and CTLA-4, on T cells bind to the same ligands
(CD80 and CD86) on antigen-presenting cells (APCs), and provide positive and
negative feedback for T-cell activation, respectively. Early studies suggested
that CTLA-4 is induced on activated T cells and binds to CD80/CD86 with much
stronger affinity than CD28, providing a competitive inhibition. Subsequent
studies by many researchers revealed the more complex mode of T-cell inhibition
by CTLA-4. After T-cell activation, CTLA-4 is stored in the intracellular
vesicles, and recruited to the immunological synapse formed between T cells and
APCs, and inhibits further activation of T cells by blocking signals initiated by
T-cell receptors and CD28. CTLA-4-positive cells can also provide cell-extrinsic 
regulation on other autoreactive T cells, and are considered to provide an
essential regulatory mechanism for FoxP3+Â regulatory T cells. Genetic deficiency 
of CTLA-4 leads to CD28-mediated severe autoimmunity in mice and humans,
suggesting its function as a fundamental brake that restrains the expansion and
activation of self-reactive T cells. In cancer, therapeutic approaches targeting 
CTLA-4 by humanized blocking antibodies has been demonstrated to be an effective 
immunotherapy by reversing T-cell tolerance against tumors. This chapter
introduces CTLA-4 biology, including its discovery and mechanism of action, and
discusses questions related to CTLA-4.

DOI: 10.1007/82_2017_61 
PMID: 28900679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

