
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Sep 13;7(1):11480. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-11915-5.

Syk-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of 3BP2 is required for optimal
FcRγ-mediated phagocytosis and chemokine expression in U937 cells.

Chihara K(1)(2), Kato Y(1)(3), Yoshiki H(1), Takeuchi K(1)(2), Fujieda S(3), Sada
K(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Science and Microbiology, Faculty of Medical Sciences,
University of Fukui, 23-3 Matsuoka-Shimoaizuki, Eiheiji, Fukui, 910-1193, Japan.
(2)Life Science Innovation Center, University of Fukui, 3-9-1 Bunkyo, Fukui,
Fukui, 910-8507, Japan.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, Faculty of Medical
Sciences, University of Fukui, 23-3 Matsuoka-Shimoaizuki, Eiheiji, Fukui,
910-1193, Japan.
(4)Department of Genome Science and Microbiology, Faculty of Medical Sciences,
University of Fukui, 23-3 Matsuoka-Shimoaizuki, Eiheiji, Fukui, 910-1193, Japan. 
ksada@u-fukui.ac.jp.
(5)Life Science Innovation Center, University of Fukui, 3-9-1 Bunkyo, Fukui,
Fukui, 910-8507, Japan. ksada@u-fukui.ac.jp.

The adaptor protein c-Abl SH3 domain binding protein-2 (3BP2) is tyrosine
phosphorylated by Syk in response to cross-linking of antigen receptors, which in
turn activates various immune responses. Recently, a study using the mouse model 
of cherubism, a dominant inherited disorder caused by mutations in the gene
encoding 3BP2, showed that 3BP2 is involved in the regulation of phagocytosis
mediated by Fc receptor for IgG (FcγR) in macrophages. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying 3BP2-mediated regulation of phagocytosis and the
physiological relevance of 3BP2 tyrosine phosphorylation remains elusive. In this
study, we established various gene knockout U937 cell lines using the CRISPR/Cas9
system and found that 3BP2 is rapidly tyrosine phosphorylated by Syk in response 
to cross-linking of FcγRI. Depletion of 3BP2 caused significant reduction in the 
Fc receptor γ chain (FcRγ)-mediated phagocytosis in addition to the
FcγRI-mediated induction of chemokine mRNA for IL-8, CCL3L3 and CCL4L2.
Syk-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of 3BP2 was required for overcoming these 
defects. Finally, we found that the PH and SH2 domains play important roles on
FcγRI-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of 3BP2 in HL-60 cells. Taken together,
these results indicate that Syk-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of 3BP2 is
required for optimal FcRγ-mediated phagocytosis and chemokine expression.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-11915-5 
PMCID: PMC5597638
PMID: 28904407  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

