
1. Tierarztl Prax Ausg K Kleintiere Heimtiere. 2017 Oct 17;45(5):295-300. doi:
10.15654/TPK-170058. Epub 2017 Sep 13.

[Heterogeneity of canine immune responses to Borrelia burgdorferi in a line
immunoassay comprising recombinant VlsE and C6 peptide].

[Article in German]

Breu D(1), Müller E.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Doris Breu, LABOKLIN - Labor für klinische Diagnostik GmbH & Co. KG,
Steubenstraße 4, 97688 Bad Kissingen, E-Mail: breu@laboklin.com.

OBJECTIVE: The study aimed to investigate the distribution of specific immune
responses (IgG) to Borrelia burgdorferi using a line immunoassay with recombinant
VlsE (variable major protein-like sequence, expressed) protein and synthetic C
peptide among other antigens. We compared the immune responses to VlsE protein
and C6 peptide, because both antigens have been considered specific for a
Borrelia infection.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 1355 blood samples from dogs suspected of
Borrelia infection were analysed. The line immunoassay employed nine antigens.
RESULTS: A total of 64.4% of all samples tested negative, 16.4% were positive for
an infection and 17.4% were positive for vaccination. Band patterns specific for 
both infection and vaccination were observed in 1.2% of the dogs. The bands that 
most frequently tested positive were p100 (24.3%), p31/OspA (18.5%), C6 (16.3%)
and VlsE (13.9%). A total of 236 dogs (17.4% of the population) had antibodies to
VlsE and/or C6 peptide. In 73.3% of these dogs, results for VlsE and C6 peptide
were consistent, whereas this was not the case for 26.7% of these animals.
CONCLUSION AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Testing using a line immunoassay allows for
qualitative analyses of different immune responses to various antigens used as
probes. In our study, >  26% of the dogs displayed discrepant results with regard
to VlsE and C6, the two antigens considered specific for Borrelia burgdorferi
infection. To confirm or rule out infection, the results of several band
patterns, thought to be specific for infection, need to be taken into
consideration.

DOI: 10.15654/TPK-170058 
PMID: 28905981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

