
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr. 2017 Dec;1859(12):2350-2360. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2017.09.010. Epub 2017 Sep 11.

Importance of the REM (Ras exchange) domain for membrane interactions by RasGRP3.

Czikora A(1), Kedei N(1), Kalish H(2), Blumberg PM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States.
(2)Trans-NIH Shared Resource on Biomedical Engineering and Physical Science
(BEPS), National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB)
National Institutes of Health, United States.
(3)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States. Electronic address:
blumberp@dc37a.nci.nih.gov.

RasGRP comprises a family of guanine nucleotide exchange factors, regulating the 
dissociation of GDP from Ras GTPases to enhance the formation of the active
GTP-bound form. RasGRP1 possesses REM (Ras exchange), GEF (catalytic), EF-hand,
C1, SuPT (suppressor of PT), and PT (plasma membrane-targeting) domains, among
which the C1 domain drives membrane localization in response to diacylglycerol or
phorbol ester and the PT domain recognizes phosphoinositides. The homologous
family member RasGRP3 shows less plasma membrane localization. The objective of
this study was to explore the role of the different domains of RasGRP3 in
membrane translocation in response to phorbol esters. The full-length RasGRP3
shows limited translocation to the plasma membrane in response to PMA, even when 
the basic hydrophobic cluster in the PT domain, reported to be critical for
RasGRP1 translocation to endogenous activators, is mutated to resemble that of
RasGRP1. Moreover, exchange of the C-termini (SuPT-PT domain) of the two proteins
had little effect on their plasma membrane translocation. On the other hand,
while the C1 domain of RasGRP3 alone showed partial plasma membrane
translocation, truncated RasGRP3 constructs, which contain the PT domain and are 
missing the REM, showed stronger translocation, indicating that the REM of
RasGRP3 was a suppressor of its membrane interaction. The REM of RasGRP1 failed
to show comparable suppression of RasGRP3 translocation. The marked differences
between RasGRP3 and RasGRP1 in membrane interaction necessarily will contribute
to their different behavior in cells and are relevant to the design of selective 
ligands as potential therapeutic agents.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2017.09.010 
PMCID: PMC5659902
PMID: 28912101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

