
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2017 Aug 1;9(8):2122-2135. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evx092.

Pneumococcal 23B Molecular Subtype Identified Using Whole Genome Sequencing.

Kapatai G(1), Sheppard CL(1), Troxler LJ(2), Litt DJ(1), Furrer J(3), Hilty
M(2)(4), Fry NK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Reference Unit, Public Health
England, National Infection Service, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Institute for Infectious Diseases, University of Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Bern University Hospital, Inselspital,
University of Bern, Switzerland.

The polysaccharide capsule is a major virulence factor of Streptococcus
pneumoniae and the target of all currently licensed pneumococcal vaccines. At
present, there are 92 serologically distinct pneumococcal serotypes. Structural
and antigenic variation of capsular types is the result of genetic variation
within the capsular polysaccharide synthesis (CPS) locus; however, genetic
variation may not always result in phenotypic differences which produce novel
serotypes. With the introduction of high throughput whole genome sequencing,
discovery of novel genotypic variants is not unexpected and this study describes 
a novel variant of the serotype 23B CPS operon. This novel variant was
characterized as a novel genotypic subtype (23B1) with ∼70% homology to the
published 23B CPS sequence. High sequence variability was determined in eight cps
genes involved in sugar biosynthesis. However, there was no distinction between
the classic 23B serotype and 23B1 serologically or in terms of polysaccharide
structure. Phylogenetic and eBURST analysis revealed a distinct lineage for 23B1 
with multiple clones (UK, Thailand, and USA) that arose at different points
during pneumococcal evolution. Analysis of the UK S. pneumoniae isolates
(n = 121) revealed an upsurge of 23B1 ST2372 in 2011, after which this previously
unseen ST increased to reach 50% proportion of the 23B sequenced isolates from
2013 and remained prevalent within our sequenced isolates from later years.
Therefore, although the 23B1 variant appears to have no phenotypic impact and
cannot be considered as novel serotype, it appears to have led to a genetic
restructuring of the UK serotype 23B population.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evx092 
PMCID: PMC5581491
PMID: 28910966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

