
1. PLoS One. 2017 Sep 14;12(9):e0184720. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184720.
eCollection 2017.

Genetic characterization of blaNDM-harboring plasmids in carbapenem-resistant
Escherichia coli from Myanmar.

Sugawara Y(1), Akeda Y(1)(2), Sakamoto N(1), Takeuchi D(1), Motooka D(3),
Nakamura S(3), Hagiya H(2), Yamamoto N(2), Nishi I(4), Yoshida H(2), Okada K(1), 
Zin KN(5), Aye MM(6), Tomono K(2), Hamada S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Thailand-Japan Research Collaboration Center on Emerging and Re-emerging
Infections, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita,
Japan.
(2)Division of Infection Control and Prevention, Osaka University Hospital,
Suita, Japan.
(3)Department of Infection Metagenomics, Research Institute for Microbial
Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
(4)Laboratory for Clinical Investigation, Osaka University Hospital, Suita,
Japan.
(5)Clinical Laboratory Department, Yangon General Hospital, Yangon, Myanmar.
(6)Bacteriology Research Division, Department of Medical Research, Yangon,
Myanmar.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2017 Dec 6;12 (12 ):e0189435.

The bacterial enzyme New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase hydrolyzes almost all β-lactam
antibiotics, including carbapenems, which are drugs of last resort for severe
bacterial infections. The spread of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae that 
carry the New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase gene, blaNDM, poses a serious threat to
public health. In this study, we genetically characterized eight
carbapenem-resistant Escherichia coli isolates from a tertiary care hospital in
Yangon, Myanmar. The eight isolates belonged to five multilocus-sequence types
and harbored multiple antimicrobial-resistance genes, resulting in resistance
against nearly all of the antimicrobial agents tested, except colistin and
fosfomycin. Nine plasmids harboring blaNDM genes were identified from these
isolates. Multiple blaNDM genes were found in the distinct Inc-replicon types of 
the following plasmids: an IncA/C2 plasmid harboring blaNDM-1 (n = 1), IncX3
plasmids harboring blaNDM-4 (n = 2) or blaNDM-7 (n = 1), IncFII plasmids
harboring blaNDM-4 (n = 1) or blaNDM-5 (n = 3), and a multireplicon F plasmid
harboring blaNDM-5 (n = 1). Comparative analysis highlighted the diversity of the
blaNDM-harboring plasmids and their distinct characteristics, which depended on
plasmid replicon types. The results indicate circulation of phylogenetically
distinct strains of carbapenem-resistant E. coli with various plasmids harboring 
blaNDM genes in the hospital.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184720 
PMCID: PMC5598989
PMID: 28910381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

