
1. Epidemiol Infect. 2017 Nov;145(15):3180-3190. doi: 10.1017/S0950268817002175.
Epub 2017 Sep 20.

First detection and characterization of Salmonella spp. in poultry and swine
raised in backyard production systems in central Chile.

Alegria-Moran R(1), Rivera D(2), Toledo V(2), Moreno-Switt AI(2), Hamilton-West
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology Unit, Department of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of
Veterinary and Animal Sciences,Universidad de Chile,Santiago,Chile.
(2)Escuela de Medicina Veterinaria, Facultad de Ecología y Recursos
Naturales,Universidad Andres Bello,Santiago,Chile.

Little is known about Salmonella serovars circulating in backyard poultry and
swine populations worldwide. Backyard production systems (BPS) that raise swine
and/or poultry are distributed across Chile, but are more heavily concentrated in
central Chile, where industrialized systems are in close contact with BPS. This
study aims to detect and identify circulating Salmonella serovars in poultry and 
swine raised in BPS. Bacteriological Salmonella isolation was carried out for
1744 samples collected from 329 BPS in central Chile. Faecal samples were taken
from swine, poultry, geese, ducks, turkeys and peacocks, as well as environmental
faecal samples. Confirmation of Salmonella spp. was performed using
invA-polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Identification of serovars was carried out 
using a molecular serotyping approach, where serogroups were confirmed by a
multiplex PCR of Salmonella serogroup genes for five Salmonella O antigens (i.e.,
D, B, C1, C2-C3, and E1), along with two PCR amplifications, followed by
sequencing of fliC and fljB genes. A total of 25 samples (1·4% of total samples) 
from 15 BPS (4·6 % of total sampled BPS) were found positive for Salmonella.
Positive samples were found in poultry (chickens and ducks), swine and
environmental sources. Molecular prediction of serovars on Salmonella isolated
showed 52·0% of S. Typhimurium, 16·0% of S. Infantis, 16·0% S. Enteritidis, 8·0% 
S. Hadar, 4·0% S. Tennessee and 4·0% S. Kentucky. Poor biosecurity measures were 
found on sampled BPS, where a high percentage of mixed confinement systems
(72·8%); and almost half of the sampled BPS with improper management of infected 
mortalities (e.g. selling the carcasses of infected animals for consumption).
Number of birds other than chickens (P = 0·014; OR = 1·04; IC (95%) = 1·01-1·07),
mixed productive objective (P = 0·030; OR = 5·35; IC (95%) = 1·24-27·59) and
mixed animal replacement origin (P = 0017; OR = 5·19; IC (95%) = 1·35-20·47) were
detected as risk factors for BPS positivity to Salmonella spp. This is the first 
evidence of serovars of Salmonella spp. circulating in BPS from central Chile.
Detected serovars have been linked to human and animal clinical outbreaks
worldwide and in Chile, highlighting the importance of BPS on the control and
dissemination of Salmonella serovars potentially hazardous to public health.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268817002175 
PMID: 28927474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

