
1. Environ Microbiol. 2017 Dec;19(12):4913-4925. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.13935. Epub 
2017 Oct 13.

Clade II nitrous oxide respiration of Wolinella succinogenes depends on the NosG,
-C1, -C2, -H electron transport module, NosB and a Rieske/cytochrome bc complex.

Hein S(1), Witt S(1), Simon J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Energy Conversion and Biotechnology, Department of Biology,
Technische Universität Darmstadt, Schnittspahnstraße 10, 64287 Darmstadt,
Germany.

Comment in
    Environ Microbiol. 2017 Dec;19(12):4806-4807.

Microbial reduction of nitrous oxide (N2 O) is an environmentally significant
process in the biogeochemical nitrogen cycle. However, it has been recognized
only recently that the gene encoding N2 O reductase (nosZ) is organized in
varying genetic contexts, thereby defining clade I (or 'typical') and clade II
(or 'atypical') N2 O reductases and nos gene clusters. This study addresses the
enzymology of the clade II Nos system from Wolinella succinogenes, a
nitrate-ammonifying and N2 O-respiring Epsilonproteobacterium that contains a
cytochrome c N2 O reductase (cNosZ). The characterization of single non-polar nos
gene deletion mutants demonstrated that the NosG, -C1, -C2, -H and -B proteins
were essential for N2 O respiration. Moreover, cells of a W. succinogenes mutant 
lacking a putative menaquinol-oxidizing Rieske/cytochrome bc complex (QcrABC)
were found to be incapable of N2 O (and also nitrate) respiration. Proton motive 
menaquinol oxidation by N2 O is suggested, supported by the finding that the
molar yield for W. succinogenes cells grown by N2 O respiration using formate as 
electron donor exceeded that of fumarate respiration by about 30%. The results
demand revision of the electron transport chain model of clade II N2 O
respiration and challenge the assumption that NosGH(NapGH)-type iron-sulfur
proteins are menaquinol-reactive.

© 2017 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.13935 
PMID: 28925551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

