
1. Oncoimmunology. 2017 Jun 20;6(9):e1341031. doi: 10.1080/2162402X.2017.1341031.
eCollection 2017.

Romidepsin alone or in combination with anti-CD20 chimeric antigen receptor
expanded natural killer cells targeting Burkitt lymphoma in vitro and in
immunodeficient mice.

Chu Y(1), Yahr A(1), Huang B(1), Ayello J(1), Barth M(2), S Cairo
M(1)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY.
(4)Department of Pathology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY.
(5)Department of Microbiology & Immunology and New York Medical College,
Valhalla, NY.
(6)Department of Cell Biology & Anatomy, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY.

Facilitating the development of alternative targeted therapeutic strategies is
urgently required to improve outcome or circumvent chemotherapy resistance in
children, adolescents, and adults with recurrent/refractory de novo mature B-cell
(CD20) non-Hodgkin lymphoma, including Burkitt lymphoma (BL). Romidepsin, a
histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), has been used to treat cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma. We have demonstrated the significant anti-tumor effect of anti-CD20
chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) modified expanded peripheral blood natural killer
(exPBNK) against rituximab-sensitive and -resistant BL. This study examined the
anti-tumor activity of romidepsin alone and in combination with anti-CD20 CAR
exPBNKs against rituximab-sensitive and -resistant BL in vitro and in vivo. We
found that romidepsin significantly inhibited both rituximab-sensitive and
-resistant BL cell proliferation in vitro (P < 0.001) and induced cell death in
rituximab-sensitive Raji (P < 0.001) and cell cycle arrest in rituximab-resistant
Raji-2R and Raji-4RH (P < 0.001). Consistent with in vitro observations, we also 
found romidepsin significantly inhibited the growth of rituximab-sensitive and
-resistant BL in BL xenografted NSG mice. We also demonstrated that romidpesin
significantly induced the expression of Natural Killer Group 2, Member D (NKG2D) 
ligands MICA/B in both rituximab-sensitive and -resistant BL cells (P < 0.001)
resulting in enhancement of exPBNK in vitro cytotoxicity through NKG2D. Finally, 
we observed the combination of romidepsin and anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK significantly 
induced cell death in BL cells in vitro, reduced tumor burden and enhanced
survival in humanized BL xenografted NSG mice (p < 0.05). Our data suggests that 
romidepsin is an active HDAC inhibitor that also potentiates expanded NK and
anti-CD20 CAR exPBNK activity against rituximab-sensitive and -resistant BL.

DOI: 10.1080/2162402X.2017.1341031 
PMCID: PMC5599075
PMID: 28932644 

