
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017 Sep 6;7:399. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00399.
eCollection 2017.

Neisseria gonorrhoeae Challenge Increases Matrix Metalloproteinase-8 Expression
in Fallopian Tube Explants.

Juica NE(1), Rodas PI(1), Solar P(1), Borda P(2), Vargas R(2)(3), Muñoz C(4),
Paredes R(4), Christodoulides M(5), Velasquez LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Medicina, Center for Integrative Medicine and Innovative Science, 
Universidad Andres BelloSantiago, Chile.
(2)Servicio de Ginecología y Obstetricia, Hospital San JoséSantiago, Chile.
(3)Servicio de Ginecología y Obstetricia, Clínica IndisaSantiago, Chile.
(4)Facultad de Ecología y Recursos Naturales, Escuela de Medicina Veterinaria,
Universidad Andres BelloSantiago, Chile.
(5)Neisseria Research Group, Sir Henry Wellcome Laboratories, Division of
Infection, Inflammation and Immunity, University of Southampton Medical
SchoolSouthampton, United Kingdom.

Background:Neisseria gonorrhoeae (Ngo) is the etiological agent of gonorrhea, a
sexually transmitted infection that initially infects the female lower genital
tract. In untreated women, the bacteria can ascend to the upper genital
reproductive tract and infect the fallopian tube (FTs), which is associated with 
salpingitis and can lead to impaired FT function and infertility. The
extracellular matrix (ECM) plays an important role in cell migration and
differentiation in the female genital tract, and some pathogens modify the ECM to
establish successful infections. The ECM is regulated by matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs),
their endogenous inhibitors; MMP deregulation causes pathological conditions in a
variety of tissues. Results: The aim of this work was to analyze the expression
and localization of MMP-3, MMP-8, MMP-9, and TIMP-1 in FT explants during Ngo
infection using real-time PCR, immunohistochemistry, zymography and ELISA. No
significant variations in MMP-3, MMP-9, and TIMP-1 transcript levels were
observed. In contrast, a significant increase (p < 0.05) was observed for MMP-8
expression and was accompanied by stromal immunoreactivity in infected explants. 
ELISA results supported these findings and showed that MMP-8 release increased
upon gonococcal infection. Conclusions: Our results indicate that gonococcal
infection induces increased MMP-8 expression, which might contribute to FT damage
during infection.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00399 
PMCID: PMC5592203
PMID: 28932707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

