
1. PLoS One. 2017 Sep 21;12(9):e0185109. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0185109.
eCollection 2017.

Spontaneous non-canonical assembly of CcmK hexameric components from
β-carboxysome shells of cyanobacteria.

Garcia-Alles LF(1), Lesniewska E(2), Root K(3), Aubry N(1), Pocholle N(2),
Mendoza CI(4)(5), Bourillot E(2), Barylyuk K(3), Pompon D(1), Zenobi R(3),
Reguera D(4), Truan G(1).

Author information: 
(1)LISBP, CNRS, INRA, INSA, University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(2)ICB UMR CNRS 6303, University of Bourgogne Franche-Comte, Dijon, France.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(4)Departament de Física de la Matèria Condensada, Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Instituto de Investigaciones en Materiales, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Cd Mx, México.

CcmK proteins are major constituents of icosahedral shells of β-carboxysomes, a
bacterial microcompartment that plays a key role for CO2 fixation in nature.
Supported by the characterization of bidimensional (2D) layers of packed CcmK
hexamers in crystal and electron microscopy structures, CcmK are assumed to be
the major components of icosahedral flat facets. Here, we reassessed the validity
of this model by studying CcmK isoforms from Synechocystis sp. PCC6803. Native
mass spectrometry studies confirmed that CcmK are hexamers in solution.
Interestingly, potential pre-assembled intermediates were also detected with
CcmK2. Atomic-force microscopy (AFM) imaging under quasi-physiological conditions
confirmed the formation of canonical flat sheets with CcmK4. Conversely, CcmK2
formed both canonical and striped-patterned patches, while CcmK1 assembled into
remarkable supra-hexameric curved honeycomb-like mosaics. Mutational studies
ascribed the propensity of CcmK1 to form round assemblies to a combination of two
features shared by at least one CcmK isoform in most β-cyanobacteria: a
displacement of an α helical portion towards the hexamer edge, where a potential 
phosphate binding funnel forms between packed hexamers, and the presence of a
short C-terminal extension in CcmK1. All-atom molecular dynamics supported a
contribution of phosphate molecules sandwiched between hexamers to bend CcmK1
assemblies. Formation of supra-hexameric curved structures could be reproduced in
coarse-grained simulations, provided that adhesion forces to the support were
weak. Apart from uncovering unprecedented CcmK self-assembly features, our data
suggest the possibility that transitions between curved and flat assemblies,
following cargo maturation, could be important for the biogenesis of
β-carboxysomes, possibly also of other BMC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0185109 
PMCID: PMC5608322
PMID: 28934279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

