
1. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2017 Dec;214:27-35. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2017.09.003. Epub 2017 Sep 20.

Molecular identification of an insulin growth factor binding protein (IGFBP) and 
its potential role in an insulin-like peptide system of the pearl oyster,
Pinctada fucata.

Zhang H(1), Shi Y(2), He M(3).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology, Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biology, South China Sea Institute of
Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510301, China; University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology, Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biology, South China Sea Institute of
Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510301, China.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology, Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biology, South China Sea Institute of
Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510301, China. Electronic
address: hmx2@scsio.ac.cn.

Insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) play critical roles in regulating metabolism, 
growth, and reproduction in invertebrates. IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs) serve as
major regulators of IGF activity and regulate endocrine system. In the present
study, the full-length cDNA of an igfbp was identified from the pearl oyster,
Pinctada fucata, using expressed sequence tag (EST) sequence. The 1124bp Pfigfbp 
cDNA contains a 465bp open reading frame (ORF) encoding a putative protein of 154
amino acids, a 5'-untranslated region (UTR) of 238bp, and a 3'-UTR of 394bp (not 
including polyA+). Multiple sequence alignment of the deduced IB domain sequences
revealed that twelve conserved Cys and ILP binding site in PfIGFBP were well
aligned with human IGFBPs1-7, Mizuhopecten yessoensis IGFBP5 and Eriocheir
sinensis IGFBP7. Gene expression analysis indicated that Pfigfbp mRNA was
expressed in all the tissues and developmental stages examined, with a higher
level in the foot than in other tissues and a higher level in the polar body
stage and 32-cell stage than in the other stages. Pfigfbp and PfILP (insulin-like
peptide) mRNA levels significantly increased in the digestive gland after
feeding, while levels were dramatically reduced during a week of food deprivation
and increased upon refeeding. In vitro experiments indicated that Pfigfbp mRNA
expression in mantle cells was affected by insulin/IGFs (IGF-I, IGF-II). Our data
suggests that Pfigfbp may be involved in endocrine signaling in P. fucata via the
regulation of insulin-like peptide signaling.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpb.2017.09.003 
PMID: 28939196  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

