
1. Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther. 2017 Dec;20:144-147. doi:
10.1016/j.pdpdt.2017.09.010. Epub 2017 Sep 19.

Analysis of gene expression of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) following
photodynamic therapy in human gingival fibroblasts.

Asl RM(1), Ghoraeian P(1), Monzavi A(2), Bahador A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Islamic Azad University, Tehran Medical Branch,
Theran, Iran.
(2)Laser Research Center of Dentistry (LRCD), Dentistry Research Institute,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Dental Research Center,
Dentistry Research Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran.
(3)Laser Research Center of Dentistry (LRCD), Dentistry Research Institute,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Dental Research Center,
Dentistry Research Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran; Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of
Medical Science, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: abahador@sina.tums.ac.ir.

BACKGROUND: Periodontal diseases are pathological inflammatory conditions of
multifactorial etiology that develops in response to periodontopathic bacteria.
Recently, photodynamic therapy (PDT) has begun to be incorporated as an adjuvant 
treatment for periodontal diseases. However, the effect of PDT on tissue
regeneration is not yet completely clear. This study aimed to analyze the gene
expression of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) following PDT in human
gingival fibroblasts (HuGu) cells in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: HuGu cells were treated in different groups: 1) ICG
(Indocyanine green) alone, 2) Diode laser irradiation alone, 3) PDT (combined ICG
with diode laser) and 4) Control (untreated cells). The expression of bFGF gene
was evaluated by real-time quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) in
different groups.
RESULTS: ICG-PDT treatment using 1000-2000μg/mL of ICG at fluency of 31.25J/cm2
displayed a significant dose-dependent increase in expression levels of the bFGF 
(all P<0.05). The expressions of bFGF were upregulated to 4.13-fold following
diode laser irradiation alone with a fluency of 31.25J/cm2 (P<0.05) while there
was no remarkable difference in expression of bFGF following ICG treatment at
concentrations of 500-2000μg/mL (all P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest PDT is effective in increasing the expression of 
bFGF gene, an important factor in periodontal tissue regeneration and could
indicate periodontal tissue regeneration.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pdpdt.2017.09.010 
PMID: 28935533  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

