
1. Food Microbiol. 2018 Feb;69:11-17. doi: 10.1016/j.fm.2017.07.014. Epub 2017 Jul
20.

Viability of and Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Listeria monocytogenes in a
delicatessen appetizer (yogurt-based) salad as affected by citrus extract
(Citrox©) and storage temperature.

Tsiraki MI(1), Yehia HM(2), Elobeid T(3), Osaili T(4), Sakkas H(5), Savvaidis
IN(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Food Chemistry and Food Microbiology, Department of Chemistry,
University of Ioannina, 45110 Ioannina, Greece.
(2)Department of Food Science and Nutrition, College of Food and Agriculture
Sciences, King Saud University, 11451 Al-Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Department of Food
Science and Nutrition, Faculty of Home Economics, Helwan University, Cairo 11221,
Egypt.
(3)Human Nutrition Department, College of Health Sciences, Qatar University,
P.O.Box: 2713, Doha, Qatar.
(4)Department of Clinical Nutrition and Dietetics, Research Institute of Medical 
and Health Sciences, College of Health Sciences, University of Sharjah, Sharjah, 
United Arab Emirates; Department of Nutrition and Food Technology, Faculty of
Agriculture, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid 22110, Jordan.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences,
University of Ioannina, 45110 Ioannina, Greece.
(6)Laboratory of Food Chemistry and Food Microbiology, Department of Chemistry,
University of Ioannina, 45110 Ioannina, Greece. Electronic address:
isavvaid@uoi.gr.

The antimicrobial effect of citrus extract (at 1 mL/kg [C1] and 2 mL/kg [C2]) on 
naturally occurring microbiota and inoculated pathogens (E. coli O157:H7 and L.
monocytogenes at ca. 6 log cfu/g) in the traditional Greek yogurt-based salad
Tzatziki stored at 4, 10, or 21 °C, was examined. Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) were
high (8.0-8.5 log cfu/g) and varied only minimally for both the control
(untreated) and the citrus extract-treated salad samples, whereas the higher
citrus extract concentration yielded the lowest yeast populations, irrespective
of temperature, during the entire storage period. Populations of inoculated
E. coli (6 log cfu/g) declined in both untreated and citrus extract-treated
samples from day 0-70, 35, and 15 at 4, 10, and 21 °C, respectively. Citrus
extract had a significant effect on the survival of the inoculated E. coli
O157:H7, with reductions of 2.8-4.8 log cfu/g in the citrus extract-treated
samples at the end of the storage period. Our data show that L. monocytogenes
survived in both untreated and citrus extract-treated samples during the entire
storage period, irrespective of the storage temperature. The higher concentration
of citrus extract had a significant effect on the survival of L. monocytogenes in
the treated samples, and reductions of 1.5-3.0 logs were noted on final day 70,
35 and 15 at 4, 10 and 21 °C, respectively. The results of our study demonstrated
the potential of citrus extract as a natural compound that can control the growth
of food-borne pathogenic bacteria, such as E. coli O157:H7 and L. monocytogenes
in Tzatziki, a yogurt-based salad.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fm.2017.07.014 
PMID: 28941891  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

