
1. PLoS One. 2017 Sep 28;12(9):e0185734. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0185734.
eCollection 2017.

Exploring Lactobacillus reuteri DSM20016 as a biocatalyst for transformation of
longer chain 1,2-diols: Limits with microcompartment.

Chen L(1), Hatti-Kaul R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, Center for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden.

Lactobacillus reuteri metabolises glycerol efficiently to form 3-hydroxypropionic
acid (3-HP) and 1,3-propanediol (1,3PDO) by the same mechanism as that for
1,2-propanediol (1,2PDO) conversion to propionic acid and propanol via its
propanediol utilization (pdu) pathway. Pdu enzymes are encoded by the pdu-operon,
which also contain genes encoding the shell proteins of the microcompartment
housing the metabolic pathway. In this work the selectivity and kinetics of the
reactions catalysed by L. reuteri DSM20016 Pdu enzymes glycerol dehydratase
(GDH), 1,3-propanediol oxidoreductase (PduQ) and coenzyme-A acylating
propionaldehyde dehydrogenase (PduP), produced recombinantly, was investigated
against corresponding substrates of different chain lengths. Glycerol dehydratase
exhibited activity against C2-C4 polyols, with the highest activity against
glycerol and 1,2-propanediol (1,2-PDO). A double mutant of the pduC gene of GDH
(PduC-S302A/Q337A) was constructed that displayed lowered activity against
glycerol and 1,2PDO but extended the substrate range upto C6-diol. The best
substrate for both PduQ and PduP was 3-hydroxypropanal (3HPA), although PduP
exhibited nearly 10-fold higher specific activity. The enzymes also showed some
activity against C3-C10 aliphatic aldehydes, with PduP having higher relative
activity. Subsequently, transformation of polyols using whole cells of L. reuteri
containing the wild type- and mutated GDH, respectively, confirmed the reduced
activity of the mutant against glycerol and 1,2PDO, but its activity against
longer substrates was negligible. In contrast, recombinant Escherichia coli
BL21(DE3) cells harboring the GDH variant converted diols with up to C6 carbon
chain length to their respective aldehydes, suggesting that the protein shell of 
the microcompartment in L. reuteri posed a barrier to the passage of longer chain
substrate.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0185734 
PMCID: PMC5619818
PMID: 28957423  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

