
1. Biochem Biophys Rep. 2017 Mar 31;10:157-164. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrep.2017.03.011.
eCollection 2017 Jul.

The effect of alcohol on recombinant proteins derived from mammalian adenylyl
cyclase.

Qualls-Creekmore E(1), Gupta R(1), Yoshimura M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, United States.

The cyclic AMP (cAMP) signaling pathway is implicated in the development of
alcohol use disorder. Previous studies have demonstrated that ethanol enhances
the activity of adenylyl cyclase (AC) in an isoform specific manner; AC7 is most 
enhanced by ethanol, and regions responsible for enhancement by ethanol are
located in the cytoplasmic domains of the AC7 protein. We hypothesize that
ethanol modulates AC activity by directly interacting with the protein and that
ethanol effects on AC can be studied using recombinant AC in vitro. AC
recombinant proteins containing only the C1a or C2 domains of AC7 and AC9
individually were expressed in bacteria, and purified. The purified recombinant
AC proteins retained enzymatic activity and isoform specific alcohol
responsiveness. The combination of the C1a or C2 domains of AC7 maintained the
same alcohol cutoff point as full-length AC7. We also find that the recombinant
AC7 responds to alcohol differently in the presence of different combinations of 
activators including MnCl2, forskolin, and GsÎ±. Through a series of
concentration-response experiments and curve fitting, the values for maximum
activities, Hill coefficients, and EC50 were determined in the absence and
presence of butanol as a surrogate of ethanol. The results suggest that alcohol
modulates AC activity by directly interacting with the AC protein and that the
alcohol interaction with the AC protein occurs at multiple sites with positive
cooperativity. This study indicates that the recombinant AC proteins expressed in
bacteria can provide a useful model system to investigate the mechanism of
alcohol action on their activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrep.2017.03.011 
PMCID: PMC5614657
PMID: 28955743 

