
1. Clin Cancer Res. 2017 Dec 15;23(24):7596-7607. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-17-0618. Epub 2017 Sep 27.

Mutational Analysis of Gene Fusions Predicts Novel MHC Class I-Restricted T-Cell 
Epitopes and Immune Signatures in a Subset of Prostate Cancer.

Kalina JL(1), Neilson DS(1)(2), Lin YY(3), Hamilton PT(1), Comber AP(1), Loy
EMH(1)(2), Sahinalp SC(3)(4)(5), Collins CC(4), Hach F(6)(4)(7), Lum JJ(8)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Trev & Joyce Deeley Research Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Victoria,
Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry & Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria,
Canada.
(3)School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada.
(4)Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver, Canada.
(5)School of Informatics & Computing, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana.
(6)School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada.
jjlum@bccancer.bc.ca fhach@prostatecentre.com.
(7)Department of Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada.
(8)Trev & Joyce Deeley Research Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Victoria,
Canada. jjlum@bccancer.bc.ca fhach@prostatecentre.com.

Purpose: Gene fusions are frequently found in prostate cancer and may result in
the formation of unique chimeric amino acid sequences (CASQ) that span the
breakpoint of two fused gene products. This study evaluated the potential for
fusion-derived CASQs to be a source of tumor neoepitopes, and determined their
relationship to patterns of immune signatures in prostate cancer
patients.Experimental Design: A computational strategy was used to identify CASQs
and their corresponding predicted MHC class I epitopes using RNA-Seq data from
The Cancer Genome Atlas of prostate tumors. In vitro peptide-specific T-cell
expansion was performed to identify CASQ-reactive T cells. A multivariate
analysis was used to relate patterns of in silico-predicted tumor-infiltrating
immune cells with prostate tumors harboring these mutational events.Results:
Eighty-seven percent of tumors contained gene fusions with a mean of 12 per
tumor. In total, 41% of fusion-positive tumors were found to encode CASQs. Within
these tumors, 87% gave rise to predicted MHC class I-binding epitopes. This
observation was more prominent when patients were stratified into low- and
intermediate/high-risk categories. One of the identified CASQ from the recurrent 
TMPRSS2:ERG type VI fusion contained several high-affinity HLA-restricted
epitopes. These peptides bound HLA-A*02:01 in vitro and were recognized by CD8+ T
cells. Finally, the presence of fusions and CASQs were associated with expression
of immune cell infiltration.Conclusions: Mutanome analysis of gene fusion-derived
CASQs can give rise to patient-specific predicted neoepitopes. Moreover, these
fusions predicted patterns of immune cell infiltration within a subgroup of
prostate cancer patients. Clin Cancer Res; 23(24); 7596-607. ©2017 AACR.

©2017 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-17-0618 
PMCID: PMC5831673
PMID: 28954787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

