
1. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2017 Aug 1;30(8):543-549. doi: 10.1093/protein/gzx045.

Exploring sequence-function space of a poplar glutathione transferase using
designed information-rich gene variants.

Musdal Y(1), Govindarajan S(2), Mannervik B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, Arrhenius Laboratories, Stockholm University,
Svante Arrhenius väg 16B, SE-10691 Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)ATUM, 37950 Central Ct, Newark, CA 94560, USA.

Exploring the vicinity around a locus of a protein in sequence space may identify
homologs with enhanced properties, which could become valuable in biotechnical
and other applications. A rational approach to this pursuit is the use of
'infologs', i.e. synthetic sequences with specific substitutions capturing
maximal sequence information derived from the evolutionary history of the protein
family. Ninety-five such infolog genes of poplar glutathione transferase were
synthesized and expressed in Escherichia coli, and the catalytic activities of
the proteins determined with alternative substrates. Sequence-activity
relationships derived from the infologs were used to design a second set of 47
infologs in which 90% of the members exceeded wild-type properties. Two mutants, 
C2 (V55I/E95D/D108E/A160V) and G5 (F13L/C70A/G122E), were further functionally
characterized. The activities of the infologs with the alternative substrates
1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene and phenethyl isothiocyanate, subject to different
chemistries, were positively correlated, indicating that the examined mutations
were affecting the overall catalytic competence without major shift in substrate 
discrimination. By contrast, the enhanced protein expressivity observed in many
of the mutants were not similarly correlated with the activities. In conclusion, 
small libraries of well-defined infologs can be used to systematically explore
sequence space to optimize proteins in multidimensional functional space.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/protein/gzx045 
PMCID: PMC5914380
PMID: 28967959  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

