
1. Chemosphere. 2017 Dec;189:581-589. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.09.070. Epub
2017 Sep 21.

Co-composting of municipal solid waste mixed with matured sewage sludge: The
relationship between N2O emissions and denitrifying gene abundance.

Bian R(1), Sun Y(2), Li W(3), Ma Q(3), Chai X(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, Tongji
University, Shanghai 200092, China.
(2)Department of Environment and Municipal Engineering, Qingdao University of
Technology, Qingdao 266033, China. Electronic address: yjsun1971@126.com.
(3)Department of Environment and Municipal Engineering, Qingdao University of
Technology, Qingdao 266033, China.

Aerobic composting is an alternative measure to the disposal of municipal solid
waste (MSW). However, it produces nitrous oxide (N2O), a highly potent greenhouse
via microbial nitrification and denitrification. In this study, the effects of
matured sewage sludge (MSS) amendment on N2O emissions and the
inter-relationships between N2O emissions and the abundance of denitrifying
bacteria were investigated during aerobic composting of MSW. The results
demonstrated that MSW composting with MSS amendments (C1, and C2, with a MSW to
MSS ratio of 2:1 and 4:1, (v/v), respectively) significantly increased N2O
emissions during the initial stage, yet contributed to the mitigation of N2O
emissions during the cooling and maturation stage. MSS amended composting emitted
a total of 18.4%-25.7% less N2O than the control treatment without MSS amendment 
(CK). Matured sewage sludge amendment also significantly altered the abundance of
denitrifying bacteria. The quantification of denitrifying functional genes
revealed that the N2O emission rate had a significant positive correlation with
the abundance of the nirS, nirK genes in both treatments with MSS amendment. The 
nosZ/(nirS + nirK) ratio could be a good indicator for predicting N2O emissions. 
The higher N2O emission rate during the initial stage of composting mixed with
MSS was characterized by lower nosZ/(nirS + nirK) ratios, compared to CK
treatment. Higher ratios of nosZ/(nirS + nirK) were measured during the cooling
and maturation stage in treatments with MSS which resulted in a reduction of the 
N2O emissions. These results demonstrated that MSS amendment could be a valid
strategy for mitigating N2O emissions during MSW composting.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.09.070 
PMID: 28963975  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

