
1. J Mater Chem B. 2017 Jan 21;5(3):531-536. doi: 10.1039/C6TB02787C. Epub 2016 Dec 
13.

Cationic Acrylate Oligomers Comprising Amino Acid Mimic Moieties Demonstrate
Improved Antibacterial Killing Efficiency.

Grace JL(1)(2), Elliott AG(3), Huang JX(3), Schneider EK(2), Truong NP(1), Cooper
MA(3), Li J(2), Davis TP(1)(4), Quinn JF(1), Velkov T(2), Whittaker MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)ARC Centre of Excellence in Convergent Bio-Nano Science and Technology, Monash
University, 381 Royal Pde, Parkville, VIC, Australia, 3052.
(2)Drug Delivery, Disposition and Dynamics Theme, Monash Institute of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, 381 Royal Pde, Parkville, VIC,
Australia, 3052.
(3)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
QLD, Australia, 4072.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Warwick University, Gibbet Hill, Coventry, CV4 7AL,
UK.

Cu(0)-mediated polymerization was employed to synthesize a library of
structurally varied cationic polymers and their application as antibacterial
peptide mimics was assessed. Eight platform polymers were first synthesized with 
low degrees of polymerization (DP) using (2-Boc-amino)ethyl acrylate as the
monomer and either ethyl Î±-bromoisobutyrate or dodecyl 2-bromoisobutyrate as the 
initiator (thus providing hydrocarbon chain termini of C2 or C12, respectively). 
A two-step modification strategy was then employed to generate the final
sixteen-member polymer library. Specifically, an initial deprotection was
employed to reveal the primary amine cationic polymers, followed by guanylation. 
The biocidal activity of these cationic polymers was assessed against various
strains of Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, and Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Polymers having a short segment of guanidine units and a C12 hydrophobic terminus
were shown to provide the broadest antimicrobial activity against the panel of
isolates studied, with MIC values approaching those for Gram-positive targeting
antibacterial peptides: daptomycin and vancomycin. The C12-terminated guanidine
functional polymers were assayed against human red blood cells, and a concomitant
increase in haemolysis was observed with decreasing DP. Cytotoxicity was tested
against HEK293 and HepG2 cells, with the lowest DP C12-terminated polymer
exhibiting minimal toxicity over the concentrations examined, except at the
highest concentration. Membrane disruption was identified as the most probable
mechanism of bacteria cell killing, as elucidated by membrane permeability
testing against E. coli.

DOI: 10.1039/C6TB02787C 
PMCID: PMC5615857
PMID: 28966792 

