
1. Molecules. 2017 Oct 2;22(10). pii: E1654. doi: 10.3390/molecules22101654.

Protective Effects of Parkia biglobosa Protein Isolate on Streptozotocin-Induced 
Hepatic Damage and Oxidative Stress in Diabetic Male Rats.

Ogunyinka BI(1), Oyinloye BE(2)(3), Osunsanmi FO(4), Opoku AR(5), Kappo AP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
bolajokotimi@gmail.com.
(2)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
tunji4reele@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, College of Sciences, Afe Babalola University, PMB 
5454, Ado-Ekiti 360001, Nigeria. tunji4reele@yahoo.com.
(4)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
alafin21@yahoo.com.
(5)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
OpokuA@unizulu.ac.za.
(6)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
KappoA@unizulu.ac.za.

This study sought to investigate the possible protective role of Parkia biglobosa
seed protein isolate (PBPi) against streptozotocin-induced hepatic damage and
oxidative stress in diabetic male rats. Prior to animal experiments, a HPLC
fingerprint of PBPi was recorded. Diabetes was induced in rats by a single
intraperitoneal injection of streptozotocin (STZ; 60 mg/kg body weight). Diabetic
rats were orally treated daily with PBPi (200 or 400 mg/kg body weight) or
insulin (5 U/kg, i.p.) for 28 days. The degree of protection was evaluated using 
biochemical parameters such as malondialdehyde (MDA) levels, serum transaminases 
(ALT and AST), total protein, total glutathione (Total GSH),
glutathione-S-transferase (GST), superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), and 
interleukin-6 (IL-6) activities. Histology of liver sections was also performed. 
The HPLC fingerprint of PBPi revealed eleven distinct peaks; PBPi at tested doses
significantly attenuates STZ-induced elevated levels of serum IL-6, ALT and AST; 
and hepatic TBARS levels. Hepatic antioxidants (Total GSH, GST, SOD, CAT) as well
as total protein were markedly restored in a dose-dependent manner.
Histopathological results strongly support the protective role of PBPi. These
results suggest PBPi could confer protection by ameliorating hepatic damage and
oxidative stress caused by STZ in animal model possibly via its anti-inflammatory
and antioxidant properties.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules22101654 
PMCID: PMC6151535
PMID: 28974040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

