
1. J Immunol. 2017 Nov 15;199(10):3504-3515. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1700289. Epub
2017 Oct 4.

Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Activation Suppresses EBF1 and PAX5 and Impairs Human B
Lymphopoiesis.

Li J(1)(2), Bhattacharya S(2)(3)(4)(5), Zhou J(2)(6), Phadnis-Moghe AS(2),
Crawford RB(2)(4), Kaminski NE(7)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824.
(2)Institute for Integrative Toxicology, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
MI 48824.
(3)Biomedical Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI 48824.
(5)Center for Research on Ingredient Safety, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI 48824; and.
(6)Microbiology and Molecular Genetics Program, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI 48824.
(7)Institute for Integrative Toxicology, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
MI 48824; kamins11@msu.edu.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor that
mediates biological responses to endogenous and environmental chemical cues.
Increasing evidence shows that the AHR plays physiological roles in regulating
development, homeostasis, and function of a variety of cell lineages in the
immune system. However, the role of AHR in human B cell development has not been 
investigated. Toward this end, an in vitro feeder-free human B cell developmental
model system was employed using human cord blood CD34+ hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells. Using this model, we found that AHR activation by the
high-affinity ligand 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin significantly suppressed
the generation of early B cells and pro-B cells from hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells, indicating the impairment of B cell lineage specification 
and commitment. Addition of an AHR antagonist reversed
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-elicited suppression of early B and pro-B
cells, suggesting a role of AHR in regulating B lymphopoiesis. Gene expression
analysis revealed a significant decrease in the messenger RNA level of early B
cell factor 1 (EBF1) and paired box 5, two critical transcription factors
directing B cell lineage specification and commitment. Additionally, binding of
the ligand-activated AHR to the putative dioxin response elements in the EBF1
promoter was demonstrated by EMSAs and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis,
suggesting transcriptional regulation of EBF1 by AHR. Taken together, this study 
demonstrates a role for the AHR in regulating human B cell development, and it
suggests that transcriptional alterations of EBF1 by the AHR are involved in the 
underlying mechanism.

Copyright Â© 2017 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1700289 
PMCID: PMC5679724
PMID: 28978690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

