
1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2017 Dec 5;24(12). pii: e00262-17. doi:
10.1128/CVI.00262-17. Print 2017 Dec.

Development of an Extended-Specificity Multiplex Immunoassay for Detection of
Streptococcus pneumoniae Serotype-Specific Antigen in Urine by Use of Human
Monoclonal Antibodies.

Eletu SD(1), Sheppard CL(2), Thomas E(1), Smith K(3), Daniel P(4), Litt DJ(1),
Lim WS(4), Fry NK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory and Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Reference Unit, National
Infection Service, Public Health England, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Respiratory and Vaccine Preventable Bacteria Reference Unit, National
Infection Service, Public Health England, London, United Kingdom
carmen.sheppard@phe.gov.uk.
(3)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust,
Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Current pneumococcal vaccines cover the 10 to 23 most common serotypes of the 92 
presently described. However, with the increased usage of
pneumococcal-serotype-based vaccines, the risk of serotype replacement and an
increase in disease caused by nonvaccine serotypes remains. Serotype surveillance
of pneumococcal infections relies heavily on culture techniques, which are known 
to be insensitive, particularly in cases of noninvasive disease.
Pneumococcal-serotype-specific urine assays offer an alternative method of
serotyping for both invasive and noninvasive disease. However, the assays
described previously cover mainly conjugate vaccine serotypes, give little
information about circulating nonvaccine serotypes, and are currently available
only in one or two specialist laboratories. Our laboratory has developed a
Luminex-based extended-range antigen capture assay to detect
pneumococcal-serotype-specific antigens in urine samples. The assay targets 24
distinct serotypes/serogroups plus the cell wall polysaccharide (CWP) and some
cross-reactive serotypes. We report that the assay is capable of detecting all
the targeted serotypes and the CWP at 0.1 ng/ml, while some serotypes are
detected at concentrations as low as 0.3 pg/ml. The analytical serotype
specificity was determined to be 98.4% using a panel of polysaccharide-negative
urine specimens spiked with nonpneumococcal bacterial antigens. We also report
clinical sensitivities of 96.2% and specificities of 89.9% established using a
panel of urine specimens from patients diagnosed with community-acquired
pneumonia or pneumococcal disease. This assay can be extended for testing other
clinical samples and has the potential to greatly improve serotype-specific
surveillance in the many cases of pneumococcal disease in which a culture is
never obtained.

Â© Crown copyright 2017.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00262-17 
PMCID: PMC5717182
PMID: 28978509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

