
1. FEBS J. 2017 Nov;284(22):3931-3953. doi: 10.1111/febs.14283. Epub 2017 Oct 23.

Structural basis for enzyme bifunctionality - the case of Gan1D from
Geobacillus stearothermophilus.

Lansky S(1), Zehavi A(2), Belrhali H(3), Shoham Y(2), Shoham G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry, The Laboratory for Structural Chemistry and Biology,
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Food Engineering, Technion - Israel Institute 
of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(3)European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Grenoble, France.

6-phospho-β-glucosidases and 6-phospho-β-galactosidases are enzymes that
hydrolyze the β-glycosidic bond between a terminal non-reducing
glucose-6-phosphate (Glc6P) or galactose-6-phosphate (Gal6P), respectively, and
other organic molecules. Gan1D, a glycoside hydrolase (GH) belonging to the GH1
family, has recently been identified in a newly characterized
galactan-utilization gene cluster in the bacterium Geobacillus stearothermophilus
T-1. Gan1D has been shown to exhibit bifunctional activity, possessing both
6-phospho-β-galactosidase and 6-phospho-β-glucosidase activities. We report
herein the complete 3D crystal structure of Gan1D, together with its acid/base
catalytic mutant Gan1D-E170Q. The tertiary structure of Gan1D conforms well to
the (β/α)8 TIM-barrel fold commonly observed in GH enzymes, and its quaternary
structure adopts a dimeric assembly, confirmed by gel-filtration and small-angle 
X-ray scattering results. We present also the structures of Gan1D in complex with
the putative substrate cellobiose-6-phosphate (Cell6P) and the degradation
products Glc6P and Gal6P. These complexes reveal the specific enzyme-substrate
and enzyme-product binding interactions of Gan1D, and the residues involved in
its glycone, aglycone, and phosphate binding sites. We show that the different
ligands trapped in the active sites adopt different binding modes to the protein,
providing a structural basis for the dual galactosidase/glucosidase activity
observed for this enzyme. Based on this information, specific mutations were
performed on one of the active site residues (W433), shifting the enzyme
specificity from dual activity to a significant preference toward
6-phospho-β-glucosidase activity. These data and their comparison with structural
data of related glucosidases and galactosidases are used for a more general
discussion on the structure-function relationships in this sub-group of GH1
enzymes.DATABASES: Atomic coordinates of Gan1D-wild-type (WT)-P1, Gan1D-WT-C2,
Gan1D-E170Q, Gan1D-WT-Gal6P, Gan1D-WT-Glc6P, and Gan1D-E170Q-Cell6P have been
deposited in the Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics (RCSB)
Protein Data Bank, under accession codes 5OKB, 5OKJ/5OKH, 5OKA/5OK7, 5OKQ/5OKK,
5OKS/5OKR, and 5OKG/5OKE, respectively.

© 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.14283 
PMID: 28975708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

