
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Biomembr. 2018 Feb;1860(2):579-585. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamem.2017.09.027. Epub 2017 Oct 5.

Assessment of synergistic antibacterial activity of combined biosurfactants
revealed by bacterial cell envelop damage.

Sana S(1), Datta S(2), Biswas D(1), Sengupta D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Technology, University of Calcutta, Kolkata 700009,
India.
(2)Department of Chemical Technology, University of Calcutta, Kolkata 700009,
India. Electronic address: sriparnadatta2014@gmail.com.

Besides potential surface activity and some beneficial physical properties,
biosurfactants express antibacterial activity. Bacterial cell membrane disrupting
ability of rhamnolipid produced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa C2 and a lipopeptide
type biosurfactant, BS15 produced by Bacillus stratosphericus A15 was examined
against Staphylococcus aureus ATCC 25923 and Escherichia coli K8813. Broth
dilution technique was followed to examine minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)
of both the biosurfactants. The combined effect of rhamnolipid and BS15 against
S. aureus and E. coli showed synergistic activity by expressing fractional
inhibitory concentration (FIC) index of 0.43 and 0.5. Survival curve of both the 
bacteria showed bactericidal activity after treating with biosurfactants at their
MIC obtained from FIC index study as it killed >90% of initial population. The
lesser value of MIC than minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) of the
biosurfactants also supported their bactericidal activity against both the
bacteria. Membrane permeability against both the bacteria was supported by
amplifying protein release, increasing of cell surface hydrophobicity,
withholding capacity of crystal violet dye and leakage of intracellular
materials. Finally cell membrane disruption was confirmed by scanning electron
microscopy (SEM). All these experiments expressed synergism and effective
bactericidal activity of the combination of rhamnolipid and BS15 by enhancing the
bacterial cell membrane permeability. Such effect of the combination of
rhamnolipid and BS15 could make them promising alternatives to traditional
antibiotic in near future.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2017.09.027 
PMID: 28988129  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

