
1. Extremophiles. 2017 Nov;21(6):1069-1080. doi: 10.1007/s00792-017-0967-6. Epub
2017 Oct 9.

Effect of environmental parameters on biodiversity of the fungal component in
lithic Antarctic communities.

Selbmann L(1), Onofri S(2), Coleine C(2), Buzzini P(3), Canini F(2), Zucconi
L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecological and Biological Sciences (DEB), University of Tuscia, 
Viterbo, Italy. selbmann@unitus.it.
(2)Department of Ecological and Biological Sciences (DEB), University of Tuscia, 
Viterbo, Italy.
(3)Department of Agricultural, Food and Environmental Sciences, Industrial Yeasts
Collection DBVPG, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

A wide sampling of rocks, colonized by microbial epi-endolithic communities, was 
performed along an altitudinal gradient from sea level to 3600 m asl and sea
distance from the coast to 100 km inland along the Victoria Land Coast,
Antarctica. Seventy-two rock samples of different typology, representative of the
entire survey, were selected and studied using denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis to compare variation in fungal diversity according to
environmental conditions along this altitudinal and sea distance transect.
Lichenized fungi were largely predominant in all the samples studied and the
biodiversity was heavily influenced even by minimal local variations. The n-MDS
analysis showed that altitude and sea distance affect fungal biodiversity, while 
sandstone allows the communities to maintain high biodiversity indices. The
Pareto-Lorenz curves indicate that all the communities analyzed are highly
adapted to extreme conditions but scarcely resilient, so any external
perturbation may have irreversible effects on these fragile ecosystems.

DOI: 10.1007/s00792-017-0967-6 
PMID: 28993960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

