
1. Biochem J. 2017 Nov 21;474(23):3963-3984. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20170615.

Dynamic multi-site phosphorylation by Fyn and Abl drives the interaction between 
CRKL and the novel scaffolding receptors DCBLD1 and DCBLD2.

Schmoker AM(1), Weinert JL(1), Kellett KJ(1), Johnson HE(1), Joy RM(1), Weir
ME(1), Ebert AM(1), Ballif BA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Vermont, 109 Carrigan Drive, 120A Marsh
Life Sciences, Burlington, VT 05405, U.S.A.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Vermont, 109 Carrigan Drive, 120A Marsh
Life Sciences, Burlington, VT 05405, U.S.A. bballif@uvm.edu.

Discoidin, CUB, and LCCL domain containing 2 (DCBLD2) is a neuropilin-like
transmembrane scaffolding receptor with known and anticipated roles in vascular
remodeling and neuronal positioning. DCBLD2 is also up-regulated in several
cancers and can drive glioblastomas downstream of activated epidermal growth
factor receptor. While a few studies have shown either a positive or negative
role for DCBLD2 in regulating growth factor receptor signaling, little is known
about the conserved signaling features of DCBLD family members that drive their
molecular activities. We previously identified DCBLD2 tyrosine phosphorylation
sites in intracellular YxxP motifs that are required for the
phosphorylation-dependent binding of the signaling adaptors CRK and CRKL (CT10
regulator of kinase and CRK-like). These intracellular YxxP motifs are highly
conserved across vertebrates and between DCBLD family members. Here, we
demonstrate that, as for DCBLD2, DCBLD1 YxxP motifs are required for CRKL-SH2
(Src homology 2) binding. We report that Src family kinases (SFKs) and Abl
differentially promote the interaction between the CRKL-SH2 domain and DCBLD1 and
DCBLD2, and while SFKs and Abl each promote DCBLD1 and DCBLD2 binding to the
CRKL-SH2 domain, the effect of Abl is more pronounced for DCBLD1. Using
high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry, we 
quantified phosphorylation at several YxxP sites in DCBLD1 and DCBLD2, mapping
site-specific preferences for SFKs and Abl. Together, these data provide a
platform to decipher the signaling mechanisms by which these novel receptors
drive their biological activities.

Â© 2017 The Author(s). Published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20170615 
PMCID: PMC6029619
PMID: 29025973  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

