
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2017 Dec 18;263:32-37. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2017.10.005. Epub 2017 Oct 3.

Virulence genotypes and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of Arcobacter
butzleri isolated from seafood and its environment.

Rathlavath S(1), Kohli V(1), Singh AS(1), Lekshmi M(1), Tripathi G(2), Kumar
S(1), Nayak BB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Post-Harvest Technology, ICAR - Central Institute of Fisheries Education
(CIFE), Mumbai 400061, India.
(2)Aquatic Environment and Health Management, ICAR- Central Institute of
Fisheries Education (CIFE), Mumbai 400061, India.
(3)Post-Harvest Technology, ICAR - Central Institute of Fisheries Education
(CIFE), Mumbai 400061, India. Electronic address: nayakbb@cife.edu.in.

Arcobacter butzleri is an emerging pathogen isolated from animals, food and the
environment. In this study, 147 A. butzleri isolated from seafood and the coastal
environment were tested for the presence of ten putative virulence genes (cadF,
cj1349, ciaB, mviN, pldA, tlyA, hecA, hecB, irgA, iroE) and antimicrobial
susceptibilities. Majority of the isolates harbored mviN (100%), cj1349 (97.2%), 
ciaB (95.9%), tlyA (91.8%), pldA (91.1%) and cadF (89.7%). Lower detection rates 
were observed for hecA (10.8%), hecB (19%), iroE (12.9%) and irgA (17.6%). Three 
A. butzleri isolates harbored all ten virulence genes. The occurrence of cj1349, 
ciaB, pldA, tlyA and hecA genes was significantly different (P≤0.05) among the
isolates from different sources. All (100%) A. butzleri isolates were resistant
to vancomycin, cephalothin, cefoxitin and sulphamethizole and susceptible to
polymyxin-B, kanamycin, streptomycin, gentamicin, tetracycline and imipenem.
Resistance to clinically important antibiotics such as cefotaxime (99.3%),
ceftazidime (87.7%), nalidixic acid (70.7%), ampicillin (72.1%), ertapenem and
amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (41.9%) was observed in A. butzleri from the
environment. The isolates were highly susceptible to norfloxacin (97.9%) and
colistin (97.2%), followed by ciprofloxacin (88.4%), meropenem (74.8%),
chloramphenicol (72.7%) and erythromycin (69.3%). A. butzleri from different
sources were not significantly different with respect to their antimicrobial
susceptibility patterns. Multidrug resistance was observed in 66 (81.4%) isolates
from fish, 29 (72.5%) isolates from shellfish and 17 (65.3%) isolates from
coastal water. A. butzleri harboring virulence genes and resistance to multiple
antibiotics found in seafood could be a potential health risk to seafood handlers
and consumers. Continuous monitoring of seafood for potentially pathogenic A.
butzleri is important to understand the evolution of antibiotic resistance in
this emerging food pathogen and to determine the antimicrobial therapy regimen in
the event of food-borne A. butzleri infections.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2017.10.005 
PMID: 29028568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

