
1. Immunobiology. 2018 Jan;223(1):38-48. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2017.10.016. Epub 2017
Oct 6.

TLR2 activation induced by H. pylori LPS promotes the differential expression of 
claudin-4, -6, -7 and -9 via either STAT3 and ERK1/2 in AGS cells.

Chavarría-Velázquez CO(1), Torres-Martínez AC(1), Montaño LF(1), Rendón-Huerta
EP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Inmunobiología, Depto. Biología Celular y Tisular, Facultad de 
Medicina, UNAM, Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio de Inmunobiología, Depto. Biología Celular y Tisular, Facultad de 
Medicina, UNAM, Mexico. Electronic address: erendon@unam.mx.

Gastric carcinogenesis has been associated to H. pylori virulence factors that
induce a chronic inflammation process. Lipopolysaccharides play a role in chronic
inflammatory responses via TLR2- and TLR4-dependent signaling pathways.
Similarly, cellular invasiveness, metastatic potential and prognosis are usually 
associated to claudin-4, -6, -7 and -9 expression in gastric carcinogenesis.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to determine if H. pylori LPS exerts an
influence on carcinogenesis-related claudin expression and if it was directly
regulated through the TLR2 pathway. Human antrum gastric adenocarcinoma AGS cells
exposed or not to H. pylori LPS were used. Polyclonal anti-claudin-4, -6, -7 and 
-9, anti-TLR2, anti-pERK1/2 as well as rabbit monoclonal anti-pNFκB p65 and mouse
monoclonal anti-CdX2 were used. ERK1/2 inhibitor UO126 and STAT3 inhibitor
Stattic were also used. Western blot, immunofluorescence and confocal experiments
were performed in whole cells as well as total protein, nuclear and cell membrane
fractions. The results showed that H. pylori LPS increased the expression of TLR2
in a time dependent bi-phasic manner (<12 and >12h exposure). Immunofluorescence 
using AGS monolayers corroborated the double phase TLR2 expression mainly on the 
cell membrane but a detectable signal was also determined in the cytoplasm of the
cells. Activation of NFkB was downstream and depended on TLR2 expression as a
statistically significant increase in pNFkB, that followed a pattern highly
similar to the TLR2 expression was observed on the cell membrane fraction. The
increase in TLR2 expression was accompanied by dramatically increased claudin-4
expression in cultures exposed from 30m to 8h to LPS. Increased expression of
claudin-6, -7 and -9 also increases in >12h LPS exposure times. The increase in
claudins expression was also dependent on NFkB activation. The results also
showed an increase in pSTAT3 that followed a bi-phasic pattern that began 30min
after stimulation and was compatible with the increase in TLR2 expression. The
expression of the claudin-4 related CDX2 transcription factor did not followed
the biphasic pattern. The results also showed that claudin-4 expression was STAT3
dependent whereas claudin-6, 7 and 9 expressions was ERK1/2 dependent. Our
results suggest that H. pylori LPS induces TLR2 expression in the AGS cells, and 
that the longer the exposure to LPS, the greater the expression of TLR2 in the
cell membrane. Consequently the expression of claudin-4, -6, -7 and -9 also
increases.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2017.10.016 
PMID: 29031421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

