
1. Fungal Genet Biol. 2017 Dec;109:26-35. doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2017.10.003. Epub 2017 
Oct 12.

The ZtVf1 transcription factor regulates development and virulence in the foliar 
wheat pathogen Zymoseptoria tritici.

Mohammadi N(1), Mehrabi R(2), Mirzadi Gohari A(3), Mohammadi Goltapeh E(4),
Safaie N(4), Kema GHJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Faculty of Agriculture, Tarbiat Modares
University, P.O. Box 14115-111, Tehran, Iran; Dryland Agricultural Research
Institute, Agricultural Research, Education & Extension Organization (ARREO),
Maragheh, Iran.
(2)Seed & Plant Improvement Institute, Agricultural Research, Education &
Extension Organization (ARREO), P.O. Box 31585-4119, Karaj, Iran; Department of
Biotechnology, College of Agriculture, Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan,
Iran. Electronic address: r.mehrabi@areeo.ac.ir.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences and
Engineering, College of Agriculture and Natural Resources, University of Tehran, 
Karaj, Iran.
(4)Department of Plant Pathology, Faculty of Agriculture, Tarbiat Modares
University, P.O. Box 14115-111, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Laboratory of Phytopathology, Wageningen University and Research, 6700AA
Wageningen, The Netherlands; Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen Plant
Research, P.O. Box 16, 6700AA Wageningen, The Netherlands.

The dimorphic fungal pathogen, Zymoseptoria tritici undergoes discrete
developmental changes to complete its life cycle on wheat. Molecular mechanisms
underlying morphogenesis during infection process of Z. tritici are poorly
understood. In this study, we have investigated the role of ZtVf1 gene encoding a
transcription factor belonging to C2-H2 subfamily. In planta assays revealed that
ZtVf1 is required for virulence. Reduced necrotic lesions and low pycnidia
density within the lesions resulted in significantly reduced virulence of ZtVf1
mutants. Cytological analysis showed that the impaired virulence of ZtVf1 mutants
attributed to reduced penetration and colonization along with hampered pycnidia
differentiation. In vitro phenotyping showed that ZtVf1 deletion affects hyphal
branching and biomass production suggesting that the reduced tissue colonization 
by the ZtVf1 mutant might be due to lower hyphal branching and less fungal
biomass production. In addition, the majority of infected substomatal cavities by
the ZtVf1 mutant filled with compacted mycelia mat that did not differentiate to 
mature pycnidia indicating that the impaired melanization negatively affected
pycnidia formation and maturation. The ZtVf1 might target multiple genes
belonging to different cellular processes whose identification is of eminent
interest to increase our understanding of this pathosystem. Overall, the data
provided in this study indicates that attenuated pathogenicity of ZtVf1 mutant is
due to involvement of this gene in the regulation of both early and late stages
of infection.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fgb.2017.10.003 
PMID: 29031630  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

