
1. Epidemiol Infect. 2017 Nov;145(15):3303-3306. doi: 10.1017/S0950268817002266.
Epub 2017 Oct 17.

Different Escherichia coli B2-ST131 clades (B and C) producing extended-spectrum 
β-lactamases (ESBL) colonizing residents of Portuguese nursing homes.

Rodrigues C(1), Machado E(1), Fernandes S(1), Peixe L(1), Novais Â(1).

Author information: 
(1)UCIBIO/REQUIMTE,Laboratório de Microbiologia,Faculdade de
Farmácia,Universidade do Porto,Porto,Portugal.

ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae and particularly Escherichia coli ST131
isolates producing CTX-M enzymes are commonly found colonizing the intestine of
nursing home (NH) residents, but ST131 subclonal structure has been scarcely
explored in this vulnerable population. Our goal was to perform a pilot study to 
assess the faecal carriage rate and epidemiological features of ESBL- and/or
carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae (ESBL-E and CPE, respectively) among
NH residents. For this purpose, faecal samples from residents at 4 different NHs 
in the North of Portugal (representing 9·5% of the residents' population, July
2014) were screened for ESBL-E and/or CPE by phenotypic and genotypic methods.
Clonal structure and plasmid typing of ESBL-producing E. coli (ESBL-Ec) was
performed by PCR and sequencing. Four ESBL-Ec isolates (2 CTX-M-15/2 CTX-M-14)
were found in 20% of the samples, all belonging to the pandemic clonal lineage
B2-ST131-O25b:H4. Two different clades were identified, the C2/H30-Rx-virotype C 
producing CTX-M-15 and an atypical B/H22-like-virotype D5 (producing CTX-M-14 and
fluoroquinolone-resistant), firstly described in Portugal. This pilot study
highlights the role of NH residents as a source of different ST131 clades,
besides emphasizing the importance of E. coli B2-ST131 subtyping in different
clinical settings, and understanding the transmission dynamics of the different
variants.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268817002266 
PMID: 29039274  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

