
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2017 Oct;192:8-12. doi: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2017.09.001.
Epub 2017 Sep 5.

Bacteria causing pyometra in bitch and queen induce neutrophil extracellular
traps.

Rebordão MR(1), Alexandre-Pires G(2), Carreira M(3), Adriano L(3), Carneiro C(2),
Nunes T(4), Mateus L(2), Ferreira-Dias G(5).

Author information: 
(1)CIISA, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Lisbon, Av. Universidade 
Técnica, 1300-477 Lisbon, Portugal; Clínica Veterinária das Nogueiras, R. Estádio
6, 3030-318 Coimbra, Portugal; Coimbra College of Agriculture, Bencanta, 3045-601
Coimbra, Portugal.
(2)CIISA, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Lisbon, Av. Universidade 
Técnica, 1300-477 Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Clínica Veterinária das Nogueiras, R. Estádio 6, 3030-318 Coimbra, Portugal.
(4)Faculty of Sciences, Microscopy Center, University of Lisbon, Campo Grande C2,
1749-016 Lisbon, Portugal.
(5)CIISA, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Lisbon, Av. Universidade 
Técnica, 1300-477 Lisbon, Portugal. Electronic address: gmlfdias@fmv.ulisboa.pt.

Neutrophils are capable of releasing their DNA in response to infectious agents
to form neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) to destroy pathogens. Even though
pyometra in queens and bitches is a common disease, its pathogenesis is not fully
understood. The aim of this study was to assess the presence of NETs in the
endometrium of queens and bitches suffering from pyometra. Pyometra and normal
uteri were obtained after ovariohysterectomy from adult queens and bitches in
diestrus. Uterine contents were evaluated for bacterial isolation and
identification and for NETs presence. Escherichia coli were isolated in 5/5
queens and 4/5 bitches, and Streptococcus spp in one bitch. Sterile glass
coverslips were placed on the endometrium surface to obtain material for NETs
that were evaluated by immunocytochemistry (histone, neutrophil elastase or
myeloperoxidase), fluorescence microscopy or scanning electron microscopy. NETs
in endometrium content were positively stained by DNA histone DAPI,
myeloperoxidase and by neutrophil elastase. NETs were spread in all observed
queen and bitch endometria of pyometra cases. Ultrastructure images of NETs
depicted clusters of globular material with fine filaments deposited on or around
thick filaments and trapped bacteria. To the best of our knowledge these are the 
first findings confirming NETs endometrial presence in queen and bitch pyometra. 
Nevertheless, the precise role of NETs in pyometra in the bitch and queen, either
to contribute to the defeat of infection or to its persistence remains to be
unraveled.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2017.09.001 
PMID: 29042016  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

