
1. Cancer Immunol Res. 2017 Dec;5(12):1086-1097. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-17-0229.
Epub 2017 Oct 20.

Natural Killer T-cell Immunotherapy in Combination with Chemotherapy-Induced
Immunogenic Cell Death Targets Metastatic Breast Cancer.

Gebremeskel S(1)(2), Lobert L(1)(2), Tanner K(1), Walker B(1), Oliphant T(1),
Clarke LE(2)(3), Dellaire G(2)(3)(4), Johnston B(5)(2)(3)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.
(2)Beatrice Hunter Cancer Research Institute, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(4)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Nova Scotia, Canada.
(5)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada. Brent.Johnston@dal.ca.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are glycolipid-reactive lymphocytes that promote
cancer control. In previous studies, NKT-cell activation improved survival and
antitumor immunity in a postsurgical mouse model of metastatic breast cancer.
Herein, we investigated whether NKT-cell activation could be combined with
chemotherapeutic agents to augment therapeutic outcomes. Gemcitabine and
cyclophosphamide analogues enhanced the potential immunogenicity of 4T1 mammary
carcinoma cells by increasing the expression of antigen-presenting molecules
(MHC-I, MHC-II, and CD1d) and promoting exposure or release of immunogenic cell
death markers (calreticulin, HMGB1, and ATP). In 4T1 primary tumor and
postsurgical metastasis models, BALB/c mice were treated with cyclophosphamide or
gemcitabine. NKT cells were then activated by transfer of dendritic cells loaded 
with the glycolipid antigen α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer). Chemotherapeutic
treatments did not impact NKT-cell activation but enhanced recruitment into
primary tumors. Cyclophosphamide, gemcitabine, or α-GalCer-loaded dendritic cell 
monotherapies decreased tumor growth in the primary tumor model and reduced
metastatic burden and prolonged survival in the metastasis model. Combining
chemotherapeutics with NKT-cell activation therapy significantly enhanced
survival, with surviving mice exhibiting attenuated tumor growth following a
second tumor challenge. The frequency of myeloid-derived suppressor cells was
reduced by gemcitabine, cyclophosphamide, or α-GalCer-loaded dendritic cell
treatments; cyclophosphamide also reduced the frequency of regulatory T cells.
Individual treatments increased immune cell activation, cytokine polarization,
and cytotoxic responses, although these readouts were not enhanced further by
combining therapies. These findings demonstrate that NKT-cell activation therapy 
can be combined with gemcitabine or cyclophosphamide to target tumor burden and
enhance protection against tumor recurrence. Cancer Immunol Res; 5(12); 1086-97. 
©2017 AACR.

©2017 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-17-0229 
PMID: 29054890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

