
1. Mod Pathol. 2018 Mar;31(3):505-516. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2017.145. Epub 2017
Oct 20.

SYK expression in monomorphic epitheliotropic intestinal T-cell lymphoma.

Mutzbauer G(1), Maurus K(1), Buszello C(1), Pischimarov J(1), Roth S(1),
Rosenwald A(1)(2), Chott A(3), Geissinger E(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(2)Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken, University and University Hospital,
Wuerzburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Pathology and Microbiology, Wilhelminenspital, Vienna, Austria.

Monomorphic epitheliotropic intestinal T-cell lymphoma (MEITL), formerly known as
type II enteropathy associated T-cell lymphoma (type II EATL), is a rare,
aggressive primary intestinal T-cell lymphoma with a poor prognosis and an
incompletely understood pathogenesis. We collected 40 cases of MEITL and 27 cases
of EATL, formerly known as type I EATL, and comparatively investigated the T-cell
receptor (TCR) itself and associated signaling molecules using
immunohistochemistry, amplicon deep sequencing and bisulfite pyrosequencing. The 
TCR showed both an αβ-T-cell origin (30%) and a γδ-T-cell derivation (55%)
resulting in a predominant positive TCR phenotype in MEITL compared with the
mainly silent TCR phenotype in EATL (65%). The immunohistochemical expression of 
the spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) turned out to be a distinctive feature of MEITL 
(95%) compared with EATL (0%). Aberrant SYK overexpression in MEITL is likely
caused by hypomethylation of the SYK promoter, while no common mutations in the
SYK gene or in its promoter could be detected. Using amplicon deep sequencing,
mutations in DNMT3A, IDH2, and TET2 were infrequent events in MEITL and EATL.
Immunohistochemical expression of linker for activation of T-cells (LAT)
subdivided MEITL into a LAT expressing subset (33%) and a LAT silent subset (67%)
with a potentially earlier disease onset in LAT-positive MEITL.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2017.145 
PMID: 29052597  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

