
1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2017 Nov 1;109(11). doi: 10.1093/jnci/djx065.

An ERBB1-3 Neutralizing Antibody Mixture With High Activity Against
Drug-Resistant HER2+ Breast Cancers With ERBB Ligand Overexpression.

Schwarz LJ(1), Hutchinson KE(1), Rexer BN(1), Estrada MV(1), Gonzalez Ericsson
PI(1), Sanders ME(1), Dugger TC(1), Formisano L(1), Guerrero-Zotano A(1),
Red-Brewer M(1), Young CD(1), Lantto J(1), Pedersen MW(1), Kragh M(1), Horak
ID(1), Arteaga CL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Department of Pathology, Microbiology and
Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN; Breast Cancer
Research Program, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, TN; Department of
Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN; Symphogen, Ballerup,
Denmark.

Background: Plasticity of the ERBB receptor network has been suggested to cause
acquired resistance to anti-human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)
therapies. Thus, we studied whether a novel approach using an
ERBB1-3-neutralizing antibody mixture can block these compensatory mechanisms of 
resistance.
Methods: HER2+ cell lines and xenografts (n ≥ 6 mice per group) were treated with
the ERBB1-3 antibody mixture Pan-HER, trastuzumab/lapatinib (TL),
trastuzumab/pertuzumab (TP), or T-DM1. Downregulation of ERBB receptors was
assessed by immunoblot analysis and immunohistochemistry. Paired pre- and
post-T-DM1 tumor biopsies from patients (n = 11) with HER2-amplified breast
cancer were evaluated for HER2 and P-HER3 expression by immunohistochemistry
and/or fluorescence in situ hybridization. ERBB ligands were measured by
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Drug-resistant
cells were generated by chronic treatment with T-DM1. All statistical tests were 
two-sided.
Results: Treatment with Pan-HER inhibited growth and promoted degradation of
ERBB1-3 receptors in a panel of HER2+ breast cancer cells. Compared with TL, TP, 
and T-DM1, Pan-HER induced a similar antitumor effect against established BT474
and HCC1954 tumors, but was superior to TL against MDA-361 xenografts (TL mean = 
2026 mm 3 , SD = 924 mm 3 , vs Pan-HER mean = 565 mm 3 , SD = 499 mm 3 , P =
.04). Pan-HER-treated BT474 xenografts did not recur after treatment
discontinuation, whereas tumors treated with TL, TP, and T-DM1 did. Post-TP and
post-T-DM1 recurrent tumors expressed higher levels of neuregulin-1 (NRG1), HER3 
and P-HER3 (all P < .05). Higher levels of P-HER3 protein and NRG1 mRNA were also
observed in HER2+ breast cancers progressing after T-DM1 and trastuzumab (NRG1
transcript fold change ± SD; pretreatment = 2, SD = 1.9, vs post-treatment =
11.4, SD = 10.3, P = .04). The HER3-neutralizing antibody LJM716 resensitized the
drug-resistant cells to T-DM1, suggesting a causal association between the
NRG1-HER3 axis and drug resistance. Finally, Pan-HER treatment inhibited growth
of HR6 trastuzumab- and T-DM1-resistant xenografts.
Conclusions: These data suggest that upregulation of a NRG1-HER3 axis can mediate
escape from anti-HER2 therapies. Further, multitargeted antibody mixtures, such
as Pan-HER, can simultaneously remove and/or block targeted ERBB receptor and
ligands, thus representing an effective approach against drug-sensitive and
-resistant HER2+ cancers.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djx065 
PMCID: PMC6543617
PMID: 29059433  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

