
1. Genes Dev. 2017 Oct 1;31(19):1939-1957. doi: 10.1101/gad.304261.117. Epub 2017
Oct 24.

Suppression of protein tyrosine phosphatase N23 predisposes to breast
tumorigenesis via activation of FYN kinase.

Zhang S(1)(2), Fan G(1)(3), Hao Y(1), Hammell M(1), Wilkinson JE(4), Tonks NK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA.
(3)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai,
201210, China.
(4)Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine, Department of Pathology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Disruption of the balanced modulation of reversible tyrosine phosphorylation has 
been implicated in the etiology of various human cancers, including breast
cancer. Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase N23 (PTPN23) resides in chromosomal region
3p21.3, which is hemizygously or homozygously lost in some breast cancer
patients. In a loss-of-function PTPome screen, our laboratory identified PTPN23
as a suppressor of cell motility and invasion in mammary epithelial and breast
cancer cells. Now, our TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) database analyses
illustrate a correlation between low PTPN23 expression and poor survival in
breast cancers of various subtypes. Therefore, we investigated the
tumor-suppressive function of PTPN23 in an orthotopic transplantation mouse
model. Suppression of PTPN23 in Comma 1Dβ cells induced breast tumors within 56
wk. In PTPN23-depleted tumors, we detected hyperphosphorylation of the
autophosphorylation site tyrosine in the SRC family kinase (SFK) FYN as well as
Tyr142 in β-catenin. We validated the underlying mechanism of PTPN23 function in 
breast tumorigenesis as that of a key phosphatase that normally suppresses the
activity of FYN in two different models. We demonstrated that tumor outgrowth
from PTPN23-deficient BT474 cells was suppressed in a xenograft model in vivo
upon treatment with AZD0530, an SFK inhibitor. Furthermore, double knockout of
FYN and PTPN23 via CRISPR/CAS9 also attenuated tumor outgrowth from PTPN23
knockout Cal51 cells. Overall, this mechanistic analysis of the tumor-suppressive
function of PTPN23 in breast cancer supports the identification of FYN as a
therapeutic target for breast tumors with heterozygous or homozygous loss of
PTPN23.

© 2017 Zhang et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.304261.117 
PMCID: PMC5710140
PMID: 29066500  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

