
1. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2017 Dec 1;27(23):5291-5295. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2017.10.025. Epub 2017 Oct 14.

Polyhydroxylated azetidine iminosugars: Synthesis, glycosidase inhibitory
activity and molecular docking studies.

Lawande PP(1), Sontakke VA(1), Kumbhar NM(1), Bhagwat TR(2), Ghosh S(2), Shinde
VS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Savitribai Phule Pune University (Formerly,
University of Pune), Pune 411007, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Modern College of Arts, Science and Commerce,
Savitribai Phule Pune University, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411016, India.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Savitribai Phule Pune University (Formerly,
University of Pune), Pune 411007, India. Electronic address:
vsshinde@chem.unipune.ac.in.

An efficient and practical strategy for the synthesis of unknown azetidine
iminosugars
(2S,3R,4S)-2-((R)-1,2-dihydroxyethyl)-3-hydroxy-4-(hydroxymethyl)azetidine 2,
(2S,3r,4R)-3-hydroxy-2,4-bis(hydroxymethyl)azetidine 3 and
(2S,3R,4S)-3-hydroxy-4-(hydroxymethyl)-N-methylazetidine-2-carboxylic acid 4,
starting from the d-glucose has been reported. The methodology involves
preparation of the
3-amino-N-benzyloxycarbonyl-3-deoxy-6-O-tert-butyldimethylsillyl-1,2-O-isopropyli
dene-α-d-glucofuranose 9, which was converted to the C-5-OMs derivative 11.
Intramolecular nucleophilic displacement of the C-5-OMs group with in situ
generated 3-amino functionality provided the required key azetidine ring
skeletons 10 with additional hydroxymethyl group. Removal of 1,2-acetonide
protection, followed by reduction and hydrogenolysis afforded azetidine
iminosugar 2. Alternatively, removal of 1,2-acetonide group and chopping of
C1-anomeric carbon gave C2-aldehyde that on reduction or oxidation followed by
hydrogenolysis gave 2,4-bis(hydroxymethyl) azetidine iminosugars 3 and
N-methylazetidine-2-carboxylic acid 4 respectively. The glycosidase inhibitory
activity of 2-4 iminosugars was screened against various glycosidase enzymes and 
compared with a standard miglitol. Amongst synthesized targets, the compound 2
was found to be more potent amyloglucosidase inhibitor than miglitol. These
results were supported by molecular docking studies.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2017.10.025 
PMID: 29074258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

