
1. Chimia (Aarau). 2017 Oct 25;71(10):734-738. doi: 10.2533/chimia.2017.734.

Production of a Recombinant Catechol 2,3-Dioxygenase for the Degradation of
Micropollutants.

Celesia D(1), Salzmann I(2), Porto EV(2), Walter F(2), Weber C(2), Dufresne R(2),
Crelier S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biologiche Chimiche e Farmaceutiche,
Universita degli Studi di Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, Ed. 16, 90100, Palermo,
Italy.
(2)Institute of Life Technologies, University of Applied Sciences Western
Switzerland, Valais, Route du Rawyl 64, CH-1950 Sion.
(3)Institute of Life Technologies, University of Applied Sciences Western
Switzerland, Valais, Route du Rawyl 64, CH-1950 Sion;, Email:
simon.crelier@hevs.ch.

Phenolic compounds such as catechol represent a particular type of micropollutant
whose high stability prevents rapid decay and metabolization in the environment. 
We successfully cloned a catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (C2,3O) from Pseudomonas putida
mt-2 and expressed it in Escherichia coli BER2566. The biomass isolated from
shake-flask fermentations was used to partially purify the enzyme. The enzyme
proved unstable in clarified liquid fractions (50 mM Tris buffer, pH 7.6) and
lost more than 90% of its activity over 7 h at 25 °C. In the presence of 10%
acetone, the process was slowed down and 30% residual activity was still present 
after 7 h incubation. Storage of the enzyme in clear liquid fractions also proved
difficult and total inactivation was achieved after 2 weeks even when kept frozen
at -20 °C. Lowering the storage temperature to -80 °C preserved 30% activity over
the same period. Only minor reactivation of the affected enzyme could be achieved
after incubation at 20 °C in the presence of FeSO4 and/or ascorbic acid. Activity
loss seems to be due mostly to Fe2+ oxidation as well as to subunit dissociation 
in the tetrameric structure. However, complete degradation of 1.0 mM catechol
could be achieved at 20 °C and pH 7.6 over a 3 h period when using a suspension
of whole cells or alginate-encapsulated cells for the biotransformation. Contrary
to the clear liquid fractions, these forms of biocatalyst showed no significant
sign of inactivation under the working conditions.

DOI: 10.2533/chimia.2017.734 
PMID: 29070422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

