
1. Curr Stem Cell Res Ther. 2018;13(2):136-143. doi:
10.2174/1574888X12666171027105532.

The AlkB Family of Fe (II)/Alpha-Ketoglutarate-Dependent Dioxygenases Modulates
Embryogenesis through Epigenetic Regulation.

Liu Y(1), Yuan Q(1), Xie L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for
Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
China.

BACKGROUND: The study of epigenetic regulation has made substantial progress in
recent years. The AlkB family in E. coli was identified as a type of DNA repair
enzyme that removes alkyl adducts from nucleobases. Recently, nine mammalian
homologs, ALKBH1-9, have been successfully identified and defined as diverse
demethylases. ALKBH1, ALKBH5, ALKBH8 and ALKBH9 act as RNA demethylases, while
ALKBH2-3 and ALKBH7 correct methyl and etheno adducts in DNA. Moreover, ALKBH4
focuses primarily on actin. Disorders of AlkB family level in mammals induce many
types of diseases.
OBJECTIVE: In this review, we will elaborate on the structure and biological
function of the members of the AlkB family. We will also focus on the latest
progress of the research on the mammalian AlkB family, particularly on new
breakthroughs, and present the relevant disorders or diseases induced by an
abnormal level of the AlkB family.
CONCLUSION: The AlkB family plays a crucial role in embryogenesis and
differentiation. The aberrant level of the AlkB family leads to many types of
diseases. The members of the AlkB family may serve as potential cancer markers
and possible therapeutic targets in the future.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1574888X12666171027105532 
PMID: 29076432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

