
1. J Dermatolog Treat. 2018 Aug;29(5):475-480. doi: 10.1080/09546634.2017.1398396.
Epub 2017 Nov 21.

Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis: what can we conclude about IL-17 antagonism?

Veverka KK(1), Feldman SR(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Dermatology Wake Forest School of Medicine , Winston-Salem ,
NC , USA.

PURPOSE: IL-17 antagonists are effective for psoriasis in clinical trials, but
long-term safety is not fully characterized. Since chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis (CMC) is caused by defects in the IL-17 pathway, CMC risk data have
been touted as providing reassurance about the safety of IL-17 antagonism.
METHODS: We performed a literature review to identify patients with CMC and
compared the prevalence of cancer in these patients to the reported 5-year
prevalence.
RESULTS: There was a higher prevalence of oropharyngeal (2.5% vs. 0.028%;
p < .0001) and esophageal cancer (1.9% vs. 0.013%; p < .0001) in patients with
CMC. There were no reports of cancer in 31 patients with CMC caused by an
isolated IL-17 deficiency (IL-17F, IL-17RA, IL17RC); however, a study would need 
over 1000 patients to detect even a 10-fold increase in the most common
malignancy of CMC patients.
CONCLUSIONS: There is evidence that some forms of CMC are associated with an
increase in cancer. While CMC is heterogeneous, our findings suggest that we
cannot use CMC data to reassure patients on the long-term safety of IL-17
antagonists beyond the safety results from clinical trials, and perhaps caution
should be taken with the development of candidiasis in patients taking these
medications.

DOI: 10.1080/09546634.2017.1398396 
PMID: 29076381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

