
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2018 Jan;72:95-103. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.10.008. Epub 
2017 Oct 24.

Conservation of structural and interactional features of CD28 and CD80/86
molecules from Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus).

Huang Y(1), Wang Z(1), Zheng Q(1), Tang J(1), Cai J(1), Lu Y(1), Jian J(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Fishery, Guangdong Ocean University, Zhanjiang, 524088, China;
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Biology and Epidemiology for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Zhanjiang, 524088, China; Guangdong Key Laboratory of
Control for Diseases of Aquatic Economic Animals, Zhanjiang 524088, China.
(2)College of Fishery, Guangdong Ocean University, Zhanjiang, 524088, China;
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Biology and Epidemiology for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Zhanjiang, 524088, China; Guangdong Key Laboratory of
Control for Diseases of Aquatic Economic Animals, Zhanjiang 524088, China.
Electronic address: jianjc@gmail.com.

Interaction of CD28 with CD80 or CD86 molecules provides a costimulatory signals 
required in T cell activation. In this study, we cloned and analyzed a CD28 gene 
(On-CD28) and a CD80/86 gene (On-CD80/86) from Nile tilapia (Oreochromis
niloticus). Sequence analysis revealed the typical characteristics of On-CD28
protein; for instance, the proline-based motif (117TYPPPL122) is essential in
binding of CD28 to CD80/86 ligands. Moreover, an extracellular Ig domain was
found in On-CD80/86; this domain is responsible in binding of CD28 to CD80/86
receptors. Subcellular localization analysis showed that both On-CD28 and
On-CD80/86 were distributed predominantly in the cytomembrane. Yeast two-hybrid
assay showed that On-CD28 directly interacted with On-CD80/86. On-CD28 and
On-CD80/86 transcripts were detected in all the examined tissues of healthy Nile 
tilapia, and the highest expression levels of On-CD28 and On-CD80/86 were
detected in the brain and heart, respectively. Following a bacterial challenge
using Streptococcus agalactiae in vivo, On-CD28 and On-CD80/86 were upregulated
in head kidney, spleen, intestines, and brain. However, they showed different
expression profiles in response to stimulation with inactivated S. agalactiae in 
vitro. These findings indicated that the interaction of On-CD28 with On-CD80/86
provides a costimulatory signals that possibly play an important role in T cell
activation during S. agalactiae infection.

Copyright Â© 2017. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.10.008 
PMID: 29074133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

