
1. J Cell Biol. 2018 Jan 2;217(1):329-346. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201702179. Epub 2017 Oct
31.

pH of endophagosomes controls association of their membranes with Vps34 and
PtdIns(3)P levels.

Naufer A(1)(2), Hipolito VEB(3)(4), Ganesan S(5), Prashar A(1)(2), Zaremberg
V(5), Botelho RJ(6)(4), Terebiznik MR(7)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toronto Scarborough, Toronto,
Canada.
(2)Department of Cell and System Biology, University of Toronto Scarborough,
Toronto, Canada.
(3)Molecular Science Graduate Program, Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biology, Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.
(6)Molecular Science Graduate Program, Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada
rbotelho@ryerson.ca.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toronto Scarborough, Toronto,
Canada terebiznik@utsc.utoronto.ca.

Phagocytosis of filamentous bacteria occurs through tubular phagocytic cups
(tPCs) and takes many minutes to engulf these filaments into phagosomes.
Contravening the canonical phagocytic pathway, tPCs mature by fusing with
endosomes. Using this model, we observed the sequential recruitment of early and 
late endolysosomal markers to the elongating tPCs. Surprisingly, the regulatory
early endosomal lipid phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate (PtdIns(3)P) persists on
tPCs as long as their luminal pH remains neutral. Interestingly, by manipulating 
cellular pH, we determined that PtdIns(3)P behaves similarly in canonical
phagosomes as well as endosomes. We found that this is the product of a pH-based 
mechanism that induces the dissociation of the Vps34 class III
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase from these organelles as they acidify. The
detachment of Vps34 stops the production of PtdIns(3)P, allowing for the turnover
of this lipid by PIKfyve. Given that PtdIns(3)P-dependent signaling is important 
for multiple cellular pathways, this mechanism for pH-dependent regulation of
Vps34 could be at the center of many PtdIns(3)P-dependent cellular processes.

Â© 2018 Naufer et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201702179 
PMCID: PMC5748975
PMID: 29089378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

