
1. Open Biol. 2017 Nov;7(11). pii: 170149. doi: 10.1098/rsob.170149.

Legionella pneumophila CsrA regulates a metabolic switch from amino acid to
glycerolipid metabolism.

Häuslein I(1), Sahr T(2)(3), Escoll P(2)(3), Klausner N(1), Eisenreich W(4),
Buchrieser C(5)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Biochemistry, Technische Universität München,
Garching, Germany.
(2)Institut Pasteur, Biologie des Bactéries Intracellulaires, Paris, France.
(3)CNRS UMR 3525, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Biochemistry, Technische Universität München,
Garching, Germany wolfgang.eisenreich@ch.tum.de.
(5)Institut Pasteur, Biologie des Bactéries Intracellulaires, Paris, France
cbuch@pasteur.fr.

Legionella pneumophila CsrA plays a crucial role in the life-stage-specific
expression of virulence phenotypes and metabolic activity. However, its exact
role is only partly known. To elucidate how CsrA impacts L. pneumophila
metabolism we analysed the CsrA depended regulation of metabolic functions by
comparative 13C-isotopologue profiling and oxygen consumption experiments of a L.
pneumophila wild-type (wt) strain and its isogenic csrA- mutant. We show that a
csrA- mutant has significantly lower respiration rates when serine, alanine,
pyruvate, α-ketoglutarate or palmitate is the sole carbon source. By contrast,
when grown in glucose or glycerol, no differences in respiration were detected.
Isotopologue profiling uncovered that the transfer of label from [U-13C3]serine
via pyruvate into the citrate cycle and gluconeogenesis was lower in the mutant
as judged from the labelling patterns of protein-derived amino acids,
cell-wall-derived diaminopimelate, sugars and amino sugars and 3-hydroxybutyrate 
derived from polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB). Similarly, the incorporation of
[U-13C6]glucose via the glycolysis/Entner-Doudoroff (ED) pathway but not via the 
pentose phosphate pathway was repressed in the csrA- mutant. On the other hand,
fluxes due to [U-13C3]glycerol utilization were increased in the csrA- mutant. In
addition, we showed that exogenous [1,2,3,4-13C4]palmitic acid is efficiently
used for PHB synthesis via 13C2-acetyl-CoA. Taken together, CsrA induces serine
catabolism via the tricarboxylic acid cycle and glucose degradation via the ED
pathway, but represses glycerol metabolism, fatty acid degradation and PHB
biosynthesis, in particular during exponential growth. Thus, CsrA has a
determining role in substrate usage and carbon partitioning during the L.
pneumophila life cycle and regulates a switch from amino acid usage in
replicative phase to glycerolipid usage during transmissive growth.

© 2017 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rsob.170149 
PMCID: PMC5717341
PMID: 29093212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

