
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2018 Jan;72:153-160. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.10.041. Epub
2017 Oct 31.

The virulence and immune protection of Edwardsiella ictaluri HemR mutants in
catfish.

Abdelhamed H(1), Ibrahim I(2), Baumgartner W(3), Lawrence ML(1), Karsi A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi
State University, Mississippi State, MS 39762, USA.
(2)Department of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi
State University, Mississippi State, MS 39762, USA; Department of Pathology,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Mansoura University, Mansoura, Dakahlia 35516,
Egypt.
(3)Department of Pathobiology and Population Medicine, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, MS 39762, USA.
(4)Department of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi
State University, Mississippi State, MS 39762, USA. Electronic address:
karsi@cvm.msstate.edu.

Edwardsiella ictaluri is a Gram-negative facultative intracellular rod, causing
enteric septicemia of catfish (ESC). Several heme uptake systems have been
described in bacterial pathogens, most of which involve outer membrane proteins
(OMPs). We have shown recently that heme/hemoglobin receptor family protein
(HemR) is significantly up-regulated in E. ictaluri under iron-restricted
conditions. In this work, our goal was to construct E. ictaluri HemR mutants and 
assess their virulence and immune protection potentials in catfish. To accomplish
this, an in-frame deletion mutant (EiΔhemR) was constructed, and its virulence
and immune protection were determined in catfish fingerlings and fry. The results
indicated that the EiΔhemR was attenuated completely in catfish fingerlings, but 
it was virulent in 14 day-old catfish fry. To increase the attenuation of EiΔhemR
in fry, we introduced frdA and sdhC gene deletions to the mutant, yielding two
double (EiΔhemRΔfrdA and EiΔhemRΔsdhC) and one triple (EiΔhemRΔfrdAΔsdhC)
mutants. Results indicated that two double HemR mutants did not exhibit increased
attenuation, but the triple HemR mutant showed significantly less virulence and
high protection in fry (p < 0.05). Histological examination of fry tissues
vaccinated with the triple mutant displayed similar inflammation to that of
wild-type infected fry, but much less necrosis and far fewer bacteria were
observed. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) result indicated fewer numbers of bacteria
around blood vessel and in the hematopoietic tissue in fry infected with triple
mutant compared to control group infected with E. ictaluri wild-type. Our data
indicated that EiΔhemR was safe and protective in catfish fingerlings, while
EiΔhemRΔfrdAΔsdhC was much safer in catfish fry.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2017.10.041 
PMID: 29097322  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

