
1. Mol Pharm. 2017 Dec 4;14(12):4597-4605. doi: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.7b00719.
Epub 2017 Nov 13.

Insights on the Mechanism of Action of INH-C10 as an Antitubercular Prodrug.

Vila-Viçosa D(1), Victor BL(1), Ramos J(2), Machado D(2), Viveiros M(2), Switala 
J(3), Loewen PC(3), Leitão R(1)(4), Martins F(1), Machuqueiro M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Química e Bioquímica, Departamento de Química e Bioquímica,
Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa , 1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)Unidade de Microbiologia Médica, Instituto de Higiene e Medicina Tropical,
Universidade Nova de Lisboa , 1349-008 Lisboa, Portugal.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Manitoba , Winnipeg, Manitoba R3T
2N2, Canada.
(4)Área Departamental de Engenharia Química, Instituto Superior de Engenharia de 
Lisboa, Instituto Politécnico de Lisboa , R. Conselheiro Emídio Navarro, 1,
1959-007, Lisboa, Portugal.

Tuberculosis remains one of the top causes of death worldwide, and combating its 
spread has been severely complicated by the emergence of drug-resistance
mutations, highlighting the need for more effective drugs. Despite the resistance
to isoniazid (INH) arising from mutations in the katG gene encoding the
catalase-peroxidase KatG, most notably the S315T mutation, this compound is still
one of the most powerful first-line antitubercular drugs, suggesting further
pursuit of the development of tailored INH derivatives. The N'-acylated INH
derivative with a long alkyl chain (INH-C10) has been shown to be more effective 
than INH against the S315T variant of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, but the
molecular details of this activity enhancement are still unknown. In this work,
we show that INH N'-acylation significantly reduces the rate of production of
both isonicotinoyl radical and isonicotinyl-NAD by wild type KatG, but not by the
S315T variant of KatG mirroring the in vivo effectiveness of the compound.
Restrained and unrestrained MD simulations of INH and its derivatives at the
water/membrane interface were performed and showed a higher preference of INH-C10
for the lipidic phase combined with a significantly higher membrane permeability 
rate (27.9 cm s-1), compared with INH-C2 or INH (3.8 and 1.3 cm s-1,
respectively). Thus, we propose that INH-C10 is able to exhibit better minimum
inhibitory concentration (MIC) values against certain variants because of its
better ability to permeate through the lipid membrane, enhancing its availability
inside the cell. MIC values of INH and INH-C10 against two additional KatG
mutations (S315N and D735A) revealed that some KatG variants are able to process 
INH faster than INH-C10 into an effective antitubercular form (wt and S315N),
while others show similar reaction rates (S315T and D735A). Altogether, our
results highlight the potential of increased INH lipophilicity for treating
INH-resistant strains.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.7b00719 
PMID: 29091448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

