
1. Vet Microbiol. 2017 Oct;210:83-90. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2017.09.004. Epub 2017
Sep 14.

Improving safety of a live attenuated Edwardsiella ictaluri vaccine against
enteric septicemia of catfish and evaluation of efficacy.

Nho SW(1), Abdelhamed H(1), Karsi A(1), Lawrence ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi
State University, Mississippi State, MS, USA.
(2)Department of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi
State University, Mississippi State, MS, USA. Electronic address:
lawrence@cvm.msstate.edu.

Edwardsiella ictaluri is a Gram-negative facultative intracellular pathogen
causing enteric septicemia of channel catfish (ESC). Our recent work indicated
that tricarboxylic acid cycle and one-carbon metabolism are critical pathways for
E. ictaluri virulence. Although single and double gene deletions in these
pathways resulted in safe and efficacious vaccines for use in catfish
fingerlings, vaccine trials in catfish fry showed safety concerns. Therefore, we 
aimed to improve the safety of these mutants by constructing two triple mutant
combinations. ESC-NDKL1 (ΔgcvPΔsdhCΔfrdA) was constructed by introducing an
in-frame deletion of frdA in a gcvP-sdh mutant. ESC-NDKL2 (ΔgcvPΔsdhCΔmdh) was
constructed in a similar manner. ESC-NDKL1 strain was a better vaccine candidate 
compared to ESC-NDKL2, providing better safety and efficacy in catfish fry and
catfish fingerlings. Field trials in earthen ponds under three vaccination
conditions showed that survival was significantly higher in catfish vaccinated
with ESC-NDKL1 by immersion at the fry stage, oral vaccination in ponds, and fry 
immersion-pond oral combination (86.74%, 81.67%, and 95.22%, respectively)
compared to sham-vaccinated (42.75%), and Aquavac-ESC fry immersion vaccinated
(61.51%) catfish. Our findings indicate that ESC-NDKL1 is a good candidate for
further development as a vaccine for ESC.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2017.09.004 
PMID: 29103702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

