
1. Gene. 2018 Jan 30;641:310-325. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2017.10.072. Epub 2017 Oct 26.

Conformational preferences and structural analysis of hypermodified nucleoside,
peroxywybutosine (o2yW) found at 37th position in anticodon loop of tRNAPhe and
its role in modulating UUC codon-anticodon interactions.

Fandilolu PM(1), Kamble AS(1), Sambhare SB(1), Sonawane KD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Structural Bioinformatics Unit, Department of Biochemistry, Shivaji
University, Kolhapur, 416004, Maharashtra (M.S.), India.
(2)Structural Bioinformatics Unit, Department of Biochemistry, Shivaji
University, Kolhapur, 416004, Maharashtra (M.S.), India; Department of
Microbiology, Shivaji University, Kolhapur, 416004, Maharashtra (MS), India.
Electronic address: kds_biochem@unishivaji.ac.in.

Hypermodified bases present at 3'-adjacent (37th) position in anticodon loop of
tRNAPhe are well known for their contribution in modulating codon-anticodon
interactions. Peroxywybutosine (o2yW), a wyosine family member, is one of such
tricyclic modified bases observed at the 37th position in tRNAPhe. Conformational
preferences and three-dimensional structural analysis of peroxywybutosine have
not been investigated in detail at atomic level. Hence, in the present study
quantum chemical semi-empirical RM1 and multiple molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations have been used to study structural significance of peroxywybutosine
in tRNAPhe. Full geometry optimizations over the peroxywybutosine base have also 
been performed using ab-initio HF-SCF (6-31G**), DFT (B3LYP/6-31G**) and
semi-empirical PM6 method to compare the salient properties. RM1 predicted most
stable structure shows that the amino-carboxy-propyl side chain of o2yW remains
'distal' to the five membered imidazole ring of tricyclic guanosine. MD
simulation trajectory of the isolated peroxy base showed restricted periodical
fluctuations of peroxywybutosine side chain which might be helpful to maintain
proper anticodon loop structure and mRNA reading frame during protein
biosynthesis process. Another comparative MD simulation study of the anticodon
stem loop with codon UUC showed various properties, which justify the functional 
implications of peroxywybutosine at 37th position along with other modified bases
present in ASL of tRNAPhe. Thus, this study presents an atomic view into the
structural properties of peroxywybutosine, which can be useful to determine its
role in the anticodon stem loop in context of codon-anticodon interactions and
frame shift mutations.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2017.10.072 
PMID: 29107006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

