
1. Brain Res. 2018 Jan 1;1678:330-336. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2017.10.034. Epub
2017 Nov 2.

Variation in MUTYH expression in Arabian horses with Cerebellar Abiotrophy.

Scott EY(1), Woolard KD(2), Finno CJ(3), Penedo MCT(4), Murray JD(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Davis, Department of Animal Science, USA.
(2)University of California, Davis, Department of Pathology, Microbiology &
Immunology, USA.
(3)University of California, Davis, Department of Population Health and
Reproduction, USA.
(4)University of California, Davis, Veterinary Genetics Laboratory, USA.
(5)University of California, Davis, Department of Animal Science, USA; University
of California, Davis, Department of Population Health and Reproduction, USA.
Electronic address: jdmurray@ucdavis.edu.

Cerebellar Abiotrophy (CA) is a neurodegenerative disease in Arabian horses
affecting the cerebellum, more specifically the Purkinje neurons. Although CA
occurs in several domestic species, CA in Arabian horses is unique in that a
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) has been associated with the disease. Total 
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was performed on CA-affected horses to address the
molecular mechanism underlying the disease. This research expands upon the
RNA-seq work by measuring the impact of the CA-associated SNP on the candidate
gene MutY homolog (MUTYH) and its regulation, isoform-specific expression and
protein localization. We hypothesized that the CA-associated SNP compromises the 
promoter region of MUTYH, leading to differential expression of its isoforms. Our
research demonstrates that the CA-associated SNP introduces a new binding site
for a novel transcription factor (Myelin Transcription Factor-1 Like protein,
MYT1L). In addition, CA-affected horses show differential expression of a
specific isoform of MUTYH as well as different localization in the Purkinje and
granular neurons of the cerebellum.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2017.10.034 
PMCID: PMC5905334
PMID: 29103988  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

