
1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2018 Jun;16(6):1148-1160. doi: 10.1111/pbi.12859. Epub 2017
Dec 7.

Expression and assembly of largest foreign protein in chloroplasts: oral delivery
of human FVIII made in lettuce chloroplasts robustly suppresses inhibitor
formation in haemophilia A mice.

Kwon KC(1), Sherman A(2), Chang WJ(1), Kamesh A(1), Biswas M(2), Herzog RW(2),
Daniell H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.

Inhibitor formation is a serious complication of factor VIII (FVIII) replacement 
therapy for the X-linked bleeding disorder haemophilia A and occurs in 20%-30% of
patients. No prophylactic tolerance protocol currently exists. Although we
reported oral tolerance induction using FVIII domains expressed in tobacco
chloroplasts, significant challenges in clinical advancement include expression
of the full-length CTB-FVIII sequence to cover the entire patient population,
regardless of individual CD4+ T-cell epitope responses. Codon optimization of
FVIII heavy chain (HC) and light chain (LC) increased expression 15- to 42-fold
higher than the native human genes. Homoplasmic lettuce lines expressed CTB
fusion proteins of FVIII-HC (99.3 kDa), LC (91.8 kDa), C2 (31 kDa) or single
chain (SC, 178.2 kDa) up to 3622, 263, 3321 and 852 μg/g in lyophilized plant
cells, when grown in a cGMP hydroponic facility (Fraunhofer). CTB-FVIII-SC is the
largest foreign protein expressed in chloroplasts; despite a large pentamer size 
(891 kDa), assembly, folding and disulphide bonds were maintained upon
lyophilization and long-term storage as revealed by GM1-ganglioside receptor
binding assays. Repeated oral gavages (twice/week for 2 months) of
CTB-FVIII-HC/CTB-FVIII-LC reduced inhibitor titres ~10-fold (average 44 BU/mL to 
4.7 BU/mL) in haemophilia A mice. Most importantly, increase in the frequency of 
circulating LAP-expressing CD4+ CD25+ FoxP3+ Treg in tolerized mice could be used
as an important cellular biomarker in human clinical trials for plant-based oral 
tolerance induction. In conclusion, this study reports the first clinical
candidate for oral tolerance induction that is urgently needed to protect
haemophilia A patients receiving FVIII injections.

© 2017 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for
Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pbi.12859 
PMCID: PMC5936678
PMID: 29106782  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

