
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2018 Jan;144:8-21. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2017.10.013. Epub
2017 Oct 27.

Comparison of biofilm cell quantification methods for drinking water distribution
systems.

Waller SA(1), Packman AI(2), Hausner M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Sustainable Systems LLC - Consulting, 4916 N Francisco Avenue, Chicago, IL
60625, United States. Electronic address: sustainablesystemsllc@gmail.com.
(2)Northwestern University, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, 2145
Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208, United States.
(3)Ryerson University, Department of Chemistry and Biology, 350 Victoria Street, 
Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Canada.

Drinking water quality typically degrades after treatment during conveyance
through the distribution system. Potential causes include biofilm growth in
distribution pipes which may result in pathogen retention, inhibited disinfectant
diffusion, and proliferation of bad tastes and odors. However, there is no
standard method for direct measurement of biofilms or quantification of biofilm
cells in drinking water distribution systems. Three methods are compared here for
quantification of biofilm cells grown in pipe loops samplers: biofilm
heterotrophic plate count (HPC), biofilm biovolume by confocal laser scanning
microscopy (CLSM) and biofilm total cell count by flow cytometry (FCM) paired
with Syto 9. Both biofilm biovolume by CLSM and biofilm total cell count by FCM
were evaluated for quantification of the whole biofilms (including non-viable
cells and viable but not culturable cells). Signal-to-background ratios and
overall performance of biofilm biovolume by CLSM and biofilm total cell count by 
FCM were found to vary with the pipe material. Biofilm total cell count by FCM
had a low signal-to-background ratio on all materials, indicating that further
development is recommended before application in drinking water environments.
Biofilm biovolume by CLSM showed the highest signal-to-background ratio for
cement and cast iron, which suggests promise for wider application in full-scale 
systems. Biofilm biovolume by CLSM and Syto 9 staining allowed in-situ biofilm
cell quantification thus elimination variable associated with cell detachment for
quantification but had limitations associated with non-specific staining of
cement and, to a lesser degree, auto-fluorescence of both cement and polyvinyl
chloride materials. Due to variability in results obtained from each method,
multiple methods are recommended to assess biofilm growth in drinking water
distribution systems. Of the methods investigated here, HPC and CLSM and
recommended for further development towards application in full-scale systems.
HPC is a sample and widely applied method that quantifies viable culturable
cells. CLSM analysis allows the elimination of experimental variables associated 
with cell detachment and affords the opportunity to evaluate biofilm components
such as extracellular polymeric substances through the addition of specific
probes. These two methods can be applied together to assess biofilms known to
degrade treated water quality during conveyance in full-scale drinking water
treatment systems. The significance of improved biofilm assessment methods for
drinking water distribution systems lies in advancing understanding of biofilm
growth and control mechanisms that may lead to improved water quality during
conveyance and at the tap for greater public health protection.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2017.10.013 
PMID: 29111400  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

