
1. Food Chem. 2018 Apr 1;244:44-49. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2017.10.007. Epub 2017
Oct 4.

Biosynthesis of acetate esters by dominate strains, isolated from Chinese
traditional fermented fish (Suan yu).

Gao P(1), Jiang Q(1), Xu Y(1), Xia W(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, School of Food Science
and Technology, Collaborative Innovationcenter of Food Safety and Quality Control
in Jiangsu Province, Jiangnan University, Lihu 1800, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214122, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, School of Food Science
and Technology, Collaborative Innovationcenter of Food Safety and Quality Control
in Jiangsu Province, Jiangnan University, Lihu 1800, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214122, China.
Electronic address: xiaws@jiangnan.edu.cn.

Biosynthesis of acetate esters by Lactobacillus plantarum 120, Staphylococcus
xylosus 135 and Saccharomyces cerevisiae 31, isolated from Chinese traditional
fermented fish (Suan yu) were studied. A buffer system containing acyl donors
(acetic acid/glyceryl triacetate/acetyl-CoA) and aliphatic alcohols (C2-C6) was
established, inoculated with intracellular and extracellular extracts of the
three strains. The results showed that the biosynthesis pathway of L. plantarum
120 was esterification and alcoholysis, while the biosynthesis pathway of S.
xylosus 135 and S. cerevisiae 31 was hydrolysis and esterification, rather than
alcoholysis. The ester-synthesizing activity of L. plantarum 120 via alcoholysis 
was higher than that via esterification at high pH value, while an opposite
result for each strain was observed at low pH value. Moreover, the
ester-synthesis activity of L. plantarum 120 was higher than that of S. xylosus
135 and S. cerevisiae 31. In addition, microbial ester-synthesis activity
increased with the increase of aliphatic alcohol carbon number.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2017.10.007 
PMID: 29120803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

