
1. Chemosphere. 2018 Feb;193:118-125. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.10.172. Epub
2017 Nov 1.

Combined use of microbial consortia isolated from different agricultural soils
and cyclodextrin as a bioremediation technique for herbicide contaminated soils.

Villaverde J(1), Rubio-Bellido M(2), Lara-Moreno A(2), Merchan F(3), Morillo
E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Recursos Naturales y Agrobiología (IRNAS-CSIC), Apartado 1052,
41080, Sevilla, Spain. Electronic address: j.villaverde@csic.es.
(2)Instituto de Recursos Naturales y Agrobiología (IRNAS-CSIC), Apartado 1052,
41080, Sevilla, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Microbiología y Parasitología, Universidad de Sevilla,
Facultad de Farmacia, C/ Profesor García González, 2, 41012, Sevilla, Spain.

The phenylurea herbicide diuron is persistent in soil, water and groundwater and 
is considered to be a highly toxic molecule. The principal product of its
biodegradation, 3,4-dichloroaniline, exhibits greater toxicity than diuron and is
persistent in the environment. Five diuron degrading microbial consortia (C1C5), 
isolated from different agricultural soils, were investigated for diuron
mineralization activity. The C2 consortium was able to mineralize 81.6% of the
diuron in solution, while consortium C3 was only able to mineralize 22.9%.
Isolated consortia were also tested in soil slurries and in all cases, except
consortium C4, DT50 (the time required for the diuron concentration to decline to
half of its initial value) was drastically reduced, from 700 days (non-inoculated
control) to 546, 351, and 171 days for the consortia C5, C2, and C1,
respectively. In order to test the effectiveness of the isolated consortium C1 in
a more realistic scenario, soil diuron mineralization assays were performed under
static conditions (40% of the soil water-holding capacity). A significant
enhancement of diuron mineralization was observed after C1 inoculation, with
23.2% of the herbicide being mineralized in comparison to 13.1% for the control
experiment. Hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin, a biodegradable organic enhancer of
pollutant bioavailability, used in combination with C1 bioaugmentation in static 
conditions, resulted in a significant decrease in the DT50 (214 days; 881 days,
control experiment). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of
the use of soil-isolated microbial consortia in combination with cyclodextrins
proposed as a bioremediation technique for pesticide contaminated soils.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.10.172 
PMID: 29127836  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

