
1. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2018 Jan;410(3):747-771. doi: 10.1007/s00216-017-0701-3. Epub 
2017 Nov 10.

Bioinspired recognition elements for mycotoxin sensors.

Peltomaa R(1), Benito-Peña E(1), Moreno-Bondi MC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, Universidad
Complutense de Madrid, Av. Complutense s/n, 28040, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, Universidad
Complutense de Madrid, Av. Complutense s/n, 28040, Madrid, Spain.
mcmbondi@ucm.es.

Mycotoxins are low molecular weight molecules produced as secondary metabolites
by filamentous fungi that can be found as natural contaminants in many foods and 
feeds. These toxins have been shown to have adverse effects on both human and
animal health, and are the cause of significant economic losses worldwide.
Sensors for mycotoxin analysis have traditionally applied elements of biological 
origin for the selective recognition purposes. However, since the 1970s there has
been an exponential growth in the use of genetically engineered or synthetic
biomimetic recognition elements that allow some of the limitations associated
with the use of natural receptors for the analyses of these toxins to be
circumvented. This review provides an overview of recent advances in the
application of bioinspired recognition elements, including recombinant
antibodies, peptides, aptamers, and molecularly imprinted polymers, to the
development of sensors for mycotoxins based on different transduction elements.
Graphical abstract Novel analytical methods based on bioinspired recognition
elements, such as recombinant antibodies, peptides, aptamers, and molecularly
imprinted polymers, can improve the detection of mycotoxins and provide better
tools than their natural counterparts to ensure food safety.

DOI: 10.1007/s00216-017-0701-3 
PMID: 29127461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

