
1. Oncotarget. 2017 Sep 16;8(47):81852-81859. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.20965.
eCollection 2017 Oct 10.

Re-balance of memory T cell subsets in peripheral blood from patients with CML
after TKI treatment.

Yao D(1)(2), Xu L(1)(2), Tan J(1)(2), Zhang Y(1)(2), Lu S(1), Li M(1)(2), Lu
S(1)(2), Yang L(1), Chen S(1), Chen J(2), Lai J(2), Lu Y(2), Wu X(1)(2), Zha
X(3), Li Y(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine of Ministry of Education, Institute
of Hematology, Jinan University, School of Medicine, Jinan University, Guangzhou,
China.
(2)Department of Hematology, First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan University,
Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan
University, Guangzhou, China.

T cell immune surveillance is considered an important host protection process for
inhibiting carcinogenesis. The full capacity of T cell immune surveillance is
dependent on T cell homeostasis, particularly for central memory T (TCM) cells
and stem cell memory T (TSCM) cells. In this study, distribution of T cell
subsets in peripheral blood from 12 patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) 
and 12 cases with CML in complete remission (CR) was analyzed using a multicolor 
flow cytometer, and 16 samples from healthy individuals (HIs) served as control. 
The proportion of CD8+ TSCM and CD4+ and CD8+ TCM cells were lower, while CD4+
effector memory T (TEM) cells and CD4+ and CD8+ terminal effector T (TEF) cells
were higher in CML patients compared with HIs. Moreover, the proportion of
CD8+CD28- T cells, which were found to have the immune suppressive function,
increased in the naive T (TN) cell and TCM subsets in CML patients compared with 
HIs. Our study reveals that elimination of leukemia cells by treating with
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) restores the memory T cell distribution from a 
skewed pattern in CML patients who are under leukemia burden, indicating that
leukemia-specific immune responses mediated by T cells might be induced and
maintained in CML patients, however, these responsive T cells might gradually
become exhausted due to the continued existence of leukemia cells and their
environment; therefore, T cell activation using a different approach remains a
key point for enhancing global T cell immunity in CML patients, even for those
with CR status.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.20965 
PMCID: PMC5669853
PMID: 29137227 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare that
they have no competing interests.

