
1. Curr Microbiol. 2018 Apr;75(4):431-440. doi: 10.1007/s00284-017-1399-3. Epub 2017
Nov 17.

Phenotypic Effects and Inhibition of Botrydial Biosynthesis Induced by Different 
Plant-Based Elicitors in Botrytis cinerea.

Liñeiro E(1), Macias-Sánchez AJ(2), Espinazo M(1), Cantoral JM(1), Moraga
J(1)(2), Collado IG(2), Fernández-Acero FJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Laboratory, Andalusian Center for Grape and Grapevine Research,
Faculty of Marine and Environmental Sciences, University of Cadiz, Polígono Rio
San Pedro s/n, 11510, Puerto Real, Cádiz, Spain.
(2)Organic Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, University of Cadiz, Puerto 
Real, Cádiz, Spain.
(3)Microbiology Laboratory, Andalusian Center for Grape and Grapevine Research,
Faculty of Marine and Environmental Sciences, University of Cadiz, Polígono Rio
San Pedro s/n, 11510, Puerto Real, Cádiz, Spain.
franciscojavier.fernandez@uca.es.

Botrytis cinerea is considered a model organism for the study of plant-pathogen
interaction showing great genetic diversity and a high degree of morphological
variability depending on environmental conditions. The use of new compounds and
plant-based elicitors may trigger the expression of different B. cinerea genes,
providing new sources of virulence factors. This work is focused on elucidating
the phenotypic effect in B. cinerea of different carbon sources such as glucose, 
cellulose and tomato cell walls (TCW). Production of botrydial and
dihydrobotrydial toxins was evaluated using thin-layer chromatography (TLC),
proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-NMR) and mass spectrometry
(UPLC-HRESIMS). Expression of the toxin biosynthesis gene BcBOT2 was followed
using RT-qPCR. Results show an inhibition of the toxin biosynthesis pathway when 
TCW are present as a sole carbon source, suggesting that the toxin is only
produced when rich molecules, like glucose, are available for fungal metabolism. 
That suggests a connection between gene expression of virulence factors and
environmental conditions, where the silent genes can be induced by different
culture conditions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-017-1399-3 
PMCID: PMC5842495
PMID: 29147762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

