
1. Environ Pollut. 2018 Jun;237:858-867. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2017.11.039. Epub
2017 Nov 15.

Subcellular distribution and biotransformation of phenanthrene in pakchoi after
inoculation with endophytic Pseudomonas sp. as probed using HRMS coupled with
isotope-labeling.

Sun K(1), Habteselassie MY(2), Liu J(3), Li S(3), Gao Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Farmland Ecological Conservation and
Pollution Prevention, School of Resources and Environment, Anhui Agricultural
University, 130 Changjiang West Road, Hefei, 230036, Anhui, China; Institute of
Organic Contaminant Control and Soil Remediation, College of Resources and
Environmental Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China.
(2)Department of Crop and Soil Sciences, University of Georgia Griffin Campus,
1109 Experiment Street, Griffin, GA 30223, United States.
(3)Institute of Organic Contaminant Control and Soil Remediation, College of
Resources and Environmental Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing
210095, China.
(4)Institute of Organic Contaminant Control and Soil Remediation, College of
Resources and Environmental Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing
210095, China. Electronic address: gaoyanzheng@njau.edu.cn.

Contamination of food-crops with polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) poses a 
grave concern to food safety, especially when PAHs are internalized. We have
demonstrated in our previous study that inoculation of crop with a
phenanthrene-degrading endophytic Pseudomonas sp. Ph6-gfp could overcome this
problem. Here, the subcellular distribution and biotransformation mechanism of
phenanthrene in pakchoi (Brassica chinensis L.) seedlings with inoculation of
Ph6-gfp were further investigated both in vitro and in vivo. The possible
biotransformation products of phenanthrene were identified by high-resolution
mass spectrometry (HRMS) coupled with 13C2-phenanthrene labeling. Results
indicated that Ph6-gfp colonized pakchoi interior and reduced the content of
phenanthrene in different cell compartments. Notably, the inoculation hindered
the subcellular distribution of phenanthrene from intercellular space to
subcellular fractions (i.e., cell wall, cell membrane, cell solution, and cell
organelles), likely resulting from the interception and biodegradation of
phenanthrene by the bacterium between the cell wall and intercellular space.
Additionally, the conjugation reactions of phenanthrene-metabolites and
endogenous plant compounds were enhanced as a result of the inoculation. We
propose that endophytic degradation, plant metabolism, and conjugation reaction
are the three possible biotransformation mechanisms that could account for the
changes in phenanthrene inside the plant cell compartments. This is the first
observation of endophytic bacteria (EB)-enhanced biotransformation and
conjugation of phenanthrene in pakchoi at the subcellular level, which drive
novel insights in regulating food-crop contamination with endophytes in
PAH-contaminated matrices.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2017.11.039 
PMID: 29150254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

