
1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2017 Nov;21(21):4930-4934.

Drug-related oral malodour (halitosis): a literature review.

Torsten M(1), GÃ³mez-Moreno G, Aguilar-Salvatierra A.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacological Research in Dentistry Group, Faculty of Dentistry, University 
of Granada, Granada, Spain. ggomez@ugr.es.

Dry mouth (xerostomia), is a fairly common, well-researched condition, which is
an indirect cause of oral malodour. This systematic literature review looked into
another cause of bad breath: adverse drug reactions in the orofacial region
causing halitosis. The study focused on extraoral halitosis, and its
subdivisions, particularly blood borne halitosis in which malodourous compounds
in the blood stream are carried to the lungs, passively diffused across the
pulmonary alveolar membrane to enter the breath. An electronic search was
conducted in various databases. Inclusion criteria were: editorials, case control
studies, retrospective studies and randomized double-blind studies published in
English between 1983 and March 2017. The search identified a total of 23
articles. According to these, drug-related halitosis may be caused by nine
medications. Dimethyl sulfoxide, cysteamine and suplatast tosilate are
metabolised to dimethyl sulfide, a malodourous compound that is stable in blood
and is transported into the breath. Disulfiram is reduced to carbon disulfide,
also a stable compound in blood. Nitric oxide reacts with foul-smelling volatile 
organosulfur compounds. The degradation of penicillamine raises the pH level,
favouring the growth of gram-negative bacteria in the oral cavity producing
halitosis. Chloral hydrate, phenothiazine, and paraldehyde could not be related
to halitosis. The analysis showed that halitosis can be caused by medication but 
does not correlate to any specific disease or specific form of drug therapy. The 
pharmacological compounds identified as causes of halitosis are administered to
treat a broad spectrum of diseases, or in therapeutic regimes.


PMID: 29164566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

