
1. Autophagy. 2017;13(11):1813-1827. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2017.1356550. Epub 2017
Nov 21.

Lipopolysaccharide mediates hepatic stellate cell activation by regulating
autophagy and retinoic acid signaling.

Chen M(1)(2), Liu J(1)(2), Yang W(1)(2), Ling W(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Nutrition , School of Public Health, Sun Yat-Sen University , 
Guangzhou , Guangdong , People's Republic of China.
(2)b Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Food, Nutrition and Health ,
Guangzhou , Guangdong , China.

Bacterial translocation and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) leakage occur at a very
early stage of liver fibrosis in animal models. We studied the role of LPS in
hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation and the underlying mechanisms in vitro and
in vivo. Herein, we demonstrated that LPS treatment led to a dramatic increase in
autophagosome formation and autophagic flux in LX-2 cells and HSCs, which was
mediated through the AKT-MTOR and AMPK-ULK1 pathway. LPS significantly decreased 
the lipid content, including the lipid droplet (LD) number and lipid staining
area in HSCs; pretreatment with macroautophagy/autophagy inhibitors or silencing 
ATG5 attenuated this decrease. Furthermore, lipophagy was induced by LPS through 
the autophagy-lysosomal pathway in LX-2 cells and HSCs. Additionally, LPS-induced
autophagy further reduced retinoic acid (RA) signaling, as demonstrated by a
decrease in the intracellular RA level and Rar target genes, resulting in the
downregulation of Bambi and promoting the sensitization of the HSC's fibrosis
response to TGFB. Compared with CCl4 injection alone, CCl4 plus LPS injection
exaggerated liver fibrosis in mice, as demonstrated by increased Col1a1
(collagen, type I, α 1), Acta2, Tgfb and Timp1 mRNA expression, ACTA2/α-SMA and
COL1A1 protein expression, and Sirius Red staining area, which could be
attenuated by injection of an autophagy inhibitor. LPS also reduced lipid content
in HSCs in vivo, with this change being attenuated by chloroquine (CQ)
administration. In conclusion, LPS-induced autophagy resulted in LD loss, RA
signaling dysfunction, and downregulation of the TGFB pseudoreceptor Bambi, thus 
sensitizing HSCs to TGFB signaling.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2017.1356550 
PMCID: PMC5788469
PMID: 29160747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

