
1. Oncotarget. 2017 Oct 4;8(51):88904-88917. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.21492.
eCollection 2017 Oct 24.

Functional expression of Tim-3 on blasts and clinical impact of its ligand
galectin-9 in myelodysplastic syndromes.

Asayama T(1), Tamura H(1), Ishibashi M(1), Kuribayashi-Hamada Y(1), Onodera-Kondo
A(1), Okuyama N(1), Yamada A(1), Shimizu M(2), Moriya K(1), Takahashi H(2),
Inokuchi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo,
Japan.

T-cell immunoglobulin mucin-3 (Tim-3), an inhibitory immune checkpoint receptor, 
is highly expressed on acute myeloid leukemia cells and its ligand galectin-9 is 
reported to drive leukemic progression by binding with Tim-3. However, it remains
unclear whether the Tim-3-galectin-9 pathway is associated with the
pathophysiology of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). Thus, we investigated the
expression and function of Tim-3 and the clinical impact of its ligand galectin-9
in MDS. Tim-3 expression levels on MDS blasts by CD45/side-scatter or CD34/CD45
gating were increased as MDS progressed to the advanced stage. Tim-3 expression
in the MDS blasts was upregulated in the presence of the cell culture supernatant
of human stromal cells or the MDS-related cytokine transforming growth factor-Î²1.
The proliferation of Tim-3+ MDS blasts was inhibited by the blockade of
anti-Tim-3 antibody. Furthermore, plasma levels of galectin-9 were elevated as
MDS progressed to the advanced stage in 70 MDS/acute leukemia transformed from
MDS patients and was a prognostic factor in 40 MDS patients. Our data
demonstrated that the Tim-3-galectin-9 pathway is associated with the
pathogenesis and disease progression of MDS. These findings provide new insight
into potential immunotherapy targeting the galectin-9-Tim-3 pathway in MDS.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.21492 
PMCID: PMC5687656
PMID: 29179486 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST There are no potential
conflicts of interest to disclose.

