
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2018;1700:25-36. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7454-2_2.

Crystallographic Analysis of Drug and Inhibitor-Binding Structure of RND-Type
Multidrug Exporter AcrB in Physiologically Relevant Asymmetric Crystals.

Nakashima R(1), Sakurai K(2), Yamaguchi A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka, Japan. nakashi@sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka, Japan.

Xenobiotic extruding pumps have recently been known to be widely distributed in
living organisms from mammalian to bacteria as a host-defense mechanism in
cellular level. These pumps not only confer multidrug resistance of cancer cells 
and pathogenic bacteria but also cause hereditary diseases through the mutation. 
Our purposes are to elucidate the molecular structures and mechanisms of these
xenobiotic exporters.We had succeeded to determine the crystal structure of
bacterial major multidrug exporter AcrB at 3.5 Å resolution (Murakami et al.,
Nature 419:587-593, 2002) and elucidated the structural bases of substrate
recognition that the pump recognize the places and thus act as a "membrane vacuum
cleaner." After that we also determined the crystal structure of the drug-binding
form of AcrB in space group C2 in which asymmetric unit contains structurally
asymmetric homo-trimer of AcrB (Murakami et al., Nature 443:173-179, 2006;
Nakashima et al., Nature 480:565-569, 2011; Nakashima et al., Nature 500:120-126,
2013). Analyses revealed the existence of a specific mechanism to recognize
numerous substrates that the multisite binding is the base of multidrug
recognition rather than induced-fit, and functional-rotation mechanism in which
three monomers undergo a strictly coordinated sequential conformational change
cycle of access, binding, and extrusion. Determination of physiological
asymmetric AcrB structure was crucially important to understand these transport
mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7454-2_2 
PMID: 29177823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

