
1. J Autoimmun. 2018 May;89:53-62. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2017.11.004. Epub 2017 Nov
27.

Excessive interferon-α signaling in autoimmunity alters glycosphingolipid
processing in B cells.

Tan AH(1), Sanny A(2), Ng SW(2), Ho YS(2), Basri N(2), Lee AP(2), Lam KP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and
Research, Singapore 138668, Singapore. Electronic address:
andy_tan@bti.a-star.edu.sg.
(2)Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and
Research, Singapore 138668, Singapore.
(3)Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and
Research, Singapore 138668, Singapore; Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin
School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore 11799, Singapore;
Department of Microbiology, and Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 117599, Singapore; Department of Pediatrics,
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore
117599, Singapore. Electronic address: lam_kong_peng@bti.a-star.edu.sg.

Excessive interferon-α (IFN-α) production by innate immune cells is a hallmark of
autoimmune diseases. What other cell type secretes IFN-α and how IFN-α affects
immune cell metabolism and homeostasis in autoimmunity are largely unclear. Here,
we report that autoimmune B cells, arising from two different B cell-specific
genetic lesions in mice, secrete IFN-α. In addition, IFN-α, found in abundance in
autoimmunity, elicited profound changes in the B cell lipidome, increasing their 
expression of glycosphingolipids (GSLs) and leading to their CD1d-mediated
depletion of iNKT cells in vitro and in vivo. IFN-α receptor blockade could
reverse the loss of iNKT cells. Excessive stimulation of B cells with IFN-α
altered the expression of enzymes that catalyze critical steps in GSL processing,
increasing the expressions of glucosylceramide synthase (GCS) and
globotrihexosylceramide synthase (Gb3S) but decreasing that of α-galactosidase A 
(α-galA). Inhibiting GCS or restoring α-galA expression prevented iNKT depletion 
by IFN-α-activated B cells. Taken together, our work indicated that excessive
IFN-α perturbs GSL metabolism in B cells which in turn adversely affects iNKT
homeostasis.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2017.11.004 
PMID: 29191573  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

