
1. Oncotarget. 2017 Oct 11;8(53):90748-90765. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.21797.
eCollection 2017 Oct 31.

Dissecting the mechanisms involved in anti-human T-lymphocyte immunoglobulin
(ATG)-induced tolerance in the setting of allogeneic stem cell transplantation - 
potential implications for graft versus host disease.

Beider K(1), Naor D(2), Voevoda V(1), Ostrovsky O(1), Bitner H(1), Rosenberg
E(1), Varda-Bloom N(1), Marcu-Malina V(1), Canaani J(1), Danilesko I(1), Shimoni 
A(1), Nagler A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, Chaim Sheba Medical Center and Tel Aviv University,
Tel-Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(2)2 Lautenberg Center for Immunology and Cancer Research, Faculty of Medicine,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

Polyclonal anti-human thymocyte globulins (ATG) have been recently shown to
significantly reduce the incidence of graft versus host disease (GVHD) post
allogeneic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) from both sibling and unrelated
donors. Induction of regulatory T cells has been suggested as one of the possible
mechanisms. The aim of current study was to further characterize the T cell
populations induced by ATG treatment and to delineate the mechanisms involved in 
ATG-induced tolerance. Phenotypic characterization revealed a significant
increase in the expression of FoxP3, GITR, CD95, PD-1 and ICOS as well as the
complement inhibitory molecules CD55, CD58 and CD59 on CD4+CD25+ T cells upon ATG
treatment. Addition of ATG-treated cells to autologous and allogeneic peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) stimulated with anti-CD3/anti-CD28 antibodies
resulted in significant inhibition of proliferation. Moreover, T-cell activation 
and IFNγ secretion were reduced in the presence of ATG-induced Treg cells. The
CD4+CD25+CD127-low Treg fraction sorted from ATG-treated culture demonstrated
greater suppressive potency than negative fraction. Conditioned medium produced
by ATG-treated but not IgG-treated cells contained TGFβ and suppressed T cell
proliferation and activation in a TGFβ receptor-dependent manner. TGFβ receptor
kinase inhibitor SB431542 interfered with the suppressive activity of ATG-primed 
cells, enabling partial rescue of proliferation and IFNγ secretion. Moreover,
SB431542 prevented Treg phenotype induction upon ATG treatment. Altogether, our
data reveal the role of TGFβ signaling in ATG-mediated immunosuppression and
further support the use of ATG, a potent inducer of regulatory T cells, for
prevention of GVHD post HSCT and potentially other therapeutic applications.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.21797 
PMCID: PMC5710882
PMID: 29207601 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS The authors declare no
competing financial interests.

