
1. Oncotarget. 2017 Sep 1;8(53):91803-91816. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.20610.
eCollection 2017 Oct 31.

Molecular targeting of the Aurora-A/SMAD5 oncogenic axis restores
chemosensitivity in human breast cancer cells.

Opyrchal M(1), Gil M(1), Salisbury JL(2), Goetz MP(3), Suman V(3), Degnim A(3),
McCubrey J(4), Haddad T(3), Iankov I(3), Kurokawa CB(5), Shumacher N(2), Ingle
JN(3), Galanis E(3)(5), D'Assoro AB(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College Of
Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic College Of Medicine, Rochester,
MN, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, East Carolina University,
Greenville, NC, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic College Of Medicine, Rochester, 
MN, USA.

Although the majority of breast cancers initially respond to the cytotoxic
effects of chemotherapeutic agents, most breast cancer patients experience tumor 
relapse and ultimately die because of drug resistance. Breast cancer cells
undergoing epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) acquire a
CD44+/CD24-/ALDH1+ cancer stem cell-like phenotype characterized by an increased 
capacity for tumor self-renewal, intrinsic drug resistance and high proclivity to
develop distant metastases. We uncovered in human breast tumor xenografts a novel
non-mitotic role of Aurora-A kinase in promoting breast cancer metastases through
activation of EMT and expansion of breast tumor initiating cells (BTICs). In this
study we characterized the role of the Aurora-A/SMAD5 oncogenic axis in the
induction of chemoresistance. Breast cancer cells overexpressing Aurora-A showed 
resistance to conventional chemotherapeutic agents, while treatment with
alisertib, a selective Aurora-A kinase inhibitor, restored chemosensitivity.
Significantly, SMAD5 expression was required to induce chemoresistance and
maintain a breast cancer stem cell-like phenotype, indicating that the
Aurora-A/SMAD5 oncogenic axis promotes chemoresistance through activation of
stemness signaling. Taken together, these findings identified a novel mechanism
of drug resistance through aberrant activation of the non-canonical
Aurora-A/SMAD5 oncogenic axis in breast cancer.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.20610 
PMCID: PMC5710966
PMID: 29207686 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare that
there are no competing financial interests in relation to the work described.

