
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2018 Jan;164(1):78-87. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000588. Epub
2017 Dec 8.

CAR gene cluster and transcript levels of carotenogenic genes in Rhodotorula
mucilaginosa.

Landolfo S(1), Ianiri G(2)(3), Camiolo S(1), Porceddu A(1), Mulas G(1), Chessa
R(1), Zara G(1), Mannazzu I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Sciences, Università degli Studi di Sassari, Viale 
Italia 39, 07100 Sassari, Italy.
(2)Department of Agricultural, Environmental and Food Sciences, Università degli 
Studi del Molise, Via Francesco de Sanctis, 86100 Campobasso, Italy.
(3)Present address: Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

A molecular approach was applied to the study of the carotenoid biosynthetic
pathway of Rhodotorula mucilaginosa. At first, functional annotation of the
genome of R. mucilaginosa C2.5t1 was carried out and gene ontology categories
were assigned to 4033 predicted proteins. Then, a set of genes involved in
different steps of carotenogenesis was identified and those coding for phytoene
desaturase, phytoene synthase/lycopene cyclase and carotenoid dioxygenase (CAR
genes) proved to be clustered within a region of ~10 kb. Quantitative PCR of the 
genes involved in carotenoid biosynthesis showed that genes coding for
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutharyl-CoA reductase and mevalonate kinase are induced
during exponential phase while no clear trend of induction was observed for
phytoene synthase/lycopene cyclase and phytoene dehydrogenase encoding genes.
Thus, in R. mucilaginosa the induction of genes involved in the early steps of
carotenoid biosynthesis is transient and accompanies the onset of carotenoid
production, while that of CAR genes does not correlate with the amount of
carotenoids produced. The transcript levels of genes coding for carotenoid
dioxygenase, superoxide dismutase and catalase A increased during the
accumulation of carotenoids, thus suggesting the activation of a mechanism aimed 
at the protection of cell structures from oxidative stress during carotenoid
biosynthesis. The data presented herein, besides being suitable for the
elucidation of the mechanisms that underlie carotenoid biosynthesis, will
contribute to boosting the biotechnological potential of this yeast by improving 
the outcome of further research efforts aimed at also exploring other features of
interest.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000588 
PMID: 29219805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

