
1. Mol Biol Cell. 2018 Feb 1;29(3):363-375. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E17-08-0493. Epub 2017 
Dec 6.

A complex molecular switch directs stress-induced cyclin C nuclear release
through SCFGrr1-mediated degradation of Med13.

Stieg DC(1), Willis SD(1), Ganesan V(1), Ong KL(2), Scuorzo J(3), Song M(3),
Grose J(2), Strich R(1), Cooper KF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Rowan
University, Stratford, NJ 08084.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Brigham Young University,
Provo, UT 84602.
(3)School of Osteopathic Medicine, Rowan University, Stratford, NJ 08084.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Rowan
University, Stratford, NJ 08084 cooperka@rowan.edu.

In response to oxidative stress, cells decide whether to mount a survival or cell
death response. The conserved cyclin C and its kinase partner Cdk8 play a key
role in this decision. Both are members of the Cdk8 kinase module, which, with
Med12 and Med13, associate with the core mediator complex of RNA polymerase II.
In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, oxidative stress triggers Med13 destruction, which
thereafter releases cyclin C into the cytoplasm. Cytoplasmic cyclin C associates 
with mitochondria, where it induces hyperfragmentation and regulated cell death. 
In this report, we show that residues 742-844 of Med13's 600-amino acid intrinsic
disordered region (IDR) both directs cyclin C-Cdk8 association and serves as the 
degron that mediates ubiquitin ligase SCFGrr1-dependent destruction of Med13
following oxidative stress. Here, cyclin C-Cdk8 phosphorylation of Med13 most
likely primes the phosphodegron for destruction. Next, pro-oxidant stimulation of
the cell wall integrity pathway MAP kinase Slt2 initially phosphorylates cyclin C
to trigger its release from Med13. Thereafter, Med13 itself is modified by Slt2
to stimulate SCFGrr1-mediated destruction. Taken together, these results support 
a model in which this IDR of Med13 plays a key role in controlling a molecular
switch that dictates cell fate following exposure to adverse environments.

© 2018 Stieg et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell 
Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E17-08-0493 
PMCID: PMC5996960
PMID: 29212878  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

