
1. ACS Synth Biol. 2018 Jan 19;7(1):86-97. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.7b00229. Epub 2017
Dec 21.

Replacing the Ethylmalonyl-CoA Pathway with the Glyoxylate Shunt Provides
Metabolic Flexibility in the Central Carbon Metabolism of Methylobacterium
extorquens AM1.

Schada von Borzyskowski L(1), Sonntag F(2), Pöschel L(2), Vorholt JA(3), Schrader
J(2), Erb TJ(1)(4), Buchhaupt M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology , Karl-von-Frisch-Str. 10,
35043 Marburg, Germany.
(2)DECHEMA Research Institute , Theodor-Heuss-Allee 25, 60486 Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany.
(3)Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zurich , Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 4, 8093 Zurich,
Switzerland.
(4)Center for Synthetic Microbiology, SYNMIKRO , 35043 Marburg, Germany.

The ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway (EMCP) is an anaplerotic reaction sequence in the
central carbon metabolism of numerous Proteo- and Actinobacteria. The pathway
features several CoA-bound mono- and dicarboxylic acids that are of interest as
platform chemicals for the chemical industry. The EMCP, however, is essential for
growth on C1 and C2 carbon substrates and therefore cannot be simply interrupted 
to drain these intermediates. In this study, we aimed at reengineering central
carbon metabolism of the Alphaproteobacterium Methylobacterium extorquens AM1 for
the specific production of EMCP derivatives in the supernatant. Establishing a
heterologous glyoxylate shunt in M. extorquens AM1 restored wild type-like growth
in several EMCP knockout strains on defined minimal medium with acetate as carbon
source. We further engineered one of these strains that carried a deletion of the
gene encoding crotonyl-CoA carboxylase/reductase to demonstrate in a
proof-of-concept the specific production of crotonic acid in the supernatant on a
defined minimal medium. Our experiments demonstrate that it is in principle
possible to further exploit the EMCP by establishing an alternative central
carbon metabolic pathway in M. extorquens AM1, opening many possibilities for the
biotechnological production of EMCP-derived compounds in future.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.7b00229 
PMID: 29216425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

