
1. Glycobiology. 2018 Feb 1;28(2):100-107. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwx100.

Interaction of Neisseria meningitidis Group X
N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase with its donor substrate.

Ming SA(1), Cottman-Thomas E(1), Black NC(1), Chen Y(2), Veeramachineni V(1),
Peterson DC(1), Chen X(2), Tedaldi LM(3), Wagner GK(3), Cai C(4), Linhardt RJ(4),
Vann WF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bacterial Polysaccharides, FDA, Silver Spring, MD 20993, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, King's College, London SE 11DB, UK.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, Troy, NY 12180, USA.

Neisseria meningitidis Group X is an emerging cause of bacterial meningitis in
Sub-Saharan Africa. The capsular polysaccharide of Group X is a homopolymer of
N-acetylglucosamine Î±(1-4) phosphate and is a vaccine target for prevention of
disease associated with this meningococcal serogroup. We have demonstrated
previously that the formation of the polymer is catalyzed by a phosphotransferase
which transfers N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphate from UDP-N-acetylglucosamine to
the 4-hydroxyl of the N-acetylglucosamine on the nonreducing end of the growing
chain. In this study, we use substrate analogs of UDP-GlcNAc to define the
enzyme/donor substrate interactions critical for catalysis. Our kinetic analysis 
of the phosphotransferase reaction is consistent with a sequential mechanism of
substrate addition and product release. The use of novel uracil modified analogs 
designed by Wagner et al. enabled us to assess whether the CsxA-catalyzed
reaction is consistent with a donor dependent conformational change. As expected 
with this model for glycosyltransferases, UDP-GlcNAc analogs with bulky uracil
modifications are not substrates but are inhibitors. An analog with a smaller
iodo uracil substitution is a substrate and a less potent inhibitor. Moreover,
our survey of analogs with modifications on the N-acetylglucosamine residue of
the sugar nucleotide donor highlights the importance of substituents at C2 and C4
of the sugar residue. The hydroxyl group at C4 and the structure of the acyl
group at C2 are very important for specificity and substrate interactions during 
the polymerization reaction. While most analogs modified at C2 were inhibitors,
acetamido analogs were also substrates suggesting the importance of the carbonyl 
group.

Published by Oxford University Press 2017. This work is written by (a) US
Government employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwx100 
PMID: 29228283  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

