
1. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2018 Apr;44(2):543-555. doi: 10.1007/s10695-017-0452-2.
Epub 2017 Dec 13.

Immunomodulatory effects of Rhodomyrtus tomentosa leaf extract and its derivative
compound, rhodomyrtone, on head kidney macrophages of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss).

Na-Phatthalung P(1), Teles M(2), Voravuthikunchai SP(1), Tort L(2), Fierro-Castro
C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Excellence Research Laboratory on Natural
Products, Faculty of Science and Natural Product Research Center of Excellence,
Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai, Songkhla, Thailand.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. mariacamino.fierro@uab.cat.

Rhodomyrtus tomentosa is a medicinal plant that shows biological effects
including immunomodulatory activity on human and other mammals but not in fish.
In this study, we evaluated the in vitro immunomodulatory effects of R. tomentosa
leaf extract and its active compound, rhodomyrtone, on the immune responses,
using rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) head kidney (HK) macrophages as a
model. The tested immune functions included the expression of genes involved in
innate immune and inflammatory responses and the production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS). Gene expression was evaluated after exposure to 10 μg mL-1 of R.
tomentosa and 1 μg mL-1 of rhodomyrtone for 4 and 24 h. R. tomentosa and
rhodomyrtone induced changes in the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines
(il1β, il8, and tnfα), anti-inflammatory cytokines (il10 and tgfβ), inducible
enzymes (inos, cox2, and arginase), and an antioxidant enzyme (gpx1). Co-exposure
of R. tomentosa with LPS resulted in a prominent reduction in the expression of
genes related to an inflammatory process (il1β, il8, tnfα, inos, saa, hepcidin,
and gpx1), suggesting anti-inflammatory effects. Similarly, co-exposure of
rhodomyrtone with LPS led to a downregulation of inflammation-related genes
(il1β, inos, saa, and hepcidin). In addition, exposure to both natural plant
products caused a reduction in cellular ROS levels by HK macrophages. The present
results indicate that R. tomentosa and rhodomyrtone exerted immunostimulatory and
anti-inflammatory effects on fish macrophages, thus opening up the possibility of
using these natural products to further develop immunostimulants for health
management in aquaculture.

DOI: 10.1007/s10695-017-0452-2 
PMID: 29238889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

