
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2018 Jul;98(9):3309-3314. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.8834. Epub 2018 Feb
23.

Effect of incorporation of natural chemicals in water ice-glazing on freshness
and shelf-life of Pacific saury (Cololabis saira) during -18 °C frozen storage.

Luo H(1), Wang W(2), Chen W(3), Tang H(4), Jiang L(2), Yu Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Jinling College, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China.
(2)College of Food Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Nanjing, China.
(3)College of Biological & Environmental Science, Zhejiang Wanli University,
Ningbo, China.
(4)Department of Food Science, Zhejiang Pharmaceutical College, Ningbo, China.

BACKGROUND: Microbial spoilage and lipid oxidation are two major factors causing 
freshness deterioration of Pacific saury (Cololabis saira) during frozen storage.
To provide a remedy, the effects of several natural chemicals incorporated alone 
or in combination in traditional water ice-glazing on the freshness and
shelf-life of Pacific saury during frozen storage at -18 °C were investigated.
Pacific sauries were subjected to individual quick freezing followed immediately 
by dipping into cold tap water (control) or solutions containing nisin, chitosan,
phytic acid (single-factor experiment) or their combinations ((L9 (34 )
orthogonal experiment) for 10 s at 1 °C and then packaged in polypropylene bags
before frozen storage at -18 °C. The storage duration tested was up to 12 months.
RESULTS: All ice-glazing treatments with individual chemicals could significantly
(P < 0.05) inhibit the accumulation of thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances
(TBARS), total volatile basic nitrogen (TVB-N) and histamine as well as the
increase in bacterial total viable count (TVC) compared with controls, while the 
combination treatments gave even better effects. The L9 (34 ) orthogonal
experiment showed that the optimal combination was A2 B1 C2 (i.e. 0.5 g L-1
nisin, 5 g L-1 chitosan and 0.2 g L-1 phytic acid). The TBARS, TVB-N, histamine
and TVC values in A2 B1 C2 -treated samples remained far below the maximum
acceptable limit for good-freshness fish after 12 months of frozen storage at -18
°C.
CONCLUSION: The incorporation of natural chemicals tested herein in ice-glazing
could inhibit microbial spoilage and lipid oxidation and therefore maintain the
freshness of Pacific saury during frozen storage. Under the optimal conditions,
the shelf-life of Pacific saury could be extended up to 12 months at -18 °C. The 
study indicated that the combination treatment with natural chemicals could be
commercially utilized to maintain the freshness and prolong the shelf-life of
Pacific saury. © 2017 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2017 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.8834 
PMID: 29239477  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

