
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2017 Dec 12;16(1):224. doi: 10.1186/s12934-017-0841-3.

Rational modification of substrate binding site by structure-based engineering of
a cellobiose 2-epimerase in Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus.

Park AR(1), Kim JS(1), Jang SW(1), Park YG(1), Koo BS(1), Lee HC(2).

Author information: 
(1)ForBioKorea Co., Ltd., Gasan digital 2-ro, Geumcheon-gu, Seoul, Republic of
Korea.
(2)ForBioKorea Co., Ltd., Gasan digital 2-ro, Geumcheon-gu, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. hclee0609@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Lactulose, a synthetic disaccharide, has received increasing interest
due to its role as a prebiotic, specifically proliferating Bifidobacilli and
Lactobacilli and enhancing absorption of calcium and magnesium. The use of
cellobiose 2-epimerase (CE) is considered an interesting alternative for
industrial production of lactulose. CE reversibly converts D-glucose residues
into D-mannose residues at the reducing end of unmodified β-1,4-linked
oligosaccharides, including β-1,4-mannobiose, cellobiose, and lactose. Recently, 
a few CE 3D structure were reported, revealing mechanistic details. Using this
information, we redesigned the substrate binding site of CE to extend its
activity from epimerization to isomerization.
RESULTS: Using superimposition with 3 known CE structure models, we identified 2 
residues (Tyr114, Asn184) that appeared to play an important role in binding
epilactose. We modified these residues, which interact with C2 of the mannose
moiety, to prevent epimerization to epilactose. We found a Y114E mutation led to 
increased release of a by-product, lactulose, at 65 °C, while its activity was
low at 37 °C. Notably, this phenomenon was observed only at high temperature and 
more reliably when the substrate was increased. Using Y114E, isomerization of
lactose to lactulose was investigated under optimized conditions, resulting in
86.9 g/l of lactulose and 4.6 g/l of epilactose for 2 h when 200 g/l of lactose
was used.
CONCLUSION: These results showed that the Y114E mutation increased isomerization 
of lactose, while decreasing the epimerization of lactose. Thus, a subtle
modification of the active site pocket could extend its native activity from
epimerization to isomerization without significantly impairing substrate binding.
While additional studies are required to scale this to an industrial process, we 
demonstrated the potential of engineering this enzyme based on structural
analysis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-017-0841-3 
PMCID: PMC5726027
PMID: 29233137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

