
1. J Immunol. 2018 Jan 15;200(2):669-680. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1602109. Epub 2017
Dec 13.

Induction of Immunosuppressive CD8+CD25+FOXP3+ Regulatory T Cells by Suboptimal
Stimulation with Staphylococcal Enterotoxin C1.

Lee J(1), Park N(1), Park JY(1), Kaplan BLF(1), Pruett SB(1), Park JW(2), Park
YH(3), Seo KS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi
State University, Mississippi State, MS 39762.
(2)Kentucky Biomedical Research Infrastructure Network Bioinformatics Core,
Department of Computer Engineering and Computer Science, University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292; and.
(3)Department of Microbiology, BK21 Program for Veterinary Science, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, South Korea.
(4)Department of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi
State University, Mississippi State, MS 39762; seo@cvm.msstate.edu.

Superantigens (SAgs) produced by Staphylococcus aureus at high concentrations
induce proliferation of T cells bearing specific TCR Vβ sequences and massive
cytokinemia that cause toxic shock syndrome. However, the biological relevance of
SAgs produced at very low concentrations during asymptomatic colonization or
chronic infections is not understood. In this study, we demonstrate that
suboptimal stimulation of human PBMCs with a low concentration (1 ng/ml) of
staphylococcal enterotoxin C1, at which half-maximal T cell proliferation was
observed, induced CD8+CD25+ T cells expressing markers related to regulatory T
cells (Tregs), such as IFN-γ, IL-10, TGF-β, FOXP3, CD28, CTLA4, TNFR2, CD45RO,
and HLA-DR. Importantly, these CD8+CD25+ T cells suppressed responder cell
proliferation mediated in contact-dependent and soluble factor-dependent manners,
involving galectin-1 and granzymes, respectively. In contrast, optimal
stimulation of human PBMCs with a high concentration (1 μg/ml) of staphylococcal 
enterotoxin C1, at which maximal T cell proliferation was observed, also induced 
similar expression of markers related to Tregs, including FOXP3 in CD8+CD25+
cells, but these T cells were not functionally immunosuppressive. We further
demonstrated that SAg-induced TCR Vβ-restricted and MHC class II-restricted
expansion of immunosuppressive CD8+CD25+ T cells is independent of CD4+ T cells. 
Our results suggest that the concentration of SAg strongly affects the functional
characteristics of activated T cells, and low concentrations of SAg produced
during asymptomatic colonization or chronic S. aureus infection induce
immunosuppressive CD8+ Tregs, potentially promoting colonization, propagation,
and invasion of S. aureus in the host.

Copyright © 2018 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1602109 
PMCID: PMC5757107
PMID: 29237775  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

