
1. ACS Infect Dis. 2018 Mar 9;4(3):391-402. doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.7b00214. Epub
2017 Dec 22.

Optimization of CoaD Inhibitors against Gram-Negative Organisms through Targeted 
Metabolomics.

Rath CM(1), Benton BM(1), de Vicente J(1), Drumm JE(1), Geng M(1), Li C(1),
Moreau RJ(1), Shen X(1), Skepper CK(1), Steffek M(1), Takeoka K(1), Wang L(1),
Wei JR(1), Xu W(1), Zhang Q(1), Feng BY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research , 5300 Chiron Way , Emeryville ,
California 94608 , United States.

Drug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria are of increasing concern worldwide. Novel 
antibiotics are needed, but their development is complicated by the requirement
to simultaneously optimize molecules for target affinity and cellular potency,
which can result in divergent structure-activity relationships (SARs). These
challenges were exemplified during our attempts to optimize inhibitors of the
bacterial enzyme CoaD originally identified through a biochemical screen. To
facilitate lead optimization, we developed mass spectroscopy assays based on the 
hypothesis that levels of CoA metabolites would reflect the cellular enzymatic
activity of CoaD. Using these methods, we were able to monitor the effects of
cellular enzyme inhibition at compound concentrations up to 100-fold below the
minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), a common metric of growth inhibition.
Furthermore, we generated a panel of efflux pump mutants to dissect the
susceptibility of a representative CoaD inhibitor to efflux. These approaches
allowed for a nuanced understanding of the permeability and efflux liabilities of
the series and helped guide optimization efforts to achieve measurable MICs
against wild-type E.Â coli.

DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.7b00214 
PMID: 29243909  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

