
1. Lasers Med Sci. 2018 Jul;33(5):941-948. doi: 10.1007/s10103-017-2407-3. Epub 2017
Dec 14.

Effect of 1064-nm Q-switched Nd:YAG laser on invasiveness and innate immune
response in keratinocytes infected with Candida albicans.

Baroni A(1), De Filippis A(2), Oliviero G(3), Fusco A(2), Perfetto B(2), Buommino
E(4), Donnarumma G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Health and Preventive Medicine, University of Campania
"Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy. adone.baroni@unicampania.it.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Microbiology and Clinical
Microbiology, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Mental Health and Preventive Medicine, University of Campania
"Luigi Vanvitelli", Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.

Erratum in
    Lasers Med Sci. 2018 Jan 25;:.

Candida albicans is an opportunistic pathogen commensal in the oral cavity,
vagina, and healthy skin. Common therapeutic options for fungal infections are
topical or systemic antifungal drugs. Recently, in cutaneous pathologies, lasers 
and light-based treatments have emerged showing few contraindications and minimal
side effects. The Q-switched (Nd-YAG) laser at a wavelength of 1064 nm has been
shown to be useful in dermatology, dentistry, and some other medical specialties.
It is used to treat onychomycoses, warts, and wounds and in some other
treatments. We analyzed the effect of Q-switched (Nd-YAG) laser 1064 nm on human 
keratinocytes infected with C. albicans. In particular, we evaluated the effect
of laser on invasiveness of C. albicans and on inflammatory and protective
response of HaCaT cells infected. The results obtained did not show inhibitory,
fungicidal, or fungistatic effects of laser on yeast; in addition, laser did not 
affect HaCaT vitality. HaCaT cells infected with C. albicans and irradiated with 
laser showed a reduction of invasiveness of TNF-α and IL8 gene expression and an 
increase of immunomodulatory cytokines such as TGFβ. Furthermore, laser induces a
significant over-expression of HSP70B (heat shock protein) and of HBD-2 (Human β 
defensin-2) in HaCaT infected with C. albicans, compared to the untreated
control. The use of Q-switched Nd:YAG laser in skin mycosis caused by C. albicans
reduces yeast invasiveness in keratinocytes, downregulates inflammatory
activities, and facilitates cytoprotection and antimicrobial defense. Our results
offer a promising therapeutic strategy in the management of skin candidiasis,
also in combination with conventional therapies.

DOI: 10.1007/s10103-017-2407-3 
PMID: 29243020  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

