
1. J Plant Physiol. 2018 Feb;221:66-73. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2017.12.002. Epub 2017 
Dec 6.

Salicylaldehyde synthase activity from Venturia inaequalis elicitor-treated cell 
culture of apple.

Sarkate A(1), Saini SS(1), Kumar P(2), Sharma AK(2), Sircar D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Molecular Biology Group, Biotechnology Department, Indian Institute of
Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 247 667, India.
(2)Protein Biochemistry Laboratory, Biotechnology Department, Indian Institute of
Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 247 667, India.
(3)Plant Molecular Biology Group, Biotechnology Department, Indian Institute of
Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 247 667, India. Electronic address:
debsrfbt@iitr.ac.in.

Salicylic acid (SA) is known to trigger a number of plant defense responses upon 
pathogen attack. It is well known that apple (Malus domestica) plants respond to 
pathogen invasion by synthesizing SA, but its biosynthesis is not well
understood. In this study, we report salicylaldehyde synthase (SAS) activity from
Venturia inaequalis elicitor (VIE)-treated cell suspension cultures of apple
(Malus domestica 'Florina'). SAS catalyzes non-oxidative C2-side chain cleavage
of 2-coumaric acid to form salicylaldehyde (SALD) in the presence of a reducing
agent such as cysteine. The side chain cleavage mechanism was found to be very
similar to that of salicylaldehyde synthase activity from tobacco and
4-hydroxybenzaldehyde synthase activity from Vanilla planifolia and Daucus
carota. A basal SAS activity was observed in the non-elicited cell cultures, and 
a 7-fold increase in SAS activity was observed upon elicitation. In parallel to
SAS activity, the level of total SA accumulation increased by 5.6-fold after
elicitation compared to the untreated control cells. Elicitor treatment further
resulted in an 8.7-fold increase in the activity of the phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase (PAL) enzyme that preceded the peak of SAS activity and total SA
accumulation, suggesting the involvement of the phenylpropanoid pathway in SA
metabolism. The preferred substrate for SAS was 2-coumaric acid (Km = 0.35 mM),
with cysteine being the preferred reducing agent. In addition, a 1.8-fold
enhancement in the SA content and 0.7-fold enhancement in the SALD content was
observed when elicited cell cultures were fed with 2-coumaric acid. These
observations suggest the involvement of SAS in SALD biosynthesis.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jplph.2017.12.002 
PMID: 29247889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

