
1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2017 Dec 20;6(12):e116. doi: 10.1038/emi.2017.106.

Longevity of antibody and T-cell responses against outer membrane antigens of
Orientia tsutsugamushi in scrub typhus patients.

Ha NY(1)(2), Kim Y(1)(2), Min CK(1)(2), Kim HI(1)(2), Yen NTH(1)(2), Choi MS(1), 
Kang JS(3), Kim YS(4), Cho NH(1)(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Seoul National University College
of Medicine, Seoul 03080, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul 03080, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Inha University School of Medicine, Incheon 22212,
Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Chungnam
National University School of Medicine, Daejeon 35015, Republic of Korea.
(5)Institute of Endemic Disease, Seoul National University Medical Research
Center and Bundang Hospital, Seoul 03080, Republic of Korea.

Scrub typhus, caused by Orientia tsutsugamushi infection, has been a serious
public health issue in the Asia-Pacific region, with rising incidence and
sporadic outbreaks. However, human protective immunity against specific antigens 
has been poorly characterized for this bacterium. In addition, immunity produced 
in early vaccine trials or even after natural infections, did not last long and
had poor cross-reactivity among various genotypes. Here, we systematically
investigated the kinetics and magnitude of specific adaptive immunity against two
membrane antigens, 56 kDa type-specific antigen (TSA56) and surface cell antigen 
A (ScaA), that are involved in bacterial adhesion and invasion of the host in 64 
recovered scrub typhus patients. Antibody responses to the bacterial antigens in 
patients were generally short-lived and waned to baseline levels 2 years after
recovery. The anti-TSA56 IgG responses were predominantly composed of the IgG1
and IgG3 subclasses and persisted for up to 1 year after recovery, whereas IgG
specific to ScaA primarily consisted of more transient IgG1, with limited
responses by other subclasses. Cellular immunity, including CD4 and CD8 T-cells
specific to membrane antigens, also rapidly declined from 1 year after infection,
as measured by enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT) assays and flow cytometry. The 
short longevity of antigen-specific adaptive immunity might be attributable to
limited memory responses, as observed in earlier vaccine studies using whole
bacterial antigens. Finally, we identified HLA-A*0201-restricted and highly
conserved CD8 T-cell epitopes in the TSA56 antigen, which may be valuable tools
for assessing cellular immunity against O. tsutsugamushi and developing an
effective scrub typhus vaccine.

DOI: 10.1038/emi.2017.106 
PMCID: PMC5750460
PMID: 29259327  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

