
1. PLoS One. 2017 Dec 18;12(12):e0185244. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0185244.
eCollection 2017.

A family-based genome-wide association study of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal
polyps implicates several genes in the disease pathogenesis.

Bohman A(1), Juodakis J(2), Oscarsson M(3), Bacelis J(2), Bende M(3), Torinsson
Naluai Å(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala,
Sweden.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of Clinical Sciences,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Skaraborg Hospital, Skövde, Sweden.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps is
largely unknown. Previous studies have given valuable information about genetic
variants associated with this disease but much is still unexplained. Our goal was
to identify genetic markers and genes associated with susceptibility to chronic
rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps using a family-based genome-wide association
study.
METHODS: 427 patients (293 males and 134 females) with CRSwNP and 393 controls
(175 males and 218 females) were recruited from several Swedish hospitals. SNP
association values were generated using DFAM (implemented in PLINK) and Efficient
Mixed Model Association eXpedited (EMMAX). Analyses of pathway enrichment, gene
expression levels and expression quantitative trait loci were then performed in
turn.
RESULTS: None of the analysed SNPs reached genome wide significant association of
5.0 x 10-8. Pathway analyses using our top 1000 markers with the most significant
association p-values resulted in 138 target genes. A comparison between our
target genes and gene expression data from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
database showed significant overlap for 36 of these genes. Comparisons with data 
from expression quantitative trait loci showed the most skewed allelic
distributions in cases with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps compared
with controls for the genes HLCS, HLA-DRA, BICD2, VSIR and SLC5A1.
CONCLUSION: Our study indicates that HLCS, HLA-DRA, BICD2, VSIR and SLC5A1 could 
be involved in the pathogenesis of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps.
HLA-DRA has been associated with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps in
previous studies and HLCS, BICD2, VSIR and SLC5A1 may be new targets for future
research.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0185244 
PMCID: PMC5734761
PMID: 29253858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

