
1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2018 Mar;310(2):127-138. doi: 10.1007/s00403-017-1802-8. Epub 
2017 Dec 18.

Increased senescent CD8+ T cells in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells of
Behçet's disease patients.

Yang JY(1), Park MJ(1), Park S(2), Lee ES(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, South
Korea.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Ajou University School of Medicine,
Suwon, South Korea.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, South
Korea. esl@ajou.ac.kr.

Behçet's disease (BD) is a chronic inflammatory disease characterized by
recurrent mucocutaneous, ocular, and skin lesions. Immunosenescence is associated
with increased susceptibility to infection and chronic low grade inflammation.
This study aimed to investigate the differences in the frequencies of
immunosenescent cells in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of
patients with BD. PBMCs were isolated from age-matched patients with active BD
(n = 19), inactive BD (n = 20), disease controls (DCs, n = 15) and healthy
controls (HCs, n = 15). The frequencies of senescent CD4+ T cells (CD3+ CD4+
CD27- CD28- cells), CD8+ T cells (CD3+ CD8+ CD27- CD28- cells) and B cells (CD19+
CD27- IgD- cells) were analyzed using flow cytometry. Senescence-associated β
galactosidase activity was also measured in CD8+ T cells using flow cytometry
with 5-dodecanoylaminofluorescein di-β-D-galactopyranoside. Frequencies of
senescent CD4+ and CD19+ cells were not significantly different between the
groups. The frequency of senescent CD8+ T cells was significantly higher in
active BD than in DCs and HCs. C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation
rate levels, which indicate disease activity, did not correlate with increased
frequencies of immunosenescent cells. Steroid treatment, specific organ
involvement, and HLA-B51 status did not have a significant influence on the
frequencies of immunosenescent cells. Frequencies of senescence-associated β
galactosidase+ CD8+ T cells were significantly higher in active BD and inactive
BD compared to DCs and HCs. There was an increased frequency of senescent CD8+ T 
cells in the PBMCs of patients with BD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-017-1802-8 
PMID: 29255925  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

