
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Dec 20;7(1):17885. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-18273-2.

Complete genome sequencing and genomic characterization of two Escherichia coli
strains co-producing MCR-1 and NDM-1 from bloodstream infection.

Zheng B(1), Yu X(1), Xu H(1), Guo L(1), Zhang J(1)(2), Huang C(1), Shen P(1),
Jiang X(3), Xiao Y(4), Li L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of 
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)College of Basic Medical Sciences, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University,
Hangzhou, China.
(4)Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. xiaoyonghong@zju.edu.cn.

We previously described the discovery of two Escherichia coli isolates (EC1002
and EC2474) co-harbouring mcr-1 and bla NDM-1 genes, which were recovered from
bloodstream infection in China. More importantly, these antibiotic resistance
genes were located on different plasmids and signaling the potential spread of
pandrug-resistant bacteria. Here, the complete genome sequences of both isolates 
were determined using Pacbio RS II and Illumina HiSeq2000 systems. The genome of 
EC1002 consists of a 5,177,501 base pair chromosome and four circular plasmids,
while the genome of EC2474 consists of a 5,013,813 base pair chromosome and three
plasmids. The plasmid replicon type of pEC1002_NDM and pEC2474_NDM were
identified as IncA/C2 and IncF, respectively. The genetic environment of bla
NDM-1 in this study was similar to bla NDM-carrying plasmids detected in China,
although the overall nucleotide identity and query coverage were variable. The
plasmid replicon type of pEC1002_MCR and pEC2474_MCR were identified as IncI2 and
IncHI2, respectively. Two different genetic strategies for mcr-1 gene spread were
observed in this study and bla NDM-1 genes were also found transferred by two
different mobile genetic elements in two plasmids. The findings of this study
further support that the diversified transfer mechanisms of bla NDM-1 and mcr-1
present in Enterobacteriaceae.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-18273-2 
PMCID: PMC5738369
PMID: 29263349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

