
1. J Biol Chem. 2018 Feb 2;293(5):1702-1712. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA117.000764. Epub
2017 Dec 22.

Structural basis for substrate specificity of methylsuccinyl-CoA dehydrogenase,
an unusual member of the acyl-CoA dehydrogenase family.

Schwander T(1), McLean R(1), Zarzycki J(1), Erb TJ(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Synthetic Metabolism,
Max-Planck-Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Marburg,
Karl-von-Frisch-Strasse 10, D-35043 Marburg, Germany and.
(2)From the Department of Biochemistry and Synthetic Metabolism,
Max-Planck-Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Marburg,
Karl-von-Frisch-Strasse 10, D-35043 Marburg, Germany and
toerb@mpi-marburg.mpg.de.
(3)the LOEWE Center for Synthetic Microbiology (SYNMIKRO), D-35043 Marburg,
Germany.

(2S)-methylsuccinyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCD) belongs to the family of
FAD-dependent acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (ACD) and is a key enzyme of the
ethylmalonyl-CoA pathway for acetate assimilation. It catalyzes the oxidation of 
(2S)-methylsuccinyl-CoA to α,β-unsaturated mesaconyl-CoA and shows only about
0.5% activity with succinyl-CoA. Here we report the crystal structure of MCD at a
resolution of 1.37 Å. The enzyme forms a homodimer of two 60-kDa subunits.
Compared with other ACDs, MCD contains an ∼170-residue-long N-terminal extension 
that structurally mimics a dimer-dimer interface of these enzymes that are
canonically organized as tetramers. MCD catalyzes the unprecedented oxidation of 
an α-methyl branched dicarboxylic acid CoA thioester. Substrate specificity is
achieved by a cluster of three arginines that accommodates the terminal carboxyl 
group and a dedicated cavity that facilitates binding of the C2 methyl branch.
MCD apparently evolved toward preventing the nonspecific oxidation of
succinyl-CoA, which is a close structural homolog of (2S)-methylsuccinyl-CoA and 
an essential intermediate in central carbon metabolism. For different metabolic
engineering and biotechnological applications, however, an enzyme that can
oxidize succinyl-CoA to fumaryl-CoA is sought after. Based on the MCD structure, 
we were able to shift substrate specificity of MCD toward succinyl-CoA through
active-site mutagenesis.

© 2018 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA117.000764 
PMCID: PMC5798300
PMID: 29275330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

