
1. Sci Rep. 2017 Dec 22;7(1):18046. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-18181-5.

Topographical diversity of common skin microflora and its association with skin
environment type: An observational study in Chinese women.

Li X(1), Yuan C(2), Xing L(3), Humbert P(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research APAC, Johnson & Johnson (China) Ltd., Worldwide EM
Innovation Center, 3285 Dongchuan Road, Minhang District, Shanghai, 200245,
China. cli9@its.jnj.com.
(2)Skin & Cosmetic Research Department, Shanghai Skin Disease Hospital, 1278 Bao 
De Road, Jing'an District, Shanghai, 200443, China.
(3)Clinical Research APAC, Johnson & Johnson (China) Ltd., Worldwide EM
Innovation Center, 3285 Dongchuan Road, Minhang District, Shanghai, 200245,
China.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Research and Clinic Centre on the Tegument,
Clinical Investigation Center, Besançon University Hospital, Besançon, France.
(5)University of Franche-Comté, Inserm, U1098, Besançon, France.

This study evaluated cutaneous microbial distribution, and microbial
co-occurrence at different body sites and skin environments in Chinese women
(39.6 ± 11.9 years, N = 100) during the winter season. Microbial distribution
(Propionibacterium acnes, Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis,
Lactobacillus, Pseudomonadaceae, and Malassezia furfur), association with
biomarkers (antimicrobial peptides: LL-37, β-defensins [HBD-2, HBD-3]), and
claudin-1) and skin biophysical parameters (transepidermal water loss, pH, skin
scaliness and roughness, sebum and hydration levels) were also determined. Skin
sites (glabella [GL], hand-back [HB], interdigital web-space [IS], antecubital
fossa [AF], volar forearm [VF], back [BA]) were classified as normal, oily or dry
based on two-step cluster analysis and exposed or unexposed (uncovered or covered
by clothes, respectively) based on seasonal apparel. Pseudomonadaceae and
Staphylococcus aureus had the highest and lowest detection rate respectively at
all sites. Cluster analysis identified skin sites as 'normal' (HB, BA, AF, VF),
'dry' (IS) and 'oily' (GL). Bacterial alpha diversity was higher in exposed (HB, 
IS, and GL) compared with unexposed sites (BA, AF and VF). Co-occurrence of
Staphylococcus aureus with any of the other five microorganisms was lower in dry 
and oily skin versus normal skin. Skin exposure, biophysical/barrier profile and 
biomarkers were found to be associated with bacterial distribution and
co-occurrence.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-18181-5 
PMCID: PMC5741767
PMID: 29273721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

