
1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2018 Apr;37(4):715-722. doi:
10.1007/s10096-017-3164-8. Epub 2017 Dec 21.

Evaluation of the use of sonication of retrieved implants for the diagnosis of
prosthetic joint infection in a routine setting.

Prieto-Borja L(1), Auñón Á(2), Blanco A(3), Fernández-Roblas R(1), Gadea I(1),
García-Cañete J(3), Parrón R(2), Esteban J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Av. Reyes
Católicos 2, 28040, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine-Emergencies, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz,
Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Clinical Microbiology, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Av. Reyes
Católicos 2, 28040, Madrid, Spain. jestebanmoreno@gmail.com.

In order to evaluate the usefulness of sonication of retrieved implants for the
diagnosis of prosthetic joint infection (PJI) in a large group of patients in a
routine setting, we designed a 3-year retrospective study. Patients were
classified into two groups: those meeting the clinical criteria of PJI and those 
that did not (control group). Two hundred patients and 276 samples were included.
The types of infection were early (n = 44), delayed (n = 53), positive
intraoperative cultures (n = 13) and late-acute (n = 8). The culture
sensitivities of sonicate fluid, periprosthetic tissue, synovial fluid and
combination of periprosthetic tissue and/or synovial fluid were 69.5, 52.8, 54.8 
and 60.2%, respectively. The specificities were 97.6, 90.3, 93.0 and 89.9%,
respectively. Sonicate fluid culture of implants was more sensitive than
peri-implant tissue, synovial fluid and combination of periprosthetic tissue
and/or synovial fluid for all infection types, though it was especially useful in
delayed infection: 91.3% vs. 60.0% (p = 0.0015), 63.2% (p = 0.0005) and 66.7%
(p = 0.0001), respectively. When sonicate fluid culture of implants was performed
in addition to conventional cultures, the sensitivity increased significantly in 
total (from 60.2 to 77.1%) and delayed PJI (from 45.1 to 71.7%). On the other
hand, for early PJI, sonicate fluid culture of prosthesis was not superior to
conventional diagnostic methods.

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-017-3164-8 
PMID: 29270861  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

