
1. J Immunol. 2018 Feb 1;200(3):1078-1087. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1701250. Epub 2017 
Dec 27.

Identification of a Multipotent Progenitor Population in the Spleen That Is
Regulated by NR4A1.

Mumau MD(1), Vanderbeck AN(2), Lynch ED(2), Golec SB(2), Emerson SG(2), Punt
JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Research Center, Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
10032 melanie.mumau@gmail.com.
(2)Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Research Center, Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
10032.

The developmental fate of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells is influenced
by their physiological context. Although most hematopoietic stem and progenitor
cells are found in the bone marrow of the adult, some are found in other tissues,
including the spleen. The extent to which the fate of stem cells is determined by
the tissue in which they reside is not clear. In this study, we identify a new
progenitor population, which is enriched in the mouse spleen, defined by
cKit+CD71lowCD24high expression. This previously uncharacterized population
generates exclusively myeloid lineage cells, including erythrocytes, platelets,
monocytes, and neutrophils. These multipotent progenitors of the spleen (MPPS)
develop from MPP2, a myeloid-biased subset of hematopoietic progenitors. We find 
that NR4A1, a transcription factor expressed by myeloid-biased long
term-hematopoietic stem cells, guides the lineage specification of MPPS. In
vitro, NR4A1 expression regulates the potential of MPPS to differentiate into
erythroid cells. MPPS that express NR4A1 differentiate into a variety of myeloid 
lineages, whereas those that do not express NR4A1 primarily develop into
erythroid cells. Similarly, in vivo, after adoptive transfer, Nr4a1-deficient
MPPS contribute more to erythrocyte and platelet populations than do wild-type
MPPS. Finally, unmanipulated Nr4a1-/- mice harbor significantly higher numbers of
erythroid progenitors in the spleen compared with wild-type mice. Together, our
data show that NR4A1 expression by MPPS limits erythropoiesis and
megakaryopoeisis, permitting development to other myeloid lineages. This effect
is specific to the spleen, revealing a unique molecular pathway that regulates
myeloid bias in an extramedullary niche.

Copyright Â© 2018 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1701250 
PMCID: PMC5793861
PMID: 29282309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

