
1. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2018 Jul;111(7):1087-1093. doi:
10.1007/s10482-017-1011-7. Epub 2017 Dec 30.

Glycomyces tritici sp. nov., isolated from rhizosphere soil of wheat (Triticum
aestivum L.) and emended description of the genus Glycomyces.

Li W(1), Liu C(1), Guo X(1), Song W(1), Sun T(1), Duan L(1), Wang X(1), Zhao
J(2), Xiang W(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agriculture Biological Functional Gene of Heilongjiang
Provincial Education Committee, Northeast Agricultural University, No. 59 Mucai
Street, Xiangfang District, Harbin, 150030, People's Republic of China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Agriculture Biological Functional Gene of Heilongjiang
Provincial Education Committee, Northeast Agricultural University, No. 59 Mucai
Street, Xiangfang District, Harbin, 150030, People's Republic of China.
guyan2080@126.com.
(3)Key Laboratory of Agriculture Biological Functional Gene of Heilongjiang
Provincial Education Committee, Northeast Agricultural University, No. 59 Mucai
Street, Xiangfang District, Harbin, 150030, People's Republic of China.
xiangwensheng@neau.edu.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute
of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, People's 
Republic of China. xiangwensheng@neau.edu.cn.

A novel actinomycete strain, designated NEAU-C2T, was isolated from rhizosphere
soil of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.), and subjected to a polyphasic taxonomic
study. Morphological and chemotaxonomic properties of this strain were consistent
with the description of the genus Glycomyces. Growth was found to occur at a
temperature range of 15-40 °C, pH 6-10 and NaCl concentrations of 0-4%. The cell 
wall was found to contain meso-diaminopimelic acid and the whole cell sugars were
identified as galactose, xylose and ribose. The predominant menaquinones were
identified as MK-10(H6) and MK-10(H2). The polar lipids were found to consist of 
diphosphatidylglycerol, phosphatidylinositol, phosphatidylglycerol,
phosphoglycolipids and an unidentified glycolipid. The major fatty acids were
identified as anteiso-C15:0, iso-C16:0, anteiso-C17:0 and iso-C15:0. 16S rRNA
gene sequence similarity studies showed that strain NEAU-C2T belongs to the genus
Glycomyces with high sequence similarity to Glycomyces algeriensis NRRL B-16327T 
(99.0% sequence similarity). Some physiological and biochemical properties and
low DNA-DNA relatedness values enabled the strain to be differentiated from
closely related species of the genus Glycomyces. It is concluded that the isolate
can be classified as representing a novel species of the genus Glycomyces, for
which the name Glycomyces tritici is proposed. The type strain is NEAU-C2T (= DSM
104644T = CGMCC 4.7410T).

DOI: 10.1007/s10482-017-1011-7 
PMID: 29289993  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

