
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Feb;98(2):589-594. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0508. Epub 2017 
Dec 21.

Characterization of Invasive Salmonella Serogroup C1 Infections in Mali.

Fuche FJ(1)(2), Sen S(1)(2), Jones JA(1)(2), Nkeze J(1)(2), Permala-Booth
J(1)(2), Tapia MD(3)(2), Sow SO(4), Tamboura B(4), Touré A(4), Onwuchekwa U(4),
Sylla M(4), Kotloff KL(3)(2), Tennant SM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland.
(2)Center for Vaccine Development and Institute for Global Health, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland.
(4)Centre pour le Développement des Vaccins, Mali, Bamako, Mali.

Nontyphoidal Salmonella (NTS) are the leading cause of foodborne infections
worldwide and a major cause of bloodstream infections in infants and HIV-infected
adults in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Salmonella Typhimurium (serogroup B) and
Salmonella Enteritidis (serogroup D) are the most common serovars in this region.
However, data describing rarer invasive NTS serovars, particularly those
belonging to serogroups C1 and C2, circulating in SSA are lacking. We previously 
conducted systematic blood culture surveillance on pediatric patients in Bamako, 
Mali, from 2002 to 2014, and the results showed that serovars Typhimurium and
Enteritidis accounted for 32% and 36% of isolates, respectively. Here, we present
data on 27 Salmonella serogroup C1 strains that were isolated during this
previous study. The strains were typed by serum agglutination and multilocus
sequence typing (MLST). Sixteen strains were Salmonella Paratyphi C, four were
Salmonella Colindale, and two were Salmonella Virchow. Interestingly, five
strains were identified as the very rare Salmonella Brazzaville using a
combination of serum agglutination and flagellin gene typing. Phenotypic
characterization showed that Salmonella Brazzaville produced biofilm and
exhibited catalase activity, which were not statistically different from the
gastroenteritis-associated Salmonella Typhimurium sequence type (ST) 19. All
tested Salmonella Paratyphi C strains were poor biofilm producers and showed
significantly less catalase activity than Salmonella Typhimurium ST19. Overall,
our study provides insight into the Salmonella serogroup C1 serovars that cause
invasive disease in infants in Mali. In addition, we show that MLST and flagellin
gene sequencing, in association with traditional serum agglutination, are
invaluable tools to help identify rare Salmonella serovars.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.17-0508 
PMCID: PMC5929196
PMID: 29280425  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

