
1. J Transl Med. 2017 Dec 28;15(1):265. doi: 10.1186/s12967-017-1368-4.

Design and validation of a disease network of inflammatory processes in the
NSG-UC mouse model.

Jodeleit H(1), Palamides P(2), Beigel F(3), Mueller T(4), Wolf E(1), Siebeck
M(5), Gropp R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Animal Breeding and Biotechnology and Laboratory for
Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377, Munich,
Germany.
(2)Department of Medicinal Microbiology, Max von Pettenkofer Institute, 80336,
Munich, Germany.
(3)Department of Medicine II-Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU),
Marchioninistr. 15, 81377, Munich, Germany.
(4)Julius von Sachs Institute, University of Würzburg, 97082, Würzburg, Germany.
(5)Department of General- Visceral-, and Transplantation Surgery, Hospital of the
University of Munich, Nussbaumstr. 20, 80336, Munich, Germany.
(6)Department of General- Visceral-, and Transplantation Surgery, Hospital of the
University of Munich, Nussbaumstr. 20, 80336, Munich, Germany.
Roswitha.gropp@med.uni-muenchen.de.

BACKGROUND: Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a highly progressive inflammatory disease 
that requires the interaction of epithelial, immune, endothelial and muscle cells
and fibroblasts. Previous studies suggested two inflammatory conditions in
UC-patients: 'acute' and 'remodeling' and that the design of a disease network
might improve the understanding of the inflammatory processes. The objective of
the study was to design and validate a disease network in the NOD-SCID IL2rγnull 
(NSG)-UC mouse model to get a better understanding of the inflammatory processes.
METHODS: Leukocytes were isolated from the spleen of NSG-UC mice and subjected to
flow cytometric analysis. RT-PCR and RNAseq analysis were performed from distal
parts of the colon. Based on these analyses and the effects of interleukins,
chemokines and growth factors described in the literature, a disease network was 
designed. To validate the disease network the effect of infliximab and pitrakinra
was tested in the NSG-UC model. A clinical- and histological score, frequencies
of human leukocytes isolated from spleen and mRNA expression levels from distal
parts of the colon were determined.
RESULTS: Analysis of leukocytes isolated from the spleen of challenged NSG-UC
mice corroborated CD64, CD163 and CD1a expressing CD14+ monocytes, CD1a
expressing CD11b+ macrophages and HGF, TARC, IFNγ and TGFß1 mRNA as inflammatory 
markers. The disease network suggested that a proinflammatory condition elicited 
by IL-17c and lipids and relayed by cytotoxic T-cells, Th17 cells and CD1a
expressing macrophages and monocytes. Conversely, the remodeling condition was
evoked by IL-34 and TARC and promoted by Th2 cells and M2 monocytes. Mice
benefitted from treatment with infliximab as indicated by the histological- and
clinical score. As predicted by the disease network infliximab reduced the
proinflammatory response by suppressing M1 monocytes and CD1a expressing
monocytes and macrophages and decreased levels of IFNγ, TARC and HGF mRNA. As
predicted by the disease network inflammation aggravated in the presence of
pitrakinra as indicated by the clinical and histological score, elevated
frequencies of CD1a expressing macrophages and TNFα and IFNγ mRNA levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of the disease network and the NSG-UC animal model
might be developed into a powerful tool to predict efficacy or in-efficacy and
potential mechanistic side effects.

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-017-1368-4 
PMCID: PMC5745765
PMID: 29282132  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

