
1. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2016 Dec;22(12):1104-1109.

[Gene expression profiling of peripheral blood mononuclear cells in patients with
secondary syphilis].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Zhao YL(1), LE WJ(2), Li S(3), Li Y(3), Zhu XF(3), Su XH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, The Third Hospital of Soochow University,
Changzhou, Jiangsu 213003, China.
(2).
(3)Institute of Dermatology, Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210042, China.

Objective: To analyze the gene expression profiling characteristics of peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from patients with secondary syphilis, and gain
an insight into the host molecular immune mechanisms involved in Treponema
pallidum infection.
METHODS: Using genome-based high-throughput Illumina sequencing technology, we
comprehensively determined the transcriptional difference in PBMCs from 4
secondary syphilis patients and 4 healthy controls, followed by real time PCR to 
validate the results of Illumina sequencing.
RESULTS: Totally, 78 differentially expressed genes were found in the PBMCs of
the secondary syphilis patients, among which 16 were associated with the immune
system. Significant upregulation was observed in the expressions of
pro-inflammatory cytokines and related receptors, such as TNF receptor
super-family member 17 (TNFRSF17), IL-17C, IL-21, IL-31 receptor A (IL-31RA),
chemokine C-X-C motif ligand 10 (CXCL10), and chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 1
(CCL1), as well as the transcripts for the CD4+ T lymphocytes activation markers 
CD38, Fc-mediated phagocytosis receptors (FcγR1A, FcγR3B), and complement (C2,
SERPING1).
CONCLUSIONS: Systemic innate and adaptive immune effecter molecules are involved 
in the host clearance mechanism of secondary syphilis.

Publisher: 目的： 分析二期梅毒患者外周血单个核细胞基因表达谱特征，探索机体抗梅毒免疫的分子机制。 方法：
采用全基因组高通量的Illumina测序技术，对4例二期梅毒患者和4例健康对照者外周血单个核细胞行数字基因转录组分析。后行实时PCR对其结果进行验证。 结果：
与健康对照者相比较，二期梅毒患者外周血单个核细胞共发现差异表达基因78个，其中有16个免疫应答相关基因。肿瘤坏死因子超家族成员17(TNFRSF17)、IL-17
C、IL-21、IL-31受体A(IL-31RA)、C-X-C配体10(CXCL10)、趋化因子配体1(CCL1)等炎症因子和相关受体、CD4+
T细胞激活标志CD38、Fc类吞噬性受体(FcγR1A、FcγR3B)以及补体(C2、SERPING1)等均显著上调。 结论：
二期梅毒患者多种天然免疫和适应性免疫分子参与机体系统性抗梅毒应答。.

PMID: 29282916  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

