
1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2017 Dec 19;13:31-41. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S147553. eCollection
2018.

Development and characterization of p1025-loaded bioadhesive liquid-crystalline
system for the prevention of Streptococcus mutans biofilms.

Calixto GMF(1), Duque C(2), Aida KL(2), Dos Santos VR(2), Massunari L(2),
Chorilli M(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, São Paulo State University (UNESP),
Araraquara, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)School of Dentistry, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Araçatuba, São Paulo,
Brazil.

Formation of a dental biofilm by Streptococcus mutans can cause dental caries,
and remains a costly health problem worldwide. Recently, there has been a growing
interest in the use of peptidic drugs, such as peptide p1025, analogous to the
fragments 1025-1044 of S. mutans cellular adhesin, responsible for the adhesion
and formation of dental biofilm. However, peptides have physicochemical
characteristics that may affect their biological action, limiting their clinical 
performance. Therefore, drug-delivery systems, such as a bioadhesive
liquid-crystalline system (LCS), may be attractive strategies for peptide
delivery. Potentiation of the action of LCS can be achieved with the use of
bioadhesive polymers to prolong their residence on the teeth. In line with this, 
three formulations - polyoxypropylene-(5)-polyoxyethylene-(20)-cetyl alcohol,
oleic acid, and Carbopol C974P in different combinations (F1C, F2C, and F3C) were
developed to observe the influence of water in the LCS, with the aim of achieving
in situ gelling in the oral environment. These formulations were assessed by
polarized light microscopy, small-angle X-ray scattering, rheological analysis,
and in vitro bioadhesion analysis. Then, p1025 and a control (chlorhexidine) were
incorporated into the aqueous phase of the formulation (F + p1025 and F +
chlorhexidine), to determine their antibiofilm effect and toxicity on epithelial 
cells. Polarized light microscopy and small-angle X-ray scattering showed that
F1C and F2C were LCS, whereas F3C was a microemulsion. F1C and F2C showed
pseudoplastic behavior and F3C Newtonian behavior. F1C showed the highest elastic
and bioadhesive characteristics compared to other formulations. Antibiofilm
effects were observed for F + p1025 when applied in the surface-bound salivary
phase. The p1025-loaded nanostructured LCS presented limited cytotoxicity and
effectively reduced S. mutans biofilm formation, and could be a promising
p1025-delivery strategy to prevent the formation of S. mutans dental biofilm.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S147553 
PMCID: PMC5741066
PMID: 29296084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of
interest in this work.

