
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Jan 8;12(1):e0006192. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006192.
eCollection 2018 Jan.

Polymorphisms in voltage-gated sodium channel gene and susceptibility of Aedes
albopictus to insecticides in three districts of northern West Bengal, India.

Chatterjee M(1), Ballav S(1), Maji AK(1), Basu N(2), Sarkar BC(1), Saha P(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata,
West Bengal, India.
(2)Director, Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
(3)Department of Zoology, A. P. C. Roy Govt. College, Himachal Bihar, Matigara,
Siliguri, West Bengal, India.

BACKGROUND: The control and prevention of dengue largely depends on vector
control measures, environmental management, and personal protection. Dengue
control programmes are facing great challenges due to development of insecticide 
resistance among vector mosquitoes. Information on susceptibility status to
different insecticides is important for national programmes to formulate vector
control strategies.
METHODS: We have studied the larval susceptibility of Aedes albopictus to
temephos and adult susceptibility to 4% DDT, 0.05% deltamethrin, and 5% malathion
as per WHO protocols in the northern districts of West Bengal. Polymorphisms in
the VGSC gene were studied by direct sequencing of PCR products.
RESULTS: The Ae. albopictus larval population showed sensitive [Resistance Ratio 
(RR99)<3] to moderate levels of resistance (5<RR99>10) to temephos at different
study sites. Adult bioassay results revealed that Ae. albopictus was highly
resistant to DDT [Corrected Mortality (CM) < 90%] in all the study sites and
susceptible to deltamethrin and malathion (CM > 98%), except in Dhupguri where a 
low level of resistance to deltamethrin (CM = 96.25%) was recorded. None of the
six important kdr mutations (S953P, I975M/V, L978, V980G, F1474C, D1703Y) were
found in the VGSC of studied mosquitoes, but we identified 11 synonymous and 1
non-synonymous mutation in the VGSC gene.
CONCLUSION: The higher susceptibility level to deltamethrin and malathion, along 
with the absence of important kdr mutations indicates that these two insecticides
are still effective against Ae. albopictus in the study areas. The susceptibility
status of temephos should be monitored closely as low to moderate levels of
resistance were observed in few sites. A similar study is recommended for
monitoring and early detection of insecticide resistance in other parts of the
country.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006192 
PMCID: PMC5774824
PMID: 29309419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

