
1. Immune Netw. 2017 Dec;17(6):365-377. doi: 10.4110/in.2017.17.6.365. Epub 2017 Nov
27.

Lineage Differentiation Program of Invariant Natural Killer T Cells.

Kwon DI(1)(2), Lee YJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Academy of Immunology and Microbiology, Institute for Basic Science, Pohang
37673, Korea.
(2)Division of Integrative Biosciences and Biotechnology, Pohang University of
Science and Technology, Pohang 37673, Korea.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are innate T cells restricted by CD1d
molecules. They are positively selected in the thymic cortex and migrate to the
medullary area, in which they differentiate into 3 different lineages.
Promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger (PLZF) modulates this process, and PLZFhigh,
PLZFintermediate, and PLZFlow iNKT cells are designated as NKT2, NKT17, and NKT1 
cells, respectively. Analogous to conventional helper CD4 T cells, each subset
expresses distinct combinations of transcription factors and produces different
cytokines. In lymphoid organs, iNKT subsets have unique localizations, which
determine their cytokine responses upon antigenic challenge. The lineage
differentiation programs of iNKT cells are differentially regulated in various
mice strains in a cell-intrinsic manner, and BALB/c mice contain a high frequency
of NKT2 cells. In the thymic medulla, steady state IL-4 from NKT2 cells directly 
conditions CD8 T cells to become memory-like cells expressing Eomesodermin, which
function as premade memory effectors. The genetic signature of iNKT cells is more
similar to that of γδ T cells and innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) than of
conventional helper T cells, suggesting that ILCs and innate T cells share common
developmental programs.

DOI: 10.4110/in.2017.17.6.365 
PMCID: PMC5746607
PMID: 29302250 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no
potential conflicts of interest.

