
1. Oncoimmunology. 2017 Nov 1;7(2):e1390641. doi: 10.1080/2162402X.2017.1390641.
eCollection 2018.

The inhibitory checkpoint, PD-L2, is a target for effector T cells: Novel
possibilities for immune therapy.

Ahmad SM(1), Martinenaite E(1), Holmström M(1)(2), Jørgensen MA(1), Met
Ö(1)(3)(4), Nastasi C(4), Klausen U(1), Donia M(1)(3), Pedersen LM(5), Munksgaard
L(2), Ødum N(4), Woetmann A(4), Svane IM(1)(3), Andersen MH(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Immune Therapy (CCIT), Department of Hematology, Copenhagen 
University Hospital, Herlev, DK-2730 Herlev, Denmark.
(2)Department of Hematology, Zealand University Hospital, DK-4000 Roskilde,
Denmark.
(3)Department of Oncology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, DK-2730
Herlev, Denmark.
(4)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of hematology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, DK-2730
Herlev, Denmark.

Cell surface molecules of the B7/CD28 family play an important role in T-cell
activation and tolerance. The relevance of the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway in cancer has
been extensively studied whereas PD-L2 has received less attention. However,
recently the expression of PD-L2 was described to be independently associated
with clinical response in anti-PD1-treated cancer patients. Here, we investigated
whether PD-L2 might represent a natural target that induces specific T cells. We 
identified spontaneous specific T-cell reactivity against two epitopes located in
the signal peptide of PD-L2 from samples from patients with cancer as well as
healthy individuals ex vivo. We characterized both CD8+ and CD4+ PD-L2-specific T
cells. Interestingly, the epitope in PD-L2 that elicited the strongest response
was equivalent to a potent HLA-A2-restricted epitope in PD-L1. Importantly,
PD-L1-specific and PD-L2-specific T cells did not cross-react; therefore, they
represent different T-cell antigens. Moreover, PD-L2-specific T cells reacted to 
autologous target cells depending on PD-L2 expression. These results suggested
that activating PD-L2 specific T cells (e.g., by vaccination) might be an
attractive strategy for anti-cancer immunotherapy. Accordingly, PD-L2 specific T 
cells can directly support anti-cancer immunity by killing of target cells, as
well as, indirectly, by releasing pro-inflammatory cytokines at the
microenvironment in response to PD-L2-expressing immune supressive cells.

DOI: 10.1080/2162402X.2017.1390641 
PMCID: PMC5749669
PMID: 29308318 

