
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2018 Feb 21;267:70-76. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2017.12.024. Epub 2017 Dec 24.

Seasonal variances in bacterial microbiota and volatile organic compounds in raw 
milk.

Nalepa B(1), Olszewska MA(2), Markiewicz LH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Industrial and Food Microbiology, Faculty of Food Science,
University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn, pl. Cieszyński 1, 10-726 Olsztyn,
Poland. Electronic address: beata.nalepa@uwm.edu.pl.
(2)Department of Industrial and Food Microbiology, Faculty of Food Science,
University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn, pl. Cieszyński 1, 10-726 Olsztyn,
Poland.
(3)Department of Immunology and Food Microbiology, Institute of Animal
Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Tuwima 10, 10-748
Olsztyn, Poland.

The aim of this study was to define the composition of microbiota and the
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in samples of raw milk collected for 22 months 
between 2012 and 2014 originated from north-eastern region of Poland. The results
revealed that the VOCs profile changed with respect to the season of milk
collection, and milk collected in autumn was characterized by a higher content of
acetic acid (C2), propionic acid (C3) and valeric acid (C5), whereas spring was
characterized by a frequent presence of acetone (Ac), ethanol (Et) and ethyl
acetate (EtAc). Bacterial species composition changed considerably within the
tested period and some bacterial species/groups occurred seasonally, e.g. L.
helveticus (summer), L. casei (winter). The results show usefulness of the
applied techniques (PCR-DGGE and HS-GC) and data analysis (PCA, correlation
coefficients) methods in characterizing the raw milk quality intended for dairy
production.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2017.12.024 
PMID: 29306137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

