
1. Curr Microbiol. 2018 Jun;75(6):651-657. doi: 10.1007/s00284-017-1429-1. Epub 2018
Jan 9.

Evaluating Protocols for Porcine Faecal Microbiome Recollection, Storage and DNA 
Extraction: from the Farm to the Lab.

Muiños-Bühl A(1), González-Recio O(1), Muñoz M(2), Óvilo C(1), García-Casco J(2),
Fernández AI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Mejora Genética Animal, Instituto Nacional de Investigación y 
Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), 28040, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Mejora Genética Animal, Centro I+D Cerdo Ibérico INIA, 06300, 
Zafra, Badajoz, Spain.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón,
Translational Research, 28009, Madrid, Spain.
anaisabel.fernandez@redcardiovascular.com.

There is a growing interest in understanding the role of the gut microbiome on
productive and meat quality-related traits in livestock species in order to
develop new useful tools for improving pig production systems and industry.
Faecal samples are analysed as a proxy of gut microbiota and here the selection
of suitable protocols for faecal sampling and DNA isolation is a critical first
step in order to obtain reliable results, even more to compare results obtained
from different studies. The aim of the current study was to establish in a
cost-effective way, using automated ribosomal intergenic spacer analysis
technique, a protocol for porcine faecal sampling and storage at farm and
slaughterhouse and to determine the most efficient microbiota DNA isolation kit
among those most widely used. Operational Taxonomic Unit profiles were compared
from Iberian pig faecal samples collected from rectum or ground, stored with
liquid N2, room temperature or RNAlater, and processed with QIAamp DNA Stool
(Qiagen), PowerFecal DNA Isolation (Mobio) or SpeedTools Tissue DNA extraction
(Biotools) commercial kits. The results, focused on prokaryote sampling, based on
DNA yield and quality, OTU number and Sørensen similarity Indexes, indicate that 
the recommended protocol for porcine faecal microbiome sampling at farm should
include: the collection from porcine rectum to avoid contamination; the storage
in liquid N2 or even at room temperature, but not in RNAlater; and the isolation 
of microbiota DNA using PowerFecal DNA Isolation kit. These conditions provide
more reliable DNA samples for further microbiome analysis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-017-1429-1 
PMID: 29318340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

