
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Jan 11;8(1):491. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-18846-1.

A set of synthetic versatile genetic control elements for the efficient
expression of genes in Actinobacteria.

Horbal L(1), Siegl T(1), Luzhetskyy A(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department Microbial Natural Products, Actinobacteria Metabolic Engineering
Group, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)Department Microbial Natural Products, Actinobacteria Metabolic Engineering
Group, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany.
andriy.luzhetskyy@helmholtz-hzi.de.
(3)Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS) Helmholtz
Center for Infectious Research (HZI), Campus C2.3, 66123, Saarbrücken, Germany.
andriy.luzhetskyy@helmholtz-hzi.de.

The design and engineering of secondary metabolite gene clusters that are
characterized by complicated genetic organization, require the development of
collections of well-characterized genetic control elements that can be reused
reliably. Although a few intrinsic terminators and RBSs are used routinely, their
translation and termination efficiencies have not been systematically studied in 
Actinobacteria. Here, we analyzed the influence of the regions surrounding RBSs
on gene expression in these bacteria. We demonstrated that inappropriate RBSs can
reduce the expression efficiency of a gene to zero. We developed a genetic device
- an in vivo RBS-selector - that allows selection of an optimal RBS for any gene 
of interest, enabling rational control of the protein expression level. In
addition, a genetic tool that provides the opportunity for measurement of
termination efficiency was developed. Using this tool, we found strong
terminators that lead to a 17-100-fold reduction in downstream expression and are
characterized by sufficient sequence diversity to reduce homologous recombination
when used with other elements. For the first time, a C-terminal degradation tag
was employed for the control of protein stability in Streptomyces. Finally, we
describe a collection of regulatory elements that can be used to control
metabolic pathways in Actinobacteria.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-18846-1 
PMCID: PMC5765039
PMID: 29323285  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

