
1. J Nat Prod. 2018 Jan 26;81(1):211-215. doi: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.7b00917. Epub
2018 Jan 12.

Bastimolide B, an Antimalarial 24-Membered Marine Macrolide Possessing a
tert-Butyl Group.

Shao CL(1)(2)(3), Mou XF(1)(2), Cao F(1), Spadafora C(4), Glukhov E(3), Gerwick
L(3), Wang CY(1)(2), Gerwick WH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Marine Drugs, The Ministry of Education of China, School of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, Ocean University of China , Qingdao 266003, China.
(2)Laboratory for Marine Drugs and Bioproducts, Qingdao National Laboratory for
Marine Science and Technology , Qingdao 266200, China.
(3)Center for Marine Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, University of California San Diego , La Jolla, California 92093,
United States.
(4)Instituto de Investigaciones Cientificas y Servicios de Alta Tecnologia ,
Clayton, Apartado 0816-02852, Panama.

We reported previously the discovery of the potent antimalarial 40-membered
macrolide bastimolide A (1) from the tropical marine cyanobacterium Okeania
hirsute. Continued investigation has led to the discovery of a new analogue,
bastimolide B (2), a 24-membered polyhydroxy macrolide with a long aliphatic
chain and unique terminal tert-butyl group. Its complete structure was determined
by a combination of extensive spectroscopic methods and comparative analysis of
its methanolysis products with those of bastimolide A. A methanolysis mechanism
for bastimolide A is proposed, and one unexpected isomerization product of the
C2-C3 double bond, 2-(E)-bastimolide A (3), was obtained. Bastimolide B (2)
showed strong antimalarial activity against chloroquine-sensitive Plasmodium
falciparum strain HB3. A preliminary investigation of the structure-activity
relationship based on six analogues revealed the importance of the double bond as
well as the 1,3-diol and 1,3,5-triol functionalities.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.7b00917 
PMID: 29327931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

