
1. Avian Dis. 2017 Dec;61(4):491-502. doi: 10.1637/11732-073017-Reg.1.

The Role of Necroptosis, Apoptosis, and Inflammation in Fowl Cholera-Associated
Liver Injury in a Chicken Model.

Tang Q(1), Li W(1), Dai N(1), Gao Y(1), Han Y(1), Cheng G(1), Gu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)A Department of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan
430070, Hubei, China.

Fowl cholera resulting from infection with Pasteurella multocida causes huge
economic losses in the poultry industry. Necrotic hepatitis is reported to be a
significant lesion associated with fowl cholera in chickens. Clarifying the
underlying molecular mechanism of hepatic injury caused by P. multocida infection
is needed to develop new strategies to control fowl cholera. Pasteurella
multocida Q (the standard reference strain) and P. multocida 1G1 (a clinical
strain) were used to infect healthy laying hens. Clinical signs were observed and
gross lesions in livers were observed postmortem. Histologic lesions and the
localization and expression of protein molecules associated with necroptosis,
apoptosis, and inflammation in hepatic tissues were examined by hematoxylin and
eosin staining and immunohistochemistry. Western blot analysis was used to
determine the expression of liver injury-related genes. Necroptotic molecules
such as RIPK1 (receptor interaction protein kinases 1), RIPK3 (receptor
interaction protein kinases 3), and MLKL (mixed lineage kinase domain-like
protein) were observed by immunostaining primarily in the cytoplasm of
hepatocytes within or around necrotic foci, and inflammatory mediators HMGB1
(high-mobility group box 1) and IL-6 (interleukin-6) were found in the cytoplasm 
of heterophils, monocytes/macrophages, and hepatic sinusoids. In addition, MMP9
(matrix metalloproteinase 9) and TIMP1 (tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1) 
were observed in hepatic parenchymal cells, inflammatory cells, and interstitial 
spaces, whereas the apoptotic effector molecule caspase-3 (cysteine-containing
aspartic proteolytic enzymes 3) was mainly found in hepatocytes. The expression
of RIPK1, RIPK3, and MLKL was significantly higher in the infected chickens than 
in the controls. HMGB1 and IL-6 protein levels were also increased in infected
chickens relative to those in controls. Both MMP9 and TIMP1 were highly expressed
in infected chickens. In addition, caspase-3 protein levels were significantly
elevated in infected chickens. Necroptosis, apoptosis, and inflammation played a 
significant role in hepatic injury caused by P. multocida.

DOI: 10.1637/11732-073017-Reg.1 
PMID: 29337619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

