
1. Chemistry. 2018 Mar 7;24(14):3391-3396. doi: 10.1002/chem.201705638. Epub 2018
Feb 13.

Mixed Fluorotryptophan Substitutions at the Same Residue Expand the Versatility
of 19 F Protein NMR Spectroscopy.

Kenward C(1), Shin K(1), Rainey JK(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Nova Scotia, B3H 4R2, Canada.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3H 4R2, 
Canada.

The strategy of applying fluorine NMR to characterize ligand binding to a
membrane protein prepared with mixtures of tryptophans substituted with F at
different positions on the indole ring was tested. The 19 F NMR behavior of 4-,
5-, 6-, and 7-fluorotryptophan were directly compared as a function of both
micellar environment and fragment size for two overlapping apelin receptor
(AR/APJ) segments; one with a single transmembrane (TM) helix and two tryptophan 
residues, the other with three TM helices and two additional tryptophan residues.
Chemical shifts, peak patterns, and nuclear spin relaxation rates were observed
to vary as a function of micellar conditions and F substitution position in the
indole ring, with the exposure of a given residue to micelle or solvent being the
primary differentiating factor. Titration of the 3-TM AR segment biosynthetically
prepared as a mixture of 5- and 7-fluorotryptophan-containing isoforms by two
distinct peptide ligands (apelin-36 and apela-32) demonstrated site-specific 19 F
peak intensity changes for one ligand but not the other. In contrast, both
ligands perturbed 1 H-15 N HSQC peak patterns to a similar degree.
Characterization of multiple fluorotryptophan types for a given set of tryptophan
residues, thus, significantly augments the potential to apply 19 F NMR to track
otherwise obscure modulation of protein conformation and dynamics without an
explicit requirement for mutagenesis or chemical modification.

© 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/chem.201705638 
PMID: 29342326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

