
1. J Phys Chem B. 2018 Feb 8;122(5):1551-1559. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b09543. Epub
2018 Jan 30.

Umbrella Sampling and X-ray Crystallographic Analysis Unveil an Arg-Asp Gate
Facilitating Inhibitor Binding Inside Phosphopantetheine Adenylyltransferase
Allosteric Cleft.

Mondal A(1), Chatterjee R(1), Datta S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology and Bioinformatics Division, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology , 4 Raja SC Mullick
Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata, West Bengal 700032, India.

Phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT) is a rate-limiting enzyme essential
for biosynthesis of coenzyme A (CoA), which in turn is responsible to regulate
the secretion of exotoxins via type III secretion system in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, causing severe health concerns ranging from nosocomial infections to 
respiratory failure. Acetyl coenzyme A (AcCoA) is a newly reported inhibitor of
PPAT, believed to regulate the cellular levels of CoA and thereby the
pathogenesis. Very little is known so far regarding the mechanistic details of
AcCoA binding inside PPAT-binding cleft. Herein, we have used extensive umbrella 
sampling simulations to decipher mechanistic insight into the inhibitor
accommodation inside the binding cavity. We found that R90 and D94 residues act
like a gate near the binding cavity to accommodate and stabilize the incoming
ligand. Mutational models concerning these residues also show considerable
difference in AcCoA-binding thermodynamics. To substantiate our findings, we have
solved the first crystal structure of apo-PPAT from P. aeruginosa, which also
found to agree with the simulation results. Collectively, these results describe 
the mechanistic details of accommodation of inhibitor molecule inside
PPAT-binding cavity and also offer valuable insight into regulating cellular
levels of CoA/AcCoA and thus controlling the pathogenicity.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b09543 
PMID: 29345931  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

