
1. Stem Cells. 2018 May;36(5):641-654. doi: 10.1002/stem.2780. Epub 2018 Jan 30.

Epigenetic Silencing of TAP1 in Aldefluor+ Breast Cancer Stem Cells Contributes
to Their Enhanced Immune Evasion.

Sultan M(1), Vidovic D(1), Paine AS(1), Huynh TT(1), Coyle KM(1), Thomas ML(1),
Cruickshank BM(1), Dean CA(1), Clements DR(1), Kim Y(1), Lee K(2), Gujar
SA(1)(3), Weaver ICG(2)(4), Marcato P(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(2)Psychology and Neuroscience, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia,
Canada.
(3)Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia,
Canada.
(4)Psychiatry and Brain Repair Centre, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.

Avoiding detection and destruction by immune cells is key for tumor initiation
and progression. The important role of cancer stem cells (CSCs) in tumor
initiation has been well established, yet their ability to evade immune detection
and targeting is only partly understood. To investigate the ability of breast
CSCs to evade immune detection, we identified a highly tumorigenic population in 
a spontaneous murine mammary tumor based on increased aldehyde dehydrogenase
activity. We performed tumor growth studies in immunocompetent and
immunocompromised mice. In immunocompetent mice, growth of the spontaneous
mammary tumor was restricted; however, the Aldefluor+ population was expanded,
suggesting inherent resistance mechanisms. Gene expression analysis of the sorted
tumor cells revealed that the Aldefluor+ tumor cells has decreased expression of 
transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) genes and co-stimulatory
molecule CD80, which would decrease susceptibility to T cells. Similarly, the
Aldefluor+ population of patient tumors and 4T1 murine mammary cells had
decreased expression of TAP and co-stimulatory molecule genes. In contrast,
breast CSCs identified by CD44+ CD24- do not have decreased expression of these
genes, but do have increased expression of C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4.
Decitabine treatment and bisulfite pyrosequencing suggests that DNA
hypermethylation contributes to decreased TAP gene expression in Aldefluor+ CSCs.
TAP1 knockdown resulted in increased tumor growth of 4T1 cells in immunocompetent
mice. Together, this suggests immune evasion mechanisms in breast CSCs are marker
specific and epigenetic silencing of TAP1 in Aldefluor+ breast CSCs contributes
to their enhanced survival under immune pressure. Stem Cells 2018;36:641-654.

Â© AlphaMed Press 2018.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.2780 
PMID: 29341428  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

