
1. J Cell Biochem. 2018 Jul;119(7):5373-5381. doi: 10.1002/jcb.26681. Epub 2018 Mar 
14.

Berberine demonstrates anti-inflammatory properties in Helicobacter
pylori-infected mice with chronic gastritis by attenuating the Th17 response
triggered by the B cell-activating factor.

Wu X(1), Li X(1), Dang Z(1), Jia Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Liver Spleen and Stomach, Henan Province Hospital of TCM,
Zhengzhou, China.

Berberine (BBR) is an isoquinoline alkaloid derived from various medicinal herbs.
Previous studies have suggested that BBR exerts antimicrobial, antitumor, and
antidiabetic effects and can be used to treat Helicobacter pylori-induced chronic
gastritis. However, the exact mechanism by which BBR inhibits H. pylori infection
is not fully understood. We investigated the anti-inflammatory properties and
potential mechanism of BBR in H. pylori-infected mice with chronic gastritis. We 
found that BBR can suppress the expression of pro-inflammatory genes IL-6, TGF-β,
and IL-1β and upregulate anti-inflammatory gene IL-10 expression in the mucosa
and RAW 264.7 macrophages. Exposure to BBR also reduced the expression and
accumulation of IL-17 in the mucosa and CD4+ T cells activated by anti-CD3 and
anti-CD28, and it decreased the frequency of IL-17-producing CD4+ T cells. B
cell-activating factor (BAFF) production was inhibited by BBR and by cultured
dendritic and CD4+ T cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated that BAFF can trigger
the Th17 response by promoting the production of pro-Th17 cytokines IL-6, TGF-β, 
and IL-1β, which are strongly associated with the anti-inflammatory role of BBR
in chronic gastritis caused by H. pylori. In conclusion, we determined that BBR
has anti-inflammatory effects on H. pylori-induced chronic gastritis by
attenuating the BAFF-triggered Th17 response.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.26681 
PMID: 29345340  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

