
1. Chronobiol Int. 2018 Apr;35(4):573-577. doi: 10.1080/07420528.2018.1424718. Epub 
2018 Jan 17.

Population level evidence for seasonality of the human microbiome.

Korownyk C(1), Liu F(1), Garrison S(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Family Medicine , University of Alberta , Edmonton , Canada.

The objective of this study is to determine whether human body odors undergo
seasonal modulation. We utilized google trends search volume from the United
States of America from January 1, 2010 to June 24, 2017 for a number of
predetermined body odors. Regression modeling of time series data was completed. 
Our primary outcome was to determine the proportion of the variability in
Internet searches for each unpleasant odor (about the mean) that is explained by 
a seasonal model. We determined that the seasonal (sinusoidal) model provided a
significantly better fit than the null model (best straight line fit) for all
searches relating to human body odors (P <.0001 for each). This effect was easily
visible to the naked eye in the raw time series data. Seasonality explained 88%
of the variability in search volume for flatulence (i.e. R2 = 0.88), 65% of the
variability in search volume for axillary odor, 60% of the variability in search 
volume for foot odor, and 58% of the variability in search volume for bad breath.
Flatulence and bad breath tended to peak in January, foot odor in February, and
Axillary odor in July. We conclude that searching by the general public for
information on unpleasant body odors undergoes substantial seasonal variation,
with the timing of peaks and troughs varying with the body part involved. The
symptom burden of such smells may have a similar seasonal variation, as might the
composition of the commensal bacterial microflora that play a role in creating
them.

DOI: 10.1080/07420528.2018.1424718 
PMID: 29341791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

