
1. Oncotarget. 2017 Dec 6;8(68):113034-113065. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.22958.
eCollection 2017 Dec 22.

FRK inhibits breast cancer cell migration and invasion by suppressing
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Ogunbolude Y(1), Dai C(1), Bagu ET(1)(2), Goel RK(1), Miah S(1)(3),
MacAusland-Berg J(1), Ng CY(1), Chibbar R(4), Napper S(1)(5), Raptis L(6),
Vizeacoumar F(2), Vizeacoumar F(2), Bonham K(1)(2), Lukong KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Canada.
(2)Cancer Research Unit, Health Research Division, Saskatchewan Cancer Agency,
and Division of Oncology, College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Canada.
(3)Departments of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, MO, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology Royal University Hospital Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
Canada.
(5)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Canada.
(6)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology and Pathology, Queen's University, 
Kingston, Canada.

The human fyn-related kinase (FRK) is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase known to
have tumor suppressor activity in breast cancer cells. However, its mechanism of 
action has not been fully characterized. We generated FRK-stable MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cell lines and analyzed the effect on cell proliferation,
migration, and invasiveness. We also used kinome analysis to identify potential
FRK-regulated signaling pathways. We employed both immunoblotting and RT-PCR to
identify/validate FRK-regulated targets (proteins and genes) in these cells.
Finally, we interrogated the TCGA and GENT gene expression databases to determine
the correlation between the expression of FRK and epithelial/mesenchymal markers.
We observed that FRK overexpression suppressed cell proliferation, migration, and
invasiveness, inhibited various JAK/STAT, MAPK and Akt signaling pathways, and
suppressed the expression of some STAT3 target genes. Also, FRK overexpression
increased the expression of epithelial markers including E-cadherin mRNA and
down-regulated the transcript levels of vimentin, fibronectin, and slug. Finally,
we observed an inverse correlation between FRK expression and mesenchymal markers
in a large cohort of breast cancer cells. Our data, therefore, suggests that FRK 
represses cell proliferation, migration and invasiveness by suppressing
epithelial to mesenchymal transition.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.22958 
PMCID: PMC5762571
PMID: 29348886 

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS The authors declare that they
have no competing interests.

