
1. J Biol Chem. 2018 Mar 16;293(11):3965-3980. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M117.816769. Epub
2018 Jan 19.

DeSUMOylation of MKK7 kinase by the SUMO2/3 protease SENP3 potentiates
lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammatory signaling in macrophages.

Lao Y(1), Yang K(1), Wang Z(2), Sun X(1), Zou Q(2), Yu X(2), Cheng J(1), Tong
X(1), Yeh ETH(3), Yang J(4), Yi J(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Institutes of Medical
Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025,
China.
(2)the Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai Institute of Immunology, Shanghai 200025, China,
and.
(3)the Department of Internal Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia,
Missouri 65211.
(4)From the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Institutes of Medical
Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025,
China, yangjieyj@shsmu.edu.cn.
(5)From the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Institutes of Medical
Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025,
China, yijing@shsmu.edu.cn.

Protein SUMOylation has been reported to play a role in innate immune response,
but the enzymes, substrates, and consequences of the specific inflammatory
signaling events are largely unknown. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are
abundantly produced during macrophage activation and required for Toll-like
receptor 4 (TLR4)-mediated inflammatory signaling. Previously, we demonstrated
that SENP3 is a redox-sensitive SUMO2/3 protease. To explore any links between
reversible SUMOylation and ROS-related inflammatory signaling in macrophage
activation, we generated mice with Senp3 conditional knock-out in myeloid cells. 
In bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced in vitro and in vivo inflammation
models, we found that SENP3 deficiency markedly compromises the activation of
TLR4 inflammatory signaling and the production of proinflammatory cytokines in
macrophages exposed to LPS. Moreover, Senp3 conditional knock-out mice were
significantly less susceptible to septic shock. Of note, SENP3 deficiency was
associated with impairment in JNK phosphorylation. We found that MKK7, which
selectively phosphorylates JNK, is a SENP3 substrate and that SENP3-mediated
deSUMOylation of MKK7 may favor its binding to JNK. Importantly, ROS-dependent
SENP3 accumulation and MKK7 deSUMOylation rapidly occurred after LPS stimulation.
In conclusion, our findings indicate that SENP3 potentiates LPS-induced TLR4
signaling via deSUMOylation of MKK7 leading to enhancement in JNK phosphorylation
and the downstream events. Therefore this work provides novel mechanistic
insights into redox regulation of innate immune responses.

Â© 2018 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M117.816769 
PMCID: PMC5857993
PMID: 29352108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

