
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2018 Nov;25(32):31895-31905. doi:
10.1007/s11356-018-1236-7. Epub 2018 Jan 21.

Combined treatment of contaminated soil with a bacterial Stenotrophomonas strain 
DXZ9 and ryegrass (Lolium perenne) enhances DDT and DDE remediation.

Xie H(1)(2), Zhu L(3)(4), Wang J(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Environment in Universities of Shandong,
College of Resources and Environment, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian,
271018, China. huixie@sdau.edu.cn.
(2)National Engineering Laboratory for Efficient Utilization of Soil and
Fertilizer Resources, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian, 271018, China.
huixie@sdau.edu.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Environment in Universities of Shandong,
College of Resources and Environment, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian,
271018, China. lushzhu@sdau.edu.cn.
(4)National Engineering Laboratory for Efficient Utilization of Soil and
Fertilizer Resources, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian, 271018, China.
lushzhu@sdau.edu.cn.
(5)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Environment in Universities of Shandong,
College of Resources and Environment, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian,
271018, China.
(6)National Engineering Laboratory for Efficient Utilization of Soil and
Fertilizer Resources, Shandong Agricultural University, Taian, 271018, China.

Bioremediation of contaminated soils by a combinational approach using specific
bacterial species together with ryegrass is a promising strategy, resulting in
potentially highly efficient degradation of organic contaminants. The present
study tested the combination of strain DXZ9 of Stenotrophomonas sp. with ryegrass
to remove DDT and DDE contaminants from soil under natural conditions in a pot
experiment. The strain DXZ9 was successfully colonized in the natural soil,
resulting in removal rates of approximately 77% for DDT, 52% for DDE, and 65% for
the two pollutants combined after 210 days. Treatment with ryegrass alone
resulted in slightly lower removal rates (72 and 48%, respectively, 61% for both 
combined), while the combination of strain DXZ9 and ryegrass significantly
(p < 0.05) improved the removal rates to 81% for DDT and 55% for DDE (69% for
both). The half-life of the contaminants was significantly shorter in combined
treatment with DXZ9 and ryegrass compared to the control. The remediation was
mostly due to degradation of the contaminants, as the net uptake of DDT and DDE
by the ryegrass accounted for less than 3% of the total amount in the soil. DDT
is reductively dechlorinated to DDD and dehydrochlorinated to DDE in the soil;
the metabolites of DDE and DDD were multiple undefined substances. The toxicity
of the soil was significantly reduced as a result of the treatment. The present
study demonstrates that the bioremediation of soil contaminated with DDT and DDE 
by means of specific bacteria combined with ryegrass is feasible.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-018-1236-7 
PMID: 29354855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

