
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Jan 5;8:1901. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01901. eCollection
2017.

Neurofibromin 1 Impairs Natural Killer T-Cell-Dependent Antitumor Immunity
against a T-Cell Lymphoma.

Liu J(1), Gallo RM(1), Khan MA(1)(2), Renukaradhya GJ(1)(3), Brutkiewicz RR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States.
(2)College of Applied Medical Sciences, Al-Qassim University, Buraidah, Saudi
Arabia.
(3)Food Animal Health Research Program (FAHRP), Ohio Agricultural Research and
Development Center (OARDC), Department of Veterinary Preventive Medicine, The
Ohio State University, Wooster, OH, United States.

Neurofibromin 1 (NF1) is a tumor suppressor gene encoding a Ras GTPase that
negatively regulates Ras signaling pathways. Mutations in NF1 are linked to
neurofibromatosis type 1, juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia and Watson syndrome.
In terms of antitumor immunity, CD1d-dependent natural killer T (NKT) cells play 
an important role in the innate antitumor immune response. Generally, Type-I NKT 
cells protect (and Type-II NKT cells impair) host antitumor immunity. We have
previously shown that CD1d-mediated antigen presentation to NKT cells is
regulated by cell signaling pathways. To study whether a haploinsufficiency in
NF1 would affect CD1d-dependent activation of NKT cells, we analyzed the NKT-cell
population as well as the functional expression of CD1d in Nf1+/- mice. Nf1+/-
mice were found to have similar levels of NKT cells as wildtype (WT) littermates.
Interestingly, however, reduced CD1d expression was observed in Nf1+/- mice
compared with their WT littermates. When inoculated with a T-cell lymphoma in
vivo, Nf1+/- mice survived longer than their WT littermates. Furthermore,
blocking CD1d in vivo significantly enhanced antitumor activity in WT, but not in
Nf1+/- mice. In contrast, a deficiency in Type-I NKT cells increased antitumor
activity in Nf1+/- mice, but not in WT littermates. Therefore, these data suggest
that normal NF1 expression impairs CD1d-mediated NKT-cell activation and
antitumor activity against a T-cell lymphoma.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01901 
PMCID: PMC5760513
PMID: 29354122 

