
1. Molecules. 2018 Jan 24;23(2). pii: E156. doi: 10.3390/molecules23020156.

Proteomic Analysis of Differentially-Expressed Proteins in the Liver of
Streptozotocin-Induced Diabetic Rats Treated with Parkia biglobosa Protein
Isolate.

Ogunyinka BI(1), Oyinloye BE(2)(3), Osunsanmi FO(4), Opoku AR(5), Kappo AP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
bolajokotimi@gmail.com.
(2)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
tunji4reele@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, College of Sciences, Afe Babalola University, PMB 
5454, Ado-Ekiti 360001, Nigeria. tunji4reele@yahoo.com.
(4)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
alafin21@yahoo.com.
(5)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
opokua@unizulu.ac.za.
(6)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
KappoA@unizulu.ac.za.

Protein isolate from Parkia biglobosa seeds is believed to possess excellent
anti-diabetic properties. The purpose of this study was to identify
differentially expressed proteins in liver of streptozotocin-induced diabetic
rats treated with Parkia biglobosa seeds protein isolate (PBPi). In this study,
total proteins extracted from rat liver were separated on one-dimensional SDS
polyacrylamide gel (1D SDS-PAGE) and stained with Coomassie brilliant blue (CBB) 
to visualize protein bands. We observed that protein bands in the region of 10-15
kDa were altered by the different treatments; these bands were selected and
excised for in-gel digestion and peptide extraction followed by nLC-MS, MALDI-TOF
MS, and LIFT MS/MS. A database search with the Mascot algorithm positively
identified four differentially expressed proteins. These proteins are known to be
responsible for diverse biological functions within various organs and tissues.
The present result gives insight and understanding into possible molecular
mechanisms by which streptozotocin causes various alterations in proteins found
in the liver of diabetic rats and the possible modulatory role of PBPi in the
management of streptozotocin-induced diabetes.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules23020156 
PMCID: PMC6017719
PMID: 29364169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no conflict of interest.

