
1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2018 Feb 15;26(4):824-832. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2017.12.046. Epub 
2017 Dec 28.

Chemosynthetic homologues of Mycoplasma pneumoniae β-glycolipid antigens for the 
diagnosis of mycoplasma infectious diseases.

Fukuda K(1), Matsuda K(2), Matsuda S(2), Kado S(3), Masu H(3), Dohi H(4), Nishida
Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Chirality Research Center, Graduate School of Advanced Integration
Science, Chiba University, 648 Matsudo, Matsudo, Chiba 271-8510, Japan; Center
for Analytical Instrumentation, Chiba University, 1-33 Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba
263-8522, Japan.
(2)M. Bio Technology Inc., 2-1-3-1103, Fukasawa, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 158-0081,
Japan.
(3)Center for Analytical Instrumentation, Chiba University, 1-33 Yayoi-cho,
Inage-ku, Chiba 263-8522, Japan.
(4)Molecular Chirality Research Center, Graduate School of Advanced Integration
Science, Chiba University, 648 Matsudo, Matsudo, Chiba 271-8510, Japan.
(5)Molecular Chirality Research Center, Graduate School of Advanced Integration
Science, Chiba University, 648 Matsudo, Matsudo, Chiba 271-8510, Japan.
Electronic address: YNishida@faculty.chiba-u.jp.

Mycoplasma pneumoniae expresses β-glycolipids (β-GGLs) in cytoplasmic membranes, 
which possess a unique β(1 → 6)-linked disaccharide epitope, which has high
potential in biochemical and medicinal applications. In the present study, a
series of β-GGLs homologues with different acyl chains (C12, C14, C16, and C18)
were prepared from a common precursor. An ELISA assay using an anti-(β-GGLs)
monoclonal antibody indicated that the synthetic homologues with long acyl chains
had greater diagnostic potential in the order C18 > C16 > C14 > C12. Toward a
simultaneous detection of natural glycolipids by mass spectrometry (MS), a
deuterium-labeled C16 homologue (β-GGL-C16-d3) was prepared and applied as an
internal standard for a high-resolution electrospray ionization MS (ESI-MS)
analysis. The ESI-MS analysis was used to identify and quantify acyl homologues
(C16/C16, C16/C18, and C18/C18) of β-GGL-C16 in cultured M. pneumoniae. A β-GGLs 
homologue with a 1,2-diacetyl group (C2) was also prepared as a "water soluble"
glycolipid homologue and characterized by 1H NMR spectroscopy. We envisage that
each of these chemosynthetic homologues will provide promising approaches to
solve medical and biological problems associated with mycoplasma infectious
diseases (MIDs).

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2017.12.046 
PMID: 29373272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

