
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Jan 10;8:1945. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01945. eCollection
2017.

The Yin and Yang of Invariant Natural Killer T Cells in Tumor
Immunity-Suppression of Tumor Immunity in the Intestine.

Wang Y(1), Cardell SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.

CD1d-restricted invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are known as early
responding, potent regulatory cells of immune responses. Besides their
established role in the regulation of inflammation and autoimmune disease,
numerous studies have shown that iNKT cells have important functions in tumor
immunosurveillance and control of tumor metastasis. Tumor-infiltrating T helper 1
(TH1)/cytotoxic T lymphocytes have been associated with a positive prognosis.
However, inflammation has a dual role in cancer and chronic inflammation is
believed to be a driving force in many cancers as exemplified in patients with
inflammatory bowel disease that have an increased risk of colorectal cancer.
Indeed, NKT cells promote intestinal inflammation in human ulcerative colitis,
and the associated animal model, indicating that NKT cells may favor tumor
development in intestinal tissue. In contrast to other cancers, recent data from 
animal models suggest that iNKT cells promote tumor formation in the intestine by
supporting an immunoregulatory tumor microenvironment and suppressing TH1
antitumor immunity. Here, we review the role of iNKT cells in suppression of
tumor immunity in light of iNKT-cell regulation of intestinal inflammation. We
also discuss suppression of immunity in other situations as well as factors that 
may influence whether iNKT cells have a protective or an immunosuppressive and
tumor-promoting role in tumor immunity.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01945 
PMCID: PMC5767593
PMID: 29375569 

