
1. J Infect Dis. 2018 Jul 13;218(4):659-668. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jix664.

Inducible Costimulator Contributes to Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus
Pneumonia.

Pires S(1), Jacquet R(1), Parker D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University, New York, New York.

Staphylococcus aureus is a major cause of both community- and healthcare-acquired
pneumonias. Inducible costimulator (ICOS) is part of the CD28 family of proteins 
and is a target for immune checkpoint therapy. We found ICOS highly expressed on 
activated CD4 cells in response to S. aureus. In the absence of ICOS, mice had
improved survival in a pneumonia model with the methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) strain USA300 and significant reductions in
bacterial burden in a nonlethal acute pneumonia model. Infected Icos-/- mice had 
major reductions in several proinflammatory cytokines, neutrophils, inflammatory 
monocytes, and eosinophils compared to infected wild-type mice, while there was
improved expression of CD11c and macrophage receptor with collagenous structure
on the surface of alveolar macrophages. Early during infection infected Icos-/-
mice had increased numbers of alveolar macrophages and expression of several
surface markers on alveolar macrophages and neutrophils. ICOS signaling also
contributed to the pathogenesis of the airway pathogens Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Streptococcus pneumoniae, and neutralizing antibody
to ICOS led to improved clearance of S. aureus from the airway. Our results
indicate that ICOS plays a significant role in orchestrating the innate immune
response to S. aureus and other airway pathogens, and could be a potential
immunomodulatory target to attenuate S. aureus-related immunopathology.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jix664 
PMCID: PMC6047441
PMID: 29378030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

