
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2018 Jan 1;74(Pt 1):39-45. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X17017708. Epub 2018 Jan 1.

Structural characterization of a novel monotreme-specific protein with
antimicrobial activity from the milk of the platypus.

Newman J(1), Sharp JA(2), Enjapoori AK(3), Bentley J(1), Nicholas KR(2), Adams
TE(1), Peat TS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Manufacturing, CSIRO, 343 Royal Parade, Parkville, VIC 3052,
Australia.
(2)Institute for Frontier Materials, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC 3217,
Australia.
(3)School of Medicine, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC 3217, Australia.

Monotreme lactation protein (MLP) is a recently identified protein with
antimicrobial activity. It is present in the milk of monotremes and is unique to 
this lineage. To characterize MLP and to gain insight into the potential role of 
this protein in the evolution of lactation, the crystal structure of duck-billed 
platypus (Ornithorhynchus anatinus) MLP was determined at 1.82 Å resolution. This
is the first structure to be reported for this novel, mammalian antibacterial
protein. MLP was expressed as a FLAG epitope-tagged protein in mammalian cells
and crystallized readily, with at least three space groups being observed (P1, C2
and P21). A 1.82 Å resolution native data set was collected from a crystal in
space group P1, with unit-cell parameters a = 51.2, b = 59.7, c = 63.1 Å, α =
80.15, β = 82.98, γ = 89.27°. The structure was solved by SAD phasing using a
protein crystal derivatized with mercury in space group C2, with unit-cell
parameters a = 92.7, b = 73.2, c = 56.5 Å, β = 90.28°. MLP comprises a monomer of
12 helices and two short β-strands, with much of the N-terminus composed of loop 
regions. The crystal structure of MLP reveals no three-dimensional similarity to 
any known structures and reveals a heretofore unseen fold, supporting the idea
that monotremes may be a rich source for the identification of novel proteins. It
is hypothesized that MLP in monotreme milk has evolved to specifically support
the unusual lactation strategy of this lineage and may have played a central role
in the evolution of these mammals.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X17017708 
PMCID: PMC5947691
PMID: 29372906  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

