
1. J Physiol. 2018 Apr 15;596(8):1397-1417. doi: 10.1113/JP275453. Epub 2018 Mar 2.

Endothelial immune activation programmes cell-fate decisions and angiogenesis by 
inducing angiogenesis regulator DLL4 through TLR4-ERK-FOXC2 signalling.

Xia S(1), Menden HL(1), Korfhagen TR(2), Kume T(3), Sampath V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Children's Mercy, Kansas
City, MO, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology and Pulmonary Biology,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(3)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Medicine,
Northwestern University School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

KEY POINTS: The mechanisms by which bacteria alter endothelial cell phenotypes
and programme inflammatory angiogenesis remain unclear. In lung endothelial
cells, we demonstrate that toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signalling induces
activation of forkhead box protein C2 (FOXC2), a transcriptional factor
implicated in lymphangiogenesis and endothelial specification, in an
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-dependent manner. TLR4-ERK-FOXC2
signalling regulates expression of the Notch ligand DLL4 and signals inflammatory
angiogenesis in vivo and in vitro. Our work reveals a novel link between
endothelial immune signalling (TLR pathway) and a vascular transcription factor, 
FOXC2, that regulates embryonic vascular development. This mechanism is likely to
be relevant to pathological angiogenesis complicating inflammatory diseases in
humans.
ABSTRACT: Endothelial cells (ECs) mediate a specific and robust immune response
to bacteria in sepsis through the activation of toll-like receptor (TLR)
signalling. The mechanisms by which bacterial ligands released during sepsis
programme EC specification and altered angiogenesis remain unclear. We postulated
that the forkhead box protein C2 (FOXC2) transcriptional factor directs EC
cell-fate decisions and angiogenesis during TLR signalling. In human lung ECs,
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induced ERK phosphorylation, FOXC2, and delta-like 4
(DLL4, the master regulator of sprouting angiogenesis expression) in a
TLR4-dependent manner. LPS-mediated ERK phosphorylation resulted in FOXC2-ERK
protein ligation, ERK-dependent FOXC2 serine and threonine phosphorylation, and
subsequent activation of DLL4 gene expression. Chemical inhibition of ERK or
ERK-2 dominant negative transfection disrupted LPS-mediated FOXC2 phosphorylation
and transcriptional activation of FOXC2. FOXC2-siRNA or ERK-inhibition attenuated
LPS-induced DLL4 expression and angiogenic sprouting in vitro. In vivo,
intraperitoneal LPS induced ERK and FOXC2 phosphorylation, FOXC2 binding to DLL4 
promoter, and FOXC2/DLL4 expression in the lung. ERK-inhibition suppressed
LPS-induced FOXC2 phosphorylation, FOXC2-DLL4 promoter binding, and induction of 
FOXC2 and DLL4 in mouse lung ECs. LPS induced aberrant retinal angiogenesis and
DLL4 expression in neonatal mice, which was attenuated with ERK inhibition.
FOXC2+/- mice treated with LPS showed a mitigated increase in FOXC2 and DLL4
compared to FOXC2+/+ mice. These data reveal a new mechanism
(TLR4-ERK-FOXC2-DLL4) by which sepsis-induced EC TLR signalling programmes EC
specification and altered angiogenesis.

© 2018 The Authors. The Journal of Physiology © 2018 The Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1113/JP275453 
PMCID: PMC5899978
PMID: 29380370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

