
1. Exp Dermatol. 2018 Apr;27(4):358-365. doi: 10.1111/exd.13504.

A topical treatment containing heat-treated Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC 533
reduces Staphylococcus aureus adhesion and induces antimicrobial peptide
expression in an in vitro reconstructed human epidermis model.

Rosignoli C(1), Thibaut de Ménonville S(1), Orfila D(1), Béal M(1), Bertino B(1),
Aubert J(1), Mercenier A(2), Piwnica D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nestlé Skin Health Galderma -R&D, Sophia Antipolis, France.
(2)Nestlé Research Center, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Staphylococcus aureus colonization is thought to contribute to the
pathophysiology of atopic dermatitis (AD). AD patients exhibit reduced levels of 
cutaneous antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), which may explain their increased
susceptibility to infections. Using an in vitro reconstructed human epidermis
(RHE) model, we sought to determine whether topical application of a
non-replicating probiotic, heat-treated Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC 533 (HT La1),
could inhibit S. aureus adhesion to skin and boost cutaneous innate immunity. We 
found that application of HT La1 suspension to RHE samples reduced the binding of
radiolabelled S. aureus by up to 74%. To investigate a potential effect of HT La1
on innate immunity, we analysed the expression of nine AMP genes, including those
encoding beta defensins and S100 proteins, following topical application of HT
La1 in suspension or in a daily moisturizer lotion. Analysed genes were induced
by up to fourfold in a dose-dependent manner by HT La1 in suspension and by up to
2.4-fold by HT La1 in the moisturizer lotion. Finally, using ELISA and
immunohistochemical detection, we evaluated the expression and secretion of the
AMPs hBD-2 and psoriasin and determined that both proteins were induced by
topical HT La1, particularly in the stratum corneum of the RHE. These findings
demonstrate that a topically applied, non-replicating probiotic can modulate
endogenous AMP expression and inhibit binding of S. aureus to an RHE model in
vitro. Moreover, they suggest that a topical formulation containing HT La1 could 
benefit atopic skin by enhancing cutaneous innate immunity and reducing S. aureus
colonization.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.13504 
PMID: 29380443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

