
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2018 Feb 1;19(2). pii: E440. doi: 10.3390/ijms19020440.

The Janus Face of NKT Cell Function in Autoimmunity and Infectious Diseases.

Torina A(1), Guggino G(2), La Manna MP(3)(4), Sireci G(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Zooprophylactic Institute of Sicily, Via Marinuzzi 3, 90100
Palermo, Italy. alessandra.torina@izssicilia.it.
(2)Biomedical Department of Internal and Specialized Medicine, Rheumatology
Section, University of Palermo, Piazza delle Cliniche 2, 90100 Palermo, Italy.
giuliana.guggino@unipa.it.
(3)Department of Biopathology and Medical Biotechnology, Section of General
Pathology, University of Palermo, Via del Vespro 129, 90100 Palermo, Italy.
marcopio.lamanna@unipa.it.
(4)Central Laboratory Advanced Diagnostic and Biological Research, University
Hospital, Via del Vespro 129, 90100 Palermo, Italy. marcopio.lamanna@unipa.it.
(5)Department of Biopathology and Medical Biotechnology, Section of General
Pathology, University of Palermo, Via del Vespro 129, 90100 Palermo, Italy.
guido.sireci@unipa.it.
(6)Central Laboratory Advanced Diagnostic and Biological Research, University
Hospital, Via del Vespro 129, 90100 Palermo, Italy. guido.sireci@unipa.it.

Natural killer T cells (NKT) are a subset of T lymphocytes bridging innate and
adaptive immunity. These cells recognize self and microbial glycolipids bound to 
non-polymorphic and highly conserved CD1d molecules. Three NKT cell subsets, type
I, II, and NKT-like expressing different antigen receptors (TCR) were described
and TCR activation promotes intracellular events leading to specific functional
activities. NKT can exhibit different functions depending on the secretion of
soluble molecules and the interaction with other cell types. NKT cells act as
regulatory cells in the defense against infections but, on the other hand, their 
effector functions can be involved in the pathogenesis of several inflammatory
disorders due to their exposure to different microbial or self-antigens,
respectively. A deep understanding of the biology and functions of type I, II,
and NKT-like cells as well as their interplay with cell types acting in innate
(neuthrophils, innate lymphoid cells, machrophages, and dendritic cells) and
adaptive immunity (CD4⁺,CD8⁺, and double negative T cells) should be important to
design potential immunotherapies for infectious and autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms19020440 
PMCID: PMC5855662
PMID: 29389901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

