
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2018 Apr 1;94(4). doi: 10.1093/femsec/fiy015.

Endosymbiont diversity and prevalence in herbivorous spider mite populations in
South-Western Europe.

Zélé F(1), Santos I(1), Olivieri I(2), Weill M(2), Duron O(3), Magalhães S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Changes (cE3c), Faculdade de
Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa, Edificio C2, Piso-3, Campo Grande, 1749016
Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution (CNRS-Université de
Montpellier-IRD-EPHE), 34095 Montpellier, CEDEX 5, France.
(3)Maladies Infectieuses et Vecteurs: Ecologie, Génétique, Evolution et Contrôle 
(CNRS-Université de Montpellier-IRD), Centre de Recherche IRD, 911 Avenue
Agropolis, 34394 Montpellier, France.

Bacterial endosymbionts are known as important players of the evolutionary
ecology of their hosts. However, their distribution, prevalence and diversity are
still largely unexplored. To this aim, we investigated infections by the most
common bacterial reproductive manipulators in herbivorous spider mites of
South-Western Europe. Across 16 populations belonging to three Tetranychus
species, Wolbachia was the most prevalent (ca. 61%), followed by Cardinium
(12%-15%), while only few individuals were infected by Rickettsia (0.9%-3%), and 
none carried Arsenophonus or Spiroplasma. These endosymbionts are here reported
for the first time in Tetranychus evansi and Tetranychus ludeni, and showed
variable infection frequencies between and within species, with several cases of 
coinfections. Moreover, Cardinium was more prevalent in Wolbachia-infected
individuals, which suggests facilitation between these symbionts. Finally,
sequence comparisons revealed no variation of the Wolbachia wsp and Rickettsia
gtlA genes, but some diversity of the Cardinium 16S rRNA, both between and within
populations of the three mite species. Some of the Cardinium sequences identified
belonged to distantly-related clades, and the lack of association between these
sequences and spider mite mitotypes suggests repeated host switching of
Cardinium. Overall, our results reveal a complex community of symbionts in this
system, opening the path for future studies.

DOI: 10.1093/femsec/fiy015 
PMID: 29390142  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

