
1. J Food Prot. 2018 Mar;81(3):348-356. doi: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-17-266.

Adjusting Processing Parameters in an Entry-Level Commercial Dehydrator To
Achieve a 5-Log Reduction of Salmonella during the Cooking Step.

Minarsich J(1), Wright D(1), Emch A(1), Waite-Cusic J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Technology, 100 Wiegand Hall, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS)
guidance encourages jerky processors to use a single lethality step that will
achieve a 5-log reduction of Salmonella. Many processors rely on internal
temperature-time combinations recommended in this guidance. However, the efficacy
of convective heating is highly dependent on relative humidity (RH). RH
recommendations are vague because of variability in processing conditions and
limited available data. This study was conducted to establish processing
conditions for an entry-level commercial dehydrator (Harvest Saver R5A) to
achieve a 5-log reduction of Salmonella. Unseasoned, unmarinated top round beef
strips (65 mm thick) were inoculated with Salmonella (>7 log CFU/g) and processed
with the chamber temperature set to 82.2°C for a total cook time of 60 min with
the intake closed (closed oven). Modifications (product load and fan speed) were 
made in subsequent trials to improve lethality. After incubation at 37°C for 24
to 48 h, surviving Salmonella populations were enumerated on tryptic soy agar. In
trial A, the maximum fan speed (2.5 m/s) with 30 kg of product resulted in 45 to 
48.5% RH at 60 min, and a 5-log reduction of Salmonella was achieved in only
35.5% of the meat samples (54 of 152 samples). Increasing the product load by 40%
(42 kg; trial B) increased RH in the chamber (57 to 85%) and resulted in improved
lethality; a 5-log reduction was achieved in 95.0% of samples (131 of 138
samples). Because samples with reduced lethality were located on the windward
side of the chamber, the fan speed was reduced (0.9 m/s; trial C1) to increase
the RH, resulting in a 5-log reduction in 100% of the samples (138 of 138
samples). A replicate trial (trial C2) was conducted, and a 5-log reduction again
was achieved in 100% of the samples. All trials exceeded recommendations by the
FSIS; however, adequate Salmonella reduction was achieved only when the RH was
>65% throughout. Product load and fan speed are practical parameters for
processors to manipulate to increase the RH in closed systems and thus improve
Salmonella lethality.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-17-266 
PMID: 29393681  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

