
1. Environ Microbiol Rep. 2018 Apr;10(2):217-225. doi: 10.1111/1758-2229.12624. Epub
2018 Feb 23.

Adhesion and invasion attributes of Burkholderia pseudomallei are dependent on
airway surface liquid and glucose concentrations in lung epithelial cells.

Mariappan V(1), Thimma J(1), Vellasamy KM(1), Shankar EM(2), Vadivelu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya,
Kuala Lumpur 50603, Malaysia.
(2)Division of Infection Biology and Microbiology, Department of Life Sciences,
Central University of Tamil Nadu (CUTN), Thiruvarur 610 101, India.

Physiological constituents in airway surface liquids (ASL) appear to impact the
adherence and invasion potentials of Burkholderia pseudomallei contributing to
recrudescent melioidosis. Here, we investigated the factors present in ASL that
is likely to influence bacterial adhesion and invasion leading to improved
understanding of bacterial pathogenesis. Six B. pseudomallei clinical isolates
from different origins were used to investigate the ability of the bacteria to
adhere and invade A549 human lung epithelial cells using a system that mimics the
physiological ASL with different pH, NaCl, KCl, CaCl2 and glucose concentrations.
These parameters resulted in markedly differential adherence and invasion
abilities of B. pseudomallei to the lung epithelial cells. The concentration of
20 mM glucose dramatically increased adherence and invasion by increasing the
rate of pili formation in depiliated bacteria. Glucose significantly increased
adherence and invasion of B. pseudomallei to A549 cells, and presence of NaCl,
KCl and CaCl2 markedly ablated the effect despite the presence of glucose. Our
data established a link between glucose, enhanced adhesion and invasion
potentials of B. pseudomallei, hinting increased susceptibility of individuals
with diabetes mellitus to clinical melioidosis.

© 2018 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1758-2229.12624 
PMID: 29393577  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

