
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2018 Apr 15;110:179-184. doi:
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.01.047. Epub 2018 Feb 3.

Autolysin mediated adherence of Staphylococcus aureus with Fibronectin, Gelatin
and Heparin.

Porayath C(1), Suresh MK(2), Biswas R(2), Nair BG(1), Mishra N(1), Pal S(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Kollam 690525, Kerala,
India.
(2)Centre for Nanosciences and Molecular Medicine, Amrita Institute of Medical
Sciences, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Cochin 682041, Kerala, India.
(3)School of Biotechnology, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Kollam 690525, Kerala,
India. Electronic address: sanjaypal@am.amrita.edu.

Major autolysin (Atl) of Staphylococcus aureusis a cell surface associated
peptidoglycan hydrolase with amidase and glucosaminidase domains. Atl enzymes
(amidase and glucosaminidase) are known to participate in biofilm formation and
also can bind with host matrices. Earlier studies demonstrated the binding of
Atlwithfibronectin, thrombospondin 1, vitronectin and heat shock cognate protein 
Hsc70. Here, we have shown, Atl mediates attachment of S.aureus to heparin and
gelatine as well. The atl mutant strain demonstrated around 2.5 fold decreased
adherence with fibronectin, gelatin and heparin coated microtiter plates. The
microscopic studies confirmed the reduced binding of atl mutant with them
compared to its parental wild type and complemented mutant strains. Amidase and
glucosaminidase were expressed as N-terminal histidine tagged proteins from
Escherichia coli, purified and refolded. We found refolded amidase bind with
fibronectin, gelatin and heparin; whereas refolded glucosaminidase binds with
only fibronectin and heparin but not gelatin. These results reemphasize Atl as
one of the crucial proteins from Staphylococcus that facilitate their binding
with multiple host cellular components during colonization and infection.

Copyright Â© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.01.047 
PMCID: PMC5864509
PMID: 29398086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

