
1. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2018 May;15(5):293-299. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2017.2368. Epub
2018 Feb 6.

Genotypic Characterization of Arcobacter spp. Isolated from Chicken Meat in
Brazil.

Oliveira MGX(1), Gomes VTM(1), Cunha MPV(1), Moreno LZ(1), Moreno AM(1), Knöbl
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária e Zootecnia da Universidade de São Paulo ,
São Paulo, Brazil .

Arcobacter butzleri, Arcobacter cryaerophilus, and Arcobacter skirrowii are
Gram-negative pathogenic microorganisms that cause watery diarrhea and septicemia
in humans. The aims of this study were to detect the presence of Arcobacter spp. 
in chicken meat from butcher shops in São Paulo (Brazil) and to verify their
virulence genes and genotypic profiles. A total of 300 chicken cuts were
analyzed. The results show the presence of Arcobacter spp. in 18.3% of samples,
which were identified as A. butzleri (63.6%) and A. cryaerophilus (36.3%). All
strains were positive for the virulence genes ciaB and mviN, followed by cj1349
(98%), pldA (94.4%), cadF (72.7%), tlyA (92.7%), hecA (49%), irgA (47.2%), and
hecB (34.5%). These strains were subjected to single-enzyme amplified fragment
length polymorphism. Nineteen genotypic profiles were obtained for A. butzleri,
and 17 for A. cryaerophilus. These results confirm the presence of virulent
strains of A. butzleri and A. cryaerophilus in the chicken meat in Brazil. The
presence of potentially virulent strains of Arcobacter highlights a possible
public health risk, particularly with respect to ingestion of undercooked foods
and cross-contamination from uncooked foods during food preparation and
contaminated utensils.

DOI: 10.1089/fpd.2017.2368 
PMID: 29406776  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

