
1. Int J Cancer. 2018 Jul 1;143(1):167-178. doi: 10.1002/ijc.31298. Epub 2018 Feb
19.

Hyperactive gp130/STAT3-driven gastric tumourigenesis promotes submucosal
tertiary lymphoid structure development.

Hill DG(1), Yu L(2)(3), Gao H(2)(3), Balic JJ(2)(3), West A(2)(3), Oshima H(4),
McLeod L(2), Oshima M(4), Gallimore A(1), D'Costa K(2)(3), Bhathal PS(3), Sievert
W(5), Ferrero RL(2)(6), Jenkins BJ(2)(3), Jones GW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, Systems Immunity Research Institute,
School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, Hudson Institute of
Medical Research, Clayton, VIC, Australia.
(3)Department of Molecular and Translational Science, Faculty of Medicine,
Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia.
(4)Division of Genetics, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa University,
Kanazawa, Japan.
(5)Department of Medicine, Monash Medical Centre, Monash University, Clayton,
VIC, Australia.
(6)Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Department of Microbiology, Monash
University, Clayton, VIC, Australia.

Tertiary lymphoid structures (TLSs) display phenotypic and functional
characteristics of secondary lymphoid organs, and often develop in tissues
affected by chronic inflammation, as well as in certain inflammation-associated
cancers where they are prognostic of improved patient survival. However, the
mechanisms that govern the development of tumour-associated TLSs remain
ill-defined. Here, we observed tumour-associated TLSs in a preclinical mouse
model (gp130F/F ) of gastric cancer, where tumourigenesis is dependent on
hyperactive STAT3 signalling through the common IL-6 family signalling receptor, 
gp130. Gastric tumourigenesis was associated with the development of B and T
cell-rich submucosal lymphoid aggregates, containing CD21+ cellular networks and 
high endothelial venules. Temporally, TLS formation coincided with the
development of gastric adenomas and induction of homeostatic chemokines including
Cxcl13, Ccl19 and Ccl21. Reflecting the requirement of gp130-driven STAT3
signalling for gastric tumourigenesis, submucosal TLS development was also
STAT3-dependent, but independent of the cytokine IL-17 which has been linked with
lymphoid neogenesis in chronic inflammation and autoimmunity. Interestingly,
upregulated lymphoid chemokine expression and TLS formation were also observed in
a chronic gastritis model induced by Helicobacter felis infection.
Tumour-associated TLSs were also observed in patients with intestinal-type
gastric cancer, and a gene signature linked with TLS development in gp130F/F mice
was associated with advanced clinical disease, but was not prognostic of patient 
survival. Collectively, our in vivo data reveal that hyperactive gp130-STAT3
signalling closely links gastric tumourigenesis with lymphoid neogenesis, and
while a TLS gene signature was associated with advanced gastric cancer in
patients, it did not indicate a favourable prognosis.

Â© 2018 The Authors International Journal of Cancer published by John Wiley & Sons
Ltd on behalf of UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.31298 
PMCID: PMC5969244
PMID: 29417587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

