
1. J Egypt Natl Canc Inst. 2018 Mar;30(1):1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jnci.2018.01.005. Epub
2018 Feb 7.

Reinforcing the utility of chick embryo model to in vivo evaluate engraftment of 
human leukemic stem cells.

Farhat A(1), Ali-Deeb E(2), Sulaiman A(3), Aljamali M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, School of Pharmacy, Damascus
University, Damascus, Syria. Electronic address: arwa.farhat1@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Animal Production, School of Agriculture, Damascus University,
Damascus, Syria.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Damascus University,
Damascus, Syria.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, School of Pharmacy, Damascus
University, Damascus, Syria; Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, National
Commission for Biotechnology (NCBT), Damascus, Syria. Electronic address:
aljamali@ncbt.gov.sy.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Development of appropriate translational in vivo models
is a prerequisite for personalized management of leukemic patients. Indeed,
several immunodeficient mice models were developed for leukemias with main
limitations due to their high cost, demanding management, and elongated
assessment intervals. In this report, we aimed at evaluating the engraftment of
CD34+ cells, isolated from an acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patient, in naturally 
immunodeficient chick embryo model.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Mononuclear cells or immunomagnetic sorted CD34+ cells were 
injected into chick embryo chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) veins. Seven days
post-injection, human CD34 transcript was detected by reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in blood, bone marrow (BM), spleen and liver
from embryos injected with human leukemic cells. Interestingly, an amplicon of
the same length has been detected in both BM and spleen from PBS injected
embryos, although analysis via bioinformatics tools revealed no matches in
chicken; neither in transcriptome nor in genome databases. Importantly,
splenomegaly and hepatic lesions were observed in some CD34+ cells injected
embryos.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, our data confirm the engraftment of primary human CD34+
leukemic cells in chick embryo liver, but other experiments are required to
verify engraftment in BM and spleen, and to confirm the identity of a putative
CD34 orthologous transcript in these two organs.

Copyright Â© 2018 National Cancer Institute, Cairo University. Production and
hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jnci.2018.01.005 
PMID: 29428370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

