
1. J Neurooncol. 2018 Jun;138(2):307-313. doi: 10.1007/s11060-018-2796-6. Epub 2018 
Feb 8.

Clinical prognostic value of the isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 single-nucleotide
polymorphism rs11554137 in glioblastoma.

Mistry AM(1), Vnencak-Jones CL(2), Mobley BC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
T-4224 Medical Center North, 1161 21st Avenue South, Nashville, TN, 37232-2380,
USA. axitamm@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

The presence of the single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs11554137:C>T in the
IDH1 gene is associated with a significantly lower survival in acute myeloid
leukemia patients. The impact of its presence in glioblastoma on patient survival
is unclear. We retrospectively reviewed 171 adult (> 18 years of age) patients
treated at a single, tertiary academic center for supratentorial glioblastoma
(WHO grade IV) between 2013 and 2017. We conducted Kaplan-Meier overall and
progression free survival analyses based on the IDH1 and IDH2 gene status of
patients' glioblastoma (IDH wild type, mutant, and IDH1 rs11554137:C>T SNP).
Multivariate Cox survival analyses were conducted accounting for age at
diagnosis, preoperative Karnofsky performance status score, treatment (extent of 
resection, postoperative radiotherapy, and temozolomide), IDH gene variant, and
MGMT promoter methylation status. Presence of rs11554137:C>T SNP in glioblastoma 
samples did not correlate with presence of IDH1 mutation. Patients with
rs11554137:C>T SNP did not have histories of prior lower-grade gliomas. Patients 
with IDH mutant glioblastoma had a distinctly higher survival profile than both
rs11554137:C>T SNP and IDH wild type glioblastomas. No survival difference was
noted between patients with glioblastoma harboring the SNP and patients with IDH 
wild type glioblastoma. In this study, clinical prognostication in glioblastoma
patients was largely dependent on the classification of IDH mutant and wild type 
glioblastoma, and not on the presence of IDH1 rs11554137:C>T SNP in the tumor.

DOI: 10.1007/s11060-018-2796-6 
PMID: 29423539  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

