
1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2018 Feb 28;28(2):305-313. doi: 10.4014/jmb.1709.09036.

Characterization of a Thermophilic Lignocellulose-Degrading Microbial Consortium 
with High Extracellular Xylanase Activity.

Zhang D(1)(2), Wang Y(2), Zhang C(1), Zheng D(2), Guo P(2)(3), Cui Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Marine Biology, Ocean College, Zhejiang University, Zhoushan
316021, P.R. China.
(2)Institute of Agricultural Products Processing and Nuclear Agriculture
Technology Research, Hubei Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Wuhan 430064, P.R.
China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Fertilization from Agricultural Wastes, Ministry of
Agriculture, Wuhan 430064, P.R. China.
(4)College of Agronomy and Biotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 
100193, P.R. China.

A microbial consortium, TMC7, was enriched for the degradation of natural
lignocellulosic materials under high temperature. TMC7 degraded 79.7% of rice
straw during 15 days of incubation at 65°C. Extracellular xylanase was
effectively secreted and hemicellulose was mainly degraded in the early stage
(first 3 days), whereas primary decomposition of cellulose was observed as of day
3. The optimal temperature and initial pH for extracellular xylanase activity and
lignocellulose degradation were 65°C and between 7.0 and 9.0, respectively.
Extracellular xylanase activity was maintained above 80% and 85% over a wide
range of temperature (50-75°C) and pH values (6.0-11.0), respectively.
Clostridium likely had the largest contribution to lignocellulose conversion in
TMC7 initially, and Geobacillus, Aeribacillus, and Thermoanaerobacterium might
have also been involved in the later phase. These results demonstrate the
potential practical application of TMC7 for lignocellulosic biomass utilization
in the biotechnological industry under hot and alkaline conditions.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1709.09036 
PMID: 29429304  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

