
1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2018 Mar;94:36-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2018.01.005. Epub
2018 Feb 6.

The intracellular region of silkworm cadherin-like protein is not necessary to
mediate the toxicity of Bacillus thuringiensis Cry1Aa and Cry1Ab toxins.

Endo H(1), Adegawa S(1), Kikuta S(1), Sato R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bio-Applications and Systems Engineering, Tokyo University 
of Agriculture and Technology, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Bio-Applications and Systems Engineering, Tokyo University 
of Agriculture and Technology, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan. Electronic
address: ryoichi@cc.tuat.ac.jp.

The cadherin-like protein in lepidopteran insects, known as a receptor for
Bacillus thuringiensis Cry1A toxins, is a single-pass membrane protein that can
be divided into extracellular and intracellular regions. The extracellular region
is important for toxin binding and oligomerization, whereas the role of the
intracellular region during Cry1A intoxication is unclear. In the present study, 
we generated a deletion mutant of Bombyx mori cadherin-like protein (BtR175) that
lacked the intracellular region to investigate its role in mediating Cry1A
toxicity. Like wild-type BtR175, the mutant protein conferred susceptibility to
Cry1Aa and Cry1Ab toxins in Sf9 cells, suggesting that the intracellular region
is not required to mediate intoxication. The deletion mutant maintained another
role of cadherin-like proteins; that it, synergistic activity with B. mori ABC
transporter C2 (ABCC2) when mediating Cry1Aa and Cry1Ab toxicity. In addition, we
evaluated the effects of reagents that have been reported to inhibit Cry1A
toxicity (e.g., protein kinase A inhibitors, EDTA, and sucrose) on Cry1A toxicity
in BtR175-expressing cells. Our results suggest that Cry1Aa-induced cell death in
BtR175-expressing cells was not caused by signal transduction but by osmotic
lysis. Overall, our data indicate that BtR175 mediates the toxicity of Cry1Aa and
Cry1Ab toxins entirely via its extracellular region. They also indicate that the 
synergism between cadherin-like protein and ABCC2 occurs outside of cells or in
the cell membrane.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2018.01.005 
PMID: 29425691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

