
1. Oncotarget. 2017 Dec 21;9(4):4823-4832. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.23572.
eCollection 2018 Jan 12.

miRNA regulation of Tip110 expression and self-renewal and differentiation of
human CD34+ hematopoietic cells.

Liu Y(1), Huang X(2), Timani KA(1), Broxmeyer HE(2), He JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth,
TX 76107, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University, Indianapolis,
IN 46202, USA.

Tip110 expression regulates hematopoiesis, but the regulatory mechanisms during
hematopoiesis are not fully understood. There are a number of putative microRNA
(miRNA) binding sites identified within the Tip110 3' untranslated region
(3'UTR). In this study, we determined the relationship among Tip110 miRNA, Tip110
expression and self-renewal and differentiation of human CD34+ hematopoietic
cells. Using a Tip110 3UTR-based reporter gene assay, 11 miRNA showed the
specific activity toward the Tip110 3'UTR and down-regulated constitutive Tip110 
mRNA expression. When human cord blood CD34+ cells were differentiated, Tip110
mRNA expression showed significant decreases. Concurrently, five miRNA showed
significant increases, five miRNA showed significant decreases, and one miRNA
remained unchanged. To further assess the roles of miRNA in Tip110 expression and
self-renewal and differentiation of human CD34+ hematopoietic cells, human cord
blood CD34+ cells were transduced to express the full-length Tip110 3'UTR RNA.
Expression of the Tip110 3'UTR RNA led to significant increases of Tip110 mRNA,
and the number of hematopoietic stem cells and progenitor cells. Taken together, 
these results show important roles of Tip110 miRNA in Tip110 expression control
and Tip110 regulation of hematopoiesis and offer a possibility of using Tip110
miRNA or 3'UTR as a strategy to maintain human CD34+ hematopoietic cells.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.23572 
PMCID: PMC5797015
PMID: 29435144 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no
conflicts of interest.

