
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Mar 27;62(4). pii: e02128-17. doi:
10.1128/AAC.02128-17. Print 2018 Apr.

In Vivo Transfer and Microevolution of Avian Native IncA/C2blaNDM-1-Carrying
Plasmid pRH-1238 during a Broiler Chicken Infection Study.

Hadziabdic S(1), Fischer J(1), Malorny B(1), Borowiak M(1), Guerra B(1),
Kaesbohrer A(1), Gonzalez-Zorn B(2), Szabo I(3).

Author information: 
(1)German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR), Department for Biological 
Safety, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Departamento de Sanidad Animal and Centro de Vigilancia Sanitaria Veterinaria,
Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(3)German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR), Department for Biological 
Safety, Berlin, Germany istvan.szabo@bfr.bund.de.

The emergence and spread of carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae (CPE) in
wildlife and livestock animals pose an important safety concern for public
health. With our in vivo broiler chicken infection study, we investigated the
transfer and experimental microevolution of the blaNDM-1-carrying IncA/C2 plasmid
(pRH-1238) introduced by avian native Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar
Corvallis without inducing antibiotic selection pressure. We evaluated the
dependency of the time point of inoculation on donor (S Corvallis [12-SA01738])
and plasmid-free Salmonella recipient [d-tartrate-fermenting (d-Ta+) S Paratyphi 
B (13-SA01617), referred to here as S Paratyphi B (d-Ta+)] excretion by
quantifying their excretion dynamics. Using plasmid profiling by S1
nuclease-restricted pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, we gained insight into the 
variability of the native plasmid content among S Corvallis reisolates as well as
plasmid acquisition in S Paratyphi B (d-Ta+) and the enterobacterial gut
microflora. Whole-genome sequencing enabled us to gain an in-depth insight into
the microevolution of plasmid pRH-1238 in S Corvallis and enterobacterial
recipient isolates. Our study revealed that the fecal excretion of avian native
carbapenemase-producing S Corvallis is significantly higher than that of S
Paratyphi (d-Ta+) and is not hampered by S Paratyphi (d-Ta+). Acquisition of
pRH-1238 in other Enterobacteriaceae and several events of plasmid pRH-1238
transfer to different Escherichia coli sequence types and Klebsiella pneumoniae
demonstrated an interspecies broad host range. Regardless of the
microevolutionary structural deletions in pRH-1238, the single carbapenem
resistance marker blaNDM-1 was maintained on pRH-1238 throughout the trial.
Furthermore, we showed the importance of the gut E. coli population as a vector
of pRH-1238. In a potential scenario of the introduction of NDM-1-producing S
Corvallis into a broiler flock, the pRH-1238 plasmid could persist and spread to 
a broad host range even in the absence of antibiotic pressure.

Copyright Â© 2018 Hadziabdic et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02128-17 
PMCID: PMC5913973
PMID: 29437622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

