
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2018 Mar 4;497(2):646-651. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.02.124. Epub 2018 Feb 15.

The C2'- and C3'-endo equilibrium for AMP molecules bound in the
cystathionine-beta-synthase domain.

Feng N(1), Qi C(2), Hou YJ(2), Zhang Y(2), Wang DC(3), Li DF(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(2)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China.
(3)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China. Electronic address: dcwang@ibp.ac.cn.
(4)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China; State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No.1 Beichen West Road, Chaoyang
District, Beijing 100101, China. Electronic address: lidefeng@moon.ibp.ac.cn.

The equilibrium between C2'- and C3'-endo conformations of nucleotides in
solution, as well as their polymers DNA and RNA, has been well studied in
previous work. However, this equilibrium of nucleotides in their binding state
remains unclear. We observed two AMP molecules, in C3'- and C2'-endo
conformations respectively, simultaneously bound to a cystathionine-beta-synthase
(CBS) domain dimer of the magnesium and cobalt efflux protein CorC in the
crystallographic study. The C2'-endo AMP molecule assumes the higher sugar pucker
energy and one more hydrogen bond with the protein than the C3'-endo molecule
does. The balance between the high sugar pucker energy and the low binding energy
suggests an equilibrium or switch between C2'- and C3'-endo conformations of the 
bound nucleotides. Our work challenge the previous hypothesis that the ribose of 
the bound nucleotides would be locked in a fixed conformation.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.02.124 
PMID: 29453981  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

