
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2018 Apr;68(4):1052-1058. doi: 10.1099/ijsem.0.002622.
Epub 2018 Feb 9.

Microbacterium telephonicum sp. nov., isolated from the screen of a cellular
phone.

Rahi P(1), Kurli R(1), Pansare AN(1), Khairnar M(1), Jagtap S(1), Patel NB(2),
Dastager SG(3), Lawson PA(2), Shouche YS(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Microbial Resource, National Centre for Cell Science,
Pune, Maharashtra 411007, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Plant Biology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, 
OK 73019, USA.
(3)NCIM-Resource Center, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, Maharashtra
411008, India.

A cultivation-based study of the microbial diversity of cellular phone screens
led to the isolation of a Gram-stain-positive, aerobic, rod-shaped and
non-endospore-forming bacterium, designated S2T63T, exhibiting phenotypic and
genotypic characteristics unique to the type strains of closely related species. 
Phylogenetic analysis based on 16S rRNA gene sequences indicated that the strain 
is a member of Microbacterium, and most closely related to Microbacterium
aurantiacum IFO 15234T and Microbacterium kitamiense Kitami C2T. The DNA-DNA
relatedness values of the strain S2T63T to M. aurantiacum KACC 20510T, M.
kitamiense KACC 20514Tand Microbacterium laevaniformans KACC 14463T were 65 %
(±4), 29.5 % (±3) and 55.9 % (±4), respectively. The genomic DNA G+C content was 
71.8 mol%. The major fatty acids were anteiso-C15 : 0, iso-C16 : 0, C16 : 0 and
anteiso-C17 : 0. The main polar lipids were diphosphatidylglycerol,
phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylglycerol and two unidentified polar lipids.
The peptidoglycan contained the amino acids glycine, lysine, alanine and glutamic
acid, with substantial amounts of hydroxy glutamic acid detected, which is
characteristic of peptidoglycan type B1α. The predominant menaquinones were MK-12
and MK-13. Rhamnose, fucose and galactose were the whole-cell sugars detected.
The strain also showed biofilm production, estimated by using crystal violet
assay. Based on the results of the phenotypic and genotypic characterizations, it
was concluded that the new strain represents a novel species of the genus
Microbacterium, for which the name Microbacteriumtelephonicum is proposed, with
S2T63T (=MCC 2967T=KACC 18715T=LMG 29293T) as the type strain.

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.002622 
PMID: 29458489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

