
1. Int J Oral Biol. 2004;29(1):7-12.

Human β-defensin-2 gene transduction of dental pulp cells: A model for pulp
antimicrobial gene therapy.

Huang GT(1)(2)(3), Zhang HB(1), Yin C(1)(2), Park SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Associated Clinical Specialties, Section of Endodontics, UCLA
School of Dentistry, Los Angeles, CA.
(2)Division of Oral Biology and Medicine, and Orofacial Pain, UCLA School of
Dentistry, Los Angeles, CA.
(3)Dental and Craniofacial Research Institute, UCLA School of Dentistry, Los
Angeles, CA.

The objective of this study was to determine whether cells from human pulp can be
transduced to express the antimicrobial peptide--human β-defensin-2 (HBD-2).
Primary human pulp cells and gingival fibroblasts from normal tissue, as well as 
two mouse cell lines (NIH 3T3 and AT-84) and a human cell line SCC-9 were
transduced with a retroviral vector carrying HBD-2 cDNA. ELISA and Northern blot 
analyses were performed to detect HBD-2 expression by these transduced cells.
Antimicrobail assays using recombinant HBD-2 were performed on two
caries-associated bacteria Streptococcus mutnas and Lactobacillus acidophilus.
The results showed that transduced pulp cells secreted 62.4 ± 27.2 ng/3 days of
HBD-2, which was comparable to that by NIH 3T3 (78.0 ± 14.1 ng/4 days), and
higher than those by gingival fibroblasts (17.9 ± 7.9 ng/3 days), AT-84 (2.6 ±
1.0 ng/3 days), and SCC-9 (47.6 ± 9.9 ng/3 days). Northern blot analysis showed
that the levels of HBD-2 mRNA expression correlated with their protein secretion 
levels. There was approximately 50% reduction of growth when S. mutans and L.
acidophilus were exposed to HBD-2 at 1 µM. Pulp cells appear to be suitable for
HBD-2 transduction using retroviral vectors, suggesting a potential for use in
controlling pulpal infections.


PMCID: PMC5812695
PMID: 29456451 

