
1. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater. 2018 Apr;80:311-319. doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2018.02.011.
Epub 2018 Feb 12.

Mechanical, bactericidal and osteogenic behaviours of hydrothermally synthesised 
TiO2 nanowire arrays.

Jaggessar A(1), Mathew A(2), Wang H(3), Tesfamichael T(4), Yan C(5), Yarlagadda
PK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, 2 George
Street, Brisbane QLD 4001, Australia. Electronic address:
a.jaggessar@hdr.qut.edu.au.
(2)Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation, Queensland University of
Technology, 60 Musk Avenue, Kelvin Grove QLD 4059, Australia. Electronic address:
asha.mathew@qut.edu.au.
(3)Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, 2 George
Street, Brisbane QLD 4001, Australia. Electronic address: hx.wang@qut.edu.au.
(4)Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, 2 George
Street, Brisbane QLD 4001, Australia. Electronic address:
t.tesfamichael@qut.edu.au.
(5)Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, 2 George
Street, Brisbane QLD 4001, Australia. Electronic address: c2.yan@qut.edu.au.
(6)Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, 2 George
Street, Brisbane QLD 4001, Australia. Electronic address: y.prasad@qut.edu.au.

The application of orthopaedic implants is associated with risks of bacterial
infection and long-term antibiotic therapy. This problem has led to the study of 
implants with nano-textured surfaces as a method of inhibiting bacterial adhesion
and reducing implant failure due to infection. In this research, various
nano-textured surfaces of TiO2 were synthesised using hydrothermal synthesis, by 
varying NaOH concentration, reaction time and reaction temperature. Their
correlations to mechanical, morphological, bactericidal and osteogenic properties
of the surfaces were investigated. It was found that high alkaline concentrations
produced large nanowire mesh arrays, while short reaction time and low
temperature produced comparatively smaller arrays. The highly dense morphology
formed at higher NaOH concentrations has resulted in high elastic modulus and
hardness values, compared to surfaces produced at lower NaOH concentrations.
Viability tests of the TiO2 nanowire array against gram-positive Staphylococcus
aureus cells showed a bactericidal efficiency of 54% and 33% after 3 and 18 h,
respectively. This nano-textured surface produces an osteoblast cellular
metabolic activity of 71% after 24 h, compared to 67% when exposed to a flat Ti
control surface. This preliminary work demonstrates an excellent outcome in
producing bactericidal surfaces that promoted metabolic activity of human
osteoblast cells for potential use in orthopaedic implants.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2018.02.011 
PMID: 29459290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

