
1. Front Microbiol. 2018 Feb 9;9:145. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00145. eCollection
2018.

Pseudomonas orientalis F9: A Potent Antagonist against Phytopathogens with
Phytotoxic Effect in the Apple Flower.

Zengerer V(1), Schmid M(2), Bieri M(1), MÃ¼ller DC(1), Remus-Emsermann MNP(3)(4), 
Ahrens CH(2), Pelludat C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Protection Research Division, Agroscope, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Competence Division Methods Development, Analytics and SIB Swiss Institute of 
Bioinformatics, Agroscope, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New
Zealand.
(4)Biomolecular Interaction Centre, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New
Zealand.

In light of public concerns over the use of pesticides and antibiotics in plant
protection and the subsequent selection for spread of resistant bacteria in the
environment, it is inevitable to broaden our knowledge about viable alternatives,
such as natural antagonists and their mode of action. The genus Pseudomonas is
known for its metabolic versatility and genetic plasticity, encompassing
pathogens as well as antagonists. We characterized strain Pseudomonas orientalis 
F9, an isolate from apple flowers in a Swiss orchard, and determined its
antagonistic activity against several phytopathogenic bacteria, in particular
Erwinia amylovora, the causal agent of fire blight. P. orientalis F9 displayed
antagonistic activity against a broad suite of phytopathogenic bacteria in the in
vitro tests. The promising results from this analysis led to an ex vivo assay
with E. amylovora CFBP1430Rif and P. orientalis F9 infected detached apple
flowers. F9 diminished the fire blight pathogen in the flowers but also revealed 
phytotoxic traits. The experimental results were discussed in light of the
complete genome sequence of F9, which revealed the strain to carry phenazine
genes. Phenazines are known to contribute to antagonistic activity of bacterial
strains against soil pathogens. When tested in the cress assay with Pythium
ultimum as pathogen, F9 showed results comparable to the known antagonist P.
protegens CHA0.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00145 
PMCID: PMC5811506
PMID: 29479340 

