
1. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2018 Feb 24;17(1):34. doi: 10.1186/s12933-018-0678-z.

MicroRNA-19a contributes to the epigenetic regulation of tissue factor in
diabetes.

Witkowski M(1), Tabaraie T(1), Steffens D(1), Friebel J(1), Dörner A(1), Skurk
C(1), Witkowski M(2), Stratmann B(3), Tschoepe D(3), Landmesser U(1), Rauch U(4).

Author information: 
(1)Charité Centrum 11, Depart. of Cardiology, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Charité
University Medicine Berlin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Institute of Microbiology and Infection Immunology, Charité University
Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Heart and Diabetes Center NRW, Ruhr University of Bochum, Bad Oeynhausen,
Germany.
(4)Charité Centrum 11, Depart. of Cardiology, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Charité
University Medicine Berlin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Germany.
ursula.rauch@charite.de.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus is characterized by chronic vascular disorder and
presents a main risk factor for cardiovascular mortality. In particular,
hyperglycaemia and inflammatory cytokines induce vascular circulating tissue
factor (TF) that promotes pro-thrombotic conditions in diabetes. It has recently 
become evident that alterations of the post-transcriptional regulation of TF via 
specific microRNA(miR)s, such as miR-126, contribute to the pathogenesis of
diabetes and its complications. The endothelial miR-19a is involved in vascular
homeostasis and atheroprotection. However, its role in diabetes-related
thrombogenicity is unknown. Understanding miR-networks regulating
procoagulability in diabetes may help to develop new treatment options preventing
vascular complications.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Plasma of 44 patients with known diabetes was assessed for
the expression of miR-19a, TF protein, TF activity, and markers for vascular
inflammation. High miR-19a expression was associated with reduced TF protein,
TF-mediated procoagulability, and vascular inflammation based on expression of
vascular adhesion molecule-1 and leukocyte count. We found plasma expression of
miR-19a to strongly correlate with miR-126. miR-19a reduced the TF expression on 
mRNA and protein level in human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC) as well as
TF activity in human monocytes (THP-1), while anti-miR-19a increased the TF
expression. Interestingly, miR-19a induced VCAM expression in HMEC. However,
miR-19a and miR-126 co-transfection reduced total endothelial VCAM expression and
exhibited additive inhibition of a luciferase reporter construct containing the
F3 3'UTR.
CONCLUSIONS: While both miRs have differential functions on endothelial VCAM
expression, miR-19a and miR-126 cooperate to exhibit anti-thrombotic properties
via regulating vascular TF expression. Modulating the post-transcriptional
control of TF in diabetes may provide a future anti-thrombotic and
anti-inflammatory therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/s12933-018-0678-z 
PMCID: PMC6389222
PMID: 29477147  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

