
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2018 Apr 20;271:15-23. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2018.02.013. Epub 2018 Feb 21.

Role of cell surface composition and lysis in static biofilm formation by
Lactobacillus plantarum WCFS1.

Fernández Ramírez MD(1), Nierop Groot MN(2), Smid EJ(1), Hols P(3), Kleerebezem
M(4), Abee T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Top Institute Food and Nutrition (TIFN), Wageningen, The Netherlands;
Laboratory of Food Microbiology, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The
Netherlands.
(2)Top Institute Food and Nutrition (TIFN), Wageningen, The Netherlands;
Wageningen Food and Biobased Research, Wageningen University and Research,
Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Université Catholique de Louvain,
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
(4)Top Institute Food and Nutrition (TIFN), Wageningen, The Netherlands;
Host-Microbe Interactomics Group, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The
Netherlands.
(5)Top Institute Food and Nutrition (TIFN), Wageningen, The Netherlands;
Laboratory of Food Microbiology, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: tjakko.abee@wur.nl.

Next to applications in fermentations, Lactobacillus plantarum is recognized as a
food spoilage organism, and its dispersal from biofilms in food processing
environments might be implicated in contamination or recontamination of food
products. This study provides new insights into biofilm development by L.
plantarum WCFS1 through comparative analysis of wild type and mutants affected in
cell surface composition, including mutants deficient in the production of
Sortase A involved in the covalent attachment of 27 predicted surface proteins to
the cell wall peptidoglycan (ΔsrtA) and mutants deficient in the production of
capsular polysaccharides (CPS1-4, Δcps1-4). Surface adhesion and biofilm
formation studies revealed none of the imposed cell surface modifications to
affect the initial attachment of cells to polystyrene while biofilm formation
based on Crystal Violet (CV) staining was severely reduced in the ΔsrtA mutant
and significantly increased in mutants lacking the cps1 cluster, compared to the 
wild-type strain. Fluorescence microscopy analysis of biofilm samples pointed to 
a higher presence of extracellular DNA (eDNA) in cps1 mutants and this
corresponded with increased autolysis activity. Subsequent studies using Δacm2
and ΔlytA derivatives affected in lytic behaviour revealed reduced biofilm
formation measured by CV staining, confirming the relevance of lysis for the
build-up of the biofilm matrix with eDNA.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2018.02.013 
PMID: 29477805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

