
1. J Food Sci Technol. 2018 Mar;55(3):956-963. doi: 10.1007/s13197-017-3003-z. Epub 
2018 Feb 6.

Determination of the microbial flora in traditional İzmir Tulum cheeses by
Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis.

Karabey B(1), Eroglu D(1), Vural C(1), Ozdemir G(1), Yerlikaya O(2), Kinik O(2).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Biology, Basic and Industrial Microbiology Section, Faculty of 
Science, Ege University, Bornova, Izmir, Turkey.
(2)2Department of Dair Technology, Faculty of Agriculture, Ege University,
Bornova, Izmir, Turkey.

In this study, it was aimed to determine microbial flora members in three
traditional Tulum cheeses (C1, C2 and C3) produced in different villages and
settlement areas in İzmir, Turkey. For this purpose, culture depended and 16S
rRNA based culture independent methods were used. According to the results of
culture depended method, Lactococcus spp., Enterococcus spp., Staphylococcus
spp., Lactobacillus spp., Pediococcus spp. and yeast-mold were detected in all
samples at different levels. In order to determine and identify both of the
culturable and non-culturable microorganisms, denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis (DGGE) method was used. DGGE results have shown that there were
eight different dominant microorganisms (Streptococcus thermophilus, Lactococcus 
lactis subs. lactis, Streptococcus infantarius subs. infantarius, Lactobacillus
gallinarum, Streptococcus equinus, Enterococcus faecalis, Enterococcus faecium,
Lactococcus garvieae) in three regionally cheese samples. Further more, total
bacterial loads were monitored with real-time PCR (qPCR) method. According to the
results, 3.5 × 108, 3.8 × 108, 8.4 × 108 copy number of DNA was detected in C1,
C2 and C3 cheese samples, respectively. This study is the first description for
the dynamics of microbial composition of Izmir Tulum cheese after the production 
and brining processes.

DOI: 10.1007/s13197-017-3003-z 
PMCID: PMC5821651
PMID: 29487437 

