
1. BMC Physiol. 2018 Feb 27;18(1):3. doi: 10.1186/s12899-018-0037-z.

Deficiency of the BMP Type I receptor ALK3 partly protects mice from anemia of
inflammation.

Gallitz I(1), Lofruthe N(1), Traeger L(1), Bäumer N(2), Hoerr V(3)(4), Faber
C(4), Kuhlmann T(5), Müller-Tidow C(2)(6), Steinbicker AU(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care and Pain Medicine, University
Hospital Muenster, Albert-Schweitzer Campus 1, Building A1, 48149, Muenster,
Germany.
(2)Department of Medicine A, Molecular Haematology and Oncology, University
Hospital Muenster, 48149, Muenster, Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Jena University Hospital, 07747, Jena,
Germany.
(4)Department of Clinical Radiology, University Hospital Muenster, 48149,
Muenster, Germany.
(5)Institute for Neuropathology, University Hospital Muenster, 48149, Muenster,
Germany.
(6)Present Address: Department of Medicine V, Hematology, Oncology and
Rheumatology, Heidelberg University Hospital, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care and Pain Medicine, University
Hospital Muenster, Albert-Schweitzer Campus 1, Building A1, 48149, Muenster,
Germany. andrea.steinbicker@ukmuenster.de.

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory stimuli induce the hepatic iron regulatory hormone
hepcidin, which contributes to anaemia of inflammation (AI). Hepcidin expression 
is regulated by the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and the interleukin-6 (IL-6)
signalling pathways. Prior results indicate that the BMP type I receptor ALK3 is 
mainly involved in the acute inflammatory hepcidin induction four and 72 h after 
IL-6 administration. In this study, the role of ALK3 in a chronic model of
inflammation was investigated. The intact, heat-killed bacterium Brucella abortus
(BA) was used to analyse its effect on the development of inflammation and
hypoferremia in mice with hepatocyte-specific Alk3-deficiency (Alk3fl/fl;
Alb-Cre) compared to control (Alk3fl/fl) mice.
RESULTS: An iron restricted diet prevented development of the iron overload
phenotype in mice with hepatocyte-specific Alk3 deficiency. Regular diet leads to
iron overload and increased haemoglobin levels in these mice, which protects from
the development of AI per se. Fourteen days after BA injection Alk3fl/fl; Alb-Cre
mice presented milder anaemia (Hb 16.7 g/dl to 11.6 g/dl) compared to Alk3fl/fl
control mice (Hb 14.9 g/dl to 8.6 g/dl). BA injection led to an intact
inflammatory response in all groups of mice. In Alk3fl/fl; Alb-Cre mice,
SMAD1/5/8 phosphorylation was reduced after BA as well as after infection with
Staphylococcus aureus. The reduction of the SMAD1/5/8 signalling pathway due to
hepatocyte-specific Alk3 deficiency partly suppressed the induction of STAT3
signalling.
CONCLUSION: The results reveal in vivo, that 1) hepatocyte-specific Alk3
deficiency partly protects from AI, 2) the development of hypoferremia is partly 
dependent on ALK3, and 3) the ALK3/BMP/hepcidin axis may serve as a possible
therapeutic target to attenuate AI.

DOI: 10.1186/s12899-018-0037-z 
PMCID: PMC6389079
PMID: 29482530  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

