
1. Plasmid. 2018 Mar - May;96-97:7-12. doi: 10.1016/j.plasmid.2018.02.002. Epub 2018
Feb 24.

Compatibility and entry exclusion of IncA and IncC plasmids revisited: IncA and
IncC plasmids are compatible.

Ambrose SJ(1), Harmer CJ(2), Hall RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney,
New South Wales, Australia.
(2)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney,
New South Wales, Australia. Electronic address: christopher.harmer@sydney.edu.au.

In an early study, IncA and IncC plasmids that were reported to be compatible
were grouped as the "A-C complex" based on similarities and on strong entry
exclusion. However, recently, the term IncA/C has been used frequently to
describe plasmids belonging to both of these two groups. Granted that the
supporting data was not included in the original reports and that the consensus
iteron sequences have since been shown to be essentially identical, we have
addressed the question again. The original IncA plasmid, RA1, and the IncC
plasmid pRMH760, were introduced into the same cell by transformation, and were
found to be maintained stably for over 100 generations in the absence of
selection for either plasmid, i.e. they were compatible. We conclude that use of 
the term IncA/C for this important plasmid group is indeed incorrect and it
causes unnecessary confusion. Granted the importance of IncC plasmids in the
spread of antibiotic resistance genes, we recommend that use of the misleading
terms IncA/C, IncA/C1 and IncA/C2 should cease. In addition, RA1 and pRMH760 were
shown to each completely prevent entry of the other via conjugative transfer into
the cell they reside in.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plasmid.2018.02.002 
PMID: 29486211  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

