
1. Biochemistry. 2018 Mar 27;57(12):1880-1892. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b01299.
Epub 2018 Mar 9.

Structural and Kinetic Studies of the Potent Inhibition of Metallo-β-lactamases
by 6-Phosphonomethylpyridine-2-carboxylates.

Hinchliffe P(1), Tanner CA(2), Krismanich AP(2), Labbé G(2), Goodfellow VJ(2),
Marrone L(2), Desoky AY(3), Calvopiña K(1), Whittle EE(1), Zeng F(4), Avison
MB(1), Bols NC(4), Siemann S(5), Spencer J(1), Dmitrienko GI(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Cellular & Molecular Medicine , University of Bristol , Bristol BS8 
1TD , U.K.
(2)Department of Chemistry , University of Waterloo , Waterloo , Ontario , Canada
N2L 3G1.
(3)Department of Chemistry, College of Science , University of Hail , Saudi
Arabia.
(4)Department of Biology , University of Waterloo , Waterloo , Ontario , Canada
N2L 3G1.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , Laurentian University , Sudbury ,
Ontario , Canada P3E 2C6.
(6)School of Pharmacy , University of Waterloo , Waterloo , Ontario , Canada N2L 
3G1.

There are currently no clinically available inhibitors of metallo-β-lactamases
(MBLs), enzymes that hydrolyze β-lactam antibiotics and confer resistance to
Gram-negative bacteria. Here we present 6-phosphonomethylpyridine-2-carboxylates 
(PMPCs) as potent inhibitors of subclass B1 (IMP-1, VIM-2, and NDM-1) and B3 (L1)
MBLs. Inhibition followed a competitive, slow-binding model without an
isomerization step (IC50 values of 0.3-7.2 μM; Ki values of 0.03-1.5 μM). Minimum
inhibitory concentration assays demonstrated potentiation of β-lactam (Meropenem)
activity against MBL-producing bacteria, including clinical isolates, at
concentrations at which eukaryotic cells remain viable. Crystal structures
revealed unprecedented modes of binding of inhibitor to B1 (IMP-1) and B3 (L1)
MBLs. In IMP-1, binding does not replace the nucleophilic hydroxide, and the PMPC
carboxylate and pyridine nitrogen interact closely (2.3 and 2.7 Å, respectively) 
with the Zn2 ion of the binuclear metal site. The phosphonate group makes limited
interactions but is 2.6 Å from the nucleophilic hydroxide. Furthermore, the
presence of a water molecule interacting with the PMPC phosphonate and pyridine
N-C2 π-bond, as well as the nucleophilic hydroxide, suggests that the PMPC binds 
to the MBL active site as its hydrate. Binding is markedly different in L1, with 
the phosphonate displacing both Zn2, forming a monozinc enzyme, and the
nucleophilic hydroxide, while also making multiple interactions with the protein 
main chain and Zn1. The carboxylate and pyridine nitrogen interact with Ser221
and -223, respectively (3 Å distance). The potency, low toxicity, cellular
activity, and amenability to further modification of PMPCs indicate these and
similar phosphonate compounds can be further considered for future MBL inhibitor 
development.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b01299 
PMCID: PMC6007964
PMID: 29485857  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

