
1. J Med Chem. 2018 Apr 26;61(8):3309-3324. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b01691. Epub 
2018 Apr 9.

Fragment-Based Drug Discovery of Inhibitors of Phosphopantetheine
Adenylyltransferase from Gram-Negative Bacteria.

Moreau RJ(1), Skepper CK(1), Appleton BA(1), Blechschmidt A(1), Balibar CJ(1),
Benton BM(1), Drumm JE 3rd(1), Feng BY(1), Geng M(1), Li C(1), Lindvall MK(1),
Lingel A(1), Lu Y(1), Mamo M(1), Mergo W(1), Polyakov V(1), Smith TM(1), Takeoka 
K(1), Uehara K(1), Wang L(1), Wei JR(1), Weiss AH(1), Xie L(1), Xu W(1), Zhang
Q(1), de Vicente J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research , 5300 Chiron Way , Emeryville ,
California 94608 , United States.

The discovery and development of new antibiotics capable of curing infections due
to multidrug-resistant and pandrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria are a major
challenge with fundamental importance to our global healthcare system. Part of
our broad program at Novartis to address this urgent, unmet need includes the
search for new agents that inhibit novel bacterial targets. Here we report the
discovery and hit-to-lead optimization of new inhibitors of phosphopantetheine
adenylyltransferase (PPAT) from Gram-negative bacteria. Utilizing a
fragment-based screening approach, we discovered a number of unique scaffolds
capable of interacting with the pantetheine site of E. coli PPAT and inhibiting
enzymatic activity, including triazolopyrimidinone 6. Structure-based
optimization resulted in the identification of two lead compounds as selective,
small molecule inhibitors of bacterial PPAT: triazolopyrimidinone 53 and
azabenzimidazole 54 efficiently inhibited E. coli and P. aeruginosa PPAT and
displayed modest cellular potency against the efflux-deficient E. coli Î” tolC
mutant strain.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b01691 
PMID: 29498517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

