
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2018 Jul;84:241-249. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2018.02.017. Epub 2018 
Feb 27.

The complement factor H (CFH) and its related protein 2 (CFHR2) mediating immune 
response in large yellow croaker Larimichthys crocea.

Qi P(1), Wu B(2), Guo B(2), Zhang C(3), Xu K(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Research Center of Marine Facilities Aquaculture, Marine 
Science and Technology College, Zhejiang Ocean University, Zhoushan, 316004,
China. Electronic address: qpz2004@sina.com.
(2)National Engineering Research Center of Marine Facilities Aquaculture, Marine 
Science and Technology College, Zhejiang Ocean University, Zhoushan, 316004,
China.
(3)Zhoushan Aquatic Science Research Institute, Zhoushan, 316000, China.
(4)Scientific Observing and Experimental Station of Fishery Resources for Key
Fishing Grounds, MOA, Key Laboratory of Sustainable Utilization of Technology
Research, Marine Fisheries Research Institute of Zhejiang, Zhoushan, 316021,
China.

Complement is a complex innate immune surveillance system, playing a key role in 
host homeostasis, inflammation, and in the defense against pathogens. Complement 
regulators are crucial to prevent the injudicious production of these mediators
and potential injury to self tissues. Here, we identified the complement factor H
(CFH) and its related gene 2 (CFHR2) homologs from large yellow croaker
(Larimichthys crocea), named LcCfh and LcCfhr2, respectively. The deduced LcCfh
and LcCfhr2 proteins shared significant structural similarities and identified
codes for a polypeptide consisting of various numbers of highly conserved SCR
domains. LcCfh, LcCfhr1 and LcCfhr2 genes were detected in all examined tissues
with predominantly expressions in liver, spleen and kidney, and their expressions
all increased upon Vibrio alginolyticus challenge. In vitro assays showed that
recombinant LcCfh was likely to act as a cofactor of CFI and played a negative
regulation role in complement system, when recombinant LcCfhr2 seemed to play
mechanisms independent of the activity of CFH. Both recombinant LcCfh and LcCfhr2
took participate in inflammatory reaction despite of the inequal ability to
mediate pro-inflammation response. These data provide a new insight into the
functional activities of teleost complement system.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2018.02.017 
PMID: 29496498  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

