
1. Food Chem. 2018 Jul 1;253:211-220. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.01.166.

Synthesis and antibacterial activity of C2 or C5 modified and D ring rejiggered
canthin-6-one analogues.

Dai J(1), Dan W(1), Li N(1), Wang R(1), Zhang Y(1), Li N(1), Wang R(1), Wang
J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Natural Products & Chemical Biology, College of
Chemistry & Pharmacy, Northwest A&F University, 22 Xinong Road, Yangling 712100, 
Shaanxi, China(1).
(2)Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Natural Products & Chemical Biology, College of
Chemistry & Pharmacy, Northwest A&F University, 22 Xinong Road, Yangling 712100, 
Shaanxi, China(1); State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of
Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zu Chong Zhi Road, Zhangjiang
Hi-Tech Park, 201203 Shanghai, China(1). Electronic address:
wangjunru@nwafu.edu.cn.

Thirty-one canthin-6-one analogues, mainly including C2 or C5 or D ring modified 
canthin-6-ones, were designed and synthesized in order to study their
antibacterial activity and structure-activity relationships. The analogue 28 with
the highest bioactivity had a peak minimum inhibitory concentration of 4 μg/ml
and showed low cytotoxicity against L02 cells and good "drug-like" properties.
The antibacterial effect of 28 was characterized further by scanning electron
microscopy, cytoplasmic β-galactosidase leakage assay, molecular docking
evaluation, UV-visible analysis and isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC)
measurement. The results showed that 28 may exert its bactericidal effect by
damaging bacterial cell membranes and disrupting the function of DNA
topoisomerases, both of which could lead to rapid cell death.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2018.01.166 
PMID: 29502823  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

