
1. Immunol Cell Biol. 2018 Mar 5. doi: 10.1111/imcb.12034. [Epub ahead of print]

Differential surface phenotype and context-dependent reactivity of functionally
diverse NKT cells.

Cameron G(1)(2), Godfrey DI(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for
Infection and Immunity, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, 3000,
Australia.
(2)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular
Imaging, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 3010, Australia.

Natural Killer T (NKT) cells are a functionally diverse population that
recognizes lipid-based antigens in association with the antigen-presenting
molecule CD1d. Here, we define a technique to separate the functionally distinct 
thymic NKT1, NKT2 and NKT17 cell subsets by their surface expression of CD278
(ICOS) and the activation-associated glycoform of CD43, enabling the
investigation of subset-specific effector-functions. We report that all three
subsets express the transcription factor GATA-3 and the potential to produce IL-4
and IL-10 following activation. This questions the notion that NKT2 cells are the
predominant source of IL-4 within the NKT cell pool, and suggests that
IL-10-production may be more indicative of NKT cell plasticity than the existence
of a distinct regulatory lineage or subset. We also show that many NKT17 cells
are CD4+ and are biased toward Vβ8.3 TCR gene usage. Lastly, we demonstrate that 
the toll-like receptor (TLR) ligand lipopolysaccharide (LPS) can induce a NKT17
cell-biased response, even in the absence of exogenous antigen, and that
combining LPS with α-GalCer resulted in enhanced IL-17A-production, and reduced
levels of the immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10. This study provides a novel means
to examine the context-dependent reactivity of the functionally heterogeneous NKT
cell population and provides important new insight into the functional biology of
these subsets.

© 2018 Australasian Society for Immunology Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/imcb.12034 
PMID: 29504657 

