
1. Bioorg Chem. 2018 Apr;77:640-650. doi: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2018.01.041. Epub 2018
Feb 7.

Potent dialkyl substrate-product analogue inhibitors and inactivators of
α-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis by rational
design.

Pal M(1), Easton NM(1), Yaphe H(1), Bearne SL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, Canada; Department of Chemistry, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, Canada. Electronic address: sbearne@dal.ca.

Rational approaches for the design of enzyme inhibitors furnish powerful
strategies for developing pharmaceutical agents and tools for probing biological 
mechanisms. A new strategy for the development of gem-disubstituted
substrate-product analogues as inhibitors of racemases and epimerases is
elaborated using α-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase from Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(MtMCR) as a model enzyme. MtMCR catalyzes the epimerization at C2 of acyl-CoA
substrates, a key step in the metabolism of branched-chain fatty acids. Moreover,
the human enzyme is a potential target for the development of therapeutic agents 
directed against prostate cancer. We show that rationally designed,
N,N-dialkylcarbamoyl-CoA substrate-product analogues inactivate MtMCR. Binding
greatly exceeds that of the substrate, (S)-ibuprofenoyl-CoA, up to ∼250-fold and 
is proportional to the alkyl chain length (4-12 carbons) with the N,N-didecyl and
N,N-didodecyl species having competitive inhibition constants with values of
1.9 ± 0.2 μM and 0.42 ± 0.04 μM, respectively. The presence of two decyl chains
enhanced binding over a single decyl chain by ∼204-fold. Overall, the results
reveal that gem-disubstituted substrate-product analogues can yield extremely
potent inhibitors of an epimerase with a capacious active site.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2018.01.041 
PMID: 29502025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

