
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2019 Feb;26(5):4171-4179. doi:
10.1007/s11356-018-1592-3. Epub 2018 Mar 2.

Urban wastewater treatment by using Ag/ZnO and Pt/TiO2 photocatalysts.

Murcia Mesa JJ(1), Arias Bolivar LG(2), Sarmiento HAR(2), Martínez EGÁ(2), Páez
CJ(3)(4), Lara MA(3), Santos JAN(3), Del Carmen Hidalgo López M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Catálisis, Escuela de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Pedagógica y
Tecnológica de Colombia UPTC, Avenida Central del Norte, Tunja, Boyacá, Colombia.
jjuliejoseane@hotmail.com.
(2)Grupo de Catálisis, Escuela de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Pedagógica y
Tecnológica de Colombia UPTC, Avenida Central del Norte, Tunja, Boyacá, Colombia.
(3)Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Sevilla (ICMS), Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas CSIC, Universidad de Sevilla, Américo Vespucio 49,
41092, Seville, Spain.
(4)Departamento de Química, Universidad de Tolima, Barrio Santa Elena, Ibague,
Colombia.

In this study, the treatment of wastewater coming from a river highly polluted
with domestic and industrial effluents was evaluated. For this purpose, series of
photocatalysts obtained by ZnO and TiO2 modification were evaluated. The effect
of metal addition and Ti precursor (in the case of the titania series) over the
physicochemical and photocatalytic properties of the materials obtained was also 
analyzed. The evaluation of the photocatalytic activity showed that semiconductor
modification and precursor used in the materials synthesis are important factors 
influencing the physicochemical and therefore the photocatalytic properties of
the materials obtained. The water samples analyzed in the present work were taken
from a highly polluted river, and it was found that the effectiveness of the
photocatalytic treatment increases when the reaction time increases and for both,
wastewater samples and isolated Escherichia coli strain follow the next order
Pt/TiO2 << ZnO. It was also observed that biochemical and chemical demand oxygen 
and turbidity significantly decrease after treatment, thus indicating that
photocatalysis is a non-selective technology, which can lead to recover
wastewater containing different pollutants.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-018-1592-3 
PMID: 29500588  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

