
1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2018 Jan;108:114-117. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2017.11.010. Epub
2017 Nov 24.

Killer (FASL regulatory) B cells are present during latent TB and are induced by 
BCG stimulation in participants with and without latent tuberculosis.

van Rensburg IC(1), Loxton AG(2).

Author information: 
(1)SA MRC Centre for TB Research, DST/NRF Centre of Excellence for Biomedical
Tuberculosis Research, Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty 
of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, PO Box 241, Cape Town, 
8000, South Africa.
(2)SA MRC Centre for TB Research, DST/NRF Centre of Excellence for Biomedical
Tuberculosis Research, Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty 
of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, PO Box 241, Cape Town, 
8000, South Africa. Electronic address: GL2@sun.ac.za.

Regulatory B cells (Bregs) have been shown to be present during several disease
states. The phenotype of the cells is not completely defined and the function of 
these cells differ between disease. The presence of FASL expressing (killer) B
cells during latent and successfully treated TB disease have been shown but
whether these cells are similar to regulatory B cells remain unclear. We assessed
the receptor expression of FASL/IL5 (killer B cells), CD24/CD38 (regulatory B
cells) on whole peripheral blood of participants with untreated active TB and
healthy controls. We then isolated B cells from a second cohort of M.tb exposed
(Quantiferon (QFN) positive) and unexposed (Quantiferon negative) HIV negative
participants, and evaluated the frequency of killer B cells induced following
stimulation with BCG and/or CD40 and IL5. Our data reveal no difference in the
expression on CD24 and CD38 between participants with active TB and the controls.
There was also no difference in the frequency of regulatory B cells measured in
the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) fraction between latent TB and
uninfected controls. We did however notice that regulatory B cells (CD24hiCD38hi)
population express the FASL receptor. The expression of killer B cell phenotype
(CD178+IL5RA+) was significantly higher in controls compared to those with active
TB disease (1,06% vs 0,455%). Furthermore, we found that BCG restimulation
significantly induced the FASL/IL5RA B cells but this was only evident in the QFN
positive group. Our data suggest that both regulatory and killer B cells are
present during latent and active TB disease but that the frequency of these
populations are increased during latent disease. We also show that the
FASL+IL5RA+ B killer B cells are induced in latent TB infection following BCG
restimulation but whether these cells are indicative of protection remains
unclear.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2017.11.010 
PMID: 29523310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

