
1. Environ Microbiol Rep. 2018 Jun;10(3):283-292. doi: 10.1111/1758-2229.12637. Epub
2018 Apr 10.

Two enzymes of the acetone degradation pathway of Desulfococcus biacutus:
coenzyme B12 -dependent 2-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA mutase and 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA
dehydrogenase.

Frey J(1)(2), Schneider F(3), Huhn T(3)(4), Spiteller D(1)(4), Schink B(1)(4),
Schleheck D(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, D-78464 Konstanz, Germany.
(2)Graduate School Biological Sciences, University of Konstanz, D-78464 Konstanz,
Germany.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Konstanz, D-78464 Konstanz, Germany.
(4)Konstanz Research School Chemical Biology, University of Konstanz, D-78464
Konstanz, Germany.

Degradation of acetone by the sulfate-reducing bacterium Desulfococcus biacutus
involves an acetone-activation reaction different from that used by aerobic or
nitrate-reducing bacteria, because the small energy budget of sulfate-reducing
bacteria does not allow for major expenditures into ATP-consuming carboxylation
reactions. In the present study, an inducible coenzyme B12 -dependent conversion 
of 2-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA to 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA was demonstrated in cell-free 
extracts of acetone-grown D. biacutus cells, together with a NAD+ -dependent
oxidation of 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA to acetoacetyl-CoA. Genes encoding two mutase
subunits and a dehydrogenase, which were found previously to be strongly induced 
during growth with acetone, were heterologously expressed in E. coli. The
activities of the purified recombinant proteins matched with the inducible
activities observed in cell-free extracts of acetone-grown D. biacutus: proteins 
(IMG locus tags) DebiaDRAFT_04573 and 04574 constituted a B12 -dependent
2-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA/3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA mutase, and DebiaDRAFT_04571 was a
3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase. Hence, these enzymes play key roles in the
degradation of acetone and define an involvement of CoA esters in the pathway.
Further, the involvement of 2-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA strongly indicates that the
carbonyl-C2 of acetone is added, most likely, to formyl-CoA through a
TDP-dependent enzyme that is co-induced in acetone-grown cells and is encoded in 
the same gene cluster as the identified mutase and dehydrogenase.

Â© 2018 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1758-2229.12637 
PMID: 29528562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

