
1. J Nat Prod. 2018 Apr 27;81(4):942-948. doi: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.7b01054. Epub
2018 Mar 19.

Antibacterial Muraymycins from Mutant Strains of Streptomyces sp. NRRL 30471.

Cui Z, Wang X(1), Koppermann S(2), Thorson JS, Ducho C(2), Van Lanen SG.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Functional Substance of Chinese Medicine, School of
Pharmacy , Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine , Nanjing 210023 , People's
Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry , Saarland
University Campus C2 3 , 66123 Saarbrücken , Germany.

Muraymycins are nucleoside antibiotics isolated from Streptomyces sp. NRRL 30471 
and several mutant strains thereof that were generated by random, chemical
mutagenesis. Reinvestigation of two mutant strains using new media conditions led
to the isolation of three new muraymycin congeners, named B8, B9, and C6 (1-3),
as well as a known muraymycin, C1. Structures of the compounds were elucidated by
HRMS and 1D and 2D NMR spectroscopic analyses. Complete 2D NMR assignments for
the known muraymycin C1 are also provided for the first time. Compounds 1 and 2, 
which differ from other muraymycins by having an elongated, terminally branched
fatty acid side chain, had picomolar IC50 values against Staphylococcus aureus
and Aquifex aeolicus MraY and showed good antibacterial activity against S.
aureus (MIC = 2 and 6 μg/mL, respectively) and Escherichia coli Δ tolC (MIC = 4
and 2 μg/mL, respectively). Compound 3, which is characterized by an N-acetyl
modification of the primary amine of the dissacharide core that is shared among
nearly all of the reported muraymycin congeners, greatly reduced its inhibitory
and antibacterial activity compared to nonacylated muraymycin C1, which possibly 
indicates this modification is used for self-resistance.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.7b01054 
PMCID: PMC6434714
PMID: 29553733  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

