
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Apr 3;115(14):3538-3546. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1802191115. Epub 2018 Mar 19.

Construction and evolution of an Escherichia coli strain relying on nonoxidative 
glycolysis for sugar catabolism.

Lin PP(1), Jaeger AJ(1), Wu TY(1), Xu SC(1), Lee AS(1), Gao F(1), Chen PW(1),
Liao JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095.
(2)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, 115 Taipei, Taiwan
liaoj@gate.sinica.edu.tw.

The Embden-Meyerhoff-Parnas (EMP) pathway, commonly known as glycolysis,
represents the fundamental biochemical infrastructure for sugar catabolism in
almost all organisms, as it provides key components for biosynthesis, energy
metabolism, and global regulation. EMP-based metabolism synthesizes three-carbon 
(C3) metabolites before two-carbon (C2) metabolites and must emit one CO2 in the 
synthesis of the C2 building block, acetyl-CoA, a precursor for many industrially
important products. Using rational design, genome editing, and evolution, here we
replaced the native glycolytic pathways in Escherichia coli with the previously
designed nonoxidative glycolysis (NOG), which bypasses initial C3 formation and
directly generates stoichiometric amounts of C2 metabolites. The resulting
strain, which contains 11 gene overexpressions, 10 gene deletions by design, and 
more than 50 genomic mutations (including 3 global regulators) through evolution,
grows aerobically in glucose minimal medium but can ferment anaerobically to
products with nearly complete carbon conservation. We confirmed that the strain
metabolizes glucose through NOG by 13C tracer experiments. This redesigned E.
coli strain represents a different approach for carbon catabolism and may serve
as a useful platform for bioproduction.

Copyright Â© 2018 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1802191115 
PMCID: PMC5889684
PMID: 29555759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

