
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2018 Aug;85:10-17. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2018.03.008. Epub 2018
Mar 14.

Functional characterization of the clade B serine protease inhibitor SerpinB3 in 
the pacific white shrimp Litopenaeus vannamei.

Liu Y(1), Hou F(2), Qian Z(3), Liu X(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular 
Biology for Agriculture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100,
China; Ministry of Education and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Children's
Environmental Health, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China. Electronic address: liuyuan198808@163.com.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular 
Biology for Agriculture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100,
China.
(3)School of Resource & Environmental Management, Guizhou University of Finance
and Economics, Guizhou 550025, China.
(4)College of Animal Science and Technology, Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular 
Biology for Agriculture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100,
China. Electronic address: liuxiaolin@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

The clade B serpins contain predominantly intracellular proteins and were
reported to be involved in multiple biological functions, especially in
inflammation and immune system function. However, studies about the role of the
invertebrate intracellular serpins in immune responses were still deficient.
Therefore, this paper focused on the functional characterization of LvserpinB3 in
white shrimp Litopenaeus vannamei. The pAc5.1-LvserpinB3-EGFP vector was
transfected into Drosophila Schneider 2 (S2) cells to analyze the subcellular
localization of LvserpinB3, and fluorescent imaging showed that LvserpinB3 were
mainly localized to the mitochondria. Knockdown LvserpinB3 significantly
increased the mRNA expression of LvSpätzle4 (LvSpz4) and LvPenaeidin4 (LvPen4)
upon Vibrio anguillarum infection. Moreover, GST-Pull down analysis showed that
LvserpinB3 could interact with serine protease 1 (LvSP1). The recombinant
LvserpinB3 (rLvserpinB3) protein exhibited inhibitory roles on the proteolytic
activity of trypsin, whereas, mutation at the P1 residue led to the disfunction
of the inhibitor. Furthermore, the LvserpinB3 and trypsin mixture were incubated 
with Anti-SERPINB3 antibodies, and a peptide band with an apparent molecular
weight of 30 kDa were detected by western blot analysis. These findings might be 
valuable in understanding the potential role for LvserpinB3 in inhibiting the
target proteases during shrimp immune defences.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2018.03.008 
PMID: 29550271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

