
1. Br J Nutr. 2018 Apr;119(7):748-758. doi: 10.1017/S0007114518000399.

Effect of nutritional supplement on bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells
from aplastic anaemia.

Luo S(1), Chen Y(2), Zhao L(1), Qi X(1), Miao X(1), Zhou H(3), Jia L(1).

Author information: 
(1)1College of Laboratory Medicine,Dalian Medical University,Dalian
116044,Liaoning Province,People's Republic of China.
(2)3Department of Radiation Oncology,the Second Affiliated Hospital of Dalian
Medical University,Dalian 116027,Liaoning Province,People's Republic of China.
(3)4Department of Microbiology,Dalian Medical University,Dalian 116044,Liaoning
Province,People's Republic of China.

Aplastic anaemia (AA) is characterised by pancytopenia resulting from a marked
reduction in haemopoietic stem cells (HSC). The regulation of haemopoiesis
depends on the interaction between HSC and various cells of the bone marrow (BM) 
microenvironment, including BM-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (BMSC). The
purpose of this study was to analyse the biological effect of nutritional
supplement (NS), a dietary supplement consisting of thirty-six compounds: amino
acids, nucleotides, vitamins and micronutrients on the BMSC of AA rats. The AA
rat model was established by irradiating X-ray (2路5 Gy) and intraperitoneal
injections of cyclophosphamide (35 mg/kg; Sigma) and chloramphenicol (35 mg/kg;
Sigma). Then AA rats were fed with NS in a dose-dependent manner (2266路95,
1511路3, 1057路91 mg/kg d) by intragastric administration. The effect of NS on the 
BMSC of AA rats was analysed. As compared with AA rats, NS treatment
significantly improved these peripheral blood parameters and stimulated the
proliferation of total femoral nucleated cells. NS treatment affected
proliferative behaviour of BMSC and suppressed BMSC differentiation to
adipocytes. Furthermore, NS treatment of AA rats accelerated osteogenic
differentiation of BMSC and enhanced bone mineral density. Co-incubation of HSC
with mesenchymal stromal cells and serum from AA rats subjected to high-dose NS
markedly improved the yield of CD34+cells. Protein microarray analysis revealed
that there were eleven differentially expressed proteins in the NS group compared
with the AA rat group. The identified specific NS might be implicated in
rehabilitation of BMSC in AA rats, suggesting their potential of nutritional
support in AA treatment.

DOI: 10.1017/S0007114518000399 
PMID: 29569543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

