
1. PLoS One. 2018 Mar 26;13(3):e0194662. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0194662.
eCollection 2018.

Neisseria Heparin Binding Antigen is targeted by the human alternative pathway
C3-convertase.

Di Fede M(1), Biagini M(1), Cartocci E(1), Parillo C(1), Greco A(1), Martinelli
M(1), Marchi S(1), Pezzicoli A(1), Delany I(1), Rossi Paccani S(1).

Author information: 
(1)GSK, Siena, Italy.

Neisserial Heparin Binding Antigen (NHBA) is a surface-exposed lipoprotein
specific for Neisseria and constitutes one of the three main protein antigens of 
the Bexsero vaccine. Meningococcal and human proteases, cleave NHBA protein
upstream or downstream of a conserved Arg-rich region, respectively. The cleavage
results in the release of the C-terminal portion of the protein. The C-terminal
fragment originating from the processing of meningococcal proteases, referred to 
as C2 fragment, exerts a toxic effect on endothelial cells altering the
endothelial permeability. In this work, we reported that recombinant C2 fragment 
has no influence on the integrity of human airway epithelial cell monolayers,
consistent with previous findings showing that Neisseria meningitidis traverses
the epithelial barrier without disrupting the junctional structures. We showed
that epithelial cells constantly secrete proteases responsible for a rapid
processing of C2 fragment, generating a new fragment that does not contain the
Arg-rich region, a putative docking domain reported to be essential for
C2-mediated toxic effect. Moreover, we found that the C3-convertase of the
alternative complement pathway is one of the proteases responsible for this
processing. Overall, our data provide new insights on the cleavage of NHBA
protein during meningococcal infection. NHBA cleavage may occur at different
stages of the infection, and it likely has a different role depending on the
environment the bacterium is interacting with.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0194662 
PMCID: PMC5868813
PMID: 29579105  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

