
1. Exp Ther Med. 2018 Apr;15(4):3989-3996. doi: 10.3892/etm.2018.5904. Epub 2018 Feb
28.

Gene expression analysis for pneumonia caused by Gram-positive bacterial
infection.

Jia R(1), Yang J(2), Cui Y(1), Guo D(3), Li T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Cangzhou Central Hospital, Cangzhou, Hebei 061001,
P.R. China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Cangzhou Central Hospital, Cangzhou, Hebei
061001, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Cangzhou Central Hospital, Cangzhou, Hebei 
061001, P.R. China.
(4)Teaching Office, Cangzhou Central Hospital, Cangzhou, Hebei 061001, P.R.
China.

Gram-positive bacteria are an important pathogenic factor for bacterial
pneumonia. The aim of the present study was to identify the differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) and to explore their associated pathways or expression
patterns. Expression profiling of gene arrays from two independent datasets,
GSE6269 and GSE35716, were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus. The DEGs 
between peripheral blood samples from healthy controls and patients with
bacterial pneumonia were identified. The Functional Annotation Tool in the
Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery was used to
annotate and analyze the DEGs in Gene Ontology (GO) terms and Kyoto Encyclopedia 
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways. Multiple proteins were used to generate a
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. A total of 624 (621 annotated) were
identified in the GSE6269 dataset and 398 (295 annotated) DEGs were identified in
the GSE35716 dataset between pneumonia and healthy samples. A total of 40 common 
DEGs were identified between the 2 datasets, including 4 downregulated and 32
upregulated DEGs. In the GO category cellular component, melanosome was highly
enriched among 11 genes; in the category biological process, the three most
enriched items were regulation of ruffle assembly, negative regulation of calcium
ion transport and necroptotic process. In the KEGG terms, only the nuclear
factor-ÎºB signaling pathway (Homo sapiens 04064) was significantly enriched. In
the PPI network, five genes (CCL4, TIMP metallopeptidase inhibitor 1,
intercellular adhesion molecule 1, plasminogen activator, urokinase receptor and 
cathepsin B) were identified to have a high degree of interaction with other
DEGs. In conclusion, these five genes may represent key genes associated with
pneumonia caused by Gram-positive bacteria. All of these results provide primary 
information and basic knowledge to understand the mechanisms of the pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2018.5904 
PMCID: PMC5863608
PMID: 29581747 

