
1. Stem Cells Dev. 2018 Apr 15;27(8):566-576. doi: 10.1089/scd.2017.0197. Epub 2018 
Mar 27.

Regulation of Constitutive Tip110 Expression in Human Cord Blood CD34+ Cells
Through Selective Usage of the Proximal and Distal Polyadenylation Sites Within
the 3'Untranslated Region.

Liu Y(1), Huang X(2), Timani KA(1), Broxmeyer HE(2), He JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, University of North Texas Health Science Center , Fort Worth, Texas.
(2)2 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University ,
Indianapolis, Indiana.

Tip110 plays important roles for stem cell pluripotency and hematopoiesis.
However, little is known about the regulatory mechanisms of Tip110 expression in 
this process. In this study, we first showed that constitutive Tip110 expression 
was cell proliferation and differentiation dependent and self-regulated in both
human cord blood CD34+ cells. Using a series of molecular techniques, we found
that ectopic Tip110 expression led to increased constitutive Tip110 expression
through its 3'-untranslated region (3'UTR), specifically through preferential
usage of proximal polyadenylation sites within its 3'UTR in cells, including
human cord blood CD34+ cells, which indeed led to an increased number of CD34+
cells during differentiation of those cells. Lastly, we showed that Tip110
protein interacted with cleavage stimulation factor 64 (CstF64) protein and that 
more CstF64 was recruited to the promixal polyadenylation site than the distal
polyadenylation site within its 3'UTR. These finding together demonstrates that
constitutive Tip110 expression is regulated, at least in part, through its
interaction with CstF64, recruitment of CstF64 to, and selective usage of those
two polyadenylation sites within its 3'UTR.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.2017.0197 
PMID: 29583087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

