
1. J Int Med Res. 2018 Jun;46(6):2461-2465. doi: 10.1177/0300060518764186. Epub 2018
Mar 27.

Acute prevertebral abscess secondary to intradiscal oxygen-ozone chemonucleolysis
for treatment of a cervical disc herniation.

Yang CS(1), Zhang LJ(1), Sun ZH(2), Yang L(1), Shi FD(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Neurology, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin Medical
University General Hospital, Tianjin, China.
(2)2 Department of Radiology, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital
Tianjin, China.
(3)3 Department of Neurology, Barrow Neurological Institute, St. Joseph's
Hospital and Medical Center, Phoenix, AZ, USA.

Objective We herein present a case involving a prevertebral abscess complicated
by a spinal epidural abscess (SEA) secondary to intradiscal oxygen-ozone
chemonucleolysis for treatment of a cervical disc herniation. Methods A
67-year-old woman with a history of intradiscal oxygen-ozone chemonucleolysis
developed numbness and weakness in her right upper and bilateral lower
extremities followed by urinary retention. Her symptoms did not respond to
intravenous antibiotics alone. Magnetic resonance imaging of the cervical region 
revealed an extensive SEA anterior to the spinal cord, spinal cord myelopathy due
to anterior compression by the lesion, and a prevertebral abscess extending from 
C2 to T1. She underwent surgical drainage and irrigation. Results The patient was
successfully treated with surgical drainage and systemic antibiotic therapy
without kyphosis. Streptococcus intermedius was detected within the abscess. All 
clinical symptoms except for the sensory deficit in the left leg were relieved.
Conclusions The safety of intradiscal oxygen-ozone therapy requires further
assessment. High-dose intravenous antibiotics should be initiated empirically at 
the earliest possible stage of prevertebral and epidural abscesses. Surgical
drainage may be a rational treatment choice for patients with a prevertebral
abscess complicated by an SEA and spinal cord myelopathy.

DOI: 10.1177/0300060518764186 
PMCID: PMC6023037
PMID: 29584512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

