
1. Front Microbiol. 2018 Mar 9;9:375. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00375. eCollection
2018.

Factors Involved in the Persistence of a Shiga Toxin-Producing Escherichia coli
O157:H7 Strain in Bovine Feces and Gastro-Intestinal Content.

Segura A(1), Auffret P(1), Bibbal D(2), Bertoni M(1), Durand A(1), Jubelin G(1), 
Kérourédan M(2), Brugère H(2), Bertin Y(1), Forano E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, UMR-MEDIS, Université Clermont 
Auvergne, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(2)IRSD, Institut National de la Santé Et de la Recherche Médicale, Institut
National de la Recherche Agronomique, ENVT, UPS, Université de Toulouse,
Toulouse, France.

Healthy cattle are the primary reservoir for O157:H7 Shiga toxin-producing E.
coli responsible for human food-borne infections. Because farm environment acts
as a source of cattle contamination, it is important to better understand the
factors controlling the persistence of E. coli O157:H7 outside the bovine gut.
The E. coli O157:H7 strain MC2, identified as a persistent strain in French
farms, possessed the characteristics required to cause human infections and
genetic markers associated with clinical O157:H7 isolates. Therefore, the
capacity of E. coli MC2 to survive during its transit through the bovine
gastro-intestinal tract (GIT) and to respond to stresses potentially encountered 
in extra-intestinal environments was analyzed. E. coli MC2 survived in rumen
fluids, grew in the content of posterior digestive compartments and survived in
bovine feces at 15°C predicting a successful transit of the bacteria along the
bovine GIT and its persistence outside the bovine intestine. E. coli MC2
possessed the genetic information encoding 14 adherence systems including
adhesins with properties related to colonization of the bovine intestine (F9
fimbriae, EhaA and EspP autotransporters, HCP pilus, FdeC adhesin) reflecting the
capacity of the bacteria to colonize different segments of the bovine GIT. E.
coli MC2 was also a strong biofilm producer when incubated in fecal samples at
low temperature and had a greater ability to form biofilms than the bovine
commensal E. coli strain BG1. Furthermore, in contrast to BG1, E. coli MC2
responded to temperature stresses by inducing the genes cspA and htrA during its 
survival in bovine feces at 15°C. E. coli MC2 also activated genes that are part 
of the GhoT/GhoS, HicA/HicB and EcnB/EcnA toxin/antitoxin systems involved in the
response of E. coli to nutrient starvation and chemical stresses. In summary, the
large number of colonization factors known to bind to intestinal epithelium and
to biotic or abiotic surfaces, the capacity to produce biofilms and to activate
stress fitness genes in bovine feces could explain the persistence of E. coli MC2
in the farm environment.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00375 
PMCID: PMC5854682
PMID: 29593666 

