
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2018 May 15;499(3):570-576. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.03.191. Epub 2018 Apr 9.

Influence of acute promyelocytic leukemia therapeutic drugs on nuclear pore
complex density and integrity.

Lång A(1), Øye A(2), Eriksson J(3), Rowe AD(4), Lång E(5), Bøe SO(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Department of Microbiology, Oslo
University Hospital, Sognsvannsveien 20, 0372 Oslo, Norway; Institute of Clinical
Medicine, University of Oslo, Postboks 1171 Blindern, 0318 Oslo, Norway.
Electronic address: anna.lang@rr-research.no.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Department of Microbiology, Oslo
University Hospital, Sognsvannsveien 20, 0372 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address:
alexander.oye@studmed.uio.no.
(3)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Department of Microbiology, Oslo
University Hospital, Sognsvannsveien 20, 0372 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address:
jens.eriksson@imbim.uu.se.
(4)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Department of Microbiology, Oslo
University Hospital, Sognsvannsveien 20, 0372 Oslo, Norway; Norwegian National
Unit for Newborn Screening, Division for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo 
University Hospital, Sognsvannsveien 20, 0372 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address:
alexander.rowe@rr-research.no.
(5)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Department of Microbiology, Oslo
University Hospital, Sognsvannsveien 20, 0372 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address:
emma.lang@rr-research.no.
(6)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Department of Microbiology, Oslo
University Hospital, Sognsvannsveien 20, 0372 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address:
stig.ove.boe@rr-research.no.

During cell division, a large number of nuclear proteins are released into the
cytoplasm due to nuclear envelope breakdown. Timely nuclear import of these
proteins following exit from mitosis is critical for establishment of the G1
nuclear environment. Dysregulation of post-mitotic nuclear import may affect the 
fate of newly divided stem or progenitor cells and may lead to cancer. Acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a malignant disorder that involves a defect in
blood cell differentiation at the promyelocytic stage. Recent studies suggest
that pharmacological concentrations of the APL therapeutic drugs, all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide (ATO), affect post-mitotic nuclear
import of the APL-associated oncoprotein PML/RARA. In the present study, we have 
investigated the possibility that ATRA and ATO affect post-mitotic nuclear import
through interference with components of the nuclear import machinery. We observe 
reduced density and impaired integrity of nuclear pore complexes after ATRA
and/or ATO exposure. Using a post-mitotic nuclear import assay, we demonstrate
distinct import kinetics among different nuclear import pathways while nuclear
import rates were similar in the presence or absence of APL therapeutic drugs.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.03.191 
PMID: 29596829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

