
1. Enzyme Microb Technol. 2018 Jun;113:29-36. doi: 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2018.02.007. 
Epub 2018 Feb 21.

Characterization of regioselective flavonoid O-methyltransferase from the
Streptomyces sp. KCTC 0041BP.

Darsandhari S(1), Dhakal D(1), Shrestha B(1), Parajuli P(1), Seo JH(1), Kim
TS(1), Sohng JK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Biochemical Engineering, Sun Moon University,
70 Sun Moon-ro 221, Tangjeong-myeon, Asan-si, Chungnam 31460, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Life Science and Biochemical Engineering, Sun Moon University,
70 Sun Moon-ro 221, Tangjeong-myeon, Asan-si, Chungnam 31460, Republic of Korea; 
Department of BT-Convergent Pharmaceutical Engineering, Sun Moon University, 70
Sun Moon-ro 221, Tangjeong-myeon, Asan-si, Chungnam 31460, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: sohng@sunmoon.ac.kr.

A flavonoid comprises polyphenol compounds with pronounced antiviral,
antioxidant, anticarcinogenic, and anti-inflammatory effects. The flavonoid
modification by methylation provides a greater stability and improved
pharmacokinetic properties. The methyltransferase from plants or microorganisms
is responsible for such substrate modifications in a regiospecific or a
promiscuous manner. GerMIII, originally characterized as a putative
methyltransferase in a dihydrochalcomycin biosynthetic gene cluster of the
Streptomyces sp. KCTC 0041BP, was tested for the methylation of the substrates of
diverse chemical structures. Among the various tested substrates, flavonoids
emerged as the favored substrates for methylation. Further, among the flavonoids,
quercetin is the most favorable substrate, followed by luteolin, myricetin,
quercetin 3-O-β-D-glucoside, and fisetin, while only a single product was formed 
in each case. The products were confirmed by HPLC and mass-spectrometry analyses.
A detailed NMR spectrometric analysis of the methylated quercetin and luteolin
derivatives confirmed the regiospecific methylation at the 4'-OH position.
Modeling and molecular docking provided further insight regarding the most
favorable mechanism and substrate architecture for the enzymatic catalysis.
Accordingly, a double bond between the C2 and the C3 and a single-ring-appended
conjugate-hydroxyl group are crucial for the favorable enzymatic conversions of
the GerMIII catalysis. Thus, in this study, the enzymatic properties of GerMIII
and a mechanistic overview of the regiospecific modification that was implemented
for the acceptance of quercetin as the most favorable substrate are presented.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2018.02.007 
PMID: 29602384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

