
1. Curr Opin Hematol. 2018 Jul;25(4):245-252. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000429.

Enhancing human cord blood hematopoietic stem cell engraftment by targeting
nuclear hormone receptors.

Guo B(1), Huang X, Broxmeyer HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) is a
life-saving therapy for hematological and nonhematological diseases. Cord blood
is a source of transplantable hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), but limited
numbers of HSCs in single cord blood units, which may cause delayed neutrophil,
platelet, and immune cell reconstitution, is a major problem for efficient
transplantation. Ex-vivo expansion and enhanced homing of cord blood HSC may
overcome this disadvantage and improve its long-term engraftment. Here, we
discuss the role of nuclear hormone receptors signaling in human cord blood HSC
engraftment.
RECENT FINDINGS: Antagonizing retinoid acid receptor (RAR) signaling promotes
human HSC expansion and increases myeloid cell production. Cord blood CD34 cells 
expanded by SR1 promotes efficient myeloid recovery after transplantation
compared with control groups, and leads to successful engraftment. Short-term
treatment of glucocorticoids enhances homing and long-term engraftment of human
HSCs and HPCs in NSG mice. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPARγ)
antagonism expands human HSCs and HPCs by preventing differentiation and
enhancing glucose metabolism. These findings demonstrate that nuclear hormone
receptor signaling components might be promising targets for improving human cord
blood HCT.
SUMMARY: Better understanding of molecular mechanisms underlying human HSC
expansion and homing mediated by nuclear hormone receptor signaling pathways will
facilitate enhanced HCT efficacy.

DOI: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000429 
PMCID: PMC6152906
PMID: 29608487  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

