
1. Rev Argent Microbiol. 2019 Jan - Mar;51(1):39-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ram.2017.12.002.
Epub 2018 Mar 28.

Monitoring the degradation capability of novel haloalkaliphilic tributyltin
chloride (TBTCl) resistant bacteria from butyltin-polluted site.

Hassan HA(1), Dawah SE(2), El-Sheekh MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Biotechnology, Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology Research, Institute, University of Sadat City, Sadat City, Egypt;
Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science and Humanity Studies at
Al-Quwayiyah, Shaqra University, Al-Quwayiyah 11971, Saudi Arabia. Electronic
address: hamdy.hassan@gebri.usc.edu.eg.
(2)Botany Department, Faculty of Science, Tanta University, Tanta 31527, Egypt.

Tributyltin (TBT) is recognized as a major environmental problem at a global
scale. Haloalkaliphilic tributyltin (TBT)-degrading bacteria may be a key factor 
in the remediation of TBT polluted sites. In this work, three haloalkaliphilic
bacteria strains were isolated from a TBT-contaminated site in the Mediterranean 
Sea. After analysis of the 16S rRNA gene sequences the isolates were identified
as Sphingobium sp. HS1, Stenotrophomonas chelatiphaga HS2 and Rhizobium borbori
HS5. The optimal growth conditions for biodegradation of TBT by the three strains
were pH 9 and 7% (w/v) salt concentration. S. chelatiphaga HS2 was the most
effective TBT degrader and has the ability to transform most TBT into dibutyltin 
and monobutyltin (DBT and MBT). A gene was amplified from strain HS2 and
identified as TBTB-permease-like, that encodes an ArsB-permease. A reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction analysis in the HS2 strain confirmed that
the TBTB-permease-like gene contributes to TBT resistance. The three novel
haloalkaliphilic TBT degraders have never been reported previously.

Copyright © 2018 Asociación Argentina de Microbiología. Publicado por Elsevier
España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ram.2017.12.002 
PMID: 29605458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

