
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2018 Apr;164(4):600-613. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000615.

Polyamines are required for normal growth in Sinorhizobium meliloti.

Becerra-Rivera VA(1), Bergström E(2), Thomas-Oates J(2), Dunn MF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Genómica Funcional de Procariotes, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos 62210, Mexico.
(2)Centre of Excellence in Mass Spectrometry and Department of Chemistry,
University of York, Heslington, York, YO10 5DD, UK.

Polyamines (PAs) are ubiquitous polycations derived from basic l-amino acids
whose physiological roles are still being defined. Their biosynthesis and
functions in nitrogen-fixing rhizobia such as Sinorhizobium meliloti have not
been extensively investigated. Thin layer chromatographic and mass spectrometric 
analyses showed that S. meliloti Rm8530 produces the PAs, putrescine (Put),
spermidine (Spd) and homospermidine (HSpd), in their free forms and norspermidine
(NSpd) in a form bound to macromolecules. The S. meliloti genome encodes two
putative ornithine decarboxylases (ODC) for Put synthesis. Activity assays with
the purified enzymes showed that ODC2 (SMc02983) decarboxylates both ornithine
and lysine. ODC1 (SMa0680) decarboxylates only ornithine. An odc1 mutant was
similar to the wild-type in ODC activity, PA production and growth. In comparison
to the wild-type, an odc2 mutant had 45 % as much ODC activity and its growth
rates were reduced by 42, 14 and 44 % under non-stress, salt stress or acid
stress conditions, respectively. The odc2 mutant produced only trace levels of
Put, Spd and HSpd. Wild-type phenotypes were restored when the mutant was grown
in cultures supplemented with 1 mM Put or Spd or when the odc2 gene was
introduced in trans. odc2 gene expression was increased under acid stress and
reduced under salt stress and with exogenous Put or Spd. An odc1 odc2 double
mutant had phenotypes similar to the odc2 mutant. These results indicate that
ODC2 is the major enzyme for Put synthesis in S. meliloti and that PAs are
required for normal growth in vitro.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000615 
PMID: 29619919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

