
1. J Biol Chem. 2018 May 18;293(20):7766-7776. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.002325. Epub
2018 Apr 4.

A Sephin1-insensitive tripartite holophosphatase dephosphorylates translation
initiation factor 2α.

Crespillo-Casado A(1), Claes Z(2), Choy MS(3), Peti W(3), Bollen M(2), Ron D(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 0XY, United Kingdom, ac880@cam.ac.uk.
(2)the Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium, and.
(3)the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Arizona, Tucson,
Arizona 85721-0041.
(4)From the Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 0XY, United Kingdom, dr360@medschl.cam.ac.uk.

The integrated stress response (ISR) is regulated by kinases that phosphorylate
the α subunit of translation initiation factor 2 and phosphatases that
dephosphorylate it. Genetic and biochemical observations indicate that the
eIF2αP-directed holophosphatase, a therapeutic target in diseases of protein
misfolding, is comprised of a regulatory subunit, PPP1R15, and a catalytic
subunit, protein phosphatase 1 (PP1). In mammals, there are two isoforms of the
regulatory subunit, PPP1R15A and PPP1R15B, with overlapping roles in the
essential function of eIF2αP dephosphorylation. However, conflicting reports have
appeared regarding the requirement for an additional co-factor, G-actin, in
enabling substrate-specific dephosphorylation by PPP1R15-containing PP1
holoenzymes. An additional concern relates to the sensitivity of the holoenzyme
to the [(o-chlorobenzylidene)amino]guanidines Sephin1 or guanabenz, putative
small-molecule proteostasis modulators. It has been suggested that the source and
method of purification of the PP1 catalytic subunit and the presence or absence
of an N-terminal repeat-containing region in the PPP1R15A regulatory subunit
might influence the requirement for G-actin and sensitivity of the holoenzyme to 
inhibitors. We found that eIF2αP dephosphorylation by PP1 was moderately
stimulated by repeat-containing PPP1R15A in an unphysiological low ionic strength
buffer, whereas stimulation imparted by the co-presence of PPP1R15A and G-actin
was observed under a broad range of conditions, low and physiological ionic
strength, regardless of whether the PPP1R15A regulatory subunit had or lacked the
N-terminal repeat-containing region and whether it was paired with native PP1
purified from rabbit muscle or recombinant PP1 purified from bacteria.
Furthermore, none of the PPP1R15A-containing holophosphatases tested were
inhibited by Sephin1 or guanabenz.

© 2018 Crespillo-Casado et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.002325 
PMCID: PMC5961032
PMID: 29618508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

