
1. Int J Oncol. 2018 Jun;52(6):2069-2078. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2018.4341. Epub 2018 Mar 
29.

Differential expression of Oct3/4 in human breast cancer and normal tissues.

Zhao FQ(1), Misra Y(1), Li DB(1), Wadsworth MP(2), Krag D(3), Weaver D(2),
Tessitore J(2), Li DW(4), Zhang G(1), Tian Q(1), Buss K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Veterinary Sciences, University of Vermont,
Burlington, VT 05405, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Vermont,
Burlington, VT 05405, USA.

Oct3/4, a transcription factor specifically expressed in mammalian totipotent
embryonic stem and germ cells, has a critical role in the regulation and
maintenance of pluripotency and self-renewal. However, reactivation of Oct3/4
expression is observed in several human breast cancer cell lines, but not in
non‑malignant cells. To examine Oct3/4 expression in human primary breast
carcinomas and normal breast tissues, we obtained breast tumor tissues from
28 patients and normal breast tissues from 9 women. According to quantitative
polymerase chain reaction, all of the tumor tissues, irrespective of tumor type
or clinicopathological status, expressed Oct3/4 mRNA at 10- to 100- fold higher
levels than that in the normal breast tissues. Expression of the Oct3/4 protein
in tumors was confirmed by western blot analysis and immunofluorescent staining. 
Additionally, rapid amplification of cDNA ends and DNA sequencing revealed
expression of multiple Oct4 gene transcripts from chromosome 6 (POU5F1) in normal
breast tissues and the non‑malignant breast epithelial cell line MCF‑10A; by
contrast, the breast tumors and malignant breast cancer cell line MCF‑7
predominantly expressed transcripts of an Oct4-like gene (POU5F1B) from
chromosome 8, which was termed Oct3 in the current study. The deduced amino acid 
sequences of full-length Oct3 and Oct4 are 96% identical. The findings of the
current study indicated that Oct3, rather than Oct4, may serve as a novel
clinical marker and a potential target for gene-specific therapy of breast
cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2018.4341 
PMID: 29620155  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

