
1. Oncoimmunology. 2017 Dec 26;7(4):e1412029. doi: 10.1080/2162402X.2017.1412029.
eCollection 2018.

Improved migration of tumor ascites lymphocytes to ovarian cancer
microenvironment by CXCR2 transduction.

Idorn M(1), Olsen M(1), Halldórsdóttir HR(1), Skadborg SK(1), Pedersen M(1)(2),
Høgdall C(3), Høgdall E(4), Met Ö(1)(2)(5), Thor Straten P(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Immune Therapy (CCIT), Department of Hematology, Herlev
University Hospital, Herlev ringvej 75, Herlev, Denmark.
(2)Department of Oncology, Herlev University Hospital, Herlev ringvej 75, Herlev,
Denmark.
(3)Department of Gynecology, The Juliane Marie Centre, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 9, København Ø, Denmark.
(4)Department of Pathology, Molecular unit, Danish CancerBiobank, Herlev
University Hospital, Herlev ringvej 75, Herlev, Denmark.
(5)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Nørre Allé 41, København N, Denmark.

Chemokines are essential mediators of cellular trafficking, interactions and
tumor development. Though adoptive cell therapy (ACT) has been a tremendous
success in the treatment of metastatic melanoma (MM), a major obstacle for
successful ACT, is limited homing of effector T cells to immune suppressive tumor
sites. We hypothesized that equipping T cells with chemokine receptors matching
the chemokines of the tumor microenvironment, could improve tumor homing of T
cells. T cells from malignant ascites (n = 13); blood from ovarian cancer (OC)
patients (n = 14); and healthy donors (n = 13) were analyzed by flow cytometry.
We found that FoxP3+ regulatory T cells accumulation in patients with OC
associates with CCR4 expression. We characterized a chemokine profile of ascites 
chemokines, and expression of corresponding receptors on circulating T cells and 
tumor ascites lymphocytes (TALs). CCL22, CXCL9, CXCL10 and CXCL12 associated with
enrichment of CCR4+, CCR5+, CXCR3+ and CXCR4+ T cells in ascites. Circulating T
cells and TALs however did not express CXCR2, identifying CXCR2 as candidate for 
chemokine receptor transduction. TALs readily expressed IFNγ and TNFα upon
stimulation despite the frequency decreasing with in vitro expansion. Lentiviral 
transduction of TALs (n = 4) with chemokine receptor CXCR2 significantly
increased transwell migration of TALs towards rhIL8 and autologous ascites. The
majority of expanded and transduced TALs were of a T effector memory subtype.
This proof of concept study shows that chemokine receptor engineering with CXCR2 
is feasible and improves homing of transduced TALs towards the OC
microenvironment.

DOI: 10.1080/2162402X.2017.1412029 
PMCID: PMC5889291
PMID: 29632724 

