
1. Chembiochem. 2018 Jul 4;19(13):1400-1408. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201800032. Epub 2018 
May 30.

Potential of Pyridine Amphiphiles as Staphylococcal Nuclease Inhibitor.

Sahareen T(1), Dey P(1), Mukherjee S(1), Das G(2), Ramesh A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Guwahati, Guwahati, Assam, 781 039, India.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati,
Assam, 781 039, India.

The present study explores the potential of pyridine-based synthetic amphiphiles 
C1 and C2 having 4-carbon and 12-carbon hydrophobic tails, respectively, as
staphylococcal nuclease inhibitors. UV-visible titration with calf-thymus DNA
(CT-DNA) revealed a hypochromic shift in the absorbance bands of C1 and C2,
whereas fluorescence titration indicated a reduction in the emission intensity of
the monomer bands of the amphiphiles. Interaction of deoxyribonuclease I
(DNase 1) and micrococcal nuclease (MNase) with C1 or C2 led to a decrease in the
emission intensity of tryptophan at λ=345 nm along with an increase in the
monomer emission intensity of C1 and C2 at λ=375 nm for DNase I and excimer
emission intensity at λ=470 nm for both DNase I and MNase. Scatchard's analysis
indicated superior interaction of C2 with DNase I. Circular dichroism
spectroscopy revealed major changes in the secondary structures of both DNase I
and MNase upon interaction with the amphiphiles. A solution-based nuclease assay 
in conjunction with gel electrophoresis indicated amphiphile-mediated protection 
against nuclease-directed DNA cleavage. Interestingly, C2 could render inhibition
of nuclease present in the culture supernatant of Staphylococcus aureus MTCC 96, 
which highlights the therapeutic prospect of the amphiphile against S. aureus.

© 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201800032 
PMID: 29645328  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

