
1. Chembiochem. 2018 Jul 4;19(13):1452-1460. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201800157. Epub 2018 
Jun 8.

Characterization of Carboxylic Acid Reductases for Biocatalytic Synthesis of
Industrial Chemicals.

Kramer L(1), Hankore ED(2), Liu Y(1), Liu K(2), Jimenez E(3), Guo J(2), Niu W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, 68588, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, 68588,
USA.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona,
85721, USA.

Carboxylic acid reductases (CARs) catalyze the reduction of a broad range of
carboxylic acids into aldehydes, which can serve as common biosynthetic
precursors to many industrial chemicals. This work presents the systematic
biochemical characterization of five carboxylic acid reductases from different
microorganisms, including two known and three new ones, by using a panel of
short-chain dicarboxylic acids and hydroxy acids, which are common cellular
metabolites. All enzymes displayed broad substrate specificities. Higher
catalytic efficiencies were observed when the carbon chain length, either of the 
dicarboxylates or of the terminal hydroxy acids, was increased from C2 to C6 . In
addition, when substrates of the same carbon chain length are compared,
carboxylic acid reductases favor hydroxy acids over dicarboxylates as their
substrates. Whole-cell bioconversions of eleven carboxylic acid substrates into
the corresponding alcohols were investigated by coupling the CAR activity with
that of an aldehyde reductase in Escherichia coli hosts. Alcohol products were
obtained in yields ranging from 0.5 % to 71 %. The de novo stereospecific
biosynthesis of propane-1,2-diol enantiomer was successfully demonstrated with
use of CARs as the key pathway enzymes. E. coli strains accumulated 7.0 mm
(R)-1,2-PDO (1.0 % yield) or 9.6 mm (S)-1,2-PDO (1.4 % yield) from glucose. This 
study consolidates carboxylic acid reductases as promising enzymes for
sustainable synthesis of industrial chemicals.

© 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201800157 
PMID: 29659112  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

