
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2018 Nov;98(14):5269-5277. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.9065. Epub 2018
Jun 7.

Quick changes of milk fatty acids after inclusion or suppression of linseed oil
in the diet of goats.

Gómez-Cortés P(1), Cívico A(2), de la Fuente MA(1), Núñez Sánchez N(2), Juárez
M(1), Peña Blanco F(2), Martínez Marín AL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioactividad y Análisis de Alimentos, Instituto de
Investigación en Ciencias de la Alimentación (CSIC-UAM), Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Producción Animal, Universidad de Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Lipid supplementation of ruminant diet is an excellent tool to
improve the nutritional quality of dairy fat. The purpose of this research was to
monitor in detail the goat milk fatty acid (FA) profile during the first 24 h
after linseed oil (LO) supplementation or suppression in the diet. Particular
emphasis was placed in the changes of FA with bioactive properties. Milk fat was 
analysed by gas chromatography from milkings at 0, 1, 3, 6, 12 and 24 h after
diet shift.
RESULTS: The α-linolenic acid levels increased 12 h after LO incorporation in the
diet and decreased 3 h after oil suppression. Most of the milk 10:0 to 16:0
saturated FA decreased 24 h after LO supplementation, whereas oil suppression
raised their levels after 6 h. Similarly, raising of mono- and polyunsaturated
trans-FA after LO inclusion was delayed in comparison with their decrease after
oil suppression.
CONCLUSION: This study supports that ruminal bacteria and mammary glands would
exhibit a fast responsiveness after the inclusion or suppression of LO in
ruminant rations. Milk with an improved FA profile could be collected between
12 h after LO supplementation and the last milking before LO suppression in the
diet. © 2018 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2018 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.9065 
PMID: 29652436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

