
1. Microb Pathog. 2018 Jun;119:131-136. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2018.04.022. Epub
2018 Apr 14.

Antimicrobial resistance and molecular characterization of Pantoea agglomerans
isolated from rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) fry.

Saticioglu IB(1), Duman M(2), Altun S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Erciyes University, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Aquatic Animal Disease
Department, Kayseri, Turkey.
(2)Uludag University, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Aquatic Animal Disease
Department, Bursa, Turkey.
(3)Uludag University, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Aquatic Animal Disease
Department, Bursa, Turkey. Electronic address: saltun@uludag.edu.tr.

Aquaculture has become an important candidate as an animal protein source through
its growth over the last decade. Based upon a report from the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, it is the fastest growing sector 
of the food industry, yet the pathogenicity of many biological agents involved in
aquaculture is still unknown. In this study, we isolated Pantoe agglomerans from 
diseased rainbow trout on several occasions and also attempted to determine their
phenotypic and genotypic characteristics, including antimicrobial resistance, of 
four bacterial isolates. In the present study, P. agglomerans was isolated from
diseased rainbow trout as a pathogenic agent. The identification of the P.
agglomerans isolates from the rainbow trout was performed through biochemical
tests and 16S rRNA sequence analysis. These isolates were predominately
biochemically homogeneous, although some features were different, such as seen in
methyl-red, mannose and lipase activity tests. All four studied isolates were
identified as 99% identical to P. agglomerans based on sequence analysis. The
isolates were compared through a phylogenetic analysis with P. agglomerans
sequences recovered from 16 other countries and accessed from the GenBank
database. All isolates in our study were at least 98.2% similar to sequences from
GenBank. Furthermore, the phenotypic antimicrobial susceptibility of the isolates
in this study was analyzed through both disc diffusion and broth micro dilution
minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) tests. Although there were some
differences between two phenotypic antimicrobial tests, all studied isolates were
found susceptible to different antimicrobials. In addition genotypic
antimicrobial resistance characteristics were assessed by the presence of
antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs), in which qnrS and sul2 were detected for
the first time in P. agglomerans.

Copyright Â© 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2018.04.022 
PMID: 29665436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

