
1. Inflammation. 2018 Aug;41(4):1372-1383. doi: 10.1007/s10753-018-0785-8.

ERK1/2 and the Bcl-2 Family Proteins Mcl-1, tBid, and Bim Are Involved in
Inhibition of Apoptosis During Persistent Chlamydia psittaci Infection.

Li L(1)(2), Wang C(1), Wen Y(1), Hu Y(2), Xie Y(1), Xu M(1), Liang M(1), Liu
W(1), Liu L(1), Wu Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory for Special Pathogens Prevention and Control, 
Institute of Pathogenic Biology, Medical College, University of South China,
Hengyang, China; and Hunan Province Cooperative Innovation Center for Molecular
Target New Drug Study, Hengyang, 421001, China.
(2)Hunan Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Changsha, 410005, 
China.
(3)Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory for Special Pathogens Prevention and Control, 
Institute of Pathogenic Biology, Medical College, University of South China,
Hengyang, China; and Hunan Province Cooperative Innovation Center for Molecular
Target New Drug Study, Hengyang, 421001, China. yimouwu@sina.com.

Chlamydia psittaci is an obligate intracellular pathogen that can cause zoonosis.
Persistent C. psittaci infection can inhibit apoptosis in host cells, thus
extending their survival and enabling them to complete their growth cycle. In
this study, the antiapoptotic effects of persistent C. psittaci infection,
induced by treatment with IFN-Î³, were found to be associated with both the death 
receptor and the mitochondrial pathways of apoptosis. These effects were mediated
by Bcl-2 family members, as evidenced by the decreased expression of proapoptotic
proteins, such as tBid and Bim. Simultaneously, the antiapoptotic protein Mcl-1
was upregulated by persistent C. psittaci infection. Increased phosphorylation of
ERK1/2 was observed; however, the expression of Bad, unlike that of other
proapoptotic proteins, did not seem to be involved in this process. In summary,
persistent chlamydial infection exerts antiapoptotic effects through both the
death receptor and the mitochondrial pathways, in a process that is regulated by 
the ERK1/2 and apoptotic proteins of the Bcl-2 family.

DOI: 10.1007/s10753-018-0785-8 
PMID: 29666982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

