
1. Biomed Res Int. 2018 Feb 19;2018:4901591. doi: 10.1155/2018/4901591. eCollection 
2018.

T-614 Promotes Osteoblastic Cell Differentiation by Increasing Dlx5 Expression
and Regulating the Activation of p38 and NF-κB.

Song J(1), Liu H(1), Zhu Q(2), Miao Y(1), Wang F(1), Yang F(1), Cheng W(1)(3), Xi
Y(1), Niu X(1), He D(2), Chen G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai Institute of Immunology, 280 South Chongqing Road,
Shanghai 200025, China.
(2)Guanghua Rheumatology Hospital, 540 Xinhua Road, Shanghai 200052, China.
(3)The Fifth People's Hospital of Yuhang District, Hangzhou 311100, China.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune inflammatory disease characterized by 
bone loss. Degree of inflammation has been identified as an important initiator
of skeletal damage in RA. Iguratimod (T-614) is an anti-inflammatory agent which 
has been reported to show the inhibitory effect of bone destruction in RA.
However, the role of T-614 in osteoblast differentiation is still not clear. In
this study, we intended to find the effect of T-614 on the osteogenesis process. 
We detected osteogenesis markers and transcription factors associated with
osteoblastic lineage and bone formation in the culture of mesenchymal stem cells 
which differentiate osteoblast. The contents and activity of alkaline
phosphatase, levels of collagen type I and bone gla protein, and calcium nodule
formation were increased significantly after T-614 treated. Meanwhile, the mRNAs 
expressions of Osterix and Dlx5 were also found to be increased significantly by 
real-time PCR. The changes of levels of phosphorylation of p38 and NF-κB were
also detected by Western blot. The results showed that T-614 promotes
osteoblastic differentiation by increasing the expression of Osterix and Dlx5 and
increasing the activation of P38. T-614 could advance the ectopic expression of
NF-κB to suppress inflammation, which indirectly inhibits the damage of the
osteoblasts.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/4901591 
PMCID: PMC5836304
PMID: 29670900  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

