
1. Water Res. 2018 Sep 1;140:1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2018.04.017. Epub 2018 Apr 
12.

Mixed culture polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) synthesis from nutrient rich wet
oxidation liquors.

Wijeyekoon S(1), Carere CR(2), West M(3), Nath S(3), Gapes D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Scion, Te Papa Tipu Innovation Park, 49 Sala Street, Private Bag 3020,
Rotorua, 3046, New Zealand. Electronic address:
suren.wijeyekoon@scionresearch.com.
(2)Scion, Te Papa Tipu Innovation Park, 49 Sala Street, Private Bag 3020,
Rotorua, 3046, New Zealand; GNS Science, Wairakei Research Centre, 114 Karetoto
Road, Wairakei, Taupō, 3352, New Zealand.
(3)Scion, Te Papa Tipu Innovation Park, 49 Sala Street, Private Bag 3020,
Rotorua, 3046, New Zealand.

Organic waste residues can be hydrothermally treated to produce organic acid rich
liquors. These hydrothermal liquors are a potential feedstock for
polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) production. We investigated the effect of dissolved
oxygen concentration and substrate feeding regimes on PHA accumulation and yield 
using two hydrothermal liquors derived from a mixture of primary and secondary
municipal wastewater treatment sludge and food waste. The enriched culture
accumulated a maximum of 41% PHA of cell dry weight within 7 h; which is among
the highest reported for N and P rich hydrothermal liquors. Recovered PHA was 77%
polyhydroxybutyrate and 23% polyhydroxyvalerate by mass. The families
Rhodocyclaceae (84%) and Saprospiraceae (20.5%) were the dominant Proteobacteria 
(73%) in the enriched culture. The third most abundant bacterial genus,
Bdellovibrio, includes species of known predators of PHA producers which may lead
to suboptimal PHA accumulation. The PHA yield was directly proportional to DO
concentration for ammonia stripped liquor (ASL) and inversely proportional to DO 
concentration for low strength liquor (LSL). The highest yield of 0.50 Cmol
PHA/Cmol substrate was obtained for ASL at 25% DO saturation. A progressively
increasing substrate feeding regime resulted in increased PHA yields. These
findings demonstrate that substrate feeding regime and oxygen concentration can
be used to control the PHA yield and accumulation rate thereby enhancing PHA
production viability from nutrient rich biomass streams.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2018.04.017 
PMID: 29679930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

