
1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2018 Aug 30;158:145-153. doi:
10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.04.026. Epub 2018 Apr 24.

Biodegradability and ecological safety assessment of Stenotrophomonas sp. DDT-1
in the DDT-contaminated soil.

Fang H(1), Deng Y(1), Ge Q(1), Mei J(1), Zhang H(1), Wang H(1), Yu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pesticide and Environmental Toxicology, College of Agriculture & 
Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.
(2)Institute of Pesticide and Environmental Toxicology, College of Agriculture & 
Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. Electronic address:
ylyu@zju.edu.cn.

The biodegradability and ecological safety assessment of the previously isolated 
DDT-degrading bacterial strain Stenotrophomonas sp. DDT-1 were investigated in
the DDT-contaminated soil under laboratory and field conditions. Under laboratory
conditions, the degradation rates of fresh p,p'-DDT in soil were enhanced by
2.0-3.0-fold with the introduction of the strain DDT-1 compared to those of the
control treatments. A similar enhancement in the dissipation of DDTs (p,p'-DDT,
p,p'-DDE, p,p'-DDD, and o,p'-DDT) in the aged DDT-contaminated field plot soils
resulted from the inoculation with this strain. Meanwhile, the degradation rates 
of DDTs increased by 2.9-5.5- and 2.8-7.6-fold in the inoculated greenhouse and
open field soils, respectively, after field demonstration application of strain
DDT-1 preparation. Moreover, no significant differences in the soil enzyme
activity, microbial functional diversity, and bacterial community structure were 
observed between the inoculated and un-inoculated field soils, but several soil
microbial genera exhibited some fluctuations in abundance. It is concluded that
strain DDT-1 could accelerate the removal of DDTs residues in field soils, and
furthermore, its inoculation was ecologically safe.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.04.026 
PMID: 29679846  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

