
1. Hum Pathol. 2018 Aug;78:36-43. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2018.04.005. Epub 2018 Apr 
22.

Whole-exome sequencing identifies unique mutations and copy number losses in
calcifying fibrous tumor of the pleura: report of 3 cases and review of the
literature.

Mehrad M(1), LaFramboise WA(2), Lyons MA(2), Trejo Bittar HE(3), Yousem SA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. Electronic address:
mitra.mehrad@vanderbilt.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC),
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA; UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, Shadyside Hospital,
Pittsburgh, PA 15232, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC),
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Calcifying fibrous tumor of the pleura (CFTP) is a rare mesenchymal tumor of
unknown pathogenesis. The diagnosis often requires exclusion of other common
entities. Our aim was to determine if genomic changes were associated with CFTP
that could contribute to mechanisms underlying tumorigenesis. Three cases of CFTP
with their corresponding uninvolved control lung tissue were identified. Two
patients were male, and 1 was female (age range, 21-32 years). Tumors were
multifocal in 2 cases and solitary in 1. Immunohistochemistry for STAT6, BCL-2,
CD34, cytokeratin AE1/AE3, calretinin, desmin, S100, ALK, and β-catenin was used.
All immunohistochemistries were negative in CFTPs. DNA was isolated from all 3
pairs of CFTPs and matching normal lungs for whole-exome sequencing. Damaging,
tumor-specific, coding variants were identified in 3 genes including multiple
heterozygotic, de novo mutations in the Zinc Finger Protein 717 (ZNF717),
fascioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy-1 (FRG1) and cell division cycle 27
(CDC27) genes. Whole-exome sequencing revealed statistically significant, focal, 
tumor-specific copy number losses among all CFTPs including a large (302 kb) loss
at 6p22.2 comprising 32 genes of the histone cluster 1 family and the
hemochromatosis (HFE) gene. This is the first study to evaluate the molecular
pathogenesis of CFTP and to identify novel deleterious mutations in ZN717, FRG1, 
and CDC27 genes as well as significant copy number losses on 8 chromosomes with a
large loss common to all samples on chromosome 6. These mutations deleteriously
altered coding domains in a manner predicted to be damaging to protein function
and may contribute to CFTP tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2018.04.005 
PMID: 29689243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

