
1. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2018 Mar-Apr;32(2):233-239.

Cysteinyl leukotrienes C4 and D4 downregulate human mast cell expression of
toll-like receptors 1 through 7.

Karpov V(1), Ilarraza R(2), Catalli A(1), Kulka M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Research Council Canada, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLT) are potent inflammatory lipid molecules that
mediate some of the pathophysiological responses associated with asthma such as
bronchoconstriction, vasodilation and increased microvascular permeability. As a 
result, CysLT receptor antagonists (LRA), such as montelukast, have been used to 
effectively treat patients with asthma. We have recently shown that mast cells
are necessary modulators of innate immune responses to bacterial infection and an
important component of this innate immune response may involve the production of 
CysLT. However, the effect of LRA on innate immune receptors, particularly on
allergic effector cells, is unknown. This study determined the effect of CysLT on
toll-like receptor (TLR) expression by the human mast cell line LAD2. Real-time
PCR analysis determined that LTC4, LTD4 and LTE4 downregulated mRNA expression of
several TLR. Specifically in human CD34+-derived human mast cells (HuMC), LTC4
inhibited expression of TLR1, 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7 while LTD4 inhibited expression of
TLR1-7. Montelukast blocked LTC4-mediated downregulation of all TLR, suggesting
that these effects were mediated by activation of the CysLT1 receptor (CysLT1R). 
Flow cytometry analysis confirmed that LTC4 downregulated surface expression of
TLR2 which was blocked by montelukast. These data show that CysLT can modulate
human mast cell expression of TLR and that montelukast may be beneficial for
innate immune responses mediated by mast cells.


PMID: 29685001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

