
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2018 Jun;68(6):2015-2023. doi: 10.1099/ijsem.0.002782.
Epub 2018 Apr 24.

Virgibacillus indicus sp. nov. and Virgibacillus profundi sp. nov, two moderately
halophilic bacteria isolated from marine sediment by using microfluidic streak
plates.

Xu B(1)(2), Hu B(1)(2), Wang J(1), Lan Y(1), Zhu Y(1), Dai X(1), Huang L(1),
Huang Y(1), Du W(3)(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, PR China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100049, PR China.
(3)Savaid Medical School, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100049, PR China.

Three Gram-variable, moderately halophilic, motile, endospore-forming rods,
designated P2-C2T, P3-H5T and P3-B8, were isolated from marine sediment of the
Southwest Indian Ocean by using the microfluidic streak plate method. Phylogeny
based on 16S rRNA gene sequences showed that strains P2-C2T and P3-H5T formed a
robust cluster within the genus Virgibacillus and exhibited 16S rRNA gene
similarity levels of 95.3-96.8 and 94.9-96.3 % to the type strains of
Virgibacillus species, respectively. The 16S rRNA gene similarity between P2-C2T 
and P3-H5T was 97.6 %. Strain P3-B8 has an identical 16S rRNA gene sequence to
strain P3-H5T. For all the novel strains, the predominant cellular fatty acids
were anteiso-C15 : 0 and anteiso-C17 : 0, the main menaquinone was MK-7, and the 
polar lipid profiles contained diphosphatidylglycerol and phosphatidylglycerol.
The genomic DNA G+C contents of strains P2-C2T, P3-H5T and P3-B8 were 38.3, 37.3 
and 37.5 mol%, respectively. Combined data from phenotypic and genotypic studies 
demonstrated that strains P2-C2T and P3-H5T/P3-B8 are representatives of two
different novel species of the genus Virgibacillus, for which the name
Virgibacillus indicus sp. nov. and Virgibacillusprofundi are proposed. The type
strains are P2-C2T (=CGMCC 1.16138T=NBRC 113014T) and P3-H5T (=CGMCC
1.16139T=NBRC 113015T).

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.002782 
PMID: 29688169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

