
1. J Anim Sci Biotechnol. 2018 Apr 16;9:32. doi: 10.1186/s40104-018-0247-z.
eCollection 2018.

Morphological adaptation of sheep's rumen epithelium to high-grain diet entails
alteration in the expression of genes involved in cell cycle regulation, cell
proliferation and apoptosis.

Xu L(1), Wang Y(1), Liu J(1), Zhu W(1), Mao S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Technology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Gastrointestinal Nutrition and Animal Health, Laboratory of Gastrointestinal
Microbiology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210095 China.

Background: The objectives of this study were to characterize changes in the
relative mRNA expression of candidate genes and proteins involved in cell cycle
regulation, cell proliferation and apoptosis in the ruminal epithelium (RE) of
sheep during high-grain (HG) diet adaptation.
Results: Twenty sheep were assigned to four groups with five animals each. These 
animals were assigned to different periods of HG diet (containing 40% forage and 
60% concentrate mix) feeding. The HG groups received an HG diet for 7 (G7,
n = 5), 14 (G14, n = 5) and 28 d (G28, n = 5), respectively. In contrast, the
control group (CON, n = 5) was fed the forage-based diet for 28 d. The results
showed that HG feeding linearly decreased (P <  0.001) the ruminal pH, and
increased the concentrations of ruminal total volatile fatty acid (linear,
P = 0.001), butyrate (linear, P <  0.001), valerate (quadratic P = 0.029) and the
level of IGF-1 (quadratic, P = 0.043) in plasma. The length (quadratic,
P = 0.004), width (cubic, P = 0.015) and surface of the ruminal papillae (linear,
P = 0.003) were all enlarged after 14 d of HG diet feeding. HG feeding cubically 
increased the number of cell layers forming the stratum corneum (SC, P <  0.001) 
and the thickness of the SC (P <  0.001) and stratum basale (P <  0.001). The
proportion of basal layer cells in the RE decreased (linear, P <  0.001) in the
G0/G1-phase, but it increased linearly (P = 0.006) in the S-phase and cubically
(P = 0.004) in the G2/M-phases. The proportion of apoptosis cells in G7, G14 and 
G28 was reduced compared to the CON (quadratic, P < 0.001). HG diet feeding
linearly decreased the mRNA expression of Cyclin E1 (P = 0.021) and CDK-2
(P = 0.001) and (P = 0.027) the protein expression of Cyclin E1. Feeding an HG
diet linearly increased the mRNA expression of genes IGFBP-2 (P = 0.034) and
IGFBP 5 (P < 0.009), while linearly decreasing (P < 0.001) the IGFBP 3
expression. The expression of cell apoptosis gene Caspase 8 decreased (quadratic,
P = 0.012), while Bad mRNA expression tended to decrease (cubic, P = 0.053) after
HG feeding.
Conclusions: These results demonstrated sequential changes in rumen papillae
size, cell cycle regulation and the genes involved in proliferation and apoptosis
as time elapsed in feeding a high-grain diet to sheep.

DOI: 10.1186/s40104-018-0247-z 
PMCID: PMC5901869
PMID: 29686866 

Conflict of interest statement: All experimental designs and procedures for this 
study were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Nanjing Agricultural 
University (SYXK(Su)2015–0656), following the requirements of the Regulations for
the Administration of Affairs Concerning Experimental Animals (The State Science 
and Technology Commission of P. R. China, 1988).Not applicable.The authors
declare that they have no competing interests.

