
1. J Biol Chem. 2018 Jun 8;293(23):9090-9100. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA117.000953. Epub
2018 Apr 25.

Insights into the binding behavior of native and non-native cytochromes to
photosystem I from Thermosynechococcus elongatus.

Kölsch A(1), Hejazi M(2), Stieger KR(3), Feifel SC(3), Kern JF(4), Müh F(5),
Lisdat F(3), Lokstein H(6), Zouni A(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Biophysics of Photosynthesis, Institute for Biology,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Philippstrasse 13, 10115 Berlin, Germany,
koelscha@hu-berlin.de.
(2)From the Biophysics of Photosynthesis, Institute for Biology,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Philippstrasse 13, 10115 Berlin, Germany.
(3)Biosystems Technology, Institute for Applied Life Sciences, University of
Applied Sciences Wildau, Hochschulring 1, 15745 Wildau, Germany.
(4)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720.
(5)Department of Theoretical Biophysics, Institute for Theoretical Physics,
Johannes Kepler University Linz, Altenberger Strasse 69, 4040 Linz, Austria, and.
(6)Department of Chemical Physics and Optics, Charles University, Ke Karlovu 3,
CZ-121 16 Praha 2, Czech Republic.
(7)From the Biophysics of Photosynthesis, Institute for Biology,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Philippstrasse 13, 10115 Berlin, Germany,
athina.zouni@hu-berlin.de.

The binding of photosystem I (PS I) from Thermosynechococcus elongatus to the
native cytochrome (cyt) c6 and cyt c from horse heart (cyt cHH) was analyzed by
oxygen consumption measurements, isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), and
rigid body docking combined with electrostatic computations of binding energies. 
Although PS I has a higher affinity for cyt cHH than for cyt c6, the influence of
ionic strength and pH on binding is different in the two cases. ITC and
theoretical computations revealed the existence of unspecific binding sites for
cyt cHH besides one specific binding site close to P700 Binding to PS I was found
to be the same for reduced and oxidized cyt cHH Based on this information,
suitable conditions for cocrystallization of cyt cHH with PS I were found,
resulting in crystals with a PS I:cyt cHH ratio of 1:1. A crystal structure at
3.4-Å resolution was obtained, but cyt cHH cannot be identified in the electron
density map because of unspecific binding sites and/or high flexibility at the
specific binding site. Modeling the binding of cyt c6 to PS I revealed a specific
binding site where the distance and orientation of cyt c6 relative to P700 are
comparable with cyt c2 from purple bacteria relative to P870 This work provides
new insights into the binding modes of different cytochromes to PS I, thus
facilitating steps toward solving the PS I-cyt c costructure and a more detailed 
understanding of natural electron transport processes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA117.000953 
PMCID: PMC5995507
PMID: 29695502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

