
1. AMB Express. 2018 Apr 25;8(1):67. doi: 10.1186/s13568-018-0594-3.

Salinity effect on the metabolic pathway and microbial function in phenanthrene
degradation by a halophilic consortium.

Wang C(1), Huang Y(1), Zhang Z(1), Wang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Joint Laboratory of Environment Simulation and Pollution Control,
School of Environment, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China.
(2)State Key Joint Laboratory of Environment Simulation and Pollution Control,
School of Environment, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China.
wanghui@tsinghua.edu.cn.

With the close relationship between saline environments and industry, polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) accumulate in saline/hypersaline environments.
Therefore, PAHs degradation by halotolerant/halophilic bacteria has received
increasing attention. In this study, the metabolic pathway of phenanthrene
degradation by halophilic consortium CY-1 was first studied which showed a single
upstream pathway initiated by dioxygenation at the C1 and C2 positions, and at
several downstream pathways, including the catechol pathway, gentisic acid
pathway and protocatechuic acid pathway. The effects of salinity on the community
structure and expression of catabolic genes were further studied by a combination
of high-throughput sequencing, catabolic gene clone library and real-time PCR.
Pure cultures were also isolated from consortium CY-1 to investigate the
contribution made by different microbes in the PAH-degrading process.
Marinobacter is the dominant genus that contributed to the upstream degradation
of phenanthrene especially in high salt content. Genus Halomonas made a great
contribution in transforming intermediates in the subsequent degradation of
catechol by using catechol 1,2-dioxygenase (C12O). Other microbes were predicted 
to be mediating bacteria that were able to utilize intermediates via different
downstream pathways. Salinity was investigated to have negative effects on both
microbial diversity and activity of consortium CY-1 and consortium CY-1 was found
with a high degree of functional redundancy in saline environments.

DOI: 10.1186/s13568-018-0594-3 
PMCID: PMC5918149
PMID: 29696463 

