
1. PLoS One. 2018 Apr 30;13(4):e0193907. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193907.
eCollection 2018.

Development and characterization of carboxy-terminus specific monoclonal
antibodies for understanding MUC16 cleavage in human ovarian cancer.

Aithal A(1), Junker WM(2), Kshirsagar P(1), Das S(1), Kaur S(1), Orzechowski
C(1), Gautam SK(1), Jahan R(1), Sheinin YM(3), Lakshmanan I(1), Ponnusamy MP(1), 
Batra SK(1)(3)(4), Jain M(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States of America.
(2)Sanguine Diagnostics and Therapeutics Inc. Omaha, NE, United States of
America.
(3)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE, United States of America.
(4)Fred and Pamela Buffett Cancer Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, NE, United States of America.

MUC16 is overexpressed in ovarian cancer and plays important roles in invasion
and metastasis. Previously described monoclonal antibodies against cell surface
expressed MUC16 recognize the N-terminal tandemly repeated epitopes present in
cancer antigen 125 (CA125). MUC16 is cleaved at a specific location, thus,
releasing CA125 into the extracellular space. Recent reports have indicated that 
the retained carboxy-terminal (CT) fragment of MUC16 might play an important role
in tumorigenicity in diverse types of cancers. However, limited data is available
on the fate and existence of CT fragment on the surface of the cancer cell.
Herein, we characterize two monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) showing specificity to
the retained juxtamembrane region of MUC16. For the first time, we demonstrate
that MUC16 is cleaved in ovarian cancer cells (NIH:OVCAR-3 [OVCAR-3]) and that
the cleaved MUC16 subunits remain associated with each other. Immunohistochemical
analyses on different grades of ovarian tumor tissues indicated differential
reactivity of CA125 and MUC16 CT mAbs. The CA125 (M11) mAb detected 32/40 (80%), 
while the CT mAb (5E6) detected 33/40 (82.5%) of total ovarian cancer cases. For 
serous and serous papillary cases, the CA125 (M11) mAb stained 27/31 cases (87%),
while CT mAb (5E6) stained 29/31 cases (93.5%). The CT mAb(s) accurately predict 
expression of MUC16 since their epitopes are not tandemly repeated and their
reactivity may not be dependent on O-linked glycosylation. These antibodies can
serve as valuable reagents for understanding MUC16 cleavage and may also serve as
potential therapeutic agents for treatment of ovarian cancer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193907 
PMCID: PMC5927449
PMID: 29708979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

