
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2018 Jun 27;501(3):607-611. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.04.211.

Effects of enzymes on elastic modulus of low-density lipoproteins were
investigated using atomic force microscopy.

Takeda S(1), Sakurai T(1), Hui SP(2), Fuda H(1), Chiba H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.
Electronic address: keino@hs.hokudai.ac.jp.
(3)Faculty of Health Science, Sapporo University of Health Sciences, 007-0894,
Japan.

Oxidation of low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) induces development of
cardiovascular disease. Recently, reports of studies using atomic force
microscopy (AFM) have described that the elastic modulus of metal-induced
oxidized LDLs is lower than the modulus before oxidation. However, the mechanisms
of change of the elastic modulus have not been well investigated. We postulated
that disorder of the LDL structure might decrease the elastic modulus. This study
measured the elastic modulus of LDLs before and after enzyme treatment with V8
protease, α-chymotrypsin, and phospholipase A2. After LDLs were obtained from
serum by ultracentrifugation, LDLs or enzyme-treated LDLs were physically
absorbed. They were crowded on a mica surface. Although V8 protease and
α-chymotrypsin did not induce the elastic modulus change, treatment with PLA2
decreased the elastic modulus. The LDL particle size did not change during the
enzyme treatment. Results suggest that disordering of the lipid structure of the 
LDL might contribute to the elastic modulus change. Results show that AFM might
be a useful tool to evaluate disorders of complex nanoscale particle structures
from lipids and proteins such as lipoproteins.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.04.211 
PMID: 29709480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

