
1. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 2018;64(2):116-128. doi: 10.3177/jnsv.64.116.

Gender Difference and Dietary Supplemental Vitamin B6: Impact on Colon Luminal
Environment.

Nirmagustina DE(1), Yang Y(1), Kumrungsee T(1), Yanaka N(1), Kato N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biosphere Science, Hiroshima University.

Colon diseases can be affected by several factors such as gender difference and
dietary supplemental vitamin B6 (B6). The nutritional status of B6 is affected by
gender difference, leading us to hypothesize that gender difference affects colon
luminal environment, which is dependent on B6 status. To investigate this
hypothesis, we fed male and female rats a diet containing 1 mg, 7 mg, or 35 mg
pyridoxine HCl/kg diet for 6 wk. We found significantly higher fecal mucin levels
in female rats compared to those in male rats. Supplemental B6 significantly
increased fecal mucins and was particularly profound in the female rats. The
abundances of cecal and fecal Akkermansia muciniphila (mucin degrader) were
unaffected. The fecal mucin levels were significantly correlated with colonic
free threonine and serine and with gene expression of colon MUC16, implying that 
the combined effect of gender and dietary B6 on fecal mucins was mediated by the 
alteration in the levels of such amino acids and MUC16 expression. This study
further showed the significant effects of gender difference on colonic free amino
acids such as threonine, ornithine, asparagine/aspartate ratio, and
glutamine/glutamate ratio, cecal and fecal Lactobacillus spp. levels, and colonic
gene expressions of MUC16 and TLR8, the factors relating to colon health and
diseases. Therefore, our findings suggest that gender difference and dietary B6
may have an impact on colon diseases by modulating these parameters.

DOI: 10.3177/jnsv.64.116 
PMID: 29710029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

