
1. Somat Cell Mol Genet. 1988 Nov;14(6):583-92.

Chromosome mapping of biological pathways by fluorescence-activated cell sorting 
and cell fusion: human interferon gamma receptor as a model system.

Jung V(1), Jones C, Rashidbaigi A, Geyer DD, Morse HG, Wright RB, Pestka S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Medicine and 
Dentistry of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway
08854-5635.

Human chromosome 6 encodes both the interferon gamma receptor as well as the
class I major histocompatibility complex antigens, HLA-A, -B, and -C. However,
the presence of chromosome 6 in somatic cell hybrids is insufficient to confer
sensitivity to human interferon gamma (Hu-IFN-gamma) as assayed by class I HLA
induction; it is necessary for both human chromosomes 6 and 21 to reside in the
hybrid to generate a response to Hu-IFN-gamma. Treatment of such a hamster-human 
hybrid, Q72-18, with Hu-IFN-gamma induces the class I HLA antigens. Q72-18 cells 
selected by fluorescence-activated cell sorting for the loss of class I HLA
induction also lost human chromosome 21. Fusions of such cells to a hybrid that
contains only human chromosome 21 reconstitutes HLA antigen induction by
Hu-IFN-gamma. Furthermore, fusions of hybrids containing a translocated human
chromosome 6q and the HLA-B7 gene to a line containing only human chromosome 21
or a translocated 21q also reconstitutes HLA-B7 mRNA and antigen induction by
Hu-IFN-gamma. Thus the segregation of cells on the basis of a biological effect
by fluorescence-activated cell sorting and reconstitution by hybrid fusion
provides a strategy by which some biological pathways can be mapped at a
chromosomal level.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01535312 
PMID: 2973662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

