
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2018 Aug;85:177-187. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2018.04.014. Epub 2018 
Apr 18.

Identification and bioactivity analysis of a newly identified defensin from the
oyster Magallana gigas.

Zhang Y(1), Cui P(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Evolution & Development, Institute of Evolution & Marine
Biodiversity, Qingdao 266003, China; Department of Marine Biology, Ocean
University of China, Qingdao 266003, China.
(2)Laboratory for Evolution & Development, Institute of Evolution & Marine
Biodiversity, Qingdao 266003, China; Department of Marine Biology, Ocean
University of China, Qingdao 266003, China; Laboratory for Marine Biology and
Biotechnology, Qingdao National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology,
Qingdao 266237, China. Electronic address: sczhang@ouc.edu.cn.

The relatively conserved sequences of signal peptides and proregions that
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) contain have been successfully used to search for
and identify novel AMPs from databases within the same lineages of fish and
amphibians and across different animal classes. If such an approach is applicable
to invertebrate species such as oyster has not yet been tested so far. In this
study, we found a cDNA from the digestive gland of the oyster Magallana gigas,
designated Mgdefdg, which contains two exons interspaced by one intron. Mgdefdg
coded for a protein with features characteristic of defensins. The mature peptide
had the cysteine-stabilized α-helix/β-sheet motif (CSαβ) and the consensus
pattern C-X5-6-C-X3-C-X4-6-C-X3-4-C-X7-8-C-X-C-X2-C forming potential disulfide
linkages C1-C5, C2-C6, C3-C7 and C4-C8 in the predicted tertiary structure.
Functional assays revealed that recombinant mature MgDefdg (rmMgDefdg) was able
to kill the Gram-negative bacterium Aeromonas hydrophila and the Gram-positive
bacterium Staphylococcus aureus, and to induce bacterial membrane/cytoplasmic
damage. ELISA showed that rmMgDefdg had high affinity to both A. hydrophila and
S. aureus as well as the microbe-associated molecular pattern molecules LPS and
LTA. Moreover, rmMgDefdg was capable of causing bacterial membrane
permeabilization and depolarization, and intracellular ROS increase.
Additionally, rmMgDefdg was not cytotoxic to human red blood cells and murine
RAW264.7 cells. Taken together, our results indicate that MgDefdg is a previously
uncharacterized defensin with membrane selectivity towards bacterial cells. It
also shows that the use of conserved sequences of signal peptides of defensins
can be an effective tool to identify potential defensins across different animal 
genera in invertebrates.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2018.04.014 
PMID: 29733023  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

