
1. Cell Biol Int. 2018 Aug;42(8):1069-1075. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10977. Epub 2018 May
10.

Myricetin-induced oxidative stress suppresses murine T lymphocyte activation.

Ghassemi-Rad J(1), Maleki M(2), Knickle AF(2), Hoskin DW(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Surgery, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.

A number of polyphenolic compounds present in fruits and vegetables have the
capacity to modulate immune responses; however, the impact of the common
plant-derived flavonoid myricetin on T lymphocyte function has not been
investigated. We show that myricetin inhibited mouse T lymphocyte activation by
bead-immobilized anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 monoclonal antibodies, as indicated by a 
dose-dependent reduction in cell proliferation and decreased synthesis of
interferon-γ, interleukin (IL)-2, IL-4, and IL-17 associated with different T
helper cell subsets. This effect was attributed to myricetin-induced reactive
oxygen species (ROS) since myricetin caused hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ) to
accumulate in cell-free culture medium and H2 O2 inhibited T cell proliferation
and cytokine synthesis. In addition, the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine restored
the ability of myricetin-treated T lymphocytes to proliferate in response to a
mitogenic stimulus. The presence of dendritic cells or bone marrow-derived
macrophages negated the inhibitory effect of myricetin on T cell activation, and 
H2 O2 in T cell cultures that were treated with exogenous H2 O2 was reduced when 
antigen-presenting cells were also present. These findings suggest that
antioxidant molecules produced by dendritic cells and macrophages protected T
cells from myricetin-induced oxidative stress, and underscore the importance of
considering immune cell interactions when evaluating the immunomodulatory
activity of ROS-generating phytochemicals.

© 2018 International Federation for Cell Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/cbin.10977 
PMID: 29745443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

