
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2018 Jun 27;501(3):718-723. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.05.054.

Molecular characterization of single-chain antibody variable fragments (scFv)
specific to Pep27 from Streptococcus pneumoniae.

Kim D(1), Jang S(1), Oh J(1), Han S(1), Park S(1), Ghosh P(2), Rhee DK(2), Lee
S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 16419,
South Korea.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 16419, South Korea.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 16419,
South Korea. Electronic address: sangholee@skku.edu.

Pep27 from Streptococcus pneumoniae is reported to initiate pneumococcal
autolysis, thereby constituting a major virulence factor. Although a few antisera
recognizing Pep27 have been reported, no monoclonal, well-characterized antibody 
for Pep27 has been developed. Here we screened two single-chain antibody variable
fragments (scFv) using a phage display from a large human synthetic scFv library 
to select clones E2 and F9. Dissociation constants (Kd) of E2 and F9 were 1.1 μM 
and 0.50 μM, respectively. E2 and F9 did not cross-react with other pneumococcal 
and unrelated proteins. The epitopes of Pep27 were localized to residues 24, 26
and 27 by alanine scanning. Molecular docking analysis supported the
experimentally investigated epitope. The E2 and F9 clones specifically detected
Pep27 in an environment mimicking in vivo conditions, demonstrated in human
serum. The scFv clones characterized here represent molecular tools for the
detection of pneumococcal diseases with potential for further improvement in
affinity.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.05.054 
PMID: 29753735  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

