
1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2018 Apr 24;12:110. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2018.00110.
eCollection 2018.

Microglial Activation After Systemic Stimulation With Lipopolysaccharide and
Escherichia coli.

Hoogland ICM(1), Westhoff D(1), Engelen-Lee JY(1), Melief J(2), Valls Serón M(1),
Houben-Weerts JHMP(1), Huitinga I(2), van Westerloo DJ(3), van der Poll T(4), van
Gool WA(1), van de Beek D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Center of Infection and Immunity Amsterdam, Academic 
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience - KNAW, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Intensive Care Medicine, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
Netherlands.
(4)Center of Experimental Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam,
Netherlands.

Background: Microglial activation after systemic infection has been suggested to 
mediate sepsis-associated delirium. A systematic review of animal studies
suggested distinct differences between microglial activation after systemic
challenge with live bacteria and lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Here, we describe a
mouse model of microglial activation after systemic challenge with live
Escherichia coli (E. coli) and compare results with systemic challenge with LPS. 
Methods: Sixty mice were intraperitoneally injected with E. coli (1 × 104
colony-forming units) and sacrificed at 12, 20, 48, and 72 h after inoculation.
For 48 and 72 h time points, mice were treated with ceftriaxone. Thirty mice were
intraperitoneally injected with LPS (5 mg/kg) and sacrificed 3 and 48 h after
inoculation; 48 control mice were intraperitoneally injected with isotonic
saline. Microglial response was monitored by immunohistochemical staining with
Iba-1 antibody and flow cytometry; and inflammatory response by mRNA expression
of pro- and anti-inflammatory mediators. Results: Mice infected with live E. coli
showed microglial activation 72 h post-inoculation, with increased cell number in
cortex (p = 0.0002), hippocampus (p = 0.003), and thalamus (p = 0.0001), but not 
in the caudate nucleus/putamen (p = 0.33), as compared to controls. At 72 h, flow
cytometry of microglia from E. coli infected mice showed increased cell size (p =
0.03) and CD45 expression (p = 0.03), but no increase in CD11b expression, and no
differences in brain mRNA expression of inflammatory mediators as compared to
controls. In mice with systemic LPS stimulation, microglial cells were
morphologically activated at the 48 h time point with increased cell numbers in
cortex (p = 0.002), hippocampus (p = 0.0003), thalamus (p = 0.007), and caudate
nucleus/putamen (p < 0.0001), as compared to controls. At 48 h, flow cytometry of
microglia from LPS stimulated mice showed increased cell size (p = 0.03), CD45 (p
= 0.03), and CD11b (p = 0.04) expression. Brain mRNA expression of TNF-α (p =
0.02), IL-1β (p = 0.02), and MCP-1 (p = 0.03) were increased as compared to
controls. Interpretation: Systemic challenge with live E. coli causes a
neuro-inflammatory response, but this response occurs at a later time point and
is less vigorous as compared to LPS stimulation.The E. coli model mimics the
clinical situation of infection associated delirium more closely than stimulation
with supra-natural LPS.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2018.00110 
PMCID: PMC5932388
PMID: 29755322 

