
1. Anim Nutr. 2016 Dec;2(4):345-350. doi: 10.1016/j.aninu.2016.09.003. Epub 2016 Oct
1.

Effect of different levels of corn steep liquor addition on fermentation
characteristics and aerobic stability of fresh rice straw silage.

Li X(1), Xu W(1), Yang J(1), Zhao H(2), Xin H(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northeast Agricultural University,
Harbin 150030, China.
(2)Institute of New Rural Development, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 
150030, China.

The object of this study was to determine the proper mixing ratio of fresh rice
straw to corn steep liquor (CSL) to obtain a high protein content silage feed.
The following experimental silages were generated: the control (C1), composed of 
fresh rice straw without CSL additive, mixed with CSL in the ratios of 4:1 (C4), 
3:1 (C3) and 2:1 (C2). Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) inoculant was applied at the
rate of 50 mL/kg (fresh basis) of forage to achieve a final application rate of
1 × 106 cfu/g of fresh matter (FM). Duplicate silos for each treatment were
opened after 0, 3, 7, 10, 20, 30, 45 and 60 d for microbiological and chemical
analysis. The results showed that the addition of CSL significantly increased
crude protein (CP) contents, and decreased neutral detergent fiber (NDF) and acid
detergent fiber (ADF) contents of treatments after 60 d of ensiling (P < 0.05).
The lactic acid contents in C4 and C3 were significantly higher than that in C1
(P < 0.05). In summary, mixing fresh rice straw with CSL at addition levels of
4:1 (C4) and 3:1 (C3) can improve the fermentation quality and nutrient
composition of fresh rice straw silage. However, a large proportion of CSL (C3)
had a negative impact on the aerobic stability of fresh rice straw.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aninu.2016.09.003 
PMCID: PMC5941058
PMID: 29767130 

