
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2018 Jul 2;501(4):1029-1033. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.05.103. Epub 2018 May 24.

Enhanced PKMT-substrate recognition through non active-site interactions.

Kublanovsky M(1), Aharoni A(2), Levy D(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics,
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be'er Sheva 84105, Israel; The National
Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev (NIBN), Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, Be'er Sheva 84105, Israel.
(2)The National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev (NIBN), Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Be'er Sheva 84105, Israel; Department of Life Sciences, 
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be'er Sheva 84105, Israel. Electronic
address: aaharoni@bgu.ac.il.
(3)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics,
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be'er Sheva 84105, Israel; The National
Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev (NIBN), Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, Be'er Sheva 84105, Israel. Electronic address: ledan@post.bgu.ac.il.

Protein lysine methyltransferases (PKMTs) catalyze the methylation of lysine
residues on many different cellular proteins. Despite extensive biochemical and
structural studies, focusing on PKMT active site-peptide interactions, little is 
known regarding how PKMTs recognize globular substrates. To examine whether these
enzymes recognize protein substrates through interactions that take place outside
of the active site, we have measured SETD6 and SETD7 activity with both protein
and peptide RelA substrate. We have utilized the MTase-Glo™ methyltransferase
assay to measure the activity of SETD6 and SETD7 with the different RelA
substrates and calculated the Michaelis-Menten (MM) parameters. We found an up to
∼12-fold increase in KM of the PKMTs activity with RelA peptide relative to the
respective full-length protein, emphasizing the significantly higher PKMT-protein
interaction affinity. Examination of SETD6 and SETD7 activity toward the same
RelA substrates highlight the similarity in substrate recognition for both PKMTs.
Our results show that the interaction affinity of SETD6 and SETD7 with RelA is
enhanced through interactions that occur outside of the active site leading to
higher catalytic efficiency and specificity. These interactions can significantly
vary depending on the PKMT and the specific methylation site on RelA. Overall,
our results underline that PKMTs can recognize their substrates through docking
interactions that occur out of the active site-peptide region for enhancing their
activity and specificity in the cellular environment.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.05.103 
PMID: 29778536  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

