
1. Infect Immun. 2018 Jul 23;86(8). pii: e00248-18. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00248-18. Print
2018 Aug.

Cytosolic Delivery of Multidomain Cargos by the N Terminus of Pasteurella
multocida Toxin.

Clemons NC(1), Bannai Y(1), Haywood EE(1), Xu Y(1), Buschbach JD(1), Ho M(1),
Wilson BA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, Illinois, USA wilson7@illinois.edu.

Erratum in
    Infect Immun. 2018 Sep 21;86(10):.

The zoonotic pathogen Pasteurella multocida produces a 146-kDa modular toxin
(PMT) that enters host cells and manipulates intracellular signaling through
action on its Gα protein targets. The N terminus of PMT (PMT-N) mediates cellular
uptake through receptor-mediated endocytosis, followed by the delivery of the
C-terminal catalytic domain from acidic endosomes into the cytosol. The putative 
native cargo of PMT consists of a 710-residue polypeptide with three distinct
modular subdomains (C1-C2-C3), where C1 contains a membrane localization domain
(MLD), C2 has an as-yet-undefined function, and C3 catalyzes the deamidation of a
specific active-site glutamine residue in Gα protein targets. However, whether
the three cargo subdomains are delivered intact or undergo further proteolytic
processing during or after translocation from the late endosome is unclear. Here,
we demonstrate that PMT-N mediates the delivery of its native C-terminal cargo as
a single polypeptide, corresponding to C1-C2-C3, including the MLD, with no
evidence of cleavage between subdomains. We show that PMT-N also delivers
nonnative green fluorescent protein (GFP) cargo into the cytosol, further
supporting that the receptor-binding and translocation functions reside within
PMT-N. Our findings further show that PMT-N can deliver C1-C2 alone but that the 
presence of C1-C2 is important for the cytosolic delivery of the catalytic C3
subdomain by PMT-N. In addition, we further refine the minimum C3 domain required
for intracellular activity as comprising residues 1105 to 1278. These findings
reinforce that PMT-N serves as the cytosolic delivery vehicle for C-terminal
cargo and demonstrate that its native cargo is delivered intact as C1-C2-C3.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00248-18 
PMCID: PMC6056849
PMID: 29784857  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

