
1. Biochemistry. 2018 Jul 31;57(30):4431-4439. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00347.
Epub 2018 Jul 23.

Investigation of Solvent Hydron Exchange in the Reaction Catalyzed by the
Antibiotic Resistance Protein Cfr.

Bauerle MR, Grove TL, Booker SJ.

Cfr is a radical S-adenosylmethionine (RS) methylase that appends methyl groups
to C8 and C2 of adenosine 2503 in 23S rRNA. Methylation of C8 confers resistance 
to several classes of antibiotics that bind in or near the peptidyltransferase
center of the bacterial ribosome, including the synthetic antibiotic linezolid.
The Cfr reaction requires the action of five conserved cysteines, three of which 
ligate a required [4Fe-4S] cluster cofactor. The two remaining cysteines play a
more intricate role in the reaction; one (Cys338) becomes transiently methylated 
during catalysis. The function of the second (Cys105) has not been rigorously
established; however, in the related RlmN reaction, it (Cys118) initiates
resolution of a key protein-nucleic acid cross-linked intermediate by abstracting
the proton from the carbon center (C2) undergoing methylation. We previously
proposed that, unlike RlmN, Cfr would utilize a polyprotic base during resolution
of the protein-nucleic acid cross-linked intermediate during C8 methylation and, 
like RlmN, use a monoprotic base during C2 methylation. We based this proposal on
the fact that solvent hydrons could exchange into the product during C8
methylation, but not during C2 methylation. Herein, we show that Cys105 of Cfr
has a function similar to that of Cys118 of RlmN while methylating C8 of A2503
and provide evidence for one molecule of water that is in close contact with it, 
which provides the exchangeable protons during catalysis.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00347 
PMCID: PMC6501181
PMID: 29787246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

