
1. Inorg Chem. 2018 Jun 4;57(11):6309-6323. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.8b00227. Epub
2018 May 23.

Water-Soluble Silver(I) Complexes Featuring the Hemilabile
3,7-Dimethyl-1,3,5-triaza-7-phosphabicyclo[3.3.1]nonane Ligand: Synthesis,
Characterization, and Antimicrobial Activity.

Armstrong D, Kirk SM, Murphy C, Guerriero A(1), Peruzzini M(1)(2), Gonsalvi L(1),
Phillips AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Chimica dei Composti Organometallici (ICCOM) , Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche (CNR) , Via Madonna del Piano 10 , 50019 Sesto Fiorentino,
Florence , Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche e Tecnologia dei Materiali (DSCTM) ,
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR) , Via dei Taurini 19 , 00185 Rome ,
Italy.

This paper describes the preparation and comprehensive characterization of a
series of water-soluble cationic silver(I)-centered complexes featuring the
hemilabile P, N-ligand known as
3,7-dimethyl-1,3,5-triaza-7-phosphabicyclo[3.3.1]nonane (herein abbreviated as
PTN(Me)) and differing types of monoanionic counterions including known
biologically active sulfadiazine and triclosan. The complexes primarily differed 
though the number of coordinating PTN(Me) ligands. The bis-substituted Ag(I)
complexes revealed P, N bidentate coordination, while the only P-monocoordination
of the metal center was observed for the tris-substituted systems. The
bis-ligated silver compounds were observed to quickly degrade upon photoexposure 
or in contact with air. In contrast, the tris-ligated complexes demonstrated
greater stability, in particular, a high resistance to photo-decomposition.
Calculated geometry optimized models using the density functional theory method
(BP86) revealed for the bis-substituted PTN(Me) Ag(I) species that the total
enthalpy of the tetrahedral C2-symmetric structure is marginally lower by -0.6
kcal mol-1 compared to the planar C2 h structure, which is analogous for the
corresponding [Au(PTN(Me))2]+ complex with Î” H = -0.5 kcal mol-1. Hence both
types of complexes feature free rotation of the PTN ligand about the M-P bond
axis. This series of Ag(I) and bis-PTN(Me) Au(I) complexes were evaluated using
the agar well diffusion test for potential antimicrobial and antifungal activity.
The nature of the counterion was found to have a strong correlation with the area
of microbiological growth inhibition. Silver(I) complexes bearing the
deprotonated triclosan as the counterion demonstrated the greatest activity, with
large zones of growth inhibition, with the tris-ligated triclosan complex
obtaining of a high clearance of 42 mm against the Gram-negative Escherichia
coli. In contrast, the previously reported [Au(PTN(Me))2]Cl complex demonstrated 
activity only against E. coli, which is lower than that observed for the
silver(I) PTN(Me) species.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.8b00227 
PMID: 29791143  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

