
1. J Biochem. 2018 Sep 1;164(3):247-255. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvy049.

Slow luminescence kinetics of semi-synthetic aequorin: expression, purification
and structure determination of cf3-aequorin.

Inouye S(1), Tomabechi Y(2), Hosoya T(3), Sekine SI(2), Shirouzu M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Yokohama Research Center, JNC. Co., 5-1 Okawa, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Japan.
(2)Division of Structural and Synthetic Biology, RIKEN Center for Life Science
Technologies, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Chemical Bioscience, Institute of Biomaterials and
Bioengineering, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 2-3-10 Kanda-Surugadai,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

cf3-Aequorin is one of the semi-synthetic aequorins that was produced by
replacing 2-peroxycoelenterazine (CTZ-OOH) in native aequorin with a
2-peroxycoelenterazine analog, and it was prepared using the C2-modified
trifluoromethyl analog of coelenterazine (cf3-CTZ) and the histidine-tagged
apoaequorin expressed in Escherichia coli cells. The purified cf3-aequorin showed
a slow luminescence pattern with half-decay time of maximum intensities of
luminescence of 5.0 s. This is much longer than that of 0.9 s for native
aequorin, and its luminescence capacity was estimated to be 72.8% of that of
native aequorin. The crystal structure of cf3-aequorin was determined at 2.15 Ã…
resolution. The light source of 2-peroxytrifluoromethylcoelenterazine
(cf3-CTZ-OOH) was stabilized by the hydrogen-bonding interactions at the
C2-peroxy moiety and the p-hydroxy moiety at the C6-phenyl group. In native
aequorin, three water molecules contribute to stabilizing CTZ-OOH through
hydrogen bonds. However, cf3-aequorin only contained one water molecule, and the 
trifluoromethyl moiety at the C2-benzyl group of cf3-CTZ-OOH interacted with the 
protein by van der Waals interactions. The slow luminescence kinetics of
cf3-aequorin could be explained by slow conformational changes due to the
bulkiness of the trifluoromethyl group, which might hinder the smooth cleavage of
hydrogen bonds at the C2-peroxy moiety after the binding of Ca2+ to cf3-aequorin.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvy049 
PMID: 29796619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

