
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2018 Jul 17;84(15). pii: e00397-18. doi:
10.1128/AEM.00397-18. Print 2018 Aug 1.

Heterologous Expression of Mycobacterium Alkene Monooxygenases in Gram-Positive
and Gram-Negative Bacterial Hosts.

McCarl V(1), Somerville MV(1), Ly MA(1), Henry R(1), Liew EF(1), Wilson NL(1),
Holmes AJ(1), Coleman NV(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, NSW,
Australia.
(2)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, NSW,
Australia nicholas.coleman@sydney.edu.au.

Alkene monooxygenases (MOs) are soluble di-iron-containing enzymes found in
bacteria that grow on alkenes. Here, we report improved heterologous expression
systems for the propene MO (PmoABCD) and ethene MO (EtnABCD) from Mycobacterium
chubuense strain NBB4. Strong functional expression of PmoABCD and EtnABCD was
achieved in Mycobacterium smegmatis mc2155, yielding epoxidation activities (62
and 27 nmol/min/mg protein, respectively) higher than any reported to date for
heterologous expression of a di-iron MO system. Both PmoABCD and EtnABCD were
specialized for the oxidation of gaseous alkenes (C2 to C4), and their activity
was much lower on liquid alkenes (C5 to C8). Despite intensive efforts to express
the complete EtnABCD enzyme in Escherichia coli, this was not achieved, although 
recombinant EtnB and EtnD proteins could be purified individually in soluble
form. The biochemical function of EtnD as an oxidoreductase was confirmed (1.36
μmol cytochrome c reduced/min/mg protein). Cloning the EtnABCD gene cluster into 
Pseudomonas putida KT2440 yielded detectable epoxidation of ethene (0.5
nmol/min/mg protein), and this could be stimulated (up to 1.1 nmol/min/mg
protein) by the coexpression of cpn60 chaperonins from either Mycobacterium spp. 
or E. coli Successful expression of the ethene MO in a Gram-negative host was
validated by both whole-cell activity assays and peptide mass spectrometry of
induced proteins seen on SDS-PAGE gels.IMPORTANCE Alkene MOs are of interest for 
their potential roles in industrial biocatalysis, most notably for the
stereoselective synthesis of epoxides. Wild-type bacteria that grow on alkenes
have high activities for alkene oxidation but are problematic for biocatalysis,
since they tend to consume the epoxide products. Using recombinant biocatalysts
is the obvious alternative, but a major bottleneck is the low activities of
recombinant alkene MOs. Here, we provide new high-activity recombinant
biocatalysts for alkene oxidation, and we provide insights into how to further
improve these systems.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00397-18 
PMCID: PMC6052275
PMID: 29802186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

