
1. Glycobiology. 2018 Jun 1;28(6):392-405. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwy017.

Cytosolic galectin-3 and -8 regulate antibacterial autophagy through differential
recognition of host glycans on damaged phagosomes.

Weng IC(1), Chen HL(1), Lo TH(1), Lin WH(1), Chen HY(1), Hsu DK(2), Liu FT(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of California-Davis,
Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.

While glycans are generally displayed on the cell surface or confined within the 
lumen of organelles, they can become exposed to the cytosolic milieu upon
disruption of organelle membrane by various stresses or pathogens. Galectins are 
a family of Î²-galactoside-binding animal lectins synthesized and predominantly
localized in the cytosol. Recent research indicates that some galectins may act
as "danger signal sensors" by detecting unusual exposure of glycans to the
cytosol. Galectin-8 was shown to promote antibacterial autophagy by recognizing
host glycans on ruptured vacuolar membranes and interacting with the autophagy
adaptor protein NDP52. Galectin-3 also accumulates at damaged phagosomes
containing bacteria; however, its functional consequence remains obscure. By
studying mouse macrophages infected with Listeria monocytogenes (LM), we showed
that endogenous galectin-3 protects intracellular LM by suppressing the
autophagic response through a host N-glycan-dependent mechanism. Knock out of the
galectin-3 gene resulted in enhanced LC3 recruitment to LM and decreased
bacterial replication, a phenotype recapitulated when Galectin-8-deficient
macrophages were depleted of N-glycans. Moreover, we explored the concept that
alterations in cell surface glycosylation by extracellular factors can be
deciphered by cytosolic galectins during the process of phagocytosis/endocytosis,
followed by rupture of phagosomal/endosomal membrane. Notably, treatment of cells
with sialidase, which removes sialic acid from glycans, resulted in increased
galectin-3 accumulation and decreased galectin-8 recruitment at damaged
phagosomes, and led to a stronger anti-autophagic response. Our findings
demonstrate that cytosolic galectins may sense changes in glycosylation at the
cell surface and modulate cellular response through differential recognition of
glycans on ruptured phagosomal membranes.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwy017 
PMID: 29800364  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

