
1. J Contemp Dent Pract. 2018 May 1;19(5):527-534.

Effect of 0.8% Hyaluronic Acid in Conventional Treatment of Moderate to Severe
Chronic Periodontitis.

Al-Shammari NM(1), Shafshak SM(2), Ali MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Periodontics, Department of Preventive Dental Science, Riyadh Elm 
University, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, e-mail: n-alsh@hotmail.com.
(2)Division of Periodontics, Department of Preventive Dental Science, Riyadh Elm 
University, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(3)Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Pharmacy and Allied
Sciences, Riyadh Elm University, Riyadh Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to evaluate the effect of the subgingival
application of 0.8% hyaluronic acid (HA) gel (GENGIGELÂ®) as an adjunct to scaling
and root planing (SRP) on clinical parameters and expression of human beta
defensin-2 (hBD-2) in patients with moderate to severe chronic periodontitis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this randomized, split mouth design study, 24
participants with moderate to severe chronic periodontitis were evaluated after
full mouth SRP. In the test sites 1 mL of 0.8% hyaluronan gel was applied
subgingivally after SRP at baseline and 1 week post therapy. Plaque index (PI),
gingival index (GI), papillary bleeding index (PBI), periodontal probing depth
(PPD), and clinical attachment loss (CAL) were recorded and gingival crevicular
fluid (GCF) samples were collected at baseline, after 6 and 12 weeks. Expression 
of human beta defensin-2 (hBD-2) was analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay.
RESULTS: At baseline, there were no statistical differences between test and
control sites in all clinical parameters and hBD-2 expression. An improvement of 
PI, GI, PBI, PPD, and CAL was observed at 6 and 12 weeks (p < 0.05) in both
groups. Clinically, it was noticed that all indices except CAL had more
statistically significant reduction in test sites than control sites at 6 and 12 
weeks. The hBD-2 levels were significantly higher in the test sites than in the
control sites at 6 and 12 weeks.
CONCLUSION: The local application of 0.8% hyaluronan gel with SRP have a positive
effect on periodontal health of moderate to severe chronic periodontitis patients
after 6 and 12 weeks.
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Subgingival application of 0.8% HA gel following SRP has
shown anti-inflammatory effect and has a beneficial effect on clinical parameters
in moderate to severe chronic periodontitis patients.


PMID: 29807962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

