
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2018 Jul 17;84(15). pii: e00722-18. doi:
10.1128/AEM.00722-18. Print 2018 Aug 1.

Agmatine Production by Aspergillus oryzae Is Elevated by Low pH during
Solid-State Cultivation.

Akasaka N(1), Kato S(2), Kato S(2), Hidese R(2), Wagu Y(3), Sakoda H(1), Fujiwara
S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Microbiology, Marukan Vinegar Co. Ltd., Kobe, Hyogo,
Japan.
(2)Department of Bioscience, Graduate School of Science and Technology, Kwansei
Gakuin University, Sanda, Hyogo, Japan.
(3)Bio'c Co. Ltd., Muro-cho, Toyohashi, Aichi, Japan.
(4)Department of Bioscience, Graduate School of Science and Technology, Kwansei
Gakuin University, Sanda, Hyogo, Japan fujiwara-s@kwansei.ac.jp.

Sake (rice wine) produced by multiple parallel fermentation (MPF) involving
Aspergillus oryzae (strain RW) and Saccharomyces cerevisiae under solid-state
cultivation conditions contained 3.5 mM agmatine, while that produced from
enzymatically saccharified rice syrup by S. cerevisiae contained <0.01 mM
agmatine. Agmatine was also produced in ethanol-free rice syrup prepared with A. 
oryzae under solid-state cultivation (3.1 mM) but not under submerged
cultivation, demonstrating that A. oryzae in solid-state culture produces
agmatine. The effect of cultivation conditions on agmatine production was
examined. Agmatine production was boosted at 30°C and reached the highest level
(6.3 mM) at pH 5.3. The addition of l-lactic, succinic, and citric acids reduced 
the initial culture pHs to 3.0, 3.5, and 3.2, respectively, resulting in a
further increase in agmatine accumulation (8.2, 8.7, and 8.3 mM, respectively).
Homogenate from a solid-state culture exhibited a maximum l-arginine
decarboxylase (ADC) activity (74 pmol · min-1 · μg-1) at pH 3.0 at 30°C;
homogenate from a submerged culture exhibited an extremely low activity (<0.3
pmol · min-1 · μg-1) under all conditions tested. These observations indicated
that efficient agmatine production in ethanol-free rice syrup is achieved by an
unidentified low-pH-dependent ADC induced during solid-state cultivation of A.
oryzae, even though A. oryzae lacks ADC orthologs and instead possesses four
ornithine decarboxylases (ODC1 to ODC4). Recombinant ODC1 and ODC2 exhibited no
ADC activity at acidic pH (pH < 4.0), suggesting that other decarboxylases or an 
unidentified ADC is involved in agmatine production.IMPORTANCE It has been
speculated that, in general, fungi do not synthesize agmatine from l-arginine
because they do not possess genes encoding arginine decarboxylase. Numerous
preclinical studies have shown that agmatine exerts pleiotropic effects on
various molecular targets, leading to an improved quality of life. In the present
study, we first demonstrated that l-arginine was a feasible substrate for
agmatine production by the fungus Aspergillus oryzae RW. We observed that the
productivity of agmatine by A. oryzae RW was elevated at low pH only during
solid-state cultivation. A. oryzae is utilized in the production of various Asian
fermented foods. The saccharification conditions optimized in the current study
could be employed not only in the production of an agmatine-containing
ethanol-free rice syrup but also in the production of many types of fermented
foods, such as soy sauce (shoyu), rice vinegar, etc., as well as for use as novel
therapeutic agents and nutraceuticals.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00722-18 
PMCID: PMC6052267
PMID: 29802188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

