
1. J Periodontol. 2018 Nov;89(11):1326-1333. doi: 10.1002/JPER.17-0665. Epub 2018
Aug 14.

Isolation and characterization of progenitor cells from surgically created early 
healing alveolar defects in humans: A preliminary study.

Sant'Ana ACP(1), Damante CA(1), Frias Martinez MA(1), Valdivia MAM(1), Karam
PSH(1), de Oliveira FA(2), Oliveira RC(2), Gasparoto TH(3), Campanelli AP(3),
Zangrando MSR(1), Rezende MLR(1), Greghi SLA(1), Passanezi E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Periodontics, Department of Prosthodontics and Periodontics.
School of Dentistry at Bauru - University of São Paulo, Bauru, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Discipline of Biochemistry, Department of Oral Biology. School of Dentistry at
Bauru - University of São Paulo, Bauru, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Discipline of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Oral Biology. School 
of Dentistry at Bauru - University of São Paulo, Bauru, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The granulation tissue present in surgically-created early healing
sockets has been considered as a possible source of osteoprogenitor cells for
periodontal regeneration, as demonstrated in animal studies. However, the in
vitro osteogenic properties of tissue removed from human surgically-created early
healing alveolar defects (SC-EHAD) remains to be established, being that the aim 
of this study.
METHODS: Surgical defects were created in the edentulous ridge of two
systemically healthy adults. The healing tissue present in these defects was
removed 21 days later for the establishment of primary culture. The in vitro
characteristics of the cultured cells were determined by Armelin method,
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay,
immunohistochemistry, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, mineralization assay, 
and flow cytometry for detection of stem cells/osteoprogenitor cell markers.
RESULTS: Cells were able to adhere to the plastic and assumed spindle-shaped
morphology at earlier passages, changing to a cuboidal one with increasing
passages. Differences in the proliferation rate were observed with increasing
passages, suggesting osteogenic differentiation. ALP and mineralization
activities were detected in conventional and osteogenic medium. Fresh samples of 
SC-EHAD tissue exhibited CD34- and CD45- phenotypes. Cells at later passages
(14th) exhibited CD34- , CD45- , CD105- , CD166- , and collagen type I+
phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Tissue removed from SC-EHAD is a possible source of progenitor cells.

© 2018 American Academy of Periodontology.

DOI: 10.1002/JPER.17-0665 
PMID: 29846937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

