
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2018 Oct 1;117:586-591. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.05.199.
Epub 2018 May 28.

Sandwich fusion of CBM9_2 to enhance xylanase thermostability and activity.

Yang A(1), Cheng J(1), Liu M(1), Shangguan Y(1), Liu L(2).

Author information: 
(1)the Life Science College, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou 450002,
China.
(2)the Life Science College, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou 450002,
China; The Key Laboratory of Enzyme Engineering of Agricultural Microbiology,
Ministry of Agriculture, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou 450002, China. 
Electronic address: liangwei@henau.edu.cn.

Used as model for sandwich fusion, a mesophilic Aspergillus niger GH11 xylanase
(Xyn) was fused into C2-Xyn-C2 with a thermophilic Thermotaga maritima GH10
xylanase carbohydrate-binding module CBM9_2 (C2). Linearized plasmids
C2-pET20b-C2-Xyn were amplified from template pET20b-Xyn-C2 with a 4.3 kb
C2-pET20b megaprimer, ligated into circular plasmids in blunt-end ligation, and
transformed into E. coli BL21 (DE3) cells. The C2-Xyn-C2 had optimum activity at 
45 °C and pH 4.2, a 2.85 h thermal inactivation half-life at 80 °C and a 8.69 h
at 50 °C, with the 8.69 h value 24.8-, 7.5-, and 7.1-fold longer than the Xyn and
single terminal fusion enzymes Xyn-C2, and C2-Xyn. Thermodynamics showed that the
enzyme had a 1.8 °C higher melting temperature, lower values ΔS, ΔΔG, and a
denser structure than the Xyn. Kinetics showed that the C2-Xyn-C2 catalytic
efficiency was 1.2-~6-fold and 2.7-~7.9-fold higher on beechwood and oat-spelt
xylan than those of the enzymes Xyn, Xyn-C2, and C2-Xyn. The sandwich fusion
evolved the xylanase with "armor-hands" to enhance simultaneously thermostability
and activity in quality.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.05.199 
PMID: 29852224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

