
1. Chembiochem. 2019 Jan 18;20(2):181-192. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201800260. Epub 2018
Jul 4.

Unravelling the Specificity of Laminaribiose Phosphorylase from Paenibacillus sp.
YM-1 towards Donor Substrates Glucose/Mannose 1-Phosphate by Using X-ray
Crystallography and Saturation Transfer Difference NMR Spectroscopy.

Kuhaudomlarp S(1), Walpole S(2), Stevenson CEM(1), Nepogodiev SA(1), Lawson
DM(1), Angulo J(2), Field RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park, 
Norwich, NR4 7UH, UK.
(2)School of Pharmacy, University of East Anglia, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK.

Glycoside phosphorylases (GPs) carry out a reversible phosphorolysis of
carbohydrates into oligosaccharide acceptors and the corresponding sugar
1-phosphates. The reversibility of the reaction enables the use of GPs as
biocatalysts for carbohydrate synthesis. Glycosyl hydrolase family 94 (GH94),
which only comprises GPs, is one of the most studied GP families that have been
used as biocatalysts for carbohydrate synthesis, in academic research and in
industrial production. Understanding the mechanism of GH94 enzymes is a crucial
step towards enzyme engineering to improve and expand the applications of these
enzymes in synthesis. In this work with a GH94 laminaribiose phosphorylase from
Paenibacillus sp. YM-1 (PsLBP), we have demonstrated an enzymatic synthesis of
disaccharide 1 (β-d-mannopyranosyl-(1→3)-d-glucopyranose) by using a natural
acceptor glucose and noncognate donor substrate α-mannose 1-phosphate (Man1P). To
investigate how the enzyme recognises different sugar 1-phosphates, the X-ray
crystal structures of PsLBP in complex with Glc1P and Man1P have been solved,
providing the first molecular detail of the recognition of a noncognate donor
substrate by GPs, which revealed the importance of hydrogen bonding between the
active site residues and hydroxy groups at C2, C4, and C6 of sugar 1-phosphates. 
Furthermore, we used saturation transfer difference NMR spectroscopy to support
crystallographic studies on the sugar 1-phosphates, as well as to provide further
insights into the PsLBP recognition of the acceptors and disaccharide products.

© 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201800260 
PMID: 29856496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

