
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2018 May 14;8:146. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00146.
eCollection 2018.

Epithelial Keratins Modulate cMet Expression and Signaling and Promote
InlB-Mediated Listeria monocytogenes Infection of HeLa Cells.

Cruz R(1)(2)(3), Pereira-Castro I(1)(4), Almeida MT(1)(2), Moreira A(1)(3)(4),
Cabanes D(1)(2), Sousa S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Group of Molecular Microbiology, Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em
Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(2)Group of Molecular Microbiology, Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology,
Porto, Portugal.
(3)Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal.
(4)Gene Regulation Group, Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, Porto,
Portugal.

The host cytoskeleton is a major target for bacterial pathogens during infection.
In particular, pathogens usurp the actin cytoskeleton function to strongly adhere
to the host cell surface, to induce plasma membrane remodeling allowing invasion 
and to spread from cell to cell and disseminate to the whole organism. Keratins
are cytoskeletal proteins that are the major components of intermediate filaments
in epithelial cells however, their role in bacterial infection has been
disregarded. Here we investigate the role of the major epithelial keratins,
keratins 8 and 18 (K8 and K18), in the cellular infection by Listeria
monocytogenes. We found that K8 and K18 are required for successful
InlB/cMet-dependent L. monocytogenes infection, but are dispensable for
InlA/E-cadherin-mediated invasion. Both K8 and K18 accumulate at InlB-mediated
internalization sites following actin recruitment and modulate actin dynamics at 
those sites. We also reveal the key role of K8 and K18 in HGF-induced signaling
which occurs downstream the activation of cMet. Strikingly, we show here that
K18, and at a less extent K8, controls the expression of cMet and other surface
receptors such TfR and integrin β1, by promoting the stability of their
corresponding transcripts. Together, our results reveal novel functions for major
epithelial keratins in the modulation of actin dynamics at the bacterial entry
sites and in the control of surface receptors mRNA stability and expression.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00146 
PMCID: PMC5960701
PMID: 29868502  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

