
1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2018 May 26;7(6). pii: E73. doi: 10.3390/antiox7060073.

Inhibitory Effects of Solvent-Partitioned Fractions of Two Nigerian Herbs
(Spondias mombin Linn. and Mangifera indica L.) on α-Amylase and α-Glucosidase.

Ojo OA(1)(2), Afon AA(3), Ojo AB(4), Ajiboye BO(5), Oyinloye BE(6)(7), Kappo
AP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Phytomedicine, Biomedical Toxicology and Diabetes Research Laboratories,
Department of Biochemistry, Afe Babalola University, Ado-Ekiti 360001, Nigeria.
ojooa@abuad.edu.ng.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Ilorin, Ilorin 240222, Nigeria.
ojooa@abuad.edu.ng.
(3)Phytomedicine, Biomedical Toxicology and Diabetes Research Laboratories,
Department of Biochemistry, Afe Babalola University, Ado-Ekiti 360001, Nigeria.
adeolabunmi24@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Afe Babalola University, Ado-Ekiti 360001,
Nigeria. ojoab@abuad.edu.ng.
(5)Phytomedicine, Biomedical Toxicology and Diabetes Research Laboratories,
Department of Biochemistry, Afe Babalola University, Ado-Ekiti 360001, Nigeria.
ajiboyebo@abuad.edu.ng.
(6)Phytomedicine, Biomedical Toxicology and Diabetes Research Laboratories,
Department of Biochemistry, Afe Babalola University, Ado-Ekiti 360001, Nigeria.
babatunjioe@abuad.edu.ng.
(7)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
babatunjioe@abuad.edu.ng.
(8)Biotechnology and Structural Biology (BSB) Group, Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, University of Zululand, KwaDlangezwa 3886, South Africa.
kappoA@unizulu.ac.za.

Therapies directed towards controlling hyperglycemia, the hallmark of type-2
diabetes mellitus, go a long way in managing diabetes and its related
complications. Reducing glucose level through the inhibition of the relevant
carbohydrate hydrolyzing enzymes is one among many routes in the management of
diabetes. This study investigates the in vitro enzyme inhibitory and antioxidant 
properties of solvent-partitioned fractions of Spondias mombin and Mangifera
indica leaves; which are used extensively in the treatment of diabetic patients
locally. The leaves of S. mombin and M. indica were extracted with methanol and
fractionated to obtain n-hexane (HF), ethyl acetate (EAF), n-butanol (BF), and
aqueous (AF) fractions successively. The α-amylase and α-glucosidase inhibitory
activities of fractions of S. mombin and M. indica leaves were investigated while
the antioxidant activity of each fraction was analyzed using iron chelating and
ABTS (2,2'-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline)-6-sulphonic acid) radical scavenging
assay. Our findings indicated that the ethyl acetate fraction of M. indica leaves
contained a considerably higher (p < 0.05) amount of total phenolic, flavonoids, 
metal ion, and ABTS radical scavenging activity than the ethyl acetate fractions 
of S. mombin. Furthermore, the ethyl acetate fraction of M. indica had a
considerably higher (p < 0.05) inhibitory effect on α-glucosidase (IC50 = 25.11 ±
0.01 μg mL-1), and α-amylase (IC50 = 24.04 ± 0.12 μg mL-1) activities than the S.
mombin fraction. Hence, the inhibitory activities of S. mombin and M. indica
leaves suggest that they are a potential source of orally active antidiabetic
agents and could be employed to formulate new plant-based pharmaceutical and
nutraceutical drugs to improve human health.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox7060073 
PMCID: PMC6025479
PMID: 29861455 

