
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2018 Jun 2;19(6). pii: E1650. doi: 10.3390/ijms19061650.

Differential Effects of Statins on Inflammatory Interleukin-8 and Antimicrobial
Peptide Human Î’-Defensin 2 Responses in Salmonella-Infected Intestinal Epithelial
Cells.

Huang FC(1), Huang SC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 833, Taiwan. huang817@cgmh.org.tw.
(2)Department of Pathology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung
833, Taiwan. shuang@cgmh.org.tw.

Alternative therapies are needed to reduce the use of antibiotics and incidence
of drug-resistant Salmonellosis. Previous studies have revealed important roles
of statins in regulating innate immunity. Therefore, we investigated the effects 
of statins on innate immunity in Salmonella-infected intestinal epithelial cells 
(IECs), which are involved in mucosal innate immunity. SW480 cells and Akt siRNA-
or vitamin D receptor (VDR) siRNA-transfected SW480 cells were infected by
wild-type S. Typhimurium strain SL1344 in the presence or absence of statins. The
mRNA or protein expression was analyzed by real-time quantitative PCR or western 
blot analysis, respectively. Simvastatin or fluvastatin caused IL-8
(interleukin-8) suppression, but increased hBD-2 mRNA expression in
Salmonella-infected SW480 cells. Both statins enhanced phosphorylated Akt and VDR
expressions. Akt or VDR knockdown by siRNA counteracted the suppressive effect of
simvastatin on IL-8 expression, whereas VDR knockdown diminished the enhanced
hBD-2 expression in Salmonella-infected SW480 cells. Therefore, we observed
differential regulation of statins on inflammatory IL-8 and anti-microbial hBD-2 
expressions in Salmonella-infected IECs via PI3K/Akt signaling and VDR protein
expression, respectively. The enhanced activity of antimicrobial peptides by
statins in Salmonella-infected IECs could protect the host against infection, and
modulation of pro-inflammatory responses could prevent the detrimental effects of
overwhelming inflammation in the host.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms19061650 
PMCID: PMC6032317
PMID: 29865262  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

