
1. Chemosphere. 2018 Feb;193:869-874. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.11.094. Epub
2017 Nov 20.

Residues of pesticides and metabolites in chicken kidney, liver and muscle
samples from poultry farms in Dar es Salaam and Pwani, Tanzania.

Mahugija JAM(1), Chibura PE(2), Lugwisha EHJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Department, University of Dar es Salaam, P.O. Box 35061 Dar es
Salaam, Tanzania. Electronic address: mahugija@udsm.ac.tz.
(2)Chemistry Department, University of Dar es Salaam, P.O. Box 35061 Dar es
Salaam, Tanzania.

The concentrations of organochlorine and organophosphorus pesticides and
metabolites were investigated in chicken kidney, liver and muscle samples
obtained from chickens collected from four poultry farms in Dar es Salaam and
Pwani regions in Tanzania. The samples were extracted by solid dispersion using
cyclohexane:ethyl acetate. The extracts were cleaned by adsorption column
chromatography. The analytes were determined using gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry (GC-MS). The concentrations of total DDT, total endosulfan and total
HCHs in the samples ranged from 0.71 to 26, 0.3 to 7.9 and 0.02-10.4 mg/kg lipid 
weight (lw), respectively. The highest concentrations of aldrin, dieldrin,
chlorpyrifos, fenitrothion and pirimiphos methyl were 5.5, 4.8, 9.7, 5.6 and
7.8 mg/kg lw, respectively. The highest concentrations of the contaminants were
found in the kidney and liver samples. The sites in Dar es Salaam showed the
highest concentrations of the compounds. Most of the concentrations were above
the maximum residue limits (MRLs) indicating risks and concerns for livestock and
public health.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.11.094 
PMID: 29874761  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

