
1. Plant Cell Physiol. 2018 Sep 1;59(9):1860-1873. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcy103.

Mechanisms for Protein Redistribution in Thylakoids of Anabaena During Cell
Differentiation.

Santamarï A-Gï Mez J(1), Mariscal V(1), Luque I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Bioquï¿½mica Vegetal y Fotosï¿½ntesis, CSIC and Universidad de
Sevilla, Avda Amï¿½rico Vespucio 49, Seville E-41092, Spain.

Thylakoid membranes are far from being homogeneous in composition. On the
contrary, compositional heterogeneity of lipid and protein content is well known 
to exist in these membranes. The mechanisms for the confinement of proteins at a 
particular membrane domain have started to be unveiled, but we are far from a
thorough understanding, and many issues remain to be elucidated. During the
differentiation of heterocysts in filamentous cyanobacteria of the Anabaena and
Nostoc genera, thylakoids undergo a complete reorganization, separating into two 
membrane domains of different appearance and subcellular localization. Evidence
also indicates different functionality and protein composition for these two
membrane domains. In this work, we have addressed the mechanisms that govern the 
specific localization of proteins at a particular membrane domain. Two classes of
proteins were distinguished according to their distribution in the thylakoids.
Our results indicate that the specific accumulation of proteins of the CURVATURE 
THYLAKOID 1 (CURT1) family and proteins containing the homologous CAAD domain at 
subpolar honeycomb thylakoids is mediated by multiple mechanisms including a
previously unnoticed phenomenon of thylakoid membrane migration.

ï¿½ The Author 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Japanese
Society of Plant Physiologists. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/pcp/pcy103 
PMID: 29878163  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

