
1. J Biosci. 2018 Jun;43(2):407-416.

A parasporin from Bacillus thuringiensis native to Peninsular India induces
apoptosis in cancer cells through intrinsic pathway.

Chubicka T(1), Girija D, Deepa K, Salini S, Meera N, Raghavamenon AC, Divya MK,
Babu TD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Amala Cancer Research Centre, Amala Nagar P O,
Thrissur, Kerala 680 555, India.

Parasporins, a class of non-insecticidal crystal proteins of Bacillus
thuringiensis (Bt) are being explored as promising anticancer agents due to their
specific toxicity to cancer cells. The present study has identified 25 Bt
isolates harbouring parasporin genes from Western Ghats region, the hotspot of
biodiversity in India. Among these, the isolate, KAU 41 (Kerala Agricultural
University isolate 41) contained non-hemolytic homogenous crystals showing
specific cytotoxicity towards cancer cells. SDS-PAGE analysis of this crystal,
isolated by aqueous biphasic separation, revealed a 31 kDa sized peptide. The
N-terminal sequence deciphered in BLAST analysis showed homology to a
hypothetical Bt protein. Upon proteolysis, a 29 kDa active peptide was generated 
which exhibited heterogenic cytotoxic spectrum on various cancer cells. HeLa
cells were highly susceptible to this peptide with IC 50 1 lg/mL and showed
characteristics of apoptosis. RT-qPCR analysis revealed the overexpression of
APAF1, caspase 3 and 9 by 14.9, 8 and 7.4 fold, respectively which indicates the 
activation of intrinsic pathway of apoptosis. However, at higher concentrations
of peptide (greater than 3 lg/mL), necrotic death was prominent. The results
suggest that the 31 kDa protein from Bt isolate, KAU 41 is a parasporin that may 
have high therapeutic potential.


PMID: 29872027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

