
1. Sci Total Environ. 2018 Nov 1;640-641:609-618. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.05.369. Epub 2018 Jun 2.

Use of fluorescence excitation-emission matrices coupled with parallel factor
analysis to monitor C- and N-DBPs formation in drinking water recovered from
cyanobacteria-laden sludge dewatering.

Ma C(1), Xu H(2), Zhang L(3), Pei H(4), Jin Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan
250100, China; Shandong Analysis and Test Center, Qilu University of Technology
(Shandong Academy of Sciences), Jinan 250014, China.
(2)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan
250100, China.
(3)College of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, Hohai University, Changzhou 
213031, China.
(4)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan
250100, China; Shandong Provincial Engineering Center on Environmental Science
and Technology, Jinan, China. Electronic address: haiyanhup@126.com.

This is the first time that correlations between the spectroscopic properties of 
algal organic matter (AOM) and cyanobacteria-related C- and N-disinfection
byproduct (DBP) formation have been presented. Three types of coagulants,
aluminium chloride (AC), chitosan (CTS) and a composite chitosan-aluminium
chloride (CTSAC), were selected to assess and compare the performance of
coagulation to control DBPs formation in dewatering water (DW). Fluorescence
excitation-emission matrices (EEMs) coupled with parallel factor analysis
(PARAFAC) indicated that four components dominated the EEM of the DW samples.
Examination of C-, N-DPBs formation and attendant changes in the AOM parameters
allows the establishment of strong linear relationships between yields of the
trihalomethanes, haloacetonitriles and trichloronitromethane and the relative
changes in the fluorescence compounds. Stronger linear correlations were found
between trihalomethanes and tryptophan-like substance C1 (r = 0.918), between
haloacetonitriles and C1 (r = 0.934), and between trichloronitromethane and amino
acid-like substance C2 (r = 0.915) than other AOM parameters, suggesting that
tryptophan-like substance and amino acid-like substance in AOM play major roles
in generating cyanobacteria-related DBPs upon chlorination. Furthermore, because 
the CTSAC composite was effective in removing fluorophores and caused little cell
lysis during the first 4 days of sludge storage, the production of C-, N-DBPs in 
the DW was lower than those in the AC or CTS systems for the same storage period.
This indicates the feasibility of surrogate monitoring of the production of
cyanobacteria-related C-, N-DBPs via online measurements of water EEM
fluorescence. CTSAC composite coagulant is thus recommended, and the sludge
should be disposed of within 4 days to obtain DW with lower DBPs formation
potentials.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.05.369 
PMID: 29870937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

