
1. Metab Eng. 2018 Jul;48:197-207. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2018.06.003. Epub 2018 Jun
7.

Engineering Pseudomonas putida KT2440 for efficient ethylene glycol utilization.

Franden MA(1), Jayakody LN(1), Li WJ(2), Wagner NJ(1), Cleveland NS(1), Michener 
WE(1), Hauer B(3), Blank LM(2), Wierckx N(4), Klebensberger J(5), Beckham GT(6).

Author information: 
(1)National Bioenergy Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO
80401, USA.
(2)Institute of Applied Microbiology, RWTH Aachen University, Worringerweg 1,
52074 Aachen, Germany.
(3)University of Stuttgart, Institute of Biochemistry and Technical Biochemistry,
Allmandring 31, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany.
(4)Institute of Applied Microbiology, RWTH Aachen University, Worringerweg 1,
52074 Aachen, Germany. Electronic address: nick.wierckx@rwth-aachen.de.
(5)University of Stuttgart, Institute of Biochemistry and Technical Biochemistry,
Allmandring 31, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany. Electronic address:
janosch.klebensberger@itb.uni-stuttgart.de.
(6)National Bioenergy Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO
80401, USA. Electronic address: gregg.beckham@nrel.gov.

Erratum in
    Metab Eng. 2021 Jan 21;:.

Ethylene glycol is used as a raw material in the production of polyethylene
terephthalate, in antifreeze, as a gas hydrate inhibitor in pipelines, and for
many other industrial applications. It is metabolized by aerobic microbial
processes via the highly toxic intermediates glycolaldehyde and glycolate through
C2 metabolic pathways. Pseudomonas putida KT2440, which has been engineered for
environmental remediation applications given its high toxicity tolerance and
broad substrate specificity, is not able to efficiently metabolize ethylene
glycol, despite harboring putative genes for this purpose. To further expand the 
metabolic portfolio of P. putida, we elucidated the metabolic pathway to enable
ethylene glycol via systematic overexpression of glyoxylate carboligase (gcl) in 
combination with other genes. Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction demonstrated that all of the four genes in genomic proximity to gcl
(hyi, glxR, ttuD, and pykF) are transcribed as an operon. Where the expression of
only two genes (gcl and glxR) resulted in growth in ethylene glycol, improved
growth and ethylene glycol utilization were observed when the entire gcl operon
was expressed. Both glycolaldehyde and glyoxal inhibit growth in concentrations
of ethylene glycol above 50 mM. To overcome this bottleneck, the additional
overexpression of the glycolate oxidase (glcDEF) operon removes the glycolate
bottleneck and minimizes the production of these toxic intermediates, permitting 
growth in up to 2 M (~124 g/L) and complete consumption of 0.5 M (31 g/L)
ethylene glycol in shake flask experiments. In addition, the engineered strain
enables conversion of ethylene glycol to medium-chain-length
polyhydroxyalkanoates (mcl-PHAs). Overall, this study provides a robust P. putida
KT2440 strain for ethylene glycol consumption, which will serve as a foundational
strain for further biocatalyst development for applications in the remediation of
waste polyester plastics and biomass-derived wastewater streams.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2018.06.003 
PMID: 29885475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

