
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Jun 4;9:1223. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01223. eCollection
2018.

Autophagy Impairment Is Associated With Increased Inflammasome Activation and
Reversal Reaction Development in Multibacillary Leprosy.

de Mattos Barbosa MG(1), de Andrade Silva BJ(1), Assis TQ(1), da Silva Prata
RB(1), Ferreira H(1), Andrade PR(1), da Paixão de Oliveira JA(1), Sperandio da
Silva GM(2), da Costa Nery JA(1), Sarno EN(1), Pinheiro RO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leprosy Laboratory, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Evandro Chagas National Institute of Infectology, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil.

Leprosy reactions are responsible for incapacities in leprosy and represent the
major cause of permanent neuropathy. The identification of biomarkers able to
identify patients more prone to develop reaction could contribute to adequate
clinical management and the prevention of disability. Reversal reaction may occur
in unstable borderline patients and also in lepromatous patients. To identify
biomarker signature profiles related with the reversal reaction onset,
multibacillary patients were recruited and classified accordingly the occurrence 
or not of reversal reaction during or after multidrugtherapy. Analysis of skin
lesion cells at diagnosis of multibacillary leprosy demonstrated that in the
group that developed reaction (T1R) in the future there was a downregulation of
autophagy associated with the overexpression of TLR2 and MLST8. The autophagy
impairment in T1R group was associated with increased expression of NLRP3,
caspase-1 (p10) and IL-1β production. In addition, analysis of IL-1β production
in serum from multibacillary patients demonstrated that patients who developed
reversal reaction have significantly increased concentrations of IL-1β at
diagnosis, suggesting that the pattern of innate immune responses could predict
the reactional episode outcome. In vitro analysis demonstrated that the blockade 
of autophagy with 3-methyladenine (3-MA) in Mycobacterium leprae-stimulated human
primary monocytes increased the assembly of NLRP3 specks assembly, and it was
associated with an increase of IL-1β and IL-6 production. Together, our data
suggest an important role for autophagy in multibacillary leprosy patients to
avoid exacerbated inflammasome activation and the onset of reversal reaction.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01223 
PMCID: PMC5994478
PMID: 29915584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

