
1. Clin Oral Investig. 2019 Feb;23(2):965-974. doi: 10.1007/s00784-018-2521-z. Epub 
2018 Jun 18.

Synthesis and application of triclosan methacrylate monomer in resin composites.

de Paula AB(1), Taparelli JR(2), Alonso RCB(3)(4), Innocentini-Mei LH(2),
Puppin-Rontani RM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Restorative Dentistry, Dental Materials Division, Piracicaba
Dental School, University of Campinas, Limeira Avenue, 901, Vila Rezende, Areiao,
Piracicaba, São Paulo, 13414-903, Brazil. andbol_63@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Materials and Bioprocess Engineering, School of Chemical
Engineering, State University of Campinas, UNICAMP, Campinas, SP, Brazil.
(3)Technological and Research Center (NPT), Mogi das Cruzes University (UMC),
Mogi das Cruzes, SP, Brazil.
(4)School of Dentistry, Metropolitan University of Santos (UNIMES), Santos, SP,
Brazil.
(5)Department of Restorative Dentistry, Dental Materials Division, Piracicaba
Dental School, University of Campinas, Limeira Avenue, 901, Vila Rezende, Areiao,
Piracicaba, São Paulo, 13414-903, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the antibacterial activity, bacterial viability,
cytotoxicity, and mechanical/physical properties of a novel methacrylate
triclosan-derivative monomer (TM) incorporated in dental resin composite.
METHODS: TM was synthesized by esterification and, after characterization by
FT-IR, was added to an experimental composite. Samples were divided into two
groups according to TM presence, i.e., C1 (control) and C2 (C1 + 14.4% TM).
Microbiological properties: Specimens (C1 and C2) were prepared and placed on
bacterial suspensions of Streptococcus mutans. Antibacterial activity, MTT, and
live/dead bacterial viability were used to test the resin composites. All assays 
were performed in triplicates. Mechanical properties: Specimens underwent
compression (CS) and flexural strength (FS) tests conducted in an Instron
universal testing machine at a crosshead speed of 0.5 mm/min. Physical
properties: Specimens were assessed for Knoop hardness (KHN) and crosslink
density (CD). Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy allowed the degree of
conversion (DC) to be evaluated. Data were subjected to appropriate statistical
tests according to data distribution and assay (p < 0.05).
RESULTS: Microbiological properties: C2 showed the lowest biofilm accumulation
and the highest membrane-compromised bacteria in the biofilm. Mechanical/physical
properties: For CS, FS, KHN, and DC, there was no significant difference between 
groups C1 and C2; however, significant difference was observed for the CD assay.
CONCLUSIONS: The triclosan methacrylate reduces bacterial adhesion of S. mutans
and decreased the formation of bacterial biofilm without affecting important
polymer properties. The triclosan methacrylate incorporated in resin composite
could greatly reduce the live bacterial adhesion of S. mutans and decrease the
formation of bacterial biofilm without affecting important polymer properties.
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: The resin composites containing triclosan methacrylate
could greatly reduce the bacterial adhesion and biofilm formation. That might
prevent the secondary caries round the margins of the restorations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00784-018-2521-z 
PMID: 29911287  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

