
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Jun 6;9:1266. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01266. eCollection
2018.

Functions of CD1d-Restricted Invariant Natural Killer T Cells in Antimicrobial
Immunity and Potential Applications for Infection Control.

Kinjo Y(1), Takatsuka S(1), Kitano N(1), Kawakubo S(1), Abe M(1), Ueno K(1),
Miyazaki Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemotherapy and Mycoses, National Institute of Infectious
Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.

CD1d-restricted invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are innate-type
lymphocytes that express a T-cell receptor (TCR) containing an invariant α chain 
encoded by the Vα14 gene in mice and Vα24 gene in humans. These iNKT cells
recognize endogenous, microbial, and synthetic glycolipid antigens presented by
the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-like molecule CD1d. Upon TCR
stimulation by glycolipid antigens, iNKT cells rapidly produce large amounts of
cytokines, including interferon-γ (IFNγ) and interleukin-4 (IL-4). Activated iNKT
cells contribute to host protection against a broad spectrum of microbial
pathogens, and glycolipid-mediated stimulation of iNKT cells ameliorates many
microbial infections by augmenting innate and acquired immunity. In some cases,
however, antigen-activated iNKT cells exacerbate microbial infections by
promoting pathogenic inflammation. Therefore, it is important to identify
appropriate microbial targets for the application of iNKT cell activation as a
treatment or vaccine adjuvant. Many studies have found that iNKT cell activation 
induces potent adjuvant activities promoting protective vaccine effects. In this 
review, we summarize the functions of CD1d-restricted iNKT cells in immune
responses against microbial pathogens and describe the potential applications of 
glycolipid-mediated iNKT cell activation for preventing and controlling microbial
infections.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01266 
PMCID: PMC5997780
PMID: 29928278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

