
1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2019;15(6):1427-1435. doi: 10.1080/21645515.2018.1491499. 
Epub 2018 Jul 12.

Deletions in guaBA and htrA but not clpX or rfaL constitute a live-attenuated
vaccine strain of Salmonella Newport to protect against serogroup C2-C3
Salmonella in mice.

Fuche FJ(1), Jones JA, Ramachandran G, Higginson EE, Simon R, Tennant SM.

Author information: 
(1)a Center for Vaccine Development and Institute for Global Health, Department
of Medicine , University of Maryland School of Medicine , Baltimore , MD , USA.

Non-typhoidal Salmonella (NTS) are a leading cause of foodborne infections
worldwide, and serogroups B, C1, C2-C3 and D are the most common serogroups
associated with human disease. While live vaccine candidates that protect against
S. Typhimurium (serogroup B) and S. Enteritidis (serogroup D) have been described
by us and others, far less effort has been directed towards vaccines that target 
either serogroup C1 or C2-C3 Salmonella. Here we describe a Salmonella
Newport-based live-attenuated vaccine (serogroup C2-C3). Deletion of the genes
clpX or rfaL, previously used in live vaccines to attenuate S. Typhimurium and/or
S. Enteritidis, failed to attenuate S. Newport. However, we found that deletion
of either guaBA or htrA raised the 50% lethal dose of S. Newport in an
intraperitoneal infection model in BALB/c mice. Our live-attenuated vaccine
candidate CVD 1966 (S. Newport ΔguaBA ΔhtrA) elicited strong antibody responses
against COPS, flagellin and outer membrane proteins when administered
intraperitoneally or orally. Following lethal challenge with the parental
virulent strain of S. Newport, we observed vaccine efficacies of 53% for
immunization via the intraperitoneal route and 47% for immunization via the oral 
route. Following intraperiteonal immunization, the vaccine also significantly
reduced the bacterial burden of challenge organisms in the liver and spleen.
Interestingly, reducing the LPS chain length by deleting rfaL did not induce a
stronger immune response towards surface antigens, and failed to elicit any
protection against lethal homologous challenge. In conclusion, we have developed 
a live-attenuated Salmonella serogroup C2-C3 vaccine that we are further
evaluating.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2018.1491499 
PMCID: PMC6663134
PMID: 29927725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

