
1. Eur J Cell Biol. 2018 Aug;97(6):402-410. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2018.06.001. Epub
2018 Jun 18.

Extracellular pH and lung infections in cystic fibrosis.

Massip-Copiz MM(1), Santa-Coloma TA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute for Biomedical
Research (BIOMED UCA-CONICET), The National Scientific and Technical Research
Council (CONICET), and School of Medical Sciences, The Pontifical Catholic
University of Argentina (UCA), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute for Biomedical
Research (BIOMED UCA-CONICET), The National Scientific and Technical Research
Council (CONICET), and School of Medical Sciences, The Pontifical Catholic
University of Argentina (UCA), Buenos Aires, Argentina. Electronic address:
tomas_santacoloma@uca.edu.ar.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive disease caused by CFTR mutations. 
It is characterized by high NaCl concentration in sweat and the production of a
thick and sticky mucus, occluding secretory ducts, intestine and airways,
accompanied by chronic inflammation and infections of the lungs. This causes a
progressive and lethal decline in lung function. Therefore, finding the
mechanisms driving the high susceptibility to lung infections has been a key
issue. For decades the prevalent hypothesis was that a reduced airway surface
liquid (ASL) volume and composition, and the consequent increased mucus
concentration (dehydration), create an environment favoring infections. However, 
a few years ago, in a pig model of CF, the Na+/K+ concentrations and the ASL
volume were found intact. Immediately a different hypothesis arose, postulating a
reduced ASL pH as the cause for the increased susceptibility to infections, due
to a diminished bicarbonate secretion through CFTR. Noteworthy, a recent report
found normal ASL pH values in CF children and in cultured primary airway cells,
challenging the ASL pH hypothesis. On the other hand, recent evidences
revitalized the hypothesis of a reduced ASL secretion. Thus, the role of the ASL 
pH in the CF is still a controversial matter. In this review we discuss the basis
that sustain the role of CFTR in modulating the extracellular pH, and the recent 
results sustaining the different points of view. Finding the mechanisms of CFTR
signaling that determine the susceptibility to infections is crucial to
understand the pathophysiology of CF and related lung diseases.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2018.06.001 
PMID: 29933921  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

