
1. Folia Microbiol (Praha). 2019 Jan;64(1):25-31. doi: 10.1007/s12223-018-0628-x.
Epub 2018 Jun 24.

Occurrence of virulence-associated genes in Arcobacter butzleri and Arcobacter
cryaerophilus isolates from foodstuff, water, and clinical samples within the
Czech Republic.

Šilha D(1), Vacková B(2), Šilhová L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Biochemical Sciences, Faculty of Chemical
Technology, University of Pardubice, Studentská 573, 532 10, Pardubice, Czech
Republic. David.Silha@upce.cz.
(2)Department of Biological and Biochemical Sciences, Faculty of Chemical
Technology, University of Pardubice, Studentská 573, 532 10, Pardubice, Czech
Republic.

Bacteria of the Arcobacter (A.) genus, originating mainly from food and water,
are dreaded germs for humans as well as animals. However, the virulence of these 
bacteria has not been fully elucidated yet. This study looked at the occurrence
of eight virulence-associated factors (ciaB, cj1349, pldA, irgA, hecA, tlyA,
mviN, hecB) in a total of 80 isolates of Arcobacter butzleri and 22 isolates of
A. cryaerophilus. The isolates were derived from food, water, and clinical
samples. A polymerase chain reaction using specific primers was used to detect
these virulence-associated genes. The presence of all genes in the isolates of A.
butzleri (98.8% ciaB, 95.0% cj1349, 98.8% pldA, 22.5% irgA, 31.3% hecA, 95.0%
tlyA, 97.5% mviN, 38.8% hecB) and A. cryaerophilus (95.5% ciaB, 0.0% cj1349, 9.1%
pldA, 0.0% irgA, 0.0% hecA, 31.8% tlyA, 90.9% mviN, 0.0% hecB) was monitored.
Among the tested isolates, there were 13 isolates (12.7%) of A. butzleri, in
which the presence of all eight virulence-associated genes was recorded in the
genome. In contrast, in one A. cryaerophilus strain, none of the observed genes
were detected. The presence of ciaB and mviN genes was significantly more
frequent in A. cryaerophilus isolates than other genes (P < 0.05). In general,
more virulence-associated genes have been detected in A. butzleri isolates
compared to A. cryaerophilus. The most common gene combination (ciaB, cj1349,
pldA, tlyA, mviN) was detected in case of 39 isolates. In 50.0% of A. butzleri
isolates derived from clinical samples, all eight virulence-associated genes were
significantly more frequently detected (P < 0.05). The tlyA gene occurred
significantly more frequent in A. butzleri isolates from meat and water samples
and irgA and hecB genes in clinical samples. Therefore, our study provides
information about occurrence of virulence-associated genes in genome of
Arcobacter isolates. These findings could be hazardous to human health, because
the presence of virulence-associated genes is the assumption for potential
dangerousness of these bacteria. Our results indicate high incidence of
virulence-associated genes in Arcobacter genomes and hence potentially pathogenic
properties of the studied strains.

DOI: 10.1007/s12223-018-0628-x 
PMID: 29936647  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

