
1. Inorg Chem. 2018 Jul 16;57(14):8211-8217. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.8b00673.
Epub 2018 Jun 25.

Light-Activated Electron Transfer and Turnover in Ru-Modified Aldehyde
Deformylating Oxygenases.

Bains RK(1), Miller JJ(1), van der Roest HK(1), Qu S(1), Lute B(1), Warren JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry , Simon Fraser University , 8888 University Drive ,
Burnaby , British Columbia V5A 1S6 , Canada.

Conversion of biological molecules into fuels or other useful chemicals is an
ongoing chemical challenge. One class of enzymes that has received attention for 
such applications is aldehyde deformylating oxygenase (ADO) enzymes. These
enzymes convert aliphatic aldehydes to the alkanes and formate. In this work, we 
prepared and investigated ADO enzymes modified with RuII(tris-diimine)
photosensitizers as a starting point for probing intramolecular electron transfer
events. Three variants were prepared, with RuII-modification at the wild type
(WT) residue C70, at the R62C site in one mutant ADO, and at both C62 and C70 in 
a second mutant ADO protein. The single-site modification of WT ADO at C70 using 
a cysteine-reactive label is an important observation and opens a way forward for
new studies of electron flow, mechanism, and redox catalysis in ADO. These Ru-ADO
constructs can perform the ADO catalytic cycle in the presence of light and a
sacrificial reductant. In this work, the Ru photosensitizer serves as a tethered,
artificial reductase that promotes turnover of aldehyde substrates with different
carbon chain lengths. Peroxide side products were detected for shorter chain
aldehydes, concomitant with less productive turnover. Analysis using
semiclassical electron transfer theory supports proposals for hopping pathway for
electron flow in WT ADO and in our new Ru-ADO proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.8b00673 
PMID: 29939728  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

