
1. Elife. 2018 Jun 22;7. pii: e34700. doi: 10.7554/eLife.34700.

Chronic 2P-STED imaging reveals high turnover of dendritic spines in the
hippocampus in vivo.

Pfeiffer T(#)(1)(2), Poll S(#)(3), Bancelin S(#)(1)(2), Angibaud J(1)(2),
Inavalli VK(1)(2), Keppler K(4), Mittag M(3), Fuhrmann M(#)(3), Nägerl
UV(#)(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Institute for Neuroscience, CNRS UMR 5297, Bordeaux, France.
(2)Interdisciplinary Institute for Neuroscience, University of Bordeaux,
Bordeaux, France.
(3)Neuroimmunology and Imaging Group, German Center for Neurodegenerative
Diseases, Bonn, Germany.
(4)Light Microscope Facility, German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Bonn,
Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

Rewiring neural circuits by the formation and elimination of synapses is thought 
to be a key cellular mechanism of learning and memory in the mammalian brain.
Dendritic spines are the postsynaptic structural component of excitatory
synapses, and their experience-dependent plasticity has been extensively studied 
in mouse superficial cortex using two-photon microscopy in vivo. By contrast,
very little is known about spine plasticity in the hippocampus, which is the
archetypical memory center of the brain, mostly because it is difficult to
visualize dendritic spines in this deeply embedded structure with sufficient
spatial resolution. We developed chronic 2P-STED microscopy in mouse hippocampus,
using a 'hippocampal window' based on resection of cortical tissue and a long
working distance objective for optical access. We observed a two-fold higher
spine density than previous studies and measured a spine turnover of ~40% within 
4 days, which depended on spine size. We thus provide direct evidence for a high 
level of structural rewiring of synaptic circuits and new insights into the
structure-dynamics relationship of hippocampal spines. Having established chronic
super-resolution microscopy in the hippocampus in vivo, our study enables
longitudinal and correlative analyses of nanoscale neuroanatomical structures
with genetic, molecular and behavioral experiments.

© 2018, Pfeiffer et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.34700 
PMCID: PMC6014725
PMID: 29932052  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: TP, SP, SB, JA, VI, KK, MM, MF, UN No competing
interests declared

