
1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2018 Sep 1;653:24-38. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2018.06.010. Epub 
2018 Jun 22.

Crystal structure of the flavin reductase of Acinetobacter baumannii
p-hydroxyphenylacetate 3-hydroxylase (HPAH) and identification of amino acid
residues underlying its regulation by aromatic ligands.

Yuenyao A(1), Petchyam N(1), Kamonsutthipaijit N(2), Chaiyen P(3), Pakotiprapha
D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Center for Excellence in Protein and Enzyme
Technology Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 10400, Thailand.
(2)Synchrotron Light Research Institute (Public Organization), Nakhon Ratchasima 
30000, Thailand.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Center for Excellence in Protein and Enzyme
Technology Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 10400, Thailand;
School of Biomolecular Science and Engineering, Vidyasirimedhi Institute of
Science and Technology (VISTEC), Rayong, 21210, Thailand.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Center for Excellence in Protein and Enzyme
Technology Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 10400, Thailand.
Electronic address: danaya.pak@mahidol.ac.th.

The first step in the degradation of p-hydroxyphenylacetic acid (HPA) is
catalyzed by the two-component enzyme p-hydroxyphenylacetate 3-hydroxylase
(HPAH). The two components of Acinetobacter baumannii HPAH are known as C1 and
C2, respectively. C1 is a flavin reductase that uses NADH to generate reduced
flavin mononucleotide (FMNH-), which is used by C2 in the hydroxylation of HPA.
Interestingly, although HPA is not directly involved in the reaction catalyzed by
C1, the presence of HPA dramatically increases the FMN reduction rate. Amino acid
sequence analysis revealed that C1 contains two domains: an N-terminal flavin
reductase domain, and a C-terminal MarR domain. Although MarR proteins typically 
function as transcription regulators, the MarR domain of C1 was found to play an 
auto-inhibitory role. Here, we report a crystal structure of C1 and small-angle
X-ray scattering (SAXS) studies that revealed that C1 undergoes a substantial
conformational change in the presence of HPA, concomitant with the increase in
the rate of flavin reduction. Amino acid residues that are important for HPA
binding and regulation of C1 activity were identified by site-directed
mutagenesis. Amino acid sequence similarity analysis revealed several as yet
uncharacterized flavin reductases with N- or C-terminal fusions.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2018.06.010 
PMID: 29940152  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

