
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2018 Jun 25;17(1):99. doi: 10.1186/s12934-018-0946-3.

Improvement of n-caproic acid production with Ruminococcaceae bacterium CPB6:
selection of electron acceptors and carbon sources and optimization of the
culture medium.

Wang H(1)(2), Li X(1)(3), Wang Y(4), Tao Y(5)(6), Lu S(1)(3), Zhu X(1)(3), Li
D(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Environmental and Applied Microbiology, Chengdu Institute of
Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu, 610041, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, People's Republic 
of China.
(3)Environmental Microbiology Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Chengdu
Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu, 610041, China.
(4)Department of Biosystems Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849,
USA.
(5)Key Laboratory of Environmental and Applied Microbiology, Chengdu Institute of
Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu, 610041, China. taoyong@cib.ac.cn.
(6)Environmental Microbiology Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Chengdu
Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu, 610041, China.
taoyong@cib.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Global energy and resource shortages make it necessary to quest for
renewable resources. n-Caproic acid (CA) production based on carboxylate platform
by anaerobic fermentation is booming. Recently, a novel Ruminococcaceae bacterium
CPB6 is shown to be a potential biotransformation factory for CA production from 
lactate-containing wastewater. However, little is known about the effects of
different electron acceptors (EAs) on the fermentative products of strain CPB6,
as well as the optimum medium for CA production.
RESULTS: In this study, batch experiments were performed to investigate the
fermentative products of strain CPB6 in a lactate medium supplemented with
different EAs and sugars. Supplementation of acetate, butyrate and sucrose
dramatically increased cell growth and CA production. The addition of propionate 
or pentanoate resulted in the production of C5 or C7 carboxylic acid,
respectively. Further, a Box-Behnken experiment was conducted to optimize the
culture medium for CA production. The result indicated that a medium containing
13.30 g/L sucrose, 22.35 g/L lactate and 16.48 g/L butyrate supported high-titer 
CA production (16.73 g/L) with a maximum productivity of 6.50 g/L/day.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that strain CPB6 could produce C6-C7
carboxylic acids from lactate (as electron donor) with C2-C5 short-chain
carboxylic acids (as EAs), but CA (C6 carboxylic acid) was the most major and
potential product. Butyrate and sucrose were the most significant EA and carbon
source respectively for CA production from lactate by strain CPB6. High titer of 
CA can be produced from a synthetic substrate containing sucrose, lactate and
butyrate. The work provided significant implications for improving CA production 
in industry-scale.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-018-0946-3 
PMCID: PMC6019802
PMID: 29940966  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

