
1. Mol Neurobiol. 2019 Feb;56(2):1421-1436. doi: 10.1007/s12035-018-1156-z. Epub
2018 Jun 9.

Dexamethasone Induces a Specific Form of Ramified Dysfunctional Microglia.

Park MJ(1), Park HS(1), You MJ(1), Yoo J(2), Kim SH(3), Kwon MS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, CHA University, CHABIOCOMPLEX,
335 Pangyo, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, 13488, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Microbiology and School of Medicine, CHA University,
CHABIOCOMPLEX, 335 Pangyo, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, 13488, Republic 
of Korea.
(3)Cell Therapy Center and Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, Hanyang 
University, Haengdang-dong, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, CHA University, CHABIOCOMPLEX,
335 Pangyo, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, 13488, Republic of Korea.
minsoo100@cha.ac.kr.

The functional status of dynamic microglial cells plays an important role in
maintaining homeostasis of microenvironment in CNS. In a previous study, we
reported that microglia phenotype might be involved in stress vulnerability and
depression recurrence. Here, we aimed to clarify a character of microglia exposed
persistently to glucocorticoid (GC), which is representative a stress hormone, in
primary cultured microglial cells. Five nanomolars of dexamethasone (DEX, GC
agonist) for 72 h decreased CX3CR1 and CD200R expression and induced ramified
form of microglial cells in similar morphology to in vivo resident microglia.
However, the ramified form of microglia did not increase microglia signature
genes such as P2RY12, OLFML3, TMEM119, and TGFBR1. In addition, DEX-treated
microglia showed a reduction of phagocytosis function, pro-and anti-inflammatory 
cytokine production, and cell proliferation. DEX washout did not restore these
changes. Based on transcriptomic analysis and functional characters of
DEX-treated microglia, we performed senescence-associated beta-galactosidase
(SA-β gal) assay in DEX-treated microglia and DEX-treated microglia showed more
SA-β gal activity with alteration of cell cycle-related genes. Thus, our results 
suggest that DEX can induce a specific phenotype of microglia (like-senescence).

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-018-1156-z 
PMID: 29948944  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

