
1. Methods Mol Biol. 2018;1799:121-133. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7896-0_11.

Characterization of Thymic Development of Natural Killer T Cell Subsets by
Multiparameter Flow Cytometry.

Tuttle KD(1), Gapin L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado Anschutz
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado Anschutz
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA. Laurent.gapin@ucdenver.edu.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are a subset of αβ T cells that recognize lipid
antigens presented by the nonclassical MHC molecule CD1d. Although numerically
small, these cells have been shown to play an important role in the regulation of
multiple immune responses, including microbial infection, autoimmunity, and
cancer. Even in the steady state, cytokine production by NKT cells influences the
basal status and function of other immune cells, including dendritic cells and
CD8 T cells. To fully understand their biology and harness them in the clinic, it
is imperative to dissect the molecular mechanisms involved in the acquisition of 
their functionality. Unlike conventional αβ T cells, NKT cells acquire their
effector function during development in the thymus. At this time, precursors
commit to one of three functionally different effector lineages: NKT1, NKT2, and 
NKT17. These subsets are characterized by the secretion of different cytokines
upon antigenic stimulation and by the expression of the master transcription
factors Tbet, promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger (PLZF), and retinoic orphan
receptor γ t (RORγt). Here we describe a multicolor flow cytometry protocol to
identify NKT cell subsets and interrogate the progression of NKT precursors
through their development in the thymus.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7896-0_11 
PMID: 29956149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

