
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2018 Sep 18;503(4):2393-2399. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.06.167. Epub 2018 Jul 6.

l-asparaginase induces intrinsic mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis in human
gastric adenocarcinoma cells and impedes tumor progression.

Sindhu R(1), Manonmani HK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Food Protectants and Infestation Control Department, CSIR-Central Food
Technological Research Institute, Mysore, 570 020, India. Electronic address:
sindhuusha@gmail.com.
(2)Food Protectants and Infestation Control Department, CSIR-Central Food
Technological Research Institute, Mysore, 570 020, India. Electronic address:
manonmani@cftri.res.in.

l-asparagine essentially regulates growth and proliferation of cancer cells.
l-asparaginase is an anti-cancer enzyme that deprives the cancer cells of
l-asparagine. The purpose of this study was to explore the mechanism of a novel
l-asparaginase from Pseudomonas fluorescens on l-asparagine deprivation mediated 
anti-proliferation, apoptosis in human gastric adenocarcinoma cells and to
evaluate inhibition of angiogenesis. We observed that, the presence of
extracellular l-asparagine was essential for the growth of AGS cells.
l-asparagine deprivation by l-asparaginase induced metabolic stress, cytotoxicity
and apoptosis by G0 phase cell-cycle arrest, modulated the mitochondrial membrane
integrity, accelerated caspase-3 activation and instigated DNA damage. The RT-PCR
analysis of pro-apoptosis genes: bak1, bax, bbc3, bik, pmaip1, bnip3l, apaf1,
casp3, casp7 and casp9 were significantly higher (P < 0.05), while anti-apoptotic
markers xiap, bid, mcl1, and death receptor genes tnf and tradd were
significantly down-regulated (P < 0.05). Additionally, higher protein expressions
of p53, caspase-3 and TEM analysis showing modulations in mitochondria confirmed 
intrinsic apoptosis pathway. The enzyme impeded tumor progression through
inhibition of cell migration and vascular remodelling of endothelial cells. Our
findings suggests that the action of l-asparaginase alters mitochondrial membrane
permeability and auxiliary activates intrinsic apoptosis. Therefore, this
mechanistic approach might be considered as a targeted enzymotherapy against
gastric adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.06.167 
PMID: 29966654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

