
1. Biochemistry. 2018 Aug 21;57(33):4967-4971. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00616.
Epub 2018 Jul 10.

Stereospecific Radical-Mediated B12-Dependent Methyl Transfer by the Fosfomycin
Biosynthesis Enzyme Fom3.

McLaughlin MI, van der Donk WA.

Fom3, the antepenultimate enzyme in the fosfomycin biosynthetic pathway in
Streptomyces spp., is a class B cobalamin-dependent radical SAM methyltransferase
that catalyzes methylation of (5'-cytidylyl)-2-hydroxyethylphosphonate
(2-HEP-CMP) to form (5'-cytidylyl)-2-hydroxypropylphosphonate (2-HPP-CMP).
Previously, the reaction of Fom3 with 2-HEP-CMP produced 2-HPP-CMP with mixed
stereochemistry at C2. Mechanistic characterization has been challenging because 
of insoluble expression and poor cobalamin (B12) incorporation in Escherichia
coli. Recently, soluble E. coli expression and incorporation of cobalamin into
Fom3 were achieved by overexpression of the BtuCEDFB cobalamin uptake system.
Herein, we use this new method to obtain Fom3 from Streptomyces wedmorensis. We
show that the initiator 5'-deoxyadenosyl radical stereospecifically abstracts the
pro- R hydrogen atom from the C2 position of 2-HEP-CMP and use the downstream
enzymes FomD and Fom4 to demonstrate that our preparation of Fom3 produces only
(2 S)-2-HPP-CMP. Additionally, we show that the added methyl group originates
from SAM under multiple-turnover conditions, but the first turnover uses a methyl
donor already present on the enzyme; furthermore, cobalamin isolated from Fom3
reaction mixtures contains methyl groups derived from SAM. These results are
consistent with a model in which Fom3 catalyzes methyl transfer from SAM to
cobalamin and the resulting methylcobalamin (MeCbl) is the ultimate methyl source
for the reaction.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00616 
PMCID: PMC6103835
PMID: 29969250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

