
1. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces. 2018 Oct 1;170:505-513. doi:
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2018.06.023. Epub 2018 Jun 18.

Promising effects of silver tungstate microcrystals on fibroblast human cells and
three dimensional collagen matrix models: A novel non-cytotoxic material to fight
oral disease.

Haro Chávez NL(1), de Avila ED(2), Barbugli PA(1), de Oliveira RC(3), de Foggi
CC(1), Longo E(3), Vergani CE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Materials and Prosthodontics, School of Dentistry at
Araraquara, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Rua Humaita, 1680, 14801-903,
Araraquara, SP, Brazil.
(2)Department of Dental Materials and Prosthodontics, School of Dentistry at
Araraquara, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Rua Humaita, 1680, 14801-903,
Araraquara, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: erica.fobusp@yahoo.com.br.
(3)CDMF-UFSCar-Universidade Federal de São Carlos, Washington Luis km 235, P.O.
Box 676, 13565-905, São Carlos, SP, Brazil.

Silver tungstate (α-Ag2WO4) microcrystals have shown encouraging results
regarding their antimicrobial activity. However, in addition to the promising
outcomes in fighting oral disease, cytotoxic tests are mandatory for screening
new materials for biological applications. Here, we developed a better
understanding of the effects of microcrystals on the behavior of both human
gingival fibroblast (HGF) cells and three-dimensional (3D) collagen matrices. To 
perform these experiments, the lowest concentration of α-Ag2WO4 capable of
preventing the visible growth of Candida albicans (C. albicans) planktonic cells 
was defined as the test concentration, and it ranged from 0.781 (C1) to 7.81 (C2)
to 78.1 (C3) μg/mL. Complete medium and lysis buffer (LB) served as negative (C-)
and positive (C+) controls, respectively. The effect of the microcrystal
concentration on the morphology, remodeling and proliferation of HGF cells was
evaluated by different approaches. Quantitative and qualitative assessments
demonstrated that α-Ag2WO4 did not affect the mitochondrial enzymatic activity of
HGF cells cultured in a monolayer or the cell viability within 3D collagen
matrices. These experiments showed that α-Ag2WO4 at the C2 concentration did not 
damage the genomic DNA. The development of new materials is attractive for the
possible treatment of diseases and for avoiding indiscriminate prescribing of
antibiotics. These findings provide information on the effect of α-Ag2WO4 on cell
behavior and reveal that these microcrystals are non-cytotoxic against human
gingival cells over a sufficient period to measure the hazard potential.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2018.06.023 
PMID: 29960951  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

