
1. Mol Carcinog. 2018 Nov;57(11):1467-1479. doi: 10.1002/mc.22870. Epub 2018 Jul 18.

Catechol derived from aronia juice through lactic acid bacteria fermentation
inhibits breast cancer stem cell formation via modulation Stat3/IL-6 signaling
pathway.

Choi HS(1)(2), Kim JH(1), Kim SL(1), Deng HY(1), Lee D(3), Kim CS(3), Yun BS(4), 
Lee DS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, College of Applied Life Science, Jeju National
University, Jeju, Korea.
(2)Subtropical/Tropical Organism Gene Bank, Jeju National University, Jeju,
Korea.
(3)JEJU TECHNOPARK, Biodiversity Research Institute, Namwon, Seogwipo, Jeju,
Korea.
(4)Division of Biotechnology, College of Environmental and Bioresource Sciences, 
Chonbuk National University, Iksan, Korea.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) as a subpopulation of cancer cells are drug-resistant
and radiation-resistant cancer cells to be responsible for tumor progress,
maintenance and recurrence of cancer, and metastasis. This study isolated and
investigated a new cancer stem cell (CSC) inhibitor derived from lactic acid
fermentation products using culture broth with 2% aronia juice. The anti-CSC
activity of aronia-cultured broth was significantly higher than that of the
control. Activity-guided fractionation and repeated chromatographic preparation
led to the isolation of one compound. Using nuclear magnetic resonance and ESI
mass spectrometry, we identified the isolated compound as catechol. In this
study, we report that aronia-fermented catechol has a novel inhibitory effect on 
human breast CSCs. Catechol inhibited breast cancer cell proliferation and
mammosphere formation in a dose-dependent manner. This compound reduced the
CD44high /CD24low subpopulation, ALDH-expressing cell population and the
self-renewal-related genes nanog, sox2, and oct4. Catechol preferentially reduced
mRNA transcripts and protein levels of Stat3 and did not induce c-Myc
degradation. These findings support the novel utilization of catechol for breast 
cancer therapy via the Stat3/IL-6 signaling pathway. Our results suggest that
catechol can be used for breast cancer therapy and that Stat3 expression is a
marker of CSCs. Catechol inhibited Stat3 signaling by reducing Stat3 expression
and secreted IL-6, a CSC survival factor. These findings support the novel
utilization of catechol for breast cancer therapy via Stat3/IL-6 signaling.

Â© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mc.22870 
PMID: 29964299  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

