
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Jun 14;9:1294. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01294. eCollection
2018.

New Genetically Manipulated Mice Provide Insights Into the Development and
Physiological Functions of Invariant Natural Killer T Cells.

Ren Y(1)(2), Sekine-Kondo E(1), Tateyama M(1)(3), Kasetthat T(1)(4),
Wongratanacheewin S(4), Watarai H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stem Cell Cellomics, Center for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, The Neurological Institute of Jiangxi Province,
Jiangxi Provincial People's Hospital, Nanchang, China.
(3)Department of Immunology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.

Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are a unique T cell subset that exhibits 
characteristics of both innate immune cells and T cells. They express Vα14-Jα18
(Trav11-Traj18) as an invariant chain of the T cell receptor (TCR) and are
restricted to the MHC class I-like monomorphic antigen presenting molecule CD1d. 
iNKT cells are known as immune regulators that bridge the innate and acquired
immune systems by rapid and massive production of a wide range of cytokines,
which could enable them to participate in immune responses during various disease
states. Thus, Traj18-deficient mice, Cd1d-deficient mice, or iNKT
cell-overexpressing mice such as iNKT TCRα transgenic mice and iNKT cell cloned
mice which contain a Vα14-Jα18 rearrangement in the TCRα locus are useful
experimental models for the analysis of iNKT cells in vivo and in vitro. In this 
review, we describe the pros and cons of the various available genetically
manipulated mice and summarize the insights gained from their study, including
the possible roles of iNKT cells in obesity and diabetes.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01294 
PMCID: PMC6010523
PMID: 29963043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

