
1. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2016 Dec 8;37(12):4577-4585. doi: 10.13227/j.hjkx.201606016.

[Optical Characteristics of Dissolved Organic Matter from Two Different Full
Mixed Reservoirs in Winter Based on UV-vis and EEMs].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang TL(1), Fang KK(1), Zhang CH(1), Zhou SL(1), Zeng MZ(1), Long SH(1), Li
Y(1), Xia C(1), Cong HB(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Environmental and Municipal Engineering, Xi'an University of
Architecture and Technology, Xi'an 710055, China.
(2)Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, Yangzhou University,
Yangzhou 225009, China.

The differences in the resource and characteristics of DOM between Zhoucun
Reservoir and Jinpen Reservoir were studied by fluorescence ultraviolet-visible
(UV-vis) and excitation-emission matrix spectra combined with parallel analysis
(EEMs-PARAFAC). The results showed that three fluorescent components were
identified by PARAFAC model in Zhoucun Reservoir and Jinpen Reservoir, including 
long wave humus-like component (C1: 350/460 nm), visible fulvic-like (C2: 335/410
nm) and protein-like (C3: 260,285/360 nm). However, the fluorescence intensity
and the relative proportions of DOM exhibited significant difference (P<0.01) in 
two reservoirs. Moreover, the concentration of protein-like component in Zhoucun 
Reservoir was higher than that in Jinpen Reservoir, while the concentration of
humus-like component presented the opposite trend. Based on the comparison of
fluorescence index, biological index, humification index and the freshness index,
the DOM of Zhoucun Reservoir where the land-use type was cultivated, livestock
and residential, the internal pollution of sediments was serious, indicating a
strong autochthonous component and aquatic bacterial origin, whereas the DOM of
Jinpen Reservoir dominated by forest system had a higher terrigenous contribution
in winter. From all the results, hydrological conditions of the reservoir and the
characteristics of coastal ecological environment were important factors to
influence the DOM sources and characteristics.

DOI: 10.13227/j.hjkx.201606016 
PMID: 29965297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

