
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Jul 4;8(1):10081. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-28396-9.

Graphene oxide polarizes iNKT cells for production of TGFβ and attenuates
inflammation in an iNKT cell-mediated sepsis model.

Lee SW(1)(2), Park HJ(1), Van Kaer L(3), Hong S(4)(5), Hong S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Bioscience and Biotechnology, Institute of
Anticancer Medicine Development, Sejong University, Seoul, 05006, Korea.
(2)Graphene Research Institute, Sejong University, Seoul, 05006, Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA.
(4)Graphene Research Institute, Sejong University, Seoul, 05006, Korea.
hong@sejong.ac.kr.
(5)Department of Physics, Sejong University, Seoul, 05006, Korea.
hong@sejong.ac.kr.
(6)Department of Integrative Bioscience and Biotechnology, Institute of
Anticancer Medicine Development, Sejong University, Seoul, 05006, Korea.
shong@sejong.ac.kr.

Graphene oxide (GO) modulates the functions of antigen-presenting cells including
dendritic cells (DCs). Although carbon nanotubes affect expression of the MHC
class I-like CD1d molecule, whether GO can influence immune responses of
CD1d-dependent invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells remains unclear. Here, we 
investigated the impact of GO on inflammatory responses mediated by
α-galactosylceramide (α-GalCer), an iNKT cell agonist. We found that in vivo GO
treatment substantially inhibited the capacity of α-GalCer to induce the iNKT
cell-mediated trans-activation of and cytokine production by innate and
innate-like cells, including DCs, macrophages, NK cells, and γδ T cells. Such
effects of GO on α-GalCer-induced inflammatory responses closely correlated with 
iNKT cell polarization towards TGFβ production, which also explains the capacity 
of GO to expand regulatory T cells. Interestingly, the absence of TLR4, a
receptor for GO, failed to downregulate, and instead partially enhanced the
anti-inflammatory activity of GO against α-GalCer-elicited responses, implying
negative effects of TLR4 signaling on the anti-inflammatory properties of GO. By 
employing an α-GalCer-induced sepsis model, we further demonstrated that GO
treatment significantly protected mice from α-GalCer-induced lethality. Taken
together, we provide strong evidence that GO holds promise as an adjuvant to
modulate iNKT cell responses for immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-28396-9 
PMCID: PMC6031608
PMID: 29973666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

