
1. Autophagy. 2018;14(10):1710-1725. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2018.1483806. Epub 2018
Jul 29.

Interaction between autophagic vesicles and the Coxiella-containing vacuole
requires CLTC (clathrin heavy chain).

Latomanski EA(1), Newton HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Microbiology and Immunology , University of Melbourne at the
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity , Melbourne , Victoria ,
Australia.

Coxiella burnetii is an intracellular bacterial pathogen which causes Q fever, a 
human infection with the ability to cause chronic disease with potentially
life-threatening outcomes. In humans, Coxiella infects alveolar macrophages where
it replicates to high numbers in a unique, pathogen-directed lysosome-derived
vacuole. This compartment, termed the Coxiella-containing vacuole (CCV), has a
low internal pH and contains markers both of lysosomes and autophagosomes. The
CCV membrane is also enriched with CLTC (clathrin heavy chain) and this
contributes to the success of the CCV. Here, we describe a role for CLTC, a
scaffolding protein of clathrin-coated vesicles, in facilitating the fusion of
autophagosomes with the CCV. During gene silencing of CLTC, CCVs are unable to
fuse with each other, a phenotype also seen when silencing genes involved in
macroautophagy/autophagy. MAP1LC3B/LC3B, which is normally observed inside the
CCV, is excluded from CCVs in the absence of CLTC. Additionally, this study
demonstrates that autophagosome fusion contributes to CCV size as cell starvation
and subsequent autophagy induction leads to further CCV expansion. This is CLTC
dependent, as the absence of CLTC renders autophagosomes no longer able to
contribute to the expansion of the CCV. This investigation provides a functional 
link between CLTC and autophagy in the context of Coxiella infection and
highlights the CCV as an important tool to explore the interactions between these
vesicular trafficking pathways.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2018.1483806 
PMCID: PMC6135622
PMID: 29973118  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

