
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Jun 20;9:1384. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01384. eCollection
2018.

Induction of Hypergammaglobulinemia and Autoantibodies by Salmonella Infection in
MyD88-Deficient Mice.

Issac JM(1), Mohamed YA(1), Bashir GH(1), Al-Sbiei A(2), Conca W(3), Khan TA(4), 
Iqbal A(5), Riemekasten G(6), Bieber K(7), Ludwig RJ(7), Cabral-Marques O(6),
Fernandez-Cabezudo MJ(2), Al-Ramadi BK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine and
Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United
Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine and Health Sciences,
United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Kohat University of Science and Technology, Kohat,
Pakistan.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL,
United States.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(7)Lübeck Institute of Experimental Dermatology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck,
Germany.

Growing evidence indicates a link between persistent infections and the
development of autoimmune diseases. For instance, the inability to control
Salmonella infection due to defective toll-like receptor (TLR)/myeloid
differentiation primary response 88 (MyD88) signaling has linked the development 
of persistent infections to a breakdown in B cell tolerance. However, the extent 
of immune dysregulation in the absence of TLR-MyD88 signaling remains poorly
characterized. Here, we show that MyD88-/- mice are unable to eliminate
attenuated Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, even when challenged with a
low-dose inoculum (200 CFUs/mouse), developing a persistent and progressive
infection when compared to wild-type (MyD88+/+) animals. The splenic niche of
MyD88-/- mice revealed increased counts of activated, Sca-1-positive, myeloid
subpopulations highly expressing BAFF during persistent Salmonella infection.
Likewise, the T cell compartment of Salmonella-infected MyD88-/- mice showed
increased levels of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells expressing Sca-1 and CD25 and producing
elevated amounts of IL-4, IL-10, and IL-21 in response to CD3/CD28 stimulation.
This was associated with increased Tfh cell differentiation and the presence of
CD4+ T cells co-expressing IFN-γ/IL-4 and IFN-γ/IL-10. Noteworthy, infected
MyD88-/- mice had enhanced serum titers of both anti-Salmonella antibodies as
well as autoantibodies directed against double-stranded DNA, thyroglobulin, and
IgG rheumatoid factor, positive nuclear staining with HEp-2 cells, and immune
complex deposition in the kidneys of MyD88-/- mice infected with live but not
heat-killed Salmonella. Infection with other microorganisms (Acinetobacter
baumanii, Streptococcus agalactiae, or Escherichia coli) was unable to trigger
the autoimmune phenomenon. Our findings suggest that dysregulation of the immune 
response in the absence of MyD88 is pathogen-dependent and highlight potentially 
important genotype-environmental factor correlations.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01384 
PMCID: PMC6019449
PMID: 29973931 

