
1. Chemistry. 2018 Sep 18;24(52):13862-13870. doi: 10.1002/chem.201802320. Epub 2018
Aug 16.

Fluorescent Trimethylated Naphthyridine Derivative with an Aminoalkyl Side Chain 
as the Tightest Non-aminoglycoside Ligand for the Bacterial A-site RNA.

Sato Y(1), Rokugawa M(1), Ito S(1), Yajima S(1), Sugawara H(1), Teramae N(1),
Nishizawa S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University,
Sendai, 980-8578, Japan.

The bacterial ribosomal decoding region of the aminoacyl-tRNA site (A-site) is
one of the most validated target RNAs for antibiotic agents. Although natural
aminoglycosides are well-characterized A-site binding ligands, high off-target
effects and the growing emergence of bacterial resistance against aminoglycosides
limit their clinical use. To circumvent these concerns with the aminoglycoside
family, non-aminoglycoside A-site binding ligands have great potential as novel
antibiotics against bacterial infections. This work describes a new class of
small heterocyclic ligands based on the 2-amino-5,6,7-trimethyl-1,8-naphthyridine
(ATMND) structure for the bacterial (Escherichia coli) A-site. ATMND possessing
an aminoethyl side chain is found to strongly and selectively bind to the
internal loop of the A-site (Kd =0.44 μm; pH 7.0, I=0.06 m, 5 °C). Significantly,
this ligand shows the tightest binding reported to date among non-aminoglycoside 
ligands. The binding study based on the thermodynamics and molecular modelling
reveals key molecular interactions of ATMND-C2 -NH2 for high affinity to the
A-site. This ligand is also demonstrated to be applicable to the fluorescence
indicator displacement assay for assessing ligand/A-site interactions.

© 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/chem.201802320 
PMID: 29971862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

