
1. Scand J Immunol. 2018 Sep;88(3):e12701. doi: 10.1111/sji.12701. Epub 2018 Aug 16.

Transcription factor c-Maf is essential for IL-10 gene expression in B cells.

Liu M(1), Zhao X(2), Ma Y(3), Zhou Y(4), Deng M(4), Ma Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China.
(3)Department of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Xi'an Jiaotong University Health Science Center, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics, Renmin Hospital, Wuhan University, Wuhan City,
China.

Interleukin (IL)-10 is an essential anti-inflammatory cytokine that plays
important roles as a negative regulator of immune responses to microbial
antigens. c-Maf has been suggested as an essential transcriptional factor for
IL-10 production in CD4+ T cells and macrophages. However, it remains unclear
whether c-Maf participates in IL-10 expression in B cells. In this study, we
investigated the role of c-Maf in the transcriptional regulation of IL-10 in
regulatory B cells, as well as the underlying molecular mechanism. We found that 
c-Maf was constitutively expressed in resting B cells. c-Maf expression was
upregulated in the presence of LPS and dose-dependently enhanced IL-10 production
following binding to the IL-10 promoter. Moreover, a lower expression of c-Maf
and decreased production of regulatory B (Breg) cells were detected in mice with 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), which may contribute to the pathological
changes. Taken together, these data demonstrate that c-Maf is an indispensable
yet constitutive transcription factor for IL-10 gene expression in LPS-activated 
B cells.

Â© 2018 The Foundation for the Scandinavian Journal of Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/sji.12701 
PMID: 29974486  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

