
1. Toxicol Sci. 2018 Oct 1;165(2):291-301. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfy162.

Exacerbation of Type 1 Diabetes in Perinatally Genistein Exposed Female Non-Obese
Diabetic (NOD) Mouse Is Associated With Alterations of Gut Microbiota and Immune 
Homeostasis.

Huang G(1), Xu J(2), Cai D(3), Chen SY(3), Nagy T(4), Guo TL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, College of Public Health.
(2)Department of Veterinary Biosciences and Diagnostic Imaging, College of
Veterinary Medicine.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, College of Veterinary Medicine.
(4)Department of Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30602.

Despite various hypothesized benefits of dietary isoflavone genistein (GEN) from 
soy-based products, many questions surrounding GEN's immunotoxic effects,
especially during perinatal exposure, have yet to be answered. The objective of
the study was to determine if there existed a sex-specific effect of GEN on type 
1 diabetes (T1D) following perinatal exposure. We exposed offspring of non-obese 
diabetic (NOD) mice to GEN per oral at a physiological dose (20 mg/kg body
weight) from embryonic day 7 to postnatal day (PND) 21. In female offspring,
perinatal GEN dosing significantly increased the incidence of T1D at early time
points, and the exacerbation was associated with decreased serum levels of
interleukin (IL)-10, IgG2a, and IgM. In male offspring dosed with GEN, a decrease
in serum IgG1 was also observed. Flow cytometric analysis in females suggested an
increased pro-inflammatory splenic CD5+CD24- and CD4-CD8+ cell counts, while both
%T cells and %CD4+ T cells were significantly decreased in males, suggesting an
anti-inflammatory effect. Gut microbiota (GMB) analysis indicated that fecal
microbiota from PND 90 female offspring exhibited an increased level of
Enterobacteriales (suggesting a pro-inflammatory response), while the similar
changes were not found in PND 30 females. Moreover, RNA sequencing showed that
intestinal α-defensin expression was down-regulated in GEN-treated females,
supporting a pro-inflammatory response. However, perinatal GEN administration
perturbed GMB toward an anti-inflammatory response in PND 90 males. Taken
together, a strong sex-specific effect was found in the perinatal GEN exposure
window, and the T1D exacerbation in NOD females was associated with GMB-related
immunomodulatory mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfy162 
PMCID: PMC6154270
PMID: 29982808  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

