
1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1985 Nov 15;243(1):150-60.

Properties of an acid phosphatase from Legionella micdadei which blocks
superoxide anion production by human neutrophils.

Saha AK, Dowling JN, LaMarco KL, Das S, Remaley AT, Olomu N, Pope MT, Glew RH.

The high-speed supernatant (100,000 g, 1 h) obtained after centrifuging a
suspension of Legionella micdadei that had been freeze-thawed and sonicated
contained (i) considerable acid phosphatase activity when assayed using
4-methylumbelliferyl phosphate (MUP) as the substrate, and a factor that blocked 
superoxide anion production by human neutrophils stimulated with f-Met-Leu-Phe.
Chromatography of the extract on a hydroxylapatite column resolved two acids
phosphatases (designated ACP1 and ACP2). Subsequent chromatography of ACP2 on a
Sephadex G-150 column revealed coincident elution of phosphatase activity and
neutrophil blocking activity. When heated at 45 degrees C for various periods of 
time, the phosphatase activity of the acid phosphatase preparation was lost at
the same rate as the ability of the preparation to block superoxide anion
production by neutrophils. Furthermore, preincubation of neutrophils and acid
phosphatase together in the presence of a heteropolymolybdate complex that
inhibits the phosphatase eliminated the effect of the L. micdadei phosphatase on 
neutrophil superoxide anion production. ACP2 had the following properties: pH
optimum, 6.0; Km for MUP, 3.8 mM; isoelectric point, 4.5; substrate specificity, 
MUP greater than ADP greater than phosphoenolpyruvate greater than
phosphothreonine greater than phosphoserine greater than phosphotyrosine;
molecular weight (estimated by sucrose density gradient centrifugation and gel
filtration chromatography), 71,000-86,000. These results indicate that a
cell-associated phosphatase may play a role in the virulence of L. micdadei.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-9861(85)90783-0 
PMID: 2998281  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

