
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2018 Oct;81:37-48. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2018.07.008. Epub
2018 Jul 5.

Nile tilapia fry fed on antimicrobial peptide Epinecidin-1-expressing Artemia
cyst exhibit enhanced immunity against acute bacterial infection.

Ting CH(1), Chen YC(1), Chen JY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Marine Research Station, Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology,
Academia Sinica, 23-10, Dahuen Road, Jiaushi, Ilan, 262, Taiwan.
(2)Marine Research Station, Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology,
Academia Sinica, 23-10, Dahuen Road, Jiaushi, Ilan, 262, Taiwan. Electronic
address: zoocjy@gate.sinica.edu.tw.

Artemia are often used as a live feed for fry in aquaculture. We have previously 
demonstrated that supplementing adult zebrafish feed with Artemia, which express 
an Epinephelus coioides-derived antimicrobial peptide, Epinecidin-1 (Epi-1),
protects against bacterial infection. Thus, Artemia may serve as a bioreactor for
producing biofunctional molecules. However, the application of Epi-1 transgenic
Artemia in larval aquaculture of commercial fish species has not been
investigated. Here we used a Tol2-transposon system to generate stable Epi-1
expressing Artemia. Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) fry were then fed with
decapsulated transgenic cysts and acutely challenged with Gram-positive
Streptococcus iniae or Gram-negative Vibrio vulnificus (204). Survival analysis
revealed that tilapia fry fed with Epi-1 transgenic cysts were resistant to acute
bacterial infection. Immune-related gene expression profiling showed that S.
iniae and V. vulnificus inoculations produced distinct immunomodulatory effects
in the tilapia fry. Upon S. iniae infection, tilapia fry fed on control diet
exhibited an immune response dominated by Tlr-7/MyD88, wherein Tnf-α, Il-8 and
Cxcl-10 expression were all induced; conversely, the tilapia fry fed with Epi-1
transgenic cysts showed a Tlr-2/Tlr-5-dominant immune response, marked by the
induction of Il-1β, Il-8 and Il-12 expression. However, after V. vulnificus (204)
infection control fry exhibited a Tlr-2/MyD88/Traf-6-dominant response with
activation of Tnf-α and Il-8 expression; meanwhile tilapia fry fed on Epi-1
transgenic cyst showed a dominant Tlr-2/Tlr-5-mediated immune response, including
induction of Il-1β, Il-8, Il-12, and Cxcl-10 expression. These findings suggest
that feeding larval fish fry with Epi-1 transgenic Artemia cysts confers enhanced
immunity toward bacterial challenge. Epi-1 transgenic cysts should therefore be
considered as a potential functional feed for larval aquaculture.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2018.07.008 
PMID: 29981882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

