
1. New Phytol. 2018 Dec;220(4):1322-1336. doi: 10.1111/nph.15295. Epub 2018 Jul 8.

Root metabolic plasticity underlies functional diversity in mycorrhiza-enhanced
stress tolerance in tomato.

Rivero J(1), Álvarez D(1), Flors V(2), Azcón-Aguilar C(1), Pozo MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soil Microbiology and Symbiotic Systems, Estación Experimental
del Zaidín, CSIC, Profesor Albareda 1, Granada, 18008, Spain.
(2)Metabolic Integration and Cell Signaling Laboratory, CSIC Associated Unit,
Plant Physiology Section, Department of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, 
Universitat Jaume I (UJI), Campus del Riu Sec, Castellón de la Plana 12071,
Spain.

Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) symbioses can improve plant tolerance to multiple
stresses. We compared three AM fungi (AMF) from different genera, one of them
isolated from a dry and saline environment, in terms of their ability to increase
tomato tolerance to moderate or severe drought or salt stress. Plant
physiological parameters and metabolic profiles were compared in order to find
the molecular mechanisms underlying plant protection against stress. Mycorrhizal 
growth response was determined, and ultrahigh-performance LC-MS was used to
compare the metabolic profile of plants under the different treatments. All AMF
increased plant tolerance to stress, and the positive effects of the symbiosis
were correlated with the severity of the stress. The AMF isolated from the
stressful environment was the most effective in improving plant tolerance to salt
stress. Differentially accumulated compounds were identified and the antistress
properties of some of them were confirmed. We demonstrate that AM symbioses
increase plant metabolic plasticity to cope with stress. Some responses were
common to all AMF tested, while others were specifically related to particular
isolates. Important metabolism reprograming was evidenced upon salt stress, and
we identified metabolic pathways and compounds differentially accumulated in
mycorrhizas that may underlie their enhanced tolerance to stress.

© 2018 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2018 New Phytologist Trust.

DOI: 10.1111/nph.15295 
PMID: 29982997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

