
1. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 2018 Oct;18(10):524-532. doi: 10.1089/vbz.2017.2200.
Epub 2018 Jul 10.

Current Status of the Sari-Dzhas Natural Focus of Plague, Kyrgyzstan: Epizootic
Activity and Marmot Population.

Sariyeva G(1), Abdel Z(2), Shabunin A(1), Sagiyev Z(2), Abdikarimov S(3),
Bazarkanova G(4), Kendirbaev D(4), Maimulov R(4), Dzhaparova A(3), Sofeikov V(4),
Abdirassilova A(2), Mussagaliyeva R(2), Kurmanov B(2), Aitbaeva Z(1), Almazbek
D(4).

Author information: 
(1)1 Issyk-Kul State University (IKSU) , Karakol, Kyrgyzstan .
(2)2 M. Aikimbayev's Kazakh Scientific Center for Quarantine and Zoonotic
Diseases (KSCQZD) , Almaty, Kazakhstan .
(3)3 Republic Center of Quarantine and Dangerous Infections (RCQDI) , Bishkek,
Kyrgyzstan .
(4)4 Karakol Anti-Plague Department of RCQDI (KAPD) , Karakol, Kyrgyzstan .

The Sari-Dzhas natural mountain focus of plague with an area of 5000 sq. km is
located mainly in Kyrgyzstan. This enzootic area belongs to a group of Tien-Shan 
mountain plague foci and crosses the boundaries of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and
China. After collapse of Soviet Union, this area was not investigated fully,
thence we have estimated current status of hosts and vectors comparing to 1977 in
the Sari-Dzhas focus. For period 1977-2014, the number of the gray marmot
(Marmota baibacina) as main host of plague has decreased twice due to regular
chemical suppression of focal area, but now there is a tendency for population
recovery. If negative impact of human activity (hunting, livestock, and tourism) 
will be minimized, the population density should rise in the near future, related
to high reproduction score of animals. Significant increase of number of
narrow-skulled vole (Microtus gregalis) observed on focus area in 1977-2017 can
effort a risk of pathogen transmission in cross-populations of marmots provided
by recovery of vector number between different hosts. For whole observation
period in the Sari-Dzhas focus were described 33 species of marmot fleas with
dominated Oropsylla silantiewi (67% from whole amount of fleas) and Radinopsilla 
li ventricosa (6.5%). Deep dustation of marmot burrows by 10%
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) conducted in 1980s caused significant
decrease of ectoparasite abundance: the number of specific fleas is strongly
diminished, while recovery of ticks and lice number is faster. At the same time, 
Yersinia pestis constantly circulates in the focal area, which is comfortable for
interacting of human populations and pathogen hosts. Last plague epizootic was
recorded in 1983 and recent outbreaks among gray marmot and its vectors with
varying intensity are registered again starting from 2012. Thus, the Sari-Dzhas
natural plague focus remains active with all links of plague epizootic cycle
(marmot-vector-rodent) and needs strong monitoring every year.

DOI: 10.1089/vbz.2017.2200 
PMID: 29989480  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

