
1. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2018 Aug 8;39(8):3816-3825. doi: 10.13227/j.hjkx.201711275.

[Effects of Biochar on Nitrous Oxide Fluxes and the Abundance of Related
Functional Genes from Agriculture Soil in the North China Plain].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu XR(1), Zhao GX(1)(2), Zhang QW(1), Tian XP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development in Agriculture, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100081, China.
(2)College of Agronomy and Resources Environment, Tianjin Agricultural
University, Tianjin 300384, China.

To explore the effect and mechanism of biochar application in reducing nitrous
oxide (N2O) content in agricultural soil, from March 27 to June 5 2015, pot
experiments were conducted to study the effects of biochar application rates (CK,
C1:5%, C2:10%, C3:15%, and C4:30%) (mass fraction) on soil N2O fluxes and the
functional marker genes ammonia monooxygenase (amoA), nirK, nirS, and nosZ, which
are responsible for nitrification and denitrification. The results revealed the
following. ①The application of low doses of biochar (5%) promoted N2O emission.
The application of middle and high doses of biochar reduced N2O emission.
Furthermore, the application of biochar (15%) was found to be the best practice
to reduce N2O emission. ② At the beginning of the experiment, biochar had a
significant effect on the abundance of soil amoA and denitrification bacteria
gene. Furthermore, the abundance of AOA and nirS had a significant positive
correlation with the biochar rate, and the abundance of nirK gene and biochar
rate were significant. There was a significant negative correlation between AOB
and nosZ gene abundance and biochar rate. At the end of the experiment, AOA
abundance correlated negatively with biochar rate, while there was a
significantly positive relationship between AOB abundance and biochar rate. ③ At 
the beginning of the experiment, the N2O fluxes exhibited a significant negative 
correlation with AOA and nirS gene, indicating that N2O production was controlled
by the abundance of AOA and nirS gene under high soil moisture content. At the
end of the experiment, there was a significant positive correlation between N2O
flux and nosZ gene, indicating that the production of N2O was regulated by the
abundance of nosZ gene under low soil water content. The results of this study
showed that the application of biochar altered the abundance of amoA and
denitrification bacteria genes, and reduced N2O emission. These results provide a
theoretical basis for a rational application of biochar in farmland.

DOI: 10.13227/j.hjkx.201711275 
PMID: 29998691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

