
1. Biochemistry. 2018 Aug 14;57(32):4858-4866. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00690.
Epub 2018 Jul 25.

Biochemical and Structural Analysis of FomD That Catalyzes the Hydrolysis of
Cytidylyl ( S)-2-Hydroxypropylphosphonate in Fosfomycin Biosynthesis.

Sato S(1), Miyanaga A(1), Kim SY, Kuzuyama T, Kudo F(1), Eguchi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry , Tokyo Institute of Technology , 2-12-1 O-okayama ,
Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8551 , Japan.

In fosfomycin biosynthesis, the hydrolysis of cytidylyl (
S)-2-hydroxypropylphosphonate [( S)-HPP-CMP] to afford ( S)-HPP is the only
uncharacterized step. Because FomD is an uncharacterized protein with a DUF402
domain that is encoded in the fosfomycin biosynthetic gene cluster, FomD was
hypothesized to be responsible for this reaction. In this study, FomD was found
to hydrolyze ( S)-HPP-CMP to give ( S)-HPP and CMP efficiently in the presence of
Mn2+ or Co2+. FomD also hydrolyzed cytidylyl 2-hydroxyethylphosphonate (HEP-CMP),
which is a biosynthetic intermediate before C-methylation. The kcat/ KM value of 
FomD with ( S)-HPP-CMP was 10-fold greater than that with HEP-CMP, suggesting
that FomD hydrolyzes ( S)-HPP-CMP rather than HEP-CMP in bacteria. The crystal
structure of FomD showed that this protein adopts a barrel-like fold, which
consists of a large twisted antiparallel β-sheet. This is a key structural
feature of the DUF402 domain-containing proteins. Two metal cations are located
between the FomD barrel and the two α-helices at the C-terminus and serve to
presumably activate the phosphonate group of substrates for hydrolysis. Docking
simulations with ( S)-HPP-CMP suggested that the methyl group at the C2 position 
of the HPP moiety is recognized by a hydrophobic interaction with Trp68. Further 
mutational analysis suggested that a conserved Tyr107 among the DUF402 domain
family of proteins activates a water molecule to promote nucleophilic attack on
the phosphorus atom of the phosphonate moiety. These findings provide mechanistic
insights into the FomD reaction and lead to a complete understanding of the
fosfomycin biosynthetic pathway in Streptomyces.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00690 
PMID: 30010320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

