
1. Nat Cell Biol. 2018 Aug;20(8):900-908. doi: 10.1038/s41556-018-0136-x. Epub 2018 
Jul 16.

NKX3-1 is required for induced pluripotent stem cell reprogramming and can
replace OCT4 in mouse and human iPSC induction.

Mai T(1)(2), Markov GJ(1)(2), Brady JJ(1)(2)(3), Palla A(1)(2), Zeng H(2)(4),
Sebastiano V(2)(4), Blau HM(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)23andMe Inc, Mountain View, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Stanford School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA, USA.
(5)Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
hblau@stanford.edu.
(6)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. 
hblau@stanford.edu.

Reprogramming somatic cells to induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) is now
routinely accomplished by overexpression of the four Yamanaka factors (OCT4,
SOX2, KLF4, MYC (or OSKM))1. These iPSCs can be derived from patients' somatic
cells and differentiated toward diverse fates, serving as a resource for basic
and translational research. However, mechanistic insights into regulators and
pathways that initiate the pluripotency network remain to be resolved. In
particular, naturally occurring molecules that activate endogenous OCT4 and
replace exogenous OCT4 in human iPSC reprogramming have yet to be found. Using a 
heterokaryon reprogramming system we identified NKX3-1 as an early and
transiently expressed homeobox transcription factor. Following knockdown of
NKX3-1, iPSC reprogramming is abrogated. NKX3-1 functions downstream of the
IL-6-STAT3 regulatory network to activate endogenous OCT4. Importantly, NKX3-1
substitutes for exogenous OCT4 to reprogram both mouse and human fibroblasts at
comparable efficiencies and generate fully pluripotent stem cells. Our findings
establish an essential role for NKX3-1, a prostate-specific tumour suppressor, in
iPSC reprogramming.

DOI: 10.1038/s41556-018-0136-x 
PMCID: PMC6101038
PMID: 30013107  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

