
1. J Mass Spectrom. 2018 Sep;53(9):903-910. doi: 10.1002/jms.4270. Epub 2018 Aug 15.

Identification of spoilage by Alicyclobacillus bacteria in tomato-based products 
by UHPLC-MS/MS.

Cocconi E(1), Franceschini B(1), Previdi MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stazione Sperimentale per l'Industria delle Conserve Alimentari (SSICA),
Parma, Italy.

In recent years, there have been some cases of alteration of tomato derivatives
by Alicyclobacilli spp. The spoilage was reported by consumers who felt odors and
abnormal tastes ("bad") of products. In this work, an untarget approach with
Q-Exactive™ Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer has been used to identify
metabolites associated with the alteration of tomato puree by Alicyclobacillus
bacteria. The study was carried out on tomato puree found positive for the
presence of Alicyclobacillus spores. The germination and growth of native spores 
were induced through incubation at 65°C under static conditions for 5 days. For
microbial concentration below 100 ufc/mL, negative growth was considered. The
samples arising from incubation were submitted to UHPL-HRMS/MS analysis. To find 
compounds related to microbial growth, data obtained by UHPLC-MS/MS analysis were
processed with Thermo Fisher Compound Discoverer™ 2.0 software. We compared
samples grouped according to microbial growth: positive growth vs negative
growth. Five compounds were identified and confirmed by analysis performed on
authentic standards. To other compounds, we have assigned a putative identity.
The HRMS approach using Q-Exactive™ Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer has
proven to be an important and powerful tool for identification of compounds which
could be used as marker molecules in cases of suspected spoilage by
Alicyclobacillus bacteria in tomato derivatives.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jms.4270 
PMID: 30019483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

