
1. J Clin Invest. 2018 Aug 1;128(8):3234-3236. doi: 10.1172/JCI122032. Epub 2018 Jul
16.

Antibiotic therapy-induced collateral damage: IgA takes center stage in pulmonary
host defense.

Lohmeyer J(1), Morty RE(1)(2), Herold S(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, University of Giessen and Marburg Lung
Center (UGMLC), member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL),
Justus-Liebig-University, Giessen, Germany.
(2)Department of Lung Development and Remodelling, Max Planck Institute for Heart
and Lung Research, member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Bad
Nauheim, Germany.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2018 Aug 1;128(8):3535-3545.

The use of broad-spectrum antibiotics in empirical antimicrobial therapy is a
lifesaving strategy for patients in intensive care. At the same time, antibiotics
dramatically increase the risk for nosocomial infections, such as
hospitalâ€‘acquired pneumonia caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and other
antibiotic-resistant bacteria. In this issue of the JCI, Robak and colleagues
identified a mechanism by which depletion of resident gut and lung microbiota by 
antibiotic treatment results in secondary IgA deficiency and impaired anti-P.
aeruginosa host defense. Impaired defenses could be improved by substitution of
polyclonal IgA via the intranasal route in a mouse model of pneumonia.
Importantly, antibiotic treatment caused lung IgA deficiency that involved
reduced TLR-dependent production of a proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL) and B
cell-activating factor (BAFF) in intensive care unit patients. These patients
might therefore benefit from future strategies to increase pulmonary IgA levels.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI122032 
PMCID: PMC6063473
PMID: 30010618  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

