
1. Mol Cell Biol. 2018 Sep 14;38(19). pii: e00306-18. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00306-18.
Print 2018 Oct 1.

Ribosomal RACK1:Protein Kinase C βII Modulates Intramolecular Interactions
between Unstructured Regions of Eukaryotic Initiation Factor 4G (eIF4G) That
Control eIF4E and eIF3 Binding.

Dobrikov MI(1)(2), Dobrikova EY(1)(2), Gromeier M(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.
(2)Departments of Molecular Genetics and of Microbiology and Neurosurgery, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, USA grome001@mc.duke.edu.

The receptor for activated C kinase (RACK1), a conserved constituent of
eukaryotic ribosomes, mediates phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor
4G1(S1093) [eIF4G1(S1093)] and eIF3a(S1364) by protein kinase C βII (PKCβII) (M. 
I. Dobrikov, E. Y. Dobrikova, and M. Gromeier, Mol Cell Biol 38:e00304-18, 2018, 
https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00304-18). RACK1:PKCβII activation drives a phorbol
ester-induced surge of global protein synthesis and template-specific translation
induction of PKC-Raf-extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
(ERK1/2)-responsive genes. For unraveling mechanisms of RACK1:PKCβII-mediated
translation stimulation, we used sequentially truncated eIF4G1 in
coimmunoprecipitation analyses to delineate a set of autoinhibitory elements in
the N-terminal unstructured region (surrounding the eIF4E-binding motif) and the 
interdomain linker (within the eIF3-binding site) of eIF4G1. Computer-based
predictions of secondary structure, mutational analyses, and fluorescent
titration with the β-sheet dye thioflavin T suggest that eIF4G1(S1093) modulates 
a 4-stranded β-sheet composed of antiparallel β-hairpins formed by the
autoinhibitory elements in eIF4G1's unstructured regions. The intact β-sheet
"locks" the eIF4G configuration, preventing assembly with eIF3/40S ribosomal
subunits. Upon PKC stimulation, activated RACK1:PKCβII phosphorylates
eIF4G(S1093) in the tight 48S initiation complex, possibly facilitating
dissociation/recycling of eIF4F.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00306-18 
PMCID: PMC6146829
PMID: 30012864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

