
1. Biomed Res Int. 2018 Jun 19;2018:1439712. doi: 10.1155/2018/1439712. eCollection 
2018.

In Vivo Study of the Effects of ERβ on Apoptosis and Proliferation of
Hormone-Independent Prostate Cancer Cell Lines PC-3M.

Zhou C(1), Yu C(2), Guo L(1), Wang X(1), Li H(1), Cao Q(1), Li F(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Jilin University, 965 Xinjiang Street, Changchun, Jilin
130020, China.
(2)Basic Medical School, Jilin University, 126 Xinmin Street, Changchun, Jilin
130020, China.

Objective: To evaluate the in vivo therapeutic effects of attenuated Salmonella
carrying PCDNA3.1-ERβ plasmid in hormone-independent prostatic cancer in nude
mice and to clarify the mechanism by which estrogen receptor β (ERβ) induces
apoptosis and proliferation in prostatic cancer cells in mice.
Methods: The orthotopic prostatic cancer models of mice were randomly divided as 
follows: MOCK group, treated with PBS, PQ group, treated with attenuated
Salmonella alone, PQ-PCDNA3.1 group, treated with attenuated Salmonella carrying 
PCDNA3.1 plasmid, and PQ-PCDNA3.1-ERβ group, treated with the attenuated
Salmonella carrying PCDNA3.1-ERβ plasmid. Then, 10 μl of the plasmid-containing
solution, comprising 1 × 107 cfu of the bacteria, was administered via intranasal
delivery to each group except the MOCK group. The experimental methods included
flow cytometry and terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase-mediated
dUTP-digoxigenin nick end-labelling (TUNEL) assay, immunohistochemistry, and
western blotting.
Results: Compared with the MOCK, PQ, and PQ-PCDNA3.1 groups, the weights of
tumors in the PQ-PCDNA3.1-ERβ group were significantly reduced. The results of
flow cytometry and TUNEL assay revealed that the number of apoptotic cells in the
PQ-PCDNA3.1-ERβ group significantly increased. Compared with PQ-PCDNA3.1 group,
the protein expression levels of ERβ, Bad, p-caspase 9, p-caspase 3, and cleaved 
PARP in the PQ-PCDNA3.1-ERβ group were significantly increased, while the
expression levels of Akt, p-Akt, and Bcl-xl were decreased (P < 0.05).
Conclusion: The attenuated Salmonella carrying PCDNA3.1-ERβ plasmid could inhibit
the growth of orthotopic prostatic cancer in mice by increasing the expression of
ERβ.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/1439712 
PMCID: PMC6029510
PMID: 30018975  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

