
1. J Perinat Med. 2018 Dec 19;47(1):114-124. doi: 10.1515/jpm-2018-0172.

Neonatal Ogg1/Mutyh knockout mice have altered inflammatory gene response
compared to wildtype mice in the brain and lung after hypoxia-reoxygenation.

Rognlien AGW(1), Wollen EJ(2), Atneosen-Åsegg M(2)(3), Suganthan R(4), Bjørås
M(4), Saugstad OD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Research, Division of Paediatric and Adolescent
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo University Hospital HF, Rikshospitalet, PO Box
4950 Nydalen, 0424 Oslo, Norway, Phone: +47 23072790, Fax: +47 23072780.
(2)Department of Pediatric Research, Division of Paediatric and Adolescent
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo University Hospital HF, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Clinical Molecular Biology and Laboratory Sciences, Akershus
University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Oslo University Hospital HF, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway.

Background 8-Oxoguanine DNA-glycosylase 1 (OGG1) and mutY DNA glycosylase (MUTYH)
are crucial in the repair of the oxidative DNA lesion 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine
caused by hypoxia-reoxygenation injury. Our objective was to compare the gene
expression changes after hypoxia-reoxygenation in neonatal Ogg1-Mutyh double
knockout mice (OM) and wildtype mice (WT), and study the gene response in OM
after hyperoxic reoxygenation compared to normoxic. Methods Postnatal day 7 mice 
were subjected to 2 h of hypoxia (8% O2) followed by reoxygenation in either 60% 
O2 or air, and sacrificed right after completed reoxygenation (T0h) or after 72 h
(T72h). The gene expression of 44 a priori selected genes was examined in the
hippocampus/striatum and lung. Results We found that OM had an altered gene
response compared to WT in 21 genes in the brain and 24 genes in the lung. OM had
a lower expression than WT of inflammatory genes in the brain at T0h, and higher 
expression at T72h in both the brain and lung. In the lung of OM, five genes were
differentially expressed after hyperoxic reoxygenation compared to normoxic.
Conclusion For the first time, we report that Ogg1 and Mutyh in combination
protect against late inflammatory gene activation in the hippocampus/striatum and
lung after neonatal hypoxia-reoxygenation.

DOI: 10.1515/jpm-2018-0172 
PMID: 30020889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

