
1. Biochemistry. 2018 Aug 21;57(33):4972-4984. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00693.
Epub 2018 Aug 9.

Stereochemical and Mechanistic Investigation of the Reaction Catalyzed by Fom3
from Streptomyces fradiae, a Cobalamin-Dependent Radical S-Adenosylmethionine
Methylase.

Wang B, Blaszczyk AJ, Knox HL, Zhou S, Blaesi EJ, Krebs C, Wang RX, Booker SJ.

Fom3, a cobalamin-dependent radical S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) methylase, has
recently been shown to catalyze the methylation of carbon 2″ of
cytidylyl-2-hydroxyethylphosphonate (HEP-CMP) to form
cytidylyl-2-hydroxypropylphosphonate (HPP-CMP) during the biosynthesis of
fosfomycin, a broad-spectrum antibiotic. It has been hypothesized that a
5'-deoxyadenosyl 5'-radical (5'-dA•) generated from the reductive cleavage of SAM
abstracts a hydrogen atom from HEP-CMP to prime the substrate for addition of a
methyl group from methylcobalamin (MeCbl); however, the mechanistic details of
this reaction remain elusive. Moreover, it has been reported that Fom3 catalyzes 
the methylation of HEP-CMP to give a mixture of the ( S)-HPP and ( R)-HPP
stereoisomers, which is rare for an enzyme-catalyzed reaction. Herein, we
describe a detailed biochemical investigation of a Fom3 that is purified with 1
equiv of its cobalamin cofactor bound, which is almost exclusively in the form of
MeCbl. Electron paramagnetic resonance and Mössbauer spectroscopies confirm that 
Fom3 contains one [4Fe-4S] cluster. Using deuterated enantiomers of HEP-CMP, we
demonstrate that the 5'-dA• generated by Fom3 abstracts the C2″- pro-R hydrogen
of HEP-CMP and that methyl addition takes place with inversion of configuration
to yield solely ( S)-HPP-CMP. Fom3 also sluggishly converts
cytidylyl-ethylphosphonate to the corresponding methylated product but more
readily acts on cytidylyl-2-fluoroethylphosphonate, which exhibits a lower C2″
homolytic bond-dissociation energy. Our studies suggest a mechanism in which the 
substrate C2″ radical, generated upon hydrogen atom abstraction by the 5'-dA•,
directly attacks MeCbl to transfer a methyl radical (CH3•) rather than a methyl
cation (CH3+), directly forming cob(II)alamin in the process.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00693 
PMCID: PMC6554712
PMID: 30036047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

