
1. J Mater Sci Mater Med. 2018 Jul 20;29(8):118. doi: 10.1007/s10856-018-6119-4.

Antibiotic release from F-doped nanotubular oxide layer on TI6AL4V alloy to
decrease bacterial viability.

Aguilera-Correa JJ(1), Doadrio AL(2), Conde A(3), Arenas MA(3), de-Damborenea
JJ(3), Vallet-Regí M(2)(4), Esteban J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, UAM. Av.
Reyes Católicos 2, 28040, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Inorganic and Bioinorganic Chemistry, Institute of Sanitary
Research Hospital, Complutense University of Madrid, 12 de Octubre i+12, 28040,
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Surface Engineering Corrosion and Durability, National Center
for Metallurgical Research, CENIM-CSIC, Avda. Gregorio del Amo, 8, 28040, Madrid,
Spain.
(4)Networking Research Center on Bioengineering, Biomaterials and Nanomedicine
(CIBER-BBN), Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Clinical Microbiology, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, UAM. Av.
Reyes Católicos 2, 28040, Madrid, Spain. jestebanmoreno@gmail.com.

We aimed to evaluate the release of two antibiotics: gentamicin and vancomycin
loaded into F-doped nanotubular anodic oxide layers, as well as their bactericide
effect. F-doped nanotubular oxide layers fabricated on Ti-6Al-4V loaded with
gentamicin (Gm), vancomycin (Vm) and their mixture (Gm + Vm) by a previously
described loading method. Antibiotic release was studied by RP-HPLC and by a
biological method. Bactericidal activity was evaluated by a bacterial adherence
protocol described previously using on three clinically important bacterial
species. The antibiotic release steady up to 120 and 180 min for Gm and Vm,
respectively, and despite the antibiotic concentration decreased, their
biological activity was maintained over time. The number of living bacteria of
three species tested on NT-Gm specimens was significantly lower than on NT
specimens without antibiotics (P < 0.01). There are significant differences among
NT-Gm and NT-Gm + Vm specimens (P < 0.05) for S. aureus 15981, S. epidermidis
ATCC 35984, and P. aeruginosa ATCC 27853 and no differences between NT-Vm and
NT-Gm + Vm for staphylococci (P > 0.05). In conclusion, this Gm + Vm loading
method added to the properties of F-doped nanotubular oxide layers fabricated on 
Ti-6Al-4V, and therefore surfaces with antibacterial, biocompatible, tissue
integration stimulating and spread-spectrum bactericidal properties can be
obtained.

DOI: 10.1007/s10856-018-6119-4 
PMID: 30030636  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

