
1. J Mol Biol. 2018 Sep 14;430(18 Pt B):3129-3142. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.07.020.
Epub 2018 Jul 18.

Probing the Architecture, Dynamics, and Inhibition of the PI4KIIIα/TTC7/FAM126
Complex.

Dornan GL(1), Dalwadi U(2), Hamelin DJ(1), Hoffmann RM(1), Yip CK(2), Burke
JE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria,
British Columbia, Canada V8W 2Y2.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z3, Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria,
British Columbia, Canada V8W 2Y2. Electronic address: jeburke@uvic.ca.

Phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase IIIα (PI4KIIIα) is the lipid kinase primarily
responsible for generating the lipid phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate (PI4P) at
the plasma membrane, which acts as the substrate for generation of the signaling 
lipids PIP2 and PIP3. PI4KIIIα forms a large heterotrimeric complex with two
regulatory partners, TTC7 and FAM126. We describe using an integrated electron
microscopy and hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) approach to
probe the architecture and dynamics of the complex of PI4KIIIα/TTC7/FAM126.
HDX-MS reveals that the majority of the PI4KIIIα sequence was protected from
exchange in short deuterium pulse experiments, suggesting presence of secondary
structure, even in putative unstructured regions. Negative stain electron
microscopy reveals the shape and architecture of the full-length complex,
revealing an overall dimer of PI4KIIIα/TTC7/FAM126 trimers. HDX-MS reveals
conformational changes in the TTC7/FAM126 complex upon binding PI4KIIIα,
including both at the direct TTC7-PI4KIIIα interface and at the putative membrane
binding surface. Finally, HDX-MS experiments of PI4KIIIα bound to the highly
potent and selective inhibitor GSK-A1 compared to that bound to the non-specific 
inhibitor PIK93 revealed substantial conformational changes throughout an
extended region of the kinase domain. Many of these changes were distant from the
putative inhibitor binding site, showing a large degree of allosteric
conformational changes that occur upon inhibitor binding. Overall, our results
reveal novel insight into the regulation of PI4KIIIα by its regulatory proteins
TTC7/FAM126, as well as additional dynamic information on how selective
inhibition of PI4KIIIα is achieved.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.07.020 
PMID: 30031006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

