
1. Blood. 2018 Sep 6;132(10):1027-1038. doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-09-806257. Epub 2018
Jul 24.

Phosphatidylinositol transfer proteins regulate megakaryocyte TGF-β1 secretion
and hematopoiesis in mice.

Capitano M(1), Zhao L(2), Cooper S(1), Thorsheim C(2), Suzuki A(2), Huang X(1),
Dent AL(1), Marks MS(3)(4), Abrams CS(2), Broxmeyer HE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN.
(2)Penn-CHOP Blood Center for Patient Care and Discovery and Hematology-Oncology 
Division, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA; and.
(4)Department of Physiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

We hypothesized that megakaryocyte (MK) phosphoinositide signaling mediated by
phosphatidylinositol transfer proteins (PITPs) contributes to hematopoietic stem 
cell (HSC) and hematopoietic progenitor cell (HPC) regulation. Conditional
knockout mice lacking PITPs specifically in MKs and platelets (pitpα-/- and
pitpα-/-/β-/-) bone marrow (BM) manifested decreased numbers of HSCs,
MK-erythrocyte progenitors, and cycling HPCs. Further, pitpα-/-/β-/- BM had
significantly reduced engrafting capability in competitive transplantation and
limiting dilution analysis. Conditioned media (CM) from cultured pitpα-/- and
pitpα-/-/β-/- BM MKs contained higher levels of transforming growth factor β1
(TGF-β1) and interleukin-4 (IL-4), among other myelosuppressive cytokines, than
wild-type BM MKs. Correspondingly, BM flush fluid from pitpα-/- and pitpα-/-/β-/-
mice had higher concentrations of TGF-β1. CM from pitpα-/- and pitpα-/-/β-/- MKs 
significantly suppressed HPC colony formation, which was completely extinguished 
in vitro by neutralizing anti-TGF-β antibody, and treatment of pitpα-/-/β-/- mice
in vivo with anti-TGF-β antibodies completely reverted their defects in BM HSC
and HPC numbers. TGF-β and IL-4 synergized to inhibit HPC colony formation in
vitro. Electron microscopy analysis of pitpα-/-/β-/- MKs revealed ultrastructural
defects with depleted α-granules and large, misshaped multivesicular bodies. Von 
Willebrand factor and thrombospondin-1, like TGF-β, are stored in MK α-granules
and were also elevated in CM of cultured pitpα-/-/β-/- MKs. Altogether, these
data show that ablating PITPs in MKs indirectly dysregulates hematopoiesis in the
BM by disrupting α-granule physiology and secretion of TGF-β1.

© 2018 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2017-09-806257 
PMCID: PMC6128088
PMID: 30042096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

