
1. Food Chem Toxicol. 2018 Oct;120:491-499. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2018.07.048. Epub
2018 Jul 27.

Anthocyanins isolated from blueberry ameliorates CCl4 induced liver fibrosis by
modulation of oxidative stress, inflammation and stellate cell activation in
mice.

Sun J(1), Wu Y(2), Long C(2), He P(2), Gu J(2), Yang L(2), Liang Y(3), Wang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, The Affiliated Hospital of
Guizhou Medical University, Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology,
Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou Province, 550004, China; Guizhou
Provincial Center for Clinical Laboratory, No.83 Zhongshandong Road, Guiyang,
Guizhou Province, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, The Affiliated Hospital of
Guizhou Medical University, Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology,
Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou Province, 550004, China.
(3)Public Health Treatment Center of Guiyang, No.6 Daying Road, Guiyang, Guizhou 
Province, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, The Affiliated Hospital of
Guizhou Medical University, Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology,
Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou Province, 550004, China. Electronic 
address: wangyuping007@gmc.edu.cn.

To study the mechanism of anthocyanins from blueberry on mice model of hepatic
fibrosis. We observed that the levels of serum ALT and AST of 100 mg*kg-1*d-1,
200 mg*kg-1*d-1 anthocyanins group were reduced compared to the CCl4 treated
group. Mitochondrial electron chain complex 1 and 2 activities, determined by
microplate assays, were reduced in CCl4 treated group and restored by anthocyanin
treatment. MDA and protein carbonyl content of liver homogenate were induced by
CCl4 and anthocyanin treated group reduced both significantly.Monocyte
chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP1), Interleukin 1 beta (IL1β), macrophage
inflammatory protein 2 (MIP-2) were induced by CCl4 were attenuated by
anthocyanin. Colagen Ⅲ and α-SMA was significantly increased as determined by
histology and anthocyanins decreased their level. The protein levels of MMP-9,
TIMP1 and PCNA of liver homogenate was also modulated by anthocyanins. In
isolated hepatic stellate cells, activation as determined by fibrotic gene
expression was attenuated by anthocyanin. Anthocyanins from blueberry may have
protective effects on CCl4 induced hepatic fibrosis. The mechanism may be related
to reduce ROS generating sources and associated oxidative damage, decrease the
influence of pro-inflammatory cytokines, and suppress the activity of hepatic
stellate cells and downregulation TIMP1, PCNA, Col-Ⅲ, α-SMA and up-regulation
MMP-9.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fct.2018.07.048 
PMID: 30056145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

