
1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2018 Jul 24;5:90. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2018.00090. eCollection
2018.

ALDH1A3 Is the Key Isoform That Contributes to Aldehyde Dehydrogenase Activity
and Affects in Vitro Proliferation in Cardiac Atrial Appendage Progenitor Cells.

Puttini S(1), Plaisance I(1), Barile L(2), Cervio E(2), Milano G(1)(2), Marcato
P(3), Pedrazzini T(1), Vassalli G(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Department, CHUV University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Cardiocentro Ticino Foundation and Swiss Institute for Regenerative Medicine, 
Lugano, Switzerland.
(3)Departments of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, NS, Canada.

High aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDHhi) activity has been reported in normal and
cancer stem cells. We and others have shown previously that human ALDHhi cardiac 
atrial appendage cells are enriched with stem/progenitor cells. The role of ALDH 
in these cells is poorly understood but it may come down to the specific ALDH
isoform(s) expressed. This study aimed to compare ALDHhi and ALDHlo atrial cells 
and to identify the isoform(s) that contribute to ALDH activity, and their
functional role. Methods and Results: Cells were isolated from atrial appendage
specimens from patients with ischemic and/or valvular heart disease undergoing
heart surgery. ALDHhi activity assessed with the Aldefluor reagent coincided with
primitive surface marker expression (CD34+). Depending on their ALDH activity,
RT-PCR analysis of ALDHhi and ALDHlo cells demonstrated a differential pattern of
pluripotency genes (Oct 4, Nanog) and genes for more established cardiac lineages
(Nkx2.5, Tbx5, Mef2c, GATA4). ALDHhi cells, but not ALDHlo cells, formed clones
and were culture-expanded. When cultured under cardiac differentiation
conditions, ALDHhi cells gave rise to a higher number of cardiomyocytes compared 
with ALDHlo cells. Among 19 ALDH isoforms known in human, ALDH1A3 was most highly
expressed in ALDHhi atrial cells. Knocking down ALDH1A3, but not ALDH1A1,
ALDH1A2, ALDH2, ALDH4A1, or ALDH8A1 using siRNA decreased ALDH activity and cell 
proliferation in ALDHhi cells. Conversely, overexpressing ALDH1A3 with a
retroviral vector increased proliferation in ALDHlo cells. Conclusions: ALDH1A3
is the key isoform responsible for ALDH activity in ALDHhi atrial appendage
cells, which have a propensity to differentiate into cardiomyocytes. ALDH1A3
affects in vitro proliferation of these cells.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2018.00090 
PMCID: PMC6066537
PMID: 30087899 

