
1. Eur J Immunol. 2018 Oct;48(10):1679-1686. doi: 10.1002/eji.201847652. Epub 2018
Sep 21.

The selective ROCK2 inhibitor KD025 reduces IL-17 secretion in human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells independent of IL-1 and IL-6.

Tengesdal IW(1)(2), Kitzenberg D(1), Li S(1), Nyuydzefe MS(3), Chen W(3), Weiss
JM(3), Zhang J(3), Waksal SD(3), Zanin-Zhorov A(3), Dinarello CA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Medicine, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Kadmon Corporation, LLC, New York, NY, USA.

Reducing the activities of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-17 is an effective
treatment strategy for several chronic autoimmune disorders. Rho-associated
coiled-coil containing kinase 2 (ROCK2) is a member of the serine-threonine
protein kinase family that regulates IL-17 secretion in T cells via signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)-dependent mechanism. We
reported here that the selective ROCK2 inhibitor KD025 significantly reduced in
vitro production of IL-17 in unfractionated human peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) stimulated with the dectin-1 agonist Candida albicans. C. albicans 
induced IL-17 was reduced by 70% (p < 0.0001); a similar reduction (80%) was
observed in PBMC stimulated with the Toll-like receptor 2 agonist Staphylococcus 
epidermidis (p < 0.0001). Treatment of PBMC with KD025 was not associated with a 
reduction in IL-1β, IL-6 or IL-1α levels; in contrast, a 1.5 fold increase in the
level of IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) was observed (p < 0.001). KD025
down-regulated C. albicans-induced Myosin Light Chain and STAT3, whereas STAT5
phosphorylation increased. Using anti-CD3/CD28 activation of the TCR, KD025
similarly suppressed IL-17 independent of a reduction in IL-1β. Thus, ROCK2
directly regulates IL-17 secretion independent of endogenous IL-1 and IL-6
supporting development of selective ROCK2 inhibitors for treatment of
IL-17-driven inflammatory diseases.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201847652 
PMID: 30098001  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

