
1. J Clin Med Res. 2018 Sep;10(9):700-706. doi: 10.14740/jocmr3505w. Epub 2018 Jul
31.

Soluble Fms-Like Tyrosine Kinase-1 Is A Marker of Endothelial Dysfunction During 
Sepsis.

Greco M(1), Palumbo C(1), Sicuro F(1), Lobreglio G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pathology and Microbiology Laboratory, Vito Fazzi General Hospital
ASL-Lecce, Lecce, Italy.

Background: Sepsis is currently defined as a life-threatening organ dysfunction
caused by a deregulated host response to infection. There is increasing evidence 
that the endothelium plays a crucial and pathogenic role in sepsis. Profound
alterations of the endothelium associated with sepsis include increased
leucocytes adhesions, shift to a procoagulant state, vasodilatation, altered
barrier function with more permeable capillaries and tissue edema. The vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway is involved in the control of
microvascular permeability and has been involved in the pathogenesis of
conditions associated with endothelial barrier disruption such as sepsis. sFlt-1 
is a soluble variant of the VEGF receptor (Fms-like tyrosine kinase-1, Flt-1 or
VEGFR-1) able to down-regulate the effects of VEGF by decreasing its signaling.
We investigated the possible involvement of sFlt-1 as biomarker of endothelial
alteration during sepsis, organ dysfunction and death.
Methods: Serum levels of s-Flt1 were measured in 170 hospitalized patients (77
with sepsis, confirmed by positive blood culture), and in 18 healthy volunteers. 
The sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) score was determined by using
biochemical and clinical parameters. In a small number of patients (9
individuals), s-Flt1 concentration was evaluated after negativization of the
blood culture.
Results: Serum level of s-Flt1 was significantly higher in septic patients than
blood culture-negative patients (277.7 ± 52.7 and 133.4 ± 12.4 pg/mL,
respectively, P = 0.0088), both groups of patients had significantly higher
concentration of sFlt-1 than healthy individuals (78.9 ± 2.5 pg/mL). Among sepsis
cases, 68% was caused by Gram-negative bacteria, 27% by Gram-positive bacteria
and 8% by Candida species. Serum level of s-Flt1 showed a significant difference 
between Gram-negative (274.1 pg/mL) and Gram-positive (145.7 pg/mL) sepsis. SOFA 
score (evaluated in 20 patients with sFlt-1 >190 pg/mL) showed a positive trend
of correlation with the increasing sFlt-1 level. After blood culture
negativization, serum level of sFlt-1 decreased (37%).
Conclusion: Our findings confirm, in a larger population of patients with sepsis,
recent evidences that sFlt-1 levels are higher in patients with
complicated-sepsis that evolve to septic shock and suggest that sFlt-1 could be a
useful biomarker for sepsis severity. An anti-VEGF effect mediated by sFlt-1
could be hypothesized as salvage compensatory mechanism activated in response to 
sepsis.

DOI: 10.14740/jocmr3505w 
PMCID: PMC6089578
PMID: 30116440 

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflict of interest with 
any financial organization regarding the items discussed in the manuscript.

