
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Aug 6;9:1802. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01802. eCollection
2018.

T Cell Receptor-Independent, CD31/IL-17A-Driven Inflammatory Axis Shapes
Synovitis in Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis.

Ferguson ID(1)(2), Griffin P(1), Michel JJ(1)(2), Yano H(3), Gaffen SL(4)(5),
Mueller RG(1)(2), Dvergsten JA(6), Piganelli JD(5)(7), Rosenkranz ME(1)(2), Kietz
DA(1)(2), Vallejo AN(1)(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United
States.
(2)Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(3)Graduate Program in Microbiology and Immunology School of Medicine, University
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(5)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United
States.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United
States.
(7)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United
States.

T cells are considered autoimmune effectors in juvenile idiopathic arthritis
(JIA), but the antigenic cause of arthritis remains elusive. Since T cells
comprise a significant proportion of joint-infiltrating cells, we examined
whether the environment in the joint could be shaped through the inflammatory
activation by T cells that is independent of conventional TCR signaling. We
focused on the analysis of synovial fluid (SF) collected from children with
oligoarticular and rheumatoid factor-negative polyarticular JIA. Cytokine
profiling of SF showed dominance of five molecules including IL-17A. Cytometric
analysis of the same SF samples showed enrichment of αβT cells that lacked both
CD4 and CD8 co-receptors [herein called double negative (DN) T cells] and also
lacked the CD28 costimulatory receptor. However, these synovial αβT cells
expressed high levels of CD31, an adhesion molecule that is normally employed by 
granulocytes when they transit to sites of injury. In receptor crosslinking
assays, ligation of CD31 alone on synovial CD28nullCD31+ DN αβT cells effectively
and sufficiently induced phosphorylation of signaling substrates and increased
intracytoplasmic stores of cytokines including IL-17A. CD31 ligation was also
sufficient to induce RORγT expression and trans-activation of the IL-17A
promoter. In addition to T cells, SF contained fibrocyte-like cells (FLC)
expressing IL-17 receptor A (IL-17RA) and CD38, a known ligand for CD31.
Stimulation of FLC with IL-17A led to CD38 upregulation, and to production of
cytokines and tissue-destructive molecules. Addition of an oxidoreductase analog 
to the bioassays suppressed the CD31-driven IL-17A production by T cells. It also
suppressed the downstream IL-17A-mediated production of effectors by FLC. The
levels of suppression of FLC effector activities by the oxidoreductase analog
were comparable to those seen with corticosteroid and/or biologic inhibitors to
IL-6 and TNFα. Collectively, our data suggest that activation of a CD31-driven,
αβTCR-independent, IL-17A-mediated T cell-FLC inflammatory circuit drives and/or 
perpetuates synovitis. With the notable finding that the oxidoreductase mimic
suppresses the effector activities of synovial CD31+CD28null αβT cells and
IL-17RA+CD38+ FLC, this small molecule could be used to probe further the
intricacies of this inflammatory circuit. Such bioactivities of this small
molecule also provide rationale for new translational avenue(s) to potentially
modulate JIA synovitis.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01802 
PMCID: PMC6087740
PMID: 30127787  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

