
1. Front Microbiol. 2018 Aug 3;9:1759. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01759. eCollection
2018.

Genomic Insights Into Energy Metabolism of Carboxydocella thermautotrophica
Coupling Hydrogenogenic CO Oxidation With the Reduction of Fe(III) Minerals.

Toshchakov SV(1)(2), Lebedinsky AV(2), Sokolova TG(2), Zavarzina DG(2),
Korzhenkov AA(1), Teplyuk AV(1), Chistyakova NI(3), Rusakov VS(3),
Bonch-Osmolovskaya EA(2), Kublanov IV(2), Gavrilov SN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbial Genomics, Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University,
Kaliningrad, Russia.
(2)Winogradsky Institute of Microbiology, FRC Biotechnology, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow, Russia.
(3)Faculty of Physics, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia.

The genus Carboxydocella forms a deeply branching family in the class Clostridia 
and is currently represented by three physiologically diverse species of
thermophilic prokaryotes. The type strain of the type species, Carboxydocella
thermautotrophica 41T, is an obligate chemolithoautotroph growing exclusively by 
hydrogenogenic CO oxidation. Another strain, isolated from a hot spring at Uzon
caldera, Kamchatka in the course of this work, is capable of coupling
carboxydotrophy and dissimilatory reduction of Fe(III) from oxic and
phyllosilicate minerals. The processes of carboxydotrophy and Fe(III) reduction
appeared to be interdependent in this strain. The genomes of both isolates were
sequenced, assembled into single chromosome sequences (for strain 41T a plasmid
sequence was also assembled) and analyzed. Genome analysis revealed that each of 
the two strains possessed six genes encoding diverse Ni,Fe-containing CO
dehydrogenases (maximum reported in complete prokaryotic genomes), indicating
crucial role of carbon monoxide in C. thermautotrophica metabolism. Both strains 
possessed a set of 30 multiheme c-type cytochromes, but only the newly isolated
Fe-reducing strain 019 had one extra gene of a 17-heme cytochrome, which is
proposed to represent a novel determinant of dissimilatory iron reduction in
prokaryotes. MÃ¶ssbauer studies revealed that strain 019 induced reductive
transformation of the abundant ferric/ferrous-mica mineral glauconite to siderite
during carboxydotrophic growth. Reconstruction of the C. thermautotrophica
strains energy metabolism is the first comprehensive genome analysis of a
representative of the deep phylogenetic branch Clostridia Incertae Sedis, family 
V. Our data provide insights into energy metabolism of C. thermautotrophica with 
an emphasis on its ecological implications.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01759 
PMCID: PMC6085454
PMID: 30123201 

