
1. J Biol Chem. 2018 Oct 12;293(41):15855-15866. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.004806. Epub
2018 Aug 28.

Structural analysis reveals pathomechanisms associated with pseudoxanthoma
elasticum-causing mutations in the ABCC6 transporter.

Ran Y(1), Zheng A(1), Thibodeau PH(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15219.
(2)From the Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15219 thibodea@pitt.edu.

Mutations in ABC subfamily C member 6 (ABCC6) transporter are associated with
pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), a disease resulting in ectopic mineralization and
affecting multiple tissues. A growing number of mutations have been identified in
individuals with PXE. For most of these variants, no mechanistic information is
available regarding their role in normal and pathophysiologies. To assess how
PXE-associated mutations alter ABCC6 biosynthesis and structure, we biophysically
and biochemically evaluated the N-terminal nucleotide-binding domain. A
high-resolution X-ray structure of nucleotide-binding domain 1 (NBD1) of human
ABCC6 was obtained at 2.3 Å that provided a template on which to evaluate
PXE-causing mutations. Biochemical analysis of mutations in this domain indicated
that multiple PXE-causing mutations altered its structural properties. Analyses
of the full-length protein revealed a strong correlation between the alterations 
in NBD properties and the processing and expression of ABCC6. These results
suggest that a significant fraction of PXE-associated mutations located in NBD1
causes changes in its structural properties and that these mutation-induced
alterations directly affect the maturation of the full-length ABCC6 protein.

© 2018 Ran et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.004806 
PMCID: PMC6187630
PMID: 30154241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

