
1. Toxicology. 2018 Dec 1;410:49-58. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2018.08.012. Epub 2018 Aug
25.

Diethylstilbestrol (DES) induces autophagy in thymocytes by regulating Beclin-1
expression through epigenetic modulation.

Singh NP(1), Miranda K(1), Singh UP(1), Nagarkatti P(1), Nagarkatti M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology & Immunology, University of South
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, SC, 29208, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology & Immunology, University of South
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, SC, 29208, USA. Electronic address:
mnagark@uscmed.sc.edu.

Diethylstilbestrol (DES) is an endocrine disruptor that was used to prevent
adverse effects of pregnancy in women in late 1940s until early 1970s. Its use
was banned following significant toxicity and negative effects not only in the
mothers but also transgenerationally. Previous studies from our laboratory showed
that DES induces thymic atrophy and immunosuppression in mice. In this study, we 
investigated the molecular mechanisms through which DES triggers thymic atrophy, 
specifically autophagy. To that end, we treated C57BL/6 mice with DES, and
determined expression of two autophagy-related proteins, microtubule-associated
protein-1 light chain 3 (LC3) and Beclin-1 (Becn1). We observed that DES-induced 
thymic atrophy was associated with increased autophagy in thymocytes and
significant upregulation in the expression of both Becn1 and LC3. DES also caused
downregulation in the expression of miR-30a in thymocytes, and transfection
studies revealed that miR-30a targeted Becn1. Upon examination of methylation
status of Becn1, we noted hypomethylation of Becn1 in thymocytes of mice exposed 
to DES. Together, these data demonstrate for the first time that DES induces
autophagy in thymocytes potentially through epigenetic changes involving
hypomethylation of Becn1 and down-regulation of miR-30a expression.

Copyright Â© 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tox.2018.08.012 
PMCID: PMC6463288
PMID: 30153466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

