
1. ACS Chem Biol. 2018 Sep 21;13(9):2699-2707. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.8b00645. Epub
2018 Sep 12.

Molecular Basis for Olefin Rearrangement in the Gephyronic Acid Polyketide
Synthase.

Dodge GJ(1), Ronnow D(2), Taylor RE(2), Smith JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Life Sciences Institute , University of
Michigan , Ann Arbor , Michigan 48109 , United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , University of Notre Dame , Notre
Dame , Indiana 46556 , United States.

Polyketide synthases (PKS) are a rich source of natural products of varied
chemical composition and biological significance. Here, we report the
characterization of an atypical dehydratase (DH) domain from the PKS pathway for 
gephyronic acid, an inhibitor of eukaryotic protein synthesis. Using a library of
synthetic substrate mimics, the reaction course, stereospecificity, and tolerance
to non-native substrates of GphF DH1 are probed via LC-MS analysis. Taken
together, the studies establish GphF DH1 as a dual-function dehydratase/isomerase
that installs an odd-to-even double bond and yields a product consistent with the
isobutenyl terminus of gephyronic acid. The studies also reveal an unexpected C2 
epimerase function in catalytic turnover with the native substrate. A 1.55-Ã…
crystal structure of GphF DH1 guided mutagenesis experiments to elucidate the
roles of key amino acids in the multistep DH1 catalysis, identifying critical
functions for leucine and tyrosine side chains. The mutagenesis results were
applied to add a secondary isomerase functionality to a nonisomerizing DH in the 
first successful gain-of-function engineering of a PKS DH. Our studies of GphF
DH1 catalysis highlight the versatility of the DH active site and adaptation for 
a specific catalytic outcome with a specific substrate.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.8b00645 
PMCID: PMC6233718
PMID: 30179448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

