
1. Biotechnol J. 2019 Apr;14(4):e1800359. doi: 10.1002/biot.201800359. Epub 2018 Sep
25.

Autotransporter-Mediated Display of a Naïve Affibody Library on the Outer
Membrane of Escherichia coli.

Andersson KG(1), Persson J(1), Ståhl S(1), Löfblom J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Protein Science, School of Engineering Sciences in Chemistry,
Biotechnology and Health, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, SE-106 91,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Development of new affinity proteins using combinatorial protein engineering is
today established for generation of monoclonal antibodies and also essential for 
discovery of binders that are based on non-immunoglobulin proteins. Phage display
is most frequently used, but yeast display is becoming increasingly popular,
partly due to the option of utilizing fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) 
for isolation of new candidates. Escherichia coli has several valuable properties
for library applications and in particular the high transformation efficiency.
The use of various autotransporters and intimins for secretion and anchoring on
the outer membrane have shown promising results and particularly for directed
evolution of different enzymes. Here, the authors report on display of a large
naïve affibody library on the outer membrane of E. coli using the autotransporter
Adhesin Involved in Diffuse Adherence (AIDA-I). The expression cassette is first 
engineered by removing non-essential sequences, followed by introduction of an
affibody library, comprising more than 109 variants, into the new display vector.
The quality of the library and general performance of the method is assessed by
FACS against five different targets, which resulted in a panel of binders with
down to nanomolar affinities, suggesting that the method has potential as a
complement to phage display for generation of affibody molecules.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/biot.201800359 
PMID: 30179307  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

