
1. Mol Oral Microbiol. 2018 Dec;33(6):407-419. doi: 10.1111/omi.12244. Epub 2018 Oct
5.

The contribution of Tannerella forsythia dipeptidyl aminopeptidase IV in the
breakdown of collagen.

Yost S(1), Duran-Pinedo AE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(2)University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida.

In this study, we characterized a serine protease from Tannerella forsythia that 
degrades gelatin, type I, and III collagen. Tannerella forsythia is associated
with periodontitis progression and severity. The primary goal of this research
was to understand the mechanisms by which T. forsythia contributes to
periodontitis progression. One of our previous metatranscriptomic analysis
revealed that during periodontitis progression T. forsythia highly expressed the 
bfor_1659 ORF. The N-terminal end is homologous to dipeptidyl aminopeptidase IV
(DPP IV). DPP IV is a serine protease that cleaves X-Pro or X-Ala dipeptide from 
the N-terminal end of proteins. Collagen type I is rich in X-Pro and X-Ala
sequences, and it is the primary constituent of the periodontium. This work
assessed the collagenolytic and gelatinolytic properties of BFOR_1659. To that
end, the complete BFOR_1659 and its domains were purified as His-tagged
recombinant proteins, and their collagenolytic activity was tested on
collagen-like substrates, collagen type I and III combined, and on the
extracellular matrix (ECM) formed on human gingival fibroblasts culture HGF-1.
BFOR_1659 was only found in T. forsythia supernatants, highlighting its potential
role on the pathogenicity of T. forsythia. We also found that BFOR_1659
efficiently degrades all tested substrates but the individual domains were
inactive. Given that BFOR_1659 is highly expressed in the periodontal pocket, its
clinical relevance is suggested to periodontitis progression.

Â© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/omi.12244 
PMCID: PMC6246789
PMID: 30171738  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

