
1. Mediators Inflamm. 2018 Aug 5;2018:4847205. doi: 10.1155/2018/4847205.
eCollection 2018.

Neuropeptides SP and CGRP Diminish the Moraxella catarrhalis Outer Membrane
Vesicle- (OMV-) Triggered Inflammatory Response of Human A549 Epithelial Cells
and Neutrophils.

Augustyniak D(1), Roszkowiak J(1), Wiśniewska I(1), Skała J(2), Gorczyca D(3),
Drulis-Kawa Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology and Immunology, Institute of Genetics and
Microbiology, University of Wroclaw, Przybyszewskiego 63/77, 51-148 Wrocław,
Poland.
(2)Department of Genetics, Institute of Genetics and Microbiology, University of 
Wroclaw, Przybyszewskiego 63/77, 51-148 Wrocław, Poland.
(3)3rd Department and Clinic of Paediatrics, Immunology and Rheumatology of
Developmental Age, Wroclaw Medical University, ul. Koszarowa 5, 51-149 Wrocław,
Poland.

Neuropeptides such as substance P (SP) and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)
play both pro- and anti-inflammatory activities and are produced during infection
and inflammation. Moraxella catarrhalis is one of the leading infectious agents
responsible for inflammatory exacerbation in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Since the airway inflammation in COPD is connected with
activation of both epithelial cells and accumulated neutrophils, in this study we
determined the in vitro effects of neuropeptides on the inflammatory potential of
these cells in response to M. catarrhalis outer membrane vesicle (OMV) stimulant.
The various OMV-mediated proinflammatory effects were demonstrated. Next, using
hBD-2-pGL4[luc2] plasmid with luciferase reporter gene, SP and CGRP were shown to
inhibit the IL-1β-dependent expression of potent neutrophil chemoattractant,
hBD-2 defensin, in transfected A549 epithelial cells (type II alveolar cells)
upon OMV stimulation. Both neuropeptides exerted antiapoptotic activity through
rescuing a significant fraction of A549 cells from OMV-induced cell death and
apoptosis. Finally, CGRP caused an impairment of specific but not azurophilic
granule exocytosis from neutrophils as shown by evaluation of
gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) or CD66b expression and elastase release, 
respectively. Concluding, these findings suggest that SP and CGRP mediate the
dampening of proinflammatory action triggered by M. catarrhalis OMVs towards
cells engaged in lung inflammation in vitro.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/4847205 
PMCID: PMC6098883
PMID: 30174554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

