
1. Sci Total Environ. 2019 Feb 1;649:405-412. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.08.388. 
Epub 2018 Aug 28.

Arsenic contamination influences microbial community structure and putative
arsenic metabolism gene abundance in iron plaque on paddy rice root.

Hu M(1), Sun W(2), Krumins V(3), Li F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Integrated Agro-environmental Pollution Control
and Management, Guangdong Institute of Eco-Environmental Science & Technology,
Guangzhou 510650, PR China.
(2)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Integrated Agro-environmental Pollution Control
and Management, Guangdong Institute of Eco-Environmental Science & Technology,
Guangzhou 510650, PR China; Department of Environmental Sciences, Rutgers
University, New Brunswick 08901, USA.
(3)Department of Environmental Sciences, Rutgers University, New Brunswick 08901,
USA.
(4)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Integrated Agro-environmental Pollution Control
and Management, Guangdong Institute of Eco-Environmental Science & Technology,
Guangzhou 510650, PR China. Electronic address: cefbli@soil.gd.cn.

Iron (Fe) plaque on rice roots contains a unique microbiota that connects the
root and rhizosphere environments. However, the factors controlling the microbial
community structure and function in Fe plaque are unknown. We performed Illumina 
sequencing of 16S rRNA gene amplicons and of total community DNA to compare the
microbial community structure and metabolic potential of Fe plaques derived from 
arsenic (As)- and non-contaminated sites. Geobacter and Hydrogenophaga were
identified as the genera that differed significantly in abundance between
As-contaminated and control samples (P < 0.05). Significant differences were
found between contaminated and control samples in the relative abundances of
predicted As functional genes of the microbial community in Fe plaque, in which
the relative abundances of the arsC (encoding As(V) reductase) and arsB genes
(encoding As(III) efflux membrane protein) in Fe plaque from contaminated sites
(YH and TP samples) were significantly higher than those from the control samples
(P < 0.05). In addition, the As concentration in Fe plaque contributed
significantly to the relative abundance of genes related to As metabolism and
correlated most strongly with the abundance of arrB genes (encoding respiratory
arsenate reductase, FeS subunit). These results suggest that As contamination
influences the community structure and metabolic potential of Fe
plaque-associated microorganisms and may help in understanding the environmental 
behavior of As at the interface of Fe plaque.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.08.388 
PMID: 30176453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

