
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2018 Nov 20;285:158-164. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2018.08.022. Epub 2018 Aug 23.

Effect of micro-encapsulated antioxidant formulations on mycobiota, residual
levels, sensory analyses and insect pest attack in stored peanuts.

Garcia D(1), Girardi NS(2), Passone MA(2), Nesci A(2), Etcheverry M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Ecología Microbiana, Departamento de Microbiología e
Inmunología, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas Físico Químicas y Naturales,
Universidad Nacional de Río Cuarto, Ruta 36 Km 601 (X5806JRA), Río Cuarto,
Córdoba, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas
(CONICET), Argentina. Electronic address: dgarcia@exa.unrc.edu.ar.
(2)Laboratorio de Ecología Microbiana, Departamento de Microbiología e
Inmunología, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas Físico Químicas y Naturales,
Universidad Nacional de Río Cuarto, Ruta 36 Km 601 (X5806JRA), Río Cuarto,
Córdoba, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas
(CONICET), Argentina.

The in situ effect of microencapsulated 2(3)-tert-butyl-4 hydroxyanisole (BHA) on
stored peanuts (Arachis hipogaea) intended for human consumption was evaluated.
Peanut were stored unshelled in flexible containers called "big bags" that were
made of polypropylene raffia. 100 kg of peanuts were used in each big bag and
stored in refrigerated cells (<18 °C) for about 5 months in two different peanut 
processing companies during 2015/2016 period. Fungal populations, aflatoxin
accumulation, BHA residues, acidity and fatty acid profile, sensory analyses,
insect damage and environmental factors variation, were evaluated. At the end of 
the storage period, significant (p < 0.05) fungitoxic effects of the BHA
formulation were observed in the order of 30 and 15% for the first and second
company, respectively. Cladosporium, yeasts, Penicillium, Fusarium, Alternaria
and Aspergillus were the main fungal isolates. No aflatoxins were found for both 
companies and years evaluated. In addition, taste of the peanuts was not
significantly affected (p < 0.05) by formulation used and insect damage was
always lower than 3%. However, different levels of BHA were detected throughout
the experiment in the two companies, with final levels of 2.5 for the C1 and
275 ng BHA/g peanuts in C2. Formulation did not affect acidity and organoleptic
properties of peanuts. These results show that BHA formulation could be used as
part of alternative strategy for control of fungal contamination storage period.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2018.08.022 
PMID: 30170271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

