
1. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2018 Nov 1;124:208-216. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2018.08.037. Epub
2018 Aug 29.

Development and in vitro evaluation of chitosan based system for local delivery
of atorvastatin for treatment of periodontitis.

Işılay Özdoğan A(1), Akca G(2), Şenel S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Hacettepe
University, Ankara 06100, Turkey; Turkish Patent and Trademark Office, Ankara
06560, Turkey.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Dentistry, Gazi University,
Ankara 06510, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Hacettepe
University, Ankara 06100, Turkey. Electronic address: ssenel@hacettepe.edu.tr.

In recent years, statin group drugs have been widely investigated in treatment of
periodontal diseases due to their anti-inflammatory effect. The efficacy of
statins can be enhanced by local administration into the periodontal pocket by
appropriate delivery systems. The aim of our study was to develop a bioadhesive
delivery system for local delivery of atorvastatin in treatment of periodontal
disease. For this purpose, gel formulations were prepared using different types
of chitosan (base and water soluble) and viscosity, bioadhesivity and
syringeability of the gels as well as in vitro drug release properties were
investigated vitro. Furthermore, anti-inflammatory effect of the formulations was
studied in vitro using tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alfa induced human gingival
fibroblast (hGF) cells. Release of proinflammatory (IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8) and
anti-inflammatory (TGF-β1, TGF-β2, TGF-β3, IL-10) cytokines were measured after
incubating the hGF cells with the formulations. The viscosity of the formulations
was found to be suitable for a local application into periodontal pocket. In
presence of drug, bioadhesive property of the formulations was found to increase,
and bioadhesion force was within the range, which would retain the delivery
system at the application site, subsequently maintain drug levels at desired
amount for longer period of time. The release of atorvastatin from the gels was
found to be slower than that of the solution. The cytokine levels were found to
decrease following application of the formulations, and anti-inflammatory effect 
was observed to enhance in presence of chitosan. No significant differences were 
found between base and water-soluble chitosan.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2018.08.037 
PMID: 30171985  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

