
1. Rev Peru Med Exp Salud Publica. 2018 Apr-Jun;35(2):279-284. doi:
10.17843/rpmesp.2018.352.3471.

[Mycobacteria identification in solid culture by inverted phase microscopy and
ziehl-neelsen stain].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Jaimes JR(1)(2), Giraldo-Chavez J(3), Huyhua-Flores Y(3), Caceres-Nakiche T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Científica del Sur, Escuela de Medicina Humana. Lima, Perú.
(2)Universidad Continental, Facultad de Ciencias Básicas. Lima, Perú.
(3)Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Instituto de Enfermedades Tropicales
Alexander von Humboldt. Lima, Perú.

With the aim of identifying morphological differences in colonies of different
species of mycobacteria by means of inverted phase microscopy, nine species of
high-prevalence pathogenic mycobacteria were seeded in 7H11 solid medium and were
observed for up to 21 days. Additionally, Ziehl-Neelsen (ZN) stains were carried 
out for each one of them. No morphological variations were identified among the
species grown on solid medium; however, it was identified that all are able to
form cords in solid medium in an early stage of growth, being corroborated by the
Ziehl-Neelsen stain in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. so techniques based on
detecting M. tuberculosis depending on the identification of the cords should be 
taken with caution so as not to generate a bad diagnosis, so microbiological
characteristics could also be established as a minimum time to detect growth,
temperature of growth and bacillary characteristics based on the Ziehl-Neelsen
stain for each species studied.

Publisher: Con el objetivo de identificar diferencias morfológicas en colonias de
diferentes especies de micobacterias mediante microscopía de fase invertida, se
sembraron en medio sólido 7H11, nueve especies de micobacterias patógenas de alta
prevalencia y se observaron hasta por 21 días. Adicionalmente se realizaron
coloraciones Ziehl-Neelsen (ZN) para cada una de ellas. No se identificó
variaciones morfológicas entre las especies cultivadas, sin embargo, se observó
que todas fueron capaces de formar cordones en su etapa temprana de crecimiento, 
siendo corroborado por coloración ZN en Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Asimismo, se 
determinó ciertas características microbiológicas como tiempo mínimo y la
temperatura de crecimiento, y características bacilares basadas en la tinción ZN 
para cada especie estudiada. Estos hallazgos son importantes para la
identificación del agente etiológico y podrían servir de base para estudios
posteriores sobre la identificación de las biomoléculas involucradas en la
agregación celular de cada micobacteria.
DOI: 10.17843/rpmesp.2018.352.3471 
PMID: 30183905  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

