
1. J Dairy Sci. 2018 Nov;101(11):9725-9735. doi: 10.3168/jds.2018-14760. Epub 2018
Sep 7.

Keto acid decarboxylase and keto acid dehydrogenase activity detected during the 
biosynthesis of flavor compound 3-methylbutanal by the nondairy adjunct culture
Lactococcus lactis ssp. lactis F9.

Luo J(1), Jiang C(2), Zhao L(3), Zhang M(4), Wang F(5), Sun E(2), Ren F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health,
College of Food Science and Nutritional Engineering, China Agricultural
University, Beijing 100083, China; College of Chemistry and Biological
Engineering, Changsha University of Science and Technology, Changsha 410114,
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Functional Dairy, Co-constructed by Ministry of Education
and Beijing Government, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100083, China.
(3)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health,
College of Food Science and Nutritional Engineering, China Agricultural
University, Beijing 100083, China.
(4)School of Food and Chemical Engineering, Beijing Technology and Business
University, Beijing 100048, China.
(5)College of Food Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Agriculture,
Beijing Laboratory for Food Quality and Safety, Beijing 102206, China.
(6)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human Health,
College of Food Science and Nutritional Engineering, China Agricultural
University, Beijing 100083, China. Electronic address: renfazheng@263.net.

3-Methylbutanal is one of the primary substances that contribute to the nutty
flavor in cheese. Lactococcus strains have been shown to have higher
aminotransferase and α-keto acid decarboxylase activities compared with other
microbes, indicating that they might form a higher amount of 3-methylbutanal by
decarboxylation. Several dairy lactococcal strains have been successfully applied
as adjunct cultures to increase the 3-methylbutanal content of cheese. Moreover, 
compared with dairy cultures, the nondairy lactococci are generally metabolically
more diverse with more active AA-converting enzymes. Therefore, it might be
appropriate to use nondairy lactococcal strains as adjunct cultures to enrich the
3-methylbutanal content of cheese. This study thereby aimed to select a nondairy 
Lactococcus strain that is highly productive of 3-methylbutanal, identify its
biosynthetic pathway, and apply it to cheese manufacture. Twenty wild nondairy
lactococci isolated from 5 kinds of Chinese traditional fermented products were
identified using 16S rRNA sequence analysis and were found to belong to
Lactococcus lactis ssp. lactis. The nondairy strains were then screened in vitro 
for their production of 3-methylbutanal and whether they met the criteria to
become an adjunct culture for cheese. The L. lactis ssp. lactis F9, isolated from
sour bamboo shoot, was selected because of its higher 3-methylbutanal production,
suitable autolysis rate, and lower acid production. The enzymes involved in the
catabolic pathway of leucine were then evaluated. Both α-keto acid decarboxylase 
(6.96 μmol/g per minute) and α-keto acid dehydrogenase (30.06 μmol/g per minute) 
activities were detected in nondairy L. lactis F9. Cheddar cheeses made with
different F9 levels were ripened at 13°C and analyzed after 90 d by a combination
of instrumental and sensory methods. The results showed that adding nondairy L.
lactis F9 significantly increased 3-methylbutanal content and enhanced the nutty 
flavor of the cheese without impairing its textural properties. Thus, nondairy L.
lactis F9 efficiently enhanced the biosynthesis of 3-methylbutanal in vitro and
in manufactured cheese.

Copyright © 2018 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2018-14760 
PMID: 30197150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

