
1. Chemosphere. 2018 Dec;212:890-897. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.08.153. Epub
2018 Aug 30.

Unraveling the ecotoxicity of deep eutectic solvents using the mixture toxicity
theory.

Macário IPE(1), Jesus F(1), Pereira JL(2), Ventura SPM(3), Gonçalves AMM(4),
Coutinho JAP(3), Gonçalves FJM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology & CESAM, University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro,
Portugal.
(2)Department of Biology & CESAM, University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro,
Portugal. Electronic address: jpereira@ua.pt.
(3)CICECO - Aveiro Institute of Materials & Department of Chemistry, University
of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal.
(4)Department of Biology & CESAM, University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro,
Portugal; MARE, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Coimbra,
3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal.

The interest on deep eutectic solvents (DES) has been increasing. However, the
ecotoxicological profile of DES is scarcely known. Also, despite previous studies
showed that DES components dissociate in water, none assessed DES toxicity using 
the classical and adequate models for mixture toxicity prediction - concentration
addition (CA) and independent action (IA). This study evaluates the
ecotoxicological profile of DES based on [N1111]Cl, [N2222]Cl and [N3333]Cl as
hydrogen bond acceptors (HBA) combined with hydrogen-bond donors (HBD) vis.
ethylene glycol and 1-propanol, through the Microtox® Acute Toxicity Test. CA and
IA with deviations describing synergism/antagonism, dose-ratio and dose-level
effects were fitted to the toxicity data. Neither the starting materials nor DES 
were found hazardous to Aliivibrio fischeri, in this specific case agreeing with 
the claimed "green character" of DES. Among the starting materials, ethylene
glycol was the least toxic, whereas [N3333]Cl was the most toxic (30
min-EC50 = 96.49 g L-1 and 0.5456 g L-1, respectively). DES toxicity followed the
same trend as observed for the salts: [N1111]Cl-based DES < [N2222]Cl-based
DES < [N3333]Cl-based DES. The IA model, with specific deviations, adjusted
better in 5 out of 6 DES. Antagonism was observed for [N1111]Cl-based DES, and
synergism for [N3333]Cl-based DES and for 1-propanol:[N2222]Cl. The application
of the mixture toxicity models represents a breakthrough in the problematic of
assessing the toxicity of the countless number of DES that can be created with
the same starting materials, since they provide the expected toxicity of any
virtual combination between HBA and HBD.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.08.153 
PMID: 30195169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

