
1. Tumour Biol. 2018 Sep;40(9):1010428318799251. doi: 10.1177/1010428318799251.

Lymph node CXCL17 messenger RNA: A new prognostic biomarker for colon cancer.

Rashad Y(1)(2), Olsson L(1), Israelsson A(1), Öberg Å(3), Lindmark G(4),
Hammarström ML(1), Hammarström S(1), Sitohy B(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Immunology, Department of Clinical Microbiology, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden.
(2)2 Division of Oncology, Department of Radiation Sciences, Umeå University,
Umeå, Sweden.
(3)3 Division of Surgery, Department of Surgical and Perioperative Sciences, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden.
(4)4 Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Helsingborg, Sweden.

Lymph node metastasis is the most important prognostic characteristic of
colorectal cancer. Carcinoembryonic antigen messenger RNA was shown to detect
tumor cells that have disseminated to lymph nodes of colorectal cancer patients
and to be at least as good as the hematoxylin and eosin method to predict
survival in colorectal cancer patients. CXCL17 was recently shown to be
ectopically expressed in colon cancer tumors. Therefore, CXCL17 may serve as
prognostic marker alone or in combination with carcinoembryonic antigen. CXCL17
and carcinoembryonic antigen messenger RNA levels were determined using
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction with RNA copy
standard in 389 lymph nodes of 120 colon cancer patients (stages I-IV) and 67
lymph nodes of 12 control patients with inflammatory bowel disease as well as in 
68 primary tumors and 30 normal colon tissue samples. Lymph nodes of colon cancer
patients were analyzed for CXCL17 and carcinoembryonic antigen protein expression
by immunohistochemistry. CXCL17 messenger RNA was expressed in primary tumors at 
high levels, while it was barely detected in normal colon tissue ( p < 0.0001).
Similarly, CXCL17 messenger RNA levels were significantly higher in hematoxylin- 
and eosin-positive (hematoxylin and eosin (+)) lymph nodes compared to
hematoxylin- and eosin-negative nodes ( p < 0.0001). CXCL17 messenger RNA levels 
were investigated in lymph nodes grouped according to carcinoembryonic antigen
messenger RNA levels: low (-), intermediate (int), and high (+). CXCL17 messenger
RNA levels were higher in the carcinoembryonic antigen (int) and carcinoembryonic
antigen (+) groups compared to the carcinoembryonic antigen (-) group ( p = 0.03 
and p < 0.0001, respectively). In lymph nodes of stage III and IV patients,
CXCL17 messenger RNA levels correlated with carcinoembryonic antigen messenger
RNA levels ( p < 0.0001, r = 0.56 and p = 0.0002, r = 0.66, respectively).
Staining of consecutive lymph node sections for CXCL17 and carcinoembryonic
antigen demonstrated that the same cells expressed both proteins. Altogether,
these results indicate that CXCL17 in lymph nodes is expressed by tumor cells.
Patients were grouped according to the CXCL17 messenger RNA levels in the highest
lymph node with low levels (-) and high levels (+). CXCL17(+) colon cancer
patients showed 2.8-3.6 fold increased risk for recurrence ( p = 0.03) and
decreased mean disease-free survival time of 8 months compared to CXCL17(-) colon
cancer patients ( p = 0.03). CXCL17(+) carcinoembryonic antigen (int) colon
cancer patients showed increased risk for recurrence by 8.3 fold ( p = 0.04) and 
decreased mean disease-free survival time of 46 months compared to CXCL17(-)
carcinoembryonic antigen (int) colon cancer patient at follow-up after 12 years (
p = 0.02). The presence of tumor cells expressing CXCL17 in regional lymph nodes 
is a sign of poor prognosis. Analysis of CXCL17 messenger RNA is particularly
useful to detect less differentiated colon cancer tumors expressing relatively
low carcinoembryonic antigen messenger RNA levels. Thus, CXCL17 messenger RNA in 
combination with carcinoembryonic antigen messenger RNA may be used as a
complementary tool to the hematoxylin and eosin method for detection of poorly
differentiated, aggressive tumors.

DOI: 10.1177/1010428318799251 
PMID: 30198422  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

