
1. Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol. 2018 Sep 1;74(Pt 9):895-905. doi:
10.1107/S2059798318009397. Epub 2018 Sep 3.

High-pressure protein crystal structure analysis of Escherichia coli
dihydrofolate reductase complexed with folate and NADP.

Nagae T(1), Yamada H(2), Watanabe N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Synchrotron Radiation Research Center, Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya
464-8603, Japan.
(2)Venture Business Laboratory, Nagoya University, Chikusa, Nagoya 464-8603,
Japan.

A high-pressure crystallographic study was conducted on Escherichia coli
dihydrofolate reductase (ecDHFR) complexed with folate and NADP+ in crystal forms
containing both the open and closed conformations of the M20 loop under
high-pressure conditions of up to 800 MPa. At pressures between 270 and 500 MPa
the crystal form containing the open conformation exhibited a phase transition
from P21 to C2. Several structural changes in ecDHFR were observed at high
pressure that were also accompanied by structural changes in the NADP+ cofactor
and the hydration structure. In the crystal form with the closed conformation the
M20 loop moved as the pressure changed, with accompanying conformational changes 
around the active site, including NADP+ and folate. These movements were
consistent with the suggested hypothesis that movement of the M20 loop was
necessary for ecDHFR to catalyze the reaction. In the crystal form with the open 
conformation the nicotinamide ring of the NADP+ cofactor undergoes a large flip
as an intermediate step in the reaction, despite being in a crystalline state.
Furthermore, observation of the water molecules between Arg57 and folate
elucidated an early step in the substrate-binding pathway. These results
demonstrate the possibility of using high-pressure protein crystallography as a
method to capture high-energy substates or transient structures related to the
protein reaction cycle.

open access.

DOI: 10.1107/S2059798318009397 
PMCID: PMC6130465
PMID: 30198899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

