
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2018 Oct 17;140(41):13260-13271. doi: 10.1021/jacs.8b06923. Epub
2018 Oct 8.

The Zinc Linchpin Motif in the DNA Repair Glycosylase MUTYH: Identifying the Zn2+
Ligands and Roles in Damage Recognition and Repair.

Nu√±ez NN, Khuu C, Babu CS(1), Bertolani SJ, Rajavel AN, Spear JE, Armas JA,
Wright JD(1), Siegel JB, Lim C(1), David SS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences , Academia Sinica , Taipei , Taiwan 11529 ,
Republic of China.

The DNA base excision repair (BER) glycosylase MUTYH prevents DNA mutations by
catalyzing adenine (A) excision from inappropriately formed 8-oxoguanine
(8-oxoG):A mismatches. The importance of this mutation suppression activity in
tumor suppressor genes is underscored by the association of inherited variants of
MUTYH with colorectal polyposis in a hereditary colorectal cancer syndrome known 
as MUTYH-associated polyposis, or MAP. Many of the MAP variants encompass amino
acid changes that occur at positions surrounding the two-metal cofactor-binding
sites of MUTYH. One of these cofactors, found in nearly all MUTYH orthologs, is a
[4Fe-4S]2+ cluster coordinated by four Cys residues located in the N-terminal
catalytic domain. We recently uncovered a second functionally relevant metal
cofactor site present only in higher eukaryotic MUTYH orthologs: a Zn2+ ion
coordinated by three Cys residues located within the extended interdomain
connector (IDC) region of MUTYH that connects the N-terminal adenine excision and
C-terminal 8-oxoG recognition domains. In this work, we identified a candidate
for the fourth Zn2+ coordinating ligand using a combination of bioinformatics and
computational modeling. In addition, using in vitro enzyme activity assays,
fluorescence polarization DNA binding assays, circular dichroism spectroscopy,
and cell-based rifampicin resistance assays, the functional impact of reduced
Zn2+ chelation was evaluated. Taken together, these results illustrate the
critical role that the "Zn2+ linchpin motif" plays in MUTYH repair activity by
providing for proper engagement of the functional domains on the 8-oxoG:A
mismatch required for base excision catalysis. The functional importance of the
Zn2+ linchpin also suggests that adjacent MAP variants or exposure to
environmental chemicals may compromise Zn2+ coordination, and ability of MUTYH to
prevent disease.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.8b06923 
PMCID: PMC6443246
PMID: 30208271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

