
1. Biochemistry. 2018 Oct 9;57(40):5841-5850. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00713. Epub
2018 Sep 27.

Structure and Reaction Mechanism of the LigJ Hydratase: An Enzyme Critical for
the Bacterial Degradation of Lignin in the Protocatechuate 4,5-Cleavage Pathway.

Hogancamp TN(1), Mabanglo MF(1), Raushel FM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry , Texas A&M University , College Station , Texas 77843
, United States.

LigJ from the soil bacterium Sphingobium sp. SYK-6 catalyzes the reversible
hydration of (3 Z)-2-keto-4-carboxy-3-hexenedioate (KCH) to
4-carboxy-4-hydroxy-2-oxoadipate (CHA) in the degradation of lignin in the
protocatechuate 4,5-cleavage pathway. LigJ is a member of the amidohydrolase
superfamily and an enzyme in cog2159. The three-dimensional crystal structure of 
wild-type LigJ was determined in the presence [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 6DXQ
] and absence of the product CHA (PDB entry 6DWV ). The protein folds as a
distorted (β/α)8-barrel, and a single zinc ion is bound in the active site at the
C-terminal end of the central β-barrel. The product CHA is ligated to the zinc
ion in the active site via the displacement of a single water molecule from the
coordination shell of the metal center in LigJ. The product-bound structure
reveals that the enzyme catalyzes the hydration of KCH with the formation of a
chiral center at C4 with S stereochemistry. The E284Q mutant was unable to
catalyze the hydration of KCH to CHA, and the structure of this mutant was
determined in the presence of the substrate KCH (PDB entry 6DXS ). On the basis
of the structure of LigJ in the presence of KCH and CHA, it is proposed that the 
side chain carboxylate of Glu-284 functions as a general base in the abstraction 
of a proton from a bound water molecule for nucleophilic attack at C4 of the
substrate. The reaction is facilitated by the delocalization of the negative
charge to the metal center via the carbonyl group at C2 of the substrate. C3 of
the substrate is subsequently protonated by Glu-284 functioning as a general
acid. The overall reaction occurs by the syn addition of water to the double bond
between C4 and C3 of the substrate KCH. The kinetic constants for the hydration
of KCH to CHA by LigJ at pH 8.0 are 25 s-1 ( kcat) and 2.6 × 106 M-1 s-1 ( kcat/ 
Km).

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00713 
PMID: 30207699  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

