
1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2018 Dec 1;315(6):F1833-F1842. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00608.2017. Epub 2018 Sep 12.

Aging phenotype(s) in kidneys of diabetic mice are p66ShcA dependent.

Vashistha H(1)(2), Marrero L(2), Reiss K(2), Cohen AJ(1), Malhotra A(3), Javed
T(1), Bradley A(1), Abbruscato F(1), Giusti S(1), Jimenez A(1), Mehra S(4),
Kaushal D(4), Giorgio M(5), Pelicci PG(5), Kakoki M(6), Singhal PC(3), Bunnell
B(7), Meggs LG(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Translational Research, Ochsner Health System , New Orleans,
Louisiana.
(2)Neurological Cancer Research, Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center, Louisiana State 
University Health Sciences Center , New Orleans, Louisiana.
(3)Immunology and Inflammation Center, Feinstein Institute for Medical Research
and Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra-Northwell, Manhasset, New York, New
York.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Tulane Primate Center, Tulane University , New
Orleans, Louisiana.
(5)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology , Milan , 
Italy.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory of Medicine, University of North
Carolina , Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(7)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Tulane University , New
Orleans, Louisiana.

The p66ShcA protein controls cellular responses to oxidative stress, senescence, 
and apoptosis. Here, we test the hypothesis that aging phenotype(s) commonly
associated with the broad category of chronic kidney disease are accelerated in
diabetic kidneys and linked to the p66ShcA locus. At the organ level, tissue stem
cells antagonize senescent phenotypes by replacing old dysfunctional cells. Using
established methods, we isolated a highly purified population of stem cell
antigen-1-positive mesenchymal stem cells (Sca-1+ MSCs) from kidneys of wild-type
(WT) and p66 knockout (p66 KO) mice. Cells were plated in culture medium
containing normal glucose (NG) or high glucose (HG). Reactive oxygen species
(ROS) metabolism was substantially increased in WT MSCs in HG medium in
association with increased cell death by apoptosis and acquisition of the
senescent phenotype. DNA microarray analysis detected striking differences in the
expression profiles of WT and p66 KO-MSCs in HG medium. Unexpectedly, the
analysis for p66 KO-MSCs revealed upregulation of Wnt genes implicated in
self-renewal and differentiation. To test the in vivo consequences of
constitutive p66 expression in diabetic kidneys, we crossed the Akita diabetic
mouse with the p66KO mouse. Homozygous mutation at the p66 locus delays or
prevents aging phenotype(s) in the kidney that may be precursors to diabetic
nephropathy.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00608.2017 
PMCID: PMC6336986
PMID: 30207172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

