
1. Cell Death Dis. 2018 Sep 11;9(9):920. doi: 10.1038/s41419-018-0954-6.

Regulation of cell surface protease receptor S100A10 by retinoic acid therapy in 
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)☆.

Holloway RW(1), Thomas ML(1), Cohen AM(2), Bharadwaj AG(1), Rahman M(3), Marcato 
P(1)(4), Marignani PA(1)(3), Waisman DM(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, B3H 1X5, Canada.
(2)Proteomic Core Facility, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
NS, B3H 1X5, Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, NS, B3H 1X5, Canada.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, 
B3H 1X5, Canada.
(5)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, B3H 1X5, Canada.
david.waisman@dal.ca.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, NS, B3H 1X5, Canada. david.waisman@dal.ca.

S100A10 (p11), a member of the S100 family of small dimeric EF-hand-type
Ca2+-binding proteins, plays a role in a variety of both intracellular and
extracellular processes. Previous studies have suggested that p11 is
intrinsically unstable and requires binding to annexin A2 (p36) to prevent its
rapid ubiquitylation and degradation. Our laboratory has shown that p11 levels
are stimulated by the expression of the oncoprotein, PML/RARα. Furthermore,
treatment of the APL cell line, NB4 with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) causes
the rapid loss of p36 and p11 protein. However, the mechanism by which ATRA
regulates p11 levels has not been established. Here, we show that the proteasomal
inhibitor, lactacystin reversed the ATRA-dependent loss of p11, but did not cause
an accumulation of ubiquitylated forms of p11, suggesting that ATRA promotes the 
proteasomal degradation of p11 in an ubiquitin-independent manner. ATRA treatment
of MCF-7 breast cancer cells reduced p11 but not p36 transcript and protein
levels, thus indicating that ATRA can regulate p11 levels independently of
PML/RARα and p36. Overexpression of p36 upregulated p11 protein but not mRNA
levels, indicating that p36 affects p11 post translationally. The forced
expression of ubiquitin and p11 in 293 T cells resulted in ubiquitylation of p11 
that was blocked by mutagenesis of lysine 57. This study highlights the complex
regulation of p11 by retinoid signaling and challenges the hypothesis that
ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation of p11 represents a universal
mechanism of regulation of this protein.

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-018-0954-6 
PMCID: PMC6134137
PMID: 30206209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

