
1. J Phys Chem B. 2018 Oct 4;122(39):9128-9136. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.8b06844. Epub 
2018 Sep 25.

Mechanical Softening of a Small Ubiquitin-Related Modifier Protein Due to
Temperature Induced Flexibility at the Core.

Bhattacharya S(1), Ainavarapu SRK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences , Tata Institute of Fundamental Research , Dr 
Homi Bhabha Road , Colaba, Mumbai 400005 , India.

Despite the growing interest in the thermal softening of proteins, the
mechanistic details of it are far from understood. β-Grasp proteins have globular
shape with compact structure and they are mechanically resilient. The β-clamp or 
mechanical clamp in them formed by the interactions between the terminal
β-strands is generally associated with the protein mechanical resistance.
Although previous studies showed that temperature can perturb the protein
mechanical stability, the structural changes leading to the lowered mechanical
resistance are not known. Here, we investigated the temperature dependent
mechanical stability of small ubiquitin-related modifier 2 (SUMO2) using
single-molecule force spectroscopy (SMFS) and the corresponding conformational
changes using ensemble experiments. SMFS studies on the polyprotein of SUMO2
estimate a decrease in the spring constant of the protein from 4.50 to 1.35 N/m
upon increasing the temperature from 5 to 45 °C. Interestingly, near-UV circular 
dichroism spectroscopy reveals a decrease in tertiary structure content while the
overall secondary structure of the protein remains unchanged. Steady-state
fluorescence and quenching studies on SUMO2 with a tryptophan mutation at the
core (F60W) show that the nonpolar environment of the tryptophan is unchanged and
the protein core is inaccessible to the bulk solvent, in the same temperature
range. We attribute the thermal softening observed in atomic force microscopy
(AFM) experiments to the reduction in tertiary structure of SUMO2. Our results
provide evidence for the importance of the intramolecular interactions at the
protein core along with the β-clamp or mechanical clamp in providing the
mechanical resistance as well as in modulating the protein stiffness.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.8b06844 
PMID: 30204456  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

