
1. ISME J. 2019 Feb;13(2):277-289. doi: 10.1038/s41396-018-0269-8. Epub 2018 Sep 11.

Deltaproteobacteria (Pelobacter) and Methanococcoides are responsible for
choline-dependent methanogenesis in a coastal saltmarsh sediment.

Jameson E(1), Stephenson J(2), Jones H(2), Millard A(3), Kaster AK(4), Purdy
KJ(2), Airs R(5), Murrell JC(6), Chen Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Warwick, CV4 7AL, UK.
Eleanor.jameson@warwick.ac.uk.
(2)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Warwick, CV4 7AL, UK.
(3)Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Leicester,
Leicester, LE1 7RH, UK.
(4)Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institute for Biological Interfaces (IBG
5), Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 1, Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Karlsruhe, 76344,
Germany.
(5)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, The Hoe, Plymouth, PL1 3DH, UK.
(6)University of East Anglia, Norwich Research Park, Norfolk, Norwich, NR4 7TJ,
UK.
(7)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Warwick, CV4 7AL, UK.
Y.chen.25@warwick.ac.uk.

Coastal saltmarsh sediments represent an important source of natural methane
emissions, much of which originates from quaternary and methylated amines, such
as choline and trimethylamine. In this study, we combine DNA stable isotope
probing with high throughput sequencing of 16S rRNA genes and 13C2-choline
enriched metagenomes, followed by metagenome data assembly, to identify the key
microbes responsible for methanogenesis from choline. Microcosm incubation with
13C2-choline leads to the formation of trimethylamine and subsequent methane
production, suggesting that choline-dependent methanogenesis is a two-step
process involving trimethylamine as the key intermediate. Amplicon sequencing
analysis identifies Deltaproteobacteria of the genera Pelobacter as the major
choline utilizers. Methanogenic Archaea of the genera Methanococcoides become
enriched in choline-amended microcosms, indicating their role in methane
formation from trimethylamine. The binning of metagenomic DNA results in the
identification of bins classified as Pelobacter and Methanococcoides. Analyses of
these bins reveal that Pelobacter have the genetic potential to degrade choline
to trimethylamine using the choline-trimethylamine lyase pathway, whereas
Methanococcoides are capable of methanogenesis using the pyrrolysine-containing
trimethylamine methyltransferase pathway. Together, our data provide a new
insight on the diversity of choline utilizing organisms in coastal sediments and 
support a syntrophic relationship between Bacteria and Archaea as the dominant
route for methanogenesis from choline in this environment.

DOI: 10.1038/s41396-018-0269-8 
PMCID: PMC6331629
PMID: 30206424  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

