
1. World J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2018 Sep 10;34(10):142. doi:
10.1007/s11274-018-2526-4.

Analysis of the ars gene cluster from highly arsenic-resistant Burkholderia
xenovorans LB400.

Serrato-Gamiño N(1), Salgado-Lora MG(1), Chávez-Moctezuma MP(1), Campos-García
J(1), Cervantes C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Químico-Biológicas, Universidad Michoacana,
Edificio B-3, Ciudad Universitaria, 58030, Morelia, Michoacán, Mexico.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones Químico-Biológicas, Universidad Michoacana,
Edificio B-3, Ciudad Universitaria, 58030, Morelia, Michoacán, Mexico.
cvega1999@yahoo.com.

The Burkholderia xenovorans LB400 multireplicon genome displays a relatively high
proportion of redundant genes, including several genes predicted to be related to
arsenic resistance. These comprise an ars gene cluster, composed of the arsR3,
acr3, arsC1 and arsH genes, as well as two arsB, arsC2, and seven individual arsR
genes. The objective of this work was to elucidate the involvement of the ars
gene cluster in arsenic resistance by the LB400 strain. Susceptibility tests
showed that B. xenovorans LB400 is highly resistant to arsenate and arsenite.
Arsenic resistance was induced by prior exposure of LB400 to arsenate or
arsenite. reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction assays using total RNA 
from LB400 showed arsenite-induced transcription of the arsR3 gene, suggesting
that the ars gene cluster constitutes an arsenite-responsive operon. Transfer of 
cloned LB400 ars genes to heterologous Escherichia coli or Pseudomonas aeruginosa
strains demonstrated that the ArsR3 transcriptional repressor, ArsC1 arsenate
reductase, and the Acr3 arsenite efflux pump encoded in the LB400 ars gene
cluster, are all associated to the arsenic resistance phenotype of this strain.
The ars gene cluster from Burkholderia xenovorans LB400 is responsible for the
inducible arsenic-resistance phenotype of the bacterium.

DOI: 10.1007/s11274-018-2526-4 
PMID: 30203106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

