
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2018 Dec 1;94(12). doi: 10.1093/femsec/fiy187.

Wolbachia both aids and hampers the performance of spider mites on different host
plants.

Zélé F(1), Santos JL(1), Godinho DP(1), Magalhães S(1).

Author information: 
(1)cE3c: Centre for Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Changes, Faculdade de
Ciencias da Universidade de Lisboa, Edificio C2, Piso-3, Campo Grande, 1749-016
Lisbon, Portugal.

In the last few decades, many studies have revealed the potential role of
arthropod bacterial endosymbionts in shaping the host range of generalist
herbivores and their performance on different host plants, which, in turn, might 
affect endosymbiont distribution in herbivore populations. We tested this by
measuring the prevalence of endosymbionts in natural populations of the
generalist spider mite Tetranychus urticae on different host plants. Focusing on 
Wolbachia, we then analysed how symbionts affected mite life-history traits on
the same host plants in the laboratory. Overall, the prevalences of Cardinium and
Rickettsia were low, whereas that of Wolbachia was high, with the highest values 
on bean and eggplant and the lowest on morning glory, tomato and zuchini.
Although most mite life-history traits were affected by the plant species only,
Wolbachia infection was detrimental for the egg-hatching rate on morning glory
and zucchini, and led to a more female-biased sex ratio on morning glory and
eggplant. These results suggest that endosymbionts may affect the host range of
polyphagous herbivores, both by aiding and hampering their performance, depending
on the host plant and on the life-history trait that affects performance the
most. Conversely, endosymbiont spread may be facilitated or hindered by the
plants on which infected herbivores occur.

DOI: 10.1093/femsec/fiy187 
PMID: 30219893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

