
1. Eur J Immunol. 1986 Oct;16(10):1289-96.

T90/44 (9.3 antigen). A cell surface molecule with a function in human T cell
activation.

Lesslauer W, Koning F, Ottenhoff T, Giphart M, Goulmy E, van Rood JJ.

T90/44 is a cell surface antigen which is present on human T cells of the helper 
and cytotoxic subsets and which binds the 9.3 monoclonal antibody (9.3 mAb). It
is expressed in the form of 90-kDa disulfide-bonded dimers of a 44-kDa
polypeptide and of free 44-kDa subunits. The function of T90/44 was investigated 
in a series of T cell function assays. 9.3 mAb was found to inhibit the
activation of class II-restricted cloned T helper cells derived from leprosy
patients and reactive with M. leprae antigens. The inhibition was first found at 
1-10 ng/ml 9.3 mAb and regularly increased with the antibody concentration. The
extent of the inhibition varied among different T cell clones in proportion to
the respective different levels of T90/44 expression at their cell surface. The
proliferative responses of peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) to purified protein
derivative of M. tuberculosis (PPD) and tetanus toxoid were enhanced by the 9.3
mAb resulting in up to 20-30-fold increase of [3H]-thymidine incorporation. After
phytohemagglutinin-induced activation of PBL, the number of T90/44 molecules per 
cell expressed at the cell surface rose from day 0 to day 7 by a factor of about 
10. High concentrations of 9.3 mAb (5-10 micrograms/ml) at low cell densities and
in the presence of monocytes in culture media supplemented by fetal calf serum
were directly mitogenic for resting lymphocytes. The cytolytic effector functions
of class I-restricted cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) were not modulated by 9.3
mAb. The mixed lymphocyte reactions of three class I-restricted CTL to their
specific target cells were found not to be significantly influenced by 9.3 mAb.
In conclusion it is proposed that an antigen-independent T cell activation
pathway can be entered at T90/44.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830161017 
PMID: 3021470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

