
1. Oncoimmunology. 2018 Apr 18;7(8):e1450715. doi: 10.1080/2162402X.2018.1450715.
eCollection 2018.

Chemokine receptor engineering of T cells with CXCR2 improves homing towards
subcutaneous human melanomas in xenograft mouse model.

Idorn M(1), Skadborg SK(1), Kellermann L(2), Halldórsdóttir HR(1), Holmen
Olofsson G(1), Met Ö(1)(3)(4), Thor Straten P(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Immune Therapy (CCIT), Department of Hematology, Herlev
University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark.
(2)Department of Pathology, Herlev University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark.
(3)Department of Oncology, Herlev University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark.
(4)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Adoptive cell therapy (ACT) using in vitro expanded tumor infiltrating T
lymphocytes (TILs) from biopsy material represents a highly promising treatment
of disseminated cancer. A crucial prerequisite for successful ACT is sufficient
recruitment of transferred lymphocytes to the tumor site; however, despite
infusion of billions of lymphocytes, T cell infiltration into the tumor post ACT 
is limited. By PCR and Luminex analyses we found that a majority of malignant
melanoma (MM) cell lines expressed chemokines CXCL1/Groα, CXCL8/IL-8,
CXCL12/SDF-1 and CCL2. Concerning expression of the corresponding receptors on T 
cells, only the IL-8 receptor, CXCR2, was not expressed on T cells. CXCR2 was
therefore expressed in T cells by lentiviral transduction, and shown to lead to
ligand specific transwell migration of engineered T cells, as well as increased
migration towards MM conditioned medium. In vivo homing was assessed in a
xenograft NOG mouse model. Mice with subcutaneous human melanoma were treated
with MAGE-A3 specific T cells transduced with either CXCR2 or MOCK. Transducing T
cells carrying the MAGE-A3a3a high affinity T cell receptor with CXCR2 increased 
tumor infiltration. Flow cytometry analysis 7 days after ACT showed a doubling in
CD3+ T cells in tumor digest of mice receiving CXCR2 transduced T cells compared 
to MOCK treated mice, a finding confirmed by immunohistochemistry. In conclusion,
our CXCR2 transduced T cells are functional in vitro and transduction with CXCR2 
increases in vivo homing of T cells to tumor site.

DOI: 10.1080/2162402X.2018.1450715 
PMCID: PMC6136860
PMID: 30221044 

