
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Sep 17;12(9):e0006792. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0006792. eCollection 2018 Sep.

Phospho-proteomic analysis of primary human colon epithelial cells during the
early Trypanosoma cruzi infection phase.

Suman S(1), Rachakonda G(1), Mandape SN(1), Sakhare SS(1), Villalta F(1), Pratap 
S(2), Lima MF(2), Nde PN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Meharry Medical College, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America.
(2)School of Graduate Studies and Research, Meharry Medical College, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America.

The protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas disease, 
causes severe morbidity and mortality in afflicted individuals. About 30% of T.
cruzi-infected individuals present with cardiac, gastrointestinal tract, and/or
neurological disorders. Megacolon, one of the major pathologies of Chagas
disease, is accompanied by gastrointestinal motility disorders. The molecular
mechanism of T. cruzi-mediated megacolon in Chagas disease is currently unknown. 
To decipher the molecular mechanism of T. cruzi-induced alteration in the colon
during the early infection phase, we exposed primary human colonic epithelial
cells (HCoEpiC) to invasive T. cruzi trypomastigotes at multiple time points to
determine changes in the phosphoprotein networks in the cells following infection
using proteome profiler Human phospho-kinase arrays. We found significant changes
in the phosphorylation pattern that can mediate cellular deregulations in colonic
epithelial cells after infection. We detected a significant increase in the
levels of phosphorylated heat shock protein (p-HSP) 27 and transcription factors 
that regulate various cellular functions, including c-Jun and CREB. Our study
confirmed significant upregulation of phospho (p-) Akt S473, p-JNK, which may
directly or indirectly modulate CREB and c-Jun phosphorylation, respectively. We 
also observed increased levels of phosphorylated CREB and c-Jun in the nucleus.
Furthermore, we found that p-c-Jun and p-CREB co-localized in the nucleus at 180 
minutes post infection, with a maximum Pearson correlation coefficient of
0.76Â±0.02. Increased p-c-Jun and p-CREB have been linked to inflammatory and
profibrotic responses. T. cruzi infection of HCoEpiC induces an increased
expression of thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), which is fibrogenic at elevated levels.
We also found that T. cruzi infection modulates the expression of NF-kB and
JAK2-STAT1 signaling molecules which can increase pro-inflammatory flux.
Bioinformatics analysis of the phosphoprotein networks derived using the
phospho-protein data serves as a blueprint for T. cruzi-mediated cellular
transformation of primary human colonic cells during the early phase of T. cruzi 
infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006792 
PMCID: PMC6160231
PMID: 30222739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

