
1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2018 Dec 15;165:597-602. doi:
10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.09.027. Epub 2018 Sep 17.

The antagonist and synergist potential of cholinium-based deep eutectic solvents.

Macário IPE(1), Ventura SPM(2), Pereira JL(1), Gonçalves AMM(3), Coutinho JAP(4),
Gonçalves FJM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology & CESAM, University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro,
Portugal.
(2)CICECO - Aveiro Institute of Materials & Department of Chemistry, University
of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal. Electronic address: spventura@ua.pt.
(3)Department of Biology & CESAM, University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro,
Portugal; MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Department of Life
Sciences, Faculty of Sciences and Technology, University of Coimbra, 3004-517
Coimbra, Portugal.
(4)CICECO - Aveiro Institute of Materials & Department of Chemistry, University
of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal.
(5)Department of Biology & CESAM, University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro,
Portugal. Electronic address: fjmg@ua.pt.

The design of environmentally friendlier solvents has gained increasing relevance
in the last decade. Deep eutectic solvents (DES) have recently emerged, with
advantages like low-cost and putative lower environmental impact. However,
information about DES toxicity is still scarce. This work aims to contribute to
profiling the ecotoxicity of DES based on cholinium chloride ([Chol]Cl). Six DES 
were addressed, combining [Chol]Cl (as hydrogen bond acceptor - HBA) with
ethylene glycol, glycerol, 1,2-propanediol, propionic acid, 1-propanol, and urea 
as hydrogen bond donors (HBD), in different molar ratios. The Microtox® Acute
Toxicity Test, was used for assessing their toxicity towards the marine bacteria 
Allivibrio fischeri . Because the dissociation of DES in water is expected,
analysis appraising the mixtures toxicity theory should be considered, which is a
step forward in this field. This analysis suggested that [Chol]Cl and all HBD
with the exception of propionic acid:[Chol]Cl 1:2 and 4:1 behave
antagonistically, which is contrary to what has been suggested previously. The
most extreme cases are Urea:[Chol]Cl and 1-Propanol:[Chol]Cl, with EC50 values
higher than their starting materials dosed singly, configuring very promising and
biocompatible alternative solvents. Toxicity was found to be dependent on DES
composition, as well as on molar proportions of the starting materials.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.09.027 
PMID: 30236922  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

