
1. mSphere. 2018 Sep 19;3(5). pii: e00314-18. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00314-18.

Complete Genome Sequence of a blaKPC-2-Positive Klebsiella pneumoniae Strain
Isolated from the Effluent of an Urban Sewage Treatment Plant in Japan.

Sekizuka T(1), Yatsu K(1), Inamine Y(1), Segawa T(1), Nishio M(1), Kishi N(1),
Kuroda M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pathogen Genomics Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Toyama,
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Pathogen Genomics Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Toyama,
Tokyo, Japan makokuro@niid.go.jp.

Antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) and the bacteria that harbor them are
widely distributed in the environment, especially in surface water, sewage
treatment plant effluent, soil, and animal waste. In this study, we isolated a
KPC-2-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae strain (GSU10-3) from a sampling site in
Tokyo Bay, Japan, near a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) and determined its
complete genome sequence. Strain GSU10-3 is resistant to most β-lactam
antibiotics and other antimicrobial agents (quinolones and aminoglycosides). This
strain is classified as sequence type 11 (ST11), and a core genome phylogenetic
analysis indicated that strain GSU10-3 is closely related to KPC-2-positive
Chinese clinical isolates from 2011 to 2017 and is clearly distinct from strains 
isolated from the European Union (EU), United States, and other Asian countries. 
Strain GSU10-3 harbors four plasmids, including a blaKPC-2-positive plasmid,
pGSU10-3-3 (66.2 kb), which is smaller than other blaKPC-2-positive plasmids and 
notably carries dual replicons (IncFII [pHN7A8] and IncN). Such downsizing and
the presence of dual replicons may promote its maintenance and stable
replication, contributing to its broad host range with low fitness costs. A
second plasmid, pGSU10-3-1 (159.0 kb), an IncA/C2 replicon, carries a class 1
integron (containing intI1, dfrA12, aadA2, qacEΔ1, and sul1) with a high degree
of similarity to a broad-host-range plasmid present in the family
Enterobacteriaceae The plasmid pGSU10-3-2 (134.8 kb), an IncFII(K) replicon,
carries the IS26-mediated ARGs [aac(6')Ib-cr,blaOXA-1, catB4 (truncated), and
aac(3)-IId], tet(A), and a copper/arsenate resistance locus. GSU10-3 is the first
nonclinical KPC-2-producing environmental Enterobacteriaceae isolate from Japan
for which the whole genome has been sequenced.IMPORTANCE We isolated and
determined the complete genome sequence of a KPC-2-producing K. pneumoniae strain
from a sampling site in Tokyo Bay, Japan, near a wastewater treatment plant
(WWTP). In Japan, the KPC type has been very rarely detected, while IMP is the
most predominant type of carbapenemase in clinical carbapenemase-producing
Enterobacteriaceae (CPE) isolates. Although laboratory testing thus far suggested
that Japan may be virtually free of KPC-producing Enterobacteriaceae, we have
detected it from effluent from a WWTP. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) monitoring 
of WWTP effluent may contribute to the early detection of future AMR bacterial
dissemination in clinical settings and communities; indeed, it will help
illuminate the whole picture in which environmental contamination through WWTP
effluent plays a part.

Copyright © 2018 Sekizuka et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00314-18 
PMCID: PMC6147131
PMID: 30232165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

