
1. J Cell Physiol. 2019 May;234(5):6414-6427. doi: 10.1002/jcp.27377. Epub 2018 Sep 
21.

Iturin A-like lipopeptides from Bacillus subtilis trigger apoptosis, paraptosis, 
and autophagy in Caco-2 cells.

Zhao H(1), Xu X(1), Lei S(1), Shao D(1), Jiang C(1), Shi J(1), Zhang Y(1), Liu
L(1), Lei S(1), Sun H(1)(2), Huang Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Space Bioscience and Biotechnology, School of Life
Sciences, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an, China.
(2)School of Hospitality Management, Guilin Tourism University, Guilin, China.

This study revealed that iturin A-like lipopeptides produced by Bacillus
subtillis induced both paraptosis and apoptosis in heterogeneous human epithelial
colorectal adenocarcinoma (Caco-2) cells. Autophagy was simultaneously induced in
Caco-2 cells treated with iturin A-like lipopeptides at the early stage and
inhibited at the later stage. A western blot analysis showed that the
lipopeptides induced apoptosis in Caco-2 cells via a mitochondrial-dependent
pathway, as indicated by upregulated expression of the apoptotic genes bax and
bad and downregulated expression of the antiapoptotic gene bcl-2. The induction
of paraptosis in Caco-2 cells was indicated by the occurrence of many cytoplasmic
vacuoles accompanied by endoplasmic reticulum (ER) dilatation and mitochondrial
swelling and dysfunction. ER stress also occurred with significant increases in
reactive oxygen species and Ca2+ levels in cells. Autophagy was detected by a
transmission electron microscopy analysis and by upregulated expression of LC3-II
and downregulated expression of LC3-I. The inhibition of autophagy at the later
stage was shown by upregulated expression of p62. This study revealed the
capability of iturin A-like B. subtilis lipopeptides to simultaneously execute
antitumor potential via multiple pathways.

Â© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.27377 
PMID: 30238995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

