
1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2018 Nov;104:133-137. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2018.09.007.
Epub 2018 Sep 17.

Human β-defensin 1 update: Potential clinical applications of the restless
warrior.

Álvarez ÁH(1), Martínez Velázquez M(1), Prado Montes de Oca E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Personalized Medicine National Laboratory (LAMPER), Medical and Pharmaceutical
Biotechnology Unit, Research Center of Technology and Design Assistance of
Jalisco State (CIATEJ), National Council of Science and Technology (CONACYT), Av.
Normalistas 800, Col. Colinas de la Normal, Guadalajara, Mexico.
(2)Personalized Medicine National Laboratory (LAMPER), Medical and Pharmaceutical
Biotechnology Unit, Research Center of Technology and Design Assistance of
Jalisco State (CIATEJ), National Council of Science and Technology (CONACYT), Av.
Normalistas 800, Col. Colinas de la Normal, Guadalajara, Mexico. Electronic
address: eprado@ciatej.mx.

Human β-defensin 1 (hBD-1) is a multifaceted antimicrobial peptide being a tumour
suppressor and, depending on call of duty, capable of inducing self-nets and
neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) to capture and/or kill bacteria,
participates in inflammatory responses in chronic diseases including hBD-3
upregulation and also capable of up/downregulation in the presence of certain
species of Lactobacillus sp. Thus, is regulated by host microbiota. Alleles,
genotypes and/or altered gene expression of its coding gene, DEFB1, have been
associated with several human diseases/conditions ranging from metabolic/chronic 
(e.g. cancer), infectious (e.g. tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS), inflammatory
(gastrointestinal diseases), male infertility and more recently, neurologic (e.g.
depression and Alzheimer) and autoimmune diseases (e.g. vitiligo and systemic
lupus erythematosus). The present update focuses on novel DEFB1/hBD-1 properties 
and biomarker features, its biological function and the pharmaceutical potential 
uses of antimicrobial peptide elicitors (APEs) or the engineered peptide in the
treatment of hBD-1-related human diseases.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2018.09.007 
PMID: 30236992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

