
1. Microb Pathog. 2018 Dec;125:219-229. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2018.09.033. Epub
2018 Sep 19.

Reverse vaccinology and subtractive genomics-based putative vaccine targets
identification for Burkholderia pseudomallei Bp1651.

Hizbullah(1), Nazir Z(1), Afridi SG(1), Shah M(2), Shams S(1), Khan A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Abdul Wali Khan University Mardan, Mardan, 23200, 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Bahauddin Zakariya University Multan, Punjab,
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Abdul Wali Khan University Mardan, Mardan, 23200, 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan. Electronic address: asif@awkum.edu.pk.

The Burkholderia pseudomallei is a unique bio-threat and causative agent of
melioidosis. The B. pseudomallei Bp1651 strain has been isolated from a chronic
cystic fibrosis patient. The genome-level DNA sequences information of this
strain has recently been published. Unfortunately, there is no commercial vaccine
available till date to combat B. pseudomallei infection. The genome-wide
prioritization approaches are widely used for the identification of potential
therapeutic candidates against pathogens. In the present study, we utilized the
recently available annotated genomic information of B. pseudomallei Bp1651
through subtractive genomics and reverse-vaccinology strategies to identify its
potential vaccine targets. The analyses identified more than 60
pathogen-specific, human host non-homologous proteins that may prioritize in
future studies to investigate therapeutic targets for B. pseudomallei Bp1651. The
potential B and T-cells antigenic determinant peptides from these
pathogen-specific proteins were cataloged using antigenicity and epitope
prediction tools. The analyses unveiled a promising antigenic peptide "FQWEFSLSV"
from protein-export membrane protein (SecF) of Bp1651 strain, which was predicted
to interact with multiple class I and class II MHC alleles with IC50
value < 100 nM. The molecular docking analysis verified favorable molecular
interaction of this lead antigenic peptide with the ligand-binding pocket
residues of HLA A*02:06 human host immune cell surface receptor. This peptide is 
predicted to be a suitable epitope capable to elicit the cell-mediated immune
response against the B. pseudomallei pathogen. The putative epitopes and proteins
identified in this study may be promising vaccine targets against Bp1651 as well 
as other pathogenic strains of B. pseudomallei.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2018.09.033 
PMID: 30243554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

