
1. Metab Eng. 2018 Sep;49:299-315. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2018.09.010. Epub 2018 Sep
18.

Secondary metabolites overproduction through transcriptional gene cluster
refactoring.

Horbal L(1), Marques F(2), Nadmid S(1), Mendes MV(3), Luzhetskyy A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department Microbial Natural Products, Actinobacteria Metabolic Engineering
Group, Saarland University, Campus C2.3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)Department Microbial Natural Products, Actinobacteria Metabolic Engineering
Group, Saarland University, Campus C2.3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany; i3S -
Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal; IBMC - Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do
Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(3)i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto,
Porto, Portugal; IBMC - Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade
do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(4)Department Microbial Natural Products, Actinobacteria Metabolic Engineering
Group, Saarland University, Campus C2.3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany;
Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland (HIPS), Helmholtz Center
for Infectious Research (HZI), Germany. Electronic address:
a.luzhetskyy@mx.uni-saarland.de.

We present a random rational approach enabling the construction of overproducing 
strains in two steps. The approach first involves creating a library of clusters 
of interest, in which native promoters are substituted with randomly generated
constitutive synthetic promoters, and then expressing this library in an
appropriate host strain. This strategy is fast, easy to use, accounts for the
architecture of a cluster and completely decouples the expression of a gene
cluster from complex native regulatory networks. The strategy was applied to
improve the production of a macrocyclic peptide, bottromycin, which possesses
antibacterial activity against multidrug-resistant bacteria and is a blueprint
for a new class of antibacterials. We successfully optimized the expression of
genes in operons and created several variants of the bottromycin gene cluster
that provide 5-50 fold higher titres of bottromycin than the natural one, thus
resulting in the identification of several new bottromycin derivatives not
previously described. Moreover, due to the higher bottromycin yield, bottromycin 
derivatization was performed via the biosynthetic engineering of the gene
cluster. The abovementioned features make this generic strategy a promising tool 
for the overproduction of known secondary metabolites and the activation of
silent secondary metabolites in Actinobacteria.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2018.09.010 
PMID: 30240601  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

