
1. J Neurosci Res. 2020 Jul;98(7):1309-1321. doi: 10.1002/jnr.24312. Epub 2018 Sep
5.

Inflammatory markers in women with postpartum depressive symptoms.

Bränn E(1), Fransson E(1)(2), White RA(3), Papadopoulos FC(4), Edvinsson Å(1),
Kamali-Moghaddam M(5), Cunningham JL(4), Sundström-Poromaa I(1), Skalkidou A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Psychiatry, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Department of Immunology, Genetics & Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Postpartum depression (PPD) is a devastating disorder affecting not only more
than 10% of all women giving birth, but also the baby, the family, and the
society. Compiling evidence suggests the involvement of the immune system in the 
pathophysiology of major depression; yet, the immune response in perinatal
depression is not as well studied. The aim of this study was to investigate the
alterations in peripheral levels of inflammatory biomarkers in 169 Swedish women 
with and without depressive symptoms according to the Edinburgh postnatal
depression scale or the M.I.N.I neuropsychiatric interview at eight weeks
postpartum. Among the 70 markers analyzed with multiplex proximity extension
assay, five were significantly elevated in women with postpartum depressive
symptoms in the adjusted LASSO logistic regression analysis: Tumor necrosis
factor ligand superfamily member (TRANCE) (OR-per 1 SD increase = 1.20),
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) (OR = 1.17) Interleukin (IL)-18 (OR = 1.06),
Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23) (OR = 1.25), and C-X-C motif chemokine 1
(CXCL1) (OR 1.11). These results indicate that women with PPD have elevated
levels of some inflammatory biomarkers. It is, therefore, plausible that PPD is
associated with a compromised adaptability of the immune system.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.24312 
PMID: 30252150 

