
1. Oncol Lett. 2018 Oct;16(4):5013-5019. doi: 10.3892/ol.2018.9287. Epub 2018 Aug 9.

Cytotoxic chemotherapy reduces T cell trafficking to the spleen by downregulating
the expression of C-C motif chemokine ligand 21 and C-C motif chemokine ligand
19.

Liu L(1), Zhao L(1)(2), Yang Y(1), Gao J(1), Hu C(1), Guo B(3), Zhu B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oncology, Third Inpatient Building of Xinqiao Hospital, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing 400037, P.R. China.
(2)Institute of Oncology, People's Liberation Army No. 324 Hospital, Chongqing
400037, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing
400037, P.R. China.

T cells serve an important role in the destruction of tumor cells and clearing of
foreign pathogens. Previous studies have suggested that the T cell immune
response of tumor-bearing patients is significantly lower than that of healthy
people, and the principal reason for this is lymphocytopenia, which is caused by 
repeated cycles of chemotherapy. In addition to lymphocytopenia, the present
study revealed that cytotoxic chemotherapy also weakens the homing ability of T
cells to the T-cell zone of the spleen, which decreases the possibility of
encounters between antigen-specific T cells and dendritic cells presenting the
appropriate antigen, thereby weakening the immune response of T cells. These
changes are attributed to the lower expression of C-C motif chemokine ligand 21
(CCL21) and C-C motif chemokine ligand 19 (CCL19) in the spleen of secondary
lymphoid organs (SLOs). Finally, the present study identified that chemotherapy
affects the function and survival of fibroblastic reticular cells in SLOs, which 
are the main source of CCL21 and CCL19. These observations aid us in further
understanding the mechanism that is responsible for the decreased T cell immune
response following repeated cycles of chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2018.9287 
PMCID: PMC6144923
PMID: 30250567 

