
1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2018 Nov;107:1728-1735. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2018.08.156.
Epub 2018 Sep 10.

Knockdown of LOXL1 inhibits TGF-β1-induced proliferation and fibrogenesis of
hepatic stellate cells by inhibition of Smad2/3 phosphorylation.

Ma L(1), Zeng Y(1), Wei J(1), Yang D(1), Ding G(1), Liu J(1), Shang J(1), Kang
Y(2), Ji X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, People's Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Henan Provincial People's Hospital, Zhengzhou 450003, China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, People's Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Henan Provincial People's Hospital, Zhengzhou 450003, China. Electronic address: 
yikang_75@163.com.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, College of Medicine, Henan University,
Kaifeng 475004, China; Henan International Joint Laboratory for Nuclear Protein
Regulation, School of Medical Sciences, Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, China. 
Electronic address: 10190096@vip.henu.edu.cn.

Liver fibrosis is pathological condition that seriously threatens human health.
The lysyl oxidase (LOX) family has been reported to promote liver fibrosis.
However, the effect of LOX-like 1 (LOXL1), a member of LOX family, on
fibrogenesis of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) remains unknown. The current study 
aimed to investigate the role of LOXL1 in liver fibrosis and the potential
mechanism. We found that the mRNA and protein levels of LOXL1 were increased in
transforming growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-β1)-stimulated human hepatic stellate cell
line LX-2. Knockdown of LOXL1 inhibited the proliferation of TGF-β1-stimulated
LX-2 cells. Knockdown of LOXL1 suppressed TGF-β1-induced expression of
metalloproteinase type 1 (TIMP1), α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), and collagen
type I (Col-I), as well as phosphorylation of Smad2 and Smad3 in LX-2 cells. In
addition, the cell proliferation and fibrogenesis mediated by TGF-β1 stimulation 
and LOXL1 overexpression were abolished by knockdown of Smad2 and Smad3.
Collectively, knockdown of LOXL1 suppressed cell proliferation and fibrogenesis
in TGF-β1-stimulated HSCs via regulating the phosphorylation of Smad2/3.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2018.08.156 
PMID: 30257391  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

