
1. J Immunol Res. 2018 Sep 3;2018:6248590. doi: 10.1155/2018/6248590. eCollection
2018.

Altered NKp30, NKp46, NKG2D, and DNAM-1 Expression on Circulating NK Cells Is
Associated with Tumor Progression in Human Gastric Cancer.

Han B(1), Mao FY(2), Zhao YL(3), Lv YP(2), Teng YS(2), Duan M(4), Chen W(4),
Cheng P(2), Wang TT(2), Liang ZY(2), Zhang JY(2), Liu YG(2), Guo G(2), Zou QM(2),
Zhuang Y(2), Peng LS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical College, 
Nanchong, Sichuan Province 637000, China.
(2)National Engineering Research Center of Immunological Products, Department of 
Microbiology and Biochemical Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China.
(3)Department of General Surgery and Center of Minimal Invasive Gastrointestinal 
Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038,
China.
(4)La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC
3085, Australia.

Natural killer (NK) cell activity is influenced by a complex integration of
signaling pathways activated downstream of both activating and inhibitory surface
receptors. The tumor microenvironment can suppress NK cell activity, and there is
a great clinical interest in understanding whether modulating tumor-mediated NK
cell suppression and/or boosting preexisting NK cell numbers in cancer patients
is therapeutically viable. To this light, we characterized the surface receptor
phenotypes of peripheral blood NK cells and examined their clinical relevance to 
human gastric cancer (GC). We found that the proportion of peripheral blood NK
cells which expressed the activating receptors NKp30, NKp46, NKG2D, and DNAM-1
was significantly decreased in GC patients compared to healthy donors, and that
this decrease was positively associated with tumor progression. At the same time,
plasma TGF-β1 concentrations were significantly increased in GC patients and
negatively correlated with the proportion of NKp30, NKp46, NKG2D, and DNAM-1
expressing NK cells. Furthermore, TGF-β1 significantly downregulated the
expression of NKp30, NKp46, NKG2D, and DNAM-1 on NK cells in vitro, and the
addition of galunisertib, an inhibitor of the TGF-β receptor subunit I, reversed 
this downregulation. Altogether, our data suggest that the decreased expression
of activating receptors NKp30, NKp46, NKG2D, and DNAM-1 on peripheral blood NK
cells is positively associated with GC progression, and that TGF-β1-mediated NK
cell suppression may be a therapeutically targetable characteristic of GC.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/6248590 
PMCID: PMC6140275
PMID: 30255106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

