
1. BMJ Case Rep. 2018 Sep 27;2018. pii: bcr-2018-225750. doi:
10.1136/bcr-2018-225750.

Comorbid presentation of syringomyelia and Guillain-Barre syndrome, attributed to
mycoplasma, in a 6-year-old female patient.

Vampertzi O(1), Dalpa E(1), Vavilis T(2), Tramma D(1).

Author information: 
(1)4th Department of Pediatrics, Geniko Nosokomeio Thessalonikis Papageorgiou,
Thessaloniki, Greece.
(2)Laboratory of Physiology, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Faculty
of Medicine, School of Health Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
School of Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece.

Syringomyelia is the development of a fluid-filled cavity or syrinx within the
spinal cord that can cause loss of sensation and muscle spasticity.
Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) is a postinfection autoimmune disease, classified
as an acute polyneuropathy. This report describes the emergency admission of a
6-year-old girl presenting with sudden pallor and pain in both lower limbs. The
patient's reflexes were normal, as were the results of her sonography,
radiography and biochemical tests; however, spinal MRI revealed extensive
compartmentalised syringomyelia extending from C2 to T3. A sensory and motor
nerve conduction study revealed a demyelinating type motor polyneuropathy which, 
along with positive Mycoplasma pneumoniae test, was suggestive of GBS.
Intravenous immunoglobulin infusion showed excellent results. In conclusion, we
report a rare paediatric case of syringomyelia coexisting with GBS. It is
important to bear in mind the possibility of other coexisting diseases even if
MRI reveals definitive characteristics of another condition.

Â© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2018. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2018-225750 
PMCID: PMC6169630
PMID: 30262531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

