
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Oct 30;115(44):11226-11231. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1809319115. Epub 2018 Sep 27.

Mechanism of tRNA-mediated +1 ribosomal frameshifting.

Hong S(1), Sunita S(1), Maehigashi T(1), Hoffer ED(1), Dunkle JA(1), Dunham
CM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322 christine.m.dunham@emory.edu.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Oct 30;115(44):11121-11123.

Accurate translation of the genetic code is critical to ensure expression of
proteins with correct amino acid sequences. Certain tRNAs can cause a shift out
of frame (i.e., frameshifting) due to imbalances in tRNA concentrations, lack of 
tRNA modifications or insertions or deletions in tRNAs (called frameshift
suppressors). Here, we determined the structural basis for how
frameshift-suppressor tRNASufA6 (a derivative of tRNAPro) reprograms the mRNA
frame to translate a 4-nt codon when bound to the bacterial ribosome. After
decoding at the aminoacyl (A) site, the crystal structure of the anticodon
stem-loop of tRNASufA6 bound in the peptidyl (P) site reveals ASL conformational 
changes that allow for recoding into the +1 mRNA frame. Furthermore, a crystal
structure of full-length tRNASufA6 programmed in the P site shows extensive
conformational rearrangements of the 30S head and body domains similar to what is
observed in a translocation intermediate state containing elongation factor G
(EF-G). The 30S movement positions tRNASufA6 toward the 30S exit (E) site
disrupting key 16S rRNA-mRNA interactions that typically define the mRNA frame.
In summary, this tRNA-induced 30S domain change in the absence of EF-G causes the
ribosome to lose its grip on the mRNA and uncouples the canonical forward
movement of the tRNAs during elongation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1809319115 
PMCID: PMC6217423
PMID: 30262649  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

