
1. ACS Synth Biol. 2018 Nov 16;7(11):2590-2599. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.8b00261. Epub
2018 Oct 17.

Functional Analyses of Cassette Chromosome Recombinase C2 (CcrC2) and Its Use in 
Eliminating Methicillin Resistance by Combining CRISPR-Cas9.

Wu Z(1), Zhang L(1), Qiao D(1), Xue H(1), Zhao X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology , Northwest A&F University , Yangling
, 712100 Shaanxi , People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Animal Science , McGill University , Ste. Anne de Bellevue ,
Quebec H9X 3V9 , Canada.

Worldwide occurrence of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) poses 
enormous challenges for both communities and health care settings. Cassette
chromosome recombinases (Ccr) specifically perform excision and acquisition of a 
staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec (SCC mec) in staphylococci and are
responsible for the spread of methicillin resistance. This study explored the
roles of CcrC2, a recently discovered Ccr, in the horizontal transfer of SCC mec 
and developed a potential means to control the spread of methicillin resistance. 
Knockout of CcrC2 completely aborted the excision of SCC mec, while
overexpression of CcrC2 partially removed the SCC mec from the genome and
transformed methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) into
methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA). Moreover, two nucleotide
residues (G5C6) in the direct repeat sequence within an att site were found to be
critical for excision and acquisition efficiencies. To block the horizontal
transfer of methicillin resistance, a SCC mec killer system was developed by
combining the CcrC2-mediated SCC mec excision and the mecA-targeting CRISPR-Cas9 
machinery. The SCC mec killer transformed MRSA to MSSA and disrupted the
mecA-carrying SCC mec intermediate, thereby eliminating methicillin resistance
determinant mecA gene inside a MRSA cell and blocking the horizontal transfer of 
SCC mec. The SCC mec killer was versatile for efficiently removing multiple types
of SCC mec elements. It is envisioned that this approach could offer a new means 
to control the spread of methicillin resistance.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.8b00261 
PMID: 30278126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

