
1. Oncol Rep. 2018 Dec;40(6):3381-3391. doi: 10.3892/or.2018.6747. Epub 2018 Sep 28.

Autophagy is positively associated with the accumulation of myeloid‑derived
suppressor cells in 4‑nitroquinoline‑1‑oxide‑induced oral cancer.

Wu JS(1), Li L(2), Wang SS(1), Pang X(1), Wu JB(1), Sheng SR(1), Tang YJ(3), Tang
YL(1), Zheng M(2), Liang XH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, State Key Laboratory of Oral
Diseases and National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, West China
Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Stomatology, Zhoushan Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University,
Zhoushan, Zhejiang 316021, P.R. China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Hubei
Provincial Cooperative Innovation Center of Industrial Fermentation, Hubei Key
Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan,
Hubei 430068, P.R. China.

It has previously been demonstrated that autophagy and inflammation act
synergistically to promote carcinogenesis. However, the precise roles of
autophagy in multistep oral carcinogenesis are still unclear, particularly
regarding its association with tumor inflammation. The present study established 
a 4NQO‑induced oral cancer mouse model and investigated autophagy status in the
multistep process of oral carcinogenesis using immunohistochemistry, western
blotting and immunofluorescence staining. Furthermore, the number of Gr‑1+CD11b+ 
myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and CD4+ Foxp3+ regulatory T cells
(Tregs) during oral carcinogenesis and the association with autophagy status was 
also examined. The results revealed that the expression of autophagy biomarkers, 
including dihydrosphingosine 1-phosphate phosphatase LCB3 (LC3B), p62/SQSTM1
(p62) and Beclin 1 increased during 4NQO‑induced carcinogenesis and in human oral
cancer. The number of MDSCs and Tregs also increased during oral carcinogenesis. 
Furthermore, the expression of LC3B and p62 significantly correlated with the
accumulation of MDSCs and the expression of Beclin 1 correlated with the increase
of Tregs. These data indicated that autophagy may be activated by the tumor
inflammation microenvironment during oral carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2018.6747 
PMCID: PMC6196587
PMID: 30272335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

