
1. Eur J Immunol. 2018 Dec;48(12):1938-1943. doi: 10.1002/eji.201847587. Epub 2018
Oct 24.

TGF-β suppresses RasGRP1 expression and supports regulatory T cell resistance
against p53-induced CD28-dependent T-cell apoptosis.

Takami M(1)(2)(3), Cunha C(1), Motohashi S(3), Nakayama T(4), Iwashima M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Loyola University, Chicago, IL,
USA.
(2)Van Kampen Cardio Pulmonary Research Laboratory, Loyola University, Chicago,
IL, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Immunology, Chiba University, Japan.
(4)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Japan.

Thymus-derived regulatory T cells (tTregs) play pivotal roles in immunological
self-tolerance and homeostasis. A majority of tTregs are reactive to
self-antigens and are constantly exposed to antigenic stimulation. Despite this
continuous stimulation, tTreg and conventional T-cell populations remain balanced
during homeostasis, but the mechanisms controlling this balance are unknown. We
previously reported a form of activation-induced cell death, which is dependent
on p53 (p53-induced CD28-dependent T-cell apoptosis, PICA). Under PICA-inducing
conditions, tTregs survive while a majority of conventional T cells undergo
apoptosis, suggesting there is a survival mechanism that protects tTregs. Here,
we report that the expression of RasGRP1 (Ras guanyl-releasing protein 1) is
required for PICA, as conventional T cells isolated from RasGRP1-deficient mice
become resistant to PICA. After continuous stimulation, tTregs express a
substantially lower amount of RasGRP1 compared to conventional T cells. This
reduced expression of RasGRP1 is dependent on TGF-β, as addition of TGF-β to
conventional T cells reduces RasGRP1 expression. Conversely, RasGRP1 expression
in tTregs increases when TGF-β signaling is inhibited. Together, these data show 
that RasGRP1 expression is repressed in tTregs by TGF-β signaling and suggests
that reduced RasGRP1 expression is critical for tTregs to resist apoptosis caused
by continuous antigen exposure.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201847587 
PMCID: PMC6368088
PMID: 30298904  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

