
1. Mol Pharmacol. 2018 Dec;94(6):1312-1320. doi: 10.1124/mol.118.112656. Epub 2018
Oct 5.

Physicochemical Solubility of and Biological Sensitivity to Long-Chain Alcohols
Determine the Cutoff Chain Length in Biological Activity.

Matsumoto A(1), Uesono Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan uesono@bs.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

The cutoff phenomenon associated with the effectiveness of long-chain alcohols in
the induction of anesthesia is also observed for various antimicrobial
activities, although the mechanism has remained unknown for over eight decades.
The minimum inhibitory concentrations at 25°C for budding yeast growth
exponentially decreased with increasing chain length of n-alcohols (C2-C12),
whereas alcohols ≥C13 lost the inhibitory effect. Thus, growth inhibition by
n-alcohols obeys the Meyer-Overton correlation up to C12 and exhibits a cutoff
phenomenon. The densities of n-alcohols are low, and the melting point and
hydrophobicity increase with chain length. C13 and C14 inhibited yeast growth at 
39.8°C, above their melting points. Alcohols ≤C14 inhibited thermophilic
bacterial growth at 50°C, whereas C16 inhibited it at 67.5°C, above their melting
points. Thus, the high melting points of long-chain alcohols contribute to the
cutoff phenomenon. C14 did not effectively inhibit yeast growth in a static
culture at 39.8°C, in contrast to a shaking culture, in which the low
density-dependent concentration gradient was eliminated. The duration of the
transient growth inhibition of yeast by C12 was prolonged by sonication, which
prevented hydrophobic aggregation. Therefore, a nonuniform distribution owing to 
low density and high hydrophobicity contributes to the cutoff. C14 inhibited the 
growth at 25°C of the pdr1,3,5 mutant, defective in multidrug efflux pumps,
whereas C12 did not inhibit the growth of yeast overexpressing PDR5, indicating
that the sensitivity to long-chain alcohols contributed to the cutoff. A balance 
between the physicochemical solubility of and the biological sensitivity to
long-chain alcohols determines the cutoff chain length.

Copyright © 2018 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.118.112656 
PMID: 30291172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

