
1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2019 Oct;34(10):1683-1695. doi: 10.1007/s00467-018-4104-2. Epub 
2018 Oct 5.

Kidney as modulator and target of "good/bad" HDL.

Zhong J(1)(2), Yang H(1)(2), Kon V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 1161 21st
Avenue South, C-4204 Medical Center North, Nashville, TN, 37232-2584, USA.
(2)Departments of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 1161 21st
Avenue South, C-4204 Medical Center North, Nashville, TN, 37232-2584, USA.
valentina.kon@vanderbilt.edu.

The strong inverse relationship between low levels of high-density lipoproteins
(HDLs) and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (CVD) led to the designation of
HDL as the "good" cholesterol. The atheroprotection is thought to reflect HDL's
capacity to efflux cholesterol from macrophages, followed by interaction with
other lipoproteins in the plasma, processing by the liver and excretion into
bile. However, pharmacologic increases in HDL-C levels have not led to expected
clinical benefits, giving rise to the concept of dysfunctional HDL, in which
increases in serum HDL-C are not beneficial due to lost or altered HDL functions 
and transition to "bad" HDL. It is now understood that the cholesterol in HDL,
measured by HDL-C, is neither a marker nor the mediator of HDL function,
including cholesterol efflux capacity. It is also understood that besides
cholesterol efflux, HDL functionality encompasses many other potentially
beneficial functions, including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antithrombotic,
anti-apoptotic, and vascular protective effects that may be critical protective
pathways for various cells, including those in the kidney parenchyma. This review
highlights advances in our understanding of the role kidneys play in HDL
metabolism, including the effects on levels, composition, and functionality of
HDL particles, particularly the main HDL protein, apolipoprotein AI (apoAI). We
suggest that normal apoAI/HDL in the glomerular filtrate provides beneficial
effects, including lymphangiogenesis, that promote resorption of renal
interstitial fluid and biological particles. In contrast, dysfunctional apoAI/HDL
activates detrimental pathways in tubular epithelial cells and lymphatics that
lead to interstitial accumulation of fluid and harmful particles that promote
progressive kidney damage.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-018-4104-2 
PMCID: PMC6450786
PMID: 30291429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

