
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Oct 5;8(1):14853. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-33135-1.

Novel multiplex PCR-SSP method for centromeric KIR allele discrimination.

Le Luduec JB(1), Kudva A(1)(2), Boudreau JE(1)(3), Hsu KC(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research, New York,
NY, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY, USA.
(3)Departments of Pathology and Microbiology & Immunology, Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, Canada.
(4)Immunology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research, New York,
NY, USA. HsuK@mskcc.org.
(5)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA.
HsuK@mskcc.org.
(6)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
USA. HsuK@mskcc.org.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2019 Oct 18;9(1):15210.

Allelic diversity of the KIR2DL receptors drive differential expression and
ligand-binding affinities that impact natural killer cell function and patient
outcomes for diverse cancers. We have developed a global intermediate resolution 
amplification-refractory mutation system (ARMS) PCR-SSP method for distinguishing
functionally relevant subgroups of the KIR2DL receptors, as defined by
phylogenetic study of the protein sequences. Use of the ARMS design makes the
method reliable and usable as a kit, with all reactions utilizing the same
conditions. Six reactions define six subgroups of KIR2DL1; four reactions define 
three subgroups of KIR2DL2; and five reactions define four subgroups of KIR2DL3. 
Using KIR allele data from a cohort of 426 European-Americans, we identified the 
most common KIR2DL subtypes and developed the high-throughput PCR-based
methodology, which was validated on a separate cohort of 260 healthy donors.
Linkage disequilibrium analysis between the different KIR2DL alleles revealed
that seven allelic combinations represent more than 95% of the observed
population genotypes for KIR2DL1/L2/L3. In summary, our findings enable rapid
typing of the most common KIR2DL receptor subtypes, allowing more accurate
prediction of co-inheritance and providing a useful tool for the discrimination
of observed differences in surface expression and effector function among NK
cells exhibiting disparate KIR2DL allotypes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-33135-1 
PMCID: PMC6173694
PMID: 30291273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

