
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2018 Nov 30;84(24). pii: e01842-18. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01842-18. Print 2018 Dec 15.

Efflux Transporter ArsK Is Responsible for Bacterial Resistance to Arsenite,
Antimonite, Trivalent Roxarsone, and Methylarsenite.

Shi K(1), Li C(1), Rensing C(2)(3), Dai X(1), Fan X(1), Wang G(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Life Science and
Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Institute of Environmental Microbiology, College of Resources and Environment,
Fujian Agriculture & Forestry University, Fuzhou, Fujian, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Urban Environment and Health, Institute of Urban
Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Life Science and
Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China
gejiao@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Arsenic-resistant bacteria have evolved various efflux systems for arsenic
resistance. Five arsenic efflux proteins, ArsB, Acr3, ArsP, ArsJ, and MSF1, have 
been reported. In this study, comprehensive analyses were performed to study the 
function of a putative major facilitator superfamily gene, arsK, and the
regulation of arsK transcriptional expression in Agrobacterium tumefaciens GW4.
We found that (i) arsK is located on an arsenic gene island in strain GW4. ArsK
orthologs are widely distributed in arsenic-resistant bacteria and are
phylogenetically divergent from the five reported arsenic efflux proteins,
indicating that it may be a novel arsenic efflux transporter. (ii) Reporter gene 
assays showed that the expression of arsK was induced by arsenite [As(III)],
antimonite [Sb(III)], trivalent roxarsone [Rox(III)], methylarsenite [MAs(III)], 
and arsenate [As(V)]. (iii) Heterologous expression of ArsK in an
arsenic-hypersensitive Escherichia coli strain showed that ArsK was essential for
resistance to As(III), Sb(III), Rox(III), and MAs(III) but not to As(V),
dimethylarsenite [dimethyl-As(III)], or Cd(II). (iv) ArsK reduced the cellular
accumulation of As(III), Sb(III), Rox(III), and MAs(III) but not to As(V) or
dimethyl-As(III). (v) A putative arsenic regulator gene arsR2 was cotranscribed
with arsK, and (vi) ArsR2 interacted with the arsR2-arsK promoter region without 
metalloids and was derepressed by As(III), Sb(III), Rox(III), and MAs(III),
indicating the repression activity of ArsR2 for the transcription of arsK These
results demonstrate that ArsK is a novel arsenic efflux protein for As(III),
Sb(III), Rox(III), and MAs(III) and is regulated by ArsR2. Bacteria use the
arsR2-arsK operon for resistance to several trivalent arsenicals or
antimonials.IMPORTANCE The metalloid extrusion systems are very important
bacterial resistance mechanisms. Each of the previously reported ArsB, Acr3,
ArsP, ArsJ, and MSF1 transport proteins conferred only inorganic or organic
arsenic/antimony resistance. In contrast, ArsK confers resistance to several
inorganic and organic trivalent arsenicals and antimonials. The identification of
the novel efflux transporter ArsK enriches our understanding of bacterial
resistance to trivalent arsenite [As(III)], antimonite [Sb(III)], trivalent
roxarsone [Rox(III)], and methylarsenite [MAs(III)].

Copyright Â© 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01842-18 
PMCID: PMC6275340
PMID: 30315082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

