
1. J Immunol. 2018 Nov 15;201(10):3006-3016. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1701402. Epub
2018 Oct 15.

Differentiation of Langerhans Cells from Monocytes and Their Specific Function in
Inducing IL-22-Specific Th Cells.

Otsuka Y(1)(2), Watanabe E(1), Shinya E(1), Okura S(1), Saeki H(2), Geijtenbeek
TBH(3)(4), Takahashi H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo
113-8602, Japan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo 113-8602, Japan.
(3)Department of Experimental Immunology, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam,
1105 HV Amsterdam, the Netherlands; and.
(4)Amsterdam Infection and Immunity Institute, 1105 HV Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo
113-8602, Japan; htkuhkai@nms.ac.jp.

Human mucosal tissues and skin contain two distinct types of dendritic cell (DC) 
subsets, epidermal Langerhans cells (LCs) and dermal DCs, which can be
distinguished by the expression of C-type lectin receptors, Langerin and DC-SIGN,
respectively. Although peripheral blood monocytes differentiate into these
distinct subsets, monocyte-derived LCs (moLCs) induced by coculture with GM-CSF, 
IL-4, and TGF-β1 coexpress both Langerin and DC-SIGN, suggesting that the
environmental cues remain unclear. In this study, we show that LC differentiation
is TGF-β1 dependent and that cofactors such as IL-4 and TNF-α promote
TGF-β1-dependent LC differentiation into Langerin+DC-SIGN- moLCs but continuous
exposure to IL-4 blocks differentiation. Steroids such as dexamethasone greatly
enhanced TNF-α-induced moLC differentiation and blocked DC-SIGN expression.
Consistent with primary LCs, dexamethasone-treated moLCs express CD1a, whereas
monocyte-derived DCs (moDCs) express CD1b, CD1c, and CD1d. moDCs but not moLCs
produced inflammatory cytokines after stimulation with CD1b and CD1d ligands
mycolic acid and α-galactosylceramide, respectively. Strikingly, CD1a triggering 
with squalene on moLCs but not moDCs induced strong IL-22-producing CD4+ helper T
cell responses. As IL-22 is an important cytokine in the maintenance of skin
homeostasis, these data suggest that CD1a on LCs is involved in maintaining the
immune barrier in the skin.

Copyright © 2018 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1701402 
PMCID: PMC6215253
PMID: 30322965  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

