
1. mBio. 2018 Oct 16;9(5). pii: e01895-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01895-18.

Small-Molecule Acetylation Controls the Degradation of Benzoate and
Photosynthesis in Rhodopseudomonas palustris.

VanDrisse CM(1), Escalante-Semerena JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
jcescala@uga.edu.

The degradation of lignin-derived aromatic compounds such as benzoate has been
extensively studied in Rhodopseudomonas palustris, and the chemistry underpinning
the conversion of benzoate to acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) is well understood. 
Here we characterize the last unknown gene, badL, of the bad (benzoic acid
degradation) cluster. BadL function is required for growth under
photoheterotrophic conditions with benzoate as the organic carbon source (i.e.,
light plus anoxia). On the basis of bioinformatics and in vivo and in vitro data,
we show that BadL, a Gcn5-related N- acetyltransferase (GNAT) (PF00583),
acetylates aminobenzoates to yield acetamidobenzoates. The latter relieved
repression of the badDEFGAB operon by binding to BadM, triggering the synthesis
of enzymes that activate and dearomatize the benzene ring. We also show that
acetamidobenzoates are required for the expression of genes encoding the
photosynthetic reaction center light-harvesting complexes through a
BadM-independent mechanism. The effect of acetamidobenzoates on pigment synthesis
is new and different than their effect on the catabolism of benzoate.IMPORTANCE
This work shows that the BadL protein of Rhodopseudomonas palustris has
N-acetyltransferase activity and that this activity is required for the
catabolism of benzoate under photosynthetic conditions in this bacterium. R.
palustris occupies lignin-rich habitats, making its benzoate-degrading capability
critical for the recycling of this important, energy-rich biopolymer. This work
identifies the product of the BadL enzyme as acetamidobenzoates, which were
needed to derepress genes encoding benzoate-degrading enzymes and proteins of the
photosynthetic apparatus responsible for the generation of the proton motive
force under anoxia in the presence of light. In short, acetamidobenzoates
potentially coordinate the use of benzoate as a source of reducing power and
carbon with the generation of a light-driven proton motive force that fuels ATP
synthesis, motility, transport, and many other processes in the metabolically
versatile bacterium R. palustris.

Copyright Â© 2018 VanDrisse and Escalante-Semerena.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01895-18 
PMCID: PMC6191541
PMID: 30327443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

