
1. J Biosci Bioeng. 2019 Apr;127(4):472-478. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2018.09.016. Epub
2018 Oct 16.

Identification and characterization of multifunctional cationic peptides from
traditional Japanese fermented soybean Natto extracts.

Taniguchi M(1), Aida R(2), Saito K(2), Ochiai A(2), Takesono S(3), Saitoh E(3),
Tanaka T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials Science and Technology, Graduate School of Science and
Technology, Niigata University, Niigata 950-2181, Japan. Electronic address:
mtanig@eng.niigata-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Materials Science and Technology, Graduate School of Science and
Technology, Niigata University, Niigata 950-2181, Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Technology, Niigata Institute of Technology, Niigata
945-1195, Japan.

In this study, we investigated the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-neutralizing and
angiogenic activities of cationic peptides derived from the traditional Japanese 
fermented product Natto, which is made by fermenting cooked soybeans using
Bacillus subtilis. Initially, we prepared 20 fractions of Natto extracts with
various isoelectric points (pI's) using ampholyte-free isoelectric focusing
(autofocusing). Cationic peptides were then purified from fractions 19 and 20,
whose pH values were greater than 12, using reversed-phase high-performance
liquid chromatography, and were identified using matrix-assisted laser/desorption
ionization-time-of-flight mass spectroscopy. Among the 13 identified cationic
peptides, seven (KFNKYGR, FPFPRPPHQK, GQSSRPQDRHQK, QRFDQRSPQ, ERQFPFPRPPHQK,
GEIPRPRPRPQHPE, and EQPRPIPFPRPQPR) had pI's greater than 9.5, positive net
charges, and differing molecular weights. These peptides were then chemically
synthesized and applied to chromogenic LPS-neutralizing assays using Limulus
amebocyte lysates, and 50% effective (neutralizing) concentrations of 2.6-5.5 μM 
were demonstrated. In addition, tube formation assays in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells revealed angiogenic activities for all but one (GEIPRPRPRPQHPE)
of these seven cationic peptides, with increases in relative tube lengths of
23-31% in the presence of peptides at 10 μM. Subsequent experiments showed
negligible hemolytic activity of these peptides at concentrations of up to 500 μM
in mammalian red blood cells. Collectively, these data demonstrate that six
cationic peptides from Natto extracts, with the exception of GEIPRPRPRPQHPE, have
LPS-neutralizing and angiogenic activities but do not induce hemolysis.

Copyright © 2018 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2018.09.016 
PMID: 30337232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

