
1. Autophagy. 2019 Mar;15(3):527-542. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2018.1535290. Epub 2018 
Nov 8.

A non-canonical autophagy-dependent role of the ATG16L1T300A variant in
urothelial vesicular trafficking and uropathogenic Escherichia coli persistence.

Wang C(1), Bauckman KA(1), Ross ASB(1), Symington JW(1), Ligon MM(1), Scholtes
G(1), Kumar A(1), Chang HW(2), Twentyman J(1), Fashemi BE(1), Xavier RJ(3),
Mysorekar IU(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology , Washington University School of
Medicine , St. Louis , MO , USA.
(2)b Pathology and Immunology , Washington University School of Medicine , St.
Louis , MO , USA.
(3)c Gastrointestinal Unit and Center for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease
, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA , USA.

50% of Caucasians carry a Thr300Ala variant (T300A) in the protein encoded by the
macroautophagy/autophagy gene ATG16L1. Here, we show that the T300A variant
confers protection against urinary tract infections (UTIs), the most common
infectious disease in women. Using knockin mice carrying the human T300A variant,
we show that the variant limits the UTI-causing bacteria, uropathogenic
Escherichia coli (UPEC), from establishing persistent intracellular reservoirs,
which can seed UTI recurrence. This phenotype is recapitulated in mice lacking
Atg16l1 or Atg7 exclusively in the urothelium. We further show that mice with the
T300A variant exhibit urothelial cellular abnormalities, including vesicular
congestion and aberrant accumulation of UPK (uroplakin) proteins. Importantly,
presence of the T300A variant in humans is associated with similar urothelial
architectural abnormalities, indicating an evolutionarily conserved impact.
Mechanistically, we show that the reduced bacterial persistence is independent of
basal autophagic flux or proinflammatory cytokine responses and does not involve 
Atg14 or Epg5. However, the T300A variant is associated with increased expression
of the small GTPase Rab33b; RAB33B interacts with ATG16L1, as well as other
secretory RABs, RAB27B and RAB11A, important for UPEC exocytosis from the
urothelium. Finally, inhibition of secretory RABs in bladder epithelial cells
increases intracellular UPEC load. Together, our results reveal that UPEC
selectively utilize genes important for autophagosome formation to persist in the
urothelium, and that the presence of the T300A variant in ATG16L1 is associated
with changes in urothelial vesicle trafficking, which disrupts the ability of
UPEC to persist, thereby limiting the risk of recurrent UTIs. Abbreviations:
3-PEHPC: 3-pyridinyl ethylidene hydroxyl phosphonocarboxylate; ATG: autophagy;
ATG16L1: autophagy related 16 like 1; BECs: bladder epithelial cells; dpi: days
post infection; hpi: hours post infection; IF: immunofluorescence; IL1B:
interleukin 1 beta; IL6: interleukin 6; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule-associated
protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MVB: multivesicular bodies; T300A: Thr300Ala; TNF: 
tumor necrosis factor; QIR(s): quiescent intracellular reservoir(s); siRNA: short
interfering RNA; UPEC: uropathogenic Escherichia coli; UTI(s): urinary tract
infection(s); TEM: transmission electron microscopy; WT: wild type.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2018.1535290 
PMCID: PMC6351132
PMID: 30335568  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

