
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2019 Feb 2;290:193-204. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2018.10.002. Epub 2018 Oct 6.

Development of air-blast dried non-Saccharomyces yeast starter for improving
quality of Korean persimmon wine and apple cider.

Kim DH(1), Lee SB(1), Jeon JY(1), Park HD(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Food Science and Biotechnology, Kyungpook National University, Daegu
41566, South Korea.
(2)School of Food Science and Biotechnology, Kyungpook National University, Daegu
41566, South Korea; Institute of Fermentation Biotechnology, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu 41566, South Korea. Electronic address: hpark@knu.ac.kr.

A total of 512 yeasts, including 422 non-Saccharomyces yeasts, were isolated from
various fruits including apple, aronia, Muscat Bailey A grapes, and persimmon.
These were used to prepare persimmon wine and apple cider starters that produced 
high levels of aromatic compounds, which contribute to high-quality fermented
products. Environmental tolerance testing with 20% glucose and 8% EtOH, alongside
a sniffing test, led to the selection of Wickerhamomyces anomalus (Synonym Pichia
anomala) SJ20, Meyerozyma caribbica (Synonym Pichia caribbica) YP1, Pichia
kluyveri CD34, Hanseniaspora uvarum SJ69 (for persimmon wine), W. anomalus CS7-16
(for apple cider), and Starmerella bacillaris (Synonym Candida zemplinina) CD80
(for both wines) as wine starters. These strains had high environmental stress
tolerance and the highest sniffing test scores. Persimmon wine and apple cider
were fermented using these strains in single- or mixed-culture with S. cerevisiae
W-3 to determine the improved effect on wine aroma. In accordance with the
results of volatile ester compounds and sensory evaluation, W. anomalus SJ20, H. 
uvarum SJ69, and W. anomalus CS7-16 had an excellent potential as persimmon wine 
and apple cider starters. Moreover, other strains also showed a good potential
for a distinctive persimmon wine and apple cider because of the different
compositions of the various volatile ester compounds. Six types of sugars
(fructose, glucose, maltose, sucrose, raffinose, sucrose, and trehalose), four
types of rehydration solutions (distilled water, 1× phosphate buffered saline,
0.85% NaCl, and 1% peptone water), and two types of antioxidants (l-ascorbic acid
and glutathione) were examined to improve the survival rate of air-blast dried
non-Saccharomyces yeast cells. Optimal sugar and rehydration conditions for each 
strain were validated, and scanning electron microscopy showed that each cell was
surrounded by protectants, including sugar, skim milk, and lactomil. Storability 
assessment of air-blast dried yeast cells maintained at 4 °C for two months
indicated that at least one condition in each strain had a higher survival rate
than the control, regardless of the concentration or type of antioxidant
treatment, except for M. caribbica YP1. These results suggest that antioxidant
treatment contributes to maintaining the viability of air-blast dried cells in
hostile environments.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2018.10.002 
PMID: 30347355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

