
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Oct 11;9:2347. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02347. eCollection
2018.

IL-17RA-Signaling Modulates CD8+ T Cell Survival and Exhaustion During
Trypanosoma cruzi Infection.

Tosello Boari J(1)(2), Araujo Furlan CL(1)(2), Fiocca Vernengo F(1)(2), Rodriguez
C(1)(2), Ramello MC(1)(2), Amezcua Vesely MC(1)(2), Gorosito Serrán M(1)(2),
Nuñez NG(3)(4), Richer W(3)(4), Piaggio E(3)(4), Montes CL(1)(2), Gruppi A(1)(2),
Acosta Rodríguez EV(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica Clínica, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad
Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba, Argentina.
(2)Centro de Investigaciones en Bioquímica Clínica e Inmunología, CONICET,
Córdoba, Argentina.
(3)SiRIC TransImm "Translational Immunotherapy Team," Translational Research
Department, Research Center, PSL Research University, INSERM U932, Institut
Curie, Paris, France.
(4)Centre d'Investigation Clinique Biothérapie CICBT 1428, Institut Curie, Paris,
France.

The IL-17 family contributes to host defense against many intracellular pathogens
by mechanisms that are not fully understood. CD8+ T lymphocytes are key elements 
against intracellular microbes, and their survival and ability to mount cytotoxic
responses are orchestrated by several cytokines. Here, we demonstrated that
IL-17RA-signaling cytokines sustain pathogen-specific CD8+ T cell immunity. The
absence of IL-17RA and IL-17A/F during Trypanosoma cruzi infection resulted in
increased tissue parasitism and reduced frequency of parasite-specific CD8+ T
cells. Impaired IL-17RA-signaling in vivo increased apoptosis of
parasite-specific CD8+ T cells, while in vitro recombinant IL-17 down-regulated
the pro-apoptotic protein BAD and promoted the survival of activated CD8+ T
cells. Phenotypic, functional, and transcriptomic profiling showed that T.
cruzi-specific CD8+ T cells derived from IL-17RA-deficient mice presented
features of cell dysfunction. PD-L1 blockade partially restored the magnitude of 
CD8+ T cell responses and parasite control in these mice. Adoptive transfer
experiments established that IL-17RA-signaling is intrinsically required for the 
proper maintenance of functional effector CD8+ T cells. Altogether, our results
identify IL-17RA and IL-17A as critical factors for sustaining CD8+ T cell
immunity to T. cruzi.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02347 
PMCID: PMC6193063
PMID: 30364284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

