
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Oct 29;8(1):15968. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-34371-1.

Distinct phenotypic traits of Staphylococcus aureus are associated with
persistent, contagious bovine intramammary infections.

Grunert T(1), Stessl B(2), Wolf F(3), Sordelli DO(4), Buzzola FR(4),
Ehling-Schulz M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Microbiology, Institute of Microbiology, Department of
Pathobiology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria.
tom.grunert@vetmeduni.ac.at.
(2)Institute of Milk Hygiene, Milk Technology and Food Science, Department for
Farm Animals and Veterinary Public Health, University of Veterinary Medicine,
Vienna, Austria.
(3)Veterinarian Dr. Franz Wolf, Bad Schallerbach, Austria.
(4)Instituto de Microbiología y Parasitología Médica (IMPaM), Universidad de
Buenos Aires and CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Functional Microbiology, Institute of Microbiology, Department of
Pathobiology, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria.

Staphylococcus aureus causing persistent, recurrent bovine intramammary
infections are still a major challenge to dairy farming. Generally, one or a few 
clonal lineages are predominant in dairy herds, indicating animal-to-animal
transfers and the existence of distinct pathotypic traits. The aim of this study 
was to determine if long term persistence and spreading of S. aureus are
associated with specific phenotypic traits, including cellular invasion,
cytotoxicity and biofilm formation. Mastitis isolates were collected over a
3-years period from a single dairy herd, resulting in two persistent subtypes,
the high within-herd prevalent subtype ST9 (CC9)-methicillin-susceptible S.
aureus (MSSA), designated HP/ST9, and the low within-herd prevalent subtype ST504
(CC705)-MSSA, designated LP/ST504. Characterization of the two different
coexisting persistent subtypes showed that the following phenotypic traits are
particularly associated with high within-herd prevalence: lack of capsular
polysaccharide expression, high cellular invasiveness, low cytotoxicity and high 
biofilm/ poly-N-acetylglucosamine (PNAG) production, which may concomitantly
contribute to the spreading of HP/ST9 within the herd. By contrast to HP/ST9,
LP/ST504 is characterized by the formation of colony dendrites, which may help
the bacteria to access deeper tissues as niches for persistence in single
animals. Thus, within a single herd, two different types of persistence can be
found in parallel, allowing longtime persistence of S. aureus in dairy cattle.
Furthermore, this study indicates that ST9 (CC9)-MSSA strains, which are
currently thought to have their primary reservoir in swine and humans, can also
successfully spread to new hosts and persist in dairy herds for years.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-34371-1 
PMCID: PMC6206001
PMID: 30374136  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

