
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2018 Nov 1;74(Pt 11):733-740. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X18014814. Epub 2018 Oct 31.

Crystal structure and kinetic analyses of a hexameric form of
(S)-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase from Clostridium acetobutylicum.

Takenoya M(1), Taguchi S(2), Yajima S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, Faculty of Life Sciences, Tokyo University of
Agriculture, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-8502, Japan.
(2)Department of Chemistry for Life Sciences and Agriculture, Faculty of Life
Sciences, Tokyo University of Agriculture, 1-1-1 Sakuragaoka, Setagaya, Tokyo
156-8502, Japan.

(S)-3-Hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (HBD) has been gaining increased attention
recently as it is a key enzyme in the enantiomeric formation of
(S)-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA [(S)-3HB-CoA]. It converts acetoacetyl-CoA to
(S)-3HB-CoA in the synthetic metabolic pathway. (S)-3HB-CoA is further modified
to form (S)-3-hydroxybutyrate, which is a source of biodegradable polymers.
During the course of a study to develop biodegradable polymers, attempts were
made to determine the crystal structure of HBD from Clostridium acetobutylicum
(CacHBD), and the crystal structures of both apo and NAD+-bound forms of CacHBD
were determined. The crystals belonged to different space groups: P212121 and
P21. However, both structures adopted a hexamer composed of three dimers in the
asymmetric unit, and this oligomerization was additionally confirmed by
gel-filtration column chromatography. Furthermore, to investigate the catalytic
residues of CacHBD, the enzymatic activities of the wild type and of three
single-amino-acid mutants were analyzed, in which the Ser, His and Asn residues
that are conserved in the HBDs from C. acetobutylicum, C. butyricum and Ralstonia
eutropha, as well as in the L-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenases from Homo sapiens 
and Escherichia coli, were substituted by alanines. The S117A and N188A mutants
abolished the activity, while the H138A mutant showed a slightly lower Km value
and a significantly lower kcat value than the wild type. Therefore, in
combination with the crystal structures, it was shown that His138 is involved in 
catalysis and that Ser117 and Asn188 may be important for substrate recognition
to place the keto group of the substrate in the correct position for reaction.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X18014814 
PMCID: PMC6213985
PMID: 30387779  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

