
1. Protein Sci. 2019 Jan;28(1):267-282. doi: 10.1002/pro.3548.

Ferredoxins as interchangeable redox components in support of MiaB, a radical
S-adenosylmethionine methylthiotransferase.

Arcinas AJ(1), Maiocco SJ(2), Elliott SJ(2), Silakov A(3), Booker SJ(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, 16802.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, 02215.
(3)Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania, 1680.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, Pennsylvania, 16802.

MiaB is a member of the methylthiotransferase subclass of the radical
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) superfamily of enzymes, catalyzing the
methylthiolation of C2 of adenosines bearing an N6 -isopentenyl (i6 A) group
found at position 37 in several tRNAs to afford 2-methylthio-N6
-(isopentenyl)adenosine (ms2 i6 A). MiaB uses a reduced [4Fe-4S]+ cluster to
catalyze a reductive cleavage of SAM to generate a 5'-deoxyadenosyl 5'-radical
(5'-dA•)-a required intermediate in its reaction-as well as an additional
[4Fe-4S]2+ auxiliary cluster. In Escherichia coli and many other organisms,
re-reduction of the [4Fe-4S]2+ cluster to the [4Fe-4S]+ state is accomplished by 
the flavodoxin reducing system. Most mechanistic studies of MiaBs have been
carried out on the enzyme from Thermotoga maritima (Tm), which lacks the
flavodoxin reducing system, and which is not activated by E. coli flavodoxin.
However, the genome of this organism encodes five ferredoxins (TM0927, TM1175,
TM1289, TM1533, and TM1815), each of which might donate the requisite electron to
MiaB and perhaps to other radical SAM enzymes. The genes encoding each of these
ferredoxins were cloned, and the associated proteins were isolated and shown to
support turnover by Tm MiaB. In addition, TM1639, the ferredoxin-NADP+
oxidoreductase subunit α (NfnA) from Tm was overproduced and isolated and shown
to provide electrons to the Tm ferredoxins during Tm MiaB turnover. The resulting
reactions demonstrate improved coupling between formation of the 5'-dA• and ms2
i6 A production, indicating that only one hydrogen atom abstraction is required
for the reaction.

© 2018 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.3548 
PMCID: PMC6295894
PMID: 30394621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

