
1. Metab Eng. 2019 Mar;52:9-19. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2018.10.006. Epub 2018 Nov 2.

Direct cell-to-cell exchange of matter in a synthetic Clostridium syntrophy
enables CO2 fixation, superior metabolite yields, and an expanded metabolic
space.

Charubin K(1), Papoutsakis ET(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Delaware,
15 Innovation Way, Newark, DE 19711, USA; Delaware Biotechnology Institute,
University of Delaware, 15 Innovation Way, Newark, DE 19711, USA. Electronic
address: kamilcha@udel.edu.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Delaware,
15 Innovation Way, Newark, DE 19711, USA; Delaware Biotechnology Institute,
University of Delaware, 15 Innovation Way, Newark, DE 19711, USA. Electronic
address: epaps@udel.edu.

In microbial fermentations at least 33% of the sugar-substrate carbon is lost as 
CO2 during pyruvate decarboxylation to acetyl-CoA, with the corresponding
electrons lost in the form of H2. Previous attempts to reduce this carbon and
electron loss focused on engineering of a single organism. In nature, most
microorganisms live in complex communities where syntrophic interactions result
in superior resource utilization. Here, we show that a synthetic syntrophy
consisting of the solventogen Clostridium acetobutylicum, which converts simple
and complex carbohydrates into a variety of chemicals, and the acetogen C.
ljungdahlii which fixes CO2, achieved carbon recoveries into C2-C4 alcohols
almost to the limit of substrate-electron availability, with minimal H2 and CO2
release. The syntrophic co-culture produced robust metabolic outcomes over a
broad range of starting population ratios of the two organisms. We show that
direct cell-to-cell interactions and material exchange among the two microbes
enabled unforeseen rearrangements in the metabolism of the individual species
that resulted in the production of non-native metabolites, namely isopropanol and
2,3-butanediol. This was accomplished by pathway-specific alterations of gene
expression brought about by one organism on the other, and vice versa. While some
of these gene-expression alterations can be explained by the exchange of
metabolites that induce specific gene expression patterns, others, as
demonstrated by co-culture setup in a transwell system, cannot. The latter, for
now, would be attributed to complex direct physical interactions among the two
organisms, thus providing a glimpse of the potential microbial complexity of
simple or multicomponent microbiomes. Such direct material-transfer phenomena
have not been documented in the literature. Furthermore, our study shows that
syntrophic cultures offer a flexible platform for metabolite production with
superior carbon recovery that can also be applied to electron-enhanced
fermentations enabling even higher carbon recoveries.

Copyright Â© 2018 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2018.10.006 
PMID: 30391511  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

