
1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2019 Mar;53(3):268-274. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2018.10.013. Epub 2018 Oct 31.

Detection and prevalence of carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative bacteria among
European laboratories in the COMBACTE network: a COMBACTE LAB-Net survey.

Kostyanev T(1), Vilken T(2), Lammens C(2), Timbermont L(2), Van't Veen A(2),
Goossens H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Vaccine & Infectious Disease Institute,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. Electronic address:
tomislav.kostyanev@uantwerpen.be.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Vaccine & Infectious Disease Institute,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, Vaccine & Infectious Disease Institute,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium; Laboratory of Medical Microbiology,
University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) represents a global public health threat that
jeopardises the progress medicine has made over the last century. To confront
AMR, the Innovative Medicines Initiative (IMI) has supported the development of a
large network of hospitals and laboratories in Europe as part of the New Drugs
for Bad Bugs (ND4BB) programme and the COMBACTE projects. COMBACTE LAB-Net
conducted a pilot survey on distribution and usage of carbapenem resistance
detection methods among laboratories in the COMBACTE network in two clinical
trials as part of the COMBACTE-CARE project. The survey was sent out to 211
laboratories in 20 European countries between May 2015 and June 2017. Answers
were collected from 165 laboratories (78%). Sixty laboratories (36%) reported an 
outbreak of carbapenem-resistant (CR) Enterobacteriaceae during one of the two
years preceding the completion of the survey. High rates of CR Acinetobacter spp.
above 50% were reported by 74 laboratories (47%), particularly in the Western
Balkan countries where the rates were sometimes higher than 90%. Apart from
determining the antimicrobial susceptibility of isolates, laboratories also used 
various methods, such as Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization - Time of
Flight (MALDI-TOF), Carbapenemase Nordmann-Poirel (Carba NP) test or molecular
methods, to detect CR Gram-negative bacteria. The survey resulted in the
selection of sites with high resistance rates that successfully recruited many
patients in the EURECA observational clinical trial.

Copyright Â© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2018.10.013 
PMID: 30391381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

