
1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2019 Jan 30;168:423-430. doi:
10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.10.075. Epub 2018 Nov 3.

Addition of wood sawdust during the co-composting of sewage sludge and wheat
straw influences seeds germination.

Kebibeche H(1), Khelil O(2), Kacem M(3), Kaid Harche M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire des Productions, Valorisations Végétales et Microbiennes,
Département de Biotechnologie, Faculté des Sciences de la Nature et de la Vie,
Université des Sciences et de la Technologie d'Oran Mohamed Boudiaf (USTO-MB), BP
1505, El M'naouer, Oran, Algeria.
(2)Département de Biotechnologie, Faculté des Sciences de la Nature et de la Vie,
Université des Sciences et de la Technologie d'Oran Mohamed Boudiaf (USTO-MB), BP
1505, El M'naouer, Oran, Algeria. Electronic address: khelil.omar@univ-usto.dz.
(3)Laboratoire des Productions, Valorisations Végétales et Microbiennes,
Département de Biotechnologie, Faculté des Sciences de la Nature et de la Vie,
Université des Sciences et de la Technologie d'Oran Mohamed Boudiaf (USTO-MB), BP
1505, El M'naouer, Oran, Algeria; Université d'Oran 1-Ahmed Ben Bella, Faculté
SNV, Département de Biotechnologie, BP. 1524 El M'Naouer, 31000 Oran, Algérie.

The objective of this study was to investigate the effect of addition of sawdust 
co-composted with sewage sludge and wheat straw on seeds germination. Two
mixtures were piled and composted over 90 days. The first mixture (C1) was
composed of sewage sludge and wheat straw, while the second mixture (C2) was
composed of sewage sludge, wheat straw and wood sawdust. The results showed that 
the physicochemical parameters of both composts, i.e., temperature (> 55 °C in
the thermophilic phase), moisture content (~ 30%). pH (6.73 for C1 and 7.19 for
C2) and EC values (1.81 mS cm-1 for C1 and 1.32 mS cm-1 for C2) reached the
required maturity standard. The values of C/N were below 12 indicating a high
degree of maturity. Also, no bacterial pathogens were detected in the final
composts. The concentration of total heavy metals has been reduced allowing the
elimination of sewage sludge toxicity, confirmed by the germination index, which 
reached over 80%. Strong positive correlations were noticed between total
Kjeldahl nitrogen of C2 and germination indexes of all the studied species. The
obtained results indicate that the addition of wood sawdust increases the
nitrogen content leading to slightly alkaline compost which influences seeds
germination by reducing the phytotoxicity of sewage sludge.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.10.075 
PMID: 30399541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

