
1. Avian Pathol. 2019 Feb;48(1):80-85. doi: 10.1080/03079457.2018.1546377. Epub 2018
Nov 26.

Vaccination of chickens with the 34 kDa carboxy-terminus of Bpmp72 reduces
colonization with Brachyspira pilosicoli following experimental infection.

La T(1), Phillips ND(1), Hampson DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)a School of Veterinary and Life Sciences, Murdoch University , Murdoch ,
Western Australia , Australia.

The anaerobic intestinal spirochaete Brachyspira pilosicoli colonizes the large
intestine of a variety of species of mammals and birds, and may result in
colitis, diarrhoea and reductions in growth rate. Naturally occurring infections 
in chickens are largely confined to adult laying and breeding birds. In this
study, the 34 kD carboxy-terminus of the prominent outer membrane protein Bmp72
of B. pilosicoli was expressed as a histidine-tagged recombinant protein and used
to immunize two groups (B and C) of 15 individually housed layer chickens.
Vaccination was with either 100 μg (B) or 1 mg (C) protein emulsified with
Freund's incomplete adjuvant delivered into the pectoral muscles, followed three 
weeks later by 1 mg of protein in phosphate buffered saline delivered via crop
tube. Two weeks later these and 15 non-vaccinated positive control birds (group
A) housed in the same room were challenged via crop tube with B. pilosicoli avian
strain CPS1. B. pilosicoli was detected in the faeces of all control birds and in
14 of the vaccinated birds in each vaccinated group at some point over the 30-day
period following challenge. Colonization was delayed and the duration of
excretion was significantly reduced (P = 0.0001) in both groups of vaccinated
birds compared to the non-vaccinated control birds. Fewer immunized birds had
abnormal caecal contents at post mortem examination compared to non-vaccinated
birds, but the difference was not statistically significant. This study indicates
that recombinant Bmp72 C-terminus has potential to be developed for use as a
vaccine component to provide protection against B. pilosicoli infections.
RESEARCH HIGHLIGHTS Laying chickens were immunized with recombinant Brachyspira
pilosicoli membrane protein Bpmp72. Immunized birds had a highly significant
reduction in the duration of colonization. Fewer immunized than control birds had
abnormal caecal contents after infection. Bpmp72 showed potential for use as a
novel vaccine component for B. pilosicoli.

DOI: 10.1080/03079457.2018.1546377 
PMID: 30404542  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

