
1. Toxins (Basel). 2018 Nov 6;10(11). pii: E459. doi: 10.3390/toxins10110459.

Bacterial Superantigen Toxins, CD28, and Drug Development.

Kaempfer R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Medical
Research Israel-Canada, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 
9112102, Israel. kaempfer@hebrew.edu.

During severe bacterial infections, death and disease are often caused by an
overly strong immune response of the human host. Acute toxic shock is induced by 
superantigen toxins, a diverse set of proteins secreted by Gram-positive
staphylococcal and streptococcal bacterial strains that overstimulate the
inflammatory response by orders of magnitude. The need to protect from
superantigen toxins led to our discovery that in addition to the well-known MHC
class II and T cell receptors, the principal costimulatory receptor, CD28, and
its constitutively expressed coligand, B7-2 (CD86), previously thought to have
only costimulatory function, are actually critical superantigen receptors.
Binding of the superantigen into the homodimer interfaces of these costimulatory 
receptors greatly enhances B7-2/CD28 engagement, leading to excessive
pro-inflammatory signaling. This finding led to the design of short receptor
dimer interface mimetic peptides that block the binding of superantigen and thus 
protect from death. It then turned out that such a peptide will protect also from
Gram-negative bacterial infection and from polymicrobial sepsis. One such CD28
mimetic peptide is advancing in a Phase 3 clinical trial to protect from lethal
wound infections by flesh-eating bacteria. These host-oriented therapeutics
target the human immune system itself, rendering pathogens less likely to become 
resistant.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins10110459 
PMCID: PMC6265702
PMID: 30404186  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

