
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Rev Cancer. 2019 Jan;1871(1):85-98. doi:
10.1016/j.bbcan.2018.11.003. Epub 2018 Nov 9.

Roles of DDX5 in the tumorigenesis, proliferation, differentiation, metastasis
and pathway regulation of human malignancies.

Nyamao RM(1), Wu J(2), Yu L(3), Xiao X(3), Zhang FM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China;
Department of Pathology, Kenyatta University, Nairobi, Kenya.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China; Wu
Lien-Teh Institute, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China; Heilongjiang
Province Key Laboratory of Immunity and Infection, Pathogenic Biology, Harbin,
China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China; Wu
Lien-Teh Institute, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China; Heilongjiang
Province Key Laboratory of Immunity and Infection, Pathogenic Biology, Harbin,
China. Electronic address: fengminzhang@ems.hrbmu.edu.cn.

The DEAD-box RNA helicase DDX5 is a member of a family of highly conserved
proteins involved in gene-expression regulation and ATP-dependent RNA helicase
activities. Recently, it has been reported to be aberrantly expressed in many
tumors, and is linked to the regulation of many cancer-related pathways. It
co-activates many transcription factors, with profound implications for cancer
development, and the de-regulation of its functions is ultimately associated with
tumor formation and progression. Moreover, it is strongly implicated in the
tumorigenesis, invasiveness and metastasis, as well as the proliferation of
several cancer types. In this review, we seek to elucidate the role of DDX5 in
the development and progression of human malignancies and put forward its
prospective applications in future cancer research.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2018.11.003 
PMID: 30419318  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

