
1. Cytokine. 2019 Feb;114:74-80. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2018.11.001. Epub 2018 Nov 13.

Serum cytokine levels differ according to major cardiovascular risk factors in
patients with lower limb atherosclerosis.

Jalkanen J(1), Hollmén M(2), Maksimow M(2), Jalkanen S(2), Hakovirta H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, Turku University Hospital and Turku
University, Turku, Finland. Electronic address: juho.jalkanen@utu.fi.
(2)Medicity Research Laboratory, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(3)Department of Vascular Surgery, Turku University Hospital and Turku
University, Turku, Finland.

Different cardiovascular risk factors present a heterogenic manifestation of
lower limb atherosclerosis. The molecular mechanisms behind this phenomenon
remain unknown. We aimed to clarify this phenomenon by studying the association
of major cardiovascular risk factors with the profile of serum cytokines in 226
consecutive patients with lower limb atherosclerosis treated at a department of
Vascular Surgery during a one-year enrollment period. Increasing age
independently associated with higher levels of IFN-γ inducible factors MIG, CTACK
and IP-10 (P < 0.001 for all). Patients with chronic kidney disease had higher
serum levels of MIF, IL-16 and SCF (P = 0.001 or less for all). Smoking and
hypertension associated with IL-17 (P = 0.037 and 0.015, respectively). In
addition, smoking associated with growth factors known to induce myeloid
progenitor cell proliferation: GM-CSF (P = 0.035), PDGF (P = 0.024), bFGF
(P = 0.026), and HGF (P = 0.030). Dyslipidemia also associated with
myeloproliferative factors: MIB-1α (P = 0.005) and PDGF (P = 0.01). Type II
diabetes associated with Th2 mediated inflammation: IL-5 (P < 0.001), IL-7
(P = 0.004) and IL-13 (P = 0.015). Major cardiovascular risk factors are
associated with different circulating cytokines implicating different
immunological pathology.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2018.11.001 
PMID: 30442459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

