
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2019 Mar;86:230-238. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2018.11.042. Epub
2018 Nov 17.

Molecular characterization of big-belly seahorse (Hippocamus abdominalis)
arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (HaALOX5): First evidence of an immune defensive role
by induced immunological stress in teleost.

Tharuka MDN(1), Priyathilaka TT(1), Kim J(1), Lim C(1), Lee J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Life Sciences & Fish Vaccine Research Center, Jeju
National University, Jeju Self-Governing Province 63243, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Marine Life Sciences & Fish Vaccine Research Center, Jeju
National University, Jeju Self-Governing Province 63243, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: jehee@jejunu.ac.kr.

Arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (ALOX5) is an essential enzyme for the biosynthesis
of leukotrienes, which are pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory mediators. In
this study, the ALOX5 paralog of the big-belly seahorse (Hippocampus abdominalis;
HaALOX5) was identified from our transcriptome database, and then molecularly and
functionally characterized to determine its oxygenation capability and expression
under pathogenic stress. The coding sequence of HaALOX5 consisted of 2025 bp and 
encoded a protein of 674 amino acids in length. Sequence and phylogenetic tree
analysis of HaALOX5 revealed a close relationship with its corresponding teleost 
HaALOX5 counterparts. Structure prediction detected an N-terminal regulatory
C2-like domain and a C-terminal catalytic domain, which are the two main
functional domains in ALOX5 enzymes. Quantitative PCR showed that HaALOX5 was
expressed in all the analyzed tissues at different magnitudes. The highest
expression was detected in the intestine and stomach. In blood cells, the liver
and the intestine, HaALOX5 transcripts were significantly elevated at many post
injection time points, when immune challenged with lipopolysaccharide,
polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid, and Streptococcus iniae, indicating its
contribution to post immune defense mechanisms in the seahorse.

Copyright Â© 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2018.11.042 
PMID: 30458312  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

