
1. Environ Technol. 2020 Jun;41(15):1912-1922. doi: 10.1080/09593330.2018.1551939.
Epub 2018 Dec 5.

Mineral pollutants removal through immobilized microalgae-bacterial flocs in a
multitrophic microreactor.

Beji O(1)(2), Adouani N(1), Poncin S(1), Hamdi M(2), Li HZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reactions and Process Engineering, University of Lorraine,
Nancy, France.
(2)Laboratory of Microbial Ecology and Technology, National Institute of Applied 
Sciences and Technology, University of Carthage, Tunis, Tunisia.

Microalgae-bacterial flocs (MaB-flocs) immobilization technique using polyvinyl
alcohol (PVA) crosslinked with sodium alginate represent a novel approach for
sustainable pollutants removal. The present work was performed to evaluate the
performance of a multitrophic batch reactor at microscale for treating two
synthetic wastewater solutions prepared with two different initial Chemical
Oxygen Demand (COD): 200 mg.L-1 and 450 mg.L-1, respectively. Three MaB-flocs
concentrations were entrapped into PVA-alginate beads: C1 (2%, v/v), C2 (5%, v/v)
and C3 (10%, v/v), without O2 supply, during three periods 2, 4 and 6 days of
batch incubation. PVA-alginate beads containing the highest concentration C3 of
MaB-flocs improved the performance of the microreactor to remove significantly
NH4+ and PO43- of about 61% and 82%, respectively, from wastewater more than two 
other concentrations used. This result confirms that C3 of MaB-flocs displays not
only a good potential for nutrients removals but also the highest MaB-flocs
morphological progression after 6 days of treatment with the highest COD of
450 mg.L-1. The feasibility of the PVA-alginate for cells immobilization,
investigated through microscopy analysis, reveals that the evolution of
multicellularity in MaB-flocs, for all experiments.

DOI: 10.1080/09593330.2018.1551939 
PMID: 30465731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

