
1. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2019 May;112(5):703-710. doi: 10.1007/s10482-018-1200-z.
Epub 2018 Nov 21.

Glycomyces luteolus sp. nov., a novel actinomycete isolated from rhizosphere soil
of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.).

Duan L(1), Song W(1), Jiang S(1), Qian L(1), Guo X(1), Wang X(1), Zhao J(2),
Xiang W(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agriculture Biological Functional Gene of Heilongjiang
Provincial Education Committee, Northeast Agricultural University, No. 59 Mucai
Street, Xiangfang District, Harbin, 150030, People's Republic of China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Agriculture Biological Functional Gene of Heilongjiang
Provincial Education Committee, Northeast Agricultural University, No. 59 Mucai
Street, Xiangfang District, Harbin, 150030, People's Republic of China.
guyan2080@126.com.
(3)Key Laboratory of Agriculture Biological Functional Gene of Heilongjiang
Provincial Education Committee, Northeast Agricultural University, No. 59 Mucai
Street, Xiangfang District, Harbin, 150030, People's Republic of China.
xiangwensheng@neau.edu.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute
of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, People's 
Republic of China. xiangwensheng@neau.edu.cn.

Three Gram-stain positive, aerobic actinomycete strains, designated NEAU-A15T,
NEAU-A13 and NEAU-C4, were isolated from rhizosphere soil of wheat (Triticum
aestivum L.) collected from Langfang, Hebei Province, China. Based on their
morphological characteristics, biochemical features and molecular phylogenetic
studies, these strains were concluded to belong to a new member of the genus
Glycomyces. 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis showed that strain NEAU-A15T shares
99.91% and 99.80% 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity with NEAU-A13 and NEAU-C4,
respectively, and these three strains showed high sequence similarities to
Glycomyces algeriensis DSM 44727T (99.24, 99.45, 99.38%), Glycomyces
lechevalierae DSM 44724T (98.97, 99.17, 99.11%) and Glycomyces rutgersensis DSM
43812T (98.83, 99.04, 98.97%). Phylogenetic analysis indicated that these three
strains clustered together and formed a cluster with Glycomyces tritici NEAU-C2T 
(97.30, 97.73, 99.48%), G. algeriensis DSM 44727T, G. lechevalierae DSM 44724T
and G. rutgersensis DSM 43812T. These three strains were observed to contain
MK-10(H2), MK-10(H6) and MK-11 as menaquinones. The whole cell sugar profiles
were found to contain galactose, ribose and xylose. The polar lipids were found
to consist of diphosphatidylglycerol, phosphatidylinositol, phosphatidylglycerol,
phosphoglycolipid, phosphatidylinositol mannoside and an unidentified glycolipid.
The major fatty acids were identified as anteiso-C15:0, iso-C16:0, anteiso-C17:0 
and iso-C15:0. The DNA-DNA hybridization values between strain NEAU-A15T and
NEAU-A13/NEAU-C4 were 86.2 ± 2.3% and 83.4 ± 3.5%, respectively. The values
between these three strains and their close phylogenetic relatives were 48-52%,
supporting the conclusion that they belong to a distinct genomic species. An
array of phenotypic characteristics also differentiated these isolates from their
closely related species. On the basis of the genetic and phenotypic properties,
strains NEAU-A15T, NEAU-A13 and NEAU-C4 can be classified as representatives of a
novel species of the genus Glycomyces, for which the name Glycomyces luteolus sp.
nov., is proposed. The type strain is NEAU-A15T (= DSM 104643T = CGMCC 4.7394T).

DOI: 10.1007/s10482-018-1200-z 
PMID: 30465323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

