
1. Oral Health Prev Dent. 2018;16(5):457-465. doi: 10.3290/j.ohpd.a41361.

Plaque Accumulation and Inflammation Adjacent to Restorations of Amorphous
Calcium Phosphate-containing Composite in Early Childhood Caries.

Gürlek C, Ertuğrul F, Nile C, Lappin DF, Buduneli N.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the clinical, biochemical, and microbiological reactions to 
nanocomposite containing amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) in comparison to a
traditional composite restorative material in early childhood caries.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eighteen teeth were restored with the test material
(ACP-containing resin) and 18 teeth were restored with the control material
(traditional composite, TC) in fourteen paediatric patients using a split-mouth
design. One caries- and restoration-free intact tooth in each patient was
selected as the healthy control. Gingival crevicular fluid (GCF) and
supragingival plaque samples were collected at baseline before the treatment and 
also on days 1, 7, 14 and 30 after treatment. Unstimulated whole saliva samples
were obtained from each patient at baseline, and 1 and 6 months after
restoration. GCF and saliva samples were assayed for IL-17A, IL-17F IL-17A/F,
IL-17E, OPG and RANKL levels by ELISA, and plaque composition was assessed using 
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Clinical evaluation indicated no statistically significant differences
between the two restorative materials according to the FDI criteria surface
lustre, material retention and marginal adaptation properties. Pro-inflammatory
IL-17 levels decreased statistically significantly at 6 months compared to
baseline and 1-month values (p < 0.05). The baseline pro-inflammatory IL-17
cytokine levels in GCF samples around the carious teeth were higher than those
obtained around the healthy teeth (p < 0.05), but similar in GCF from the
ACP-test and TC teeth. Microbiological findings were similar in the ACP and T
groups.
CONCLUSION: It may be suggested that both ACP-containing and traditional resin
composites show similar antimicrobial and biochemical effects in early childhood 
caries.

DOI: 10.3290/j.ohpd.a41361 
PMID: 30460359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

