
1. Front Microbiol. 2018 Nov 6;9:2638. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02638. eCollection
2018.

Effects of Monolaurin on Oral Microbe-Host Transcriptome and Metabolome.

Silva VO(1)(2), Pereira LJ(3), Pasetto S(2), da Silva MP(2), Meyers JC(4), Murata
RM(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Federal University of Lavras, Lavras,
Brazil.
(2)Division of Periodontology, Diagnostic Sciences, Dental Hygiene and Biomedical
Science, Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA, United States.
(3)Department of Health Sciences, Federal University of Lavras, Lavras, Brazil.
(4)Department Foundational Sciences, School of Dental Medicine, East Carolina
University, Greenville, NC, United States.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine, East
Carolina University, Greenville, NC, United States.

The aim of this in vitro study was to evaluate the effects of monolaurin against 
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans (Aa) and determine their effects on the
host transcriptome and metabolome, using an oral cell/bacteria co-culture
dual-chamber model to mimic the human periodontium. For this, the Aa, was applied
to cross the monolayer of epithelial keratinocytes (OBA-9) to reach the
fibroblasts layer (HGF-1) in the basal chamber. The Monolaurin treatments (25 or 
50 μM) were added immediately after the inoculation of the dual-chamber with Aa. 
After 24 h, the transcriptional factors and metabolites produced were quantified 
in the remaining cell layers (insert and basal chamber) and in supernatant
released from the cells. The genes IL-1α, IL-6, IL-18, and TNF analyzed in HGF-1 
concentrations showed a decreased expression when treated with both concentration
of Monolaurin. In keratinocytes, the genes IL-6, IL-18, and TNF presented a
higher expression and the expression of IL-1α decreased when treated with the two
cited concentrations. The production of glycerol and pyruvic acid increased, and 
the 2-deoxytetronic acid NIST, 4-aminobutyric acid, pinitol and glyceric acid,
presented lower concentrations because of the treatment with 25 and/or 50 μM of
Monolaurin. Use of monolaurin modulated the immune response and metabolite
production when administered for 24 h in a dual-chamber model inoculated with A. 
actinomycetemcomitans. In summary, this study indicates that monolaurin had
antimicrobial activity and modulated the host immune response and metabolite
production when administered for 24 h in a dual-chamber model inoculated with A. 
actinomycetemcomitans.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02638 
PMCID: PMC6237204
PMID: 30467497 

