
1. Syst Appl Microbiol. 2019 Jan;42(1):85-93. doi: 10.1016/j.syapm.2018.11.002. Epub
2018 Nov 15.

Candidatus Krumholzibacterium zodletonense gen. nov., sp nov, the first
representative of the candidate phylum Krumholzibacteriota phyl. nov. recovered
from an anoxic sulfidic spring using genome resolved metagenomics.

Youssef NH(1), Farag IF(2), Hahn CR(2), Premathilake H(3), Fry E(2), Hart M(2),
Huffaker K(2), Bird E(2), Hambright J(2), Hoff WD(2), Elshahed MS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Oklahoma State University, 
Stillwater, OK 74074, United States. Electronic address: noha@Okstate.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Oklahoma State University, 
Stillwater, OK 74074, United States.
(3)Department of Animal and Food Sciences, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater,
OK 74074, United States.

The accumulation of genomes of uncultured organisms has highlighted the need for 
devising a taxonomic and nomenclature scheme to validate names and prevent
redundancies. We here report on the recovery and analysis of four
phylogenetically related genomes recovered from an anoxic sulfide and sulfur-rich
spring (Zodletone spring) in southwestern Oklahoma. Phylogenetic analysis based
on 120 single copy markers attested to their position as a novel distinct
bacterial phylum. Genomic analysis suggests Gram-negative flagellated organisms
that possess type IV pili. The organisms are predicted to be rod-shaped,
slow-growers, with an anoxic, heterotrophic, and fermentative lifestyle.
Predicted substrate utilization pattern includes multiple amino acids,
dipeptides, tripeptides, and oligpopeptides; as well as few sugars. Predicted
auxotrophies include proline, vitamin B6, lipoic acid, biotin, and vitamin B12.
Assessment of the putative global distribution pattern of this novel lineage
suggests its preference to anoxic marine, terrestrial, hydrocarbon-impacted, and 
freshwater habitats. We propose the candidatus name Krumholzibacterium
zodletonense gen. nov, sp. nov. for Zgenome0171T, with the genome serving as the 
type material for the novel family Krumholzibacteriaceae fam. nov., order
Krumholzibacteriales ord. nov., class Krumholzibacteria class nov., and phylum
Krumholzibacteriota phyl. nov. The type material genome assembly is deposited in 
GenBank under accession number QTKG01000000.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.syapm.2018.11.002 
PMID: 30477901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

