
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Feb 20;47(3):1557-1563. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1178.

Ribosomal ambiguity (ram) mutations promote the open (off) to closed (on)
transition and thereby increase miscoding.

Hoffer ED(1), Maehigashi T(1), Fredrick K(2), Dunham CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Emory Antibiotic Resistance Center, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Decoding is thought to be governed by a conformational transition in the
ribosome-open (off) to closed (on)-that occurs upon codon-anticodon pairing in
the A site. Ribosomal ambiguity (ram) mutations increase miscoding and map to
disparate regions, consistent with a role for ribosome dynamics in decoding, yet 
precisely how these mutations act has been unclear. Here, we solved crystal
structures of 70S ribosomes harboring 16S ram mutations G299A and G347U in the
absence A-site tRNA (A-tRNA) and in the presence of a near-cognate anticodon
stem-loop (ASL). In the absence of an A-tRNA, each of the mutant ribosomes
exhibits a partially closed (on) state. In the 70S-G347U structure, the 30S
shoulder is rotated inward and intersubunit bridge B8 is disrupted. In the
70S-G299A structure, the 30S shoulder is rotated inward and decoding nucleotide
G530 flips into the anti conformation. Both of these mutant ribosomes adopt the
fully closed (on) conformation in the presence of near-cognate A-tRNA, just as
they do with cognate A-tRNA. Thus, these ram mutations act by promoting the open 
(off) to closed (on) transition, albeit in somewhat distinct ways. This work
reveals the functional importance of 30S shoulder rotation for productive
aminoacylated-tRNA incorporation.

© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky1178 
PMCID: PMC6379664
PMID: 30476222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

