
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Biol Lipids. 2019 Feb;1864(2):158-167. doi:
10.1016/j.bbalip.2018.11.002. Epub 2018 Nov 22.

Upregulation of human glycolipid transfer protein (GLTP) induces necroptosis in
colon carcinoma cells.

Mishra SK(1), Stephenson DJ(2), Chalfant CE(3), Brown RE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, MN 55912, USA. Electronic
address: smishra@hi.umn.edu.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth
University Medical Center, Richmond, VA 23298-0614, USA; Department of Cell
Biology, Microbiology and Molecular Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, 
FL 33620, USA.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology and Molecular Biology, University of 
South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, USA; Research Service, James A. Haley Veterans
Hospital, Tampa, FL 33612, USA; The Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL 33620, USA.
(4)Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, MN 55912, USA. Electronic
address: reb@umn.edu.

Human GLTP on chromosome 12 (locus 12q24.11) encodes a 24 kD amphitropic lipid
transfer protein (GLTP) that mediates glycosphingolipid (GSL) intermembrane
trafficking and regulates GSL homeostatic levels within cells. Herein, we provide
evidence that GLTP overexpression inhibits the growth of human colon carcinoma
cells (HT-29; HCT-116), but spares normal colonic cells (CCD-18Co). Mechanistic
studies reveal that GLTP overexpression arrested the cell cycle at the G1/S
checkpoint via upregulation of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor-1B (Kip1/p27)
and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A (Cip1/p21) at the protein and mRNA
levels, and downregulation of cyclin-dependent kinase-2 (CDK2), cyclin-dependent 
kinase-4 (CDK4), cyclin E and cyclin D1 protein levels. Assessment of the
biological fate of HCT-116 cells overexpressing GLTP indicated no increase in
cell death suggesting induction of quiescence. However, HT-29 cells
overexpressing GLTP underwent cell death by necroptosis as revealed by
phosphorylation of human mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein (pMLKL) via
receptor-interacting protein kinase-3 (RIPK-3), elevated cytosolic calcium, and
plasma membrane permeabilization by pMLKL oligomerization. Overexpression of
W96A-GLTP, an ablated GSL binding site mutant, failed to arrest the cell cycle or
induce necroptosis. Sphingolipid assessment (ceramide, monohexosylceramide,
sphingomyelin, ceramide-1-phosphate, sphingosine, and sphingosine-1-phosphate) of
HT-29 cells overexpressing GLTP revealed large decreases (>5-fold) in
sphingosine-1-phosphate with minimal change in 16:0-ceramide, tipping the
'sphingolipid rheostat' (S1P/16:0-Cer ratio) towards cell death. Depletion of
RIPK-3 or MLKL abrogated necroptosis induced by GLTP overexpression. Our findings
establish GLTP upregulation as a previously unknown suppressor of human colon
carcinoma HT-29 cells via interference with cell cycle progression and induction 
of necroptosis.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2018.11.002 
PMCID: PMC6448591
PMID: 30472325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

