
1. Sci Rep. 2018 Nov 23;8(1):17317. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-35350-2.

Diversity and predictive metabolic pathways of the prokaryotic microbial
community along a groundwater salinity gradient of the Pearl River Delta, China.

Sang S(1), Zhang X(1), Dai H(2), Hu BX(3), Ou H(1), Sun L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, Guangdong, China.
(2)Institute of Groundwater and Earth Sciences, Jinan University, Guangzhou,
510632, Guangdong, China. heng.dai@jnu.edu.cn.
(3)Institute of Groundwater and Earth Sciences, Jinan University, Guangzhou,
510632, Guangdong, China. Bill.x.hu@gmail.com.

Almost half of the groundwater in the Pearl River Delta (PRD) contains salt water
originally derived from paleo-seawater due to the Holocene transgression, which
then generates intense physicochemical gradients in the mixing zone between
freshwater and saltwater. Although some studies have been conducted on the
hydrological and geochemical characteristics of groundwater in the PRD to monitor
the intrusion of seawater, little attention has been paid to the microbial
community of this particular region. In this study, we implemented a
high-throughput sequencing analysis to characterize the microbial communities
along a salinity gradient in the PRD aquifer, China. Our results indicated that
the microbial community composition varied significantly depending on the
salinity of the aquifer. The presence of abundant anaerobic microorganisms of the
genera Desulfovibrio and Methanococcus in certain saltwater samples may be
responsible for the gas generation of H2S and CH4 in the stratum. In saline water
samples (TDS > 10 g/L), the linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe)
analysis found two biomarkers that usually live in marine environments, and the
aquifers of the PRD still contained large quantity of saltwater, indicating that 
the impact of the paleo-seawater has lasted to this day. The predictive
metagenomic analysis revealed that the metabolic pathways present in the
groundwater samples studied, included the degradation of pesticides and
refractory organics (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), atrazine and
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons), matter cycling (methane, nitrogen and sulfur),
and inorganic ion and mineral metabolites. This study can help enhance our
understanding of the composition of the microbial assemblages and its
implications as an environmental indicator in an aquifer affected by saltwater
intrusion.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-35350-2 
PMCID: PMC6251883
PMID: 30470770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

