
1. J Immunother. 2019 Feb/Mar;42(2):43-50. doi: 10.1097/CJI.0000000000000252.

Combined Expression of Genetic Adjuvants Via mRNA Electroporation Exerts Multiple
Immunostimulatory Effects on Antitumor T Cells.

Weinstein-Marom H(1)(2)(3)(4), Levin N(1)(2), Pato A(1)(2), Shmuel N(1)(3),
Sharabi-Nov A(3), Peretz T(2), Eisenberg G(2), Lotem M(2), Itzhaki O(4), Besser
MJ(4)(5), Gross G(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, MIGAL, Galilee Research Institute, Kiryat Shmona.
(2)Sharett Institute of Oncology, Hadassah Hebrew University Hospital, Jerusalem.
(3)Tel-Hai College, Upper Galilee.
(4)Sheba Medical Center, Ella Lemelbaum Institute for Immuno-Oncology, Sheba
Medical Center, Ramat Gan.
(5)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Adoptive transfer of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) or gene-modified T
cells expressing antitumor TCRs or chimeric antigen receptors often yields a high
rate of clinical response in several types of cancer. New approaches for
enhancing the functional properties of antitumor T cells could improve the
clinical outcome of these treatments. To this end, we created 3 classes of genes,
each designed to operate autonomously upon expression in T cells. We recently
reported on the enhancing effects of constitutively active toll-like receptor 4
(caTLR4), membrane (mem) interleukin-2, memIL-12, and memIL-15, and
self-oligomerizing, constitutively active CD40 (caCD40). Here, we evaluated their
combined effects on peripheral blood CD8 T cells and different antimelanoma TIL
cultures following mRNA electroporation. Expression in CD8 T cells induced
transient production of interferon-γ and prolonged and robust upregulation of
CD25, CD69, 4-1BB, and OX40. The adjuvants enhanced cytolytic activity of TILs
and production of interferon-γ and TNF-α in the presence of autologous, but not
mismatched, melanoma for at least 3 days after electroporation. Expression of the
3 adjuvants in young TILs from different patients markedly increased the
expression of CD25, OX40, 4-1BB, CD127, and CD28 and exhibited cooperative and,
at times, synergistic effects. Furthermore, predefined mixtures of mRNA encoding 
these adjuvants markedly enhanced the specific antitumor response of selected
TILs and killing of autologous melanoma cells by young TILs. Our findings suggest
that combinations of these new genetic adjuvants can substantially improve the
functional properties of antitumor T cells, offering a new tool of unique
versatility in adoptive cell therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/CJI.0000000000000252 
PMID: 30489430  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

