
1. Molecules. 2018 Nov 26;23(12). pii: E3085. doi: 10.3390/molecules23123085.

Aminoribosylated Analogues of Muraymycin Nucleoside Antibiotics.

Wiegmann D(1), Koppermann S(2), Ducho C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Saarland
University, Campus C2 3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. wiegmann_d@web.de.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Saarland
University, Campus C2 3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
stefan.koppermann@uni-saarland.de.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Saarland
University, Campus C2 3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
christian.ducho@uni-saarland.de.

Nucleoside antibiotics are uridine-derived natural products that inhibit the
bacterial membrane protein MraY. MraY is a key enzyme in the membrane-associated 
intracellular stages of peptidoglycan biosynthesis and therefore considered to be
a promising, yet unexploited target for novel antibacterial agents. Muraymycins
are one subclass of such naturally occurring MraY inhibitors. As part of
structure-activity relationship (SAR) studies on muraymycins and their analogues,
we now report on novel derivatives with different attachment of one
characteristic structural motif, i.e., the aminoribose moiety normally linked to 
the muraymycin glycyluridine core unit. Based on considerations derived from an
X-ray co-crystal structure, we designed and synthesised muraymycin analogues
having the aminoribose attached (via a linker) to either the glycyluridine amino 
group or to the uracil nucleobase. Reference compounds bearing the
non-aminoribosylated linker units were also prepared. It was found that the novel
aminoribosylated analogues were inactive as MraY inhibitors in vitro, but that
the glycyluridine-modified reference compound retained most of the inhibitory
potency relative to the unmodified parent muraymycin analogue. These results
point to 6'-N-alkylated muraymycin analogues as a potential novel variation of
the muraymycin scaffold for future SAR optimisation.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules23123085 
PMCID: PMC6320880
PMID: 30486316  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

