
1. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2019 Jun 10;30(17):1949-1968. doi: 10.1089/ars.2018.7521. 
Epub 2019 Jan 28.

Isosteviol Protects Free Fatty Acid- and High Fat Diet-Induced Hepatic Injury via
Modulating PKC-β/p66Shc/ROS and Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Pathways.

Yi H(1), Xu D(1), Wu X(2), Xu F(2), Lin L(1), Zhou H(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Southeast University,
Nanjing, China.
(2)2 State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life
Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.
(3)3 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University 
and McGuire Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Richmond, Virginia.

Aims: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common cause of
chronic liver diseases. However, there are no approved pharmacotherapies for the 
treatment of NAFLD other than managing life style and controlling diets.
Extensive studies have demonstrated that multiple mechanisms are involved in free
fatty acid (FFA)- and high fat diet (HFD)-induced hepatic injury, including
mitochondrial dysfunction, activation of oxidative stress and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, and lysosome dysfunction. A previous study reported that
Isosteviol (ISV), a derivative of stevioside, prevents HFD-induced hepatic
injury. However, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Results: In this
study, we examined the potential cellular/molecular mechanisms underlying
ISV-mediated protective effect against FFA-/HFD-induced hepatic lipotoxicity by
using both in vitro primary rat hepatocytes and the in vivo rat NAFLD model. The 
results indicated that ISV inhibits FFA-/HFD-induced hepatic injury via reducing 
oxidative and ER stress. Specifically, ISV inhibited the expression, activation, 
and mitochondrial translocation of Src-homology-2-domain-containing transforming 
protein 1 (p66Shc), an adapter protein that mediates oxidative stress-induced
injury and is a substrate of protein kinase C-β (PKC-β), via inhibition of PKC-β 
activity. However, ISV had no effect on the expression and activity of
peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase and serine/threonine protein phosphatase 2A, 
isomerase and phosphorylase of p66Shc. In addition, ISV also inhibited
FFA-induced ER stress and decreased ER-mitochondrial interaction. Innovation and 
Conclusion: We first identified that ISV prevents FFA-/HFD-induced hepatic injury
through modulating PKC-β/p66Shc/oxidative and ER stress pathways. ISV represents 
a promising therapeutic agent for NAFLD in the future. Antioxid. Redox Signal.
30, 1949-1968.

DOI: 10.1089/ars.2018.7521 
PMCID: PMC6486675
PMID: 30484323  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

