
1. Invest New Drugs. 1988 Jun;6(2):67-78.

In vivo and in vitro investigations on biological effects of aromatic
bis-(2-chloroethyl)amino-bisphosphonic acids, new agents proposed for
chemotherapy of bone tumors: cytostatic activity in rat osteosarcoma; toxicity
and genotoxicity in liver and bone marrow; mutagenicity in S. typhimurium.

Pool BL(1), Berger M, Schlehofer JR, Wingen F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Chemotherapy, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

Two new aromatic bis-(2-chloroethyl)-amino derivatives (BCMP and BAD) which are
linked to osteotropic bisphosphonates were investigated for their therapeutical
efficacy in rat osteosarcoma. Furthermore their genotoxic potential in vitro was 
determined in S. typhimurium and in mammalian cells. Finally, parameters for
toxicity and genotoxicity were determined in liver and bone marrow cells
following in vivo treatment. It was shown that BAD was of higher therapeutic
effectiveness than BCMP. Both compounds induced approximately a two fold increase
of his+ revertants in S. typhimurium TA1535 following metabolic activation by
subcellular liver fractions. Both compounds also induced amplification of SV40
DNA in SV40 transformed cells (CO631). This endpoint may be of importance for
acquired resistancy of cells during therapy. DNA-single strand breaks were
induced by BCMP but not by BAD in liver cells and CO631 cell line. Following in
vivo treatment BCMP was of higher genotoxic activity in liver cells than BAD. In 
comparison, genotoxicity of both compounds was much lower in bone marrow cells
than in liver cells. BCMP was again more potent than BAD in inducing DNA single
strand breaks, whereas BAD was more toxic. The higher therapeutic efficacy of BAD
together with its lower genotoxic properties makes this compound superior to BCMP
as a candidate for applied chemotherapy in humans.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00195363 
PMID: 3049432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

