
1. Mol Immunol. 2019 Jan;105:116-130. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2018.09.023. Epub 2018
Nov 28.

The ins and outs of type I iNKT cell development.

Shissler SC(1), Webb TJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, 685 W. Baltimore St. HSF-1 Room 380, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
Electronic address: susannah.shissler@umaryland.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, 685 W. Baltimore St. HSF-1 Room 380, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are innate-like lymphocytes that bridge the gap
between the innate and adaptive immune responses. Like innate immune cells, they 
have a mature, effector phenotype that allows them to rapidly respond to threats,
compared to adaptive cells. NKT cells express T cell receptors (TCRs) like
conventional T cells, but instead of responding to peptide antigen presented by
MHC class I or II, NKT cell TCRs recognize glycolipid antigen in the context of
CD1d. NKT cells are subdivided into classes based on their TCR and antigen
reactivity. This review will focus on type I iNKT cells that express a semi
invariant Vα14Jα18 TCR and respond to the canonical glycolipid antigen,
α-galactosylceramide. The innate-like effector functions of these cells combined 
with their T cell identity make their developmental path quite unique. In
addition to the extrinsic factors that affect iNKT cell development such as
lipid:CD1d complexes, co-stimulation, and cytokines, this review will provide a
comprehensive delineation of the cell intrinsic factors that impact iNKT cell
development, differentiation, and effector functions - including TCR
rearrangement, survival and metabolism signaling, transcription factor
expression, and gene regulation.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2018.09.023 
PMCID: PMC6331266
PMID: 30502719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

