
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2019 Mar 1;124:478-491. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.11.237.
Epub 2018 Nov 27.

Controlled release of lawsone from polycaprolactone/gelatin electrospun nano
fibers for skin tissue regeneration.

Adeli-Sardou M(1), Yaghoobi MM(2), Torkzadeh-Mahani M(1), Dodel M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Science and High Technology and
Environmental Sciences, Graduate University of Advanced Technology, Kerman, Iran.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Science and High Technology and
Environmental Sciences, Graduate University of Advanced Technology, Kerman, Iran.
Electronic address: m.yaghoobi@kgut.ac.ir.
(3)Textile Engineering Department, Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran,
Iran.

In this study, we aimed to evaluate the role of electrospun nanofibers containing
lawsone (2-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone) in wound healing. Different concentrations
of lawsone (0.5%, 1%, 1.5%) were electrospun in polycaprolactone-gelatin
(PCL/Gel) polymers in core-shell architecture. Nanofibers were characterized
using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Transmission electron microscopy (TEM).
Coaxial electrospinning of PCL/Gel/lawsone (PCL/Gel/Law) scaffolds prolonged the 
release of lawsone over a period of 20 days. In vitro bioactivity of fibers on
human gingiva fibroblast cells (HGF) was evaluated by MTT assay. The PCL/Gel/Law 
1% increased cell attachment and proliferation significantly. Additionally, the
in vitro gene expression of transforming growth factor β (TGF-B1), collagen
(COL1) and epidermal growth factor (EGF) was monitored using RT-qPCR technique,
which there was significant increase in TGF-B1 and COL1 gene expression in
PCL/Gel/Law 0.5% and 1% mats. In vivo wound healing activity of lawsone loaded
scaffolds in rat wound model revealed that the PCL/Gel/Law 1% had the highest
impact on healing by increasing re-epithelialization of the wound after 14 days. 
It can be inferred that lawsone 1% incorporation in the core of PCL/Gel
electrospun nanofibers has excellent characteristics and can be used as wound
dressing patch in medicine.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.11.237 
PMID: 30500508  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

