
1. J Integr Plant Biol. 2019 Jan;61(1):75-88. doi: 10.1111/jipb.12754.

Syntenic quantitative trait loci and genomic divergence for Sclerotinia
resistance and flowering time in Brassica napus.

Zhang F(1)(2), Huang J(1)(3), Tang M(1), Cheng X(1), Liu Y(1), Tong C(1)(3), Yu
J(1), Sadia T(1), Dong C(1)(3), Liu L(1), Tang B(2), Chen J(3), Liu S(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Oil Crops, the Ministry
of Agriculture, Oil Crops Research Institute of CAAS, Wuhan 430062, China.
(2)Cereal Crops Research Institute, Henan Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Zhengzhou 450002, China.
(3)Hubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Green Transformation of
Bio-Resources, Faculty of Life Science, Hubei University, Wuhan 430062, China.

Oilseed rape (Brassica napus) is an allotetraploid with two subgenomes descended 
from a common ancestor. Accordingly, its genome contains syntenic regions with
many duplicate genes, some of which may have retained their original functions,
whereas others may have diverged. Here, we mapped quantitative trait loci (QTL)
for stem rot resistance (SRR), a disease caused by the fungus Sclerotinia
sclerotiorum, and flowering time (FT) in a recombinant inbred line population.
The population was genotyped using B. napus 60K single nucleotide polymorphism
arrays and phenotyped in six (FT) and nine (SSR) experimental conditions or
environments. In total, we detected 30 SRR QTL and 22 FT QTL and show that some
of the major QTL associated with these two traits were co-localized, suggesting a
genetic linkage between them. Two SRR QTL on chromosome A2 and two on chromosome 
C2 were shown to be syntenic, suggesting the functional conservation of these
regions. We used the syntenic properties of the genomic regions to exclude genes 
for selection candidates responsible for QTL-associated traits. For example, 152 
of the 185 genes could be excluded from a syntenic A2-C2 region. These findings
will help to elucidate polyploid genomics in future studies, in addition to
providing useful information for B. napus breeding programs.

Â© 2018 Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/jipb.12754 
PMID: 30506639  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

