
1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2019 Feb;26(4):3340-3349. doi:
10.1007/s11356-018-3761-9. Epub 2018 Dec 3.

Insight into transformation of dissolved organic matter in the Heilongjiang
River.

Shi J(1), Zhao Y(1), Wei D(2), Zhang D(3), Wei Z(4), Wu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, 150030,
China.
(2)Institute of Plant Nutrition and Resource, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and 
Forestry Science, Beijing, China.
(3)School of Civil Engineering, Heilongjiang University, Harbin, 150080, China.
(4)College of Life Science, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, 150030,
China. weizm691120@163.com.

Heilongjiang is a "browning" river that receives substantial terrestrial organic 
matter, where reactivity of dissolved organic matter (DOM) may have important
effect on ecosystem function and carbon biogeochemical cycle. However, little is 
known about microbial transformations of different DOM components, which could
provide valuable insight into biogeochemical reactivity of DOM. In this study,
bioavailability experiments were conducted for 55Â days to determine changes of
different DOM components by microbial transformations. Labile matter (C1) was
detected only in initial DOM, and tryptophan-like substances (C4) were observed
from day 5 onwards. Thus, three individual components were identified at each
sampling time of the bioavailability experiment. The increase of Fmax in DOM
components revealed that microbial humic-like substances (C2), terrestrial
humic-like substances (C3), and C4 were produced by microbial transformation,
especially in the spring samples. Further, two-dimensional correlation
spectroscopy (2D-COS) indicated that shorter wavelength tryptophan-like and
microbial humic-like substances can be degraded by microbes or transformed into
longer wavelength complex substances. Relatively simple microbial humic-like
substances were preferentially produced compared to complex terrestrial
humic-like substances. The results make sense to understand the biogeochemical
cycling and environmental effects of DOM in the Heilongjiang River.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-018-3761-9 
PMID: 30511222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

