
1. Rev Prat. 2016 Dec;66(10):1115-1120.

[Infectious glomerulonephritis].

[Article in French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

François-Pradier H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de médecine interne, immunologie clinique, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.

Infectious glomerulonephritis. Post-infectious or infectious glomerulonephritis
(PIGN) represent the most frequent glomerular disease during bacterial infection.
Patients, usually young children, with PIGN typically present nephritic syndrome 
15 days after an upper respiratory tract infection. In this case renal histology 
shows exsudative endocapillary proliferation with C3-dominant deposits "hump"
shaped in the subepithelial compartment. Renal prognosis was typically favorable.
However, nowadays, PIGN is rare and represents less than 1% of kidney biopsies in
industrialized countries and usually occurs in immunocompromised hosts (such as
patients with cancer, alcoholism, diabetes, elderly patients). Therefore, renal
sequels are more frequent. The physiopathology typically involves immune
complexes activating the classical complement pathway although alternative
complement pathway regulation or abnormal activation were more recently reported.
Treatment remains symptomatic.

Publisher: Glomérulonéphrites infectieuses. Les glomérulonéphrites infectieuses
ou post-infectieuses représentent la cause la plus classique d’atteinte
glomérulaire au cours ou au décours des infections bactériennes. La forme typique
correspond à un syndrome néphritique aigu survenant environ 15 jours après une
infection de la sphère oto-rhino-laryngée chez les enfants. D’un point de vue
histologique, il s’agit d’une prolifération endocapillaire exsudative avec des
dépôts de C3 prépondérants en forme de bosse ou « humps » sur le versant externe 
de la membrane basale glomérulaire. L’évolution était classiquement favorable. De
nos jours, la fréquence est très faible dans les pays industrialisés (moins de 1 
% des biopsies rénales) et touche plutôt des adultes fragilisés ou immunodéprimés
(cancer, alcoolisme, diabète, patients âgés) et les séquelles rénales sont donc
plus fréquentes. D’un point de vue physiopathologique, les complexes immuns
activant la voie classique du complément jouent un rôle, mais plus récemment des 
anomalies de la régulation ou une activation pathologique de la voie alterne ont 
été décrites. Le traitement reste symptomatique.

PMID: 30512477  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H. François-Pradier déclare des interventions
ponctuelles pour Novartis et Astellas et avoir été prise en charge lors de
congrès par Alexion, Novartis et Roche.

