
1. Braz Oral Res. 2018 Nov 29;32:e120. doi: 10.1590/1807-3107bor-2018.vol32.0120.

Evaluation of chemokines and receptors in gnotobiotic root canal infection by F. 
nucleatum and E. faecalis.

Santa-Rosa CC(1), Thebit MM(1), Maciel KF(1), Brito LCN(2), Vieira LQ(3),
Ribeiro-Sobrinho AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais - UFMG, Faculty of Dentistry, Department 
of Restorative Dentistry, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(2)Fundação Universidade de Itaúna - FUI, Faculty of Dentistry, Itaúna, MG,
Brazil.
(3)Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais - UFMG, Institute of Biological Sciences,
Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.

The present study aims to evaluate the longitudinal effects of induced
experimental infections in gnotoxenic animals on the expression of inflammatory
chemokines and their receptors in periradicular tissues. The null hypothesis
tested was that Enterococcus faecalis and Fusobacterium nucleatum had no effect
on CCR5, CCL5, CXCL10, CCL2/MCP-1, CXCR2 and CCR1 expression. Two groups of five 
animals (n = 5) aged between 8 and 12 weeks were used in this study. The animals 
were anaesthetized, and coronary access was performed in the first molar on the
right and left sides. Microorganisms were inoculated into the left molar, and the
right molar was sealed without contamination to function as a control. Animals
were sacrificed 7 and 14 days after infection, and periapical tissues were
collected. The cytokine mRNA expression levels were assessed using real-time PCR.
The chemokine mRNA expression levels demonstrated that the experimental infection
was capable of inducing increased chemokine expression on day 7 compared to that 
on day 14, except for CCR5 and CCL5, which showed no changes. The gnotoxenic
animal model proved to be effective and allowed evaluation of the immune response
against a known infection. Additionally, this study demonstrates that gene
expression of chemokines and their receptors against the experimental infection
preferentially prevailed during the initial phase of induction of the
periradicular alteration (i.e., on day 7 post-infection).

DOI: 10.1590/1807-3107bor-2018.vol32.0120 
PMID: 30517429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

