
1. HLA. 2019 Jan;93(1):24-31. doi: 10.1111/tan.13448. Epub 2019 Jan 2.

Differential HLA allele frequency in Mycobacterium africanum vs Mycobacterium
tuberculosis in Mali.

Kone A(1), Diarra B(1), Cohen K(2), Diabate S(1), Kone B(1), Diakite MT(1),
Diarra H(1), Sanogo M(1), Togo ACG(1), Sarro YDS(1), Baya B(1), Coulibaly N(1),
Kodio O(1), Achenbach CJ(3), Murphy RL(3), Holl JL(3), Siddiqui S(4), Doumbia
S(1), Bishai WR(2), Diallo S(1), Maiga M(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies of Bamako (USTTB), Bamako,
Mali.
(2)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois.
(4)National Institute of Allergic and Infectious Diseases, Rockville, Maryland.

Tuberculosis (TB) is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC),
however, the distribution and frequency of MTBC lineages and sublineages vary in 
different parts of the globe. Mycobacterium africanum, a member of MTBC is
responsible for a large percentage of TB cases in West Africa, however, it is
rarely identified outside of this part of the World. Whether or not differential 
HLA polymorphism (an important host factor) is contributing to the geographic
restriction of M. africanum to West Africa is unknown. Here, we conducted a
cohort study in Mali of newly diagnosed individuals with active pulmonary TB and 
normal healthy controls. The MTBC isolates were spoligotyped to determine the TB 
study groups (M. tuberculosis sensu stricto LAM10 and M. africanum), and HLA
typing was performed on peripheral blood. Unlike previous reports on other
populations, we found that HLA class-I alleles were significantly associated with
active TB disease in this population. HLA-B alleles (B*07:02, B*08:01, B*14:02,
B*15:03, B*15:10, B*18:01, B*42:01, B*42:02, B*51:01 and B*81:01) were
significantly associated with M. africanum (40%-45%) and M. tuberculosis (75%)
compared with healthy controls. Many HLA-A alleles (A*02:05, A*34:02, A*66:01 and
A*68:02) were also associated with both TB groups (65%-70%). However, many class 
II HLA-DR variants were found to be associated with M. tuberculosis but not M.
africanum with the exception of the DRB1*03:01, which was associated with both
groups. The differential HLA distribution observed in this study might be at
least partially responsible for the geographical restriction of M. africanum
infections to West Africa.

Â© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tan.13448 
PMCID: PMC6333481
PMID: 30516034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

