
1. FASEB J. 2019 Mar;33(3):4166-4177. doi: 10.1096/fj.201801332R. Epub 2018 Dec 7.

Collagen biomaterial stimulates the production of extracellular vesicles
containing microRNA-21 and enhances the proangiogenic function of CD34+ cells.

McNeill B(1), Ostojic A(1)(2), Rayner KJ(3)(4), Ruel M(1)(2), Suuronen EJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Atherosclerosis, Genomics, and Cell Biology Group, University of Ottawa Heart 
Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

CD34+ cells are promising for revascularization therapy, but their clinical use
is limited by low cell counts, poor engraftment, and reduced function after
transplantation. In this study, a collagen type I biomaterial was used to expand 
and enhance the function of human peripheral blood CD34+ cells, and potential
underlying mechanisms were examined. Compared to the fibronectin control
substrate, biomaterial-cultured CD34+ cells from healthy donors had enhanced
proliferation, migration toward VEGF, angiogenic potential, and increased
secretion of CD63+CD81+ extracellular vesicles (EVs). In the biomaterial-derived 
EVs, greater levels of the angiogenic microRNAs (miRs), miR-21 and -210, were
detected. Notably, biomaterial-cultured CD34+ cells had reduced mRNA and protein 
levels of Sprouty (Spry)1, which is an miR-21 target and negative regulator of
endothelial cell proliferation and angiogenesis. Similar to the results of
healthy donor cells, biomaterial culture increased miR-21 and -210 expression in 
CD34+ cells from patients who underwent coronary artery bypass surgery, which
also exhibited improved VEGF-mediated migration and angiogenic capacity.
Therefore, collagen biomaterial culture may be useful for expanding the number
and enhancing the function of CD34+ cells in patients, possibly mediated through 
suppression of Spry1 activity by EV-derived miR-21. These results may provide a
strategy to enhance the therapeutic potency of CD34+ cells for vascular
regeneration.-McNeill, B., Ostojic, A., Rayner, K. J., Ruel, M., Suuronen, E. J. 
Collagen biomaterial stimulates the production of extracellular vesicles
containing microRNA-21 and enhances the proangiogenic function of CD34+ cells.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.201801332R 
PMID: 30526047  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

