
1. Parasite Immunol. 2019 Feb;41(2):e12609. doi: 10.1111/pim.12609. Epub 2018 Dec
27.

Effects of host-derived chemokines on the motility and viability of Trypanosoma
brucei.

Alfituri OA(1), Ajibola O(2)(3), Brewer JM(2), Garside P(2), Benson RA(2), Peel
T(4), Morrison LJ(1), Mabbott NA(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Sciences,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)Wellcome Centre for Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Infection, Immunity
and Inflammation, College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine, Glasgow, UK.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Federal University Birnin Kebbi, Birnin Kebbi,
Nigeria.
(4)Centre for Inflammation Biology and Cancer Immunology, Faculty of Life
Sciences, King's College London, London, UK.

African trypanosomes (Trypanosoma brucei spp.) are extracellular, hemoflagellate,
protozoan parasites. Mammalian infection begins when the tsetse fly vector
injects trypanosomes into the skin during blood feeding. The trypanosomes then
reach the draining lymph nodes before disseminating systemically. Intravital
imaging of the skin post-tsetse fly bite revealed that trypanosomes were observed
both extravascularly and intravascularly in the lymphatic vessels. Whether
host-derived cues play a role in the attraction of the trypanosomes towards the
lymphatic vessels to aid their dissemination from the site of infection is not
known. Since chemokines can mediate the attraction of leucocytes towards the
lymphatics, in vitro chemotaxis assays were used to determine whether chemokines 
might also act as chemoattractants for trypanosomes. Although microarray data
suggested that the chemokines CCL8, CCL19, CCL21, CCL27 and CXCL12 were highly
expressed in mouse skin, they did not stimulate the chemotaxis of T brucei.
Certain chemokines also possess potent antimicrobial properties. However, none of
the chemokines tested exerted any parasiticidal effects on T brucei. Thus, our
data suggest that host-derived chemokines do not act as chemoattractants for
T brucei. Identification of the mechanisms used by trypanosomes to establish host
infection will aid the development of novel approaches to block disease
transmission.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pim.12609 
PMCID: PMC6767366
PMID: 30525202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

