
1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2018 Nov 1;11:167-179. doi:
10.1016/j.omtm.2018.10.014. eCollection 2018 Dec 14.

Pre-clinical Development of a Lentiviral Vector Expressing the Anti-sickling βAS3
Globin for Gene Therapy for Sickle Cell Disease.

Poletti V(1), Urbinati F(2), Charrier S(1), Corre G(1), Hollis RP(2), Campo
Fernandez B(2), Martin S(1), Rothe M(3), Schambach A(3)(4), Kohn DB(2), Mavilio
F(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Genethon, Evry, France.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Institute of Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.
(4)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena,
Italy.
(6)Paris Descartes University, Imagine Institute, Paris, France.

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is caused by a mutation (E6V) in the hemoglobin (Hb)
β-chain that induces polymerization of Hb tetramers, red blood cell deformation, 
ischemia, anemia, and multiple organ damage. Gene therapy is a potential
alternative to human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-matched allogeneic hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation, available to a minority of patients. We developed a
lentiviral vector expressing a β-globin carrying three anti-sickling mutations
(T87Q, G16D, and E22A) inhibiting axial and lateral contacts in the HbS polymer, 
under the control of the β-globin promoter and a reduced version of the β-globin 
locus-control region. The vector (GLOBE-AS3) transduced 60%-80% of mobilized
CD34+ hematopoietic stem-progenitor cells (HSPCs) and drove βAS3-globin
expression at potentially therapeutic levels in erythrocytes differentiated from 
transduced HSPCs from SCD patients. Transduced HSPCs were transplanted in
NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG)-immunodeficient mice to analyze
biodistribution, chimerism, and transduction efficiency in bone marrow (BM),
spleen, thymus, and peripheral blood 12-14 weeks after transplantation. Vector
integration site analysis, performed in pre-transplant HSPCs and post-transplant 
BM cells from individual mice, showed a normal lentiviral integration pattern and
no evidence of clonal dominance. An in vitro immortalization (IVIM) assay showed 
the low genotoxic potential of GLOBE-AS3. This study enables a phase I/II
clinical trial aimed at correcting the SCD phenotype in juvenile patients by
transplantation of autologous hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) transduced by
GLOBE-AS3.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2018.10.014 
PMCID: PMC6276308
PMID: 30533448 

