
1. World J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2018 Dec 10;35(1):2. doi:
10.1007/s11274-018-2573-x.

Isolation and characterization of mineral-dissolving bacteria from different
levels of altered mica schist surfaces and the adjacent soil.

Wang YL(1), Wang Q(1), Yuan R(1), Sheng XF(2), He LY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural and Environmental Microbiology, Ministry of
Agriculture, College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 
210095, People's Republic of China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Agricultural and Environmental Microbiology, Ministry of
Agriculture, College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 
210095, People's Republic of China. xfsheng@njau.edu.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Agricultural and Environmental Microbiology, Ministry of
Agriculture, College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 
210095, People's Republic of China. helyan0794@njau.edu.cn.

Microorganisms play important role in mineral weathering. However, little is
known about rock-associated mineral-dissolving bacteria. In this study, 129
bacterial isolates were obtained from the less and more weathered mica schist
surfaces and the adjacent soil and characterized for mineral dissolving activity,
population, and the linkage of rock weathering level and distribution of the
bacteria. Among the 129 isolates, 112 isolates could dissolve biotite. The
relative abundance of the highly effective Fe solubilizers was significantly
higher on the more altered rock surface (89.6%) than in the soil (51.2%) and on
the less altered rock surface (22.5%), while the relative abundance of the highly
effective Si solubilizers was significantly higher in the soil (65.9%) than on
the more (41.7%) and less (12.5%) altered rock surfaces. Furthermore, 17.5-42.5%,
87.5%, and 60.9-90.2% of the highly effective acid- and siderophore-producing
isolates were obtained in the less and more weathered rocks and the soil,
respectively. The mineral-dissolving bacteria belonged to 18 genera and
Burkholderia, Bacillus, and Paenibacillus were the dominant and highly effective 
mineral-dissolving bacteria. Phylogenetic analysis found 2, 9, and 5 bacterial
species in the highly effective mineral-dissolving bacteria on the less and more 
altered rock surfaces and in the soil, respectively. The results showed the
abundant and diverse mineral-dissolving bacterial populations on the more
weathered rock surfaces. The results also suggested distinct mineral-dissolving
activities and mechanisms of the bacteria and highlighted the possibility for the
development of bacterial inocula for plant nutrition improvement in silicate
mineral-rich soils.

DOI: 10.1007/s11274-018-2573-x 
PMID: 30536084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

