
1. Eur J Immunol. 2019 Feb;49(2):228-241. doi: 10.1002/eji.201847611. Epub 2018 Dec 
17.

Human anti-NKp46 antibody for studies of NKp46-dependent NK cell function and its
applications for type 1 diabetes and cancer research.

Berhani O(1), Glasner A(1), Kahlon S(1), Duev-Cohen A(1), Yamin R(1), Horwitz
E(2), Enk J(1), Moshel O(3), Varvak A(4), Porgador A(5), Jonjic S(6), Mandelboim 
O(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Concern Foundation Laboratories at the Lautenberg Center for Immunology
and Cancer Research, The BioMedical Research Institute Israel Canada of the
Faculty of Medicine (IMRIC), The Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School,
Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Department of Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, Institute for Medical
Research-Israel-Canada, The Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem,
Israel.
(3)Core Research Facility, Institute for Drug Research, School of Pharmacy,
Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem,
Israel.
(4)Chromatography Unit, Scientific Equipment Center, The Mina and Everard Goodman
Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(5)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(6)Department of Histology and Embryology and Center for Proteomics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia.

Natural killer (NK) cells are innate lymphocytes that efficiently eliminate
cancerous and infected cells. NKp46 is an important NK activating receptor shown 
to participate in recognition and activation of NK cells against pathogens, tumor
cells, virally infected cells, and self-cells in autoimmune conditions, including
type I and II diabetes. However, some of the NKp46 ligands are unknown and
therefore investigating human NKp46 activity and its critical role in NK cell
biology is problematic. We developed a unique anti-human NKp46 monocloncal
antibody, denoted hNKp46.02 (02). The 02 mAb can induce receptor internalization 
and degradation. By binding to a unique epitope on a particular domain of NKp46, 
02 lead NKp46 to lysosomal degradation. This downregulation therefore enables the
investigation of all NKp46 activities. Indeed, using the 02 mAb we determined NK 
cell targets which are critically dependent on NKp46 activity, including certain 
tumor cells lines and human pancreatic beta cells. Most importantly, we showed
that a toxin-conjugated 02 inhibits the growth of NKp46-positive cells; thus,
exemplifying the potential of 02 in becoming an immunotherapeutic drug to treat
NKp46-dependent diseases, such as, type I diabetes and NK and T cell related
malignancies.

Â© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201847611 
PMID: 30536875  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

