
1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2018 Oct 25;11:143-154. doi:
10.1016/j.omtm.2018.10.009. eCollection 2018 Dec 14.

Barcoding of Macaque Hematopoietic Stem and Progenitor Cells: A Robust Platform
to Assess Vector Genotoxicity.

Yabe IM(1)(2), Truitt LL(1), Espinoza DA(1), Wu C(1), Koelle S(1)(3), Panch S(1),
Corat MAF(1)(4), Winkler T(1), Yu KR(1), Hong SG(1), Bonifacino A(1), Krouse
A(1), Metzger M(1), Donahue RE(1), Dunbar CE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Washington, DC 20057, USA.
(3)Department of Statistics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(4)Multidisciplinary Center for Biological Research, University of Campinas,
Campinas, SP 13083-877, Brazil.

Gene therapies using integrating retrovirus vectors to modify hematopoietic stem 
and progenitor cells have shown great promise for the treatment of immune system 
and hematologic diseases. However, activation of proto-oncogenes via insertional 
mutagenesis has resulted in the development of leukemia. We have utilized
cellular bar coding to investigate the impact of different vector designs on the 
clonal behavior of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) during in vivo
expansion, as a quantitative surrogate assay for genotoxicity in a non-human
primate model with high relevance for human biology. We transplanted two rhesus
macaques with autologous CD34+ HSPCs transduced with three lentiviral vectors
containing different promoters and/or enhancers of a predicted range of
genotoxicities, each containing a high-diversity barcode library that uniquely
tags each individual transduced HSPC. Analysis of clonal output from thousands of
individual HSPCs transduced with these barcoded vectors revealed sustained clonal
diversity, with no progressive dominance of clones containing any of the three
vectors for up to almost 3 years post-transplantation. Our data support a low
genotoxic risk for lentivirus vectors in HSPCs, even those containing strong
promoters and/or enhancers. Additionally, this flexible system can be used for
the testing of future vector designs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2018.10.009 
PMCID: PMC6258888
PMID: 30547048 

