
1. PLoS One. 2018 Dec 14;13(12):e0209230. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209230.
eCollection 2018.

Glucosylceramide acyl chain length is sensed by the glycolipid transfer protein.

Backman APE(1), Halin J(1), Nurmi H(1), Möuts A(1), Kjellberg MA(1), Mattjus
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry, Faculty of Science and Engineering Åbo Akademi University,
Artillerigatan 6A, III, FI Turku, Finland.

The glycolipid transfer protein, GLTP, can be found in the cytoplasm, and it has 
a FFAT-like motif (two phenylalanines in an acidic tract) that targets it to the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). We have previously shown that GLTP can bind to a
transmembrane ER protein, vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein 
A (VAP-A), which is involved in a wide range of ER functions. We have addressed
the mechanisms that might regulate the association between GLTP and the VAP
proteins by studying the capacity of GLTP to recognize different N-linked acyl
chain species of glucosylceramide. We used surface plasmon resonance and a lipid 
transfer competition assay to show that GLTP prefers shorter N-linked fully
saturated acyl chain glucosylceramides, such as C8, C12, and C16, whereas long
C18, C20, and C24-glucosylceramides are all bound more weakly and transported
more slowly than their shorter counterparts. Changes in the intrinsic GLTP
tryptophan fluorescence blueshifts, also indicate a break-point between C16- and 
C18-glucosylceramide in the GLTP sensing ability. It has long been postulated
that GLTP would be a sensor in the sphingolipid synthesis machinery, but how this
mechanistically occurs has not been addressed before. It is unclear what proteins
the GLTP VAP association would influence. Here we found that if GLTP has a bound 
GlcCer the association with VAP-A is weaker. We have also used a formula for
identifying putative FFAT-domains, and we identified several potential
VAP-interactors within the ceramide and sphingolipid synthesis pathways that
could be candidates for regulation by GLTP.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209230 
PMCID: PMC6294359
PMID: 30550553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

