
1. Front Immunol. 2018 Dec 3;9:2761. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02761. eCollection
2018.

NLRX1 Facilitates Histoplasma capsulatum-Induced LC3-Associated Phagocytosis for 
Cytokine Production in Macrophages.

Huang JH(1), Liu CY(1), Wu SY(1), Chen WY(1), Chang TH(1), Kan HW(2), Hsieh
ST(2), Ting JP(3), Wu-Hsieh BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Immunology, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, National Taiwan University College of 
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Departments of Genetics, Microbiology and Immunology, Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Center for Translational Immunology, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC, United States.

LC3-associated phagocytosis (LAP) is an emerging non-canonical autophagy process 
that bridges signaling from pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) to autophagic
machinery. LAP formation results in incorporation of lipidated LC3 into
phagosomal membrane (termed LAPosome). Increasing evidence reveals that LAP
functions as an innate defense mechanism against fungal pathogens. However, the
molecular mechanism involved and the consequence of LAP in regulating anti-fungal
immune response remain largely unexplored. Here we show that Histoplasma
capsulatum is taken into LAPosome upon phagocytosis by macrophages. Interaction
of H. capsulatum with Dectin-1 activates Syk and triggers subsequent NADPH
oxidase-mediated reactive oxygen species (ROS) response that is involved in LAP
induction. Inhibiting LAP induction by silencing LC3α/β or treatment with ROS
inhibitor impairs the activation of MAPKs-AP-1 pathway, thereby reduces
macrophage proinflammatory cytokine response to H. capsulatum. Additionally, we
unravel the importance of NLRX1 in fungus-induced LAP. NLRX1 facilitates LAP by
interacting with TUFM which associates with autophagic proteins ATG5-ATG12 for
LAPosome formation. Macrophages from Nlrx1 -/- mice or TUFM-silenced cells
exhibit reduced LAP induction and LAP-mediated MAPKs-AP-1 activation for cytokine
response to H. capsulatum. Furthermore, inhibiting ROS production in Nlrx1 -/-
macrophages almost completely abolishes H. capsulatum-induced LC3 conversion,
indicating that both Dectin-1/Syk/ROS-dependent pathway and NLRX1-TUFM
complex-dependent pathway collaboratively contribute to LAP induction. Our
findings reveal new pathways underlying LAP induction by H. capsulatum for
macrophage cytokine response.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02761 
PMCID: PMC6286976
PMID: 30559741  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

