
1. Plant Physiol. 2019 Feb;179(2):761-769. doi: 10.1104/pp.18.01357. Epub 2018 Dec
14.

Genome-Scale Fluxome of Synechococcus elongatus UTEX 2973 Using Transient
13C-Labeling Data.

Hendry JI(1), Gopalakrishnan S(1), Ungerer J(2), Pakrasi HB(2), Tang YJ(3),
Maranas CD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University 
Park, Pennsylvania 16802.
(2)Department of Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63130.
(3)Department of Energy, Environment, and Chemical Engineering, Washington
University, St. Louis, Missouri 63130.
(4)Department of Chemical Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University 
Park, Pennsylvania 16802 costas@psu.edu.

Synechococcus elongatus UTEX 2973 (Synechococcus 2973) has the shortest reported 
doubling time (2.1 h) among cyanobacteria, making it a promising platform for the
solar-based production of biochemicals. In this meta-analysis, its intracellular 
flux distribution was recomputed using genome-scale isotopic nonstationary
13C-metabolic flux analysis given the labeling dynamics of 13 metabolites
reported in an earlier study. To achieve this, a genome-scale mapping model,
namely imSyu593, was constructed using the imSyn617 mapping model for
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (Synechocystis 6803) as the starting point
encompassing 593 reactions. The flux elucidation revealed nearly complete
conversion (greater than 96%) of the assimilated carbon into biomass in
Synechococcus 2973. In contrast, Synechocystis 6803 achieves complete conversion 
of only 86% of the assimilated carbon. This high biomass yield was enabled by the
reincorporation of the fixed carbons lost in anabolic and photorespiratory
pathways in conjunction with flux rerouting through a nondecarboxylating reaction
such as phosphoketolase. This reincorporation of lost CO2 sustains a higher flux 
through the photorespiratory C2 cycle that fully meets the glycine and serine
demands for growth. In accordance with the high carbon efficiency drive,
acetyl-coenzyme A was entirely produced using the carbon-efficient
phosphoketolase pathway. Comparison of the Synechococcus 2973 flux map with that 
of Synechocystis 6803 revealed differences in the use of Calvin cycle and
photorespiratory pathway reactions. The two species used different reactions for 
the synthesis of metabolites such as fructose-6-phosphate, glycine,
sedoheptulose-7-phosphate, and Ser. These findings allude to a highly
carbon-efficient metabolism alongside the fast carbon uptake rate in
Synechococcus 2973, which explains its faster growth rate.

Â© 2019 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.18.01357 
PMCID: PMC6367904
PMID: 30552197  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

