
1. Int J Mol Med. 2019 Feb;43(2):956-966. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2018.4032. Epub 2018 Dec
18.

Investigation of the neuroprotective effects of crocin via antioxidant activities
in HT22 cells and in mice with Alzheimer's disease.

Wang C(1), Cai X(1), Hu W(1), Li Z(2), Kong F(1), Chen X(1), Wang D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin 130012, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin 130006, P.R. China.

Due to its complex pathogenesis, the prevention and therapization of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) remains a serious challenge. Crocin, the main compound isolated from
Crocus sativus L., demonstrates various pharmacological activities including
anti‑apoptotic properties. The present study investigated the neuroprotective
effect of crocin and the underlying mechanisms. In l‑glutamate‑damaged HT22
cells, 3‑h crocin pretreatment strongly enhanced the HT22 cell viability, reduced
the apoptotic rate, mitigated mitochondrial dysfunction, suppressed intracellular
reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation and Ca2+ overload compared with
untreated cells. Additionally, crocin significantly decreased the expression
levels of Bax, Bad and cleaved caspase‑3 and increased the expression levels of
B‑cell lymphoma‑extra large, phosphorylated (P‑) protein kinase B and P‑mammalian
target of rapamycin compared with untreated cells. In mice with AD induced by
d‑galactose and aluminum trichloride, crocin substantially improved the cognition
and memory abilities of the mice as measured by their coordination of movement in
an open field test, and reduced their escape time in the Morris water maze test
compared with untreated mice. Biochemical analysis confirmed that crocin was able
to reduce the Aβ1‑42 content in the mouse brains, increase the levels of
glutathione peroxidase, superoxide dismutase, acetylcholine and choline
acetyltransferase, and reduce the levels of ROS and acetylcholinesterase in the
serum, cerebral cortex and hypothalamus compared with untreated mice.
Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated that crocin reduced Aβ1‑42 deposition
in the hippocampus of the brains of treated mice compared with untreated mice. In
conclusion, crocin demonstrates good prospects in the treatment of AD through the
oxidative stress‑associated apoptosis signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2018.4032 
PMCID: PMC6317678
PMID: 30569175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

