
1. Invest New Drugs. 1988 Sep;6(3):155-67.

Anticancer activity of bisphosphonic acids in methylnitrosourea-induced mammary
carcinoma of the rat--benefit of combining bisphosphonates with cytostatic
agents.

Wingen F(1), Pool BL, Klein P, Klenner T, Schm√§hl D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Chemotherapy, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

This study primarily describes the cytostatic activity of a bisphosphonate and of
an alkylating agent linked bisphosphonate toward mammary carcinomas in vivo.
Bisphosphonates had been shown to be therapeutically active in bone metastases.
There is no animal tumor model available in which both primary mammary carcinomas
and bone metastases can be studied simultaneously. Therefore, the Walker
carcinosarcoma model, which was used as a model for bone metastasis in earlier
studies, was combined with the M-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU) induced mammary
carcinoma as a model for the primary tumor. Four-, or six-week treatment of
MNU-induced mammary carcinomas in Sprague-Dawley rats with the new aromatic
bisphosphonate 4[4-[bis(2-chloroethyl)-amino]-phenyl]-1-hydroxybutane-1,
1-bisphosphonate (BAD) showed higher antitumor activity than treatment with
melphalan or with 3-amino-1-hydroxypropylidene-1,1-bisphosphonate (APD) alone.
BAD is the APD moiety covalently bound to a molecule derived from melphalan. A
combination therapy with 11.75 mg/kg/day APD and 0.6 mg/kg/day melphalan showed
the best therapeutic efficacy in this tumor model. In comparison to monotherapy
with BAD, APD, or melphalan, a significantly higher rate of complete remissions
was achieved. APD, itself, was not genotoxic in 3 employed short term assays.
Since bisphosphonates had been shown to be therapeutically active in bone
metastases, the antitumor potency of these compounds against experimental primary
mammary carcinomas, coupled with the non-genotoxicity of APD and the inhibition
of osteolytic bone metastases, might be an important advancement for adjuvant
chemotherapy of human mammary carcinomas.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00175392 
PMID: 3056867  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

