
1. Environ Microbiol. 2019 Feb;21(2):648-666. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.14509. Epub
2019 Jan 13.

Repeated evolutionary transitions of flavobacteria from marine to non-marine
habitats.

Zhang H(1), Yoshizawa S(2), Sun Y(1), Huang Y(1), Chu X(1), González JM(3),
Pinhassi J(4), Luo H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Simon F. S. Li Marine Science Laboratory, School of Life Sciences and Partner 
State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shatin, Hong Kong.
(2)Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa,
Chiba, Japan.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of La Laguna, La Laguna, ES-38200,
Spain.
(4)Centre for Ecology and Evolution in Microbial Model Systems - EEMiS, Linnaeus 
University, Kalmar, SE-39182, Sweden.

The taxonomy of marine and non-marine organisms rarely overlap, but the
mechanisms underlying this distinction are often unknown. Here, we predicted
three major ocean-to-land transitions in the evolutionary history of
Flavobacteriaceae, a family known for polysaccharide and peptide degradation.
These unidirectional transitions were associated with repeated losses of marine
signature genes and repeated gains of non-marine adaptive genes. This included
various Na+ -dependent transporters, osmolyte transporters and glycoside
hydrolases (GH) for sulfated polysaccharide utilization in marine descendants,
and in non-marine descendants genes for utilizing the land plant material pectin 
and genes facilitating terrestrial host interactions. The K+ scavenging ATPase
was repeatedly gained whereas the corresponding low-affinity transporter
repeatedly lost upon transitions, reflecting K+ ions are less available to
non-marine bacteria. Strikingly, the central metabolism Na+ -translocating NADH: 
quinone dehydrogenase gene was repeatedly gained in marine descendants, whereas
the H+ -translocating counterpart was repeatedly gained in non-marine lineages.
Furthermore, GH genes were depleted in isolates colonizing animal hosts but
abundant in bacteria inhabiting other non-marine niches; thus relative abundances
of GH versus peptidase genes among Flavobacteriaceae lineages were inconsistent
with the marine versus non-marine dichotomy. We suggest that phylogenomic
analyses can cast novel light on mechanisms explaining the distribution and
ecology of key microbiome components.

© 2018 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.14509 
PMID: 30565818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

