
1. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2018 Nov-Dec;32(5):1421-1432.

Impact of treatments on fecal microbiota and fecal metabolome in symptomatic
uncomplicated diverticular disease of the colon: a pilot study.

Laghi L(#)(1), Mastromarino P(#)(2), Elisei W(3), Capobianco D(2), Zhu CL(1),
Picchio M(4), Giorgetti G(5), Brandimarte G(6), Tursi A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Foodomics, Department of Agro-Food Science and Technology,
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Section of Microbiology, 
Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, ASL RM6, Albano Laziale, Rome, Italy.
(4)Division of Surgery, "P. Colombo" Hospital, ASL RM6, Velletri Rome, Italy.
(5)Digestive Endoscopy and Clinical Nutrition Unit, "S. Eugenio" Hospital, Rome, 
Italy.
(6)Division of Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology, "Cristo Re" Hospital,
Rome, Italy.
(7)Gastroenterology Service, ASL BAT, Andria (BT), Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

Symptomatic uncomplicated diverticular disease (SUDD) affects 50% of people
having diverticulosis. We performed a pilot study assessing the effect of current
treatments on fecal microbiota and metabolome in SUDD. Thirteen consecutive
females with SUDD were treated with a 2-week therapeutic trial of 30 g/day fiber 
supplementation (3 patients), 1.6 g/day of mesalazine (3 patients), 900
billion/day of probiotic mixture VivoMixxÂ® (3 patients), or 800 mg/day of
rifaximin (4 patients). Stool samples were collected at entry (T0), at the end of
the 2-week therapeutic course (T1), and 30 (T2) and 60 days (T3) after the end of
the therapeutic course. Real-time PCR quantified targeted microorganisms. Fecal
metabolome patterns were studied by high-resolution proton NMR spectroscopy. At
cumulative analysis, symptoms significantly decreased at each time point during
follow-up (p less than 0.0001), and only left-lower quadrant pain increased again
at T3. The overall bacterial quantity was not altered by the treatments. The
amount of Akkermansia muciniphila species was significantly reduced at T1
(p=0.017) and at T2 (p=0.026), while at T3 the reduction was not significant in
comparison to enrollment (p=0.090). Fecal molecular profile showed significant
changes at T1 and T2, while at T3 it became similar to that of T0. Differences
were found for 18 of the quantified molecules (tryptophan, phenylalanine,
tyrosine, 4-hydroxyphenylacetate, urocanate, X-6.363, X-5.779, uridylate,
galactose, X-4.197, threonine, sarcosine, methionine, 2-oxoisocaproate,
5-aminolevulinate, alanine, leucine, valerate). Metabolome and microbiota changed
in patients with SUDD under treatment, confirming a possible role of
dysbiosis/dysmetabolome in the pathology.


PMID: 30574746  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

