
1. J Adv Res. 2018 Jul 6;15:19-25. doi: 10.1016/j.jare.2018.07.001. eCollection 2019
Jan.

Evaluation of proteins in sheep colostrum via laser-induced breakdown
spectroscopy and multivariate analysis.

Abdel-Salam ZA(1), Abdel-Salam SAM(2), Abdel-Mageed II(2), Harith MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Laser Enhanced Science (NILES), Cairo University, Giza, 
Egypt.
(2)Faculty of Agriculture, Department of Animal Production, Cairo University,
Giza, Egypt.

Colostrum is essential to guarantee normal and healthy feeding in newborn
ruminants during the first hours. In the present work, Laser-Induced Breakdown
Spectroscopy (LIBS), as a spectrochemical analytical technique, and principal
component analysis (PCA) as a multivariate analysis method were used to evaluate 
colostrum compared to mature milk of sheep to plan the nutritional strategies for
newly born lambs. Samples of colostrum have been collected from thirty-three
Barki ewes. The sheep were milked every 12 h three times after birth, the fourth 
sample of mature milk is taken from milking in the 7th day postpartum. The
spectrochemical analytical results depicted that the intensities of CN and C2
spectral bands, and C 247.86 nm atomic line (as an indicator for protein content 
in LIBS spectra) are higher in colostrum than that in milk. This relationship has
been confirmed by measuring the total protein in the same samples conventionally.
The relation between calcium and protein percentage has also been demonstrated.
Moreover, it has been shown that the higher is the CN bands' intensity the lower 
is the bacteria count in colostrum samples, owing to the high levels of
lactoferrin with its antibacterial effect. The qualitative analysis of LIBS data 
using PCA led to a pronounced discrimination between colostrum and mature milk.
The present study demonstrates that it is, in principle, possible to make use of 
the analytical and chemometric results in dairy farms to evaluate sheep colostrum
to manage the nutritional strategies for the lambs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jare.2018.07.001 
PMCID: PMC6300458
PMID: 30581609 

