
1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2019 Apr;76(8):1579-1593. doi: 10.1007/s00018-018-3001-y. Epub
2019 Jan 1.

Impairment of CFTR activity in cultured epithelial cells upregulates the
expression and activity of LDH resulting in lactic acid hypersecretion.

Valdivieso ÁG(1), Clauzure M(2), Massip-Copiz MM(2), Cancio CE(2), Asensio
CJA(2), Mori C(2), Santa-Coloma TA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute for Biomedical
Research (BIOMED), School of Medical Sciences, Pontifical Catholic University of 
Argentina (UCA), and The National Scientific and Technical Research Council of
Argentina (CONICET), Alicia Moreau de Justo 1600, 1107, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
angel_valdivieso@uca.edu.ar.
(2)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute for Biomedical
Research (BIOMED), School of Medical Sciences, Pontifical Catholic University of 
Argentina (UCA), and The National Scientific and Technical Research Council of
Argentina (CONICET), Alicia Moreau de Justo 1600, 1107, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute for Biomedical
Research (BIOMED), School of Medical Sciences, Pontifical Catholic University of 
Argentina (UCA), and The National Scientific and Technical Research Council of
Argentina (CONICET), Alicia Moreau de Justo 1600, 1107, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
tsantacoloma@gmail.com.

Mutations in the gene encoding the CFTR chloride channel produce cystic fibrosis 
(CF). CF patients are more susceptible to bacterial infections in lungs. The most
accepted hypothesis sustains that a reduction in the airway surface liquid (ASL) 
volume favor infections. Alternatively, it was postulated that a reduced HCO3-
transport through CFTR leads to a decreased ASL pH, favoring bacterial
colonization. The issue is controversial, since recent data from cultured primary
cells and CF children showed normal pH values in the ASL. We have reported
previously a decreased mitochondrial Complex I (mCx-I) activity in cultured cells
with impaired CFTR activity. Thus, we hypothesized that the reduced mCx-I
activity could lead to increased lactic acid production (Warburg-like effect) and
reduced extracellular pH (pHe). In agreement with this idea, we report here that 
cells with impaired CFTR function (intestinal Caco-2/pRS26, transfected with an
shRNA-CFTR, and lung IB3-1 CF cells) have a decreased pHe. These cells showed
increased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity, LDH-A expression, and lactate
secretion. Similar effects were reproduced in control cells stimulated with
recombinant IL-1β. The c-Src and JNK inhibitors PP2 and SP600125 were able to
increase the pHe, although the differences between control and CFTR-impaired
cells were not fully compensated. Noteworthy, the LDH inhibitor oxamate
completely restored the pHe of the intestinal Caco-2/pRS26 cells and have a
significant effect in lung IB3-1 cells; therefore, an increased lactic acid
secretion seems to be the key factor that determine a reduced pHe in these
epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-018-3001-y 
PMID: 30599064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

