
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2019 Mar;86:1207-1216. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2018.12.040.
Epub 2018 Dec 24.

Carbohydrate sources deferentially influence growth performances, microbial
dynamics and immunomodulation in Pacific white shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei)
under biofloc system.

Panigrahi A(1), Sundaram M(2), Saranya C(2), Swain S(3), Dash RR(2), Dayal JS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Crustacean Culture Division, ICAR-Central Institute of Brackishwater
Aquaculture, #75, Santhome High Road, Raja Annamalai Puram, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 
600028, India. Electronic address: panigrahi@ciba.res.in.
(2)Crustacean Culture Division, ICAR-Central Institute of Brackishwater
Aquaculture, #75, Santhome High Road, Raja Annamalai Puram, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 
600028, India.
(3)Crustacean Culture Division, ICAR-Central Institute of Brackishwater
Aquaculture, #75, Santhome High Road, Raja Annamalai Puram, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 
600028, India; Department of Fisheries Science, Centurian University, Alluri
Nagar, Parlakhemundi, Gajapati, 761211, India.

This study aims to evaluate the influence of different carbohydrate sources on
water quality, growth performance and immunomodulation in pacific white shrimp
and to find an alternate for molasses in biofloc system. The experiment consists 
of 8 biofloc treatments with different carbon sources, C1 (maida flour), C2
(wheat flour), C3 (gram flour), C4 (millet flour), C5 (rice flour), C6 (corn
flour), C7 (molasses), C8 (multigrain flour) and un-supplemented control C0 was
conducted in 200 L tank system for 120 days. Shrimp juveniles of average weight
1 g were stocked at the rate of 300 nos/m3. Shrimp reared in C8, C7 and C4
treatments had similar growth, survival rate, and disease resistance and were
significantly higher (P < 0.05) than other treatments including control. Immune
parameters like total hemocyte count (THC) and prophenoloxidase (ProPO) activity 
showed significantly higher (P < 0.05) levels in biofloc treatment groups. The
genes targeting the proPO cascade (PX, BGBP) and antioxidant defense systems
(SOD, MnSOD, CAT) revealed significant upregulation in the transcript levels
indicating an enhancement in the immune-regulatory functions in the BFT groups.
The results suggest that millets and multigrain flour can effectively replace
molasses as the carbohydrate source for biofloc system and the biofloc system
offers higher growth, survival, and immunomodulation than control.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2018.12.040 
PMID: 30590161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

