
1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2018 Oct;204:19-27. doi: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2018.09.001. 
Epub 2018 Sep 13.

Recombinant ferritin-H induces immunosuppression in European sea bass larvae
(Dicentrarchus labrax) rather than immunostimulation and protection against a
Vibrio anguillarum infection.

Yaacob EN(1), De Geest BG(2), Goethals J(3), Bajek A(4), Dierckens K(5), Bossier 
P(5), Vanrompay D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Aquaculture and Artemia Reference Center, Faculty of Bioscience 
Engineering, Ghent University, Coupure Links 653, 9000 Ghent, Belgium; School of 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Sciences, Universiti Malaysia Terengganu, 21030 Kuala
Terengganu, Terengganu, Malaysia. Electronic address: eamynursaliza@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Science, Ghent
University, Ottergemsesteenweg 460, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Laboratory of Immunology and Animal Biotechnology, Faculty of Bioscience
Engineering, Ghent University, Coupure Links 653, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Écloserie Marine de Gravelines, voie des Enrochements, 59820 Gravelines,
France.
(5)Laboratory of Aquaculture and Artemia Reference Center, Faculty of Bioscience 
Engineering, Ghent University, Coupure Links 653, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.

Vibrio anguillarum causes high mortality in European sea bass (Dicentrarchus
labrax) larviculture. In this study, we evaluated if the recombinant sea bass
ferritin-H could stimulate the innate immune system of gnotobiotic European sea
bass larvae resulting in protection against a V. anguillarum challenge. We also
evaluated the effect of a V. anguillarum infection on the transcription of
immune-related genes in gnotobiotic European sea bass larvae. Recombinant sea
bass ferritin-H was produced, encapsulated in calcium alginate microparticles and
orally delivered to sea bass larvae at seven days after hatching. Our results
showed V. anguillarum caused an acute infection, resulting in high mortality. The
infection significantly upregulated the expression of tlr3, tlr5, cas1, il1β,
tnfα, mif, il10, cc1, cxcl8 at 18, 24 and 36 h post infection, but not of the
chemokine receptor genes cxcr4 and ccr9. There was no protective effect of
ferritin-H. Remarkably, ferritin-H caused significantly higher transcript levels 
for cxcr4 and ccr9. Sea bass ferritin-H was more likely involved in
immune-suppression and results point in the direction of a negative regulation of
CXCR4 resulting in inhibition of cell proliferation, differentiation and
migration which is detrimental to innate immunity and might explain the
non-protective effect of ferritin-H in fish larvae.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2018.09.001 
PMID: 30596377  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

