
1. PLoS One. 2018 Dec 31;13(12):e0210116. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210116.
eCollection 2018.

Evidence of CD1d pathway of lipid antigen presentation in mouse primary lung
epithelial cells and its up-regulation upon Mycobacterium bovis BCG infection.

Rizvi ZA(1), Puri N(1), Saxena RK(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, Delhi, India.
(2)Faculty of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, South Asian University, New Delhi,
Delhi, India.

Presentation of a prototype lipid antigen α-Galactosylceramide (αGC) was examined
on primary epithelial cells derived from mouse lungs and on bronchoalveolar
lavage (BAL) cells that essentially comprise alveolar macrophages. Presence of
CD1d molecules coupled to αGC was demonstrated on both types of cells pre-treated
with αGC, suggesting that both cell types are equipped to present lipid antigens.
Internalization of Mycobacterium bovis Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG: a prototype
pathogen), a pre-requisite to the processing and presentation of protein as well 
as lipid antigens, was clearly demonstrated in primary lung epithelial (PLE)
cells as well as BAL cells. Both PLE and BAL cells expressed CD1d molecule and a 
significant up-regulation of its expression occurred upon infection of these
cells with BCG. Besides CD1d, the expression of other important molecules that
participate in lipid antigen presentation pathway (i.e. microsomal triglyceride
transfer protein (MTTP), scavenger receptor B1 (SR-B1) and Saposin) was also
significantly upregulated in PLE and BAL cells upon BCG infection. In situ
up-regulation of CD1d expression on lung epithelial cells was also demonstrated
in the lungs of mice exposed intra-tracheally to BCG. Taken together these
results suggest that lung epithelial cells may have the ability to present lipid 
antigens and this pathway seems to get significantly upregulated in response to
BCG infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210116 
PMCID: PMC6312317
PMID: 30596774  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

