
1. Cancer Treat Res. 2019;176:31-68. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-99716-2_2.

Molecular and Genomic Landscape of Peripheral T-Cell Lymphoma.

Iqbal J(1), Amador C(1), McKeithan TW(2), Chan WC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 
US.
(2)Department of Pathology, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA,
USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA,
USA. jochan@coh.org.

Peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) is an uncommon group of lymphoma covering a
diverse spectrum of entities. Little was known regarding the molecular and
genomic landscapes of these diseases until recently but the knowledge is still
quite spotty with many rarer types of PTCL remain largely unexplored. In this
chapter, the recent findings from gene expression profiling (GEP) studies,
including profiling data on microRNA, where available, will be presented with
emphasis on the implication on molecular diagnosis, prognostication, and the
identification of new entities (PTCL-GATA3 and PTCL-TBX21) in the PTCL-NOS group.
Recent studies using next-generation sequencing have unraveled the mutational
landscape in a number of PTCL entities leading to a marked improvement in the
understanding of their pathogenesis and biology. While many mutations are shared 
among PTCL entities, the frequency varies and certain mutations are quite unique 
to a specific entity. For example, TET2 is often mutated but this is particularly
frequent (70-80%) in angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) and IDH2 R172
mutations appear to be unique for AITL. In general, chromatin modifiers and
molecular components in the CD28/T-cell receptor signaling pathways are
frequently mutated. The major findings will be summarized in this chapter
correlating with GEP data and clinical features where appropriate. The mutational
landscape of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, specifically on mycosis fungoides and
Sezary syndrome, will also be discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-99716-2_2 
PMID: 30596212  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

