
1. Immunohorizons. 2018 Jan 1;2(1):54-66. doi: 10.4049/immunohorizons.1700069.

Requirement for CD40/CD40L Interactions for Development of Autoimmunity Differs
Depending on Specific Checkpoint and Costimulatory Pathways.

Voynova E(1), Mahmoud T(1), Woods LT(2), Weisman GA(2), Ettinger R(1),
Braley-Mullen H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory, Inflammation and Autoimmunity Group, Medimmune LLC, Gaithersburg,
MD 20878.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Christopher S. Bond Life Sciences Center,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211.
(3)Department of Medicine and Microbiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 
65212.

CD40/CD40L interactions play a critical role in immunity and autoimmunity. In
this study, we sought to understand the requirement for CD40 signaling in the
programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) checkpoint and CD28 costimulatory pathways
important for maintenance of peripheral tolerance. Blocking either pathway can
result in loss of self-tolerance and development of autoimmunity. We found that
primary Sjögren's syndrome (pSS) and autoimmune thyroid diseases (ATDs) that
develop spontaneously in CD28-deficient IFN-γ-/- NOD.H-2h4 (CD28-/-) mice
required CD40 signaling. Specifically, blockade of CD40L with the anti-CD40L mAb,
MR1, inhibited autoantibody production and inflammation in thyroid and salivary
gland target tissues. Unexpectedly, however, ATD and pSS in PD-1-deficient
IFN-γ-/- NOD.H-2h4 (PD-1-/-) mice developed independently of CD40/CD40L
interactions. Treatment with MR1 had no effect and even exacerbated disease
development in pSS and ATD, respectively. Most interesting, anti-thyroglobulin
and pSS-associated autoantibodies were increased following anti-CD40L treatment, 
even though MR1 effectively inhibited the spontaneous splenic germinal centers
that form in PD-1-deficient mice. Importantly, blockade of the PD-1 pathway by
administration of anti-PD-1 mAb in CD28-/- mice recapitulated the PD-1-/-
phenotype, significantly impacting the ability of MR1 to suppress ATD and pSS in 
these mice. These results indicate that there can be different pathways and
requirements to autoimmune pathogenesis depending on the availability of specific
checkpoint and costimulatory receptors, and an intact PD-1 pathway is apparently 
required for inhibition of autoimmunity by anti-CD40L.

DOI: 10.4049/immunohorizons.1700069 
PMCID: PMC6309431
PMID: 30607385 

