
1. PLoS One. 2019 Jan 4;14(1):e0208431. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0208431.
eCollection 2019.

Enhancement of mixture pollutant biodegradation efficiency using a bacterial
consortium under static magnetic field.

Mansouri A(1), Abbes C(1), Ben Mouhoub R(1), Ben Hassine S(2), Landoulsi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Carthage, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Lab of Faculty of
Sciences, Risks Related to Environmental Stress, Struggle and Prevention
(UR17ES20), Bizerte, Zarzouna, Tunisia.
(2)Laboratory of Environmental Analytical Chemistry, University of Carthage,
Faculty of Sciences of Bizerte, Zarzouna, Tunisia.

One of the main challenges of bioremediation is to define efficient protocols
with low environmental impact and high removal rates, such as static magnetic
field (SMF). The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of SMF exposure on 
the biodegradation rate of a mixture of pollutants using three bacterial strains 
which were isolated and identified from the Bizerte lagoon: Pseudomonas stutzeri 
LBR (KC157911), Cupriavidus metallidurans LBJ (KU659610) and Rhodococcus equi LBB
(KU743870). To recognize the improvement role of SMF, the culture was submitted
to a pre-treatment with SMF with an induction equal to 200 mT for 5 hours, after 
that the degradation experiment was followed with individual strains and with a
consortium. Results showed an increase by 20% in the growth of the exposed
bacterial population compared to controls, and 98% of biodegradation of DDT and
90% for BaP after 30 days of follow-up. This encouraging data opens new
perspectives for a bioremediation bioprocess using SMF.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0208431 
PMCID: PMC6319723
PMID: 30608939  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

