
1. Toxicol Sci. 2019 Apr 1;168(2):497-507. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfz005.

Long-term Immunotoxic Effects of Oral Prenatal and Neonatal Atrazine Exposure.

Holásková I(1), Elliott M(1), Brundage K(1)(2), Lukomska E(1), Schafer R(1),
Barnett JB(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, West Virginia
University School of Medicine, Morgantown, West Virginia 26506.
(2)West Virginia University Cancer Institute, Morgantown, West Virginia 26506.

Atrazine and its metabolites are present at high concentrations in many water
supplies in agro-intensive areas. Because residents in these areas drink water
from sources fed from these contaminated supplies, we investigated the long-term 
immunotoxicity of combined prenatal and neonatal (perinatal) exposure to atrazine
via drinking water, on the immune system in mice. At 6 months of age, upon
immunization with heat-killed Streptococcus pneumoniae, the serum IgG antibody
response against the T independent antigen phosphorylcholine was significantly
higher in male, but not female, atrazine-exposed mice as compared with that in
untreated controls. No alterations were present in all offspring in the serum
antibody response against the T-dependent antigen pneumococcal surface protein A 
(PspA). ELISpot analysis showed only a small, insignificant reduction in
PspA-specific IgG producing splenocytes in atrazine-treated male offspring.
Interestingly, upon ex vivo stimulation with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies,
significant decreases in interleukin (IL)-2, tumor necrosis factor-α,
interferon-γ, and IL-17A and a decreasing trend in IL-10 were observed in
splenocytes from atrazine-exposed male, but not female mice. Analysis of thymic
and splenic cell populations showed no effects of atrazine exposure in either
sex. This is the first time that long-term changes in the immune response were
observed after a perinatal exposure to atrazine and it demonstrates that these
early life exposures can result in permanent changes to the immune system as well
as a male bias in these effects.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfz005 
PMCID: PMC6432865
PMID: 30629250  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

