
1. Blood. 2019 Feb 28;133(9):927-939. doi: 10.1182/blood-2018-10-878025. Epub 2019
Jan 8.

A topological view of human CD34+ cell state trajectories from integrated
single-cell output and proteomic data.

Knapp DJHF(1)(2)(3), Hammond CA(1)(2), Wang F(1)(4), Aghaeepour N(5), Miller
PH(1)(2), Beer PA(1), Pellacani D(1), VanInsberghe M(6), Hansen C(6)(7), Bendall 
SC(8), Nolan GP(5), Eaves CJ(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada.
(5)Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA.
(6)Michael Smith Laboratories and.
(7)Department of Physics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 
and.
(8)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA.

Recent advances in single-cell molecular analytical methods and clonal growth
assays are enabling more refined models of human hematopoietic lineage
restriction processes to be conceptualized. Here, we report the results of
integrating single-cell proteome measurements with clonally determined lymphoid, 
neutrophilic/monocytic, and/or erythroid progeny outputs from >1000 index-sorted 
CD34+ human cord blood cells in short-term cultures with and without stromal
cells. Surface phenotypes of functionally examined cells were individually mapped
onto a molecular landscape of the entire CD34+ compartment constructed from
single-cell mass cytometric measurements of 14 cell surface markers, 20
signaling/cell cycle proteins, and 6 transcription factors in ∼300 000 cells.
This analysis showed that conventionally defined subsets of CD34+ cord blood
cells are heterogeneous in their functional properties, transcription factor
content, and signaling activities. Importantly, this molecular heterogeneity was 
reduced but not eliminated in phenotypes that were found to display highly
restricted lineage outputs. Integration of the complete proteomic and functional 
data sets obtained revealed a continuous probabilistic topology of change that
includes a multiplicity of lineage restriction trajectories. Each of these
reflects progressive but variable changes in the levels of specific signaling
intermediates and transcription factors but shared features of decreasing
quiescence. Taken together, our results suggest a model in which increasingly
narrowed hematopoietic output capabilities in neonatal CD34+ cord blood cells are
determined by a history of external stimulation in combination with innately
programmed cell state changes.

© 2019 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2018-10-878025 
PMCID: PMC6396178
PMID: 30622121  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

