
1. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2018 Dec 8;39(12):5451-5463. doi: 10.13227/j.hjkx.201804058.

[Spectral Evolution Characteristics of DOM in Sediment Interstitial Water During 
the Formation Stage of Thermal Stratification in the Main Reservoir Area of the
Zhoucun Reservoir].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou SL(1), Zhang YR(1), Huang TL(2), Li ZX(1), Luo X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pollution Prevention Biotechnology Laboratory of Hebei Province, School of
Environmental Science and Engineering, Hebei University of Science and
Technology, Shijiazhuang 050018, China.
(2)School of Environmental and Municipal Engineering, Xi'an University of
Architecture and Technology, Xi'an 710055, China.

Based on three-dimensional fluorescence spectra (EEMs) combined with parallel
factor analysis (PARAFAC), and ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectra, we analyzed 
the vertical distribution and characteristics of dissolved organic matter in
sediment interstitial water during the formation stage of thermal stratification 
in the Zhoucun Reservoir. The results show that the UV-Vis absorption coefficient
varies between -400% and 400%, indicating the different properties of
DOM(dissolved organic matter) at different depths. The changes of E2/E3 show that
the proportion of fulvic acid in DOM increases with the stratification of the
reservoir and fulvic acid accounts for the main proportion with autochthonous
characteristics based on E3/E4>3.5 and SR>1. Two fulvic-like substances (C1, C3),
two protein-like substance (C2, C5), and two humic-like substances (C4, C6) were 
identified with the PARAFAC model. Moreover, fulvic-like and protein-like
substances account for most of substances. The total DOM fluorescence intensity
and the fluorescence intensity of each component show a decreasing trend with the
occurrence of stratification and exhibit significant vertical and temporal
differences. Based on the analysis of FI, HIX, BIX, and β:α in sediment
interstitial water, the high BIX, FI, β:α and low HIX indicate that the DOM of
sediment interstitial water has strong autochthonous components and original
characteristics of aquatic bacteria.

DOI: 10.13227/j.hjkx.201804058 
PMID: 30628388 

