
1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Mar 15;294(11):4119-4136. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.004984. Epub
2019 Jan 8.

Transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) induces NUAK kinase expression to fine-tune
its signaling output.

Kolliopoulos C(1)(2), Raja E(2), Razmara M(2), Heldin P(1)(2), Heldin CH(1)(2),
Moustakas A(3)(2), van der Heide LP(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Science for Life
Laboratory, Box 582 Biomedical Center, Uppsala University, 751 23 Uppsala, Sweden
and.
(2)the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Science for Life Laboratory, Box 595
Biomedical Center, Uppsala University, 751 24 Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)From the Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Science for Life
Laboratory, Box 582 Biomedical Center, Uppsala University, 751 23 Uppsala, Sweden
and aris.moustakas@imbim.uu.se.
(4)the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Science for Life Laboratory, Box 595
Biomedical Center, Uppsala University, 751 24 Uppsala, Sweden
L.P.vanderHeide@uva.nl.

TGFβ signaling via SMAD proteins and protein kinase pathways up- or
down-regulates the expression of many genes and thus affects physiological
processes, such as differentiation, migration, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis, 
during developmental or adult tissue homeostasis. We here report that NUAK family
kinase 1 (NUAK1) and NUAK2 are two TGFβ target genes. NUAK1/2 belong to the
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) family, whose members control central and
protein metabolism, polarity, and overall cellular homeostasis. We found that
TGFβ-mediated transcriptional induction of NUAK1 and NUAK2 requires SMAD family
members 2, 3, and 4 (SMAD2/3/4) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
activities, which provided immediate and early signals for the transient
expression of these two kinases. Genomic mapping identified an enhancer element
within the first intron of the NUAK2 gene that can recruit SMAD proteins, which, 
when cloned, could confer induction by TGFβ. Furthermore, NUAK2 formed protein
complexes with SMAD3 and the TGFβ type I receptor. Functionally, NUAK1 suppressed
and NUAK2 induced TGFβ signaling. This was evident during TGFβ-induced epithelial
cytostasis, mesenchymal differentiation, and myofibroblast contractility, in
which NUAK1 or NUAK2 silencing enhanced or inhibited these responses,
respectively. In conclusion, we have identified a bifurcating loop during TGFβ
signaling, whereby transcriptional induction of NUAK1 serves as a negative
checkpoint and NUAK2 induction positively contributes to signaling and terminal
differentiation responses to TGFβ activity.

© 2019 Kolliopoulos et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.004984 
PMCID: PMC6422081
PMID: 30622137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

