
1. DNA Cell Biol. 2019 Mar;38(3):223-228. doi: 10.1089/dna.2018.4389. Epub 2019 Jan 
14.

Origin of Coding RNA from Random-Sequence RNA.

Banfalvi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Microbiology, University of Debrecen,
Debrecen, Hungary.

D-ribose and D-arabinose differ only by the steric orientation of their C2-OH
groups. The initial reactions and emergence of RNA depended on the position,
reactivity, and flexibility of the C2-OH moiety in the ribose molecule. The
steric relationship of the C2- and C3-OH groups favored the selection of ribose, 
ribonucleotide, and RNA synthesis and excluded the possibility of xenonucleic
acid-based life on Earth. This brief review provides a hypothesis based on the
absence of nucleotides and enzymes under prebiotic conditions and on the
polymerization of ribose 5-phosphate units leading to the polarized formation of 
the ribose-phosphate backbone. The strong covalent bond formation in the
sugar-phosphate backbone was followed by the somewhat less reactive interaction
between ribose and nucleobase and supplemented by even weaker hydrogen-bonded and
stacking interactions. This hypothesis proposes a scheme how prebiotic
random-sequence RNA was formed under abiotic conditions and hydrolyzed to
oligomers and nucleotides. The term random-sequence prebiotic RNA refers to
nucleobases attached randomly to the ribose-phosphate backbone and not to
cellular RNA sequences as proteins and cells did not probably exist at the time
of abiotic RNA formation. It is hypothesized that RNA generated under abiotic
conditions containing random nucleobases was hydrolyzed to nucleotides that
served as a pool for the selected synthesis of genetic RNA.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.2018.4389 
PMID: 30638405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

