
1. Prep Biochem Biotechnol. 2019;49(1):64-73. doi: 10.1080/10826068.2018.1536986.
Epub 2019 Jan 16.

Isolation, screening, and optimization of bacterial strains for novel
transglutaminase production.

Sorde KL(1), Ananthanarayan L(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Food Engineering and Technology Department , Institute of Chemical
Technology , Mumbai , India.

Transglutaminases are a class of transferases known to form isopeptide bond
between glutamine and lysine residues in a protein molecule. Increasing demand
for transglutaminase in food and other industries and its low productivity have
compelled researchers to isolate and screen micro-organisms with potential to
produce it. In the present investigation around 200 isolates were screened for
extracellular secretion of microbial transglutaminase (MTGase). Isolate B4 showed
enzyme activity of 1.71 ± 0.2 U/mL followed by isolate C2 which showed
1.61 ± 0.17 U/mL activity, comparable with the activity of industrially used
microbial strains. Biochemical analysis along with 16S r-RNA sequencing revealed 
these isolates (B4 and C2) to be Bacillus nakamurai and a variant of Bacillus
subtilis, respectively. Amongst the various production media screened, a medium
containing starch and peptone was found best for MTGase production. Correlation
between growth, enzyme production, and sugar utilization was also studied and
maximum enzyme production was obtained after 48 to 60 hr. Highest MTGase titer
(3.95 ± 0.03 U/mL for B4 and 2.65 ± 0.17 U/mL for C2) was obtained by
optimization of parameters. The enzyme was characterized for temperature and pH
optima, pH and thermal stability, and effect of metal ions, suggesting its
potential use in future applications.

DOI: 10.1080/10826068.2018.1536986 
PMID: 30648497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

