
1. Environ Int. 2019 Mar;124:501-510. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2018.12.034. Epub 2019
Jan 24.

Deciphering the evolution characteristics of extracellular microbial products
from autotrophic and mixotrophic anammox consortia in response to nitrogen
loading variations.

Zhang ZZ(1), Cheng YF(1), Liu YY(1), Zhang Q(1), Zhu BQ(1), Jin RC(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life and Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University,
Hangzhou 310036, China; Key Laboratory of Hangzhou City for Ecosystem Protection 
and Restoration, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China.
(2)College of Life and Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University,
Hangzhou 310036, China; Key Laboratory of Hangzhou City for Ecosystem Protection 
and Restoration, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China. Electronic
address: jrczju@aliyun.com.

Extracellular microbial products (EMP) in biological wastewater treatment systems
vary with operational conditions and in turn indicate the metabolic status of
functional bacteria. In this study, the response of EMP from autotrophic and
mixotrophic anammox consortia (AAC and MAC) to the variation of total nitrogen
loading rates (TNLR) were investigated as well as their correlations with the
community evolution. The variation of TNLR showed a significantly negative
correlation with the production of bound microbial products (BMP) but a
significantly positive correlation with the production of soluble microbial
products (SMP). The presence of organic matters with COD/TN ratio of 0.15 limited
the abundance of anammox bacteria in MAC at the full-load phase and suppressed
their proliferation at the restart phase. Due to the improved abundance of
carbohydrate metabolism genes, MAC with lower abundance of anammox bacteria
produced lower soluble polysaccharides than AMC at the full-load phase.
Furthermore, four components (C1-4) were identified on the excitation-emission
matrix fluorescence spectra of SMP using parallel factor analysis. C1 exhibited a
relative higher proportion at the full-load phase, whereas C4 was generated only 
at the light-load phase or empty-load phase. At the restart phase, C2 and C3
appeared simultaneously and accounted for a high proportion. The information of
four components also suggested the metabolic status of AC as revealed by the
specific anammox activity, which therefore provided a novel complementary but
direct approach for monitoring the operation status of anammox bioreactors.

Copyright Â© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2018.12.034 
PMID: 30685452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

