
1. FEMS Yeast Res. 2019 Mar 1;19(2). pii: foz008. doi: 10.1093/femsyr/foz008.

Anti-Candida activity of beneficial vaginal lactobacilli in in vitro assays and
in a murine experimental model.

De Gregorio PR(1), Silva JA(1), Marchesi A(1), Nader-Macías MEF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Referencia para Lactobacilos (CERELA)-CONICET, Chacabuco 145, 4000. 
San Miguel de Tucumán, Tucumán, Argentina.

Vulvovaginal candidiasis (VVC) is one of the most frequent infections affecting
women worldwide. Healthy vaginal microbiota is dominated by lactobacilli, which
form a strong defense line against pathogens. In this work, in vitro
antimicrobial properties of thirty vaginal Lactobacillus strains were evaluated
against eleven Candida vaginal clinical isolates, employing three different
methods. Also, the effect of intravaginal (i.va.) administrations (preventive,
therapeutic and preventive-therapeutic) of L. reuteri CRL1324 or L. rhamnosus
CRL1332 strains against the i.va. challenge with Candida albicans C2 (C.a.) was
evaluated in a murine experimental model. From the results of agar overlay and
liquid medium assays the selected lactobacilli strains have shown to inhibit the 
growth of at least one Candida strain. The inhibition was mainly due to the
effect of organic acids. Anti-Candida activity was not evidenced in the agar
plate diffusion method. In the experimental murine model, only
preventive-therapeutic administration of both lactobacilli was able to
significantly reduce viable C.a. numbers recovered in vaginal washes and the
leukocyte influx induced by the fungi. In conclusion, lactobacilli exhibited in
vitro and in vivo antimicrobial effects on Candida, suggesting that they could be
promising candidates for protection against VVC.

© FEMS 2019.

DOI: 10.1093/femsyr/foz008 
PMID: 30689833  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

