
1. Biochimie. 2019 Mar;158:217-223. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2019.01.012. Epub 2019 Jan
22.

Kinetic mechanism of Enterococcus faeciumd-aspartate ligase.

Škedelj V(1), Fonović UP(1), Molek P(1), Magnet S(2), Mainardi JL(2), Blanot
D(3), Gobec S(1), Stojan J(4), Zega A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Ljubljana, Aškerčeva 7, 1000, Ljubljana,
Slovenia.
(2)INSERM, U1138, LRMA, Equipe 12 Du Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris,
France; Sorbonne Université, UMR S, 1138, Paris, France; Université Paris
Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, UMR S, 1138, Paris, France.
(3)Laboratoire des Enveloppes Bactériennes et Antibiotiques, Institut de Biologie
Intégrative de La Cellule (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, 91198,
Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(4)Institute of Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, Vrazov Trg 2, 1000, Ljubljana,
Slovenia.
(5)Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Ljubljana, Aškerčeva 7, 1000, Ljubljana,
Slovenia. Electronic address: anamarija.zega@ffa.uni-lj.si.

Enterococcus faeciumd-aspartate ligase (Aslfm) is a peptide bond-forming enzyme
that is involved in the peptidoglycan assembly pathway. It catalyzes the
ATP-dependent ligation of the β-carboxylate of D-Asp to the ε-amino group of
L-Lys in the nucleotide precursor UDP- MurNAc-pentapeptide. The enzyme is of
interest as a target of new, potential, narrow-spectrum antibiotics directed
against multiresistant E. faecium. The kinetic mechanism of Aslfm has not been
fully characterized. To determine it, a progress curve analysis of Aslfm
catalytic process using pyruvate kinase/lactate dehydrogenase ATPase detection
assay was performed. With an inspection of the shape of measured progress curves 
and the results of specific qualitative experiments, the Aslfm reaction mechanism
was singled out. The proposed Aslfm kinetics reaction scheme was evaluated by
fitting the parameters of the corresponding differential equations to progress
curves using the computer program ENZO. The complete kinetic analysis result is
consistent with the substrate binding order 1) ATP, 2) D-Asp, and 3)
UDP-MurNAc-pentapeptide. The analysis suggests that slowly establishing
non-productive equilibria between the free and ATP-bound enzyme with the
participating pentapeptide are responsible for initial reaction burst followed by
a steady-state period before the complete depletion of the reactant added in the 
lowest concentration.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2019.01.012 
PMID: 30682389  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

