
1. PLoS One. 2019 Jan 25;14(1):e0209938. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209938.
eCollection 2019.

Genetic characterization of Mycoplasma pneumoniae isolated in Osaka between 2011 
and 2017: Decreased detection rate of macrolide-resistance and increase of p1
gene type 2 lineage strains.

Katsukawa C(1)(2), Kenri T(3), Shibayama K(3), Takahashi K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, Osaka Institute of Public Health, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Department of Veterinary Science, Graduate School of Life and Environmental
Sciences, Osaka Prefecture University, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Bacteriology II, National Institute of Infectious Diseases,
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)International University of Health and Welfare, Tochigi, Japan.

We characterized 419 Mycoplasma pneumoniae isolates collected between 2011 and
2017 in Osaka prefecture of Japan. This analysis revealed high prevalence of
macrolide-resistant M. pneumoniae (MRMP) in Osaka during 2011 and 2014 with
annual detection rates of MRMP strains between 71.4% and 81.8%. However, in 2015 
and after, the detection rate of MRMP decreased significantly and did not exceed 
50%. Genotyping of the p1 gene of these isolates showed that most of MRMP strains
harbored type 1 p1 gene. In contrast, strains expressing p1 gene type 2 or its
variant were largely macrolide-susceptible M. pneumoniae (MSMP) strains. There
was a strong correlation between p1 gene genotype and the presence of mutations
conferring macrolide resistance in M. pneumoniae isolated in Osaka. These results
indicate that lower incidence of MRMP strains in Osaka from 2015 was associated
with the relative increase of p1 gene type 2 lineage strains. During these
experiments, we also isolated three M. pneumoniae strains that showed irregular
typing pattern in the polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis of the p1 gene. Two of these strains harbored
new variants of type 2 p1 gene and were designated as type 2f and 2g. The
remaining strain with an irregular typing pattern had a large deletion in the p1 
operon.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209938 
PMCID: PMC6347185
PMID: 30682029  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

