
1. Discov Med. 2018 Dec;26(145):251-260.

Modulation of aldosterone levels by aldosterone synthase promoter polymorphism
and association with eGFR decline in patients with chronic kidney disease.

Qian J(1), Zhong J(1)(2), Yan M(1), Shi H(1), Hao C(1), Gu Y(1), Lai L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200040,
China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Division of Pediatric Nephrology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

To determine whether -344T/C CYP11B2 promoter polymorphism affects serum
aldosterone levels and whether this polymorphism is an indicator of eGFR decline 
in patients with chronic kidney disease. -344 C/T CYP11B2 gene polymorphism
analysis was performed in 96 adults with stages 1-5 CKD by using polymerase chain
reaction. Serum aldosterone levels were measured at baseline and at 1.5-year
follow-up. The primary outcome was the annual eGFR decline and the secondary
outcome was the occurrence of cardio-cerebrovascular events. The genotype
distribution of -344T/C SNP in the patients with CKD was: CC (9.4%), CT (53.1%), 
and TT (37.5%), nearly similar to the healthy non-CKD individuals as reported.
Mean aldosterone levels were highest in the TT group and lowest in CC group (p = 
0.036). Serum aldosterone level also showed a negative correlation with baseline 
eGFR in patients with eGFR >60 mL/min (r = -0.403, p < 0.001). The mean annual
eGFR decline ratio was highest in the TT group and lowest in the CC group (p =
0.011). The incidence of cardio-cerebrovascular accidents was significantly
higher in the TT group than in the CC and CT groups (p = 0.033). -344T/C promoter
polymorphism of CYP11B2 modulated aldosterone levels in patients with all stages 
of CKD and was predictive of annual eGFR decline in CKD stages 3-4. In addition, 
the -344 T allele appeared to be an independent predictor of
cardio-cerebrovascular events.


PMID: 30695674  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

