
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Apr 8;47(6):3058-3071. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz045.

Single molecule glycosylase studies with engineered 8-oxoguanine DNA damage sites
show functional defects of a MUTYH polyposis variant.

Nelson SR(1), Kathe SD(2), Hilzinger TS(2), Averill AM(2), Warshaw DM(1), Wallace
SS(2), Lee AJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Robert Larner College of
Medicine, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Robert Larner College of
Medicine and College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, University of Vermont,
Burlington, VT 05405, USA.

Proper repair of oxidatively damaged DNA bases is essential to maintain genome
stability. 8-Oxoguanine (7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine, 8-oxoG) is a dangerous DNA
lesion because it can mispair with adenine (A) during replication resulting in
guanine to thymine transversion mutations. MUTYH DNA glycosylase is responsible
for recognizing and removing the adenine from 8-oxoG:adenine (8-oxoG:A) sites.
Biallelic mutations in the MUTYH gene predispose individuals to MUTYH-associated 
polyposis (MAP), and the most commonly observed mutation in some MAP populations 
is Y165C. Tyr165 is a 'wedge' residue that intercalates into the DNA duplex in
the lesion bound state. Here, we utilize single molecule fluorescence microscopy 
to visualize the real-time search behavior of Escherichia coli and Mus musculus
MUTYH WT and wedge variant orthologs on DNA tightropes that contain 8-oxoG:A,
8-oxoG:cytosine, or apurinic product analog sites. We observe that MUTYH WT is
able to efficiently find 8-oxoG:A damage and form highly stable bound complexes. 
In contrast, MUTYH Y150C shows decreased binding lifetimes on undamaged DNA and
fails to form a stable lesion recognition complex at damage sites. These findings
suggest that MUTYH does not rely upon the wedge residue for damage site
recognition, but this residue stabilizes the lesion recognition complex.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz045 
PMCID: PMC6451117
PMID: 30698731  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

