
1. J Biosci Bioeng. 2019 Jul;128(1):13-21. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2018.12.012. Epub
2019 Jan 28.

Expression of alcohol oxidase gene from Ochrobactrum sp. AIU 033 in recombinant
Escherichia coli through the twin-arginine translocation pathway.

Matsumura K(1), Yamada M(2), Yamashita T(1), Muto H(1), Nishiyama KI(1), Shimoi
H(1), Isobe K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Food Science, Iwate University, Ueda-3,
Morioka 020-8550, Japan.
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry and Food Science, Iwate University, Ueda-3,
Morioka 020-8550, Japan. Electronic address: myamada@iwate-u.ac.jp.

We cloned a set of genes encoding alcohol oxidase from Ochrobactrum sp. AIU 033
(OcAOD), which exhibits the appropriate substrate specificity for glyoxylic acid 
production from glycolic acid. The set of genes for OcAOD contained two open
reading frames consisting of 555-bp (aodB) and 1572-bp (aodA) nucleotides, which 
encode the precursor for the β-subunit and α-subunit of OcAOD, respectively. We
expressed the cloned genes as an active product in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3).
The recombinant OcAOD oxidized glycolic acid and primary alcohols with C2-C8 but 
not glyoxylic acid (as is the case for native OcAOD), whereas the Km and Vmax
values for glycolic acid and the pH stability were higher than those of native
OcAOD. A consensus sequence for the twin-arginine translocation (Tat) pathway was
identified in the N-terminal region of the precursor for the β-subunit, and the
active form of OcAOD was localized in the periplasm of recombinant E. coli, which
indicated that OcAOD would be transported from the cytoplasm to the periplasm by 
the hitchhiker mechanism through the Tat pathway. The OcAOD productivity of the
recombinant E. coli was 24-fold higher than that of Ochrobactrum sp. AIU 033, and
it was further enhanced by 1.2 times by the co-expression of additional tatABC
from E. coli BL21(DE3). Our findings thus suggest a function of the β-subunit of 
OcAOD in membrane translocation, and that the recombinant OcAOD has
characteristics that are suitable for the enzymatic synthesis of glyoxylic acid
as well as native OcAOD.

Copyright © 2019 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2018.12.012 
PMID: 30704918  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

