
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2019 Apr;87:515-523. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2019.01.041. Epub
2019 Jan 29.

Dual RNA-seq reveals the effect of the flgM gene of Pseudomonas plecoglossicida
on the immune response of Epinephelus coioides.

Sun Y(1), Zhuang Z(2), Wang X(2), Huang H(2), Fu Q(2), Yan Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Environment and Public Health, Xiamen Huaxia University, Xiamen,
Fujian 361024, China; Fisheries College, Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture
for the East China Sea, Ministry of Agriculture, Jimei University, Xiamen, Fujian
361021, China.
(2)College of Environment and Public Health, Xiamen Huaxia University, Xiamen,
Fujian 361024, China.
(3)Fisheries College, Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for the East China
Sea, Ministry of Agriculture, Jimei University, Xiamen, Fujian 361021, China.
Electronic address: yanqp@jmu.edu.cn.

Pseudomonas plecoglossicida is an important and highly pathogenic bacterium for
aquaculture and causes serious losses. The expression level of flgM was found to 
be significantly upregulated post-infection compared with in vitro results, which
was confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR. RNAi significantly reduced the
expression level of flgM mRNA of P. plecoglossicida. Compared with infection with
the wild-type strain, infection with the flgM-RNAi strain resulted in a delay in 
death and a 75% reduction in the mortality of Epinephelus coioides, followed by
alleviation of the symptoms in E. coioides spleen. Moreover, compared with
infection with the wild-type strain, infection with the flgM-RNAi strain of P.
plecoglossicida resulted in a significant change in the transcriptome of the
spleens of infected E. coioides and P. plecoglossicida. KEGG analysis for E.
coioides showed that genes of 17 immune pathways were most affected by flgM-RNAi 
of P. plecoglossicida. Among them, the expression of mhc2, zap70, rhoh, tlr2,
ca79a, hcst and cd32 in E. coioides spleen was predicted to be negatively related
to flgM in P. plecoglossicida but positively related to genes involved in
communication, metabolism and motility.

Copyright Â© 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2019.01.041 
PMID: 30708058  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

