
1. Plant Dis. 2014 May;98(5):682. doi: 10.1094/PDIS-06-13-0679-PDN.

First Report of Bacterial Soft Rot of Konnyaku Caused by Dickeya dadantii in
China.

Wei JF(1), Wei JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Protection College of Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming 650201,
China.
(2)Foreign Languages School of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning 530021, China.

Konnyaku (Amorphophallus rivieri Durieu) is grown in some rural areas of China as
an important cash crop. In 2011, there was a serious outbreak of Konnyaku soft
rot in Xuanwei District of Yunnan Province of China. The disease was
characterized by partial or complete tuber rot. At its anaphase, the soft rot may
move up the stem, causing the caudex to decay and the whole plant to collapse. If
the stem is strong or big enough, the soft rot may develop on one side of the
stem, leaving the other side healthy for several days. In this case, the stem
does not collapse, and etiolation may be observed on the rotten tissue. In
serious cases, up to 80% of the plants were infected. The disease is even more
serious if Konnyaku is grown continuously in the same field for more than one
year. At its worst, the disease can wipe out the whole crop. In 2012 and 2013, we
isolated 46 strains of bacteria from 60 Konnyaku tuber samples with soft rot
symptoms from Xuanwei District. All strains grew on CVP medium, and produced
iridescent, cross-hatched translucent colonies in deep, cuplike depressions or
pits. All strains were facultatively anaerobic, gram-negative, straight
rod-shaped cells with peritrichous flagella. All strains were catalase-positive, 
but oxidase-negative. They were able to ferment glucose, reduce nitrate, produce 
β-galactosidase and H2S, and they utilized L-arabinose, D-galactose, D-glucose,
glycerol, D-mannose, D-ribose, and sucrose, but did not produce urease, or acid
from adonitol. Pectobacterium carotovorum subsp. carotovorum (syn. Erwina
carotovora subsp. carotovora) has been commonly accepted as the causal agent of
Konnyaku soft rot in Japan and China (1,3). Our studies also confirmed that P.
carotovorum subsp. carotovorum caused Konnyaku soft rot, but the colony
morphology and physiological and biochemical characteristics of these bacteria
differed greatly from those of P. carotovorum subsp. carotovorum and other
pectolytic Pectobacterium species. They grew at 37°C, caused potato soft rot,
produced acid from melibiose, citrate, raffinose, and lactose, but did not
produce acid from sorbitol and arabitol. The strain also utilized malonate but
not keto-methyl glucoside as the sole carbon source. All strains were positive
for phosphatase. Forty-one of 46 strains were sensitive to erythromycin.
Thirty-seven of 46 strains produced indole. All tests were conducted with P.
carotovorum subsp. carotovorum standard strain C2 isolated from Chinese cabbage
as a positive control. Healthy Konnyaku tubers were inoculated with suspensions
of the strains with a concentration of 108 CFU/ml in sterile water to confirm
pathogenicity. After ~48 h, tuber rot symptoms were observed on all inoculated
Konnyaku tubers. In comparison, there were no symptoms on tubers inoculated with 
sterile water. The bacterium was re-isolated from the infected Konnyaku tubers
and identified as Dickeya dadantii, in accordance with Koch's postulates. All
strains were confirmed by using the species-specific primers ERWFOR/CHRREV (2),
which amplified a 450-bp DNA fragment by PCR assay. To our knowledge, this is the
first report of Konnyaku soft rot caused by D. dadantii in China. References: (1)
N. Hayashi. Gunma J. Agric. Res. A (Genera1) 5:25, 1988. (2) E. J. Smid et al.
Plant Pathol. 44:1058, 1995. (3) J. Y. Tang et al. J. Yunnan Agric. Univ. 16:185,
2001.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-06-13-0679-PDN 
PMID: 30708562 

