
1. Mar Environ Res. 2019 Feb;144:213-229. doi: 10.1016/j.marenvres.2019.01.006. Epub
2019 Jan 23.

CO2 leakage can cause loss of benthic biodiversity in submarine sands.

Molari M(1), Guilini K(2), Lins L(2), Ramette A(3), Vanreusel A(2).

Author information: 
(1)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for
Marine Microbiology, Germany. Electronic address: mamolari@mpi-bremen.de.
(2)Marine Biology Research Group, Department of Biology, Ghent University,
Krijgslaan 281/S8, 9000, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Max Planck Institute for
Marine Microbiology, Germany.

One of the options to mitigate atmospheric CO2 increase is CO2 Capture and
Storage in sub-seabed geological formations. Since predicting long-term storage
security is difficult, different CO2 leakage scenarios and impacts on marine
ecosystems require evaluation. Submarine CO2 vents may serve as natural analogues
and allow studying the effects of CO2 leakage in a holistic approach. At the
study site east of Basiluzzo Islet off Panarea Island (Italy), gas emissions
(90-99% CO2) occur at moderate flows (80-120 L m-2 h-1). We investigated the
effects of acidified porewater conditions (pHT range: 5.5-7.7) on the diversity
of benthic bacteria and invertebrates by sampling natural sediments in three
subsequent years and by performing a transplantation experiment with a duration
of one year, respectively. Both multiple years and one year of exposure to
acidified porewater conditions reduced the number of benthic bacterial
operational taxonomic units and invertebrate species diversity by 30-80%. Reduced
biodiversity at the vent sites increased the temporal variability in bacterial
and nematode community biomass, abundance and composition. While the release from
CO2 exposure resulted in a full recovery of nematode species diversity within one
year, bacterial diversity remained affected. Overall our findings showed that
seawater acidification, induced by seafloor CO2 emissions, was responsible for
loss of diversity across different size-classes of benthic organisms, which
reduced community stability with potential relapses on ecosystem resilience.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.marenvres.2019.01.006 
PMID: 30709637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

