
1. Int J Cancer. 2019 Nov 1;145(9):2360-2371. doi: 10.1002/ijc.32175. Epub 2019 Feb 
14.

Prediagnostic serum organochlorine insecticide concentrations and primary liver
cancer: A case-control study nested within two prospective cohorts.

Engel LS(1), Zabor EC(2), Satagopan J(2), Widell A(3), Rothman N(4), O'Brien
TR(4), Zhang M(4), Van Den Eeden SK(5), Grimsrud TK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
(4)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda,
MD.
(5)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, Oakland, CA.
(6)Cancer Registry of Norway, Institute of Population-based Cancer Research,
Oslo, Norway.

Although experimental evidence indicates that certain organochlorine insecticides
are hepatocarcinogens, epidemiologic evidence for most of these chemicals is very
limited. We estimated associations, using prospectively collected sera, between
organochlorine insecticide concentrations and cancer registry-identified primary 
liver cancer in two cohorts, one from the United States and one from Norway. In
nested case-control studies, we used sera collected in the 1960s-1980s from 136
cases and 408 matched controls from the Kaiser Permanente Northern California
Multiphasic Health Checkup (MHC) cohort and 84 cases and 252 matched controls
from the population-based Norwegian Janus cohort. We measured concentrations of
nine organochlorine insecticides/metabolites and markers of hepatitis B and C in 
sera. Adjusted odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for tertiles of
lipid-corrected organochlorines were calculated for each cohort using conditional
logistic regression. Among MHC participants with sera from the 1960s, there was a
suggestive exposure-response trend for trans-nonachlor (second and third tertile 
of analyte ORs = 1.63 and 1.95, respectively; p-trend = 0.08) and a
nonsignificantly elevated risk for the highest tertile of oxychlordane (OR =
1.87). Among Janus participants with sera from the 1970s, we observed an apparent
trend for p,p'-DDT (second and third tertile ORs = 1.70 and 2.14, respectively;
p-trend = 0.15). We observed little consistency in patterns of association
between the cohorts. We found limited evidence that exposure to p,p'-DDT and
chlordane-related oxychlordane and trans-nonachlor may be associated with
increased risk of primary liver cancer. However, the modest strength of these
associations and their lack of concordance between cohorts necessitate caution in
their interpretation.

© 2019 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.32175 
PMCID: PMC6667305
PMID: 30701531  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

