
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2019 Apr;103(7):3225-3236. doi:
10.1007/s00253-019-09660-y. Epub 2019 Feb 6.

Biodegradation of polyacrylic and polyester polyurethane coatings by enriched
microbial communities.

Vargas-Suárez M(1), Fernández-Cruz V(1), Loza-Tavera H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Facultad de Química, Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México, Ave. Universidad 3000. Col. UNAM, 04510, Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Bioquímica, Facultad de Química, Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México, Ave. Universidad 3000. Col. UNAM, 04510, Mexico City, Mexico.
hlozat@unam.mx.

Microbial communities are more effective in degrading natural polymers and
xenobiotics than pure cultures. Biodegradation of polyacrylic and polyurethane
polymers by bacterial and fungal strains has been addressed, but limited
information about their biodegradation by microbial communities exists. The aim
of this work was to evaluate the ability of three enriched microbial communities 
(BP1h, BP3h, and BP7h), selected from deteriorated foam pieces collected in a
landfill, to biodegrade the polyacrylic component of the 2K-PU coating Bayhydrol®
A2470 and the polyester polyurethane coating NeoRez™ R-9637. Two communities were
further selected to quantify extracellular esterase, protease, and urease
activities, to identify their taxonomic composition, and to analyze the ability
of their isolated members to grow in those polymers. The growth of the three
communities was larger in polyester polyurethane than in polyacrylic and their
biodegradative activities affected ester, urethane, ether, aromatic, and
aliphatic groups of the compounds present in the coatings. From all the
communities growing in polyacrylic or in polyester polyurethane, two and five
different types of colonies were isolated, respectively. In polyacrylic,
extracellular esterase and protease activities were at their maximum level at
7 days of culture, whereas in polyester polyurethane, protease and urease were
greatest at 21 days. All the isolated community members were identified as
xenobiotics degraders. The complete communities grew better in media with the
polymers than the isolated members. This is one of the few studies reporting
biodegradation of synthetic polymers by microbial communities and serves as basis
for developing synthetic consortia with enhanced degradative abilities.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-019-09660-y 
PMID: 30729284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

