
1. J Microbiol. 2019 Apr;57(4):263-270. doi: 10.1007/s12275-019-8298-1. Epub 2019
Feb 5.

β-1,3-Glucan/CR3/SYK pathway-dependent LC3B-II accumulation enhanced the
fungicidal activity in human neutrophils.

Li D(1), Bai C(2), Zhang Q(2), Li Z(2), Shao D(3), Li X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute
and Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Key Laboratory of
Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin's Clinical Research Center for Cancer,
Tianjin, 300060, P. R. China. lidingly@126.com.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute
and Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Key Laboratory of
Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin's Clinical Research Center for Cancer,
Tianjin, 300060, P. R. China.
(3)Denali Medpharma Co., Ltd, Chongqing, 400000, P. R. China.
di.shao@denalimedpharma.com.
(4)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Animal and Plant Resistance, College of Life
Sciences, Tianjin Normal University, Tianjin, 300387, P. R. China.
xichuanli@tmu.edu.cn.

Since molecular genotyping has been established for the Candida species, studies 
have found that a single Candida strain (endemic strain) can persist over a long 
period of time and results in the spread of nosocomial invasive candidiasis
without general characteristics of horizontal transmissions. Our previous study
also found the existence of endemic strains in a cancer center in Tianjin, China.
In the current study, we performed further investigation on endemic and
non-endemic Candida albicans strains, with the aim of explaining the higher
morbidity of endemic strains. In an in vivo experiment, mice infected with
endemic strains showed significantly shorter survival time and higher kidney
fungal burdens compared to mice infected with non-endemic strains. In an in vitro
experiment, the killing percentage of neutrophils to endemic strains was
significantly lower than that to non-endemic strains, which is positively linked 
to the ratio of LC3B-II/I in neutrophils. An immunofluorescence assay showed more
β-1,3-glucan exposure on the cell walls of non-endemic strains compared to
endemic strains. After blocking the β-glucan receptor (CR3) or inhibiting
downstream kinase (SYK) in neutrophils, the killing percent to C. albicans
(regardless of endemic and non-endemic strains) and the ratio of LC3B-II/I of
neutrophils were significantly decreased. These data suggested that the killing
capability of neutrophils to C. albicans was monitored by β-1,3-glucan via
CR3/SYK pathway-dependent LC3B-II accumulation and provided an explanation for
the variable killing capability of neutrophils to different strains of C.
albicans, which would be beneficial in improving infection control and
therapeutic strategies for invasive candidiasis.

DOI: 10.1007/s12275-019-8298-1 
PMID: 30721460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

