
1. J Cell Mol Med. 2019 Apr;23(4):2769-2781. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.14183. Epub 2019 Feb 
7.

The Pros1/Tyro3 axis protects against periodontitis by modulating STAT/SOCS
signalling.

Jiang L(1), Chen XQ(1), Gao MJ(1), Lee W(1), Zhou J(1), Zhao YF(1), Wang GD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, P. R. China.

Periodontitis, an oral inflammatory disease caused by periodontal pathogen
infection, is the most prevalent chronic inflammatory disease and a major burden 
on healthcare. The TAM receptor tyrosine kinases (Tyro3, Axl and Mertk) and their
ligands (Gas6 and Pros1) play a pivotal role in the resolution of inflammation
and have been associated with chronic inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. In
this study, we evaluated the effects of exogenous Pros1 in in vitro and in vivo
models of periodontitis. We detected higher Pros1 but lower Tyro3 levels in
inflamed gingival specimens of periodontitis patients compared with healthy
controls. Moreover, Pros1 was mostly localized in the gingival epithelium of all 
specimens. In cultured human gingival epithelial cells (hGECs), Porphyromonas
gingivalis LPS (p.g-LPS) stimulation down-regulated Pros1 and Tyro3. Exogenous
Pros1 inhibited p.g-LPS-induced production of TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β, MMP9/2 and
RANKL in a Tyro3-dependent manner as revealed by PCR, Western blot analysis,
ELISA and gelatin zymography. Pros1 also restored Tyro3 expression down-regulated
by p.g-LPS in hGECs. In rats treated with ligature and p.g-LPS, administration of
Pros1 attenuated periodontitis-associated gingival inflammation and alveolar bone
loss. Our mechanistic studies implicated SOCS1/3 and STAT1/3 as mediators of the 
in vitro and in vivo anti-inflammatory effects of Pros1. Collectively, the
findings from this work supported Pros1 as a novel anti-inflammatory therapy for 
periodontitis.

© 2019 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.14183 
PMCID: PMC6433735
PMID: 30729671  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

