
1. Mol Med Rep. 2019 Apr;19(4):2927-2934. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2019.9901. Epub 2019 Jan 
28.

Knockdown of ARK5 expression suppresses invasion of ovarian cancer cells.

Wang S(1), Li S(2), Wang H(1), Li W(3), Gao Y(4), Wang X(1), Fang C(1), Zhang
B(4), Sun X(5), Li R(5), Shi W(6), Chen M(1), Shi L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weifang Medical University, Weifang, Shandong
261053, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Physics, Weifang Medical University, Weifang, Shandong 261053,
P.R. China.
(3)Department of Gynecology, Zhenjiang Maternity and Child Health Hospital,
Zhenjiang, Jiangsu 212001, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Weifang Medical University, Weifang, Shandong 261053,
P.R. China.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Weifang Medical University, Weifang, Shandong
261053, P.R. China.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Weifang Medical University, Weifang, Shandong 261053,
P.R. China.

The aim of the current study was to investigate the effects and the molecular
mechanisms of ARK5 in ovarian cancer cell invasion. The plasmid
pGCsilencerU6/GFP/Neo‑RNAi‑ARK5 and the control vector with a scramble sequence
were transfected into SKOV3 cells to establish ARK5‑deficient SKOV3 cells
(siARK5/SKOV3) and a control cell line (Scr/SKOV3), respectively. Reverse
transcription‑polymerase chain reaction (RT‑PCR) and Western blot analysis were
used to determine the mRNA and protein expression levels of ARK5. Migration and
invasion abilities of SKOV3 cells were determined in chemotaxis and invasion
assays, respectively. The epidermal growth factor‑1 (EGF‑1)‑induced expression of
matrix metallopeptidase (MMP)‑2 and MMP‑9, epithelial‑mesenchymal transition
(EMT) and phosphorylation of mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase (mTOR) in
siARK5/SKOV3 and Scr/SKOV3 cells were detected by western blot. RT‑PCR and
western blot analyses demonstrated that the expression of ARK5 was significantly 
downregulated in siARK5/SKOV3 cells at the mRNA and protein levels (P<0.01). The 
migration and invasion abilities of siARK5/SKOV3 cells were markedly decreased
compared with Scr/SKOV3 cells (P<0.01). In addition, the results demonstrated
that EGF‑1‑induced expression of MMP‑2 and MMP‑9, EMT and phosphorylation of mTOR
were suppressed in siARK5/SKOV3 cells as compared with Scr/SKOV3 cells (P<0.01). 
The current study demonstrated that ARK5 is a critical factor involved in SKOV3
cell invasion and ARK5 increases invasive potential by promoting EMT and
activating the Akt‑mTOR‑MMPs pathway.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2019.9901 
PMID: 30720082  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

