
1. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2019 Dec;34(1):490-499. doi:
10.1080/14756366.2018.1559161.

An AGT-based protein-tag system for the labelling and surface immobilization of
enzymes on E. coli outer membrane.

Merlo R(1), Del Prete S(1), Valenti A(1), Mattossovich R(1), Carginale V(1),
Supuran CT(2), Capasso C(1), Perugino G(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biology Agriculture and Food Sciences , Institute of
Bioscience and BioResources - National Research Council of Italy , Naples ,
Italy.
(2)b Neurofarba Department , University of Florence, Polo Scientifico , Sesto
Fiorentino Firenze , Italy.

The use of natural systems, such as outer membrane protein A (OmpA), phosphoporin
E (PhoE), ice nucleation protein (INP), etc., has been proved very useful for the
surface exposure of proteins on the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria.
These strategies have the clear advantage of unifying in a one-step the
production, the purification and the in vivo immobilisation of
proteins/biocatalysts onto a specific biological support. Here, we introduce the 
novel Anchoring-and-Self-Labelling-protein-tag (ASLtag), which allows the in vivo
immobilisation of enzymes on E. coli surface and the labelling of the
neosynthesised proteins with the engineered alkylguanine-DNA-alkyl-transferase
(H5) from Sulfolobus solfataricus. Our results demonstrated that this tag
enhanced the overexpression of thermostable enzymes, such as the carbonic
anhydrase (SspCA) from Sulfurihydrogenibium yellowstonense and the β-glycoside
hydrolase (SsβGly) from S. solfataricus, without affecting their folding and
catalytic activity, proposing a new tool for the improvement in the utilisation
of biocatalysts of biotechnological interest.

DOI: 10.1080/14756366.2018.1559161 
PMCID: PMC6366409
PMID: 30724623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

