
1. JCI Insight. 2019 Feb 7;4(3). pii: 125442. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.125442. [Epub
ahead of print]

Mass cytometry identifies distinct CD4+ T cell clusters distinguishing
HIV-1-infected patients according to antiretroviral therapy initiation.

Bekele Y(1), Lakshmikanth T(2), Chen Y(2), Mikes J(2), Nasi A(1), Petkov S(1),
Hejdeman B(3), Brodin P(2)(4), Chiodi F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Biomedicum, and.
(2)Science for Life Laboratory, Division of Clinical Pediatrics, Department of
Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Clinical Science and Education, Södersjukhuset, Karolinska
Institutet, and Unit of Infectious Diseases, Venhälsan, Södersjukhuset,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Newborn Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Recent guidelines recommend antiretroviral therapy (ART) to be administered as
early as possible during HIV-1 infection. Few studies addressed the immunological
benefit of commencing ART during the acute phase of infection. We used mass
cytometry to characterize blood CD4+ T cells from HIV-1-infected patients who
initiated ART during acute or chronic phase of infection. Using this method, we
analyzed a large number of markers on millions of individual immune cells. The
results revealed that CD4+ T cell clusters with high expression of CD27, CD28,
CD127, and CD44, whose function involves T cell migration to inflamed tissues and
survival, are more abundant in healthy controls and patients initiating ART
during the acute phase; on the contrary, CD4+ T cell clusters in patients
initiating ART during the chronic phase had reduced expression of these markers. 
The results are suggestive of a better preserved immune function in
HIV-1-infected patients initiating ART during acute infection.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.125442 
PMCID: PMC6413791
PMID: 30728327 

