
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2019 Apr;87:590-599. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2019.02.005. Epub
2019 Feb 8.

Involvement of a novel protein kinase C (nPKC) in immunocompetence in hemocytes
of white shrimp, Litopenaeus vannamei.

Chang ZW(1), Chang CC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquaculture, National Pingtung University of Science and
Technology, Pingtung, 91201, Taiwan, ROC.
(2)Department of Aquaculture, National Pingtung University of Science and
Technology, Pingtung, 91201, Taiwan, ROC. Electronic address:
changcc@mail.npust.edu.tw.

Complementary (c)DNA encoding novel protein kinase C (PKC) messenger (m)RNA of
the white shrimp Litopenaeus vannamei, consisted of 2454-bp cDNA containing an
open reading frame (ORF) of 2232 bp, belonging to the novel (n)PKC family of
proteins characterized by their containing two phorbol
ester/diacylglycerol-binding domains (C1 domain), a C2 domain, and a catalytic
domain of the serine/threonine kinase, designated LvnPKC. A comparison of amino
acid sequences showed that LvnPKC was closely related to arthropod nPKC. LvnPKC
cDNA was detected in all tested tissues with a real-time PCR including the
hepatopancreas, gills, muscles, subcuticular epithelium, abdominal nerve,
thoracic nerve, brain, the stomach, heart, and especially in hemocytes and the
intestines. Moreover, significantly upregulated LvnPKC expression was only
observed in the eyestalk, brain, and hepatopancreas of shrimp transferred from
28 °C to 18 °C for 30 min. Induction of LvnPKC expression in hemocytes of L.
vannamei injected with Vibrio alginolyticus at 105 cfu shrimp-1 was detected
earlier than in those injected with 103 cfu shrimp-1. Shrimp received
LvnPKC-dsRNA for 1 days specifically depleted the expression of LvnPKC mRNA in
hemocytes compared those of diethylpyrocarbonate water treatment. After that,
significantly decreased expressions of lipopolysaccharide - and
β-1,3-glucan-binding protein, prophenoloxidase-activating enzyme, peroxinectin,
prophenoloxidase I, and prophenoloxidase II in the prophenoloxidase-activating
system; lysozyme and cytosolic manganese superoxide dismutase and mitochondrial
manganese superoxide dismutase in the antioxidant system were observed. We
therefore concluded that LvnPKC is involved in immune defense of L. vannamei
exposed to hypothermal stress or infected with V. alginolyticus.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2019.02.005 
PMID: 30738864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

