
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2019 Jul;51(6):1489-1496. doi: 10.1007/s11250-019-01837-x.
Epub 2019 Feb 9.

Rambutan fruit peel powder and dietary protein level influencing on fermentation 
characteristics, nutrient digestibility, ruminal microorganisms and gas
production using in vitro fermentation techniques.

Ampapon T(1), Wanapat M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
40002, Thailand.
(2)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
40002, Thailand. metha@kku.ac.th.

The objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of rambutan (Nephelium
lappaceum) fruit peel powder (RP) on fermentation characteristics, rumen
microorganisms, and in vitro gas production. Three levels of crude protein (CP)
in the concentrate (14%, 16%, and 18% CP) and supplementation of rambutan peel
powder (0, 2, 4, and 6% of the total dietary substrate) were designed for
treatments according to 3 × 4 factorial arrangement in a completely randomized
design (CRD). The rumen fluid samples were collected from two-fistulated dairy
bulls which had been fed on rice straw with concentrate to adjust the rumen
environment. The ratio of roughage (R) and concentrate (C) at 60:40 was used, and
all ingredients were added according to the mentioned ratio, respectively. Under 
this study, supplementation of CP at different levels in the concentrate diet
significantly altered (P < 0.05) rumen NH3-N at 6 and after 12 h of incubation,
whereas the rumen pH was not significantly changed with CP and RP supplementation
levels at any times of incubation. The rumen pH was declined at 18% CP at 6 h of 
incubation time, as compared to 14 and 16% CP with 0% RP supplementation. The CP 
and RP supplementation could enhance and maintain the rumen pH during incubation 
to the optimum condition. The RP supplementation significantly doubled bacterial 
population while reduced protozoal population; however, fungal zoospores were not
altered with CP and RP supplementation. The ruminal propionate (C3) production
was remarkably higher (P < 0.05) by the RP and CP supplementation. The ratio of
acetate to propionate (C2:C3) was decreased (P < 0.05) with RP supplementation.
Meanwhile, rumen methane (CH4) production was significantly reduced by the RP
supplementation. In addition, high level of RP supplementation (6% of total
substrate) also significantly decreased the cumulative gas production and the in 
vitro true digestibility (%IVTDMD). Level of CP had no effect on rumen
fermentation while interactive effects of CP level and RP supplementation were
not found. This current study indicated that RP supplementation could suppress
protozoal population, mitigate methane production, and improve rumen
fermentation.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-019-01837-x 
PMID: 30739278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

