
1. mBio. 2019 Feb 12;10(1). pii: e02818-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02818-18.

Cdk8 and Ssn801 Regulate Oxidative Stress Resistance and Virulence in
Cryptococcus neoformans.

Chang AL(1), Kang Y(2), Doering TL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA doering@wustl.edu.

Cryptococcus neoformans kills 200,000 people worldwide each year. After
inhalation, this environmental yeast proliferates either extracellularly or
within host macrophages. Under conditions of immunocompromise, cryptococci
disseminate from the lungs to the brain, causing a deadly meningoencephalitis
that is difficult and expensive to treat. Cryptococcal adaptation to the harsh
lung environment is a critical first step in its pathogenesis, and consequently a
compelling topic of study. This adaptation is mediated by a complex
transcriptional program that integrates cellular responses to environmental
stimuli. Although several key regulators in this process have been examined, one 
that remains understudied in C. neoformans is the Mediator complex. In other
organisms, this complex promotes transcription of specific genes by increasing
assembly of the RNA polymerase II preinitiation complex. We focused on the Kinase
Module of Mediator, which consists of cyclin C (Ssn801), cyclin-dependent kinase 
8 (Cdk8), Med12, and Med13. This module provides important inhibitory control of 
Mediator complex assembly and activity. Using transcriptomics, we discovered that
Cdk8 and Ssn801 together regulate cryptococcal functions such as the ability to
grow on acetate and the response to oxidative stress, both of which were
experimentally validated. Deletion of CDK8 yielded altered mitochondrial
morphology and the dysregulation of genes involved in oxidation-reduction
processes. This strain exhibited increased susceptibility to oxidative stress,
resulting in an inability of mutant cells to proliferate within phagocytes,
decreased lung burdens, and attenuated virulence in vivo These findings increase 
our understanding of cryptococcal adaptation to the host environment and its
regulation of oxidative stress resistance and virulence.IMPORTANCE Cryptococcus
neoformans is a fungal pathogen that primarily affects severely immunocompromised
patients, resulting in 200,000 deaths every year. This yeast occurs in the
environment and can establish disease upon inhalation into the lungs of a
mammalian host. In this harsh environment it must survive engulfment by host
phagocytes, including the oxidative stresses it experiences inside them. To adapt
to these challenging conditions, C. neoformans deploys a variety of regulatory
proteins to alter gene expression levels and enhance its ability to survive. We
have elucidated the role of a protein complex that regulates the cryptococcal
response to oxidative stress, survival within phagocytes, and ability to cause
disease. These findings are important because they advance our understanding of
cryptococcal disease, which we hope will help in the efforts to control this
devastating infection.

Copyright Â© 2019 Chang et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02818-18 
PMCID: PMC6372802
PMID: 30755515  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

