
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2019 Apr;69:328-336. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2019.01.044. Epub
2019 Feb 15.

Exopolysaccharides from Cyanobacterium aponinum induce a regulatory dendritic
cell phenotype and inhibit SYK and CLEC7A expression in dendritic cells, T cells 
and keratinocytes.

Gudmundsdottir AB(1), Brynjolfsdottir A(2), Olafsdottir ES(3), Hardardottir I(4),
Freysdottir J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Biomedical Center, Vatnsmyrarvegur
16, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland; Department of Immunology, Landspitali-The National
University Hospital of Iceland, Bld 14 at Eiriksgata, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland; 
Center for Rheumatology Research, Landspitali-The National University Hospital of
Iceland, Bld 14 at Eiriksgata, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland.
(2)Blue Lagoon, Nordurljosavegur 9, IS-240 Grindavik, Iceland.
(3)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Iceland, Hofsvallagata 53,
IS-107 Reykjavik, Iceland.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Biomedical Center, Vatnsmyrarvegur
16, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland; Department of Immunology, Landspitali-The National
University Hospital of Iceland, Bld 14 at Eiriksgata, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Biomedical Center, Vatnsmyrarvegur
16, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland; Department of Immunology, Landspitali-The National
University Hospital of Iceland, Bld 14 at Eiriksgata, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland; 
Center for Rheumatology Research, Landspitali-The National University Hospital of
Iceland, Bld 14 at Eiriksgata, IS-101 Reykjavik, Iceland. Electronic address:
jonaf@landspitali.is.

Regular bathing in the Blue Lagoon has beneficial effects on psoriasis.
Previously, we showed that exopolysaccharides (EPS-Ca) secreted by Cyanobacterium
aponinum, a dominating organism in the Blue Lagoon, increased IL-10 secretion by 
human dendritic cells (DCs). In addition, co-culturing allogeneic CD4+ T cells
with DCs matured in the presence of EPS-Ca increased differentiation of T cells
into T regulatory cells at the cost of the disease inducing Th17 cells. In the
present study, EPS-Ca increased the proportion of DCs expressing CD141, a surface
molecule linked to regulatory DCs, and the CD141+ cells secreted more IL-10 than 
the CD141- cells. EPS-Ca decreased T cell secretion of IL-17, IL-13 and IL-10 and
the proportion of T cells expressing the activation marker CD69 that has also
been linked to lymphocyte retention. In addition, EPS-Ca reduced keratinocyte
secretion of CCL20 and CXCL10, chemokines implicated in recruitment of
inflammatory cells. EPS-Ca decreased DC expression of Dectin-1/CLEC7A and SYK,
keratinocyte expression of CLEC7A, SYK and CAMP (the gene for LL37), and T cell
expression of phosphorylated Zap70. These results indicate that EPS-Ca may induce
a regulatory phenotype of DCs, T cells that are less active/inflammatory and less
prone to being retained in the skin, and keratinocytes that induce less
recruitment of inflammatory cells to the skin and that these effects may be
mediated by the effects of EPS-Ca on CLEC7A and SYK. Overall the results indicate
that EPS-Ca may be involved in the beneficial effects psoriasis patients
experience when bathing in the Blue Lagoon.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2019.01.044 
PMID: 30772700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

