
1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2019 May 15;172:556-565. doi:
10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.12.076. Epub 2019 Feb 15.

Toxicity profiling of 24 l-phenylalanine derived ionic liquids based on
pyridinium, imidazolium and cholinium cations and varying alkyl chains using
rapid screening Vibrio fischeri bioassay.

Kusumahastuti DKA(1), Sihtmäe M(2), Kapitanov IV(3), Karpichev Y(3), Gathergood
N(4), Kahru A(5).

Author information: 
(1)ERA Chair of Green Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology,
Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn 12618, Estonia; Laboratory of
Environmental Toxicology, National Institute of Chemical Physics and Biophysics, 
Tallinn 12618, Estonia; Department of Chemistry, Satya Wacana Christian
University, Salatiga 50711, Indonesia.
(2)Laboratory of Environmental Toxicology, National Institute of Chemical Physics
and Biophysics, Tallinn 12618, Estonia.
(3)ERA Chair of Green Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology,
Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn 12618, Estonia.
(4)ERA Chair of Green Chemistry, Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology,
Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn 12618, Estonia. Electronic address:
nicholas.gathergood@ttu.ee.
(5)Laboratory of Environmental Toxicology, National Institute of Chemical Physics
and Biophysics, Tallinn 12618, Estonia; Estonian Academy of Sciences, Kohtu 6,
Tallinn 10130, Estonia. Electronic address: anne.kahru@kbfi.ee.

A library of 24 pyridinium-, imidazolium-, and cholinium-based ionic liquids
(ILs) with varying alkyl chain from C2 to C16 was toxicologically profiled using 
naturally luminescent marine bacteria Vibrio fischeri. The toxicity (30-min EC50)
of studied ILs to Vibrio fischeri ranged from 7.82 µM (4.2 mg/L) (PyC12Phe) to
3096 µM (1227 mg/L) (ImidC2Phe), i.e. from "toxic" (EC50 1-10 mg/L) to "not
harmful" (EC50 > 100 mg/L). Inhibition of the bacterial luminescence upon 30-min 
exposure to ILs correlated well with bacterial viability (exposure for 4 h). The 
toxicity of studied ILs was largely driven by the length of the alkyl chain
(hydrophobicity) and not the type of cationic part of the IL: starting from C10
all the ILs irrespective of the cationic part proved "toxic". The toxicity of the
studied ILs was increasing in parallel to their hydrophobicity up to log Kow = 1 
(C8-C10) and then levelling up, being consistent with the previously obtained
analogous data sets. The "cut-off" effect reported in this study for longer chain
length members of the ILs series leads to the "limit" toxicity level for this
type of ILs to be ca. 8 mM. Two open-access online tools (www.molinspiration.com 
and www.vcclab.org) have been applied for the calculation of the Kow values for
the 24 ILs reported in this study and 21 ILs reported in the literature. This
lead to plotting two nonlinear monotonic correlations between the values of
experimental log (1/EC50) and calculated log Kow. The limitation of the online
tools and an effect of the ILs structure on the "cut-off" effect have been
discussed. The challenge of developing low microbial toxicity surface active ILs 
remains a significant task to overcome. Our results shed light on the new
approaches for designing environmentally benign ILs and functional surfactants.
As the hydrophobicity of the ILs significantly correlated with the toxicity, the 
Vibrio fischeri assay could be considered a powerful tool in providing toxicity
data for building and evaluating the QSAR toxicity models for ILs.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.12.076 
PMID: 30776578  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

