
1. Foods. 2019 Feb 13;8(2). pii: E70. doi: 10.3390/foods8020070.

Use of a Selected Leuconostoc Citreum Strain as a Starter for Making a
"Yeast-Free" Bread.

De Bellis P(1), Rizzello CG(2), Sisto A(3), Valerio F(4), Lonigro SL(5), Conte
A(6), Lorusso V(7), Lavermicocca P(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Sciences of Food Production (ISPA), National Research Council
(CNR), Via G. Amendola 122/O, 70126 Bari, Italy. mirella.debellis@ispa.cnr.it.
(2)Department of Soil, Plant and Food Science, University of Bari Aldo Moro, Via 
G. Amendola 165/A, 70126 Bari, Italy. carlogiuseppe.rizzello@uniba.it.
(3)Institute of Sciences of Food Production (ISPA), National Research Council
(CNR), Via G. Amendola 122/O, 70126 Bari, Italy. angelo.sisto@ispa.cnr.it.
(4)Institute of Sciences of Food Production (ISPA), National Research Council
(CNR), Via G. Amendola 122/O, 70126 Bari, Italy. francesca.valerio@ispa.cnr.it.
(5)Institute of Sciences of Food Production (ISPA), National Research Council
(CNR), Via G. Amendola 122/O, 70126 Bari, Italy. lisa.lonigro@ispa.cnr.it.
(6)Department of Agricultural Sciences, Food and Environment, University of
Foggia, Via Napoli 25, 71122 Foggia, Italy. amalia.conte@unifg.it.
(7)Institute of Sciences of Food Production (ISPA), National Research Council
(CNR), Via G. Amendola 122/O, 70126 Bari, Italy. valeria.lorusso19@gmail.com.
(8)Institute of Sciences of Food Production (ISPA), National Research Council
(CNR), Via G. Amendola 122/O, 70126 Bari, Italy. paola.lavermicocca@ispa.cnr.it.

The aim of this study was the characterization and selection of bacterial strains
suitable for the production of a "yeast-free" bread. The strains Leuconostoc
citreum C2.27 and Weissella confusa C5.7 were selected for their leavening and
acidification capabilities and individually used as starters in bread-making
tests. Liquid type-II sourdoughs, singly inoculated with the two selected
strains, were characterized and employed for bread-making, through the set-up of 
a biotechnological protocol without the use of baker's yeast as a leavening
agent. Aiming to verify the ability of the selected strains to dominate the
fermentation process, bacteria and yeasts were isolated from liquid sourdoughs
and doughs, genetically characterized and identified. Both the selected strains
were suitable for the production of bread, even if L. citreum C2.27 showed the
highest leavening capacity and was able to dominate the dough microbiota. The
effects of different salt concentrations on the selected strain performances were
also investigated. The applicability of the developed protocol, adapted for the
production of the typical Apulian bread, "puccia", and the suitability of the
strain L. citreum C2.27 were confirmed at pilot scale in an industrial bakery.
The puccia bread, which was produced with the liquid sourdough fermented with L. 
citreum C2.27, without baker's yeast and salt, was similar in appearance to the
conventional product containing baker's yeast and was judged positively by a
sensory analysis.

DOI: 10.3390/foods8020070 
PMCID: PMC6406974
PMID: 30781845 

