
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Feb 20;9(1):2339. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-38800-7.

A diet-change modulates the previously established bacterial gut community in
juvenile brown trout (Salmo trutta).

Michl SC(1)(2)(3), Beyer M(4), Ratten JM(4), Hasler M(5), LaRoche J(4), Schulz
C(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Gesellschaft für Marine Aquakultur mbH (GMA) Büsum, Büsum, Germany.
michl@gma-buesum.de.
(2)Department of Marine Aquaculture, Institute of Animal Breeding and Husbandry, 
Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany. michl@gma-buesum.de.
(3)GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
michl@gma-buesum.de.
(4)Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada.
(5)Lehrfach Variationsstatistik, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel,
Germany.
(6)Gesellschaft für Marine Aquakultur mbH (GMA) Büsum, Büsum, Germany.
(7)Department of Marine Aquaculture, Institute of Animal Breeding and Husbandry, 
Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the impact of dietary plant
proteins on the gut microbiome of first feeding brown trout (Salmo trutta)
reproduced from wild stocks and to evaluate whether the initial microbiome of
brown trout fry can be permanently manipulated by the first feeding diet.
Therefore, brown trout fry was fed diets based on either 0%, 50% or 90%
plant-derived proteins from first feeding onwards and via 16S rRNA gene
sequencing a strong dietary influence on the bacterial gut community on phylum
and order level was detected. Proteobacteria and Fusobacteria were significantly 
enhanced when fishmeal was integrated into the experimental diet, whereas
plant-derived proteins significantly promoted Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes. In
order to evaluate whether the first feeding diet had a permanent effect on the
initially established microbial gut community of juvenile brown trout, a
cross-over diet-change was applied 61 days post first feeding. 48 days after the 
diet-change, the gut microbiome of all dietary groups was significantly different
from the one initially established after first feeding. Moreover, the first
feeding diet had no statistically significant influence on the gut microbiome
after the diet-change, demonstrating no permanent effect on the gut microbiome
formation.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-38800-7 
PMCID: PMC6382790
PMID: 30787388  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

