
1. J Biomed Mater Res B Appl Biomater. 2019 Nov;107(8):2517-2526. doi:
10.1002/jbm.b.34342. Epub 2019 Feb 19.

Polylactic-co-glycolic acid microspheres added to fixative cements and its role
on bone infected architecture.

Ibarra B(1)(2), García-García J(3), Azuara G(4), Vázquez-Lasa B(2), Ortega
MA(1)(2), Asúnsolo Á(5)(6), San Román J(2), Buján J(1)(2)(6), García-Honduvilla
N(1)(2)(6), De la Torre B(7)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Medical Specialities, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, University of Alcalá, Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Networking Biomedical Research Center on Bioengineering, Biomaterials and
Nanomedicine (CIBER-BBN), Institute of Polymer Science and Technology
(ICTP-CSIC), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Service of Orthopedic Surgery of University Hospital Principe de Asturias,
Madrid, Spain.
(4)Service of Traumatology of University Hospital of Guadalajara, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Surgery, Medical and Social Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, University of Alcalá, Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Ramón y Cajal Institute of Sanitary Research (IRYCIS), Madrid, Spain.
(7)Service of Traumatology of University Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain.

Joint prostheses are an essential element to improve quality of life. However,
prostheses may fail due to several factors, including the most frequent cause,
Staphylococcus aureus infection. The identification of new fixing bone cements
with less reactivity on bone tissue and an adequate response to infection remains
a primary challenge. The aim of this study is to evaluate the response of bone
tissue in rabbits after introduction of a hydroxyapatite-coated titanium rod with
a commercial fixative cement (Palacos®) compared to a modified experimental
cement (EC) containing polylactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) microspheres in the
presence or absence of contaminating germs. This study used 20 New Zealand
rabbits which were divided into four groups (n = 5) depending on the presence or 
absence of S. aureus and the use of commercial (Palacos®) or EC. A histological
method, based on bone architecture damage, was proposed to evaluate from 1 to 9
the histological results and the response of the infected tissue. The macrophage 
response was also evaluated using monoclonal antibody RAM-11. The study showed
better bone conservation with the use of EC with PLGA microspheres against the
Palacos® commercial cement, including the noncontaminated and contaminated
groups. © 2019 The Authors. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part B:
Applied Biomaterials published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biomed Mater Res Part
B: Appl Biomater 107B:2517-2526, 2019.

© 2019 The Authors. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part B: Applied
Biomaterials published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jbm.b.34342 
PMCID: PMC6790951
PMID: 30784189  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

