
1. FEBS J. 2019 May;286(10):1894-1907. doi: 10.1111/febs.14793. Epub 2019 Mar 12.

The structural features of Acetobacterium woodii F-ATP synthase reveal the
importance of the unique subunit γ-loop in Na+ translocation and ATP synthesis.

Bogdanović N(1), Trifunović D(2), Sielaff H(1), Westphal L(2), Bhushan S(1)(3),
Müller V(2), Grüber G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nanyang Technological University, School of Biological Sciences, Singapore
City, Singapore.
(2)Molecular Microbiology & Bioenergetics, Institute of Molecular Biosciences,
Johann Wolfgang Goethe University Frankfurt/Main, Germany.
(3)NTU Institute of Structural Biology, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore City, Singapore.

The Na+ translocating F1 FO ATP synthase from Acetobacterium woodii shows a
subunit stoichiometry of α3 :β3 :γ:δ:ε:a:b2 :(c2/3 )9 :c1 and reveals an
evolutionary path between synthases and pumps involving adaptations in the rotor 
c-ring, which is composed of F- and vacuolar-type c subunits in a stoichiometry
of 9 : 1. This hybrid turbine couples rotation with Na+ translocation in the FO
part and rotation of the central stalk subunits γ-ε to drive ATP synthesis in the
catalytic α3 :β3 headpiece. Here, we isolated a highly pure recombinant A. woodii
F-ATP synthase and present the first projected structure of this hybrid engine as
determined by negative-stain electron microscopy and single-particle analysis.
The uniqueness of the A. woodii F-ATP synthase is also reflected by an extra 17
amino acid residues loop (195 TSGKVKITEETKEEKSK211 ) in subunit γ. Deleting the
loop-encoding DNA sequence (γΔ195-211 ) and purifying the recombinant F-ATP
synthase γΔ195-211 mutant provided a platform to study its effect in enzyme
stability and activity. The recombinant F-ATP synthase γΔ195-211 mutant revealed 
the same subunit composition as the wild-type enzyme and a minor reduction in ATP
hydrolysis. When reconstituted into proteoliposomes ATP synthesis and Na+
transport were diminished, demonstrating the importance of the γ195-211 loop in
both enzymatic processes. Based on a structural model, a coupling mechanism for
this enzyme is proposed, highlighting the role of the γ-loop. Finally, the
γ195-211 loop of A. woodii is discussed in comparison with the extra γ-loops of
mycobacterial and chloroplasts F-ATP synthases described to be involved in
species-specific regulatory mechanisms.

© 2019 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.14793 
PMID: 30791207  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

