
1. Toxins (Basel). 2019 Feb 19;11(2). pii: E124. doi: 10.3390/toxins11020124.

Function and Role of ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters as Receptors for 3D-Cry
Toxins.

Sato R(1), Adegawa S(2), Li X(3), Tanaka S(4), Endo H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bio-Applications and Systems Engineering, Tokyo University 
of Agriculture and Technology, Naka 2-24-16, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan.
ryoichi@cc.tuat.ac.jp.
(2)Graduate School of Bio-Applications and Systems Engineering, Tokyo University 
of Agriculture and Technology, Naka 2-24-16, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan.
s174092v@st.go.tuat.ac.jp.
(3)Graduate School of Bio-Applications and Systems Engineering, Tokyo University 
of Agriculture and Technology, Naka 2-24-16, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan.
s159217x@st.go.tuat.ac.jp.
(4)Graduate School of Bio-Applications and Systems Engineering, Tokyo University 
of Agriculture and Technology, Naka 2-24-16, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan.
shiho_9099@yahoo.co.jp.
(5)Graduate School of Bio-Applications and Systems Engineering, Tokyo University 
of Agriculture and Technology, Naka 2-24-16, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan.
haruka@edu.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

When ABC transporter family C2 (ABCC2) and ABC transporter family B1 (ABCB1) were
heterologously expressed in non-susceptible cultured cells, the cells swelled in 
response to Cry1A and Cry3 toxins, respectively. Consistent with the notion that 
3D-Cry toxins form cation-permeable pores, Bombyx mori ABCC2 (BmABCC2)
facilitated cation-permeable pore formation by Cry1A when expressed in Xenopus
oocytes. Furthermore, BmABCC2 had a high binding affinity (KD) to Cry1Aa of 3.1 Ã—
10-10 M. These findings suggest that ABC transporters, including ABCC2 and ABCB1,
are functional receptors for 3D-Cry toxins. In addition, the Cry2 toxins most
distant from Cry1A toxins on the phylogenetic tree used ABC transporter A2 as a
receptor. These data suggest that 3D-Cry toxins use ABC transporters as
receptors. In terms of inducing cell swelling, ABCC2 has greater activity than
cadherin-like receptor. The pore opening of ABC transporters was hypothesized to 
be linked to their receptor function, but this was repudiated by experiments
using mutants deficient in export activity. The synergistic relationship between 
ABCC2 and cadherin-like receptor explains their ability to cause resistance in
one species of insect.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins11020124 
PMCID: PMC6409751
PMID: 30791434  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

