
1. Inflammation. 2019 Aug;42(4):1170-1178. doi: 10.1007/s10753-019-00977-4.

Glycoprotein Nonmetastatic Melanoma Protein B (GPNMB) Ameliorates the
Inflammatory Response in Periodontal Disease.

Song R(1)(2), Lin L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, 150001, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 150081, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 150081, China. 
linlexun@163.com.

Glycoprotein nonmetastatic melanoma protein B (GPNMB) is a type I transmembrane
protein that can modulate osteoblasts and bone mineralization. Periodontal
disease (PD) is characterized by gum inflammation, alveolar bone resorption, and 
tooth loss. In this study, we found that GPNMB is highly expressed in inflamed
periodontal tissue through microarray and immunohistochemistry (IHC) assays. The 
role of GPNMB in the pathogenesis of PD was evaluated with primary human
periodontal ligament cells (hPDLCs) treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and a
GPNMB-expressing lentivirus (lenti-GP). In the hPDLCs treated with LPS and
lenti-GP, the expression of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-Î± and interleukin (IL)-6 
was suppressed and that of IL-10 was upregulated. GPNMB significantly decreased
apoptosis in the hPDLCs treated with LPS. GPNMB could upregulate the expression
of Jumonji domain-containing protein 3 (Jmjd3), a histone 3 lysine 27 (H3K27)
demethylase that is linked to the modulation of the inflammatory response and
apoptosis. Taken together, our data find that GPNMB is highly expressed in gum
tissue with PD and may be an anti-inflammatory player in the pathogenesis of PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s10753-019-00977-4 
PMID: 30793225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

