
1. Biotechnol J. 2019 Jun;14(6):e1800471. doi: 10.1002/biot.201800471. Epub 2019 May
20.

Gene-Centric Metagenome Analysis Reveals Gene Clusters for Carbon Monoxide
Conversion and Validates Isolation of a Clostridial Acetogen for C2 Chemical
Production.

Kang H(1), Park B(2), Bolo NR(3), Pathiraja D(2), Park S(1), Cha M(1), Choi
IG(2), Chang IS(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Earth Sciences and Environmental Engineering, Gwangju Institute of
Science and Technology, 123 Cheomdangwagi-ro, Buk-gu, Gwangju, 61005, Republic of
Korea.
(2)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology Korea University, 5 Anam-ro,
Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, 02841, Republic of Korea.
(3)International Environmental Research Institute Gwangju Institute of Science
and Technology, 123 Cheomdangwagi-ro, Buk-gu, Gwangju, 61005, Republic of Korea.

Erratum in
    Biotechnol J. 2019 Oct;14(10):e1970083.

Syngas fermentation is largely dependent on acetogens that occur in various
anaerobic environmental samples including soil, sediment, and feces. Here the
authors report the metagenomic isolation of acetogens for C2 chemical production 
from syngas. Screening acetogens for C2 chemical production typically involves
detecting the presence of the Wood-Ljungdahl Pathway for carbon monoxide
conversion. The authors collect samples from river-bed sediments potentially
having conditions suitable for carbon monoxide-converting anaerobes, and enrich
the samples under carbon monoxide selection pressure. Changes in the microbial
community during the experimental procedure are investigated using both amplicon 
and shotgun metagenome sequencing. Combined next-generation sequencing techniques
enabl in situ tracking of the major acetogenic bacterial group and lead to the
discovery of a 16 kb of gene cluster for WLP. The authors isolat an acetogenic
clostridial strain from the enrichment culture (strain H21-9). The functional
activity of H21-9 is confirmed by its high level of production of C2 chemicals
from carbon monoxide (77.4 mM acetate and 2.5 mM of ethanol). This approach of
incorporating experimental enrichment with metagenomic analysis can facilitate
the discovery of novel strains from environmental habitats by tracking target
strains during the screening process, combined with validation of their
functional activity.

© 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/biot.201800471 
PMID: 30802355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

