
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Feb 26;9(1):2812. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-38726-0.

Proteomic analysis of cholera toxin adjuvant-stimulated human monocytes
identifies Thrombospondin-1 and Integrin-β1 as strongly upregulated molecules
involved in adjuvant activity.

Terrinoni M(1), Holmgren J(1), Lebens M(1), Larena M(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and University of Gothenburg Vaccine
Research Institute (GUVAX), Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at
University of Gothenburg, Box 435, SE-405 30, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and University of Gothenburg Vaccine
Research Institute (GUVAX), Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at
University of Gothenburg, Box 435, SE-405 30, Gothenburg, Sweden.
maximilian.larena@gu.se.
(3)Department of Organismal Biology, Uppsala University, Norbyvägen 18C, SE-753
26, Uppsala, Sweden. maximilian.larena@gu.se.

Cholera Toxin (CT) as well as its related non-toxic mmCT and dmLT mutant proteins
have been shown to be potent adjuvants for mucosally administered vaccines. Their
adjuvant activity involves activation of cAMP/protein kinase A (PKA) signaling
and inflammasome/IL-1β pathways in antigen presenting cells (APC). To get a
further understanding of the signal transduction and downstream pathways
activated in APCs by this group of adjuvants we have, employing quantitative
proteomic analytic tools, investigated human monocytes at various time points
after treatment with CT. We report the activation of three main biological
pathways among upregulated proteins, peaking at 16 hours of CT treatment:
cellular organization, metabolism, and immune response. Specifically, in the
further analyzed immune response pathway we note a strong upregulation of
thrombospondin 1 (THBS1) and integrin β1 (ITGB1) in response to CT as well as to 
mmCT and dmLT, mediated via cAMP/PKA and NFKB signaling. Importantly, inhibition 
in vitro of THSB1 and ITGB1 in monocytes or primary dendritic cells using siRNA
abrogated the ability of the treated APCs to promote an adjuvant-stimulated Th17 
cell response when co-cultured with peripheral blood lymphocytes indicating the
involvement of these molecules in the adjuvant action on APCs by CT, mmCT and
dmLT.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-38726-0 
PMCID: PMC6391456
PMID: 30808871  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

