
1. J Invest Dermatol. 2019 Aug;139(8):1743-1752.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2019.02.010. 
Epub 2019 Feb 23.

Human Keratinocytes Use Sphingosine 1-Phosphate and its Receptors to
Communicate Staphylococcus aureus Invasion and Activate Host Defense.

Igawa S(1), Choi JE(1), Wang Z(1), Chang YL(1), Wu CC(1), Werbel T(1),
Ishida-Yamamoto A(2), Di Nardo A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Asahikawa Medical University, Asahikawa, Japan.
(3)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. Electronic address: adinardo@ucsd.edu.

Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) is a bioactive lipid mediator generated when a cell
membrane or its components are damaged by various factors. S1P regulates diverse 
cell activities via S1P receptors (S1PRs). Keratinocytes express S1PR1-5.
Although it is known that S1PRs control keratinocyte differentiation, apoptosis, 
and wound healing, S1PR functions in keratinocyte infections have not been fully 
elucidated. We propose that the S1P-S1PR axis in keratinocytes works as a
biosensor for bacterial invasion. Indeed, in human impetigo infection, we found
high epidermal expression of S1PR1 and S1PR2 in the skin. Furthermore, in normal 
human epidermal keratinocytes in vitro, treatment with Staphylococcus aureus
bacterial supernatant not only induced S1P production but also increased the
transcription of S1PR2, confirming our in vivo observation, as well as increased 
the levels of TNFA, IL36G, IL6, and IL8 mRNAs. However, direct treatment of
normal human epidermal keratinocytes with S1P increased the expressions of IL36G,
TNFA, and IL8, but not IL6. In both S1P- and S. aureus bacterial
supernatant-treated normal human epidermal keratinocytes, S1PR1 knockdown reduced
IL36G, TNFA, and IL8 transcription, and the S1PR2 antagonist JTE013 blocked the
secretion of these cytokines. Overall, we have proven that during infections,
keratinocytes communicate damage by using S1P release and tight control of S1PR1 
and 2.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jid.2019.02.010 
PMCID: PMC7682680
PMID: 30807768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

