
1. Bioresour Technol. 2019 Jun;281:217-225. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2019.02.096.
Epub 2019 Feb 23.

Enhancement of acid re-assimilation and biosolvent production in Clostridium
saccharoperbutylacetonicum through metabolic engineering for efficient biofuel
production from lignocellulosic biomass.

Wang P(1), Zhang J(1), Feng J(1), Wang S(1), Guo L(2), Wang Y(3), Lee YY(4),
Taylor S(3), McDonald T(1), Wang Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosystems Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849,
USA.
(2)College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China,
Qingdao 266100, China.
(3)Department of Biosystems Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849,
USA; Center for Bioenergy and Bioproducts, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849,
USA.
(4)Department of Chemical Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA.
(5)Department of Biosystems Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849,
USA; Center for Bioenergy and Bioproducts, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849,
USA. Electronic address: yiwang3@auburn.edu.

In the clostridial acetone-butanol-ethanol (ABE) fermentation, the intermediate
acetate and butyrate are re-assimilated for solvent production. Here, key genes
in ABE pathways in Clostridium saccharoperbutylacetonicum N1-4 were overexpressed
to enhance acid re-assimilation and solvent production. With the overexpression
of sol operon, acid re-assimilation was enhanced, and ABE production was
increased by 20%, with ethanol production increased by six times but almost no
increase in butanol production. To further drive carbon flux for C4 metabolites
and ultimate butanol production, key genes including hbd, thl, crt and bcd in
butanol production pathway were further overexpressed. Compared to the control,
butanol, acetone and total ABE production in the new strain was increased by 8%, 
18%, and 12.4%, respectively. Finally, simultaneous saccharification and
fermentation was carried out using acetate-pretreated switchgrass. 15.4 g/L total
ABE (with a yield of 0.31 g/g) was produced in both engineered strains, which was
significantly higher than the control.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2019.02.096 
PMID: 30822643  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

