
1. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2019 May 30;169:49-59. doi: 10.1016/j.jpba.2019.02.033. Epub
2019 Feb 21.

Enantioselective recognition of sutezolid by cyclodextrin modified non-aqueous
capillary electrophoresis and explanation of complex formation by means of
infrared spectroscopy, NMR and molecular modelling.

Michalska K(1), Bocian W(2), Bednarek E(2), Pałys B(3), Cielecka-Piontek J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Antibiotics and Microbiology, National Medicines Institute,
Chełmska 30/34, 00-725, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
k.michalska@nil.gov.pl.
(2)Department of Counterfeit Medicinal Products and Drugs, National Medicines
Institute, Chełmska 30/34, 00-725, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Laboratory of Electrochemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Warsaw,
Pasteura 1, 02-093, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Pharmacognosy, Poznań University of Medical Sciences,
Swiecickiego 4, 60-781, Poznan, Poland.

A method for the enantioseparation of sutezolid, the next analogue after
linezolid and tedizolid, belonging to the truly new class of antibacterial
agents, the oxazolidinones, was developed based on non-aqueous capillary
electrophoresis (NACE), using a single isomer of cyclodextrins as a chiral
pseudophase. During the experiment, the enantioseparation of sutezolid together
with its predecessor, linezolid, both weak base antibacterial agents, was
evaluated using anionic single-isomers of cyclodextrins from hydrophilic, up to
hydrophobic: heptakis-(2,3-dihydroxy-6-sulfo)-β-cyclodextrin,
heptakis-(2,3-diacetyl-6-sulfo)-β-cyclodextrin (HDAS-β-CD), as well as
heptakis-(2,3-dimethyl-6-sulfo)-β-cyclodextrin (HDMS-β-CD), respectively. Based
on the observed results, the cyclodextrins, HDAS-β-CD and HDMS-β-CD which carry
the acetyl and methyl groups at the C2 and C3 positions, respectively, provided
the baseline separation of sutezolid enantiomers. However, HDMS-β-CD led to a
reversal of enantiomer migration order (EMO) in comparison to HDAS-β-CD. Instead,
enantiomers of linezolid were separated only by HDMS-β-CD. During the
experiments, different organic solvents and their mixtures in various ratios were
tested. The selectivity and separation efficiency were critically affected by the
nature of the buffer system, the type of organic solvent, and the concentrations 
of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in the NACE buffer system. Focusing on the desired 
EMO in which the eutomers (S)-sutezolid and (S)-linezolid migrated last, the
highest enantioresolution using the NACE method was achieved at normal polarity
mode with 45  mM HDMS-β-CD dissolved in MeOH/ACN (85:15, v/v) containing 200  mM 
TFA/20  mM ammonium formate. Moreover, infrared spectroscopy, NMR and molecular
modelling were investigated to provide information about complex formation.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpba.2019.02.033 
PMID: 30836246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

