
1. Molecules. 2019 Mar 3;24(5). pii: E889. doi: 10.3390/molecules24050889.

Isolation and Purification of Bioactive Compounds from the Stem Bark of Jatropha 
podagrica.

Minh TN(1), Xuan TD(2), Tran HD(3), Van TM(4), Andriana Y(5), Khanh TD(6)(7),
Quan NV(8), Ahmad A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School for International Development and Cooperation (IDEC),
Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8529, Japan. minhtn689@gmail.com.
(2)Graduate School for International Development and Cooperation (IDEC),
Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8529, Japan.
tdxuan@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, NTT Institute of Hi-Technology, Nguyen-Tat-Thanh 
University, 298A-300A Nguyen-Tat-Thanh Street, District 04, Ho chi Minh City
72820, Vietnam. thdung@ntt.edu.vn.
(4)Graduate School for International Development and Cooperation (IDEC),
Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8529, Japan.
truongmaivan1991@gmail.com.
(5)Graduate School for International Development and Cooperation (IDEC),
Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8529, Japan. yusufandriana@yahoo.com.
(6)Agricultural Genetics Institute, Hanoi City 123000, Vietnam. tdkhanh@vaas.vn.
(7)Center for Expert, Vietnam National University of Agriculture, Hanoi 131000,
Vietnam. tdkhanh@vaas.vn.
(8)Graduate School for International Development and Cooperation (IDEC),
Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8529, Japan. nguyenquan26@gmail.com.
(9)Chemical Engineering, CSIR, CIMAP, Kukrail Picnic Spot Road, Lucknow 226016,
India. ateeque97@gmail.com.

This paper reports the successive isolation and purification of bioactive
compounds from the stem bark of Jatropha podagrica, a widely known medicinal
plant. The ethyl acetate extract of the stem bark exhibited the strongest
antioxidant activity assessed by 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH),
2,2'-azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS) radical scavenging,
and ferric reducing antioxidant power (FRAP) assays (IC50 = 46.7, 66.0, and
492.6, respectively). By column chromatography (CC) with elution of hexane and
ethyl acetate at 8:2, 7:3, and 6:4 ratios, the isolation of this active extract
yielded five fractions (C1⁻C5). Chemical structures of the constituents included 
in C1⁻C5 were elucidated by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS),
electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry (ESI-MS), and nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) and resolved as methyl gallate (C1, C2, C3, C4), gallic acid (C1,
C2), fraxetin (C2, C3, C4, C5), and tomentin (C3). Mixture C2 (IC50 DPPH and ABTS
= 2.5 µg/mL) and C3 (IC50 FRAP = 381 µg/mL) showed the highest antioxidant
properties. Among the isolated fractions, C4 was the most potential agent in
growth inhibition of six bacterial strains including Staphylococcus aureus,
Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Listeria monocytogenes, Bacillus
subtilis, and Proteus mirabilis (MIC = 5, 20, 30, 20, 25, and 20 mg/mL,
respectively). All identified constituents exerted an inhibitory activity on the 
growth of Lactuca sativa, of which the mixture C3 performed the maximal
inhibition on shoot (IC50 = 49.4 µg/mL) and root (IC50 = 47.1 µg/mL) growth.
Findings of this study suggest that gallic acid, methyl gallate, fraxetin, and
tomentin isolated from J. podagrica possessed antioxidant, antibacterial, and
growth inhibitory potentials.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules24050889 
PMCID: PMC6429288
PMID: 30832436  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

