
1. Leuk Lymphoma. 2019 Sep;60(9):2115-2121. doi: 10.1080/10428194.2019.1581929. Epub
2019 Mar 7.

Importance of early immune recovery after autologous hematopoietic cell
transplantation in lymphoma patients.

Jantunen E(1)(2)(3), Varmavuo V(4), Pelkonen J(5)(6), Valtola J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Insitute of Clinical Medicine/Internal Medicine, University of Eastern Finland
, Kuopio , Finland.
(2)Department of Medicine, Kuopio University Hospital , Kuopio , Finland.
(3)Siunsote - North Carelia Hospital District , Joensuu , Finland.
(4)Department of Medicine, Kymenlaakso Central Hospital , Kotka , Finland.
(5)Department of Clinical Microbiology, University of Eastern Finland , Kuopio , 
Finland.
(6)Laboratory Centre of Eastern Finland, Kuopio , Kuopio , Finland.

Lymphomas constitute the second most common indication for autologous
hematopoietic cell transplantation (AHCT). Graft infusion is followed by a rapid 
hematological recovery and slower immune recovery. The number of natural killer
cells and CD3+ T lymphocytes achieve normal counts usually within a month,
whereas the recovery of CD3+CD4+ T lymphocytes is much slower. Early immune
recovery is usually defined as the absolute lymphocyte count (ALC) ≥0.5 × 109/L, 
which has been associated with improved progression-free and even overall
survival. Several factors have been associated with early immune recovery,
including higher infused lymphocyte and CD34+ cell doses, both of which are
affected by the choice of mobilization. This review summarizes the clinical
importance of early immune recovery for long-term success of AHCT in lymphomas.
Factors known to affect early immune recovery are discussed and suggestions made 
how to improve mobilization and collection processes to optimize immune recovery 
and post-transplant outcomes.

DOI: 10.1080/10428194.2019.1581929 
PMID: 30843749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

