
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Mar 6;9(1):3640. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-40216-2.

Proteolytic Degradation of reduced Human Beta Defensin 1 generates a Novel
Antibiotic Octapeptide.

Wendler J(1), Schroeder BO(2)(3), Ehmann D(1), Koeninger L(1), Mailänder-Sánchez 
D(1), Lemberg C(4)(5), Wanner S(4)(6), Schaller M(4), Stange EF(2), Malek NP(1), 
Weidenmaier C(6), LeibundGut-Landmann S(5), Wehkamp J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 1, University Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen,
Germany.
(2)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart and 
University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(3)Wallenberg Laboratory, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Institute of Dermatology, University Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(5)Institute of Immunology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zürich, Zurich,
Switzerland.
(6)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Hospital Tuebingen, 
Tuebingen, Germany.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine 1, University Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen,
Germany. jan.wehkamp@med.uni-tuebingen.de.

Microbial resistance against clinical used antibiotics is on the rise.
Accordingly, there is a high demand for new innovative antimicrobial strategies. 
The host-defense peptide human beta-defensin 1 (hBD-1) is produced continuously
by epithelial cells and exhibits compelling antimicrobial activity after
reduction of its disulphide bridges. Here we report that proteolysis of reduced
hBD-1 by gastrointestinal proteases as well as human duodenal secretions produces
an eight-amino acid carboxy-terminal fragment. The generated octapeptide retains 
antibiotic activity, yet with distinct characteristics differing from the
full-length peptide. We modified the octapeptide by stabilizing its termini and
by using non-natural D-amino acids. The native and modified peptide variants
showed antibiotic activity against pathogenic as well as antibiotic-resistant
microorganisms, including E. coli, P. aeruginosa and C. albicans. Moreover, in an
in vitro C. albicans infection model the tested peptides demonstrated effective
amelioration of C. albicans infection without showing cytotoxity on human cells. 
In summary, protease degradation of hBD-1 provides a yet unknown mechanism to
broaden antimicrobial host defense, which could be used to develop
defensin-derived therapeutic applications.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-40216-2 
PMCID: PMC6403363
PMID: 30842543  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

