
1. J Fish Dis. 2019 May;42(5):657-666. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12962. Epub 2019 Mar 10.

Identification and functional characterization of Histone-like DNA-binding
protein in Nocardia seriolae (NsHLP) involved in cell apoptosis.

Wang W(1)(2)(3)(4), Chen J(1)(2)(3)(4), Liao B(2), Xia L(1)(2)(4), Hou
S(1)(2)(3)(4), Wang Z(1)(2)(3)(4), Lu Y(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Research Institute of Guangdong Ocean University, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Fisheries College of Guangdong Ocean University, Zhanjiang, China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Biology and Epidemiology for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Zhanjiang, China.
(4)Guangdong Provincial Engineering Research Center for Aquatic Animal Health
Assessment, Shenzhen, China.

Nocardia seriolae, a facultative intracellular bacterium, is the main pathogen of
fish nocardiosis. Bioinformatic analysis showed that the histone-like DNA-binding
protein (HLP) gene of N. seriolae (nshlp) encoded a secreted protein and might
target the mitochondria in the host cell. To further study the preliminary
function of HLP in N. seriolae (NsHLP), the gene cloning, extracellular products 
identification, subcellular localization, overexpression and apoptosis detection 
assay were carried out in this study. Mass spectrometry analysis of the
extracellular products from N. seriolae showed that NsHLP was a secreted protein.
Subcellular localization of HLP-GFP fusion proteins mainly assembled in the
nucleus, which indicated that the NsHLP was co-located with the nucleus rather
than mitochondria in fathead minnow (FHM) cells. Notably, the expression of NsHLP
had changed the distribution of mitochondria into lumps in the FHM cell. In
addition, apoptotic features were found in the transfected FHM cells by
overexpression of NsHLP. Quantitative assays of mitochondrial membrane potential 
value, caspase-3 activity and pro-apoptotic genes mRNA (Bad, Bid and Bax)
expression level demonstrated that the cell apoptosis was induced in the
transfected FHM cells. All the results presented in this study provided insight
on the function of NsHLP, which suggested that it may participate in the cell
apoptosis regulation and play an important role in the pathogenesis of
N. seriolae.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.12962 
PMID: 30854666  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

