
1. J Dairy Sci. 2019 May;102(5):4249-4263. doi: 10.3168/jds.2018-15906. Epub 2019
Mar 7.

Candidate genes associated with the heritable humoral response to Mycobacterium
avium ssp. paratuberculosis in dairy cows have factors in common with
gastrointestinal diseases in humans.

McGovern SP(1), Purfield DC(2), Ring SC(3), Carthy TR(2), Graham DA(4), Berry
DP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University College Cork, Coláiste na hOllscoile
Corcaigh, College Road, Cork City, Co. Cork, Ireland T12 CY82.
(2)Teagasc, Animal & Grassland Research and Innovation Centre, Moorepark, Fermoy,
Co. Cork, Ireland P61 C996.
(3)Irish Cattle Breeding Federation, Highfield House, Shinagh, Bandon, Co. Cork, 
Ireland P72 X050.
(4)Animal Health Ireland, 4-5 The Archways, Carrick-on-Shannon, Co. Leitrim,
Ireland N41 WN27.
(5)Teagasc, Animal & Grassland Research and Innovation Centre, Moorepark, Fermoy,
Co. Cork, Ireland P61 C996. Electronic address: Donagh.Berry@teagasc.ie.

Infection of cattle with bovine paratuberculosis (i.e., Johne's disease) is
caused by Mycobacterium avium ssp. paratuberculosis (MAP) and results in a
chronic incurable gastroenteritis. This disease, which has economic ramifications
for the cattle industry, is increasing in detected prevalence globally;
subclinically infected animals can silently shed the bacterium into the
environment for years, exposing contemporaries and hampering disease-control
programs. The objective of the present study was to first quantify the genetic
parameters for humoral response to MAP in dairy cattle. This was followed by a
genome-based association analysis and subsequent downstream bioinformatic
analyses from imputed whole genome sequence SNP data. After edits, ELISA test
records were available on 136,767 cows; analyses were also undertaken on a subset
of 33,818 of these animals from herds with at least 5 MAP ELISA-positive cows,
with at least 1 of those positive cows being homebred. Variance components were
estimated using univariate animal and sire linear mixed models. The heritability 
calculated from the animal model for humoral response to MAP using alternative
phenotype definitions varied from 0.02 (standard error = 0.003) to 0.05 (standard
error = 0.008). The genome-based associations were undertaken within a mixed
model framework using weighted deregressed estimated breeding values as a
dependent variable on 1,883 phenotyped animals that were ≥87.5%
Holstein-Friesian. Putative susceptibility quantitative trait loci (QTL) were
identified on Bos taurus autosome 1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 18, 21, 23,
25, 26, 27, and 29; mapping the most significant SNP to genes within and
overlapping these QTL revealed that the most significant associations were with
the 10 functional candidate genes KALRN, ZBTB20, LPP, SLA2, FI3A1, LRCH3, DNAJC6,
ZDHHC14, SNX1, and HAS2. Pathway analysis failed to reveal significantly enriched
biological pathways, when both bovine-specific pathway data and human ortholog
data were taken into account. The existence of genetic variation for MAP
susceptibility in a large data set of dairy cows signifies the potential of
breeding programs for reducing MAP susceptibility. Furthermore, the
identification of susceptible QTL facilitates greater biological understanding of
bovine paratuberculosis and potential therapeutic targets for future
investigation. The novel molecular similarities identified between bovine
paratuberculosis and human inflammatory bowel disease suggest potential for human
therapeutic interventions to be translated to veterinary medicine and vice versa.

Copyright © 2019 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2018-15906 
PMID: 30852025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

