
1. Environ Microbiol. 2019 May;21(5):1771-1781. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.14586. Epub
2019 Mar 25.

A new chromosomal rearrangement improves the adaptation of wine yeasts to
sulfite.

García-Ríos E(1), Nuévalos M(1), Barrio E(1)(2), Puig S(1), Guillamón JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biotecnología de los Alimentos, Instituto de Agroquímica y
Tecnología de Alimentos (IATA-CSIC), Agustín Escardino 7, E-46980, Paterna,
Valencia, Spain.
(2)Departament de Genètica, Universitat de València, Doctor Moliner 50, E-46100, 
Burjassot, Valencia, Spain.

Sulfite-generating compounds are widely used during winemaking as preservatives
because of its antimicrobial and antioxidant properties. Thus, wine yeast strains
have developed different genetic strategies to increase its sulfite resistance.
The most efficient sulfite detoxification mechanism in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
uses a plasma membrane protein called Ssu1 to efflux sulfite. In wine yeast
strains, two chromosomal translocations (VIIItXVI and XVtXVI) involving the SSU1 
promoter region have been shown to upregulate SSU1 expression and, as a result,
increase sulfite tolerance. In this study, we have identified a novel chromosomal
rearrangement that triggers wine yeast sulfite adaptation. An inversion in
chromosome XVI (inv-XVI) probably due to sequence microhomology, which involves
SSU1 and GCR1 regulatory regions, increases the expression of SSU1 and the
sulfite resistance of a commercial wine yeast strain. A detailed dissection of
this chimeric SSU1 promoter indicates that both the removed SSU1 promoter
sequence and the relocated GCR1 sequence contribute to SSU1 upregulation and
sulfite tolerance. However, no relevant function has been attributed to the
SSU1-promoter-binding transcription factor Fzf1. These results unveil a new
genomic event that confers an evolutive advantage to wine yeast strains.

© 2019 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.14586 
PMID: 30859719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

