
1. Prev Vet Med. 2019 Apr 1;165:52-62. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2019.02.008. Epub
2019 Feb 12.

Antibiotic resistance in Escherichia coli from pigs from birth to slaughter and
its association with antibiotic treatment.

Burow E(1), Rostalski A(2), Harlizius J(3), Gangl A(2), Simoneit C(4), Grobbel
M(4), Kollas C(4), Tenhagen BA(4), Käsbohrer A(4).

Author information: 
(1)German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, Max-Dohrn-Str. 8-10, 10589,
Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: Elke.Burow@bfr.bund.de.
(2)Bavarian Animal Health Services, Senator-Gerauer-Str. 23, 85586, Poing,
Germany.
(3)Animal Health Services, Chamber of Agriculture of North Rhine-Westphalia, Haus
Düsse, Ostinghausen, 59505, Bad Sassendorf, Germany.
(4)German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, Max-Dohrn-Str. 8-10, 10589,
Berlin, Germany.

The purpose of this longitudinal study was to describe the occurrence of
antibiotic resistance in faecal Escherichia coli isolated from pigs between birth
and slaughter and its association with antibiotic treatment. Four objectives were
addressed: comparison of antibiotic resistance in isolates from a) treated vs.
non-treated pigs, b) follow-up vs. initial samples of treated and non-treated
pigs, c) pigs receiving treatments via different administration routes and d)
sows and their piglets. Each comparison addressed the following antibiotic groups
used for treatment: beta-lactams, tetracyclines, polymyxins and macrolides, and
the susceptibility of E. coli isolates to the respective agents: ampicillin,
tetracycline, colistin and azithromycin. Between 2014 and 2016, 406 focal animals
from 29 commercial breeding herds were followed from birth to the end of the
relevant fattening periods. All antibiotic treatments in these pigs were
documented. Faecal samples were collected from the focal pigs once while
suckling, once after weaning and three times during fattening, and from their
dams once around farrowing. Escherichia coli isolated from these samples was
tested for antibiotic susceptibility. In total, 264 animals from 19 breeding
herds were treated with an antibiotic at least once during their lifetime.
Beta-lactams, tetracyclines and colistin were used most frequently. Piglets were 
treated individually by injection (n = 108 treatments) or via drench (9); weaners
via feed (192) or water (56) and fatteners via feed (30) or injection (15).
Resistance to ampicillin and tetracycline in E. coli was already common prior to 
antibiotic treatment. Resistance proportions were higher for beta-lactam-,
tetracycline-, colistin- and macrolide-treated pigs compared to untreated pigs at
different sampling periods (p < 0.05; Fisher's exact test). In the logistic
analysis, the difference was confirmed for beta-lactam-treated vs. untreated
pigs. In E. coli from macrolide-untreated pigs, resistance to azithromycin was
more frequent compared to pre-treatment values. Route of application did not
affect rates of antibiotic resistance in the logistic analysis even though
Fisher's exact test indicated associations for beta-lactams (feed/water vs.
injection), tetracyclines (feed/water vs. non-treatment) and macrolides
(tulathromycin-injection vs. tylosin in feed). Piglets were more likely to carry 
an E. coli resistant to ampicillin or azithromycin if their dams did so as well. 
Our results suggest further research on resistance effects by administration
routes is required. Reducing antibiotic resistance in sows might lead to a lower 
level of beta-lactam or macrolide-resistant E. coli among their progeny. To
preserve treatment options for bacterial infections, antibiotic use should be
restricted to necessary cases.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2019.02.008 
PMID: 30851928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

