
1. J Cell Biochem. 2019 Aug;120(8):12331-12339. doi: 10.1002/jcb.28497. Epub 2019
Mar 12.

Inhibition of tyrosine kinases protects against lipopolysaccharide-induced acute 
lung injury by preventing nuclear export of Nrf2.

Duan J(1), Yang Z(1), Huang J(1), Zhu Y(1), Zhao H(2), Unwith S(2), Gao X(1), Lu 
K(1), Ning J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Anaesthetics, Pain Medicine and Intensive Care, Department of Surgery and
Cancer, Faculty of Medicine, Chelsea & Westminster Hospital, Imperial College
London, London, UK.

Acute Lung Injury is a common severe pathological condition that is usually
caused by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) infection from bacteria. Enhanced activity of 
nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) could attenuate LPS induced
lung injury, However, it still remains unknown whether the enhanced activity of
Nrf2 via suppression of Nrf2 nucleus export attenuates the LPS induced lung
injury. The aim of this study is to investigate the effects of inhibitors of Fyn 
on the LPS-induced acute lung injury and to explore its underlying molecular
mechanisms. Nrf2 localization in the cells was observed by using confocal
microscopy and its transcriptional activation was measured by Electrophoretic
Mobility Shift Assay and controlled genes expression levels. The lung injury
severity was examined by histopathological scoring and oxidative stress level. In
this study, we showed that PP2, LMB, and Nrf2 Y568A abrogated Nrf2 nuclear export
and thus enhance the Nrf2 transcriptional activity. PP2 attenuated lung injury
and the reduction of cells viability induced by LPS. The current study
demonstrated, for the first time, that increase of expression of Nrf2 controlled 
protective genes via suppression of Nrf2 nucleus export could attenuate lung
injury.

Â© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.28497 
PMID: 30861161  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

