
1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2019 May 1;135:227-234. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2019.03.007. Epub 2019 Mar 9.

Peroxiredoxin expression and redox status in neutrophils and HL-60 cells.

de Souza LF(1), Pearson AG(2), Pace PE(2), Dafre AL(3), Hampton MB(2), Meotti
FC(4), Winterbourn CC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Química (IQUSP), Universidade de São 
Paulo, São Paulo, SP, CEP 05508-000, Brazil.
(2)Centre for Free Radical Research, Department of Pathology and Biomedical
Science, University of Otago Christchurch, PO Box 4345, Christchurch, 8040, New
Zealand.
(3)Departamento de Bioquímica, Centro de ciências biológicas, Universidade
Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, SC, CEP 88040-900, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Química (IQUSP), Universidade de São 
Paulo, São Paulo, SP, CEP 05508-000, Brazil. Electronic address:
flaviam@iq.usp.br.
(5)Centre for Free Radical Research, Department of Pathology and Biomedical
Science, University of Otago Christchurch, PO Box 4345, Christchurch, 8040, New
Zealand. Electronic address: christine.winterbourn@otago.ac.nz.

Peroxiredoxins (Prxs) are thiol peroxidases with a key role in antioxidant
defense and redox signaling. They could be important in neutrophils for handling 
the large amount of oxidants that these cells produce. We investigated the redox 
state of Prx1 and Prx2 in HL-60 promyelocytic cells differentiated to
neutrophil-like cells (dHL-60) and in human neutrophils. HL-60 cell
differentiation with dimethyl sulfoxide caused a large decrease in expression of 
both Prxs, and all-trans retinoic acid also decreased Prx1 expression. Prx1 was
mostly reduced in dHL-60 cells. NADPH oxidase activation by phorbol myristate
acetate (PMA) or ingestion of Staphylococcus aureus induced rapid oxidation to
disulfide-linked dimers, and eventually hyperoxidation. The NADPH oxidase
inhibitor, diphenyleneiodonium, prevented Prx1 dimerization in stimulated
dHL-60 cells, and decreased the extent of oxidation under resting conditions. In 
contrast, Prx1 and Prx2 were present in neutrophils from human blood as
disulfides, and PMA or S. aureus caused no further oxidation. They remained
oxidized on incubation with diphenyleneiodonium in media. Although this suggests 
that Prx redox cycling could be deficient in neutrophils, thioredoxin expression 
and thioredoxin reductase activity were similar in neutrophils and dHL-60 cells. 
Additionally, neutrophil thioredoxin was initially reduced and underwent
oxidation after PMA activation. Thus, although the Prxs respond to oxidant
generation in dHL-60 cells, in neutrophils they appear "locked" as disulfides. On
this basis we propose that neutrophil Prxs are inefficient antioxidants and
contribute little to peroxide removal during the oxidative burst, and speculate
that they might be involved in other cell processes.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2019.03.007 
PMID: 30862546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

