
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Feb 26;10:183. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00183. eCollection
2019.

GM-CSF Promotes the Expansion and Differentiation of Cord Blood Myeloid-Derived
Suppressor Cells, Which Attenuate Xenogeneic Graft-vs.-Host Disease.

Park MY(1), Lim BG(1), Kim SY(1), Sohn HJ(1), Kim S(2)(3), Kim TG(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Catholic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Bank, The Catholic University of Korea,
Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Department of Biomedicine and Health Sciences, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, South Korea.

Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are increased in tumor patients. Studies
have shown generation of MDSCs from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) by various cytokine combinations. However, large scale expansion of human
MDSCs has not been demonstrated or applied in clinic settings. We investigated
which cytokine combinations among GM-CSF/SCF, G-CSF/SCF, or M-CSF/SCF efficiently
expand and differentiate human MDSCs following culture CD34+ cells of umbilical
cord blood (CB). GM-CSF/SCF showed the greatest expansion of MDSCs. Up to 108
MDSCs (HLA-DRlowCD11b+CD33+) could be produced from 1 unit of CB following 6
weeks of continuous culture. MDSCs produced from culture of CD34+ cells with
GM-CSF/SCF for 6 weeks had the greatest suppressive function of T cell
proliferation and had the highest expression of immunosuppressive molecules
including iNOS, arginase 1 and IDO compared to those differentiated with
G-CSF/SCF or M-CSF/SCF. MDSCs secreted IL-10, TGB-β, and VEGF. The infusion of
expanded MDSCs significantly prolonged the survival and decreased the GVHD score 
in a NSG xenogeneic model of GVHD. Injected MDSCs increased IL-10 and TGF-β but
decreased the level of TNF-α and IL-6 in the serum of treated mice. Notably,
FoxP3 expressing regulatory T (Treg) cells were increased while IFN-γ (Th1) and
IL-17 (Th17) producing T cells were decreased in the spleen of MDSC treated mice 
compared to untreated GVHD mice. Our results demonstrate that human MDSCs are
generated from CB CD34+ cells using GM-CSF/SCF. These MDSCs exhibited potent
immunosuppressive function, suggesting that they are useable as a treatment for
inflammatory diseases such as GVHD.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00183 
PMCID: PMC6399310
PMID: 30863394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

