
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj. 2019 Jun;1863(6):1027-1039. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2019.03.009. Epub 2019 Mar 12.

Investigation of quaternary structure of aggregating 3-ketosteroid dehydrogenase 
from Sterolibacterium denitrificans: In the pursuit of consensus of various
biophysical techniques.

Sofińska K(1), Wojtkiewicz AM(2), Wójcik P(1), Zastawny O(1), Guzik M(1),
Winiarska A(1), Waligórski P(3), Cieśla M(4), Barbasz J(1), Szaleniec M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jerzy Haber Institute of Catalysis and Surface Chemistry, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Niezapominajek 8, PL30239, Krakow, Poland.
(2)Jerzy Haber Institute of Catalysis and Surface Chemistry, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Niezapominajek 8, PL30239, Krakow, Poland. Electronic address:
a.wojtkiewicz@cyfronet.pl.
(3)The Franciszek Górski Institute of Plant Physiology, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Niezapominajek 8, PL30239 Krakow, Poland.
(4)Marian Smoluchowski Institute of Physics, Jagiellonian University,
Lojasiewicza 11, 30-348 Krakow, Poland.

In this work we analyzed the quaternary structure of FAD-dependent 3-ketosteroid 
dehydrogenase (AcmB) from Sterolibacterium denitrificans, the protein that in
solution forms massive aggregates (>600 kDa). Using size-excursion chromatography
(SEC), dynamic light scattering (DLS), native-PAGE and atomic force microscopy
(AFM) we studied the nature of enzyme aggregation. Partial protein de-aggregation
was facilitated by the presence of non-ionic detergent such as Tween 20 or by a
high degree of protein dilution but not by addition of a reducing agent or an
increase of ionic strength. De-aggregating influence of Tween 20 had no impact on
either enzyme's specific activity or FAD reconstitution to recombinant AcmB. The 
joint experimental (DLS, isoelectric focusing) and theoretical investigations
demonstrated gradual shift of enzyme's isoelectric point upon aggregation from
8.6 for a monomeric form to even 5.0. The AFM imaging on mica or highly oriented 
pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) surface enabled observation of individual protein
monomers deposited from a highly diluted solution (0.2 μg/ml). Such approach
revealed that native AcmB can indeed be monomeric. AFM imaging supported by
theoretical random sequential adsorption (RSA) kinetics allowed estimation of
distribution enzyme forms in the bulk solution: 5%, monomer, 11.4% dimer and 12% 
trimer. Finally, based on results of AFM as well as analysis of the surface of
AcmB homology models we have observed that aggregation is most probably initiated
by hydrophobic forces and then assisted by electrostatic attraction between
negatively charged aggregates and positively charged monomers.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2019.03.009 
PMID: 30876874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

