
1. Thromb Haemost. 2019 Jun;119(6):930-940. doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1681046. Epub 2019
Mar 14.

Platelet Btk is Required for Maintaining Lung Vascular Integrity during Murine
Pneumococcal Pneumosepsis.

de Porto APNA(1)(2), Claushuis TAM(1)(2), van der Donk LEH(1)(2), de Beer
R(1)(2), de Boer OJ(3), Florquin S(3), Roelofs JJTH(3), Hendriks RW(4), van der
Poll T(1)(2)(5), Van't Veer C(1)(2), de Vos AF(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Amsterdam UMC, Academic
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Amsterdam Infection and Immunity Institute (AI&II), Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, Amsterdam UMC, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Amsterdam UMC, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Platelet Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) is an essential signalling protein for
the collagen receptor glycoprotein VI (GPVI) and podoplanin receptor
C-type-lectin-like receptor-2, which are platelet receptors implicated in the
maintenance of vascular integrity during inflammation. Moreover, platelets,
platelet GPVI and Btk are important for host defence during murine bacterial
pneumosepsis. The aim of this study was to determine the role of platelet Btk in 
vascular integrity and host defence during murine pneumosepsis caused by the
common human pathogens Streptococcus pneumoniae and Klebsiella pneumoniae. Using 
the Cre-loxP system, male platelet-specific Btk-deficient mice (PF4creBtkfl/Y)
were created. Similar to platelets from total Btk-deficient mice, platelets from 
PF4creBtkfl/Y mice showed abrogated aggregation and P-selectin expression when
stimulated with the GPVI ligand cross-linked collagen-related peptide. Upon
infection with S. pneumoniae, PF4creBtkfl/Y mice showed increased lung bleeding, 
but unimpaired anti-bacterial defence. During pneumosepsis evoked by K.
pneumoniae, platelet Btk deficiency was not associated with lung bleeding and did
not impact on host defence, even when platelet function was further compromised
by blocking secondary platelet activation by the P2Y12 receptor antagonist
clopidogrel. Together, these data indicate that, while platelet Btk is not
important for anti-bacterial defence in pneumosepsis, its role in maintaining
vascular integrity in the lung depends on the causative pathogen.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart Â· New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0039-1681046 
PMID: 30873567  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.

