
1. J Immunol. 2019 May 1;202(9):2795-2805. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1800899. Epub 2019 
Mar 18.

Dendritic Cell Expression of Retinal Aldehyde Dehydrogenase-2 Controls
Graft-versus-Host Disease Lethality.

Thangavelu G(1), Lee YC(2), Loschi M(1), Schaechter KM(1), Feser CJ(1), Koehn
BH(1), Nowak EC(2), Zeiser R(3), Serody JS(4), Murphy WJ(5), Munn DH(6), Chambon 
P(7), Noelle RJ(2), Blazar BR(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Department of Pediatrics,
Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Lebanon, NH 03756.
(3)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, University
Medical Center, Albert Ludwig University of Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC 79106.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Center for Comparative Medicine, University of
California, Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA 95817.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, GA
30912; and.
(7)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR7104, 
INSERM U964, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, France.
(8)Division of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Department of Pediatrics,
Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455;
blaza001@umn.edu.

Recent studies have underscored the critical role of retinoic acid (RA) in the
development of lineage-committed CD4 and CD8 T cells in vivo. We have shown that 
under acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) inflammatory conditions, RA is
upregulated in the intestine and is proinflammatory, as GVHD lethality was
attenuated when donor allogeneic T cells selectively expressed a dominant
negative RA receptor α that blunted RA signaling. RA can function in an autocrine
and paracrine fashion, and as such, the host cell lineage responsible for the
production of RA metabolism and the specific RA-metabolizing enzymes that
potentiate GVHD severity are unknown. In this study, we demonstrate that
enhancing RA degradation in the host and to a lesser extent donor hematopoietic
cells by overexpressing the RA-catabolizing enzyme CYP26A1 reduced GVHD. RA
production is facilitated by retinaldehyde isoform-2 (RALDH2) preferentially
expressed in dendritic cells (DCs). Conditionally deleted RA-synthesizing enzyme 
RALDH2 in host or to a lesser extent donor DCs reduced GVHD lethality. Improved
survival in recipients with RALDH2-deleted DCs was associated with increased T
cell death, impaired T effector function, increased regulatory T cell frequency, 
and augmented coinhibitory molecule expression on donor CD4+ T cells. In
contrast, retinaldehydrogenase isoform-1 (RALDH1) is dominantly expressed in
intestinal epithelial cells. Unexpectedly, conditional host intestinal epithelial
cells RALDH1 deletion failed to reduce GVHD. These data demonstrate the critical 
role of both donor and especially host RALDH2+ DCs in driving murine GVHD and
suggest RALDH2 inhibition or CYP26A1 induction as novel therapeutic strategies to
prevent GVHD.

Copyright © 2019 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1800899 
PMCID: PMC6478543
PMID: 30885956  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

