
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom. 2019 Jun;1867(6):537-547. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2019.03.002. Epub 2019 Mar 15.

Structural and binding studies of phosphopantetheine adenylyl transferase from
Acinetobacter baumannii.

Gupta A(1), Singh PK(1), Iqbal N(1), Sharma P(1), Baraigya HR(1), Kaur P(1), Umar
MS(2), Ahmad F(2), Sharma A(2), Owais M(2), Sharma S(1), Singh TP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.
(2)Interdisciplinary Biotechnology Unit, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh,
India.
(3)Department of Biophysics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India. Electronic address: tpsingh.aiims@gmail.com.

Phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT, EC. 2.7.7.3) catalyzes an essential
step in the reaction that transfers an adenylyl group from adenosine tri
phosphate (ATP) to 4'-phosphopantetheine (pPant) yielding 3'- dephospho-coenzyme 
A (dPCoA) and pyrophosphate (PP) in the coenzyme A (CoA) biosynthesis pathway.
The enzyme PPAT from Acinetobacter baumannii (AbPPAT) was cloned, expressed and
purified. The binding studies of AbPPAT were carried out with two compounds,
tri‑sodium citrate (TSC) and l-ascorbic acid (LAA, vitamin-C) using fluorescence 
spectroscopic (FS) and surface Plasmon resonance (SPR) methods. Both methods
provided similar values of dissociation constants for TSC and LAA which were of
the order of 10-8 M and 10-5 M respectively. The computer aided docking studies
indicated fewer interactions of LAA with AbPPAT as compared to those of TSC. The 
freshly purified samples of AbPPAT were crystallized. The crystals of AbPPAT were
soaked in the solutions containing TSC and LAA. However, the crystals of the
complex of AbPPAT with LAA did not diffract well and hence the structure of the
complex of AbPPAT with LAA could not be determined. On the other hand, the
crystals of the complex of AbPPAT with TSC diffracted well and the structure was 
determined at 1.76 Å resolution. It showed that TSC bound to AbPPAT at the ATP
binding site and formed several intermolecular contacts including 12 hydrogen
bonds. The results of binding studies for both TSC and LAA and the structure of
the complex of AbPPAT with TSC clearly indicated a potential role of TSC and LAA 
as antibacterial agents.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2019.03.002 
PMID: 30885618  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

