
1. Chemosphere. 2019 Jun;225:507-516. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.03.089. Epub
2019 Mar 16.

Depth-dependent variations of dissolved organic matter composition and
humification in a plateau lake using fluorescence spectroscopy.

Song F(1), Wu F(2), Feng W(2), Liu S(2), He J(2), Li T(2), Zhang J(3), Wu A(2),
Amarasiriwardena D(4), Xing B(5), Bai Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Criteria and Risk Assessment, Chinese
Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing, 10012, China; College of
Water Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Criteria and Risk Assessment, Chinese
Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing, 10012, China.
(3)School of Environmental and Safety Engineering, Changzhou University, Jiangsu,
213000, China.
(4)School of Natural Science, Hampshire College, Amherst, MA, 01002, USA.
(5)Stockbridge School of Agriculture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA,
01003, USA.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Criteria and Risk Assessment, Chinese
Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing, 10012, China. Electronic
address: baiyc@craes.org.cn.

In aquatic systems, dissolved organic matter (DOM) plays an important role in
regulating the reactivity and transport of environmental pollutants. Fluorescence
excitation-emission matrix (EEM) analysis combined with fluorescence regional
integration (FRI) and parallel factorial analysis (PARAFAC) were applied to
investigate the composition, humification degree and depth-dependent variation of
DOM in Lake Baihua, China. The results showed that humic-like materials with more
than 60% of percentage fluorescence response (Pi,n) were dominant in DOM. The
molecular complexity and structural condensation of PARAFAC components showed the
order of C1 (humic-like components) > C3 (protein-like components) > C4
(fulvic-like components) > C2 (fulvic-like components). The lower maximum
fluorescence intensities (Fmax) of components in surface layers were attributed
to photo-oxidation of DOM by radiation. With depths less than 16 m, the Fmax
increases and decreases were attributed to accumulation of recalcitrant humic
substances and microbial/abiotic degradation of particulate DOM, respectively. A 
combination of biological and humification indices could be used as indicators
for distinguishing different degrees of humification and sources of DOM. DOM from
Lake Baihua mainly originated from an aquatic bacterial source that consisted of 
an important/intermediate autochthonous component with a weak humic character.
The fluorescence indices of PI,n/PII,n, PI+II+IV,n/PIII+V,n, C2, C1/C2 and
C2/(C3+C4) were more suitable to determine the humification degree. Stronger
humic characters and higher humification degree for DOM were present at depths of
10-13 m. The fluorescence spectroscopy combined with fluorescence indices is
convenient to investigate depth-dependent DOM characteristics and to assess water
quality or pollution risk in lake systems.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.03.089 
PMID: 30897474  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

