
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Mar 22;20(6). pii: E1447. doi: 10.3390/ijms20061447.

Dissipation of Three Fungicides and Their Effects on Anthocyanins and Color of
Monastrell Red Wines.

Briz-Cid N(1), Rial-Otero R(2), CÃ¡mara MA(3), Oliva J(4), Simal-Gandara J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Nutrition and Bromatology Group, Department of Analytical and Food Chemistry, 
CITACA, Faculty of Food Science and Technology, University of Vigo, Ourense
Campus, E32004 Ourense, Spain. nbriz@uvigo.es.
(2)Nutrition and Bromatology Group, Department of Analytical and Food Chemistry, 
CITACA, Faculty of Food Science and Technology, University of Vigo, Ourense
Campus, E32004 Ourense, Spain. raquelrial@uvigo.es.
(3)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Geology and Pedology, Faculty of
Chemistry, University of Murcia, Campus de Espinardo, 30100 Murcia, Spain.
mcamara@um.es.
(4)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Geology and Pedology, Faculty of
Chemistry, University of Murcia, Campus de Espinardo, 30100 Murcia, Spain.
josoliva@um.es.
(5)Nutrition and Bromatology Group, Department of Analytical and Food Chemistry, 
CITACA, Faculty of Food Science and Technology, University of Vigo, Ourense
Campus, E32004 Ourense, Spain. jsimal@uvigo.es.

The effect of fungicides on fermentation is of paramount importance to control
the quality and safety of wines. In this work, the quality (enological
parameters, color, phenolic content, antioxidant activity, and fungicide
residues) of wines from Monastrell grapes fortified with iprovalicarb,
mepanipyrim, and tetraconazole fungicides was evaluated. Along the winemaking
process, initial residues of mepanipyrim and tetraconazole were removed in more
than 90% while the dissipation of iprovalicarb was around 73%. Significant
statistical differences were found in the presence of iprovalicarb and
mepanipyrim residues, especially at the highest concentration assayed. For both
fungicides, increases in the volatile acidity (between 4 and 8.6 times), the
lactic acid content (between 8.6 and 20.5 times), the percentage of polymeric
anthocyanins (between 1.3 and 1.7 times), and also a slight increase of the total
phenolic index and the total anthocyanin content determined by spectrophotometry 
were observed. On the contrary, the total monomeric anthocyanins content
decreased about 16.3% and 28.6% in the presence of iprovalicarb and mepanipyrim, 
respectively. These results could be related to a higher development of acetic
acid or lactic bacteria in the presence of these fungicides. The color of the
final wines was also different in comparison with the control, with a higher
yellow component, color intensity, tonality, and hue angle because of pH changes 
in the medium. Tetraconazole fermentations had a more similar trend to the
control wine, probably due to the lower concentration of this fungicide in the
grape must at the initial time. No effects on the antioxidant activity was
observed for any of the target fungicides. A multivariate statistical analysis
was done to view the interrelationships between different variables (color and
anthocyanins profile). The obtained model allowed the wines to be separated
according to the fungicide treatment applied.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20061447 
PMCID: PMC6470954
PMID: 30909373  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

