
1. Arab J Gastroenterol. 2019 Jun;20(2):74-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ajg.2019.01.003. Epub 
2019 Mar 21.

Virulent Escherichia coli strains among Egyptian patients with acute diarrhoea
versus urinary tract infection, and their antibiotic susceptibility.

Tharwat N(1), El-Sherif R(2), Elnagdy S(1), Marzaban R(3), Amer S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Botany and Microbiology Department, Faculty of Science, Cairo University,
Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Microbiology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Tropical Medicine Department, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo,
Egypt.

BACKGROUND AND STUDY AIMS: Diarrhoea and urinary tract infection (UTI) are common
clinical problems. Meanwhile, Escherichia coli (E. coli), is the commonest
bacterial pathogen reported in both of them. This study aimed to evaluate the
pathogenic E. coli (PEC) in stool of acute diarrhoea and urine of UTI regarding
their virulence genes and their influence on the susceptibility to routinely
prescribed antibiotics.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Twenty two stool and another 22 urine samples of patients
with acute diarrhoea and UTI respectively were collected from patients admitted
at Kasr Al-Ainy Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Egypt. E. coli
isolation, identification of their phyla; chuA, yjaA, and TspE4.C2, and further
identification of 10 virulent genes; fimH, papC, papG//, papG///, papEF, afa,
sfa, CNF1, iroN & hlyA was performed. Antibiotic susceptibility was studied
against quinolones, gentamicin (GM), and trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole
(TMP-SMX).
RESULTS: The studied virulence genes were comparably detected in both pathogenic 
samples. In diarrheogenic E. coli (DEC); phylum A was significantly related to
both ciprofloxacin (CIP) and TMP-SMX resistance, and both of the virulence genes 
fimH and iroN were significantly related to all the studied antibiotics
resistance, while afa was significantly related to nalidixic acid (NA)
resistance. In uropathogenic E. coli (UEC); phylum D was significantly related to
CIP and levofloxacin resistance, and both of the virulence genes fimH and iroN
were significantly related to most of the studied antibiotics resistance.
CONCLUSION: The isolated PEC was evidently and broadly resistant to the studied
antibiotics, with limited influence of their phyla and virulence genes (fimH and 
iroN).

Copyright Â© 2019 Pan-Arab Association of Gastroenterology. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajg.2019.01.003 
PMID: 30905635  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

