
1. RNA. 2019 Jun;25(6):685-701. doi: 10.1261/rna.069609.118. Epub 2019 Mar 25.

Molecular mechanism of the RNA helicase DHX37 and its activation by UTP14A in
ribosome biogenesis.

Boneberg FM(1), Brandmann T(#)(1), Kobel L(#)(1), van den Heuvel J(#)(2),
Bargsten K(1), Bammert L(2), Kutay U(2), Jinek M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Zurich, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, ETH Zurich, CH-8093 Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    RNA. 2019 Nov;25(11):1576.

Eukaryotic ribosome biogenesis is a highly orchestrated process involving
numerous assembly factors including ATP-dependent RNA helicases. The DEAH
helicase DHX37 (Dhr1 in yeast) is activated by the ribosome biogenesis factor
UTP14A to facilitate maturation of the small ribosomal subunit. We report the
crystal structure of DHX37 in complex with single-stranded RNA, revealing a
canonical DEAH ATPase/helicase architecture complemented by a structurally unique
carboxy-terminal domain (CTD). Structural comparisons of the nucleotide-free
DHX37-RNA complex with DEAH helicases bound to RNA and ATP analogs reveal
conformational changes resulting in a register shift in the bound RNA, suggesting
a mechanism for ATP-dependent 3'-5' RNA translocation. We further show that a
conserved sequence motif in UTP14A interacts with and activates DHX37 by
stimulating its ATPase activity and enhancing RNA binding. In turn, the CTD of
DHX37 is required, but not sufficient, for interaction with UTP14A in vitro and
is essential for ribosome biogenesis in vivo. Together, these results shed light 
on the mechanism of DHX37 and the function of UTP14A in controlling its
recruitment and activity during ribosome biogenesis.

Â© 2019 Boneberg et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the 
RNA Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.069609.118 
PMCID: PMC6521606
PMID: 30910870  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

