
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Mar 27;9(1):5269. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-41748-3.

Global Gene Networks in 3D4/31 Porcine Alveolar Macrophages Treated with
Antigenic Epitopes of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae ApxIA, IIA, and IVA.

Kim S(1), Oh MW(1), Bin Park W(1), Yoo HS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. yoohs@snu.ac.kr.

Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae (App) is the causative agent of porcine
pleuropneumonia. Although App produces several virulence factors, Apx toxins, the
primary App virulence factors, have been the focus of numerous studies. However, 
the host response against the Apx toxins has not been elucidated at the
transcriptomic level. Therefore, in this study, we examined the response of an
immortalized porcine alveolar macrophage cell line (IPAM 3D4/31) to four
antigenic epitopes of the App exotoxins, ApxIA, IIA and IVA. The antigenic
epitopes of the Apx toxins (ApxIA Ct, ApxIIA Nt, ApxIVA C1 and ApxIV C2) were
determined by an in-silico antigenicity prediction analysis. Gene expression in
IPAMs was analyzed by RNA-Seq after treatment with the four proteins for 24â€‰h. A 
total of 15,269 DEGs were observed to be associated with cellular and metabolic
processes in the GO category Biological Process and nuclear receptors and
apoptosis signaling in IPA analyses. These DEGs were also related to M2
macrophage polarization and apoptosis in IPAMs. These host transcriptional
analyses present novel global gene networks of the host response to treatment
with Apx toxins.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-41748-3 
PMCID: PMC6437162
PMID: 30918280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

