
1. Diagn Cytopathol. 2019 Aug;47(8):797-802. doi: 10.1002/dc.24179. Epub 2019 Mar
27.

Fine-needle aspiration of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans metastasizing to
hemithorax with superior vena cava compression: Case report and literature
review.

Banach BS(1), Antic T(1), Bridge JA(2), Cipriani NA(1), Frye L(3), Krausz TN(1), 
Biernacka A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, The Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, Arizona.
(3)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois.

Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP) is a low-grade spindle cell tumor of the
skin commonly arising on the trunk and extremities which tends to be slow growing
yet locally aggressive. DFSPs are associated with a good prognosis when surgical 
excision with negative margins is achieved. Although local recurrences occur up
to 50% of incompletely resected cases, distant metastases are very rare. Here, we
report a case of DFSP metastasizing to the right hemithorax diagnosed by an
endobronchial ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (FNA) 9 years after
initial presentation. The aspirate showed a bland spindle cell proliferation that
was morphologically similar to the original skin excision; the storiform pattern 
was particularly prominent in tumor-tissue fragments in the cellblock.
Immunostaining showed strong, diffuse positivity for CD34. Molecular studies
demonstrated a characteristic COL1A1/PDGFB fusion in both original and metastatic
specimens. A review of the literature revealed that metastatic DFSP most often
involves the lungs, occurs usually in cases with fibrosarcomatous transformation 
and after a local recurrence, and presents on average 4.5 years after the
original diagnosis. This case did not show fibrosarcomatous transformation or
local recurrence prior to metastasis 9 years later. In summary, it is important
to consider the potential for metastases years after a nonrecurring primary DFSP,
despite its rarity. Cytologic features when complemented by ancillary studies and
awareness of the patient's prior clinical history permit a confident diagnosis of
metastatic DFSP by FNA. In addition, by confirming the characteristic
translocation, tyrosine-kinase inhibitor imatinib can provide additional
treatment options for unresectable metastatic DFSP.

Â© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dc.24179 
PMID: 30919592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

