
1. Biochemistry. 2019 Dec 31;58(52):5281-5293. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.9b00177.
Epub 2019 May 24.

Characterization of Thiamine Diphosphate-Dependent 4-Hydroxybenzoylformate
Decarboxylase Enzymes from Rhodococcus jostii RHA1 and Pseudomonas fluorescens
Pf-5 Involved in Degradation of Aryl C2 Lignin Degradation Fragments.

Wei Z(1), Wilkinson RC(2), Rashid GMM(1), Brown D(1), Fülöp V(2), Bugg TDH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry , University of Warwick , Coventry CV4 7AL , U.K.
(2)School of Life Sciences , University of Warwick , Coventry CV4 7AL , U.K.

A thiamine diphosphate-dependent enzyme annotated as a benzoylformate
decarboxylase is encoded by gene cluster ro02984-ro02986 in Rhodococcus jostii
RHA1 previously shown to generate vanillin and 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde from lignin 
oxidation, and a closely related gene cluster is also found in the genome of
Pseudomonas fluorescens Pf-5. Two hypotheses for possible pathways involving a
thiamine diphosphate-dependent cleavage, either C-C cleavage of a ketol or
diketone aryl C3 substrate or decarboxylation of an aryl C2 substrate, were
investigated by expression and purification of the recombinant enzymes and
expression of dehydrogenase and oxidase enzymes also found in the gene clusters. 
The ThDP-dependent enzymes showed no activity for cleavage of aryl C3 ketol or
diketone substrates but showed activity for decarboxylation of benzoylformate and
4-hydroxybenzoylformate. A flavin-dependent oxidase encoded by gene ro02984 was
found to oxidize either mandelic acid or phenylglyoxal. The crystal structure of 
the P. fluorescens decarboxylase enzyme was determined at 1.69 Å resolution,
showing similarity to structures of known benzoylformate decarboxylase enzymes.
The P. fluorescens decarboxylase enzyme showed enhanced carboligase activity
between vanillin and acetaldehyde, rationalized by the presence of alanine versus
serine at residue 73 in the enzyme active site, which was investigated further by
site-directed mutagenesis of this residue. A hypothesis for a pathway for
degradation of aryl C2 fragments arising from oxidative cleavage of
phenylcoumaran and diarylpropane structures in lignin is proposed.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.9b00177 
PMID: 30946572  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

