
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2019 May;103(10):4137-4151. doi:
10.1007/s00253-019-09749-4. Epub 2019 Apr 2.

Fungal biotransformation of short-chain n-alkylcycloalkanes.

Schl√ºter R(1), Dallinger A(2), Kabisch J(2), Duldhardt I(2), Schauer F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Strasse
8, 17489, Greifswald, Germany. rabea.schlueter@uni-greifswald.de.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Strasse
8, 17489, Greifswald, Germany.

The cycloalkanes, comprising up to 45% of the hydrocarbon fraction, occur in
crude oil or refined oil products (e.g., gasoline) mainly as alkylated
cyclohexane derivatives and have been increasingly found in environmental samples
of soil and water. Furthermore, short-chain alkylated cycloalkanes are components
of the so-called volatile organic compounds (VOCs). This study highlights the
biotransformation of methyl- and ethylcyclohexane by the alkane-assimilating
yeast Candida maltosa and the phenol- and benzoate-utilizing yeast Trichosporon
mucoides under laboratory conditions. In the course of this biotransformation, we
detected 25 different metabolites, which were analyzed by HPLC and GC-MS. The
biotransformation process of methylcyclohexane in both yeasts involve (A) ring
hydroxylation at different positions (C2, C3, and C4) and subsequent oxidation to
ketones as well as (B) oxidation of the alkyl side chain to hydroxylated and acid
products. The yeast T. mucoides additionally performs ring hydroxylation at the
C1-position and (C) oxidative decarboxylation and (D) aromatization of
cyclohexanecarboxylic acid. Both yeasts also oxidized the saturated ring system
and the side chain of ethylcyclohexane. However, the cyclohexylacetic acid, which
was formed, seemed not to be substrate for aromatization. This is the first
report of several new transformation reactions of alkylated cycloalkanes for
eukaryotic microorganisms.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-019-09749-4 
PMID: 30941461  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

