
1. Biol Lett. 2019 Jan 31;15(1):20180607. doi: 10.1098/rsbl.2018.0607.

Phagocyte chase behaviours: discrimination between Gram-negative and
Gram-positive bacteria by amoebae.

Rashidi G(1), Ostrowski EA(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston , Houston, TX 
77204 , USA.
(2)2 Institute of Natural and Mathematical Sciences, Massey University , Auckland
, New Zealand.

Phagocytes are cells that pursue, engulf and kill bacteria. They include
macrophages and neutrophils of the mammalian immune system, as well as
free-living amoebae that hunt and engulf bacteria for food. Phagocytosis can
result in diverse outcomes, ranging from sustenance to infection and colonization
by either pathogens or beneficial symbionts-and thus, discrimination may be
necessary to seek out good bacteria while avoiding bad ones. Here we tested
whether the soil amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum can discriminate among different
types of bacteria using behavioural assays where amoebae were presented with
paired choices of different bacteria. We observed variation in the extent to
which the amoebae pursued different types of bacteria, as well as preferential
migration towards Gram-negative compared with Gram-positive bacteria. Response
profiles were similar for amoebae that originated from different geographical
locations, suggesting that chase preference is conserved across much of the
species range. While prior work has demonstrated that bacteria use chemotaxis to 
seek out amoebae they colonize, our work suggests that the opposite also
occurs-amoebae can preferentially direct themselves to particular bacteria in the
environment. Preferential sensing and response may help to explain why some
amoeba-bacteria associations are more common in nature than others.

DOI: 10.1098/rsbl.2018.0607 
PMCID: PMC6371911
PMID: 30958215  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

