
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Apr 11;9(1):5949. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-41548-9.

Accurate target identification for Mycobacterium tuberculosis endoribonuclease
toxins requires expression in their native host.

Cintrón M(1), Zeng JM(2), Barth VC(1), Cruz JW(1), Husson RN(2), Woychik
NA(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rutgers University, Robert
Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, NJ, 08854, USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Boston Children's Hospital/Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rutgers University, Robert
Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, NJ, 08854, USA.
nancy.woychik@rutgers.edu.
(4)Member, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Piscataway, 08854, USA.
nancy.woychik@rutgers.edu.

The Mycobacterium tuberculosis genome harbors an unusually high number of
toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems. These TA systems have been implicated in
establishing the nonreplicating persistent state of this pathogen during latent
tuberculosis infection. More than half of the M. tuberculosis TA systems belong
to the VapBC (virulence associated protein) family. In this work, we first
identified the RNA targets for the M. tuberculosis VapC-mt11 (VapC11, Rv1561)
toxin in vitro to learn more about the general function of this family of toxins.
Recombinant VapC-mt11 cleaved 15 of the 45 M. tuberculosis tRNAs at a single site
within their anticodon stem loop (ASL) to generate tRNA halves. Cleavage was
dependent on the presence of a GG consensus sequence immediately before the cut
site and a structurally intact ASL. However, in striking contrast to the broad
enzyme activity exhibited in vitro, we used a specialized RNA-seq method to
demonstrate that tRNA cleavage was highly specific in vivo. Expression of
VapC-mt11 in M. tuberculosis resulted in cleavage of only two tRNA isoacceptors
containing the GG consensus sequence, tRNAGln32-CUG and tRNALeu3-CAG. Therefore, 
our results indicate that although in vitro studies are useful for identification
of the class of RNA cleaved and consensus sequences required for accurate
substrate recognition by endoribonuclease toxins, definitive RNA target
identification requires toxin expression in their native host. The restricted in 
vivo specificity of VapC-mt11 suggests that it may be enlisted to surgically
manipulate pathogen physiology in response to stress.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-41548-9 
PMCID: PMC6459853
PMID: 30976025  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

