
1. Carbohydr Polym. 2019 Jul 1;215:90-98. doi: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.03.044. Epub
2019 Mar 20.

Thermo-responsive behaviors and bioactivities of hydroxybutyl chitosans prepared 
in alkali/urea aqueous solutions.

Cai Y(1), Cao J(1), Xu C(1), Zhou J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Key Laboratory of Biomedical Polymers of Ministry 
of Education, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Key Laboratory of Biomedical Polymers of Ministry 
of Education, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. Electronic address:
zhoujp325@whu.edu.cn.

A series of hydroxybutyl chitosans (HBCSs) with a degree of substitution (DS)
ranging from 0.38 to 1.54 were homogeneously synthesized in KOH/LiOH/urea aqueous
solutions under ambient conditions. The structure and solution properties of
HBCSs were characterized by FT-IR, NMR, SEC-LLS, UV-vis, rheological and DLS
measurements. The amino groups at C2 and hydroxyl groups at C3 and C6
participated in the reaction, although substitution mainly occurred at the
hydroxyl groups at C6. The HBCSs exhibited good solubility in aqueous solutions, 
and those with a DS above 1.25 displayed phase separation behavior and
precipitated out from solution when heated to a critical temperature. All results
confirmed the hypothesis that the homogeneous KOH/LiOH/urea aqueous solution is a
stable, mild, and energy-saving reaction medium for preparing HBCSs. Moreover,
the HBCSs exhibited excellent biocompatibility, and even promoted the
proliferation of normal cells. They also displayed antibacterial activities
against Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli, thus being suitable for
biomedical applications.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.03.044 
PMID: 30981375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

