
1. Autophagy. 2020 Feb;16(2):223-238. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2019.1606635. Epub 2019 
Apr 25.

The negative effect of lipid challenge on autophagy inhibits T cell responses.

Guerrero-Ros I(1), Clement CC(1), Reynolds CA(1), Patel B(2), Santambrogio
L(1)(3)(4), Cuervo AM(2)(4), Macian F(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(4)Institute for Aging Research, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, 
USA.

Obesity is associated with changes in the immune system that significantly hinder
its ability to mount efficient immune responses. Previous studies have reported a
dysregulation of immune responses caused by lipid challenge; however, the
mechanisms underlying that dysregulation are still not completely understood.
Autophagy is an essential catabolic process through which cellular components are
degraded by the lysosomal machinery. In T cells, autophagy is an actively
regulated process necessary to sustain homeostasis and activation. Here, we
report that CD4+ T cell responses are inhibited when cells are challenged with
increasing concentrations of fatty acids. Furthermore, analysis of T cells from
diet-induced obese mice confirms that high lipid load inhibits activation-induced
responses in T cells. We have found that autophagy is inhibited in CD4+ T cells
exposed in vitro or in vivo to lipid stress, which causes decreased autophagosome
formation and degradation. Supporting that inhibition of autophagy caused by high
lipid load is a key mechanism that accounts for the effects on T cell function of
lipid stress, we found that ATG7 (autophagy-related 7)-deficient T cells, unable 
to activate autophagy, did not show additional inhibitory effects on their
responses to activation when subjected to lipid challenge. Our results indicate, 
thus, that increased lipid load can dysregulate autophagy and cause defective T
cell responses, and suggest that inhibition of autophagy may underlie some of the
characteristic obesity-associated defects in the T cell
compartment.Abbreviations: ACTB: actin, beta; ATG: autophagy-related; CDKN1B:
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B; HFD: high-fat diet; IFNG: interferon gamma;
IL: interleukin; MAPK1/ERK2: mitogen-activated protein kinase 1; MAPK3/ERK1:
mitogen-activated protein kinase 3; MAPK8/JNK: mitogen-activated protein kinase
8; LC3-I: non-conjugated form of MAP1LC3B; LC3-II:
phosphatidylethanolamine-conjugated form of MAP1LC3B; MAP1LC3B:
microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MS: mass spectrometry; MTOR:
mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; NFATC2: nuclear factor of activated T
cells, cytoplasmic, calcineurin dependent 2; NLRP3: NLR family, pyrin domain
containing 3; OA: oleic acid; PI: propidium iodide; ROS: reactive oxygen species;
STAT5A: signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A; TCR: T cell
receptor; TH1: T helper cell type 1.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2019.1606635 
PMCID: PMC6984598
PMID: 30982401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

