
1. Brain Behav Immun. 2019 Aug;80:452-463. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2019.04.025. Epub 2019
Apr 11.

Early life stress induces type 2 diabetes-like features in ageing mice.

Ilchmann-Diounou H(1), Olier M(1), Lencina C(1), Riba A(1), Barretto S(2), Nankap
M(1), Sommer C(3), Guillou H(2), Ellero-Simatos S(2), Guzylack-Piriou L(1),
Théodorou V(1), Ménard S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Neuro-Gastroenterology and Nutrition Team, Toxalim (Research Centre in Food
Toxicology), Université de Toulouse, INRA, ENVT, INP-Purpan, UPS, Toulouse,
France.
(2)Integrative Toxicology and Metabolism Team, Toxalim (Research Centre in Food
Toxicology), Université de Toulouse, INRA, ENVT, INP-Purpan, UPS, Toulouse,
France.
(3)Experimental and Zootechnic Platform, Toxalim (Research Centre in Food
Toxicology), Université de Toulouse, INRA, ENVT, INP-Purpan, UPS, Toulouse,
France.
(4)Neuro-Gastroenterology and Nutrition Team, Toxalim (Research Centre in Food
Toxicology), Université de Toulouse, INRA, ENVT, INP-Purpan, UPS, Toulouse,
France. Electronic address: sandrine.menard@inra.fr.

Early life stress is known to impair intestinal barrier through induction of
intestinal hyperpermeability, low-grade inflammation and microbiota dysbiosis in 
young adult rodents. Interestingly, those features are also observed in metabolic
disorders (obesity and type 2 diabetes) that appear with ageing. Based on the
concept of Developmental Origins of Health and Diseases, our study aimed to
investigate whether early life stress can trigger metabolic disorders in ageing
mice. Maternal separation (MS) is a well-established model of early life stress
in rodent. In this study, MS increased fasted blood glycemia, induced glucose
intolerance and decreased insulin sensitivity in post-natal day 350 wild type
C3H/HeN male mice fed a standard diet without affecting body weight. MS also
triggered fecal dysbiosis favoring pathobionts and significantly decreased IL-17 
and IL-22 secretion in response to anti-CD3/CD28 stimulation in small intestine
lamina propria. Finally, IL-17 secretion in response to anti-CD3/CD28 stimulation
was also diminished at systemic level (spleen). For the first time, we
demonstrate that early life stress is a risk factor for metabolic disorders
development in ageing wild type mice under normal diet.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2019.04.025 
PMID: 30981713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

