
1. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2020 Dec;33(24):4117-4132. doi:
10.1080/14767058.2019.1597047. Epub 2019 Apr 18.

Human β-defensin-3 participates in intra-amniotic host defense in women with
labor at term, spontaneous preterm labor and intact membranes, and preterm
prelabor rupture of membranes.

Para R(1)(2), Romero R(1)(3)(4)(5), Miller D(1)(2), Panaitescu B(1)(2), Varrey
A(1)(2), Chaiworapongsa T(1)(2), Hassan SS(1)(2)(6), Hsu CD(2)(6), Gomez-Lopez
N(1)(2)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Perinatology Research Branch, Division of Obstetrics and Maternal Fetal
Medicine, Division of Intramural Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
US Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, Maryland, and Detroit,
Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, USA.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(5)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit,
Michigan, USA.
(6)Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, 
Michigan, USA.
(7)Department of Immunology, Microbiology and Biochemistry, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, USA.

Objective: Human β-defensin-3 (HBD-3) has a broad spectrum of antimicrobial
activity, and activity and, therefore, plays a central role in host defense
mechanisms against infection. Herein, we determined whether HBD-3 was a
physiological constituent of amniotic fluid during midtrimester and at term and
whether the concentration of this defensin was increased in amniotic fluid of
women with spontaneous preterm labor and intact membranes and those with preterm 
prelabor rupture of membranes (pPROM) with intra-amniotic inflammation or
intra-amniotic infection.Methods: Amniotic fluid was collected from 219 women in 
the following groups: (1) midtrimester who delivered at term (n = 35); (2) with
or without spontaneous labor at term (n = 50); (3) spontaneous preterm labor with
intact membranes who delivered at term (n = 29); (4) spontaneous preterm labor
with intact membranes who delivered preterm with or without intra-amniotic
inflammation or intra-amniotic infection (n = 69); and (5) pPROM with or without 
intra-amniotic infection (n = 36). Amniotic fluid HBD-3 concentrations were
determined using a sensitive and specific ELISA kit.Results: (1) HBD-3 is a
physiological constituent of amniotic fluid; (2) the amniotic fluid concentration
of HBD-3 did not change with gestational age (midtrimester versus term not in
labor); (3) amniotic fluid concentrations of HBD-3 were higher in women with
spontaneous labor at term than in those without labor; (4) in the absence of
intra-amniotic inflammation, amniotic fluid concentrations of HBD-3 were similar 
between women with spontaneous preterm labor who delivered preterm and those who 
delivered at term; (5) among patients with spontaneous preterm labor who
delivered preterm, amniotic fluid concentrations of HBD-3 were greater in women
with intra-amniotic infection than in those without this clinical condition; (6) 
among patients with spontaneous preterm labor, amniotic fluid concentrations of
HBD-3 were higher in women with intra-amniotic inflammation or intra-amniotic
infection who delivered preterm than in those without these clinical conditions
who delivered at term; and (7) women with pPROM and intra-amniotic infection had 
higher median amniotic fluid concentrations of HBD-3 than those without this
clinical condition.Conclusion: Human β-defensin-3 is a physiological constituent 
of amniotic fluid and increases during the process of labor at term. Amniotic
fluid concentrations of HBD-3 were increased in women with spontaneous preterm
labor with intact membranes or pPROM with intra-amniotic inflammation or
intra-amniotic infection, indicating that this defensin participates in the host 
defense mechanisms in the amniotic cavity against microorganisms or danger
signals. These findings provide insight into the soluble host defense mechanisms 
against intra-amniotic inflammation and intra-amniotic infection.

DOI: 10.1080/14767058.2019.1597047 
PMCID: PMC6800590 [Available on 2021-12-01]
PMID: 30999788 

