
1. Sci Rep. 2019 Apr 17;9(1):6193. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-42604-0.

Organoid culture media formulated with growth factors of defined cellular
activity.

Urbischek M(1), Rannikmae H(1), Foets T(1), Ravn K(1), Hyv√∂nen M(2), de la Roche 
M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom. mh256@cam.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom. mad58@cam.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2020 Jul 9;10(1):11592.

The media formulations necessary for deriving and sustaining organoids from
epithelial tissues such as prostate, colon, gastric, liver, pancreas, and others 
have been established. Critical components of organoid media are a set of growth 
factors that include R-spondins and BMP signalling antagonists such as Noggin or 
Gremlin 1. Currently, the practical limitations for formulating organoid media of
reproducible potency and larger-scale media production that have hampered further
technological applications of organoid technology include: the cost of growth
factors such as R-spondins and Gremlin 1/Noggin and their production as defined
specific activities free of contaminants that may affect organoid growth. Here we
report the production of highly pure recombinant Gremlin 1 and R-spondin 1 from
bacterial expression for use in organoid media. We detail the workflow for
Gremlin 1 and R-spondin 1 expression, purification, quantification of cellular
activity, quality control and use in media formulated for culturing organoids
derived from a number of tissues. The development of precisely formulated,
cost-effective media of defined specific activity will engender the development
of novel applications for organoid technology.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-42604-0 
PMCID: PMC6470207
PMID: 30996238  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

