
1. SAGE Open Med Case Rep. 2019 Apr 10;7:2050313X19843390. doi:
10.1177/2050313X19843390. eCollection 2019.

Report of a rare case of severe allergic reaction due to nasal myiasis and a
brief review of the literature in Turkey.

Erenler AK(1), Turan AP(2), Ay ÖO(3), Taylan Özkan A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, School of Medicine, Hitit University, Çorum,
Turkey.
(2)Institute of Health Sciences, Hitit University, Çorum, Turkey.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, School of Medicine, Hitit University,
Çorum, Turkey.
(4)Department of Clinical Microbiology, School of Medicine, Hitit University,
Çorum, Turkey.

Myiasis is defined as infestation of a mammal by fly larvae. It may occur on
either living tissues (primary myiasis) or dead tissues (secondary myiasis). In
this report, we present a patient with myiasis with an extremely rare clinical
manifestation and severe allergic reaction, and we review the literature in order
to reveal the current status. A 20-year-old female patient was admitted to our
emergency department due to rush on face, cough and shortness of breath. The
maggot came out of her nose was identified as Oestrus ovis. With a diagnosis of
severe allergic reaction due to myiasis, she was treated diphenhidramine,
prednisone and inhale albuterol in the emergency department. After treatment and 
further investigation, she was discharged with full recovery. Myiasis is a rare
cause for severe allergic reaction in patients with definite diagnosis. Immediate
diagnosis and treatment are milestones in preventing bad outcomes.

DOI: 10.1177/2050313X19843390 
PMCID: PMC6458663
PMID: 31007925 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship and/or publication of this article.

