
1. J Phys Chem B. 2019 May 16;123(19):4230-4241. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.9b02981. Epub
2019 May 2.

Active-Site Glu165 Activation in Triosephosphate Isomerase and Its Deprotonation 
Kinetics.

Deng H(1), Dyer RB(2), Callender R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx, New 
York 10461 , United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry , Emory University , Atlanta , Georgia 30322 , United 
States.

Triosephosphate isomerase (TIM) catalyzes the interconversion between
dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) and d-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (GAP) via an
enediol(ate) intermediate. The active-site residue Glu165 serves as the catalytic
base during catalysis. It abstracts a proton from C1 carbon of DHAP to form the
reaction intermediate and donates a proton to C2 carbon of the intermediate to
form product GAP. Our difference Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy studies 
on the yeast TIM (YeTIM)/phosphate complex revealed a C═O stretch band at 1706
cm-1 from the protonated Glu165 carboxyl group at pH 7.5, indicating that the p
Ka of the catalytic base is increased by >3.0 pH units upon phosphate binding,
and that the Glu165 carboxyl environment in the complex is still hydrophilic in
spite of the increased p Ka. Hence, the results show that the binding of the
phosphodianion group is part of the activation mechanism which involves the p Ka 
elevation of the catalytic base Glu165. The deprotonation kinetics of Glu165 in
the μs to ms time range were determined via infrared (IR) T-jump studies on the
YeTIM/phosphate and ("heavy enzyme") [U-13C,-15N]YeTIM/phosphate complexes. The
slower deprotonation kinetics in the ms time scale is due to phosphate
dissociation modulated by the loop motion, which slows down by enzyme mass
increase to show a normal heavy enzyme kinetic isotope effect (KIE) ∼1.2 (i.e.,
slower rate in the heavy enzyme). The faster deprotonation kinetics in the tens
of μs time scale is assigned to temperature-induced p Ka decrease, while
phosphate is still bound, and it shows an inverse heavy enzyme KIE ∼0.89 (faster 
rate in the heavy enzyme). The IR static and T-jump spectroscopy provides
atomic-level resolution of the catalytic mechanism because of its ability to
directly observe the bond breaking/forming process.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.9b02981 
PMCID: PMC6579534
PMID: 31013084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

