
1. Mediators Inflamm. 2019 Mar 18;2019:6758159. doi: 10.1155/2019/6758159.
eCollection 2019.

Apoptosis Transcriptional Profile Induced by Porphyromonas gingivalis HmuY.

Carvalho-Filho PC(1)(2), Moura-Costa LF(1), Pimentel ACM(1), Lopes MPP(1),
Freitas SA(2), Miranda PM(1), Costa RS(1), FigueirÃªdo CAV(1), Meyer R(1),
Gomes-Filho IS(3), Olczak T(4), Xavier MT(2), Trindade SC(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Federal University of Bahia, Bahia, Brazil.
(2)Dental School, Bahiana School of Medicine and Public Health, Brazil.
(3)Department of Periodontics, Feira de Santana State University, Bahia, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Medical Biology, Faculty of Biotechnology, University of
Wroclaw, Wroclaw, Poland.

This study aimed at evaluating the transcriptional profile of apoptosis-related
genes after in vitro stimulation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
derived from individuals with periodontitis (P) and healthy nonperiodontitis (NP)
control subjects with P. gingivalis HmuY protein. PBMCs from the P and NP groups 
were stimulated with HmuY P. gingivalis protein, and the expression of genes
related to apoptosis was assessed by custom real-time polymerase chain reaction
array (Custom RT2 PCR Array). Compared with the NP group, the P group showed low 
relative levels of apoptosis-related gene expression, downregulated for FAS, FAS 
ligand, TNFSF10 (TRAIL), BAK1, CASP9, and APAF1 after P. gingivalis HmuY protein 
stimulation. Furthermore, the P group exhibited low levels of relative gene
expression, downregulated for CASP7 when the cells were not stimulated. Our data 
suggest that P. gingivalis HmuY protein might participate differently in the
modulation of the intrinsic and extrinsic apoptosis pathways.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/6758159 
PMCID: PMC6442302
PMID: 31011284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

