
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Apr 9;10:665. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00665. eCollection
2019.

Microbial Diversity and Connectivity in Deep-Sea Sediments of the South Atlantic 
Polar Front.

Varliero G(1)(2), Bienhold C(1)(3), Schmid F(4)(5), Boetius A(1)(3)(5), Molari
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(3)HGF-MPG Joint Research Group on Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Alfred
Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research, Bremerhaven, Germany.
(4)Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel, GEOMAR, Kiel, Germany.
(5)MARUM Center for Marine Environmental Sciences, University of Bremen, Bremen, 
Germany.

Ultraslow spreading ridges account for one-third of the global mid-ocean ridges. 
Their impact on the diversity and connectivity of benthic deep-sea microbial
assemblages is poorly understood, especially for hydrothermally inactive,
magma-starved ridges. We investigated bacterial and archaeal diversity in
sediments collected from an amagmatic segment (10°-17°E) of the Southwest Indian 
Ridge (SWIR) and in the adjacent northern and southern abyssal zones of similar
water depths within one biogeochemical province of the Indian Ocean. Microbial
diversity was determined by 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequencing. Our results
show significant differences in microbial communities between stations outside
and inside the SWIR, which were mostly explained by environmental selection.
Community similarity correlated significantly with differences in chlorophyll a
content and with the presence of upward porewater fluxes carrying reduced
compounds (e.g., ammonia and sulfide), suggesting that trophic resource
availability is a main driver for changes in microbial community composition. At 
the stations in the SWIR axial valley (3,655-4,448 m water depth), microbial
communities were enriched in bacterial and archaeal taxa common in organic
matter-rich subsurface sediments (e.g., SEEP-SRB1, Dehalococcoida, Atribacteria, 
and Woesearchaeota) and chemosynthetic environments (mainly Helicobacteraceae).
The abyssal stations outside the SWIR communities (3,760-4,869 m water depth)
were dominated by OM1 clade, JTB255, Planctomycetaceae, and Rhodospirillaceae. We
conclude that ultraslow spreading ridges create a unique environmental setting in
sedimented segments without distinct hydrothermal activity, and play an important
role in shaping microbial communities and promoting diversity, but also in
connectivity among deep-sea habitats.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00665 
PMCID: PMC6465420
PMID: 31024475 

