
1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2020 Mar;38(5):1435-1447. doi:
10.1080/07391102.2019.1608305. Epub 2019 Apr 30.

Computational investigations of gram-negative bacteria phosphopantetheine
adenylyltransferase inhibitors using 3D-QSAR, molecular docking and molecular
dynamic simulations.

Wang Y(1)(2), Feng S(1)(3), Gao H(1)(2), Wang J(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design & Discovery of Ministry of
Education, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang, People's Republic of
China.
(2)School of Traditional Chinese Materia Medica, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China.
(3)School of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University,
Shenyang, People's Republic of China.

Phosphopantetheine adenylyltransferase (PPAT) has been recognized as a promising 
target to develop novel antimicrobial agents, which is a hexameric enzyme that
catalyzes the penultimate step in coenzyme A biosynthesis. In this work,
molecular modeling study was performed with a series of PPAT inhibitors using
molecular docking, three-dimensional qualitative structure-activity relationship 
(3D-QSAR) and molecular dynamic (MD) simulations to reveal the structural
determinants for their bioactivities. Molecular docking study was applied to
understand the binding mode of PPAT with its inhibitors. Subsequently, 3D-QSAR
model was constructed to find the features required for different substituents on
the scaffolds. For the best comparative molecular field analysis (CoMFA) model,
the Q2 and R2 values of which were calculated as 0.702 and 0.989, while they were
calculated as 0.767 and 0.983 for the best comparative molecular similarity index
analysis model. The statistical data verified the significance and accuracy of
our 3D-QSAR models. Furthermore, MD simulations were carried out to evaluate the 
stability of the receptor-ligand contacts in physiological conditions, and the
results were consistent with molecular docking studies and 3D-QSAR contour map
analysis. Binding free energy was calculated with molecular mechanics generalized
born surface area approach, the result of which coincided well with bioactivities
and demonstrated that van der Waals accounted for the largest portion. Overall,
our study provided a valuable insight for further research work on the
recognition of potent PPAT inhibitors.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2019.1608305 
PMID: 31038397 

