
1. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2019 Dec;34(1):946-954. doi:
10.1080/14756366.2019.1605991.

Thermostability enhancement of the α-carbonic anhydrase from Sulfurihydrogenibium
yellowstonense by using the anchoring-and-self-labelling-protein-tag system
(ASLtag).

Del Prete S(1), Merlo R(1), Valenti A(1), Mattossovich R(1), Rossi M(1),
Carginale V(1), Supuran CT(2), Perugino G(1), Capasso C(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biology Agriculture and Food Sciences , Institute of
Bioscience and BioResources - National Research Council of Italy , Naples ,
Italy.
(2)b Neurofarba Department , University of Florence, Polo Scientifico , Sesto
Fiorentino Firenze , Italy.

Carbonic anhydrases (CAs, EC 4.2.1.1) are a superfamily of ubiquitous
metalloenzymes present in all living organisms on the planet. They are classified
into seven genetically distinct families and catalyse the hydration reaction of
carbon dioxide to bicarbonate and protons, as well as the opposite reaction. CAs 
were proposed to be used for biotechnological applications, such as the
post-combustion carbon capture processes. In this context, there is a great
interest in searching CAs with robust chemical and physical properties. Here, we 
describe the enhancement of thermostability of the α-CA from Sulfurihydrogenibium
yellowstonense (SspCA) by using the anchoring-and-self-labelling-protein-tag
system (ASLtag). The anchored chimeric H5-SspCA was active for the CO2 hydration 
reaction and its thermostability increased when the cells were heated for a
prolonged period at high temperatures (e.g. 70 °C). The ASLtag can be considered 
as a useful method for enhancing the thermostability of a protein useful for
biotechnological applications, which often need harsh operating conditions.

DOI: 10.1080/14756366.2019.1605991 
PMCID: PMC6493269
PMID: 31039618  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

