
1. Gut Microbes. 2019;10(6):688-695. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2019.1586038. Epub 2019
Apr 29.

Circulating levels of the anti-oxidant indoleproprionic acid are associated with 
higher gut microbiome diversity.

Menni C(1), Hernandez MM(1), Vital M(2), Mohney RP(3), Spector TD(1), Valdes
AM(1)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, King's College London,
London, UK.
(2)Microbial Interactions and Processes, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research,
Braunschweig, Germany.
(3)Discovery and Translational Sciences, Metabolon Inc, Raleigh-Durham, NC, USA.
(4)MSK Theme, NIHR Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre, Nottingham, UK.
(5)School of Medicine, Nottingham City Hospital, Nottingham, UK.

The gut microbiome has recently emerged as an important regulator of insulin
resistance and abdominal obesity. The tryptophan metabolite generated by the gut 
microbiome, indoleproprionic acid (IPA) has been shown to predict the onset of
type 2 diabetes. IPA is a metabolite produced by gut microbes from dietary
tryptophan that exhibits a high degree of inter-individual variation. The
microbiome composition parameters that are associated with circulating levels of 
this potent anti-oxidant have however not been investigated to date in human
populations. In 1018 middle-aged women from the TwinsUK cohort, we assessed the
relationship between serum IPA levels and gut microbiome composition targeting
the 16S rRNA gene. Microbiome alpha-diversity was positively correlated with
serum indoleproprionic acid levels (Shannon Diversity: Beta[95%CI] =
0.19[0.13;0.25], P = 6.41 Ã— 10-10) after adjustment for covariates. Sixteen taxa 
and 12 operational taxonomic units (OTUs) associated with IPA serum levels. Among
these are positive correlations with the butyrate-producing Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii, the class Mollicutes and the order RF39 of the Tenericutes, and
Coprococcus Negative correlations instead were observed with Eubacterium dolichum
previously shown to correlate with visceral fat mass and several genera in the
Lachnospiraceae family such as Blautia and Ruminococcus previously shown to
correlate with obesity. Microbiome composition parameters explained ~20% of the
variation in circulating levels of IPA, whereas nutritional and host genetic
parameters explained only ~4%. Our data confirm an association between IPA
circulating levels and metabolic syndrome parameters and indicate that gut
microbiome composition influences IPA levels.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2019.1586038 
PMCID: PMC6866703
PMID: 31030641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

