
1. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2019 May 1;75(Pt 5):332-339. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X19004266. Epub 2019 Apr 24.

Noncovalent structure of SENP1 in complex with SUMO2.

Ambaye ND(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immune-Oncology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope
National Medical Center, 1500 East Duarte Road, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

SUMOylation is a post-translational modification in which a small ubiquitin-like 
molecule (SUMO) is appended to substrate proteins and is known to influence
myriads of biological processes. A delicate interplay between several families of
SUMOylation proteins and their substrates ensures the proper level of SUMOylation
required for normal cell function. Among the SUMO proteins, SUMO2 is known to
form mono-SUMOylated proteins and engage in poly-SUMO chain formation, while
sentrin-specific protease 1 (SENP1) is a key enzyme in regulating both events.
Determination of the SENP1-SUMO2 interaction is therefore necessary to better
understand SUMOylation. In this regard, the current paper reports the noncovalent
structure of SENP1 in complex with SUMO2, which was refined to a resolution of
2.62 Å with R and Rfree values of 22.92% and 27.66%, respectively. The structure 
shows that SENP1-SUMO2 complex formation is driven largely by polar interactions 
and limited hydrophobic contacts. The essential C-terminal motif (QQTGG) of SUMO2
is stabilized by a number of specific bonding interactions that enable it to
protrude into the catalytic triad of SENP1 and provide the arrangement necessary 
for maturation of SUMO and deSUMOylation activity. Overall, the structure shows a
number of structural details that pinpoint the basis of SENP1-SUMO2 complex
formation.

DOI: 10.1107/S2053230X19004266 
PMCID: PMC6497105
PMID: 31045562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

