
1. Environ Microbiol. 2019 Jul;21(7):2544-2558. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.14647. Epub
2019 May 20.

Elements of the heterocyst-specific transcriptome unravelled by co-expression
analysis in Nostoc sp. PCC 7120.

Brenes-Álvarez M(1), Mitschke J(2), Olmedo-Verd E(1), Georg J(2), Hess WR(2)(3), 
Vioque A(1), Muro-Pastor AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Bioquímica Vegetal y Fotosíntesis, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad de Sevilla, E-41092, Sevilla, Spain.
(2)Genetics and Experimental Bioinformatics, Faculty of Biology, University of
Freiburg, D-79104, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Freiburg Institute for Advanced Studies, University of Freiburg, D-79104,
Freiburg, Germany.

Nitrogen is frequently limiting microbial growth in the environment. As a
response, many filamentous cyanobacteria differentiate heterocysts, cells devoted
to N2 fixation. Heterocyst differentiation is under the control of the master
regulator HetR. Through the characterization of the HetR-dependent transcriptome 
in Nostoc sp. PCC 7120, we identified the new candidate genes likely involved in 
heterocyst differentiation. According to their maximum induction, we defined
E-DIF (early in differentiation) and L-DIF (late in differentiation) genes. Most 
of the genes known to be involved in the critical aspects of heterocyst
differentiation or function were also classified into these groups, showing the
validity of the approach. Using fusions to gfp, we verified the
heterocyst-specific transcription of several of the found genes, antisense
transcripts and potentially trans-acting sRNAs. Through comparative sequence
analysis of promoter regions, we noticed the prevalence of the previously
described DIF1 motif and identified a second motif, called DIF2, in other
promoters of the E-DIF cluster. Both motifs are widely conserved in heterocystous
cyanobacteria. We assigned alr2522 as a third member, besides nifB and nifP, to
the CnfR regulon. The elements identified here are of interest for understanding 
cell differentiation, engineering of biological nitrogen fixation or production
of O2 -sensitive molecules in cyanobacteria.

© 2019 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.14647 
PMID: 31050860  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

