
1. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2019 Sep;29(7):488-498. doi: 10.1080/15376516.2019.1611981.
Epub 2019 Jun 18.

Isolation and molecular characterization of spermatogonia from male
Sprague-Dawley rats exposed in utero and postnatally to dibutyl phthalate or
acrylamide.

Souza NP(1), Arnold LL(2), Pennington KL(2), Nascimento E Pontes MG(1), Miot
HA(1), de Camargo JLV(1), Cohen SM(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Sao Paulo State University (UNESP), Botucatu Medical School, Botucatu
Campus, Department of Pathology, Center for the Evaluation of the Environmental
Impact on Human Health (TOXICAM) , Botucatu , Brazil.
(2)b Department of Pathology and Microbiology , University of Nebraska Medical
Center , Omaha , NE , USA.
(3)c Havlik - Wall Professor of Oncologyan endowed chair at the University of
Nebraska Medical Center , Omaha , NE , USA.

The increased incidence of testicular disorders in young men and the possible
influence of environmental chemicals, such as dibutyl phthalate (DBP) and
acrylamide (AA), requires experimental models for identifying modes of action.
Most published reproductive toxicologic studies use RNA samples from the total
testis to evaluate testicular gene expression; however, analyses of isolated cell
types could provide a more specific tool. Among testicular germ cells,
spermatogonia are critical since they represent the onset of spermatogenesis.
This study aimed, (1) to establish a technique for spermatogonia isolation; (2)
to apply this isolation technique to verify possible gene expression alterations 
(Pou5f1, Kitlg, Mki-67, Bak1 and Spry4) in prepubertal post-natal day, (PND24)
and pubertal (PND45) testes after in utero and postnatal exposure to DBP or AA.
The technique was efficient for isolation of a majority of spermatogonia. In
utero DBP exposure led to reduced litter body weight at birth, reduced anogenital
distance of male pups on PND4, and increased frequency of male nipple retention
on PND14 compared to controls. DBP-exposed relative testes weights were reduced
only at PND24 compared to control but they did not differ at PND45. DBP-exposed
animals showed reduced expression levels of Pou5f1 and Mki67 on PND24, and
reduced expression of Pou5f1 and Spry4 on PND45. AA exposure reduced expression
of Pou5f1, Mki67, and Spry4 at PND45 although not significantly. Our results
suggest that DBP acts by reducing cell proliferation and impairing
differentiation in prepubertal and pubertal testes.

DOI: 10.1080/15376516.2019.1611981 
PMID: 31050326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

