
1. J Inorg Biochem. 2019 Aug;197:110699. doi: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2019.110699. Epub 
2019 Apr 26.

The role of catalases in the prevention/promotion of oxidative stress.

Gebicka L(1), Krych-Madej J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Chemistry, Institute of Applied Radiation Chemistry, Lodz
University of Technology (TUL), Lodz, Poland. Electronic address:
lgebicka@mitr.p.lodz.pl.
(2)Faculty of Chemistry, Institute of Applied Radiation Chemistry, Lodz
University of Technology (TUL), Lodz, Poland.

Catalases, heme enzymes which catalyze decomposition of hydrogen peroxide to
water and molecular oxygen, are important members of the antioxidant defense
system of cells of almost all aerobic organisms. However, recent studies suggest 
that catalase may be involved in various other processes in the cell. The paper
provides a review of reactions of catalases with their main substrate, hydrogen
peroxide, and with oxidizing species such as hydroxyl radical, superoxide, nitric
oxide, peroxynitrite, hypochlorous acid, and singlet oxygen. A number of these
individuals are formed under oxidative eustress (good stress) as well as distress
(bad stress), while others only under conditions of oxidative distress. Potential
biological significance of the reactions of mammalian as well as bacterial
catalases with oxidizing species is discussed. The majority of these reactions
inhibit catalase. Authors emphasize that catalase inhibition, which may lead to
significant increase of the local concentration of hydrogen peroxide, may be
detrimental to the neighboring tissues, but in some pathological states (e.g. the
defense directed against pathogenic bacteria rich in catalase, or induction of
apoptosis of cancer cells which possess membrane-associated catalase) it may be
beneficial for the host organism.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2019.110699 
PMID: 31055214  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

