
1. Biomacromolecules. 2019 Sep 9;20(9):3271-3282. doi: 10.1021/acs.biomac.9b00342.
Epub 2019 May 15.

Anaerobic Production of Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) and Its Precursor
3-Hydroxybutyrate from Synthesis Gas by Autotrophic Clostridia.

Flüchter S(1), Follonier S(2), Schiel-Bengelsdorf B(1), Bengelsdorf FR(1), Zinn
M(2), Dürre P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie und Biotechnologie, Universität Ulm ,
Albert-Einstein-Allee 11 , 89081 Ulm , Germany.
(2)Institute of Life Technologies, University of Applied Sciences and Arts
Western Switzerland (HES-SO Valais) , Route du Rawyl 64 , 1950 Sion ,
Switzerland.

Anaerobic production of the biopolymer poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) and the
monomer 3-hydroxybutyrate (3-HB) was achieved using recombinant clostridial
acetogens supplied with syn(thesis) gas as the sole carbon and energy source.
3-HB production was successfully accomplished by a new synthetic pathway
containing the genes thlA (encoding thiolase A), ctfA/B (encoding CoA-transferase
A/B), and bdhA (encoding (R)-3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase). The respective
recombinant Clostridium coskatii [p83_tcb] strain produced autotrophically 0.98 ±
0.12 mM and heterotrophically 21.7 ± 0.27 mM 3-HB. As a proof of concept,
production of PHB was achieved using recombinant C. coskatii and Clostridium
ljungdahlii strains expressing a novel synthetic PHB pathway containing the genes
thlA (encoding thiolase A), hbd (encoding 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase),
crt (encoding crotonase), phaJ (encoding (R)-enoyl-CoA hydratase), and phaEC
(encoding PHA synthase). The strain C. coskatii [p83_PHB_Scaceti] synthesized
heterotrophically 3.4 ± 0.29% PHB per cell dry weight (CDW) and autotrophically
1.12 ± 0.12% PHB per CDW.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biomac.9b00342 
PMID: 31066546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

