
1. Proc Biol Sci. 2019 May 15;286(1902):20190226. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2019.0226.

Sexual selection favours good or bad genes for pathogen resistance depending on
males' pathogen exposure.

Joye P(1), Kawecki TJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne , 1015 Lausanne , 
Switzerland.

Resistance to pathogens is often invoked as an indirect benefit of female choice,
but experimental evidence for links between father's sexual success and offspring
resistance is scarce and equivocal. Two proposed mechanisms might generate such
links. Under the first, heritable resistance to diverse pathogens depends on
general immunocompetence; owing to shared condition dependence, male sexual
traits indicate immunocompetence independently of the male's pathogen exposure.
By contrast, other hypotheses (e.g. Hamilton-Zuk) assume that sexual traits only 
reveal heritable resistance if the males have been exposed to the pathogen. The
distinction between the two mechanisms has been neglected by experimental
studies. We show that Drosophila melanogaster males that are successful in mating
contests (one female with two males) sire sons that are substantially more
resistant to the intestinal pathogen Pseudomonas entomophila-but only if the
males have themselves been exposed to the pathogen before the mating contest. By 
contrast, sons of males sexually successful in the absence of pathogen exposure
are less resistant than sons of unsuccessful males. We detected no differences in
daughters' resistance. Thus, while sexual selection may have considerable
consequences for offspring resistance, these consequences may be sex-specific.
Furthermore, contrary to the 'general immunocompetence' hypothesis, these
consequences can be positive or negative depending on the epidemiological context
under which sexual selection operates.

DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2019.0226 
PMCID: PMC6532500
PMID: 31064300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

