
1. Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol. 2019 May 1;75(Pt 5):475-487. doi:
10.1107/S2059798319004169. Epub 2019 Apr 29.

Structural and functional insights into phosphomannose isomerase: the role of
zinc and catalytic residues.

Bangera M(1), Gowda K G(1), Sagurthi SR(1), Murthy MRN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka
560 012, India.

Phosphomannose isomerase (PMI) is a housekeeping enzyme that is found in
organisms ranging from bacteria to fungi to mammals and is important for
cell-wall synthesis, viability and signalling. PMI is a zinc-dependent enzyme
that catalyses the reversible isomerization between mannose 6-phosphate (M6P) and
fructose 6-phosphate (F6P), presumably via the formation of a cis-enediol
intermediate. The reaction is hypothesized to involve ring opening of M6P, the
transfer of a proton from the C2 atom to the C1 atom and between the O1 and O2
atoms of the substrate, followed by ring closure resulting in the product F6P.
Several attempts have been made to decipher the role of zinc ions and various
residues in the catalytic function of PMI. However, there is no consensus on the 
catalytic base and the mechanism of the reaction catalyzed by the enzyme. In the 
present study, based on the structure of PMI from Salmonella typhimurium,
site-directed mutagenesis targeting residues close to the bound metal ion and
activity studies on the mutants, zinc ions were shown to be crucial for substrate
binding. These studies also suggest Lys86 as the most probable catalytic base
abstracting the proton in the isomerization reaction. Plausible roles for the
highly conserved residues Lys132 and Arg274 could also be discerned based on
comparison of the crystal structures of wild-type and mutant PMIs. PMIs from
prokaryotes possess a low sequence identity to the human enzyme, ranging between 
30% and 40%. Since PMI is important for the virulence of many pathogenic
organisms, the identification of catalytically important residues will facilitate
its use as a potential antimicrobial drug target.

DOI: 10.1107/S2059798319004169 
PMID: 31063150  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

