
1. Int Endod J. 2019 Oct;52(10):1479-1488. doi: 10.1111/iej.13140. Epub 2019 Jun 5.

TLR5 activation induces expression of the pro-inflammatory mediator Urokinase
Plasminogen Activator via NF-κB and MAPK signalling pathways in human dental pulp
cells.

Hwang HS(1)(2), Kim JW(1)(2), Oh SH(1)(2), Song JH(1)(2), Yang JW(1)(2), Zang
Y(1)(2), Kim YH(1)(2), Lee SE(1), Hwang YC(2)(3), Koh JT(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Dental Therapeutics, Chonnam National
University, Gwangju, Korea.
(2)Research Center for Biomineralization Disorders, Chonnam National University, 
Gwangju, Korea.
(3)Department of Conservative Dentistry, School of Dentistry, Chonnam National
University, Gwangju, Korea.

AIM: To explore the involvement of TLR5 in pulp inflammation and to examine the
effects of TLR5 activation with its ligand, FlaB protein, on pro-inflammatory
gene expression.
METHODOLOGY: TLR5 expression in dental pulp tissues and human dental pulp cells
(hDPCs) were determined by immunohistochemistry, immunocytochemistry, Western
blots and RT-PCR analyses. To examine the role of TLR5, hDPCs were treated with
recombinant FlaB protein (500 ng mL-1 ) to activate the receptor or with a small 
interfering RNA against TLR5 (si-TLR5) to downregulate the receptor. After
exposure to FlaB, the expression of inflammation-related proteins was screened
using a protein array kit. Western blots or qRT-PCR analyses were performed to
identify changes in the expression of uPA (urokinase plasminogen activator),
TIMPs (tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases), and IL-6 and to determine their
signalling pathways. Statistical analysis was performed using one-way analysis of
variance (anova) with Tukey post hoc test; P < 0.05 was considered statistically 
significant.
RESULT: TLR5 expression was identified in pulp tissues and hDPCs. In the protein 
array analysis, treatment with FlaB significantly increased uPA expression
(P < 0.01) and significantly decreased TIMP1/4 (P < 0.05). FlaB treatment also
significantly increased expression of the inflammatory marker IL-6 (P < 0.01).
FlaB treatment increased phosphorylation of the NF-κB p65 subunit, JNK, p38 and
ERK. Chemical inhibitors of NF-κB (Bay11-7082), p38 (SB202190) or ERK (U0126)
decreased the FlaB induction of uPA expression. Downregulation of TLR5 expression
by siRNA decreased the FlaB induction of uPA protein and p65 phosphorylation.
CONCLUSION: TLR5 activation with FlaB treatment induced the expression of uPA via
the NF-κB and MAPK signalling pathways. Flagellin-bearing oral bacteria may cause
pulp inflammation through TLR5. The findings provide new clues to control pulpal 
diseases by targeting TLR5 signalling pathways.

© 2019 International Endodontic Journal. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/iej.13140 
PMID: 31062874  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

