
1. Int J Med Microbiol. 2019 May - Jun;309(3-4):252-257. doi:
10.1016/j.ijmm.2019.04.004. Epub 2019 Apr 26.

Interplay of plant glycan hydrolases and LysM proteins in plant-Bacteria
interactions.

Schlöffel MA(1), Käsbauer C(1), Gust AA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biochemistry, Center for Plant Molecular Biology (ZMBP), University of
Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Plant Biochemistry, Center for Plant Molecular Biology (ZMBP), University of
Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. Electronic address:
andrea.gust@zmbp.uni-tuebingen.de.

Plants are always found together with bacteria and other microbes. Although
plants can be attacked by phytopathogenic bacteria, they are more often engaged
in neutral or mutualistic bacterial interactions. In the soil, plants associate
with rhizobia or other plant growth promoting rhizosphere bacteria; above ground,
bacteria colonise plants as epi- and endophytes. For mounting appropriate
responses, such as permitting colonisation by beneficial symbionts while at the
same time fending off pathogenic invaders, plants need to distinguish between the
"good" and the "bad". Plants make use of proteins containing the lysin motif
(LysM) for perception of N-acetylglucosamine containing carbohydrate structures, 
such as chitooligosaccharides functioning as symbiotic nodulation factors or
bacterial peptidoglycan. Moreover, plant hydrolytic enzymes of the chitinase
family, which are able to cleave bacterial peptidoglycan or
chitooligosaccharides, are essential for cellular signalling induced by rhizobial
nodulation factors during symbiosis as well as bacterial peptidoglycan during
pathogenesis. Hence, LysM receptors seem to work in concert with hydrolytic
enzymes that fine-tune ligand availability to either allow symbiotic interactions
or trigger plant immunity.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2019.04.004 
PMID: 31079999  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

