
1. J Am Chem Soc. 2019 Jun 5;141(22):8989-8995. doi: 10.1021/jacs.9b02931. Epub 2019
May 22.

Directed Evolution of a Cytochrome P450 Carbene Transferase for Selective
Functionalization of Cyclic Compounds.

Brandenberg OF(1), Chen K(1), Arnold FH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering , California Institute of
Technology , Pasadena , California 91125 , United States.

Transfers of carbene moieties to heterocycles or cyclic alkenes to obtain
C(sp2)-H alkylation or cyclopropane products are valuable transformations for
synthesis of pharmacophores and chemical building blocks. Through their readily
tunable active-site geometries, hemoprotein "carbene transferases" could provide 
an alternative to traditional transition metal catalysts by enabling heterocycle 
functionalizations with high chemo-, regio-, and stereocontrol. However, carbene 
transferases accepting heterocyclic substrates are scarce; the few enzymes
capable of heterocycle or cyclic internal alkene functionalization described to
date are characterized by low turnovers or depend on artificially introduced,
costly iridium-porphyrin cofactors. We addressed this challenge by evolving a
cytochrome P450 for highly efficient carbene transfer to indoles, pyrroles, and
cyclic alkenes. We first developed a spectrophotometric high-throughput screening
assay based on 1-methylindole C3-alkylation that enabled rapid analysis of
thousands of P450 variants and comprehensive directed evolution via random and
targeted mutagenesis. This effort yielded a P450 variant with 11 amino acid
substitutions and a large deletion of the non-catalytic P450 reductase domain,
which chemoselectively C3-alkylates indoles with up to 470 turnovers per minute
and 18â€¯000 total turnovers. We subsequently used this optimized alkylation
variant for parallel evolution toward more challenging heterocycle carbene
functionalizations, including C2/ C3 regioselective pyrrole alkylation,
enantioselective indole alkylation with ethyl 2-diazopropanoate, and cyclic
internal alkene cyclopropanation. The resulting set of efficient biocatalysts
showcases the tunability of hemoproteins for highly selective functionalization
of cyclic targets and the power of directed evolution to enhance the scope of
new-to-nature enzyme catalysts.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.9b02931 
PMID: 31070908  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

