
1. Parasite Immunol. 2019 Aug;41(8):e12631. doi: 10.1111/pim.12631. Epub 2019 May
26.

Cellular characterization of actin gene concerned with contact-dependent
mechanisms in Naegleria fowleri.

Sohn HJ(1)(2), Song KJ(3), Kang H(1)(2), Ham AJ(1)(2), Lee JH(1)(2), Chwae
YJ(1)(2), Kim K(1)(2), Park S(1)(2), Kim JH(4), Shin HJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science, Graduate School of Ajou University, Suwon,
Korea.
(3)PurgoFarm Co. Ltd, Hwasung, Gyeonggi, Korea.
(4)Institute of Animal Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Gyeongsang
National University, Jinju, Korea.

Free-living amoeba, Naegleria fowleri, destroys target cells through
contact-dependent mechanisms, such as phagocytosis and/or trogocytosis. A
previous experiment showed that the nf-actin gene consisted of 1.2 kbp, produced 
a 50.1 kDa recombinant protein (Nf-actin), and was localized on the cytoskeleton,
pseudopodia and amoebastome. In this study, cellular characterization of the
nf-actin gene concerned with contact-dependent mechanisms in N fowleri was
performed. The nf-actin gene was amplified from a gene-cloned vector,
pEXQP5-T7/NT TOPO. The nf-actin gene was introduced into the Ubi-pEGFP-C2 vector,
and Ubi-pEGFP-C2/nf-actin was transfected into N fowleri trophozoites. Strong GFP
fluorescence was detected in N fowleri trophozoites transfected with
Ubi-pEGFP-C2/nf-actin. Expression of EGFP-Nf-actin protein was detected by
Western blot analysis. The nf-actin-overexpressing N fowleri showed significantly
increased adhesion activity against extracellular matrix components, fibronectin,
collagen I and fibrinogen, compared with wild-type N fowleri. Moreover,
nf-actin-overexpressing N fowleri showed increased phagocytic activity and
cytotoxicity in comparison with wild-type N fowleri. In summary, the
overexpressed nf-actin gene has an important function in ability to increase cell
adhesion, cytotoxicity and phagocytosis by N fowleri.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pim.12631 
PMID: 31077592  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

