
1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2019 Nov;51(8):2139-2144. doi: 10.1007/s11250-019-01911-4.
Epub 2019 May 10.

Improving the nutritive value of cassava bioethanol waste using fermented yeast
as a partial replacement of protein source in dairy calf ration.

Cherdthong A(1), Supapong C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
40002, Thailand. anusornc@kku.ac.th.
(2)Tropical Feed Resources Research and Development Center (TROFREC), Department 
of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen,
40002, Thailand.

The aim of this work was to evaluate the influence of yeast (Saccharomyces
cerevisiae)-fermented cassava bioethanol waste (YECAW) on feed utilization,
ruminal fermentation, and microbial population in dairy calves fed a concentrate 
diet at 1% body weight (BW). Four male Holstein Friesian crossbred calves with an
initial BW of 109 ± 6.23 kg were used in this research. The experimental design
was a 4 × 4 Latin squared design and the dietary treatments were four levels of
YECAW supplementation at 0%, 5%, 10%, and 20% concentrate mixture. The YECAW
product contained CP at 25.1% dry matter (DM) and NDF and ADF at 65.2 and 40.6%
DM, respectively. Inclusion of YECAW did not alter feed intake of rice straw,
total intake, nutrient intake, and digestion coefficients (P > 0.05). Ruminal pH 
and temperature, ruminal ammonia-nitrogen, and blood urea-nitrogen (BUN) were not
significant by YECAW levels supplementation (P > 0.05). Increasing YECAW levels
did not adversely affect the population of bacteria, protozoa, and fungi and
values ranged from 6.5 to 7.0 × 1012, 3.2 to 4.0 × 105, and 6.9 to 7.4 × 103
cells/ml, respectively (P > 0.05). Feeding of YECAW to dairy calves did not
affect the total VFA, acetic acid (C2), propionic acid (C3), or butyric acid (C4)
proportion (P > 0.05) which ranged from 102.6 to104.6 mmol/l, 70.7 to 72.0, 17.8 
to 20.2, and 9.1 to 10.3 mol/ 100 mol, respectively. Therefore, feeding of YECAW 
is recommended because no adversely affect the utilization of feed and rumen
characteristics and might be alternative protein source for ruminants.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-019-01911-4 
PMID: 31076995  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

