
1. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2019 Sep;235:1-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2019.05.004. Epub 2019 May 10.

Molecular characterization and immune analysis of a defensin from small abalone, 
Haliotis diversicolor.

Yao T(1), Lu J(1), Ye L(1), Wang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of South China Sea Fishery Resources Exploitation &
Utilization, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, South China Sea Fisheries
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Guangzhou Guangdong
510300, PR China.
(2)Key Laboratory of South China Sea Fishery Resources Exploitation &
Utilization, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, South China Sea Fisheries
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Guangzhou Guangdong
510300, PR China. Electronic address: wjy104@163.com.

As one of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), defensins are involved in invertebrate
innate immunity against invading pathogens. In this study, a member of the
invertebrate defensins was cloned and characterized from the small abalone
Haliotis diversicolor, designated HdDef-2. The HdDef-2 cDNA contained a 201 bp
open reading frame encoding 66 amino acids including a signal peptide of 18 amino
acids and a mature peptide of 48 amino acids. The mature peptide of HdDef-2
possessed similar features to other AMPs, such as lower molecular mass, net
positive charge (+1), and a high hydrophobic residue ratio (45%). In addition,
six cysteines in the mature peptide were arranged in the pattern
C-X16-C-X3-C-X9-C-X4-C-X1-C and stabilized the α-helix/β-sheet motif (CSαβ) with 
three disulfide bonds (C1-C4, C2-C5 and C3-C6) in the predicted tertiary
structure. Moreover, the similar three-dimensional structure to Anopheles gambiae
defensin and a phylogenetic analysis suggest that HdDef-2 may be a new member of 
the arthropod defensin family. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis revealed that 
HdDef-2 transcripts were constitutively expressed in the mantle, gill,
hepatopancreas, and foot, with the highest level in the hepatopancreas. It was
observed that HdDef-2 transcripts were significantly induced in the
hepatopancreas after infection by Vibrio harveyi. These results indicate that
HdDef-2 may be involved in the immune response against invading pathogenic
bacteria, but future work is needed to verify its antimicrobial activity in
protein level and elucidate the underlying mechanisms.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpb.2019.05.004 
PMID: 31078702  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

