
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Apr 26;10:841. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00841. eCollection
2019.

T Cell Receptor Expression Timing and Signal Strength in the Functional
Differentiation of Invariant Natural Killer T Cells.

Dashtsoodol N(1)(2), Bortoluzzi S(1), Schmidt-Supprian M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Klinikum rechts der Isar and
TranslaTUM Cancer Center, Technische Universität München, München, Germany.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Biomedicine, Mongolian
National University of Medical Sciences, Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.

The CD1d-restricted Vα14 invariant NKT (iNKT) cell lineage in mice (Vα24 in
humans) represents an evolutionary conserved innate-like immune cell type that
recognizes glycolipid antigens. Because of their unique ability to promptly
secrete copious amounts of both pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines,
typically produced by different T helper cell types, iNKT cells are implicated in
the regulation of various pathologic conditions such as infection, allergy,
autoimmune disease, maintenance of transplantation tolerance, and cancer. This
striking multifaceted role in immune regulation is correlated with the presence
of multiple functionally distinct iNKT cell subsets that can be distinguished
based on the expression of characteristic surface markers and transcription
factors. However, to date it, remains largely unresolved how this puzzling
diversity of iNKT cell functional subsets emerges and what factors dictate the
type of effector cell differentiation during the thymic differentiation
considering the mono-specific nature of their T cell receptor (TCR) and their
selecting molecule CD1d. Here, we summarize recent findings focusing on the role 
of TCR-mediated signaling and discuss possible mechanisms that may influence the 
sub-lineage choice of iNKT cells.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00841 
PMCID: PMC6497757
PMID: 31080448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

