
1. Mycologia. 2019 May-Jun;111(3):371-383. doi: 10.1080/00275514.2019.1571380. Epub 
2019 May 16.

Potential roles of marine fungi in the decomposition process of standing stems
and leaves of Spartina maritima.

Calado MDL(1)(2)(3), Carvalho L(1)(2), Barata M(1)(2), Pang KL(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Centre for Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Changes (Ce3C), Faculty of
Sciences of University of Lisbon, Edifício C2, 5º Piso, Campo Grande , 1749-016
Lisbon , Portugal.
(2)b Department of Plant Biology, Faculty of Sciences of the University of
Lisbon, Edifício C2, 2º Piso, Campo Grande, 1749-016 Lisbon , Portugal.
(3)c MARE-IPLeiria, Marine and Environmental Sciences Center, Polytechnic
Institute of Leiria, Edifício Cetemares, Avenida Porto de Pesca, 2520-630 Peniche
, Portugal.
(4)d Institute of Marine Biology and Centre of Excellence for the Oceans,
National Taiwan Ocean University, 2 Pei-Ning Road , Keelung 20224 , Taiwan ,
Republic of China.

Fungal communities inhabiting live, senescent, and decaying leaf sheaths, stems, 
and leaf blades of standing plants of Spartina maritima in two Portuguese salt
marshes were assessed by morphological identification of fruiting structures and 
sequence-based identification based on polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-cloning
analysis of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) rDNA. The molecular method
enabled identification of infrequent ascomycetes and basidiomycetes (filamentous 
and yeasts) and the asexual morph of Byssothecium obiones and Phaeosphaeria
halima. The occurrence and ecological role of the most frequent fungi on
different S. maritima substrates seem to depend on the phase of plant life cycle,
and specifically on the availability and microenvironmental conditions of each
plant substrate. Specifically, By. obiones, Natantispora retorquens, and
Lulworthia sp. 1 were involved in the decay of lower-middle culms, Buergenerula
spartinae of middle culms and leaves, P. halima, Phaeosphaeria spartinicola, and 
Stagonospora sp. 1 of middle-upper leaves, and Mycosphaerella sp. I of upper
leaves of early-decaying S. maritima plants. The presence of these fungi on live 
vegetative structures suggests that they might begin the colonization process as 
endophytes, gaining a competitive advantage over the other saprobic fungi on the 
plants.

DOI: 10.1080/00275514.2019.1571380 
PMID: 31095449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

