
1. J Crohns Colitis. 2019 Aug 14;13(8):1081-1091. doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjz025.

CD1d Modulates Colonic Inflammation in NOD2-/- Mice by Altering the Intestinal
Microbial Composition Comprising Acetatifactor muris.

Lee C(1), Hong SN(2), Paik NY(2), Kim TJ(2), Kim ER(2), Chang DK(2), Kim YH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

AIMS: NOD2 and CD1d play a key role in innate immunity by recognizing conserved
molecular patterns of pathogens. While NOD2-/- and CD1d-/- mice display
structural and functional alterations in Paneth cells, animal studies have
reported no impact of NOD2 or CD1d deficiency on experimental colitis. NOD2
mutations increase the susceptibility to inflammatory bowel diseases and the CD1d
bound to α-galactosylceramide [α-GalCer] alleviates intestinal inflammation. We
evaluated the effect of CD1d modulation on experimental colitis in NOD2-/- mice.
METHODS: The effect of CD1d augmentation and depletion in NOD2-/- mice was
assessed in a dextran sodium sulphate [DSS]-induced colitis model via
administration of α-GalCer and construction of NOD2-/-CD1d-/- mice. The
structural and functional changes in Paneth cells were evaluated using
transmission electron microscopy and pilocarpine administration. Colitogenic taxa
were analysed in the faeces of NOD2-/-CD1d-/- mice using 16S rRNA gene
sequencing.
RESULTS: In NOD2-/- mice, α-GalCer alleviated and CD1d depletion [NOD2-/-CD1d-/- 
mice] aggravated colitis activity and histology compared with co-housed
littermates NOD2-/-, CD1d-/- and wild-type mice after administration of 3% DSS.
In NOD2-/-CD1d-/- mice, the ultrastructure and degranulation ability of secretary
granules in Paneth cells were altered and the intestinal microbial composition
differed from that of their littermates. Faecal microbiota transplantation [FMT] 
with NOD2-/-CD1d-/- mice faeces into wild-type mice aggravated DSS-induced
colitis, while FMT with wild-type mice faeces into NOD2-/-CD1d-/- mice alleviated
DSS-induced colitis. Acetatifactor muris was identified only in NOD2-/-CD1d-/-
mice faeces and the oral gavage of A. muris in wild-type mice aggravated
DSS-induced colitis.
CONCLUSION: CD1d modulates colonic inflammation in NOD2-/- mice by altering the
intestinal microbial composition comprising A. muris.

Copyright © 2019 European Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation (ECCO). Published by
Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjz025 
PMID: 31094420  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

