
1. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2019 Apr;44(7):1341-1349. doi:
10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20190129.011.

[Study of heterologous efficient synthesis of β-amyrin and high-density
fermentation].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun MC(1), Chao EK(1), Su XY(2), Zhu M(3), Su Y(1), Qian GT(1), Chen SL(2), Wang 
CX(2), Xue JP(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Huaibei Normal University Huaibei 235000, China
Institute of Chinese Medicine,China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences Beijing
100700, China.
(2)Institute of Chinese Medicine,China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences
Beijing 100700, China.
(3)Institute of International Traditional Chinese Medicine Translational
Medicine, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine Guangzhou 510000, China.
(4)College of Life Sciences, Huaibei Normal University Huaibei 235000, China.

In this study, the synthetic pathway of β-amyrin was constructed in the
pre-constructed Saccharomyces cerevisiae chassis strain Y0 by introducing
β-amyrin synthase from Glycyrrhiza uralensis, resulting strain Y1-C20-6, which
successfully produced β-amyrin up to 5.97 mg·L~(-1). Then, the mevalonate
pyrophosphate decarboxylase gene(ERG19), mevalonate kinase gene(ERG12),
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase gene(ERG13), phosphomevalonate kinase
gene(ERG8) and IPP isomerase gene(IDI1)were overexpressed to promoted the
metabolic fluxto the direction of β-amyrin synthesis for further improving
β-amyrin production, resulting the strain Y2-C2-4 which produced β-amyrin of 10.3
mg·L~(-1)under the shake flask fermentation condition. This is 100% higher than
that of strain Y1-C20-6, illustrating the positive effect of the metabolic
engineering strategy applied in this study. The titer of β-amyrin was further
improved up to 157.4 mg·L~(-1) in the fed-batch fermentation, which was almost 26
fold of that produced by strain Y1-C20-6. This study not only laid the foundation
for the biosynthesis of β-amyrin but also provided a favorable chassis strain for
elucidation of cytochrome oxidases and glycosyltransferases of β-amyrin-based
triterpenoids.

DOI: 10.19540/j.cnki.cjcmm.20190129.011 
PMID: 31090290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

