
1. Infect Immun. 2019 Jul 23;87(8). pii: e00409-18. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00409-18. Print
2019 Aug.

Role of Toll-Like Receptor 5 (TLR5) in Experimental Melioidosis.

Birnie E(1), Weehuizen TAF(2), Lankelma JM(2), de Jong HK(2), Koh GCKW(2)(3), van
Lieshout MHP(2), Roelofs JJTH(4), Budding AE(5), de Vos AF(2), van der Poll
T(2)(6), Wiersinga WJ(1)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Amsterdam UMC, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands e.birnie@amc.uva.nl
w.j.wiersinga@amc.uva.nl.
(2)Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Amsterdam UMC, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Pathology, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, Amsterdam UMC, VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Amsterdam UMC,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The Gram-negative intracellular pathogen Burkholderia pseudomallei is the
causative agent of melioidosis, an important cause of sepsis in Southeast Asia.
Recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns by Toll-like receptors
(TLRs) is essential for an appropriate immune response during pathogen invasion. 
In patients with melioidosis, TLR5 is the most abundantly expressed TLR, and a
hypofunctional TLR5 variant has been associated with improved survival. Here, we 
studied the functional role of TLR5 and its ligand flagellin in experimental
melioidosis. First, we observed differential TLR5 expression in the pulmonary and
hepatic compartments upon infection with B. pseudomallei Next, we found that B.
pseudomallei-challenged TLR5-deficient (Tlr5-/- ) mice were more susceptible to
infection than wild-type (WT) mice, as demonstrated by higher systemic bacterial 
loads, increased organ injury, and impaired survival. Lung bacterial loads were
not different between the two groups. The phenotype was flagellin independent; no
difference in in vivo virulence was observed for the flagellin-lacking mutant
MM36 compared to the wild-type B. pseudomallei strain 1026b. Tlr5-/- mice showed 
a similar impaired antibacterial defense when infected with MM36 or 1026b. Ex
vivo experiments showed that TLR5-deficient macrophages display markedly impaired
phagocytosis of B. pseudomallei In conclusion, these data suggest that TLR5
deficiency has a detrimental flagellin-independent effect on the host response
against pulmonary B. pseudomallei infection.

Copyright Â© 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00409-18 
PMCID: PMC6652761
PMID: 31109950  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

