
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Apr 30;10:942. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00942. eCollection
2019.

Staphylococcal and Streptococcal Superantigens Trigger B7/CD28 Costimulatory
Receptor Engagement to Hyperinduce Inflammatory Cytokines.

Popugailo A(1), Rotfogel Z(1), Supper E(1), Hillman D(1), Kaempfer R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Medical
Research Israel-Canada, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem,
Israel.

Staphylococcal and streptococcal superantigens are virulence factors that cause
toxic shock by hyperinducing inflammatory cytokines. Effective T-cell activation 
requires interaction between the principal costimulatory receptor CD28 and its
two coligands, B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86). To elicit an inflammatory cytokine
storm, bacterial superantigens must bind directly into the homodimer interfaces
of CD28 and B7-2. Recent evidence revealed that by engaging CD28 and B7-2
directly at their dimer interface, staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) potently
enhances intercellular synapse formation mediated by B7-2 and CD28, resulting in 
T-cell hyperactivation. Here, we addressed the question, whether diverse
bacterial superantigens share the property of triggering B7-2/CD28 receptor
engagement and if so, whether they are capable of enhancing also the interaction 
between B7-1 and CD28, which occurs with an order-of-magnitude higher affinity.
To this end, we compared the ability of distinct staphylococcal and streptococcal
superantigens to enhance intercellular B7-2/CD28 engagement. Each of these
diverse superantigens promoted B7-2/CD28 engagement to a comparable extent.
Moreover, they were capable of triggering the intercellular B7-1/CD28
interaction, analyzed by flow cytometry of co-cultured cell populations
transfected separately to express human CD28 or B7-1. Streptococcal mitogenic
exotoxin Z (SMEZ), the most potent superantigen known, was as sensitive as SEB,
SEA and toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (TSST-1) to inhibition of inflammatory
cytokine induction by CD28 and B7-2 dimer interface mimetic peptides. Thus,
superantigens act not only by mediating unconventional interaction between MHC-II
molecule and T-cell receptor but especially, by strongly promoting engagement of 
CD28 by its B7-2 and B7-1 coligands, a critical immune checkpoint, forcing the
principal costimulatory axis to signal excessively. Our results show that the
diverse superantigens use a common mechanism to subvert the inflammatory
response, strongly enhancing B7-1/CD28 and B7-2/CD28 costimulatory receptor
engagement.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00942 
PMCID: PMC6503043
PMID: 31114583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

