
1. Cancer Immunol Res. 2019 Jul;7(7):1188-1201. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-18-0881. 
Epub 2019 May 21.

An Artificial Antigen-Presenting Cell Delivering 11 Immune Molecules Expands
Tumor Antigen-Specific CTLs in Ex Vivo and In Vivo Murine Melanoma Models.

Zhang L(1), Song S(1), Jin X(1), Wan X(1), Shahzad KA(1), Pei W(1), Zhao C(1),
Shen C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical School, Southeast
University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical School, Southeast
University, Nanjing, China. chuanlaishen@seu.edu.cn.

Antigen-presenting cells expand antigen-specific T cells ex vivo and in vivo for 
tumor immunotherapy, but are time-consuming to generate and, as live cells, raise
biosafety concerns. An alternative is found in cell-free artificial
antigen-presenting cells (aAPC), but these only present two or three kinds of
immune molecules. Here, we describe a multipotent artificial antigen-presenting
cell (MaAPC) that delivered 11 kinds of immune moleclues. This MaAPC simulated
natural APCs through the concurent coupling of target antigens
(H-2Kb/TRP2180-188-Ig dimers and H-2Db/gp10025-33-Ig dimers), costimulatory
molecules (anti-CD28, anti-4-1BB, and anti-CD2), and "self-marker" CD47-Fc onto
surface-modified polylactic-co-glycolic acid microparticles (PLGA-MP). These
PLGA-MPs also encapsulated cytokines (IL2 and IL15), a chemokine (CCL21), and
checkpoint inhibitors (anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1). Culture of MaAPCs with naïve T
cells for 1 week elevated the frequencies of TRP2180-188-specific and
gp10025-33-specific CTLs to 51.0% and 43.3%, respectively, with enhanced
cytotoxicity. Three infusions of MaAPCs inhibited subcutaneous melanoma growth in
a mouse model and expanded TRP2180-188 and gp10025-33-specific CTLs 59-86-fold in
peripheral blood, 76-77-fold in spleen, and 205-212-fold in tumor tissue, in an
antigen-specific manner. Compared with conventional aAPCs carrying two or three
immune molecules, the 11-signal MaAPCs exerted greater impact on T cells,
including activation, proliferation, cytotoxicity, differentiation to memory CTLs
or regulatory T cells and cytokines profiles, without detected side effects. Such
MaAPCs could be used to individualize tumor immunotherapy.

©2019 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-18-0881 
PMID: 31113806  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

