
1. Platelets. 2020;31(3):344-354. doi: 10.1080/09537104.2019.1615612. Epub 2019 May 
22.

Human platelets and megakaryocytes express defensin alpha 1.

Valle-Jiménez X(1)(2), Ramírez-Cosmes A(2), Aquino-Domínguez AS(2), Sánchez-Peña 
F(2), Bustos-Arriaga J(3), Romero-Tlalolini MLÁ(4), Torres-Aguilar H(5),
Serafín-López J(1), Aguilar Ruíz SR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Inmunología, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas (ENCB),
Instituto Politécnico Nacional (IPN), ENCB-IPN, Ciudad de México, México.
(2)Departamento de Biomedicina Experimental, Facultad de Medicina y Cirugía de la
Universidad Autónoma 'Benito Juárez' of Oaxaca, Oaxaca, México.
(3)Laboratorio de Biología Molecular e Inmunología de Arbovirus, Unidad de
Biomedicina, Facultad de Estudios Superiores - Iztacala de la Universidad
Autónoma Nacional de México, Tlalnepantla de Baz, Estadode México, México.
(4)CONACYT- Universidad Autónoma 'Benito Juárez' de Oaxaca, Oaxaca, Facultad de
Medicina y Cirugía, México.
(5)Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Autónoma 'Benito Juárez' de Oaxaca,
Oaxaca, México.

Platelets are anucleate cells that have a role in several innate immune
functions, including the secretion of proteins with antimicrobial activity.
Several studies have demonstrated the ability of platelets to secrete
thrombin-induced platelet microbicidal proteins and antimicrobial peptides, like 
hBD-1. However, the expression and secretion of defensins of the alpha family by 
platelets have not been fully elucidated. The aim of this study was to
characterize the expression of defensin alpha 1 (DEFA1) in human platelets and
megakaryocytes. Our data indicate that DEFA1 mRNA and protein are present in
peripheral blood platelets and in the megakaryoblastic leukemia cell line
(MEG-01). DEFA1 co-localize with α-granules of platelets and MEG-01 cells, and
was also detected in cytoplasm of MEG-01 cells. The assay of our in vitro model
of platelet-like particles (PLPs) revealed that MEG-01 cells could transfer DEFA1
mRNA to their differentiated PLPs. Furthermore, platelets secreted DEFA1 into the
culture medium when activated with thrombin, adenosine diphosphate, and
lipopolysaccharide; meanwhile, MEG-01 cells secreted DEFA1 when activated with
thrombopoietin. Platelet's secreted DEFA1 can rebind to platelet's surface and
have antibacterial activity against the gram-negative bacteria Escherichia coli. 
In summary, our data indicate that both, human platelets and megakaryocytes, can 
express and secrete DEFA1. These results suggest a new role of platelets and
megakaryocytes in the innate immune response.

DOI: 10.1080/09537104.2019.1615612 
PMID: 31116063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

