
1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Jul 5;294(27):10503-10518. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.008481. Epub 
2019 May 22.

Activation of the ILT7 receptor and plasmacytoid dendritic cell responses are
governed by structurally-distinct BST2 determinants.

Bego MG(1), Miguet N(2), Laliberté A(1), Aschman N(2), Gerard F(2), Merakos
AA(1), Weissenhorn W(2), Cohen ÉA(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec H2W
1R7, Canada.
(2)the University Grenoble Alpes, Institut de Biologie Structurale (IBS), CEA,
CNRS, 38044 Grenoble, France, and.
(3)From the Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec H2W
1R7, Canada, eric.cohen@ircm.qc.ca.
(4)the Department of Microbiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Université de
Montréal, Montreal, Quebec H3T 1J4, Canada.

Type I interferons (IFN-I) are key innate immune effectors predominantly produced
by activated plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). By modulating immune responses 
at their foundation, IFNs can widely reshape immunity to control infectious
diseases and malignancies. Nevertheless, their biological activities can also be 
detrimental to surrounding healthy cells, as prolonged IFN-I signaling is
associated with excessive inflammation and immune dysfunction. The interaction of
the human pDC receptor immunoglobulin-like transcript 7 (ILT7) with its
IFN-I-regulated ligand, bone marrow stromal cell antigen 2 (BST2) plays a key
role in controlling the IFN-I amounts produced by pDCs in response to Toll-like
receptor (TLR) activation. However, the structural determinants and molecular
features of BST2 that govern ILT7 engagement and activation are largely
undefined. Using two functional assays to measure BST2-stimulated ILT7 activation
as well as biophysical studies, here we identified two structurally-distinct
regions of the BST2 ectodomain that play divergent roles during ILT7 activation. 
We found that although the coiled-coil region contains a newly defined
ILT7-binding surface, the N-terminal region appears to suppress ILT7 activation. 
We further show that a stable BST2 homodimer binds to ILT7, but post-binding
events associated with the unique BST2 coiled-coil plasticity are required to
trigger receptor signaling. Hence, BST2 with an unstable or a rigid coiled-coil
fails to activate ILT7, whereas substitutions in its N-terminal region enhance
activation. Importantly, the biological relevance of these newly defined domains 
of BST2 is underscored by the identification of substitutions having opposing
potentials to activate ILT7 in pathological malignant conditions.

© 2019 Bego et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.008481 
PMCID: PMC6615697
PMID: 31118237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

