
1. Microb Pathog. 2019 Aug;133:103545. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103545. Epub 2019
May 18.

Escherichia coli K12: An evolving opportunistic commensal gut microbe distorts
barrier integrity in human intestinal cells.

Bhat MI(1), Sowmya K(1), Kapila S(1), Kapila R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biochemistry Division, ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, 
Haryana, India.
(2)Animal Biochemistry Division, ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, 
Haryana, India. Electronic address: rkapila69@rediffmail.com.

Commensal enteric microbes under specific conditions viz. immunocompromised
system, altered microbiota or uncompetitive niche induce their otherwise dormant 
pathogenic phenotype to distort host cellular functioning. Here we investigate
how under in vitro environment established by using Caco-2 cells, commensal gut
microbe E. coli K12 (ATCC 14849) disrupt intestinal epithelial barrier function. 
Caco-2 cells exposed to E. coli showed the time dependent significant (P < 0.01) 
decrease in transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) and concomitantly
increased phenol red flux across cell monolayer in contrast to non infected
control cells. E. coli infected intestinal cells were observed with suppressed
(p < 0.05) mRNA levels of ZO-1, Claudin-1, Occludin and Cingulin-1 in contrast to
significantly (p < 0.05) higher PIgR and hbd-2 mRNA fold changes.
Immunofluorescent and electron micrographs revealed the disrupted distribution
and localisation of specific tight junction proteins (Zo-1 and Claudin-1) and
actin filament in E. coli infected Caco-2 cells that ultimately resulted in
deformed cellular morphology. Taken together, E. coli K12 under compromised in
vitro milieu disrupted the intestinal barrier functions by decreasing the
expression of important tight junction genes along with the altered distribution 
of associated proteins that increased the intestinal permeability as reflected by
phenol red flux and TEER values.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103545 
PMID: 31112772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

