
1. ISME J. 2019 Sep;13(9):2334-2345. doi: 10.1038/s41396-019-0437-5. Epub 2019 May
22.

Proteomics quantifies protein expression changes in a model cnidarian colonised
by a thermally tolerant but suboptimal symbiont.

Sproles AE(1), Oakley CA(1), Matthews JL(1), Peng L(1), Owen JG(1), Grossman
AR(2), Weis VM(3), Davy SK(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, 
6140, New Zealand.
(2)Department of Plant Biology, The Carnegie Institution for Science, Stanford,
CA, 94305, USA.
(3)Department of Integrative Biology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR,
97331, USA.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, 
6140, New Zealand. simon.davy@vuw.ac.nz.

The acquisition of thermally tolerant algal symbionts by corals has been proposed
as a natural or assisted mechanism of increasing coral reef resilience to
anthropogenic climate change, but the cell-level processes determining the
performance of new symbiotic associations are poorly understood. We used liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry to investigate the effects of an experimentally 
induced symbiosis on the host proteome of the model sea anemone Exaiptasia
pallida. Aposymbiotic specimens were colonised by either the homologous
dinoflagellate symbiont (Breviolum minutum) or a thermally tolerant, ecologically
invasive heterologous symbiont (Durusdinium trenchii). Anemones containing D.
trenchii exhibited minimal expression of Niemann-Pick C2 proteins, which have
predicted biochemical roles in sterol transport and cell recognition, and
glutamine synthetases, which are thought to be involved in nitrogen assimilation 
and recycling between partners. D. trenchii-colonised anemones had higher
expression of methionine-synthesising betaine-homocysteine S-methyltransferases
and proteins with predicted oxidative stress response functions. Multiple
lysosome-associated proteins were less abundant in both symbiotic treatments
compared with the aposymbiotic treatment. The differentially abundant proteins
are predicted to represent pathways that may be involved in nutrient transport or
resource allocation between partners. These results provide targets for specific 
experiments to elucidate the mechanisms underpinning compensatory physiology in
the coral-dinoflagellate symbiosis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41396-019-0437-5 
PMCID: PMC6775970
PMID: 31118473  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

