
1. J Immunol. 2019 Jul 1;203(1):117-126. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1801585. Epub 2019
May 24.

The Lysophosphatidylcholine Transporter MFSD2A Is Essential for CD8+ Memory T
Cell Maintenance and Secondary Response to Infection.

Piccirillo AR(1), Hyzny EJ(1), Beppu LY(1), Menk AV(2), Wallace CT(3), Hawse
WF(1), Buechel HM(1), Wong BH(4), Foo JC(5), Cazenave-Gassiot A(5), Wenk MR(5),
Delgoffe GM(2), Watkins SC(3), Silver DL(4), D'Cruz LM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213.
(2)Tumor Microenvironment Center, UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, PA
15232.
(3)Center for Biologic Imaging, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213.
(4)Signature Research Program in Cardiovascular and Metabolic Diseases,
Duke-National University of Singapore Graduate Medical School, Singapore 159857, 
Singapore; and.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, National University of Singapore, Singapore
117597, Singapore.
(6)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213;
ldcruz@pitt.edu.

Access to nutrients is critical for an effective T cell immune response to
infection. Although transporters for sugars and amino acids have previously been 
described in the context of the CD8+ T cell immune response, the active transport
of exogenous fatty acids has remained enigmatic. In this study, we discovered
that the sodium-dependent lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) transporter major
facilitator superfamily domain containing 2A (MFSD2A) is upregulated on activated
CD8+ T cells and is required for memory T cell maintenance. MFSD2A deficiency in 
mice resulted in decreased import of LPC esterified to long chain fatty acids
into activated CD8+ T cells, and MFSD2A-deficient cells are at a competitive
disadvantage resulting in reduced memory T cell formation and maintenance and
reduced response to secondary infection. Mechanistically, import of LPCs was
required to maintain T cell homeostatic turnover, which when lost resulted in a
decreased memory T cell pool and thus a reduced secondary response to repeat
infection.

Copyright Â© 2019 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1801585 
PMCID: PMC6581627
PMID: 31127034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

