
1. Environ Technol. 2020 Dec;41(28):3682-3694. doi: 10.1080/09593330.2019.1618921.
Epub 2019 Jun 3.

Passive phosphorus capture in biofiltration context: nitrate impact on the
performance.

Hamidou S(1)(2), Dubé R(2), Lessard P(1), Buelna G(2), Dorea CC(1)(3), LeBihan
Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Département de génie civil et de génie des eaux, Pavillon Adrien-Pouliot,
Université Laval, Québec, Canada.
(2)Centre de Recherche Industrielle du Québec (CRIQ), Québec, Canada.
(3)Department of Civil Engineering, University of Victoria, Victoria, Canada.

Research on the development of a passive phosphorus entrapment process
characterized by biofilters with active wood-based media impregnated with iron
hydroxide has been conducted. Phosphorus removal was done by sorption which
includes adsorption, exchange of ions and precipitation. Experiments were
performed in order to investigate the effect of nitrate, generally present at the
end of secondary treatment, on the phosphorus removal performance. Columns tests 
were performed with anaerobic activated wood-based media and immersion over a
period of 150 days. Columns were fed for 32 days with a synthetic solution of
5 mg P L-1. Different concentrations of nitrate (5, 10 and 25 mg N-NO3 L-1) were 
then applied on three columns (C2, C3 and C4), column C1 serving as a control.
Results showed total phosphorus (TP) removal efficiencies of 96.9%, 81.7%, 70.6% 
and 75.7%, respectively, for C1, C2, C3 and C4. Addition of nitrate increases the
oxidoreduction potential (ORP). This results in an inhibition of the reductive
dissolution, characterized by a decrease in the release of ferrous ions.
Simultaneous denitrification occurs within the columns. It is both biological and
chemical through the oxidation of ferrous ions by NO2, produced during biological
denitrification. Furthermore, bacterial identification tests have highlighted the
presence of iron-related bacteria (Pseudomonas, Thiobacillus, Enteric bacteria,
e.g. E. coli), slym forming bacteria, sulphate reducing bacteria and denitrifying
microorganisms such as Pseudomonas and E. bacteria in biofilters.

DOI: 10.1080/09593330.2019.1618921 
PMID: 31120399  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

