
1. ACS Synth Biol. 2019 Jun 21;8(6):1391-1400. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.9b00078. Epub 
2019 May 28.

Development of a Genetically Encoded Biosensor for Detection of Polyketide
Synthase Extender Units in Escherichia coli.

Kalkreuter E(1)(2), Keeler AM(1), Malico AA(1), Bingham KS(1), Gayen AK(1),
Williams GJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry , North Carolina State University , Raleigh , North
Carolina 27695 , United States.
(2)Comparative Medicine Institute , North Carolina State University , Raleigh ,
North Carolina 27695 , United States.

The scaffolds of polyketides are constructed via assembly of extender units based
on malonyl-CoA and its derivatives that are substituted at the C2-position with
diverse chemical functionality. Subsequently, a transcription-factor-based
biosensor for malonyl-CoA has proven to be a powerful tool for detecting
malonyl-CoA, facilitating the dynamic regulation of malonyl-CoA biosynthesis and 
guiding high-throughput engineering of malonyl-CoA-dependent processes. Yet, a
biosensor for the detection of malonyl-CoA derivatives has yet to be reported,
severely restricting the application of high-throughput synthetic biology
approaches to engineering extender unit biosynthesis and limiting the ability to 
dynamically regulate the biosynthesis of polyketide products that are dependent
on such α-carboxyacyl-CoAs. Herein, the FapR biosensor was re-engineered and
optimized for a range of mCoA concentrations across a panel of E. coli strains.
The effector specificity of FapR was probed by cell-free
transcription-translation, revealing that a variety of non-native and non-natural
acyl-thioesters are FapR effectors. This FapR promiscuity proved sufficient for
the detection of the polyketide extender unit methylmalonyl-CoA in E. coli,
providing the first reported genetically encoded biosensor for this important
metabolite. As such, the previously unknown broad effector promiscuity of FapR
provides a platform to develop new tools and approaches that can be leveraged to 
overcome limitations of pathways that construct diverse α-carboxyacyl-CoAs and
those that are dependent on them, including biofuels, antibiotics, anticancer
drugs, and other value-added products.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.9b00078 
PMCID: PMC6915837
PMID: 31134799  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

