
1. Parasit Vectors. 2019 May 27;12(1):263. doi: 10.1186/s13071-019-3523-7.

A combination of metabolic resistance and high frequency of the 1014F kdr
mutation is driving pyrethroid resistance in Anopheles coluzzii population from
Guinea savanna of Cameroon.

Fadel AN(1)(2), Ibrahim SS(3)(4), Tchouakui M(1), Terence E(1), Wondji MJ(1)(5), 
Tchoupo M(1), Wanji S(2), Wondji CS(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)LSTM Research Unit, Centre for Research in Infectious Diseases (CRID), P.O.
Box 13591, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, University of Buea, P.O. Box 63, 
Buea, Cameroon.
(3)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM),
Liverpool, L3 5QA, UK. sulaimansadi.ibrahim@lstmed.ac.uk.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Bayero University, PMB 3011, Kano, Nigeria.
sulaimansadi.ibrahim@lstmed.ac.uk.
(5)Vector Biology Department, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM),
Liverpool, L3 5QA, UK.

BACKGROUND: The scale-up in the distribution of long-lasting insecticidal nets
(LLINs) and indoor residual spraying has significantly reduced malaria burden and
mortality. However, insecticide resistance, among other factors, is responsible
for a recent rebound in malaria transmission in 2015-2016, threatening the
progress so far made. As a contribution towards understanding patterns of
resistance and its mechanism in the field we characterized a population of
Anopheles gambiae (s.l.) from Gounougou, a Guinea savanna of north/central
Cameroon.
RESULTS: Indoor collection conducted in September 2017 identified Anopheles
coluzzii and Anopheles arabiensis as the unique Anopheles vector species, with
abundances of 83 and 17%, respectively. Analysis of infection with TaqMan assays 
using heads/thoraces of indoor collected females of An. coluzzii revealed a low
Plasmodium falciparum parasite rate of 4.7%. Bioassays conducted with female An. 
coluzzii revealed extreme resistance, with low mortalities of only 3.75 ± 1.25%, 
3.03 ± 1.59% and 1.45 ± 1.45%, respectively, for permethrin, deltamethrin and
DDT. In contrast, high susceptibility was obtained with the organophosphates and 
carbamates, with mortalities in the range of 98-100%. Synergist assays with
piperonyl butoxide (PBO) recovered some susceptibility with increased mortality
for permethrin to 14.88 ± 8.74%, and for deltamethrin to 32.50 ± 10.51% (~27-fold
increase compared to mortalities with deltamethrin alone, χ2 = 29, df = 1,
P < 0.0001). These correlated with the results of cone bioassays which revealed
complete loss of efficacy of Olyset®Net (0% mortality) and PermaNet®2.0 (0%
mortality), and the considerable loss of efficacy of Olyset®Plus (mortality of
2 ± 2%), PermaNet®3.0 side panel (mortality of 2 ± 2%) and PermaNet3.0® roof
(mortality of 16 ± 5.1%). Time-course bioassays conducted with deltamethrin
established a high intensity of resistance, with LT50 of 309.09 (95% CI
253.07-393.71, Fiducial), and a resistance ratio of 93.09 compared with the fully
susceptible Ngoussou laboratory colony. TaqMan genotyping revealed a high
frequency of the 1014F allele (65.25%) in the An. coluzzii populations.
Sequencing of a fragment of the voltage-gated sodium channel identified a single 
An. arabiensis female harbouring the 1014S kdr mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: This finding of high pyrethroid and DDT resistance in An. coluzzii
from north-central Cameroon is a major obstacle to malaria control using
pyrethroid bednets and indoor residual spraying with DDT.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-019-3523-7 
PMCID: PMC6537440
PMID: 31133042  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

