
1. Transfus Apher Sci. 2019 Aug;58(4):475-483. doi: 10.1016/j.transci.2019.05.006.
Epub 2019 May 22.

Comparison and correlation among in vitro and in vivo assays to assess cord blood
quality according to delivery temperature and time after collection.

Maeng JY(1), Kim SY(2), An BY(2), Kim S(1), Lee JL(3), Oh IH(4), Kim TG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Department of Biomedicine & Health Sciences,
College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Catholic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Bank, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Daegu Fatima Hospital Public Cord Blood Bank, Daegu Fatima Hospital, Deagu,
Republic of Korea.
(4)Catholic Cell Therapy Center and Department of Cellular Medicine, College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Department of Biomedicine & Health Sciences,
College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea; 
Catholic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Bank, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
kimtg@catholic.ac.kr.

Cord blood (CB) has been used as an alternative source for unrelated allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. To determine which assay was useful for 
predicting the successful outcome of CB transplantation, CBs were grouped
according to the temperature (4 °C, 24 °C, and 37 °C) and time (24, 48, and 72 h)
after collection. The viability, early apoptosis, and colony forming units (CFUs)
were ascertained for the total nucleated cells (TNCs) and CD34+ cells; in
addition, the engraftment of infused CD34+ cells in NSG mice was determined. The 
viability of the TNCs and CD34+ cells and total CFUs were significantly decreased
whereas the early apoptosis was significantly increased in the 72 h group at
37 °C compared to that of the 24 h group at 24 °C. The viability and early
apoptosis of the TNCs correlated with those of CD34+ cells. In addition, the
viability and early apoptosis correlated with the number of granulocyte/monocyte 
progenitor CFUs. In transplanted NSG mice, the frequency of human CD45+ cells
decreased in the 72 h group at 24 °C compared to that of the 24 h group at 24 °C 
and was negatively correlated with early apoptosis of TNCs and CD34+ cells. This 
study demonstrated that the early apoptosis of TNCs and CD34+ cells constitutes a
useful marker for predicting the engraftment of HSCs and may provide helpful data
for standard assessment regarding CB quality by analyzing the correlation between
in vitro and in vivo assays using NSG mice.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transci.2019.05.006 
PMID: 31147270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

