
1. Sci Rep. 2019 May 31;9(1):8131. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-44595-4.

CSN5 inhibition triggers inflammatory signaling and Rho/ROCK-dependent loss of
endothelial integrity.

Majolée J(1), Pronk MCA(1), Jim KK(2), van Bezu JSM(1), van der Sar AM(2),
Hordijk PL(1), Kovačević I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Physiology,
Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, De Boelelaan 1117, 1081HZ, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(2)Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Medical
Microbiology and Infection Control, Amsterdam Infection and Immunity Institute,
De Boelelaan 1117, 1081HZ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Physiology,
Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, De Boelelaan 1117, 1081HZ, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. i.kovacevic@vumc.nl.

RhoGTPases regulate cytoskeletal dynamics, migration and cell-cell adhesion in
endothelial cells. Besides regulation at the level of guanine nucleotide binding,
they also undergo post-translational modifications, for example ubiquitination.
RhoGTPases are ubiquitinated by Cullin RING ligases which are in turn regulated
by neddylation. Previously we showed that inhibition of Cullin RING ligase
activity by the neddylation inhibitor MLN4924 is detrimental for endothelial
barrier function, due to accumulation of RhoB and the consequent induction of
contractility. Here we analyzed the effect of pharmacological activation of
Cullin RING ligases on endothelial barrier integrity in vitro and in vivo.
CSN5i-3 induced endothelial barrier disruption and increased macromolecule
leakage in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, CSN5i-3 strongly induced the
expression and activation of RhoB and to lesser extent of RhoA in endothelial
cells, which enhanced cell contraction. Elevated expression of RhoGTPases was a
consequence of activation of the NF-κB pathway. In line with this notion, CSN5i-3
treatment decreased IκBα expression and increased NF-κB-mediated ICAM-1
expression and consequent adhesion of neutrophils to endothelial cells. This
study shows that sustained neddylation of Cullin RING-ligases leads to activation
the NF-κB pathway in endothelial cells, elevated expression of RhoGTPases,
Rho/ROCK-dependent activation of MLC and disruption of the endothelial barrier.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-44595-4 
PMCID: PMC6544660
PMID: 31148579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

