
1. Scand J Immunol. 2019 Sep;90(3):e12794. doi: 10.1111/sji.12794. Epub 2019 Jun 26.

Defining a novel subset of CD1d-dependent type II natural killer T cells using
natural killer cell-associated markers.

Singh AK(1), Rhost S(1), Löfbom L(1), Cardell SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells are αβ T cell receptor (TCR) expressing innate-like 
T cells that display natural killer (NK) cell markers. Based on TCR
characteristics, they are divided into two groups restricted to the MHC class
I-like molecule CD1d. Type I NKT cells, most extensively studied, are identified 
by a semi-invariant Vα14-Jα18 (mouse, Vα24-Jα18 in humans) TCR reactive to the
prototypic ligand α-galactosylceramide presented on CD1d. In contrast, type II
NKT cells display diverse TCR reacting to different CD1d-presented ligands. There
are no reagents that identify all type II NKT cells, limiting their exploration. 
Here, we searched for novel type II NKT cells by comparing Jα18-/- MHCII-/- mice 
that harbour type II but not type I NKT cells, and CD1d-/- MHCII-/- mice, lacking
all NKT cells. We identified significantly larger populations of CD4+ and CD4-
CD8- (double negative, DN) TCRβ+ cells expressing NKG2D or NKG2A/C/E in Jα18-/-
MHCII-/- mice compared with CD1d-/- MHCII-/- mice, suggesting that 30%-50% of
these cells were type II NKT cells. They expressed CD122, NK1.1, CXCR3 and
intermediate/low levels of CD45RB. Further, the CD4+ subset was CD69+ , while the
DN cells were CD49b+ and CD62L+ . Both subsets expressed the NKT cell-associated 
promyelocytic leukaemia zinc finger (PLZF) transcription factor and Tbet, while
fewer cells expressed RORγt. NKG2D+ CD4+ and DN populations were producers of
IFN-γ, but rarely IL-4 and IL-17. Taken together, we identify a novel subset of
primary CD4+ and DN type II NKT cells that expresses NKG2 receptors have typical 
NKT cell phenotypes and a TH1-like cytokine production.

© 2019 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of The Foundation for the Scandinavian Journal of Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/sji.12794 
PMCID: PMC6851763
PMID: 31141185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

