
1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2019 Sep 1;136:296-304. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.06.027.
Epub 2019 Jun 6.

Deep eutectic solvents based on choline cation - Physicochemical properties and
influence on enzymatic reaction with β-galactosidase.

Hoppe J(1), Drozd R(2), Byzia E(3), Smiglak M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Chemistry, Adam Mickiewicz University, ul. Umultowska 89b, 61-614
Poznan, Poland.
(2)Department of Immunology, Microbiology and Physiological Chemistry, West
Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin, Piastów 45, 70-311 Szczecin,
Poland.
(3)Poznan Science and Technology Park, Adam Mickiewicz University Foundation, ul.
Rubiez 46, 61-612 Poznan, Poland.
(4)Poznan Science and Technology Park, Adam Mickiewicz University Foundation, ul.
Rubiez 46, 61-612 Poznan, Poland. Electronic address:
marcin.smiglak@ppnt.poznan.pl.

In presented study analysis of physicochemical properties of deep eutectic
solvents (DESs) and their usefulness as an element of reaction medium for
β-galactosidase from Kluyveromyces lactis was conducted. Analyzed DESs were based
on choline salt derivatives: choline chloride, choline acetate and hydrogen
bond-donors (HBD) such as: glycerol, ethylene glycol, urea, thiourea and
levulinic acid. Results showed that reaction medium with appropriate amount of
DES based on choline acetate had beneficial effect on activity of
β-galactosidase. The 5% (v/v) addition of developed choline acetate:glycerol DES 
mixture enhanced enzyme activity almost three fold. The results of performed
experiments have also revealed that β-galactosidase activity is less affected by 
the organic anion as choline acetate in ionic liquid, than inorganic anion as
choline chloride. The developed green solvents as DES based on choline acetate
exhibit a wide application potential that can be used to increase efficiency of
enzyme-based industrial process.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.06.027 
PMID: 31176858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

