
1. Chemosphere. 2019 Oct;233:252-260. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.05.208. Epub
2019 May 28.

The synergistic interaction between sulfate-reducing bacteria and pyrogenic
carbonaceous matter in DDT decay.

Ding K(1), Duran M(1), Xu W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Villanova University,
Villanova, PA, 19085, USA.
(2)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Villanova University,
Villanova, PA, 19085, USA. Electronic address: wenqing.xu@villanova.edu.

Although 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-di(4-chlorophenyl)ethane (DDT) was banned in the
United States in 1972, it is still often detected in sediments where pyrogenic
carbonaceous matter (PCM) and sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) co-exist. In this
study, we found that 70.2 ± 0.2% of DDT disappeared in the presence of SRB and
graphite powder, a model PCM, after 21 days at pH 7. Our results suggest that the
observed DDT decay was due to the reaction between graphite powder and the
reduced sulfur species that were produced by SRB. No biofilm formation was
observed on the surface of graphite powder. Rather, the activity of SRB was
inhibited by the presence of graphite powder. To understand the involvement of
PCM in DDT decay, electrochemical cells and batch reactor experiments with
sulfur-pretreated PCM as well as direct electrochemical reduction by a
potentiostat were employed. Our results suggest that polysulfide, sulfide,
sulfite, and thiosulfate could all react with PCM, forming surface-bound
intermediates that subsequently led to DDT decay. The reactivity of reduced
sulfur species was the highest for polysulfide, followed by sulfide, sulfite, and
thiosulfate.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.05.208 
PMID: 31176126  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

