
1. J Biomater Sci Polym Ed. 2019 Oct;30(14):1243-1259. doi:
10.1080/09205063.2019.1627650. Epub 2019 Jun 19.

Polyethyleneimine and quaternized ammonium polyethyleneimine: the versatile
materials for combating bacteria and biofilms.

Lan T(1), Guo Q(2), Shen X(2).

Author information: 
(1)a School of Chemical Engineering , Guizhou Minzu University, University Town ,
Guizhou , China.
(2)b The Department of pharmaceutical Engineering (State Key Laboratory of
Functions and Applications of Medicinal Plants, the High Efficacy Application of 
Natural Medicinal Resources Engineering Center of Guizhou Province, the Key
Laboratory of Optimal Utilization of Natural Medicine Resources), School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences , Guizhou Medical University, University Town , Guizhou ,
China.

Bacterial infection has become a serious clinical concern due to the emergence of
drug-resistance and biofilm formation. Therefore, it is in great demand to
develop efficient antimicrobial agents to treat bacterial infection without using
antibiotics. Herein, we successfully prepared four quaternized ammonium PEI
(QPEI: PEI1200-C2, PEI1200-C4, PEI1200-C6 and PEI1200-C8) using the commercial
available PEI1200. Both PEI and four QPEI presented broad-spectrum antimicrobial 
activity against Gram-negative bacteria (E. coli, and P. aeruginosa) and
Gram-positive bacteria (B. amyloliquefaciens and S. aureus), especially
PEI1200-C6 showed the strongest antimicrobial activity with good biocompatibility
at the MIC concentrations. Besides, PEI1200-C6 showed 4-16-fold better
antibacterial effect than PEI1200, and fluorescent microscope imaging
demonstrated that both of them could efficiently eradicate biofilms formed by
four bacterial strains in vitro. As the accessible broad-spectrum antibacterial
agents, PEI1200 and PEI1200-C6 are significant candidates to treat bacterial
infections or eradicate biofilms on indwelling medical devices.

DOI: 10.1080/09205063.2019.1627650 
PMID: 31177926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

