
1. Cell Signal. 2019 Oct;62:109340. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2019.06.005. Epub 2019
Jun 5.

PICOT (GLRX3) is a positive regulator of stress-induced DNA-damage response.

Pandya P(1), Braiman A(1), Isakov N(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty 
of Health Sciences and the Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel.
(2)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Genetics, Faculty 
of Health Sciences and the Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, P.O.B. 653, Beer Sheva 84105, Israel.. Electronic address: noah@bgu.ac.il.

Protein kinase C (PKC)-interacting cousin of thioredoxin (PICOT; also termed
glutaredoxin 3 (Glrx3)) is a ubiquitously expressed protein that possesses an
N-terminal monothiol thioredoxin (Trx) domain and two C-terminal tandem copies of
a monothiol Glrx domain. It has an overall highly conserved amino acid sequence
and is encoded by a unique gene, both in humans and mice, without having other
functional gene homologs in the entire genome. Despite being discovered almost
two decades ago, the biological function of PICOT remains largely ill-defined and
its ramifications are underestimated considering the fact that PICOT-deficiency
in mice results in embryonic lethality. Since classical Glrxs are important
regulators of the cellular redox homeostasis, we tested whether PICOT participate
in the stress-induced DNA-damage response, focusing on nuclear proteins that
function as integral components of the DNA repair machinery. Using wild type
versus PICOT-deficient (PICOT-KD) Jurkat T cells we found that the anti-oxidant
mechanism in PICOT-deficient cells is impaired, and that these cells respond to
genotoxic drugs, such as etoposide and camptothecin, by increased caspase-3
activity, a reduced survival and a slower and diminished phosphorylation of the
histone protein, H2AX. Nevertheless, the effect of PICOT on the drug-induced
phosphorylation of H2AX was independent of the cellular levels of reactive oxygen
species. PICOT-deficient cells also demonstrated reduced and slower γH2AX foci
formation in response to radiation. Furthermore, immunofluorescence staining
using PICOT- and γH2AX-specific Abs followed by confocal microscopy demonstrated 
partial localization of PICOT at the γH2AX-containing foci at the site of the DNA
double strand breaks. In addition, PICOT knockdown resulted in inhibition of
phosphorylation of ATR, Chk1 and Chk2 kinases, which play an essential role in
the DNA-damage response and serve as upstream regulators of γH2AX. The present
data suggest that PICOT protects cells from DNA damage-inducing agents by
operating as an upstream positive regulator of ATR-dependent signaling pathways. 
By promoting the activity of ATR, PICOT indirectly regulates the phosphorylation 
and activation of Chk1, Chk2, and γH2AX, which are critical components of the DNA
damage repair mechanism and thereby attenuate the stress- and replication-induced
genome instability.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2019.06.005 
PMID: 31176019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

