
1. Dis Aquat Organ. 2019 Apr 11;133(3):253-261. doi: 10.3354/dao03349.

MHC Class IIB gene polymorphisms associated with resistance/susceptibility to
Streptococcus agalactiae in Nile tilapia Oreochromis niloticus.

Gao FY(1), Zhang D, Lu MX, Cao JM, Liu ZG, Ke XL, Wang M, Zhang DF.

Author information: 
(1)Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Science, 
Guangzhou 510380, PR China.

Genetic variation in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) Class IIB was
tested in Nile tilapia Oreochromis niloticus, and the association between the MHC
IIB alleles and disease resistance was also studied. F3 fry offspring (n = 1200) 
from 12 full-sib families were challenged with Streptococcus agalactiae, which
caused significantly different mortalities in different Nile tilapia families
(11.00-81.10%). Twenty fry (F1) from each of the 12 families were selected to
study the polymorphisms of the MHC Class IIB gene using PCR followed by cloning
and sequencing methods. The results showed that the size of the amplified
fragment was 770-797 bp. Thirty-seven sequences from 240 individuals revealed 22 
different alleles, which belonged to 9 major allele types. Up to 63.58% of
nucleotide positions were variable, while the proportion of the amino acid
variable positions was up to 68.73%. According to the survival rate of offspring 
(F3) from 12 full-sib families, we deduced that the alleles Orni-DAB*0107,
Orni-DAB*0201 and Orni-DAB*0302 were highly associated with resistance to S.
agalactiae, while the allele Orni-DAB*0701 was associated with susceptibility to 
S. agalactiae. In addition, our previous study found that the allele
Orni-DAB*0201 was more frequently distributed in the disease-resistant groups.
Therefore, the allele Orni-DAB*0201 could be used as an S. agalactiae
resistance-related MHC marker in molecular marker-assisted selective breeding
programs for S. agalactiae-resistant Nile tilapia.

DOI: 10.3354/dao03349 
PMID: 31187732  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

