
1. Int J Dermatol. 2019 Dec;58(12):1360-1365. doi: 10.1111/ijd.14509. Epub 2019 Jun 
13.

Are new variants of psoriasis therapy (IL-17 inhibitors) safe?

Wcisło-Dziadecka D(1), Kaźmierczak A(2), Grabarek B(2), Zbiciak-Nylec M(3),
Brzezińska-Wcisło L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cosmetology, School of Pharmacy with Division of Laboratory
Medicine in Sosnowiec, Medical University of Silesia, Sosnowiec, Poland.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy with Division of
Laboratory Medicine in Sosnowiec, Silesian Medical University, Sosnowiec, Poland.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Andrzej Mielęcki Memorial Independent Public
Clinical Hospital in Katowice, Katowice, Poland.
(4)Chair and Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine in Katowice, Medical
University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.

Psoriasis is a chronic, recurrent, inflammatory, and proliferative skin disease. 
Its etiology has not yet been fully assessed, but undoubtedly it is a
multifaceted disease. The key role in its pathomechanism is played by genetic,
immunologic, and environmental factors and stress. If traditional methods of
psoriasis treatment (phototherapy, methotrexate, retinoids, cyclosporine A) fail,
we reach for the following biopharmaceuticals - infliximab, etanercept,
adalimumab, or ustekinumab. However, genetic engineering progress discovers new
possibilities - the pending clinical trials involve IL-17, IL-23 antagonists,
PDE4 and -3 and -1. Psoriasis etiopathogenesis mainly involves the IL-17A,
IL-17F, and IL-17A/F subtypes, which affect the keratinocytes. The biological
therapy molecularly oriented with the antagonists of interleukin 17 is based
mainly on the influence onto the cytokine in the manner that prevents it from
binding with the receptor. Three biopharmaceuticals are currently under third
phase studies: two fully humanized antibodies neutralizing IL-17 - ixekizumab and
secukinumab, and one human monoclonal antibody, brodalumab. The below work will
be devoted to the analysis of possible undesirable symptoms, which were observed 
during the studies. We will try to review the latest literature concerning the
most important clinical trials conducted in many centers.

© 2019 The International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/ijd.14509 
PMID: 31192456  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

