
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 May 27;10:1120. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.01120. eCollection 
2019.

Transcriptomic Analysis of Trichoderma atroviride Overgrowing Plant-Wilting
Verticillium dahliae Reveals the Role of a New M14 Metallocarboxypeptidase CPA1
in Biocontrol.

Morán-Diez ME(1), Carrero-Carrón I(1)(2), Rubio MB(1), Jiménez-Díaz RM(2)(3),
Monte E(1), Hermosa R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Genetics, Spanish-Portuguese Institute for
Agricultural Research (CIALE), University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(2)College of Agriculture and Forestry (ETSIAM), University of Córdoba, Córdoba, 
Spain.
(3)Institute for Sustainable Agriculture (IAS), Spanish National Research Council
(CSIC), Córdoba, Spain.

Verticillium dahliae, a vascular-colonizing fungus, causes economically important
wilt diseases in many crops, including olive trees. Trichoderma spp. have
demonstrated an effective contribution as biocontrol agents against this pathogen
through a variety of mechanisms that may involve direct mycoparasitism and
antibiosis. However, molecular aspects underlaying Trichoderma-V. dahliae
interactions are not well known yet due to the few studies in which this pathogen
has been used as a target for Trichoderma. In the present study, Trichoderma
atroviride T11 overgrew colonies of V. dahliae on agar plates and inhibited
growth of highly virulent defoliating (D) V. dahliae V-138I through diffusible
molecules and volatile organic compounds produced before contact. A Trichoderma
microarray approach of T11 growing alone (CON), and before contact (NV) or
overgrowing (OV) colonies of V-138I, helped to identify 143 genes that differed
significantly in their expression level by more than twofold between OV and CON
or NV. Functional annotation of these genes indicated a marked up-regulation of
hydrolytic, catalytic and transporter activities, and secondary metabolic
processes when T11 overgrew V-138I. This transcriptomic analysis identified
peptidases as enzymatic activity overrepresented in the OV condition, and the
cpa1 gene encoding a putative carboxypeptidase (ID number 301733) was selected to
validate this study. The role of cpa1 in strain T11 on antagonism of V-138I was
analyzed by a cpa1-overexpression approach. The increased levels of cpa1
expression and protease activity in the cpa1-overexpressed transformants compared
to those in wild-type or transformation control strains were followed by
significantly higher antifungal activity against V-138I in in vitro assays. The
use of Trichoderma spp. for the integrated management of plant diseases caused by
V. dahliae requires a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying
this interaction that might provide an increase on its efficiency.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.01120 
PMCID: PMC6545926
PMID: 31191472 

