
1. Heliyon. 2019 May 9;5(5):e01674. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01674. eCollection 
2019 May.

Catalytic, kinetic and thermodynamic properties of free and immobilized caseinase
on mica glass-ceramics.

Ahmed SA(1), Saleh SAA(1), Abdel-Hameed SAM(2), Fayad AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry of Natural and Microbial Products Department, National Research
Centre, Dokki, Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Glass Research Department, National Research Centre, Dokki, Cairo, Egypt.

Bacillus megaterium 314 strain was able to utilize agricultural and industrial
wastes for metallo-protease production. Orange peel and wheat bran were found as 
the most suitable carbon and nitrogen sources, respectively. Optimized production
process enhanced the enzyme production by 5.1-folds. Glass and glass-ceramic with
different particle sizes based on mica were used as inorganic carrier. Protease
enzyme was immobilized by covalent bonding and physical adsorption methods on
nanoparticle supports. Enzyme physically adsorbed on glass ceramic (particle size
0.71-1.0 mm) had the highest residual activity and the highest immobilization
yield. Glass-ceramic was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning
electron microscopy (SEM). Immobilized enzyme exhibited activation energy (E a ) 
and deactivation rate constant at 60 °C (k d ) about 1.29 and 1.46-times,
respectively lower than free enzyme. Moreover, adsorbed enzyme had higher energy 
for denaturation (E d ), half-life (t 1/2 ), and decimal reduction time (D). The 
thermodynamic parameters of irreversible thermal denaturation for the protease
enzyme indicate that immobilized enzyme had higher enthalpy (ΔH°), free energy
(ΔG°), and entropy (ΔS°) than free one. There was a significant improvement in
the maximum reaction velocity Vmax (2.5-fold), Michaelis constant Km (1.9-fold), 
and catalytic efficiency Vmax/Km (4.7-fold) values after immobilization
indicating the efficiency and effectiveness of immobilization approach.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01674 
PMCID: PMC6514538
PMID: 31193050 

