
1. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1987 Dec;94(6):874-80.

Proper donor selection for heart-lung transplantation. The Stanford experience.

Harjula A(1), Baldwin JC, Starnes VA, Stinson EB, Oyer PE, Jamieson SW, Shumway
NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Calif.

Clinical cardiopulmonary transplantation is currently limited by the availability
of suitable heart-lung donors. Distant graft procurement, with pretreatment, of
the donor by intravenous prostaglandin E1 and cooling of the graft with pulmonary
artery perfusion, is now clinically established and should increase the number of
available donors. Between March 1981 and September 1986, 40 heart-lung
transplantations were performed. The characteristics of the donor pool were
analyzed. Gram stain of the donor tracheal aspirate revealed gram-positive
bacteria in 80% and gram-negative organisms in 35%. Yeast was present on stain in
25% of the patients. Donor arterial oxygen tension was less than 100 torr
inspired oxygen concentration 40%) repeatedly in one patient; this recipient died
of lung failure at operation. Severe deterioration of allograft lung function was
seen in 11 (27.5%) recipients. The causes of deterioration were substantial
postoperative bleeding in six patients, sepsis in two, and acute rejection, poor 
lung function, and allograft heart failure in one patient each. HLA-A locus
mismatch, poor donor alveolar-capillary gas exchange, tracheal colonization with 
heavy polymorphonuclear cells, and heavy bacteria and fungus resulted in
increased operative mortality. Donor pretreatment with prostaglandin E1 was
associated with improved survival. Recipient selection, emphasizing adequate
liver function and absence of previous thoracic operation, careful surgical
technique with minimal bleeding, and brief perfusion time were factors associated
with improved survival. Early morbidity and mortality were principally related to
recipient risk factors, and the strict criteria observed for selection of
heart-lung donors were valid. The importance of appropriate recipient selection
is underscored.


PMID: 3119947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

