
1. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2019 Jul;25(7):887-902. doi: 10.1111/cns.13156.

KCTD: A new gene family involved in neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric
disorders.

Teng X(1)(2), Aouacheria A(3), Lionnard L(3), Metz KA(2), Soane L(2), Kamiya
A(4), Hardwick JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neuropsychiatric Diseases and College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
(2)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns 
Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)ISEM, Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution de Montpellier, CNRS, EPHE, IRD,
Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

The underlying molecular basis for neurodevelopmental or neuropsychiatric
disorders is not known. In contrast, mechanistic understanding of other brain
disorders including neurodegeneration has advanced considerably. Yet, these do
not approach the knowledge accrued for many cancers with precision therapeutics
acting on well-characterized targets. Although the identification of genes
responsible for neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders remains a major
obstacle, the few causally associated genes are ripe for discovery by focusing
efforts to dissect their mechanisms. Here, we make a case for delving into
mechanisms of the poorly characterized human KCTD gene family. Varying levels of 
evidence support their roles in neurocognitive disorders (KCTD3),
neurodevelopmental disease (KCTD7), bipolar disorder (KCTD12), autism and
schizophrenia (KCTD13), movement disorders (KCTD17), cancer (KCTD11), and obesity
(KCTD15). Collective knowledge about these genes adds enhanced value, and
critical insights into potential disease mechanisms have come from unexpected
sources. Translation of basic research on the KCTD-related yeast protein Whi2 has
revealed roles in nutrient signaling to mTORC1 (KCTD11) and an autophagy-lysosome
pathway affecting mitochondria (KCTD7). Recent biochemical and structure-based
studies (KCTD12, KCTD13, KCTD16) reveal mechanisms of regulating membrane channel
activities through modulation of distinct GTPases. We explore how these seemingly
varied functions may be disease related.

© 2019 The Authors. CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics Published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cns.13156 
PMCID: PMC6566181
PMID: 31197948  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

