
1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2019 Aug 15;377:114628. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2019.114628. 
Epub 2019 Jun 14.

Alpha-linolenic acid based nano-suspension protect against lipopolysaccharides
induced mastitis by inhibiting NFκBp65, HIF-1α, and mitochondria-mediated
apoptotic pathway in albino Wistar rats.

Yadav RK(1), Tripathi CB(1), Saraf SA(1), Ansari MN(2), Saeedan AS(2), Aldosary
S(3), Rajinikanth PS(1), Kaithwas G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Biosciences and
Biotechnology, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, (A Central University),
Vidya vihar, Raebareli road, Lucknow 226 025, UP, India.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, Prince Sattam Bin Abdulaziz
University, Al-Kharj, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, King Faisal University, Al-Ahsa, Saudi 
Arabia.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Biosciences and
Biotechnology, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, (A Central University),
Vidya vihar, Raebareli road, Lucknow 226 025, UP, India. Electronic address:
gauravk@bbau.ac.in.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the therapeutic effects and
underlying mechanism of alpha-linolenic acid based intra-mammary nano-suspension 
(ALA-NS) on both in vitro antimicrobial and in vivo activity. The ALA-NS
formulated and optimized for parameters like particle size, zeta potential,
polydispersity index, sedimentation volume, and stability studies. In vitro, our 
results showed that ALA-NS (F1 and F2) have the higher zone of inhibition and
lower minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) value than ALA and cefotaxime alone 
against mastitis-causing pathogens. In vivo, our results showed that ALA-NS (F1
and F2) restored the altered oxidative biomarkers (superoxide dismutase,
catalase, glutathione, TBARs, and protein carbonyl) along with histopathological 
changes in lipopolysaccharides (LPS) treated rats. Western blot results indicated
that ALA-NS (F1 and F2) inhibited LPS induced inflammatory proteins (NFκBp65,
COX, LOX, and IFN-γ) in rat mammary epithelial cells. ALA-NS (F1 and F2) also
suppressed the hypoxia inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) and upregulated
prolyl-hydroxylase (PHD-2), sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP-1c),
and fatty acid synthase (FASN) protein expression. In addition, ALA-NS
upregulated the pro-apoptotic (BAX and BAD) and downregulated anti-apoptotic
(BCL-2 and BCL-XL) proteins expression in rat mammary epithelial tissue. In
conclusion, we found that ALA-NS (F1 and F2) have in vitro antimicrobial activity
and protective effects on LPS-induced mastitis in rats.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2019.114628 
PMID: 31207257  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

