
1. J Struct Biol. 2019 Sep 1;207(3):287-294. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2019.06.006. Epub
2019 Jun 19.

Structural basis for recognition and ring-cleavage of the Pseudomonas quinolone
signal (PQS) by AqdC, a mycobacterial dioxygenase of the α/β-hydrolase fold
family.

Wullich SC(1), Kobus S(2), Wienhold M(3), Hennecke U(4), Smits SHJ(5), Fetzner
S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, University of Münster,
Corrensstraße 3, 48149 Münster, Germany. Electronic address: wullich@wwu.de.
(2)Center for Structural Studies, Heinrich-Heine-University, Universitätsstraße
1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany. Electronic address:
stefanie.kobus@uni-duesseldorf.de.
(3)Organic Chemistry Institute, University of Münster, Corrensstraße 40, 48149
Münster, Germany. Electronic address: m_wien13@uni-muenster.de.
(4)Organic Chemistry Institute, University of Münster, Corrensstraße 40, 48149
Münster, Germany; Organic Chemistry Research Group, Department of Chemistry and
Department of Bioengineering Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2,
1050 Brussel, Belgium. Electronic address: ulrich.hennecke@uni-muenster.de.
(5)Center for Structural Studies, Heinrich-Heine-University, Universitätsstraße
1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany; Institute of Biochemistry,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Universitätsstraße 1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
Electronic address: sander.smits@hhu.de.
(6)Institute for Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, University of Münster,
Corrensstraße 3, 48149 Münster, Germany. Electronic address:
fetzner@uni-muenster.de.

The cofactor-less dioxygenase AqdC of Mycobacteroides abscessus catalyzes the
cleavage and thus inactivation of the Pseudomonas quinolone signal (PQS,
2-heptyl-3-hydroxy-4(1H)-quinolone), which plays a central role in the regulation
of virulence factor production by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. We present here the
crystal structures of AqdC in its native state and in complex with the PQS
cleavage product N-octanoylanthranilic acid, and of mutant AqdC proteins in
complex with PQS. AqdC possesses an α/β-hydrolase fold core domain with
additional helices forming a cap domain. The protein is traversed by a bipartite 
tunnel, with a funnel-like entry section leading to an elliptical substrate
cavity where PQS positioning is mediated by a combination of hydrophobic
interactions and hydrogen bonds, with the substrate's C4 carbonyl and C3 hydroxyl
groups tethered by His97 and the catalytic His246, respectively. The side chain
of the AqdC-bound product extends deeper into the "alkyl tail section" of the
tunnel than PQS, tentatively suggesting product exit via this part of the tunnel.
AqdC prefers PQS over congeners with shorter alkyl substituents at C2. Kinetic
data confirmed the strict requirement of the active-site base His246 for
catalysis, and suggested that evolution of the canonical nucleophile/His/Asp
catalytic triad of the hydrolases to an Ala/His/Asp triad is favorable for
catalyzing dioxygenolytic PQS ring cleavage.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsb.2019.06.006 
PMID: 31228546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

