
1. Bioresour Technol. 2019 Oct;289:121664. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2019.121664. Epub
2019 Jun 18.

Characteristics of the extracellular polymeric substance composition in an
up-flow biological aerated filter reactor: The impacts of different aeration
rates and filter medium heights.

Ren J(1), Cheng W(2), Wan T(1), Wang M(1), Meng T(1), Lv T(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Eco-hydraulics in Northwest Arid Region of China,
Xi'an University of Technology, NO. 5, South Jinhua Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710048, 
PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Eco-hydraulics in Northwest Arid Region of China,
Xi'an University of Technology, NO. 5, South Jinhua Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710048, 
PR China. Electronic address: wencheng@xaut.edu.cn.

In this study, the compositional characteristics of extracellular polymeric
substances (EPS) were systematically explored to reveal their relationship with
microbial community under different conditions in an up-flow biological aerated
filter reactor. The aeration rates had a significant positive correlation
(0.898 ≤ R ≤ 0.979) with the tightly bound (TB)-EPS contents, but basically
showed an opposite trend (R < -0.631) with the loosely bound (LB)-EPS. Moreover, 
the filter medium heights also affected EPS distribution. The microbial biofilm
produced more LB-EPS and TB-EPS to withdraw from the extreme environment. Five
fluorescent substances were identified in the EPS by EEM-PARAFAC modeling;
namely, two protein-like components (protein-like C1 and tryptophan-like C2) and 
three humic-like components (UVA marine humic-like C3, hydrophobic humic
acid-like C4, and humic acid-like C5). Under different conditions, the relative
abundance of Proteobacteria and Nitrospirae had a significant positive
correlation with C5 and C4, respectively. These results demonstrated that
microbial community distribution could affect EPS composition.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2019.121664 
PMID: 31229858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

